BSAVA
BSAvA Manual of
BRITISHSMALLANIMAL
VETERINARYASSOCIATION
Canine and Feline
Anaesthesiaand
Analgesia
Second edition
Editedby
Chris Seymour and
Tanya Duke-Novakovski
BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline
Anaesthesia and
Analgesia
Second edition
Editors:
Chris Seymour
MA VetMB DVA MRCVS
9 Hillside Close, Shilington, Hitchin, Hertfordshire SG5 3NN, UK
and
Tanya Duke-Novakovski
BVetMed DVA DipACVA DipECVA
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences,
Western College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Saskatchewan,
52 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4, Canada
Published by:
British Small Animal Veterinary Association
Woodrow House, 1 Telford Way, Waterwells
Business Park,Quedgeley,Gloucester GL2 2AB
A Company Lirmited by Guarantee in England.
Registered Company No. 2837793.
Registered as a Charity.
Copyright @ 2007 BSAVA :
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
 in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical,photocopying,recording or otherwise without prior written
permission of the copyright holder.
Figures 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.6, 10.7, 10.8, 10.9, 10.10, 10.11, 10.12,
10.13, 17.2, 17.7 and 18.1 were drawn by S. J. Elmhurst BA Hons 
(www.livingart.co.uk) and are printed with her permission.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN-13 978 0 905214 98 6
The publishers and contributors cannot take responsibility for information
provided on dosages and methods of application of drugs mentioned in
this publication.Details of thiskind must be verified by individual users
 from the appropriate literature.
Printed by: Lookers, Upton, Dorset, UK 
Other titles in the
BSAVA Manuals series:
Manual of AdvancedVeterinaryNursing
Manual of Canine & Feline Abdominal Surgery
Manual of Canine & Feline Behavioural Medicine
Manual of Canine&Feline Clinical Pathology
Manual of Canine & Feline Dentistry
Manual of Canine & Feline Emergency and Critical Care
Manual of Canine & Feline Endocrinology
Manualof Canine&Feline Gastroenterology
Manual ofCanine&FelineHaematologyandTransfusionMedicine
Manual of Canine&Feline Head,Neck and ThoracicSurgery
Manual of Canine & Feline Infectious Diseases
Manual of Canine & Feline Musculoskeletal Disorders
Manual of Canine &Feline Musculoskeletal Imaging
Manual of Canine & Feline Nephrology and Urology
Manual of Canine & Feline Neurology
Manual of Canine & Feline Oncology
Manual of Canine & Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Manual of Exotic Pets
Manual of Ornamental Fish
Manual of Practical Veterinary Nursing
Manual of Psittacine Birds
Manual of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfow!
Manual ofReptiles
Manual ofSmallAnimalCardiorespiratoryMedicineandSurgery
Manual of Small Animal Dermatology
Manual of Small AnimalDiagnostic Imaging
Manual of Small AnimalFracture Repair and Management
Manual of Small Animal Ophthalmology
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Manual of Veterinary Care
Manual of Wildlife Casualties
 For information on these and all BSAVA publications please visit our website: www.bsava.com
1
List of contributors
V
Foreword
vii
Preface
vili
Legal and ethical aspects of anaesthesia
Ronald S. Jones
2
Pre-anaesthetic assessment
6
Lysa P. Posner
3
 Postoperative care: generai principles
12
Daniel Hoiden
4
The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
18
Hatim Alibhai
5
 Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
30
Lynne Hughes
6
Automatic ventilators
49
Richard Hammond
7
Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment 
62
Yves Moens and Paul Coppens
8
The physiology and pathophysiology of pain
79
JillPrice and AndreaNolan
9
 Pain management l: systemic analgesics
89
Carolyn Kerr
10
 Pain management ll: local and regional anaesthetic techniques 
104
Kip A. Lemke
11
Pain management Ill: ancillary therapies
115
Shauna Cantwel!
12
Premedication and sedation
120
Joanna C. Murrel!
13
Intravenous anaesthetics
133
Sabine B.R. Kastner
14
Inhalant anaesthetics
150
Nora S. Matthews
15
Muscle relaxants
156
Derek Flaherty and Adam Auckburally
16
 Fluid therapy and blood transfusion 
166
Paula F. Moon-Massat
17
Ophthalmic surgery
183
Sarah Thomson
18
Dental and oral surgery
194
Tanya Duke-Novakovski
19
Cardiovascular disease
200
R. Eddie Clutton
20
Respiratory disease
220
R.Eddie Clutton
21
"Thoracic surgery
230
Peter J. Pascoe
22
Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
244
Rachel C. Bennett
23
Urogenital disease
257
Petro Dobromyiskyi
24
Caesarean section
265
Robert E. Meyer
25
Endocrine disease
274
Craig Johnson and Elizabeth J. Norman
26
Neurological disease
284
Elizabeth Leece
Paediatric patients
296
Daniel Holden
28
 Geriatric patients
303
Gina Neiger-Aeschbacher
29
Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
310
Christine Egger
Index
333
iv
contributors
Hatim Alibhai BVSc MVM PhD DipECVA ILTM
The Queen Mother Hospital for Animals, The Royal Veterinary College, Hawkshead Lane, North Mymms,
Hatfield, Herts AL9 7TA, UK
Adam Auckburally Bvsc CertvA MRcvs
Companion Animai Sciences, Institute of Comparative Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Glasgow, Bearsden Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK
Rachel C. Bennett MA VetMB CertVA MRCVS
New Bolton Center, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 382 West Street Road
Kennett Square,PA19348,USA
Shauna Cantwefl DvM MvSc DipACVA CvSMT CVA
Department of Large Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida.
PO Box 100136, Gainesville, FL 32610-0136, USA
R. Eddie Clutton BVSc DVA DipECVA MRCA MRCVS
Midlothian EH25 9RG,UK
Paul Coppens DvM DipECvA
Clinic of Anaesthesiology and Perioperative Intensive Care, Veterinarplatz 1, A-1210 Vienna, Austria
Petro Dobromylskyj BSc BvetMed Dva DipECVA MRCvs
6 Westfields, Compton, Newbury, Berkshire RG20 6NX, UK
Tanya Duke-Novakovski BVetMed DvA DipAcvA DipECVA
University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan: S7N 5B4, Canada
Christine Egger DVM MVSc CvA cvH DipACVA
University of Tennessee, College of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences,
C247 Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Knoxville, TN 37996-4544, USA
Derek Flaherty BVMS DVA DipECVA MRCA MRCVS
Companion Animal Sciences, Institute of Comparative Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Glasgow, Bearsden Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK
Richard Hammond PhD DVA DipECVA BSc BVetMed ILrM MRCVS
University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington, Leicestershire LE12 5RA, UK
Daniei Holden BVetMed DVA DipECVA CertSAM MRCvS
The County Veterinary Clinic, 137 Kingston Road, Taunton, Somerset TA2 7SR, UK
Lynne Hughes MvB DipECVA DvA FCARCSI MRCvs
School ofAgricuiture,FoodScienceandVeterinaryMedicine,VeterinarySciencesCentre,
University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Republic of Ireland
Craig Johnson BVSc PhD DvA DipECVA MRCA MRCVS
Institute of Animal, Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Massey University, Private Bag 11 222,
Palmerston North, New Zeaiand
Ronaid S. Jones OBE JP DvSc FRCA FRCVS
Emeritus Professor of Veterinary Anaesthesia, Merseyside, UK
Sabine B.R. Kastner PD Dr med vet MvSc DipECVA
Clinic for Small Animals, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Foundation Bischofsholer Damm 15,
 30173 Hannover, Germany
Carolyn Kerr DvM DVSc PhD DipACVA
Department of Clinical Studies, University of Guelph, Ontario N1H 1Y3, Canada
Elizabeth Leece BvSc CvA DipEcVA MRCvs
European Specialist in Veterinary Anaesthesia, The Animal Heaith Trust, Lanwades Park, Newmarket,
Suffolk CB8 7UU, UK
Kip A. Lemke DvM Ms DipACVA
AtlanticVeterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island, 550 UniversityAvenue,Charlottetown,
PE C1A 4P3, Canada
Nora S. Matthews DVM DipACVA
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-4474, USA
Robert E. Meyer DVM DipACVA
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State University, PO Box 6100,
MS 39762-6100, USA
Yves Moens DVM PhD PD DipECVA
Paula F. Moon-Massat DvM DipAcVA
Preclinical Research, Biopure Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Joanna C. Murrell BvSc (Hons) PhD DipECvA MRCvS
Institute of Animal, Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Massey University, Private Bag 11 222,
Palmerston North, New Zealand
Gina Neiger-Aeschbacher Drmed vet DipAcvA DipEcvA MRCvS
Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, PO Box 8466,
3001 Bern, Switzerland
Andrea Nolan MvB MRCVS DVA PhD DipECvA DipECVPT
Office of Vice Principal (Learning, Teaching and Internationalisation), The Cloisters, Gilbert Scott Building,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK
Elizabeth J. Norman BvSc MvM MAcvsc MRcvS
Institute of Veterinary, Animal and Biomedical Sciences, Massey University, Private Bag 11 222,
Palmerston North 4442, New Zealand
Peter J. Pascoe BVSc DVA DACvA DipECVA MRCVS
Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California,
Davis, CA 95616, USA
Lysa P. Posner DvM DipACVA
Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University, 4700 Hillsborough Street, Raleigh, NC 27606, USA
Jill Price BVMS PhD CertVA DipECVA
Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, Saint George's University, Grenada, West Indies
Sarah Thomson BvSc CertvA MRcVS
Davies Veterinary Specialists, Manor Farm Business Park, Higham Gobion, Near Hitchin, Herts SG5 3HR, UK
vi
Foreword
This rew edition of the BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Anaesthesia
and Anaigesia has undergone massive changes since the last edition.
A fuli section of four chapters on pain management has been added,
reflecting the increased importance with which this subject is now
considered in both human and veterinary medicine. These chapters
include not only the basic science behind mechanisms of pain relief but
anaigesia. Among the many expanded areas there are now three
chapters relating to equipment, including one which provides a
comprehensive description of automatic ventilators suitable and
and updated.
This current book is one of a series which commenced as a very slim
volume in 1979 as the BSAVA Manual of Anaesthesia of Small Animal
Practice, and which was intended to provide a simple guide for those
        s   
analgesia was awarded a chapter of its own! Each edition has seen
new edition could be of relevance on a day-to-day basis to those in
practice. The fact that the expansion has been necessary is a tribute to
the continually improving practice standards of veterinary anaesthesia
and pain management. The authors, all well known as 'experts' in the
and the book has been written so as to be relevant to veterinary surgeons
in many countries. The content of the book now not only fulfils the original
purpose of the series, but will be a useful text book for veterinary
surgeons wishing to advance their knowledge, and possibly obtain
further qualifications in veterinary anaesthesia and analgesia.
I thank the Editors, their authors and the BSAVA team assisting them
final outcome.
K.W. Clarke MA VetMB DVetMed DVA DipECVA FRCVS
RCvS and European Specialist in Veterinary Anaesthesia
Senior Lecturer inVeterinary Anaesthesia
 Royal Veterinary College
February 2007
vi
Preface
The administration of safe and reliable anaesthesia is important for all
development of anaesthesia has also made possible some types of
surgica! intervention that would hitherto have been either impossible or
extremely hazardous. In addition, good contro! of pain after injury, either
In compiling this new edition, we have retained the original broad
 sections dealing with basic principles, pharmacology and anaesthetic
management in specific clinicai situations. A new section on pain
assessment and management has also been added. Details of
anaesthesia and analgesia in exotic species have been moved to the
relevant BSAVA Manuals.
Anaesthetic equipment, patient monitoring and anaesthetic accidents
previous edition, and the chapters on pharmacology and specific
recommended international non-proprietary rames (riNN) throughout,
in line with the BSAVA Small Animal Formulary.
As with the previous edition, this book is aimed primarily at veterinary
surgeons and students, but nurses and technicians will also find a wealth 
of useful information. We also hope those studying for examinations in
veterinary anaesthesia will find the book useful. We have used
contributors from around the world and have tried to make the book as
universal as possible.
We are extremely grateful to all contributors, a truly international
team of experts in their field, for finding the time to share their expertise
and knowledge; also to Marion Jowett, Sabrina Cleevely and Nicola
Lloyd at BSAVA, without whose help this book might never have come
to fruition.
Chris Seymour
Tanya Duke-Novakovski
February 2007
vili
.egal and ethical aspec
of anaesthesi
Ronald S. Jones
Introduction
 Humanitarian considerations. It is a basic
requirement that every effort should be made to
It is a fundamental aspect of veterinary medicine and
relieve both pain and suffering in animals by all
surgery that adequate provision is made for the health
means available. Gentle and sympathetic
and welfare of patients that are entrusted to our care.
handling with minimal restraint should always be
One of the most important aspects of this care is to
used to reduce fear and apprehension and to
prevent pain and suffering. A considerable amount of
avoid undue struggling, which has the potential
attention has been paid to the subject of pain in humans,
to lead to injury to both patient and personnel.
but there is still scope for improvement. In animals, the
Adequate analgesia must always be provided as
situation has improved dramaticaly over the past dec-
and when necessary
ade but there is stil much to be done. Pain is a subjec-
Technical considerations. In view of the
tive experience to the individual and is dependent both
potentially uncooperative nature of veterinary
on the mental and physical state of the patient and on
patients, deep sedation or anaesthesia may be
the environment. In animals, the perception of pain has
required as a means of restraint for procedures
to be inferred as they lack an effective means of verbal
that are not considered painful (e.g.
communication with humans. There are, however, no
radiography). Other diagnostic and investigative
anatomical or physiological grounds to assume that
procedures are often facilitated by a reduction in
animals do not perceive pain in a similar manner to
muscle tone and/or by intermittent positive
humans. There are certain differences in the manifes-
pressure ventilation. Other technical
tation and the responses, but these can be attributed
considerations include the protection of
to species variation. This is a basic aspect of pain
personnel from injuries such as bites and
 in animals where, for example, different behavioural
scratches and accidental injury from hypodermic
reactions are observed in the cat and horse in response
needles or scalpel blades
to a given painful stimulus.
Legal considerations. There is legislation in
virtually all western countries which governs the
Aims of anaesthesia
prevention of pain and suiffering in animals
during treatment and procedures involving pain.
In general the aims of anaesthesia are to:
In the UK, a number of Acts of Parliament are
applicable. These include the Protection of
 Prevent awareness of, and response to, pain
Animals Act 1911, the Veterinary Surgeons Act
 Provide restraint and immobility of the anima!
1966, the Protection of Animals (Anaesthetics)
and relaxation of skeletal muscles when this is
Act 1964 and the Scientific Procedures Act
required for a particular procedure
1986. ln the USA, there are no Federal Laws
 Achieve both of the above without jeopardizing
governing this particular area. As each state is
the life and safety of the animal before, during
its own political entity, the laws are only relevant
and after anaesthesia.
to that particular geographical area, but there is
Until relatively recentiy it was considered that a
a great deal of similarity between states.
single anaesthetic agent could achieve all of these
aims and occasionally this is still true today. However,
Choice of anaesthetic technigue
and as new agents become available and new tech-
The ideal anaesthetic agent has not been developed,
niques are developed, a combination of agents with
specific actions is more likely to be used to produce
although the properties of such an agent have been
safe and relatively trouble-free anaesthesia.
defined. These include:
Independence of the detoxification mechanisms
Indications for anaesthesia
of the body for the agent's destruction and
elimination
Animals are anaesthetized for a number of different
Rapid induction, quick changes in the depth of
reasons:
anaesthesia and a rapid recovery.
Chapter 1  Legal and ethical aspects of anaesthesia
 Lack of depression of the respiratory and
require very much lower doses than normal
cardiac centres
animals. Toxaemic animals may have a slow
 Non-irritant to tissues
circulation and if this is not appreciated then
Inexpensive, stable, non-inflammable and
non-explosive
The myocardium may also be affected, which 
+
No requirement for expensive equipment for its
may lead to cardiac failure. Problems with fluid
administration.
balance should be corrected and diabetic
patients stabilized before anaesthesia. It is
A wide variety of factors influences the choice of a
important that animals are in optimal heaith
 particular anaesthetic technique. These include:
before anaesthesia, even if this means
deferring anaesthesia for some days
 Facilities. lf facilities are poor and likely to
Site and nature of the surgery. These
prejudice the outcome of the anaesthetic
influence the choice of technique. Operations on
procedure, they should not be used. For
the head and neck require endotracheal
example, a well administered intravenous
intubation. Special care must be taken during 
technique may be much safer than an inhalation
cral, dental and pharyngeal surgery to prevent
agent given with inferior equipment
the accumulation of any foreign materia! that 
 Skill and experience of the anaesthetist and
couid be inhaled after the removal of the
the surgeon. These are extremely important in.
endotracheal tube. The use of an endoscope
choosing a technique (particularly noticeable if
within the respiratory tract presents problems
they are used to working as a team)
because of competition for the airway, and
Facilities for postoperative recovery and
anaesthetic techniques need to be adapted to
care. This will be influenced by whether the
deal with the problem
animal is to be hospitalized or returned to its
 Use of muscle relaxant drugs. Intermittent
owner following anaesthesia (see legal aspects 
positive pressure ventilation is essential when
below). It is important to ensure that adequate
relaxant drugs are used as part of the
postoperative analgesia is provided
anaesthetic technique, e.g. to provide profound
Temperament of the patient. This can have an
muscle relaxation for surgery of the thorax and
important influence on the choice of technique.
abdomen and some orthopaedic procedures
 In animals of good temperament, a minimum of
Anaesthesia for Caesarean section. This
sedative premedication may be required before
requires special techniques as multiple lives are
the intravenous induction of anaesthesia.
involved
Competent and sympathetic assistance in
Examination under anaesthesia. Although this
restraint can be of extreme value. Some cats
normally requires only short periods of
may be so unruly that crush cages or inhalation
anaesthesia, a high level of care is required. The
anaesthetic induction chambers are needed.
old adage that there may be minor procedures
Vicious dogs may require heavy sedative
but never minor anaesthetics' certainly applies
premedication before anaesthesia, which can
Proposed duration of surgery. This must
influence the subsequent doses of both 
always be considered when selecting an
 induction and maintenance agents
appropriate anaesthetic technique. Short
Species and breed of animal. These can
procedures can often be carried out with a single
influence the choice of technique. Some breeds
dose of thiopental and slightly longer ones with
respond adversely to some intravenous agents.
multiple doses of propofol. Even under these
Some Boxers are sensitive to acepromazine
circumstances equipment must be readily
Age. This is an important factor influencing the
available to carry out endotracheal intubation 
choice of anaesthetic agents and the doses
and intermittent positive pressure ventilation. In
used. Doses may need to be reduced in both
situations where procedures are likely to be
young and elderly animals. In puppies and
prolonged it is important to ensure that proper
kittens of a very young age, inhalation agents
inhalation anaesthetic techniques are used.
are the drugs of choice. Such patients are also
very susceptible to hypothermia
 State of health of the animal. The state of 
Legislation
health of the animal is an important factor in the
choice of technique. The physical status of the
Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966
patient is often classified according to the five
In the UK, the practice of veterinary medicine and
categories of the American Society of
o suoins Aeuuae au Aa pauanon si Aabins
Anesthesiologists for human patients (see
and Ae uosiad ou o beul hapun pue 9961
Chapter 2). The categories are classified from
 unless he or she is registered with the Royal Coilege
1 to 5, where 1 is a normal healthy patient and
of Veterinary Surgeons. There are certain minor ex-
5 is moribund. Toxaemia is one of the most
ceptions under Schedule 3, which refer to certain pro-
important disease conditions as it is often
cedures that may be performed by trained lay
accompanied by cardiac and hepatic problems.
 personnel and by veterinary nurses. None of these
Extra care is needed in the administration of 
exemptions applies to the induction and maintenance
computed doses to such patients, who may
of anaesthesia in animals.
2
Chapter 1  Legal and ethical aspects of anaesthesia
The Protection of Animals (Anaesthetics)
The cabinet should preferably be made of steel, with
Act 1964
suitable hinges, fixed to a wall or the floor with rag
The Protection of Animals (Anaesthetics) Act 1964
bolts (these bolts should not be accessible from out-
governs anaesthesia of animals in the Uk. It basi-
side the cabinet). Ideally the safe/cabinet should be
cally states that the performance of any operation,
within a cupboard or in some other position to avoid
with or without the use of instruments and involving
easy detection by intruders. Also, the room contain-
 interference with the sensitive tissues or bone struc-
ing the safe/cabinet should be lockable. A locked
tures of an animal, shall constitute an offence un-
motor vehicle is not classed as a locked receptacle.
ol se Aem e yons ul pesn si oeuisaeue ue ssol
It makes sense to lock all Schedule 3 drugs (with
 prevent any pain to the animal during the operation.
Schedule 2) in the CD cabinet.
Some exceptions to this general rule are included in
The CD register must:
the Act. They include:
Be a bound register with appropriately ruled and
Castration of farm animals up to certain ages
headed columns (there are commercially printed
(anaesthesia is always required for the
registers available of varying standards)
castration of cats and dogs)
 Have the drugs to which the entries relate
 Amputation of the dewclaws of a dog before its
specified at the head of the page
eyes are open
 Show drugs obtained and drugs supplied. The
Any minor operation performed by a veterinary
name and address of the person or firm from
 surgeon, which by reason of its quickness or
whom they are received should be recorded, as
painlessness is customarily performed without
well as the name and address of the owner and
the use of an anaesthetic
animal supplied
 Any minor operation (whether performed by a
Be kept on the premises and be available for
inspection
which is not customarily performed by a
Be kept for 2 years from the date of the last
entry
veterinary surgeon. Other procedures not
 covered in the previous sentence are listed in
Have entries written in indelible ink
the Act but apply mainly to farm animals.
Have two members of staff sign the register, one
of whom would be a witness
Have entries in chronological order, made on the
The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971
day of transaction or on the following day
The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 and its various regu-
Have no cancellations or obliterations or
lations govern the use of several agents that are ad-
alterations (corrections must be made in
ministered to cats and dogs to provide anaesthesia
indelible ink in the margin or as a footnote and
and analgesia. The regulations impose legal obli-
must be signed and dated).
 gations on all veterinary surgeons (as well as doctors.
dentists and pharmacists) prescribing, supplying and
Controlled drugs in Schedules 1 or 2 may only be
administering these drugs. Over 100 substances are
listed and they are placed in four schedules, which
destroyed in the presence of a person authorized by
relate mainly to potential for harm to, and abuse by,
the Secretary of State, e.g. a police officer or Home
Office inspector. Such an authorized person would be
 human subjects:
required to be present for the destruction of out-of-
date stock items from Schedule 1 or 2. Details of the
Schedule 1 drugs (such as cannabis and LSD)
drug being destroyed must be entered in the control-
have no veterinary use and veterinary surgeons
led drugs register, including the drug name, form,
have no authority to prescribe them
strength and quantity as well as the date of destruc-
Schedule 2 drugs include morphine, fentanyl
tion and the signature of the person in whose pres-
and methadone. A record of their purchase and
ence the drug was destroyed.
supply must be kept in a bound controlled drug
Whilst the legislation may difer in detail from coun-
(CD) register (see below). A handwritten
try to country (and from state to state in the USA),
requisition is required by a supplier/wholesaler
similar laws apply to the secure storage and record
before delivery is permitted
keeping of this group of drugs.
 Schedule 3 drugs include buprenorphine and
barbiturates. These require a requisition but
The Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act
their purchase and use do not have to be
1986
recorded
The Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 governs
 Schedule 4 drugs include the benzodiazepines
the use and care of experimental animals for research
and are exempt from most controls.
purposes. It is specific about the use of analgesic and
anaesthetic agents. Similar legislation exists in the
Separate registers must be kept for all Schedule
European Community and there is Federal legislation
2 drugs that are used and supplied. It is also a re-
on the subject in the USA. The Canadian Council on
quirement that these drugs are to be kept in a locked
Animal Care issues welfare guidelines for animals
used for research in Canada, including anaesthetic
ized person or with an authorized person's consent.
and analgesic use.
3
Chapter 1  Legal and ethical aspects of anaesthesia
Duty of care
Consent
The principles of the duty of care, as defined in
There is a detinite difference in law between the duty
Halsbury's Laws of England, apply equally to veteri-
to obtain consent from an owner for a particular proce-
nary surgeons as to medical practitioners, with one
o np au pue ee ue uo ino pao aq ot ain
distinct difference, namely that the duty of care is to
 inform them of the material risks. Whilst there is a con-
the client/animal owner in making a number of deci-
siderable amount of information and case law on the
sions relating to anaesthesia. These include:
subject in human medicine compared to the veterinary
field, it is reasonable to assume that the courts would
follow a similar course of action. Failure to obtain con-
 A duty of care in deciding whether anaesthesia
sent may constitute a trespass, whereas failure to warn
may be performed with a reasonable degree of
of material risks may give rise to an obligation to com-
safety
pensate for damages caused by that breach of duty. It
A duty of care deciding on the most appropriate
could result in a claim for compensation in respect of a
technique of anaesthesia
complication or side effect of the treatment even if that
A duty of care in the administration of the
procedure was conducted properly. Consent is a state
anaesthetic
of mind - a decision by the animal owner. The compe-
A duty of care in fully consulting other veterinary
tent adult owner, over 18 years of age, has a funda-
surgeons dealing with the case and offering full
mental right under common law to give or withhold
and proper advice to the animal owner.
consent to examination, investigation or treatment. Con-
sent may be implied or express:
 Consent is implied when an owner brings an
Negligence
animal to a veterinary surgeon for examination
and there is physical contact between the
The anaesthetist must bring to his/her task a rea-
veterinary surgeon and the animal. Implied
sonable degree of skill and knowledge and must ex-
consent does not necessarily imply that the
ercise a reasonable degree of care. Whether this has
 material risks of any procedure have been
been done is a matter that must be determined by
explained or understood
the facts pertaining to each individual case. It is clear,
Express consent should be obtained for any
however, that failure to do so, which results in injury
procedure which carries a material risk and this,
to (or death of) an animal will give the owner the
of course, applies to anaesthesia. Whilst express
right to bring a legal action for damages. In general,
consent may be obtained orally or in writing it is
always preferable to obtain written consent
animal will be judged against the standard of the
wherever possible. It is not acceptable for an
good, careful and competent general practitioner.
owner to sign a blank piece of paper; it is
However, a veterinary surgeon of specialist or con-
essential that they have given their consent for a
sultant status will be judged against the standard of
procedure and to provide evidence that the
his/her peers.
material risks have been explained to them. In the
There is also the very important aspect of the re-
exceptional situation that oral consent is obtained,
sponsibility of the veterinary surgeon for negligence
it is essential that a record of the advice offered
by any person assisting him/her with the anaesthe-
and that consent was given should be written in
sia of an animal. In general practice, it is likely that a
the case notes. Written consent is not necessary
veterinary surgeon as an employer would be respon-
to defend an action although it does provide
sible for the negligence of an employee. It is likely
evidence that consent was obtained.
that when assessing an action for negligence of a
lay assistant, the courts wouid have regard to their
It may occasionally be necessary to provide
level of training and qualifications. Hence, it is es-
treatment and carry out a procedure without con-
sential to ensure that any person asked to assist with
sent, although this is rarely used except for a life-
anaesthesia is competent to carry out the tasks as-
saving procedure where it is not possible to contact
signed to them.
the animal owner. When this is done a note should
 In recent years there have been two high profie
be made in the case notes to explain the absence
court cases involving dogs being returned to their
of formal consent.
owners before they were fully recovered from anaes-
 Adult owners have a right to refuse to consent to a
thesia. Both animals died. The courts found the vet-
particular procedure with or without good reason. If
erinary surgeons to be negligent.
consent is refused for an anaesthetic procedure that is
There is often confusion between negligence and
considered to be the most appropriate, then reason-
disgraceful professional conduct which could lead to
able attempts should be made to persuade the owner
disciplinary action by the Royal College of Veterinary
that the technique carries the least risk of adverse se-
Surgeons. Negligence per se does not necessarily
quelae. However, it is not acceptable to coerce owners
amount.to disgraceful professional conduct unless it
into accepting a specific technique. In certain situations 
is so gross and excessive that it is likely to bring the
it may be necessary to point out to owners that a fail-
veterinary profession into disrepute. It is only then that
 a disciplinary action may ensue.
of the Protection of Animals Act 1911.
4
Chapter 1  Legal and ethical aspects of anaesthe.
A copy of the specimen consent form recom-
CONSENT FOR ANAESTHESIA AND
mended by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons
SURGICAL PROCEDURES
is shown in Figure 1.1.
Species and breed 
medicine outwith the data sheet recommendations
Name.
('off-label'), a human medicine, a specially prepared 
Colour...
medicine or an imported medicine under certain
circumstances. The veterinary surgeon should
Age
Sex M/F/NM/NF
explain fully what is involved and ideally obtain the
Microchip/tattoo/brand .
owner's written consent. A sample consent form can
be found on the Veterinary Defence Society website
Owner/agent's name...
(www.veterinarydefencesociety.co.uk). It is also nec-
essary to inform the owner and obtain their consent
when drugs are being used in a clinical trial.
Address
Personnel
The role of the veterinary nurse or veterinary tech-
Telephone
Home
nician in anaesthesia is often the subject of debate
Work .
within the profession. It is well accepted that both the
Mobite..
maintenance of anaesthetic equipment and prepa-
ration for anaesthesia can be delegated to these staff.
Operation/procedure
They also play an important part in the restraint and
management of animals during induction of anaes-
I hereby give permission for the administration of an anaesthetic to
thesia. However, in the UK the induction and mainte-
 the above animal and to the surgical operation/procedure detailed 
ahod heu youm sanpenod Aue ym jeebo woy sn uom
nance of anaesthesia is an act of veterinary surgery
ao yons yo pue sanpeoad asau jo anieu aui Aressaau 
under the Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966. Veterinary
aw ol peueldxa ueag ay Asseu aaoudi subi se sanpaooid
nurses are often involved in the monitoring of anaes-
 and I understand that all anaesthetic techniques and surgical
thesia but the ultimate responsibility is that of the vet-
 procedures involve some risk to the animal. I accept that the likely
erinary surgeon (see negligence above).
cost willbe as detailed on the attached estimate, and that in the 
A similar situation applies in North America, even
event of further treatment being required or of complications
 though it appears that more responsibility is taken by
 occurring which will give rise to additional costs, I shall be contacted 
as soon as practicable so that my consent to such additional costs
veterinary technicians. In most states and provinces
may be obtained.
the law clearly states that the technician must be un-
der the supervision of a veterinary surgeon, and most
Signature
stipulate that they must be under direct supervision.
Owner/agent's name ..
This has come to be interpreted that the veterinary
(Block capitals)
surgeon must be on the premises even if not in close
 proximity to the animal. This appears to be legal and
Date
acceptable. However, if there are problems, the vet-
erinary surgeon is still ultimately responsible.
 Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons.
5
Lysa P. Posner
Introduction
compared to those in ASA category 1 or 2. Thus,
accurately assigning an ASA score is a proven way to
Benefits of evaluating veterinary patients before gen-
identity at-risk patients. in order to assign an ASA sta-
eral anaesthesia are often underestimated. With
tus properly, a thorough pre-anaesthetic evaluation
 the advancement of veterinary medicine and surgery,
must be performed.
thetize older and sicker patients. At present, peri-
anaesthetic mortality for dogs and cats is approx-
Patient assessment
imately 1 in 2,000 patients. By comparison, peri-
anaesthetic mortality in people is approximately 1 in
Veterinary patients are a heterogenous group, both in
10,0oo patients. Thus, there is still room for veteri-
physical stature and disease state. Many companion
animals are also anaesthetized for procedures other
rates. One approach to minimize morbidity and mor-
than surgery. Knowledge of the procedure can help
tality is to identify at-risk patients and modify the an-
direct the focus of a pre-anaesthetic evaluation,
aesthetic plan accordingly.
although the veterinary surgeon must resist focusing
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA)
only on the obvious problem. Fractious or feral patients
has developed a scale to rate physical status (Figure
may require anaesthesia to facilitate examination, and
2.1). A patient is assigned a category status from 1 to
may be healthy (feral cat for castration) or severely com-
 5. 1 denotes healthy, and 5 is moribund. An 'E' follow-
promised (aggressive dog hit by car). Furthermore,
ing the number denotes 'emergency'. This scale has
patients may require anaesthesia to allow imaging or
been shown to be predictive of anaesthetic morbidity
diagnostics (medical imaging, endoscopy, angio-
and mortality in veterinary patients. Animals with an
graphy). Again, patients range from healthy (radio-
ASA score of 3 or greater are almost four times
graphic examination for hip dysplasia) to severely
more likely to suffer peri-anaesthetic complications
tumour). However, the vast majority of patients are
anaesthetized to allow surgery. Patients range from
sical descrlptlonVeterinary patient
healthy (routine ovariohysterectomy) to critically ill (in-
oxamples s
testinal obstruction). It is important to understand the
surgical/diagnostic plan and whether anaesthesia is
:1
: Normal patient with'no..
Healthy patient for.
ovariohysterectomy or
elective, scheduled or urgent. Pre-anaesthetic assess-
disease
ment must therefore be tailored to each patient.
castration
2
Patient with mild -
Controlled diabetes mellitus,
History
systemic disease that
:mild cardiac vaive.
...
Each patient should have a complete history taken
does not limit norma...
：：
from the owner. This is an opportunity not only to
function
gather useful information about the patient, but also
3
Patient with severe ..
Uncontrolled diabetes
to engage the owner and allow questions and con-
systemic disease that.
melitus, symptomatic heart 
cerns to be raised. Some animals cannot be handled
Llimits. normal function..
disease.
for physical examination or diagnostic testing (wildlife
 Patient with severe
Sepsis, organ failure, heart 
systemic disease that is.
 faifure.
knowledge of the patient the veterinary surgeon will
a constant threat to. life
have before anaesthesia is induced. The patient his-
5
Patient that is moribund
Shock, mulpleorga falure,.
tory should include the following details.
and not expected to live
severe trauma
24 hours wthout surgery
Signalment
Basic information should include species, breed, age,
.E
Describes patient as an.
Gastric dilatation-volvulus,
emergency.
 respiratory distress
Knowledge of breed characteristics and certain medi-
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA)
cal conditions pertinent to the breed can provide in-
 scale of physical status.
formation about additional anaesthetic concerrs (see
6
Chapter 2 Pre-anaesthetic assessment
later). Age might influence whether further diagnostic
requirements (fever, renal insufficiency, diabetes) can
tests are warranted, and influence choice of drugs and
quickly become dehydrated during long periods of
the doses used.
water deprivation. In people, alowing an abbreviated
fast does not result in increased morbidity in healthy
Chief complaint/reason for surgery
patients. Furthermore, prolonged fasting in animals
 This information should include duration and severity
has been associated with increased incidence of
of the presenting probiem. It should include any ab-
reflux and increased gastric acidity. Based on this
information, it is probably prudent to have a moder-
 Although this will narrow the focus, the veterinary sur-
ate fasting period.(6-8 hours for food and 2-4 hours 
geon should remain cautious, so as not to have tun-
for water) before the premedication stage of anaes-
nel vision', and remember to assess the whole patient.
thesia for average, reasonably healthy patients.
Complete medical history
 Owner comprehension and permission
This information should include any other pertinent
Before anaesthesia, the owner should understand both
medical history, including vaccination and, in relevant 
 anaesthetic and surgical risks. A frank discussion should
areas, heartworm status. It is important to ask the
take place about what to do in an emergency situation
owner directly about each individual organ system
(e.g. 'do not resuscitate' orders). The owner should also
(Figure 2.2) as many animals have concurrent dis-
sign a consent form (see Chapter 1).
 eases that could affect the way anaesthesia is man-
Cleanliness
aged. lt is also useful to know if the animal has
 undergone anaesthesia before and whether there
Due to the hair coat of domestic pets, many veteri-
 nary surgeons recommend that all anaesthetic/surgi-
were any adverse effects. Good record keeping within
cal patients are recently bathed and are free of fleas
a practice can provide useful information.
 and ticks. The patient's coat, season, geographical
location and procedure performed should dictate
whether this is necessary.
Physical examination
Owner
Complete contact information, secial
Ideally, every patient should have a complete physi-
considerations, e.g. consent, 'do not :
cal examination within the week before surgery and a
resuscitate"orders
further cursory examination on the day of anaesthe-
Medical history
Present and previous ilness, surgery and
sia. Patients presented for emergency anaesthesia
anaesthetics, current medications, vaccination
should be evaluated as completely as possible. Gen-
 status, heartworm status 
eral assessment should include the following areas.
Pre-anaesthetic
Fasted, clean, signed consent.fm
preparedness
Body condition score
Patients are generally given a score from 1 to 9 (1 is
General
Atitude, activity, appetite, gain or: loss of weight -
cachectic and 9 is obese). Body condition can provide
Integument
tch,haross,wndsnton
information about chronicity of a disease process, and
Cardiovascular:
Activty staia, cough,tainting piss
can serve as an alert for potential problems during an-
system
 aesthesia. In general, obese animals have diminished
cardiovascular function and are at risk for hypoventila-
Respiratory
Cough, sneze, wheeze, dyspna gaging,
tion, while cachectic animals have poor reserves and
system
change of voice
 are at risk for hypothermia and hypoglycaemia.
Gastrointestinal
Faeces, vomiting, regurgitation
system
.+....
.......
Hydration
 All patients should have hydration status evaluated.
Genitourinary
Urinatin,dtiv stasa
 Skin turgor, moisture of mucous membranes and
system
 sunken eyes can all be used to assess hydration physi-
Central nervous
Mentation, balance, tremor, seizure,...
cally. Hydration estimation is important because de-
system
aggression:
hydrated animals are likely to have decreased
intravascular volume and electrolyte abnormalities.
 Guidelines on which areas to concentrate on
Whenever possible, rehydration and electrolyte
while taking a patient's history.
stabilization should take place before anaesthesia
(see Chapter 16).
Preparation for anaesthesia
Cardiovascular system
Fasting/water deprivation
All patients should have mucous membrane colour and
Fasting is routinely recommended before general an-
 capillary refill time assessed, and the heart auscultated
 aesthesia to decrease the amount of food and fluid
for rate, rhythm and murmurs. Pulses should be exam-
in the stomach, and decrease risk of aspiration. Fast-
 ined for subjective assessment of vascular tone and
ing is considered unpleasant by many owners and
synchronicity with heart sounds. Murmurs and
 can be deleterious in some patients. Young or thin
 arrhythmias can be indicators of significant cardiac dys-
animals or patients with a fast metabolism are at risk
function and should be further evaluated before an-
for hypoglycaemia. Patients with increased fluid
aesthesia (e.g. radiographs, electrocardiogram (ECG)).
7
Chapter 2 Pre-anaesthetic assessment
Pulmonary system
tempting to simply 'run every test', it is wiser to run
All patients should have breathing patterns observed
tests on body systems where results will alter the
at rest, colour of mucous membranes assessed and
anaesthetic plan. As more information is obtained,
lungs auscultated for breath sounds. Additionally, the
 the risk assessment associated with anaesthesia
trachea should be palpated and an attempt made to
may change and owners should be updated with this
elicit a cough. Inducible coughs can indicate tracheitis
information before the animal is anaesthetized.
or colapsing trachea, both of which could increase peri-
Although there is controversy regarding the per-
anaesthetic morbidity. Attention is directed to increased
 centage of patients that benefit from routinely running
respiratory rates, dyspnoea, areas of diminished or wet
full pre-anaesthetic blood tests, it is clear that if test-
breath sounds, crackles or wheezes. These changes
ing is not performed, no abnormalities can be found.
can all indicate decreased pulmonary performance and
 the need for further assessment (e.g. radiographs, pulse
basic bloodwork prior to anaesthesia.
oximetry, arterial blood gas measurement).
Packed cell volume, total solids, blood glucose 
Gastrointestinal and urinary systems
and biood urea nitrogen
Abdominal palpation should be performed to identify
Minimum bloodwork in young, otherwise healthy ani-
discomfort or structural abnormalities. The gastro-
mals presented for elective procedures should consist
intestinal system is often considered irrelevant in the
 of packed cell volume (PCV), total solids (TS), blood
pre-anaesthetic evaluation, but disease states can
noy asoul (nna) uabou san poolg pue esoonie
have an effect on anaesthetized patients. Viscus dila-
tests can detect anaemia, hypo-/hyperproteinaemia,
tion, pancreatitis and abdominal cavity inflammation
kidney disease and hypo-/hyperglycaemia. This wealth
are painful conditions. Enlargement of abdominal
 of information can be obtained with litte blood, equip-
ment or cost. If any abnormalities are noted, then fur-
on the diaphragm causing hypoventilation. Decreased
ther testing or evaluation can be performed.
Jow blood pressure. Impaired ventilation can result in
Complete blood count, serum chemistry and
hypoxaemia and hypercapnia.
urinalysis
In older or infirm animals, more comprehensive test-
Integument
ing should be performed to screen for occult prob-
The skin should also be evaluated for infection and
lems. In general, complete blood count (CBC), serum
skin characteristics. Although this is often overlooked
chemistry and urinalysis should be completed. These
in a pre-anaesthetic examination;, the health of the
three tests can be diagnostic for diseases such as
skin can affect how anaesthesia is performed. Cath-
diabetes (see Chapter 25), or indicate the need for
eters and epidural/spinal injections should not be
further tests (e.g. bile acids to check liver function).
placed through infected skin, as this increases the pos-
sibility of transferring infection to within the body. Ad-
 Tests for heartworm
ditionally, skin characteristics can point to other
concurrent disease processes (e.g. thin, friable skin
facility or travel history of the patient, prevalence of
to Cushing's disease; ulcerated skin to autoimmune
heartworm disease in dogs and cats can greatly vary.
diseases). Some breeds tend to have thicker skin, and
In endemic areas, heartworm status should be known
this can make vein catheterization challenging
before anaesthesia is induced, as heart failure and
sudden death are possible with heartworm disease.
Neurological system
A basic neurological examination shouid be performed.
Tests for thyroid function
Since all anaesthetics affect the central nervous sys
Ideally, any animal that shows physical evidence of
tem (CNS), it is prudent to find any problems before
 thyroid dysfunction should be evaluated before an-
anaesthesia is induced. Patients with CNS depression
aesthesia. Hypothyroidism in dogs is associated with
are sensitive to many anaesthetic drugs and an exag-
obesity and a hypometabolic state. Hyperthyroid cats
gerated response may be observed with even low
are generally underweight, have high metabolic de-
doses of anaesthetics. Animals that may have elevated
mands and often have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
intracranial pressure should be anaesthetized cau-
Both of these thyroid conditions and subsequent ef-
tiously as intracranial pressure can increase further with
fects on other organ systems increase anaesthetic
certain drugs (e.g. ketamine), intubation and with hyper-
risk. when possible, hypo- or hyperthyroid animals
capnia (common during anaesthesia) (see Chapter 26).
should be treated before the anaesthetic episode (see
Patients with neuromuscular disease can have weak-
Chapter 25).
ened respiratory musculature leading to hypoventila-
tion and hypoxaemia under anaesthesia.
Coagulation profile
Animals at risk for increased bleeding based on breed
Clinical diagnostics
(e.g. Dobermann), disease (e.g- portosystemic shunt)
In addition to a thorough physical examination, many
or procedure (e.g. liver biopsy) should be screened
patients may require additional tests before anaes-
for the presence of coagulopathies. When possible,
thesia. Which tests are performed is based on patient 
blood coagulation tests or specific factor determin-
age, surgical procedure, coricurrent disease pro-
ation should be performed in advance of the sched-
cesses and the owner's ability to pay. Although it is
uled procedure. Abnormal results can. become
8
Chapter 2 Pre-anaesthetic assessment
 grounds to cancel elective surgical procedures due
injuries or cardiac abnormalities. It is imperative that
to a high risk of uncontrollable bleeding. Non-elective
the veterinary surgeon does not lose sight of the whole
procedures must often proceed, but with knowledge
patient in a rush to fix the obvious problem.
that excessive bleeding might occur and the need for
blood products wil be increased (see Chapter 16).
Breed considerations
While it is obvious that the Great Dane, Bulldog and
Radiological examination
Yorkshire Terrier are all dogs, they can require differ.
The most used imaging modality in veterinary private
ent anaesthetic management. Below is a short list of
breeds that have known risk factors associated with
used to assess the size and shape of many internal
anaesthesia/surgery.
 organs (heart, liver, kidney) and can identify abnor-
mal organ position (e.g. gastric dilatation-volvulus
Dobermann
(GDV), structures (e.g. tumour) or densities (e.g. air,
Abnormal concentrations of von Willebrand factor oc-
fluid). Radiographs can be taken for routine screen-
cur in 73% of Dobermanns. With such a high fre-
ing (post-trauma or geriatric patients) or when asses-
quency, it is reasonable that all Dobermanns are
sing a particular problem.
screened before elective surgery. If a Dobermann is
presented for emergency anaesthesia and the status
Electrocardiography
is unknown, the buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT)
Routine EcG screening is recommended for older
should be assessed. A dog deficient in von Willebrand
animals, patients with evidence of cardiac disease or
factor or with prolonged BMBT may require additional
patients with underlying disease that might lead to
treatment (desmopressin acetate, cryoprecipitate or
arrhythmias (hyperkalaemia, splenomegaly, GDV,
whole blood) to limit bleeding during surgery (see
post-traumatic myocarditis). For veterinary surgeons
Chapter 16).
who do not feel comfortable evaluating ECGs, ad-
vancements in technology now allow for ECG con-
Miniature Schnauzer
sultation with a cardiologist through a telephone line.
Miniature Schnauzers, particularly bitches, are at risk
for developing sick sinus syndrome. They may
Echocardiography
appear normal on physical examination, but it is pos-
An echocardiographic examination should be per-
 sible for occult disease to be unmasked by anaesthe-
formed in patients that have evidence of cardiac dis-
sia. It is therefore recommended that all Miniature
ease on physical examination, radiographical changes
 Schnauzers have an ECG evaluated before any an-
to the heart and/or an abnormal ECG. Echocardio-
aesthetic drugs are given. If sick sinus syndrome
graphy should also be performecd in patients that have
is detected before an elective procedure, the anaes-
a disease associated with changes in cardiac func-
thetic should be cancelled and the heart disease evalu-
 tion (e.g. feline hyperthyroidism). This examination will
ated (see Chapter 19).
provide further information on anatomical or contrac-
tile changes. This information is useful for establish-
Boxer
ing anaesthetic risk, and to assess the abiity of the
 Certain familial lines of Boxers appear to be quite
cardiovascular system to cope with stress.
sensitive to the effects of acepromazine, and can have
an exaggerated response to the sedative and hypo-
 Computed tomography and magnetic resonance
tensive effects of the drug. There are anecdotal re-
imaging
ports of dogs fainting from what is assumed to be
 More specialized diagnostics can provide even fur-
hypotension. Interestingly, bradycardia has been re-
ther information, but unfortunately these imaging
ported to occur alongside hypotension, prompting the 
modalities require general anaesthesia for veterinary
recommendation that an anticholinergic (e.g. glyco-
species and are therefore rarely useful prior to induc-
pyrronium) is used with acepromazine in Boxers or
tion of anaesthesia. Management of the patient for
that acepromazine is avoided in this breed altogether.
computed tomography or magnetic resonance
imaging can be found in Chapter 26.
Brachycephalic breeds
The brachycephalic breeds (e.g. Bulldog, Pug) are
thick-necked dogs that often have small tracheas,
 Other anaesthetic considerations
elongated soft palates and stenotic nares. Addition-
ally, the laryngeal mucous membranes are prone to
Recent trauma
swelling, which can compromise an already tenuous 
Traumatized patients can have multiple changes or
airway. Recommendations for these breeds include
injuries that increase anaesthetic risk. Recently trau-
matized animals often require anaesthesia for surgi-
tracheal tube (which might be smaller than expected
cal repair of obvious injuries (e.g. fractured limbs). It 
based on the weight of the dog), and late extubation
should be remembered that these patients often have
a   u op a m 
more than one injury (see Chapters 19, 21 and 26). It 
of these breeds shouid be monitored post extubation
is commonplace for these patients to have hidden in-
for a rumber of hours for any sign of respiratory dis-
 juries that are potentiallylife-threatening (e.g. pneumo-
tress. Heavy sedation should be avoided unless the
thorax). Traumatized patients should be evaluated for
patient can be closely monitored with attention to
presence of shock,. bleeding, abdominal or thoracic
oxygenation and ventilation.
6
Chapter 2 Pre-anaesthetic assessment
Greyhounds and sighthounds
Anaesthetic recovery from thiopental occurs through
overdoses can result in ECG and contractility abnor-
redistribution. The drug moves from brain to blood to
malities. Patients treated with cardiac glycosides are
fat and is eventually removed through hepatic meta-
sensitive to hypomagnesaemia, hypokalaemia, hypo-
bolism. Therefore, dogs with low fat stores, either
volaemia and hypoxaemia, and these conditions will
through genetics or disease, tend to have higher con-
increase ventricular arrhythmias. Patients receiving
centrations of intravenously administered drugs in cir-
digoxin should not receive anticholinergics.
culating blood, and this can lead to lengthy recoveries
and potential overdosing. Sighthounds tend to be lean
Beta blockers: Beta blockers (e.g. propranolol,
dogs with a low fat:body mass ratio. In addition to lower
esmolol) are class Il anti-arrhythmics and block beta-1
fat deposits, Greyhounds are missing a iver enzyme
and beta-2 adrenergic receptors. These drugs are
needed for metabolism of barbiturates; therefore the
primarily used to treat tachyarrhythmia and their use
effects can be prolonged (up to four times longer than
alongside anaesthetic drugs can result in bradycar-
in mixed breed dogs). Aithough barbiturates do not
dia and decreased cardiac contractility.
depress the cardiovascular system in Greyhounds or
sighthounds any more than in other breeds, the pro-
Analgesics
longed recovery would suggest they not be used in
 Opioids: Opioids (e.g. morphine, methadone, hydro-
these breeds, or used with care. There are better al-
morphone, fentanyl) are drugs that bind to opioid
ternatives available for induction such as propofol or 
receptors and provide analgesia. Aside from analgesia
a ketamine/diazepam combination.
these drugs can cause clinically significant bradycar-
Concurrent drug use
dia, second-degree heart block, respiratory depres-
sion and vomiting, and are synergistic with other
Many veterinary patients require anaesthesia while
anaesthetic drugs. Care should be taken routinely to
receiving medications for other disease processes. It
monitor the patient's heart and respiratory rate when
is imperative that the drugs are identified and a deci-
using these drugs.
sion made whether to discontinue their administra-
tion, or to avoid certain anaesthetic drugs.
Tramadol: This is by classification a mu opioid ago-
nist, but analgesia is also from inhibition of noradren-
Antibiotics
aline and serotonin uptake. Tramadol is gaining favour
Many animals will concurrently be receiving antibiotic
in the veterinary community because it is not control-
therapy, although most do not interfere or cause a
led, has reasonable efficacy and can be administered
problem with anaesthesia. However, the aminoglyco-
orally. However, tramadol should be used with cau-
side antibiotics (e.g. gentamicin) can be nephrotoxic.
tion in patients taking monoamine oxidase (MAO) in-
Patients receiving aminoglycosides should be
hibitors or tricyclic antidepressants, which also
screened for renal disease and precautions taken to
increase circulating serotonin levels. Elevated sero-
lmit renal damage under anaesthesia (i.e. good
tonin levels can lead to 'serotonin syndrome' which
perfusion, good hydration). Additionally, the amino-
can be expressed as drowsiness, restlessness, altered
glycosides can interfere with neuromuscular transmis-
mentation, muscle twitching, high body temperature,
sion and could potentiate the neuromuscular blockade
shivering, diarrhoea, unconsciousness and death.
from peripherally acting neuromuscular-blocking drugs
(sih euayise ea) asesip no (wnunone ba)
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs):
These are frequently used for analgesia in anaesthe-
Cardiac drugs
tized patients. These drugs are potent analgesics
Drugs for treatment of heart failure are becoming
through interference with prostaglandin synthesis in the
commonly used in veterinary practice. t is imperative
arachidonic acid inflammatory pathway. Although inhi-
the veterinary surgeon knows the class of drugs
bition of certain prostaglandins results in analgesia,
used and the potential effects during anaesthesia. 1n
inhibition of other prostaglandins necessary for normal
general, cardiac drugs should be continued during
physiological functions can be detrimental. NSAIDs can
the peri-anaesthetic period and side effects should
interfere with gastric mucosal protection, renal blood
be anticipated.
flow and coagulation. Different NSAIDs have different
side effects and safety profiles,particularly with differ-
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors: Angio
ent species, so the veterinary surgeon must be famil-
tensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (e.g.
iar with the particular NSAID and the species in which
ramipril, enalapril, benazepril) are commonly used as
it is used. Patients that are dehydrated, hypovolaemic,
vasodilators to prevent and treat heart failure (de-
hypotensive or who might become this way, should not
crease afterload). These drugs interfere with the renin-
be given NSAIDs. Furthermore, patients with a history
angiotensin-aldosterone system and can result in
of vomiting or diarrhoea, or those given corticosteroids
clinicaly significant hypotension under anaesthesia.
should also not receive NSAIDs.
Cardiac glycosides: Cardiac glycosides (e.g. digoxin)
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists
are positive inotropes used to prevent and treat heart
failure as well as to treat some arrhythmias (increase
Ketamine and amantadine: These are Used to
treat chronic pain states. Ketamine is routinely used
Although these drugs allow the heart to work more
as an injectable anaesthetic, but can be used at
10
Chapter 2 Pre-anaesthetic assessment
sub-anaesthetic doses to treat refractory pain.
the veterinary surgeon is prepared to look for such
When used at low doses it is unlikely that either of
changes in any patient undergoing chemotherapy and
also requiring anaesthesia.
anaesthetics.
Nutraceuticals
Behaviour modification drugs
Many owners administer a variety of 'natural thera-
pies to their pets, and often assume they are benign,
Selegiline (t-deprenyl): This is used to treat dogs
and therefore do not report their use when asked if
with canine cognitive disorder ('old dog dementia') and
their pets receive any 'medications'. However, many
 separation anxiety. Selegiline is an MAO inhibitor 
of the over-the-counter remedies and nutraceuticals
which results in increased levels of dopamine as well
have chemical properties that can react with anaes-
as other monoamines, such as serotonin. Dogs
thetic drugs. For example, St John's wort has been
receiving selegiline should not be given pethidine
linked to serotonin syndrome in people also taking
(meperidine) or tramadol, both of which interfere with
tricyclic antidepressants or MAO inhibitors. From this,
 serotonin reuptake and can lead to 'serotonin syn-
it is reasonable to assume that St John's wort might
drome' (see earlier).
 have negative interactions with tramadol (see earlier)
It is therefore wise to ask if the owner is giving 'any-
Clomipramine: This is a tricyclic antidepressant that
thing else' and research the potential interactions
prevents reuptake of serotonin and noradrenaline. The
same precautions should be taken as for selegiline
veterinary surgeon might not be familiar.
(see above).
Concurrent disease states
Many patients requiring anaesthesia will have con-
Incontinence drugs
current diseases. It is prudent to be familiar with the
diseases and how they might affect the patient in the
Phenylpropanolamine: This is a sympathomimetic
peri-anaesthetic period (see Chapters 17-28).
 creased noradrenaline release. The increase in nor-
Assigning ASA category
adrenaline can result in clinical hypertension and/or
After completion of a thorough physical examination
tachycardia. Tramadol also inhibits reuptake of nor-
and interpretation of the data from ancillary tests,
 adrenaline and should be avoided in patients taking
an ASA physical status can be assigned. Knowing
phenylpropanolamine.
a patient's physical status will better aid the veteri-
nary surgeon in assigning relative anaesthetic risk
for that patient, and in altering the anaesthetic pro-
mimetics which increase urethral sphincter tone
tocol accordingly.
(pseudo-ephedrine is an isomer of ephedrine) by in-
creasing noradrenaline. Clinical signs and cautions
are the same as for phenylpropanolamine (see above).
References and further reading
Atkins CE, DeFrancesco TC, Coats JR et al. (2000) Heartworm infection
Anticonvulsants
in cats:50 cases (1985-1997). Journal of fhe American Veterinary
MedicalAssociation 217.355-358
Phenobarbital: This is a barbiturate commonly used
prevent perioperative complications. Cochrane Database of
to treat epilepsy. Phenobarbital is a gamma amino
Systematic Reviews. www.cochrane.org
 butyric acid (GABA) receptor agonist. Many other .
BrooksM,Dodds WJ and RaymondSL(1992)Epidemiologic features
 anaesthetic drugs work via the GABA receptor,
of von Willtebrand’s disease in Doberman pinschers, Scottish
terriers, and Shetland sheepdogs: 260 cases (1984-1988). Jourmal
such as thiopental, pentobarbital, benzodiazepines
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 200, 1123-1127
(diazepam, midazolam) and inhalants (isoflurane).
Dyson DH,Maxie MG and Schnurr D(1998)Morbidity andmortality
Therefore, patients treated with phenobarbital may
associated with anesthetic management in small animal veterinary.
practice in Ontario. Journal of fhe American Animal Hospital
 have exaggerated CNS effects to these anaesthetic
Association34,325-335
drugs (synergy). In general, it is best to continue
 Galatos AD and Raptopoulos D (t995) Gastro-oesophageal reflux during
anaesthesia in the dog: the effect of preoperative fasting and
phenobarbital therapy and adjust the anaesthetic
premedication.VeterinaryRecord137,479-483
drug doses accordingly.
Aaloog ueowv pue abe jo uoenjeaa (coo) a llouog pue 5 poobso
perianesthetic morbidity and mortality in the cat. Journal of
Chemotherapy drugs
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 12, 9-16
There are dozens if not hundreds of drugs used for
Kawashima Y, Takahashi S, Suzuki M et al. (2003) Anesthesia-related
mortality and morbidity over a 5-year period in 2,363,038 patients
inJapan.Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica 47,809-817
bone marrow while others may be nephrotoxic, cardio-
 Robinson EP, Sams RA and Muir Ww (1986) Barbiturate anesthesia in
toxic or hepatotoxic. It is beyond the scope of this
greyhound and mixed-breed dogs: comparative cardiopulmonary
 chapter to list all the drugs, but t is imperative that 
effects, anesthetic effects, and recovery rates. American Journa!
ofVeterinary Research 47,2105-2112
11
Daniel Holden
Introduction
Patient's name, species, breed, age, sex, weight
Relevant pre-existing disease (if any)
Advances in veterinary medicine, anaesthesia and
Operation/procedure performed and staff
Surgery have increased the ability to operate on a wider
involved
range of patients. This has led to greater demands for
·
 Anaesthetic protocol
a high level of postoperative care, which has naturaliy
 Spontaneous or intermittent positive pressure
extended to the development of intensive care units,
ventilation
and specialist veterinary surgeons and nurses work-
 Use of neuromuscuiar-blocking drugs and their
·
ing within university teaching hospitals and larger prac-
reversal agents
tices. In many practices, however, the recovery area
Pain control
doubles as the ward or patient preparation area; this
General condition during procedure
arrangement need not necessarily compromise patient
Body position for the procedure
care if vigilance and attention to detail are maintained.
+
 Untoward events during the procedure.
The recovery room
Postoperative monitoring and
complications
In ideai circumstances, the recovery room is a sepa-
rate area adjacent to the operating theatre(s), where
Monitoring should be performed at the same inten-
patients are monitored and undergo stabilization for
lun aunpeooid aun buunp se Aouanbeiy pue Ais
variabie periods of time before returning to the ward
the patient's vital signs have normafized. The most
area. Size should reflect both the number and the type
important areas that require regular attention are:
of cases seen. A separate area within the room for
cats and small mammals/exotics is beneficial. It should
Airway
be possible to observe al patients easily and the area
·
 Breathing and gas exchange (see also Chapters
should be well ventilated (current Department of
7, 20 and 29)
Health regulations for human units recommend 15 air
Circulation (see also Chapters 7, 19 and 29)
changes per hour) to ensure effective elimination of
Level of consciousness (see Chapter 7)
·
waste anaesthetic gases; active extraction may be
Body temperature
required if occupational exposure limits are exceedied.
 Pain management (see Chapters 8-11)
Ambient temperature should be kept at 23-25°℃. The
Patient comfort.
foliowing equipment should be readily available:
Airway
A fully equipped anaesthetic machine (preferably
Airway-related complications are among the most
with a ventilator and scavenging)
common problems in the postoperative period. Any
Oxygen flowmeters (on wali or on size E cylinder)
intubated patient shouid never be ieft unattended.
Equipment for induction of anaesthesia
Extubation is usuaily performed once signs of return
Equipment for management of cardiopulmonary
of the swailowing reflex are apparent; it may be pre-
arrest
ferable in cats (and other species prone to laryngeal
Portable suction apparatus
spasm and oedema) to remove the tube earlier. Tube
Equipment for patient warming/cooling
removal should be timed to coincide with expiration,
 Equipment for intravenous access and fluid
so that any accumulated debris or secretions are then
therapy.
exhaled or expectorated. Following extubation, the
patient's neck should be gently extended and the
In the immediate period after surgery, close moni-
tongue drawn forward to maintain airway patency.
toring of the patient should continue in: the recovery
Severely brachycephalic individuals may tolerate the
area. If this involves transfer of care to other staff,
presence of the tube for surprisingly long periods; this
 then a comprehensive exchange of information should
is not problematic, provided that the patient is care-
take place as part of the handover process, including
fully monitored and prormpt extubation is performed
the following information:
when required.
12
Chapter 3 Postoperative care: general principles
Clinical signs of airway obstruction include stert-
Therapy for the above causes of hypoventiation
 orous (snoring) or stridorous breathing, flaring of the
consists of oxygen administration and reversing the
nostrils and asynchronous motion of the thoracic and
effects of implicated drugs using specific antagonists.
abdominal walls. Total obstruction results in an ab-
Intubation and positive pressure ventlation may be
sence of airflow at the mouth and nostrils. Common
g 'ndeu ea sew weidexop o asn aul essaoau
causes of postoperative airway obstruction include:
it is a general CNS stimulant and excessive use may
precipitate hypertension, tachycardia and seizures.
 Soft tissues, most commonly the tongue and
pharynx: elevation of the chin and withdrawal of
 Impaired respiratory mechanics:
Airway obstruction
the tongue usually relieves signs
 Respiratory muscular weakness (epidural/
 Foreign material (e.g. blood clots, saliva,
vomitus, teeth, swabs): especially common after
spinal anaesthesia, residual neuromuscular
 ear, nose and throat (ENT), endoscopic or dental
blockade, neuromuscular disease, electrolyte
 procedures. Removal of the offending material
disturbances)
'Splinting' of the abdomen and/or diaphragm.
with forceps or suction is required
 Laryngeal spasm: reflex contraction may occur
(obesity, pain, tight dressings, abdominal
following airway irritation or following upper
distension)
Bronchospasm (anaphylaxis, drugs, asthma/
airway surgery. Oxygen should be given by
bronchitis)
facemask and gentle suction of the pharynx
and larynx performed. Atropine may be required
Chest wall disease or injury.
to prevent any reflex bradycardia that may
 Patients in this group also require oxygen, and
ensue. lIf the problem persists or the patient
therapy of the underlying cause wherever possible.
does not tolerate oral suction, then re-intubation
Opioids should not be excluded for anaigesia in these
may be necessary
cases, as they may actually facilitate improved res-
 Laryngeal oedema: this is usually more
piratory mechanics. Patients with chest wall pain may
 problematic in patients with smaller diameter
benefit from intercostal or interpleural analgesic tech-
airways (e.g. cats, neonates) and may result
niques (see Chapter 10).
from traumatic intubation, excessively iarge
tubes or allergy/anaphylaxis. Administration of 
Venous admixture: dependent lung parenchyma
becomes atelectatic due to a fall in functional
 acting corticosteroids are often given although
residual capacity (FRC) of the lung (resuiting
there is little evidence to support their use. In 
 from reduced respiratory muscle tone). This
severe cases, nebulized or intravenous
 results in alveoli that cause mismatching of
adrenaline (0.02 mg/kg) may be required.
ventilation and perfusion. In humans, this effect 
is enhanced by pain, age, obesity and
Breathing and gas exchange
pulmonary parenchymal disease (e.g. oedema,
Adequate ventilation is essential, not only to main-
pneumonia, contusions). Careful auscultation to
tain sufficient uptake of oxygen and elimination of
detect pulmonary crackles and/or areas of
carbon dioxide, but also to permit the elimination
decreased resonance is essential; radiography
 of volatile anaesthetic agents. Pulse oximetry is an
may be necessary to detect more subtie
invaluable tool for assessment of saturation of haemo-
 pulmonary changes. Therapy consists of oxygen
globin with oxygen (see Chapter 7); its efficacy may.
therapy and vigorous management of the
however, be hampered by patient movement and
underlying cause (e.g. analgesia, diuretics).
poor probe contact. Clinical examination of the
Oxygen therapy
patient is often unreliable at detecting even severe
Oxygen therapy is vital in the management of many
hypoxaemia (S,O, <80%).
postoperative complications, but care should be taken
Hypoxaemia in the postoperative period may be
to ensure that the stress created in the patient by the
due to the following factors:
method of administration does not offset the benetit
of oxygen therapy. A wide variety of techniques exists
 Decreased inspired oxygen: supplemental
(although no single one is perfect).
oxygen may be required, particularly if nitrous
oxide was a component of the inspired gas
Enclosed techniques: In these systems, oxygen
mixture during the procedure, as this may lead
flows into a contained area over the head or muzzle
to diffusion hypoxia (see Chapter 14)
of the animal. Most oxygen masks are made of trans-
 Hypoventilation. Potential causes include:
parent plastic, through which the animal can be ob-
一
Impaired control of respiration
served. Several methods have been described by
 Drugs (injectable and volatile agents, opioids,
which increased inspired concentrations of oxygen can
benzodiazepines, alpha-2 agonists)
be achieved, including placement of a plastic bag over
Hyperventilation during surgery
the head, into which oxygen is pumped, and the use
Central nervous system (CNS) disease or
of an Elizabethan collar with plastic wrap covering the
injury
front (Figure 3.1). One must remember to leave a hole
Hypothermia
for carbon dioxide to escape and placement of the
Endocrinopathies (e.g. hypothyroidism,
hole should allow oxygen (heavier than air) to accu-
hyperadrenocorticism).
mulate near the patient.
13
Chapter 3 Postoperative care: general principles
Cat with head tent for delivery of oxygen using
Bain breathing system.
Advantages of these methods include a relative
ease of use and rapid placement in emergency situa-
tions. Depending on flow rates and tightness of fit,
very high oxygen concentrations can be achieved and
access to the rest of the patient is still possible. Dis-
these systems, and build-up of excessive heat and
2
[a) Placing nasal oxygen catheters. (b) Dog
carbon dioxide can limit their usefuiness or even lead
 with two nasal oxygen catheters in piace.
to respiratory acidosis.
Nasal administration: A urinary catheter or soft poly-
thene nasal feeding tube is commonly used. Catheters
may vary in size from 5 to 10 French (Fr) depending on
the size of the animal. The catheter is measured from
the nares to the medial canthus of the eye, and marked.
Following desensitization of the nostril, the lubricated
catheter is inserted gently into the nostril in a ventro-
medial direction (Figure 3.2a) and advanced to the
mark. Once the catheter is in place, it is contoured
 around the alar fold, and sutured or glued in place on
the side of the face (Figure 3.2b). For the most secure
placement, a suture should be placed as close to the
nasal-cutaneous junction as possible. The nasal cath-
eter is attached to an oxygen delivery system with
 Nasal oxygen prongs that are manufactured 
for human patients can be used in many
animals, bilateral nasal oxygen lines can be used. If
canine patients to provide oxygen supplementation.
the nasal catheter is guided further into the nasophar-
ynx under sedation, inspired oxygen concentrations
 Oxygen cages: These are now widely available to the
(FO2) of up to 80% may be achieved in some animals.
Knowing the FO, makes interpretation of arteria! blood
centration of inspired oxygen, a good oxygen cage
gases more informative.
should also allow control of internal cage temperature
 Some animals can be best managed using human
aigedeo aq pjnous abeo uabixo poob y Aipiwny pug
bilateral nasal 'prongs' that only penetrate 1 cm or
 of reaching oxygen concentrations in excess of 80%,
less into the nasal cavity (Figure 3.3). Inspired oxy-
for use with severely hypoxic animals (Figure 3.4).
gen concentrations of 30-50% can easily be achieved
However, the time needed to achieve these concen-
using this type of system, although panting probably
trations may be prohibitively long. Poor-quality cages
 limits the effectiveness of prongs.
will only reach oxygen concentrations of about 50-60%.
Some animals will not tolerate nasal catheters or
Oxygen cages and incubators can be invaluable for
prongs and inspired oxygen concentrations may not
be high enough for very hypoxic animals, particularly
a high oxygen concentration non-invasively is essen-
if they are mouth breathing. This is not a useful
tial. Oxygen cages can be expensive to purchase and
technique in brachycephalic animals or patients with
potentially wasteful of oxygen, since each time the door
facial disease or pain.
is opened much of the oxygen inside is lost.
14
Chapter 3 Postoperative care: general principles
In all cases, fluid support shouid be given to
provide volume and minimize further acid-base and
electrolyte changes while the underlying cause is iden-
tified. Inotropes should be considered if myocardial
dysfunction is suspected. Vasopressors (ephedrine,
roradrenaline) may be appropriate in sepsis or other
causes of inappropriate vasodilation.
Hypertension
This is most commonly caused by:
 Pain (wound/other trauma, full urinary bladder)
Hypoxia
03.4N
 Cyanotic dog in an oxygen cage showing 
Hypercapnia
 signs of dyspnoea. Note the extended neck to
Pre-existing hypertensive disease:
Hyperadrenocorticism
of Dr SL Cantwell, University of Florida)
Hyperthyroidism
Chronic renal failure
Circulation
Diabetes mellitus
Following simple routine procedures in fit, healthy
Phaeochromocytoma
patients, all that may be required is frequent monitor-
ing of vital signs (heart and pulse rate, pulse quality.
 Hyperaldosteronism
latrogenic causes (eg vasopressors).
mucous membrane colour, capillary refil time, extrem-
ity temperature) to ensure a smooth recovery.Arterial
 Patients should be given oxygen (and intubated
blood pressure monitoring is essential in patients with 
and ventilated if severely hypercapnic) and analgesia
unstable haemodynamics, or in those that have un-
dergone more invasive or prolonged procedures. Cen-
while the underlying cause is determined and treated.
Specific antihypertensive therapy is rarely necessary.
 postoperative hypovolaemia, or in patients that are
preload sensitive (e.g. myocardial disease).
Arrhythmias
The most common potential circulatory problems
Arrhythmias are, in many cases, of little or no haemo-
in the postoperative period include hypotension,
dynamic significance. Their effect on tissue perfusion
hypertension and arrhythmias.
-uexe jeoishyd jo Aem Aq Aquo j passasse aq pinous
 ination) and if signs of low cardiac output are evident,
Hypotension
the underlying cause shouid be addressed while spe-
This is arguably the commonest cardiovascular com-
 cific anti-arrhythmic therapy is provided. Causes of
plication and may be multifactorial. Potential causes
arrhythmias include:
can be grouped as follows:
 Residual effects of anaesthetic drugs
 Decreased preload:
Blood loss:
Pre-existing cardiac disease
Ongoing
Acid-base and electrolyte imbalance
Inadequately replaced
Hypoxaemia/hypercapnia
一
Coagulopathy
Pain
Reduced venous return:
Excessive vagal tone
 Aggressive rewarming
Hypothermia.
Drugs (anaesthetic agents, spinal
anaesthesia, vasodilators)
Level of consciousness
 Massive pulmonary embolism
The duration of the unconscious state depends on a
Sepsis
number of factors. These include:
 Increased intrathoracic pressure
(pneumothorax, intermittent positive
 Drugs used perioperatively: agents that have
pressure ventilation)
active metabolites (e.g. ketamine) or drugs
Decreased contractility:
with a long duration of action may delay return
Drugs
to consciousness
 Pre-existing myocardial disease
 Duration of anaesthesia and surgery: a greater
一
Hypoxia/ischaemia
risk of drug accumulation and increased risk of
Acid-base and electrolyte disturbances
other factors influencing recovery, e.g.
 Decreased afterload:
hypothermia, hypoglycaemia, hypoxaemia
Regional anaesthesia-induced sympathetic
Intercurrent disease: hepatic, renal or thyroid 
blockade
dysfunction may all delay metabolism and/or
Sepsis
clearance of any anaesthetic drugs used
Other vasodilator.drugs
 Adverse intraoperative events: hypoglycaemia,
 Over-aggressive rewarming of a hypothermic
hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, hypotension and
patient.
haemorrhage all prolong recovery.
15
Chapter 3 Postoperative care: general principles
Level of consciousness shouid be carefully and
like the Bair Hugger (Figure 3.5) or Warmtouch@. Oxy-
regularly assessed at the same frequency as was
gen supplementation is essential as postoperative
employed intraoperatively. Ocular and cough reflexes,
shivering can raise 0xygen consumption by 300-400%.
jaw tone and response to gentle manipulation or other
physical or verbal stimulation can ali be used to as-
3.59
sess the return of consciousness. Care should be
Bair
taken to ensure that animals that have received neuro-
Hugger@
 muscular-blocking drugs as part of their anaesthetic
warming
protocol have had the blockade adequately reversed,
system.
as assessment of return to consciousness may be
hampered by residual paralysis. Patients undergoing
diagnostic or surgical procedures involving the CNS
 may require other specific assessments or might war-
rant deliberate prolongation of sedation or anaesthe-
sia as part of the recovery process (see Chapter 26).
An elevated core body temperature in the im-
Emergence delirium is a term used to describe a
 mediate postoperative period is uncommon, but may
state during recovery from anaesthesia characterized
represent pyrexia due to infection, a febrile transfu-
by vocalization, abnormal repetitive movement and
sion reaction or sepsis. True hyperthermia may occa-
unresponsiveness to verbal reassurance or com-
 sionally occur in larger dogs undergoing low-flow
mands. The aetiology of this condition is uncertain,
anaesthesia using absorber systems (see Chapter 5),
but in humans it appears more common in children,
the elderly, patients who are anxious or agitated
Patients in this latter category are extremely rare, but
prior to anaesthesia and patients with psychological
if this is suspected any volatile agents should be dis-
disturbances. ft has been poorly studied in animals,
continued and dantrolene (if available) should be ad-
but appears more common in unpremedicated patients 
ministered immediately at a dose of 2.5-5 mg/kg.
and those who experience rapid recovery (use of
sevoflurane and desflurane has been implicated).
Adequate analgesia should obviously be ensured and
Pain management
further sedation (acepromazine 0.01-0.03 mg/kg or
 Pain assessment and management are discussed in 
medetomidine 1-5 μg/kg) may be necessary to mini-
further detail in Chapters 8-11. Difficulties in accu-
 mize the risk of trauma to the patient and surgical site.
rate detection and quantification of postoperative pain
Body temperature
shouid not prevent the veterinary surgeon from ad-
Despite widespread awareness of the risk, hypo-
ministering efective analgesia. The use of pre-emptive
analgesia in dogs and cats is now becoming com-
thermia is still a common occurrence in anaesthetized
monplace, and both opioids and non-steroidal anti-
dogs and cats. The causes are many and varied:
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are widely used
perioperatively. Assessment of postoperative pain
 Lack of endogenous heat production:
should be performed by careful observation of the
Intercurrent disease (hepatic, metabolic, thyroid)
patient's attitude and behaviour, degree of vocaliza-
Starvation/cachexia
tion (often more in dogs than in cats) and assess-
Trauma
Extremesof age
ment of responses to stroking, gentle manipulation
and very gentle examination of the wound and its
 Impaired thermoregulation leading to increased
heat loss:
immediate area. The patient's willingness to eat, drink,
 move and interact with personnel are all useful para-
Intercurrent disease
 meters to assess. Previous drug administration and
 Drugs (e.g. acepromazine)
Trauma
other history should be checked before other anal-
gesics are given.
 Exposure to cold surfaces and environment
during premedication, anaesthesia and surgery
 Radiant and evaporative losses during clipping.
Patient comfort
surgical preparation and tissue or organ
(Aabans Aeo Apog buunp Aleloadsa) aunsodxe
It is axiomatic that all patients should be kept as com-
 Delivery of cold, dry anaesthetic gases to the lungs
 fortable as possible at all times during the immediate
Further radiant losses during the recovery period.
recovery period. All dressings, points of intravenous
access or drains should be checked to ensure that
 The effects of hypothermia are complex and may
excessive tightness or traction is avoided. Recumbent
result in hypoventilation, arrhythmias, delayed drug
patients should be turned regularly (every 1-2 hours)
metabolism, hypoxaemia and CNS dysfunction.
 and care should be taken to avoid limb compression
 or compromise of venous drainage. Bedding should
ature as well as the ambient temperature of the
be kept warm and dry and shouid be of sufficient tex-
patient's immediate environment. This may require
ture and depth to prevent decubital sores or other in-
measures such as urinary bladder lavage with warmed
juries. Prompt, calm and kind interaction with staff to
0.9% saline and the use of waterbeds, heatpads or
provide reassurance and TLC' is aiso important to
more sophisticated methods such as warm air devices
16
Chapter 3 Postoperative care: general principles
Prolonged recovery from
refill, urine output and core/peripheral body
anaesthesia
temperature. Ensure intravenous access and
look for signs of continued operative
Common causes of prolonged recovery from anaes-
haemorrhage or bleeding from other sites.
 thesia include the following:
 Provide intravenous fluid support if signs of 
hypotension are present.
Hypothermia due to intercurrent disease,
4.
Check body temperature - if core body
prolonged surgery and anaesthesia, patient 
 temperature is reduced then institute warming
debilitation, cold environment
mechanisms:
 Drugs with active metabolites with a long duration
 Raise the environmental temperature
 of action may delay return to consciousness
Provide passive insulation to prevent further
Prolonged anaesthesia and surgery not only
heat loss
carry a greater risk of drug accumulation but
Warm intravenous fluids
also incur an increased risk of other factors
Consider active external warming techniques
influencing recovery, e.g. hypothermia,
(warm air blowers, heat pads, waterbeds)
hypoglycaemia, hypoxaemia
Consider colonic or urinary bladder lavage
·Intercurrent disease: hepatic, renal or thyroid
with warmed sterile saline.
dysfunction may all delay metabolism and/or
 5. Check for signs of pain and provide analgesia if
clearance of any anaesthetic drugs used
necessary - cranial abdominal or thoracic pain 
Adverse intraoperative events: hypoglycaemia,
hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, hypotension and
elimination of volatile agents.
haemorrhage all proiong recovery.
6.(
 Collect blood and evaluate packed cell volume,
total solids, glucose, urea and electrolytes for
The following basic steps are suggested as a guide
signs of disturbance. Arterial blood gas analysis
to the management of patients that do not recover
(if available) is invaluable in determining
from anaesthesia within the expected timeframe:
puimonary functional status.
Consider systemic disease (hepatic, renal,
1. Check the patient's airway - if respiration is
stertorous or stridorous, or if there are any
 8. Continue to provide respiratory, cardiovascular
doubts as to the patient's ability to maintain an
and thermal support and monitor vital signs at
airway, then re-intubate.
frequent regular intervals until signs of 
2. Check respiratory function - ensure that both
 Improvement are observed.
 oxygen saturation and ventilation are adequate:
 Provide supplemental oxygen to all patients 
in prolonged recovery
References and further reading
Patients with severe hypoxia (S,O, <85%)
Fitzpatrick RK and Crowe DT (1986) Nasal oxygen administration in
and/or hypercapnia (end-tidal carbon dioxide
dogs and cats: experimental and clinical investigations. Journal of
>55 mmHg) may need intubation and 
theAmericanAnimal HospitalAssociation22,493-503
ventilatory support
McGaffin PA and Cristoph AB (1994) Assessment and monitoring of the
post anaesthesia patient. In: The Post Anaesthesia Care Unif, 3rd
Ensure adequate reversal of any respiratory
edn, ed. CB Dran, pp. 261-288. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
depressant agent using specific antagonists.
3. Check circulatory status: heart rate, pulse rate
Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine t(1), 3-6
Wingfield WE and Raffe MR (eds) (20o1) The Veterinary ICU Book.
and volume, mucous membranes and capillary
Teton New Media, Jackson, Wyoming
17
The anaesthetic machine
and vaporizers
Hatim Alibhai
Introduction
Accurate and continuous delivery of gas and vapour
mixtures of desired compositions is possible by the
use of an anaesthetic machine and vaporizer. Sev-
erai manufacturers produce anaesthetic machines for
human or veterinary use and, alithough the equipment 
is varied, the basic design remains the same and a
working knowledge of the basic components will en-
able familiarity with newer designs.
A standard machine consists of a rigid steel or
aluminium framework on rubber antistatic wheels
with brakes. Antistatic measures improve flowmeter
performance.
Anaesthetic machines are designed to suit a wide
variety of environments. Compact (portable) or wall-
A wall-mounted machine with twin positions for
vaporizers on the back bar.
rail mounted machines (Figure 4.1) may be suitable in 
areas where space is restricted and they may have
single or twin positions for vaporizers on the back bar
Gas supplies
(Figure 4.2). Ceiling- or trolley-mounted machines are 
The supply of medical gases in any veterinary clinic
large and heavy with many components, incfuding an 
or hospital takes the form of cylinders or piped gases.
integrated array of monitors. Machines intended for use 
in magnetic environments are made from non-ferrous 
Cylinders
metais. Modern machines have very easy-to-clean
Historically, these were made from low-carbon steel,
surfaces, and drawers, shelves and rails to accommo-
but modern standard cylinders in the UK are now con-
date specialist accessories. Modern machines are
structed from molybdenum steel. Cylinders designed
mains powered and have a rechargeable battery.
for the home or use in magnetic resonance imaging
The basic anaesthetic machine consists of:
(MRl) facilities are made from aluminium alloy. Ex-
A gas supply
tremely portable cylinders are made from lightweight
Pressure gauges
 steel or aluminium and have a wrapping of fibreglass 
Pressure-reducing valves
in epoxy resin matrix. lmpact, pressure and tensile
Flowmeters
tests are carried out regularly by manufacturers; col-
Vaporizers
our-coded plastic discs around the neck of the cylint-
A common gas outlet
der indicate when the next tests are due (Figure 4.3).
A breathing system (see Chapter 5)
A ventilator (on modern machines).
A size E oxygen
Cylinder with
colour-coded plastic discs
showing when cylinder
testing is noxt cue.
Three wall-mounted anaesthetic machines in a
busy preparation room.
18
Chapter 4 The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
 Oxygen and medical air are stored in cylinders as
Cylinders also conform to a colour code in order
compressed gas; oxygen is stored at a pressure of
to prevent accidental misuse of gas or vapour, and
13.700 kPa. Nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide liquefy
are painted so that their contents are known. In the
at the pressures used to fill the cylinders and in fact
UK, oxygen cylinders are painted black with a white
 most of the gas content is in liquid form. Nitrous oxide 
shoulder; nitrous oxide, blue; carbon dioxide, grey. in
is stored in the liquid phase, in equilibrium with its
North America, the cylinder colours are the same
vapour at the top of the cylinder, at a pressure of 4400
except that oxygen is stored in green, or green and
kPa. Cylinders containing liquefied gas are filled to a
white cylinders.
filling ratio (the weight ofliquid in the cylinder divided
 by the weight of water that it could hold); the filling
Cylinder storage
ratio for nitrous oxide is 0.75. This ratio is very impor-
Medical gas cylinders should be stored as described
tant because if the cylinder were completely filled, a
in Figure 4.6. They must not be subjected to extremes
small rise in temperature would cause a large rise in
of heat or cold, and should not be stored near flam-
pressure and possibly cause the cylinder to rupture.
mable materials such as oil or grease, nor near any
Cylinders with liquefied gas must always be used ver-
source of heat. They should be kept dry and away
tically with the valve uppermost, otherwise liquid will
from corrosive chemicals. Full and empty cylinders
be discharged when the valve is opened.
should be stored separately. E-sized and smaller cyl-
Cylinders are available in sizes A to J: Figure 4.4
inders should be stored horizontaly, or vertically in a
shows the capacity of the commonly used ones.
specialy designed trolley, whereas F-sized and larger
cylinders should be stored vertically. Smoking and
Cylinder identification
naked flames should be prohibited in the vicinity of a
ldentification information on what a cylinder contains
cylinder or in confined spaces where cylinders are
is provided on a label (Figure 4.5), with further infor-
stored; warning notices to this effect should be posted
mation engraved on the side of the valve block. This
and clearly visible. Large clear signs should indicate
engraving indicates tare weight, chemical formula of
the cylinder storage location and the nature of gases
contents, test pressure and dates when tests were
kept there. Cylinders are filed to high pressures and
carried out.
explosions are possible if they are dropped or exposed
UK
"USA.
F
18.
Dimensions
34×4
36 x 35/2
54 x 7
56'x9
26 x 41!g
51 x 5!2
51x82
.Oxygen
680
1360
3400
6800
650
2062
5300
Nitrous oxide
1820
3640
9100
18200
1590
5260
13800
 Dimensions (height x outer diarmeter in inches) and approximate capacity (in litres measured at room 
temperature and pressure) for various commmonly used gas cylinders. (Acapted from Ward (1975) and Dorsch
and Dorsch (1999).)
 Cylinders should be stored:
Under cover
Not subjected to extremes of heat or cold
MEDICLASFORMCO
In dry clean well ventiated storage areas
%0mi
CONFOHNST
Separately from industrial and non-medical gases
 Cylinders should not be stored:
Near stocks of combustible material
Near sources of heat
Fulland empty cylinders should be stored separately
Plastic label
 Full cylinders should be used in strict rotation (the earliest date
attached to a
size F oxygen cylinder
cylinder should be used first)
 showing conienis and
 F-sized and larger cyinders should be stored verticaly in 
other information.
concrete-floored pens 
E-sized and smaller cylinders shoud be stored horizontally
Emergency services should be advised of the cylinder store 
location and the nature of gases kept there 
 Warning notices prohibiting smoking and naked lights shouid be
posted clearly on the storage compound
 Storage of medical gas cylinders.
19
Chapter 4 The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
to high temperatures. Further information on the safe 
storage and handling of cylinders may be found on
the BOC website (www.bocmedical.co.uk).
Cylinder valves
Cylinder valves seal and secure the contents within
the cylinder. Al cylinders come with a plastic wrap-
ping around the valve to prevent dust gathering and
blocking the exit port (Figure 4.7). The cylinder valve
is turned on or off with a spindle; only sufficient force
shouid be used to close a vaive. Valves must not be
fubricated and must be kept free from carbon-
based oils and greases; failure fo observe this can
result in explosion.
[a)
Size E oxygen
Pin-indexed yokes for (a) a size E oxygen
cylinder with
cyiinder and (b) a size E nitrous oxide cylinder.
protective plastic
wrapping around the
A Bodok
valve block.
seaf.
Cylinder yokes may also be fitted with one-way,
spring-loaded check valves. These prevent retrograde
gas flow through the inlet nipple of vacant hanger
yokes when a pipeline gas source is in use. They also
allow changing of empty cylinders, by preventing gas 
transfer from a high-pressure (fresh) cylinder to a low-
Pin index system
pressure (used) cylinder. Check valves are difficult to
- s su o p ae saa ss xau u
locate within the yokes: their presence is confirmed
ders that are commonly connected to anaesthetic
by removing a cylinder from the yoke under test and
machines. This prevents the fitting of a cylinder of the
allowing an alternative source of the same gas to be
wrong gas to a yoke on the anaesthetic machine. The
turned on. A hiss at the yoke will indicate a malfunc-
cylinder valve block bears a specific configuration of
tioning or absent check valve. If the check vaive func-
holes for each medical gas, which fit on a matching
tion is unknown then it is safer to close the cylinder
configuration of pins protruding from the yoke on the 
that is empty before opening a new one.
anaesthetic machine (Figures 4.8 and Figure 4.9). This
allows only the correct gas cylinder to be fitted to that
Pipeline supply
yoke. The exit port for the gas will not fit and seal
The source of pipeline gas supply can be a cylinder
against the Bodok seal (Figure 4.10) on the yoke un-
manifold, liquid oxygen storage tank or oxygen
less the holes and the pins are aligned. The Bodok
concentrators.
seal should be inspected for damage prior to use, and 
spare seals shouid always be available.
Cylinder manifold
      
folds that supply oxygen and nitrous oxide. An aver-
 age cylinder manifoid configuration has two banks of
gas cylinders with a centrally located panel (Figure
4.11), which provides a nominal output of 400 kPa
yuea ,Aqpueis, ol ,Ainp, wouy laaoabueuo aul (eg t)
shouid ideally be automatic, achieved through a pres-
sure-sensitive device that detects when the cylinders
are nearly empty. This changeover also alerts staff to
change the cylinders. The arrangement should also
contain a manually operated emergency bank with two
 cylinders. The total capacity of the bank should be
based on 1 week's supply of gas, with a minimum of 2
5
days' supply on each bank and a supply for 3 days on
the spare cyinders held in the manifold room. Nitrous
 Pin indexing on the vaive biocks of [a] a size
 E oxygen cylinder and (b) a size E nitrous
oxide manifolds have heaters fitted to the supply line
oxide cyinder.
to prevent freezing during periods of high demand.
20
Chapter 4  The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
The VIE has a pressure regulator that allows
 oxygen to enter the pipelines and maintains the
An oxygen cylinder
pressure throughout the pipelines at 400 kPa
manifold
A safety valve, which functions at 1700 kPa,
allows gas to escape during periods of low
demand. During periods of high demand, a
control valve opens, allowing iquid oxygen to
 Oxygen liquefies at -150°℃ to -170°C, and is stored 
at pressures of up to 500-1000 kPa. The storage ves-
sel rests on a weighing balance to measure the mass
of liquid. When required, fresh supplies of liquid oxy-
gen are pumped from a tanker into the vessel. At
atmospheric pressure and temperatures of 15*C,
liquid oxygen can give 842 times its volume in gas.
Oxygen concentrators
These devices separate oxygen from air by chemical
The manifold room should be:
means, and all the currently available modeis are elec-
 Constructed from sturdy material which is fireproof
trically powered. Low-pressure generators will supply
one anaesthetic machine (Figure 4.13), whereas high-
Well venfilated
ldeally located to allow delivery and distribution
pressure models can be connected to the manifold of
in the hospital
an existing pipeline system.
Well lit
The Krutech
Temperature regulated
Onyx 8 low-
Contain only cylinders used for pipeline supply
pressure oxygen
Not used as a general store
generator. This unit 
Fitted with warning signs on the outside and
delivers up to 8 I/rminute
inside of the building.
of dry oxygen with a
94% purity at a pressure
of 130 kPa.
Only suitably trained persons should be allowed
to change cylinders and a logbook must be completed
when they are changed.
Liguid oxygen storage
When the annual consumption of a veterinary hospi-
tal is considered too great for a cylinder manifold, a
vacuum-insulated evaporator (VIE) for liquid oxygen
is the most economical way to store and supply oxy-
gen (Figure 4.12). This has significant advantages:
Distribution systems
It is a semi-permanent installation and is filled
Medical gases are distributed throughout the hospital
from a remote point, which removes the need for
at a pressure of 400 kPa, through pipelines designed
manually handling and connecting large 
to achieve a minimum pressure drop from the source
cylinders
to the point of use. Oxygen, nitrous oxide and medi-
cal air are the most common gases normaly distrib-
uted by pipeline in veterinary hospitals within the UK.
Newly installed gas pipelines should be inspected and
purged according to the laws of the country in which
the hospital is located. The gases are fed into a
labelled and colour-coded pipeline distribution network,
which terminates in self-sealing (Schrader) sockets
(o buao e uo o (tt't anaii) m aun ui haa
A European standard governs the dimensioning and
construction of the terminal unit and its associated
 probe. A flexible pipeline connects the terminal outlet
to the anaesthetic machine or other medical equip-
ment. Each ffexible pipeline has three components:
The Schrader probe (Figure 4.15). To prevent
 misconnection to the wrong gas service, the
probe for each gas supply has a protruding
indexing collar with unique diameter, which only
oxygen
fits the Schrader assembly for the same gas
21
Chapter 4 The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
Alarms
There are several different types of alarm used within
the hospital medical gas system: the main plant alarms
and the locai alarms. The main alarm is to provide an
indication of the plant status and to provide advance
warnings that something might be in process of failure.
In addition to the indicators on the main plant panel, a
visual indicator will appear on each manifold providing 
more detailed information on the nature of the fault.
The local alarm is more an indication that fhe problem 
has already occurred at the point of use. Each local
Self-sealing wall mounted terminal outlels
area is monitored by a pressure switch that detects
('Schrader sockets') for (a] oxygen and 
high or low pressure within the pipeline, near an area
[b] nitrous oxide.
valved service unit in the local zone. Alarms are both
visual and audible; the audible alarm can be muted for
Schrader
15 minutes. Ifthe fault has not been rectified, the alarm
 probes and
hoses for the ierminal 
will reset itself until the problem has been cured.
 outlets. From top to 
bottom: medical air: 
oxygen; nitrous oxide.
The anaesthetic machine
Most anaesthetic machines should have the folow-
ing features to ensure the safe delivery of anaesthetic
gases and vapours:
Pressure gauges (colour coded for each gas)
 Pressure-reducing valves (pressure regulators)
 Flowmeters that are colour-coded for oxygen,
 Flexible hose. Modern hoses are colour-coded
nitrous oxide and medical air
for each gas: oxygen is white: nitrous oxide is
 Baffling the oxygen flowmeter so that it is the
French blue; medical air is black and white
last gas to be mixed with the other gases (to
 Non-interchangeable screw thread (NIST) for 
 prevent delivery of a hypoxic mixture to the
connection to the anaesthetic machine (Figure
patient in the event of a cracked flowmeter tube)
4.16). This ensures a hose connection specific
Oxygen low pressure provides the cut-off for
to each gas service. lt comprises a nut and
nitrous oxide
probe: the probe has a unique profile for each
 Pin index system for cylinders and a NiST for
gas, which fits only the union on the machine for
pipelines
that gas. The nut has the same diameter and
An oxygen failure alarm
thread for all services, but can only be attached 
 At least one reserve oxygen cylinder on
to the machine when the probe is engaged. The
machines that use pipeline supply, and two
term NIST is therefore misleading. because the
 oxygen cylinders on machines that do not use a
screw thread does not determine the unique fit.
pipeline supply.
A one-way valve ensures unidirectional flow.
Pressure gauges
These measure the pressure of the gas in the pipe-
line and cylinders, using Bourdon gauges. The pres-
sure gauges in older machines are mounted above
the cylinder yoke, while in modern machines they are
mounted on the front panel (Figure 4.17).
6
Non-interchangeable screw
threads (NIST) for
[a] nitrous oxide and 
 (b) oxygen.
[e] Attachments to
anaesthetic machine.
 Pressure gauges for oxygen and nitrous
 oxide on the front panel of a modern
C]
anaesthetic machine.
22
Chapter 4 The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
The gauges are labelled, colour-coded and cali-
Machines holding more than two cylinders have
brated for each gas or vapour. The pressure gauge
one regulator per cylinder. Piped gases are regulated
for oxygen indicates the gas volume in the cylinder,
at their source. Complex pressure regulators incor-
calculated using Boyle's law (PV-K). For example,
porating pressure gauges, regulators, flowmeters and 
an E-sized cylinder contains 680 litres of gas when
a 'bull-nosed' connector are available for the attach-
flled to 13,700 kPa at 20*C. At the same tempera-
ment of pipelines to larger cylinders.
ture, a pressure gauge registering 4500 kPa indicates
Pressure relief valves (opening at a pressure of
that only 230 litres remain.
570-700 kPa) are fitted downstream on the anaesthetic
The nitrous oxide pressure gauge does not act
machine to allow the escape of gas should the regula-
as the contents gauge; it measures the saturated
tors fail: these valves may be spring-loaded so that
vapour pressure of gaseous nitrous oxide in equi-
they open at high pressure and close when the pres-
Hibrium with its liquid phase. This remains constant 
paoeldai aq ot paau pue eunidn sew awos 'sllel ains
until all the liquid evaporates, after which the pres-
by a qualified engineer. Modern anaesthetic machines
sure falls rapidly. Gas volume in a nitrous oxide
mary regulators are used to reduce high cylinder pres-
applying the formula:
sures and thus lower the machine working pressure.
 Some machines allow cylinder reducing valves to work
Gas present (itres) = (net-tare) weight (in grams) x 22.4/44
below 420 kPa (60 psi) thus giving the pipeline prefer-
ence and allowing pipeline gas to be used instead of
(The tare weight of a nitrous oxide 'E' cylinder is
cylinder gas. It is preferable to leave the reserve cylin-
about 5800-6400 g)
der on, but some cylinders may leak and empty their
contents slowly if accidentally turned on.
 Pressure-reducing valves (pressure
Using oxygen from an auxiliary port to drive a ven-
regulators)
tilator (or during peak usage of pipeline gases) may
Pressure-reducing valves (Figure 4.18) are used:
aul jo ainssaid bulyiom aul ul uojeniong e asneo
anaesthetic machine. A secondary reducing valve set 
To reduce the high pressure delivered from a
below the anticipated pressure drop smoothes out the
cylinder, so that sudden surges of pressure
supply, minimizing fluctuations.
cannot be delivered fo the patient 
All regulators are tested before being installed to
To maintain a constant reduced pressure
withstand pressures of 30 MPa with no disruption and
(generally 400 kPa) as the contents of the
with no variation of their output over a wide flow range.
cylinder are exhausted.
Gas flow measurement and control vaives
Control (needle) valves control the gas flow into the
flowmeters by manual adjustment. These valves pro-
vide the final stage of pressure reduction, and pres-
sures beyond the flowmeters in the back bar range
from 1-8 kPa. The flowmeter (also called a rotameter)
is a tube made of transparent tapered (wider at the
top of the flowmeter) glass or plastic, with a lightweight 
ball or bobbin (e.g. non-rotating H-float, skirted bob-
bin and non-skirted bobbin) floating on the gas flow
(Figure 4.19). The bobbin (or ball) is held in the tube
by gas flow passing around it, and the higher the flow
rate, the higher the bobbin rises in the tube. The flows
within the tube are both laminar (low flows) and tur-
bulent (higher flows), thus making both viscosity and
density of the gas significant in calibration. The flow
(b)
4183
 Pressure regulators. (a] Oxygen. (bj Nitrous
Flowmeter. [a} Ball. (b] Bobbin.
oxide
23
Chapter 4  The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
rate is etched on to the tube (in litres/minute for flows
The Quantiflex
above one litre. and 100 ml/minute for flows below
MDM. Note
that the oxygen
one litre). Gas flow is read from the top of the bob-
bin; when a ball is used the reading is taken from
flowmeter is on the right.
and that for nitrous oxide
the centre of the ball. Neoprene washers at either
on the left.
end make them leak proof. Flowmeters are designed
to be read in a vertical position. Calibration is done
at room temperature and sea level and the error
margin is ±2%. The commonest causes of inac-
 Curate flow measurements are dirt and static electri-
city. This could be a problem at low flow rates, when
there is a narrow clearance between bobbin and flow-
can cause the bobbin to stick to the sides of the flow-
meter tubing; using an antistatic material coating on 
the inside and outside of flowmeters will prevent this.
An application of antistatic spray will generally soive.
the problem of a sticky bobbin.
The needle valve control knobs are colour- and
touch-coded and bear the name of the gas: the oxy-
Low-flow anaesthesia (see Chapter 5) requires
gen knob is large and white in colour and has larger
 flowmeters that measure flows accurately below
ridges than the other knobs. In the UK, flowmeters
1 I/minute; to achieve this, an arrangement of two
are arranged in a block, with the oxygen flowmeter to
flowmeters in series is used (Figure 4.22). One
the left and nitrous oxide on the right, and those for
flowmeter reads to a maximum of f l/minute, allow-
medical air and carbon dioxide in between these
ing fine adjustment of flow. One flow control valve
where fitted (Figure 4.20). The flowmeters are ar-
per gas is needed for both the flowmeters.
leui os seuio yoea ol luaoeipe pue Aeoaa pabuei
'Cascade'
flowmeter blocks, this resulted in oxygen (instead of 
flowmeters:
nitrous oxide) leaking out if the central flowmeter tube
these allow accurate
measurement of gas 
was damaged, resulting in a hypoxic mixture being
 flows less than 1 l/minute.
delivered to the patient, Later designs of the flow-
meter block ensure that oxygen is the last gas to be
delivered to the back bar (by baffing the oxygen tube).
In the USA and Canada, this problem is solved by
placing the oxygen flowmeter to the right of the block
and nitrous oxide to the left.
A flowmeter
block. Note
protrusion of oxygen flow
control.
In modern anaesthetic machines designed for hu-
man use, highly accurate microprocessors are used
to control the flow of gas.
Back bar
 The back bar supports the flowmeter block, vapor.
izers and some other components (Figure 4.23). The
back bar on older anaesthetic machines has the
vaporizer (alone or in series) mounted downstream from
the flowmeter block and bolted to the bar with tapered
cagemount connector fittings; this makes servicing 
On some modern machines, it is impossible to
individual components very difficult. Modern back bars
deliver nitrous oxide without the addition of a fixed
allow greater flexibility in allowing vaporizers to be
 percentage of oxygen; the interactive nitrous oxide
removed and exchanged with ease for servicing and
and oxygen controls prevent hypoxic mixtures being
refilling. The Ohmeda 'Selectatec' fitting is the most
delivered to the patient. Figure 4.21 shows the
Quantiflex MDM, which was one of the earlier machines
sembly has two female poris with a locking mecha-
designed to prevent delivery of hypoxic mixtures.
nism (Figure 4.24bc), which fit on to two vertically
24
Chapter 4 The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
In order to ensure an airtight seal, O-rings are placed
on the male ports on the back bar. Modern TEC va-
porizers (4-7) also incorporate an extension rod, which
protrudes sideways from the vaporizer when it
is turned on: this displaces an equivalent rod in the
vaporizer adjacent to it and prevents that one from
being turned on as well (Figure 4.25).
The back bar, attached to the right of the
flowmeter block.
 Safety interlock, showing an extension rod
 protruding from each vaporizer; the rod
extends sideways from one vaporizer as it is turned on.
and immobilizes the equivalent pin on the adjacent
vaporizer.
In modern back bars, back pressure from minute
lal
a pressure-relief valve (often set at 30-40 kPa) is fit-
ted in the same housing as a non-return valve at the
right hand side of the back bar (see below).
Common gas outlet
The common gas outlet (Figure 4.26) connects the
anaesthetic machine to breathing systems, ventila-
tors or oxygen supply devices (e.g. masks). The out-
let has a 22 mm male/15 mm female outlet. The
[6
common gas outlet is either fixed or swivelled; the
latter is useful because it reduces the need for the
machine to be moved and facilitates breathing sys-
tem positioning, with reduced risk of hoses kinking.
Common gas
[a] A 'Selectatec' station for vaporizer
attachment to the back bar. [b) Matching
vaporizer assembly showing iwo female ports, accessory
pin and locking recess. [c] Locking mechanism on a 
TEC3 vaporizer.
mounted male ports on the 'Selectatec' fitting: between
Auxiliary gas sockets
the inlet and the outlet ports is an accessory pin and
One or more mini-Schrader gas sockets are fitted to
locking recess. The vaporizers have to be locked on
to the bar by turning a knob. This system prevents
ventilators (Figure 4.27) and suction units. The work-
the use of older vaporizers on the modern back bar.
ing pressure for these sockets is 400 kPa.
25
Chapter 4 The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
Auxiliary gas
Emergency air-intake valve
socketsfor
This valve opens with a loud beep when the gas flow
 oxygen and medical air.
from the anaesthetic machine ceases, allowing the
 patient to breathe room air until flow is restored.
Overpressure valve
This allows release of excessive pressure downstream
from the common gas outlet; as the valve opens it
may also sound an alarm. The device is useful in test-
ing breathing systems for leaks.
 Oxygen failure alarm
Oxygen failure devices are very important on anaes-
thetic machines. ldeally, falling oxygen supply
should curtail nitrous oxide flow and simultaneously
Non-return and pressure-relief safety valve
sound an alarm, which should be gas driven and
This is situated either on the back bar or near the
depend on the pressure of oxygen alone. It should
common gas outlet (Figure 4.28). It opens when back
not require batteries or mains electrical supply. The
pressure exceeds 35 kPa, usually from the use of
British Standard states that the alarm should be
minute volume divider ventilators. This prevents dam-
activated when the oxygen pressure falls to approxi-
age to flowmeters and vaporizers.
mately 200 kPa.
Vaporizers
A vaporizer is a device that delivers clinically safe and
effective concentrations of anaesthetic vapour. Most
inhaled anaesthetics are liquids at room temperature
and pressure, and therefore need to be vaporized
before being delivered to the patient.
The saturated vapour pressure (SvP) of most
volatile anaesthetics is much greater than that
needed to produce anaesthesia (see Chapter 14).
For example, the SvP of isoflurane at 20°C is ap-
      m
 of isoflurane would be rapidly fatal and thus vapor-
izers are used to dilute the saturated vapour of vola-
Pressure-relief valve.
inyasn pue ajes jo abuel e plan pue sojauisaeue el
concentrations. This dilution is achjeved by spliting
Emergency oxygen flush
the flow of gas to the vaporizer into two streams.
One passes through the vaporizer chamber (which
the pipeline or cylinder, thus bypassing the vaporizer
contains saturated vapour), whilst the other stream 
(Figure 4.29). When activated by a button, 0xygen is
bypasses the chamber. The ratio between these two
delivered at a high flow of 30--70 /minute at a pres-
flows (the splitting ratio) is what the control dial of
sure of 400 kPa. Care should be exercised when
the vaporizer dictates.
using this with patients attached to breathing systems:
Gas can be made to flow through a vaporizer in
it exposes them to risk of barotrauma.
one of two ways:
Emergency
 Under positive pressure of gas delivered from
 oxygen flush:
flowmeters proximal ('upstream') to the
this supplies oxygen.
directly to the breathing
vaporizer. This type is called a plenum vaporizer
systerm at a rate oi
(plenum is a term which describes a pressurized 
30-70 l/minute. Note that 
chamber). This is the most familiar type, fitted to
in mocern machines, the
the back bar of the anaesthetic machine.
valve does not have a
Resistance to gas flow is relatively high
locking facility (to
Under negative pressure developed distal
prevent barotrauma).
('downstream') to the vaporizer. This is known as
a draw-over vaporizer and the negative pressure
is generated by the patient's inspiratory effort.
Such vaporizers have a low resistance to gas
flow and are normally used 'in-circuit' in the 
Komesaroff and Stephens' anaesthetic
machines (see below).
26
Chapter 4  The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
Vaporizer performance
fall in output that would otherwise occur as the liquid
The amount of volatile liquid anaesthetic vaporized
anaesthetic evaporates and cools. This is achieved
depends on:
by altering the splitting ratio with temperature, so that
more gas flows through the vaporization chamber
The SVP of the agent
as the temperature falls. TEC vaporizers contain a
Temperature
temperature-controlled valve, which adjusts the split-
Gas flow through the vaporizer
ting ratio; this may involve the use of either a bimetal-
The amount of contact between the liquid and
lic strip or an aneroid bellows.
the gases
When purchased, performance data are provided
The dimensions of the vaporizing chamber
with the vaporizer (in graphical form) indicating ac-
 Movement and tilting of vaporizers: always keep
tual output (compared with control dial seting) over a
upright. If tilted, liquid anaesthetic may
range of temperatures and gas flows and it is impor-
contaminate the bypass and expose the next
tant to consult these before use. For example, at flows
patient to very high vapour concentrations
less than 1 Vminute, the splitting ratio may alter and
Back pressure, e.g. from minute volume divider
affect vaporizer output.
ventilators (Chapter 6).
Measured flow vaporizers
In simple vaporizers (such as the Boyle's bottle),
Examples include the 'copper kettle' (not used in
liquid anaesthetic evaporates so that its temperature
the UK) and the TEC6 for use with desflurane (Fig-
and hence SVP fall. Also, the degree of saturation
ure 4.31). Desflurane has a very low boiling point
of gas leaving the vaporizing chamber is very de-
(23?C), so that it would not stay in liquid form in the
pendent on gas flow (with higher concentrations
reservoir of a conventional vaporizer. Consequently,
achieved at lower flows). This problem of flow and
the liquid anaesthetic is contained within an electri-
temperature dependence is overcome in the design
cally heated chamber that raises the temperature
of modern vaporizers.
of the desflurane to 39?C, at which the SVP is
1500 mmHg. Pure vapour under pressure is then
Plenum vaporizers
released into the carrier gas as required, dependent
on the control dial setting.
Temperature-compensated (TEC) vaporizers
Examples include the Ohmeda TEC3, TEC4 and
TEC5, the Drager Vapor and the Penlon Sigma Delta
(Figure 4.30). Temperature compensation prevents the
TEC6 vaporizer
for desilurane.
a
[b)
[a] Ohmeda
Filling of plenum vaporizers
TEC3 and
[b] TEC4 vaporizers for
In older designs, a screw-threaded stopper in the fill-
isoflurane. (c} Penlon 
ing port is unscrewed and liquid anaesthetic poured
Sigma Delta vaporizer for
in. This alows the possibility of filling the vaporizer
sevoflurane.
with the wrong agent and thus agent-specific filling
devices have been developed:
Key-indexed filling systems: the proximal end of
the 'key' will only fit on to the neck of the bottle
 of a specific agent, whilst the distal end will only
fit into a vaporizer calibrated for that agent
(Figure 4.32)
Sevoflurane and desflurane are sold in sealed
botles and will only fit into the filler ports on the
correct vaporizer (Figure 4.33).
27
Chapter 4 The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
as a preservative) can accumulate and make
the dial difficult to turn. To avoid this, it is
recommended that halothane vaporizers
 are drained and refilled at regular intervals
(usually weekiy).
Position of vaporizers on the back bar
If two or more vaporizers are fitted to the back bar,
their relative position is important. in simple terms,
the vaporizer for the more volatile agent should be
mounted upstream (i.e. closer to the flowmeters). More
correctly, vaporizer position depends on the ratio be-
tween the SvP and the minimum alveolar concentra-
tion (MAC; see Chapter 14). The vaporizer for the
agent with the lowest ratio should be placed upstream
and that with the highest ratio downstream (Figure
4.34). The arrangement of sevoflurane-isoflurane-
halothane (from upstream to downstream) minimizes
the potential for vaporizer contamination from con-
siderations of SVP and potency (MAC).
b
(c)
[a]Proximalend of key-filler forisoflurane: the
grooves on the screw top wilf only fit on to the
 collar of an isoflurane bottie. (b] and (c) Distal ends of
key-filfers for isoflurane (purpie) and halothane (red):
these 'keys' will only fit into the filling ports of matching
vaporizers.
 Correct positioning for isoflurane and halothane
vaporizers on the back bar, based on the ratio
DESFLUAA
 of SvP/minirmium alveolar concentration.
'Vaporizer in circuit' anaesthetic
machines
Examples of these include the Komesaroff and
Stephens' machines. These are basically circle
 breathing systems (see Chapter 5) with one or more
draw-over (low-resistance) vaporizers positioned
within the circle.
The basic design of the Komesaroff machine
[a)
consists of an oxygen supply, pressure-reducing
valve and flowmeter attached to a circle breathing
 Seaied bottles of [a) sevoflurane and
(b] desffurane fitting into the filling ports of
system, which incorporates one or two in-circuit
their specific vaporizers.
vaporizers (Figure 4.35). The Stephens' machine is
similar in design but incorporates a single in-circuit
Checking plenum vaporizers before use
vaporizer and does not have an integral oxygen sup-
 Before the gas ffow is turned on, vaporizers shouid
ply (Figure 4.36).
be checked to ensure that:
These machines are economical to use because
of the very low fresh gas ffows required, but do
They contain enough liquid anaesthetic (and are
need some practice to operate. Disadvantages
not overfilled)
include the possibility of anaesthetic overdosage,
The filing port is tightly closed
especially if intermittent positive pressure ventila-
The control dia! turns smoothly. 'Sticking' of
tion is used. Also, performance of the draw-over
the dial can be a problem with halothane
vaporizers may be affected by contamination with
vaporizers, where thymol (added to halothane
watervapour.
28
Chapter 4 
The anaesthetic machine and vaporizers
Checking the anaesthetic machine
before use
The anaesthetic machine should always be checked
before use (Figure 4.37).
1. Ensure tlow control valves are turned off.
2. Ensure cylinders are turned offandfited securely on the
hanger yoke.
3. Press the oxygen flush vave until n gas fows fromthe
common gas outiet.
4. Check hat flowmeters and pressure gauges are atf zero.
 5. Open the oxygen cylinder valve (slowly, anticlockwise) and
oxygen flush valve. (On machines that carry a second oxygen
cylinder, the tested cylinder should be closed first and the iest
repeated on the second cylinder.)
6. Label the cylinders either In Use' or Full depending on the
registered pressure
7. Replace cyinders with litte remaining gas.
8. Open the oxygen cylinder that is ln Use' and set the oxygen
flow to 2 l/minute. Examine the status of the nitrous oxide
cyinders as in Step 5. Label the nitrous oxide cylinders.
[c]
9. Set the nitrous oxide flow to 4 l/minute then turn offthe oxygen
The Komesarof anaesthetic machine.
supply; ensure low oxygen warning device operates:
[a} Complete unit. (b) Flowmeter on the
10. Check the vaporizer (see text).
Komesaroff machine, designed for delivering very low 
flows. (c) Low-resistance draw-over vaporizers for
11. Check overpressure and emergency air intake valves.
 isoflurane and halothane.
 Checking the anaesthetic machine before use.
The Stephens'
References and further reading
anaesthetic machine.
Al-Shaikh B and Stacey S (2001) Essentials of Anaesthetic Equipment,
2nd edn. Churchill Livingstone, New York 
Davey AJ and Diba A (2005) Ward's Anaesthetic Equipment, 5th edn.
Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia
 Dorsch JA and Dorsch SE (1999) Understanding Anesthesia Equipment,
 4th edn. Lippincott wiliams & Wilkins, Pennsylvania 
Laredo FG, Sanchez-Valverde MA, Cantalapiedra AG et al. (1998)
Efficacy of the Komesaroff anaestheticmachine for delivering
isoflurane to dogs. Veterinary Record 143, 437-440
Ward CS (1975) Anaesthetic equipment: physical principles and
maintenance. Bailiere Tindall, London 
29
Lynne Hughes
Definition and function of breathing
accumulation of carbon dioxide; however, in the
systems
context of anaesthetic breathing systems it is 
possible for patients to rebreathe either partially
Breathing systems are interposed between an anaes-
or fully without an increase in arterial carbon 
thetic machine and a patient, i.e. between the common
dioxide tension (hypercapnia). The amount of
 gas outlet and an endotracheal tube or a facemask.
rebreathing will depend on the gas flow, the
They serve to:
 apparatus deadspace and the design of the
 Deliver oxygen and anaesthetic agents from the
breathing system.
anaesthetic machine to the patient 
Apparatus deadspace: the volume of the
Remove carbon dioxide exhaled by the pafient
breathing system occupied by gases that
Provide a means of ventilating the lungs, by
are rebreathed without any change in
applying pressure on the reservoir bag.
composition.
Minute volume: the sum of all gas volumes
Ancillary functions include delivery of waste an-
exhaled in 1 minute. lt is calculated as a multiple
aesthetic gases to a scavenging system, measure-
of tidal volume and respiratory rate. An
ment of airway pressure, gas sampling and volume
approximate value is 200 ml/kg.
measurements.
Tidal volume: the volume of gas exhaled in one
breath. An approximate value is 10-20 ml/kg.
Other definitions relating to breathing
systems
Basic components of breathing
 Rebreathing: to inhale previously respired 
systems and their function
gases, from which carbon dioxide may have
been removed. In some cases this may lead to
These features are summarized in Figure 5.1.
Notes
(and thirsnonyms)
Breathing tubes (limbs)
To convey gases to and from patient 
May be rubber or plastic
To alow flexibilty in positioning of breathing system
Srmooth intermal bore causes less turbulence
To act as a reservoir
Corrugated tubing is capable of expansion
Reservoir bag (breathing bag.
To ailow accurmulation of gas curing exhalation
Should contain at least twice tidal volume
rebreathing bag; : .
To act as a reservoin for inhalation
of patient
To visualize breathing
Sizes from 0.5-4 lires
To provide a method of assisting ventilation 
Ellipsoid shape
 To protect the patient from excessive pressure 
 Open-ended or closed 
 Compliance accommodaies rise in pressure 
Carbon dioxide absorbent (Waters'
To aosorb carbon dioxide. This allows complete
See section on Breathing systems with
canister, soda lime, baralyme)
rebreathing of exhaled gases
 carbon dioxide aosorption
 One-way valves (unidirectional vaives)
 To ensure that gases flow towards the patient in one
Present in the circle system 
 breathing tube and away from the patient in the other
Valve leailet/disc may sit horizontally (turret
To prevent mixing of fresh gas with carbon dioxide-rich
preferable
 Pressure relief valve (pop-off valve,
To limit the build up of pressure within the system
Most have a lightweight disc on a narrow
scavenging valve, spil valve,
To release waste gases
seating held in place by a spring
expiratory valve,APL valve.etc.
To allow safe connection to a scavenging system
 APL valve imits the maximum pressure in the
breathing system
Fresh gas inlet
To connecthe breathing system to the common gas
Attach with push and twist action for
outlet on the anaesthetic machine
 maximum security
 Basic components of breathing systems anct their function.
30
Names and classification of
during anaesthesia, the fresh gas flow should be
Greathing systems
recalculated and increased
When the vaporizer setting is altered, the patient
The classification of breathing systems is confusing
receives the new percentage of anaesthetic
and terminology is complicated. They have been clas-
agent at the next breath. This makes it possible
sified in various ways:
to alter depth of anaesthesia rapidly
Inspired gas is cold and dry and will contribute to
According to their function (open, semi-open,
the development of hypothermia, especially in
semi-closed, closed)
small patients
Whether they allow rebreathing
High fresh gas flow increases the cost of
Whether they contain absorbent to remove
anaesthesia and also the amount of 
carbon dioxide
atmospheric pollution
 The systems without carbon dioxide absorption
To increase the efficiency of these systems, a
were classified by Mapleson in t954 (A to F).
capnograph may be used to monitor levels of
inspired carbon dioxide and the gas flow reduced
For the purposes of this chapter, the most common
until rebreathing is detected (see Chapter 7)
name for the breathing system will be used and refer-
If nitrous oxide is used, the total fresh gas flow
ence will be made to alternative names and classifica-
may be divided between oxygen and nitrous
tions. Descriptions of the passage of gas in each system
 oxide; the usual oxygen:nitrous oxide ratio is 1:2.
are included in relation to the spontaneously breathing
patient only. For further details on classification sys-
The T-piece and the Bain systems are functionally
tems, the mechanical aspects of individual systems and
similar and require fresh gas flows of at least twice
their detailed use during intermittent positive pressure
 the minute volume to prevent carbon dioxide accu-
: *.
ventilation (IPPV), the reader is directed to a standard
mulation. Both may be used for the spontaneously
textbook on anaesthesia equipment.
breathing patient, but are most economical when used
 In veterinary anaesthesia, the simplest method of
for IPPv. The T-piece is most offen used for cats and
describing breathing systems is by grouping them into
smal dogs, while the Bain is suitable for larger dogs.
systems with similarities in their mode of use.
However, in North America the Bain is commonly used
for patients less than 10 kg bodyweight and the
Breathing systems without carbon
T-piece is rarely used.
dioxide absorption
The Magill and Lack systems allow partial rebreathing
 Some general points when using breathing systems
of gas from the patient's anatomical deadspace. Thus,
without carbon dioxide absorption:
a fresh gas flow equal to alveolar ventilation should pre-
vent accumulation of carbon dioxide. However if these
 There are no unidirectional valves in any of these
systems are used to provide IPPV, this advantage is
systems and so clearance of carban dioxide is
lost and gas flows in the order of two to three times the 
dependent on using an adequate flow of fresh gas
minute volume are required. Both systems are suitable
 The fresh gas flow should not be altered during 
 for small to medium dogs. These breathing systems are
anaesthesia, unless there is a change in the
not commonly used in North America.
patient's minute volume
In order to prevent rebreathing of alveolar gas, all
The T-piece
 fresh gas flows are based on a multiple of minute 
This section includes various modifications of the
volume. Their proper function also depends on an
T-piece, with and without bags, e.g. Ayre's T-piece,
end-expiratory pause. If the respiratory pattern
Jackson-Rees modified T-piece (Mapleson D, E and
 alters, and especially if respiratory rate increases 
F) (Figure 5.2).
T-pieces.
[a] Paediatric
Scavenge
T-piece with APL. valve
(Mapleson D). (b] Ayre's
Patient
T-piece (Mapleson E).
(continues)
al
Freshgas
Patient
Scavenge
Freshgas
31
Chapter 5  Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
(continued)
Patient
T-pieces.
[c] Jackson-Rees modified
T-piece (Mapleson F).
Scavenge
[c)
Fresh gas enters the system close to the patient
IPPV is possible by partially or intermittently
(at a T-junction) and fills the breathing tubing, from
blocking an open-ended reservoir bag, or by
where it is inhaled. After a short pause,exhaled gas
partially closing the APL valve on other
passes into the breathing tubing and is driven by the
(Mapleson D) versions.
continuous flow of fresh gas to the exterior through
Disposable paediatric versions of this system are
the tubing itself, or an open-ended reservoir bag, or
in common use in veterinary practice. Models should
an expiratory valve. The tubing thus refills with fresh
be chosen with an APL valve (Mapleson D). This en-
gas during the expiratory pause. A high fresh gas flow
sures that, during routine use, pressure in excess of
 of two and a half to three times the minute volume (or
the limit cannot be transmitted to the patient: a suit-
approximately 600 ml/kg/minute) is required to pre-
 able pressure limit is 35 cmH,O. This is the maximum
vent rebreathing of alveolar gas (Figure 5.3). Addi-
pressure that can be generated before the valve
tionaf points of interest include:
opens. ln addition, easy and safe scavenging is pos-
sible via a standard scavenging shroud. Disposable
There are no one-way valves or absorbent
 systems must be discarded on a regular basis.
canisters in this system. Thus, resistance to
breathing is low and the system is suitable for
The Bain system (Mapleson D)
small patients. The resistance from the
Two versions of the Bain system are available: in the
 adjustable pressure limiting (APL) valve on the
co-axial version, tubing carrying fresh gas is situated
paediatric Mapleson D is small (2-3 cmH,O)
inside the expiratory tubing (Figure 5.4); in the parallel
when the valve is fully open
 version, the two lengths of tubing run side by side. This
 The requirement for high fresh gas flows makes 
system is functionally similar to the T-piece in its mode
this system uneconomical in patients greater
of action. Prior to inspiration, fresh gas is delivered in
than 10-12 kg
close proximity to the patient and fills a length of breath- 
 It must be possible to contain the patient's tidal
 ing tubing, from where it is inhaled. Exhaled gas passes
volume within the breathing tubing and the
 through the expiratory limb of the breathing system to
reservoir bag, otherwise waste gas (or air) wil!
a reservoir bag, a pressure relief valve and then to the
be entrained during inspiration
exterior. Some mixing of fresh gas and exhaled gas
 The narrow breathing tubing may cause
occurs in the tubing but, provided fresh gas flow is
resistance during peak expiratory gas flow. This
adequate, no significant rebreathing of carbon dioxide-
is of importance in larger dogs
rich alveolar gas should occur. Fresh gas ffows of two
In the Jackson-Rees modification, waste gas is
to four times the minute volume are recommended for
 scavenged through a tail on an open-ended
spontaneously breathing animals: in practice, once to
reservoir bag. Extreme care must be taken to
twice the minute volume is usually adequate (200-400
ensure that the tail does not become twisted and
ml/kg/minute; see Figure 5.3). This may be lowered
obstruct the outflow of gas: the high pressures
 further if a capnograph is used to detect rebreathing.
generated can cause a reduction in venous
As the reservoir for fresh gas (the breathing tubing and 
 return, pneumomediastinum and/or
the breathing bag) is more capacious than the Ayre's
 pneumothorax, resulting in disaster
T-piece, the system is suitable for larger patients.
A
Breathing system.
Multiple of
Fresh gas flow Size of animal
Sutable tor IPPv?
T-piece
2.53
 500-600
Uneconomical if >10 kg
Yes
Bain
1-2
200-400
Uneconomical if>15-20 kg
Yes
Magill
0.8-1
160-200
Uneconomicalif >25-30 kg
Best not unless gas flow increased
Lack
0.8-1
160-200
Uneconomical if >25-30 kg
 Best not unless gas flow increased
 Mini-Lack 
1
200
Upto 10 kg
Yes, if gas flow increased to 600 ml/kg/minute
Humphrey ADE, A mode 
10.5-0.75
f00-150
Up to 10-20 kg
Yes (manual)
'anuw/l g ueu ssal mog seh ysa Aege ue uo paseg e Awouooa uo suawuo
32
Chapter 5 Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
Scavenge
Patient
Fresh gas
<<<
The Bain system (Mapleson D).
When used for IPpV, the pressure relief valve may
The Lack system (Mapleson A)
be closed during lung inflation only and opened im-
The Lack system also allows rebreathing of dead-
mediately following compression of the bag. Extreme
space gas and requires a similar fresh gas flow to the
care should be taken when using the Bain for IPPV,
Magill(160 ml/kg/minute). This system has two lengths 
as pressures within the system may build up rapidly if
of breathing tubing, one which transports fresh gas to
high gas flows are used. High gas flows during IPPV
the patient and the other which brings exhaled gas to
 may lead to hypocapnia and are seldom required.
the scavenging system. The bag is situated between
the common gas outlet and the inspiratory tubing. As
The Magill system (Mapleson A)
in the Magill system, when the patient inhales the bag
The Magill system consists of a reservoir bag (situ-
will empty, allowing the first portion of exhaled gas to
ated beside the fresh gas inlet), wide-bore breathing 
pass into the inspiratory tubing. This, combined with 
tubing and a pressure relief valve (Figure 5.5). Fresh
continuous fresh gas flow, will increase the pressure
gas fills the reservoir bag and the breathing tubing
in the system and drive the second portion of the ex-
before reaching the patient, so that, when the patient
haled breath (alveolar gas) into the expiratory tubing
inhales, the bag empties. The initial portion of exhaled 
where it exits through the pressure relief valve. There
breath (deadspace gas) passes along the breathing
are no unidirectional valves to prevent the patient in-
tubing to the partially empty bag, until the pressure
haling from both the inspiratory and expiratory tubes.
increases sufficiently to open the pressure relief valve.
Like the Bain system, the Lack is available in parallel
Since the pressure relief valve is situated close to the 
and co-axial versions (Figure 5.6ab).
patient, alveolar gas is preferentially vented and dead-
 The mini parallel Lack (Figure 5.6c) was designed 
space gas is retained for rebreathing. In the sponta-
as an alternative to the T-piece for patients under 10 kg:
neously breathing patient, the only requirement for
the tubing connectors are too narrow for larger patients.
fresh gas is to replace alveolar gas: approximately
The recommended gas flow is 200 ml/kg/minute (see
0.8 times the minute volume (160 ml/kg/minute; see
Figure 5.3), although it has been used successfully in
Figure 5.3).
cats at lower gas flows (Walsh and Taylor, 2004).
Freshgas
Scavenge
<<<<<5
Patient
The Magill system (Mapleson A).
33
Chapter 5  Breathing systems and ancilary equipment
Scavenge
Patient
Freshi gas
Expired gas
(a)
Scavenge
Freshgas
Patient
[a} The Lack system
(Mapleson A). (b) The
paraile! Lack (Mapleson A). (c) The
mini-Lack.
(b)]
The Humphrey ADE system
which allow the passage of gas into other
The Humphrey ADE is a versatile breathing system,
components
which may be used in three diferent modes by alter-
An APL valve with a red spindle (to indicate
ing a lever switch (Figure 5.7). As there are a number
aul pnous bubuaaeos e pue (aouewoad
of versions on the market, the reader is directed to
APL valve offers a small amount of positive
the manufacturer's instructions (Arnolds Veterinary
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of about
Products Ltd.) for detailed descriptions of the use of
1 cmHO, which may assist in preventing
each system. The notes below are intended to give a
alveolar collapse
summary of the modes of use only.
An over-pressure relief valve which opens at
The main component of the system is the Humphrey
pressures in excess of 60 cmHO
block, which attaches to the common gas outiet on an
A closed reservoir bag
 anaesthetic machine. The constituents are:
A port for connection to a ventilator
Two connection ports for lengths of 15 mm
A lever which can be moved to the upright (A
smooth-bore breathing tubing. The breathing
mode) or downward (E mode) positions. The
tubes are connected at a Y-connection leading to
lever rotates a metal cylinder with openings
the patient.
 The Humphrey ADE system. (a) without canister, with parallel breathing tubing and reservoir bag. The
ventilator port is not visible. 1 = Lever to seiect spontaneous or controlled ventilation. The lever is in the 'up' or
Mapleson A position for spontaneous ventilation; 2 = Inspiratory tubing: 3 = Expiratory tubing: 4 = APL valve with visibie
indicator; 5 = Scavenging shroud; 6 = Safety pressure relief valve. (bj With soda lime canister attached. (e) Top view.
34
When the patient is breathing spontaneously and
The circle system
the lever is in the upright position, the Humphrey ADE
The arrangement of the components of the circle sys-
may be used in a mode similar to the Lack (Mapleson
tem ensures that gases move in one direction only, in
A). The A mode is more economical than the Lack
a circular fashion (Figure 5.9a). Inspired gas is a mix-
and gas flows of 100-150 ml/kg/minute wil prevent 
ture of fresh gas and previously exhaled gas, from which
carbon dioxide has been removed. The system con-
tains two unidirectional valves: one alows the patient
ing the gas ffow. When the position of the leverswitch
to inhale only through an inspiratory breathing tube
is facing downwards and respiration is controlled by
(limb), which connects to the patient at a Y-piece; an-
 a ventilator, the system may be used in a similar mode
other prevents exhaled gas from entering the inspira-
to the T-piece (Mapleson E).It is also possible to use
 tory limb, instead it enters the expiratory breathing tube
Wea aui oi snoboieue uoyse, e ur waisas aul
(limb), which is also connected to the Y-piece. The other
(Mapleson D), but this is now considered unneces-
basic components of the system are an absorbent can-
sary as the A mode is more economical. A recent
ister, a closed reservoir bag and a pressure relief valve.
 modification of the Humphrey ADE is the inclusion of
The exact arrangement varies from manufacturer to
a removable absorbent canister so that the system
manufacturer. Some systems include a pressure
may be used in circle mode (see below). This further
manometer, which is useful when carrying out IPPV.
increases efficiency, and its use is recommended by
Specific advantages of the circle system include:
the manufacturer in dogs greater than 10-20 kg.
The Humphrey ADE is suitable for use in cats and
The apparatus deadspace is smal provided the
 dogs. The 15 mm smooth-bore tubing has a low inter-
unidirectional valves are functioning correctly: it
is only in the Y-piece that mixing of inspiratory
nal volume, reduces turbulence, encourages laminar
and expiratory gases may occur 
gas flow and does not increase resistance to breath-
 Removal of carbon dioxide is efficient because
ing when compared to standard 22 mm corrugated
the passage of gas in a circle ensures that all 
tubing. A smaller reservoir bag (500 ml or 1 l) should
be used in cats and small dogs.
exhaled gas must pass through the canister
The pressure relief valve is situated remotely
from the patient, allowing ease of access
Breathing systems with carbon dioxide
 Dust from the absorbent should not reach the
absorption
patient as it will settle in the breathing tube
The circle and to-and-fro systems allow rebreathing of
The risk from hyperthermia is reduced, as heat
generated by the absorption of carbon dioxide
removed by an absorbent. Fresh gas flow must include
'sagni buyeag eui Ag pajedissip aq Aew
oxygen at a rate at least equal to that required by the
body for cellular metabolism. These systems are most
The to-and-fro system
economical when used for low-flow' anaesthesia (see
In the to-and-fro system, fresh gas enters the system
below). Both systems may be used in the spontane-
near the patient. The patient exhales through a Wa-
ously breathing patient, or may be used to provide IPPV.
ters' canister, for absorption of carbon dioxide. into a
panoenueu suaiss isou paeis Airoads sselun
closed reservoir bag and gas returns to the patient by
for the veterinary market are not suitable for spontane-
the same route (Figure 5.9b). Excess gas is vented
ously breathing patients weighing less than 12-15 kg.
through a pressure relief valve situated close to the
The advantages and disadvantages of using these
systems are summarized in Figure 5.8.
tages when compared with the circle:
Absorbs carbon dioxide
Allowsrebreathing of exhaled gas, therefore allwing low fresh gas flows to be employed - thisresults in greatereconomy
Warms inspired gas
Moistens inspired gas
Low-flow systems result in less environmental polution
Chanellirckifgasemarthcansttaeorttgant piitad
Absorbent presenis resistance to breathing
Waier may collct in the breathing tubes (particuiar problem in the circle)
 sness
 Deadspace may increase wih the duration of the anaesthetic (particular problem in the to-and-iro system)
May cause drag' on the endotracheal tuhe (particular problem in the to-and-fro system)
a uu wgod reed suisp aosu wass ajpyms ge s
:Canister is prone to leakage
: Advantages and disadvantages of using an absorbent canister.
35
Chapter 5 Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
Scavenge
Patient
Fresh
(a)
gas
Scavenge
Patient
9
[b}
Fresh gas
[a) The circle system. (b] The to-and-fro system. 1 = Fresh gas inflow; 2 and 4 = Inspiratory and expiratory
unidirectional valves; 3 = Patient connector; 5 = Pressure relief valve; 6 = Reservoir bag: 7 = Absorbent canister.
The canister is usually positioned horizontally
Substances used to absorb carbon dioxide
and, as the absorbent settles and granules
In the anaesthetized patient, if carbon dioxide is re-
disintegrate, spaces will appear above the
moved from the exhaled breath, then the remainder
 absorbent. This allows channelling of gases
of the respiratory gases may be recycled and inhaled.
through areas with no absorbent, with resultant
The advantages of a breathing system containing
reduction in absorption of carbon dioxide
absorption of carbon dioxide include:
 The canister is situated in close proximity to the
 patient, increasing the possibility of caustic dust
 Decreased fresh gas requirement (oxygen ±
reaching the respiratory tract, especially during
nitrous oxide)
IPPV
 Decreased expense of volatile agent
The system is bulky and heavy, and exerts
Decreased environmental pollution
considerable drag on the endotracheal tube
 Decreased foss of heat and moisture from the
The pressure relief valve is situated close to the
patient.
patient, which may be inconvenient during surgery
As anaesthesia progresses, the absorbent 
The most common substances used to absorb
becomes increasingly exhausted from the surface
carbon dioxide are calcium hydroxide and sodium
closest to the patient; over time this results in an 
hydroxide. Barium hydroxide was removed from the
enlargement in apparatus deadspace
market in Europe in 2004. Various advances in manu-
When used for small patients (less than 10 kg) a
facturing have resulted in the addition of other com-
significant portion of alveolar gas may never
pounds to increase the effectiveness of the absorbent
reach working absorbent, resulting in 
and reduce the production of toxic byproducts (Fig-
rebreathing of carbon dioxide-rich gas.
ure 5.10)
Properties
Possible problems
Calcum.hydroxide.
 Maini comiponent of soda fime
 Very soft unless mixed with other substances
Sodium hydroxide..
Enhances reactivity and ability.to bind water.:
Ifdry; causes degradation of isofurane, enfuane and destlurane to.
 Usualy present in soda lime..
 carbon monoxide, and degradation of sevofurane to. compound A; :
 formaldehyde and methanol :
Potassium hydroxide .
 As sodium hydroxide
As sodium hydroxide: Now discontinued
......
Baritm
 Contains water of crystalization. Does not
 Produces more carbon, monoxide and compound A than soda lime.
 require hardeners
} Removed from market 
Main constituents of carbon dioxide absorbents and their properties. (continues)
36
Chapter 5  Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
: Water..
14-19% essential for chain reaction to occur
 there is inadequate water, absorbents will exhaust quicky,can
produce toxic compounds and may absorb anaesthetic agents. Excess 
 water wil increase resistance and stickiness
lndicaiors
 Acid or base whose colour depends on the
Itis mportant tobe familar with the xpected colur change
pH. Used to reveal when the absorbent 
Ethyl violet may be deactivated in light
is exhausted
Zeolite.
 Increases porosity. hardness and water
 May absorb anaestheic agent if absorbent is very dry
content
: Silica
To overcome softness of calcium hydroxide
 Calciun chloride and
 Enhance reactivity, ability to bind water and
Colour may change if dried out
 calcium sulphate
improve the hardness
(continued) Main constituents of carbon dioxide absorbents and their properties.
Carbon dioxide is removed from exhaled gases
 Depleted absorbents may appear to regenerate as
by a chemical reaction. The reaction both requires
the granules dry out when not in use. However, the
and generates water - on balance more water is gen-
additional capacity to absorb carbon dioxide is mini-
erated than is required. The reaction also generates
mal and the indicator usually reverts to the exhausted
 heat and a pH change. Several steps are involved
colour after only a few breaths. Absorbent should be
but they may be summarized as follows:
replaced as soon as the indicator change is noticed.
Absorbent canisters are manufactured in many
1.HO+CO→HCO
shapes and sizes. The desirable features of a canis-
ter are:
2. 2HCO+2NaOH + Ca(OH), →
CaCO+NaCO + 4HO + heat
Transparent walls, so that the colour change can
be visualized: this is the norm for modern canisters
 Absorbent materials are granular. The following
Large cross-sectional area, to decrease
details are important:
resistance and dust migration: this is a feature of 
 The size of the granules. A combination of small
most circle absorbers, but not of the to-and-fro
Large enough to contain the tidal volume of the
and large granules is preferable as this
 minimizes resistance to breathing, increases the
 patient in the intergranular space: there is variation
between manufacturers in the sizes of canisters
surface area for contact and absorption, and
 decreases caking and channelling
 Situated in the vertical position, to prevent gas 
Granules may fragment, producing dust. f
channelling through unfilled portions: this is
usual in the circle, but not in the to-and-fro.
excessive, dust may:
 Result in increased resistance to breathing
Practices that avoid the production of toxic by-
Cause caking of granules and channelling of
products from absorbents include:
gases through the spaces which are formed
Reach the patient, where it will cause caustic
Not alowing the absorbent to dry out, i.e. turning
burns of the respiratory tract
off the anaesthetic machine and/or
Settle on valves and other moving parts,
disconnecting the oxygen supply when not in
causing them to malfunction
use, so that there is no possibility of prolonged
Migrate on to gaskets and rubber seals,
gas flow through the absorbent
causing them to leak.
Turning off the vaporizer when not in use
Checking the absorber for excessive heat; heat
 Modern manufacturing techniques help reduce the
increases the production of toxic byproducts.
quantity of dust produced by absorbents.
Signs of exhaustion of the carbon dioxide absorb-
 Precautions for the care and handling of soda lime
ent include:
include:
 Colour change - the colour varies with the pH
Wet soda lime is caustic - avoid touching it
indicator used
(wear gloves), inhaling it (wear a mask) or
A canister that is cold to the touch when in use
allowing it to enter the eyes
 Increased inspired carbon dioxide detected by a
Handle the absorbent gently to avoid
capnograph
fragmentation of granules and dust production
Signs of hypercapnia, i.e. increased respiratory
Reseal the package after opening to prevent the
rate, heart rate and blood pressure, in association
absorbent reacting with air, deactivation of the
with a bounding pulse and wound oozing
indicator by light and loss of moisture
 Granules that are hard, not crumbly (gloves
 Store at temperatures above freezing to prevent
should be worn when carrying out this test).
granules expanding and disintegrating.
37
Chapter 5  Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
C The F
circuit.
= Fresh gas
(inspiratory limb);
2 = Exhaled gas;
3 = Patient
connection.
3
(Courtesy of Chris
Hughes)
F circuit
to maintain and alter depth of anaesthesia and for
The universal F circuit (Figure 5.1t) is not a complete
this reason a simpler and more reliable method is
detailed below.
a-tube) system of breathing tubing in which the inner
and outer tubes diverge at one end. The patient is
Using low-flow anaesthesia in veterinary
attached at the co-axial end, while the other ends can
practice
be connected to the inspiratory and expiratory side of
Following induction of anaesthesia and
a breathing system.
endotracheal intubation, a fresh gas flow of 100
It is most commonly used as part of a circle breath-
ml/kg/minute should be provided for 5-10
ing system when the diverging ends are attached in
minutes. The pressure refief valve should be
the same manner as the traditional lengths of tubing.
fully open during this period. The advantages of 
It is usual for the inner tubing to be the inspiratory
Jimb and the outer tubing the expiratory. Characteris-
an initial high flow include purging the system of 
tics include:
air (nitrogen) and filling it with fresh gas (oxygen
 and anaesthetic agent) and aiso providing
sufficient inhaled anaesthetic agent for rapid
 One length of tubing instead of two attached to
stabilization of anaesthetic depth.
the patient. This streamlined version is less
Once anaesthetic depth is stabilized, the fresh
buiky and may cause less drag
gas flow may be reduced to approximately 10
 It is thermally efficient, as heat from the exhaled 
ml/kg/minute. Altermatively, 0.5-1 I/minute is 
breath warms the inspired gases
adequate for all dogs weighing less than 50 kg.
Water vapour condensing in the outer expiratory
Moreover, many vaporizers require a fresh gas
tube is more likely to cause an obstruction than
flow of at least 0.5 I/minute to ensure accuracy.
in the two tube system.
At this stage, the pressure relief valve should be
The F circuit is manufactured in various lengths
partially closed so that the reservoir bag
contains adequate gas, but without any 
which are useful for special anaesthetic procedures
detectable increase in pressure within the
such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRl).
adjustment during anaesthesia.
Low-flow anaesthesia
 Some general points should be considered when
The circle and to-and-fro systems may be utilized with
using low-flow anaesthesia:
low flows in veterinary anaesthesia. when considering
The contribution of fresh gas to the overall
the minimum fresh gas flow, only the oxygen required
volume of the breathing system is small when
for cellular metabolism need be supplied, as exhaled
using low-flow anaesthesia; many circle
gas is rebreathed. Any additional gas must be vented
breathing systems in use in veterinary practice
through the pressure relief valve. These systems
have a volume in excess of 4 litres. Moreover,
are thus economical to run and result in less atmos-
exhaled breath usually contains less volatile
pheric pollution. Estimates of oxygen requirements
agent than was inspired by the patient,
in dogs and cats under general anaesthesia vary from
especially at the beginning of an anaesthetic.
 2-7 ml/kg/minute. As this figure is dependent on meta-
The net result is that the exhaled breath 'dilutes'
 bolic rate, age, temperature, eic., a safe estimate that 
the effect of the fresh gas, and the patient 
also affords ease of calculation is 10 ml/kg/minute.
inhales considerably less volatile agent than the
True low-flow' anaesthesia involives provision of
vaporizer setting would suggest. The lower the
aa aun iot 'wsogeiau log seb ysay ybnoua isng
fresh gas flow used and the larger the patient,
 duration of anaesthesia. The breathing system is used 
aul uaamag Aouedaiosip al jelean aui
in the 'closed' mode with the pressure relief valve re-
vaporizer setting and the inspired breath. In
maining shut. This method requires considerable skill
addition, this is more noticeable with halothane,
38
Chapter 5 Breathing systems and ancillary equiprment
 because it takes longer to equilibrate in the body
Checking and leak testing of
 than do isoflurane or sevoflurane. The example 
breathing systems
below illustrates this:
The minute volume of a 15 kg dog is
Prior to use, all breathing systems should receive a
approximately 3 /minute (200 m/kg/minute). If
thorough check-over. This is especially important when
the fresh gas ffow during the initial high-flow
a system is used for the first time or following
period is 1.5 1/minute (100 ml/kg/minute), then
reassembly after cleaning.
the diluting effect of the patient's breath is 2:t.
However,if the fresh gas flow during the
1. Inspect the system checking that:
Jow-flow period is 150 m/minute (10 ml/kg/minute).
All components are present and assembled
then the fresh gas containing volatile agent is
correctly
diluted 20:1 by the patient's exhaled breath.
There are no obvious holes, obstructions or
This explains why it is difficult to stabilize (or
foreign bodies in tubing
change) depth of anaesthesia rapidly using
The inner tube of co-axial systems is
volatile agents and a low-flow system. Over
attached at both ends.
time, the patient exhales increasing amounts of
 2. Attach to the common gas outlet with a
volatile agent and the concentration difference
'push and twist' action and ensure the
between the vaporizer and inspired percentage
connection is secure.
of that agent reduces
3.
. Test the system for leaks:
The initial vaporizer setting should be
 Close the pressure relief valve, or the tail on
maintained until depth of anaesthesia is well
an open-ended bag
stabiized. when the gas flow is reduced, a
Close the patient connector with a finger or
higher vaporizer setting is usually required, for
suitable plug
the reason stated above
 Fill the system with oxygen to a pressure of
During the course of an uneventful anaesthetic,
30-40 cmH,O
the vaporizer setting may be increased or
Turn off the oxygen flow and ensure that the
decreased by small increments (0.5-1.0%),
system maintains the set pressure for at least
without varying the gas flow
10 seconds. In the absence of a pressure
If it is necessary to alter the depth of
gauge the bag should be filled until it appears
anaesthesia rapidly:
under pressure and it should be observed for 
The vaporizer setting should be adjusted
signs of deflation
 The gas flow should be increased to 100
 Open the pressure relief valve and
ml/kg/minute for several minutes and the
ensure that the pressure is immediately
pressure relief valve opened fully
relieved
The contents of the reservoir bag may be
Remove the plug from the patient
'dumped' into the scavenging system
connector.
although this is not essential
 4. Check the function of the unidirectional valves
This allows the new vapour setting to wash
on the circle.
into the system rapidly. When the required 
 Specific tests are required to check the
depth of anaesthesia has been achieved, the
integrity of the inner tube of co-axial systems
lower gas flow should again be used
(Bain and Lack). Note that these tests must
During the low-flow period, the pressure relief
be carried out with care as they can result in
valve may be partialy closed, but some gas will
disconnection of the inner limb at one or
be vented to the scavenging system
other end:
If nitrous oxide is used in a rebreathing system,
Bain: with an oxygen flow of 2 Vminute.
care should be taken to provide adequate
briefly occlude the inner limb (with a pencil or
inspired oxygen. Because oxygen is
plunger from small syringe) and note that the
continuously consumed by the patient, and
reservoir bag remains deflated. As this
nitrous oxide is not, the proportion of oxygen in
generates considerable back pressure in the
the system will decrease over time. In the
anaesthetic machine the following may also
 absence of an inspired oxygen analyser, a 1:1
happen: the flowmeter bobbin will drop, if the
mixture of oxygen:nitrous oxide should be used,
machine is fitted with a high-pressure safety
and oxygen flow should be set at a minimum of
valve, it will alarm (if not, the breathing
20 ml/kg/minute
system may be propelled from the common
If the reservoir bag empties, it should be refilled 
gas outiet)
by increasing the gas flow at the flowmeter.
Lack: using a suitably sized endotracheal
Using the oxygen flush mechanism will result in 
tube, cover the inner tubing at the patient
dilution of the volatile anaesthetic agent
end. Blow down the endotracheal tube and
At the conclusion of anaesthesia, gas flow
if any movement is observed in the
should again be increased and/or the contents
reservoir bag then there is leakage from
of the reservoir bag 'dumped' to flush out
the inner limb. (Alternative method: with the
exhaled anaesthetic agent, which would 
pressure relief valve closed, occlude the
 otherwise recirculate and prevent the patient
inner limb and ensure that the reservoir
from awakening.
bag distends).
39
Chapter 5 Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
Common hazards caused by
 The presence of farge quantities of water in
breathing systems
the expiratory limb of a circle breathing
system, particularly if the limb hangs off the
 The medical literature contains numerous descriptions 
table in a loop
 of hazards caused by faulty breathing systems, or
Generation of negative pressure at inspiration
errors in their use. This section covers the most com-
(and resultant pulmonary oedema) caused by:
mon errors encountered in veterinary practice, their
 Inadequate fresh gas flow resuiting in an
consequences and main causes:
empty bag when the patient inhales. Some
breathing systems incorporate a valve, which
 Disconnection of the breathing system (and
allows entrainment of air to combat this
resultant hypoxia) caused by:
Excess 'pull from an active scavenging
 Failure to secure breathing systems using a
system, which empties the bag
'push and twist' action when attaching
 Failure of the inspiratory valve on the circle
components. The most common site of
system to open
disconnection is between the breathing system
 Hyperthermia (and resultant tachycardia and 
and the endotracheal tube. This is particularly
arrhythmias) caused by heat generated during low.
hazardous during surgery of the head and
flow anaesthesia when using breathing systems
neck, when the area is covered by drapes
with an absorbent. The incidence is increased in 
Attaching components that are manufactured
giant-breed dogs and in warm weather.
 from different materials. in this case the friction
generated will not be as strong as if the two
 Disposable breathing systems are in common use
components are made of the same material
in medical anaesthesia, where they are discarded on
Increased deadspace (and resultant
a routine basis: approximately once a week. As the
hypercapnia) caused by:
systems are not designed for prolonged use, faults
Exhausted absorbent in the circle or to-and-
will develop over time. It is vital that these systems
fro systems. This may not be noticed if the
are checked prior to every use and that the veterinary
centre of the canister is fully exhausted while
practice develops a routine of discarding them. The
the absorbent around the outside has not
most common faults include:
changed colour
 Channelling of gases along the top of an
Unidirectional valves which fail to operate - this
inadequately packed Waters' canister in the
may be difficult to detect without a capnograph
Pressure relief valves which fail to open
to-and-fro
 Cracking, splitting or distortion of the attachment 
 Non-functioning unidirectional valves in a circle,
which allow mixing of fresh gas with exhaled gas
for the common gas outlet
 Inadequate fresh gas flow when using
Holes in the breathing tubing or bag 
Disconnection of the inner limb of co-axial systems.
 systems without carbon dioxide absorption
Use of overlong elbow (or other) connectors
between the endotracheal tube and the
Care and maintenance of breathing
breathing system
Disconnection of the inner tubing in a co-axia!
systems
Bain system
For the purposes of this section, breathing systems
 Inadvertent switching of the absorbent out of
 may be divided into disposable and re-usable. As a
use; this is possible in some older circles
 general principle, the closer the equipment is to the
Excessive pressure at exhalation (and resultant
patient, the greater the need to sterilize or discard if.
prevention of adequate venous return,
barotrauma to the lungs, pneumomediastinum or
Disposable systems (single or limited use)
pneumothorax) caused by:
 Failure to open the pressure relief vaive
 Should be chosen if it is suspected that a patient
following leak testing of the breathing system
has an infectious disease. The system should be
Obstructions of the scavenging outlet, as
discarded after use.
described above in the open-ended bag of
 Should be fully checked prior to every use.
the Jackson-Rees modified T-piece
If re-used for a limited period, should be
discarded on a routine basis (e.g. after a certain
open, This is most likely if disposable breathing
number of cases or on a certain date).
systems are re-used indefinitely or f the valves
of re-usable systems are over-tightened
Re~usable systems
 Obstruction of the pressure relief valve with
It is important to adhere to a set routine of thorough
soda lime granules
cleaning and rinsing, followed by disinfection or steri-
 Obstruction or kinking of the breathing tubing
lizing. it is preferable to fully sterilize re-usable breath-
or the neck of the bag by other equipment
ing systems periodically, using heat or chemical
(oftena table)
methods appropriate to the material from which they
The presence of foreign bodies in the
are manufactured. In the intervening periods they
breathing system. This has been reported as
should be dismantled, washed in hot soapy water and
a manufacturing or packaging fault
 soaked in a suitable disinfectant solution on a routine
40
Chapter 5  Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
(weekly) basis. In addition, moisture collecting in the
an indicator that the cuff is inflated. The Murphy eye
breathing tubing from the circle system should be
is an oval hole opposite the bevel. This allows gas
 drained daily and the contents of absorbent canisters
to flow through the tube should the bevel become
should be replaced when the colour change is no-
obstructed or be positioned against the wal of the
ticed - not left till the folowing morning.
trachea.
All re-usable systems must be checked fully when
Armoured tubes are thick-walled tubes with a spi-
reassembled.
ral wire coil embedded in the wall (Figure 5.14). They
The medical literature contains several case
yoau jewxw buunp buuy nuasaid on pasn aie
reports documenting cross-infection of patients by
flexion. Several problems have been associated with
 anaesthetic-related equipment. Although this evidence
their use: they are difficult to insert and require an
is scanf in the veterinary field, the potential for trans-
introducer, and if the animal bites down on them they
mission of infections via this route should not be
may become permanently obstructed.
ignored and procedures should be put in place to mini-
mize the risk.
Endotracheal tubes
Endotracheal tubes may be manufactured from
red rubber, PVC or silicone (Figures 5.12 and 5.13).
There is generally a pilot balloon, which is used as
 An armoured endotracheal tube. (Courtesy of
ElizabethLeece)
There are different cuff types:
High-pressure, low-volume. These provide
narrow area of high pressure generated by the
profile of the cuff may damage the tracheal
mucosa
D
Low-pressure, high-volume. Because the region
of pressure is spread over a wider area, there is
Endotracheal tubes manufactured from
different materials. A = Silicone; B = PVC
less risk to the tracheal mucosa. However, liquid
low-pressure, high-volume cuff; C = Red rubber:
may pass the cuff due to the small folds that
D = PvC high-pressure, low-volume cuff.
may develop in the cuff.
Feature
Red rubber
PVC
Durability..
May be re-used. but wil perish over
Disposable
May be re-used:
 time, especially in sunlight
Repair
 Cannot be repaired. .
Cannot be repaired :
.:.
 May be repaired'
Available sizes
 2-16 mm ID.
 2--11 mm ID
..
Withstands autoclave
No
Yes
Yes
：
Mould to shape when
No.
Yes
Yes
:
warmed
Withstands kinking
No, especially when old 
 Better than red rubber
 Better than red rubber
Ieritant
Yes
No
No
Expense
Moderate
Inexpensive
Most expensive
Blockages visible.
No
Yes
Perhaps
Pre-formed curve
Yes
Yes
No:
.
Ease of.insertion
Easy to insert
Easy to insert
May requre stylet fom cuve
.......
Self-sealing pilot ballon 
No
·.·
Yes
Yes.
for cuff inflation 
Types of cuff available
Low-volume, high-pressure
Low-volume, high-pressure
Low-valume, high-pressure
 High-volume, low-pressure 
Comparison of manufacturing maierials of endotracheal tubes. ID = Internal diameter.
41
Chapter 5 Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
When selecting endotracheal tubes:
Ensure there is a male 15 mm connector in
place, for attachment to the breathing system
 Choose the widest diameter that will pass easily
Lubricate the tube with a water-soluble lubricant
through the narrowest part of the airway.
(e.g. KY Jelly), but do not occlude the bevel or
However, care must be taken not to damage the
the Murphy eye.
larynx or trachea by placing a tube that is too
big, and if in doubt a slightly smailer tube should
 Small animals may be intubated while in lateral or
be chosen. Narrow tubes increase resistance to
sternai (or rarely dorsal) recumbency. Occasionaly
gas flow and so increase the work of breathing.
pathology dictates which position is best, but most
It is best to have two or three possible sizes of
often the choice is personal preference. A trained as-
tube available for every animal. A guide to sizes
 sistant is of immense benefit when intubating small
is shown in Figure 5.15
animals. Dogs and cats are intubated using the fol-
Choose the shortest tube that can be adequately
[owing technique (Figure 5.16):
secured (see section below). This also
decreases the work of breathing, decreases the
1. The assistant grasps the upper jaw, taking.
possibility of intubating a main bronchus and
care not to place fingers in the mouth, and 
decreases apparatus deadspace. Tubes may be
extends the head and neck towards the
cut to the correct length
operator, keeping them straight and in
Choose a tube with a cuff, as this is preferable in
alignment with the spine. Their other hand
most situations; the cuff will result in superior
may be used to help extend the head; it
protection of the airway. Opinions vary on
should not be placed under the neck as this
whether cuffs are desirable when intubating 
will block visualization of the larynx.
cats. The cuffs of modern disposable tubes are
2. The operator then grasps the lower jaw,
manufactured from very thin material which may
draws out the tongue gently and opens the
not restrict the diameter of the airway to the
mouth widely, facilitated by the resistance of
 same extent as red rubber tubes. A cuff is
their assistant
especially important if:
3.
. The laryngoscope (see below) and the tongue
The animal is not fasted: it is more likely to
should be held in the non-dominant hand and
regurgitate
the tip of the laryngoscope placed on the base of
The procedure involves the gastrointestinal
the tongue, rostrai to the epiglottis.
tract, upper abdomen or mouth
4.
.The laryngoscope should be used to depress the
A smaller tube than expected is used.
tongue and visualize the larynx. It should not be
used directly on the epiglottis as the pressure
may cause swelling of the epiglottis.
lean
5. As cats are prone to laryngospasm, the larynx
diameter)
(mm)
bodyweight
may be sprayed with lidocaine at this stage. Wait
(kg)
 30-60 seconds for the spray to desensitize the
larynx, and then continue.
2.0, 2.5, 3.0
Cuffed and uncuffed
1-2.5
6. The endotracheal tube should be advanced over
3.5, 4.0, 4.5
Cuffed and uncuffed
2.5-5
the epiglottis, keeping to the ventral aspect and 
depressing the epiglottis. It shouid then pass
5.6
Cuffed and uncuffed (size 5) 
14-9
through the arytenoid cartilages and vocal folds,
7.8
Cuted
7--15
into the trachea.
 7. In cats, if the larynx is closed when first 
9.10
Cuffed
15-25
visualized, it is preferable to wait for inhalation to
11. 12
Cuffed
25-45
occur before inserting the tube.
14, 16
Cuffed
>40
8.
 Always confirm placement of the tube in the
 trachea following intubation using one or two of 
 Suggested sizes of endotracheal tubes
the following methods:
 suitabie for small animal practice. Note that
A capnograph, which will detect exhaled
 there is farge individua! variation in tracheal diameter in
carbon dioxide
dogs and this table is intended as a guideline only The
A small piece of cotton wool or tissue
Bulldog breed has a high incidence of hypoplastic
paper held over the end of the endotracheal
(narrow) trachea.
tube - this will move when the patient
 Technigue for intubating dogs and cats
exhales
Visualization of simultaneous movement of
Prior to inserting an endotracheal tube, the procedure 
the animal's thorax and the reservoir bag on
is as follows:
the breathing system
 Pre-measure the tube against the patient. It
 Direct visualization of the tube in the larynx 
should reach from the incisors to the thoracic
using a laryngoscope
inlet, when the neck is flexed
Detection of water vapour on a mirror or base
Ensure the tube is clean and the lumen is patent
of the laryngoscope handle
 Inflate the cuff and leave it for 10 minutes to
 Palpation of the neck to ensure the presence
 check for leaks (or test under water)
of only one rigid structure.
42
Chapter 5  Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
Endotracheal tubes (with an inlated cuff):
Provide a method of inflating the lungs; facemasks result in
inilation of the stomach with gas
Prevent aspiration of foreign material (saiva, stomach contents,
blood, dental debris, etc.) into the lungs
Resut in better maintenance of gas volumes in the breathing
system than facemasks. This is paricularly important when.
using a ventilator
Resulit in less atmospheric pollution than facemasks
May be secured with ties: facemasks are difficult to secure
Possible complications of endotracheal intubation.
Endotracheal tubes may:
Be inserted into the oesophagus 
Be inserted into one main bronchus
Technique for intubating dogs and cais.
·
Kink or become cbstructed
Become disconnected
Be biten by the patient and inhaled
Following insertion of the endotracheal tube:
Damage the trachea or larynx or initiate laryngeal spasm
Cause tracheal rupture if not disconnected when turning the
1.
 Secure the tube in place by tying it with a
patient
dol aul oi (engem-uado el!ym :b'a) abepueg
The cuff may:
or bottom jaw, or behind the ears. The
 Herniate over the bevel and cause an obstruction
bandage needs to be tied tightly, but must
Deflate during anaesthesia 
Increase in size when nitrous oxide is used
not occlude the lumen of the tube. ldeally
 Cause tracheal necrosis if over-inflated
the knot should be around the connector
and not the tube.
Advantages and possible complications of
2.
 Position the endotracheal tube connector
cuffed endotracheal tubes, when compared
external to the incisors. This will ensure that the
with facemasks.
handler is not bitten when disconnecting or re-
connecting the tube.
3.
Turn on the oxygen flow.
Laryngeal masks
4.
 Connect the endotracheal tube to the breathing
system, using a 'push and twist' action to
Laryngeal mask airways (LMAs) were developed in
prevent accidental disconnection,
medical anaesthesia to overcome the high incidence
5.
 Check for gas leakage and inflate the cuff.
of haemodynamic changes and laryngeal spasm
Avoid excessive pressure in the cuff (maximum
caused by intubation of the trachea in people. Their
35 mmHg/20 cmH,O) as this wil occlude the
use coincided with the introduction of propofol, a drug
blood supply to the tracheal mucosa. To check
which results in reduced laryngeal sensitivity when
for leaks:
compared with thiopental. Although LMAs have
 Fill the breathing system with oxygen and
achieved great popularity for short, uncomplicated pro-
briefly close the pressure relief vaive
cedures, the endotracheal tube remains the 'gold stand.
Inflate the cuff while squeezing the breathing
ard' for assured protection of the airway. While the use
bag and listening for gas leaks from the
of LMAs has been reported in dogs, cats and rabbits,
mouth - this requires an assistant 
their full benefit in veterinary practice remains to be
Stop inflating the cuff immediately when no
quantified. Intubation of dogs and cats does not present
more leaks are heard
the same degree of difficulty or complexity as that ex-
 Quickly open the pressure relief valve on the
hibited in humans and laryngeal spasm in the cat is
breathing system
easily prevented with topical lidocaine spray. Intuba-
Check the cuff inflation pressure from time
tion of rabbits is technically more challenging and LMAs 
to time during the anaesthetic. Most
may prove useful in this species (Bateman etal., 2005).
commonly it will deflate. However, nitrous
The LMA must not be used in unfasted animals or in
oxide may diffuse into the cuff and cause it
those with a high risk of vomition or regurgitation.
to expand.
Components of an LMA include (Figure 5.18):
 System from the endotracheal tube when turning 
A transparent tube, which protrudes from the mouth
the patient. Cats, especially, have suffered
in a similar manner to an endotracheal tube
tracheal rupture from twisting of the
The tube is attached to an elliptical latex mask.
endotracheal tube within the trachea.
soibida aui siaaoo l! lel os pauoisod s! yoiym
and laryngeal opening 
 The advantages and complications of using endo-
 Slits at the junction between the cuff and the
tracheal tubes, in comparison with facemasks, are
tube prevent the epiglottis from obstructing the
 shown in Figure 5.17.
airway
43
A selection of
facemasks.
Two types of laryngeal rnask airway. Top: Plain
Bottom: Reinforced (the tube is made thinner 
and jonger, and is reinforced with a spiral of steel wire to
Laryngoscopes
A pilot balloon is used to inflate a cuff that runs
around the perimeter of the mask
The main functions of a laryngoscope are to retract
Six sizes are manufactured for use in humans.
the tissues of the pharynx, providing an uninterrupted
view of the larynx and facilitating intubation (see sec-
Insertion of the LMA is as follows:
tion on endotracheal tubes for technique of use). Note
1. The LMA shouid be lubricated prior to use and
that the blade should not be used to depress the epi-
the cuff deflated.
glottis. A comparison of the different aids available for
2. With the head extended and the tongue pulled
endotracheal intubation in smali animals is shown in
out, the LMA is inserted blindly into the mouth,
Figure 5.20. Laryngoscope blades should always be
keeping to the centre of the mouth and parallel
cleaned and disinfected after each use.
to the hard palate.
3. It is advanced towards the larynx until!
Laryngoscope (or bright 
Endoscope
Bright Jight
resistance is felt; once clear breath sounds are
and no aios
detected the cuff should be inflated and the
tube secured in place.
May be used to depresth
No tongue
.No tongue
fongue
depression
depression
The laryngoscope provides
The light provides.
 Poor
Facemasks
better visualiation of the·
excellent
 visualization .
larynx and related structures
visualization of the
oi larynx
Veterinary facemasks are avaiable in a wide range
larynx and related
of shapes and sizes, to correspond with the diversity
structures
in the contours of our patients' taces (Figure 5.19).
Laryngoscope useful for
Most useful if the
Should only
demonstrating normal
larynx is not visible,
be used by
 an airtight seal. The following points are of interest:
anatomy.:
e.g. pathology of"
 experienced
 Masks are valuable for preoxygenation and
temporomandibular
 persons
joint
provision of supplemental oxygen to sick patients
Very useul in brachycephalic
They may be used for induction of anaesthesia,
Most
and Chow-Chow dogs
.：
although if the sea! is inadequate they result in
reliable in 
dolichocephalic
atmospheric pollution
dogs only
Masks manufactured from transparent materials
are preferable, so that the patient's tongue and 
Essentia to use an aid when
No
mucous membranes can be visualized
the patient is sufering from
visualization
laryngeai pathology (paralysis,
of laryngeal
Masks with a detachable rubber diaphragm
collapse, neopiasia, etc.)
pathology
provide a good seal around the face but may be
poorly tolerated by conscious patients
Handling of the laryngoscope,
Most useful if the
No additional
Care should be taken not to exert excess
tongue and endotracheal
endoscope wil fit
equipment to.
tube may reguire a period of
 through the 
handle
pressure when applying a mask as reduction in
 training
endotracheai tube
venous return from the face will cause oedema
to allow passage of
of the muzzie
 the tube over the.'
Deadspace shouid be minimized by using a
 scope (railrading).
mask with an appropriate shape, e.g. avoid the
Many aryngoscope lades are
 Requires expensive.
use of a conical mask in the cat
awkward tor right-banded"
 equipment
..
Masks are usually well tolerated. However, if
persons:
previously used, they should be washed well
Avarietyf sizes and shapes.
and flushed with oxygen as they may smeli of
of laryngoscope blades are-
..·
anaesthetic agent and the patient may resist
availabie
their application
Masks do not protect the airway from aspiration
 Comparison of aids for intubation in small
 of. toreign material.
animals.
44
Chapter 5  Breathing systems and ancilary equipment 
Features of laryngoscopes include:
Detachable blades are made in several
lengths; the most readily available are sizes
0,1,2, and 3
The array of blade patterns available for medical
anaesthesia is bewildering. However, only three
are commonly used in veterinary patients: the
(curved) (Figure 5.21). Personal preference
dictates which is chosen
The light source is situated within the handle,
Usually battery powered. It should always be
 checked prior to use
 An anaesthetic induction chamber.
Light projections may be via a tungsten bulb in
the blade, or more commonly a fibreoptic bundle
from a buib in the handle. The intensity of
Have at least two ports - one for delivery of
fibreoptic light is superior, although the bundle
volatle anaesthetic agents and oxygen (at the
may degrade over time
bottom) and the other for scavenging of waste
Blades may be plastic or metal. Metal blades are
gases (at the top).
more expensive, but also more robust
The high ridge on the right-hand side of some
Induction chambers may be used as an oxygen
blades wil impede the view of a right-handed
cage for small creatures and neonates, although they
 person passing an endotracheal tube into the
are most commonly used for gaseous induction of
trachea with their right hand. This problem arises
anaesthesia as follows:
because blades are designed for medical use
1.F
 Fill the chamber with 100% oxygen for 3-5
where supine humans are intubated from behind
minutes prior to turning on the vaporizer.
(the ridge is then on the left)
2.
 Use a relatively high gas flow to increase speed
Boxed sets are available which contain one
of induction of anaesthesia (see Chapter 14).
handle and up to eight blades.
3.
Watch the patient continuously and remove it
from the chamber as soon as it becomes
unconscious.
The chamber may be used to induce anaesthesia
in wild animals, e.g. fractious or feral cats, or in tiny
animals, where venous access is difficult or intramus-
cular mass is limited, e.g. small mammals, birds or
exotic pets. It may also be used as an oxygen cage or
incubator for small creatures and neonates. while
practical in the above patients, these boxes are not
without their disadvantages:
Pungent anaesthetic gases may cause the
patient to struggle and breath-hold. This results
Types of laryngoscope blade. 1 = Handle
in increased circulating catecholamines and
 containing batteries; 2 = Stainless steel Miller
carbon dioxide concentrations in the blood, with
blade with bulb light source; 3 = Disposable Macintosh
the associated risk of cardiac arrhythmias
blade with fibreoptic light source.
They constitute a considerable health hazard as
they result in substantial atmospheric pollution
when the lid is opened. A double-box system has
Induction chambers
been designed for laboratory animal work, which
evacuates all waste anaesthetic gases before
Induction chambers are usualy rectangular boxes,
the box is opened.
constructed of a clear plastic material (Figure 5.22);
this allows visualization of the patient in the chamber.
Chambers should:
Waste gas scavenging systems
Have a hinged lid which can be closed tightly
Waste volatile and gaseous anaesthetic agents pose
and seal the chamber so it is leak proof
a threat to human health if not removed by an effec-
Have a removable clear partition, alowing the
use of a smaller compartment for smaller
legislation in most countries limits the permitted ex-
animals
posure to airborne contaminants, including anaes-
Be large enough to allow the patient to lie in
thetic agents. For these reasons it is essential to install
lateral recumbency without flexing its neck 
45
Waste anaesthetic gases leave most breathing sys-
tems via the pressure relief valve; there is a standard
scavenging shroud on modern breathing systems (male
 30 mm in the Uk). This should be connected to 22 mm
tubing, which carries the waste gas away from the
patient. By convention, the scavenging tubing should
be a different colour to that of the breathing system,
i.e. blue or red. Scavenging from the open-ended bag
 of the Jackson-Rees modified T-piece is potentiaily
 hazardous and has been discussed previously.
Types of scavenging systems
Active scavenging system
 This is the most effective type of scavenging and it is
probable that it will be required by law in many coun-
ure 5.23):
 An extractor fan or pump which generates
 negative pressure; this is often capable of
a1
 scavenging gas from several anaesthetic
Detail of an airbreak receiver. (a) Airoreak of.
 machines at once. it is usually situated above a
(b) Airbreak on.
false ceiing, where the noise nuisance is reduced.
It has an outlet to the exterior (i.e. through a wall)
and care should be taken in situating this outlet
Prevents build up of pressure if the
 so that it does not in itself pose a health hazard
evacuation system fails
 A length of non-collapsibie tubing connecting the 
Has a filter to prevent foreign material
extractor fan to the airbreak
 blocking the tubing or damaging the fan
An airbreak receiver (Figure 5.24):
Coloured, flexible 22 mm tubing leading from the
Is interposed between the extractor fan and
 airbreak to the shroud on the pressure relief 
the pressure relief valve
valve on the breathing system.
Has a visible flow indicator which is activated
at flows >80 I/minute
Active-passive scavenging system
 Prevents transmission of sub-atmospheric
 In this system, 22 mm tubing carries waste gas from
(negative) pressure from the extractor fan to
the expiratory valve on the breathing system to the
 the patient by allowing entrainment of air
 grille of a ventilation system. The ventilation system
must be capable of extracting gas from the room,
and must be turned on. Ventilated gases must not
ACTIVE ANAESTHETIC GAS SCAVENGING SYSTEM
be recirculated within the building, and care must be
taken with the position of the extracted gases, as in
the active system.
AGSS pump unit
Passive scavenging system with adsorber
In this system, the scavenging tubing is connected to
an activated charcoal container, e.g. Cardiff
'Aldasorber' (Figure 5.25). The container must be situ-
ated below the pressure relief valve, and should not
be positioned near a source of heat as vapours may
Alternative
A Cardiff
'Aidasorber"
Scavenging expiralcry valve
AGSS pum
with scavenging tubing
attached.
Flow inaicator
-AGSS wall
oullet
Aircreak
(Barnsiey receiver)
Standiard 22mTt
Po palert
scavenging hos
Ar: active scavenging system. (Courtesy of
Coltronics Systems)
46
Chapter 5 Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
 be liberated. The adsorber adsorbs volatile agents only
Humidifiers may be of two types:
(halothane, isoflurane, sevoflurane), and does not
adsorb nitrous oxide. There is no full indicator, so
Heat and moisture exchangers (HMEs; Figure
the container must be weighed daly to ensure it has
5.26) are placed between the endotracheal tube
 not exceeded the maximum weight. This requires an
and the breathing system. Their function is to
accurate weighing scale (±0.1 kg). Correct disposal
conserve the heat of the exhaled breath and use
 of the container is essential.
it to warm the inhaled gases. Porous material
absorbs heat from the exhaled gas, allowing
Passive scavenging system
water to condense out and be stored in or
The scavenging tubing takes the waste gas to an out-
adjacent to the porous material. when the
let in a wall or leads out through a window. This sys-
patient inhaies, the heat is returned to the
tem has many drawbacks. The total length of the
inhaled gas and the condensate evaporates.
tubing should not be excessive and there should be
They are most useful when high fresh gas flows
 no constrictions or bends which may increase the re-
are used in systems without carbon dioxide
sistance to expiration. The walloutlet or window open-
absorption. They are designed for medical use in
ing must be lower than the expiratory valve. The outlet
adult or paediatric patients; they increase
is subject to prevailing wind conditions; excess nega-
deadspace and resistance to breathing and
tive pressure may be generated or waste gas may be
should be used with caution in small patients. It
 blown back into the building. Care must be taken with
is important to follow the manufacturer's
the position of the outlet, as in the active system.
directions with regard to patient size.They
ym buibbnjd ioy Aiuanbay paaesgo aq pinous
Minimizing exposure to waste
secretions and they must be discarded after use
anaesthetic gases
 Bubble-through humidifiers are used in
In addition to instaling and using an efficient active
conjunction with supplemental oxygen delivery
scavenging system, there are many anaesthetic
systems, often in the intensive care setting. A
practices, which, if practised daily, help to reduce the
stream of oxygen is passed through a botle,
exposure of personnel to waste anaesthetic gases:
containing sterile water, before reaching the
 patient. Those in common usage do not heat the
 Leak test all anaesthetic equipment
gas and most will produce large water droplets,
Intubate all patients with a cuffed endotracheal
which tend to condense in the delivery system.
tube and inflate the cuff where appropriate
For maximum efficiency, low gas flows should be
Avoid the use of facemasks and induction boxes
used and the gas should be driven below the
Connect the breathing system to the patient
surface of the water to increase the area
and leak test the endotracheal tube before
available for evaporation.
turning on vaporizers
Use low-flow anaesthesia where appropriate
several minutes before disconnection of the
patient
 Cap the breathing system after use (this is more 
applicable in large animals)
Ventilate the recovery area with a minimum of
15-20 air changes per hour, using a system that 
does not recirculate air
 Fill vaporizers at the end of the day in a well
ventilated area, using a key (agent-specific) filler
Vary the rostering of personnel who fill the
vaporizers
Carry out regular maintenance of anaesthetic
equipment 
Heat and moisture exchangers (HMEs).
Monitor waste anaesthetic gases in the premises
every 6 months.
Magnetic resonance imaging-
compatible equipment
Humidifiers
The MRl unit contains a powerful magnet which
Humidification of inspired gases is desirable when-
presents unique challenges to the anaesthetist, often
ever there is prolonged administration of cold gases 
at high flows, and particularly if they bypass the tur-
ables and anaesthetic depth, and restricted access
binate system in the nares. Without humidification,
respiratory secretions become thicker, mucociliary
toring equipment used within the inner controlled area
function is reduced and atelectasis may occur in the
(limits of the magnetic field) must not contain any iron;
lung. In addition, losses through evaporation are in-
aluminium and plastics are suitable alternatives. While 
Creased, leading to hypothermia.
non-ferrous equipment is available, it is considerably
47
Chapter 5 Breathing systems and ancillary equipment
more expensive than standard equipment. In many
in some cuff inflator balloons must be avoided
cases it is possible (and desirable) to position the
(Figure 5.27), as they can cause image artefact
anaesthetic machine, monitoring equipment and ven-
Pulse oximetry: MRl-compatible probes, with
tilator in the console area of the unit so they remain
fibreoptic cabling, are available from some
outside the limits of the magnet. In this case extended 
 manufacturers. Normal probes result in patient 
tubing and hosing is required to reach the patient. The
burns
personnel safety issues associated with MRls are
ECG: normal electrodes and cables may result
outside the scope of this text.
in patient burns, and the cables may act as
MRl-compatible equipment may be defined as
antennae. Special MR!-compatible versions are
equipment that, within the MRl environment, presents
available, but extreme care must be taken with
no safety hazard to patients or personnel, functions
 their positioning, and the trace is prone to
normally and does not interfere with the correct op-
significant artefact which makes diagnosis of
eration of the MRl equipment, providing instructions
abnormalities difficult
concerning its proper use are correctly followed.
 Blood pressure monitors: the cuffs and hosing
Reasons for using MRi-compatible equipment
used in most oscillometric blood pressure
include:
monitors are suitable for use in the MRl unit.
 Extended hosing may be specially manufactured 
 Avoiding a projectile effect - the magnet will
Capnography: plastic sampling tubing does not
rapidly attract all ferrous material to it, often with
pose problems with MRI compatibility; however,
disastrous results, e.g. gas cylinders, anaesthetic
there may be a considerable delay (20-30
 machines and sharp objects such as scissors
seconds) in obtaining the signal due to the
Avoiding patient burns, which can occur from
length of the sampling tubing 
electric currents generated by the magnetic field
Waste gas scavenging: use of extended plastic
in probes and cables
scavenging tubing to duct waste gases away
Avoiding equipment malfunction, e.g. syringe
from the patient does not pose any problems
drivers which deliver incorrect volumes of drugs
with MRl compatibiity. This may be attached to a
Avoiding degradation of MRl image quality.
Cardiff adsorber (see above) or an active system
positioned outside the controlled area.
Equipment required for anaesthesia which is MRI-
compatible includes:
Gas cylinders: non-ferrous cylinders are
available. An alternative is to store gas cylinders
outside the controlled area and use an extended
hose to deliver the gas to the anaesthetic
machine. Under no circumstances should
standard cylinders be brought into the inner
A"
controlled area
Anaesthetic machines: non-ferrous machines
 Small metal coils inr some cuf inflator balloons 
are available but standard versions may be
 can cause inmage artefacts with MRi.
(Courtesy of Elizabeth Leece)
positioned outside the limits of the magnet and
used with an extended breathing system (see
below). Under no circumstances should
standard anaesthetic machines be located within 
References and further reading
the inner controlled area
 Breathing systems: all plastic breathing systems
Al-Shaikh B and Stacey S (200t) Essentials ofAnaesthetic Equipment,
are suitable. Several companies manufacture
2nd edn. Churchill Livingstone, New York
extra-long universal F circuits or Bain breathing
facerask and laryngeal mask airway in rabbits during isoflurane
systems which wil reach from the console area
anesthesia.VeterinaryAnaesthesia andAnalgesia32,280-288
 into the MRI chamber. ideally, these long
Davey AJ & Diba A (2005) Waro's Anaesthetic Equiprment. 5th edn.
Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia
systems shouid be used in conjunction with a
Dorsch JA&Dorsch SE (1999) Understanding Anesthesia Equipment.
ventilator (also positioned outside the controlled
4th edn. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Pennsylvania
area). Expiratory valves contain metal parts
Michell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E and Pernell RT (200o) Tracheal
rupture associated with intubation in cats: 20 cases (1996-1998).
which are not MRi-compatible
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 216(10).
Endotracheal tubes: standard rubber, PVC and
1592-1595
silicone tubes are suitable for use in MRl units.
Walsh CM and Taylor PM (2004) A clinical evaluation of the 'mini parallel
Ferromagnetic coils within armoured tubes and
Lack' breathing system in cats and comparison with a modified
48
Automatic ventilators
Richard Hammond
The role of automatic ventilators
inspired gases to prevent further hypocapnia, meta-
bolic alkalosis and cerebral vasoconstriction.
Automatic ventilators allow provision of intermitent
In contrast, in anaesthetized patients with normal
positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) in anaesthetized
lung physiology and a high FO2, respiratory failure is
or heavily sedated patients. By virtue of providing
more usually due to mild to moderate hypoventilation.
repeated, controllable breathing, automatic ventilators
This will normally result in hypercapnia without a con-
are an invaluable tool to allow a more efective resource
comitant hypoxaemia. The role of ventilation curing
allocation of the veterinary surgeon or nurse/techniciant
anaesthesia is normally, therefore, to correct hypo-
to other aspects of patient monitoring and support.
ventilation (for causes see Figure 6.1) and return arte-
There is a wide range of complex and, in many
rial carbon dioxide tension to within the normal range.
cases, technically challenging ventilators available;
Minute ventilation (respiratory rate x tidal volume) de-
entire texts are dedicated to their use. In the small
fines the total volume of gas passing through the lungs
animal operating theatre, however, ventilation is per-
per minute. This, in turn, determines the amount of
formed for limited periods in anaesthetized patients
carbon dioxide eliminated from the lungs (assuming
and predominantly in those with normal lung physio-
inspired gases contain no carbon dioxide and also that
logy. The ventilators suitable for this purpose are there-
right-sided cardiac output remains constant). Automatic
fore relatively basic in design, simple to use and can
ventilator set-up in these circumstances should aim to
provide a correct minute volume, whilst minimizing the
fice use. This chapter describes key aspects of venti-
unwanted effects of IPPV on the animal (see below).
lator design and respiratory physiology, as well as
in the clinical situation.
Inability to ventlate
The open thorax - thoracotomy thoracoscopy and chest wall trauma
Neuromuscular blockade
Indications for IPPV
Phrenic nerve paralysis 
Pneumothorax
Assisted ventilation may be used to support any
Myaesthenia gravis
Clostridium botufinum intoxication:
patient with respiratory failure. There is a marked
Clostridium tetani intoxication
difference between the role of the ventilator in the
intensive care seting for support of a patient with 
Spinal cord injury/oedema
Decreased lung. pleural or chest wall compliance 
pulmonary pathology and its role in the anaesthe-
Decreased ventilatory drive
tized surgical patient.
In critically ill patients, those defined as being in
Anaesthetic agents (injectable and volatile)
increased intracranial pressure 
 those with a decreased pulmonary oxygen uptake and
Other central nervous system (CNS), disease - infarct,
 subsequent reduced tissue oxygen delivery. In severe
encephalopathy. etc.
or multifactorial disease these patients may demon-
Hypothermia
Severe hypoxia
strate concurrent failure of carbon dioxide elimination
and consequent hypercapnia. More usually, due to the
highly soluble nature of carbon dioxide, patients may
Causes of hypoventilation.
demonstrate normal or even low arterial carbon dioxide
tension in the face of hypoxaemia; this is a result of
compensatory hyperventilation. In such patients, the
When to initiate IPPV
goal of ventilatory support is complex and may include
altering speciic parameters of the ventilatory process
Absolute indications for IPPV during anaesthesia are
(e.g. positive end expiratory pressures with high in-
those where the animal is unable to ventilate (see Fig-
spired concentrations of oxygen (FO)) in an attempt
Ure 6.1). Relative indications and the degree of hyper-
to reverse the hypoxaemia. Where this cannot be
capnia at which to initiate IPPV in most species remain
achieved without an associated increase in minute
controversial. The normal range for arterial carbon
volume, carbon dioxide may even be added to the
dioxidetension (P,CO2) is considered to be 35-50 mmHg
49
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
(4.6-6.6 kPa) and many veterinary surgeons would
Where ventricular arrhythmias are seen to
advocate initiation of IPPV at levels above that range.
be associated with even mild hypercapnia -
Most anaesthetic agents are non-selective central
initiate IPPV
nervous system (CNS) depressants and therefore
Higher leveis (>60 mmHg; >8 kPa) may induce 
most anaesthetized patients hypoventilate. Although
more detrimental effects including bradycardia
usually well tolerated in the heaithy patient, even mild
and myocardial depression - initiate IPPV.
hypercapnia during anaesthesia may result in acid-
aemia, hyperkalaemia and reduced myocardial con-
tractility. Further, hypercapnia and acidaemia contribute 
Classification of ventilators
to the development of ventricular tachyarrhythmias
during inhalant anaesthesia with halogenated agents.
There are numerous and varied systems for the
The full cardiovascular effects of hypercapnia are com-
classification of automatic ventilators. The following
plex. Direct, local effects of hypercapnia include myo-
refers to only those elements of classification which
cardial depression and peripheral arteriolar dilation. To
enable a better understanding of their safe and effec-
some extent these effects are balanced by indirect
tive use and pertain to those machines in common
effects, primarily mediated via activation of the sympa-
use in general small animal practice.
thetic nervous system. This stimulation may result in 
tachycardia, hypertension and increased myocardial
Control and cycling
 contractility, although the extent may be decreased
Ventilators are described by how the flow of gas is deliv-
by use of volatile agents. Higher levels of hypercapnia
tend to increase vagal nervous tone and can therefore
ered to the patient, and are either volume controlled (con-
induce bradycardia, which in combination with other
factors may precipitate sinus arrest. High levels of
pressure delivered). in addition, volume-controlled ven-
hypercapnia also result in CNS depression and narco-
tilators may be time cycled, volume cycled or pressure
sis, although these are unlikely to be seen at levels
cycled. This describes the method of transition from 
 the inspiratory to expiratory phases. Understanding the
below 95 mmHg (12.5 kPa).
The need for IPPV should therefore be based on
advantages and disadvantages of each cycling method
a multisystem evaluation, rather than on the level of
is key to enabling appropriate ventilator selection and
hypercapnia; one should recognize that detrimental
set-up for an individual patient. Most ventilators in vet-
effects of IPpV may include reduction of cardiac out-
erinary use are volume controlled and volume cycied,
put and further reduction of mean arterial pressure
i.e. the flow delivered is constant, the tidal volume is
(Figure 6.2).
targeted and the pressure delivered is variable and de-
pendent upon lung compliance.
Volume-controlled ventilation with time cycling
The delivered flow remains constant over the period
More accurate control of respiratory variables
Constant arterial gas tensions create stable plasma pH and
 of inspiration. Inspiration is terminated once either a
 potassium concentration
targeted tidal volume is delivered, or a fixed inspira-
Regular rhythm depresses ventilation, algments narcosis and
improves operating conditions
sure does not normally affect the duration of
Constant tidal volume (volume controlled) allows compliance 
measurement
 is variable and delivered relative to the compliance of
Special ventilatory modes may be imposed 
the lung. Inspiratory pressure therefore increases over
the period of inspiration to maintain a constant flow;
the operator adjusts the inspiratory flow. In machines
May reduce venous return and meanarterial pressure
where tidal volume is fixed separately and causes
cycling (see below), increasing flow will shorten the
Unnoticed disconnection/cuff defation fatal in 'paralysed cases
inspiratory phase time as the preset tidal volume is
Mechanical falure possible 
reached more quickly. increased ffows will also mean
Lung trauma more likely if inappropriate variables are set
Purchase and maintenance costs may be high
 an increased peak airway pressure. In other machines,
Some mechanical ventilators may be unsuitable for al patient sizes 
where the inspiratory phase time is fixed and deter-
Ventilators may become fomites and harbour transmissible
mines cycling, increasing inspiratory ffow will increase 
respiratory pathogens 
the total delivered tidal volume. Rarely, machines may
 allow setting of all three variables (inspiratory phase
 Advantages and potential disadvantages of
time. flow and tidal volume). In such a device, if the
controlied ventilation during general
flow is high enough such that tidal volume is reached
anaesthesia in animals.
before the end of the set inspiratory phase, then an
 inspiratory pause will ensue with no inspiratory flow.
In summary.
Advantages of these ventilators include:
 Mild hypercapnia is normal during anaesthesia,
They are generally simple to operate and set up.
usually well tolerated and often supports blood
The operator sets the appropriate tidal volume
pressure - in this situation IPPV is not normally
for the animal either directly. or indirectly by
indicated
setting the flow and inspiratory phase time
50
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
 The predetermined tidal volume is delivered
inspiration to maintain a constant flow. The rate of rise
regardless of the changes in resistance and
of airway pressure depends on multiple factors includ-
 compliance that may occur during anaesthesia
ing gas flow. airway resistance, compliance of both
(e.g. animal is heavily draped, reducing 
lungs and chest wall, and even the nature of the gases
compliance; mucus in the endotracheal tube
delivered (density or viscosity depending on flow). The 
yead au pue mon Aoendsui aul lsnipe Aew joleiado
resistance). The ventilator 'compensates' for such 
airway pressure (cycling pressure) but cannot set the
changes by increasing airway pressure during 
aoqe asoun Alleloadsa) smo seb yoih anloa jepi!
 inspiration to maintain the fixed flow.
which flow is expected to be laminar) will shorten the
inspiratory phase time as resistance increases and
Disadvantages of these ventilators include:
therefore reduce tidal volume,
 Advantages of these ventilators include:
 In animals weighing less than 5 kg. it may be
difficult to set the appropriate tidal volume
Tidal volume does not have to be calculated.
 accurately. At the lower end of the contro!
In animals with normal airways, setting the 
 settings, even small changes in the setting for
 cycling pressure to 15-20 cmHO, and
jlow may markedly change the delivered tidal
adjusting inspiratory flow such that the
volume, therefore introducing the potential for
inspiratory phase time appears to be 'normal
significant under- or over-inflation and
for that patient, should provide the correct
consequent volutrauma
tidal volume for that patient
There is no lower limit to the size of animal that
：
Aoendsui buol e buey Aq seule 'paidwae s!
can be put on the ventilator. Setting 10--15 cmH2O
phase time or high flow, the rise in airway
inflation pressure should provide the correct
 pressure in an attempt to deliver that volume may
tidal volume. This setting will be within the
be potentially harmful. Some volume-controlled
useable range of the ventilator controls and
ventilators have an additional adjustable safety
therefore can be set as accurately for a kitten
relief valve to avoid high peak airway pressures.
 as for a St. Bernard. Limitations to animal size
 will be based on the ability to have a low
Most basic volume-controlled machines may not
enough flow. This is not normally a problem 
Volutrauma is less likely because the peak
have a pressure-limiting adjustment, and rely on a
high-pressure relief valve with audible warning sound
airway pressure is the primary setting and
 for prevention of airway trauma. These are fixed and
therefore cycling occurs before alveolar over-
preset to between 65 and 80 cmH,O. Some patients
inflation can occur
with high airway resistance or low compliance may
 In patients with high resistance or low
require peak airway pressures in excess of 60 cmH2O.
compliance due to disease, accurate setting of a
Conversely, even one or two attempted ventilations
at these airway pressures may result in volutrauma in
 and can be easily set
very young animals and other patients with highly
If the effective tidal volume of a patient is
 compliant lungs. A high compliance (high elasticity)
reduced during a procedure (e.g. lung lobe
may result in a more rapid rate of lung expansion for
removal, lung areas packed off for surgical
a given flow and a greater volume of lung for a given
 peak inspiratory pressure.
adjustment is needed. The ventilator still cycles
In summary:
at the same airway pressure irrespective of
changes in tidal volume. This avoids potential
Volume-controlled ventilators with time cycling
over-inflation of a lower effective lung space.
·
are more commonly encountered and generally
Disadvantages of these ventilators include:
more simple to set up and use effectively
 They deliver the preset tidal volume irrespective
Tidal volume is unpredictable and may be
of changes in the animal and need less
incorrect where normal cycling pressures are set
readjustment during use
in animals with abnormal airways
 Their potential for producing volutrauma should
Changes in resistance or compliance during a
be recognized and care taken in animals with a
procedure (see above) may reduce the delivered
low tidal volume and in young animals due to
volume of gas. Nothing on the ventilator (in most 
high lung compliance.
machines) will warn of such an occurrence.
Volume-controlled ventilation with pressure
Pressure-controlled ventilation with time cycling
cycling (pressure-limited)
Such machines are currently rare in veterinary
The delivered flow remains constant over the period of
anaesthesia.
inspiration. Inspiration is terminated once a targeted
The delivered pressure remains constant over the
period of inspiration. A fixed pressure is rapidly
pressure determines the duration of inspiration. The
achieved throughout the breath by delivering a decel-
pressure of the gas being delivered is variable and
erating inspiratory flow pattern. Once peak inspira-
delivered relative to the compliance of the lung. lnspira-
tory pressure is reached, flow continues at a gradually
tory pressure therefore increases over the period of
reducing rate until the end of the inspiratory phase.
51
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
Inspiration is terminated by adjustment of the inspira-
tory phase time. The total volume of gas delivered in
each breath stil depends on the product of inspira-
tory phase time (fixed by operator) and the flow. In a
voiume-controlled, pressure-iimited machine, flow
ceases irrespective of inspiratory phase time (once
the preset pressure is reached). with a pressure.
controiled machine, flow continues once the preset
 pressure is reached. Tidal voiume may be reduced
but can be restored by increasing inspiratory phase
time rather than peak airway pressure.
Triggering
.
initiated.
Ventilaiors designed for ICU use are compiex
and mulifunctional. They are rareiy relevant for
use in anaesthetized surgical patients.
Time triggering
The expiratory phase time is set by the user, either
 less) or a second-hand, basic human anaesthetic ven-
directly or indirectiy by means of adjusting either the
tilator is a more effective option. These are simpler to
inspiratory to expiratory (l:E) ratio or the respiratory
Understand and use and are therefore safer from a prac-
rate. This is the more usual method employed during
tical viewpoint. Even a simple ventiator is suitable for
anaesthesia where management of hypoventilation is
postoperative support, in ICU patients for short-term
normaily the primary objective. There is no allowance
use (up to 24 hours), or for resuscitation and
for spontaneous breathing. This is described as con-
postresuscitation situations.
trolled mandatory ventilation (CMV).
The ideal properties of a veterinary ventilator are
summarized in Figure 6.4. Although no veterinary
Pressure triggering
ventilator fulfils all such requirements, many encom-
The inspiratory effort of the patient initiates a ventila-
pass the key components of the requirements for use
tion by creating a decrease in baseline pressure. The
(highlighted in italics). The following section describes
ventilatory frequency is set by the animal, although in
some machines an 'escape rate' may be additionally
set in the event of a period of apnoea. Pressure trig-
gering is used in intensive care situations where there
Compact, portabie, robust and easy to operate
may be respiratory muscle paresis, inadequate tidal
Economicai to purchase, use and maintain 
volume and associated peripheral alveolar collapse. lt
is also used in those situations where the role of the
Use
ventilator is not purely to correct hypoventiation, e.g.
Maximum inspiratory flow rates of 80 Wminute allowing:
provision of positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP).
Variable inspiratory times of 0.5-3.9 seconds..
An advance on pressure triggering is flow triggering.
Frequencies of 5-50 breaths/minute
whereby a constant flow is maintained in the breathing
A tidal votume range 0f 50-1500 ml
A variable l:E ratio {1:1-1:3.5)
circuit. Changes in flow, in response to spontaneous
The capabiity to control allthe above simuianeously altering.
ventilation attempts, initiate an assisted ventilation. This 
one variable shouid not affect others)
form of triggering reduces the work of breathing com-
Capable of use with non-rebreathing or rebreathing anaesthetic .
pared to pressure cycling and is found on sophisticated
breathing systems
intensive care unit (ICU) ventilators.
 Capable of rapid conversion for paediatric use 
Capable of use with air oxygen mixtures and all anaesthetics
Capable of humidifying inspired gas
Practical use of ventilators
Should allow'sighbreaths and the abiity to inflate and holdby the
user
Choosing an automatic ventilator for
general veterinary practice
volume
saiety
The requirements of a ventilator for use with anaes-
thesia are more basic than those needed in the ICu. it
Electricaly saelatedpprssedandexplosionrf
is possible to source second-hand human iCU ventila-
Have the abiity. to maintain output even when leaks develop 
 tors as the technology struggles to keep up with chang-
Capable of rapid disassembly for easy sterilization.
ing clinical theory. The temptation to purchase one of
Capable of using disposable hoses.
.
these machines as an anaesthetic ventilator which will
Fitted with bacterial fiters
'aiso do if we have the odd ICU case' is best avoided.
These machines are usually highly complex, expen-
Equipped with'a pressure relief valve
Fitted with alams for low pressure and/or circuit disconnection and
high pressure and/or pressure overioad
 of gargantuan proportions and require in-depth know.
Indicate lovi expired minute volume and low FO?
iedge of respiratory fluid dynamics to operate (Figure
6.3). In contrast, a ventilator designed for veterinary
Properties of the ideal veterinary ventiator.
use (and therefore for use in animais down to 1 kg or
52
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
 the commonly available automatic ventiators in use
to set a triggering pressure (negative 0.5-5.0 cm H,O)
at which the ventilator will cycle from expiration to in-
 and potential hazards; it should be used in conjunc-
spiration in response to inspiratory effort. This over-
 tion with manufacturers' operator guidelines and warn-
rides the setting for expiratory phase time. A pressure
indicator is also provided.
 description, but the principles will be transferable to
 other machines of similar operation.
Set-up:
Set-up and use of commonly encountered
1.
Attach 4 bar (400 kPa) driving gas (this does not
aujomatic ventilators in Uk small animal
reach the patient); oxygen or air is suitable.
practice
 Set the inspiratory pressure control (E) to
between 15 and 20 cmH2O. This determines
The Bird Mark 7 ventilator
when the ventilator stops inflating and is later
Ciassification:
 adjusted in combination with the flow setting to
optimize tidal volume.
Volume controlled, pressure cycled.
 Set the triggering pressure (A) to maximum to
Inspiratory phase is initiated either by time (time
eliminate patient triggering.
 Ensure that the expiratory valve assembly on the
triggered) or by the patient aftempting to breathe
(pressure triggered).
bellows housing is open and attached to the
jo adeosa smoe sui - waisss burbuaaos
This ventilator (Figure 6.5) is suitable for both small
expired gases in the expiratory phase.
and large animal use depending upon the size of bel-
5.
 Connect the hose from the bellows to the
lows to which it is attached. It is driven by medical
reservoir bag port on the breathing system.
compressed gas or oxygen at approximately 4 bar
6.
 Close the adjustable pressure limiting (APL)
and may be supplied from either the high-pressure
valve ('pop off' valve) of the breathing system.
oxygen outlet of an anaesthetic machine, or a sepa-
7.
 Increase or decrease the flow (C) from the
rate cylinder with regulator. On its own, the ventilator
ventilator to deliver a tidal volume in what
simply produces a flow of gas and it is always used in
appears to be a normal time for that animal
conjunction with a separate set of bellows (e.g. as
(usually 1-2 seconds).
part of a Vet-Tech SAV-75). The flow of gas from the
8.
 Set the expiratory phase time (D) to adjust the
Bird pressurizes the space between the bellows and
number of breaths per minute and hence the
a surrounding canister or bottle'. The bellows, which
minute volume. ldeally adjusted to maintain
contain the gases to be delivered to the patient, are
normal arterial carbon dioxide based on
compressed by this increase in surrounding pressure.
capnography or arterial blood gases.
Gas is forced from the bellows via a corrugated tube
into a breathing system (circuit). Suitable breathing 
The Pneupac ventiPAC, paraPAC and transPAC
systems include the circle, the Bain (in both of which
(Smiths Medical)
 the attachment to the bellows simply replaces the res-
The details in this section also apply to the Penlon
ervoir bag), a T-piece or the Humphrey ADE in E mode.
Nuffield Series 200.
The key controls on the Bird include: inspiratory flow
-d (buo aouu pue) yeed (anu/ oz ot dn) 
Classification:
sure up to 60 cmH,O and expiratory phase time (re-
sulting in 4-60 breaths/minute). There is also an option
Volume controlled, time cycled.
 Inspiratory phase is initiated by time (time
triggered).
The Pneupac ventiPAC is shown in Figure 6.6.
These are simple, suitable for anaesthesia use, versa-
tile and can be sourced cost effectively (ex-human
medical use). Although some models are designed for
ambulatory use and vary in terms of control over in-
spiratory and expiratory times, these ventilators all work
on a similar principle and are considered together.
The basic unit is a control module and a patient
valve that attaches directly to a suitable anaesthetic
breathing attachment (see Bird ventilator) or to a bel-
lows (bag in bottle) arrangement (Figure 6.6c). The
driving gas may be air or oxygen at 4 bar (from the
6.53
The Bird Mark 7 ventilator - a pressure cycled
machine which may drive both companion
and large animal ventilation systems. A = Triggering
should not reach the patient. The control unit com-
pressure control; B = Pressure indicator;: C = Flow 
prises a spool valve (Figure 6.6d) and two timers, one
control; D = Expiratory time control; E = Inspiratory
to control the inspiratory phase (A) and one for the
pressure control.
expiratory phase (B). The spool valve can be in two
53
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
[a] The Pneupac
assembly where the ventiPAC is attached to a 'bag in
ventiPAC (in situ).
 bottle'). The valve directs all gas from the ventilator to
[b] Detail of the Pneupac
the breathing attachment during the inspiratory phase,
ventiPAC. A = Inspiratory
phase tirmer; B = Expiratory
but allows gas returning from the patient to pass to a
phase timer: C = Flow
 scavenging port during expiration.
controller: D = Pressuro
gauge; E = On/off swich).
:dn-las
(c) A typical bag in a bottle
arrangement which would
1.
Attach 4 bar (400 kPa) driving gas.
be attached to the Pneupac
2.
 Estimate the patient's tidal volume based on
ventiPAC in volume-
controlled time cyclec!
10-15 mi/kg. Set the flow and inspiratory phase
modes. (d) Working 
time settings to achieve this volume. For
 principies of the Pneupac
example for a 30 kg dog with a tidal volume of
ventiPAC.A= inspiratory
350 ml, a flow of 0.3-0.4 /sec for 1 second will
 phase timer: B = Expiratory
be suitable. Try to make this as normal for that 
 phase timer: C = Flow
animal as possible, judged by adequacy of chest
controller: E = Gas inlet.
wall movement.
3.
 Ensure scavenging is attached to the expiratory
 port of the patient valve.
Connect the hose from the patient valve to the
breathing system.
5.
Close the APL valve of the breathing system.
6.
Switch on the ventilator (E).
7.
 Set the expiratory phase time (B) to adjust the
number of breaths per minute and hence the 
minute volume. ldeally it shouid be adjusted to 
maintain normal arterial carbon dioxide based on
capnography or arterial blood gases.
Pneupac ventiPAC used with a Newton valve
The normal patient valve can simply and quickly be
replaced with an alternative (a Newton valve) (Figure
6.7) to convert the ventilator to a 'mechanical thumb'
on an Ayre's T-piece or Bain. This makes it suitable
for any animal down to a mass of 100 g, because the
b
tidal volumes delivered can be very small and any
change in tidal volume of the animal will be matched
E
irle
ducingvalve
by the ventilator (similar to pressure cycling). The
Newton valve connects via a corrugated tube to the
bag port of a modified Ayre's T-piece (Mapleson E) or
-euaa eui woy seh jo mo eyi (a uose[den) ueg 
tor, instead of going to the T-piece, acts to occlude or
The Pneupac
ventiPAC with
Newton valve (N)
attachment.
L
converting this
versatile ventilator
Inspiratory tirer
Expiratory timer
into a 'mechanicaf
[d)
thumb' or pressure 
iertva
generator.
positions, one aflowing driving gas to pass to the
breathing attachment at a rate (C) and for a time that
is set by the operator. At the end of inspiration, the
valve closes and gas builds up in a capacitor until the
presslire is sufficient to push the valve back into the
inspiratory position. Pressure is indicated by a large
gauge on the front of the control unit (D). The patient
valve is a simple pneumatic valve at the base of the
ventilator, through which the gases pass to the breath-
ing attachment (this may be located on a bellows
54
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
partially occlude the end of the tube. This is analo-
gous with placing a thumb over the end of the T-piece.
The animal's lungs are inflated at a rate that is de-
-segue aul wouy sef ysay jo mojy aui uodn juepued
thetic machine, and for a time dependent on how long
the 'thumb' is in place. At low flows, set by the ventila-
tor, the pressure generated is low and only parly over-
1000
comes the pressure of gas coming from the T-piece 
120
 or Bain: occlusion is partial and tidal volumes are very
small. As ventilator flow is increased, occlusion be-
comes more complete; at higher flows some driving
 gas is forced into the tube and the rate of lung infla-
tion is greater than that produced just by the flow from
the anaesthetic machine.
B
Set-up:
1.
Attach 4 bar (400 kPa) driving gas.
 Set the inspiratory phase time to be normal for 
0000
that patient.
3.
 Ensure scavenging is aitached to the expiratory
D
port of the Newton valve.
 The Hallowell EMC Model 3000 veterinary
4.
Connect the hose from the patient valve to the
 ventiltator. A = Inspiratory flow controller:
breathing system.
B = Peak pressure controller: C = Breathing rate
Switch on the ventilator (E).
controller: D = Respiratory hold button.
6.9
Starting with the flow on the lowest setting.
increase the flow until chest wall excursion
appears normal. The pressure reading (D)
tidal volume unless the two controls are adjusted in
should peak at 15-20 cmH,O.
synchrony. The pressure limiter will terminate inspi-
7.9
 Set the expiratory phase time (B) to adjust the
ration, although if this has been set to 60 cmH,O the 
number of breaths per minute (and hence
potential for volutrauma exists.
minute volume). ideally it should be adjusted to 
The Model 2002 version is functionally equivalent
maintain normal arterial carbon dioxide based on
to the Model 2000, with the exception that there is an
capnography or arterial blood gases.
additional fine needle valve that may be used to regu-
late flows from 0-20 I/minute. This fine control adds
The Hallowell EMC Model 2000/3000 (and 2002)
to the output of the coarse control and is for fine tun-
veterinary ventilator
ing' the tidal volume when the ventilator is active.
Classification:
Set-up:
Volume controlled, time cycled.
 Attach 2-4 bar driving gas.
Inspiratory phase is initiated by time (time
2.
Select and attach appropriate bellows.
triggered).
3.5
 Set the maximum working pressure limit to
30 cmHzO (or less) for normal patients.
 This ventilator has built-in ascending bellows and
4.(
 Connect the corrugated tubing to breathing
is designed for direct attachment to the reservoir bag
system.
port of a suitable breathing system (Figure 6.8). The
5.
Close APL valve on breathing system.
device relies on both a driving gas supply (4 bar) and
 Switch on power and select breaths per minute.
a mains power supply. The key controls include in-
7.
 Increase volume setting until each breath is of
 the correct tidal volume as indicated by
pressure limit (B) (up to 60 cmHO) and breaths per
excursion of the bellows.
minute (C). There is also a respiratory hold' button
8.
 The rate control is then used to fine tune the
(D) for maintaining inflation and overriding cycling. Low 
tidal volume of each breath.
breathing-system pressure is indicated by an alarm
9.
The volume setting is used to control minute
in the event of disconnection. Bellows are interchange-
volume and is adjusted to maintain normal
able and suitable for tidal volumes from 20 ml to 3 1.
arterial carbon dioxide based on capnography or
The I:E ratio is fixed at 1:2. A major potential pitfall of
arterial blood gases.
this ventilator is that the volume control (A) regulates
inspiratory flow directly and is effectively a minute
The Manley MP2/3 and MN2
volume setting and not a tidal volume setting. If the
These old but still serviceable machines (Figure 6.9)
rumber of breaths per minute is reduced by the op-
erator, without a concomitant decrease in the flow
 practice. They are reliable, extremely easy to use, and 
setting, then the tidal volume of each breath will in-
-dns jamod jou sen busap jeuonppe jauiau anbai
crease: halving the breaths per minute will double the
ply. Second-hand, ex-human use machines can be
55
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
Classification: These are unusuai, as they do not fit
into any classification explained above. They are best 
described as minute volume dividers in that they take
 the volume of gas delivered by the anaesthetic ma-
chine per minute and deliver it in breaths of a tidal
volume set by the operator. All of the gas from the
anaesthetic machine passes through the ventilator to
the patient.
The working principle is explained in Figure 6.9b.
The ventilator is attached directly to the common gas
outiet from the anaesthetic machine. All gas from the
 machine (including nitrous oxide and other volatile
 agents) passes into the ventilator. During the expira-
tory phase, the gas accumulates in a set of belows
visible externally on the machine (A). The bellows in-
flate to a volume set by the operator by means of (B)
Inspiratory phase.
at which point a mechanism is tripped (C) and the
D·
volume in A is delivered to the patient at a fixed pres-
sure set by the operator by a sliding weight (D)
usually 20 cmH,O. During inspiration, fresh gas from
 the anaesthetic machine is stil flowing and accumu-
lates in internal bellows (E). These bellows inffate to
a set volume, at the end of which the expiratory phase
is initiated and the gas from E is dumped into bellows
A. The degree to which the internal bellows E inflate
Expiratory phase: atmospheric
determined by the setting of the inspiratory phase
control. This description may make the device sound
complex but in practice the operator normally simply
FGF
 sets the tidal volume on the ventilator and then ad-
justs the breaths per minute by changing the fresh
gas flow on the anaesthetic machine.
Patient
Set-up:
Manual or spontaneous.
 Set the tidaf volume to that estimated for the
animal using the slider (B).
2. Check the weight (D) is at about the 20 cmH,O
mark.
 3. Attach the ventilator to the fresh gas outlet of the 
anaesthetic machine.
[b)
Patient
4.
 Switch the ventilator to automatic at control
[a] The Manley MP2: a Classic if aging
knobs F and G.
 machine, yet far from being a museum piece.
 5. Adjust the fresh gas flow on the anaesthetic
A = Externally visible bellows; B = Volume control;
machine until the ventilatory rate is suitable to
C = Tidal volume catch for main bellows; D = Sliding
maintain the required arterial carbon dioxide (as
weight; F and G = Controls to switch ventilator to
judged by capnography or arterial blood gases).
 automatic. (b) Working principles of the Manley MP2.
A = Externaliy visible belliows; D = Sliding weight;
E = lnternal bellows.
The Vetronic Im Merlin' veterinary ventilator
Classification:
sourced for little money. When purchasing a machine,
the state of the bellows is critical; these devices have
Volume controlfed, time cycled, pressure cycled
both external and internal black rubber bellows that may
or volume cycled.
perish. if there is any sign of such deterioration, the
Inspiratory phase is initiated either by time (time 
machine should be checked and idealy serviced be-
 triggered) or by the patient attempting to breathe
 fore first use. The description here is based on the MP2
in assist mode.
(the MN2 has a setting for negative pressure during
 exhalation that has fittie application in veterinary use).
This is a highly advanced ventilator specifically
The MP3 has an autoclavable patient connector, an
designed for veterinary use (Figure 6.10). If uses
airway manometer and the ability to deliver higher tidal
gases delivered from the anaesthetic machine (or
volumes. The main limitation of these ventilators is
room air) and can deliver tidal volumes in the range
the inability to provide lower tidal volume settings that
of 1-800 ml. The working principle is a precision-
Fimits their use to animals above approximately 13 kg.
controlled piston that acts like a syringe to generate
56
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
Controls are illustrated in Figure 6.10b:
 Flow or volume control setting
Inspiratory time control setting (seconds)
Expiratory time control setting (seconds)
Maximum airway pressure control seting (cmHzO)
Assist threshold control setting (cmH,O)
Flow rate/volume selector switch
Assist mode on/off selector switch
LED indicator for expiratory port pressure
[a]
(cmH2O)
J
M
 LED indicator for inspiratory port pressure 
1
(cmH,O)
K
Men 
Ventilate mode stop/run selector switch
SmallAnimal Ventlator
Alarm reset switch - non-latching, momentary
action only
Alarm flashing LED indicator
 Main status LCD screen.
This ventilator provides flexibility of operating
 modes and a wealth of settings not normally seen (or
indeed necessary) on an anaesthetic ventilator. With
this, however, comes a greater level of complexity and 
User involvement. A full description of the settings, set-
up and correct use of the Merlin in all its modes of
operation is therefore beyond the scope of this text
(b]H
B
C
D
and the reader is referred to the in-depth and excel-
[a] The VetronicTM 'Merlin' veterinary ventilator.
lent support materials provided by the manufacturer.
(b] The VetronicTM Merlin' veterinary ventiator
One mode of operation is described as an
- controls (schematic). A = Flow or volume control setting;
illustration. This is the volume cycled mode and is
B = Inspiratory time conirol seting; C = Expiratory time
conirol setting: D = Maximum airway pressure control
enced users.
setting; E = Assist threshold control setting: F = Flow 
rate/voiume selector switch; G = Assist mode on/off
Set-up:
selector switch; H = LED indicator for expiratory port
J = Ventilaie mode stop/run selector switch: K = Alarm
1. Set tidal volume switch to volume (F).
2.
Set an inspiratory time and volume (A and B).
 status LCD screen.
3.
 Make sure that the ventilation assist mode is set
to OFF (G)
driving pressure. The piston can be controlled to within
4.
Set the expiratory time (C).
0.03 mi at low volumes. it has the capacity to operate
5.9
Set the maximum airway pressure to a safe level
in either volume cycled (with optional time limit) or
for the animal you are about to ventilate (D) and 
pressure cycled modes. The manufacturers claim it is
make sure there is a non-return vaive
suitable for animals between 50 g and 70 kg. Inspira.
 somewhere in the breathing system delivering
tory and expiratory times are between 0.2 and 9 sec-
 gas to the patient.
onds. Maximum airway pressure is 57 cmHzO and
6.
 Ensure that the anaesthetic circuit is delivering
negative triggering pressures may be set from 1-10
 gas and that the fliow of the incoming gas at
cmHzO. The maximum flow is relatively low at only 25
least matches the minute volume of the patient 
I/minute. There are audible and visual warnings for
as shown on the main display or is at least half
high airway pressures, blocked inlets and patient dis-
of the inspiratory phase flow.
connection. A small display on the unit provides infor-
7.
Set the ventilate mode switch to run (J).
mation on the patient's tidal volume, minute volume,
The Max P reading on the screen will start to
respiratory rate, I:E ratio, inspiratory and expiratory
increase as the pressure in the chest rises.
times and airway pressures, triggering pressure for
9.(
 Compliance will be displayed on the screen
assist mode, cycling pressure (ior pressure cycled
 based on the tidal volume and the pressure
mode) and even a caiculated figure for compliance.
change.
The ventilator is normally connected to the common
10. The bar graph displays on either side of the unit
gas outlet of an anaesthetic machine, from which it
will register the pressure measured in both limbs
requires a flow of above minute volume. As peak flow
of the patient delivery system (H and I).
into the ventilator exceeds this during piston filling (in
11. In normal operation, both bar graph
the expiratory phase), a reservoir bag must be present
measurements will be identical. lf there is any
between anaesthetic machine and ventilator. Connec-
functional blockage of the expiratory limb, this
tions from the ventilator allow connection to either a
will show as a reduced pressure reading on the
rebreathing or non-rebreathing system.
expiratory port pressure bar graph.
57
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
The VetronicrM SAV03 veterinary ventiator
The SAv03 is a mains-powered, pressure cycled
ventilator designed for use in animals up to 10 kg
Classification:
(Figure 6.11). The driving gas is taken directy from the
anaesthetic machine and delivered via the valve of the
Pressure cycied ('mechanical thumb for Ayre's
ventiator to the endotracheal tube. During inspiration,
T-piece').
Inspiratory phase is initiated either by time (time
gas is delivered to the patient in the inspiratory phase
triggered) or by the patient attempting to breathe
until a set airway pressure is reached, at which point the
patient is allowed to exhale. A user-defined delay then
(pressure triggered).
elapses before inspiration begins again and the cycle
repeats. The peak airway pressure can be adjusted to
Detaiis inciude:
contro! the depth of respiration. This airway pressure is
Trigger range: 0-40 cmHzO
shown on a digitai dispiay, together with valve status
 Expiratory phase: 1-30 seconds 
indicators. The SAV03 is designed for use in very small
 Breaths per minute: 2-60.
animais, for which pressure cycling is more suitable.
Set-up and operation are simple. When not in
ventilate mode, the valve remains open and the valve
A
attachment acts as a T-piece; the patient, attached
at P, draws gas from the limb (L). During expiration
and the expiratory pause, this is replaced by fresh
gas from the anaesthetic machine via FG. In IPPV
On' mode, the valve is closed in response to attempted
ventilation. The negative pressure at which the venti-
lator, is triggered is set by the user (C). Inspiration
is terminated when inspiratory pressure reaches a
figure set by the operator using the same trigger set
control, but before the IPPV mode is started. The
syt ne ainssaid aioho jas aul aleoipus lm (v) aeidsi
 point. The valve then opens and expired gas passes
into the limb (L) and thence to scavenging. Expiratory
phase time is set by the operator (B).
{a)
Preventing spontaneous ventilation
during IPPV
As most anaesthetized patients hypoventilate, spon-
taneous ventilatory efforts during IPPV (bucking' the
ventilator) do not tend to occur. f normocapnia is
maintained and spontaneous breathing attempts are
made, this may cause sharp changes (negative and
positive) in intrathoracic pressure. This interferes with
the normal process of the thoracic venous pump and
in many cases reduces ventilator effectiveness. Straf-
egies to reduce spontaneous ventilatory aftempts are
listed in Figure 6.12. It is important to ensure adequate
 provision of analgesia and anaesthesia first.
'Strategy..
Increase tidal
The response of pulrmonary stretch receptors to
volume
PPVis tosupresssaneus inhaation.
 Take care that peak airway pressure is not
 greater than 20 cmHO in heatthy patients 
Use of
See Chapter 15
neuromuscular-
 blocking agents
FG
Use of 
Low doses of an addional agent wil further
supplemental
 reduce ventilatory drive (e.g. midazolam 0.2
[a] The Vetronic?M SAV03 veterinary ventilator -
CNS depression mg/kg i.v. dog/cat; medetomidine 1-5 μg/kg i.v
a pressure cycled 'mechanical thumb' designedl
dog/cat; ketamine 1-2 mg/kg i.v. dog/cat;
for patients less than 10 kg. A = Dispiay: B = Expiratory
 tentanyl 1-5 ug/kg i.v. dog/cat). NOTE: these
phase time control; C = Trigger sel. (b) The VetroniciM
 may reduce the requirenenis for volatile agents
SAVO3 veterinary ventilator (in use). (c) The Vetronic?M
SAV03 veterinary ventilator valve asserbly. FG = Fresh
 Strategies to reduce spontaneous ventilation
gas; L = Limb; P = Patient attachment.
during IPPV.
58
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
Monitoring and supporting the
in the healthy patient undergoing some ventilation
patient during IPPV
(albeit at a reduced rate), this is unlikely to fall.
Hypothermia reduces ventilatory drive and attempts
All the basic principles of monitoring the anaesthe-
to correct this should be initiated at this point, if not
tized patient apply (see Chapter 7). Capnography (or
already in progress.
arterial blood gas analysis) and, to a lesser extent,
pulse oximetry are of particular value in these patients.
Capnography is the simplest and most effective tech-
The physiological effects of
nique; it is a non-invasive and reliable way to show
mechanical ventilation
ventilatory (and hence ventilator) performance on a
breath-by-breath basis. All clinics in which IPPV is
Respiratory effects
more than a rarely performed novelty should consider
 The main determinants of arterial oxygen tension are
purchasing suitable equipment. For occasional use,
inspired oxygen concentration and mean airway pres-
there are cheap, disposable, semiquantitative carbon
 sure. Mean airway pressure is altered by changes in
dioxide detectors available. The other additional fo-
the duration of inspiration (l:E ratio) and changes in
cuS of monitoring during IPPV should be mean arte-
peak airway pressure. Automatic ventilation increases
rial blood pressure (MAP). This is the parameter most
mean airway pressures and, during anaesthesia, is
likely to be compromised by the effects of ventilation,
performed with an FO2 >0.21. Therefore, 0xygenation
especially where there is reduced cardiovascular re-
-oine ue jo esn Aq paaaudu io pauieluiew Ajensn s!
serve (see below).
matic ventilator. Removal of carbon dioxide is primarily
Ventilators are known fomites in human anaes-
determined by minute volume. Either high ventilatory
thetic practice. In-line bacterial filters (Figure 6.13) are
rates with a concurrent low tidal volume, or low rates
widely available, are of low resistance and are cost
with a high tidal volume may therefore result in a simi-
effective compared to sterilization of the ventilator
lar minute volume and consequent arterial carbon
(where this is possible).
the ventilatory characteristics are as physiological as
6137
possible for that patient. For time or volume cycled
ventilators, this is best achieved by setting the calcu-
An example of an
lated tidal volume first. This is then checked by observ-
in-line bacterial
filter.
ing the animal to ensure that the excursion of the chest
wall looks normal for that animal and, where available,
checking that the peak airway pressure rises to
between 15 and 20 cmH,0 in the healthy animal. The
ventilatory rate is then set.ideaily to the animal's meas-
ured arterial carbon dioxide levels, as indicated by
 arterial blood gas analysis or capnography. Where no
 measurement is available, the rate should be set to a
value which is just below a normal estimated rate for
that animal - IPPV is more effective than spontaneous
ventilation and normal rates will result in hypocapnia,
and respiratory alkalosis. Where severe hypocapnia
Weaning from automatic ventilation
results (P,CO, <20 mmHg (2.6 kPa). cerebral vas0-
constriction and cerebral hypoxia may result. In a
Weaning from IPPV after short periods of intra-
pressure cycled ventilator, the cycling pressure is
operative use is less of a challenge than after pro-
initially set and adjusted based on observing chest
longed ventilation of the ICU patient, in which
wall excursion, as above. Ventilatory rate is then set
ventifatory drive may be suppressed. In theory, where
as described above. Where the expiratory phase time
normocapnia is maintained, a reduction of the
(or l:E ratio) can be set, the expiratory phase must
ventilatory rate set by the ventilator will allow a rise in
 be long enough to allow adequate exhalation. Failure
arterial carbon dioxide and inifiation of spontaneous
of exhalation will lead to gas trapping and potentially
ventilation. Alternatively, the patient may be removed
over-inflation. This is more likely in patients with
from the ventilator and ventilated by squeezing the
increased small airway resistance (feline asthma) or
reservoir bag of a suitable breathing system at a re-
high compliance (neonates).
duced rate, until spontaneous ventilation returns. A
 During the inspiratory phase of spontaneous ven-
very slight reduction of the tidal volume at this point
filation, gases are drawn into the lung by a drop in
may also reduce pulmonary stretch and increase res-
intrathoracic pressure. Passive expiration sees a re-
piratory drive, although care should be taken to avoid
turn to baseline pressures and towards atmospheric
peripheral alveolar collapse. In practice, this is per-
pressure. Throughout the active phase of spontane-
formed at the end of surgery where there is less sur-
ous ventilation, intrathoracic (intrapleural) pressures
are therefore below baseline (Figure 6.14). In con-
depression. A concomitant reduction in the depth of
anaesthesia may therefore be beneficial. Oxygen
in intrathoracic pressure; this pressure returns to base-
saturation should be monitored carefully at this time,
line but remains above atmospheric pressure through-
although, with high inspired oxygen concentrations
 out expiration. The distribution of ventilation (V) and
59
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
leff-sided preload, stroke volume and mean arterial
inhale
Exhale
pressure. This is more serious in animals with either
hypovolaemia or pre-existing cardiac failure, espe-
cially diastolic failure (the cat with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy; the dog with pericardial effusion). In such
cases, the use of central venous pressure (CvP)
monitoring is invaluable in assessing right-sided
(cmH
Alveolar
 preload, the effects of IPPV and outcomes of inter-
ventional therapy. A drop in CVP is seen in normal
patients during IPPV; in animals that are hypovol-
aemic there is a longer time to recovery of CvP (and 
also MAP). This may be used as a marker of a poten-
tial problem in such cases. Increased right ventricular
ntrapleural
wall tension may also impede coronary perfusion and,
when accompanied by low diastolic pressures, myo-
cardial hypoxia may further decrease cardiac output
and predispose to arrhythmias. Management strat-
egies include optimizing ventilator set-up to provide a
long expiratory phase time and pre-emptive and re-
active intravenous fluid loading (titrated to CVP). Use
Lung volume
of vasopressors is rarely indicated as they wil increase
afterload, which in the face of a pre-existing inad-
wn
equate preload will further reduce cardiac output.
Changes in lung volume affect autonomic tone and 
9
pulmonary vascular resistance. This is seen in many
species during spontaneous ventilation as a sinus ar-
rhythmia. This pattern may be exaggerated during
Normal respiratory pressures curing 
IPPV, especialy where there is a concurrent hypo-
 spontaneous ventilation. Note that intrapleurai 
pressure remains negative during the entire cycle - a key
volaemia. Over-inflation leads to stimulation of pul-
component of the thoracic pump' and the maintenance 
monary stretch receptors and a reflex increase in vaga!
 of cardiac preload.
tone (as well as inhibition of spontaneous ventilatory
drive). Where over-inflation is associated with high
blood perfusion (Q) in the lung depends upon the pres-
peak airway pressures, capillary collapse also in-
sure and volume changes and is therefore very differ-
creases pulmonary vascular resistance. Heart rate in
ent for spontaneous ventilation and controlled
these circumstances may fall significantly, even to the
ventilation. In a recumbent anaesthetized animal, de-
point of sinus arrest with severe over-inflation.
pendent parts of the lung are less compliant due to
Increased intrathoracic pressure also reduces ve-
increased tissue mass surrounding them. IPPV will
nous drainage from the juguiar veins and increases
therefore preferentially ventilate the more compliant
intracranial pressure. In normal patients cerebral auto-
non-dependent lung zones, exacerbating the V/Q mis-
regulation will prevent reduction in cerebral perfusion 
match already present in an anaesthetized recumbent 
and oxygen delivery. In patients with CNS disease
animal. In addition, where inflation pressures achieve
this process may be suboptimal and IPPV should be
values greater than 30 cmHzO, those capillaries in
Used with caution.
non-dependent lung areas (which have a relatively
In summary:
sequent reduction in capilary blood flow further ex-
Minimize cardiovascular effects of IPPV by
acerbates the V/Q mismatch. IPPV is physiologically
supporting preload and maximizing duration of
very different to spontaneous ventilation and wors-
the expiratory phase
ens any V/Q mismatch that may be seen in an anaes-
Avoid over-inflation
thetized recumbent patient. This is usually of little
Low heart rates, exaggerated sinus arrhythmia
clinical significance in small animal patients with no
or low mean arterial blood pressures necessitate
 concurrent ung disease.
 adjustment of inspiratory phase settings.
Cardiovascular effects
Rena! and hepatic effects
Adequate venous return relies on the maintenance of
A reduction in cardiac output results in a barorecep-
tor-mediated increase in sympathetic nervous tone
and the right atrium of the heart. During IPPV, the rise
and increased refease of antidiuretic hormone (ADH).
in intrathoracic pressure is transmitted through the
Reduced renal perfusion, coupled with the increased
right atrial wall, reducing this gradient and venous
sympathetic drive, aiso stimulates the renin-angio-
return. In extreme cases this mimics cardiac tampon-
tensin system, resulting in an aldosterone-mediated
ade. The reduction in return is worsened by a long
increase in the reabsorption of sodium and water. A
inspiratory phase time, high mean airway pressures
reduction in atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) release
and PEEP. The reduction in right-sided preload re-
accompanies the reduction in atrial stretch due to re-
duces right-sided cardiac output. This will then reduce
duced preload, again increasing the reabsorption of
60
Chapter 6 Automatic ventilators
Eichbaum FW and Yasaka WJ (1973) Influence of pulmonary ventilation
 sults from a reduced MAP. Reduced portal blood flow
with oxygen and carbon dioxide-oxygen mixtures upon cardiac
results fromraised intrathoracic pressure and hepatic
Eisele JH, Eger El and Muallem M (1967) Narcotic properties of carbon 
venous congestion.Clinically this means that patients
dioxide in the dog. Anesthesiology 28, 856-865
Horwitz L, Bishiop VS. Stone HL and Stegall HF (1969} Cardiovascular
Gogs.Journal of AppliedPhysiology27,370-373
reflex curing strabismus surgery. Anesthesia and Analgesia 91. 1044
Ralf N and Cote CJ (1991) Persistent cardiac arrhythmias in pediatric
patients: effects of age.expired carbon dioxide values.depth of
anesthesia and airway management. Anesthesia and Analgesia 73,
Reierences and further reading
720-724
Useful websites
Aiaiah MM, Demian AD, el-Diasty TA et al (2000) Can we increase
www.hallowell.com
hepatic oxygen availability? The role of intentional hypercarbia.
www.pneupac.co.uk
Middie East Journa/ of Anesthesiology t5, 503-514
www.surgivel.com
www.vetronic.co.uk
in: man. Anesthesiology 41, 345-349
www.viasyshealthcare.com
61
Patient monitoring and
monitoring equipment
Yves Moens and Paul Coppens
Introduction
Anaesthetic machine 
When performing general anaesthesia, a reversible
Check gas source(s):
'coma-like' state is produced. Most drugs used in anaes-
 Open cylinder(s)
thesia have an inherent degree of toxicity and often
Check quantity
Check output pressure
produce cardiovascular and respiratory side effects.
Check flowmeter(s)
These side effects jeopardize body homeostasis and
Check vaporizer(s):
make anaesthesia a potentialy dangerous procedure.
Off posiion
In order to limit the risks of generai anaesthesia,
Quantity
controlable' problems must be prevented. Patient-
 Check oxygen bypass
related problems can be detected by the pre-anaes-
Choose and connect a breathing system
thetic examination (see Chapter 2). Checking
Check the breathing system; carry out a leak test:
equipment will help to prevent problems due to tech-
1.
 Close exhaust valve
2.
 Obstruct the patient extremity of the breathing systen
nical errors (Figure 7.1; see also Chapters 4, 5 and
3. Fill system with oxygen until reservoir bag is under tension
6). Furthermore, basic prevention of problems involves 
(oHWo)
maintaining the patient at an appropriate anaesthetic
4. Check if pressure is kept, otherwise find and fix feak
level throughout the procedure. However, even with 
5. Open exhaust vaive
adequate preparation, it is not possible to eliminate
If ventilator available:
risk because every patient may exhibit individual and
Check function
unpredictable reactions to anaesthesia. Earliest de-
 Carry out a leak test
 Preset the parameters
tection of any adverse reaction by the patient (by
Monitoring equipmene
aesthetic administration) is vital. Therefore, attention
Power on
should be focused on the monitoring of vital systems,
Batfery state
such as the cardiovascular and the respiratory sys-
Test
tems, which are responsible for correct delivery of
Caibration if mecessary
 oxygen to the organs. Additionally. other parameters
Specifie equipment.
reflecting general homeostasis and the degree of anti-
 nociception and unconsciousness should be carefuly
Intravenous catheter
Intubation
observed. If deviations from normality outside defined
Fluids.
limits occur, analysis of the situation is necessary and
Hypothermia prevention
corrective measures should be taken. The results of
Ophthalmic ointment 
such action must also be evaluated.
Resuscitationeguipment avallabilty
Monitoring is performed in various ways. Initialliy.
the veterinary surgeon must always make full use of
his/her own senses (vision, touch, smell, hearing) to
 Tne preventive approach: pre-anaesthetic
collect clinical information, on which decisions can be
equipment check.
 made as to whether intervention is necessary. Clinical
examination, although very relevant, does have limita-
able to collect information on a continuous basis and
tions. The information is, in general, more qualitative
can upgrade clinical observation with more sensitive
than quantitative. Moreover, when staff availability is
information. The risk of anaesthesia in veterinary medi-
limited, or when the veterinary surgeon monitors more
cine remains very high compared with that of human
than one patient (or performs some adjustments to
anaesthesia. Healthy dogs and cats run a mortality risk
equipment), continuous coilection of patient parameters
of 0.054% and 0.112%, respectively (Brodbelt et al..
will be difficult if not impossible. Therefore, monitoring
2005). Actual anaesthetic mortality in humans is re-
can be complemented by mechanical and electronic
ported to be as low as 0.05 for every 10,000 patients
auxiliary equipment. During the last two decades, sev-
(Arbous et al., 2001). One should bear in mind that in
eral new devices have come on to the market and more
human medicine (unlike veterinary medicine), anaes-
affordable prices for these have led to their increasing
thesia is performed by a medical professional specially
popularity in veterinary anaesthesia. These devices are
trained in anaesthesia.
62
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
Monitoring equipment occasionally provides
observation of several parameters (integrated moni-
toring) is necessary to build a more complete picture
tion and limits of these devices (as well the physio-
of vital system function in the individual animal and
fogical significance of the information they provide)
the function of the anaesthetic machine. In this way.
must be very well understood if they are to be used
monitoring is the central tool to 'pilot anaesthesia with
to increase patient safety. Furthermore, this inform-
enhanced safety.
 ation must be used afongside clinical judgement
when evaluating a situation and deciding on possi-
ble therapeutic intervention.
 It is erroneous to think that monitoring may be
The main monitor: human senses
omitted for some 'simple' or 'quick' procedures, with
jo saposida ajgeis, buunp io sbnup ajes, oupeds
Veterinary surgeons are used to performing a clini-
 anaesthesia. Unexpected events often occur during 
cal examination, using their senses, on a daily
short and simple procedures on apparently healthy
basis and should adapt this skill to conditions
patients. Both clinical and technical monitoring must
during anaesthesia (Figure 7.2). Moreover, even
not be limited only to the patient but aiso include the
today, the most appropriate method for assessing
 anaesthetic machine.
the depth of anaesthesia in veterinary practice
Monitoring must not concentrate either on one clini-
remains the assessment of clinical signs (Figures 7.3
cal sign or one measured parameter. Simultaneous
and 7.4).
Sight
Mucous membrane colour
Pale
Hypoperfusion, anaemia
 Pink
Red
Vasodilation, local congestion
Brick red 
Haemoconcentration
Blue
Cyanosis
 Surgical site
Tissue colour
Cardiovascular and respiratory status
Bleeding: colour, intensity
Blood vessels:cofour, turgescence
horaxaoftheathinsytmellwsftvenla
Rate
Respiratoryrate
Amplitude
Tidal volume
Type
Respiratory pattern
Eye
Position
Depth of anaesthesia 
Lacrimation
Pupil size
Degree of third eyelid protrusion
Movement
Spontaneous motor activity
Depth of anaesthesia
Touch
Pulse: femcralis, sublingual, metacarpal, metatarsal arteries
Tonus/amplitude
Cardiovascular system: heart rate/rhyth, blood pressure 
Rate/rhythm
Autonomous response to noxious stirmuli
Synchronicity with heart auscullation, ECG
Depth of anaesthesia
prossire
 Pulse amplitude:
 Systolic-diastolic pressure diference 
Tonus of the artery
Iim8
Capillary refifltime
Palpebral/corneal refex
Depth of anaesthesia
 Skin temperature
Body temperature
Muscle relaxation
Relaxation of the jaw
 Muscle tone, depth of anaesthesia 
Squeeze the bag after closing the exhaust vaive
Mechanical integrity of the breathing system and respiratory tract
Leak
 Obstruction
Pulmonary compliance
Thoracic or extrathoracic resistance
Parameters that can be monitored during anaesthesia using the senses. (continues)
63
Chapter 7 Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
Intormation
15290838
Hearing
Abnormalnoise
Leak
Obstruction
Cardiac auscuitation: stethoscope,cesophageai stethoscope
Rate
Cardiac system: heart rate, rhythm, heart integrity
Rhythm':
.
：
 Autonomic responses to noxious stimuli
Synchronicity with pulse, ECG
.
Depth of anaesthesia
Murmaur
Pumonary auscutatintethsopeesophagea
stethoscope
Rate
Respiratory system: rate, rhythim, integrity
Rhythm
Autonomic rsponse to noxious stimuli
Lung sounds
Depth of anaesthesia
Smel!:
Presence of abnormal odour
Mechanical integrity of the breathing system and respiratory tract
(continued) Parameters that can be monitored during anaesthesia using the senses.
Eye position
.Central.
Rotated
Central
Paipebral rellex
+
Jaw tonicity
+
Movement
Possible:
Absent
Absent
Cornea
Moist
Moist
Dry
Heart rate
Usually increased
Usually decreased
Respiratory rate
Usually increased
Usually decreased
Haemodynamic and/or respiratory
I..Yes.
Usualyno
No
eorfuns bumojoi suonerea
stimulation
Clinical signs of depth of anaesthesia. Eye position, palpebral reffex and jaw tonicity are the most accurate
 signs to evaluate depth of anaesthesia. Note that heart rate and respiratory rate are inftuenced by many other
Parameter.
Eye position
Central
Central
Central
Palpebral reflex
+
Jaw tonicity
Movernent
Possible
Possible
Possible/absent
Carnea
Moist
Moist
Moist/dry
Heart rate
Usually increased
Usually decreased
Respiratory rate
Usually increased
 Usually decreased
Haemodynamic and/or respiratory variations
Yes
Usually no
No
following surgical stirmulation 
 Clinical signs of depth of anaesthesia with a dissociative anaesthetic agent. Note that heart rate and
respiratory rate are influenced by many other factors.
64
Chapter 7Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
Initially, the person in charge of anaesthesia needs
t0 organize his/her workplace in such a way that the
 collection of clinical information necessary to assess
depth of anaesthesia and the quality of the vital signs
is easy: the concept of ergonomics. The aim of this
concept is to be able to perform, from one location, a
 quick and complete assessment of all monitored para-
meters and machine function (Figure 7.5). The layout
of the workplace will help concentration on the per-
ception and integration of measurements from the
patient, anaesthetic equipment and monitoring de-
vices. This includes:
 Clinical parameters, such as eye position,
The anaesthesia 'screen'.
palpebral reflex, jaw tone, mucous membrane
colour, capilliary refill time, sublingual pulse,
 chest movement, skin temperature and, during 
surgery, blood colour and bleeding intensity
(a) Oesophageal
Indirect clinical parameters, e.g. movement of
stethoscope.
the reservoir bag
(b} Tip of the
Parameters collected from technical/electronic
oesophageal
devices, e.g. wave forms and numeric displays
stethoscope.
on the screen
Monitoring of the anaesthetic machine: inlet
pressure (when available), flowmeters, vaporizer.
breathing system and function of any other
 accessories like ventilators or syringe pumps.
chnica
onitors
Act as a source for retrospective analysis,
allowing further improvement of anaesthesia
strategies
 Represent a medicolegal document, attesting 
The use of an anaesthesia 'screen' (Figure 7.6), s0
the presence of an active monitoring effort of the
the patient's head can be seen, and the placement of
patient during anaesthesia.
an oesophageal stethoscope (Figure 7.7), to make
 cardiac and lung auscultation easier, are strongly rec-
ommended. However, the veterinary surgeon remains
Monitoring of parameters that
the main monitor; he/she is the collector of parameters,
reflect the integration of several
the central analyser and is responsible for all decisions
physiological functions
(i.e. he/she is the piot on board). The limit of this 'main
monitor' is that its quality (and thus safety) is depend-
Capnometry and capnography
ent on qualifications, knowledge and experience.
Capnometry is the measurement and numerical dis-
A record of anaesthesia, even in a simple form,
play of the carbon dioxide concentration in the respi-
must be completed. This will:
ratory gas during the whole respiratory cycle
(inspiration and expiration). When a continuous
Aid appreciation of trends in observed and
graphical display (screen or paper) is available, the
measured parameters
measurement produces typical curves (a capnogram)
Act as a reference for future anaesthesia in an
and the technique (instrument) is often referred to as
individual animal
capnography (capnograph)
65
Chapter 7 Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
The measuring principle relies on absorption of
The capnogram
infrared light by carbon dioxide molecules. Capno-
The production of the capnogram is based on the fact
meters are available as either sidestream or main-
that carbon dioxide is produced in cells as a result of
stream infrared analysers. Sidestream capnometers
 metabolism and then carried by the circulation to the
require a sampling line connected to the airway and
Iungs, where it is removed by alveolar ventilation.
continuously sample the respiratory gases (Figure
There are four distinct phases of the capnogram
7.8a). Samples are then analysed in the measuring
(Figure 7.9a):
chamber of the instrument. With mainstream ana-
lysers, miniaturization allows placement of the meas-
 Phase I is the inspiratory baseline. This phase
uring chamber directly in the airway and the
represents the analysis of the gas mixture
measurement signal is generated here (Figure 7.8b).
inspired by the patient for carbon dioxide. The
(a) Close-up of a connector for sampling gas
(sidestream capnograph). (b) Adaptor and sensor
a]
ofa mainstream capnograph.
[a) The normal capnogram.
Metabolism
Decreased
[b] Cardiogenic oscilations.
ETCO
"0013
A-B: exhalation of carbon dioxide-
·Cardiovascular
Cardiac output
free gas contained in deadspace
at the beginning ot expiration.
B-C: respiratory upstroke.
·Respiratory
Hypoventilation
representing the emptying of
ETCO, F
 connecting airways and the
beginning of emptying of alveoli.
C-D: expiratory (alveoiar) plateau,
representing emptying of aiveolil.
D: end-tidal carbon dioxide leve! -
the best approximation of alveolar 
carbon dioxide level.
D-E: inspiratory downstroke, as the
patient begins to inhaie fresh gas.
E -A: continuing inspiration, wnere
carbon dioxide remains at zero.
ETCO= Enci-tidal carbon dioxide;
ICO, = Inspired carbon dioxide.
a
66
Chapter 7 Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
baseline should have a value of zero, otherwise
where Paar is barometric pressure in mmHg.
the patient is rebreathing carbon dioxide
Capnometers can often perform the conversion be-
Phase Il is the expiratory upstroke. This
cause of a barometric pressure sensor in the device.
represents arrival at the sampling site of carbon
End-tidal carbon dioxide concentrations between 5 and
dioxide from the alveoli and the mixing with gas
6% (35-45 mmHg: 4.6-6 kPa) are considered nor-
present in the conducting airways. It is usually
 mal in anaesthetized animals.
very steep
Phase ll is the expiratory (alveolar) plateau:
 Interpreting the capnogram
which represents pure alveolar gas (of
The approach for proper interpretation of capno-
emptying alveoli). Due to uneven emptying of
graphic information is initially to check if a normal
alveoli, the slope continues to rise gradually
aui elou 0l uaul pue juesaid s! euno olydeiboudeo
during the expiratory pause. The peak of this 
numerical value of end-tidal carbon dioxide. One
exhaled carbon dioxide is called the end-tida!
must acknowledge the possible contribution of
carbon dioxide
metabolism, circulation and ventilation to the pro-
 Phase IV is the inspiratory downstroke. This is
duction of this number. When two functions are
the beginning of the inhalation and the carbon 
stable, capnometry monitors closely the third func-
dioxide curve falls steeply to zero.
tion, e.g. if metabolism and circulation are stable,
the capnometer monitors ventilation. Conversely, if
During anaesthesia, with long expiratory times,
metabolism and ventilation are stable, the state of
phase Ill can show cardiogenic oscillations caused
the circulation will be more closely reflected. Addi-
by movement of the heart and this is considered
tionally, capnography will provide information
normal (Figure 7.9b).
The capnometer usually displays respiratory rate,
about airway patency. technical faults and ade-
quacy of gas flow in non-rebreathing systems.
the value of end-tidal carbon dioxide and sometimes
the value for inspiratory carbon dioxide. If a capno-
Capnography has become standard care for intra-
operative monitoring of ventilatory efficiency and
graph is used, the presence of a normal shape of the
thus decreases the need for invasive arterial blood
capnographic curve indicates that the number dis-
gas analysis.
played for end-tidal carbon dioxide is likely to repre-
sent a true end-expiratory sample. when grossly
normal ventilation/perfusion conditions in the lungs
Increased Erco,: Increases in end-tidal carbon
exist, the end-tidal carbon dioxide reflects the partial
dioxide concentrations (Figure 7.11a) may be due to
pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (P:CO;
impaired alveolar ventilation (anaesthetic-induced res-
Figure 7.10). Hence capnometry offers a continuous,
piratory depression), increased metabolism (malignant 
non-invasive way to reflect the partial pressure of car
hyperthermia or early sepsis), increased cardiac out-
bon dioxide in arterial blood, which is directly deter-
put or the addition of carbon dioxide to the circulatory
mined by alveolar ventilation.
system as a result of rebreathing carbon dioxide.
End-tidal carbon dioxide is displayed as a concen
In the latter case, increased inspired carbon dioxide
tration in volume percent (%) or as a partial pressure
will be associated with increased end-tidal carbon
(in mmHg or kPa). Concentration can be converted
dioxide (Figure 7.11b). Increased end-tidal carbon
into mmHg with the formula:
dioxide is also observed during laparoscopy due to
absorption from the peritoneum of carbon dioxide used
PCO= (Pbar-47) x %CO2/100
to inflate the abdomen.
Capnography:
 the principle.
P,CO,
 = Alveolar carbon dioxide;
PcO² = Partial pressure of
carbon dioxide in arterial blood;
PCO, = Partial pressure of carbon
dioxide in venous blood.
：
P.CO.
67
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
Capnograpns showing
(a) increased eno-tidal
carbon dioxide: (b) increased
Metabolism.
Decreased
inspired carbon Cioxide: and
"0013
[o) decreased end-tical carbon
Cardiovascutar
dioxide.
ETCO
·Respiratory,
6
Decreased ETcO2: Decreased end-tidal carbon
ventilation), cardiac arrest (no circulation) or technj-
dioxide concentrations (Figure 7.11c) may be due to
cal problems (see below). Rapid diagnosis of cardiac
hyperventilation, low cardiac output (low blood vol-
arrest increases the chance of a successful outcome
ume delivered to the lungs) or pronounced hypother-
for cardiopulmonary resuscitation.End-tidal carbon
mia. Rapidly faling end-tidal carbon dioxide, in the
dioxide values during resuscitation and cardiac mas-
presence of respiratory movements and absence of
sage reffect etficiency of lung perfusion, and in hu-
hyperventilation, is a good indicaior of failing circula-
man medicine have been considered to have
tion and cardiac arrest. Absent end-tidal carbon diox-
 prognostic value for successtul restoration of sponta-
ide can indicate respiratory arrest (no alveolar
neous circulation.
89
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
Technical monitoring: Several technical aspects of
With sidestream devices, artefactually low end-tida!
 breathing systems, their function and connection to
carbon dioxide is seen:
the patient are also monitored by quantitative (capno-
meter value) and qualitative analysis (capnogram
When concomitant aspiration of ambient air
morphology). The presence of inspired carbon dioxide
occurs anywhere between sampling site and
(rebreathing) (see Figure 7.11b) can be due to soda
measuring chamber
lime exhaustion; an incompetent expiratory valve on
e mol Aaa pue salei Aoeldsal pider yim
a circle system allowing exhaled carbon dioxide to be
volumes
 When sampling at the level of fresh gas delivery
re-inhaled (even with normal function of soda lime);
insufficient gas flow in a non-rebreathing system. An
in non-rebreathing systems. The sampling line 
abnormal capnogram may be due to:
can become obstructed by condensation drops
or aspiration of any fluids.
A dislodged endotracheal tube
With mainstream capnographs, the measuring
A misplaced endotracheal tube (oesophageal
chamber in the airway adaptor can become dirty or
intubation)
damaged, leading to erroneous end-tidal or inspired
An obstructed endotracheal tube or airway
carbon dioxide values. Sidestream technology offers
(endotracheal tube cuff hernia; Figure 7.12)
other (less important) possibilities like sampling
A leak around the endotracheal tube cuff
directly from a nostril in non-intubated patients. Main-
(Figure 7.13)
 stream technology can be used only in the presence
Disconnection of the endotracheal tube from the
of an endotracheal tube, but copes better with rapid
breathing system.
respiratory rates and very small tidal volumes.
Pulse oximetry
Capnometry versus capnography:The drawback
The pulse oximeter is a device that allows non-
of a capnometer compared with a capnograph is
invasive measurements of the saturation of haemo-
that the former lacks the capnogram and, therefore.
globin with oxygen (S,O2); in addition, it displays
cannot provide a qualitative analysis and precise
heart rate. The principle of measurement is as fol-
diagnosis from the morphological changes of exhaled
lows: a probe, which features a transmitter and re-
carbon dioxide.
ceiver of red and infrared light, is positioned to
When ventilation/perfusion mismatch in the lungs 
transilluminate a pulsatile arteriolar bed. In small
becomes important, the end-tidal carbon dioxide
animal patients, it is usually placed on the tongue,
underestimates P:cO, due to an increase in alveolar
(tt'/ anbiy) eaie patuewbidun leuo no aondaid
deadspace (e.g. low cardiac output, pulmonary
Computer software analyses the total absorption of
thromboembolism).
the light and detects the pulsating component of the
Capnograph showing
increased resistance at
expiration.
Capnograph showing
leakage at the level of
endotracheai tube and/or breathing
system.
69
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
absorption that originates from cyclic arrival of arte-
The threshold of hypoxaemia occurs at an arteria!
rial blood in the tissue. The absorption of infrared
oxygen tension of 60 mmHg (8 kPa). As shown on
-seau s! jueuodwoo elesind aul Xq jyb! pai pue
the dissociation curve of haemoglobin (Figure 7.17),
ured differentially. Because oxyhaemoglobin and re-
this threshold corresponds to a saturation of 90%.
duced haemoglobin absorb more infrared and red
During anaesthesia, therefore, oxygen saturation must 
light, respectively (Figure 7.15), a ratio is calculated
be kept above 90%. when oxygen is supplied (or even
that corresponds to a percentage of haemoglobin
in a healthy patient breathing room air), a saturation
saturated with oxygen (Figure 7.16). Because maxi-
 closer to 100% should be expected. The usual preci-
 mal total light absorption corresponds to a pulse, the
sion of measurement of a pulse oximeter is ± 2%. It is
pulse oximeter also provides a figure for pulse rate.
important to note that S.O, only indicates that the
patient is receiving enough oxygen; S,O can be nor-
 mal in hypoventilating patients when the inspired oxy-
 gen fraction is increased (which normaily should be
the case during anaesthesia). In these circumstances,
S,O: gives no information about adequacy of ventila-
tion. Conversely, when a patient hypoventilates whilst
breathing room air, S,O, will fall.
P9z（mmHg)
Sensor of a pulse oximeter. (a) On the tongue.
Haemogiobin-oxygen dissociation curve.
[b] On a non-pigmented toe.
Any general cause of poor peripheral perfusion,
such as vasoconstriction associated with shock,
hypothermia or use of alpha-2 agonists, causes erro-
Red
Intrared
6600m
neously low values or failure to measure. Local
hypoperfusion can also be induced by progressive
oxvHb
50l
the position of the clip and the probe every so often
temporarily solves the situation.
Other factors can also interfere with puise oximetry
readings:
The presence of abnormal haemogiobin will
affect measurement. For instance, in the 
Wavelength
 presence of carboxyhaemoglobin S,O2 wilbe
overestimated
Light absorption of reruced haemoglobin and 
Interference from ambient light will reduce the
oxyhaemoglobin.
quality of the signal received
7.167
 Motion or shivering, use of electrasurgical
equipment and mucosal or skin pigmentation.
Relationship
between the ratio
Some pulse oximeters display a photoplethysmo-
of red to infrared 
 graphic waveform. The presence of a regular and dis-
light absorption
tinct waveform similar to an arterial pressure waveform
and the saturation
 confirms the validity of the dispiayed S,O, values (Fig-
of haem:ogfobin
withoxygen
ure 7.18). Moreover, this can be supported by a dis-
(S.O).
played heart rate equivalent to the true heart rate.
However, the amplitude of the waveform does not
necessarily reflect the quality of the signal because
Ratlored:lnfrare
the gain can be automatically adapted.
70
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
complex as all the results are interrelated, and inter-
ested readers are advised to consult standard textbooks
on the subject. Figure 7.19 summarizes basic inter-
pretation of blood gas analysis.
If the ability of the lungs to oxygenate blood is to
be assessed, sampling of arterial blood is mandatory.
The value of POz (partial pressure of oxygen in arte-
rial blood) on its own is not meaningful to evaluate
oxygenation if the inspired oxygen fraction (FO2) is
not known. Classical indices of oxygenation are:
[a]} Pulse oximeter: display of SO,: heart rate
The ratio PO/FO, (normal: >300)
and waveform. (b] Display of capnography
The alveolar-arterial difference for PO2
aniti pulse oximetry.
((A-a)PO2) where PAO2 = ((Phar -47) x FO2) 
1.2P:CO2 (normal: 5-10 mmHg if FO2 = 0.21,
Capnography and pulse oximetry
100 mmHg if FOz = 1.0).
Capnography and puise oximetry (see Figure 7.18b)
provide complementary infarmation. It has been
The 'gold standard' to evaluate the efficiency of
shown that the proper interpretation of information
ventilation is P,cO,. The assessment of venous blood
received by capnography and pulse oximetry, used
samples does not provide straightforward information
 together, have the potential to prevent 93% of the com-
 about oxygenation, but it does allow satisfactory moni-
plications during anaesthesia in human medicine
-uaa Ao apixop yoqiio aaowal oi Age aul jo buoi
(Tinker, 1989).
tilation and the acid-base status.
 The classic blood gas machine uses samples of
Blood gas analysis
heparinized blood. Faifure to use the correct samples
Blood gas analysers measure directly the pH and the
causes clotting within the circuit. To obtain accurate
partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in a
results, blood samples should be withdrawn anaerobi-
blood sample. They also calculate derived variables,
cally (no air bubbles) to avoid actual gas tensions be-
such as plasma bicarbonate concentration (HCO,),
ing modified by gas exchange with room air. Analysis
base excess and saturation of haemoglobin with oxy-
is best done promptly, but storing blood samples for
gen (S;O2). In traditional analysers, the blood sample
less than 1 hour in iced water is acceptable. Taking an
is aspirated into a circuit bringing the blood in contact
arterial blood sample is relatively easy in larger ani-
with different electrodes to perform the measurements.
mals, but rather difficult in very small ones. Femoral
These machines are expensive and require careful
and dorsal metatarsal arteries are often used. without 
maintenance. Recently, portable and even handheld
careful attention to technique, complications such as
blood gas analysers have become available, allow-
haematoma or bruise formation at the site of sampling
:
ing blood gas analysis to be performed in remote lo-
can occur. In particular, pressure should be applied to
cations. These devices use disposable cartridges,
the site for several minutes after sample collection to
which need only a minimal amount of blood to per-
allow the vessel to seal. If it is likely that multiple sam-
form the measurement. They measure blood gas para-
ples will be required, insertion of an arterial catheter
meters but offer the option to measure additional
should be considered; this is often done in combina-
parameters, e.g. electrolytes, glucose and lactate.
tion with invasive blood pressure measurement.
 Blood gas analysis is the 'gold standard' method
Blood gas analysis is useful in the management 
for evaluation of gas exchange. It provides invaluable 
of critically ill patients and patients with ventilatory
 information about the oxygenation, ventilation and
problems. Specific treatment can be planned from the
 acid-base status of the patient. Interpretation of the
results of initial blood gas analysis, and the response
values for pH, PCO2 and HCO;, coupled to the clinical
to this treatment can be monitored by taking further
history of the patient, allows identification of respira-
blood gas samples. The necessity of repeated blood
tory and metabolic acidosis and alkalosis, as well as
sampling in anaesthesia is diminished when non-
ongoing compensatory mechanisms. The detailed
invasive monitors of oxygenation and ventilation are used
interpretation of blood gas measurements can be
 simultaneously, e.g. pulse oximetry and capnometry.
lncrease
+.
区
Hd
7.35-7.45
Acidaemia
Alkalaemia
PCO2
 35-45 mmHg
Respiratory component: alkalosis
 Respiratory component acidosis
HCO-
22-26 mmol/l
Metabolic component: acidosis 
Metabolic component: alkalosis
.
PO2
1f oxygen level in inspired gas (FO) =
Hypoxaemia: <60 mmHg (8kPa)
 Due to increased FO, or increased 
21%:80-100 mmHg (10.7-13.3 kPa)
atmospheric pressure
5.02
95-100%
Hypoxaemia: < 90 %
 Basic interpretation of blood gas analysis.
71
Cardiovascular monitoring
peripheral artery. ln the dog, the dorsal metatarsal
artery is most commonly used, but the femoral
Heart rate indicator
artery or the palmar artery can also be used. In the
Heart rate indicators exist as separate devices but
cat, the femoral artery is the most common site. The
more often heart rate counting is a feature of an
catheter is connected to a pressure transducer via
electrocardiographic monitoring system. The heart
non-compliant tubing filed with heparinized saline.
rate is deduced using detection of the QRS complex.
Pure mechanical pressure transducers have been
The number of complexes is counted over a certain
mostly abandoned for electronic ones connected
time period and calculated as beats per minute. Aigo-
to the monitoring device. The transducer must be
rithms are based on human use and in veterinary
'zeroed' to ambient air at the level of the right atrium.
patients regularly cause the display of a double heart
The transducer-monitor combination gives a continu-
rate when relatively high T waves are erroneously
ous reading of blood pressure and shows the pres-
detected as QRS complexes. The displayed heart rate
sure waveform. Systolic and diastolic pressures are
must be regularly double-checked by clinical exami-
taken as the cyclic maximum and minimum pres-
nation. There is no information about the pumping 
sures, respectively. Mean pressure is automatically
function of the heart (see Electrocardiography, below)
calculated. To allow trouble-free continuous monj-
and consequently such heart rate indicators can give
toring (avoiding clotting in the arterial line), the set-
a faise feeling of security.
up is combined with a pressurized continuous ffush
 system that does not inffuence the accuracy of the
Blood pressure
pressure reading (Figure 7.20). Repeated arteriai
blood sampling (blood gas analysis) is easy when
Arterialbloodpressure
an arterial catheter is in place.
Arterial blood pressure is one of the most usefui meas-
ures of cardiovascular function available to the vet-
Non-invasive blood pressure measurement: There
erinary surgeon. Two methods of measuring blood
are two methods generally used to measure blood
pressure can be used: invasive (direct) and non-inva-
pressure non-invasively: the oscillometric method and
 sive (indirect). Invasive blood pressure measurement
the Doppler method. Both methods are based on the 
is less straightforward to carry out in practice condi-
occlusion of blood flow to an extremity by the inffation
tions but, on the other hand, non-invasive blood pres-
of a cuff and detection of reappearance of blood flow
sure measurement might not fulfil the expectations of 
during deffation. Any of the limbs or the tail can be
reliability and accuracy.
 Used. The ideal cuff width is usually quoted as 40% of
the circumference of the limb. Wider cuffs will lead to
Invasive blood pressure measurement: Invasive
underestimation of the true pressure, while narrow
blood pressure measurement is considered the 'gold
cuffs will tend to overestimate. Most cuffs have a mark
standard' technique. A catheter must be placed in a
that should be placed directly over the artery.
 Set-up for
invasive blood
Monitor
pressure measurement.
Pressurized
continuous flush
system
Electronic
pressure
transducer
Catheter in
peripheral
artery
72
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
 Using the oscillometric method, returning blood
also Chapters 19 and 29). Analysis of the arterial
fow is detected by pulsatile pressure changes in the
waveform with invasive blood pressure measurement
cuff itself. The pressure at which pulses in the cuff 
allows semiqualitative estimation of ventricular
appear is taken as systolic blood pressure. As the cuff
contractility, hypovolaemia, cardiac output and the role
js further deflated, diastolic and mean blood pressure
of peripheral resistance, e.g. a low dichrotic notch in-
are measured. Oscillotonometric devices record mean
dicates vasodilation, steepness of upstroke represents
blood pressure as the pressure at which the pulses in
strength of contraction.
the cuff are maximal and diastolic pressure as the
Invasive blood pressure monitoring is less practi-
pressure below which they disappear. The option of
cal than non-invasive techniques in the clinical set-
 automated function provides non-invasive blood pres-
ting. It requires more expensive equipment, skills in
 sure measurements at adjustable time intervals. Heart 
placemenf of a catheter (especially in smaller patients)
rate is also usually displayed.
and correct calibration, There is a risk of haematoma
Using the Doppier method, placement of an ultra-
formation, particularly after withdrawal of the catheter,
 soLind probe over an artery distal to the cuff is neces-
and a risk of infection.
 sary. The emitted ultrasound is reflected by the moving
 Individual blood pressure values obtained by non-
blood and a frequency shift is converted to an audible
invasive methods must always be regarded cautiously.
signal. The pressure at which blood flow recom-
Oscillometric blood pressure measurements tend to
 mences, characterized by a typical 'whoosh' sound,
be less accurate or the measuring devices regularly
is taken as systolic blood pressure. Diastolic pressure
cease to function during hypotension and periphera!
is more difficult to determine. No automatic function
vasoconstriction (especially in small patients <5 kg
is available but leaving the probe in place with a de-
bodyweight). The Doppler technique, in principle, oniy
flated cuf allows one to hear the blood flow continu-
indicates systolic pressure; in cats the Doppler tech-
ously, hence turning it into a continuous monitor.
nique underestimates true systolic pressure and tends
Changes in the pitch of the tone suggest changing
to be more closely related to mean blood pressure.
haemodynamics. The Doppler technique can be ap-
plied to any size of animal, including cold-blooded
Central venous pressure
animals, and is relatively inexpensive. lt requires more
Central venous pressure (CvP) represents the bal-
operator experience than automated oscillometric
ance between the filling of the central venous reser-
measurement and the noise it produces can be dis-
voir and the pumping ability of the heart. CVP is
turbing to some unless headphones are used.
measured in the vena cava within the thoracic cavity
via a long intravenous catheter. The classical approach
Significance of information: There is a wide range
is to position the catheter, via the juguiar vein, in the
in blood pressure encountered in anaesthetized dogs
 thoracic portion of the cranial vena cava. Alternatively,
and cats. Ranges commonly seen are between 90
the femoral or saphenous approach can be used to
 and 120 mmHg for systolic, between 55 and 90 mmHg 
position the catheter in the thoracic portion of the cau-
for diastolic, and between 60 and 120 mm Hg for mean 
dal vena cava. CVP can be measured using the tech-
 blood pressure.
nique described for invasive arterial blood pressure.
Generally, arterial blood pressure gives an indica-
The zero reference point is the level of the right atrium.
tion of the adequacy of cardiovascular function. The
Landmarks are the manubrium (in lateral recumbency)
systolic blood pressure is determined by a combina-
and the scapulohumeral joint (in patients in dorsal 
tion of peripheral vascular resistance, stroke volume
recumbency). Instead of electronic transducers, a
and intravascular volume, whereas diastolic blood pres-
cheap saline manometer is often used (Figure 7.21).
sure primarily arises from peripheral vascular resist-
A change of CVP over a short time period, in the
ance. Measurement of systolic and diastolic blood
absence of a changed fluid load suggests changes in
 pressures allows estimation of pulse pressure, which
cardiac function. A low or falling CVP suggests the
is the difference between systolic and diastolic pres-
presence of hypovolaemia. High or rising CVP can
sures (pulse quality). Mean blood pressure is an im-
be due to fuid overload or to failing heart function.
portant factor in relation to general tissue perfusion.
The administration of a fluid bolus, which is followed
Blood flow to the major organs of the body is
by a transient rise in CvP, suggests hypovolaemia
sannssaid poolg ueaw jo ebuei e ssoion paleinbaioine
but adequate cardiac function. Subsequent fluid
from about 60 mmHg to about 120 mmHg. When mean
therapy can be guided by CVP control. CVP can be a
blood pressure falls below this range, blood flow to the
valuable aid in differentiating low arterial blood pres-
major organs is jeopardized. This results in inadequate
sure due to hypovolaemia from low arterial blood pres-
 oxygen delivery and accumulation of lactic acid, lead-
sure due to heart failure. The normal range is quite
ing to acidosis. On the other hand, it must be realized
variable (3-8 cmH,O), so single values have limited
that a normal mean blood pressure does not neces-
meaning. Conversely. repetitive measurements and
sarily equate to good overall tissue perfusion. f a nor-
determination of trends provide valuable information.
mal blood pressure is generated by excessive
 CVP measurement is not a routine procedure dur-
vasoconstriction, perfusion of tissue might be insuffi-
ing anaesthesia. In many cases, CVP measurement
cient. Acute hypertension can have deleterious effects 
may have already begun before anaesthesia. it is of 
 on the central nervous system and the lungs.
particular use in critical patients who need extensive
Changes in blood pressure and heart rate can be
and prolonged fluid therapy and/or are being treated
seen with inadequate anaesthetic depth, anaesthetic
for haemodynamic instability. During intermittent posi-
agent overdose, hypovolaemia and overhydration (see
tive pressure ventilation (IPPV), CVP is influenced by
73
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
Set-up for CVP
measurement.
Note that the zero point on
 the saline manometer is set
at the level of the
manubrium in the iaterally
recumbenl patient.
D
the elevated intrathoracic pressure, especially when
improve electrical contact and is preferred to alcohol;
positive end-expiratory pressure is used, and CVP
ssol pateloosse aul pue eieiodeae ol spuel leel eut
measurements have to be corrected accordingly.
of electrical contact can be the cause of artefacts.
Placing adhesive electrode patches on the skin ne-
Electrocardiography
cessitates shaving, but this can be avoided when they
The electrocardiogram (ECG) was the first monitor-
are attached to the pads of the paws. Patches can be
ing to be made compuisory in human medicine and it
reused when fixed with self-adhesive bandage.
may be the most frequently used monitor in veteri-
A normal ECG trace is shown in Figure 7.22. The
nary anaesthesia.
three-electrode system is effective for arrhythmia
In veterinary practice, the three electrode system
analysis, but in human medicine is considered insuf-
is almost exclusively used: the electrical activity of the
ficient for detection of myocardial ischaemia (analysis
heart is measured between two electrodes, with the
of the ST segment). When the surgical site does not
third electrode acting as the ground electrode. They
allow normal electrode placement, a base-apex deri-
 are normally located on left and right forelimbs and
vation can be used: one electrode is placed dorsal to
the left hindlimb. Perfect electrical contact with the
the base of the heart, another ventrally near the apex
 skin is essential to obtain reliable and prolonged ECG
and the third peripherally. Transoesophageal ECG,
tracings. This contact can be achieved with adhesive
using a special oesophageal probe or stethoscope
electrode patches, crocodile clips or transcutaneous
equipped with ECG electrodes, is also a very con-
needles. In general, electrode gel is recommended to
venient method of monitoring cardiac rhythm.
Normal
ECG.
74
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
The ECG:
Respiratory monitoring
 Provides information limited to electrical activity
Respiratory rate counters
of the heart. ft does not provide any information
One type of respiratory rate monitor uses a connec-
about pumping function and haemodynamic
tor attached to the end of the endotracheal tube. This
consequences. An extreme example is
connector is equipped with a thermistor, which de-
electromechanical dissociation, where the ECG
 tects the movement of respiratory gases (expired gas
remains normal but the heart is not beating
is warmer than inspired gas). These monitors can emit
Allows quick diagnosis of the type of cardiac
an audible tone synchronous with the detection of
arrest (asystole, ventricular fibrillation,
movement of gas. They can also display the time in
electromechanical dissociation) and is the only
seconds since the last breath, or the respiratory fre-
way to detect and analyse any other
quency. They produce an alarm in case of apnoea
arrhythmias.
('apnoea detector'). However, the respiratory rate dis-
played should not be used as a safe indicator of the
Examples of common ECG abnormalities during
eficiency of ventilation, because no information is
anaesthesia are shown in Figure 7.23.
provided about tidal volume. A 'normal' displayed res-
Common causes of artefacts in ECG monitoring
piratory rate, and even tachypnoea, can be associ-
are poor electrical contact of the electrodes (insufficient
ated with hypoventilation. In addition, if instrument
gel, dirty crocodile clips), detachment of electrodes,
Joj elgissod s! l! 'peisnipe Ajedoid jou si Aajsues
50/60 Hz interference, electrical interference from
these monitors to produce artefactual acoustic sig-
nals and dispiay erroneous information.
Abnormal ECGs.
with normal
ECG trace
superimposed
in grey.
[ajVeniricular
extrasystole.
[b] Atrioventricular
block, secord
degree.
[al
B
75
Chapter 7 Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
Airway pressure gauges
Electronic spirometers exist in different forms for
It is highly desirable to have an airway pressure gauge
both research and clinical purposes and are based
(Figure 7.24) in an anaesthetic breathing system. This
on diferent physical principles. However, they are
is a simple mechanical aneroid (or Bourdon-type)
expensive and rarely found in veterinary practice.
manometer with a scale varying from -10 to +100
Some devices do not provide any more information
cmHzO. This instrument heips the performance of a
than the mechanical spirometer.
pre-anaesthetic quantitative leak test of the anaes-
Spirometry is reliable and shows whether or not
thetic machine and breathing system. The monitoring
ventilation is within acceptable limits (minute volume 
 of the typical pressure cycles of IPPV will serve as a
100-300 ml/kg/minute, tidal volume 7-15 ml/kg). How-
 guide during manual ventilation and for adjustment of 
 ever, acceptable values for ventilation are not neces-
automatic ventilators. The absence of pressure swings
sarily associated with acceptable gas exchange;
indicates major leaks or disconnection of patient and
because the contribution of deadspace volume (about
anaesthetic apparatus. Airway pressure monitoring will
-one third in normal circumstances) remains unknown,
detect dangerously high airway pressure, e.g. due t0
the alveolar part of the minute volume (which deter-
 maladjustment of ventilator settings or when the ex-
mines PcOg) remains speculative. In this respect,
haust vaive remains inadvertently closed during spon-
capnometry and blood gas analysis are most useful.
taneous ventilation. If the delivered tidal volume is
Some spirometers allow advanced monitoring of
known, the ratio of tidal volume to airway pressure is
ventilation because they use physical principles that
an indicator of compliance of the respiratory system
when IPPV is applied. Moreover, the level of positive
pressure, calculate compliance of the respiratory sys-
end-expiratory pressure can be checked.
tem, and provide graphic presentation of the pressure-
flow and pressure-volume relationships in the form
of loops.
Airway
Oxygen analyser
pressure
The measurement of oxygen concentration in inspired
gauge.
 gas (FO,) is compulsory in human anaesthesia. When
several gases are used (oxygen, nitrous oxide, air),
monitoring of the inspired oxygen fraction is a basic
method to prevent delivery of a hypoxic gas mixture
and hypoxaemia. The measurement of FO2 also al-
lows safe use of low-flow anaesthesia techniques (see 
Chapter 5). This measurement is often included in
respiratory gas analysis performed by multiparameter
anaesthetic monitors and different physical principles 
are used. A popular simple stand-alone device is
Spirometers
based on a chemical reaction in a fuel cell. The lifespan 
A simple method to evaluate the eficiency of ventia-
of this relatively costly cell is limited and depends on
tion is the use of a mechanical respirometer (Figure
the amount and time of oxygen measurement. A mini-
7.25). This instrument measures the volume of expired
mum of 30% oxygen in the inspired gas should be
gases and is often fixed in the expiratory limb of a
provided during anaesthesia of healthy patients.
breathing system. Alternatively, if can be connected
directly to an endotracheal tube or facemask. A
Temperature monitoring
respirometer indicates tidal volume and thus the minute
volume must be calculated using a stopwatch. Some
The continuous measurement of body temperature is 
respirometers have a built-in timer and automatically
performed by a thermistor or a thermocouple mounted
display the minute volume (minute volume (MV) is the
ul paoeid aq ueo aqoid aul 'aqoid aedoidde ue uo
product of respiratory rate (RR) per minute and tidal
 the oesophagus, nasopharynx or rectum.
volume (V) of the patient (MV = V, x RR/minute)).
Perioperative monitoring of body temperature is
important to detect hypothermia, which commonly
develops during anaesthesia. Among other reasons,
this is due to depression of hypothalamic thermo-
Spirometer.
regulation and heat loss from surgical exposure of body
cavities. Hypothermia leads to reduced cellular meta-
bolism, decreased anaesthetic requirements (danger
60.
of overdosage), delayed recovery, bradycardia and
increased morbidity. It is important to take preventive
measures, such as insulation of the surgical table, use
of a circulating warm water mattress, warm blankets
and heating pads. However, if not well controlled, there 
is a potential risk of inducing iatrogenic hyperthermia.
Hyperthermia is also seen occasionally during low-flow
anaesthesia in a warm environment, and during
sepsis and malignant hyperthermia.
76
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
Inhalational anaesthetic agent
to cardiovascular failure, hypovolaemia and shock
monitoring
(see Chapter 23). Urine output is part of the fluid
balance evaluation comparing fluid input during an-
Monitors that continuously measure the concentra-
aesthesia (intravenous infusions) and fluid losses
tion of inhaled anaesthetic agents in the breathing
(blood, urine, transudates).
 system are available In many of these devices, infra-
In some circumstances, the perioperative moni-
red analysis is used, and is often combined with the
toring of blood glucose concentration (e.g. anaes-
measurement of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
thesia of diabetic patients and those with insulinoma)
Measurement allows control of the dosage of vola-
or electrolytes, haematocrit and total protein (unsta-
tile agent administered to the patient and correlation
ble critical patients with emergency surgery) may
of this with its clinical efects. The principle is that al-
be necessary.
veolar (end-tidal) concentration of an agent reffects
its arterial and cerebral concentration; this value can
be compared with the documented minimum alveolar
Guidelines for monitoring strategy in
concentration (MAC) value of the agent (see Chapter
veterinary anaesthesia
14). However, a very large number of factors influr-
ence MAC value (e.g. individual variation, sedative
When organizing and purchasing anaesthetic moni-
 and analgesic drugs) and measured values are in-
toring equipment, there are several factors to bear
dicative of the dosage of the agent but not of the depth
in mind:
of anaesthesia. Clinical examination remains the key
factor in the assessment of anaesthetic depth.
Staff numbers and qualifications
If properly calibrated, these monitors can be used
·
Costs versus benefits
to check the accuracy of the output of vaporizers. In
Case load and nature of those cases
this case, it is imperative that sampling be done at the
 The anaesthetic techniques used
outlet of the vaporizer and not in the breathing system.
The need to monitor several cases
simultaneously
The need for post-anaesthetic monitoring.
Monitoring depth of anaesthesia
The choice of which monitoring equipment to buy
In clinical veterinary anaesthesia, the most accurate
depends on:
method to assess the depth of anaesthesia is based
on collection and interpretation of relevant clinical
The organization of the practice: if nobody is
parameters (see Figure 7.3). The use of neuro-
available to monitor anaesthesia. more
muscular-blocking agents as part of a balanced an-
equipment will be necessary to alert the
aesthesia protocol eliminates many of these important
surgeon, but this method has clear limits. It is far
preferable to have a trained person to monitor
 cine, this has occasionally led to difficulties in estima-
anaesthesia, rather than rely exclusively on the
tion of anaesthetic depth, resulting in awareness
use of electronic monitors. It cannot be
during anaesthesia, or undesired recall afterwards.
 jo asn pue aseuond out teut paziseydwaiaao
 For this reason, there is an increased use in human.
monitors is of no use if:
clinical practice of electronic devices to evaluate depth 
Clinical monitoring is not mastered
of anaesthesia. These devices are based on compu-
Artefactual information cannot be identified
terized analysis of the electroencephalogram (EEG)
The physiological meaning of the
(bispectral analysis) or EEG reaction to auditory stimu-
information provided is not understood and
lation (middle latency auditory evoked potentials). In
the right corrective steps cannot
veterinary anaesthesia, this kind of monitoring is
consequently be undertaken. Adequate
reserved for research purposes.
training of staff is therefore of utmost
importance, and the practice must be
organized in a way that allows someone
 Monitoring of the neuromuscular
with adequate training to assess
anaesthetized patients on a regular basis
junction
The budget: cost of the equipment is a limiting
factor. Also, to invest in expensive monitoring
 For information on monitoring of the neuromuscular
equipment which is not properly understood (and
junction, see Chapter 15.
whose information cannot be correctly
interpreted) will be of no use in either improving
quality of anaesthetic management or reducing
Additional monitoring
the incidence of anaesthetic mishaps
Patient condition (ASA status): patients with
When a urinary catheter is in place, the urine output
increased anaesthetic risk will require more
can easily be measured by collecting the urine in
complete monitoring of their vital functions so
a bag (normal 1-2 ml/kg/h). A normal urine output
that rapid detection of abnormalities is possible
reflects correct cardiovascular status and normal
and correct assessment and therapeutic
renal perfusion. Renal perfusion can be reduced due
decisions can be made quickly
77
Chapter 7  Patient monitoring and monitoring equipment
 The chosen anaesthetic technique:
The use of normal anaesthetic and monitoring
Capnography in non-intubated patients is
equipment inside a magnetic resonance unit is not
difficult, whereas pulse oximetry can be used
 possibie. The magnetic field attracts all ferrous metal
 High doses of alpha-2 agonists in intubated 
and electronic functions are disturbed. Special moni-
patients may increase the likelihood of
toring equipment that can remain inside the room is
unreliable pulse oximeter function, but 
available, but is very expensive. For respiratory gas
capnography will still be reliable
 When nitrous oxide is used, or when using.
solution is to sample via a very long line while the
fow-flow techniques, there is a potential risk
monitor is stationed outside the room. For ECG and
 of administration of a hypoxic gas mixture. in 
pulse oximetry. special sensors are necessary.
this case, the use of an oxygen analyser in
the breathing system and/or a pulse oximeter
is recommended (S,O2)
The case foad and the types of surgery or
Conclusion
diagnostic examinations: it is not obligatory to
 use all available monitoring equipment for very 
It is clear that monitoring equipment can never re-
short and simple procedures on healthy patients.
place a suitably qualified person: it has not been
A pulse oximeter in non-intubated patients or a
proven that monitoring equipment necessarily de~
capnograph in intubated patients can suffice.
creases anaesthetic risk. As complexity increases, the
Generally, the greater the disturbance in
chances for errors to occur due to artefacts and mis-
homeostasis that is anticipated, the greater the
and set-up of monitoring equipment can be time-
monitored. Invasive surgery (e.g. thoracotomy),
consuming and the devices are usuaily expensive;
or surgery associated with specific
such considerations could lead one to question the
 pathophysiology or problems (e.g. bleeding) will
true benefits.
need appropriate monitoring.
One important aspect is that the whole concept of
monitoring provides continuous information about the
 For practices performing invasive procedures or
patient, and thus becomes a kind of teacher support-
dealing with emergency cases and postoperative care,
ing the person in charge of anaesthesia. This teacher
capnography, pulse oximetry, ECG, non-invasive
demonstrates the physiological consequences of ad-
blood pressure measurement (with the option of in-
ministered drugs and dosages, and of the complex
vasive blood pressure measurement) and temper-
interactions between anaesthesia, disease and sur-
 ature monitoring are highly desirable. Nevertheless,
 gical manipulation. in this way one can become a
regular clinical assessment of depth of anaesthesia
 better veterinary surgeon, with more insight into what
remains necessary because no technical device can
one is actually 'doing' to the patient.
replace this evaluation (Figure 7.26).
In conclusion, 'when applied appropriately, oper-
ated properly, and interpreted correctly, however,
monitors aford the patient the best possible outcome'
(Lawrence, 2005).
References and further reading
 Arbous MD, Grobbee DE, van Kleef JW et af. (2001) Mortality associated
with anaesthesia: a qvalitative anafysis to identify risk factors.
Anaesthesia 56, 1141-1153
Bhavani-Shankar K http:/www.capnography.com (a useful,free, website
with animated capnographsj
Brodbelt D,Brearley J,Young
L. Wood ↓ and Pfeiffer D (2005)
Anaesthetic-related mortality risks in srmall animals in the UK. AVA
Spring Meeting, Rimini, taly 20-23 Aprif 2005
Lawrence JP (2005) Advances and new insights in monitoring. Thoracic
Surgery Clinics 15, 55-77
Multiparametric monitor anci anaesthesia
Tinker JH, Dull DL, Caplan RA, Ward RJ and Cheney FW (1989) Role
of monitoring devices in prevention of anesthetic mishaps: a closed
'screen'
claisns analysis. Anesthesiology 7t, 541-546 
78
pathophys
Jill Price and Andrea Nolan
Introduction
Although we tend to think of pain as a single sen-
sory entity, several distinct types exist, classified as
Mankind has struggled to understand the nature of
nociceptive, inffammatory, neuropathic and functiona!
pain since ancient times. The conscious experience
(Woolf, 2004a). Cancer pain often displays charac-
of pain defies precise anatomical, physiological and
teristics of both inflammatory (tissue damage) and
pharmacological definition; unlike any other sensory
neuropathic (nerve damage) pain. As the neurobio-
experience, pain is a subjective emotion which can
logical mechanisms responsible for these different
be experienced even in the absence of obvious ex-
types of pain become more clearly defined, we can
ternal noxious stimulation, and which can be enhanced
better understand their cistinct aetiologies, identify
or abolished by a wide range of behavioural experi-
individuals at risk and develop analgesic strategies
ences, including fear, memory and emotional stress.
that target and prevent specific pain mechanisms,
Adaptive 'physiological pain announces the presence
rafher than purely treating symptoms.
of a potentially harmful stimulus and thus has an es-
sensation in humans with congenital insensitivity to
Types of pain
pain reduces life expectancy. In contrast, maladap-
tive pain represents malfunction of neurological trans-
Nociceptive pain
mission and serves no physiological purpose, leading
The conscious experience of acute pain resulting from
to chronic syndromes in which pain itself becomes
a noxious stimulus is mediated by a high-threshold
the primary disease.
nociceptive sensory system. The basic neuroanatomy
While elusive and ill defined, pain nonetheless has
of this system is summarized in Figure 8.1 and has
substance and specific characteristics. The official
been recently reviewed (Usunoff et al., 2006).
definition of the International Association for the Study
Nociceptors are the least differentiated of the several
of Pain (IASP) is 'an unpleasant sensory and emo-
types of sensory receptors found in body tissues. They
tional experience, associated with actual or potential
represent the free endings of primary sensory neu-
tissue damage, or described in terms of such
rons, with their cell bodies located in the dorsal root
damage'. Recognizing that animals (similar to non-
and trigeminal ganglia. The primary afferent nerve fi-
verbal humans) are unable to verbally communicate
bres, which carry information from these free nerve
and describe their pain experience, a widely used,
endings to their central location, consist of two main
more specific definition of animal pain is 'an aversive
types: unmyelinated C fibres and myelinated A8
sensory and emotional experience representing
fibres. Following tissue trauma, changes in the prop-
awareness by the animal of damage or threat to the
erties of nociceptors occur such that large-diameter
integrity of its tissues...producing a change in physi-
Aβ fibres may also transmit 'pain information'.
ology and behaviour directed to reduce or avoid the
Unmyelinated C fibres are activated by intense
damage, reduce the likelihood of recurrence and pro-
mechanical, chemical and thermal stimuli and con-
 mote recovery' (Molony and Kent, 1997).
duct impulses relatively slowly at 0.5 m/s, contri-
There is no simple definition of chronic pain, but it
buting to the familiar 'slow burn' sensation of pain.
is generally described in human medicine as pain
 A8 fibres conduct impulses at 5-30 m/s, contributing 
which persists beyond the normal time of healing, or
to the rapid 'stab' of the acute pain response. There
as persistent pain caused by conditions where heal-
is also a population of so-called 'silent' nociceptors,
ing has not occurred or which remit and then recur.
which may become active during inflammation or tis-
More recently chronic pain in dogs has been described
sue damage.
as 'pain lasting longer than one month, associated
The stimulation thresholds of C fibres are substan-
with a wide range of often subtle behavioural distur-
tially higher than those of other types of afferent sen-
bance' (Wiseman-Orr et al., 2004).
sory fibre, and physiologically demonstrate a direct
Conscious perception of pain represents the final
relationship between stimulus intensity and receptor
product of a complex neurological information-
response. Under normal conditions, the greater the
processing system, resulting from the interplay of
stimulus intensity, the more vigorous is the C fibre
facilitatory and inhibitory pathways that communicate via
response. In contrast to other sensory afferent fibres,
an orchestra of interacting neurotransmitter systems.
C nociceptors have no physiological background
79
Chapter 8 The physiology and pathophysioiogy of pain
 Neuroanatomical
Prefrontal cortex
patnways
involved in nociception.
Somaticsensorycortex
Association complex
Thalamus
Caudate nucleus
Amygdala
Reticularformatiol
Periaqueductal grey matter
Midbrain
 Reticular formation of pons
inhibit
Pons
Locus coerulus
Subcoerulus
buipu
Reticular formation of medulla
Medulla
Ventromedial medulla
苏
bO
Spinal cord
Nociceptors
(C,A8, Aβ)
pattern of discharge. lntense or repeated noxious
grey matter and superior colliculus), the spinothalamic
stimulation can induce peripheral sensitization, in
tract (which projects to the medial and ventrobasal
which the direct relationship between stimulus and
thalamus) and spinoreticular fibres (which project to
response in peripheral nociceptors is uncoupled and
the reticular formation of the midbrain). Sensory input
tonic background activity can develop, which persists
from nociceptors located in the head travels via neu-
in the absence of ongoing noxious stimulation.
ronal cell bodies located in the trigeminal ganglion and,
Primary afferent fibres carrying sensory information
thereafter, noxious information is conveyed to the
from nociceptors synapse in the dorsal horn of the
nucleus caudalis (part of the trigeminal sensory com-
spinal cord: A8 fibres predominantly in laminae I and
plex). Recently, it has been recognized that there are
V and C fibres in superficial laminae I and It, the so-
called substantia gelatinosa. The fibres of 'nociceptive'
addition to descending inhibitory pathways.
responsive cells of the spinal cord project to various
The cerebral cortex is the seat of conscious expe-
higher centres involved in pain transmission, both ip-
rience of pain. A noxious stimulus activates not only
silaterally and contralaterally to their site of origin.
several cortical areas, but also, as the intensity of the
Several spinal-brainstem-spinal pathways are acti-
stimulus increases, an increasing number of subcor-
vated simultaneously when a noxious stimulus occurs,
tical and cortical regions. The cerebral cortex exerts
providing widespread positive and negative feedback
powerful top-down' control on almost all nociceptive
loops by which information relating to noxious stimu-
relays within the central nervous system (CNS), such
lation can be amptified or diminished. Spinal tracts
that supraspinal cortical and subcortical mechanisms
involved in pain transmission differ between animal
can modulate (enhancing or inhibiting) the sensation
species, but common pathways include the spinomes-
of pain. This *corticofugal modulation' underlies
encephalic tract(which projects to the periaqueductal
the magnifying effects of factors, such as attention,
Chapter 8  The physiology and pathophysiology of pain
anticipation, mood, anxiety, placebo administration
In humans, neuropathic pain underlies post-
 and hypnosis, on pain perception. Central pain asso-
 amputation phantom limb pain, sciatica, distal limb
ciated with a cortical or subcortical lesion can result
pain associated with diabetic neuropathy and post-
in severe pain, which is not associated with any de-
herpetic neuropathy, all conditions that are difficult to
tectable pathology in the body.
control using standard analgesic strategies such as
Recognizing this complexity, the 'pain experience'
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and
is now considered to consist of three key compo-
 opioids. latrogenic neuropathic pain is postulated to
nents: a sensory-discriminatory component (tempo-
be the major cause of long-term postsurgical pain in
ral, spatial, thermal/mechanical), an affective
humans (Kehlet et al., 2006). It is surprising, there-
component (subjective and emotional, describing
fore, that neuropathic pain is rarely recognized or di-
associated fear, tension and autonomic responses)
agnosed in animals. Many of the drugs which
and an evaluative component, describing the mag-
 demonstrate efficacy against neuropathic pain act
 nitude of the quality (e.g. stabbing/pounding; mild/
essentially as 'membrane stabilizers' able to attenu-
severe). Undoubtedly, an animal's pain experience
ate ectopic neuronal hyperexcitability; these include
is similarly composed despite the tendency to focus
 anticonvulsants such as gabapentin, iocal anaesth-
on pain intensity alone.
etics, tricyclic antidepressants and anti-arrhythmics.
'Functionar or central pain is a specific type of
Inflammatory pain
neuropathic pain in which no peripheral injury or neuro-
When tissue damage occurs despite the nociceptive
logical lesion can be identified, but pain sensitivity is 
defence system (through trauma, surgery or inflam-
nonetheless amplified. Several common human con-
matory disease), the body's imperative shifts from
ditions are believed to have a functionai component,
 preventing tissue injury to protecting the injured re-
including fibromyalgia and irritable bowel syndrome. 
gion so that it can heal. When tissue injury occurs,
but it is rarely diagnosed in animals.
there is a change in the way in which the peripheral
uanbasgns sseood suaisss snoseu jeueo pue
Cancer pain
noxious (and non-noxious) stimuli.
 Although cancer is common in domestic animals and 
The nociceptive sensory system is not 'hard-
wired', but rather is an inherently plastic system, able
 surgeon's caseload, recognition of the adverse effects
to change its sensitivity following intense or repeated
of neoplastic disease on pain processing and thus the
 stimulation. Following tissue damage or inflam-
key role of pain management in veterinary cancer
 mation, the sensitivity of an injured region is enhanced 
 treatment remains a neglected field. This is of real
so that normally innocuous stimuli are perceived as
concern, since it is known that human cancer patients
painful, thus preventing use of (or contact with) the
with unresolved or chronic pain are significantly more
 injured tissue and promoting healing. This is inflam-
emotionally disturbed than those without pain, respond
matory pain.
less well to therapy and die sooner than patients with
 Inflammatory pain is the pain that, under normal
no pain (Woodforde and Fielding, 1975; Ahles et al.,
circumstances, drives acute postoperative pain until
-unoo pedojeaep ui sluened jeoueo uewny ul '(eg6 l
the wound has healed and thus represents a poten-
tries, several national studies have demonstrated that
only slightly greater than 50% pain control is achieved;
within minutes of tissue trauma and, in general, its
the proportion of animal cancer patients receiving
extent, intensity and duration are directly related to
-je aul uayby eg ol Aeyun s! jellar ujed aienbape
the extent and severity of tissue damage during sur-
fective component of the pain experience is often
 highly developed in cancer patients, and non-pharma-
erally reversible and normal sensitivity of the system 
 cological strategies, such as transcutaneous nerve
should be restored as tissue heais. However, if the
 stimulation (TENS) and acupuncture, are often re-
noxious insult was severe or if a focus of ongoing in-
quired in combination with more complicated pharma-
flammation persists, then the pain will persist. This is
cological approaches to achieve adequate relief of
the pain experience of animals with chronic inflam-
cancer pain.
matory diseases such as arthritis, otitis, gingivitis,
dermatitis and back pain.
Postsurgical pain
In humans, despite 'routine' administration of anal-
Neuropathic and functional pain
 gesia. persistent postsurgical pain represents a major,
 Neuropathic pain is the pain that develops following
largely unrecognized problem. Major and routine sur- 
injury to peripheral or central nerves. A whole spec-
 gical procedures are often followed by significant pain,
trum of mechanisms contribute to the neuropathic pain
impaired organ function and prolonged hospitaliza-
syndrome (Woolf, 2004b), including changes in the
tion (Kehlet and Holte, 2001). Acute postoperative pain
peripheral nervous system, spinal cord, brainstem and
is followed by persistent pain in 10-50% of humans
brain. Nerve injury can disrupt the electrical proper-
folowing common operations, with 2-10% of these
ties, neurochemistry and central conductivity of neu-
 patients experiencing severe chronic pain (Kehlet et
rons so that the damaged nerves begin to generate
al., 2006). Chronic postsurgical pain in humans is
spontaneous volleys of ectopic discharges, initiate
believed to be primarily neuropathic in nature, asso-
abnormal 'crosstalk' with adjacent fibres and develop
ciated with surgical injury to peripheral nerves, or less
 commonly as a result of ongoing inflammation (Kehlet
mally innocuous stimuli.
et al., 2006).
81
Chapter 8 The physiology and pathophysiology of pain 
Although less well researched, it is likely that the
Peripheral sensitization
risk of persistent postsurgical pain in animals under-
Peripheral sensitization is the result of changes in the
going surgery is similar to that reported in humans.
chemical milieu bathing nociceptor terminals as a re-
Persistent pain and hypersensitivity cause substan-
sult of tissue injury or inflammation. A barrage of
tial distress in human patients. and can have serious
chemical mediators is released by damaged cells, in-
adverse effects on psychological, social and functional
cluding hydrogen and potassium ions, histamine.
 status and quality of ife. Studies in dogs with persist-
purines including adenosine and adenosine triphos-
ent pain due to chronic inflammation have indicated
phate (ATP), neuropeptides including substance P and
that quality of life, measured by identifying patterns of
neurokinin A, bradykinin, serotonin, arachidonic acid
altered behaviour, is adversely affected (Wiseman et
metabolites, cytokines and growth factors (Figure 8.3).
al., 2001; Wiseman-Orr et al., 2004).
Some of these agents (such as adenosine) directly
activate the nociceptor, while others (such as
prostaglandins) sensitize the nerve terminal so that 
Hyperalgesia and allodynia
its response to subsequent stimuli is amplified.
The clinical halmarks of sensitization of the noci-
Nociceptive
ceptive system are hyperalgesia and allodynia. Hyper-
C fibre
algesia is an exaggerated and prolonged response
to a noxious stimulus while allodynia is a pain re-
sponse to a low-intensity, normally innocuous stimu-
lus, such as light touch to the skin or gentle pressure
Immunecell
Nerve growth
(Figure 8.2). Hyperalgesia can develop in undam-
factors
cytokines
factor
Neurogenic
aged skin in neuropathic pain conditions, and can
enkephalins
endorphins
factors
be a consequence of somatic referral from visceral
Vascular
neurokinins 
pain and injury or pathology of internaf organs (such
galanin
agents
somatostatin
as the heart and oesophagus) (Verne et al., 2004;
kinins
serotonin
Mechanica!
Chahal and Rao, 2005)
nitric oxide
stimuli
Tissue
thermal
injury
Sympathetic
Hyperalgesia
bradykinin
influences.
100
noradrenaline
prostanoids
prostanoids
80
 Chemical and other mediators invoived in 
60
 peripheral sensitization.
sen
Injury
Normal
 Inflammatory injury can also induce changes,
40
Allodynia
mediated by growth factors, in intracellular signalling
20
pathways, leading to upregulation of protein expres-
sion for synthesis of receptors, ion channels and
neurotransmitters. This resuits in long-lasting changes
Innocuous
Noxious
Stimulus intensity
in the functional properties, intrinsic excitability and 
 analgesic sensitivity of peripheral nociceptors.
 Changes in pain sensitivity associated with 
tissue injury.
Central sensitization
Trauma and inflammation can also sensitize nocicep
tor transmission in the spinal cord to produce central
sensitization. Central sensitization is a more precise
Neuronal plasticity and pain
description of the electrophysiological phenomenon
of 'wind-up' described in the spinal cord by Mendell
There is no direct relationship associated with the
and Wall (1965), the first recognition of the inherent 
duration or intensity of peripheral injury that trans-
plasticity of central pain processing.
forms acute transient pain into chronic maladaptive
Induction of central sensitization requires a brief
pain. Nociceptive plasticity is driven by two inter-
but intense period of nociceptor stimulation, e.g. a
dependent mechanisms: peripheral and central
surgical incision, intense input from sensitized peri-
sensitization. This plasticity can be reversible, asso-
pheral nociceptors following tissue trauma, or input 
ciated with changes in the 'software' of the system
from damaged sensory neurons following nerve in-
(e.g. neurotransmitter concentrations, receptor sen-
jury. As a result of this input, the response threshold 
sitivity), as predominates in inflammatory pain; or it
of the central neuron falls, its response to subsequent 
can be long-lasting, associated with changes in the
stimulation is amplified and its receptive field enlarges
'hardware' of the nociceptive system, namely the
to recruit additional previously 'sleeping' afferent
phenotype of the nociceptive cells and their expres-
fibres into nociceptive transmission.
sion of neurotransmitters, receptors and other pro-
Key neurotransmitter pathways and neurological
teins involved in pain processing (woolf and Salter.
changes involved in central sensitization are summa-
2000; Ji et al., 2003; Woolf, 2004b).
rized in Figure 8.4. Amino acids, nitric oxide and
82
Chapter 8  The physiology and pathophysiology of pain
Descending inhibition
Inhibhtory nterneuron
Neurotransmitters
involved in
moauiation of central
nociceptive
 transmission and
 central sensitization.
Endogenous opioids
AMPA = α-3-
Noradrenaline
hydroxy-5-methyl-
Prostanoids (PGE)
(u,8)
Serotonin
4-isoxazole
Nitric oxide
propionic acid:
Intracellutar signaling
CGRP = Calcitorin
Metabotropic
molecules
Alpha-2
gene-related
adrenoreceptors
peptide:
GABA = Gamma-
NMDA
aminobutyric acid;
GLUTAMATE
Gene Inducion
NK = Neurokinin;
C fibre
Aexciability
NKA = Neurokinin A:
AMPA
NMDA = N-methyl-3-
aspariate:
sP = Substance P.
Neuropeptides
Dorsat horn nociceptive neuron
SP, NKA,CGRP
neuropeptides, including substance P, neurokinin A
Prostanoids, cyclo-oxygenase enzyme
and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), re-
inhibition and nociception
Prostaglandins are classic inflammatory mediators
 ganglion contribute to the sensitization. Glutamate,
synthesized from arachidonic acid via COX enzymes.
the key excitatory neurotransmitter in the CNS, plays
There are four subtypes of prostaglandin receptors
(EP,-EP) and there is evidence that allfour receptors
Jogical 'nociceptive' pain is primarily mediated through
contribute to nociceptive processing, with prostaglan-
glutamate acting at its AMPA (α-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-
din E, (PGEz) considered the principal sensitizing
 4-isoxazole propionic acid) receptor on dorsal horn
prostanoid. The principal anti-nociceptive action of
 neurons, instantaneously alerting the brain to noxious 
NSAIDs was originally attributed to COX inhibition at
insult. If injury persists or if the afferent barrage is
the site of inflammation: prostaglandins certainly play
a key role in peripheral sensitization, acting as 'sensi-
 aspartate) glutamate receptors are also activated and
tizing agents' that enhance the nociceptive proper-
profoundly amplify the excitability of the central noci-
ties of other inflammatory mediators, including
ceptive neuron. As with peripheral sensitization, in-
bradykinin and histamine. However, prostaglandins
 tense stimulation can alter gene expression within the
also play a key role in central sensitization, and it has
neuron and thus induce the long-lasting phenotypic
recently been proposed that prostaglandins generate
 changes in neuronal behaviour that underlie persist-
hyperalgesia principally through their central, rather
ent central sensitization. Some of the changes in gene
than their peripheral, effects (Turnbach et al., 2002).
expression are restricted to the region of the spinal
COX exisis as two isoenzymes, Cox-t and
o anssll painui aui waj sindui saierai jeu pios
COX-2. Recently, a splice variant of COX-1 (conven-
 genes are activated more widely throughout the CNS,
iently named COx-3) has also been characterized
including those for endogenous opioids and their
in canine and human neuronal and cerebrocortical
receptors. and cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2) and its
tissues. Cox-1, being found in most cells, is classic-
prostanoid receptors. COx-2 expression is initiated 
ally termed the constitutive “housekeeping enzyme'
in many regions of the CNS within a few hours of a
responsible for production of basal physiological
localized peripheral tissue injury, contributing to the
prostaglandins involved in gastrointestinal mucosal
 generalized aches often associated with inflammatory
protection, preservation of normal renal haemo-
disease (Samad et al., 2001).
dynamics and normal platelet function. The gene for 
 Several types of analgesic drug are able to inhibit 
COx-2 is principally a 'primary response' gene with
the development of central sensitization, including
many regulatory sites, which are induced in response 
 NMDA receptor antagonists and nitric oxide synthase
to inflammatory injury. However, low levels of COX-2
 inhibitors. Central sensitization is better prevented
are also tonically, constitutively expressed in the
by inhibitory or analgesic agents when they are
CNS, reproductive tissue and kidneys. COX-2 in the
 administered before, rather than after, the initiating
 spinal cord plays a key role in the generation of PGE2
 afferent barrage. This is the rationale used to justify
levels during peripheral inflammation and is mainly
 pre-emptive analgesia, although the efficacy of pre-
responsible for centrai sensitization associated with
emptive analgesia has been difficult to prove in the
inflammatory pain. However, recent findings have 
clinical setting.
shown that Cox-1 also plays an important role in
83
Chapter 8  The physiology and pathophysiology of pain
surgery (Zhu et al., 2003). suggesting that COX-1
competently is currently considered one of the big-
inhibition may also be important for treatment of
gest deficiencies in our understanding of animal pain.
 postoperative inffammatory and neuropathic pain.
tices relating to the management of pain in dogs and
Central inhibitory systems
 cats has shown that recognition and management of
Within the CNS, several endogenous receptor systems
 pain in companion animals is suboptimal and that rec-
are activated by noxious stimulation or by drug admini-
ognition that animals do feel pain often fails to trans-
stration to produce analgesia. Opioids have been used 
late into positive actions taken by veterinary surgeons
 as analgesic agents tor over 5000 years. Three key
to resolve that pain (Capner et al., 1999). Even in ar-
opioid receptor types have been characterized: delta
ticulate humans who are able to self-report, pain as-
(OR1), kappa (OR3) and mu (OR2), with a fourth opioid-
 sessment is complicated by the multidimensional
like receptor, the orphan (ORL1) receptor, recently char-
nature of the pain experience. Evaluation of pain in
 acterized. Most clinically effective opioid drugs act
an animal under veterinary care is at best a 'value
principally on the mu receptor (see Chapter 9).
judgement' dominated by personal bias, perception
pue isluobe joidaoai eddey e Aueud s! joueydiona
and philosophy, where we define and evaluate pain
a mu receptor antagonist. Endogenous opioid agonists,
through our subjective interpretation of those behav-
the enkephalins, act primarily on the mu and delta
iours we personally consider to represent pain. In or-
receptors to inhibit excitatory nociceptive transmission,
der to evaluate pain competently, we must be familar
while dynorphins exert complex actions on pain sen-
with the full range of 'normal behaviours displayed
 sation. Opioid receptors are densely located in the dor-
by the individual animal, and then be able to identify
sal horn of the spinal cord, the brainstem and midbrain.
and discriminate changes from 'normal that are at-
They can also be found in the forebrain and in periph-
tributable to pain. At present, positive response to
eral sites, such as the synovial membrane and in the
appropriate analgesic therapy is probably the best
skin. In the spinal cord, opioids act both presynapti-
marker for effective diagnosis of pain.
cally, to inhibit excitatory neurotransmitter release from 
 Chronic pain is even harder to define and evalu-
nociceptive sensory neurons, and postsynaptically. to
ate than acute pain. Behavioural changes associated
 inhibit activity of dorsal horn neurons.
with chronic pain often develop gradually and are ex-
Another pharmacological system that plays an im-
tremely subtle, so that they can only be detected by
 portant role in endogenous analgesia is the alpha-2
someone very familiar with the animal (usually the
adrenoreceptor system. Within the CNS, alpha-2
owner). It is generally recognized that chronic pain
adrenoreceptors are densely located in the dorsal horn
impairs 'quality of life', which in humans is represented 
of the spinal cord and found both pre- and post-
through eight key indicators: sleep disturbance, irrit-
synaptically on nociceptive (and non-nociceptive)
ability, appetite disturbance, psychomotor retardation,
neurons which release noradrenaline. Alpha-2
social withdrawal, lowered pain tolerance, constipa-
 adrenoreceptors are also densely localized in the locus
tion and abnormal ilness behaviour (Sternbach, 1981:
coeruleus of the brainstem and are also found in the
Wiseman-Orr et al., 2004). Similar changes are often
periaqueductal grey matter; both are important regions
described by owners of dogs with chronically painful
 involved in modulation of nociceptive neurotransmission.
conditions such as osteoarthritis.
Within the spinal cord, inhibition of ascending pain
transmission is mediated by inhibitory neurons that
Assessment of acute pain
act principally through releasing the neurotransmitters
The key points in assessment of pain in companion
 glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). In
animals are shown in Figure 8.5. Behavioural expres-
higher centres (cortex, midbrain and brainstem),
sion of pain is highly species-specific and is further
monoamine systems (noradrenaline acting through
influenced by age, breed, individual temperament
alpha-2 receptors and serotonin acting through
and the presence or absence of additional stressors,
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptors) interact with
excitatory neurotransmitters, such as glutamate, and
dramatically reduce the range of behavioural indica-
inhibitory transmitters, such as GABA, some syner-
tors of pain that an animal is capable of showing.
 gistically and some antagonistically, to produce 'top-
Prey animals, such as small rodents and rabbits,
down' modulation of pain. These pathways link pain
dramatically change their behaviour in the presence
sensation to emotional responses such as fear and
of a perceived predator, which may be another
anger, and also link pain to depression. Other neuro-
animal or the individual grading their pain. Many
transmitter systems contributing to descending inhi-
analgesic drugs, including opioids and alpha-2
 bition of pain transmission include adenosine (acting
agonists, have sedative properties, which make it
through the A, receptor) and cannabinoids.
even more difficult to distinguish sedation from
adequate or inadequate analgesia.
Appreciation of the many subtle behavioural indi-
Pain assessment
cators of pain in any species requires familiarity with
the species, breed and particular stimulus. When as-
Pain assessment is the keystone of effective pain
management, but the ability to measure pain in a
ries which should be assessed include posture,
reliable, communicable, accurate and valid fashion
 mobility, activity, response to touch, attention to the
remains one of the most difficult challenges facing
painful area and vocalization (Holton et al., 2001).
8
Chapter 8 The physiology and pathophysiology of pain
Physioiogical variables provide useful supplemen-
assume that humans and animals are closely similar in temsof
tary information when assessing pain but it is impor-
a perception and anticipation, and manage pain accordingly
tant to remember that they are influenced by a host of
Atpresent, response to appropriate analgesia remains the best
factors other than pain, including concurrent disease,
 maker for accurate diagnosis of pain
Rememer that bred, age,ss merame and 
drug therapy and other stressors, and thus are not
oministration infuence benavioural responses to pain
consistent or reliable indicators of pain when used in
Sinceithe pain experience can alter rapidly, pain assessment
isolation (Holton et al., 1998). Physiological signs as-
must be performed frequently
sociated with either pain, anxiety or ill-health include
Painassessors shoud have experience in pain assessment and
changes in heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pres-
be familiar with the patient
sure (usualy hypertension), increased body tempera-
 ture and changes in serum concentrations of cortisol,
pain.where this is possible (i.e.pre- and postoperatively), so that
 adrenaline, noradrenaline and acute phase proteins.
Pain scoring systems
simple observation in the cage
Assess response to gentle palpation or manipulation of the
Until recently, the most commonly used pain scoring
affected area
systems used in animals were analogous to the sub-
Look for subtle indicators of pain, particularly in sick patients.
jective unidimensional scoring systems used to score
pain in human infanis and non-verbal humans. The
demonstrate explicit pain behaviour.Certain animals may
scales most commonly used irn pain scoring are the
: respond to pain through withdrawal
visual analogue scale (VAS), numerical rating scale
(NRS) and simple descriptive scale (SDS). All of these
pain. An ideal scoring system should be relatively easy to use by
 simple scoring systems have fundamental limitations,
al staff, with clearly defined assesment criteria, and validated
which are summarized in Figure 8.7.
in.a clinical seting
Reassess. Re-evaluate analgesic efficacy. Re-administer
 analgesia appropriately as assessment requires
Sos Key points in assessmeni of pain in
Visual analogue
Significant inter-observer variability
companion animals.
scale (VAS)
 Sensitivity depends on cbserver training and-
experience
      
Expresses summation of observer's -
 specific pain-associated behavioural changes in rats 
interpretation ofmany diferent behaviours
associated with laparotomy.
Numerical rating
 Figure 8.6 indicates some key behaviours associ-
 Significant inter-observer variability
scale (NRS)
Diferences in pain severity between categories
 ated with pain in dogs and cats. While cats and dogs 
 are undefined and inconsistent (uneven 
share many similar behavioural indicators of acute
weighting)
 pain, cats have their own spectrum of behaviours.
 Expresses summation of observer's
many responding to pain through withdrawal (Taylor 
 interpretation of many different behaviours 
 and Robertson, 2004; Robertson, 2005).
Simple
 Significant inter-observer variability 
descriptive
Absence of selection criteria for behaviours
scale (SDS)
assessed
Low sensitivity
Hyperalgesia or allodynia
 Cannot identify small changes in the pain.
response
In humans has been shown to anificialy 
Locmtostiweigheringnafctd 
magnify the efficacy of analgesics
Vocalization: barking. growling, whining
Facial exatyn
Composite
Tine consuming
Attention t orguaring of the affected area
 scoring system
No selection criteria for the behaviours 
Aggression
assessed
mappetance
 Few validated tools in small anirnals
Weak tailwag
Muitidimensional
Time consurming
sa
scoring system
No selection criteria for the behaviours 
As for dog, with addiionaly:
assessed
Vocalization: hissing
Facial expressins:furwedbrowars pinnedback
 Limitations of commonly used pain scoring
Depression, no self-grooming
systems.
Hunched immobile stance
Hyperventilation
More recently, composite and mulitidimensional
Ears pulled back
scales have been developed for assessment of acute
Siting inback of cage or hiding underblanket
Pupilary dilation
pain in dogs (Hellyer and Gaynor, 1998; Firth and
Reslessness
Haldane, 1999) and also in laboratory rats (Roughan
Tachypnoea or panting
and Flecknell, 2001, 2003). These systems evaluate
a collection of specific behaviours, physiological vari-
 Behavioural indicators of pain in companion
 ables and contextual factors to produce a 'composite
 animals.
. These may also indicate stress.
pain score'. No composite scales have yet been de-
disease or anxiety.
veloped for assessment of pain in cats.
85
:Chapter 8 The physiology and pathophysiology of pain
 Recognizing the limitations of physiological and
evaluated. The GCPMS is time consuming but a
 subjective behavioural indices, objective evaluation of 
shorter form (downloadable from www.gla.ac.uk/vet/
behaviour currently provides the most sensitive means 
research/cascience/shortform.htm) provides a prac-
of assessing pain in animals, but is tremendously time
tical and sensitive means of evaluating and recording
consuming. However, as has been achieved with labo-
patient comfort and response to analgesic therapy in
ratory rats, once behavioural indices of discomfort have
a busy practice environment.
been identified and clearly defined it should be possi-
Recently. an interval level pain assessment scale
ble subsequently to develop, validate and optimize
has been developed from the GCMPS, in which the
more rapid techniques for subjective behaviour-based
individual items evaluated in the composite pain scale
clinical evaluation of animal pain.
have been weighted, providing another useful tool for
In humans, muitidimensional pain scoring systems,
sonugo Asng u uied anoe buuonuow pue buenjeaa
 such as the McGill Pain Questionnaire, evaluate not
(Morton et al., 2005).
only intensity but aiso sensory and affective qualities
of pain, thus providing a more complete picture of an
Assessment of chronic pain
individual's 'pain experience'. Similar multidimensional
Assessment of chronic pain in companion animals is
 systems have been developed for evaluation of post-
 an emerging science. Presently, the best tools avail-
 operative pain in dogs undergoing surgery, incfuding
able to evaluate chronic pain in companion animals
the Melbourne Pain Scale (Firth and Haldane, 1999)
are structured questionnaires, similar to those used
and the Glasgow Composite Pain scale (GCMPS)
for human chronic pain patients. These aim to pro-
(Holton et al., 2001). The GCMPS is the only scale
vide a comprehensive picture of the quality of life of
 for evaluating acute pain in dogs to have been devel-
animals with chronic pain. Wiseman-Orr et al. (2004)
 oped and validated according to psychometric princi-
have identified 13 key behavioural domains, which are 
ples. and is summarized in Figure 8.8. Dogs are
relevant to assessment of dogs with chronic pain, and
observed from a distance, and then their responses
descriptive terms used by owners to describe these
are yaaiasgo ue Ag uoedied punam pue uooeial o
domains (Figure 8.9).
Question
Variable
Descriptors"
Posture
 Does the dog seem..
rigid?
hunched or tense?
 to have normal posture?
Comfort
 Does the dog seem...
restless?
 comfortable?
Vocalization
If the dog is vocalizing, isi...
 crying or whimpering?
groaning?
 screaming?
not vocalizing or none of these?
 Attention to the wound area
 is the dog...
chewing the wound?
licking, looking at or rubbing the wound?
ignoring the wound?
Demeanour
Having interacted with the dog. does the dog
aggressive?
 seem to be...
depressed?
uninterested?
nervous, anxious or fearful?
quiet or indifferent?
happy and content?.
happy and bouncy?
Mobility (in some instances, this assessment is
After walking the dog for a short distance if
stiff?
not possible because of the type of surgery)
possible), did the dog seem to be...
 slow or reluctant to rise or sit?
lame?
able to move with normal gait?
 assessment not carried ouf?
Response to touch
When gentle, even pressure was applied t0
cry?
 the area approximately 5 cm around the 
fllnch?
} surgica! wound (or near the area of the wound 
snap?
 if it was inaccessible) did the dog...
 growl or guard wound?
have no adverse response to touch?
86
Domain.
Positive descriptors
Apathetic, apprehensive, lacklustre, lethargic, listless.
Active,boisterous,bouncy,energetic,lively, play.
Tactvty.
reluctant, sleepy, slowed, sluggish, tired, weary
tireless
 Complaining, groaning, moaning, pained. sore, stoic.
Comfortable, stretching
Comfort
uncomiontable
sAopelie.
OIfood, picky (with regard to food)
Enthusiastc about food, greedy, interested in food, thirsty
Extroversion/introversion
Detached quit subdued, unresponsive, unsociable,
Affectionate,old,curiousagerexitale,friendly,
withdrawn
loving, nosy, outgoing, sociable
Aggression
Aggressive, grumpy. irritable, terrtorial or protective 
Good natured, even tempered, placid
Anxety.
Anxious, cautious, distressed, trightened, nervous,
 Acceping, easygoing, laid back 
 panicky, strained, uneasy, upset
 
Alertness
Depressed, dul, confused, uninterested
Alert,bright,nquisitive,intrested,een,bd
Depandence
.
Attention seeking, clingy, coiort seeking, pathetic
Conficdent, independent 
or pitiful
Contentment
Miserable, sad, sorrowful, resigned, unhappy
Contented, happy
Consistency
Inconsistent
 Consistent 
Agition
Agitated, crying, disurbed, panting, restless, usetld.
Caim, at ease
whining
Posture-mobility
Awkward, limping, stiff
Athletic, fit, refaxed
roisnduiog-
 Compulsive
SUuIe ON
 Behavioural domains relevant to the assessment of dogs with chronic pain and descriptive terms used by
owners to describe those domains. (Adapted from Wiseman-Orr et al. 2004)
Summary
Animal Practice 39, 469-474
Ji R-R, Kohno T, Moore KA and Woolf CJ (2003) Central sensitisation
Although great progress has been made in the ability
in Neuroscience 26, 696-705
to assess pain in companion animals over recent
Kehlet H and Holte K (2001) Effect of postoperative analgesia on surgical
outcome.British Journal of Anaesthesia87（1),62-72
years, many challenges remain. Current assessment
Kehlet H,Jensen TS and Woolf CJ (2006) Persisteni post-surgical pain:
tools provide a framework from which, with time, vet-
risk factors and prevention. Lancet 367, 1618-1625
erinary surgeons and nurses/technicians should be
Mendell LM and Wall PD (1965) Response of single dorsal cord cells to
able to improve their ability to identify different types
peripheral cutaneous unmyelinated fibres. Narure 206, 97-99
Miranda C, Di Virgilia M. Seleri S et af. (2002) Novel pathogenic
oi pain in all of the companion animal species under
 mechanisms of congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis
their care.
genetic disorder unveiled by functional analysis of neurotrophic
i i   a  rr a
mutations.Journal of Biological Chemistry 277,6455-6462
Mokony V and Kent JE (1997) Assessment of acute pain in farm animals
References and further reading
using behavioural and physiological measurerments. Journal of
Animal Science 75, 266-272
.
Morton CM,Reid JScott EM,Hoiton LE and Nolan AM (2005)Application
Ahles T,Blanchard EB and RuckdeschelJC (1983)The multidimensional
 of a scaling model to establish and validate an interval level pain
nature of cancer-related pain. Pain 17, 277-288
scale for assesment of acute pain in dogs. American Journal of
Capner CA,Lascelles BDX and Waterman-Pearson AE(1999) Current
Veterinary Research 66,2154-2166
Robertson SA (2005) Managing pain in feline patients. Veterinary Clinics
Veterinary Record145,95-99
of North America: Smalf Animal Practice 35, 129-146
Roughan J and Flecknell P (200t) Behavioural effects of laparotomy
visceral hyperalgesia. Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology 39:
and analgesic effects of keioprofen and carprofen in rats. Pain 90.
S204-210
65-74
Roughan J and Flecknell P (2003) Evaluation of a short duration
postoperative pain in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary
behaviour-based post-operative pain scoring system for rats.
Medical Association 214. 651-659
European Journat of Pain 7. 397-405
Heliyer P and Gaynor J {1998) Acute post-surgical pain in dogs and
Samad TA, Moore KA. Sapirstein A et al. (2001) Interleukin-1beta-
cats. Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
mediated induction of COx-2in the CNS contributes to inflammatory
Veternarian(SmalAnimais)20.140-153
 pain hypersensitivity. Nature 410, 425-427
Holton LL, Reid J, Scott EM, Pawson P and Nolan AM (2001)
Sternbach R (1981) Chronic pain as a disease entity. Triangle 20, 20-37
Development of abehaviour-based scale to measure acute pain in
Taylor PM and Robertson SA (2004) Pain management in cats - past,
dogs. Veterinary Record 148, 523-531
Holton LL, Scott EM, Nolan AM. Reid J and Wersh E (1998)
Medicine and Surgery 6. 313-320
 Relationship between physiological factors and clinical pain in
 Turnbach ME. Spraggins DS and Randich A (2002) Spinal administration
dogs scored using a numerical rating scale. Journal of Smalf
 of prostagiandin E2 or prostaglandin F2-alpha primarily produces
87
Chapter 8  The physiology and pathophysiology of pain
mechanical hyperalgesia that is mediated by naciceptive specific
Woodforde J and Fielding J (1975) Pain and cancer. In: Pain, Clinical
and Experimental Perspectives, ed. M Weisenberg, pp. 326-335.
Mosby, St Louis
neuroanatomyof pain.Advances inAnatomyEmbryologyandCeff
Woolf CJ (2004a) Pain: moving from symptom control toward
Biology (Eerin) 184, 1-115
mechanism-specific pharmacologic management Annals of internat
Verne GN. Rooinson ME and Price DD (2004) Representations of pain
Medicine 140, 441-451
in the brain. Current Rheumatology Repors 6, 26f-265
Woolf CJ (2004b) Dissecting out mechanisms responsible for peripheral
Wiseman ML,NolanAM,Reid. an Scott EM (200t) Preiminary study
neuropathic pain: Implications for diagnosis and therapy. Life
Sciences 74, 2605-2610
Wiseman-OrrM,Nolan AM,Reid JandScotEM(2004)Development
in pain. Science 288,1765~1768
of &a questionnaire to measure the effecis of chronic pain on health-
Zhu X, Conklin D and Eisenach JC (2003) Cyclo-oxygenase-1 in the
spinal cord plays an important role in post-operative pain. Pain 104,
Research 6s, 1077-1084
15-23
88
Pain management I:
systemic analgesics
Carolyn Kerr
Introduction
opioids are synthesized from morphine and are called
semi-synthetic. Considerable variability in lipophilicity
 Most agents used for analgesia in small animal patients 
exists between different opioids. In general, more lipo-
fall into the opioid or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
philic agents, such as fentanyl, have a shorter dura-
(NSAID) groups. Recently, however, N-methyl-D-
tion of action compared with more hydrophilic opioids;
aspartate (NMDA) antagonists, local anaesthetics
such as morphine. All opioid analgesics are metabo-
and alpha-2 adrenergic agonists have also been used
lized in the liver prior to excretion; the metabolites of
for analgesia. Traditionally, opioid analgesics have
some drugs may possess analgesic properties.
been used to treat acute pain while NSAIDs have been
Most opioids are well absorbed following intra-
reserved for chronic pain management. Fortunately,
muscular or subcutaneous administration. The
newer drugs and new formulations of older drugs have
intravenous route is aiso suitable for the majority of
expanded the potential of these drug groups.
opioids, except for morphine and pethidine (meperi-
dine). These two drugs produce mast cell degranu-
processing through different mechanisms, and can
lation, histamine release and a significant decrease
therefore be used in combination to maximize anal-
 in systemic arterial blood pressure. Morphine can be
gesia (multimodal analgesia). In addition to the selec-
administered slowly intravenously with few clinically
tion of appropriate analgesics, the timing of drug 
significant effects on haemodynamics, although the
administration is important as it influences the efficacy
intravenous route is not recommended in patients
 of analgesic drugs. Administration of analgesics prior
with mast cell neoplasia. The preservatives found in
to the initial painful stimulus (e.g. elective neutering)
most opioid formulations have not been reported
optimizes pain control during surgery, and less anal-
to cause any adverse consequences when they are
administered parenterally.
analgesia). In the sections below, the general proper-
Although most opioids are well absorbed from the
ties of analgesic drugs are reviewed and followed by
gastrointestinal tract, only a few can be administered
descriptions of individual drugs within each category.
enterally due to limited bioavailability. After absorp-
tion, most opioids are extensively metabolized during
their first pass through the liver. With some agents,
Opioid analgesics
the mucous membrane route (oral, nasal and buccal)
can bypass hepatic metabolism and produce effec-
Opioids are generally considered the most efficacious
tive plasma concentrations. Transcutaneous delivery
drugs for acute pain. The term 'opiate' refers to drugs 
is a novel approach suitable for long-term administra-
derived from either opium or thebaine (a derivative of
tion of some opioids.
opium) and includes morphine, codeine and derived 
The goal of opioid administration is to achieve
semi-synthetic congeners. Opioid analgesic (or
plasma concentrations associated with analgesia. The
'opioid') is a more general term and refers to any natu-
 plasma half-life of the drug is used to determine the 
rally occurring, semi-synthetic or synthetic substance
duration of action and dosing intervals. with some
with morphine-like activity. Because opioids can be
opioid analgesics, such as morphine, there is often a
abused, all countries legally regulate the purchase,
discrepancy between plasma concentrations and
storage and use of opioids. The severity of regulation
duration of clinical or experimental analgesia;this dis-
is dependent on opioid class scheduling (see Chap-
crepancy probably occurs because plasma concen-
ter 1). Opioids available to veterinary surgeons with
trations do not always reflect drug concentrations at
 the greatest potential for abuse are Schedule 2 drugs,
the site of action within the central nervous system
while opioid drugs with less abuse risk are Schedule
(CNS). It is also possible that an active metabolite
3 drugs. In Canada, all opioids fal under Narcotic
exists and contributes to analgesia. Recommended
 Control Regulations and scheduling does not apply.
dosing intervals are also based on analgesia trials or,
 in some cases, clinical experience.
Pharmacology
Morphine is an alkaloid derived from opium. Due to
Mechanism of action
its complex synthesis, morphine is still derived from
The desirable and undesirable efects of opioid an-
opium obtained from poppy seeds. Several newer
algesics are derived from activity at opioid receptors
89
Chapter 9 Pain management I: systemic analgesics
within the CNS. Currently there are three major
Analgesic effects
classes of opioid receptors recognized, designated
In general, opioids are considered more effective for
mu, delta and kappa. These receptors differ in their
continuous dull pain rather than sharp intermittent
binding properties, functional activity and distribu-
pain. However, effects of mu agonist opioids are dose 
tion. For example, mu and delta receptors are
dependent and it is possible to reduce the intensity
Jocated supraspinally and spinally. while kappa
of most types of pain with their use. The analgesic
receptors are primarily located in the spinal cord.
effect is produced rapidly, but is of relatively short
Within each class, several subtypes may exist.
duration (<12 hours). Opioids specifically act on
Despite these differences, all opioid receptors are
nociception; touch, pressure and proprioception are
 couple to G-proteins and subsequently inhibit ade-
mostly unaffected. in humans, there is considerable
nylate cyclase, decreasing the conductance of volt-
inter-individual variation in opioid requirements for
age-gated calcium channels, and/or open inwardly
postoperative analgesia. The same is probably true
rectifying potassium channels. As a result, neuronal
for cats and dogs. Therefore, to optimize the effect,
activity is decreased, neurotransmitter release is
patient response to opioid treatment should be con-
reduced and postsynaptic membranes are hyper-
tinuously assessed and treatment adjusted accord-
polarized, thereby decreasing the propagation of
 ingly. Fortunately, opioids can be titrated to effect and
action potentials.
have a wide therapeutic index, so that doses can be
 Drugs acting on opioid receptors are classified as
safely adjusted over a wide range.
 agonists, partial agonists, mixed agonist/antagonists
All three classes of opioid receptor mediate anal-
and antagonists:
 gesia. The different opioid drugs produce character-
istic patterns of analgesia, due partly to differences in
Agonist drugs have high affinity and intrinsic
receptor affinity and location. For example, systemi-
activity for mu receptors and include morphine,
 cally administered mu agonists produce analgesia
pethidine (meperidine), hydromorphone,
through receptors located in the brain (centrally me-
 methadone, fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil,
diated or supraspinal analgesia). Analgesia produced
remifentanil and codeine
by kappa agonists is mediated through activity at
 Partial agonists, which by definition are only 
receptors located in the spinal cord (spinally medi-
 partly as effective as agonists, include 
ated analgesia).
buprenorphine
 In general, mu agonists produce the most profound
Mixed agonist/antagonists, such as
analgesia and are recommended for moderate to se-
 butorphanol, are agonists at some receptors
vere pain and anaesthetic-sparing effects. Mixed ago-
 and antagonists at others depending on
nist/antagonists are generaly recommended for mild
their affinity and intrinsic activity at the
to moderate pain and are suitable for minor surgical
receptor site. Mixed agonist/antagonists can
eue jo Aenb aul uo oaa buliao, y 'saunpeooid
reverse the effects of pure mu agonists, so
gesia produced by mixed agonist/antagonists has
they should not be administered with mu
 been described and refers to a plateau effect in the
 agonists unless the goal is to reverse the
level of analgesia despite increased doses. The rela-
mu receptor effects
Antagonists, e.g. naioxone and nalmefene,
with the potency of morphine and this is shown in Fig-
 can reverse the effects of mu and kappa
ure 9.1. Potency, however, refers to the dose required
agonists because of their high atfinity and
to produce similar effects and is not necessarily in-
low intrinsic activity.
dicative of overall efficacy in relieving pain.
Drug
Classtication (potncyDosage foms
Duration of effect
 relative tomorphine)
 of one bolus
M21
Morphine
Mu agonist(1)
Injectable: 0.5-50 mg/ml 
0.1-1.0 mg/kg i.m. or s.c.
46 hours
CRt:0.1-0.2mg/kg/h
Epidural:0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Pethidine (meperidine)
Mu agonist (0.2-0.3)
 Injectable: 10-100 mg/ml
 3-5 mg/kg i.m. or s.c.
-1.5 hours
Methadone
Mu agonist (1)
Injectable: 10 mg/mnl
0.1-0.5 mg/kg i.v., i.m. or s.c.
4 hours
Hydromorphone 
Mu agonist (5)
Injectable: 2-100 mg/ml 
0.05-0.1 mg/kg i.v, i.m. or s.c.
4hours
Fentanyl
Mu agonist [100} 
Injectable: 50 and 78.5 μg/ml
5-20 μug/kg
20-30minutes
CRl: 3-5 μg/kg bolus folowed by -
3-6 μg/kg/h i.v.
Transdermal:
4 ug/kg
25, 50, 75 and 100 μg/h
Sufentanil 
Mu agonist (500)
injectable: 50 μg/ml
3-5 ug/kg (balus) fllowedy
10-20 minutes
CRI: 2.6-3.4 ug/kg/h
Alfentanil
 Injectable: 500 μg/ml
CRI: 0.5-1ug/kg/minute
Mu agonist (25)
10-20 minutes
Opioid anaigesics used in dogs. (continues)
90
Chapter 9 Pain management I: systemic analgesics
Clasification (potency  Dosage forms
Dose
retative to morphine).
 ot one bolus
CRententanil (not
Mu agonist (50)
 Injectable: 1t mg/md 
CRI: 0.1 μg/kg/minute
avalabie in Canada)
 Mu agonist (0.1)
Injectable: 50 mg/rml
vamacol (not available
1-4 mg/kg orally
6-12hours
Tablet:50mg
an Canada
Buterphanol
Mu antagonist-kappa
Injectable: 10 mg;/ml 
 0.2-0.4 mng/kg i.v. i.m,. or s.c.
1.5-2 hours
agonist 
Partial mu agonist
 Injectable: 0.3 mg/ml 
0.0t-0.02 mg/kg i.v. .m. or s.c.
"Buprenorphine
 4-12 hours
Naloxone
Antagonist
 Injectable: 0.4 and 1 mg/rmnt 
0.002-0.04 mg/kg i.v. 1.m. or s.c.
 30 minutes-1 hour
(continued) Opioid analgesics used in dogs.
CNS effects
A change in respiratory pattern can be observed
Classically, mu opioid agonists produce euphoria and
following opioid administration. In healthy. pain-free
kappa agonists produce dysphoria, although some
dogs, panting is a frequent observation with pure mu
authors use these behavioural descriptions inter-
 agonists. This occurs secondary to a change in the
changeably. Euphoria in dogs is described as exces-
central thermoregulation set-point. In cats, open-
sive wakefulness and vocalization. In cats, euphoria
Aigegoud s! pue paniasqo aq Aeu buyieaig yinou
produces rolling, grooming, kneading' and extreme
due to dysphoria.
firiendliness. Dysphoria in dogs is typified by agita-
tion, excitement, restlessness, excessive vocalization
Cardiovascular effects
and disorientation. In cats, fearful behaviour, open-
At analgesic doses, especially with pure mu agonists,
miouth breathing, agitation, vocalization, pacing and
decreased heart rate secondary to increased vagal
apparent hallucinations are described. Both behav-
tone is common. However, the resulting bradycardia
nu jo sesop yby ym paaasgo Aoidh ee sinon
is responsive to anticholinergics. When mu agonists 
agonists or mixed agonist/antagonists. Fortunately,
are used alone for analgesia, the decreased hear rate
 these behaviours can be managed by administering
rarely requires treatment. When administered with
sedatives/tranquilizers and/or opioid antagonists.
other cardiodepressant drugs, such as volatile anaes-
 In healthy, dogs without pain, most mu agonists
 thetics, administration of an anticholinergic may sig-
produce mild to moderate sedation while the kappa
 nificantiy improve haemodynamic status. In general,
agonists result in little change or mild sedation. In
the effect of the opioids on systemic blood pressure
fealthy. cats without pain, mu agonists produce mild
is minimal.
euphoric behaviour. In cats or dogs in pain it is rare
for euphoric or dysphoric behaviours to occur with
Gastrointestinal effects
 either mu or kappa agonists.
Vomiting and defecation in dogs without pain are com-
Mu and kappa agonists potentiate sedation pro-
mon following administration of some mu agonists.
 duced by sedatives or tranquillizer drugs when given
However. when administered to patients in pain, or
in.combination. High doses of mu agonists, such as
postoperatively, these side effects are uncommon. The
hydromorphone or fentany, in combination with a
incidence of vomiting is lower in cats and dogs affer
benzodiazepine can produce a light plane of anaes-
intravenous injection compared with the intramuscu-
thesia in dogs.
lar route. Vomiting can be reduced if acepromazine is
administered 15 minutes prior to intramuscular mor-
Respiratory effects
Depression of the respiratory centre response to
phine or hydromorphone. In cats, excessive saliva-
tion and vomition are frequently observed following
hypercapnia and hypoxaemia are well recognized
mu agonists, although defecation is rarely observed.
side effects of opioids. At equi-anaigesic doses, the
Decreased gastric emptying time and intestinal
 propulsive motility have been demonstrated in dogs,
piratory depression. Respiratory depression should be
and therefore increased gastrointestinal transit time
expected when administering opioids in combination
should be anticipated following opioid administration.
An increase in pyloric sphincter tone has been re-
ported folowing mu agonists; they are not, therefore,
recommended prior to duodenal endoscopy. Similarly,
mu agonists increase the tone of the biliary sphincter
 of Oddi, resulting in a decrease in biliary secretions.
Mu agonists are therefore not recommended in cats
or dogs with biliary obstruction.
Ocular effects
The mu agonists produce miosis in dogs, while
mydriasis is observed in cats. The miotic effect is a
consideration for intraocular surgery, otherwise it
91
Chapter 9 Pain management l: systemic analgesics
has little clinical significance. Miosis is produced
final effect is dependent on the dose and rate of ad-
through opioid-mediated stimulation of cell bodies
ministration; a slow intravenous infusion can be
in the oculomotor nuclear complex. In cats, mydria-
administered either ailone, or combined with other
sis occurs secondary to an opioid-induced increase
analgesics, to produce continuous analgesia. Mor-
in circulating catecholamines. Mydriasis impairs nor-
phine may also be given via the epidural route (see
mal vision and increases sensitivity to light; these
Chapter 10).
alterations should be considered when handling and
 The reported half-ife of intravenous morphine is
exposing the cat to light.
approximately 60 minutes in dogs and 75 minutes in
Urinary effects
injection. Orally administered sustained or extended
Mu agonists increase urethral sphincter tone and in-
release formulations have 5-20% bioavailability with
hibit the voiding reflex. This may be manifested as a
considerable
 individual  variability.  Reduced
short-term decrease in urination, although urine pro-
 bioavailability is attributed to first-pass metabolism by
duction is otherwise not decreased significantly by
the liver and intestinal mucosa following absorption
opioid analgesics.
from the gastrointestinal tract. Based on the individual 
variability and low bioavailability, oral formulations are
Thermoregulation
currently not recommended.
In dogs, opioids decrease the thermoregulatory set
 Using a thermal device to determine pain thresh-
point in the CNS and cause panting, When opioids
old, onset of analgesia following 0.2 mg/kg morphine 
have been used perioperatively in dogs, it is common
i.m. in cats was reported to be 4 hours with duration of
to observe decreased body temperature. In cats, how-
effect lasting 2 hours. Using this particular model,
ever, postoperative hyperthermia is a relatively com-
morphine was found to have lower efficacy relative to
 mon adverse side effect of mu agonists. Hyperthermia
hydromorphone or buprenorphine. To achieve target
 appears to be dose related, with higher doses asso-
serum concentrations for analgesia in dogs, 0.5 mg/kg 
i.v. every 2 hours has been recommended, although
mechanism for this observation is currently unknown,
this dosing regime has not been validated in clinical
but body temperature should be closely monitored in
settings. Clinical trials using doses ranging from
cats given mu agonists.
0.3-0.8 mg/kg i.m. resulted in good postoperative
analgesia following orthopaedic surgery in over 70%
Auditory sensitivity
of dogs for 4 hours after termination of anaesthesia.
 Certain opioids, such as fentanyl, increase noise sen-
A single dose of morphine (0.3 mg/kg i.m.) or
sitivity in cats and dogs and the environment should
buprenorphine (0.01 mg/kg i.m.) for premedication
be as quiet as possible.
operative analgesia for 7 hours. Following thora-
Opioid mu agonists
cotomy in dogs, doses of 1.0 mg/kg i.m. or
intrapleurally provided similar postoperative pain con-
Morphine
trol to intercostal nerve blocks with bupivacaine.
Morphine has been used in Western medicine since
 Morphine and nerve blocks can be used together to
the mid 19th century and remains the 'gold stand-
facilitate pain management following thoracotomy. In
ard'. It has high affinity for mu receptors, but also 
summary, duration of effective analgesia is approxi-
has mild affinity for kappa and delta receptors. It is 
mately 2--6 hours in cats and dogs at the doses shown
relatively hydrophilic compared to more potent mu
in Figures 9.1 and 9.2, and this interval is used for
 agonists. It is generally administered intramuscularly
repeat dosing. As previously mentioned, in the healthy
or subcutaneously; rapid intravenous administration 
dog or cat without pain, high doses of morphine, or
is associated with histamine release, causing vaso-
any other opioid, should be combined with a seda-
dilation, decreased blood pressure and urticaria. The
tive/tranquillizer to prevent dysphoria or euphoria.
Drug
Dose"
Morphine
Mu. agonist.
 Injectable: 0.5-50 mg/ml 
0.1-1.0 mg/kg i.m. or s.c.
 4-6 hours
1.
.:
Epidural:.0.1-0.2 mg/kg -
Pethidine (meperidine)
Mu agonist
Injectable: 10-100 mg/m: :
3-5 mg/kg i.m, or s.c.
1-1.5 hours
Methadone
Mu agonist
1 Injectable: 10 mg/ml 
0.10.3 mg/kg i.v, i.m. or s.c.
 4 hors
Hydromorphone .
Mu agonist
[njectable: 2~100 mg/ml
0.05-0.1 mg/kg i.v., i.m. or s.c.
4hours
Fentanyl
 Mu agonist.
Injectable: 50 and 78.5 μg/ml
 5-10 μug /kg i.v.
20-30 minutes
 CRl: 2-3 μg/kg bolus followed by
2-3 μg/kg/h i.v.
Transdermal: 25 μg/h
4 μg/kg
Opioid analgesics routinely used in cats. (continues)
92
Chapter 9 Pain management 1: systemic analgesics
Dosage forms.
Durationof effect
Butorphanol
Mu antagonist-kappa
Injectable: 10 mg/ml
0.2-0.4 mg/kg i.v., i.m. or s.c.
1.5-2 hours
Buprenorphine
Partial mu agonist
 Injectable: 0.3 mg/ml 
0.01-0.02 mg/kg i.v., i.m. or s.c.
 4-12 hours
Naloxone
 Antagonist
 Injectabie: 0.4 and 1 mg/ml
0.002-0.04 mg/kg i.v.
30 minutes-1 hour
(continued) Opicid analgesics routinely used in cats.
Morphine can be administered to dogs as a con-
 be administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously
 stant rate infusion (CRl) for prolonged analgesia. This
because intravenous administration results in pro-
technique provides consistent levels of analgesia and
found hypotension secondary to histamine release. It 
minimizes adverse side effects following intermittent 
has a short half-life following intramuscular adminis-
boluses, and less morphine is administered overall
tration and the duration of action is approximately
For example, following laparotomy, dogs were reported
1-2 hours in cats and dogs.
to have similar levels of analgesia when receiving
It is not as efficacious as morphine or hydromor-
by/6w 0'1 1e 1o 4! y/by/6w 21'0 1e laue 9uudiou
phone for treating severe pain. Due to its short dura-
1.m. every 4 hours. In general, both groups exhibited
tion of action, it is only recommended for procedures
good postoperative analgesia with minimal adverse side
associated with mild discomfort. At analgesic doses
effects. Despite the CRl group receiving half the amount
(3-5 mg/kg), pethidine is associated with mild seda-
-de 1! 'dno.b snjog juenlalu! aul u! pasn eulydiow jo
tion and a low incidence of vomiting. It can therefore
peared that the dosing techniques provided equipo-
be used as a premedicant in those patients requiring
tent analgesia. The target plasma concentrations
light sedation, or where emesis is undesirable, and
achieved using the CRl technique were lower than pre-
 other pure mu agonists can be given to 'top-up' anal-
viously reported plasma concentrations in other spe-
gesia during anaesthesia if necessary.
cies. However, it is feasible that following more invasive
surgery. such as thoracotomy or major orthopaedic
Methadone
intervention, higher infusion rates would be necessary
Methadone is a synthetic pure mu agonist with simi-
in dogs. Currently recommended rates of infusion are
lar analgesic properties to morphine, but with less
shown in Figure 9.1. Recommended infusion rates for
sedation. It rarely induces emesis, unlike morphine,
cats have not been published at this time.
and is therefore useful in those cases where vomiting
Morphine at recommended doses also produces
is undesirable (e.g. those cases with increased
mild sedation; administration with acepromazine or
intraocular or intracranial pressure). However, it is
medetomidine improves the quality of sedation and
more likely to cause dysphoria than morphine, and
analgesia. when administered at recommended
clinical experience suggests that cats and dogs are
doses during inhalational anaesthesia, morphine has
less 'happy' affer receiving methadone than they
an anaesthetic-sparing effect. The minimum alveolar
are after morphine. Doses of 0.1-0.5 mg/kg 1.m. or
concentration (MAC) of isoflurane is decreased by
i.v. in dogs, and 0.1-0.3 mg/kg i.m. in cats have
Aq pue 'sbop u! A1 by/6u Z e aujydiow buisn %09
been recommended.
25% using 1 mg/kg i.v. in cats.
Using morphine and atropine for premedication in
Hydromorphone
dogs can make duodenal endoscopy more dificult to
Hydromorphone is also a semi-synthetic opioid de-
perform compared with premedication with pethidine
rived from morphine. lt is a pure mu agonist and its
(meperidine) (with or without an anticholinergic). Mor-
physiochemical properties, such as hydrophilicity, are 
phine is also reported to increase biliary sphincter tone
similar to morphine. lt has five to ten times the po-
more than fenfanyl, pethidine or butorphanol
1in
tency of morphine and can be administered
humans. Morphine administered prior to anaesthesia
intramuscularly, subcutaneously or intravenously. The 
in dogs without pain can increase the incidence of
characteristics and efficacy of hydromorphone and
gastro-oesophageal reflux, but the clinical significance
oxymorphone are similar, but hydromorphone is less
remains to be determined. Administration (intramus-
expensive. Since oxymorphone is now unavailable in
cular or subcutaneous) typically induces emesis in
North America, hydromorphone has gained popular-
most healthy cats and dogs without pain. The rate of
ity in veterinary medicine.
emesis is lower with the intravenous route. lt is rare
Similar to other pure mu agonisis, it produces dose-
for emesis to occur when intravenous or intramuscu-
dependent analgesia. When administered intra-
lar morphine is administered postoperatively at anal-
venously, onset of analgesia and sedation is more
 gesic doses. If necessary, the pharmacological effects 
rapid than with morphine. At doses of 0.05-0.1 mg/kg 
can be reversed with: naloxone or butorphanol.
1.m., the duration of analgesic effects is 3-7 hours in
cats and dogs. In cats, 0.1 mg/kg i.m. or i.v. has been
Pethidine (meperidine)
reported to result in an increase in pain threshold, us-
Pethidine is a semi-synthetic mu agonist with one third
ing a thermal testing device within 15 minutes of ad-
to one fith of the potency of morphine. lt should only
ministration, which lasted 5-7 hours. Hyperthermia
93
Chapter 9 Pain management I: systemic analgesics
following hydromorphone administration in cats has
is approximately 64% in dogs and 36% in cats and
been reported, although this has also been reported
the dose required for analgesia is approximately
following high doses of morphine or fentanyl.
4 μg/kg/h. The size of patch recommended for cats
The incidence of vomiting following intramuscular
and dogs is given in Figure 9.3. In cats weighing
administration in dogs ranges from 0% to 10%. If ace-
between 1.6 and 4.3 kg, it has been shown that expo-
promazine is administered prior to intramuscular
sure of 50% of the patch to skin results in decreased
hydromorphone, or if hydromorphone is administered
 plasma concentrations compared with full exposure.
intravenously, the incidence of vomiting is reduced.
However, although plasma fentanyl concentrations
 Mydriasis is observed in cats, but miosis is com-
were below theoretical therapeutic concentrations in
mon in dogs. When administered in combination with
the 'partial exposure' group, analgesia foliowing 
acepromazine, intraocular pressure does not increase
ovariohysterectomy was comparable to analgesia in
in normal dogs, although the effect of hydromorphone
the "full exposure' group. Some authors recommend
alone on intraocular pressure in the dog or cat has
using partial patch exposure in cats weighing <4 kg.
not been reported.
but the invasiveness of the procedure and the degree
of analgesia required should be considered when se-
Fentanyl
lecting amount of patch exposure.
Fentanyl is a synthetic pure mu agonist, but with 100
Recommended fentanyl patch size
ministered intramuscularly, subcutaneously, intra-
Patient size
venously or via the transdermal route. when
Cats and dogs <10 kg
25 ugh
administered intravenously, the elimination half-life is
Dogs 10-20 kg
50 μg/h
reported to be 3-6 hours in dogs and 2 hours in cats.
Clinically. intravenous administration results in rapid 
Dogs 20-30 kg
75 μg/h
onset (1-2 minutes) and a short duration of action
Dags >30 kg
100 μg/h
(20-30 minutes in dogs). Fentanyl may be adminis-
tered using a bolus technique to control acute, se-
 Recommended fentanyl patch size for cats
vere pain (10--20 μg/kg i.v.), but can also be given by
and dogs.
 intravenous CRl or a transdermal delivery system.
Other routes of administration, such as topical and
 The recommended location for patch placement
intranasal, have recently been evaluated, but further
 includes the dorsal or lateral thorax. The tarsal area
 or dorsum (possibly using the area clipped for a pre-
In the healthy dog without pain, bolus doses in the
vious epidural injection) has also been used. An in
range used to control pain will generally result in re-
vitro study using canine cadaver skin revealed faster
cumbency and sedation. Healthy, cats without pain
absorption rates from the groin region compared with 
receiving a bolus (10 μg/kg i.v.) are reported to be
the thoracic and neck regions. aithough this has not
easy to handle and quiet with mild signs of euphoria.
been tested in vivo.
Fentanyl infusion rates in dogs and cats are presented
The area selected should be clipped of hair and 
in Figures 9.1 and 9.2. Trials evaluating the analgesic
the skin cleaned with mild soap (not alcohol), and al-
effects in cats and dogs found plasma concentrations
lowed to dry prior to patch placement. The protective
in the order of 1-3 ng/ml to be associated with anal-
cover is removed, and the patch applied to the skin 
gesia. Specifically. in cats, the thermal threshold
and held in place for 60 seconds. lf necessary, a light 
was increased by 2-12°℃ for 110 minutes following a
bandage can be placed over the patch to prevent its 
10 μg/kg i.v. bolus of fentanyi. Fentanyl administered
removal. Therapeutic plasma concentrations of fen-
as an intravenous bolus produces bradycardia, but
tanyl are reached in approximately 24 hours in dogs,
has minimal direct depressant effects on the myocar-
 and within 12 hours in cats. Plasma fentanyl concen-
 dium or vasculature. Bradycardia is due to increased
trations are generally maintained within the analgesic
vagal tone and is responsive to anticholinergics.
range for up to 72 hours following patch application in 
Anticholinergics can be used to increase heart rate
cats and dogs. Removal or replacement of the patch
and improve cardiac output, although this is rarely
at 72 hours is recommended because plasma concen-
necessary but might be considered when fentanyl is
trations begin to fall at this time. Once the patch is re-
used in combination with anaesthetic drugs.
 moved, plasma concentrations decrease to below the
Transdermal administration of fentanyl has become
analgesic range within 4-6 hours in dogs and 6-20
popular as a method of providing prolonged analgesia
hours in cats. In cats and dogs. studies have revealed 
for patients. Transdermal fentanyl patches are avail-
relatively large individual variations in plasma fentanyl
able in four different sizes based on the delivery rate to
 concentrations, although the concentrations were still
the systemic circulation across human skin. The patch
in the desired therapeutic range in dogs. Therefore,
itself is composed of a drug reservoir, a rate-limiting
the veterinary surgeon should attempt to assess de-
 membrane and an adhesive perimeter for attaching the
gree of analgesia in each patient following patch appli-
patch to skin. The rate of absorption of fentanyl is
cation to verify that adequate analgesia is provided.
dependent on the surface area of the patch exposed
Studies evaluating the analgesic efficacy of
to skin. Therefore, only partially removing the protec-
transdermal fentanyl in dogs undergoing orthopaedic
 tive cover will reduce the exposed surface area, lower
surgery have shown that early postoperative analgesia
the rate of fentanyl absorption and reduce plasma con-
(0-6 hours) from patches was not as profound as the
 centration. The transdermal bioavailability of fentany!
analgesia from epidurally or systemically administered
6
Chapter 9 Pain management l: systemic analgesics
 pure mu agonists. However, overall analgesia over a
receptors. Because of this, it needs to occupy a greater
48-hour assessment period was better with trans-
fraction of the available pool of functional mu receptors
dermal fentanyl. For 24 hours following ovario
(compared with a full mu agonist) in order to induce a
hysterectomy in dogs transdermal fentanyl was
response of similar magnitude. However, bupre-
reported to result in similar behavioural and analgesic
norphine has high receptor affinity and can displace
effects to oxymorphone. In cats undergoing onychi-
morphine from the mu receptor and its reversal using
ectomy (not permitted in the UK), transdermal fenta-
naloxone is difficult. Buprenorphine can be adminis-
nyl has compared favourably with butorphanol.
tered intravenously, intramuscularly and subcutane-
Few adverse effects have been reported with use
of transdermal fentanyl alone. Cutaneous iritation at
transmucosal administration in cats.
the site of patch placement can be common. Mild se-
One of the major benefits of its use is the long
dation, bradycardia and anorexia have been reported
duration of action, which has made it a popuiar anal-
in dogs, and hyperthermia, euphoria and dysphoria
gesic for laboratory animals, cats and dogs. The re-
have been reported in cats. Respiratory depression
ported duration of analgesia varies from 4-12 hours.
during patch application has not been shown to be clini-
However, the onset time of analgesia is longer com-
cally significant in the awake dog. However, if plasma
pared with that for hydromorphone, ranging from 30
fentanyl concentrations have reached analgesic levels
minutes to 2 hours. If given for postoperative analge-
sia, it must be administered pre- or intraoperatively to
sion is possible during general anaesthesia. Skin tem-
provide immediate postoperative analgesia.
perature can influence rate of absorption of fentanyl
In the past, doses of buprenorphine were often
from the patch: external warming devices such as heat-
restricted because early studies showed a 'bell
ing pads and water blankets may dramatically increase
shaped' dose-response curve, where administration
plasma concentrations and lead to severe respiratory
of higher doses led to a reduced analgesic effect.
depression. Halothane anaesthesia and surgery
However, the doses that result in a reduction in effi-
have not been shown to influence plasma fentanyl con-
Aieouo pasn sasop eyi ueul leybiy yonw aie Aoeo
centrations in cats. Hypothermia in isoflurane-
In dogs. several studies have found that doses of
anaesthetized cats, and halothane- and isoflurane-
buprenorphine (0.007-0.02 mg/kg i.m.) have similar
 anaesthetized dogs, however, significantly reduced
analgesic efficacy to morphine (0.3-0.8 mg/kg i.m.)
plasma fentanyl concentrations.
following orthopaedic surgery. lnterestingly, in cats,
buprenorphine (0.01 mg/kg i.m.) produces increased
Sufentanil/alfentanil/remifentanil
analgesia from 4-12 hours (using a thermal testing
 Sufentanil, alfentanil and remifentanil are all short-
device) compared with a duration of only 4-6 hours in
acting, potent derivatives of fentanyl. In humans, they
cats receiving morphine (0.2 mg/kg i.m.).
have fewer side effects with less variability in cardio-
vascular responses than are observed with fentanyl.
Mixed opioid agonist/antagonists
Due to their short duration of action, these mu
agonists are primarily administered as an infusion to
Butorphanol
provide anaigesia during general anaesthesia. Un-
fortunately, they are more expensive than fentanyl
and there are few studies evaluating their relative
has high affinity. lt is considered effective for mild to
efficacy compared with fentanyl in cats and dogs.
moderate visceral pain and is a popular pre-anaesthetic
A long-acting form of sufentanil has recently been
and postoperative analgesic for minor elective surgi-
reported to provide sedation and analgesia for
cal procedures. For analgesia, the intravenous, intra-
approximately 24 hours in dogs although this formu-
muscular or subcutaneous routes of administration are
lation is not yet commercially available.
used. ln some countries, an oral formulation is avail-
able as an anti-tussive, but this has low oral bio-
Codeine
availability and high doses are required for analgesia.
Codeine is a synthetic opioid agonist that exerts its
The duration of analgesia in cats and dogs ranges from
 analgesic effects through its metabolism to morphine.
 30-120 minutes with intravenous administration.
In humans, codeine has an oral bioavailability of
approximately 60% and it is most commonly adminis-
Alithough butorphanol is a commonly used analge-
sic in dogs, the literature suggests that, alone, if is not
tered in an oral formulation. In cats and dogs, it has
 an effective analgesic compared with pure mu agonists
been shown to have poor oral bioavailability and a lower
conversion rate to morphine. Codeine at 4 mg/kg s.c.
lowing laparotomy, 0.4 mg/kg i.m. provided inadequate
was shown to be equivalent to 0.2 mg/kg s.c. of mor-
postoperative analgesia to half the dogs in the study.
phine in dogs during an analgesia study. To date, there
Meloxicam has been demonstrated to provide supe-
are no studies evaluating the analgesic efficacy of orally
rior analgesia for 12 hours compared with butorphanol
lood s! pue shop lo sieo ul aulepoo pajaisuiup
folowing ovariohysterectomy in biches. When used 
bioavailability may limit its use.
as an analgesic for pain resulting from orthopaedic
Partial agonists
procedures, butorphanol has consistently been demon-
strated to result in inadequate analgesia.
Buprenorphine
Butorphanol is considered a good visceral but a
Pharmacologically, buprenorphine is classified as a
 poor somatic analgesic in cats. Using doses ranging
partial mu agonist with little or no effect at kappa
from 0.1-0.4 mg/kg i.v. 0r 0.2-0.8 mg/kg s.c., somatic
Chapter 9 Pain management l: systemic analgesics
analgesia was only reported at the dose of 0.8 mg/kg
of 2.0 mg/kg i.v. resulted in similar postoperative anal-
s.c. Visceral analgesia was reported with 0.1 mg/kg
gesia over a 6-hour period to morphine (0.2 mg/kg
i.v. and 0.4 mg/kg s.c. and duration of visceral anal-
i.v.). The dose recommended for dogs is 1-4 mg/kg 
gesia was fonger using the higher dose. Minimal an-
i.v., or orally every 6 hours for acute severe pain, or
algesic effects were produced using a thermal stimulus
1--4 mg/kg oraily every 12 hours for treatment of
with 0.2 mg/kg i.m., and were limited to the 5-minute
osteoarthritis.
period following administration. Another study dem
onstrated analgesic effects for 15-165 minutes fol-
Opioid antagonists
lowing 0.4 mg/kg i.m. These results would suggest
Naloxone
that somatic analgesia requires a dose of at least 0.4
Naloxone is considered an opioid antagonist with least
 going onychectomy and/or ovariohysterectomy, dem-
agonist effects (pure antagonist). It can be used to
reverse the effects of mu agonists or mixed agonist/
onstrating that a dose of 0.4 mg/kg i.v. or s.c. is
antagonists, since it has higher affinity for the mu and
required to improve analgesia, although the non-
steroidal analgesic meloxicam was better for cats
kappa receptors, but no intrinsic activity. Naloxone
undergoing onychectomy.
does not effectively reverse buprenorphine because
this partial mu agonist has greater affinity for the mu
 Butorphanol administered alone results in mild
receptor than pure antagonists. lf using naloxone to
sedation and is an effective anti-tussive. Therefore, it 
is a useful addition to the pre-anaesthetic medication
reverse excessive opioid-induced respiratory depres-
 sion in an animal in pain, administer naloxone slowly
in small intravenous increments to achieve the de-
choscopy. As part of pre-anaesthetic medication
butorphanol does not impair passing of an endoscope
sired effect. ldeally, the goal is to reverse undesirable
side effects while maintaining analgesia. Fortunately.
through the pyloric sphincter, unlike pure mu agonists.
naloxone has a rapid onset of action (1-2 minutes)
It is therefore a suitable premedication agent for duo-
denal endoscopy.
facilitating this titration technique. Naloxone can also
Although butorphanol is associated with some res-
be administered intramuscularly. Duration of action is
reported to be 30-60 minutes, therefore when used
piratory depression, it is less profound than depres-
to reverse long-acting opioid mu agonists, close moni-
sion obtained with pure mu agonists. The degree of
toring for return of undesirable mu agonist side ef-
respiratory depression is characterized by a 'ceiling
fects is necessary. For example, when naloxone was
effect' as with its analgesic effects. With increasing
used to reverse oxymorphone sedation, dogs showed
doses respiratory depression and analgesia do not
clinical signs of renarcotization, such as sedation, 2
become more profound.
hours after naloxone administration. The dose range
Butorphanol can be used to reverse the effects of a
pure mu agonist. This technique is often used to re-
for naloxone is shown in Figures 9.1 and 9.2.
verse a relative overdose of a pure mu agonist in a
patient exhibiting dysphoric behaviour or profound res-
Nalmefene
Like naloxone, nalmefene is a rapid-onset opioid an-
 piratory depression. In these situations, the goaf is to
tagonist. lt is, however, approximately four times more
reverse the undesirable effects of the pure mu agonist
potent than naloxone with a duration of effect approxi-
without reversing kappa receptor-mediated analgesia.
mately twice that of naloxone. A dose of 0.03 mg/kg
It is recommended that 0.1-0.4 mg/kg of butorphanol
i.v. was shown effectively to reverse oxymorphone-
is diluted in a large volume (10 ml) of saline and 
induced sedation in dogs.
administered in small intravenous increments every
 2-5 minutes until adequate reversal has occurred.
Nalorphine and diprenorphine
Nalorphine and diprenorphine are mu antagonists but
Miscellaneous opioid drugs
partial kappa agonists. They have mild sedative ef
fects when administered alone. They are primarily
Tramadol
Lsed to antagonize the effects of mu agonists used in
Tramadol is classified as an atypical, centraily acting
 opioid anaigesic. Tramadol has one tenth the potency
wildlife immobilization, where prolonged duration of
action is required.
of morphine. lt is now considered a controlled drug in
many countries and is under regulatory controi as with
Naltrexone
other opioids. Central analgesic effects are produced
 Naltrexone is a synthetic opioid antagonist that is avail-
through activity of both the parent drug and its
able in oral formulation. It is primarily used for the treat-
metabolites at the mu receptor. Tramadol also inhib-
ment of behavioural disorders in cats and dogs.
its serotonin and noradrenaline uptake, which may
contribute to a reduction in nociceptive transmission
within the spinal cord. Tramadol is available in oral
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
and parenterai formuiations.
drugs
It is metabolized in the liver via demethylation and
glucuronidation prior to excretion through the kidney.
 Use of NSAIDs for acute and chronic pain manage-
Pharmacokinetic data on oraly administered tramadol
ment has dramatically increased over the past 10 years
is not yet available for cats and dogs, so bioavailability
with the introduction of newer, less toxic agents. AJ-
is unknown. To date, few clinical trials are available to
though not reversible and with a much lower therapeu-
evaluate its analgesic efficacy in cats or dogs. A dose
tic index than opioids, they have some advantages:
96
Chapter 9 Pain management I: systemic analgesics
Long duration of effect
Anti-inflammatory properties
 No behaviour modifying effects
Lack of respiratory and cardiovascular side effects
 Availability in oral formulation
No regulatory control due to the lack of abuse
potential.
NSAIDs are indicated for postoperative pain, in-
flammatory conditions, osteoarthritis, panosteitis,
(PLA,
 hypertrophic osteodystrophy, pain from cancer and
dental pain. Marked species differences exist in the
(S-LO)
Arachidonic acid
(cox)
efficacy and toxicity of NSAIDs, and therefore con-
siderable care must be exercised to ensure appropri-
5-HPETE
PGG2
ate drug and dose selection in cats or dogs. Some
NSAlDs are available without prescription and own-
5-HETE
(unstable) LTA:
PGle
下xA
PGD,PGEPGF:
ers should be questioned whether they have given
an NSAID to their pet. Without this information, inad-
LTB:
LTC:
vertent overdose of NSAIDs may occur.
LTDA
Pharmacology
LTE,
Chemically, the NsAIDs are a heterogenous group of
compounds, although they do share considerable simi-
(unsiable) LTF,
larities in their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
 Formation of inilammatory mediators from
properties. The majority of older NSAiDs are weak
 membrane phospholipids. CoX = Cyclo- 
acids, while the newer agents may be neutral, but they
oxygenase; 5-HETE = 5-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid:
are all highly protein bound with a small volume of 
5-HPETE = 5-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid; 5-LO =
distribution. NSAlDs have different half-lives between 
uipueibeisoid = Sd euauioxnen = 1n :aseuabaxodli-g
PGG, =Hydroperoxide; PGl = Prostacyclin; PLA=
species, so dosing should be based on individual drug
Phospholipase A: TxA, = Thromboxane A2
data for the species. Duration of anti-inflammatory ef-
fects is considerably longer than the measured plasma
half-life. This is partly because the plasma concen-
many diverse functions. For example, many prosta-
trations do not reflect tissue concentrations. In par-
 glandins regulate blood flow in peripheral tissues such 
ticular, inflamed tissue has a pH that tends to result in 
as the gastric mucosa, kidney and intestinal tract.
NSAID accumulation at the site of action.
Most NSAIDs primarily undergo hepatic metabo-
tion. Byproducts of arachidonic acid are also invalved
 lism with the metabolites excreted through the kidney.
Enterohepatic recycling may occur with some NSAIDs
algesia and allodynia. Prostaglandins are released
and conjugated metabolites excreted in bile are
from peripheral nerves at sites of injury causing vaso-
reabsorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. This
dilation and neutrophil chemotaxis, leading to in-
recycling results in a prolonged half-life. Cats have a
limited ability to metabolize drugs through glucuro-
The COX enzyme is not identical throughout the
nidation, and the half-life of some NSAIDs may be
body. It has isoforms, which have been numbered
prolonged. Increased half-lives contribute to the risk of
COX-1 and COX-2. Conventional NSAIDs, such as
toxicity when NSAiDs are used in cats. If the appropri-
 aspirin, are non-specific inhibitors of the coX enzyme, 
ate dose and dosing interval are selected, however,
inhibiting both COX-1 and COX-2 isoforms. The
NSAlDs can be useful for pain management in cats.
COX-1 isoform was initially thought to be the sole con-
Patients with hepatic or renal disease may have
stitutive enzyme, produced in consistent quantities
 greater and more prolonged peak plasma concentra-
throughout the body and responsible for producing
tions of the NSAID (and metabolites) due to reduced
byproducts important for normal homeostasis, such
metabolism and/or elimination of both parent drug and
 as regional tissue and organ biood flow, and platelet
metabolites. Therefore, NSAIDs are not recommended 
function. Conversely, the COX-2 isoform was thought 
in patients with underlying hepatic or renal disease.
to be an inducible enzyme, produced in response to
stimuli such as cytokines and other inflammatory
Mechanismof action
mediators released folowing tissue injury. Therefore,
 The majority of desirable and undesirable effects from
it was hypothesized that drugs that inhibited only the
NSAIDs stem from their inhibitory action on the COX
COX-2 enzyme would be effective inhibitors of inflam-
enzyme. CoX is responsible for conversion of ara-
mation, but free of side effects. Although COx-2 is
chidonic acid (a byproduct of membrane phospho-
the sole isoform involved in producing prostaglandins
lipids) into prostaglandins (PGE2, PGF, PGD2),
 associated with inflammation, it is also produced con-
prostacyclin (PGl2) and thromboxanes. Figure 9.4
 stitutively in some tissues such as the kidney to main-
ilustrates the synthesis of mediators from membrane
tain renal blood flow. lt may also play a role in the
phospholipids. These compounds are synthesized
repair of gastrointestinal erosions. The newer COx-2-
from arachidonic acid throughout the body and have
specific drugs are as effective as general Cox-1 and
97
Chapter 9 Pain management I: systemic analgesics
a a o b  a o
Sucralfate at double the listed doses above
associated with fewer gastrointestinal and bleeding
Famotidine at 0.5 mg/kg i.v. every 12 hours in
dysfunctions. However, they are still not completely
cats or dogs
free of adverse effects.
Omeprazole at 0.7 mg/kg i.v. every 24 hours in
 Different NSAlDs vary in the way they block the
cats or dogs (<20 kg), or 20 mg orally every 24
COX enzyme. Most agents produce either competi-
hours in dogs (>20 kg).
tive, reversible inhibition, or a time-dependent inhibi-
tion of the active site on the enzyme. Aspirin is an
Renal effects
exception, as it forms a covalent bond with the active
When renal blood flow is reduced, localy produced
site of the enzyme, resulting in irreversible inhibition.
prostaglandins in the kidney produce afferent arteri-
In addition, some NSAIDs have been shown to inhibit 
olar vasodilation to restore renal blood flow. Prosta-
the enzyme lipoxygenase, thereby decreasing forma-
glandins are also involved in the control of renin release
tion of leukotrienes in addition to prostagiandins.
and tubular function. By blocking prostaglandin forma-
tion, NSAIDs adversely affect renal perfusion when
Analgesic effects
blood flow to the kidney is reduced. The COX-2 as well
Prostaglandins increase the sensitivity of nociceptors
as the COX-1 isoform is expressed constitutively in the 
and nociceptive neurons to stimuli capable of produc-
kidney, so even COx-2-selective agents may have
ing pain. High concentrations of prostaglandins in
adverse renal effects. In the well hydrated patient with
peripheral tissues also result in changes to pathways 
normal renal function, the probability of NSAiD-related
involved in transmitting nociceptive stimuli within the
renal dysfunction is low. In patients with renal disease 
CNS. NSAiDs block the COX-2 enzyme, reduce
or with cardiovascular dysfunction leading to reduced
renal blood flow (jincluding anaesthetic-induced hypo-
sues, and minimize subsequent alteration of pain
tension), there is increased risk of NSAID-induced acute
processing pathways. NSAIDs may also inhibit
ischaemic renal failure and/or renal papillary necrosis.
prostaglandin synthesis within the CNS. Both non-
When administering NSAIDs that are licensed for
specific COX and COX-2-specific inhibitors block the
 perioperative use, intravenous fluid therapy and haemo-
COX-2 enzyme. and all are effective analgesic/anti-
dynamic monitoring are recommended intraoperatively
inflammatory agents.
to prevent periods of low renal blood flow. Some
NSAIDs have also been reported to impair prostaglan-
Gastrointestinal effects
din inhibition of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), leading
The COx-1 isoform is mainly responsible for the pro-
to decreased urine output and dilutional hyponatrae-
duction of prostaglandins that influence mucosal
mia. In this case, renal injury is not present.
blood flow, epithelial cell turnover and mucus and
bicarbonate secretion in the gastrointestinal tract.
Effects on coagulation
 Conventional, general COX inhibitors have a low gas-
Inhibition of COX-1, which is responsible for the for-
trointestinal margin of safety, with side effects of
mation of thromboxane, leads to platelet dysfunction
vomiting, diarrhoea, anorexia, abdominal pain and
and prolonged bleeding. The non-selective COx in-
gastrointestinal ulceration. In severe cases, gastro-
hibitors are therefore not recommended for use
intestinal perforation may occur. The risk of adverse
 preoperatively because of increased risks of intra-
gastrointestinal events is increased with high doses
operative haemorrhage. Patients receiving conven-
of NSAIDs, prolonged use, multiple NSAID use,
tional NSAIDs should have treatment withdrawn for a
underlying gastrointestinal disease and concurrent
period (10-14 days) before elective surgery to allow
 glucocorticoid administration. The COX-2-selective
NSAID elimination and restoration of platelet function.
drugs are clearly associated with fewer gastro-
The COx-2-specific inhibitors are associated with a
 intestinal side effects, although inappropriate dos
significantly reduced bleeding risk in humans. In
ing or patient selection can still result in similar
healthy dogs, COX-2 inhibitors have been shown to
adverse events.
have minimaf effect on platelet function, although they
Gastric ulcer prophylaxis may be recommended
have not been assessed in animals with pre-existing
in some high-risk patients. Misoprostol (synthetic
 platelet disorders.
 prostaglandin E,) has been shown to reduce the inci-
dence of gastrointestinal ulcers in dogs. A dose of
Hepatic effects
2-5 μg/kg orally is recommended at 12-hour intervals.
NSAIDs are metabolized in the liver and hepatotoxic-
Sucralfate may also play a role in the prevention of
ity is a risk following overdose with any of these agents.
 gastrointestinal ulcers in dogs and can be adminis-
Idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity has been reported with
tered concurrently with misoprostol. Sucralfate must
numerous different NSAIDs in humans and in smal
be administered either 1 hour after or 2 hours before
animal patients. Idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity is not
misoprostol. The recommended dose of sucralfate for
Ma, e uum sunooo Auenbaiy pue tuapuadep asop
prevention of ulcers is 0.5-1.0 g orally every 8 hours
weeks after starting NSAID therapy. Clinical signs of
in dogs, and 0.25 g orally every 8-12 hours in cats.
vomiting and inappetance are observed with a marked
increase in hepatic enzymes.
have developed clinical signs associated with gastro
intestinal ulcers during NSAID treatment. NSAID ad-
Reproductive effects
ministration should be stopped and current treatment 
Prostaglandins are involved in normal labour, closure
of the ductus arteriosus in the neonate, ovulation and
98
Chapter 9 Pain management I: systemic analgesics
embryo implantation. The safety of the currently avail-
When switching from one NSAID to another, it is
 able NsAiDs has not been assessed in pregnant ani-
recommended that a 5-7-day washout interval is
 mals; they are, therefore, not recommended for
allowed to prevent adverse drug interactions. If NSAID
 pregnant, actating or breeding animals, until there is
withdrawal is due to adverse side effects, the patient
evidence of their safety.
shouid be fully recovered prior to starting treatment
with an alternative NSAID.
Eiffects on cartilage
The effects of NsAIDs on cartilage are controversial
and appear to be dependent on the specific NSAID
Veterinary approved non-steroidal
..
and the method used to evaluate cartilage status. Some
anti-inflammatory drugs
NSAlDs decrease proteoglycan synthesis and pos-
Several different NSAlDs are currently authorized for
sibly contribute to chondrocyte death, while others may
use in cafs and dogs, while others, although not ap-
have chrondroprotective effects. Of the NSAIDs cur-
proved, have been used in veterinary patients off-
rently licensed for use in dogs for treatment of osteo-
label for many years. Due to the physiological roles
 arthritis, there is no evidence to support clinically
of the different COX isoforms. interest has primarily
significant deleterious effects on cartilage, hyalurate or
been given to developing COX-2-specific inhibitors.
proteoglycan homeostasis and some literature sug-
Unfortunately. in vitro studies have produced highly
variable results with respect to relative CoX-1 and
COX-2 inhibitory actions of various NSAIDs. Further-
Contraindications for non-steroidal anti-
more, although CoX-2 agents are relatively less ikely
inflammatory drugs
to induce gastrointestinal and haemostatic abnormal-
Based on known side effects of NSAIDs, these drugs
should not be used in patients with the following
vivo. The selection of a specific NSAlD should take
conditions:
into consideration:
 Impaired renal or hepatic function
 Dehydration or hypovolaemia
The reported COX-2 selectivity
Coagulopathies
Reported efficacy and safety in clinical trials
 Animals receiving other NSAlDs or corticosteroids
 Suitable dosing format
Gastrointestinal ulcers or erosions
The individual's response to the drug.
Conditions associated with low circulating blood
volume, such as congestive heart failure
Suitable doses for use in dogs and cats are shown
 Pregnant, lactating or breeding animals.
in Figures 9.5 and 9.6.
9s00
Carproien
 Injectable: 50 mg/ml
4 mg/kg s.c.
Capsules (not available in UK): 25, 75 and 100 mg
UK: 24 mg/kg/iay orally in 2 equally divided doses
 Dose may be reduced to 2 mg/kgiday orally as a single dose
Chewable tablets: 20, 50, 100 mg in UK
after7 days, subject to clinical response
(25. 75, 100 mg in USA and Canada)
USA and Canada: 4.4 mg/kg orally q24h or 2.2 mg/kg orally q12h
Meloxicam
Injectable: 5 mg/ml 
0.2 mg/kg i.y. or s.c. on day 1, 0.1 mg/kg i.v. or s.c. on subsequent days
 Oral Suspension: 1.5 mg/ml
0.2 mg/kg orally on day 1, 0.1 mg/kg oraly q24h on subsequent days
Ketoproten
Injectable: 100 mg/ml 
2 mg/kg i., i.m., s.c. or orally on day 1, followed by 1 mg/kg i.v, i.m,
：
s.c. 0f 0rally q24h
Tablets: 5 and 20 mg
Tolfenamic acid
 Injectable: 40 mg/ml
4 mg/kg orally or s.c. q24h for 3 days, followed by a minirnum of 4 days
 with no administration, then repeat 
Tablets: 6,20 and 60 mg 
：
Deracoxib (USA
Chewable tablets: 25 and 100 mg
Postoperative:3-4 mg/kg orally q24h for maximum of 7 days
and Canada)
 Chronic treatment: 1-2 mgkg orally q24h
Etodolac (USA)
Tablets:150, 300 and 500 mg
10-15 mg/kg orally g24h
Firocoxib
Tabiets: 57 and 227 mg
 5 mg/kg orally q24h
Tepoxalin
Tablets:30,50,100 and 200 mg
10-20 mgikg orally on day 1 followed by 10 mg/kg oraly q24h
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs licensed for use in dogs.
99
...
Chapter 9 Pain management I: systemic analgesics
:
Drug
"Carprofen"
Injectable: 50 mg/ml
 4 mg/kg s.c.(icensed for single dose oniy)
:Meloxicam
Injectable: 5 mg/ml .
0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.v. or s.c.(licensed tor single dose only)
：：
....
 0.1 mg/kg oraly can be administered once a day for 3-4 days, followed
yem e sawn 2-z Ae1o (1e0 jad bu 1'0 elot 1oj by/bu g20'0 Ag
：
....
[unlicensed use]
Ketoproterni...
Injectable: 100 mg/ml
2 mg/kg s.c. single dose followed by oral administration or 2 mg/kg s.c.
q12h for a maximum of 3 days
Tablets: 5 and 20 mg
shps jo wmixeu e jo uzb kero byoul
 Tolfenamic acid
 Injectable: 40 mg/ml 
4 mg/kg orallyor s.c. g24h for maximum of 3 days,folowed by a
mirnimum of 4 days with no administration, then repeat
Tablets: 6, 20 and 60 mg
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs icensed for use in cats.
Carprofen
true breed sensitivity exists. Data from the US Food
Carprofen is considered to be a relatively COX-2-
and Drugs Administration suggest the incidence of
specific NSAID. It is licensed for use in cats and dogs
hepatotoxicity (<0.05%) associated with carprofen is
in Europe, Canada and the USA, lt is available
similar to that of other NSAIDs.
as injectable and oral formulations. The injectable
Clinically important alterations in renal function
ag ueo ll 'shop pue sieo ioy pasuao s! uoneinon
have not been demonstrated in dogs given carprofen
prior to anaesthesia and surgery. However, mainte-
operatively or postoperatively. The oral formuiation
nance of renal blood flow by optimizing fluid status,
is only licensed for dogs, aithough there are reports
as well as ensuring adequate systemic arterial blood
of use in cats. In cats and dogs the oral bioavailability
of carprofen is over 90%, and peak plasma concen-
istration of any NSAID. Carprofen (4 mg/kg i.v. or s.c.)
trations are achieved between I and 3 hours after ad-
sey pue auexogwoiul jo tonewoj jaluu jou saop
ministration. The plasma half-life of injectable
not been shown to have any significant effect on mu-
carprofen is reported to be 10 hours in dogs. In cats,
-nbai sbop ui do sbop Autjeau ui awy bupaalg jesos
the halfife is reported to be approximately 20 hours,
ing fracture repair.
although considerable variability exists with a reported
Carprofen injectable is licensed at 4 mg/kg s.c. in
range of 9-49 hours. Time to onset of action follow-
cats, although it has also been shown to be effective
ing administration of injectable carprofen (intrave-
at 2 mg/kg s.c. lt is an effective postoperative anal-
nously) is <1 hour and its duration of action in dogs is
gesic, comparable to pethidine (meperidine) but with
reported to be 12-18 hours (considerably longer than
a duration of analgesia lasting approximately 20 hours.
most opioid analgesics).
Due to its variable half-life in cats, close monitoring
A dose of 4.0 mg/kg i.v. has been shown to be a
for toxicity should accompany long-term use (it is not 
very effective postoperative analgesic in dogs under-
licensed for chronic use in cats).
going orthopaedic and soft tissue surgery. One study
Aeneradoisod pue Alaaeiedoaid esn sll paieniaa
Meloxicam
in dogs with favourable results, and preoperative ad-
Meloxicam is a COX-2-specific inhibitor available in
ministration resulted in superior postoperative anal-
injectable and oral liquid formulations. The parenteral
gesia compared with postoperative administration. lts
formulation is licensed for use in cats and dogs in
efficacy in the immediate postoperative period is un-
Europe, Canada and the USA. It can be administered
ploido nw jualod jo jeyt se punojoid se ag ol Ajayil
intravenously and subcutaneously, and is used both
agonists. However, carprofen (4.0 mg/kg oraly) was
preoperatively and postoperatively. The oral formula-
shown to be superior to butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg i.v.)
tion is only licensed for use in dogs, although it is widely
in an acute synovitis faboratory model.
used off-label in cats because it is easy to dispense
Carprofen has been shown to be an effective an-
 and cats find it palatable. It has a long elimination half-
algesic for osteoarthritis in numerous studies and has
life in dogs (20-30 hours), and therefore is adminis-
relatively good gastrointestinal tolerance when admin-
tered once a day. The reported haif-life in cats is 11-21
istered to dogs for long periods of time. Although
hours folowing parenteral and oral administration.
Preoperative or postoperative administration at a
administration once daily may stil provide adequate
 dose of 0.2 mg/kg i.v. or s.c. has repeatedly been shown
anaigesia because of its long half-life. Hepatotoxicity
to produce effective postoperative analgesia for soft
has been reported in dogs following carprofen admin-
tissue and orthopaedic surgery. Similar to carprofen,
istration and a large proportion of the dogs in the study
the degree of analgesia in the immediate postopera-
were Labrador Retrievers. However, the study did not
tive period is not as profound as that provided by pure
evaluate the relative breed prevalence of dogs with
mu opioid agonists. Analgesia from meloxicam, how-
adverse effects, and it is not possible to determine if
100
X
Chapter 9 Pain management I: systemic anaigesics
or mixed agonist/antagonists and meloxicam has a
The dose of ketoprofen for chronic pain manage-
 prolonged duration of effect. Fortunately, opioids and
ment should be reduced to 1.0 mg/kg once a day for
NSAIDs can be combined to improve overall anaige-
dogs. These animals should be closely monitored for
sia. Studies in dogs comparing different NSAlDs have 
signs of gastrointestinal dysfunction as a relatively high
found comparable analgesia with the perioperative
rate of gastrointestinal erosions has been reported
with prolonged use of this agent.
meloxicam (0.2 mg/kg s.c.) following ovariohyster-
A dose of 2.0 mg/kg s.c. or i.m. has been shown in
ectomy. Meloxicam also performed similarly to
 several studies to be an effective postoperative anal-
ketoprofen in dogs following orthopaedic surgery.
 gesic in cats. It has compared favourably to the opioids
No adverse effects on renal function have been
buprenorphine and oxymorphone following onych-
demonstrated in dogs when meloxicam has been ad-
ministered preoperatively, even when periods of mild
the dose should be reduced to 1.0 mg/kg once a day
hypotension were created. Aiso, it has not been shown
for repeated treatment. Treatment should, however,
to impair platelet function or lead to any haemostatic
be limited to a total of 5 days.
alterations when administered preoperatively.
Meloxicam is also an effective analgesic for chronic
Tolfenamic acid
 osteoarthritis. The recommended dose is 0.2 mg/kg 
Tolfenamic acid is considered a specific COx-2
on day 1, followed by 0.1 mg/kg once daily thereafter.
NSAID, although it also has anti-thromboxane activ-
It has been shown to be effective and well tolerated 
ity. It is available in injectable and oral formulations
by dogs with osteoarthritis receiving recommended
adoina u! sbop pue sieo u! esn joi pasuaoi s! pue
doses chronically. In one large study. the most com-
and Canada for the treatment of postoperative and
mon adverse clinical signs reported in dogs on chronic
chronic pain. It is reported to have excellent anti-
therapy included vomiting, diarrhoea and inappetance.
pyretic and anti-inflammatory properties, and has a
A dose of 0.t-0.3 mg/kg has been shown to be an
long half-life in cats and dogs. Due to its anti-
effective postoperative analgesic in cats. In one study
thromboxane activity, it is not recommended
evaluating several NSAIDs, it was shown to provide
preoperatively or in patients with haemostatic dis-
orders. Unfortunately, there are few clinical studies
all cats still had some incisional tenderness. A dose
of 0.2-0.3 mg/kg has compared favourably to
available NSAIDs. Tolfenamic acid has been shown
to provide similar postoperative analgesia to
or to butorphanol in cats undergoing onychectomy with:
carprofen, ketoprofen or meloxicam following ovario-
or without neutering.
hysterectomy in cats.
Most studies report a 24-hour duration of anal-
gesia from meloxicam in dogs and cats. Although
Deracoxib
repeated administration is not licensed in cats, its
Deracoxib is a specific COx-2 inhibitor licensed in
continuous use has been reported. Following an ini-
Canada and the USA for treatment of postoperative
tial dose of 0.1--0.2 mg/kg, 0.1 mg/kg orally can be
pain and inflammation associated with orthopaedic
administered once a day for 3-4 days, followed by
surgery, and for control of pain and inflammation
0.025 mg/kg (or total 0.1 mg per cat) orally 2-3 times 
associated with osteoarthritis in dogs. It is reported
a week. Cats should be closely monitored for adverse
to inhibit the COx-2 enzyme irreversibly, a unique
effects during treatment.
feature for this class of drug. It is currently only avail-
able in an oral formulation. It has high oral bio-
Ketoprofen
availability and an elimination half-life of approxi-
Ketoprofen is a non-specific COX inhibitor avallable
mately 6 hours. Similar to other NSAlDs,
in injectable and oral formulations. The injectable for-
because of its long duration of action, deracoxib is
mulation can be administered intravenously, intra-
administered every 24 hours.
muscularly or subcutaneously. It is approved for
It has been shown to be an effective analgesic in
chronic administration and for immediate postopera-
an acute synovitis model in dogs. In this model, it
tive use in dogs in Europe and Canada. lt has a long
was superior to carprofen in alleviating lameness and
duration of effect despite a relatively short half-life
pain associated with synovitis. 1n a study evaluating
(0.5--1.5 hours) and is therefore administered once
pain and lameness following stifle surgery, deracoxib
every 24 hours. It has been shown to have high oral
was also shown to reduce pain and improve range
bioavailability, with rapid absorption from the gastro-
of motion. The efficacy of deracoxib compared with
intestinal tract.
other NSAIDs administered postoperatively remains
A dose of 2.0 mg/kg i.v. has been shown to be an
to be determined.
effective postoperative analgesic for dogs undergoing
Aenb eul 'sainpeooid sipeedouuo pue anssil os
agement, the recommended dose is 1- 2 mg/kg orally
of analgesia provided with ketoprofen is similar to that
once daily. At this dose, in dogs suffering from
with carprofen and meloxicam in dogs. Due to its lack
osteoarthritis, it has been shown to reduce lameness
 of COX selectivity, ketoprofen inhibits platelet aggre-
and improve quality of life when assessed by the
gation and increases the incidence of gastrointestinal
owner. The most commonly reported side effects as-
ulceration compared with placebo. Ketoprofen should
sociated with chronic deracoxib administration are
vomiting and diarrhoea. The recommended dose for
normal haemostatic profiles.
acute postoperative pain is shown in Figure 9.5.
101
Chapter 9 Pain management l: systemic analgesics
Etodolac
evaluating the analgesic efficacy of gabapentin exist,
Etodolac is a selective COx-2 inhibitor available in
it is currently recommended for control of neuropathic
an oral formulation. It is approved for use in dogs
pain in cats and dogs. In an acute pain phase or for
in the USA for treatment of inflammation and pain
postoperative use, it should be used in combination
associated with osteoarthritis. lt has an elimination
with other traditional analgesics such as opioids or
half-life of approximately 14 hours and is administered
NSAIDs. The major side effect is sedation. It does not
m sv Ae1o by/6w 91-0l j0 asop e 1e Aep 90uo
undergo significant hepatic metabolism, but is ex-
other NSAIDs, gastrointestinal erosions and bleeding 
creted through the kidney. and therefore patients
 dysfunction have been reported when doses exceed
should have normal renal function. It is only available
those recommended.
in an oral formulation and the recommended dose
range is wide. Currently recommended doses range
Firocoxib
 Firocoxib is available in an oral formulation in Europe
mg/kg is given initially, with subsequent dose adjust-
 and the USA for treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs. lt
ments made according to the response.
is one of the newly released selective COX-2 NSAlDs.
The recommended dose is shown in Figure 9.5.
Ketamine
 Ketamine is a non-competitive NMDA receptor antago-
Tepoxalin
Tepoxalin is reported to be a COx-1, COx-2 and
nist routinely used as an anaesthetic in veterinary medi-
cine. Its analgesic properties, however, have more
lipoxygenase inhibitor. It is licensed for treatment of
 osteoarthritis in dogs in Europe and the USA, and is
buguui sa pooisiepun pue paziubooai uaag auaoa
NMDA receptors, ketamine has been shown to reduce
available as a dissolvable tablet. As with firocoxib, this
the activity of neurons in the spinal cord in response to
 drug has only relatively recently received approval and
 clinical studies comparing its efficacy with other cur-
nociceptive stimuli and reduce sensitization of these
rently available NSAIDs are not yet available. The 
neurons. Other proposed mechanisms for analgesic
effects include interaction at opioid receptors and/or
dose is shown in Figure 9.5.
 activation of noradrenergic and serotonergic neurons.
When administered as a CRl at 10 μg/kg/minute to
Non-conventional or adjunctive
dogs, ketamine has been has been shown to reduce
isoflurane anaesthetic requirements. In dogs presented 
analgesics
for forelimb amputation, ketamine has been adminis-
 Recommended doses are shown in Figure 9.7.
tered first as an intravenous bolus (0.5 mg/kg)
followed by an intravenous infusion intraoperatively
"Dose.
(10 μg/kg/minute), continued into the postoperative
period (2 μg/kg/minute) for 18 hours. Adequate anal-
Gabapentin
Capsules: 100.
Dog: 5-25 mg/kg orally 8qh
300 and 400 mg
gesia was demonstrated with no adverse side effects.
Cat:5-25 mg/kg orally 8qh
These dogs also received morphine preoperatively and
Tablets: 600 and
fentanyl postoperatively (CRl). To date, no controlled
800mg
 clinicai studies evaluating ketamine as a postopera-
Ketanine
tive analgesic have been reported. Recommended
 Injectable:
Dog: 0.2-4.0 mg/kg i.v.
100 mg/ml
bolus followed by CRl of
0l lounipe ue se sbop pue sleo snoiosuoo jol sasop
 2-60 ug/kg/minute
traditional analgesia are a 0.2--4.0 mg/kg i.v. bolus, fol-
Cat: 0.2-4.0 mg/kg i.v.
lowed by an infusion of 2-60 μg/kg/minute based on
bolus followed by CRI of
patient response. Side effects may include dysphoria,
2-60μg/kg/minute
increased blood pressure and ventricular arrhythmias.
Lidocaine
Dog: 1-4 mg/kg i.v bolus
Injectable:
 20 mg/ml
followedby 1-3mg/kg/h
Local anaesthetics
Medetomidine
Injectable: 1 mg/m I Dog: 1-5 ug/kg iv. or im. or 
Local anaesthetics are routinely administered locally
1-5 μg/kg/h i.v. as a CRI
to block nerve conduction. When administered as an
Cat: 1-5 ug/kg i.v. or i.m. or
intravenous infusion, they are thought to inhibit modu-
1-5 μg/kg/h i.v. as a CRI
latory nociceptive processing. In experimental stud-
jes, lidocaine has been shown to provide analgesia
 Adjunctive analgesics.
for neuropathic pain and to possess MAC reducing
 properties. A pilot study in dogs reported that lidocaine
Gabapentin
Gabapentin is primarily used as an anticonvulsant in
 some postoperative analgesia. Several authors also
 humans, although it has also been shown to have an-
report the use of lidocaine as a CRl to control pain in
algesic properties in humans with neuropathic pain,
dogs and cats refractory to other traditionally used
analgesics. In dogs, a 1-4 mg/kg i.v. bolus followed
exact mechanism of action is unclear, although it is
by 1--3 mg/kg/h is suggested, while in cats recom-
 thought to produce its clinical effects secondary to an
 mended doses are not currently available. Nausea and
increase in synthesis of the inhibitory neurotransmit-
vomiting are observed in awake dogs when infusion
ter, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Analgesia may
rates >4.5 mg/kg/h are given, which may limit its use.
also be mediated through blockage of membrane cal-
 In the dog, these infusion rates have been shown to
cium channels. Although no controlled clinical trials
induce minimal cardiopulmonary alterations.
102
Chapter 9 Pain management I: systemic analgesics
Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists
ientanyl and intramuscular oxymorphone on post-operative
The alpha-2 adrenergic agonist medetomidine is
Science 65, 245-251
 licensed in the dog and cat as a sedative. However,
Lasceles BD. Cripps PJ. Jones A and Waterman-Pearson AE (1998)
it has potent analgesic properties that are primarily
Eficacy and kinetics of carproien, administered preoperatively or
 postoperatively, for the prevention of pain in dogs undergoing
mediated via alpha-2 adrenergic receptors located
ovarichysterectomy.Veterinary Surgery 27,568-582
 in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. These receptors
Lascelles BD and Roberston SA (2004) Antinociceptive effects of
modulate the release of neurotransmitters respon-
hydrororphone, butorphanol, or the corbination in cats. Journar
sible for transmission of nociceptive signais to higher
of Veterinary Internal Medicine 18. 190-195
Lucas AN, Firth AM, Anderson GA, Vine JH and Edwards GA (2001)
centres. Alpha-2 receptors located in the periphery
 Comparison of the effects of morphine administered by constant
may also play a role in the mediation of nociception.
rate intravenous infusion or intermittent intamuscular iajection int
dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 218.
Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists also have effects on the
884-891
 cardiovascular system such as increased systemic
MacPhail CM. Lappin MR, Meyer DJ et al. (1998) Hepatocellular
vascular resistance and, therefore, increased sys-
toxicosis associated with administration of carprofen in 21 dogs
temic arterial blood pressure. Decreased heart rate
1895-1901
Ag palebou) auon (ebea pesaiou! wo snooo
Mastrocinque S and Fantoni DT (2003) A comparison of preoperative
increased blood pressure). Cardiac output is de-
in canine ovariohysterectomy. Veterinary Anaesthesia and
creased as a result of reduced myocardial contrac-
Anaigesia30.220-228
tility, reduced heart rate and increased systemic
Mathews KA(2000) The Veterinary Clinics of North America Small
Animat Practice: Management of Pain. WB Saunders Company.
vascular resistance. In patients where sedative and
Philadelphia
 cardiopuimonary effects are not clinically significant,
Mathews KA, Paley DM, Foster RA, Valliant AE and Young SS (1996) A
low doses of medetomidine can be administered
comparison of ketorotac with flunixin, butorphanol, and
oxymorphone in controlling postoperative pain in dogs. The
either as a bolus (1-5 μg/kg i.v. or i.m.) or as an
CanadianVeterinaryJourna/37(9)557-567
 intravenous infusion (1-5 μg/kg/h) for pain refrac-
McCann ME, Andersen DR, Zhang D et ar. (2004) In vitro effects and in
vitro efficacy of a novel cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitar in dogs with
tory to other analgesics.
experimentaly induced synovitis. American Journat of Veterinary
Research 65(4),503-512
Millis DL. Weigel JP. Moyers T.and Buonomo FC (2002) Effect of
 deracoxib, a new CoX-2 inhibitor, on the prevention of lameness
References and further reading
453-464
Bergmann HM, Nolte IJ and Kramer S (2005) Effects of preoperative
 Polis I, Moens Y, Gauthuys F, Hoenben D and Tshamala M (2004) Anti-
 r p      
nociceptive and sedative effects of sufentanil long-acting during
and after sevoflurane anaesthesia in dogs. Journal of Veterinary
Veterinary Research66.1356-1363
Medicine51,242-248
pue sistobe pioido :siewue gews ur ured jo lonuoo (looz) sa yoog
antagonists and other locally and centrally acting analgesics. In:
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 15(4), 261-272
Smal Animal Clinical Pharmacoiogy and Therapeutics, ed. DA
 Robertson SA, Lascelles BDX, Taylor PM and Sear JW (2005) PK-PD
Baoth, pp. 405-424. WB Saunders Company, Philadelphia
modeling of buprenorphine in cats: intravenous and oral
Borer LR,PeelJE,Seewald W,Schawalder P and Spreng DE (2003)
transmucosal administration.Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology
Effect of carprofen,etodolac,meloxicam,orbutorphanol in dogs
and Therapeutics 28, 453-460
with: induced acute synovitis. American Journai of Veterinary
Research 64. 1429-1437
Brodbelt DC, Taylor PM and Stanway GW (1997) A comparison of
Record 152, 675-678
preoperative morphine and buprenorphine for postoperative
 Robinson TM, Kruse-Elliot KT, Markel MD et al.(1999) A comparison of
analgesia for arthrotomy in dogs. Journal of Veterinary
undergoing major orthopedic surgery. Journal of the American
Carroll GL, Howe LB and Peterson KD (2005) Analgesic efficacy of
Animal Hospital Association 35. 95-100
 preoperative administration of meloxicam or butorphanol in
 Sawyer DC and Rech RH (1987) Analgesia and behavioral effects of
onychectomized cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
butorphanol, nalbuphine and pentazocine in the cat. Journal of the
Association 226, 913-919
American Animal Hospital Association 23, 438-446
Caulkett N, Read M, Fowler D and Waldner C (2003) A comparison of 
 Skingle M and Tyers MB (1980) Further studies on opiate receptors
the analgesic efiects of butorphanol with those of meloxicam after
that mediate antinociception: tooth pulp stirmulation in the dog. British
Journal of Pharmacology 70, 323-327
Journal44.565-570
Slingsby LS and Waterman-PearsonAE(2000) Postoperative analgesia
Davidson CD, Petifer GR and Henry JD (2004) Plasma fentanyl
in the cat after ovariohysterectomy by use of carprofen, ketoprofen,
 concentrations and analgesic effects during fulf or partial exposure 
meloxicam or tolfenamic acid. Journaf of Smat Animal Practice 41,
to tansdermal fentanyl patches in cats. Journal of the American
447-450
Veterinary Medical Association 224. 700-705
 Slingsby LS and Waterman-Pearson AE (2002) Comparison between
：
of buprenorphine,oxymorphone hydrochloride,and ketoprofen for
ovariohysterectomy. Journal of Smaf Animal Practice 43, 286-289
 Smith LJ, Bentley E, Shih A and Miller PE (2004) Systemic lidocaine
sterilization in cats. Journaf of the American Animaf Hospital
infusion as an analgesic for intraocular surgery in dogs: a pilot study.
Association38.507-514
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Anaigesia 31. 53-63
 Dyson DH, Doherty T, Anderson Gl and McDoneli WN (1990) Reversal
Stanway GW, Taylor PM and Brodbelt DC (2002) A preliminary
 of oxymorphone sedation by naloxone, nalmefene, and butorphanol.
Veterinary Surgery19,398-403
for post-operative analgesia. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
Gassel AD, Tobias KM, Egger CM and Rohrback BM (2005) Comparison
29.29-35
 of oral and subcutaneous administration of buprenorphine and
 Stobie D, Caywood DD. Rozanski EA et al. (1995) Evaluation of
meloxicam for pre-emptive analgesia in cats undergoing
 pulmonary function and analigesia in dogs after intercostal
ovariohysterectomy. Journal of the American Veterinary Medica!
Association 227. 1937-1944
intrapleurally and bupivacaine administered intapleuraly American
Karnik PS. Johnston S, Ward D, Broadstone R and inzana K (2006)
Journal of Veterinary Research 56, 1098-1109
 The etfects of epidural deracoxib on the ground reaction forces in
an acute stifle synovitis model. Veterinary Surgery 35, 34~42
 inflammatory drugs and ather drugs. Journal of Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care 15(4). 248-253
 of morphine and plasma concentrations of morphine-6-glucuronide
) y          
folowing morphine administration to dogs.Journal of Veterinary
Use of low doses of ketamine administered by constant rate irfusion
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 28, 371-376
as an adjunct for postoperative analgesia in dogs. Journal of the
Kyles AE, Hardie EM and Hansen BD (1998) Comparison of transdermal 
American Veterinary Medical Association 221, 72-75
103
Pain management Il: local and
regional anaesthetic techniques
Kip A. Lemke
lntroduction
 Clinical pharmacology
Local and regional anaesthetic techniques are gaining
Chemistry
widespread acceptance in the management of peri-
Local anaesthetics are weak bases that are classi-
 operative pain in both cats and dogs. in recent years,
fied as aminoesters (procaine) or aminoamides (lido-
 caine, bupivacaine). All local anaesthetics have an
operative pain has provided the conceptual framework
aromatic group that is connected to a tertiary amine
for a more rational use of these techniques. Surgical
group by either an ester or an amide linkage. As a
trauma and inflammation produce sensitization of the
general rule, the structure of the aromatic group de-
peripheral nervous system, and the subsequent barrage
termines the lipid solubility of the drug, while the
of nociceptive input produces sensitization of neurons
 structure of the tertiary amine group determines
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Because local and 
the water solubility of the drug. At physiological pH
regional anaesthetic techniques are the only anaige-
sidaooe Apeal dnob auie Aeei aui '(t')
sic techniques that produce complete blockade of peri-
protons, and local anaesthetic molecules exist in
pheral nociceptive input, they are the most effective
equilibrium as a neutral, lipid-soluble base, and a
way to prevent sensitization of the central nervous sys-
 positively charged, water-soluble acid. The dissocia-
tem (CNS) and the development of pathological pain.
tion constant, or pka, is the pH at which concentra-
The neuroendocrine or stress response to surgical
pioe pabieuo Ajaallisod pue aseg lenau jo suo!
trauma compromises haemostatic, metabolic and im-
are equal. Most local anaesthetics have pKa values
munological function, which increases perioperative
in the 7.5-8.5 range. As the pKa value decreases, a
morbidity and mortality. Preoperative use of local and
greater fraction of the drug exists as neutral base.
regional anaesthetic techniques, in particular epidural
more molecules penetrate lipid membranes and the
techniques, attenuates the neuroendocrine response
onset of action tends to be more rapid. Conversely.
and dramatically reduces the incidence of major com-
as the pKa value increases, a greater fraction of the
plications in human patients. Preoperative use of these
drug exists as positively charged acid, fewer mole-
techniques also reduces inhalant anaesthetic
cules penetrate lipid membranes and the onset of 
requirements and autonomic responses to noxious sur-
action tends to be slower.
gical stimuli. These reductions improve cardiopu-
monary function intraoperatively, and facilitate a rapid
Mechanism of action
smooth recovery from anaesthesia postoperatively.
Peripheral nerves are composed of different types
Local and regional anaesthetic techniques are of-
of myelinated (Ao, Aβ, Ay, A8) and unmyelinated (C)
nerve fibres that are surrounded by connective tis-
alpha-2 adrenergic agonists, dissociative anaesthet-
sue sheaths. Local anaesthetics are injected near
ics and anti-inflammatory drugs as part of a multimodal
peripheral nerves and the drug must penetrate these
strategy to manage pain. They can be easily incorpo-
connective tissue sheaths before reaching the neu-
rated into anaesthetic and pain management plans
ronal membranes. Diffusion of local anaesthetics
[eojbins jo sadk1 lsow buiobiepun sieo pue sbop 1oj
away from the injection site is a function of tissue
procedure. Branches of the maxillary and inferior al-
binding and uptake into the systemic circulation.
veolar nerves can be blocked in patients undergoing
Local anaesthetics block the generation and conduc-
dental procedures. The brachial plexus and more distal
tion of nerve impulses by inhibiting voltage-gated
nerves of the thoracic limb can be blocked in patients
sodium channels in neuronal membranes. The
undergoing forelimb procedures. Intercostal nerves
binding site for local anaesthetics is located on
can be blocked in patients undergoing thoracic pro-
the cytoplasmic or intracellular surface of the
cedures, and lumbar nerves can be blocked by epi-
sodium channel. The neutral base must difuse
dural administration of local anaesthetics in patients
across the lipid membrane and dissociate from the
undergoing abdominal and hindlimb procedures. A
membrane to gain access to this site. Once inside
clear understanding of the clinical pharmacology of
the cell, the tertiary amine group is protonated and
local anaesthetics, as well as relevant canine and fe-
the charged acid binds to the sodium channel. Local
line anatomy, is required to use these techniques
anaesthetics stabilize inactive conformational states
safely and effectively.
of the sodium channel and delay reactivation of the
104
Chapter 1o Pain management ll: local and regional anaesthetic techniques
：
 channel rather than physically blocking the pore. Only
have littie effect on the duration of action of long-
moderately lipid-soluble local anaesthetics with pka
acting drugs (e.g. bupivacaine). Given the potential
values close to the physiological pH can penetrate
for localized ischaemia as well as the availability of
 connective tissue sheaths and neuronal membranes,
long-acting local anaesthetics with inherently slow sys-
 gain access to the cytoplasmic binding site and in-
temic absorption, the addition of vasoconstrictors to
activate sodium channels.
local anaesthetic solutions has limited clinical utility.
The onset and duration of local anaesthetic block-
 Once absorbed into the systemic circulation, locai
ade differs by anatomical location, fibre type and fre-
anaesthetics bind reversibly to plasma proteins (α- 1
quency of stimulation. As a general rule, fibres
acid glycoprotein, aibumin) and red blood cells. The
innervating more proximal regions are located more
degree of tissue and protein binding influences the
superficialy in peripheral nerve bundles than those 
onset and duration of action, as well as the toxicity of 
innervating more distal regions. Consequently, local
local anaesthetic drugs. Aminoesters tend to be less 
anaesthetics penetrate superficial nerve fibres first and
lipid-soluble and protein-bound, and tend to have a
proximal areas are blocked sooner than more distal
faster onset and shorter duration of action. Conversely.
areas. Fibre type also influences the onset and dura-
 aminoamides tend to be more lipid-soluble and pro-
tion of local anaesthetic blockade. The conventional
tein-bound, and tend to have a slower onset and longer
duration of action. Consequently, doses of local an-
specifically myelinated (A8) and unmyelinated (C)
 aesthetics, especially aminoamides, should be cal
nociceptive fibres, are blocked before larger sensory
 culated carefully for patients with significant anaemia
(Aβ) and motor (Ao) fibres. However, recent experi-
or hypoproteinaemia.
mental evidence shows that small unmyelinated (C)
Aminoesters and aminoamides are metabolized
fibres are more resistant to focal anaesthetic block-
by distinctly different pathways and at very different
ade than previously thought, and are blocked after
rates. Aminoesters are rapidly hydrolysed by tissue
larger sensory and motor fibres. Based on these find-
and plasma esterases, and metabolites are excreted
ings, it appears that nociceptive transmission medi
by the kidneys. Aminoamides are metabolized prima-
ated by unmyelinated C fibres can persist even after 
rily in the liver by cytochrome P450 enzymes at a rela-
motor blockade has been established. Frequency of
tively slow rate. The major routes of hepatic meta-
stimulation also influences the onset of local anaes-
bolism are hydroxylation, N-dealkylation and
thetic blockade. Nociceptive fibres from areas of tis-
hydrolysis, with subsequent elimination of metabolites
sue trauma discharge at higher rates than those in
by the kidneys. Some metabolism of the aminoamides
normal tissue, and are more susceptible to local an-
also occurs extrahepatically in the lungs and kidneys.
aesthetic blockade than other types of fibres. This in-
 Consequently, doses of aminoamides should be cal-
期
culated carefully for patients with advanced liver dis-
Use-dependent or frequency-dependent blockade.
ease to avoid toxic plasma concentrations associated
with hypoproteinaemia and delayed metabolism.
Absorption and metabolism
Systemic absorption of local anaesthetics is deter-
Locai and systemic toxicity
mined by dose, vofume and route of administration.
Local anaesthetics are relatively safe drugs if they are
男
Absorption from mucosal, pleural and peritoneal sur-
used with reasonable care. Dosage calculations
faces is rapid and complete, and peak plasma con-
should be based on lean bodyweight, and total doses 
centrations are reached within 10 minutes. Plasma
should be calculated carefully to avoid systemic
 concentrations achieved after interpleural or intercos-
toxicity -- especially in small patients (<5 kg). Admin-
tal administration are comparable to those achieved
istration of an incorrect dose and inadvertent intra-
after intravenous administration. Local anaesthetics
vascular administration are probably the most
are also absorbed quickly from epidural injection sites
 common causes of systemic toxicity in dogs and cats.
and peak plasma concentrations are reached in
Interpleural or intercostal administration of large doses
approximately 30 minutes. Absorption from subcuta-
is also a potential cause of systemic toxicity. Recently.
neous sites is slower and peak plasma concentrations
mixtures of lidocaine and bupivacaine have become
popular for some local anaesthetic techniques. Un-
pleural or intercostal administration.
fortunately, toxicity of local anaesthetics is additive,
Binding to tissue proteins and vascularity of the in-
 and administration of lidocaine-bupivacaine mixtures
jection site also influences systemic absorption of local
produces little change in onset time and a significant
anaesthetic drugs. Moderately lipid-soluble drugs (e.g.
decrease in duration of action when compared with
[idocaine) do not bind extensively to tissue proteins and
administration of bupivacaine alone. Most commonly
are rapidly absorbed, while highly lipid-soluble drugs 
used local anaesthetic solutions also cause some
(e.g. bupivacaine) bind extensively to tissue proteins
degree of local tissue irritation, and inappropriate ad-
and are more slowly absorbed. All commonly used
ministration of concentrated solutions consistently
local anaesthetics cause vasodilation, which acceler-
causes local tissue toxicity and nerve damage.
ates systemic absorption of the drug. Vasoconstrictors 
Aminoesters have the potential to cause allergic re-
(adrenaline) can be added to local anaesthetic solu-
actions but they are used infrequently in veterinary
tions to delay absorption and reduce systemic toxic-
 medicine. Conversely, allergic reactions to amino-
ity, but they can also cause localized ischaemia
 amide local anaesthetics are extremely rare, although
Vasoconstrictors are added to prolong the duration of
 some preservatives (methylparaben) can cause al
action of short-acting drugs (e.g. lidocaine), but they
lergicreactions.
105
Concentrated local anaesthetic solutions produce
that produces convulsions in cats (3.8 mg/kg) is only
local tissue irritation and are directly neurotoxic. Ap-
20% lower than that in dogs (4.3-5.0 mg/kg). Initial
 plication of 5% lidocaine to peripheral nerves causes 
 signs of CNS toxicity (sedation, ataxia) become ap-
irreversible conduction block within minutes. Even
parent after administration of approximately half of
 standard concentrations of commonly used local an-
the convuisive dose. Furthermore, moderate respi-
aesthetics (2% lidocaine) produce localized tissue
ratory acidosis (P,CO, = 60-80 mmHg (8-10.7 kPa))
irritation and significant histological changes. Be-
increases cerebral blood flow and the proportion of
cause of the tissue damage associated with admin-
free drug available for diffusion across neuronal
istration of standard concentrations of most local
membranes, and decreases the convulsive dose of
 anaesthetic solutions, regional blockade of nerves 
lidocaine and bupivacaine by approximately 50%. As
proximal to the surgical field is preferred to local in-
a result, adequate ventilatory support, in addition to
filtration of tissues within the field. Dilution of local
anticonvulsant therapy, is critically important in the
 anaesthetics at the site of injection also plays an im-
management of systemic toxicity.
portant role in reducing local tissue toxicity, and some
Clinical signs of cardiovascular toxicity occur at
preservatives (sodium bisulphite) used in local an-
aesthetic solutions are potentially neurotoxic. Con-
those required to produce CNS toxicity (see Figure
sequently, only low concentrations (2% lidocaine.
10.1). Local anaesthetics produce direct effects on
0.5% bupivacaine) of preservative-free local anaes-
the heart and blood vessels, and indirect effects me-
thetic solutions should be administered by the intra-
diated by blockade of the autonomic nervous system.
thecal or epidural route.
Toxic doses of local anaesthetics depress myocardial
In cats and dogs, the relative potency and sys-
contractility, and cause peripheral vasodilation and
profound hypotension. Conduction abnormalities and
times those of lidocaine. As a result, a 0.5% solution
arrhythmias are rarely observed after administration
of bupivacaine is equivalent to a 2% solution of lido-
 of large doses of short-acting local anaesthetics (e.g.
caine in terms of both potency and toxicity. Systemic
lidocaine, mepivacaine). However, administration of
reactions to local anaesthetics involve primarily the
large doses of long-acting local anaesthetics (e.g.
CNS, but the cardiovascular system can be affected
bupivacaine) can produce ventricular arrhythmias and
if very large doses are given (Figure 10.1). Initial signs
cardiovascular collapse in cats and dogs. New long-
 of CNS toxicity include sedation, disorientation and
acting local anaesthetics (e.g. ropivacaine, levobupi-
ataxia. Muscle tremors, convulsions and respiratory
vacaine) have recently been developed, and these
 depression can occur after administration of large
drugs appear fo be slightly less cardiotoxic than
doses. The intravenous dose of lidocaine that pro-
bupivacaine at equipotent doses.
duces convulsions in cats (12 mg/kg) is approxi-
 A summary of the clinical pharmacology of selected
mately 40% lower than that in dogs (20.8-22.0
aminoamide local anaesthetic drugs is given in Fig-
mg/kg), while the intravenous dose of bupivacaine
ure 10.2.
CNS toxic doseCV toxic dose
Drug
toxicity.
(convulsions)
(ventricular
tachycardia andratio
fierilaiony
.230
Lidocaine
The total dose of lidocaine should not exceed 6-8 mg/kg in healthy
Cat
11.7 mg/kg i.v.
47.3 mg/kg i.v.
4.0
uanib ag lou pjnous ieo by g Ayjeau e 'adwexa iot 'shop pue sieo 
(Chadwick,1985).
:
more than 1 ml of the 2% (20 mg/ml) solution or 0.2 mal of the 10%
..
.....
Dog
(100 mg/ml) spray
(Liui et al, 1982, 1983;
 22.0 mg/kg i.v.
76.2 mg/kg.i.v
3.5
Ventricular tachycardia and ibrilation occur at doses that are
Feldman et al. 1989)
 20.8 mg/kg i.v.
approximately ten times those used clinicalyand four times those
 that produce convulsions 
Mepivacaine.
 CNS and CV toxicity are comparable t lidcaine
Dog
 80.4 mg/kg i.v.
(Liu et al., 1982)
Bupivacaine
The total dose of bupivacaine should not exceed 1:5-2.0 mg/kg in.
Cat
 3.8 mg/kg L.v.
18.4 mg/kg i.y.
4.8
heaithy cats and dogs.For examle, a healthy 3 kg cat should not.
(Chadwick, 1985)
be given more.than 1 ml of the 0.5% (5 mg/ml) solution
Dog
Venitricular tachycardia and fibrillation occur at doses that are
(Liu et al. 1982, 1983;
 5.0 mg/kg i.v.
 20.4 mg/kg i.v.
 4.1
 approximately ten times those used chinically and four times those
Feldman et al., 1989)
4.3 rmg/kg i.v.
 that produce convulsions 
Ropivacaine
CNS and CV toxicity are comparable to bupivacaine at
Dog
4.9 mg/kg i.v.
 equipotent doses
(Feldman et al, 1989)
106
ybnd
Comments
 indingtime of action poteney
sopn  (snou) (anum):
.
Lidocaine
7.7
55-65
5-15
1-2
1
Topical
2% (20 mg:m)
Lsed in cats and dogs for a wide variety of
Lccal iniltration
sourtion
minar surgical and ciagnostic procedures
Peripheral and
10% (100 mg:mll
The 2% solution is approved for use in cais
 central (epicural)
 topical spray
and dogs in Canada, the UK and the USA
 neural blockade
Mepivacaine
7.6
75-80
5-15
1.5-2.5
1
 Local inftiraion
2% (20 mg/ml) 
Used in cats and dogs ior a wide variety of
Peripheral and 
solution
minorsurgical and diagncsticrocedures
central (epidural)
Aproved for use in dogs in Canada
neural blockade
Bupivacaine
8.1
85-95
10-20
4-6
 Local inftratlion
0.5% (5 mg/mf)
Used perioperatively in cais and dogs
Peripreral and
nadnsumsu
central (epiduratl}
 without preservativ Not aproved for use in arinals
neural blockade
3
Levobupivacaine
8.1
97
10-20
4-6
4
Local intiltration
 0.5% (5 mg/ml)
Not approved for use in anals
Peripheral and
solution withott
ceniral (epidural)
preservative
neural blockade
Ropivacaine
8.1
94
10-20 
3-5
3
Local infirtion .
 0.75% (7.5 mg/mi)  Not approved for use in animals
Peripheral and
solution without
central (epidural)
preservative
neural blockade
Pharmacology oi aminoamide local anaesihetic drugs.
General techniques
50-100 mg/ml; 2% in the UK) can be used to desen-
sitize oral, nasal and urogenital mucous membranes
Local and regional anaesthetic techniques are usu-
in most patients. However, systemic toxicity can be
ally safer and easier to perform in cats and dogs that
jou s! Aeids eut j! (by g>) suaed jiews u! walqoid e
have been sedated or anaesthetized. Patients are
easier to position, anatomical landmarks are easier
of standard concentrations of lidocaine (2%) or bupi-
 to identify, specific nerves and blood vessels are easier
vacaine (0.5%) to abraded or cut skin is ineffective.
to isolate and needle placement is more precise and
Splash blocks before incision closure are essentially
less traumatic. Healthy cats and dogs can be sedated
subcutaneous injections with significant drug loss and
with acepromazine-opioid or medetomidine-opioid
may not be effective. In human paediatric patients.
 combinations, and fractious cats can be immobilied
mucous membranes and abraded or cut skin are de-
with low doses of ketamine. in anaesthetized patients,
sensitized with a mixture of lidocaine (4%, 40 mg/ml),
local and regional anaesthetic techniques are usually
adrenaline (0.0005%, 5 μg/ml) and tetracaine (0.5%,
 performed shortly after induction of anaesthesia and
 5 mg/ml), but this mixture has not been used widely
 in veterinary medicine. A eutectic mixture of lidocaine
dental or diagnostic procedures.
(2.5%, 25 mg/ml) and prilocaine (2.5%, 25 mg/ml)
A clear three-dimensional understanding of rel-
can be used to desensitize intact skin, but the mix-
evant anatomical landmarks and the location of
ture must be applied under an occlusive dressing
nerves, vessels and anatomical spaces is required to
for 60 minutes.
perform local and regional anaesthetic techniques in
Infiltration anaesthesia
can be easily palpated, and others can be located by
Infiltration of local anaesthetics can be used to de-
identifying specific anatomical landmarks. Often, tradi-
sensitize dermal and subcutaneous tissues for minor
tional anatomy texts provide the best descriptions and
diagnostic and surgical procedures. After aseptic
illustrations to review anatomical landmarks and the
preparation of the skin, local anaesthetic solution is
location of specific nerves and blood vessels.
injected as a subcutaneous bleb to desensitize small
areas, or in a linear, triangular or rectangular pattern
Topical anaesthesia
to desensitize larger areas. The needle should always
Topical application of local anaesthetics is used pri-
be withdrawn to a point just below the dermis before
 marily for minor surgical procedures, and to facilitate
if is redirected. Attempting to redirect without first
placement of endotracheal tubes. nasal oxygen lines
withdrawing the needle simply bends the needle
 and urinary catheters. Most local anaesthetic solu-
and causes unnecessary tissue trauma. when large
tions will not penetrate intact skin, and high concen-
 areas need to be desensitized, the potential for sys-
trations are required to penetrate and desensitize
temic toxicity should be considered, and tocal anaes-
mucous membranes. Lidocaine spray (5-10%,
thetic solutions diluted if necessary.
107
 Chapter 10 Pain management Il: local and regional anaesthetic techniques
Interpleural anaesthesia
Calculate the total dose of local anaesthetic
carefully for each patient to avoid systemic toxicity
through chest tubes or specialized catheters. The
Base total dose calculations on lean bodyweight,
interpleural technique has been very popular in vet-
not on actual bodyweight
erinary and human medicine in recent years, and is
Dilution of standard solutions to 1% lidocaine or
easy to perform in conscious patients once a chest
0.25% bupivacaine may be required for cats and
tube or catheter has been placed. However, the qual-
small dogs.
ity of analgesia is variable and the efficacy of the
technique for post-thoracotomy pain has been ques.
Techniques in the dog
tioned in human medicine. Further, uptake of local
anaesthetics from the pleural space into the systemic
Cranial nerves: Selective blockade of the maxillary
circulation is rapid, plasma concentrations are ex-
and mandibular branches of the trigeminal nerve can
tremely high, and the risk of systemic toxicity (convul-
be used for a variety of surgical and dental proce-
sions) is considerable. Given these findings, the
dures (Figure 10.3). Most nerves can be blocked by
clinical efficacy and toxicity of interpleural admini-
injecting 0.5-1 ml of 2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupivacaine 
stration of local anaesthetics needs to be more criti-
using a 22 gauge (0.7 mm), 1 inch (2.5 cm) needle.
cally evaluated in veterinary patients. Local
 anaesthetic solution is administered through a chest
tube or interpleural catheter using aseptic technique
with the patient positioned “incision side down' for
10 minutes. The block can be performed with either
 2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupivacaine, and the total dose
of local anaesthetic should be calculated carefully to
avoid systemic toxicity.
Intra-articular anaesthesia
Intra-articular anaesthesia is used infrequently in cats
 and dogs. The technique has been used for stifle sur
 gery (cruciate repair) in recent years and is relatively
easy to perform. Local anaesthetic solution is admin-
 istered intra-articularly after closure of the stifle joint
and before closure of the skin. Intra-articular admin-
istration of bupivacaine appears to improve anal-
Anatomicai Jandmarks for performing
gesia for several hours postoperatively. The stifle joint
maxillary, infraorbital, inferior alveolar and
rmental nerve blocks in dogs.
 can be blocked in most patients by placing a 22 gauge
(0.7 mm) needle aseptically into the joint on either
The maxillary nerve and its branches provide sen-
side of the patellar tendon and administering a total
sory innervation to the upper dental arcade, soft and
dose of 1--2 ml of 2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupivacaine.
hard palates and muzzle. The maxillary nerve is
The potentiai for local tissue toxicity should be con-
blocked proximally before it enters the infraorbital
sidered before using this technique, and the total dose
canal by inserting a needle under the rostral portion
of local anaesthetic should be calculated carefully to
of the zygomatic arch, and directing it towards the
avoid systemic toxicity.
maxillary foramen. The infraorbital nerve provides
 sensory innervation to the rostral portion of the max-
Intravenous regional anaesthesia
illa. The nerve is blocked by palpating the intraorbital
Intravenous regional anaesthesia is rarely used in cats
foramen, inserting a needle transorally or trans-
 and dogs. Although the technigue is relatively easy to
cutaneously above the third premolar, and directing it 
perform, a large amount of local anaesthetic is re-
towards the infraobital foramen.
quired and the risk of systemic toxicity is high. For
The mandibuiar nerve and is branches provide
this reason, the use of intravenous regional anaes-
sensory innervation to the lower dental arcade, tongue
thesia should be avoided in small patients (<5 kg).
and chin. The inferior alveolar nerve can be blocked 
Techniques that selectively block specific nerves are
proximally before it enters the mandibular foramen on
usually safer and more effective for most patients than
the medial surface of the mandible just rostral to the
intravenous regional techniques.
angular process. The foramen and nerve are easily
palpated from inside the mouth on the medial surface
Peripheral neural blockade
of the mandible. The nerve is blocked by inserting a
 Guidelines for peripheral neural blockade are as
needle transcutaneously below the rostral portion of
follows:
the angular process and directing it towards the
foramen along the medial surface of the mandible.
Identify key anatomical landmarks
The nerve can also be blocked distally as it exits the
Note the location of blood vessels that lie in
mental foramina.
close proximity to target nerves
 Chronic otitis externa is an extremely painful con-
 Use aseptic and atraumatic technique
Aspirate syringes before injections are made to
surgical intervention, Blockade of the auriculotem-
 avoid inadvertent intravascular administration
poral (mandibuiar) nerve and great auricuiar nerve
108
Chapter 1o Pain management Il: local and regional anaesthetic techniques
(cervical nerve ll) can be used to facilitate medical
Blockade of the nerves of the brachial plexus can
and surgical procedures involving the inner surface
be used to manage perioperative pain associated
of the auricular cartilage and the external ear canal
with forelimb injuries and fractures (Figure 10.5). The
(Figure 10.4). The auriculotemporal nerve is blocked
 block has traditionally been performed by injecting
by inserting a needle rostral to the vertical ear ca-
nal, and directing it towards the base of the 'V' formed 
of the shoulder (similar to the technique for the cat
aul pue yoie oewobz aui jo loadse jepneo aui 6q
shown in Figure 10.10). Although this technique is
vertical canal. The great auricular nerve is blocked
relatively easy to perform, large amounts of local
by inserting a needle ventral to the wing of the atlas
anaesthetic solution are required, the shoulder and 
and caudal to the vertical ear canal, and directing it
proximal humerus are not anaesthetized, and incom-
parallel to the vertical canal.
plete blockade is relatively common. An alternative
technique, the paravertebral brachial plexus block, has
Cervical and thoracic nerves: Selective blockade
been used at the Atlantic Veterinary College for
of cervical and thoracic nerves can be used for sur-
several years. The nerves of the brachial plexus (C6,
gical procedures involving the forelimb and thorax.
C7, C8, T1) are blocked as close as possible to
Most nerves can be blocked by injecting 1-3 ml of
their respective intervertebral foramina rather than
2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupivacaine using a 22 gauge
in the axillary space. To perform the paravertebral
(0.7 mm), 1 inch (2.5 cm) needle. Particular atten-
 block, the scapula is shifted caudaly to expose the
tion should be paid to the location of major blood
large transverse process of the sixth cervical verte-
vessels that lie in close proximity to the brachial
bra and the first rib. Ventral branches of C6 and C7
 plexus as well as the intercostal nerves.
are blocked as they cross the dorsal surface of the
transverse process of the sixth cervical vertebra by
inserting a needle dorsal to the process, and direct-
ing it towards the cranial and caudal margins, respec-
tively. Ventral branches of C8 and T1 are blocked at
their juncture on the lateral surface of the first rib by
directing the needle to the cranial and also ventral
border of the dorsal part of the first rib, close to the
articulation with the vertebra. when blocking the
ventral branches of C6 and C7, the needle should
be directed caudally to avoid epidural or intrathecal
administration. The vertebral artery and branches
of the costocervical artery run in close proximity
to the nerves as they exit intervertebral foramina
and care should be taken to avoid intravascular injec-
 tion. Unilateral blockade of the phrenic nerve and
hemiparalysis of the diaphragm can occur with either
 the axillary or paravertebral technique, and these
Anatomical landmarks for performing
blocks should not be performed bilaterally. Pneumo-
 auriculoiemporal and great auricular nerve
thorax is also a potential complication with both
blocks in dogs.
techniques.
Anatomical
landmarks
for performing
paravertebral
blockade of the
brachial plexus in
dogs (dotted line 
shows normal
anatomical position).
7
109
Chapter 10 Pain management l: local and regional anaesthetic techniques
 Perioperative pain associated with injuries or frac-
to the angle of the rib near the insertions of the epax-
tures distal to the elbow can be managed by selec-
ial (longissimus, iliocostalis) muscles, and are directed
tively blocking the radial, uinar, median and musculo-
dorsaly along the caudal border of each rib.Pneumo-
cutaneous nerves (RUMM block) (Figure 10.6). The
 thorax can occur if the needie enters the interpleural
radial nerve is blocked by inserting a needle proximal
space, and patients should be watched closely for
to the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and directing
20--30 minutes after performing the block.
it between the brachialis and the lateral head of the
triceps. The radial nerve can be palpated between these
Lumbar and sacral nerves: Selective blockade of
muscles over the distal third of the humeral shaft. The
lumbar and sacral nerves can be used for surgical
uinar, median and musculocutaneous nerves are
procedures involving the hindlimb. Most nerves can
blocked by inserting a needle proximal to the medial
be blocked by injecting 1-2 ml of 2% lidocaine or 0.5%
epicondyle of the humerus and directing it between the
bupivacaine using a 22 gauge (0.7 mm), 1 inch (2.5
biceps brachii and the medial head of the triceps. Pul-
cm) needle.
sation of the brachial artery can be used to locate these
Perioperative pain associated with injuries and
 nerves, and they can be palpated between these mus-
fractures distal to the stifle can be managed by selec-
cles over the distal third of the humerus. Because of
tively blocking the saphenous, common peronealand
 the proximity of the brachial artery and vein, care should
tibial nerves (Figure 10.8). The saphenous nerve is a
 be taken to avoid intravascular injection.
branch of the femoral nerve, and runs through the
Intercostaf nerve blocks can be used to manage
femoral triangle on the medial surface of the thigh.
pain in animals with fractured ribs, or to manage
The nerve lies cranial to the femoral artery and vein,
 perioperative pain in patients undergoing tateral thora-
and pulsation of the artery can be used to facilitate
cotomy (Figure 10.7). Intercostal nerves and vessels
correct placement of the needle. The saphenous nerve
lie adjacent to the caudal border of each rib, and two
 is blocked by placing a needle cranial to the femoral
artery within the femoral triangle. Because of the prox-
 sion site must be blocked. Needles are inserted distal
imity of the femoral artery and vein, care should be
Anatomical landmarks
for performing radial,
ulnar, median and 
musculocutaneous
nerve blocks in dogs.
[a] Medial view.
Radial
{b] Lateral view.
Ulnar
nerve
nerve
Median
nerve
Musculo-
cutaneous
nerve
[a)
[b]
 Anatomical landmarks 
 for performing.
intercostal nerve blocks in dogs
(dotted line shows position of
surgical incision).
110
Chapter 1o Pain management Il: local and regional anaesthetic techniques
Saphenous
nerve
Common
gAnatomical landmarks for performing
peroneal
 infraorbital, inferior alveolar and mental
nerve
nerve blocks in cats.
Tibial
nerve
Unlike the dog, the cat's infraorbital foramen is recessed
and cannot be palpated, although the ridge is obvious.
The nerve is blocked by inserting a needle transorally
or transcutaneously above the premolars and direct-
ing it towards the infraorbital foramen.
The inferior alveolar nerve and its branches pro-
vide sensory innervation to the lower dental arcade,
tongue and chin. The nerve can be blocked proximally
before it enters the mandibular foramen. The nerve is
blocked by inserting a needle transcutaneously be-
 Aratomical landmarks for performing
low the rostral portion of the angular process and di-
saphenous, common peroneal and tibial
nerve blocks in dogs (medial view).
recting it towards the foramen along the medial surface
of the mandible. The nerve can also be blocked distally
taken to avoid intravascular injection. The common
as it exits the mental foramina.
peroneal nerve is a branch of the sciatic nerve, and
runs laterally over the gastrocnemius and across the
Cervical and thoracic nerves: Selective blockade
lateral surface of the fibular head. The nerve is easily
of cervical and thoracic nerves can be used to man-
palpated and blocked by inserting a needle distat to
age perioperative pain associated with surgical pro-
the fibular head and directing it towards the nerve.
cedures of the forelimb and thorax. The brachial plexus
The tibial nerve is also a branch of the sciatic nerve,
 caine or 0.5% bupivacaine using a 22 gauge (0.7 mm).
and runs deep to the medial and lateral heads of
the gastrocnemius and then between the superficial
1 inch (2.5 cm) needle. Most other nerves can be
digital flexor tendons and the long digital extensor
blocked by injecting 0.1-0.3 ml of 2% lidocaine or 
tendon. The nerve is blocked by placing a needle deep
0.5% bupivacaine using a 25 gauge (0.5 mm), 0.6
to the medial and lateral heads of the gastrocnemius,
inch (1.6 cm) needle.
Blockade of the nerves of the brachial plexus can
flexor tendons and the long digital extensor tendon
be used to manage perioperative pain associated with
distal to the lateral saphenous vein.
forelimb injuries and fractures below the elbow (Figure 
10.10). Nerves of the brachial plexus (C6, C7, C8, T1)
Techniques in the cat
are blocked as they enter the axillary space. The block
is performed by inserting a needle into the axillary space
Cranial nerves: Selective blockade of the maxillary
at the level of the shoulder, and directing it towards the
and mandibular branches of the trigeminal nenve can
first rib. The brachial plexus is located just cranial to
be used for a variety of surgical and dental procedures
the first rib within the axillary space. The axillary artery 
(Figure 10.9). Most nerves can be blocked by injecting 
and vein run in close proximity to the brachial plexus 
 0.1-0.3 ml of 2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupivacaine using
and syringes should be aspirated before injection. Uni-
a 25 gauge (0.5 mm), 0.6 inch (1.6 cm) needle.
lateral blockade of the phrenic nerve and hemiparalysis
The infraorbital nerve and its branches provide sen-
of the diaphragm can also occur, and this block should
sory innervation to the rostral upper dental arcade, hard 
not be performed bilaterally. Although the technique is 
palate and muzzle. The nerve is blocked as it exits the
easy to perform, large amounts of local anaesthetic
 infraorbital foramen, which is located ventral to the eye
solution are required, and the shoulder and proximal
at the junction of the zygomatic arch and the maxilla.
humerus are not anaesthetized.
111
Chapter 1o Pain management Il: local and regional anaesthetic techniques
dorsomedial to the carpus just proximal to the joint.
The median and uinar nerves are blocked by placing
needles subcutaneously medial and lateral to the ac-
cessory carpal pad on the ventraf surface of the paw.
Care should be taken to avoid entering the joint spaces
when making these injections.
 Intercostal nerve blocks can be used to manage
pain in animals with fractured ribs, or to manage pain
in patients undergoing lateral thoracotomy. As in
 dogs, intercostal nerves and vessels lie adjacent
to the caudal border of each rib, and two or three
intercostal nerves on either side of the fracture or
incision site must be blocked. Needles are inserted
distal to the angle of the rib near the insertions of
the epaxial (longissimus, iliocostalis) muscles, and
are directed dorsally along the caudal border of each
rib. Pneumothorax is a potential complication and
patients should be watched closely for 20-30 min-
utes after the block is performed.
Lumbar and sacral nerves: Selective blockade of
perioperative pain associated with surgical procedures
of the hindlimb. Most nerves can be blocked by in-
jecting 0.1-0.3 ml of 2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupivacaine
using a 25 gauge (0.5 mm). 0.6 inch (1.6 cm) needle.
Perioperative pain associated with injuries and
fractures distal to the stiffe can be managed by selec-
 Anatomicai landmarks for performing axillary
tively blocking the saphenous, common peronea/ and
& blockade of the brachial plexus in cats.
tibial nerves. The saphenous nerve is a branch of the
femoral nerve, and runs through the femoral triangle
Selective blockade of the distal branches of the
on the medial surface of the thigh. As in dogs, the
radiai, uinar and median nerves can be used to man-
nerve lies cranial to the femoral artery and vein, and
age perioperative pain associated with surgical pro-
pulsation of the artery can be used to facilitate cor-
cedures of the front paw (Figure 10.11). The radial
rect placement of the needle. The saphenous nerve
nerve is blocked by placing a needle subcutaneously
is blocked by placing a needle cranial to the femoral
 artery within the femoral triangle. Because of the prox-
imity of the femoral artery and vein, care should be
taken to avoid intravascular injection. The common
Radial
peroneal nerve is a branch of the sciatic nerve, and
nerve
runs laterally over the gastrocnemius and across the
lateral surface of the fibular head. The nerve is easily
Ulnar nerve,
dorsal branch
palpated and blocked by inserting a needle distal to
the fibular head and directing it towards the nerve.
 Ulnar nerve,
palmar branch
The tibial nerve is also a branch of the sciatic nerve,
Median
and runs deep to the gastrocnemius and then between
nerve
the superficial digital flexor tendons and the long dig-
 ital extensor tendon. The nerve is blocked by placing
and the long digital extensor tendon.
Central neural blockade
Epidural anaesthesia and analgesia in dogs
Epidural administration of local anaesthetics or opioids
can be used to manage perioperative pain associated
with injuries and fractures of the hindlimb (Figure
10.12). The term *epidural anaesthesia' refers to the
complete sensory, motor and autonomic blockade
produced by epidural administration of local anaes-
thetics. Lumbosacral epidural administration of local
 Anatomica! landmarks for performing nerve
blocks of the distai branches of the radial, 
anaesthetics produces segmental blockade of lum-
ulnar and median nerves in cats. Shaded areas within
 bar and sacral nerve roots. Cranial spread of the block-
dotted lines show areas to be blocked.
ade is dependent on the volume of local anaesthetic
112
is often given in combination with local anaesthetics.
 Preoperative epidural administration of 0.5% bupi-
vacaine with morphine provides 4-6 hours of
intraoperative and postoperative 'anaesthesia', and
12-24 hours of postoperative 'analgesia' with a sin-
gle injection.
 Unlike other domestic species, the spinal cord in
dogs ends at the level of the sixth lumbar vertebra,
and the meninges end at the level of the seventh
lumbar vertebra. The epidural space surrounds the
spinal cord and meninges, and is limited dorsally by
the vertebral laminae and the ligamentum flavum.
The epidural space communicates with the paraver-
tebral space and spinal nerve roots via interverte-
bral foramina. Epidural injections are usually made
at the lumbosacral junction or space. Patients are
placed in sternal or lateral recumbency and the cra-
nial edges of the wings of the ilia are paipated. The
[a)
lumbosacral space is caudal to a line connecting
these two points. The indentation over the lumbosac-
ral space is bordered cranially by the dorsal spinous
process of the seventh lumbar vertebra and caudally
by the sacral ridge. After aseptic preparation of the
site, a 20 gauge (0.9 mm), 1.5 inch (3.8 cm) spinal
needle is placed in the centre of the indentation per-
pendicular to the plane of the pelvis, and advanced 
slowly towards the lumbosacral space. Longer
needles may be required in large dogs, but these
needles are more difficulf to stabilize once the epi-
Sacrum!
dural space has been enfered.
 An increase in resistance followed by an abrupt
(b)
loss of resistance, commonly referred to as a 'pop', is
402
 Anatomical landmarks for performing 
encountered as the needle passes through the liga-
 lumbosacral epidural anaesthesia and
mentum flavum and enters the epidural space. The
analgesia in dogs. (a) Dorsal view. (b) Laterai view. The
needle is stabilized with one hand and the stylet is
umeip aul e ol lepneo punoj ag ueo aoeds jeioesoawni
removed with the other, and a test injection of 1--3 ml
of air is made to verify correct placement of the nee-
dotted line).
dle. Absence of resistance to injection of air indicates
correct placement of the needle. The 'hanging drop'
administered. Small volumes (1 ml/10 kg) produce
technique can also be used to identify correct place-
blockade of the immediate lumbosacral area while
ment, but the technique is not as reliable in dogs as it
larger volumes (1 ml/5 kg) produce blockade up to
is in larger domestic animals and patients must be
the level of the umbilicus. Epidural anaesthesia is
placed in sternal recumbency. Preservative-free 2%
frequently used in combination with general anaes-
lidocaine or 0.5% bupivacaine is administered slowly
thesia as part of a balanced technique designed to
over 10-20 seconds at a dose of 1 ml/5 kg (lean
reduce anaesthetic requirements, improve analgesia
and muscle relaxation and reduce the incidence of
helps to confirm correct placement of the spinal nee-
major complications. Epidural administration of 2%
dle during injection. Collapse of the air space within
lidocaine typically provides 1-2 hours of 'anaesthe-
sia' while epidural administration of 0.5% bupivacaine
movement of the needle. After injection, the patient
provides 4--6 hours of regional 'anaesthesia'.
can be rotated to facilitate migration of the local an-
The term 'epidural analgesia' refers to the anal-
aesthetic solution towards the nerve roots supplying
the surgical site. Alternatively, preservative-free mor-
Epidural administration of morphine (preservative-free
 phine (0.2 mg/kg) can be given alone in an equiva-
 preparation; 0.1-0.3 mg/kg) produces longer lasting
lent volume of saline, or in combination with lidocaine
anaigesia with fewer side effects than administration
 or bupivacaine. At the Atlantic Veterinary College, a
of more lipid-soluble opioids, such as fentanyl or
 concentrated (25 mg/ml) morphine solution is pre-
hydromorphone. Epidural administration of morphine
ferred to avoid dilution of local anaesthetic solutions
produces analgesia for hindlimb as well as abdomi-
 nal, thoracic and forelimb procedures. Unlike epidural
age calculations should be based on lean bodyweight,
administration of local anaesthetics, cranial spread
and total doses should be calculated carefuly to avoid
is not dependent on volume but on diffusion of mor-
systemic toxicity. Syringes should also be labelled
phine from the epidural space into the cerebrospinal
clearly and strict aseptic technique should be followed
fluid and the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Morphine
when administering drugs epidurally.
113
Complications are infrequent if epidural tech-
Summary
niques are performed carefully. ldentification of land-
Local and regional anaesthetic techniques are usu-
with peivic injuries. Epidural techniques should not
ally the safest and most effective way to improve the
be used if a localized skin infection is present at the 
 quality of anaesthesia and anaigesia for patients un-
 injection site. Coagulopathy and septicaemia are po-
dergoing surgical, dental and diagnostic procedures.
tential contraindications and epidural injections are
Currently, lidocaine and bupivacaine are the local
usually avoided in these patients. Sympathetic block-
 anaesthetics used most commonly in dogs and cats.
ade produced by epidural administration of local an-
Bupivacaine has a slightly slower onset of action but
aesthetics can cause significant peripheral
lasts 3-4 hours longer than lidocaine. Consequently.
vasodilation and hypotension. Consequently, local
 bupivacaine is usually a better choice than lidocaine
ol Aeinpide ueaib aq lou pinous sojieuiseeue
for the management of perioperative pain. Local and
patients that are volume depleted or haemodynami-
regional anaesthetic techniques are relatively safe if
cally unstable. Even in healthy anaesthetized
they are performed with reasonable care. Relevant
patients, vaporizer settings should be reduced, blood 
 anatomy should be reviewed, and doses of local an-
aesthetics, especially those for cats and small dogs,
pressure should be monitored closely, and intra-
venous fluids should be given to maintain adequate
 should be calculated carefully to avoid systemic tox
 perfusion pressures. Postoperatively. urine retention
icity. Preoperative use of local and regional anaes-
can be a problem, so all patients should be checked
thetic techniques reduces anaesthetic requirements,
periodically for bladder distension.
improves analgesia, attenuates the stress response
to surgical trauma and reduces the incidence of
major complications. In short, these techniques can 
Epidural anaesthesia and analgesia in cats
dramatically improve the quality of care provided to
Epidural administration of local anaesthetics and
opioids can be used to manage perioperative pain
dental and diagnostic procedures.
 associated with injuries and fractures of the hindlimb.
Unlike in the dog, the spinal cord ends at the level
of the seventh lumbar vertebra and the meninges
References and further reading
extend into the sacral region. Patients are placed in
sternal or lateral recumbency and the cranial edges
of the wings of the ilia are palpated. Anatomical land-
bupivacaine-infused cats. Anesthesiology 63, 385-390
 Feldman HS, Arthur GR and Covino BG (1989) Comparative systemic
marks for lumbosacral injection are more distinct in 
 toxicity of convulsant and supraconvulsant doses of intravenous
cats than in dogs, but the epidural space is much
ropivacaine, bupivacaine, and lidocaine in the conscious dog.
smaller. Because the spinal cord and meninges
Anesthesia and Anaigesia 69(6), 794-801
Foster RH and Markham A (2000) Levobupivacaine: a review of its
extend into the lumbosacral region the potential for
 pharmacology and use as a locaf anesthetic. Drugs 59, 551-579
intrathecal injection or direct injury to the spinal cord
myelinated sensory and motor fibers by lidocaine: in vivo electro-
is higher than in dogs.
After aseptic preparation of the site, a 22 gauge
Kehlet H and Dahl JB (i993) The value of multimodal or balanced
(0.7 mm), 1.5 inch (3.8 cm) spinal needle is placed in
anaigesia in postoperative pain treatment. Anesthesia and
Anaigesia 77.1049-1056
the centre of the indentation between the sacral ridge
 Kehlet H and wilmore Dw (2002) Multimodal strategies to improve 
and the dorsal spinous process of the seventh lum-
 surgical outcome. American Journal of Surgery 183, 630-641
bar vertebra, and advanced slowly towards the epi-
Clinics of North America:SmaffAnimal Practice 32.747-763
dural space. Techniques for needle placement are
Lemke KA (2000) Local and regional anesthesia. Veterinary Clinics of
North America:SmallAnimal Practice 30.839-857
similar to those for dogs, but a smaller volume of air 
Lemke KA (2004) Understanding the pathopnysiology of perioperative
(0.5 ml) is used to verify correct placement. If cer-
pain.Canadian Veterinary Journa/45.405-413
ebrospinal fluid is observed when the stylet is re-
Liu PL. Feldman HS. Covino BM et al. (1982) Acute cardiovascular
moved, the needle should be withdrawn slightly so
toxicity of intravenous amide local anesthetics in anesthetized
ventilated dogs. Anesthesia and Analgesia 61, 317-322
the distal end is within the epidural space, before
Liu PL. Feldman HS, Giasi R et al. (1983) Comparative CNS toxicity of
making the injection. Preservative-free 2% lidocaine
 following rapid intravenous administration. Anesthesia and
or 0.5% bupivacaine is administered slowly over 10--
Anaigesia 62,375-379
20 seconds at a dose of 1 ml/5 kg. As always, dosage
MeClure JH (1996) Ropivacaine. British Journal of Anaesthesia 76,
calculations should be based on lean bodyweight, and 
300-307
Muir ww and Woolf CJ (2001) Mechanismis of pain and their therapeutic
total doses should be calculated carefully to avoid
implications Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
systemic toxicity. After injection, the patient can be
219.1346-1356
Reiestad F and Stromskag KE (1986) Interpleural catheter in
rotated to facilitate migration of the local anaesthetic
solution towards the nerve roots supplying the surgi-
Anesthesia 11,89-91
cal site.Alternatively, preservative-free morphine (0.2
Rodgers A, Walker N, Schug S et al. (2000) Reduction of post-operative
 mg/kg) can be given alone in an equivalent volume of
From an overview of randomized triais. Brtish Medical Journa/321.
saline, or in combination with lidocaine or bupivacaine.
1493-1504
Contraindications and complications are similar to
Rosenburg PH, Scheinin BM, Lepantalo MJ et al. (1987) Continuous
intrapleural infusionof oupivacaine for analgesia afer thoracotomy.
those for dogs.
Anesthesiology 67, 811-813
114
Pain management Ill:
ancillary therapies
Shauna Cantwell
Introduction
Alternative and complementary
therapy
-uou ol uojonpoiul ue sapiaoid iaideuo siul
pharmacological means of providing analgesia or pre-
In humans, the factors leading to the desire for non-
venting pain. More common modalities such as acupunc-
pharmacological treatment are high-intensity pain,
ture and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
aching pain and cutting/stabbing pain. In a study of
(TENS) therapy are discussed. Some less common or
patients with spinal cord injury, acupuncture, massage
scientifically unvalidated therapies are also introduced,
and TENS were the treatments most often sought by
but it should be remembered that evidence-based medi-
patients. Massage and heat have also been reported
cine is the standard to which medical practice should
to result in appreciable alleviation of chronic pain. lce 
aspire. Ancillary methods of pain management are many
massage over an acupuncture point has also been
and varied, but besides those of physical therapy in
shown to reduce pain. Neuropathic pain responds
humans, most are not yet well documented and poor
poorly to traditional analgesics and so requires a long-
methodology limits the usefulness of many studies. Much
term commitment to complex management strategies,
of the therapy available to veterinary surgeons is a com-
which can include non-traditional approaches. For
pilation of clinically used techniques from veterinary
cancer pain in humans, a combination of pharmaco-
medicine, and those extrapolated from human medicine.
logical and non-pharmacological treatment modalities
 This chapter is an introduction to many forms of therapy
is the standard of care recommended by the World
that are available. Most require further training and it is
Health Organization. Complementary and alternative
beyond the scope of this text to teach the application.
therapies are also becoming recognized by major re-
search agencies, and are now acknowledged as use-
tained from the reference list.
ful tools in veterinary medicine.
Manipulative therapies
Nursing care
Physical modalities can be used to augment pain treat-
In addition to pharmacological and invasive or man-
ment plans. Veterinary physical therapy entails the
ipulative techniques for pain management, basic
use of non-invasive means for the rehabilitation of
nursing care must first be considered. Good surgical
injuries. Optimizing range of motion, strength and
technique, infection control and wound management
neuromuscular control can reduce instability and pain
are paramount. Bandaging, joint immobilization or
associated with disuse.
mobilization (as needed) and general comfort must
be addressed. Muscle spasms secondary to pain can
Temperature
be controlled not only through muscle relaxants such
Application of heat or cold is helpful. Cold is offen
as diazepam, but also with thick bedding, hot or cold
applied to acute postoperative sites to decrease in-
applications and manipuiative therapy.
flammation; ice packs can be covered with a towel
and applied to an inflamed area for no more than 20
 essary to understand the effects of therapy, and to know
minutes at a time. Heat can improve circulation, aid
when to intervene. Controling anxiety is important to
removal of tissue waste products and promote heal-
decrease fear and its potentiation of pain. This can be
ing, especially of chronic lesions. Caution must be
done with quiet handling, interaction with socialized
used when applying heat to patients with lack of sen-
animals and minimal handling of non-socialized ani-
sation, poor perfusion, or open ulcers and wounds.
mals. Provision of basic needs will reduce anxiety and
Local heat may also promote growth of neoplasms so
allow rest. These needs include nutritional support,
should not be applied over such areas.
facilitation of timely urination and defecation, and pro-
vision of seclusion for reclusive animais such as cats.
Massage
 Distraction of attention has been shown to reduce pain
Auew sapnjous yoym wal peong Aoa e si ahess
awareness in human cancer pain studies and can be
types of muscle manipulation. It can be used to im-
an effective, although time-consuming, therapy. lf nurs-
prove range of motion, reduce muscle tension and
ing care does not manage to reduce anxiety, acupunc-
improve circulation. Massage can function in a simi-
ture and herbal treatment can also be useful.
lar way to muscle relaxants, such as benzodiazepines;
115
Chapter 11  Pain management ll: anciliary therapies
through interruption of positive feedback loops that
components surrounding the joints. 'Subluxations' can
 create further pain and sympathetic stimulation. Mus-
cause kinesiopathological changes (biomechanical
cle spindle cells and Goigi tendon organs are the ef-
problems) and neuropathology due to direct or indirect
fective receptors in this cycle. Massage also functions
pressure on the dorsal and ventral nerve roots as well
to inhibit nociceptive transmission by stimulation
as the spinal nerves exiting the intervertebral foramen.
of Aβ fibres. These fibres are low-threshoid sensory
Subsequent myopathological changes occur, mani-
 fibres and can modulate and inhibit nociceptive path-
fested as muscle weakness, myofascitis and pain.
ways via the gate control theory.
Inffammatory changes can also occur, and somatic-
Animals with chronic painful disorders also have
visceral or somatic-autonomic neural relationships can
muscle spasms, tender points and trigger points. A trig-
be affected. Rapid thrusts to the spinal articular joints
 ger point is a localized tense area of muscle which when
will produce a relative separation of the joint, break
 paipated causes radiating pain. Many types of physi-
down adhesions and reset the muscle spindle cels and
Golgi tendon organs of the paraspinal musculature. The
to trigger point therapy. Veterinary surgeons or nurses/
resulting sensory afferent stimulation can interfere with
technicians can gently assess muscle zones for ten-
derness or rigidity. Manipulating accessible muscle ori-
plasticity. Stimulation of joint versus cutaneous sen-
 gins and insertions can provide significant relief and
 sory afferent nerves will decrease hyperalgesia, and
owners can be taught to provide treatment of trouble
this may be one neural mechanism of action of anal-
 spots at home. Common zones to be examined in dogs
gesia through chiropractic adjustments. Many prospec-
include the triceps, gluteals, semimembranosus/semi-
tive double-blind studies have been performed to
tendinosus and longissimus dorsi over the lumbar re-
 demonstrate clinical effectiveness of chiropractic
 gion. Dogs with weak or painful backs and hindquarters
therapy, especially with lower back pain in humans.
will routinely have muscle spasm in both brachio-
Osteopathy
cephalicus muscles as well as the caudal scapular
 Osteopathy is a form of manipulative therapy similar
muscles. They are usually very amenable to massage
 as well as heat therapy. Internal disorders must be ruled 
 cannabimimetic effects rather than effects relating
 out as a source of referred pain to muscle regions, such 
as back pain with cystitis.
to endogenous opioid release. Endorphins cannot
be consistently shown to increase with either chiro-
Alternative techniques: Techniques such as
practic or osteopathic treatment. The 'cannabimimetic
 orthobionomy and Bowen therapy are muscle manipu-
tetrad' includes changes in locomotor activity, hypo-
lations that are considered 'alternative'. The Bowen
thermia; catalepsy and anti-nociception. One study
technique uses light pressure applied to specific and
compared osteopathy with sham (no treatment), and
 prescribed locations to stimulate the body's return to
found most of the above descriptors in the osteopathy
normal function. It can be helpfu! in alleviating pain
group. Endogenous cannabinoids were measured,
unresponsive to standard treatment. Historically, physi-
and were suggestive of an increase in the osteopathy-
cal therapy has been developed to rehabilitate and re-
treated group. Osteopathy is also considered an alter-
turn people and animals to structural function. Of course
native therapy.
function and pain can be closely linked, but perhaps
Electrical and vibrational
 physical manipulation can be used to stimulate and
 Scientific data on analgesic electrical and vibrational
drive the nervous system to cause anti-nociception
 therapy is beginning to accumulate, but conclusive
directly. Stimulation of the motor cortex for refractory
information is still scant. Transcutaneous electrical
neuropathic pain is used in humans, though the mecha-
nerve stimulation, pulsed electromagnetic fields,
nism of action is not yet known. Sensitized patients
ultrasound, cold laser therapy, shock wave, ionto-
(with allodynia) seem to be more responsive to this
phoresis, short-wave, microwave and infrasound
form of treatment. The use of muscle stimulation (or
vibrations represent other therapeutic options. How-
 stimulation in specific ways of somatic sensory affer-
ever, most are chosen based on personal experience
ent neurons proximaly along the nerve pathways) may
of the therapist. Indications for use of one versus the
become a method of anti-nociception.
other are not yet well documented.
Chiropractic
Acupuncture
Chiropractic therapy (also known as veterinary spinal
Acupuncture is a form of traditional Chinese medicine.
manipulative therapy) is another physical manipulative
which aids in 'rebalancing' the body through the move-
 therapy that is becoming increasingly popular, espe-
ment of 'chi'. The premise is that a 'rebalanced' body is
 cially for working dogs such as police, hunting and agility
pain-free. The basis of Chinese medicine is the merid-
show dogs. For those unfamiliar with chiropractic
jan system named after internal organs. Connecting
therapy, the most important thing to realize is that the
pathways throughout the body, as yet undefined as
term 'subluxation' has a diferent meaning compared 
with the term used in traditional veterinary medicine.
flow in a healthy body. Small gauge needles (28-35
The lesions are called subluxations, which in chiroprac-
gauge) can be inserted into points along the meridian
system to create local, distant and systemic effects.
the spine. The hypomobility causes a segmental dys-
 Electrical stimulus is often applied to paired needles
function, which can place undue strain on the inter-
for more intense and longer duration of effect. Depend-
vertebral foramina, ligaments, muscles and other
ueipuau pue Aenb asind Koisly juaned aui uo bu!
116
Chapter 11  Pain management Ill: ancillary therapies
 palpation, prescribed points can suppress nausea, stop 
 seizures, reverse bronchoconstriction, raise or lower
 blood pressure and alleviate pain, but there are many
 oiher actions. The metaphors of Chinese medicine are
 not easily adapted to Western paradigms. Western
trained practitioners may be more apt to use acupunc-
ture to stimulate trigger points, tender areas or seg-
mental areas in order to augment musculoskeletal
physical therapy (Figure 11.1).
Electroacupuncture and cold iherapy applied
 during the recovery phase of orthopaedic
surgery.
around the abdomen of pregnant animals because
abortion can be precipitated, nor across tumours
because tumour growth may be augmented. it should
 also not be used near the heart in dogs with pace-
makers. with repeated sessions using similar points,
tolerance can develop to acupuncture. With these
 Acupunciure trigger points in the dog.
caveats, however, an experienced acupuncturist
can be a tremendous provider of analgesia and well-
being to veterinary patients.
Studies have shown that some of the effects are
mediated by central endorphin release, but this is not
Transcutaneous electrical nerve
the sole mechanism of action, Electroacupuncture
stimulation (TENS)
reduces halothane requirements in dogs, and this
TENS is the application of electricity through superfi-
effect cannot be reversed with the opioid antagonist
cial electrodes to promote analgesia. The electrodes
naltrexone. Electroacupuncture can also decrease the
can be positioned across painful joints, over large
inflammation of colitis through beta adrenoreceptor
muscle masses or in the general area of discomfort.
activity. Acupuncture may contribute to inhibitory pain
TENS is easy to use and devoid of major side effects.
pathways by stimulating Aβ fibres. In most cases the
Clinically, TENS can be used at either low frequency
needles do not hurt as they are inserted and the Aβ
(<10 Hz) or high frequency (>50 Hz), as with electro-
(sensory fibre) stimulation may reduce nociception via
 acupuncture. The intensity of the stimuius (amplitude)
the gate control theory of pain, Many diferent mech-
is set to just at or below that which will create a motor
anisms of action are possible, but the exact way
response. At higher amplitudes, it can actually cause
acupuncture works is unlikely to be known for some
pain. When applied under general anaesthesia, TENS
time. The basis is most likely to be neurophysiologi-
can still be effective. TENS can also be useful in the
cal, but the subsequent cascade of effects is currently
 postoperative period. Use in human medicine is very
difficult to define. The complex physiological inter-
common, but the analgesic mechanism of action is not 
actions that promote homeostasis are difficult to cat-
fully understood. The gate control theory is thought to
egorize for each treatment, but research is growing
be the mechanism of action for many of the therapies
exponentially in this field.
using electricity, although other studies indicate that
A trained veterinary acupuncturist can be extremely
release of neurotransmitters is also important. Opiate,
effective in providing analgesia. Postoperative anal-
serotonergic and muscarinic receptors are activated
gesia can be augmented in the recovery phase (Fig-
through the use of TENS and it may also be indirectly
ure 11.2), but as with conventional analgesic therapy,
acting at the level of the spinal cord.
one must remember to protect the surgical sites of
animals who can suddenly feel better. While there are
Electrical fields
points that alone may contribute to pain management,
Electrical fields, magnetic fields and electromagnetic
use with other points in a traditional Chinese medical
fields are thought to have healing or curative effects.
approach may be very beneficial in alleviating pain
Electric fieids have been shown to alleviate several
 and discomfort, and in promoting patient well-being.
types of pain (headaches, stomach aches) in numer-
The meridian system and application of acupunc-
ous human patients. In one study, an electrical field
ture can be studied through various teaching organi-
of 50 Hz with intensity of 17.5 kV/m was applied to
zations. Skill and caution must both be used in the
dogs with brain tumours and with spinal cord injuries,
application of acupuncture: it is contraindicated in ani-
as well as to healthy dogs. The comparison yielded
mals with severe clotting disorders and severe immuno-
significant results. The degree of pain was not meas-
deficiency, and needle placement is avoided in areas
ured, but beta endorphin concentrations in the non-
of infection. Electroacupuncture should not be used
heaithy dogs almost doubled with multiple treaiments.
117
Chapter 11  Pain management ll: ancillary therapies
The intriguing aspect of this study is that the concen-
Homoeopathy
trations in normal dogs did not change with applica-
Homoeopathy is a form of therapy not routinely
tion of the electrical field. This concurs with the often
utilized alone in Western medicine, but is often a
noted premise that many alternative therapies cause
component of integrative medicine utilizing both
the individual to return towards a normal or physiologi-
Western and holistic approaches. The principle of
cally optimal state, and in that regard may not cause
homoeopathy is that disease and symptoms are
changes in normal animals. Electric and electromag-
cured by using diluted and potentized forms of
netic fields may be applied through use of skin
substances that produce symptoms similar to the ill-
 patches, or magnets which can be placed in collars
ness in healthy individuals. Numerous laboratory
 or on bandages or wraps. The use of electric fields
studies, clinical trials and observational studies
Ul eisabieue jo uoisiaoid ul alon lauuiny e Aejd Aew
have been performed, but no single model has been
veterinary patients in the future.
one of a change in solvent after many dilutions of
Laser
the parent compound, as the dilutions may have
Laser light is a source of light of a single wavelength.
almost no original compound, but are still active.
A positive outcome of pain management has been
ranging between 630 and 904 nm and the effective
shown using Arnica montana in trauma and post-
 power range starts at 1-3 mw. Battery-operated units
operative situations. Ruta graveolens has been
will provide an inconsistent source of power, but
used for pain associated with extended immobility
newer units have computer processing which main-
 or structural injury (ligamentous or skeletal), although
tains a more consistent and useful output. The ef-
no studies validate its use. Homoeopathy might
fect is not thermal, but related to photochemical
be an alternative for pain management with minimaf
reactions within cells. The effect for chronic pain
intervention, as there are no known or documented
appears to be significant but short lasting. Low-
side effects, and it is thought to potentiate the indi-
intensity laser light has been shown to promote
vidual's capacity to self-heal.
healing in chronic wounds and very low intensity
laser light (<3 mw) over acupuncture points has
Interventional techniques
been shown to decrease oedema, pain and hyper-
Pain management is difficult in chronic pain situa-
algesia in acute inflammatory, chronic inflammatory
tions, such as metastatic neoplasia. when conven-
and neuropathic pain conditions in rats. Laser light
tional and pharmacological therapies provide
can be applied over wounds, joints, trigger points
inadequate rellef, alternative surgical or other inter-
ventional techniques can be considered. Radio-
Herbal therapy
therapy is thought to decrease cancer pain by not
only decreasing the activity of the neoplasm but
Botanical medicine (also caled phytotherapy) is rou-
by diminishing the activity of the local nociceptive
tinely practised in some areas of the world. Anti-
 microbial and anti-inflammatory effects have been
neurons; radio-ablation is similar. Rhizotomies cut
the nerves returning to the spinal cord, and hence
described and used to treat allergies and infections.
 diminish nociception. Vertebral stabilization dimin-
 as well as to promote wound healing and provide pain
ishes nerve root pain.
relief. Phytotherapy may be considered a form of 
 pharmacoiogical medicine, although most of these
agents are considered to be supplements and
nutraceuticals rather than traditional medicines. Be-
Summary
cause these treatments are administered for efect
 over a period of time, they tend to be used for chronic 
Analgesia can be provided in many ways beyond
 pain syndromes rather than acute pain.
 pharmacological means. Some, such as acupunc-
 More interest is being directed toward validation
of this type of therapy through scientific studies. For
lejnbai ou! peonpou! ag ol buijels pue peqios
instance, green tea has been administered to mice
veterinary undergraduate curricula. As well as
with chronic pain caused by osteoarthritis, and dimin-
being providers of traditional Western medicine,
ished the incidence and severity of the arthritis and
veterinary surgeons should be trained to evaluate
 Subsequent pain. Antipeptide enzymes and the inflam-
critically and apply novel ways to improve their
 matory mediators COX-2, interferon-y and TNF-α were
medical approach; for example, surgeons are now
decreased significantly in the group given green tea.
electrically stimulating the spinal cord to relieve
A comprehensive discussion of this type of therapy
pain unresponsive to pharmacological anaigesia. The
cannot be presented here, but some reviews of vet-
recently discovered fact that oral sugar solutions
erinary herbal therapy have been made and a review
provide anaigesia in neonates, possibly by causing
of the efficacy of analgesic herbs in human medicine
release of endogenous opioids, could be used clini-
has also been written. Caution must be exercised
cally. One must grasp the subtle relationships
when using herbs perioperatively; for example, gar-
between previously reported and apparently unre-
-paag jeoibins asaoui Ae buasub pue obyuje '!!
lated information. One must also assess this infor-
ing. Care must be taken when considering herba!
mation and examine ways that it could be applied
therapy for species in which the use and side effects
in practice; only by using this critical approach can
have not been documented.
advances be made.
118
Chapter 11  Pain management Hll: ancillary therapies
Resources
palliative effect on some clinical symptoms in human patients.
Research Buletin Obihiro University 22,193-199
Harakawa S, Takagi K, Inoue N et al. (2005) Etfects of an electric field
McTimoney Chiropractic Association
on plasma levels of ACTH and beta-endorphin in dogs with tumors
Wallingford
or spinal cord injuries. Journal of Aternative and Compiementary
Medicine 11(5). 788-791
Oxfordshire
HausserK(1999)Chiropractic evaluation andmanagement.Veterinary
OX10 8DJ 
Chinics of North America: Equine Practice 15(1), 195-209
Phone: +44 (0)1491 829211
Huang KC (200o) The Pharmacology of Chinese Herbs. CRC Press.
Fax:+44 (0)1491829492
Boca Raton
Kaster B. Boulahdour H, Barral FG et al. (2005) Pain management in
Email: admin@mctimoney-chiropractic.org
bone metastasis of puimonary origin: new interventional and
metabolic techniques. Revue des Maladies Respiratoires 22(6-2).
Association of British Veterinary Acupuncturists
94-100
Keoung-Woo K, Tae-Wan K, Jun-Ho L et al. (2004) Eiectroacupuncture
(ABVA)
ameliorates experimental colitis induced by acetic acid in the rat.
ABVA Hon. Secretary
Journa/ of Veterinary Science 5(3), 189-195
66A Easthorpe
 the effects of glucose on expressed mu opioid receptors. Anesthesia
Southwell
and Anaigesia 101(t). 64-68
Linderof B and Foreman RD (2006) Mechanisms oi spinal cord
Notts
stimulation in painful syndromes: role of animal rmodeis. Pain
NG25 OHZ
Medicine May-Jun (Suppl 1). S14-26
Email:johnnyboyvet@hotmail.com 
Lucroy MD, Edwards BF and Madewell BR (1999) Low-intensity laser
light-induced closureofachronic wound ina dog.Veterinary Surgery
28(4), 292-295
Association of Chartered Physiotherapists
McPartland JM, Giufrida A, King J et al. (2005) Cannabimismetic effects
specializing in Animal Therapy
of osteopathic maniputative treatment. Journal of American
Osteopathy 105(6), 283-291
 52 Littleham Road
Melzack R and WallPD (1982) The Challenge of Pain. Penguin Books,
Exmouth 
London
Devon
Menefee LA and Monti DA (2005) Nonpharmacologic and complermentary
approaches to cancer pain management. Journal of the American
EX8 2QJ
OsteopathyAssociation 105（11),15-20
Email: bexsharples@hotmail.com
Millis DL, Levine D and Taylor RA (2004). Canine Rehabiiration and
Physical Therapy, 1st edn. wB Saunders, St. Louis
 Norrbrink C and Lundeberg T (2004) Non-pharmacological pain-relieving
American Veterinary Chiropractic Association
therapies in individuais with spinal cord injury: a patient perspective.
442154 E 140 Road
Complementary Therapies in Medicine 12(4), 189-197
NutiC,PeyronR,Garcia-Larreaetal.(2005)Motorcortex stmulatin
Bluejacket, OK 74333
for refractory neuropathic pain: Four year outcome and predictors
USA
of elfficacy. Pain 118. 43-52
Phone: (918)-784-2231
Pauls AL (2002) The Philosophy and History of Ortho-Bionomy. ALP
Publishing, Rossland, BC, Canada
Radhakrishnan R and Sluka K (2003) Spinal muscarinic receptors are
activated during low or high frequency TENs-induced
References and further reading
antihyperalgesia in rats. Neuropharmacology 45, 111t-1119
Radhakrishnan A and Sluka KA (2005) Deep tissue afferents, but
not cutaneous afferents, mediate transcutaneous electrical
Ang-Lee MK. Moss J and Yuan CS (200t) Herbal medicines and
nerve stimulation-induced antihyperalgesia. Journal of Pain 6(10),
perioperative care. Journal of the American Medical Association
673-680
286(2), 208-216
 Schoen AM (2001) Veterinary Acupuncture: Ancient Art to Modern
Bliddal H, Rosetzsky A, Schlichting P et al. (20o0) A randomized,
Medicine, 2nd edn. Mosby. London 
placebo-controlled, cross-over study of ginger extracts and
 Smith PB, Comptan DR. Welch SP et al (1994) The pharmacological
ibuprofen in osteoarthritis.Osteoarthritis andCartilage 8(1). 9-12
BorcherT0mandiv
activity of anandamide. a putative endogenous cannabinoid, in
mice.Journal ofPharmacological ExperimentatTherapeutics 270,
American medicine: the role of botanicals. American Journal of
219-227
Clinical Nutrition72,339-347
Brosseau L, Robinson V, Wells G et al. (2005) Low levellaser therapy
hemodynamic and respiratory effects, and beta-endorphin
(Classes lIl, Hl for treating rheumatoid arthritis.he Cochrane
concentration in spinal fluid and plasma of horses aiter acupuncture
Database of Systematic Reviews 4: Art.No.: CD002049.DOl:
and electroacupuncture. Armerican Journal of Veterinary Research
10.1002/14651858.CD002049.pub2.
63(10). 1435-1442
CarterB(2002) Clientsexperiences of frozen shoulder and its treatment
Tay AA, Tseng CK, Pace NL et al. (1982) Failure of narcotic antagonist
WithBowen technique.Complement Therapies in Nursing and
to alter electroacupuncture modification of halothane anesthesia
Midwifery 8(4).204-210
in tihe dog. Canadian Anaesthesia Society Journa/29(3). 231-235
Chaitow L (1988) Soft-Tissue Manipuiation: APractitioners Guide t0
Thomson M, Al-Quatten KK, Al-Sawan SM et al. (2002) The use of ginger
the Diagnosis and Treatment of SoftTissue Dysfunction and Refex
(Zingiber officinale Rosc.) as a potential anti-inflammatory and
Activity,rdednHealingArtsPressRochesterent
antithrombotic agent. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes, and Essential
Faity Acids 67, 475-478
review ofrandomized placebo controlled double-blind trials.
RheumaticDiseases Clinics of North America 26(t).13-27
state of the art. Journal of Aiternative and Compiementary Medicine
GiulianiA,FernandezMFarinelli M etal.(2004) Verylawlevel lasr
11(5), 813-829
therapy attenuates edema and pain in experimentai models.
Internationar Journat of Tissue Reactions 26(1-2),29-37
 induced arthritis in mice by a polyphenolic iraction from green
 relieve pain: a review of efficacy and adverse effects. Pain
tea. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 96.
Management Nursing 6(4). 145-167
4524-4529
Wynn SG and Marsden S (2003) Manual of Naturar Veterinary Medicine:
Harakawa S, Doge F and Saitco A (2002) Exposure to electric field: its
Science and Tradition, 1st edn. Mosby. London
119
Premedication and sedation
Joanna C. Murrell
Introduction
Counter the effects of other anaesthetic drugs,
e.g. co-administration of atropine with opioids to
 Premedication and sedation are common procedures
prevent bradycardia.
carried out on a daily basis in small animal practice.
Contribute to a smooth and quiet recovery.
The majority of animals are premedicated before
induction of anaesthesia, yet the important role of
 premedication in the anaesthetic regimen as a
Pharmacology
whole is often forgotten: the choice of premedicants 
will have a major impact on the characteristics of
The drugs used should ideally have the following
 the ensuing general anaesthetic. The appropriate
properties:
selection of premedication drugs can significantly
improve intraoperative cardiovascular stability,
 Produce reliable sedation and anxiolysis
 Have minimal effects on the cardiovascular system
 perioperative analgesia and quality of recovery. in
Cause minimal respiratory depression
Produce analgesia
it is important to select drugs based upon the needs
 Reversibility: the ability to reverse the effects of
of the individual patient, rather than using a single
 sedation may be desirable in some circumstances.
regimen for all animals.
 Sedation is often used as an alternative to gen-
No individual drug used for premedication and
eral anaesthesia for minor procedures. There is a
sedation possesses all of these characteristics, and
general perception, particularly amongst pet owners,
therefore combinations of drugs with different proper-
that sedation is safer and therefore preferable to
ties are employed. Provision of balanced' premedi-
 general anaesthesia. However, drugs used for
cation and sedation using combinations of drugs with
 sedation and premedication also have cardiovas-
different specific effects allows the dosages of indi-.
cular and respiratory side effects, while options for
vidual drugs to be reduced, minimizing side effects
the monitoring and support of sedated patients are
while maximizing the reliabiity of the sedation
limited compared with those for animals under gen-
achieved. These combinations commonly utlize the
eral anaesthesia. In this context general anaesthe-
synergism that occurs between different groups of
sia may be safer than heavy sedation for some
sedative drugs, such as between alpha-2 adreno-
high-risk patients.
receptor agonists and opioids, or phenothiazines and
The drugs used for premedication and sedation
 are identical and are discussed interchangeably in
this chapter. Dosage schedules are discussed later
Route of administration
in the chapter.
 Drugs may be given by the intravenous, intramuscular,
subcutaneous and oral routes. The advantages and
disadvantages of each route are shown in Figure 12.1.
Aims of premedication and sedation
The route of administration will also inffuence the time
to peak effect: this is shown in Figure 12.2 (along with
duration of effect).
 Sedation and anxiolysis: quieten or immobilize
 an animal sufficiently to allow a procedure,
 Such as intravenous catheterization, to be 
Drugs commonly used for sedation
carried out. Reduce stress before and during
and premedication
induction of anaesthesia.
Facilitate animal handling: this increases safety
See Figure 12.2. The classes of drug used are as
for animal and personnel during restraint.
follows:
 Contribute to a balanced anaesthetic technique:
reduce the dose of other anaesthetic agents 
 Phenothiazines,e.g. acepromazine,
required for induction and maintenance of
propionylpromazine
anaesthesia
Alpha-2 adrenoreceptor agonists, e.g. xylazine,
 Provision of analgesia.
medetomidine, dexmedetomidine
120
Chapter 12 Premedication and sedation
Xintravenous.
.·
Reliable drug absorption
 Animal is not sedated before handling and drug.
tmmediate onset of action:
 administration - stressful for the animal and animal handlers
 Some drugs should not be given intravenously
Minimal handling required for administration
Maybe painfu whendrug vole islare
Intramuscular
 Drug absorption is more reliable than by
Adinistratonmaybe dificult invry aressive animals
...
subcutaneous route
Delay before onset of peak sedation'
.:.
 Route of choice for most premedicants 
: Subcutaneous
Easy to administer drugs single handedly
Delay before onset of peak effect is greater than for
Adminisration ofalage volume of drug is
 intramuscular route and more variable
not painful
.
 Owners are able to administer sedative drugs orally
Variable onset and duralion of action
 Only oral preparations of acepromazine and
 Sedation achieved following oral administration ot diazepam
diazepam are readily available
 or acepromazine is unpredictable -
Dose range is unpredictable and dependent on the
individual patient 
 Advantages and disadvantages of different routes of administration of premedicant and sedative drugs.
sDrug
Acepromazine
 35-40 minutes i.m.
4-6 hours
. No..
.
No..
↑5-20 minutes i.v.
. Medetomidine
15-20 minutes.i.m....
Sedation: 2-3 hours
Yes - with atipamezole
Yes
2-3 minutes i.v.
I.Analgesia: t hour.**.
:
: 11.5 hours
Yes —with fumazenil
Midazolam
10-15 minutes i.m.':
:.
No
5 minutes i.v.
Diazepam
10-15 minutes i.m.
2hours
 Yes - with fumazenil.
 No.
 5 minutes i.v.
.
Atropine
20-30 minutes i.m.
 Vagal inhibiton: 2-3 hours :
 No
. No.
- 1-2 minutes i.v.
Glycopyrronium :
20-30 minutes i.m:
Vagal inhibition: 2-3 hours
No.
No
2-3 minutes i.v.
.
Methadone,hydromorphone
20-30 minutes i.m.
.2--4 hours
Yes - with naloxone
Yes:
 2-5 minutes i.v.
.
Yes - with naloxone.
Morphine.
20-30.minutes i.m..
 2-4 hours
Not recommended i.v.
.
.........
 Pethidine (meperidine)"
 20-30 minutes i.m. 
1--1.5 hours
Yes - with naloxone
Yes'
....
 Contraindicated i.v.
..
Buprenorphine
30-45 minutes i.m.
6 hours
.....
Yes - with naloxone
Yes
12-15 minutes i.v.
. Butorphanol
20-30 minutes i.m.
1-1.5.hours
Yes - with naloxone
Yes
 2-5 minutes i.v.
 Characteristics of drugs used for sedation and premedication. Note that the duration of action of many of
 approximate guidelines only.
 Benzodiazepines, e.g. diazepam, midazolam
altering effects. Acepromazine is the phenothiazine
Opioids, e.g. morphine, methadone, pethidine
 most commonly used for premedication in small
(meperidine), hydromorphone, butorphanol,
animal practice.
buprenorphine
 Anticholinergics, e.g. atropine, glycopyrronium.
Sedation
Acepromazine causes sedation and anxiolysis that is
initially dose-dependent. Increasing the dose from
Phenothiazines
 0.01 mg/kg to 0.05 mg/kg will usually improve seda-
tion. With larger doses the degree of sedation is un-
 Phenothiazines are dopamine (D1 and D2) receptor
changed, whereas side effects are increased and
antagonists, having caiming, anti-psychotic, mood-
duration of action prolonged. In comparison with the
121
Chapter 12  Premedication and sedation
sedation produced by alpha-2 adrenergic agonists,
Other
Giant breeds of dog are considered to be 'more sen-
reliable. However, the quality and reliability of seda-
sitive' to the effects of acepromazine. This is prob-
tion can be improved by combination with an opioid
ably a reflection of relative overdosing of large dogs
(neuroleptanaigesia). Addition of an opioid also
when dose is calculated according to bodyweight
provides analgesia, which is advantageous since ace-
rather than to allometric scaling.
promazine itself is not an analgesic. In order to maxi-
 Some Boxers are uniquely sensitive to even small
mize sedation, the animal should be left undisturbed
 doses of acepromazine, which has been attributed to
for 30-40 minutes after administration. In common
orthostatic hypotension or vasovagal syncope in this
with most sedative drugs, animals that appear sedated 
breed. Although acepromazine is not contraindicated
after acepromazine will often wake up if roused or
in Boxers, it is not the premedicant of choice in this
excited and therefore quiet handling during induction
breed. A very low dose (<0.01 mg/kg) is recommended
 of anaesthesia is necessary.
and animals should be monitored carefully after
administration.
 Acepromazine has an ant-emetic action and a
Other pharmacological effects
recent study in dogs demonstrated that acepromazine
given prior to opioid administration decreased the in-
Cardiovascular system
cidence of vomiting. This is attributed to a central de-
Acepromazine is an antagonist at alpha-1 adreno
pressant effect on the chemoreceptor trigger zone and
receptors. Administration can therefore cause peri-
vomiting centre. Acepromazine has weak anti-hist-
pheral vasodilation and potentially a fall in arterial
amine efects, so its use for premedication prior to
blood pressure. This is usually well tolerated in
intradermal skin testing is not recommended.
healthy animals, and changes in heart rate after
acepromazine administration to normal animals are
minimal, reflecting a limited effect on blood pressure.
Alpha-2adrenoreceptor agonists
However, in animals with shock or cardiovascular
disease this vasodilation can be disastrous, leading
Alpha-2 adrenoreceptor agonists are potent sedative
to cardiovascular collapse. Aggressive fluid therapy
and analgesic drugs. Xylazine was the first to be used
with a balanced electrolyte solution is the primary
in veterinary practice but it has now been largely
treatment of phenothiazine-induced hypotension.
superseded by medetomidine, the most selective
Acepromazine is long lasting and non-reversible: it
alpha-2 adrenoreceptor agonist currently available.
is therefore advisable to avoid administration to
Compared with medetomidine, xylazine is relatively
     
unselective for the alpha-2 receptor (alpha-2:alpha-t
promise is anticipated as a potential complication of
receptor selectivity binding ratios of medetomidine and
anaesthesia and surgery.
xylazine are 1620:1 and 160:1 respectively);: the ago-
nist effect of xylazine at alpha-1 receptors in the heart
Heart rhythm: Acepromazine is considered to have
-seaoipleo peonpeu aul loy junoooe ol peisebbns s!
anti-arrhythmic properties caused primarily by acting
cular safety of xylazine compared with medetomidine.
as an antagonist at alpha-1 adrenoreceptors in the
The superior selectivity of medetomidine makes t the
heart. The clinical relevance of this anti-arrhythmic
alpha-2 agonist of choice for use in small animals.
effect in small animals is unknown.
 Medetomidine is an equal mixture of two optical
enantiomers, dexmedetomidine and levomedeto-
Respiratory system
midine. The dextrorotatory isomer is the active ingre-
Clinical doses have litle effect on respiratory func-
dient and has gained more interest in human anaes-
tion, although higher doses can cause respiratory
 thesiology over medetomidine. Dexmedetomidine is
depression, particularly when given in combination
likely to become available on the veterinary market in
with opioids.
the near future. Proposed advantages of dexmedeto-
midine over medetomidine include improved analge-
Body temperature
sia and a reduced requirement for drug metabolism
Acepromazine is associated with a fall in body tem-
because only active enantiomer is presented to the iver
perature due to a resetting of thermoregulatory mecha-
 for metabolism. It is currently uncertain if it is clinically
nisms, combined with increased heat loss from the
advantageous to use dexmedetomidine instead of
periphery due to peripheral vasodilation. Measures
medetomidine in small animals.
to support body temperature should be initiated im-
mediately after administration of acepromazine in or-
Sedation
der to minimize changes in body temperature.
Medetomidine sedation is profound and dose-related.
However, similar to acepromazine, a plateau effect is
Seizure threshold
reached and beyond this point further increases in
The effect of acepromazine on seizure threshold is
dose prolong the duration of effect rather than increase
contentious. Some people recommend that acepro-
the intensity of sedation. Synergism between aipha-2
aoui ul o Asdalide ym slewue ui paploae ag auizu
agonists and opioids or benzodiazepines means that
at an increased risk of convulsions, such as patients
 combining medetomidine with either of these agents
Undergoing myelography. There are imited data in
 will lead to more profound sedation, allowing the dose
animals to support these recommendations.
 of medetomidine to be reduced.
122
Chapter 12 Premedication and sedation
Characteristics of general anaesthesia following
Phase 2: The peripheral vasoconstriction induced by
premedication with alpha-2 agonists
 medetomidine lasts for approximately 20 minutes and
Premedication with alpha-2 agonists has a significant
in phase 2 blood pressure returns to normal or slightly
influence on the characteristics of the ensuing anaes-
below normal. Despite the reduction in blood pres-
thesia. This must be remembered in order to use these
Sure back to approximately normal values, heart rate
drugs safely and the following points should be
remains low throughout the period of medetomidine
recognized:
administration. Phase 2 bradycardia is mediated cen-
trally as a result of the reduction in sympathetic nerv-
 Significant drug-sparing effect: the dose of
ous system tone. Medetomidine causes a fall in
 sympathetic tone via an effect at presynaptic alpha-2
medetomidine is dramatically reduced. Failure to 
 adrenoreceptors located in the CNS and this causes 
recognize this can easily lead to anaesthetic
a prolonged reduction in heart rate.
 Overdose. The concentration of inhalant agent
required for maintenance of anaesthesia is
Cardiac output: Alpha-2 agonists cause a reduction
similarly reduced (by up to 70% for halothane
in cardiac output. The precise aetiology of this reduc-
and isoflurane)
tion is unknown and is considered to be multifactorial.
 Intravenous induction agents must be given
The increase in afterload resulting from peripheral
slowly and to effect: medetomidine slows the
 vasoconstriction is thought to be a contributing factor.
injection site to brain blood circulation time such
 In animals with a healthy, normally functioning cardio-
that it takes longer to see the peak central
vascular system, the reduction in cardiac output is not
nervous system (CNS) depressant effect of the
associated with reduced oxygen delivery to central
intravenous agent. This can inadvertently lead to
 organs, namely the CNS, heart, kidney and liver. How-
anaesthetic overdose if the intravenous agent is
given too quickly
the reduction in cardiac output following medetomidine
Alpha-2 agonists have potent anaigesic
properties: premedication with medetomidine
tion due to reduced oxygen delivery. Alpha-2 agonists
can contribute significantly to intraoperative
have a very limited margin of cardiovascular safety
analgesia. This can result in a very stable plane
 and therefore are only suitable for use for sedation or
of anaesthesia during the maintenance phase,
premedication in animals with a normally functioning 
reducing swings in depth of anaesthesia
cardiovascular system.
associated with changes in the level of 
intraoperative surgical stimulation.
Respiratory system
Minimal effects on the respiratory system are seen
Other pharmacological effects
uoqen pue uabixo jejaje pue sjewue Auneay us
dioxide tensions (concentrations) remain within normal
limits. Profound sedation after medetomidine can lead 
Cardiovascular system
'shop oeydaoauoeig ue uoonisgo Aemne laddn ol
Medetomidine produces a biphasic effect on blood
pressure (initial increase followed by a return to nor-
Renal system
mal or slightly below normal values). Heart rate is
 Urine production is increased due to a reduction in 
decreased throughout the period of alpha-2 agonist 
 vasopressin and renin secretion. This is not of clinical
administration, and normal expected heart rates are
significance in healthy animals.
45-60 and 100-115 beats per minute for dogs and
cats, respectively.
Pancreas
Endogenous insulin secretion is reduced, leading to
Heart rate: The characteristic changes in heart rate
 a transient hyperglycaemia. This is not of sufficient
result from the stimulation of alpha-2adrenoreceptors
 magnitude to result in an osmotic diuresis in dogs
located around peripheral blood vessels and in the
and cats.
CNS and can be divided temporally into two phases.
It is important to understand the origin of these
Liver
 changes in order to use alpha-2 agonists safely
Both hepatic blood ffow and the rate of metabolism of
and effectively for sedation and pre-anaesthetic
 other drugs by the liver are reduced. This is not of clini-
medication.
cal significance in healthy animals, but medetomidine
 should be avoided in animals with liver disease.
 Phase 1: The immediate response of the cardiovas-
 cular system to medetomidine is an increase in blood
Body temperature
pressure, caused by peripheral vasoconstriction via
Although medetomidine has a direct depressant ef-
activation of alpha-2 receptors located in the periph-
fect on the thermoregulatory centre, peripheral vaso-
eral vasculature. The mechanism of vasoconstriction
 constriction tends to reduce peripheral heat loss. As
is similar to that caused by activation of the sympa-
a consequence it can be easier to maintain normo-
thetic nervous system during the fight or flight (stress)
 thermia during the perioperative period than in ani-
response. The increase in blood pressure, however,
mals given acepromazine. In the author's experience,
causes a reflex reduction in heart rate, mediated by
animals tend to stay warmer during medetomidine/
the baroreceptor reflex.
isoflurane anaesthesia.
123
Chapter 12 Premedication and sedation
Emesis
Routine co-administration of atropine and
Vomiting is frequently seen in cats and dogs after intra-
medetomidine
muscular or subcutaneous administration due to acti-
When alpha-2 agonists were first introduced into small
vation of central alpha-2 receptors. Alpha-2 agonists
animal practice, there was a trend for the routine co-
are contraindicated in animals with a suspected
administration of atropine to offset the bradycardia. It
 oesophageal foreign body where emesis may result
is now recognized that the routine co-administration
 In further tissue damage.
of atropine and medetomidine is detrimental. The ini-
tial reduction in heart rate is physiological and a re-
Reversal of alpha-2 agonists with
sponse to an increase in blood pressure. Obtunding
atipamezole
this normal physiological response results in tachy-
 Aipha-2 agonist sedation and analgesia are rapidly
cardia and greater hypertension. The heart is required
reversed by the administration of a specific alpha-2
pesaydued paiosuososea e psuiebe leise, peag ol
 adrenoreceptor antagonist such as atipamezole. Re-
vascular bed, increasing myocardial oxygen consump-
coveries following intramuscular administration of
tion. There is also less diastolic time for adequate
myocardial perfusion. This can lead to ventricular
Intravenous administration of atipamezole usually
arrhythmias and potential cardiovascular collapse.
thesia or sedation and this route is not recommended.
Management of extremely 'low' heart
It is important to ensure that analgesia is supplemented,
rates during anaesthesia following
if necessary, with different classes of druigs (such as
medetomidine
 opioids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
before reversal by atipamezole. Preliminary findings
Atropine
from a recent study into anaesthetic-related mortality
Heart rates during anaesthesia affer premedication
and morbidity in small animal practice (Confidential
with medetomidine are lower than after premedica-
Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities 
tion with other sedatives such as acepromazine. How-
CEPSAF) have identified the recovery period to be of
ever, should the heart rate fall below the 'expected'
relatively high risk because animals are often poorly
range following medetomidine (45-60 and 100--115
monitored and observed, despite still being under the
beats/minute for dogs and cats, respectively) and clini-
influence of the cardiovascular andrespiratory depres-
 cal monitoring suggests that the bradycardia is hav-
sant effects of anaesthetic agents. Shortening the
ing a negative impact on blood pressure, action should
length of the recovery period using atipamezole can
be taken to increase the heart rate back to within the
contribute to improved patient safety during the
 perioperative period. Yohimbine and tolazoline are com-
heart rate during anaesthesia and therefore other
 mercially available (in some countries) alpha-2 antago-
causative factors, such as too-deep' anaesthesia due
nists that may also be used as reversal agents after
to overdose of a volatile agent, should first be ad-
medetomidine or other alpha-2 agonist sedation. Com-
dressed. However, in cases where the excessive
 pared with atipamezole, these antagonists have a lower
bradycardia appears to be primarily medetomidine
alpha-2:alpha-1 receptor selectivity.
mediated, a low dose of atropine (2.5-5 μug/kg, slowly
i.v.) can be used to shift the heart rate back into the
Patient selection
expected normal range for medetomidine patients.
 Medetomidine affords many advantages for premedi-
Aiejes bnp eui asn ci sepo u! ng 'uonepas pue uoe
Ketamine
and effectively in small animals, it should only be ad-
Administration of a low dose of ketamine is an alter-
ministered to healthy animals. It should not be used
native strategy to manage extremely low heart rates
in the following patient groups:
 during anaesthesia following medetomidine: ketamine
 has sympathomimetic properties. Therefore, in phase
 Cardiovascular disease (e.g. mitral regurgitation)
 2 of the cardiovascular response to medetomidine,
 Systemic disease causing deterioration in
when the bradycardia is primarily due to a central re-
cardiovascular function (e.g. toxaemia)
duction in sympathetic tone, a low dose of ketamine
Liver disease
(0.1-0.2 mg/kg, slowly i.v.) can also be efective to
 Geriatric animals: these patients do not have
increase heart rate. lt is important first to exclude other
 the normal functional organ reserve of healthy
causative factors of a low heart rate. Ketamine may
adult animals
also be used as a second-line approach in patients
Very young animals: the physiological effects of
where atropine has been ineffective. It is important to
medetomidine in puppies and kittens are
allow sufficient time for a response to atropine (3-4
unknown. Medetomidine is not the premedicant 
minutes) before ketamine is given.
 or sedative agent of choice in animals less than
12 weeks of age
Partial reversal of medetomidine during
Diabetes mellitus: such patients often have
anaesthesia by the administration of a
multiple organ disease, which, in combination 
low dose of atipamezole
with the effect of medetomidine on blood
Administration of a low dose of atipamezole (5-20 μg/kg
glucose concentration, means that
to effect, i.v.) is an alternative technique to reduce any
medetomidine is not the ideal premedicant or 
adverse effects of medetomidine during anaesthesia,
sedative drug for animals with diabetes melitus.
such as an excessive reduction in heart rate.
124
Chapter 12  Premedication and sedation
Atipamezole will concurrently antagonize medetomidine
in combination with other sedatives. Many of these
sedation and analgesia, and therefore administration
protocols combine a benzodiazepine with an opioid
may be associated with a reduction in depth of anaes-
because both classes of drugs have few negative
thesia. Intraoperatively, this must be managed promptly
effects on haemodynamics.
by co-administration of an intravenous anaesthetic
agent such as propofol. There are no clinical studies to
Other pharmacological effects
 support the use of atipamezole intraoperatively and this
technique should be used with caution.
Cardiovascular and respiratory systems
Benzodiazepines have minor effects on both of these
systems. This is one of their major advantages and
Benzodiazepines
these drugs tend to be used as premedicants in ani-
mals with cardiovascular compromise. Synergism
 Diazepam and midazolam are the benzodiazepines
used most commonly in small animal practice. A
may enhance respiratory depression from other drugs
comparison of the physical properties and pharma-
when used in combination.
cological effects of these two drugs is shown in
Figure 12.3. They exert their main sedative effects
Anticonvulsant effects
through depression of the limbic system. Their action
 Benzodiazepines are commonly used to manage con-
Is thought to be through activation of a specific
vulsions, particularly as a first-line intervention for
benzodiazepine receptor, part of the gamma-
animals presenting in status epitepticus.
aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor complex. GABA
is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the CNS.
Reversal of benzodiazepines with
These drugs do not have analgesic properties, ex-
flumazenil
cept to reduce skeletal muscle spasm. Zolazepam
The CNS effects of benzodiazepines can be effectively
is a benzodiazepine derivative that is only available
antagonized by the administration of the benzodiaze-
in combination with tiletamine. This preparation
 pine receptor antagonist flumazenil. When given intra-
(Telazol or Zoletil) is a short-acting anaesthetic
venously it will rapidly reverse all agonist effects of
agent in cats and dogs. The pharmacological effects 
benzodiazepines. This drug is expensive, but low doses
of zolazepam and tiletamine are similar to ketamine
(0.01-0.03 mg/kg) are often adequate to reverse
combined with diazepam (see Chapter 13).
ceiving high doses of benzodiazepines for sedation.
spioido
Preparation
Water-soluble, can
Insoluble in water,.usually.
be injected
solubilized in propylene
Opioids are commonly incorporated into premedica-
I intramuscularly and.
 glycol, although an eraulsion 
tion regimens to provide analgesia and to improve
intravenously
 formulation is available.
the reliability and intensity of the sedation achieved
without causing pain.
Propylene glycai preparation
 foliowing combination with the primary sedative drug.
! or irritation 
 causes pain on injection and
 thrombophlebitis when given
The choice of opioid will depend on the degree of
 intravenously. Unpredictable 
analgesia needed, the speed of onset of the drug's
absorption after
action and the tength of action required. Generally,
 intramuscular administration 
longer-acting opioid agents, such as morphine,
 methadone, hydromorphone and buprenorphine, are
Length of
Metabolized in liver;
 Metabolized in liver;
used as premedicants. Butorphanol provides poor
metabolites are.
 metabolites are active, so
metabolism 
 inactive, so .
analgesia compared with that provided by these other
risk of accumulation and
：
midazolami is.
 prolonged action when given.
opioids, but is useful to enhance sedation provided
....
 shorter. acting than.
repeatedly :'...
by either acepromazine or medetomidine (e.g. for
 diazepam with less.
diagnostic imaging).
..
：
. risk of accumulation-
 Pharmacological effects
Clinical use
Benzodiazepine of
Give propylene glycol.
choice foruse in
 A more detailed description of opioid pharmacology
preparation slowly
：
 small animals :
intravenously; preterably
can be found in Chapter 9.
with free-running fluids.
Analgesia
 Comparison of midazolam and diazepam.
 Depending on the opioid chosen, different intensities 
of analgesia can be obtained. Opioids are a key ele-
ment of perioperative pain control.
Sedation
Sedation
 Benzodiazepines administered alone produce mini-
The sedative effect of opioids is usually dose- and
 mal or no sedation in healthy cats and dogs, and may
drug-dependent. Sedation from phenothiazines and
even cause excitation due to loss of learned inhibi-
alpha-2 agonists is enhanced when they are combined 
 tory behaviour. Benzodiazepines are therefore given
with opioids.
125
Chapter 12 Premedication and sedation
Other pharmacological effects
Reduction of salivary and bronchial secretions
Blockage of the effects of vagal stimulation
Cardiovascular system
 Blockage of the effects of drugs that stimulate
Opioids have few negative effects on haemodynam-
ics. They can cause a reduction in heart rate through
opioids.
stimulation of the vagal nerve, which can be managed 
by co-administration of an anticholinergic.
Routine premedication with an anticholinergic is
unnecessary in current anaesthetic practice. Modern
Respiratory system
volatile agents are not irritant to the airway and do
Opioids such as methadone, morphine, hydromor-
not cause excessive salivary and bronchial secretions.
phone and buprenorphine do not cause clinically sig-
 Pre-emptive administration of an anticholinergic be-
nificant respiratory depression in animals at the dose
fore stimulation of the vagal nerve may cause tachy-
rates normally used.
cardia. Although high doses of opioids may cause
bradycardia, it is not aiways necessary to manage this
Gastrointestinal system
by administration of an anticholinergic. Therefore,
Morphine and hydromorphone directly stimulate the
 anticholinergics are normally given if required rather
vomiting centre and animals sedated or premedicated
than routinely as a part of the premedication protocol.
with morphine and hydromorphone often vomit shortly
after their administration. This effect is less apparent
(or not evident at al) when morphine or hydromor-
Drug combinations
phone is used postoperatively for management of
perioperative pain.
Acepromazine + opioid
Opioids stimulate the sphincters of the gastro-
intestinal tract causing an overall action that is consti-
 Commonly used for premedication of both cats
pating; increased intestinal peristalsis tends to combat 
and dogs.
this effect. When animals are anaesthetized for gastro-
 Degree of sedation is dose-dependent, but
intestinal endoscopy. pyloric constriction after opioid
Usually only light sedation is achieved.
premedication may make passage of an endoscope
 Sedation is usually inadequate for complex
through the pylorus from the stomach to the duode-
num more challenging.
 Consider cardiovascular effects of
acepromazine: unsuitable for animals that are in
shock or have severe cardiovascular
Anticholinergic agents
compromise.
Anticholinergic agents antagonize the muscarinic ef-
Medetomidine + opioid
fects of acetylcholine and historically have been used
in premedication regimens to prevent the unwanted
Potent, reliable sedation in both cats and dogs.
effects of stimulation of the parasympathetic nervous
 Premedication prior to general anaesthesia.
system by anaesthetic agents or surgery. The two
 Suitable for sedation for invasive procedures
agents commonly used in small animal practice are
(such as ear examination) and radiography
atropine and glycopyrronium, and a comparison of
where the animal needs to be immobile.
their properties is shown in Figure 12.4.
Consider cardiovascular effects of medetomidine
Aims of premedication with an anticholinergic are
- any evidence of cardiovascular or systemic
as follows:
disease is a contraindication for use.
CNS action
Able to cross the blood-brain barrier and placenta
A quaternary ammonium compound and highly polar,
 therefore lirmited difusion across the blood-brain barier and
 placenta
Routes of administration
latravenous, intramuscular, subcutaneous
Intravenous,intramuscular, subcutaneous
Folowing intravenous administration atropine may
Initialincrease invagal tonefollowing intravenousinjection
cause an initial increase in vagal tone associated
 is less likely to occur compared with atropine
 with a reduction in heart rate. The classic 
 parasympatholytic action occurs secondarily
Action on the pupil
 Pupil dlation -- may impair vision which can 
No effect on the pupil
 contribute to poor recoveries in cats 
Duration of action
 Varies between species and dose-dependent.
Longer duration of actin than atropine. Vagal inhibition
Vagal inhibition wilast for approximately 1-2 hours
lastsorntisiagguefetmaersist f
7hours
Comparison of atropine and glycopyrronium.
126
Chapter 12  Premedication and sedation
Medetomidine + benzodiazepine
Tiletamine + zolazepam (Telazol or
Zoletil)
More potent sedation than when medetomidine
is given alone.
 Preparation is an equal mixture (weight to
Useful combination for sedation for procedures
weight of tiletamine and zolazepam.
such as hip radiography.
Similar to a diazepam or midazolam and
ketamine combination.
See above and Chapter 13 for guidelines on
Medetomidine + ketamine
clinical use.
Medetomidine prevents CNS excitation from
Propofol
ketamine.
 Depending on the dose of ketamine
Low doses of propofol intravenously can be
administered, this combination wil provide
used to provide 'sedation' in cats and dogs for
heavy sedation/general anaesthesia for invasive
short procedures.
short procedures.
Sedation produced by propofol, although
Addition of an opioid, such as buprenorphine, to
this combination will allow doses of the other
dose-dependent, is significant and the distinction
jojodo.d pue yonepas ljodoid uaemlag
drugs to be reduced.
 anaesthesia is minimal.
Recoveries from anaesthesia following this
combination can be very excitable in dogs.
Maximizing the sedation achieved by a
The effects of ketamine during recovery are
present in the cat but usually acceptable.
particular drug combination
 Following short procedures it is important to wait
at least 45 minutes before reversing the effects 
 Ensure that the animal is left in a quiet
of medetomidine, otherwise the excitation effecis
environment following drug administration.
of ketamine are unmasked.
ideally place cats and dogs in separate rooms.
Do not disturb the animal until sufficient time
 See also Chapter 13 (intravenous anaesthetics)
has elapsed for drugs to have reached their 
peak effect.
Opioid + benzodiazepine
 Darkening the environment can lead to improved
sedation.
 Minimal negative effects on the cardiovascular
When the animal is sedated, ensure that it is
 ainpaooid eui buunp Ajeinb pue Ajueb paipuey
dogs with cardiovascular compromise.
or induction of anaesthesia. This helps to
Degree of sedation is dependent on the dose
prevent sudden arousal from sedation.
and individual patient - animals with severe 
systemic disease usually become more sedated
 than healthier patients.
Choosing the right premedicant
Very young animals tend to become more
combination for the patient
sedated than adults.
Combination is not optimal for use in cats.
Sedation is unreliable and excitation may occur.
Factors that influence the choice of premedicants
include:
Benzodiazepine + kelamine
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA)
classification of the patient (see Chapter 2)
 Benzodiazepine prevents CNS excitation from
Species and breed of the patient
ketamine.
Temperament of the patient 
Useful for sedating cats when heavy sedation
Age of the patient
is required.
 Reason for anaesthesia and procedure to be
With higher doses of ketamine, general
carried out
 anaesthesia can be induced (see Chapter 13)
 Degree of pain expected from the procedure.
Combination is cardiovascularly stable and is
useful for cats in which the administration of
The ASA status of the patient can be used as a
acepromazine or medetomidine is undesirable.
basis to build protocols for premedication and seda-
Caution should be exercised in cats with
tion of animals in clinical practice. It can be a practi-
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The positive
cal way to introduce some standardization into
chronotropic effects of ketamine may result in
tice setting while still taking the needs of individual
of a hypertrophic myocardium.
patients into consideration. The following section de-
 Difficult to avoid ketamine-induced behavioural
scribes premedication or sedation protocols that are
 changes in recovery. Animals are often
suitable for dogs or cats of different ASA classifica-
disorientated for the first few hours of the
tion status. Dosage schedules are shown in Figures 
recovery period.
12.5 and 12.6
127
Chapter t2 Premedication and sedation
Drug combination-
.
Acepromazine:
/ Methadone (0.2-0.5 mg/kg).
1.
i.m, or i.v.
Cat and dog·
ASA13patientsdepending
(0.03-0.05.mg/kg).
/ Morphine (0.2-0.5 mg/kg)..
I i.m.
 Cat and dog 
 on assessment of.
/Hydromerphone (0.05-0.15 mg/kg)
i.m. or i.v.
Cat and dog
 cardiovascular function Use
/Pethidine (meperidine) (4-5 mg/kg)
i.m.
Cat and diog
I lower dose of acepromazine in
/Buprenorphine (20 μg/kg)
i.v., i.m., s.C.
Cat and dog
↑ ASA 2-3 patients. Use lower
/Butorphano (0.2-0.4 mg/kg)
i.v, i.m., s.c.
Cat and dog
dose range of drugs when
given intravenously
Medetomidine.
/Buprenorphine (20 μg/kg)
i.m. or i.v.
Cat and dog.
ASA 1-2 patients.
(10-20 μg/kg)
Butorphanal (.2-0.4mg/kg)
i.m. or i.v,
Cat and dog
Cardiovasctar function must
/Hydromorphone(0.1mg/kg)
 im. or i.v.
Dop pue 1eO 
/Morphine (0.1-0.2mg/kg)
I be normal.
i.m.
Cat and dog
/Methadone (0.10.2 mg/kg)
i.rm. oOr t.v.
Cat and dog.
Use lower doses iv.
Medetomidine.
/Midazolam (0.2-0.3 mg/kg)
i.m. or i.v. -use lower
600
/ iazepam (.2-0.3mg/kg).
ASA 1-2 patients.
[10-20 μg/kg] :
 dose i.v.
I Dog.
Cardiovasclar functionmust
:.
be normal. Useful for 
non-painful procedures such
 as diagnostic imaging
Midazolam
Methadone (0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
im. or iy.
：
 Dog
...
ASA 3-5
(0.3-0.4.mg/kg)
/Morphine (0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
i,m.
...
Dog
.Good cardiovauar stabit..
/Hydromorphone(0.050.15mgkg)
I.iv. or i.m.
Dog, rarely cat
Midazolam
/ Ketamine (5-10 mg/kg)
：:
 i.m. or i.v.- use lower
Cat
ASA 2-4. Avoid in patients with
(0.2-0.3 mg/kg).
 dose i.v.
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Higher dose of ketamine will
 induce anaesthesia
: Zolazepam + tletamine:
Available as a proprietary mixture
i.m. or E.y. -use lower
Cat anddog
 As above for midazolam!.
(Telazol or Zoleti)
 dose i.y.
ketamine mixture. Recovery
Dose range for premedication.
can be stormy in dogs.
3-6mg/kg
Morphine '.
im.
 Cat and.dog 
ASA 4-5
(0.2-0.5 mg/kg).
：
Use lower end of
Young animals'
Methadone
i.m. or i.v,.
dose range and
(0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
 intramuscular route
Hydromorphone'
i.m. or i.v.
in cats'
(0.05~0.1 mg/kg)
 Drug combinations used for premedication in cats and dogs
Houte of adt
Sedation not
Drug
Drug2
Acepromazine
/Methadone (0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
i.v. or i,mh.
Dogs: higher doses
Will provide light sedation in
(0.03-0.05 mg/kg)
Morphine (0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
i.m.
of opioids will
 cals and dogs. Do not expect
Pethidine(45mgkgasabe
i.m.
provide greaier.
 animals to become recumbent -
/ Buprenorphine (20 μg/kg)
i.m. or i.v.
sedation'
/Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg)
t.m. or i.y.
/Hydromorphone (0.1-0.2mg/kg）
Cats: use low to.
i.m. or .v.
mid dose range of.
Use lower doses i.v.
opioids
Medetomidine
/Buprenorphine (20 μg/kg)
i.m. ori.v.
Dogs and cats .
Higher doses of medetomidine *
(20-40 μg/kg) 
Butorphanol(0.2-0.4mg/kg)
 Use lower doses i.v.
will provide more reliabie and 
Hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg)
 profound sedation. Expect
 animals to become.recumbent.
Usefulfor invasive painfu
 procedures such as renmoval of
grass seeds from the ear canai
jo alnou bupiebai uoewsou lol s'zl ainoiy aas) sieo pue shop ul uogepes joj pasn suoeuiquoo bnia
administration and patient selection). (continues)
128
Chapter 12 Premedication and sedation
：
.
Drug.combin
Route of administration
Sedationnotes
1Species notes.
：
Drug 1
Drug2
/ Midazolam (0.3 mg/kg)
Dogs
 Medetomidine
i.m, or i.v.
 Higher doses of medetomidine 
[(20-40 μg/kg)
/ Diazepam (0.3 mgkg)
Use lower coses i.y.
 wif provide more reliable and
：
 protound sedation. Expect 
I animals to bacome recumbent.
 Degree of analgesia is less 
 than when medetomidine is
combined with an opioid
：
Midazolam
/Methadone (0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
i.m. or i.v.
Dogs
Degree of sedation wil depend
(0.4-0.5 mg/kg)
/ Morphine (0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
i.m.
 on the heaith and terperament
/Hydromorphone (0.1-0.15 mg/kg)
i.m. or i.v,
 af the palient. May be able to
 carry out some invasive
 procedures if the animal is
：
 handled patienty and quietly
Midazolam
/Ketamine (5-10 mg/kg)
1.m. ori.v. - use lower
Cats
 Expect profound sedationlight 
: (0.2-0.3 mg/kg)
doses i.v.
general anaesthesia
 Zolazepam + tiletamine
Available as a proprietary mixture
i.m. or i.v. - use lower
Dogs and cats
As above for midazolamy
[Telazol or Zoleill) 
doses i.v.
kelamine mixture. Recovery
Dose range fior sedation/short duration
can be stormy in dogs
 general anaesthesia 9-13 mg/kg
Morphine
i.m.
Dogs and cats
Mild sedation only. Do not
(0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
Use lower end of
 expect animal to become
Methadone
i.m. Dr i.v.
dose range and
recumbent 
(0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
 intramuscular route 
Hydromorphone
1.m, or i.v.
in cats 
(0.1-0.2 mg/kg)
 (continued) Drug combinations used for sedation in dogs and cats (see Figure 12.5 for information regarding 
 route of administration and patient seiection).
：
Dogs
buprenorphine, a partial agonist, usually
ASA1
analgesia. Medetomidine and hydromorphone is
also a good choice. Full agonists, such as
Combination of either acepromazine or
morphine and methadone, should be combined
medetomidine with an opioid: the choice of
with acepromazine for procedures that are
opioid is determined by the requirement for
expected to be painful. The comparative
intraoperative analgesia. Medetomidine is a
properties of acepromazine and medetomidine
potent analgesic, so combination with
are shown in Figure 12.7.
Acepromazine.".
Medetomtdine
Sedation.
Less reliable than medetoraidine, improved by
Reliable sedation, improved by combination with an opioid.
 addition of an opioid 
 Analgesia'
No analgesia
Potent analgesia 
：
Cardiovascular system'
Vasodilation and possible hypotension, minimal
Decrease in cardiac output that is of minimal significance in
 signicance in healthy anieals 
the cardiovascular system compared with acepromazine
Respiratory system
I Minimal effect 
Minimal effect
": Drugj-sparing efftect 
Limaited (approx. 25%)
Potent drug-sparing effect: improved balance of anaesthesia
. Background .
 Limited -
Tends to prevent big swings in depth of anaesthesia in
' anaesthesia/analgesia'
 response to changing surgical stirmulation 
:Body.temperature.
Rapid drop in body temperature due to peripheral
jenauduad ol anp pidel ssel s aineadual Apoq u ned
vasodilation
vasoconstriction
.Reversibility
Not reversible. Length of action approx .6 hours 
Reversible (atipamezole)
 Comparison of acepromazine and medetomidine.
129
Chapter 12 Premedication and sedation
ASA2
(5 mg/kg i.m. with midazolam 0.3 mg/kg) wil
usually provide profound sedation allowing easy
Combination of acepromazine and an opioid.
intravenous access for induction of anaesthesia.
 Medetomidine combined with an opioid is
Higher doses of ketamine (10 mg/kg i.m.) will 
appropriate for some ASA 2 animals, depending 
result in anaesthesia, allowing intubation and a
on the underlying reason for this ASA
 direct progression to inhalant maintenance of
classification (see under 'Patient.selection' in
anaesthesia. Ketamine should be avoided in
medetomidine section).
cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy because
of its positive chronotropic effects (see Chapter
ASA3
13). Premedication with ketamine will usually
cause behavioural changes during recovery.
 Acepromazine (low dose) and opioid
combination may be appropriate as long as
ASA 4
there is no underlying cardiovascuiar disease.
Benzodiazepine and opioid combination: useful
 Benzodiazepine and ketamine combination.
for premedication and sedation of dogs with
 Benzodiazepine and opioid combination.
either cardiovascular disease or systemic
Opioid alone: in cats that have a quiet
abnormalities that affect cardiovascular function.
temperament, sedation with an opioid alone (e.g.
Better sedation can be expected in animals
o eenbepg eg Aew (euydiow so euudiouaidng
provide mild sedation. This can be useful in cats
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy where
ASA4
ketamine is contraindicated.
 Benzodiazepine and opioid combination.
ASA5
Recommendations are as for dogs. Administration of
ASA5
a low dose of a benzodiazepine and opioid close to
It is unlikely that sedation will be needed. Low doses
the time of induction of anaesthesia will contribute to
of opioids or benzodiazepines prior to anaesthesia
a bafanced anaesthetic technique.
are desirable to reduce the concentration of anaes-
thetic agents needed for induction and maintenance
Other specific patient groups
of anaesthesia, but a distinct premedication phase is
not usually necessary in very sick patients.
Geriatric animals
Geriatric animals tend to have a higher incidence of
Cats
concurrent disease than younger animals, which may
increase their risk for anaesthesia and affect ASA clas-
ASA1
sification status (see Chapter 28). It is also likely that
Recommendations are as for dogs. The profound se-
the normal organ reserve of geriatric animals is de-
dation caused by medetomidine can be advantageous
 creased compared with that of younger animals. This
in aggressive cats where intravenous access can be
is particularly relevant for the cardiovascular system:
although no abnormalities may be found on pre-
challenging unless good sedation is achieved. In fe-
ral or extremely aggressive cats the addition of
anaesthetic examination, cardiovascular function may
ketamine to this combination will ensure heavy seda-
be decreased under stress, such as during anaes-
tion/short-term general anaesthesia. High-dose mor-
 thesia. It is advisable to avoid medetomidine in geri-
phine (0.6 mg/kg) with acepromazine (0.1 mg/kg) also
atric patients because of the reduced reserve
works well in aggressive ASA 1 cats.
functionality in the cardiovascular system.
ASA2
Young animals
 Recommendations are as for dogs.
Cats and dogs older than 12 weeks have normal liver
function and can therefore be considered as adults in
ASA3
terms of anaesthetic drug metabolism. In younger
patients with immature liver function, the effects of
Acepromazine and opioid combination (low
anaesthetic drugs may be prolonged and, therefore,
dose): as with dogs, will depend on evaluation of
it is advisabie to avoid long-acting agents such as
the cardiovascular system. The addition of a
acepromazine. There are limited data regarding use
benzodiazepine to this combination can be helpful.
of medetomidine in very young cats and dogs.
 Benzodiazepine and opioid combination: unlike
 Medetomidine combined with ketamine has been used
in dogs, this combination does not produce
successfully for early neutering in cats. although
reliable sedation in adult cats. However,
haemodynamic monitoring in those cases was lim-
although some cats do not appear to be very
ited. An opioid and benzodiazepine combination can
sedated they can be remarkably tolerant of
be used very effectively in both puppies and kittens,
intravenous catheter placement.
which seem to be more susceptible to the sedative
 Benzodiazepine and ketamine combination: this
effects of these drugs than adults. An opioid (low dose)
is an alternative to the benzodiazepine/opioid 
administered alone is also suitable, especially in sick
protocol used in dogs. Low doses of ketamine
animals where sedation will be more profound.
130
Chapter 12 Premedication and sedation
 Animals at risk of respiratory obstruction and
mandatory in all animals. Use of pulse oximetry is
brachycephalicbreeds
useful to monitor oxygen saturation and a probe can
 Sedation caused by premedicants can exacerbate
：
 palepas Aub! isow jo anbuot aui uo paoeid ag Ajsea
respiratory obstruction caused by anatomical confor-
 and premedicated animals. Other sites of placement 
 mation or by laryngeal paralysis, although sometimes
 include the non-pigmented and hairless vulva or pre-
系：
this can be offset by the caiming effect of sedatives
puce, the ear pinna or interdigital skin. Pulse oximetry
leading to a more normal breathing pattern. These
animals must be carefuly observed and monitored
 medetomidine due to the peripheral vasoconstriction
induced by this agent. This should not be of concern.
for respiratory distress after premedication or seda-
tion, and provision of supplemental oxygen is advis-
able. Acute and complete respiratory obstruction is
 tained in healthy animals following medetomidine
an indication to proceed directly to general anaesthe-
 administration. Supplementation of oxygen is still 
sia. in this situation, opioids and benzodiazepines can 
advisable in these patients. Electrocardiographic
be given intravenously after induction to provide a
monitoring is beneficial in higher-risk patients and
balanced anaesthetic technique.
patients with cardiovascular disease, particularly heart
rhythm abnormalities.
Monitoring and support of the
Respiratory system
sedated and premedicated patient
Observation of the respiratory rate and depth of
respiration is mandatory in all sedated animals. In
Most of the drugs used for sedation and premedica-
brachycephalic breeds it is important that the head
tion of cats and dogs are associated with varying de.
and neck are kept extended to prevent upper respi-
 grees of cardiovascular and respiratory depression.
ratory obstruction from the soft tissues. Placing ani-
As well as the direct effects of some drugs on the
mals in sternal recumbency also assists maintenance
respiratory system, brachycephalic dogs are predis-
 of a clear airway and maximizes lung function. Moni-
posed to a degree of respiratory tract obstruction af-
uogueo paidxa pue paidsu) seseb keme buol
ter sedation. The effects of sedation prevent the animal
dioxide and oxygen concentrations) is possible in
from effectively maintaining a clear airway. Sedated
 animals that are not intubated, depending on the type
 animals can aiso easily become hypothermic due to
juawdinba buuojuow uabixo pue Aydeiboudeo jo
decreased muscle activity and impairment of the thermo-
 available. With side-stream capnography the gas
regulatory system. Although it is clear that adequate
sampling tube can be placed in the nasal cavity of
monitoring and 'support' must be provided for sedated
the animal, allowing reasonably accurate measure-
and premedicated patients, the logistics of this can
ment of expired carbon dioxide concentration. Al-
be difficult. Animals are usually placed in a kennel fol-
though severe respiratory depression is unusual after
lowing administration of sedative drugs, so that supple-
administration of clinically used sedation and pre*
mental oxygen may be difficult to administer. Animals
medication protocols, always be ready to induce an-
that are being moved between a kennel and diagnos-
 aesthesia and intubate a sedated patient to allow
tic areas can be difficult to keep warm unless inten-
 support of ventilation if necessary.
sive efforts are made. Unless portable monitoring
 equipment is available, kennel side' monitoring can
Body temperature
 be difficult. Monitoring and support of sedated and
premedicated patients should begin as early as pos-
palepas u! Alelenbepe ainreiadwal Apog juoddns
sible and this support continued until the patient is
 patients. Practically this can be achieved using a
fully awake. The level of support and monitoring pro-
rectal thermometer.
vided should be determined by the ASA status of the
patient and the reason for sedation/premedication.
Blood glucose
ui asoonio poog iotuou oi aedoidde aq Aew 1
Monitoring
 some patients in order to prevent hypoglycaemia.
This is particularly the case in young puppies and
Depth of sedation/CNS depression
kittens that have limited glucose reserves and are
This is useful to assess if the level of sedation is ad-
 thereiore at risk of hypoglycaemia during sedation
equate for the procedure and should be monitored
 and anaesthesia.
intermittently throughout the period of sedation. The
following can be assessed:
Supportive measures
Heart and respiratory rate
+
 Presence of an eyelid/blink reflex 
Oxygen
·
Response to toe pinch
 Oxygen can be easily supplemented via an anaesthe
Response of the animal to arousal with voice
or touch.
：
tion of anaesthesia will help prevent hypoxaemia should
Cardiovascular system
The level of cardiovascular system monitoring will be
of anaesthesia. increasing the concentration of
determined by the cardiovascular status of the ani-
patepas u! %oe< oi einixiw seb paidsul aul ui uabaxo
s! Aenb asind pue ael asind aun buoon eu
131
Chapter 12 Premedication and sedation
as a result of respiratory depression, and should
Summary
be implemented during sedation of all animals. Alter-
native techniques to increase the inspired oxygen
 Sedation and premedication are part of the daily rou-
concentration are placing sedated animals in an
tine in small animal practice. It is important to under-
p yonoi uabAxo jo uoesup ro ebeo uabxo
stand the pharmacology of the different drugs used so
nasal catheter. The oxygen cage can be useful for dys-
that the most appropriate combination for each indi-
pnoeic cats after premedication and before induction
vidual can be chosen. Implementation of practice
of anaesthesia, or while an animal is recovering from
protocols based on ASA classification can be helpful to
the effects of sedation. Use of nasal catheters is ap-
improve uniformity in a busy clinic, while ensuring that 
propriate for animals that require longer-term sedation
the requirements of individual patients are met. Moni-
 and oxygen supplementation.
 toring and support of premedicated patients should be
initiated early; the intensity of this 'peri-premedicant'
Support of body temperature
 support should be adjusted to the ASA status of the
Sedated animals quickly become hypothermic and
patient and the procedure to be carried out.
 preventing a fall in body temperature is important. The
following measures can be implemented to help main-
References and further reading
tain body temperature:
 Alibhai Hl, Clarke KW. Lee YH and Thompson J (1996) Cardiopulrmonary
Ensure adequate ambient temperature
 effects of combinations of medetomidine hyarochioride and atropine
 Provide warm bedding in the kennel/cage of 
sulphate in dogs. Veterinary Record 138, 11-12
the animal
 Results from the Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small
Ensure that the animal is not lying directly on a
Animal Fatalities (CEPSAF). Proceedings of the Association of
cold surface
Veterinary Anaesthetists, Liverpool. Aprif 2006, 119-122
Hall LW. Clarke KW and Trim CM (2001) Veterinary Anaesthesia, 10th
Wrap the animal in reflective foil or bubble wrap
 edn. WB Saunders, London 
as insulation
Hall TL. Duke T, Townsend HG, Caulkett NA and Cantwell SL (f999)
 The effect of opioid and acepromazine premedication on the
anesthetic induction dose of propofol in cats. Canadian Veterinary
water ('hot hands') around the animal. Be aware
Journa/ 40, 867-870
 that a sedated animal is unable to move away
lkiw JE, Suter CM, Farver TB, McNeal D and Stefey EP (1996) The
 from a heat source that is too hot and capable of
 behaviour of healthy awake cats following intravenous and
intramuscuiar administration of midazolam. Journal of Veterinary
 causing skin damage.
Pharmacology and Therapeutics 19, 205-216
Kuusela E, Raekalio M. Anttila M et af. (2000) Clinical eifects and
 pharmacokinetics of medetomidine and its enantiomers in dogs.
Fluid therapy
Journal of Veterinary Pharmacotogy and Therapeutics 23, 15-20
Indications for fluid therapy during sedation will depend
Murrell JC and Hellbrekers LJ (2005) Medetomidine and dexmedeto-
midine: a review of cardiovascular and antinociceptive effects in
 on the reason for sedation and the health status of the
the dog. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 32, 117-127
animal. One should remember that sedated animals
Mutoh T, Nishimura R and Sasaki N (2002) Eifects of medetomidine-
 are not capable of regulating their own fluid balance
midazolam, midazolam-butorphanor, or acepromazine-butorphanol
as premedicants for mask induction of anesthesia with sevoflurane
and therefore some animals will benefit from support-
in dogs.American Journaf of Veterinary Research 63.1022-1028
ive fluid therapy. Examples include patients with chronic
 Pypendop B and Verstegen J (i999) Cardiorespiratory effects of a
renal failure and very young puppies and kittens
combination of medetomidine, midazolam, and butorphano in dogs.
who may require support to maintain a normal blood
Pypendop BH and Verstegen JP (1998) Hemodynamic effects of
 glucose concentration. Higher risk (ASA 3, 4 and 5)
medetomidine in the dog: a dose titration study. Veterinary Surgery
27, 612-622
 Rishniw M, Tobias AH and Slinker BK (1996) Characterization of
administration of fluids intraoperatively, therefore it can
chronotropic and dysrhylhmogenic effects of atropine in dogs with
bradycardia. American Journal of Veterinary Research 57, 337-341
be advantageous to place an intravenous catheter and
Robinson KJ, Jones RS and Cripps PJ (2G01) Effects of medetomidine
 begin the fluid support early, at around the time of pre-
and buprenorphine administered for sedation in dogs. Journal of
medication. This contributes to optimal stabilization of
Smaff Animal Practice 42, 444-447
Thurmon JC, Tranquili wJ and Benson GJ (1996) Lumb & Jones
the patient before induction of anaesthesia.
Veterinary Anaesthesia, 3rd edn. willians and Wikins, Baltinore
132
Intravenous anaesthetics
Sabine B.R. Kastner
Introduction
Injectable anaesthetics are used for induction of an
aesthesia followed by maintenance with a volatile
agent, or as the sole anaesthetic agents to maintain
general anaesthesia. For minor procedures of short 
duration, a single injection willi suffice. Repeated
boluses or infusion of an anaesthetic in conjunction
with analgesics defines total intravenous anaesthe-
sia (TIvA). Infusion of certain anaesthetics can be
Used for seizure control (tetanus, status epilepticus)
or to provide iong-term sedation in intensive care units.
For some injectable anaesthetics, there is a dose-
dependent transition from sedation to general anaes-
thesia. Dose rates required for induction and mainte-
(a).
nance of anaesthesia depend on the premedication
given and individual sensitivity. Therefore, fragmented 
dosing of the calculated amount of anaesthetic is rec-
stration of potent anaesthetics, it is crucial to choose
an appropriately sized syringe. Placing small volumes
in a large syringe inevitably leads to overdose. In cats,
syringe size rarely needs to exceed 1-2 ml. In the
case of very potent, highly concentrated drugs such
as medetomidine or acepromazine, prior dilution with
saline (e.g. 1:10) will improve accuracy of dosing.
Venous access
Safe venous access is necessary for careful and ef-
(b)
fective administration of anaesthetics.
[a] Insertion oi an intravenous catheter into
Proper premedication and handling usually allows
ihe cephalic vein in a cat. [b) Fixation of the
placemenf of an intravenous catheter without forcefu!
catheter to the limb with iape.
restraint in the majority of dogs and cats.
Catheter site
Catheter types
Accessible veins in the dog and the cat are the ce-
phalic vein on the dorsomedial aspect of the foreleg
needle' technique are suitable for the peripheral veins
(Figure 13.1) and the recurrent tarsal vein running
across the lateral aspect of the hindleg above the hock.
erence (Figure 13.2). Because of the flexibility of the
Restraint and catheter fixation are more difficult on
neck, short catheters will easily dislodge from the jugu-
the hindlegs. In cats, the (medial) saphenous vein on
lar vein and a length of at least 6 cm is required to
the medial aspect of the hindieg is easily localized if
avoid this. Conventional 'over-the-needle' catheters
intravenous access to both cephalic veins is impos-
of this length can be difficult to introduce in the neck
sible. In large-eared dogs, external ear veins might
area and a through-the-needle' technique might be
be accessible for catheterization. For prolonged piace-
necessary for insertion of a jugular catheter after in-
ment of venous catheters (central venous catheters)
duction of anaesthesia. Commercial human catheter
or in very small animals, the external jugular vein can
be used.
catheter intended for long-term use.
133
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
Accidental perivascular injection
drugs such as thiopental leads to cellulitis, phlebitis 
 or tissue sloughing (Figure 13.4). Immediate infiltra-
tion of the affected area with normat saline dilutes
the drug and prevents tissue necrosis. Using 2% lido-
caine instead of normal saline helps to neutralize
spasm, and reduce inflammation and pain reactions.
taining heparin or an anti-inflammatory drug, in
conjunction with systemic therapy using a non-
steroidal anti-intlammatory drug, further reduces
 Different types of intravenous catheters
tissue inflammation.
In the well hydrated animal, percutaneous place-
ment of peripheral catheters is possible. In older
uncastrated male cats and dog breeds with very thick
skin, initial perforation of the skin with a hypodermic
needle is advisable to avoid damage to the catheter
tip. In very small animals or in dehydrated, hypo-
volaemic animals, a cut-down to the vein with prior
subcutaneous local anaesthesia might be necessary.
Preparation
Preparation of the catheter area depends on the type
of catheter used and intended duration of catheter
placemenf. The hair should be clipped over a wide
pe oi pezjaiauieo ag ol jassas aui punoe eane
inadvertent contamination of the catheter during
insertion. The clipped area is prepared with an anti-
septic solution (1-2% iodine tincture, iodophors,
 A skin siough causod by perivascular injection 
chlorhexidine or 70% alcohol). When using a cut-down
 Oi thiopental.
technique or inserting long catheters using guide wires
(Seldinger technique), surgical draping of the area and
Anaesthetics
sterile gloves should be used to avoid contamination.
After placement, the catheter is fixed by tape (limb,
A comparison of physicochemical and clinical proper.
see Figure 13.1b) or sutured to the skin (neck). The
catheter is flushed with heparinized saline (2 units
heparin/ml) and capped, or an intravenous fluid infu-
given in Figures 13.5 and 13.6.
sion instituted immediately to avoid plugging of the
Barbiturates
catheter. To prevent accidental dislodgement of the
Short-acting barbiturates have been the classical
catheter, the infusion line should also be fixed to the
animal's body. For provision of unrestricted access to
injectable anaesthetics in veterinary medicine for
the vein with concurrent fluid administration, different 
several decades. Barbiturates produce hypnosis
with minimal analgesia and high doses are required
(Figure 13.3).
to produce surgical anaesthesia when used as the
sole anaesthetic agent. Barbiturates are also used
for their anticonvulsant and sedative properties. The 
inhibition and inhibited excitation at the Jevel of
synaptic neurotransmission, mainly by interaction
with the gamma aminobutyric acid A (GABAa)
receptor.
Rapidity of action and dose requirements depend 
 on the amount of the unbound and unionized form of
the drug in the bloodstream, because only this form 
can penetrate cell membranes and enter the CNS. A
decrease in blood pH and hypoproteinaemia caused
unionized (active) drug and thereby dose require-
 Catheter with side port, a connecting Y-piece 
ments can be dramaticaly decreased in severely
and check valve for intravenous infusions.
debilitated patients.
134
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
Physicochemical
/Induetionrecovery.
Haemodynamic
 Respiratory effecisy. CNS eftects
 other.
concentrton
poperies
:Taiopental
Yelow crystaline powrer
Rapid (30 seccnds),
1 HR ,
Anticcnvutisant
110P ↓
: 1% [wv)
Soluion pH 1-14
 smooth induction; not
tachyarrhythenia
VT↓
jCerebral
Pocr analgesia
 2.5% (wiv)
lriting, precipitates with  suitable for repeated 
MAP↓
 Aonoea after rapid 
metabolism
many acidic drugs
dosing
 col
injection
ICP↓
SVR
↑80
 Propofol
Whiteemulsion
 Smooih induction and
HR↑
RR
Anticonvulsant
IOP
1% (wiv)
pH~7
recovery, exciatory.
1MAP ↓
VT↓
Cerebral
Poor analgesia
Promotes bacterial growth  signs can ocur during  Co↓
Apnoea after rapid
metablisn
 induction and recovery
SVR ↓
 injecticn 
1CP ↓
CBF↓
Ketamine
Clear, stable solutiof
lncreased muscle tone.
HR↑个
Apnetustic, iregular
 Stemulaticn
IOP↑
1% (WV)
pH 3.5-5.5
 spasms, seizures.
MAP
breaihing
Cerebral
Somatic analgesia
5% (WV)
excitatory recovery
C0↑
Aproea with high doses
metaboism ?
NMDAreceptor
10% (w/v)
wihout premedication
SVR
ICP↑
antagonist
CBF↑↑
Ketamine
Mixed immeciately
 Smooth induction 
HR ↑
Apneustic, irregular
 Stimulation
 Somatic analgesia
1-10% (w/v))
before use clear soltionExcitaoryreovery
MAP↑
breathing
Cerebral
NMDAreceptor
diazepam 0.5%
wih yelfow tinge
cO 1
More depression than
metabolism 
aniagonist
[w/v)]
SVR
with ketamine alone
CP↑
Apnoea with high Goses
CBF ↑
Tiletaminei
Lyophilized powder
Smooth induction,
HR↑
RR ↓
 Stirnulatior
IOP !
zolazepan
Soiution pH 2-3.5
Exciltatoryrecovery
MAP ↓
VT↓
Cerebral
 Somalic analgesia
250 mg/250 mg
1:1 mixiure
mainly in dogs
CO↓
Depression with high
metabolism 
SVR↑
doses
ICP↑
}CBF?
Etomidate
 Propylene glycol
Myoclorus withcut
RR↑
Anticonvulsant
↑dO
0.2% (w/v)
preparation nyperosmolar
premedication
MAP
VT↓
00 
CP
Adrenal
(4640mOsm/)
Depression wiah high 
CBF↓
suppression
Enutsion promotes
SVR
doses
1 CPP A
Poor analgesia
bacterial growah
Alfaxalone
Alfaxalone is solubilized
  Smooth induction and 
HR (dog) ↑
RR (dog)
Anticonvuisant
Rapid clearance
 in 2-hydroxypropyl-beta-
recovery
HR {catf ↓
RR (cai3
CP↓
 and cces not
 cyclodextrin to make a
Excitatory signs can
MAP (dog) 
VI(dog] 
CBF↓
accumulate
ciear 10 mg/ml solution al  occur upon recovery
MAP(cat}
}V (cal 
CPP 
No stinging upon
pH~7
although these can be
CO [dog/cat →/
The risk of apnoea
Cerebral
injection
decreased with proper
SVR (dog and
increases if Alfaxan* is
metabolism 
premedicalion
cat)
injected rapidly
these cenirat
..
effects are
reporteo for
：
alfaxalcne/
alfadolone!
Cremophor EL
combination
(Saffan)})
 Comparison of some properties of commonly used intravenous anaesthetics. ↑ = Mild increase:
↑个 = Moderate increase;↓= Mid Gecrease; ↓↓ = Moderate cecrease; > = No change: CBF = Cerebral
vascular resistance; RR = Respiratory rate; VT = Tidal volume.
Drug
Thiopental
Dog
182.4
3.4
0.81(Vc 0.038)
kiw et al. 1991
Cal
Propofol
Dog
 90
58.6
4.9
Nolan et al., 1993
1 322
50.1
6.5
Nolan and Reid, 1993
Cat 
55
1.3
Adam et al.1980
Ketamine
boa
61
39.5
1.95
Kaka and Hayion, 1980
Caf
78.66
21.33
2.12
Hanna et al, 1988
Etomidate
Dog
86.4
Zhang et al.,1998
59.66
40.1
Vc0.108
Mcintosh et al. 2004
Cat
173.4
41.2
4.88 (Vc 1.17)
Wertz et al., 1990
Alfaxalone
Dog (2 mg/kg)
24 (harmonic)
59
 2.4
Ferre et al., 2006
[Alfaxan)
Cat (5 mg/kg)
45 (harmonic)
125
1.8
Heit et al.. 2004
 Pharmacokinetic variables of commonly used intravenous anaesihetics. Vc = Volume of the central
compartment.
135
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
Thiopental
In Greyhounds and other sighthounds, thiopental
must be used with care. Because of their body dispo-
Physicochemical properties: Thiopental is a
sition (low body fat) and decreased liver metabolism,
thiobarbiturate. lIt is a weak organic acid provided as
very high plasma concentrations can occur. This can
a sodium salt (yellow, crystaline powder) in seaied
cause severe cardiovascular depression and pro-
vials. Anhydrous sodium bicarbonate is added to
Ionged recovery in these dog breeds. With the avail-
 prevent precipitation of the free acid with atmospheric
ability of aiternative induction agents (e.g. propofol,
carbon dioxide. After reconstitution with sterile water
ketamine-diazepam) it might be safer to avoid the use
 the solution is very alkaline (pH in the range of
of thiopental in sighthounds.
11-14), which makes it extremely irritant at concen-
Thiopental reduces the metabolic rate and oxy-
trations greater than 2.5%. Reduction of alkalinity of
 gen requirements of the brain by depressing cellular
the solution results in precipitation of the free acid.
activity. With the reduction in metabolic demands, a
Therefore, thiopental will not dissolve in lactated
parallel reduction in cerebral blood flow and intra-
 Ringer's (Hartmann's) solution and it precipitates with 
cranial pressure (ICP) occurs. A reduction in ICP is
many other acidic drugs: care must therefore be taken
desirable in head trauma or intracranial tumour
to avoid occlusion of the intravenous line. The pre-
patients. However, thiopental-induced hypoventilation
pared solution should be tightly capped and refriger-
has to be avoided becausehypercapnia will increase
ated at 5-6°℃ to prolong shelf-ife (approximately
ICP. Thiopental is an effective anticonvuisant, for ex-
1 week). When the solution becomes turbid, it Joses
ample in benzodiazepine-resistant seizures, but its
activity and must be discarded.
cardiorespiratory effects have to be closely monitored.
Clinical properties: Thiopental causes rapid loss of
Practical use:
 consciousness (approximately 30 seconds). The time
Use as induction agent or as the sole
 to onset of action is influenced by the circulation time
anaesthetic for very short procedures only.
to the brain, which might be prolonged by prior
 Prepare 1--2.5% solution for small animals (as
 preanaesthetic sedation (especially alpha-2agonists).
dilute as possible; consider reasonable injection
Thiopental is classified as an ultra short-acting
volume).
 barbiturate and recovery is fast (t10-15 minutes) after
 Discard turbid solution.
a single injection. Recovery after a single injection is
mainiy governed by redistribution of the drug from the
Best used with intravenous catheter
(perivascular injection leads to tissue necrosis).
bloodstream to other tissues. Initially, well perfused
Give to effect (Figures 13.7 and 13.8):
tissues (brain, heart, kidney) will take up the drug,
 Consider premedication
resulting in a rapid decline in plasma concentrations
Consider physical status of the animal
 after a single thiopental bolus. A further decrease in 
Slow injection (30-60 seconds)
plasma thiopental concentrations occurs when mod-
Give half of calculated dose and await
erately perfused tissues, such as muscle, take up the
drug. At that time, brain concentrations begin to fall
maximum effect, proceed further with
increments until desired effect (endotracheai
 and recovery occurs. Poorly perfused tissue, such as
intubation)
 body fat, will take up thiopental siowly; however, adi-
Decreased blood pH (e.g. uraemia) reduces
pose tissue has a high 'storage' capacity for lipid-
soluble drugs such as thiopental. Repeated doses of
required dose.
 Flush catheter before and after thiopental use.
'bnp aui jo uonenwnooe ue ol peei lm jeuadoyl 
+
Avoid in hypovolaemic patients.
because tissue sites become saturated and liver met-
Avoid in cardiac arrhythmia.
abolism is slow. Successive doses lead to an expo-
Poor analgesia (use with analgesic).
 nential increase in anaesthesia time. Therefore,
 thiopental is unsuitable for maintenance of anaesthe-
Methohexital
sia as accumulation can lead to serious cardiorespi-
 Before the advent of propofol, the oxybarbiturate
 ratory depression and delayed recovery.
 Thiopental induces respiratory depression and ini-
 methohexital was used as an alternative to thiopenta!
in Greyhounds and other sighthounds. In many
tial apnoea commonly occurs after rapid intravenous
 injection. Thiopental causes dose- and rate-depend-
countries it is no longer available, and propofol or
ketamine-diazepam are considered to be better al-
 ent cardiovascular depression (high plasma concen-
ternatives for thiopental in sighthounds.
trations after rapid injection). Hypotension caused by
 peripheraf vasodilation and reduction in cardiac out-
Pentobarbital
arrhythmias (e.g. ventricular extrasystole, bigeminy,
Physicochemical properties: Pentobarbitai is an
ventricular tachycardia) are the main effects. In re-
oxybarbiturate. lts sodium salt occurs as white crystal-
sponse to hypotension, persistent tachycardia can
line powder or granules. As an anaesthetic it is pro-
occur after thiopental injection. Drugs used concur-
vided as an aqueous, alkaline (approximate pH 9-10.5),
rently (sedatives, opioids) and the animal's body con-
5% or 10% solution, which is stable at room tempera-
dition will influence the overall effects. Cardiac
ture. Preparations with higher concentrations (30-40%)
arrhythmias can be accentuated by xylazine, haio-
are available as euthanasia solutions. In some coun-
thane and adrenaline, whereas lidocaine and acepro-
tries (including the UK) the low-concentration pento-
mazine attenuate arrhythmic effects.
barbital for anaesthetic purposes is no longer available.
136
Chapter
Intravenous anaesthetics
Dose
Comment
20-25 mg/kg i.v.
Give to effect
8-12.5 mg/kg i.v.
6m10 mg/kg i.v.
 Give to effect
5 mg/kg i.v.
6-8 mg/kg i.y.
 Give to effect
2-4 mg/kg i.v.
 2-5 mg/kg i.v.
Intramusculariy only in very uncooperative dogs
5-10 mg/kg i.m.
十
5 mg/kg i.vy.
Mix ketamine (10%) and diazepam (0.5%) at 1:1 (v:v); give 0.05-0.1 ml/kg
土
0.25 mg/kg i.v.
 of this mixture in increments to efect. Lower dose suitable for dogs with
10 mg/kg i.v.
and.diazepam
gastric dilatation-volvulus
0.5 mg/kg i.v.
 5 mg/kg i.v.
Mixed in one syringe given to effect.
0.25 mg/kg i.v.
5 mg/kg i.v.
letamune-zolazepam
12 mg/kg i.V.
十
 4-8 mgikg i.m.
1-3 mg/kg i.v.
Elemoate
0.5-2 mg/kg i.v.
 3 mg/kg i.v.
xalone (Altaxan-CD
2 mg/kg.i.v.
RTU
：
PremedicationDose
Comment
10-{20) mg/kg i.v.
Givetoeffect
Thiopenial.
2-10 mg/kg i.v.
+
4-8 mg/kg i.v.
Give to effect
4-6 mg/kg i.v.
2-10 mg/kg i.v.
10-20 mg/kg i.n.
+
 5 mg/kg i.vy.
Mix ketanine (10%) and diazepam (0.5%) at 1:1.(v:v);:give.0.05-0.1 ml/kg
十
0.25 mg/kg i.v.
of this mixture in increments to effect
10 mg/kg i.v.
eamine and dazepam
士
0.5 mg/kg i.v.
5 mg/kg i.v.
Mixed in one syringe given to effect
Keanine and midazolam
0.25 mg/kg i.v.
4-5 mg/kg i.v.
1-2 mg/kg i.v.
 4-8 mg/kg i.m.
1-3 mg/kg i.v.
Etomdate.
0.5-2 mg/kg i.v.
6-9 mg ikg i.v..
 3--6 mg/kg i.vy.
5 mg/kg i.v.
2-3 mg/kg i.v.
Without premedication; + = With premedication.
Clinica! properties:Pentobarbital causes fairly rapid
Recovery depends on liver metabolism. ln the
loss of consciousness (approximately 40-120 sec-
past it was the principal agent for general anaesthe-
onds). Pentobarbital is classified as a short-acting
sia, although it provides minimal analgesia and
barbiturate and duration of action is 1-2 hours after a
muscle relaxation and has a very narrow safety
single injection (10-20 mg/kg).
margin. Therefore, pentobarbital as an anaesthetic
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
 agent in small animals has been superseded by
Non-barbiturate anaesthetics
 other anaesthetics.
Nowadays, the main indications for pentobarbital
Propofol
are the treatment of intractable seizures caused by
convulsants or CNS toxins (it is an effective anti-
Physicochemical properties: Propofol is a hypnotic
convulsant), long-term sedation in an intensive care
alkyl phenol (2,6 dlisopropylphenol) occurring as an
Unit (ICU) setting to allow mechanical ventilation, and 
oil at room temperature. It is insoluble in aqueous
euthanasia (Figure 13.9).
solutions but highly lipid soluble. To allow intravenous
injection, propofol is currently formulated as a white
oil-in-water emulsion containing Intralipid (1% w/v
soya bean oil, 1.2% w/v purified eg9 phosphatide,
2.25% w/v glycerol). This formulation has a ph of 7
Diazepam
Repeated boluses (0.2-0.5
Seizure control.
and appears as a slightly viscous, milky white liquid.
mg/kg i.v.) to effect
In case of repeated seizures 
The veterinary product usually comes at a concentra-
0.2-0.5 mg/kg/h constant
tion of 1% (w/v). A 2% (w/v) formulation is available
rate infusion (CRl) to effect.
as a human product. The emulsion is an ideal culture
 Diazepam CRI can induce
medium for bacteria; open vials should be used within
phiebitis (use long catheter)
24 hours. Intramuscular injection does not induce
Mtidazolarm
Repeated boluses (0.2-0.5
 Seizure control.
anaesthesia at reasonable dose rates, but inadvert-
mg/kg i.v.) to effect
ent perivascular injection is non-irritating. Propofol is
In case of repeated seizures
compatible with 5% dextrose in water if a dilute solu-
 0.3-0.9 mg/kg/h CRI. to 
tion is required.
eifect
 Pentobarbitl  2-15 mg/kg sowly v. t0
Uncontrollable
Clinical properties: Propofol is primarily a hypnotic
effect, then 0.2-1.0 mg/kg/h
seizures
agent with a rapid onset (60-90 seconds) and short
 to effect
Long-term sedation for
duration of action after a single dose (approximately
2-4 mg/kg iv.initial bolus
ventilatory support
followed by 0.5-2 mg/kg/h
10 minutes). The hypnotic action is mainly mediated
CRl to effect
by interaction with the GABAA receptor subunit,
 potentiating the GABA-induced chloride current.
The half-life of equilibration between CNS effects
Propofol
4-6 mgkg slowlyi. to effect,
} Uncontrollable
seizures
and plasma concentrations is about 2 minutes. There-
 then 0.1-0.4 mg/kg/minute to
fore, an injection time of 2 minutes is recommended
effect
Requires intubation (risk of.
for induction doses to enable titration to effect and to
 aspiration] and monitoring.
avoid overdose and apnoea. In contrast to dogs, in
of venlilation
 cats the induction dose of propofol seems unaffected
Fantanyl
0.5-4 μg/kg/minute and
Long-term sedation for 
 t0 a significant extent by acepromazine premedica-
Diazepam
0.2-0.5 mg/kg/h
ventilatory support
tion. However, opioids and alpha-2 agonists reduce
I given to effect, algne or in'
propofol requirements significantly and induction
combination with
doses need to be adapted.
pentobarbital 0.5-2 mg/kg/h
The pharmacokinetic properties of propofol (see
Fentanyl and diazepam are'
Figure 13.6) contribute to its clinical advantages. Af-
not mixed in one infusion;
ter a single bolus injection, propofol blood levels de-
 they must be given separately
crease rapidly due to redistribution of the drug to highly
perfused tissues. After the initial rapid distribution
Long-term sedation and seizure control.
phase, propofol is metabolized rapidly and further slow 
distribution to fat occurs. This is followed by prolonged 
Recovery after pentobarbital infusions is pro-
terminal elimination, which reflects slow release from
longed and associated with hyperexcitability after
fat tissue, although this has little effect on clinical re-
 short-term use (<2 days). After medium-term use
covery from anaesthesia. Clearance rates exceed
(3-7 days) withdrawal dysphoria can occur and
hepatic blood flow and extrahepatic metabolism has
 after long-term use (>1 week) recovery is associated
been demonstrated. A high first-pass extraction of
with seizures, which require anticonvuisant treatment
propofol in the lung has been demonstrated. Propofol
with phenobarbital before the pentobarbital is with-
is metabolized to sulphate and glucuronide conju-
drawn. Switching to a propofol infusion (see later)
gates, which are inactive. Propofol conjugates are
before planned recovery may help to reduce recov-
mainly excreted via the urine. Hepatic and renal dis-
ery dysphoria and seizures.
ease does not appear to influence propofol pharma-
Pentobarbital produces very rapid unconscious-
cokinetics. In dogs, premedication with medetomidine
 ness and cardiovascular depression, which qualfies 
or maintenance of anaesthesia with halothane and 
it as an agent suitable for euthanasia. For this pur-
nitrous oxide do not alter propofol kinetics to a signifi-
pose, it is used at a high concentration (30-40%) at 
cant extent. In dogs, propofol doses required to in-
002-001 pue (s6op u1) 4! 6y/6w 001-08 j0 9sop e
duce anaesthesia seem to decrease with age.
mg/kg i.v. (in cats). It is advisable to colour the solu-
Rapid metabolism of propofol results in minimal
tion (e.g. methylene blue) to avoid confusion with 
accumulation ater repeated doses and this makes
other anaesthetics.
138
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
maintenance of anaesthesia (TIvA) with excellent re-
Propofol readily crosses the placenta and may af-
sults in dogs. However, in Greyhounds recovery is
fect neurological and cardiorespiratory variables in
 prolonged after propofol infusions because of their 
puppies and kittens. Therefore. propofol should not
higher proportion of lean body mass to fat and lower
be used for maintenance of anaesthesia in bitches
microsomal activity. Cats have a reduced capacity
and queens undergoing Caesarean section. Clinical
for glucuronide conjugation, which is required for
：
metabolism of phenolic compounds. This leads to
duction of anaesthesia in the mother prior to an inha-
prolonged recoveries in cats after propofol infusions
lant, as long as she is haemodynamically stable. An
.·
that last longer than 30 minutes. In addition. propofol
infusion of more than 30 minutes in cats leads to
tion of anaesthesia and delivery of the puppies or kit-
clinically significant reductions in packed cell volume
tens minimizes respiratory depression by residual
(PCV). Therefore, propofol TIvA in cats should be
propofol effects (see Chapter 24).
kept at a low dose rate and be as short as possible.
 Disorders of lipid metabolism could potentially be
 In addition, feline haemoglobin is prone to oxidative
 aggravated by the lipid emulsion formulation of
injury by phenolic compounds. Repeated propofoi an-
propofol, in particular after long-term infusion. There-
aesthesia (more than 3 consecutive days) results in
fore, propofol should be used with caution in patients
significant Heinz body formation, anorexia, diarrhoea,
with diabetic hyperlipidaemia or pancreatitis.
facial oedema, depression and delayed recovery
 Propofol for induction and maintenance should be
from anaesthesia.
titrated to effect, similar to a volatile agent, because
The most prominent haemodynamic effect is mod-
 of the variable influence of premedicants, concurrent 
erate hypotension due to reductions in cardiac output
 analgesics and surgical stimulation.
and systemic vascular resistance, which can become
Practical use:
severe in hypovolaemic patients or patients with a low
cardiac reserve. Hypotension is most severe 2 min-
 Induction and maintenance agent (see Figures
 utes after an induction dose of propofol and after rapid
13.7 and 13.8).
injection. In patients with pre-existing bradycardia (e.g.
 Keep TIvA in cats as short as possible (<30
 minutes).
stole can occur. Bradycardia can be severe if high
 Discard open viais after 24 hours (refer to
 doses of opioids are combined with propofol, although
 manufacturer's data sheets).
this can be prevented by prior administration of a para-
 Supplement oxygen when using repeated doses
 or infusion.
result in apnoea. Respiratory depression with hyper-
Give to effect:
capnia and a drop in arterial oxygen saturation oc-
Consider premedication (20-80% reduction 
:buisop jojodod snonuuoo lo paieadau jele sino
depending on premedication) 
oxygen supplementation is therefore advisable dur-
Consider physical status of the animal
ing prolonged propofol administration.
Slow injection (60-120 seconds)
Propofol has both proconvulsant and anticonvulsant
Give half of calculated dose and await
 properties, by different mechanisms. Propofol has been
maximum effect, proceed further with 
used successfuly as an anti-epileptic drug for seizure
increments until desired effect (e.g. deep
control (see Figure 13.9). On the other hand, excitatory
 sedation, endotracheal intubation).
 signs, such as myoclonus, paddling, opisthotonus and
Poor analgesia (use with analgesic).
nystagmus can occur during the induction period and
Avoid in hypovolaemic patients.
fo a lower extent during recovery. Premedication re-
Avoid in heart failure.
 duces the incidence of excitatory signs but cannot com-
 Avoid in hyperlipidaemia and pancreatitis.
pletely prevent their occurrence. In most cases
Avoid repeated (more than 3 consecutive days)
excitatory signs cease when inhalation anaesthetics
 propofol anaesthesia in cats.
are commenced. Refractory excitations have been
Etomidate
treated successfully with ketamine (1 mg/kg i.v.), diaze-
pam (0.2 mg/kg i.v.) or pentobarbital (2 mg/kg i.v.)
Physicochemical properties: Etomidate is an imid-
Propofol decreases cerebral metabolic require-
azole derivative. It exists as a racemate, but only the
ments for oxygen, cerebral perfusion pressure and
 S(+) isomer has hypnotic activity. Etomidate is water
causes a corresponding decrease in ICP (in both nor-
 soluble at an acidic pH and becomes lipid soluble at
mal animals and those with intracranial pathology) and 
physiological pH. Therefore, several formulations ex-
intraocular pressure. The reactivity of cerebral ves-
ist. The 'classic' etomidate 0.2% (v/v) preparation, which
sels to changes in PcO, seems to be maintained
 appears as clear solution, contains propylene glycol
 during propofol anaesthesia. The rapid recovery char-
(35% v/v), has a pH of 6.9 and a high osmolarity (4640
acteristics and lack of cerebrovascular dilation (in
 mOsm/l). Perivascular injection causes tissue necro-
contrast to volatiles) make propofol TIvA an alterna-
sis and phlebitis. A newer preparation is formulated as
tive to volatile anaesthetics in neurosurgery in dogs
a lipid emulsion (Etomidate-Lipurog, Braun Melsungen,
(see Chapter 26).
Germany). This formulation contains Intralipid. has a
 Propofol has poor analgesic properties and the
pH of approximately 7 and appears as a slightly vis-
doses required for induction and maintenance of an-
 cous, milky white liquid like propofol. The emulsion pro-
aesthesia are significantly reduced by analgesic
motes bacterial growth and open ampoules should be
premedications (alpha-2 agonists, opioids).
refrigerated and be discarded within 24 hours.
139
Chapter 13 lntravenous anaesthetics
Clinical properties: Etomidate is a hypnotic agent
Practical use:
with fast penetration of the blood-brain barrier and
peak brain concentrations are reached within t minute.
 Induction agent, short infusion.
Its hypnotic activity is partly related to interaction with
 Pain on injection and phlebitis (propylene glycol
the GABA system, by increasing the availability of
preparation).
GABA receptors. Recovery after a single bolus injec-
Refrigerate open ampoules (lipid emulsion).
tion is rapid (10-20 minutes).
 Discard open ampoules after 24 hours (lipid
After a single bolus injection in cats, etomidate
emulsion).
blood levels initially decrease rapidly followed by
High incidence of myoclonus when used as sole
a slower distribution phase and an elimination half-
agent.
Hife of approximately 3 hours. Total body clearance
Best used with premedication.
rates are high. Etomidate is rapidly hydrolysed to
Give to effect (see Figures 13.7 and 13.8):
inactive metabolites by hepatic and plasma
Consider premedication
esterases. Drugs reducing hepatic blood ffow
Consider physical status of the animal
(e.g. alpha-2 agonists) will reduce etomidate elimi-
Slow injection (60 seconds).
nation. The pharmacokinetic profile (see Figure
 Poor analgesia (use with analgesic).
13.6) makes etomidate suitable for repeated dosing
Good cardiovascular stability (high-risk patients).
 or continuous infusion.
Avoid in animals with known adrenal
Etomidate alone produces minimal cardio-
insufficiency (supplement).
vascular changes in healthy and hypovolaemic dogs,
making it an ideal induction agent in patients with
Dissociative agents
a low cardiac reserve and hypovolaemia. However,
etomidate should not be used without premedication
Ketamine
because of a high incidence of myoclonus and
pain on injection (propylene glycol preparation).
Physicochemical properties: The phencyclidine de-
Therefore, the choice of premedication rather than
rivative, ketamine hydrochloride, occurs as a white,
the etomidate itself will influence the cardiovascular
crystalline powder. The commercially available solu-
status. Combinations of etomidate either with di-
tions are slightly acidic (pH 3.5-5.5). Ketamine con-
azepam or midazolam, or with fentanyl or morphine
sists of two stereoisomers, S(+) ketamine and R(-)
(and other opioids) have been used successfully
ketamine. The S(+) isomer has about 1.5-3-fold
in high-risk patients.
-eue jeaib plol-e pue Aouaiod oouday jeieain
Etomidate induces dose-dependent respiratory
gesic potency than R(-) ketamine. Compared with the
 depression. A slower injection rate results in less de-
racemic mixture, S(+) ketamine is 1.5-2 times more
potent. Racemic ketamine is a mixture of both
Etomidate reduces cerebral metabolic oxygen re-
enantiomers in equal amounts and comes as 1%
quirements and cerebral blood ffow and decreases
(w/v), 5% (w/v) and t0% (w/v) preparations contain-
elevated ICP. Because of the minimal influence on
ing the preservative benzethonium chloride. In some
systemic blood pressure, cerebral perfusion pressure
countries S(+) ketamine is available as 0.5% (w/v) and
is well maintained. Etomidate decreases intraocular
2.5% (w/v) solutions. Ketamine solutions are very sta-
 pressure. Etomidate has no analgesic properties.
ble, but should be protected from light and excessive
The major drawback or concern with the use of
heat. Ketamine can be administered by intramus-
 etomidate is its inhibition of adrenal steroid synthe-
cular, intravenous, subcutaneous or intraperitoneal in-
sis. The production of cortisol, aldosterone and
jection. It is also effective when given oraily or
 corticosterone is decreased by inhibition of 11-0.
intranasally. Ketamine can be difuted with sterile water
 and 11-β hydroxylases, and the cholesterol side-
or physiological saline for injection. Because of illicit 
chain cleavage enzyme. A major problem (Addiso-
recreational use, in 1999 racemic ketamine became
nian crisis) can occur after infusion of etomidate
a Schedule lil controlled drug in the USA.
over prolonged periods of time (constant sedation in
ICU). After a single induction bolus, adrenocortical
Clinical properties: Ketamine penetrates the blood-
responses and cortisol are suppressed for 2--6 hours
lae uonoe jo jasuo ue seu pue Apider leueg uieg
0l asuodsal ssans jo yoel aul 'sbop pue sieo u!
intravenous injection of 30-90 seconds in cats and
 anaesthesia and surgery seems to have no detri-
dogs. After intramuscular injection it is distributed into
mental effects after a single intravenous bolus, but
body tissues rapidly and peak anaesthetic effects oc-
care has fo be taken in animals with pre-existing
cur within 10--15 minutes.
 adrenal insufficiency.
Ketamine induces a dose-dependent CNS depres-
The propylene glycol preparation induces acute
sion that leads to a dissociative state, characterized
 haemolysis after rapid injection or prolonged continu-
by profound analgesia and amnesia with maintained
ous infusion, mediated by a massive increase in
ocular, laryngeal, pharyngeal, pinnal and pedal re-
 plasma osmolarity.
flexes. This catalepsy is caused (mainly) by inhibition
Overall, etomidate is a suitable agent for high-
of thalamocortical pathways and stimulation of the lim-
bic system. The neuropharmacology of ketamine is
ampoules, which restricts repeated use after
'sas buung aldnu yhm soeia! ll pue xaidmo
opening, are reasons for its limited use in veteri-
including N-methyl-o-aspartate (NMDA) and non-
nary practice.
NMDA glutamate receptors, nicotinic and muscarinic
140
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics 
 cholinergic, monoaminergic and opioid receptors. In
direct myocardial depression (a negative inotropic
addition, inhibition of voltage-dependent sodium and
effect). Normally the stimulatory efects predominate,
calcium channels has been described. lt seems that
but high intravenous ketamine doses can result in tran-
the antagonism at the NMDA receptor accounts for
sient hypotension. In severely compromised animals
 the majority of the analgesic, amnesic and psychoto-
or with concurrent use of other anaesthetics,ketamine
mimetic effects.
may induce cardiovascular depression.
After an intravenous bolus, racemic ketamine is
Ketamine has minimal effects on central respira-
distributed rapidly, followed by an elimination half-life
tory drive. After bolus administration of an induction
'sieo pue shop u sanuju 0g pue 0g Aajewixoidde jo
dose, initial respiratory depression occurs, often fol-
lowed by a so-called 'apneustic' pattern of breathing;
gle dose occurs mainly by redistribution. Ketamine un-
characterized by periodic breath holding on inspira-
dergoes high hepatic extraction and is metabolized
rapidly by the liver. The main metabolite, norketamine,
Generally, arterial and tissue oxygenation are well
has about 10-30% of the anaesthetic potency of
maintained. Potential respiratory problems can occur
ketamine. The cat also excretes ketamine as the ac-
in cats and small dogs because of increased saliva-
tive drug through the kidney. Accumulation of
tion, leading to upper airway obstruction or endo-
norketamine after repeated doses or ketamine infu-
tracheal tube occlusion. The swalow, sneeze and
sions contributes to prolonged recovery and drowsi-
cough reflexes remain relatively intact after ketamine
ness. The parent compound and the metabolites
administration but 'silent' aspiration can still occur with 
undergo glucuronidation and are excreted via the kid-
ketamine anaesthesia.
ney. Hepatic dysfunction impairs elimination of the
Because of its excitatory effects on the CNS,
drug and prolongs its action considerably.
ketamine increases cerebral metabolism, cerebral
The main pharmacokinetic difference between ra-
blood flow and ICP. Cerebrovascular responsiveness
cemic ketamine and S(+) ketamine seems to be a
to carbon dioxide remains intact and therefore reduc-
higher elimination rate for the latter. Complete recov-
ing P.COz attenuates the rise in ICP after ketamine.
ery after S(+) ketamine is faster and less likely to be
Ketamine has epileptogenic potential and should gen-
erally not be used in animals with known seizure dis-
as wel as S(+) ketamine anaesthesia is associated
aonpu! Aigissod ol umouy sainpaooid ul jo shapio
with increased muscle tone, muscle spasm and sei-
seizures (e.g. myelography). Ketamine also increases
zures and concurrent use of acepromazine, a benzo-
intraocular pressure and is therefore not suitable for
diazepine or an alpha-2 agonist is required to reduce
intraocular surgery or open globe injuries. The eyes
these side effects and obtain a surgical state of an-
do not rotate with ketamine anaesthesia, making ani-
aesthesia. Therefore, in a clinical setting, the advan-
mals prone to corneal drying.
tages of S(+) ketamine over racemic ketamine are
 Recovery from ketamine anaesthesia can be as-
influenced by the chosen premedication.
Ketamine has unique cardiovascular effects. Un-
cause animals become hypersensitive to noise, light
and handling.
cardiovascular system, resulting in increases in heart
 Ketamine is still licensed for use as the sole an-
rate, blood pressure and cardiac output. This increase
aesthetic agent for cats and non-human primates. Be-
in haemodynamic variables is associated with in-
 cause of the increased muscle tone, involuntary
creased myocardial work and oxygen consumption.
movements and the high incidence of excitation dur-
A healthy heart can increase its oxygen supply by
ing recovery in cats, it should always be used in com-
coronary vasodilation and increased cardiac output,
bination with a sedative or tranquillizer to offset these
but a compromised heart (hypertrophic, ischaemic
side effects (see Figures 13.7 and 13.8). Ketamine is
heart) might not be able to mount such a response.
a popular anaesthetic in cats because deep sedation
Central stimuiation of the sympathetic system is re-
 or anaesthesia for short surgical procedures (e.g.
sponsible for the cardiovascular stimulation. Concur-
castration) can be induced via the intramuscular route,
rent use of sedatives will attenuate the stimulatory
a major advantage in uncooperative, fractious animals
effects of ketamine. In contrast, ketamine also exerts
(Figure 13.10).
Acepromazine
0.02-0.05 mg/kg
Give acepromazine/opioid combination 15 minutes
Short surgical procedures (30-40 minutes)
Buprenorphine
0.01 mg/kg
 before ketamine
Or
：
Butorphanol
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
Ketamine
20-30mg/kg
Xylazine
1 mg/kg 
Mixed in one syringe
Short surgical procedures (20-30 minutes)
Ketamine
5-10 mg/kg
Medetomidine
0.04 mg/kg
Mixed in one syringe
Short surgical procedures (30-40 minutes)
Ketamine
5-7mg/kg
Combinations with aipha-2 agonists can induce vomiting. (continues)
141
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
sesod
77
 Medetomidine 
0.02 mg/kg
Medetomidine/opioid 15 minutes before ketamine
Short surgical procedures (30-40 minutes)
Butorphanol
0.1 mg/kg
Ketamine
5 mg/kg
Romidine
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
Mixed in one syringe
Short surgical procedures (30-40 minutes)
Ketamine
10-20 mg/kg
 Midazolam
0.25 mg/kg
Mixed in one syringe
 Short minor procedures
Ketamine 
10-(20) mg/kg 
Combinations with alpha-2 agonists can induce vomiting.
Ketamine readily crosses the placenta and neuro-
Zolazepam is a benzodiazepine (diazepinone minor
logical reflexes in puppies delivered by Caesarean
tranquilizer) with muscle relaxant and anticonvulsant
section after ketamine-midazolam anaesthesia induc-
effects. Telazof (USA) or Zoletil (Europe) is a
tion are reduced.
proprietary combination of zolazepam and tiletamine
Its activity as a non-competitive antagonist at
at a ratio of 1:1 (250 mg zolazepam, 250
mg
NMDA glutamate receptors and its ability to produce
tiletamine). The preparation comes as a lyophilized
profound somatic analgesia have expanded the indi-
powder, which can be reconstituted with 5 ml saline,
cations for ketamine. In subanaesthetic doses given
5% dextrose or sterile water (50 mg/ml zolazepam,
in the perioperative period, ketamine may reduce the
50 mg/ml tiletamine). The clear solution is acidic
central 'wind-up' phenomenon, with a reduction in the
(pH 2.0-3.5) and should be discarded if precipi
requirement for postoperative analgesics. In addition,
tation occurs. The prepared solution can be stored
ketamine might be helpful in the treatment of chronic
at room temperature for 4 days, and for 14 days when 
m uooelau! sh uo paseg yied ouedoinau pue
refrigerated. Telazol? is a controlled substance in
NMDA receptors. Ketamine constant rate infusion
the USA (Schedule Il) and it is licensed in small
(CRl) during inhalation anaesthesia provides pre-
animals for intramuscular injection, although intra-
emptive analgesia and reduces the required concen-
Aanban pesn si uonoalui snouaa 
tration of the inhalation anaesthetic.
Clinical properties: Tiletamine alone produces a
Practical use:
cataleptic, dissociative state similar to that produced
 Induction agent, sole anaesthetic for short
 by ketamine. High doses can produce unconscious-
ness and surgical anaesthesia in cats, but not in dogs,
surgical procedures (see Figures 13.7, 13.8
in which severe convulsions occur. Zolazepam has
and 13.10).
 Effective after intravenous, intramuscular,
anticonvulsant and anxiolytic properties and produces
muscle relaxation. Like the benzodiazepine group in
 subcutaneous, intranasal, oral or rectal
 general, its sedative effects are unreliable in healthy
administration.
animals. Zolazepam alone causes only minimal CNS
 Pain can occur after intramuscular injection.
 Increased muscle tone and high incidence of
 depression and has minimal cardiorespiratory effects.
The combination of tiletamine and zolazepam can
convulsions (dogs) when used alone.
 Combine with benzodiazepine, alpha-2 agonist 
produce sedation or general anaesthesia in dogs and
cats. After intravenous injection, induction of anaes-
or acepromazine.
thesia is rapid (60-90 seconds). Onset of action after
Intact eye and laryngeal reflexes.
intramuscular injection varies between 1 and 7 min-
 Anaesthetic depths difficult to judge.
utes in cats, and 5 and 12 minutes in dogs. Intramus-
Good somatic analgesia.
 cular injection can be painful (due to the low pH of the
Use eye ointment.
solution). Duration of anaesthesia is dependent on
Cardiovascular stimulation (heart rate, blood 
the dose used (30-60 minutes).
pressure, cardiac output increase).
 Do not use in patients with hypertrophic
aesthesia can be long (4-5 hours) and is smoother in
cardiomyopathy.
cats than in dogs. in cats, elimination half-life of
Avoid in epileptics.
Avoid in animals with increased ICP (trauma,
aul jo teui ueun nabuol s! (sinoy 9't) wedazeioz
tiletamine component (2-4 hours) and the recovery
tumours).
phase is still influenced by the tranquillizer. In dogs,
Apneustic breathing (apnoea with high doses).
zolazepam effects wane earlier (half-life 1 hour) than
 Recover animal in a quiet, dimmed and
heated room.
those of tiletamine (half-life 1.2 hours) and the recov-
ery phase is characterized by muscle rigidity, excita-
Tiletamine-zolazepam
dosing will prolong and worsen recovery and there-
 Physicochemical properties: Tiletamine is chemi-
fore redosing is not recommended. Animals with re-
cally related to ketamine (phencyclidine derivative,
nal disease have prolonged anaesthetic action and
cyclohexanone) with a longer duration of action.
recovery periods.
142
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
Anaesthetic depth is difficult to judge because
mixed with alfadolone acetate to increase its solubil-
 animals maintain ocular, laryngeal, pharyngeal and 
ify. Alfadolone also has anaesthetic properties, with
pedal reflexes.
about half the potency of alfaxalone. The mixture of
Cardiovascular effects of Telazol in cats and dogs
alfaxalone (9 mg/ml) and alfadolone acetate (3 mg/ml)
are dose-dependent. In dogs, sinus tachycardia and
in 20% (w/v) polyoxyethyltated castor oll (Cremophor 
premature ventricular complexes occur due to sym-
EL) is known as Saffan (Schering Plough Animal
pathetic stimulation, but Telazol does not change the
Health). The viscid solution is isotonic and has a pH
arrhythmogenic dose of adrenaline. In cats, heart rate
of about 7. Perivascular injection is not painful and
responses are variable, but the cardiostimulatory ef-
does not produce tissue necrosis.
fects of Telazol should be avoided in cats with hyper-
In veterinary anaesthesia, doses of Saffan* are
thyroidism and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy At lower
doses, the overall haemodynamic state remains sta-
Cremophor EL induces non-specific mast cell
ble (blood pressure, cardiac output), whereas at higher
degranulation and histamine release (true hypersen-
doses cardiovascular depression occurs (reduced
sitivity and complement activation). In dogs and other
cardiac output, blood pressure and contractility).
canidae, prolonged hypotension, tachycardia, urticaria
Respiratory depression with hypoxaemia and
and oedema formation occur and Saffan? must not
hypercapnia occurs after intravenous injection and 
be used in these species. In cats, the response seems
after high intramuscutar doses of Telazor. As with
 to be more localized to tissues with a high mast cell
ketamine, hypersalivation is common and can be
population. Transient facial (ear pinnae, nose) and paw
oedema, scratching, sneezing and pawing of the face
Like ketamine, tiletamine has excitatory effects on
as manifestations of histamine release occur in about
the CNS and increases cerebral metabolism, cerebral
 25-69% of cats treated with Saffan. However, pul-
blood flow and ICP, and is therefore contraindicated 
monary oedema and prolonged hypotension can also
in patients with head trauma or intracranial tumours.
occur in cats.
Tiletamine increases intraocular pressure and is there-
 Alfaxaione as the single anaesthetic steroid has
fore not suitable for intraocular surgery or open globe
recently been reformulated with the solubilizing agent
injuries. In cats a post-anaesthetic hyperthermic
2-hydroxypropyl-beta cyclodextrin (Alfaxan-CD
response can occur.
RTU, Jurox Pty Ltd., Australia) and is registered for 
cats and dogs only in Australia, New Zeaiand and
Practical use:
South Africa, but registration in the UK and other
countries is currently under review. The Alfaxan?
Induction agent (intravenous).
formulation exists as a sterile, colourless and clear
 Sole anaesthetic agent only for diagnostic or 
'2 Aaiewixodde jo hd jenau e yhm uonios
minor surgical procedures.
Perivascular injection is not painful and does not
 Induction agent for aggressive dogs and 
produce tissue necrosis. This preparation is devoid
fractious cats (intramuscular).
of the adverse side effects related to Cremophor EL
Dose recommendations refer to total drug.
and can also be used in dogs.
Effective after intravenous and intramuscular
administration,
Clinical properties: Neuroactive steroids produce
 Pain after intramuscular injection common.
hypnosis and muscle relaxation by enhancing the in-
 Intact eye and laryngeal reflexes.
hibitory effect of GABA on the GABAA receptor chlo-
Anaesthetic depths difficult to judge.
ride channel complex. Anticonvulsive effects are low.
Do not redose.
Dependent on the dose, sedation or anaesthesia can
Use eye ointment.
be achieved. Intravenous injection leads to rapid re-
 Do not use in patients with hypertrophic 
laxation and induction of anaesthesia (30-60 seconds)
cardiomyopathy.
with dose-dependent duration. Intramuscular injection
Do not use in patients with pancreatic disease.
is effective, with onset of sedation/anaesthesia within
Avoid in epileptics.
 7-10 minutes, but with a very variable degree of ef-
Avoid in animals with increased ICP (trauma,
fect. Subcutaneous injection is unsuitable for induc-
tumours).
 tion of anaesthesia.
Apneustic breathing (apnoea with high doses).
Neither alfaxalone nor alfadolone acetate under-
 Recover animal in a quiet, dimmed and heated
 goes significant plasma protein binding. Glucuro-
room.
nidation processes play a major role in excretion of
 Premedication with acepromazine, alpha-2
the drug and hepatic insufficiency will prolong an-
agonist or benzodiazepine reduces dose
aesthetic time. Recovery depends more on drug
requirements and improves recovery.
metabolism than redistribution and cumulative
effects are low. However, in one study in cats, anaes-
Steroid anaesthetics
thetic time increased non-linearly with doses above
5 mg/kg (of both the Cremophor EL preparation
Alfaxalone
and Alfaxan).
In dogs, alfaxalone (Alfaxans) is cleared from
Physicochemical properties: The progesterone de-
plasma very rapidly (see Figure 13.6). This is re-
rivative alfaxalone is a neuroactive steroid. This mol-
flected by an average duration of anaesthesia (al-
ecule is insoluble in water and previously has been
lowing endotracheal intubation) of 6 minutes and
143
Chapter t3 Intravenous anaesihetics
26 minutes after 2 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg, respectively.
Maintenance: incremental dosing is
in cats, dose-cependent disposition with a slower
approximately 0.f mg/kg/minute (0.01 mf/kg/
elimination than in dogs occurs. Doses of 5 mg/kg
minute) in premedicated dogs and cats,
i.v. and 25 mg/kg i.v. resulted in mean anaesthesia
Aea Aew sasuodsa lenpiaipui yhnoulle
times to complete recovery of 44 minutes and 68
In practical terms, a 10 kg dog would require
minutes, respectively.
10 mg or 1 ml for 10 additional minutes of 
Saffan alone produces a similar dose-dependent
anaesthesia, while a 5 kg cat would require
reduction in stroke volume, arterial pressure and cen-
5 mg or 0.5 ml for 10 additional minutes of
tral venous pressure to thiopental in cats. However,
anaesthesia.
hypotension is not dose-related, can be profound and
is accompanied by tachycardia, which is mainly the
result of histamine release rather than the effects of
 the steroid anaesthetic itself. Saffan produces ex-
Neuroleptanalgesia
celient muscle relaxation and results in smooth an-
aesthesia induction. A bolus injection of Saffan
The concept of neuroleptanalgesia involves the com-
decreases cerebral metabolism, cerebral blood flow
bination of a neuroleptic agent (benzodiazepines,
and ICP. Recovery from Saffan* anaesthesia can be
butyrophenones, phenothiazines) with a potent opioid
excitable, although this can be alleviated by recovery
analgesic. This technique can be used in two ways.
in a quiet area.
At low doses, it is commonly used for sedation and
 Alfaxan produces excellent anaesthesia induction
 premedication via the intramuscuiar route before gen-
and recovery, with dose-dependent changes in cardio-
eral anaesthesia, which is described in detail in Chap-
vascular and respiratory variables and anaesthetic
ter 12. At high doses, usualy given by intravenous
duration in dogs. At the recommended induction dose
injection, the combinations can be used to produce
(see Figures 13.7 and 13.8) all cardiorespiratory para-
sufficient CNS depression to allow endotracheal intu-
meters return to baseline within 15 minutes. Signifi-
 bation and moderate surgical stimulation. The
 cant respiratory depression occurs only at between
excitatory effects of high doses of opioids make this
three and five times the recommended dose. Anaes-
technique unsuitable for heaithy cats, although it has
thesia is characterized by excelent muscle relaxa-
been used in severely debilitated cats.
tion and lack of response to electrical and mechanical
Neuroleptanalgesia is characterized by analgesia,
 noxious stimulation.
suppression of motor activity. suppression of auto-
In cats, Alfaxan at 5 mg/kg i.v. results in smooth
nomic reflexes and behavioural indifference, but not
 anaesthesia induction with excellent muscle relaxa-
'true' unconsciousness. Neuroleptanalgesia combina-
tion. Premedication with medetomidine, aceproma-
tions are not suitable for routine induction of anaes-
 zine, butorphanol or midazolam reduces the induction
 thesia in heaithy, young animals, because a true
dose to 2-3 mg/kg i.v. (see Figure 13.8).
anaesthetic state is not reached unless followed by
another anaesthetic agent (nitrous oxide, volatile or
Practicaf use:
injectable anaesthetic), or unduly high doses are used.
However, in high-risk and debilitated patients, tranquil-
Saffan:
lizer-opioid combinations can have a profound effect.
 Do not use Saffan in dogs
The advantages of this technique are a wide safety
Used as induction (and maintenance) agent in
margin and partial reversibility (by using opioid anta-
cats, but histamine release possible
gonists). The disadvantages are: possible occurrence
Dose recommendations refer to total steroid 
of panting or marked respiratory depression (requiring
Best used intravenously: intramuscular
 artificial ventilation); occurrence of spontaneous move-
administration less reliable
 ments; sensitivity to noise and light; and possible post-
Give to effect
operative behavioural changes, especialy when used
Facial and paw oedema, profound
as the sole anaesthetic agents. Bradycardia related to
hypotension can occur in cats, treat with
the high dose of an opioid can be treated with para-
antihistamine
sympatholytic agents (atropine, glycopyrronium).
Do not use in conjunction with barbiturates.
The 'classic' neuroleptanalgesic mixtures contain
phenothiazines or butyrophenones like aceprom-
Alfaxan:
azine, proprionylpromazine, droperidol or fluanisone,
Induction agent; redosing possible
which can lead to significant alpha-1 receptor block-
 Best used intravenously; intramuscular
 ade (hypotension unresponsive to adrenaline).
administration less reliable
Benzodiazepines (diazepam, midazolam) possess
No accumulation and can be used as a
a wide safety margin with minimal cardiovascular
 maintenance agent
depression and lack of alpha-1 effects. Therefore,
Give to effect (see Figures 13.7 and 13.8):
 combinations of an opioid with a benzodiazepine
Consider premedication (20-50% reduction
are well suited for induction of anaesthesia in
in induction dose depending on
severely debilitated high-risk patients (Figure 13.11).
premedication)
The time required to obtain conditions suitable for
Consider physical status of the animal
endotracheal intubation is longer than with other
 Slow injection (60 seconds, one quarter of
intravenous anaesthetics (>2-3 minutes) but haemo-
the dose every 15 seconds)
dynamic stability is excellent.
144
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
13:
Dose
Maintenance.
Midazolam/diazepam
 0.2 mg/kg i.v.
Inhalant 
lnject in aiternate increments until desired effect (intubation)
Hydromorphone
0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.v.
 Give opioid first, wait few minutes, then administer benzodiazepine 
 Do not mix in same syringe (excitement possible)
Methadone
0.5 mg/kg i.v.
Midazolam
0.2 mg/kg i.v.
Inhalant 
 Give opioid first, wait few minutes, then administer benzodiazepine
Fentany!
2-5 pg/kg i.v.
Do not mix in same syringe
Midazolam
0.9 mg/kg i.v.
Micazolam
 Mixed in one syringe, give in increments until intubation possible
Sufentanil
3 μg/kg i.v.
0.9 mg/kg/h 
Used in gastric dilatation-volvulus, endotoxaemic patients
Sufentanil
Requires intermittent positive pressure ventlation/oxygen
 3 μg/kg/h
Bradycardia possible
Reverse midazolam with flumazenil if necessary at end (10-30 μg/kg i.v.)
Total intravenous anaesthesia
in plasma concentrations and subsequently excessive
drug effect at the time of the bolus and inadequate
TIVA refers to induction and maintenance of anaes-
effect before the next bolus. Continuous infusion re-
thesia by intravenous drugs only. An intravenous an-
sults in less variation in plasma levels with fewer os-
aesthetic (usuaily propofol) provides hypnosis, muscle
cillations in haemodynamic, respiratory and central
relaxation and immobility, whereas analgesia is pro-
effects and thus is safer for the animal.
vided by an opioid, an alpha-2 agonist or ketamine.
 Pharmacokinetic models can be used to develop dos-
Both the analgesic and the anaesthetic can be given
ing regimes with intravenous anaesthetic infusions. Such
by the intravenous route as an infusion. Some anaes-
models are a mathematical description of how the body
thetists prefer to provide the analgesic in the premedi-
'disposes' a drug. For detailed accounts of pharmaco-
cation by the intramuscular route and supplement it
kinetic principles and models, standard pharmacokinetic
as required. Anaesthesia can be maintained by inter-
textbooks should be consulted (e.g. Riviere, 1999). The
mitent boluses, but continuous infusion produces a
 parameters describing the disposition process are usu-
more stable plane of anaesthesia and is more eco-
ally estimated by administering a known dose of a drug
nomical in terms of total drug use. Drugs can be given
and measuring the resulting plasma concentrations at
as a CRl with or without manual adjustment (variable
various time points. Pharmacokinetic variables impor-
rate infusion, VRi). Abetter adjustment of anaesthetic
tant for the basic description of intravenous drugs are
depth can be achieved with target-controlled infusion
the volume of distribution, total body clearance and
(TCI) devices, which deliver a drug to a predicted blood 
elimination half-life (Figure 13.12).
concentration set by the veterinary surgeon.
Typically the drug concentration versus time curve
is described as an exponential equation. Depending
Principles
 on the shape of the curve, the equation can have a
 Sedation or anaesthesia can be maintained by inter-
single exponent (one-compartment model), two ex-
mittent drug boluses. This technique is simple and 
ponents (two-compartment model) or three exponents
 does not require special equipment. The disadvan-
(three-compartment model), which reflect different 
 tage of intermittent drug boluses is the large variation
rates of drug decay at different time points.
SymbotDescription
22
Distribution half-life
salleu aui y euo a esap  eusd ui bnp jo une ue no paba a
VElimination half-ife
T:23
dependent on the extent of drug distribution in the body (volume of distribution) and 
required to eliminate a drug from the body
Total body clearance
Clg .
Volume of plasma (blood) cleared of a drug per unit time; tofal body clearance includes
all eimination processes (liver, kidney, lung)
Volumes of distibution:
Theoretical or apparent degree of dilution of a drug within the body. A large voume of
Volume of thecentral comparment
Vc
distribution implies extensive distribution of a drug to tissues. The lower limit is the 
Vvolume of distribution at seady state
Vdss'
plasma volume.The highly lipophilic anaesthetics have a very large volume of
Vd area
1
Apparent volume of distribution
Vd (B)
 change dose requirements
The volume of the diferent estimates varies, with Vc < Vdss< Vd area < Vd (B)
Vdssdefines the extent of drug dilution at maximum distribution or when all
 compartments are in equilibrium; V, is the volume from which clearance is determined 
and is used for target-controlled infusion calculations
145
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
Half-lives are derived from the rate of change in
Loading dose (LD) = desired plasma concentration (Cpt) x
drug concentration; different half-lives are reported.
volume of distribution (Vd.g)
depending on the model. in a one-compartment model,
only the elimination half-life occurs: in a two-compart-
Many different volumes of distribution are reported
 ment model a distribution half-life and an elimination
in pharmacokinetic studies (see Figure 13.12) and
hal-life are estimated: in a three-compartment model
there is considerable confusion about which one to
three half-lives exist. Intravenous anaesthetics are usu-
-ul jenueu e iol asop bupeol e jo uogewjse jof esn
ally described by two- or three-compartment models:
fusion regime. The volume of distribution at steady
a rapid initial decrease in plasma drug concentration
state (Vdss) seems to be a very robust estimate be-
(distribution) is followed either by a second slower dis-
cause it is independent of any elimination processes
and constants, and avoids massive over- or underes-
timation of a loading dose as can occur with other
the same drug contributes to the often large variation
distribution volumes.
in reported elimination half-lives (see Figure 13.6)
Plasma concentrations and, thereby. anaesthe-
After infusion of an intravenous anaesthetic, the
 sia are maintained by a maintenance infusion rate.
offset of effect (recovery) is not merely a function of
which compensates for drug 'losses' (distribution,
the elimination half-life, but is affected by the rate of
excretion, metabolism). Therefore, the maintenance
equilibration between plasma and effect site and by
dose can be derived from the knowledge of the
the duration of infusion. Therefore, the context-sen-
total body clearance of a drug and the desired
sitive half-time has been introduced, which is defined
plasma concentration:
as the time for the plasma concentration to decrease
by 50% after termination of an intravenous infusion
designed to maintain a constant plasma concentra-
Maintenance dose (MD) = Cpt x total body clearance (CLa)
tion. 'Context' refers to infusion duration. Consider-
able differences between the elimination half-life after
The ideal drug for TIvA does not accumulate and
a single intravenous bolus and context-sensitive half-
would allow infusion at a constant rate over pro-
times after different infusion times can be demon-
longed periods of time. However, distribution proc-
strated for many drugs (thiopental, ketamine, fentanyl).
esses over time, individual and breed differences
asop bupeoi e jo isisuo vall lot suawibai buisoa
in pharmacokinetics and sensitivity to a drug, and
aimed to achieve an effective concentration of the drug
surgical stimulation make adjustments of the infu-
in the plasma, or better at the effect site (brain), con-
 sion rate necessary. Therefore, the infusion rate is
 sistent with anaesthesia. In the case of anaesthesia,
rarely kept at a constant over the whole anaesthetic.
the loading dose of a drug is equivalent to an anaes-
but is adjusted to the animal's needs. A common
thesia induction dose. With the knowledge of the vol-
approach is to keep either the analgesic or the
ume of distribution of a drug and the effective plasma
 propofol at a constant rate and infuse the other drug 
concentration, a loading dose can be calculated:
to effect (Figures 13.13 and 13.14),
Drugs.
Maintenance dose
Infusion
Propofof
4-6 mg/kg
 0.2 mg/kg/minute
 Deep sedation, without 
CRI
 or 2 mg/kg about every 5 minutes
endotracheal tube
as required
Propofol
4-6 mg/kg
0.4-0.5 mg/kg/minute
 Non-painfLl procedures
VRI
Propoiol
2-4 mg/kg
0.1-0.2 mg/kg/minute
Surgery
BA
Fentany!
5 μg/kg
0.5 μg/kg/minute
CRI
Propofol
2-4mg/kg
0.3mg/kg/minute
Surgery
CRI
Fentany!
5 μg/kg
0.f6-0.3 μg/kg/minute
VR1
Propofol.
2-4 mg/kg
0.3 mg/kg/minute
Surgery
CRI
Alfentanil 
5 μg/kg
1-5 ug/kg/minute
VRI
Propofot
2-4 mg/kg
0.3-0.5 mg/kg/minute
Surgery
VRI
：
Remifentanil .
No loading
0.3-0.6 μg/kg/minute
Propofol
2-4mng/kg
Plasma target 3-3.5 μg/ml
Surgery
TCI
Remifentanil
No loading
0.2-0.5 μg/kg/minute
VRI
infusion; VRI = Variable rate infusion.
146
Chapter 13 Irtravenous anaesthetics
Drugs
slnfusion7
A
：
：
Propofol
6-8 mg/kg
 0.2 mg/kg/minute
 Deep sedation, without
1801
:
 or 2 mg/kg every 5 minutes to effect
endotracheal tube
Propofol
 6-8 mg/kg
0.4-0.5 mg/kg/rnainute
 Non-painful procedures 
VRI
Propofol
 4~-6 mg/kg
 0.12-0.3 mg/kg/minute
Surgery
VRI
Fentanyl
1 μg/kg
0.1 μg/kg/minute
Propofol
 4-6 mg/kg
0.12-0.3 mg/kg/minute
Surgery
180
Alientanit
5 μgkg
 0.5 μg/kg/minute
 Propofol
4-6mg/kg
0.12-0.3 mg/kg/minute
Surgery
180 1
Sufentanil
0.1 μg/kg
0.01 μg/kg/minute
Propofol
 6-8 mg/kg
0.3 mg/kg/minute
Surgery
CRI
Remifentanil
Bupeo ON 
0.2-0.3 μig/kg/minute
VRI
Infusion regimes for TivA in the cat aiter premedication and anaesthesia induction with propofol
CRi = Constant rate infusion; TCI = Target-controlled infusion: VRi = Variable rate infusion.
Target-controlled infusion
The idea of TCl systems is to aim at a specific drug
plasma (effect site) concentration, which is known to
produce a desired effect. Based on a mathematical
(pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic) model, a micro-
processor predicts changes in drug concentrations
and controls an infusion device. Infusion rates are
aul yieigo ot weisis siut Ag Alleoewoine paisnipe
targeted drug plasma concentration. with an open,
model-based system, the anaesthetist sets the target
concentration with the knowledge of drug effects. The
plasma target is a calculated number based on a
EHSK
 mathematical model and not a measured concentra-
tion. Therefore, the performance of TCl systems de-
a
pends on the pharmacokinetic model used and
Volumetric infusion pumps.
requires careful evaluation. The next step in develop-
ment of automated drug delivery systems is to feed
the measured drug efect (i.e. blood pressure, EEG
Piston pumps also divide the millitre dose into por-
traces) back into the system. With such 'closed loop'
tions, which can produce a 'mini-bolus' effect within
 systems the model is permanently updated based on
the patient, especially with diluted drugs with a very
actual drug effects rather than on drug concentration.
short half-life (e.g. vasopressors). Infusion by gravity
with an infusion set is a simple way of administering
Infusion devices
an anaesthetic continuously, but is less accurate than
Infusion devices are classified as either controllers or
with an infusion pump and requires careful calcula-
 positive displacement pumps. Rate controllers sim-
tion and adjustment of the drip rate.
 ply control the flow produced by gravity. Infusion sets
 Syringe pumps (Figure 13.16) that use a stepper
with regulating roller clamps come in different sizes
 motor with a drive screw (syringe drivers) are particu-
labelled as number of drops producing 1 ml of fluid.
larly suitable for the delivery of potent anaesthetics.
They deliver fluids/drugs with an accuracy of ±10%
Rates as low as 0.01 ml/h can be delivered with high
depending on the height above ground.
accuracy (2-3%). Some syringe drivers include a cal-
Positive displacement pumps contain an active
Culator feature, which enables one to set the patient 
 pumping mechanism. Volumetric infusion pumps (Fig-
ure 13.15) work with different delivery mechanisms
(bellows, piston, peristaltic, shuttle) and can produce
delivery rates of 0.1-1999 ml/h with an accuracy of
±5%. This type of pump often requires special tubing/
060
infusion sets and cannot be used with regular infu-
sion sets. Administration of anaesthetics or haemo-
dynamic agents using a drip infusion via roller clamps 
or a volumetric infusion pump requires dilution of the
very potent drugs to obtain dose rates (volume/time)
 Syringe driver.
become a problem, particularly in very smali animals.
147
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
weight, the drug concentration and the infusion rate
possible with low dose rates (low plasma concen-
in dose/weight/time and the pump calculates the infu-
trations) of propofol, which maintain spontaneous
 sion in volume/unit time. Numerous pumps allow auto-
respiration. However, propofol is a respiratory depres-
 matic recognition of syringe size and staged infusions,
sant and causes hypoxaemia even when spontaneous
with a loading dose and a maintenance infusion
respiration persists. Therefore, oxygen should be 
being programmable. Special tubing is not required
supplemented for all procedures lasting more than
with syringe drivers. Syringe drivers can deliver drugs
15-20 minutes and equipment for intubation and
accurately, even to very small patients, and infusion 
basic artificial ventilation should be available. TIVA
of the anaesthetic can be adjusted independent of fluid 
protocols for prolonged, invasive surgical procedures
 administration.
require concurrent administration of an effective
Syringe drivers (e.g. Diprifusor from Zeneca for
opioid. With these combinations spontaneous respi-
propofol in humans) with inbuilt computer software and
ration usually ceases and endotracheal intubation and 
pharmacokinetic models to run TCls, are not commer-
mechanical ventilation are required.
cially available for dogs or cats at present. Syringe
Various propofol TIvA infusion regimes are used
drivers (Graseby 3400, 3500), which can be control-
with excellent results in dogs for extended procedures
led by a custom-built externai computer and pharma-
(>2 hours), but prolonged recoveries have to be ex-
 cokinetic modelling software. have been used to target
pected in Greyhounds (see Figure 13.13). In cats, it
plasma concentrations of various drugs in experimen-
seems advisable to restrict duration of propofol infu-
tal animal studies and for evaluation of a TCl protoco!
sions (30-60 minutes) because of cats' increased
 for propofol anaesthesia in dogs. Because of limited 
sensitivity to phenolic compounds and prolonged re-
availability of infusion hardware and software, as well 
coveries (see Figure 13.14).
as evaluated population pharmacokinetics, the TCl
Maintenance of anaesthesia with TIVA by means
idea is not yet ready to be used in veterinary practice.
 of an infusion pump or a syringe driver does not mean
anaesthesia is automated without intervention. Anaes-
TIVA protocols
thesia monitoring and adjustment of anaesthetic depth
Drugs used for maintenance of anaesthesia require a
by changing infusion rates shouid be as meticulous
pharmacokinetic profile that allows adjustment of an-
as during inhalation anaesthesia and by changing
aesthetic depth by changing the infusion rate over
vaporizer settings.
prolonged periods of time without significant accumu-
lation and without significant prolongation of recovery
(short context-sensitive half-time). This means rapid
Balanced anaesthesia
onset of effect, short duration of effect and high clear-
ance rates with rapid metabolism to inactive sub-
As with propofol TIVA, different analgesic compounds
stances and excretion.
(opioids, medetomidine, ketamine, lidocaine) can be
Of the currently licensed drugs, propofol is the most
used as CRls in conjunction with volatile agents, re-
suitable and most used for maintenance of anaesthe-
sulting in a type of balanced anaesthesia. The anal-
 sia by continuous infusion. Because propofol has poor
gesic and anaesthetic-sparing properties of these
anaigesic properties it is often combined with fenta-
drugs allow reduced concentrations of volatile agents
nyl or one of its derivatives such as alfentanil,
and thereby less cardiovascular depression. Dose
 sufentanil or remifentanil. Medetomidine and ketamine
rates of CRls for balanced anaesthesia techniques
can also given by infusion (see Chapter 9).
using various drugs are given in Figure 13.17. For
 Diagnostic procedures, cast changes and surgi-
descriptions of detailed pharmacology of the single
cal procedures with low invasiveness might be
't pue e saideuo oi paaiai si epeai aui shnp
Drugs
Fentanyl
3-5 μg/kg i..
0.08-0.3 μg/kg/minute
VRl to effect 
IPPV 
Bradycardia
 Alfentanil
 2.5-5 μg/kg i.v.
 0.5-5 μg/kg/minute
VRI
JPPV
Bradycardia
. Sufentanil -
.0.1-3 μg/kg i.v.
0.015-0.1 μg/kg/minute
 VRI
IPPV
Bradycardia
 Remifentanil
No loading.
 0,2-0.6 μg/kg/minute
VRI
IPPV
Bradycardia
：
Ketamine,
0.3-0.5 mg/kg i.v.
 2-20 μg/kg/minute
CRI
High doses lead to ketamine 'signs'
(common 5 μg/kg/minute)
Medetomidine
No loading
1-1.5 μg/kg/h
CRI
Bradycardia
 Constant rate infusions (CRls) used in conjunction with inhalation anaesthesia in order to reduce anaesthetic
requirements. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) becomes necessary. VRl = Variable rate 
infusion. (continues)
148
Chapter 13 Intravenous anaesthetics
"Drugs"
Maintenance dose
Dexmedetomidine
No lcading
0.5-1 μg/kg/h
180
i Bradycardia
Lidocaine
Dog: 2-4 mg/kg
25-80 μg/kg/mainute
180
Care withlidocaine infusions incats because
Cat:0.25-0.75
10-40 ug/kg/minute
CRI
of the potential for toxicity (seizures and
mgikg slow i.v.
 severe bradycardia)
：
Morphine
Dog: 10 ml/kg
 3.3 pμg/kgiminute
CR1
 5 mg morphine 
Lidocaine
 Cat: no loading 
50 ugikgminute
75mg lidocaine
Ketamine
10 μg/kg/minute
 15 mg ketamine in 250 ml NaCl
{MLK]
infused at 10 mlikg/h
postoperative 2 mi/kg/h
(continued) Constant rate infusions (CRls) used in conjunction with inhalation anaesthesia in order to reduce
 anaesthetic requirements. Intermitent positive pressure vertilation (IPPV) becomes necessary VRl = Variable 
rate infusion.
A
1.2
References and further reading
evaluation of a sulfobutyl ether beta-cyclodextrin enabled etomidate
formufation. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 93(10). 2585-2594
 Mendes G and Selmi A (2003) Use of a combination of propofol and
Adam H, Glen JB and Hoyle P (1980) Pharmacokinetics in laboratory
fentanyl, alfentanil, or sufentanil for total intravenous anesthesia in
animals of ICI 35 868, a new iV anaesthetic agent. British Journa!
cats. Journal of fthe American Veterinary Medical Association 223.
ofAnaesthesia52.743-746
1608-1613
Beths T. Glen JB, Reid J, Monteiro A and Nolan A (2001) Evaluation
Muir W, Wiese AJ and March PA (2003) Effecis of morphine, lidocaine.
and optimisation of target-controled infusion systems for
 ketamine, and morphine-licocaine-ketarnine drug combination on 
administering propofol to dogs as part of a total intravenous
anaesthetic technique during dental surgery. Veterinary Record148.
isoflurane. American Journal of Veterinary Research64. 1155-1160
198-203.
Murrell J, Notten RwV and Hellebrekers L (2005) Clinical investigation
Boscan P, Pypendop B, Solano Aand llkiw J (2005) Cardiovascular and
 of remifentanil and propofol for the total intravenous anaesthesia
.
respiratory effects of ketamine intusions in isoflurane-anesthetized
of dogs. Veterinary Record 156, 804-808
dogs before and during noxious stimulation.American Journal of
 Musk G, Pang D, Beths T and Flaherty D (2006) Target controlled infusion
2
Veterinary Research 66, 2122-2129.
Ferre P, Pasloske K, Whittem T et al. (2006) Plasma pharmacokinetics
press)
of alfaxalone in dogs after an intravenous bolus of Alfaxan-CD RTU.
 Nolan A and Reid J (1993) Pharmacokinetics of propofol administered
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Anaigesia 33(4),229-236
by infusion in dogs undergoing surgery. British Journar of
：
Hall L, Ciarke KW and Trim C (200f) Veterinary Anaesthesia. 1o" edn.
Anaesthesia 70.546-551
 Saunders, Edinburgh
 Nolan A, Reid J and Grant S (1993) The effects of halothane and nitrous
Hanna R, Borchard A and Schmidt S (1988) Pharmacokinetics of
 oxide on the pharmacokinetics of propofol in dogs. Journal of
ketamine HCl and metabolite I in the cat: a comparison of i.v, i.m.,
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 16, 335-342
and rectal administration.JournalofVeterinary Pharmacoiogy and
 Pascoe PJ. likiw JE and Frischmeyer KJ (2006a) The effect of
Therapeutics 11. 84-93
the duration of propofol administration on recovery from
Heit M,Paoske KWhitmT,RanasingheMad iQ (2004)Plama
anesthesia in cats. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Anaigesia 33(1).
pharmacokinetics of alfaxaione in cats after administrationat 5 and
2-7
 Pascoe PJ, Raekallio M. Kuusela E, McKusick B and Granhoim M
Proceedings of the American College of Veterinary Internal
(2006b) Changes in the minimum alveolar concentration of
Medicine, Minneapolis, pp. 849-850
isoflurane and some cardiopuimonary measurements during three
[Ikiw J, Benthuysen J, Ebling W and McNeal D (1991) A comparative 
continuous infusion rates of dexmedetomidine in dogs. Veterinary
Study of the pharmacokinetics of thiopental in the rabbit, sheep
Anaesthesia and Analgesia 33(2), 97-103
and dog. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics
 Pypendop B and likiw J (2005) Pharrmacokinetics of ketamine and its
14. 134-140
metabolite, norketamine, after intravenous administration of a bolus
lkiw J and Pascoe P (2003) Cardiovascular effects of propofol alone
of ketaminte to isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. American Journal of
and in combination with ketamine for total intravenous anesthesia
Veterinary Research 66, 2034-2038
in cats. American Journal of Veterinary Research 64, 913-917
Riviere JE (1999) Comparative Pharmacokinetics - Principies,
Techniques and Appfications. Iowa Slate University Press, Ames.
various anesthetic agents on laryngeal motion during laryngoscopy
lowa
in normal dogs. Veterinary Surgery 33, 102-106
Wertz E, Benson G. Thurmon J et al. (t9go) Pharmacokinetics of
Kaka J and Hayton W (1980) Pharmacokinetics of ketamine and two.
 etomidate in cats. American Journal of Veterinary Research 51,
metabolites in the dog. yournal of Pharmacokinetics and
281-285
Biopharmaceutics 8, 193-202
 Wright M (1982) Pharmacologic efects of ketamine and its use in
Luna S, Cassu R, Castro G et al. (2004) Effects of four anaesthetic 
veterinary medicine. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association18D.1462-1471
puppies born by caesarean section. Veferinary Record 154, 387-
 Zhang J, Maland L. Hague B et al.(1998) Buccal absorption of etomidate
389
from a solid formulation in dogs. Anesthesia and Anaigesia 86, 1116-
 Mclntosh MP. Schwarting N and Rajewski FA (2004) In viro and in vivo
1122
：
149
Inhalant anaesthetics
Nora S. Matthews
Introduction
Disadvantages
Inhalant anaesthetics have specific advantages and
The inhalant anaesthetics require the use of a costly
anaesthetic machine, breathing system and vaporizer,
For most patients, the advantages outweigh the dis-
which the user must understand and be able to trou-
advantages, which is why they have become a main-
ble-shoot (see Chapters 4 and 5). For instance, the
 stay for most practices. Since methoxyflurane is no
veterinary surgeon must be aware that carbon mon-
longer being manufactured on a large scale and has
largely fallen out of use, the reader is referred to the
tile inhalants with soda lime. Pollution of the workplace 
previous edition of this manual or other texts for dis-
 is possible with inhalants and effective scavenging
cussion of its use. Halothane is included for the sake
 systems must be in place (covered later and in Chap-
 of completeness, although its use and availability are
ter 5). Therefore, appropriate maintenance of the
also decreasing.
machine and use of fresh, moist soda lime is critical.
In general, soda lime should be changed after every
6-8 hours of use and dry soda lime should be replaced,
Advantages
or the system flushed with oxygen to prevent the
accumulation of carbon monoxide. Dose-dependent
All of the inhalants have the advantage that they are
cardiopulmonary depression is produced by the inha-
generaily administered in oxygen and usually through 
lants and this must be carefully monitored.
an endotracheal tube (although a mask can be used).
Both the addition of oxygen and a secured airway con-
tribute to greater patient safety. The more modern in-
Minimum alveolar concentration
halant anaesthetics (isoflurane, sevoflurane) act rapidly.
values
produce less cardiac sensitivity to catecholamines and
are minimally metabolized by the liver. Changes in
To use the inhalants effectively, the concepts of mini-
depth of anaesthesia with modern inhalants can be
 mum alveolar concentration (MAC) values and solu-
produced more rapidly, compared with injectable or
bility of the inhalant (usually blood/gas solubility, see
intravenous infusion techniques, with arapid, complete
 later) must be understood. The minimum alveolar con-
recovery from anaesthesia. Their rapid elimination from
 centration is that concentration in the alveoli required
the body, minimal metabolism by the liver or kidneys 
to prevent 50% of a group of animals from respond-
and decreased myocardial sensitization to catechol-
ing with purposeful movement to a supramaximal nox-
amines make the newer agents more appropriate for
jous stimulus (Figure 14.1). It is a value obtained using
geriatric patients. patients with organ dysfunction and
reproducible laboratory techniques under stable con-
exotic species. Although it must be emphasized that
ditions. This information then gives the veterinary sur-
there is no such thing as a completely safe anaesthetic,
there are several reasons for the perception that
the vaporizer at to maintain an appropriate depth of
isoflurane and sevoflurane are 'safer' than halothane,
anaesthesia. However, since the MAC value by defi-
which are covered in the discussion of individual agents.
nition only keeps 50% of animals anaesthetized, the
(CBICIH-CF
 (CF-CHCIO.CF.H),
MAC (dog/cat %)
0.87/1.14
1.28/1.63
2.35/2.58
222/255
Vapour pressure at 25°℃
243
205
197
Gas
Blood/gas solubilty (37"℃)
2.0
1.43
0.63-0.69
0.47
ml of vapour/ml of liquid at 20°℃
195
183
Not appliable
 Physical characteristics and minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of currently used inhalant anaesthetics.
 a = Halothane is a ha:ogenated hydrocarbon. t = lsoflurane and sevoflurane are halogenated ethers.
150
Chapter 14 Inhalant anaesthetics
 actual alveolar concentration for clinical use needs to 
when pre-anaesthetic or injectable induction drugs
be 25-50% greater than the MAC value to achieve a
are not used, the amount of inhalant needed for main-
light surgical plane of anaesthesia when volatile
tenance will be increased.
agents are used alone (see effects of drugs on MAC
Increases in MAC occur with elevation of body tem-
later). Higher concentrations (with the associated
perature and increased levels of catecholamines.
 greater cardiopulmonary depression) will be needed
Factors which have little effect on MAC are:
for invasive procedures unless adjunctive analgesics
are used. Certain situations, as well as drugs, can
Duration of anaesthesia
 affect the minimum alveolar concentration.
Circadian rhythms
Hyper- or hypothyroidism
Factors affecting MAC values
 Severe metabolic acidosis or alkalosis
MAC values are generally measured in a limited popu-
Hypertension
lation of healthy animals under controlled conditions.
Moderate hyper- or hypoventilation.
In clinical practice, these conditions are often not
：
 present; it is therefore important to recognize how
other drugs and conditions will affect the MAC value.
Anaesthetic breathing systems, gas
Factors which decrease the MAC value of inha-
flows and minimum alveolar
lant anaesthetics include:
concentration
 Pre-anaesthetic sedatives, injectable
I is important to understand that the vaporizer setting 
anaesthetics and many analgesics (Figure 14.2)
will only be reflective of patient alveolar inhalant con-
High PaCO,(above 90 mmHg (12 kPa))
centration after the breathing system concentration is
Hypoxaemia (P,O,less than 40 mmHg (5.3 kPa))
well equilibrated with inhalant under stable conditions,
Haematocrit less than 10%
 The concentration of inhalant in the system will de-
。
Increasing age
pend on the choice of anaesthetic breathing system 
Hypothermia
(non-rebreathing or rebreathing), and fresh gas flow
Pregnancy
+
rates used. Expensive monitors can measure inhaled
Concurrent illness.
gas (see Chapter 7), and the alveolar concentration
is measured in the exhaied breath. Rebreathing sys-
Drug
eence
tems (circle or to-and-fro) tend to take longer to equili-
decrease in,studied
brate with vaporizer settings during the early part of
anaesthesia because these systems usually have a
 Buprenorphine
9~14
Cat
lkiw et al, 2002
high internal volume, require lower fresh gas flow rates 
0S-91
Criado et al.,2000
and attached patients are relatively larger compared
to when non-rebreathing systems are used (e.g. Ayres
 Butorphanol
8-19
Cat
lkiw et al, 2002
T-piece, Bain, Lack; see also Chapter 5). Generally,
Diazepam
53
Dog
Hellyer et al. 2001
alveolar concentrations more rapidly reflect
Eleciroacupuncture
15-21
Dog
Jeong and Nam. 2003
vaporizer settings when non-rebreathing systems
and high gas flow rates are used. Rebreathing sys-
Fantanyi
18
Cat
Yackey et al., 2004
tems can be more rapidly equilibrated with vaporizer
(lransdermal)
output by temporarily using high fresh gas flows and
Ketamine
25
Dog
Muir et al., 2003
increasing the vaporizer setting.
Up to 75
Cat
Pascoe el al., 2005
Lidocaine
19-43
Dog
Valverde et al., 2004
3-52
Cat
Pypendop and Ikiw, 2005
Uptake of inhaled anaesthetic gases
48
into the body
Morphine
Dog
Muir et al., 2003
MLK
45
Dog
Muir et al., 2003
Inspired anaesthetic gases are diluted by other gases
(oxygen, nitrogen and carbon dioxide) in the patient's 
auudow einpidg 
21-30
Cat
Golder el al., 1998
lung, so the rate of change of concentration of the
volatile agent in the alveoli will depend on the size of
 Decrease in mirimum alveolar concentration 
 (MAC) of isoflurane associated with commonly
the lung and the volume of gas which is being ex-
used drugs or techniques. MLK = Morphine--lidocaine-
changed (i.e, minute ventilation). If the minute venti-
ketamine combination.
lation is small, the alveolar concentration will increase
more slowly than if it is large. Once the anaesthetic
The decrease in MAC may be significant; for in-
gas reaches the alveoli, uptake by blood occurs; the
 stance, various lidocaine infusion rates have been
rate of this uptake depends on the alveolar/blood an-
found to decrease the MAC of isoflurane in dogs by
aesthetic concentration gradient (which is effectively
19-43% (see Figure 14.2). Clinically, this means
'pushing' the drug) and the blood/gas partition coefi
the delivered concentration of inhalant should be
cient (which is effectively 'pulling' the drug). Agents
decreased when a lidocaine infusion is used and
with relatively low blood/gas solubility (such as
close patient monitoring is essential to prevent over-
isoflurane and sevoflurane) will have slower removai
dosing the patient with anaesthetic. Conversely.
151
Chapter 14 Inhalant anaesthetics
(e.g. halothane) but this allows greater alveolar/blood
Anaesthetic index
The anaesthetic index (Al) is derived from the con-
and therefore uptake is increased overall, leading to
centration of inhalant required to produce apnoea for
fast induction of anaesthesia. Anaesthetic agents with
 60 seconds (i.e. apnoeic concentration) divided by the
higher blood solubility (e.g.methoxyflurane or halo-
MAC value for the inhalant. The lower the Al value,
thane) will produce slower inductions since gradients
the greater the amount of respiratory depression pro-
 are not well established, and more of the agent will be
duced by that inhalant. Al values for cats and dogs
retained in the blood and not transferred to the brain
are presented in Figure 14.3.
where the anaesthetic effect is produced. This is an
oversimplification of a very complicated subject; for a
detailed discussion see Eger (1974) or Sawyer (1982).
 Cardiac output also influences anaesthetic uptake
 from the alveoli; generally, higher blood flow past the
 alveoli will promote greater anaesthetic uptake but
Halothane 
N/A
12.9
large alveoiar/blood anaesthetic concentration gradi-
ents are not established and, therefore, induction of
Isolrane
2.4
2.51
 anaesthesia is actually slowed during high cardiac
Sevoflurane
N/A
3.45
output states. Sick animals with low cardiac output
 states have faster inductions.
 Anaesthetic index of commonly used
 Finally, uptake of anaesthetic agent by tissues must 
inhalational agents in cats and dogs.
be considered. The vessel-rich group (brain, heart,
N/A = Not available.
 intestines, kidneys, liver, spleen and endocrine or-
 gans) receive the majority of cardiac output, so the
concentration of anaesthetic wilequilibrate very
 quickly with the blood in these tissues.
General characteristics of inhaled
Again, if we oversimpify the whole picture impor-
anaesthetics
 tant factors in induction of anaesthesia are as follows:
 To a large extent, the currently used volatile anaes-
 Ventilation must be sufficient to present
thetics share the same characteristics; they all pro-
 anaesthetic molecules to the blood
duce a dose-dependent decrease in cardiac output
 Inspired concentration of anaesthetic must be
and blood pressure, depression of the central nerv-
high enough to "force' iarge numbers of
ous system and have poor analgesic effects. None of
molecules into blood and tissues
the newer agents are particularly good analgesics
 Cardiac output as well as solubility in blood will
when used alone (hence the common use of concur-
interact to affect uptake and delivery of
rent analgesics for very invasive procedures). Since
anaesthetic agents; the less soluble the agent,
 the newer agents are all relatively insoluble and al-
the smaller the influence of changes in blood
veolar/blood gradients are rapidly established, depth
flow on alveolar concentration
 Abnormalities in ventilation to perfusion ratio
of respiratory depression varies slightly between each
(V/Q mismatch: see Chapters 19, 20 and 21)
volatile agent, but generally they all produce dose-
will delay uptake of inhaied anaesthetics; and
dependent depression.
will slow induction.
Halothane
 Putting all of these conditions together can be dem-
Halothane is a very potent (MAC value 0.9% in
onstrated in the folowing potential clinical situation: a
dogs) halogenated hydrocarbon which is falling out
chamber induction (capacity 20 l) of an unpre-
of favour due to decreased production (at least in
medicated cat using isoflurane at a vaporizer setting
the USA) and decreased cost of newer competing
of 2.0% (approx. 1.5 x MAC) with 2 I/minute oxygen
volatile anaesthetics.Halothane does require a
flow rate. It will take a minimum of 10 minutes before
preservative (0.01% thymol) and does not decom-
the concentration in the box is close to 2.0% because
pose in the presence of warm soda lime, but will
 of the low flow rates and high breathing system vol-
attack aluminium, brass, lead, rubber and some
ume. It will be even longer before the alveolar con-
plastics when moisture is present. It has a pleasant,
centration of inhalant in the cat stabilizes at this
non-irritating odour and is a respiratory depressant.
concentration. The unpremedicated cat is probably
Halothane reduces blood pressure, may result
 nervous, therefore its cardiac output may be in-
in bradycardia and will sensitize the myocardia!
creased, thereby slowing inhalant uptake by slowing
conduction system to adrenaline, resulting in
build-up of alveolar concentration. This slower uptake
arrhythmias. It is licensed for both cats and dogs
 may be offset by increased ventilation associated with 
and, compared with methoxyfturane, induction and
the stressful situation. Therefore, it is normal to use
recovery are rapid. Significantly more halothane is
higher oxygen flow rates and vaporizer settings to
metabolized by the liver (approximately 20-25%)
achieve anaesthesia more quickly. Premedication
than the other newer volatile anaesthetics (isoflurane
 helps to relieve stress and may improve uptake of in-
and sevoflurane), making it inappropriate for patients 
halant anaesthetic (by normalizing cardiac output)
with severe liver dysfunction and highlighting the
during mask or chamber induction of anaesthesia.
importance of waste anaesthetic gas scavenging.
152
Chapter 14  Inhalant anaesthetics
lsoflurane
the vaporizer will prevent its popularity in veterinary
Isoflurane is a fluorinated ether, which has been in
anaesthesia at present. The MAC values of desflurane
ael ol plm al aouis siuaed jewue les ul asn
are 7.2% and 9.8% in the dog and cat, respectively.
：
1980s. Since it is very potent (MAC value for dogs is
1.28%) it is usually delivered using a precision, out-
Nitrous oxide
of-circuit' vaporizer. lsoflurane does not require a pre-
Nitrous oxide (NzO) is a gaseous inhalant which has 
servative and does not decompose in the presence
been widely used as an analgesic adjunct alongside
of soda lime (at normal operating temperatures). It
the more potent inhalants. Due to its low solubility, it
has a fairly strong, pungent odour and is a respiratory
was widely used with halothane to speed anaesthetic
depressant, as weli as producing dose-dependent
uptake in the first few minutes of administration of NO
cardiovascular depression. However, heart rhythm is
(second gas effect). The second gas effect occurs when
stable. As it is much less soluble than halothane, in-
two anaesthetics are given together. Uptake of a large
duction, recovery and changes in depth of anaesthe-
volume of NzO (typically used at flow rates of several
sia are rapid in comparison with halothane. Less than
litres per minute) combined with the insolubility of NO
1 % of isoflurane is metabolized by the patient (since
 augments uptake of volatile agent from the alveoli, thus
the majority is exhaled) making it a good choice of
increasing the delivery of the second gas (e.g. halo-
inhalant for patients with hepatic or renal dysfunction.
thane, which is delivered in millilitres per minute) and 
concentrating the halothane left behind'. This second
Sevoflurane
 gas effect has been found not to be as advantageous
Sevoflurane is also a fluorinated ether, which has been 
with isoflurane or sevoflurane since they are already
more recently introduced into veterinary use (late
rapidly taken up from alveoli into the bloodstream.
1990s). It is slightly less potent (MAC value for dogs is
Although true anaesthesia cannot be achieved in
2.36%) than isoflurane and requires a different
dogs or cats with NO alone (since the MAC value is
vaporizer from that used for isoflurane (since the
so high), the use of NO at inspired levels of 50-65%
vapour pressure is different). Sevoflurane does not re-
facilitates appropriate anaesthetic depth without
quire a preservative, but can decompose in the
using higher concentrations of the more cardiopulmo-
presence of soda lime to produce compound A, which
nary depressant volatile agents. Some have advo-
is nephrotoxic in rats. At normal oxygen flow rates (not 
 cated using 75% NO with another volatile inhalant,
<10 ml/kg/minute), production of compound A does not
but it is imperative that inspired oxygen concentra-
appear to be clinically relevant. Production of compound
tions are 33% or greater in anaesthetized patients. If
A is greater with Baralyme than with soda lime, and is
75% N,O is used with 3% volatile inhalant, the amount
greater at higher concentrations of sevoflurane and
of oxygen in the system is less than 22% (depending
lower oxygen flow rates. Sevoflurane is metabolized 
on how much carbon dioxide is in the system); in ef-
to produce fluoride ions but no toxicity has been
fect the inspired oxygen concentration in the system
associated with this, even in patients with some renal
is now similar to room air. The maximum inspired NO
dysfunction. However, since all anaesthetics can com-
can thus only be about 65% to allow adequate inspired
：
promise renal function, the veterinary surgeon would
oxygen levels. Fifty percent inspired N,O (approxi-
mately 1 I/minute oxygen flow used with 1 l/minute
urine output. Sevoflurane is currently considerably more
N,O) in a rebreathing system is still effective at lower-
%:
expensive than isoflurane, but, since it is less soluble
ing some volatile anaesthetic requirements and can
 than isoflurane, very rapid changes in the depth of an-
aesthesia are possible. One advantage of sevoflurane
of N,O (50-65%) it is advisable to use a pulse 0xi-
is that mask inductions are well tolerated (since it is
 meter to monitor oxygen saturation of haemoglobin.
not as pungent as isoflurane and does not induce
pue uabixo aun buas waisis buuieaiget-uou e uj 
coughing). The cardiovascular depression observed is
NO flowmeters in a ratio of 1:2 (for example 1 l/minute
similar to that observed with isoflurane, but the degree
 oxygen and 2 1/minute NzO) will still provide 33% in-
'xapu oeuseeue Ag pebpnl uoissaidap Aioiendsai jo
spired oxygen.
see above) is less profound with sevoflurane. Approxi-
 N,O can be advantageous in that it produces mild
mately 3% of sevoflurane is metabolized by the patient,
 sympathetic stimulation which tends to support the
which means it is still a good choice for patients with
cardiovascular system. Caution should always be
hepatic or renal dysfunction.
used with NO in patients where diffusion of the gas
into currently existing closed gas pockets might be
Desflurane
detrimental (e.g. a patient with gastric dilatation). The
 Desflurane is also a fluorinated ether, which is only
volume of the closed gas space will increase as N,O
approved for use in humans. There has been some
crosses into the pocket faster than nitrogen leaves,
research into the use of desflurane in the veterinary
and the volume increase can exacerbate problems
field, but the main detractor has been the need for a
further. The endotracheal tube cuff can also increase
very specialized vaporizer. Since desflurane has a very
 in volume, so patients receiving NzO should also have
high vapour pressure (664 mmHg (88.5 kPa) at 20°C)
the cuffs rechecked approximately half an hour after
 it requires an expensive heated vaporizer to produce
 starting NzO administration to avoid excess pressure
an accurate output. Although desflurane appears to
 on the tracheal mucosa. Adequate oxygen should also
have characteristics which make it attractive for use
be provided during recovery to prevent diffusion
in animals (low blood/gas solubility of 0.42) with
hypoxia caused by the rapid outpouring of N,O into
promising results in equine trials, it appears the cost of
the aiveoli after its administration is discontinued. This
153
Chapter 14 Inhalani anaesthetics
rapid accumuiation of NO can dilute oxygen levels
within the alveoli and cause hypoxaemia. Supple-
mental oxygen should be continued for 5-10 minutes
flow fll vaporizers at the end of the working day)
following termination of N,O.
ansodxa aonai ol sushs u paay um sazoden jpisu
to liquid inhalant
Discard ermpty botles with the tops attached and secured
Calculation of inhalant volume used
 Don't turn vaporizers on unti the patient is attached to the
breathing system
Since the newer inhalants are more expensive, it is
 Scavenge gas from induction chambers (rather than leving the
helpful to be able to approximate how much liquid
top off!
inhalant will be used so that costs can be predicted
Use endotracheal tubes with functional cuffs which have been
(Figures 14.1 and 14.4). Cost per bottle divided by
inflated
size of the botle (in mililitres) equals cost per mili-
Minimize mask inductions or maintenance with masks; use tightly
litre of liquid. Use of higher flow rates wil result in
fitting masks
more inhalant being used and greater expense;
 Check anaesthetic machines and ventilators for leaks and fix them 
therefore, mask or chamber inductions and use of
 Ensure anaesthetic equipment and vaporizers are regularly
NO will increase the amount of volatile agents
serviced
Used. Other causes for greater use of volatile agents 
At finish of anaesthetic administration leave the patient attached to
include leaks in the breathing system, e.g. leaking
 breathing system until extubation instead of letting the patient 
endotracheal tube cuffs or leaks around the soda
exhale into the room
lime canister.
Make sure recovery areas are well ventiated
 Simple ways to minimize anaesthetic waste
3 x FGF (l/minute) x vol% = ml used/h
gas exposure.
Example:if you are using 2 I/minute oxygen and sevoflurane is set
at 4%,the estimate would be 24 ml/h. If the current cost of
sevoffurane is 0.64 (US $1.00)/ml, it would cost the veterinay
Pollution of workspace and pregnant
surgeon f15.36 (US $24)/h.
women
There is little reliable information available to provide
 Calculation of liquid inhalant use. FGF = Fresh
answers regarding risks of exposure to anaesthetic
gas flow: Vol% = Vaporizer setting. (After
gases for pregnant women. Pregnant women should
Ehrenwerth and Eisenkraft, 1993).
consult their physicians regarding precautions that
should be taken. Most institutions have the following
Waste anaesthetic gases
need to continue working in environments where an-
It seems clear that exposure to waste anaesthetic
aesthetic gases are used:
 gases should be minimized as much as possible to
prevent associated health risks with this exposure.
Assign filling of vaporizers to other individuals
There is little evidence regarding risks of the newer
Other individuals should fill vaporizers in areas
agents, but in the USA, the National Institute for Oc-
with good ventilation
cupational Safety and Health (NiOSH) (www.cdc.gov/
 Minimize or eliminate chamber and mask
niosh/hcwold.html), Occupational Safety and Health
inductions
Administration (OSHA) (www.osha-slc.gov/dts/osta/
Other individuals should empty induction
 anestheticgases/indexs.html#E) and American Cof-
 chambers via scavenging systems, rather than
lege of Veterinary Anesthesiologists (ACVA) all have
opening the chamber into the room 
recommendations for minimizing exposure in the UK,
Consider wearing a facemask which filters
 such recommendations are contained in the 'Control
 organic vapours (e.g. 3M 7500 series half
of Substances Hazardous to Health' (COSHH) Regu-
facepiece respirator with 6001 organic vapour 
lations, available from the Health and Safety Execu-
chemical cartridges)
tive (HSE). TheACVA recommendations acknowledge
Monitor concentrations of inhalant anaesthetics
conflicting evidence but mention cancer, hepatic and
using exposure badges (see Chapter 5) to make
renal disease, immunological effects and complica-
sure that concentrations do not exceed COSHH/
tions during pregnancy as being linked to trace gas
NIOSH guidelines
exposure. Waste anaesthetic gas scavenging systems
 In the recovery room it is important to leave
(see Chapter 5) should be routinely used on all equip-
the patient attached to the breathing system
ment. Additional procedures related to case manage-
(with scavenging) after the vaporizer is
ment can decrease exposure (Figure 14.5). Each
turned off to scavenge as much exhaled
country will have its own guidelines, but if pollution of
agent as possible
 the workspace is kept to a minimum through effective
Avoid the use of NzO unless scavenging is
scavenging techniques the risks should be minimal
excellent. Chronic exposure to trace amounts of
(www.nohsc.gov.au/AboutNohsc/; www.ccohs.ca/
N,O may be, although not proven, more serious
oshanswers/chemicais/waste_anesthetic.html). In the
to the unborn child than volatile agents. Note
UK, a list of approved workplace exposure limits is
that activated charcoal scavengers do not
available from the HSE (www.hse.gov.uk).
adsorb NzO, only volatile agents.
154
Chapter 14 Inhalant anaesthetics
Summary
isoflurane in cats. Journal of Veterinary Anaesthesia 25, 52-56
Hellyer P: Mama K, Shafford H, Wagner A and Kollias-Baker C (2001}
Elfects of diazepam and flumazenil on minimum alveolar
Overal, the use of inhalants contributes to safe and
effective anaesthesia, but requires a good understand-
of isoflurane andfentanyi.AmericanJournalof VeterinaryResearch
ing of the agents and the equipment required. The
62.555-560
Ikiw J, Pascoe P and Tripp L (2002) Effects of morphine, butorphanol,
author would also suggest that an inhalant used by
buprenorphine, and U50488H on the minimum alveolar
concentratinofisofuraneincats.AmericanJournalofVetrinary
itself, with no premedication or analgesics, is not nec-
Research 63. 1198-1202
essarily the safest way to anaesthetize patients; the
 Jeong SM and Nam TC (2003) Eifect of electroacupuncture on minimum
use of a more balanced technique (e.g. concurrent
alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Journal of Veterinary
use of premedication and analgesics such as opioids,
Medicar Science 65.145-147
 Jones N, Clarke K and Clegg P (1995) Desiurane in equine anaesthesia:
 epidural anaesthesia or local techniques to provide 
a preliminary trial. Veterinary Record 137, 618-620
analgesia) is recommended.
Muir W, Wiese A and March P (2003) Effects of morphine, lidocaine,
ketamine, and morphine-lidocaine-ketamine drug combinations on
minimum alveolar concentration in dogs anesthetized with
isoflurane. American Journal of Veterinary Research 64, 1155-1f60
References and further reading
Mutoh T,Nishimura R and Sasaki N(2001)Effects of nitrous oxide on
Armerican Journal of Veterinary Research 62, 1727-1733
 Burm AG (2003) Occupalional hazards of inhalational anaesthetics. Best
Pascoe P, likiw J, Craig C, Kollias-Baker C (2005) The effects of ketamine
Practice and Research. Clinical Anaeshesiology 17,147-161
on the minimum alveolar concentration of isofurane in cats.
Cornick-Seahorn J, Cuvelliez S, Gaynor J, McGrath; C and Hartsfield S.
Proceedings of the 3oth Annual Meeting.American College oi
(1996) Commentary and recommendations on control of waste
Veterinary Anesthesioiogists, Atlanta, GA. p. 77
anesthetic gases in the workplace. Journal of the American
Pypendop B and llkiw J (2005) Assessment of the hemodynamic effects
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation209,75-77
of lidocaine administered IV in isoflurane-anesthetized cats.
Criado A, de Segura A. Tendillo F and Marsico F (2000) Reduction of
American Journal of Veterinary Research 66. 66t-668
isoflurane MAC with buprenorphine and morphine in rats. Laboratory
 Pypendop B, likiw J, Imai A and Bolich J (2003) Hemodynamic effects
Animais 34, 252-259
of nitrous oxide in isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Arerican Journal
Eger El(1974) Anesthetic Uptake and Action. Wiliams and Wilkins Co,
of Veterinary Research 64,273-278
Baltimore
Sawyer D (1982) The anesthetic period. In: The Practice of SmalfAnimal
 Ehrenwerth J (1993) Anesthesia vaporizers. in: Anesthesia Equipment:
Anesthesia, ed. D. Sawyer, Pp. 45-120. WB Saunders Co,
 Principres and Apolications, ed. J Ehrenwerth and JB Eisenkraft,
Philadelphia
pp. 57-88. Mosby Inc. St. Louis
Valverde A, Doherty T. Hernandez J and Davies W (2004) Effect of
Galloway D, Ko J, Reaugh H et af. (2004) Anesthetic indices of
 lidocaine on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in 
sevoflurane and isoflurane in unpremedicated dogs. Journat of the
dogs.Veterinary Anaesthesia andAnaigesia31,264-271
American Veterinary Medical Association 225, 700-704
Golder F, Pascoe P, Bailery C. likiw J and Tripp L (1998) The effect of
 administered fentanyl on the rninimum alveolar concentration of
isoflurane in cats. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Anagesia 31, 183-189
客：
3.
:i :
155
Muscle relaxants
Derek Flaherty and Adam Auckburally
Introduction
and the region of contact between the nerve and mus-
cle is known as the motor end-plate (Figure 15.1). Here,
Many drugs used for induction or maintenance of an-
the muscle membrane becomes folded, and is sepa-
aesthesia provide a degree of muscle relaxation, but
rated from the nerve terminal by a distance of approxi-
in general this is only mild to moderate at conven-
 mately 20 nm: this separation is known as the junctional
tional anaesthetic 'depths'. More profound muscle
(or synaptic) cleft. within the nerve terminal are abun-
relaxation can be achieved in several ways:
dant vesicles containing the neurotransmitter acetyl-
Provision of 'deep' anaesthesia. Although
 choline (ACh), while on the crests of the folded muscle
muscle relaxation wil improve with increasing 
 membrane lie postjunctional nicotinic ACh receptors.
 depth of anaesthesia, this is not recommended
because of the associated increase in 
cardiopulmonary depression
 Local anaesthetic techniques. By paralysing the
motor fibres responsible for maintenance of
Motorneuror
 muscle tone, the use of local anaesthetics can
provide profound muscle relaxation (see Chapter
Muscle
10). However, local anaesthesia may not be
applicable or achievable in all cases, and there
is a steep learning curve associated with some
of the commonly performed regional nerve blocks 
Centrally acting muscle relaxants.
Magnified view of
Benzodiazepines and alpha-2 adrenoceptor
motor end-plate
agonists both provide moderate to good muscle
relaxation. However, because these agents
ACh storage
achieve this through a centrally mediated action,
vesicles in nerve 
terminal
they also have numerous other effects, many of
DULLU
Junctional cleft 
which may be undesirable (see Chapter 12)
 Peripherally acting muscle relaxants. These
Postjunctional nicotinic
are neuromuscular-blocking agents (NMBAs)
AChreceptors
that act at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ)
315.7
Microanatomy of the neuromuscular junction.
to provide profound muscle relaxation
('paralysis') throughout the body. Although
 other agents can be considered as muscle
relaxants due to the relaxation produced
When an action potential reaches the nerve termi-
through their cenfral efects (see above), in
nal, ACh storage vesicles fuse to the prejunctional
general the term 'muscle relaxant' is used 
membrane and release ACh into the junctional cleft 
specificaly for NMBAs, and these form the
by exocytosis. ACh then diffuses across the cleft to
bind to the postjunctional receptors. The receptors
focus of this chapter.
 comprise a pentameric protein structure, which, when
stimulated, undergoes a conformational change, creat-
Microanatomy of the neuromuscular
ing a transmembrane channel that alows movement
 junction and physiology of normal
 of ions across the membrane. Two ACh molecules,
neuromuscular transmission
 binding to two distinct subunits of the pentameric struc-
ture, are required to activate opening of the ion chan-
An understanding of normal neuromuscular transmis-
nel. If one subunit remains unbound, or is occupied
sion is essential for appropriate use of muscle relax-
by another molecule, channel opening will not occur.
ant drugs.
 The movement of ions generates an end-plate poten-
Skeletal muscle cells are innervated by myelinated
tial, and if enough ion channels are opened, the adja-
nerve branches of a motor neuron. As the nerve ap-
 cent muscle membrane is depolarized and generates
proaches the muscle cell, it loses its myelin sheath,
an action potential. within the muscle membrane, this
156
Chapter 15 Muscle relaxants
action potential traverses the T-tubule system and
binding of suxamethonium to the ACh receptor pre-
vents normal neuromuscular transmission. The result-
mic reticulum, initiating excitation-contraction coupling 
ant clinical effect is one of initial muscle stimulation -
and subsequent muscle contraction (Figure 15.2).
due to the initial action potential (and manifested as
widespread transient muscle fasciculations through-
out the body) - followed by a longer period of muscle
Motor nerve action potential 
flaccidity. This normal pattern of suxamethonium-
induced blockade is known as phase I block (phase il
block is described later).
Release of ACh
 Non-depolarizing relaxants have a different chemi-
 cal structure to that of suxamethonium, and although
Receptor binding
they also bind to the postsynaptic ACh receptors, they
1
do not induce channel opening and consequent gen-
eration of an action potential. By preventing ACh
..
 Activation of ligand-gated channels
reaching the receptors, they induce a competitive
blockade, resuiting in muscle paralysis. Thus, unlike
Muscle contraction
suxamethonium, non-depolarizing relaxants do not
produce initial muscle fasciculations prior to onset of
 Surmmary of events leading to normal muscle
muscle relaxation. Both subunit binding sites within
contraction.
the pentameric receptor structure do not need to be
occupied by a non-depolarizing NMBA to produce
ACh remains bound to the postjunctional receptors
paralysis; only one site can be occupied and the ion
for approximately 2 milliseconds, detaches, and is then
channel will still remain closed, even with one site
occupied by an ACh molecule.
enzyme acetylcholinesterase, present in the junctional
It is important to emphasize that muscle relaxant
cleft. This terminates the action of ACh on the
drugs are neither anaesthetic nor anaigesic.It is there-
postjunctional nicotinic receptors, the transmembrane
fore possible that if these agents are used inappropri
channel closes and muscle contraction terminates.
ately, a patient may be paralysed but fully conscious.
At physiological frequencies of nerve stimulation,
This must be avoided at all costs by closely monitor-
neuromuscular transmission begins to fail only after
ing the adequacy of anaesthesia (see later).
a minimum of 75% of the postsynaptic ACh receptors
have been blocked, with complete failure of transmis-
sion occurring with greater than 90% receptor block-
Pattern of neuromuscular blockade
implies that only 25% of ACh receptors need to be
Because NMBAs paralyse afl skeletal muscles within
stimulated to induce normal neuromuscular transmis-
the body (including the respiratory musculature), it is
sion. The major implication from this is that during re-
essential that facilities forcontrolledventilation are avail-
abie whenever these drugs are used. Not all muscles
still be blocked, with the patient exhibiting no detect-
are equally sensitive to relaxants, with the diaphragm
able clinical signs, but with a reduced margin of safety.
in particular being relatively resistant: this is usually
the last muscle to become paralysed, and the first to
recover following administration of a relaxant. However,
Mechanism of action of muscle
the musculature of the pharyngeal/laryngeal area is
relaxants
much more sensitive to the effects of NMBAs, and takes
longer to return to normal function. Clinically, patients 
 Based on differences in their mechanisms of action,
-Aooau buunp Alajenbape buejuaa aq ol jeedde Aew
NMBAs can be classified as either depolarizing (non-
ery from a muscle relaxant, but may still succumb to
Lpper airway obstruction once the endotracheal tube
The only depolarizing relaxant used clinically is
is removed. Because the diaphragm and intercostal
suxamethonium (succinylcholine), which comprises
muscles are less sensitive to NMBAs than other skel-
two molecules of ACh joined together. Because of this
etal muscles in the body, attempts have been made to
structure, administration of suxamethonium causes 
produce muscle relaxation without interference with
the generation of an action potential through binding
respiratory function. An example is relaxation of the
to postsynaptic ACh receptors. However, since
extraocular muscles (for intraocular surgery) by utiliz-
suxamethonium is not metabolized by acetylcholin-
ing low doses of relaxant, while still maintaining spon-
esterase, the drug remains bound to the receptors for
taneous ventilation. This technique avoids the necessity
a longer period of time, until blood concentration has
for either a person devoted to manual ventilation of the
declined sufficiently for the drug to diffuse down its
lungs, or an expensive ventilator. Although some
concentration gradient from the neuromuscular junc-
authorities have claimed success with this practice, it 
tion into the plasma, allowing restoration of normal
involves considerable risk of hypoventilation, and, in 
neuromuscular transmission. Plasma degradation of
these authors' opinions, should be avoided. As inspired 
suxamethonium is mediated through the enzyme
oxygen concentration is often at 100%, patients may 
pseudocholinesterase (plasma cholinesterase), which
be able to maintain oxygenation under these circum-
is distinct from acetylcholinesterase. The prolonged
stances, but are oten hypercapnic.
157
Chapter 15  Muscle relaxants
Monitoring the neuromuscular
most often used. The electrodes may be attached
junction
directly to the skin, or to subcutaneousty placed
needles. The response of the muscle groups innervated 
Use of muscle relaxants should always be accom-
 by these nerves is observed when the nerve stimulator
panied by assessment of the degree of neuromus-
is activated. It is important that the electrodes are
cular blockade. This is most commonly performed by
attached over the nerve rather than the muscle body
using a peripheral nerve stimulator (Figure 15.3a). This 
itself, otherwise direct electrical stimulation of the
device delivers a small electrical current through a
muscle may occur, resulting in a muscle response even 
pair of electrodes attached to the skin overlying a peri-
in the presence of complete neuromuscular blockade.
pherai nerve. The ulnar nerve on the medial aspect of 
Although techniques such as mechanomyography and
the elbow (Figure 15.3b), the peroneal nerve at the
aui ssasse ci pasn Auomoo ae Audeibowonoala
lateral cranial tibia (Figure 15.3c), or the facial nerve
 muscle response for research purposes, they are too
on the lateral aspect of the face (Figure 15.3d) are
complex to be used clinically, and the veterinary sur-
geon has to rely on visual and tactile assessment of
the evoked muscle response.
The nerve stimulator should be capable of produc-
ing a square wave pulse, with a current of at least 50
mA over a 1000 Q load. The stimulus applied should
be supramaximal to recruit all the nerve fibres: in the
clinical setting. a supramaximal stimulus is usually
T
achieved by increasing the nerve stimulator to the
作
 maximum current output.
Several different stimulation patterns are used to
assess neuromuscular blockade.
Stimulation patterns
Single twitch
The single twitch is a stimulation pattern utilizing a sin-
gle electrical pulse delivered at a rate between 1/sec
and 1 per 10 seconds (1 Hz to 0.1 Hz). This pattern is
principally used to assess onset of neuromuscular
blockade, and has limited use in clinical anaesthesia.
Train-of-four
This is the commonest pattern of nerve stimulation
used for assessing neuromuscular function. Four elec-
trical pulses are applied to the nerve over a 2-second
period (i.e. 2 Hz). In the absence of neuromuscular-
blocking agents, four distinct muscle twitches will oc-
cur (T,, T2, T and T4), each of which are of identical
strength (Figure 15.4a). If a non-depolarizing relax-
ant is then administered, the fourth twitch (T4) in the
train-of-four (TOF) will become weaker and eventu-
 ally disappear, foliowed by the third twitch (Ts), then
the second (T,) and eventually the first (T,) if suffi-
cient relaxant is given (Figure 15.4bc). This phenom-
enon of a gradually decreasing muscle response
to nerve stimulation during non-depolarizing NMBA-
induced relaxation is known as fade (Figure 15.4b).
Fade is thought to be due to a prejunctional effect of
relaxants reducing the availability of ACh for release
during nerve stimulation.
Since depolarizing relaxants only act postsynapti-
cally, fade is observed solely with non-depolarizing
agents, or in the presence of abnormal (phase Il)
 Suxamethonium blockade (see later). Although the TOF
response to phase I suxamethonium blockade does
5
(a] Peripheral nerve stimulator with needle
not exhibit tade, al four twitches are reduced to an equa!
 electrodes. (b) Placement of needle 
extent. with onset of non-depolarizing neuromuscular
blockade, T. disappears when approximately 75% of
the elbow. (c) Stimulation of the peroneal nerve can be 
ACh receptors are blocked; T, with approximately 80%
 achieved by electrode placement over the lateral head of
the fibula. (d) Needle electrodes placed over the facial 
blocked; T, with around 90% blocked; and loss 0f T,
nerve as it exis the infraorbital foramen.
indicates essentially 100% blockade.
158
Chapter 15 Muscle relaxants
T4
Fade
qth
strengt
4
Twitch
ch
Twitch
Time
Time
[a)
2 seconds
[q)
Time
[o]
Train-of-four (TOF). [a] Normal animal, no reiaxant. All four twitches in the TOF are present and of equal
strength. (b] Onset of non-depoiarizing blockade. Face is present in TOF but all twitches are still visible.
(c] Neuromuscular blockade is now more profound; the iourih twitch in the TOF has now disappeared and the remaining
three twitches are weaker
During recovery, the twitches reappear in reverse
those produced by TOF. The ratio of D2:D, in DBS
order (i.e. T, first). In addition to counting the number
cofrelates closely with the TOF ratio T4:T,. However,
of muscle twitches in response to TOF (the *TOF count')
it is easier to detect fade with DBS than TOF, since
as a means of assessing the degree of neuromuscular
one is only comparing the strength of Dto D, in DBS,
blockade, attempts have been made (using mechano-
but T4 to T, in TOF, whilst attempting to ignore Tz and 
 myography in the research setting) to establish a TOF
Ta. Visual and tactile assessment of DBS can detect
ratio (height of T/height of T,) which is consistent with
fade at equivalent TOF ratios <0.6. Thus, although 
recovery of neuromuscular function to a degree that
DBS may appear superior to TOF for detection of re-
allows the patient adequate muscle strength for con-
sidual neuromuscular blockade, it does not completely
trol of the airway. A TOF ratio of at least 0.9 in humans
rule out the presence of residual paralysis, since a
is considered optimal prior to endotracheal extubation.
-oneu eenbape einsue ol panbel s! b'o< ojjel 3ol
It has been demonstrated in a number of studies
muscular recovery. DBS is used to assess recovery
that visual and tactile assessment of the TOF ratio is
 from neuromuscular blockade when there is no ap-
only able to detect fade when the TOF ratio is <0.4.
parent fade to TOF (Figure 15.6).
implying that a significant degree of neuromuscular
blockade may be missed by an observer in the clini-
cal setting. This poor sensitivity of TOF in detecting
residual neuromuscular blockade is probably related
to the difficulty in comparing the strength of T4 and T,:
while ignoring the two muscle twitches in between.
TOF is used to assess both intraoperative muscle re-
laxation and recovery.
Tetanic stimulation
Tetanic stimulation ('tetanus') is defined as a sustained 
electrical stimulus of 50 Hz (occasionaly 100 Hz) for
750 msec
a 5-second period. Because of the high frequency of
Double-burst stimulation (DBS,s). Each burst
stimulation, the muscle is unable to respond by pro-
 comprises three stimuli of 0.2 milliseconds
 ducing 50 individual muscle contractions per second,
duration with 20 milliseconds between each stimulus, the
and instead summates to produce one sustained
U 'shy eu jae spuooasllaw osz bumollol ssing puooes
the absence of neuromuscular blockade, this produces 
muscle contraction. This pattern of stimulation is pain-
two distinci muscle twitches.
ful in the awake and minimally anaesthetized patient,
but stresses the NMJ sufficiently that neuromuscular
blockade can be detected by fade. Similar to TOF,
tetanic fade can only be detected when significant
degrees of neuromuscular blockade are present; the
Single twitch
Assessing onset of blockade
absence of obvious fade by visual and tactile assess-
TOF
Assessing depth of block
ment is not an indication of adequate neuromuscular
Assessing recovery from block
transmission. Tetanic stimulation is principally used
Tetanus
Assessing depth of block
to assess recovery from neuromuscular blockade.
Assessing recovery from block 
Double-burst stimulation
DBS
 Assessing recovery from block
Double-burst stimulation (DBS) (Figure 15.5) com-
prises three short pulses at 50 Hz, a 750 millisecond
 Main use of different peripheral nerve 
pause followed by either three further 50 Hz pulses
 simulation patterns. TOF is the most efective
means of assessing depth of neuromuscular blockade.
(DBSa.a) or two 50 Hz pulses (DBSs.2). The resultant
DBS is the most effective means of assessing recovery
muscle response is characterized by two individual
from neuromuscular blockade (i.e. ihe most reliable 
muscle twitches (D, and D2), which are stronger than
detector of fade).
159
Chapter 15  Muscle relaxants
Use of peripheral nerve stimulation
Monitoring adequacy of anaesthesia
It is important to emphasize that peripheral nerve
stimulation provides an indication only of the degree
Although some studies have suggested that anaes-
of neuromuscular blockade present - it gives no
thetic requirements may be reduced by the adminis-
information on adequacy of anaesthesia. Therefore.
tration of muscle relaxants (presumably through a
a patient may have no response to nerve stimulation,
reduction in afferent input to the CNS as a resuit of
but still be fully conscious.
the loss of normal muscle tone), this is controversial.
Peripheral nerve stimulation serves two useful
The animal must aiways be closely observed for signs
purposes. Firstly, it has been shown that ideal mus-
 of inadequate anaesthesia.
cle relaxation for abdominal surgery is achieved when
It is more difficult to assess the depth of anaes-
only one or two twitches remain in the TOF (80-90%
thesia in patients that have received NMBAs, since
of receptors blocked). This allows the veterinary
many of the signs and responses commonly moni-
surgeon to titrate the dose of neuromuscular-blocking
tored during *conventional anaesthesia will be absent
drug to achieve suitable surgical conditions. Sec-
or modified. For instance, while the eye will normally
ondly, at the end of surgery, it permits an assess-
rotate ventrally at surgical planes of anaesthesia in
ment of residual neuromuscular blockade.The TOF
the dog and cat, neuromuscular blockade of the
should have recovered to four equal-strength
extraocular muscles will cause the globe to remain
 twitches again, with no fade detectable on DBS,
 centrally positioned. Similarly, although the presence 
before the animal is allowed to awaken and the
 or absence of the palpebral reffex is often Lised to
endotracheal tube removed. It is important to recog-
quantify depth of anaesthesia, paralysis of the peri-
nize that, because individual muscle groups have
 ocular muscles will obliterate this response, and no
differing sensitivities to relaxants, monitoring the
blinking will occur when the eyelids are stimulated.
response to Linar nerve stimulation, for instance,
Paralysis of the respiratory musculature will also pre-
gives limited information on the muscles of respira-
vent any alteration in ventilatory pattern, regardless
tory function. Consequently, even with apparently
 of whether the depth of anaesthesia is appropriate
adequate recovery on nerve stimulation, the patient
for the procedure being performed (bearing in mind
that animals given NMBAs should be receiving inter-
adequate airway control and ventilation.
mittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) anyway).
It goes without saying that the most classical sign of
inadequate anaesthesia, gross movement, is impos-
Clinical assessment of recovery
sible when muscle relaxants have been administered.
from muscle relaxants
Assessment of anaesthetic depth in patients that
have received NMBAs does, therefore, present some
Because none of the patterns of peripheral nerve
challenges, but alterations in sympathetic nervous
stimulation described above can reliably assure
system activity will usually provide a useful guide to
adequate recovery of neuromuscular function (TOF
the adequacy (or otherwise) of anaesthesia. In gen-
ratio >0.9), clinical assessment of return of muscle
eral, patients that are too lightly anaesthetized will
strength should aiways be used in conjunction with
be tachycardic and hypertensive, although some
nerve stimulation. Since the most serious conse-
may demonstrate a form of vasovagal response, and
quence of residual paralysis (curarization) is inad-
become bradycardic and hypotensive. However.
equate ventilation and/or loss of airway control, many
the latter appears to be much less common than the
of these clinical tests of recovery have focused on
classical tachycardia/hypertension pattern. In addition,
assessing tidal volume or minute ventilation. How-
 they may salivate excessively, demonstrate increased
ever, diaphragmatic and intercostal muscle activity
tear production and dilation of the pupils. End-tidal
may have returned to normal even in the presence
carbon dioxide values may also rise on the
of significant degrees of weakness in other muscle
capnograph, and isolated muscle twitching may
 groups, since the former are relatively resistant t0
occur, particularly on the extremities, tongue or
the effects of NMBAs. Consequently, patients may
commissures of the mouth (Figure 15.7). This muscle
have an entirely normal tidal volume, but have lim-
ited control of the upper airway musculature, and
totaly paralysed with TOF nerve stimulation, and
although various theories have been proposed as
extubated. Thus, the presence of a normal tidal
to how this apparent anomaly may be possible, there
 is currently no universally accepted explanation.
little information about the degree of residual curari-
zation. Similarly, a normal end-tidal carbon dioxide
:. :
value on capnography gives no indication of ade-
 quacy of upper airway muscle strength
Other tests used in humans, such as assessment
Salivation,
 of vital capacity and maximum negative inspiratory
.
: Lacrimation -
 pressure, are more difficult to utilize or interpret in
animals. The ability to sustain a head lift for 5 sec-
 Muscle wtching, especially around head 
onds has been shown fo correlate well with return of
pharyngeal muscle strength in humans, and can prob-
 Signs of inadequate anaesthesia during
ably be similarly interpreted in animals.
muscle relaxant uso.
160
Chapter 15 Muscle relaxants
Patients that have received NMBAs and are exces-
may become severely hypoxaemic during this period.
 possibly bradycardic. Although it is potentially more
 Fortunately, relaxation of the larynx may also be
difficult to detect excessive anaesthetic depth than it is
achieved through the use of muscle relaxants. Al-
to identify inadequate anaesthesia, every effort should
though any NMBA may be used for this purpose.
be directed to ensuring the adequacy of anaesthesia
suxamethonium is the one most commonly chosen,
in patients receiving NMBAs, since it is clearly unac-
because it has the fastest onset time of any muscle
ceptable to have a patient aware but paralysed
relaxant. Administration of suxamethonium immedi-
It is important to reiterate that monitoring of
ately following the anaesthetic induction agent allows 
endotracheal intubation in a significantly shorter time
stimulator gives no information whatsoever on
than when local anaesthesia is used to desensitize
anaesthetic depth.
the larynx. This is the only situation where relaxants
tracheal intubation.
Indications for the use of muscle
relaxants
Individual agents
 Deep surgical dissection
Muscle relaxants are extremely useful to relax the
Muscle relaxants are only administered once a pat-
abdominal musculature,particulariy for dissection deep
ent airway has been established by endotracheal in-
within the abdomen, e.g. nephrectomy and adrenal-
tubation (with the exception of suxamethonium for
ectomy. However, they will improve surgical conditions 
rapid intubation in cats as described above), a stable
plane of anaesihesia has been achieved and facili-
 ectomy. They are also of value during spinal surgery
ties for controlled ventilation are immediately avail-
(e.g. laminectomies) in heavily muscled individuals.
able. In addition, secure intravenous access should
be available throughout the procedure because all
Thoracic surgery
muscle relaxants and antagonists are administered
See Chapter 2i. iPPV is mandatory during intra-
by this route.
thoracic surgery. Although not required in every case.
 Although many agents have been used to produce
the use of muscle relaxants aliows the veterinary sur-
neuromuscular blockade over the years. only those
geon a smooth 'take-over' of the patient's ventilation.
currently used clinically will be considered here.
Dislocations and fractures
Depolarizing relaxants
Muscle relaxants facilitate the replacement of dis-
located joints. Although controversial, they may in
Suxamethonium
addition also improve conditions during fracture re-
Suxamethonium (succinylcholine) is the only depo-
duction, especially in larger individuals: this depends 
larizing agent currently in use. It has the fastest
on the degree of muscle fibrosis that has resulted from
onset time of any relaxant, and is generally relatively
the initial trauma.
short acting. However, repeated or high doses can
lead to a phase ll block (as opposed to the phase I
Intraocular procedures
block usually produced), where the neuromuscular
 See Chapter 17. By relaxing the extraocular muscles,
blockade assumes some characteristics of a non-
 NMBAs will produce a centrally positioned eye, which
depoiarizing block and becomes relatively long
protrudes slightly. This facilitates intraocular surgery.
acting. Phase ll block can be detected by TOF moni-
 In addition, paralysis of the respiratory musculature 
toring because fade' develops, a characteristic not 
means that the patient can neither cough nor fight
normally associated with suxamethonium-induced
imposed ventilation, both of which would be detrimen-
(phase l) blockade. Phase ll block can develop in
tal: increased intrathoracic pressures significantly
dogs folowing even a single dose of the drug, so it
increase intraocular pressure. Muscle relaxants have
is seldom used in this species.
-aq sieo jo sbop ul azis Aeidnd uo poae ioaup ou
 Suxamethonium has a number of other side ef-
cause the iris is composed of smooth muscle, but they
fects which limit its usefulness. In particular, cardio-
will cause pupillary dilation in birds, where the ciliary
vascular effects can be marked, with either
 muscle is striated.
bradycardia or tachycardia occurring, as wel as arte-
rial hypertension. Cardiac arrhythmias may also be
Endotracheal intubation
 seen. Because of the initial muscle fasciculations pro-
Because of the sensitivity of the feline larynx, it is
duced, suxamethonium is thought to cause actual
muscle damage, and an increase in plasma potas-
sium concentrations may be observed. This increase
avoid the development of laryngospasm. However, this
may be clinicaly significant in patients with pre-exist-
technique imposes a time delay between induction of
ing hyperkalaemia, e.g. cats with urinary obstruction.
anaesthesia and establishment of a secure airway,
Suxamethonium can also increase intraocular pres-
because the local anaesthetic requires approximately
sure through sustained contraction of extraocuiar
60 seconds to achieve its peak effect. While this is
muscles, and can trigger malignant hyperthermia in
the rare susceptible patient.
161
Chapter 15 Muscle relaxants
Since incremental doses of suxamethonium may
Cis-atracurium: Cis-atracurium is one of 10 stereo
induce a phase Il block. the drug should only be ad-
isomers of atracurium. lt is metabolized in a similar
ministered as a single dose. No antagonist agent is
way by Hofmann degradation, but non-specific
available, and the duration of action is principally dic-
esterases do not appear to play a part in its elimina-
tated by plasma cholinesterase levels, which vary
tion. Cis-atracurium is more potent than atracurium,
widely between patients. As a result of these two fac-
and has a reduced propensity to release histamine.
tors, suxamethonium has limited use in veterinary
Because of the greater potency, less cis-atracurium
anaesthesia, with the main indication being facilita-
is required to produce an equivalent degree of neuro-
tion of endotracheal intubation in cats.
muscular blockade and consequentiy, less laudano-
:
sine is produced in comparison with atracurium.
Dose:
 Since histamine release is uncommon in animals
foilowing atracurium administration, and since the clini-
 Dogs: 0.3 mg/kg i.v. provides approximately
cal significance of laudanosine production is limited,
25 minutes of relaxation. Not recommended
the precise advantages of cis-atracurium in veterinary
(see above).
anaesthesia are unclear. lt may be the relaxant of
Cats: 3-5 mg i.v. total dose for an adult cat
choice in patients who are at risk from histamine re-
provides approximately 5 minutes of relaxation.
lease, and additionally have concurrent hepatic dis-
ease. The effects of cis-atracurium appear to be fairly
Non-depolarizing relaxants
unpredictable in animals.
Non-depolarizing relaxants can be classified as either
benzylisoquinoline (curariform) derivatives or amino-
Dose:
Steroids, based on their chemical structure. With all
these agents, potency is inversely related to onset time,
 Dogs: 0.15 mg/kg i.v. provides approximately
i.e. the more potent the agent, the slower its onset.
30 minutes of relaxation. Infusion rates of 
Increments may be given as required, using approxi-
approximately 0.2-0.45 mg/kg/h following the
mately one quarter to one third of the initial dose, and 
initial bolus dose have also been used successfuily.
their effects can be antagonized with anticholinester-
Cats: there are no published reports of the
ases (see below). Therefore, they offer much greater
clinical use of cis-atracurium in cats.
flexibility of use than suxamethonium. Iit is important to
emphasize that the doses provided below for each drug
Mivacurium: Mivacurium is unique amongst non-
are guides only, since patients vary widely in their
depolarizing relaxants in that it is metabolized by plasma
requirements; use of a peripheral nerve stimulator is
 cholinesterase at a rate of approximately 70-88% that
the only accurate method of determining the neces-
of suxamethonium (in humans), and this produces a
sary dose and the need for additional increments.
short duration of neuromuscular blockade. In addition
(and unlike suxamethonium), mivacurium can be antag-
Benzylisoquinolines
onized readily with anticholinesterases (see below).
Aithough there is very limited information on its clinical
Atracurium: Atracurium is metabolized in the body
-bap yuewsoh Aa pue saseieisa yoads-uou Ag yiog
use in animals, this agent has provided rapid onset,
 medium duration relaxation in cats. In dogs, however,
mivacurium has a long duration of action unless admini-
pH and temperature), with <10% of the drug excreted 
unchanged by the liver and kidneys. Because of this
stered at very low doses, although it does appear to be
devoid of significant haemodynamic effects. It would
unique method of metabolism, the action of atracurium
seem, therefore, that mivacurium offers little benefit in
is independent of renal and hepatic function, and it is
animals over the more commonly used relaxants such
generally the relaxant of choice for patients with
 as atracurium and vecuronium.
hepatopathy or nephropathy. Laudanosine, one of the
metabolites of atracurium, has been associated with
Dose:
precipitation of seizures: this is unlikely to occur in
the clinical setting unless the animal has received
6y/bu s0'0 pue by/6w 20:0 by/6w L0'0 :s6og
massive doses of atracurium and additionaly has
i.v. provide relaxation for approximately 34, 65
hepatic impairment, because laudanosine is metabo-
 and t51 minutes, respectively.
lized by the liver. Although atracurium has the poten-
Cats: 0.1 mg/kg i.v. provides approximately
tial to release histamine (particularly with high doses
25 minutes of relaxation.
-ue u uouiwooun ag ol sheadde siun '(Apidei uanib
mals. However, the drug is probably best avoided in
Aminosteroids
patients where histamine release may be detrimen-
tal, e.g. asthmatics.
Vecuronium: Vecuronium has negligible effects on
the cardiovascular system, even at high doses. It under-
Dose: In dogs and cats 0.25-0.5 mg/kg i.v. provides
goes only a minor degree of hepatic metabolism, and
approximately 30-40 minutes of relaxation. The drug
depends mainly on biliary excretion for termination of
sh'o jo snjog leui ue :uoisnul sot algenns osie si
its effect. Duration of action may therefore be mark-
mg/kg being followed by an infusion of 0.4-0.5 mg/
edly prolonged in animals with hepatic disease.
kg/h, started immediately after the bolus dose. The
Vecuronium is supplied in a lyophilized form, which is
infusion should be prepared in 0.9% NaCl or 5% dex-
then dissolved in water; the resultant solution is sta-
trose to minimize Hofmann degradation.
ble at room temperature for approximately 24 hours.
162
Chapter 15 Muscle relaxants
Dose: in dogs and cats, 0.1 mg/kg i.v. provides ap-
NMJ may be affected. The most important
 proximately 20-25 minutes of relaxation. Vecuronium
antibiotics in this regard are the aminoglycosides,
can also be administered by intravenous infusion, an
 although the effect produced varies depending on
initial bolus dose of 0.1 mg/kg being followed imme-
 the relaxant used, the concentration of the
diately by infusion of 0.1 mg/kg/h.
antibiotic achieved in vivo, and inter-patient
variability. Close monitoring of the NMJ is
certainly recommended if aminoglycosides and
acting relaxant. Although it generally has little effect
muscle relaxants are used concurrently during
 on cardiovascular function, it can occasionally induce
anaesthesia. Some authorities have suggested
tachycardia and hypertension through a vagolytic and
that administration of calcium salts may be useful
mild indirect sympathomimetic action.
to reverse any prolonged blockade that occurs
when these agents are used together
Dose: In dogs and cats, 0.06 mg/kg provides approxi-
Anticonvulsants. Some anticanvulsants may
mately 45-60 minutes of relaxation.
shorten the duration of NMBAs, although this 
depends on the relaxant used and the
 Rocuronium: Rocuronium is an intermediate duration
anticonvulsant
NMBA, with minimal cardiovascular side effects. It
H, receptor antagonists. High-dose oral
has the fastest onset of any non-depolarizing agent,
cimetidine prolongs vecuronium-incuced 
being only slightly slower than suxamethonium, but this
blockade, while infravenous ranitidine has been
appears to be its only reai advantage over other agents.
shown to antagonize atracurium relaxation in
rats, but not in humans. The clinical significance
Dose:
of the interaction between muscle relaxants and
H, antagonists is unclear.
 Dogs: 0.5 mg/kg i.v. provides approximately 30
minutes of relaxation. An infusion of 0.2 mg/kg/h
started immediately after the initial bolus may be
Use of muscle relaxants in the
used to maintain relaxation.
presence of concurrent disease
S1 Alaeuxodde saod A1 by/bu g'o :se
..:
minutes of relaxation. There are no reports of 
 The presence of concurrent disease may influence
 the use of this drug by infusion in cats.
the relaxant chosen, and may also require modifica-
tion of the dose;
Short-acting and long-acting relaxants
I has been demonstrated in humans that shorter.
 Renal and hepatic disease. Atracurium (or cis-
acting relaxants are more easily antagonized than
atracurium) is generally the relaxant of choice for
longer-acting ones. Therefore, for procedures where
 patients with renal or hepatic disease because of
relaxation may be required for a relatively long period
the unique method of metabolism, Although
of time, it is now more common to administer short or
renal elimination plays only a minor role in 
intermediate durafion agents, such as atracurium or
terminating the effects of vecuronium, studies in
vecuronium, and to provide incremental doses as re-
humans have demonstrated an increased
quired, rather than using longer-acting agents such
 duration of action in patients with renal failure
as pancuronium.
Acid-base and electrolyte disturbances. The
effects of acid-base disturbances on muscle
relaxants are extremely complex and vary from
Interactions between muscle
agent to agent, but either potentiation or
relaxants and other drugs
antagonism of relaxation may occur. Electrolyte
disorders have similarly complex effects, but.
A number of different agents may interact with mus-
generally, hypernatraemia and hypokalaemia will
cle relaxants when administered concurrently:
 potentiate non-depolarizing agents, while
hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia will
Volatile anaesthetic agents. These potentiate the
antagonize them
effects of NMBAs both in terms of dose
Burn injuries. Patients with extensive burn
requirements and duration of action. lsoflurane
injuries may develop resistance to non-
appears more potent in this regard than
depolarizing neuromuscular blockers, while
halothane, while atracurium and vecuronium 
administration of suxamethonium can produce
-jabuol eut ueui ssel peieuglod eg oi jeadde
severe hyperkalaemia and ventricular fibrillation
acting relaxants
 Spinal cord injury. This may increase sensitivity
 Injectable anaesthetic agents. At clinical doses,
to non-depolarizing agents, while administration
propofol appears to have minimal effect on the 
 of suxamethonium to these patients can induce
action of muscle relaxants. Ketamine potentiates
hyperkalaemia
all non-depolarizing relaxants in a dose-
Myasthenia gravis (MG). Patients with MG are
dependent manner in a primate model
extremely sensitive to the effects of non-
 Antibiotics. Some antibiotics may prolong
depolarizing relaxants, and use of a nerve
neuromuscular blockade by mechanisms fhat
stimulator is mandatory if these agents are to be
vary from agent to agent. Severai sites at the
used in animals with this condition. An initial
163
Chapter 15  Muscle relaxants
dose of approximately one tenth of the normal
If a short-acting antagonist (edrophonium) is used
dose of relaxant shouid be used, and smal!
aaun (unjuoinoued b'a) nuexejai bunoe-buog e yim
incremental doses administered as dictated by
is an increased risk of recurarization in the recovery
TOF monitoring.
period, i.e. the edrophonium may initially antagonize
the blockade and restore normal neuromuscular trans-
mission, but because edrophonium is shorter-acting
Antagonism of neuromuscular
than the relaxant, neuromuscular blockade may
blockade
recur as edrophonium concentration at the NMJ
declines. Thus, if [onger-acting relaxants have been
Recovery from neuromuscular blockade may occur
used, neostigmine is the anticholinesterase of choice.
spontaneously, as the plasma concentration of relax-
In addition, neostigmine will more reliably antagonize
 ant diminishes (due to metabolism and elimination).
a more intense blockade than edrophonium. Neostig-
This allows the drug to difuse away from the NMJ,
mine has, however, also been shown to possess
 moving down its concentration gradient into the
neuromuscular-blocking capabilities, particularly if ad-
plasma. Alternatively, in the case of non-depolarizing
ministered in high doses; consequently, the doses
relaxants. recovery may be hastened by administra-
described below should not be exceeded.
 tion of an anticholinesterase agent. These inhibit the
The greater the TOF count prior to antagonism,
effects of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, which is
the more likely the success in restoring neuromus-
responsible for the rapid degradation of ACh follow-
cular transmission, and the less likely residual curari-
ing its release. Consequently, anticholinesterases al-
low accumulation of ACh, which is then able to
Consequently, where time allows, it is preferable to
allow restoration of all four twitches in the TOF prior
from the postsynapticACh receptor and restore neuro-
to antagonism, although reversal can be achieved
muscular transmission. Anticholinesterase agents will
not antagonize classic phase I suxamethonium block-
tagonism at this point will be more difficult, will re-
ade because the block induced is non-competitive
quire higher doses of anticholinesterase, and will also
(see earlier); there is some evidence, however, that
increase the risk of problems occurring in recovery.
they may facilitate reversal of a fully developed phase
inadequate antagonism of neuromuscular blockade
 Il suxamethonium block.
at the end of anaesthesia risks residual curarization
Anticholinesterases do not only allow a build up of
in the recovery period, which may incur serious con-
ACh at the nicotinic receptors of the NMJ; ACh also
-ny ui seipns snoewnn 'jewue aut ol seouanbas
accumulates at postganglionic parasympathetic mus-
mans have demonstrated that patients commonly
carinic receptors throughout the body, and may pro-
 arrive at the recovery room with significant residual
duce a number of unwanted side effects, such as
blockade still present, which is responsible for an in-
bradycardia and cardiac arrhythmias, broncho-
 creased incidence of complications, particularly involv-
constriction and salivation. To prevent these mus-
ing the respiratory system.
carinic effects, anticholinesterases are usually
Although antagonism is not always required fol-
administered in conjunction with antimuscarinic
lowing the use of muscle relaxants, it should certainly
agents, such as atropine or glycopyrronium.
be considered when longer-acting NMBAs have been
 Used, or when multiple boluses or infusions of these
antagonism of non-depolarizing induced relaxation:
 agents have been delivered. lf in doubt as to the state
neostigmine and edrophonium. Neostigmine has a
of neuromuscular recovery, it is wise to err on the side
slow onset but long duration, whereas edrophonium
 of caution and administer an anticholinesterase.
has a more rapid onset but shorter duration. Atropine
has rapid onset, short duration, and glycopyrronium
Administration of anticholinesterases
slow onset, long duration. Therefore, the pharmaco-
Neostigmine and glycopyrronium are usually mixed
kinetic profile of atropine fits more closely with that of
in a ratio of 5:1 (2.5 mg neostigmine + 500 μg glyco-
edrophonium, while that of glycopyrronium fits more
pyrronium/ml in the commercial preparation), with a
closely with neostigmine. lIt is, therefore, most logica!
total dose requirement of 0.01-0.1 mg/kg i.v. neostig-
mine, depending on the degree of blockade at the time
of antagonism.
neuromuscular blockade. A neostigmine-glycopyrro-
 Edrophonium and atropine are usually mixed in
 nium combination is commercially available (Robinul-
-one by/6n 0t + wnjuoydopa by/bu 1) oe1 t:9z e
Neostigmine, Anpharm). However, even though the
 pine) and given slowly intravenously to effect over
pharmacokinetics of neostigmine-glycopyrronium
several minutes.
and edrophonium-atropine are the most favourable,
In preference to mixing the antimuscarinic and
it is still not uncommon to see minor muscarinic ef-
 anticholinesterase in the same syringe, some anaes-
fects when these combinations are used, particularly
thetists administer the antimuscarinic 1-2 minutes
 mild bradycardia or second-degree atrioventricular
prior to the anticholinesterase to lessen the risk of
block. These effects are, however, usually transient.
muscarinic side effects occurring. However, cardiac
An edrophonium-atropine combination produces the
 instability may also occur with this approach because
fewest muscarinic side effects and is the combination
the antimuscarinic generally induces a transient tachy-
of choice in patients where these may be detrimental,
cardia before the heart rate reduces once the anti-
e.g. those with cardiac disease.
cholinesterase is administered.
164
Chapter 15 Muscle relaxants
l is vital that ventilatory support and a depth of
during profound (or following prolonged) neuromus-
 anaesthesia adequate to prevent awareness are main-
cular blockade. Once the rocuronium becomes encap-
sulated in the central core of the cyclodextrin molecule,
been achieved. Failure t restore spontaneous venti-
it is no longer able to act at the NMu. Org 25969
 lation may occur for several reasons (Figure 15.8).
may also have some activity against vecuronium, but
apparently to a much lesser extent than against
rocuronium. Since Org 25969 produces antagonism
without inhibition of acetylcholinesterase, muscarinic 
smulalor):
effects do not occur, and therefore the concurrent
：
hadequate antagonism
administration of antimuscarinic drugs is unnecessary.
Hepatic/renal disease
：
Acid-base/electrolyte disturbance
The ability rapidly to terminate even profound
rocuronium-induced blockade without potential mus-
.
Excessve anaesthetic depth
 carinic side effects is a major benefit of Org 25969.
Hypocapnia (over-ventiation)
Hyoothermia 
 Common causes of failure to restore
References and further reading
spontaneous ventilation following the use of
uscle relaxants.
Auer U and Mosing M (2006) Aclinical study of the effects of rocuronium
in isoflurane-anaesthetized cats. Veterinary Anaesthesia and
Anaigesia 33(4), 224-228
Non-depolarizing antagonist
 Clutton RE (1994) Edrophonium for neuromuscular blockade antagonism
Recertly, a novel non-depolarizing antagonist has been
in the dog. Veterinary Record 134, 674-678
Corletto F and Breariey JC (2003) Clinical use of mivacurium in the cat.
described. This agent, Org 25969 (Sugammadex), is a
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Anaigesia 30(2), 93-94
 modified cyclodextrin compound that works in a com-
Dugdale AHA, Adams WA and Jones RS (2002) The clinical use of the 
 neuromuscular blocking agent rocuronium in dogs. Veterinary
 pletely different way to anticholinesterases. Cyclo-
Anaesthesia and Anaigesia 29(1), 49-53
dextrins have a ring structure with a hydrophilic surface,
 Shielas M, Giovannelli M, Mirakhur RK et al. (2006) Org 25969
which makes them water soluble, but with the capabil-
(sugammadex], a selective relaxant binding agent for antagonism
of prolonged rocuronium-induced neuromuscularblockade.British
ityto encapsulate hydrophobic molecules within their
Journalof Anaesthesia 96(1), 36-43
central core. Org 25969 has principally been developed
Smith LJ, Moon PF, Lukasik VM and Erb HN (1999) Duration of action
as a reversal agent forrocuronium, and it appears highly
anesthetized with halothane. American Journal of Veterinary
effective at rapidly 'mopping up' this molecule even
Research 60(9). 1047-1050
：
.
....
：
165
Fluid therapy and blood
transfusion
Paula F. Moon-Massat
General considerations
on matching the patient's individual needs with a fluid
that has the composition and volume of distribution
Introduction
equivalent to the patient's deficit. Therefore, it is es-
Parenteral fluids are indicated for treatment or pre-
sential to know the composition of available solutions
vention of decreased oxygen delivery, hypotension
(Figure 16.1) and their equilibration within the fluid
and hypovolaemia, and electrolyte, metabolic and
compartments of the patient (Figures 16.2 and 16.3).
acid-base disorders. As a patient's physical condi-
Equilibration of intravenous fluid is a balance of
tion deteriorates the importance of selecting the
hydrostatic, osmotic and oncotic pressures and is also
most compatible fluid increases. This chapter reviews
influenced by the permeability characteristics of the
the decision-making process for designing an appro-
capillaries (Starling's law). Normal dog blood has
 priate fluid therapy plan for anaesthetized smal
a colloid osmotic (oncotic) pressure of 25-30 mmHg
animal patients.
and an 0smolarity of 280-310 mOsm/l. Normal vas-
cular endothelium is permeable to small ions or elec-
Fluid dynamics
trolytes, but impermeable to large proteins. Hydrostatic
In emergency situations, fuids are often administered 
pressure is rarely an important factor in determining
intravenously to restore vascular volume and cardiac
 a fluid type. Consequently, fluid osmotic and oncotic
output to levels that, at least, can sustain life until treat-
pressures are the most important criteria in patients
ment is provided. Definitive fluid selection depends
without vascular permeability abnormalities.
Solution
CE
AK
MgButter
（joua (ouu)(oun-(/ouu(ou) （/ouu
Isotonic crystaloids
0.9% NaCl
10
308
5.0-5.7
154
154
0
0
0
0
252-278
4.0-6.5
D5W
10
10
0
0
10
141
294-310
86
15
一
Acetated Ringer's solution
0
7.4
1.5
27-29 acetate/.
[Kendall-McGaw, Baxter)
23 gluconate
Lactated Ringer's solution
10
273
6.5
130
109
14
1.5
0
28lactate
(Baxter, Abbott, Animalcare)
Ringer's
0
310
5.8-6.1
147
156
4
2.25
0
3% NaC!
0
1,026
5.0
513
513
0
0
0
0
7.5% NaCI
10
2,567
5.0-5.7
1,283
1,283
0
0
0
D5W/LRS
10
495-527
 4-6
f30
109
 4 
1.35
28lactate
3% Plasmagel
NO
310
ND
120
147
0
Some
0
Some
6% Albuminl
30
310
5.5
154
154
0
0
0
0
6% Hetastarch (Du Pont,
 30-35
310
5.5
154
154
0.
.0.
0
0
Fresenius Kabij
 6% Pentastarch (Du Pont 
25
310
5.5
154
154
0
0：
0
Critical Care)
Haemaccel (Intervet)
25-29
ND
7.3
145
145
15.1
3.125
ND
ND
 Electrolyte composition and physical properties of commonly available fluids. COP = Colloid osmotic pressure;
DSW = 5% dextrose in water; HES = Hydroxyethyl starch; HS = Hypertonic saline; ND = No data. (continues)
166
Chapter 16 Fluid therapy and blood transfusion
Osmolarity
uonnos
Hyperoncoti colloids (in normal saliney
：
Oxypolygelatin (Marshalton
45-47
200
7.4
145
100
0
11
10
30 carbonate
Veterinary Group)
6% Dextran 70 (Baxter)
75
1309
5.0
154
154
10
0
10
10
10% Dextran 40
>100
310
3.5-7.0
154
154
10
10
0
10
10% HES (Fresenius Kabi)
>100
308
Acidic
154
154
0
10
0
10
>100
---
20% HES
310
Acidic
154
154
0
0
0
01
7.5% NaCI-20% HES
2.567
Acidic
1,283
0
0
>100
1,283
0
7.5% NaCi-6% dextran 70
75
2,567
~4-5
1.283
1.283
0
0
0
0.
pressure: D5W = 5% dextrose in water; HES = Hydroxyethyl starcn: HS = Hypertonic saine: ND = No data.
.. ...
Volume neded 
...
Fiuid type
Examples of clinicat indications
 to increase PV
.by.one litre..
Colioid
Starch
1-1.5 litres 
PV
Hypovolaemia, hypotension, normovolaemic ·
Gelatin
 haemodilution, hypoalbuminaemia
Dextrans
 Hypertonic crystalloid
300 ml
Immediate PV expansion
Hypovolaemic shock, cerebral oedema
：
7.5% NaCl
 causing ICFV reduction
Hypotonic crystalloid
5%dextrose
14 itres
TBW
 Free water deficit, hypermatraemia
Isotonic crystalloid
0.9% NaCI
 3-4 litres 
 ECFV (PV and ISFV
Dehydration, hypovolaemia, hypotension,
 Lactated Ringer's
expansionj
normovolaemic haemodiution
 Categories, distribution and clinical indications for commonly available fluids for intravenous fluid therapy.
 ECFV = Extracelular fluid volume; ICFV = Intracelular iluid volume; ISFV = Interstitial fluid volume;
 water as that found in plasma. Therefore, isotonic fluid
Total body water =
: 60% bodyweight
administration produces no change in the osmotic
pressure of plasma and no fluid shift between com-
partments. Sodium, the primary ion present in extra-
 20% bodyweight =
40% bodyweight =
cellular fluid, is also the main component of most
extraceltular fluid 
intracellular fluid
electrolyte or 'crystalloid' solutions (see Figure 16.1).
Sodium freely crosses capilary boundaries, taking
water with it as it distributes throughout the entire ex-
5% body-
15% body-
tracellular fluid volume. Similarly, all isotonic electro-
weight =
weight =
lyte solutions will distribute themselves throughout the
plasma
interstitial
extracellular fluid volume.
volume
volume
A solution that is 'hypotonic' has fewer particles
than the number present in plasma. Because the ad-
 Distribution of fluid compartments. Intracellular
fiuid includes the fluid within red blood cells.
dition of a hypotonic solution decreases the plasma
 as well as other cells. Interstitial fuid volume includes 
osmotic pressure, an osmotic pressure difference is
 cerebrospinal and ocular fiuids, and luids in the pleurai
established between intravascuiar and extravascuiar
 and peritoneal spaces.
spaces. For equilibrium to be re-established, water
moves out of the intravascular space (low osmotic
Osmosis is the net movement of water across a
pressure) and into the interstitial and intraceilular
semi-permeable membrane caused by the concen-
spaces (high osmotic pressure). Conversely, when a
tration differences of solutes across that membrane.
'hypertonic' solution is administered, water moves from 
 Osmotic pressure, the pressure exerted by the parti-
the interstitial and intracelular spaces (low osmotic
cies within the solution, prevents the movement of
water across the membrane.
. 'Tonicity' refers to the
 pressure). The more hypertonic the solution, the larger
osmotic pressure of a fluid when compared with
the osmotic driving pressure and the more rapidly the
plasma. An “isotonic' solution (approximately 300
water will move into and expand the piasma volume.
mOsm/l) has the same proportion of particles and
This is the principal mechanism for the rapid plasma
167
Chapter 16  Fluid therapy and blood transfusion
volume expansion after hypertonic saline administra-
"Iso-oncotic' colloids have the same oncotic pres-
tion and explains why a smaller volume of hypertonic
sure as plasma and 'hyperoncotic' colloids have a
saline causes a larger expansion of the plasma vol-
higher oncotic pressure. Hyperoncotic fluid adminis-
ume than an equivalent volume of isotonic saline.
tration will increase plasma oncotic pressure and will
Eventually, the shiffing water results in no pressure
draw water into the vascular compartment, similarly
difference between compartments and the volume of
to hypertonic saline. However, unlike both isotonic and
administered electrolyte fluid redistributes evenly
hypertonic crystalloids, colloid molecules cannot cross
throughout the extracellular fluid compartment. Hence,
normal capillary membranes. Therefore, the plasma
hypertonic saline is transient in its effect.
volume expansion after colloid fluid administration is
Commercially available fluids provide the osmo-
maintained for a longer period of time than after ad.
larity of the fluid on the label and package insert. This
 ministration of an equivalent volume of either isotonic
information can be used to predict the degree and
 Or hypertonic crystalloid solutions.
duration of plasma volume expansion after parentera!
 administration. There is one caveat to this, however,
Fluid types
for crystalloid solutions containing glucose. Glucose
molecules are unique because they only act as
Isotonic crystalloids
'effective osmoles' initially (i.e. 5% dextrose in water
lsotonic crystalloids (lactated Ringer's, Isolyte) are
is isotonic, 10% dextrose in water is hypertonic) and
inexpensive fluids used to expand both the vascular
body water shifts as predicted based on osmotic
and the interstiial fluid compartments. They are com-
pressures. However, through cellular transport and
monly used to maintain plasma volume in anaesthe-
 gluicose metabolism, the tonicity of the final glucose-
tized uncomplicated patients; to replace deficits in
containing solution should be estimated assuming
dehydrated patients: to restore third-space losses; and
no glucose remains. Consequently, 5% dextrose in
to promote urinary flow. Within 30-45 minutes of ad-
water, while isotonic in the container, is ulfimately
ministration, approximately 75-80% of the adminis-
hypotonic in the body and should only be adminis-
 tered volume has left the intravascular compartment 
tered if the goal is to provide free water' to all fluid
and redistributed primarily into the interstitial space.
compartments. Such hypotonic solutions do not
Therefore, the transient nature of crystalloids prevents 
adequately replace standard fluid losses under con-
 sustained improvement in plasma volume and haemo-
ditions of anaesthesia and surgery and should not
dynamic parameters unless they are administered as
routinely be used for maintenance and volume
a continuous infusion. Large volumes of isotonic flu-
replacement. Furthermore, they will cause intracellu-
ids, coupled with their large volume of redistribution,
lar and interstitial oedema more rapidly than if an
 may promote peripheral and pulmonary oedema.
isotonic fluid is used to maintain an equivalent
 Another consideration is the acidity of the solution.
degree of plasma volume expansion. The movement 
The pH of common solutions varies greatly, some are
 of free water into cells may either treat cellular dehy-
acidifying, others alkalinizing, depending on whether
dration or produce celiular oedema, depending on
or not buffers are added (see Figure 16.1). Chloride or
the situation of a given patient. Thus, it is imperative
lactate, the anions associated with the sodium and
to consider the effects of a fluid's tonicity on the
 potassium cations in most fluids, can be used inter-
patient's fluid compartments.
changeably for most patients. When there is concern
In fluid selection, the second important property is 
for acidosis, the veterinary surgeon should select a fluid
 oncotic pressure (colloid osmotic pressure, COP) and
of the appropriate pH with the presence of a metabo-
this is an extremely important component of
lizable buffer (acetate, gluconate or lactate).
transcapillary fluid dynamics. Oncotic pressure is the
Calcium-free solutions, such as saline (0.9% NaCl)
 pressure exerted by large molecular weight molecules
and some commercial fluids (see Figure 16.1), can
(molecular weight >30,000 Daltons) that normaly do
be administered simultaneously with blood products.
hot cross the capillary membranes. Solutions contain-
 Calcium-containing solutions, such as lactated Ring-
ing these large molecules, either endogenous proteins 
er's (Hartmann's), cannot be combined with blood
(aibumin) or synthetic molecules (e.g. starches), are
products or microprecipitates may occur.
considered 'colloid solutions'.
Normal oncotic pressure of plasma is 20-30 mmHg
Hypertonic solutions
 and, in most situations, it is assumed that plasma
These rapidly expand the plasma volume, increase
hz si ujwngie wnies t aienbape si aanssaid ojoouo
cardiac output and improve blood pressure. Hyper-
g/l and total protein is ≥50 g/l. The contribution that 
tonic saline may directly increase myocardial
plasma proteins (albumin, globulins) make to the to-
contractility and decrease systemic vascular resist-
tal plasma osmotic pressure is small (approximately
4%) but they exert enough of a pressure diference
latory blood flow because of a reduction in endothelial
to influence the vascular-interstitial distribution of
cell size and a lower blood viscosity. For a more sus-
water. It is primarily the plasma proteins that cause wa-
tained efect, hypertonic crystalloids can be adminis-
ter to remain preferentialy in the intravascular space.
tered with a colloid.
A normal capillary wall is relatively impermeable to
Hypertonic solutions are useful in the initial treat-
 such colloid molecules although the actual capilary
ment of hypovolaemic shock because of effective
permeability to colloids, endogenous or synthetic,
plasma volume expansion folowing rapid administra-
depends upon the type of capillary as well as the
tion of a small volume. Replacement of only one quar-
nature of the colloid (size, shape and charge).
ter to one third of the lost volume of blood is needed 
168
to rapidly restore cardiovascular function compared
Colloids
with three to four times the lost volume necessary with
Clinical conditions of hypoaibuminaemia, blood loss,
isotonic crystalloids. Hypertonic solutions are a 'stop-
hypovolaemia, third-space fluid accumulation, sepsis
 gap' therapy and must be followed by administration
and persistent hypotension are indications for colloid
of appropriate follow-up fluids (crystalloids, colloids 
administration. The benefit of colloids is that they do
 or blood products). in addition to treatment of shock,
not cross normal capillary wals and have a more sus-
slow infusions of hypertonic saline have been advo-
cated for intraoperative use during cardiac surgery.
talloid solutions. Compared with plasma, synthetic
t0 prevent tissue oedema from conventional fluid
colloids have a longer storage time, no risk of trans-
mission of infectious diseases and no long-term
sensitization effect. Although less expensive than
in experimental traumatic brain injury modeis and may
plasma, they are more cosily than crystalioids.
be lseful in treating cerebrai oedema.
The volume of colloid administered is equal to or
Most of the adverse effects of hypertonic saline
slightly greater than the lost volume of blood. Com-
are transient but can be clinically relevant. The most
pared with isotonic crystalloids, this translates into less
important side effects are hypernatraemia, hyperchlor-
total fluid administered, less fluid distributed into extra-
aemia, hypokalaemia, hyperosmolarity and meta-
vascular spaces and less risk of peripheral oedema.
bolic acidosis. For example, at the standard shock
However, both colloids and crystalloids have been
dose (4 ml/kg i.v. over 10 minutes), a hyperchiorae-
associated with pulmonary oedema in patients with
mic metabolic acidosis can cause a transient de-
permeable capillaries. Diseased capillaries may leak
crease of 0.05 unit in pH that lasts approximately 10
both colloids and fluid into the interstitial space when
minutes. Newer hypertonic solutions have attempted
gaps' become large enough, resulting in oedema. On
to prevent some of these side effects and both
the other hand, colloids that are larger than the 'gaps'
hypernatraemic-isochloraemic-acetate solutions and 
suaiaid ews pue jaem jo podsuel epadu Aew
isonatraemic-hyperchloraemic solutions are being
through permeabie capilliaries. This property may have
developed. Because of the hyperosmolarity, hyper-
therapeutic benefit. Pentafraction (a derivative of
'..
tonic saline administered through a small peripheral
starch for plasma substitution), in particular, may be
vein to a patient with poor perfusion may resuit in
useful in 'plugging' leaky capillaries in patients with
intravascular haemolysis and haemoglobinuria.
sepsis, pulmonary dysfunction, burns and other dis-
Hypertonic saline also produces haemodilution of all
eases with increased capillary permeability.
blood components. Finally, ventricular arrhythmias
Typically, colloids are categorized as a type of dex-
can be observed occasionally during administration
tran, gelatin or starch (Figure 16.4). The plasma half-
and their incidence may increase with the severity
life is proportional to the size of the molecules.
of the patient's condition.
Molecules <50,000 Daltons are rapidly filtered un-
The use of hypertonic saline in dehydrated patients
changed by the kidneys while larger molecules are
 or patients with ongoing, uncontrolied blood loss re-
degraded, metabolized and excreted through renal and
gastrointestinal pathways. Diseases that alter renal
mains a controversial topic. With pre-existing cellular
1
dehydration, hypertonic saline causes further de-
function or vascular permeability will alter the duration
：
crease in cell size and it is important to administer an
of plasma volume expansion. In addition, if high doses
 isotonic crystalloid promptly to repiace this aggravated
 of smaller colloids are administered to a patient with
cellular fluid deficit. However, some evidence suggests
renal dysfunction, renal tubular obstruction may occur,
that mild cellular dehydration does not compromise
potentially causing acute renal falure.
the efficacy of a single dose of hypertonic saline for
Three potential disadvantages of all synthetic col-
treatment of hypovolaemia. Cardiovascular improve-
loids are circulatory overload, anaphylactic reactions
ment is not sustained, however, with a second dose
and coagulation disorders. Because of slow fluid re-
of hypertonic saline in these patients. In more severely
distribution, circulatory overload and haemodilution
dehydrated patienfs, mortality may actually increase
may occur if the patient is not properly monitored. As
with its use.
errors in fluid loading with colloids have a prolonged
The other concern with hypertonic saline is that
effect, the volume of colloid used should be carefully
uncontrolled bleeding will worsen (due to the rapid
titrated. Central venous pressure, systemic blood pres-
increase in blood pressure) and mortality may in-
sure, capilary wedge pressure and urine output should
crease. As with any fluid therapy, aggressive volume
be monitored in patients with pulmonary oedema,
restoration to normotension can promote continued
congestive heart failure or renal failure or other
blood loss if the source of haemorrhage is not con-
patients at risk for circulatory overload.
troled. Therefore, it seems rational to provide only
Historically, anaphylactic and anaphylactoid reac-
enough fluid to prevent tissue ischaemia and main-
tions have been reported in humans for all three
tain life support as an initial measure. One must real-
classes of coloids and are estimated to be 0.33%
ize that striving for normal blood pressure in such
overall. This incidence is small compared with the de-
un juiod-pua aiejdoidde ue aq jou Aew suojens
 gree of reactions reported affter administration of blood,
bleeding has been controlled. 'Hypotensive resusci-
penicillin, barbiturates or contrast media. The incidence
tation' (mean arterial blood pressure approximately
60 mmHg) is acceptable for short-term delays (<3
reactions to dextrans have been reported in dogs
hours) until definitive treatment, regardless of the type 
(rarely) and rats (commonly). Reactions are usuaily im-
 of fluid used in initial resuscitation attempts.
mediate, even after administration of a small volume.
169
Chapter 16 Fluid therapy and blood transfusion 
Coloid
%
Tetrastarchc
%solution
6%
4 10%
%
aeu pe
Category"
Protein
Gelatin 
Dextran
 Starch:
Substance
Polypeptide
Polysaccharide
Amyiopectin (branched poiysaccharide)
Source
Blood
Bacteria
Maize or sorghum 
Mean (range)
69
35
30
40
70
450
264
130
.Weight ave. mol.
(5-50)
(15-75)
(20-175)
(10-1,000)
(150-350)
wt (kD)
% Interslitial
20%
50%
50%
10%
10%
0%
0%
0%
 % Intravascular
80%
50%
50%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Plasma T2 (h) 
>16
1 2-4
2-4
2-6
6-12
10-12
3-5
2-3
Total elimination
Very rapid
Veryrapid
Very rapid
Rapid
Prolonged
Prolonged
% adverse
Fewest
Some (0.78%)
Few (0.2% if pretreat with
Extremely
.
reactions (in
(0.001%)
dextran 1),.common in rats
rare (0%)
humans, after 1980)
Coagulopathies*
Rare
 Reported
Reported
 Comparison of commonly available colloid solutions. The number average molecular weight of pentastarch is 
range of medium-weight molecules.
Therefore, initial, slow administration with careful
 haematological effects that are due to more than sim-
monitoring is justified. Signs of an adverse reaction
ple haemodilution, one should consider avoiding them
include hypotension, ischaemia, flushing, urticaria,
and using a geiatin or plasma in patients with
respiratory compromise, pulmonary oedema and
coagulopathies or von Willebrand's disease, or blood
 gastrointestinal disturbances. In a few extremely rare
products when massive blood loss is expected.
Instances, administration of a colloid has been fatal.
Although all colloids affect coagulation, gelatins are
Albumin therapy
the least detrimental, followed by starches and finally
The administration of highly concentrated 25% human
dextrans.For dextrans, the effects have been attrib-
serum albumin (HSA) is becoming increasingly popu-
uted to platelet coating, precipitation of coagulation
Jar in veterinary medicine but with limited investiga-
factors, increased fibrinolytic activity and decreased
tion regarding iis safety and efficacy. HSAis an easily
functional von Willebrand factor. The effect on coagu-
obtainable fluid that is extremely hyperoncotic (COP
lation with dextrans appears to be dose-related. The
approximately 200 mmHg versus plasma approxi-
manufacturer's recommended dose for 6% dextran
mately 25 mmHg). As described earller, COP is
70 is up to 1.5 g/kg with the total dose not to exceed
important for maintaining intravascular volume and
20 ml/kg the first day, and haff this dose on the follow-
a hypertonic solution will draw extravascular fluids
ing 2 days. Higher doses may increase blood visco-
into the intravascular space. The slow redistribution
sity, vascular resistance and afterload. A maximum rate
of HSA decreases the likelihood of causing oedema
of 2 ml/kg/h has not been associated with bleeding
problems in people while large, rapid doses may cause
other purported theoretical advantages over other
haemorrhagic diathesis. There are no controlled data
synthetic colloids including, but not limited to, reduc-
 on the maximum safe dose for dextrans in veterinary
ing microvascular permeability, decreasing platelet
 medicine. Empirical doses of 5-10 ml/kg/h have been
aggregation and antioxidant properties. At present,
suggested for the treatment of hypoproteinaemia while
there are no commercially available species-specific
doses from 5-15 ml/kg given as a rapid bolus, at a
 albumin products. However, a study reported the use
rate of 40--50 ml/kg/h, have been suggested for acute
of 25% HSA in 64 dogs and 2 cats for treatment of
hypovolaemia. It has been reported that doses of
severe hypoalbuminaemia (<15 g/l or <18 g/l, in the
20 ml/kg, over 30 or 60 minutes, produced minimal
presence of hypovolaemia and dehydration) at a
haemostatic abnormalities in clinically normal dogs,
mean total dose of 5 ml/kg as either 2 ml/kg boluses
but there were enough alterations to suggest dextrans
or a 0.f-1.7 ml/kg/h infusion. The study concluded
may precipitate bleeding in dogs with marginal hae-
that administration of HSA was safe (two dogs de-
mostatic function. The coagulation changes that can
veloped facial oedema possibly associated with this
occur with hetastarch, although measurable, are not
treatment) and 25% HSA reliably increased blood
as pronounced. Hetastarch slightly prolongs partial
pressure and albumin concentration. It was also
thromboplastin and prothrombin bleeding times. Clot-
suggested that HSA may be a good choice for criti-
ting factor Vll function is decreased 25-50%, and
cally ill patients with systemic inflammatory response
there is altered fibrin formation with hetastarch. Since
syndrome (SIRS), gastric dilatation--volvulus, perito-
both dextrans and starches have documented
nitis and liver disease.
170
Chapter 16  Fluid therapy and blood transfusion
Despite use of albumin in human medicine since
species or indication for its use, it is essential to re-
the 1940s, its use and risk:benefif ratio are still con-
spect Oxyglobin as a colloid. Because of its oncotic
troversial. The 2004 'Saline versus Albumin Fluid
pressure (Figure 16.5), circulatory overload may
Evaluation' (SAFE) study evaluated 6997 patients
occur, with development of pulmonary oedema and
(ICU patients where ffuid was indicated for intravas-
pleural effusion. As with all colloids, this can be pre-
cular volume depletion with the exception of liver trans-
vented through careful monitoring of administration
plantation, burn or cardiac surgery patients); it
rate and minimizing the dose to the lowest effective
concluded that the 28-day mortality rate was the same
dose. In fragile patients, invasive monitoring with a
central venous pressure line is recommended. Signs
ence in other secondary outcomes (similar days in
of volume overload include pulmonary crepitations and
ICU, in hospital and need for mechanical ventilation).
crackles or diminished lung sounds (pleural effusion),
There was limited evidence that a subpopulation of
decreased P.O, or respiratory distress. Appropriate
 patients with severe sepsis who received albumin had
treatment involves slowing or discontinuing fluid
a more favourable outcome. On the other hand, the
administration, and providing diuretics and oxygen.
 study also suggested that the subpopulation of
 Several reports indicate that cats may be especially
patients with trauma (especially with brain injury) had 
 sensitive to volume overload when Oxyglobin is ad-
a more favourable outcome if they did not receive
 ministered at infusion rates and volumes appraved for
albumin. The overall conclusion was that albumin,
dogs, but such effects were not observed at lower rates
evaluated across the entire population, was safe with-
(<2--5 ml/kg/h) and smaller volumes (≤10-15 ml/kg).
out any clear efficacy advantage over saline.
Thus broad utilization of 25% HSA is not recom-
mended at present. Absolute guidelines have not been
determined and highly intensive monitoring of patients
Haemoglobin (g/l)
140-160
120-140
to prevent circulatory overload must occur if this po-
Osmolarity (mOsrm/l)
280-310
: 082
tent colioid is used. Furthermore, the immunological
Oncotic pressure (mmHg)
25-30
43
effects of this human protein are not known in all spe-
cies presented to the veterinariay surgeon.
Viscosity (cp)
3.5
1.3
Hal-life (h) 
Varies
18-43(dogs)
Oxygen-carrying solutions
The inability to readily obtain blood products or per.
Ps (mmHg) a
26
34
form a cross-match can have life-threatening conse~
Methaemoglobin (%)
<2
3
quences. Following over 60 years of research and
development, only one blood substitute, Oxyglobin
16.5
 Comparison of whole blood io a haemoglobin-
Solution, is commercially available. Oxyglobin Solu-
based oxygen carrier, Oxygiobin Solution
(HBOC-301). Note that the half-life of Oxyglobin is dose-
tion is a polymerized bovine haemoglobin (130 g/l)
dependent and values are based on doses ranging from
colloid in a balanced electrolyte solution (130 mmol/l
10 to 30 ml/kg. a Ps, is the partial pressure at which 50%
Na', 4 mmol/l K+ and 110 mmol/l Cl) with a pH of 7.8.
of haemoglobin is saturated with oxygen.
It is stable at room temperature, has a 3-year shelf-
life and there is no need for cross-matching, reconsti-
Results of a multicentre clinical trial using
tution, warming the solution or specialized transfusion
Oxyglobin in 64 anaemic dogs showed that the most
administration sets. The potential for disease trans-
commonly reported adverse reactions were transient
mission is negligible. The plasma haemoglobin is able
discoloration of sclera and urine, vomiting and over-
to carry oxygen to tissues and can temporarily replace
expanded vascular volume when Oxyglobin was ad-
the need for red blood celis (half-life is dose-depend-
ministered at a higher than recommended rate. Less
ent but ranges from 18-43 hours). Oxyglobin Solu-
frequent adverse events that had an unknown rela-
tion has the same advantages as other colloids and a
tionship to the administration of Oxyglobin included
smaller volume than crystalloids can be used to main-
diarrhoea, fever, cardiac arrhythmia and tachypnoea.
tain blood volume.
-ea ol sbop u! esn ol paaoidde s! ugojbixo
Priorities in fluid therapy
ment of anaemia and the recommended dose is
 The initial goal in any fluid therapy plan is to maintain
10-30 ml/kg bodyweight i.v. at a rate not to exceed
enough oxygen delivery to vital organs to sustain aero-
10 ml/kg/h, administered once. Blood loss, haemo-
bic metabolism (Figure 16.6). Oxygen delivery (DO)
lysis and ineffective erythropoeisis are other common
is primarily based on cardiac output (CO), haemo-
indications for its use. Controversy exists as to whether
 globin content (Hb) and arterial oxygen saturation of
Oxyglobin is beneficial in dogs with immune-mediated
haemoglobin (S:O2):
 haemolytic anaemia (IMHA). One report suggested
an association with poor survival while a more recent
DO= CO x C02
report revealed that Oxyglobin had a positive effect
The arterial or mixed venous oxygen content (C:O2
on long-term survival. The difference in outcome may
have been related to a difference in dosing strategy.
or C,O2, respectively) is determined by the amount of 
oxygen bound to the haemoglobin plus the amount 
Oxyglobin has been administered (off-label) un-
dissolved in the plasma. The full equation for oxygen
der experimental and clinical conditions to over two
delivery then becomes:
dozen different species, ranging from reptiles, birds
and mammals to aquatic species. Regardless of the
DO = CO x (1.36 (Hb)(%S。O2) + (0.003)(P。O2))
171
Chapter 16  Fluid therapy and blood transfusion
where the variable 0.003(P:O2) is the amount of oxy-
gen dissolved in the plasma at that arterial oxygen
 Calculation of fluid volume needed:
tension (P:O2). The determinants of a patient's oxy-
1. Calcutate the patient's normal blood volume (BV)
Aquo lou juapuadap are (on) uodwnsuoo uab
2.
 Estimate the percent blood loss, based on clinical signs and 
on the metabolic demands of the patient but also on
history
adequacy of oxygen delivery. lIf oxygen delivery
 3. Calculate the volume deficit, VD = BV x % blood toss
decreases, then more oxygen must be extracted from 
4. Determine the resuscitation volume, based on:
the blood to maintain the oxygen consumption of the
Whole blood voume = VD
patient. Estimates of adequate oxygen delivery can
Colloid voiume =1.5 x VD
Isotonic crystalid volume = 4 x VD
be made either by estimating the components of oxy-
gen delivery itself or evaluating whether or not the
Normal blood volume:
Dog s 80-90 ml/kg
 oxygen extraction of the patient has increased, as-
Cat = 60-70 m/kg
 Normal plasma volume:
6yu -9g = bog
suming an unchanged metabolic state. See 'Fluid
therapy monitoring' for indirect methods of evaluating
Cat = 35-53m/kg
 oxygen delivery and extraction.
Shock fluid rates:
Isotonic crystaloid fluids 
7.5% Hypertonic saline ± collid
Dog = 80-90 ml/kg/h
4 ml/kg over 10 minutes
Normalrange
Cat = 60-70 ml/kg/h
Arterial haemoglobin saturation (S,O) (%)
>95
Blood replacement:
Base deficit (mmol/l)
Volume (ml) of blood to administer =
+2to-2
(desired Hb - existing Hb) x (ml/kg BV x recipient wt)
Blood lactate (mmol)
<2
9H Jouop
Cardiac index (ml/kg/minute) 
100-150
Plasma replacement:
Central venous pressure (cmH,0)
Awake: -3 to +4
Volume (ml of plasma to administer =
Anaesthetized: 2-7
(desired TP - existing TP) x (ml/kg PV x recipient wt)
Gastric intramucosal pH 
7.35-7.41
donor TP
Heart rate (bpm)
Dog: 70--180
Cryoprecipitatea:
Cat:145-200
Valume m of cryoprecipitate to adinister 
Haematocrit (%)
Qog:37-55
recipient wtxBV(lkg)x[1 -Hct(l] x
Cat:25-45
(desired - current factor level (U/mal)
Mean arterial blood pressure (mmHg)
80-110
factor level in plasma product (U/l)
Platelet-rich plasma²:
Mixed venous haemoglobin saturation
>65
($,02) (%)
Expected 1-hour plt count (x 10*/1)
pll count before 
unit plt count (x10%/l) x unit vol. x 0.51
Mixed venous oxygen tension (mmHg; kPa)
40: 5.3
transtusion (x 109/)
recipient kg wt x BV (/kg)
()  p x)
500-800
Oxygen extraction (%)
Guidelines for calculating iluid and blood
20-30
component replacement. BV = Blood volume;
Oxygen consumption (VO) (ml/minute/m²)
110-160
Hb = Hlaemoglobin concentration: Hct = Haematocrit;:
Plt = Platelet; PV = Plasma volume; TP = Total protein: 
 Pulmonary artery wedge pressure (mmHg)
3-9
wt = Weight in kg. α Reprinted from Mathews (1996) with
Urine output (rml/kg/h)
1-2
 permission of the publisher. b 0.51 corrects for splenic
sequestration of transfused platelets.
Normal values of cardiopulmonary parameters
for monitoring of fluid therapy.
Following volume restoration, the second priority is 
 haemoglobin restoration. However, haeimatocrit values
In situations such as acute haemorrhage, cardiac
taken alone give no information about oxygen delivery
output and haemoglobin concentration will decline.
or oxygen uptake by the fissues. If they did, elevated
Initially, the consequences of low cardiac output out-
haematocrits in dehydrated patients wouid signify in-
weigh the consequences of low haemoglobin. There-
creased oxygen delivery, and fluid therapy would not 
fore, treating hypovolaemia is more important than
be required. This rationale is obviously incorrect, im-
treating anaemia and restoring volume is more im-
 plying that the common practice of transfusing red blood
portant than maintaining haemoglobin concentration.
cells based on a specific haematocrit alone has little
The blood volume of a dog is 80-90 ml/kg and that of
scientific basis. A more rational approach to determine
a cat is 60-70 ml/kg. A rough estimate for determin-
if red cell transfusions are necessary is to evaluate
ing the fluid volume needed to restore blood volume
oxygen delivery variables and look for evidence of in-
can be calculated based on the final distribution of
o (g'g1 ainblg ees) uoidunsuoo uebixo eienbape
the chosen fluid type. When administering whole
example, with normovolaemic anaemia (following crys-
blood, give a volume equal to the volume deficit; when
talloid fluid therapy or in chronic anaemia), red cell trans-
administering a colloid, give a volume equal to 1-1.5
fusion may not be necessary because blood volume is
times the volume deficit; and when administering an
adequate and a compensatory increase in cardiac out-
isotonic crystalloid give a volume equal to 3-4 times
put may have occurred to meet oxygen delivery. How-
the volume deficit (see Figures 16.2 and 16.7).
ever, red cell administration may be indicated if oxygen
172
Chapter 16  Fluid therapy and blood transfusion
delivery is below normal and lactate is being produced
calculated to include pre-existing deficit, mainte-
in large amounts (suggesting anaerobic metabolism)
nance and ongoing losses (evaporative losses, sur-
 or ifoxygen extraction is greater than normal (suggest-
gical blood loss and third-space fluid loss).
ing tissue oxygen needs are greater than delivery). Nor-
Preoperatively. a minimum database of haemat-
ocrit, total protein, glucose, blood urea nitrogen and
 and an increase in oxygen consumption affer adminis-
creatinine should be obtained and the patient should
tration of blood or packed red cells should be consid-
be evaluated for signs of dehydration or haemo-
 ered a positive response. Transfusions should be
dynamic compromise. Clinical assessment includes
continued until oxygen consumption is no longer de-
evaluating skin elasticity, pulse rate and quality, mu-
pendent on haemoglobin content.
 cous membrane colour, capillary refill time, respira-
 Other priorities in fluid therapy include correction
tory rate and character; temperature of extremities,
 or prevention of acid-base; electrolyte and metabolic
behaviour and mentation. The ability to assess extra-
disorders. Treatment is tailored to the individual
cellular fluid volume is important but often it must be
patient and can be addressed either by selecting a
estimated based on these non-specific clinical signs 
fluid of appropriate pH and electrolyte composition 
and abnormalities such as haemoconcentration, ol-
(see Figure 16.1) or by adding a supplement to the
iguria, azotaemia and acid-base or electrolyte altera-
fluid (Figure 16.8). Chronic abnormalities should be
tions. A history suggestive of extracelluiar fluid deficits
corrected slowly.
may include protracted gastrointestinal losses (vomit-
 The pH of common solutions varies greatly: some
ing, diarrhoea, bowel obstruction), sepsis, trauma or
 are acidifying and others alkalinizing, depending on 
 chronic diuretic administration. In some cases, addi-
whether buffers have been added (see Figure 16.1).
tional information, such as mixed venous blood oxy-
 Chloride and lactate, the anions associated with so-
 gen saturation or tension, buffer or base deficit
dium and potassium cations in most fluids, can be used
calculations, blood lactate concentrations, urine out-
interchangeably for most patients, but not for patients
 put and urine specific gravity, will assist in determin-
with acidaemia. When there is concern about acidosis,
ing adequacy of tissue perfusion and severity of
the clinician should select a fluid of the appropriate pH
metabolic abnormalities.
 with a metabolizable buffer (acetate, gluconate or lac-
Whenever time permits, stabilization of oxygen
tate) in preference to chloride, as chloride may pro-
delivery, pH and electrolyte balance should occur in
mote a hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis while the
the preoperative period to optimize the patient's abil-
 metabolizable anions can be converted to bicarbonate.
-saidap Aeuowndopieo uanbasgns eul elelaloi on A!
 sant effects of general anaesthesia. In an emergency,
however, while adequate oxygen delivery must still
Perioperative considerations
be restored, mild metabolic, electrolyte and acid-base
disorders can be corrected during the intraoperative
Pre-anaesthetic considerations
and postoperative periods. Treatment should always
 A healthy adul's body is composed of 55-60% water, 
be initiated preoperatively for extreme hyperkalaemia
divided unequally into intracellular (40%) and extra-
(28 mmol/l), acidaemia (pH ≤7.2) or hypoglycaemia
cellular (20%) volumes (see Figure 16.3). The exira-
(<3.3 mmol/i). Fluids should be warmed prior to ad-
cellular fluid volume can be subdivided into the
ministration, because cold fluids will promote hypo-
interstitial fluid volume and plasma volume. An
thermia and increase metabolic oxygen demands as
estimate of the volume of fluids needed should be
the body attempts to maintain normothermia.
Supplement 
 Emergency dose
OsmolaritypH
Composition.
(mosm/）
(mmo)
Caicium chloride (10%)
0.05-0.1 ml/kg slowly
2,040
5.5-7.5
17 Ca2+
68 Ch
Calcium gluconate (10%)
0.5-3 ml/kg slowly or 60-90 mg/kg/day
1680
6-8.2
232.5 mmc/l Ca2*
ND gluconate
Dextrose (50%)
 500 mg/kg ciluted, for inmediate bolus 
2,530
4.2
ND
 Magnesium suiphate 
 0.075-0.15 mmol/kg over 5 minutes
4,060
 5.5-7.0
2.03 Mg²-
(1 g/2 ml)
ND SO2-
Mannitol (25%)
0.25-3g/kg diuted and given sowly over 30 minstes
1,373
4.5-7.0
ND
.
 Potassiusm chloride
0.5 mmol/kg/h
4,000
48
2,000 K
(u/OWU Z)
2,000 CF
Sodium bicarbonate (8.4%),
0.3 x bodyweignt in kg x base deficit (mmol/l)
2,000
7.8
1,000 Nar
(1 mmol/ml)
Give one third over 20 mirutes and rest over 4 hrs or
1,000 HCO
 mamol/l immediately 
Intravenous iluid supplements. ND = No dGata.
173
Chapter 16 Fluid therapy and blood transfusion 
Choice of fluid will depend upon the condlition of
 Or paediatric patients. However. the stress response
the patient:
that results from anaesthesia and surgery produces
an 'anti-insulin' effect, making it difficult to predict the
For most routine surgical patients, a balanced,
 glucose requirements for an individual patient. Except
isotonic crystalloid solution is an appropriate
where hypoglycaemia is likely, routine administration
choice administered at 5-10 ml/kg/h
 of glucose has two disadvantages. Firstly, hyper-
Dehydration will decrease the intracellular,
 glycaemia may cause an osmotic diuresis and dehy-
interstitial and plasma fluid volumes and these
dration. Secondly, studies have indicated that
patients need volume expansion of al fluid 
hyperglycaemia may worsen neurological ischaemia
compartments. Practically, however, one relies
and outcome after traumatic brain injury. This latter
on the patient's own physiological mechanisms
finding may also have clinical relevance for other criti-
to control intracellular fluid deficits. Therefore, a
cally ill patients. To prevent hypoglycaemia, one can
balanced isotonic crystalloid is an acceptable
formulate a 2.5% dextrose infusion by adding 5 ml of
fluid choice
 50% dextrose to t00 ml of an isotonic crystaloid so-
If massive acute blood loss or severe
lution. This allows additional dextrose to be adminis-
hypotension occurs, a crystalloid is an
tered without the concern of also administering free
acceptable initial fluid choice, provided that 
water. Blood glucose should then be re-evaluated
 colloids and blood products are immediately
periodically and additional glucose added to the solu-
available to maintain blood volume as soon as
tion if necessary (blood glucose <4.5-6.0 mmoll).
indicated during the procedure
The electrolytes sodium and potassium must be
In more chronic, progressive types of
replaced in the perioperative period. Slight variations
hypovolaemia, the patient needs restoration of
in the fliuid concentrations are generally well compen-
both blood volume and interstitial fluid volume
 sated by the kidneys. The average maintenance so-
and will benefit from combination of an isotonic
dium requirements are approximately 30 mmol/l and 
pue hep pin iesiaui aoeida oi pioesao
 maintain urine output) and colloid (to maintain 
There are no other short-term requirements for other
plasma volume)
electrolytes except in instances where severe
Septicaemic conditions or severe ischaemic
derangements have 0ccurred (see Figure 16.8). Water
episodes, from any cause, can decrease blood 
-oseh aoeida ol paau aut apnoui sueanbai
volume but increase intracellular and interstitial
intestinal, renal and insensible losses (e.g. respira-
volumes because of changes in capillary and
tory, cutaneous), Additional fiuids are required to
cell membrane permeability and secondary fluid
replace blood and third-space fluid losses and to pre-
shifts. Such patients need fluids to support
vent general anaesthesia-induced hypotension from
 oxygen delivery but fluids should be chosen that
will minimize further tissue or organ oedema
Even awake animals are intolerant of acute blood
 With a pre-existing metabolic acidosis or when
loss and rapid intervention is essential. With hypovol-
there is concern for future acidosis, the pH of the
aemic shock, the mortality rate is directly related to
 jnitial fluid should be near that of plasma (see
the magnitude and duration of the ischaemic insult.
Figure 16.1), and acetate or gfuconate (easier to
Since life-saving compensatory reflexes are obtunded
metabolize than lactate) may be a better buffer
or removed in patients under general anaesthesia,
choice in severely ill patients. In mild to moderate
these patients are even more sensitive to acute blood
 metabolic acidosis, efforts should be made to
loss and hypovolaemia. Furthermore, seemingly small
improve circulating blood volume and oxygen
volumes of blood loss may not be tolerated in sick,
delivery either by increasing the volume of fluid
debilitated or traumatized patients.
The first priority after blood loss is to restore blood
being administered or by erythrocyte restoration
to improve oxygen content. Stored blood and
volume (and red cells, if needed) and secondarily to
packed red cells are extremely acidotic and
replenish interstitial fluid deficits that may have oc-
fresh whole blood is preferred to prevent
curred due to compensatory 'transcapilary refill. In
worsening acidaemia in critical patients. With
emergency situations, blood volume and cardiac out-
severe acidaemia (pH <7.2), administration of an
put restoration will occur with any fluid that re-expands
alkalinizing solution may be of temporary benefit
plasma volume (crystalloids, colloids or blood prod-
while the underlying cause is treated. A buffer
ucts). However, less viscous colloids and crystaloids
should not be administered through the same
flow faster through intravenous tubing than more vis-
：
catheter as either a calcium-containing solution
cous blood products. Hence, any acellular solution will
onpoid pooig to ad Aue 1o (s,jebu! paleioel)
faster than undiluted packed red cells. Therefore, car-
Intraoperative considerations
diac output is most rapidly restored with colloids and
Two concerns for intraoperative maintenance fluid
least rapidly restored with packed red cells. Due to
choices are whether to administer glucose, and how
differences in compartment distribution, the volume
much water, sodium and potassium are necessary to
 of crystaloids must be at least three times greater than 
replace losses. Glucose has, in the past, been given
the volume of colloid infused to have an equivalent
perioperatively to decrease protein catabolism and
effect on cardiac output. With mild to moderate haem-
prevent hypoglycaemia. This may be of special con-
orrhage, crystalloids are still beneficial because this
cern for diabetic patients, patients with liver disease
174
Chapter 16  Fiuid therapy and blood transfusion
In severe haemorrhage, administering a colloid fol-
This fluid movement may lead to hypovolaemia (if the
lowed by a crystalloid wil restore the blood volume and
fluid came from the vasculature), dehydration (if the
interstitial fluid volume rapidly. In addition, acellular
fluid came from the extracellular space) and/or hypo-
solutions will decrease haemoglobin concentration
proteinaemia (if the third-space fluid has high protein
through haemodilution, and decrease blood viscosity.
content). The third-space fluid can accumulate in re-
This decrease may improve microcirculatory blood flow
gions that may further compromise circulation to an
without detrimental effects on oxygen delivery. Con-
organ or within an organ and produce poor tissue
ventional shock doses of an isotonic crystalloid fluid
perfusion. In human patients, guidelines for third-space
are 90 ml/kg/h for dogs and 60 ml/kg/h for cats (one
fluid losses are calculated based on degree of expected
blood volume in an hour). The fluid rate should be
tissue trauma; these losses are corrected in addition to
slowed as soon as favourable responses are observed.
the fluids calculated to replace blood loss. The more the
If the patient remains unstable, or initial blood loss is
tissue damage, the more the third spacing of fluids.
severe, fluids such as colloids and blood may be nec-
Estimated fluid rates for an anaesthetized patient are
  s   t 
cal period, with fluid rates dictated by the patient's
trauma, 6 ml/kg/h for moderate trauma and 8 ml/kg/h
clinical condition. The standard 'shock' colloid dose is
for extreme tissue trauma. For all patients, clinical moni-
 5--20 ml/kg over 15-30 minutes. For emergency blood
toring will determine if the rate is adequate or should
heo piooo e sngd aujes suouady uoisuedxa aunoa
be adjusted.
be life-saving. The standard emergency hypertonic
saline/dextran dose is 4 ml/kg i.v. of 7.5% hypertonic
Postoperative fluid considerations
a-01 e lo 0 uxp %g + by/w 21 um us
Most patients receive a high fluid rate preoperatively
period followed by conventional fluid therapy. If
and intraoperatively in order to maintain intravascular
hypertonic saline is given more rapidly, paradoxical
blood volume. In the postoperative phase, this fluid may
hypotension due to direct vascular relaxation and vaso-
redistribute to extravascular spaces thus causing a
dilation may occur. This hypotension, in the face of a 
decrease in intravascular volume. At the same time,
life-threatening hypovolaemia, can be detrimental and 
the patient is awakening from anaesthesia and the
even fatal. If hypertonic saline is administered more
return to normal blood pressure increases glomerular
slowly than the above rate, fluid shifting will still occur
filtration and diuresis. Patients may need additional
 but the onset may be slower and maximum effect may 
fluids for several hours after the anaesthetic period to
 be obtunded. Lower hypertonic saline doses or rates
compensate for this inappropriate diuresis. The diure-
may be necessary in patients with cardiac disease to
sis may mask signs of hypovolaemia, as it appears
prevent circulatory overload and cardiac failure.
that the patient has adequate urine production. Fur-
It should be noted that the crystalloid and colloid
thermore, patients that were not hydrated prior to
'shock' doses are only approximate starting doses.
anaesthesia may continue to be dehydrated following
The safe maximum rate or volume that can be admin-
the anaesthetic procedure and will require additional
...
 istered is undetermined for any fluid. In one study.
fuid volume. On the other hand, interstitial over-
8-14% dehydrated but otherwise healthy dogs
expansion may develop after administration of isotonic
received intravenous lactated Ringer's for 1 hour
crystalloids. Once haemodynamic stability has returned,
at doses of: 90 ml/kg/h (A); 225 m/kg/h (B); or 360
this sequestered fluid is mobilized, returned to the
ml/kg/h (C). Clinical signs of circulatory overload
plasma volume and eventually removed from the body.
were absent or mild in groups A and B while dogs in
Mobilization of accumulated fluids tends to occur
group C showed marked serous nasal discharge,
maximally around the third postoperative day, with con-
coughing and dyspnoea within 20 minutes of fluid
 tinued fluid shifting for up to 10 days, depending on the
administration. One may conclude that isotonic crys-
 circumstances and severity of surgical trauma.
talloid fluids probably can be administered faster than
Special conditions
 healthy dogs (with no pulmonary oedema, sepsis or
heart disease). The rule of thumb is to infuse fluids as
Cardiac function
slowly as possible but as fast as necessary to pro-
Patients with decreased cardiac function do not toler-
duce haemodynamic stability. While 'shock' doses
ate excessive fluid administration. Large sodium loads
should be decreased as soon as the clinical condition
should be avoided. Colloids are an acceptable alter-
 permits, it is equally important to be aggressive dur-
native but must be titrated carefully because over-
ing initial resuscitation because duration of tissue is-
expansion of the plasma volume with colloids cannot 
chaemia affects outcome. Cellular oedema and injury
be corrected very quickly.
-ons Auaedde lae anuuoo ueo suebio jofeu ol
cessful resuscitation due to the no-reflow phenom-
Oliguria
Patients with acute oliguria also need to be monitored
Third spacing is the abnormal accumulation of fluid
carefully. An acceptable plan would be to infuse an
in normal extracellular locations. It is caused by ex-
isotonic crystalloid while monitoring urine output, cen-
pansion of the interstitial fuid space, ascites, hydro-
tral venous pressure, blood pressure and heart rate.
thorax or fluid accumulation around traumatized tissues
The patient's response to a small fluid challenge may
(including excessive surgical manipulation of the gastro-
help differentiate the origin of the oliguria. Signs of
 intestinal tract). Loss of fluid into these spaces needs
urine output greater than 0.5 ml/kg/h indicate prerenal
to be considered when calculating fluid replacement.
oliguria. lIf ffuid challenge causes neither signs of
175
chapter t6 Fluid therapy and biood transfusion
 improvement nor toxicity and there is concern that fur-
out deleterious consequences of fluid therapy, It has
ther fluids may result in unacceptable risk, fluid rates
 been found that in high-risk surgical patients, survi-
should be decreased. In these patients, concurrent
vors frequently have supranormal oxygen delivery
therapy may include dopamine or diuretic administra-
indices compared with those who later die. Thus, in-
tion. If colloids are chosen, careful titration and moni-
tensive monitoring is necessary in critically il patients,
toring are essential because many colloids are cleared 
even if there are no outward clinical signs of
by the kidneys and may have a prolonged effect or
hypoperfusion. The challenge, however, is that there
worsen renal disease.
is no practical way directly and repeatedly to meas-
ure oxygen delivery, blood volume, extracellular fluid
Central nervous system
volume, etc. One must rely on both subjective and
Patients with traumatic brain injury and/or elevated
objective information. Subjective signs of adequate
intracranial.pressure are very fragile and react quickly
tissue perfusion include mentation, mucous mem-
to insufficient or excessive fluid administration. Unfor-
brane colour, capillary refill time, temperature of ex-
tunately, no single fluid is superior in this situation and
tremities and other signs of perfusion. Useful objective
extreme care must be taken in evaluating the patient's
data include heart rate, direct or indirect arterial pres-
response. The volume and type of fluid depend on
sure, pulse quality, central venous pressure, tempera-
whether or not the patient is haemodynamically stable
ture, pulse oximetry, blood pH and gas tensions,
and if the blood-brain barrier is thought to be intact.
electrolytes, haematocrit, total protein, blood urea
The goal is to provide a systolic blood pressure greater
nitrogen, urine output and response to fluid chal-
than 90 mmHg without detrimentally affecting cerebral
lenges as well as calculation of oxygen indices (see
 perfusion pressure. Paradoxically, cerebral perfusion
Figure 16.6).
pressure can decrease with fluid therapy due to re-
Many of the common cardiovascular monitoring
distribution of water into the cerebral interstitial and
techniques have limitations. For example, changes in 
intracellular spaces, increasing cerebral oedema and 
 blood pressure and heart rate are important but non-
causing secondary brain injury. The normal blood-
specific, insensitive markers of hypovolaemia due to
brain barrier is relatively impermeable to both protein
blood loss. Hypotension may just as easily be due to
and sodium, causing water normally to move in or out
excessive anaesthetic depth, the type of anaesthetic
 of brain cells and the interstitium based on primarily
used, cardiac dysfunction or decreases in systemic
capillary osmotic pressure and secondarily on oncotic
vascular resistance. Non-invasive blood pressure
pressure. Sodium changes are, therefore, more im-
measurements can yield equally low values in both
portant than protein changes. Thus, even a slightly
hypovolaemic and hypothermic patients and it is diffi-
hypotonic solution, such as lactated Ringer's (although 
cult to differentiate between these two conditions,
classified as an isotonic solution in Figure 16.1) may
 since they often co-exist. Cardiac filling pressures,
promote cerebral oedema. Isotonic saline; with sup-
such as central venous pressures and pulmonary ar-
tery wedge pressures, show a poor correlation to the
However, prolonged saline use is not advisable be-
 presence and extent of blood loss until the blood loss
 cause the patient may become hypernatraemic or
is severe (>30%). Cardiac filling pressures are nor-
hyperchloraemic and the fluid is devoid of other im-
maily low (central venous pressure is 0-7 cmH,O),
portant electrolytes. Three to five percent hypertonic
and many types of monitors are insensitive to small
saline solution lowers intracranial pressure and may
changes in pressure. These measurements may not
decrease cerebral oedema as well as provide rapid
be practically useful because changes are not easily
haemodynamic stabiity. Resuscitation with colloid-
 Or accurately measured (see also Chapter 7).
containing solutions aiso has been associated with
 Periodic assessment of the patient's packed cell
lower intracranial pressure than resuscitation with iso-
volume (PCV) or haematocrit will detect acute anae·
tonic crystalloid solutions. Specifically, pentafraction
mia and its direct effect on oxygen delivery. The hae-
is composed of very large molecules and may 'plug'
matocrit is often measured in patients with acute blood
leaks in the blood-brain barrier.
loss and during fluid therapy but it should be remem-
 Solutions containing glucose should be avoided
bered that the haematocrit, by itself, is not an appro-
in patients with any type of neurological disease. It is
priate method of evaluating blood loss. Since whole
thought that patients with increased intracranial pres-
blood is lost during haemorrhage, the haematocrit will
 sure with elevated plasma glucose have a worse neuro-
not change acutely, only the total volume of blood will
logical outcome because glucose promotes cellular
decrease. After several hours, with transcapillary re-
：
metabolism leading to anaerobic conditions and intra-
piy eui Ag iejem pue wnpos jo uojeaiasuoo pue il!
 cellular lactic acidosis. Pure dextrose-containing
 neys, the haematocrit will decrease. This decrease
solutions will also cause cerebral oedema due to the
 may not be maximal for up to 24 hours. if, simultane-
addition of free water. lf dextrose must be adminis-
 ously, the patient is treated with asanguinous intra-
 tered to treat hypoglycaemia, it is imperative to add 
venous fluids to promote normovolaemia, the
the dextrose to an isotonic sofution and not use dex-
haematocrit will decrease further as a result of
trose in water.
haemodilution of remaining red cels. Neither of these 
decreases in haematocrit is an indication of ongoing
Fluid therapy monitoring
blood loss. However, a decrease in haematocrit plus
The goal of monitoring is to evaluate for adequate 
dependency on continued fluid therapy to maintain
haemodynamic stability is more suggestive of ongoing 
tissue oxygen delivery (see Figure 16.6), assess the
effect of any changes to fluid administration and rule
blood loss.
176
Chapter 16 Fiuid therapy and blood transfusion
Indirect indicators of oxygen delivery
(CO- C,O)/CO
 Even after apparently adequate intravenous fluid re-
suscitation following a hypovolaemic or hypotensive
where C:Oand C.O2 are arterial and venous oxygen
incident, unrecognized tissue hypoperfusion may be
content (described earlier). Monitoring blood lactate
 present. This unseen hypoperftusion is the most likely
concentrations or the base deficit from a central vein
cause of many postoperative complications that de-
or mixed venous blood gas sample will provide
velop in critical patients, such as acute renal failure,
additional information on the development of lactic
acidosis from hypoperfusion. A lactate concentration
drome. Monitoring oxygen indices (e.g. oxygen ex-
>4 mmol/l or a base deficit lower than -10 mmol/l
traction, mixed venous partial pressure of oxygen) is
 suggests profound oxygen debt.
tissue perfusion. in most situations where tissue oxy-
gen delivery falls, tissue oxygen extraction will in-
Blood transfusion
normal S,O2 is >95% and the SvO2 >65%, giving a
The classical indications for blood product transfusions
normal extraction of 20-30%. when the patient is
are treatment or prevention of decreased oxygen de-
breathing room air, this corresponds to an arterial
livery, hypoproteinaemia, hypovolaemia and coagu-
oxygen tension of approximately 100 mmHg (13.3
lation disorders. Commercial animal blood banks now
kPa) and a mixed venous oxygen tension of approxi-
make specific blood component therapy possible in
mately 40 mmHg (5.3 kPa).
some areas (Figure 16.9).
The oxygen extraction will increase, and S,O, (and
Blood volume is critical for homeostasis. Clearly,
corresponding mixed venous oxygen tension) will de-
blood volume will decrease during haemorrhage but it
crease. as tissues take ouf more and more oxygen
can also decrease with diseases associated with hypo-
from the inadequate amount of delivered blood. At the
proteinaemia (due to decreased intravascular oncotic
point where extraction can no longer increase, tissue
pressure). Initially, blood volume can be restored with
oxygen consumption becomes dependent on oxygen
either crystalloid or colloid therapy. However, two points
delivery (the critical oxygen delivery threshold). Ex-
need to be considered in deciding whether blood
 perience suggests that the transition from compen-
therapy is indicated: the haemoglobin content of the
sated hypovolaemia to uncompensated hypovolaemic
patient's blood and the rate of blood loss.
shock takes place when SO, falls below 50% and
Absolute minima in haemoglobin content are
 oxygen extraction approaches 50-60%. Thus, oxy-
controversial for both awake and anaesthetized
 gen extraction >30% is a marker of profound tissue
hypoperfusion and oxygen extraction >50% indicates
the other determinants of oxygen delivery. Cardiac
hypovolaemic shock. Other possible diferential diag-
output and blood flow may increase to compensate
noses for increased oxygen extraction are anaemia,
for a decrease in haematocrit, but when they are
hypermetabolism or use of a solution containing a hae-
maximized, correcting a low haematocrit becomes
moglobin-based oxygen carrier (HBOC).
critical. Conventional wisdom suggests that a patient
A rough estimate of oxygen extraction can be per-
 can tolerate a low haematocrit when awake or if the
formed using a pulse oximeter (in lieu of an arterial 
anaemia is of chronic duration. For these patients. a
blood gas analyser or arterial haemoximeter) and a
haematocrit of 18-20% is often well tolerated. How-
mixed venous blood gas measurement in which oxy-
ever. when anaesthesia is required, blood products
gen saturation values are provided. Arterial oxygen 
are necessary sooner because of increased fluid
saturation minus venous oxygen saturation (S,O2
needs during surgery. depressed compensatory re-
SyOz) roughly describes the percentage extraction and
flexes, myocardial depression and vasodilation from
this technique is known as 'dual oximetry'. The extrac-
the anaesthetic drugs. Haematocrits below 25-27%
tion ratio can also be calculated using the formula:
Crvoprecipitate
rich
zo
frozen
plasma
blood
Acute haemorrhage
x
x (plus colloid}
x (pilus red cells)
x (pius red cells)
Anaemia
X
X
X
.Coagulopathy
X
: Hypoproteinaermia
x
X
 Platelet function abnormality
+
Replace specific clotting factors
X
 Thrombocytopenia
X
X
von Wilebrand's disease
X
X
X
 Indications for blood component therapy. Bold type indicates best choice of blood component for that 
disorder.
177
Chapter 16 Fluid therapy and blood transfusion
Therefore, depending on the length of anaesthesia 
Cross-matching tests check for the presence of
 and the invasiveness of the surgical procedure, the 
pre-anaesthetic haematocrit is recommended to be
at least 30-34% in dogs and 25-29% in cats.
cell antigens. When red blood cells are to be admin-
The most common indications for administration
istered to a patient, a major cross-match should be
 of a blood product during anaesthesia are acute blood
performed (washed donor red cells and serum of re-
loss or normovolaemic anaemia from acellular fluid
cipient), while a minor cross-match (washed recipient
administration. Signs of blood loss, such as tachycar-
red cells and serum of donor) is recommended when
dia and hypotension, are inconsistent, imprecise and
plasma products are to be administered.
unreliable in anaesthetized patients; therapy should
Cross-matching is performed in both dogs and cats
 not be withheld until these signs are observed. Even
not only to decrease the risk of transfusion reactions
in awake, healthy patients, an acute blood loss of 30-
but also to decrease the risk of sensitizing the recipi-
 40% may cause reflex tachycardia and vasoconstric-
ent if future transfusions become necessary. Trans-
tion to be limited, with sudden and profound onset of
fusion reactions may occur in previously sensitized
hypotension and hypovolaemic shock. In awake, pre-
animals, animals with naturally occurring isoantibodies
viously healthy patients, an acute blood loss of >40%
or those with neonatal isoerythrolysis.
is usually fatal unless immediate intravascular volume
 and haemoglobin restoration occur. Under anaesthe-
Blood typing
sia, the amount of permissible blood loss is much
 Blood typing reveals blood group antigens on the red 
blood cell surface. Blood typing is recommended
lower. An anaesthetized patient with an acute blood
joss of ≥10% may require a blood transfusion, espe-
whenever red blood celils are to be administered. A
blood typing card to classify dogs as DEA 1.1 positive
stable, prolonged anaesthesia time is predicted, or
or negative and cats as type A, type B or type AB is
additional blood loss is likely.
available for convenient in-house use (see Appendix
The actual blood volume of a patient should be
of manufacturers, below). These tests require oniy a
calculated to determine the significance of lost fluids
small volume of whole blood (approximately 50 μl for
in the perioperative period and to predict the neces-
dogs and 150 μl for cats) to perform the assay. Al-
sary volume of fluid replacement. Calculating the ex-
though the canine card allows for rapid and reliable
 act blood volume in larger animals is often overlooked 
identification of DEA 1.1, it has been reported that
 but it is important to have an estimate. Blood volume
weak reactions may also occur to DEA 1.2-positive
dogs. Likewise, the feline card has been reported to
ml/kg) in dogs (45% cells and 55% plasma), and ap-
have weak reactions to type AB blood. in the case of
such reactions, dog and cat blood types should be 
cells and 64% plasma). Therefore, for an equivalent
verified at a qualified laboratory using another typing 
bodyweight and equivalent volume of lost blood, the
method (e.g. tube or gel).
loss is a greater percentage of a cat's blood volume
 compared with that of a dog. Obviously, the same vof-
Canine blood types: There are approximately 12
ume of blood loss in different-sized animals willclearly
different canine blood types (Figure 16.10). The
 affect the smaller animal more profoundly. For small
most antigenic is DEA 1.1, followed by DEA 1.2 and
DEA 7. in contrast to cats, dogs do not appear to
may become essential to assess accurately blood or
have any clinically important naturaly occurring
fluid loss, while measuring the PCVof and estimating
antibodies to other canine blood types. The low inci-
the volume of fluid in the suction canister may be nec-
dence of DEA 1.1, 1.2 and 7 and the lack of naturally
 essary in larger patients.
occurring antibodies have two important clinical
implications. Firstly, if neither donor nor recipient
Blood types and incompatibility reactions
has ever received a transfusion before, a cross-
match will not detect any alloantibodies even if the
Cross-matching
individual blood samples are of two different blood
 Cross-matching tests evaluate for serological incom-
types. Secondly, a random, first-time transfusion is
unlikely to cause an immediate incompatibility reac-
useful for determining the likelihood of atransfusion
tion because 4-14 days are required for the recipi-
reaction under the patient's current medical conditions.
ent to produce antibodies to donor cells.
12
8
S
33-45
7-24
5-10
87-98
12-25
66-29
8-45
USA
40
Netherlands
38
4
5
56
8
74
31
17
22
24
ND
ND
60
ND
44
ND
Japan
 Population incidences (percentages) of canine blood types. Adapted from Giger et al. (1995).
178
Chapter 16 Fuid therapy and blood transfusion 
For canine blood transfusions, it is recommended
that all biood donors be blood typed and, ideally, DEA
Domestic Shorthair
1.1-, 1.2- and 7-negative (with DEA 1.1 the most im-
USA
Northeast
99.7
10.3
portant). Approximately 40% of all dogs are DEA 1.1-
positive. However certain breeds, such as the
 North central
99.6
0.4
Greyhound, have a low frequency of DEA 1.1, 1.2 and
Southeast 
98.5
1.5
7 antigens, and are especially suitable donors. These
:Southwest
97.5
2.5
dogs can be considered 'universal donors' because
the other blood types cause minimal antigenic stimu-
West coast
95.3
4.7
lation in unsensitized dogs. lt is preferable to blood
Other countries
Australia
73.7
26.3
type the recipient as well,to prevent a delayed haemo-
(Brisbane)
lytic reaction and to prevent sensitization (see below)
but, in emergency situations, this can be foregone.
Argentina
97.3
2.7
.
However, a blood type and cross-match shouid al-
Europe
Austria
197.0
3.0
ways be performed if either the donor or recipient has
previously received a blood transfusion.
England
97.1
2.9
:
Finland
1100
0
.......
Canine incompatibility reactions: An immediate or
France
185.1
14.9
delayed reaction can occur with incompatible blood
types. If a cross-match is not available and the dogs
Germany
94.0
6.0
1:
are of different blood types, the recipient dog may
 destroy the donor red cells as antibodies develop. This
Italy
88.8
11.2
delayed haemolytic transfusion reaction can be ob-
Netherlands
96.1
3.9
 served as a rapid decline in the haematocrit over 1 --2
Scotand
97.1
2.9
weeks after the transfusion and is easily overlooked
or misdiagnosed on follow-up biood work. The dog
Switzerland
99.6
0.4
also is now sensitized to that blood type, and all fu-
ture transfusions with blood of that type may cause
an acute haemolytic reaction.
Abyssinian
An acute haemolytic reacfion occurs when mis-
84
16
matched blood is administered to a previously sensi-
American Shorthair
100
0
tized recipient. The most severe reaction will occur
when a previously DEA 1.1-sensitized dog receives
182
18
 another DEA 1.1 blood transfusion. The signs of an
 British Shorthair
64
36
acute transfusion reaction are variable and can de-
Burmese
100
10
velop within minutes to hours after the transfusion has
begun. The severity of signs is roughly proportional
Cornish Rex
67
33
to the amount of incompatible blood received
73
27
Exotic Shorthair
and degree of incompatibility. Common signs include
fever, vomiting, urticaria, haemoglobinaemia and
Japanese Bobtail
84
16
haemoglobinuria. The reaction can be fatal, with ini-
Maine Coon
97
3
tial signs of severe hypotension, bradycardia and dys-
93
7
...
pnoea. If the animal survives this phase, a second
Norwegian Forest
 phase may occur in which the patient becomes tachy-
Oriental Shorthair
100
10
：
pnoeic, hypertensive and tachycardic, and may de-
Persian
velop other cardiac arrhythmias. Stabilization, if it is
86
14
to occur, generally follows within 30 minutes.
Scotish Folde
181
19
Feline blood types: Cats have an AB blood group
 Siamese
100
0
system; the most common blood type is type A (Figure 
Somalia
82
18
16.11). A and B are alleles, with A being dominanf. The
Sphinxa
83
17
 third cat blood type, type AB, is inherited separately as
a third allele that is recessive to A and co-dominant
Tonkinese
100
01
 with B. In certain breeds, type B can be very common
compared with the general population (Figure 16.11)
6
Blood type A and B frequencies in cats.
and historical information from owners or breeders may
Reprinted from Giger and Oakley (1988) with 
permission from the publisher.
of type B cats have natural isoagglutinins against the
opposite red blood cell antigens. Type AB cats do not
 reactions and avoids sensitizing a cat that may not have
have any alloantibodies against either type A or B red 
naturally occurring alloantibodies. lf blood typing is not 
blood cels. There is no 'universal' donor.
available, a major and minor cross-match should be
 For feline blood transfusions, it is recommended
 performed. Small test doses' of blood to recipient
that both donor and recipient cats are blood typed.
should never be administered. Type A donors are pre-
Biood typing prevents acute or delayed transfusion
ferred because of their common blood type but access
179
Chapter 16  Fluid therapy and blood transfusion
to a type B cat is advisable. Cats with type AB blood
Al of these 'rules-of-thumb' are rough estimates,
are best transfused with type AB blood or, at the very
because they do not take into account the haematocrit
least, type A blood. There are two reasons for not us-
of the donor or that cats and dogs have a different ratio
ing type B donor blood:
of red cell mass to plasma volume. A pre-calculated
chart is also available for cats (Figure 16.12).
 More type B cats have isoaggiutinins than type A
For plasma albumin, approximately 22 ml/kg of
cats
plasma will be necessary to increase albumin by 5
Any anti-A alloantibodies in type B donor blood 
g/l. A relatively large volume of plasma is required for
will recognize A antigens in the recipient type AB
very little effect and using plasma for treatment of
blood, causing a more severe haemolytic
hypoalbuminaemia is not ideal.
reaction than if type A donor blood is used.
Using fresh frozen plasma for coagulopathies, the
dose is 10-20 ml/kg bodyweight. This dose may be
Feline incompatibility reactions: Naturaly occurring
repeated several times to obtain the desired effect.
alloantibodies are much more common in cats than in
If cryoprecipitate is needed, the 'rule-of-thumb'
dogs, so a random, frst-time blood transfusion will have
dose is approximately 1 ml/kg, or 1 unit/10 kg.
a higher likelihood of a reaction (approximately 36%).
The mean half-life of feline red cells is approximately
Transfusion administration and
30 days in cats that receive a matched blood type. Type 
complications
A cats with anti-B serum that receive mismatched blood
will have decreased red cell survival (half-life of ap-
Route of administration
proximately 2 days) and a modest, sometimes clini-
Jugular, cephalic or saphenous veins and intra-
 cally inapparent, transfusion reaction. However, type
osseous femoral or humeral sites are all acceptable
B cats with anti-A serum that receive type A blood will
routes for blood administration. Intraperitoneal trans-
have tremendously decreased red cell survival (half-
fusion is not advisable since rate of peritoneal absorp-
life of approximately 1 hour) and will exhibit marked
tion is slow (40% absorbed after 24 hours).
 systemic reactions consistent with an acute intravas-
cular haemolytic transfusion reaction. In such situations,
Preparation
as little as 1 ml of blood can be fatal.
Refrigerated blood and blood products should be
warmed gently to body temperature before transfus-
Calculating the transfusion volume needed
ing (not to exceed 37*C). Packed red cells should only
Formulae have been devised to estimate the volume
be diluted with 0.9% saline. Frozen bags of plasma
of whole blood or blood component to administer to a
must be handled carefully to prevent cracking during
 patient (see Figure 16.7). Alternatively, some less pre-
the thawing process. Thawing of frozen plasma, con-
cise 'rules-of-thumb' are available:
temperature between 30 and 37°C, generally takes
For whole blood, administer 10-40 ml/kg for a 
about 30 minutes. Frozen plasma can be microwaved
dog or 5-20 ml/kg for a cat and remeasure the
 and ready to administer affer approximately 3-5 min-
patient's haematocrit
Uutes. To microwave frozen plasma, the plasma bag is
Use 2 ml/kg whole blood for every 1% desired
placed in a container of water, without its sides touch-
increase in haematocrit.
ing the container, and the container placed in the
PCV ot donated hlood (incjuding anticoagulant)
%08
32%
38%
40%
42%
44%
36%
46%
PCV ot
4
35.9
33.7
31.7
29.9
28.4
27.1
25.8
24.4
23.3
22.4
121.6
recipient
6%
30.8
28.8
27.3
25.7
24.4
23.1
22.0
20.9
20.2
19.4
18.5
8%
25.7
24.0
22.7
21.3
20.2
19.4
18.3
17.6
16.7
16.1
15.4
10%
20.5
19.4
18.0
17.2
16.3
15.4
14.7
14.1
13.4
12.8
12.3
12%
15.4
14.5
13.6
12.8
12.1
11.7
11.0
10.6
10.1
9.7
9.2
14%
10.3
9.5
9.0
.8.6
8.1
7.7
7.3
7.0
6.6
6.4
6.2
Example:
PCV of recipient
6%
PCV of donated blood
46%
Weignt of recipient
3.2 kg
Volume of blood required per kg body weight
20 ml
(see above table)
 Multiplied by weight of the recipient 
20 ml x 3.2 kg
Total volume of blood required 
64 ml
into pounds (Ibs) divide by the conversion iactor of 2.2.) Adapted from Norsworthy (1977).
180
Chapter 16 Fluid therapy and blood transfusion 
centre of a microwave oven (700 W setting). The
 DDAVP include the transient effect, failure of some dogs
 plasma unit is microwaved for 5-10-second periods 
to respond (presumably because some dogs have mini-
 and is agitated for 3-5 seconds by hand between ex-
mal von Willebrand factor, even in storage) and patients
 posures (to prevent localized overheating). Microwave
who become refractory after repeated treatments. Thus,
thawing of canine fresh frozen plasma does not alter
 DDAVP can only be considered an adjunct therapy in 
the one-stage prothrombin time, factor Vlll coagulant
some specific patients and should not be considered a
activity and von williebrand factor antigen. Thawed
reliable substitute to transfusion therapy.
plasma should be used within 6-8 hours and should
Administration and rate
never be refrozen. Whole blood and other blood com-
 ponents should never be warmed' in a microwave.
A blood filter must always be used to remove
Stored blood and packed red cels quickly become
microthrombi. A human adultflter is generally accept
acidotic and have higher ammonia levels than fresh
able but, when small volumes of blood are being ad-
whole blood. Citrate-phosphate-dextrose, the anti-
ministered, an 18 micron micropore filter can also be
：
coagulant solution in most blood collection bags, has
used safely with less blood being trapped in the filter
a pH of 5.5. Thus, the pH of even a freshly drawn bag
apparatus (see Appendix of manufacturers below).
of blood will decrease to approximately 7.0 or 7.1. With
 Blood products should always be administered
additional storage, lactic and pyruvic acids produced by
through a separate intravenous line with no latex,
red cell metabolism and glycolysis will accumulate and
or, at least, with compatible fluids that do not con-
the pH may decrease to 6.9 after 3 weeks of storage.
tain calcium or bicarbonate (e.g. 0.9% NaCl). Do not
A contributing factor to acidosis of stored blood is hyper-
administer drugs through the blood intravenous line
capnia. However, excess carbon dioxide is rapidly re-
and do not add any medication to the blood bags.
moved if the patient has adequate ventiliatory function.
Genfly oscillate the bag to mix the contents periodi-
Stored blood alterations should be considered and
cally during administration.
addressed in patients with pre-existing acidosis, those
An extremely slow rate of administration is initially
with hepatic encephalopathy or in critically ill patients.
transfusion reaction. Even with appropriate serologi-
Autotransfusion
cal screening, non-immunological transfusion reac-
The best method of autotransfusion is to estimate the
tions can occur due to improper storage or transfusion
volume of blood loss preoperatively, harvest this
technique, or contamination with infectious organisms.
amount from the patient and store it several days to a
As already mentioned, a transfusion reaction can have
week prior to the surgery. Alternatively, blood can be
a wide variety of clinical signs and, should any occur,
the transfusion must be immediately aborted. If no
cedure and replaced with appropriate crystalloids or
transfusion reaction develops, the rate can be in-
colloids, a technique called 'normovolaemic haemo-
creased to the desired rate. If possible, the final rate
dilution'. This blood can then be given intraoperatively
should be as slow as possible to obtain the desired
when needed without concern about incompatible
result over 4-8 hours, unless the patient is severely
transfusion reactions. Intraoperative salvage tech-
hypovolaemic. A standard rate of approximately 4-5
niques for autotransfusion have some definite draw-
ml/kg/h is generally adequate for conditions of mild
 backs but can be performed. Intraoperative salvage is
hypovolaemia. If the patient is normovolaemic, the rate
preferably done with some type of automated cell saver
should be slower (2.5-5 ml/kg/h) to prevent circula-
or blood salvage system. The blood is aspirated from
the surgical field, mixed with anticoagulant and trans-
ease, the rate may need to be further decreased to
ferred to a reservoir unit. In the reservoir, it is filtered.
0.5-1 ml/kg/h. At the other extreme, 5-15 ml/kg/h is
centrifuged, washed and resuspended. Complications 
recommended to treat acutely hypovolaemic animals
include haemolysis, coagulopathies, decreased calcium 
and, in a life-threatening emergency. rates up to
and air embolism. Salvaged blood should not be
40-60 ml/kg/h may be required (bolus technique).
reinfused if the blood may contain tumour cells, urine,
bile, faecal matter or other contaminants.
Monitoring of the patient receiving transfusions
In this instance, monitoring means evaluating the re-
Desmopressin acetate
sponse to therapy and looking for signs of acute trans-
DDAVP (Rhinyle, Octim, Vasopressin) is used to re-
fusion reactions such as change in attitude, vomiting:
lease factor Vll and von willebrand factor transiently
pruritis, altered capillary refill time, fever, tachycardia.
from endothelial stores. It is administered to human
dyspnoea or eratic respiration, peripheral oedema,
patients with selected types of von willebrand's dis-
disseminated intravascular coagulation, urticaria,
ease prior to surgery. The recommended dose is
hypotension, icterus or haemoglobinaemia. Blood
0.1--0.3 mg/kg i.v., using the human intranasal drops
 pressure, heart rate, body temperature, urine output
diluted with sterile saline and administered over 10 min-
and haematocrit measurements, evaluation of serum
utes. The peak effect is obtained 30-50 minutes after
administration and the duration of response is transient 
monitor patients receiving a blood transfusion during
(approximately 6 hours). In dogs. a dose of 1-5 μg/kg 
anaesthesia. Acute haemolysis is indicative of direct
s.c. has been used empirically as an alternative to trans-
incompatibility. If hyperthermia occurs, even mild, up 
fusion therapy for some patients with von Willebrand's
to 4~5 hours post-transfusion, the most likely cause
disease, or to increase factor Vll! levels in the blood
is incompatibility between donor white blood cells and
：
donor dog 30 minutes prior to collectian. Limitations to
recipient antigens.
181
Chapter 16  Fluid therapy and blood transfusion
For any reaction, treatment involves stopping the
Fresenius Kabi UK, Runcorn, UK
 blood transfusion immediately and providing support-
 ntervet, Milton Keynes, UK
ive care. lf the reaction is mild, the transfusion can be
Kendall-McGaw. Inc., Irvine, CA
reinitiated at a slower rate. Corticosteroids (dexa-
methasone sodium phosphate at 2 mg/kg i.v. or
Marshalton Veterinary Group, West Chester, PA, 1-800-833-3090
methyl prednisolone at 10 mg/kg i.v.) and diphenhy-
HEMO-NATE neonalal flter: Gesco international, PO Box 690188,
dramine (0.5 mg/kg i.m.) are often used to prevent or 
San Antonio. Texas, USA 78269; Utah Medical Products, Garrycastie
Industrial Est., Athlone, County Westmeath, lreland 
lessen the signs of an acute haemolytic transfusion
Oxyglobin Solutian: Biopure Corp., Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA;
reaction. There is, however, no current objective evi-
European Union Arnolds Veterinary Products Ltd, UK: +44 (0) 17 43
dence to support use of these drugs. Donor antibod-
44 1632
ies reacting to recipient white blood cell antigens may
RapidVet-H (Canine 1.1). RapidVet-H (feline): Catalog #HC105, DMS
cause white blood cell aggregates or emboli to lodge
Laboratories, Flemington, NJ: 1-800-567-4367: UK: Wocdley
Aeuownd u hnsa Aew sui 'shunj suaidioan su u
Equipment Cormpany: +44 (0) 12 04 66 9034
oedema and has been termed 'transfusion-induced
acute lung injury'. Serial arterial blood gas analyses
References and further reading
and pulse oximetry may detect this complication in
an anaesthetized and conscious patient.
Callan MB and Rentko VT (2003) Clinical application of a hemoglobin-
Some adverse reactions may not be due to incom-
basedoxygen-carrying solution.VeterinaryClinics of NorthAmerica
patible blood types. but to improper handling or ad-
Conroy JM, Fishman RL, Reeves ST, Pinosky ML and Lazarchick J
ministration of blood:
(1996) The effects of desmopressin and 6% hydroxyethyl starch:
on Factor Vll-C. Anesthesia and Anaigesia 83, 804-807
 Cornelius LM, Finco DR and Culver EH (i978) Physiologic effects of
 Units containing dark brown or black blood
should be discarded, because they may be
Journal of Veterinary Research 39, 1185-1190
colonized by bacteria and can lead to sepsis
transfusion reaction caused by dog erythrocyte antigen 1.1
Bleeding can occur if large volumes of factor-
incompatibility in a previously sensitized dog.Journal of the
free blood components are administered
American Veterinary Medical Association 206(9) 1358-1362
Giger U, Kilrain CG, Filippich LJ and Bell K (1989) Frequency of feline
 In patients affected with coagulopathies.
monitoring platelet number, activated clotting 
Veterinary Medical Ass0ciation 195, 1230-1232
time, partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin 
issues in cats. in: Proceedings of the Vf international Veterinary
time and buccal mucosal bleeding time may be
beneficial
Giger U, Stieger K and Palos H (2005) Comparison of various canine
 Lung microemboli can cause respiratory
blood-typing methods. American Journal of Veterinary Research
66(8). f386-1392
insufficiency if the blood product is not filtered 
Grundy SA and Barton C (2001) Influence of drug treatment on survival
properly
of dogs with irmmune-mediated hernolytic anemia: 88 cases (1989-
Circulatory overload can occur if blood is
1999). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 218,
543-546
Lundy EF, Kuhn JE, Kwon JM. Zelenock GB and D'Alecy LG (1987)
in patients with pre-existing cardiac or renal
following six minutes of cardiac arrest in resuscitated dogs. Journa?
disease. These patients should be monitored for
of Critical Care 2. 4-14
classical signs of vascular overload, such as an
MarinoPL(1997) TheICU Book,2ndedn.Williams&Wilkins,Baltimore
increase in central venous pressure, dyspnoea,
Mathews KA(1996) Blood/Plasma transfusion.in: Veterinary Emergency
and Critical Care Manual, pp. 10-11. Life Learn Inc., Gueiph, Ontario
vomiting, chemosis or pulmonary oedema
Mathew CB (t994) Treatment of hyperthermia and dehydration with
 Citrate toxicity can occur if large volumes of
hypertonic saline in dextran. Shock 2(3), 216-221
 Moon PF and Kramer GC (1995) Hypertonic saline-dextran resuscitation
jo Age aut pue paasupe Aipiden ae poog
 trom hemorrhagic shock induces transient mixed acidosis. Critical
the liver to metabolize citrate is transiently
Care Medicine 23(2).323-331
 overwhelmed. Citrate binds calcium, causing 
 and hemodynamic effects of sodium bicarbonate or tromethamine
signs of transient hypocalcaemia with
hypotension, a narrow pulse pressure, and,
metabolic acidosis.AmericanJournal of VeterinaryResearch58(7),
771~776
rarely, cardiac arrhythmias. Usually this
Moon PF. Hollyfield-Gilbert MA, Myers TL, Uchida T and Kramer GC
 complication is self-limiting but calcium
(1996) Fluid compartments in hemorrhaged rats after hyperosmotic
 supplementation may be necessary in some
crystalloid and hyperoncotic colloid resuscitation. American Journar
cases (see Figure 16.8). lonized calcium
of Physiology 207.F1-F8
Norsworthy GD (1977) Blood transfusion in the cat.Feline Practice 7,
concentrations in critically ill patients should be
29-31
measured during transfusions and whenever
 SAFE Study Investigators (2004) A comparison of albumin and saline
for tluid resuscitation in the intensive care unit. New England Journal
massive transfusions are rapidly administered.
of Medicine 350, 2247-2256
Stieger K, Palos H and Giger U (2005) Comparison of various blood-
typing methods for the feline AB blood group system. American
Jourmal of Veterinary Research 66(8), 1393-1399
Appendix of manufacturers
Turrentine MA, Kraus KH and Johnson GS (1988) Plasma from donor
dogs, pretreated with DDAVP transfused into a German Shorthait
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL
Pointer with type ll von willebrand's disease. Veterinary Clinics of
North America 18, 275
 Animalcare, York, UK 
Weinkle TK. Center SA, Randolph JF et al. (2005) Evaluation of
Baxter Healthcare Corp, Deerlieid, IL; Baxter Healthcare, Newbury, UK
prpgnostic factors, survivaf rates, and treatment protocols for
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs: 151 cases (1993-
Du Pont Pharmaceuticais, Wikmington, DE; Du Pont Critical Care,
2002) Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Waukegan,IL; Du Pont, Stevenage, UK 
226(11), 1869-1880
182
nthalmic surgery
Sarah Thomson
Introduction
Rate oi production of aqueous humour
Anaesthesia for ophthalmic surgery presents several
Facility of outflow of aqueous humour
challenges. The type of surgery being performed
 Choroidal blood volume
and the condition of the eye have implications for
Vitreous volume
patient handling. as well as for the analgesic and 
Rigidity and compliance of sclera 
anaesthetic protocois. Many patients presenting for
Tone of extraocular muscles
ocular surgery are geriatric or have concurrent dis-
External pressure
ease, such as diabetes mellitus. Brachycephalic
Factors that maintain intraocular pressure
breeds are predisposed to corneal ulceration and
(from Almeida et al.. 2004).
 general anaesthesia may be complicated by brachy-
cephalic obstructive airway syndrome. Positioning and
draping for ophthalmic surgery often restricts
access to the head and forelimbs with subsequent
Anterior
effects for monitoring techniques. Specialized equip-
chamber
ment, such as ventiators and nerve stimulators, is
valuable for many intraocular and corneal surgeries.
Vitreous
Cornea
This chapter considers ocular physiology, ocular
pain and analgesia, the systemic effects of ocular
drugs and the management of patients requiring dif-
ferent types of ophthalmic surgery.
tris'
Physiology relevant to anaesthesia
Optic nerve
Posterior
Intraocular pressure
chamber
Ciliary
 Anaesthetic management should minimize changes,
process Ciliary body
principally increases, in intraocular pressure (IOP)
over the entire anaesthetic period. Preoperatively, this
 Schematic diagram of the cross-section of a
is important with deep corneal lesions as an increase
 globe. Arrow shows direction of flow of
in IOP can cause the globe to rupture. Intraoperative
aqueous humour from the site of production into the
rises in IOP during intraocular surgery can cause vit-
anterior chamber.
reous prolapse and retinal detachment. Postopera-
tive intraocular haemorrhage and wound breakdown
Central venous pressure
 may occur with serious consequences.
 Raised CVP can increase IOP by reducing venous
IOP is maintained by the interaction of several fac-
drainage and aqueous humour outflow. Vomiting.
tors (Figure t7.1). Aqueous humour originates from
gagging and coughing are all possible causes, so
the ciliary processes of the ciliary body, resulting from
potentially emetic drugs, such as morphine, hydro-
active secretion (catalysed by the enzyme carbonic
morphone and medetomidine, should be avoided.
anhydrase), diffusion and ultrafiltration of plasma.
 Laryngeal and pharyngeal reflexes can be minimized
Aqueous humour flows into the posterior chamber,
ue buuiee Aq eayoenl eul jo uoeqnu! buunp
through the pupil into the anterior chamber and exits
adequate degree of unconsciousness before at-
the eye via the iridocorneal drainage angle, ultimately
tempting to intubate. Topical lidocaine is commonly
reaching the venous circulation (Figure 17.2). Clini-
 applied to the larynx of cats, and intravenous lido-
cally, lOP is influenced by central venous pressure
caine (1 mg/kg i.v.) or fentanyl (t-2 μg/kg i.v.) may
(CVP). arterial carbon dioxide tension, arterial oxy-
be used in dogs to minimize the response to intuba-
gen tension, extraocular muscle tone, head position,
tion. In humans, intravenous lidocaine has been
external pressure on the globe, drugs and arterial
shown to prevent increases in lOP associated
blood pressure (Figure 17.3).
with endotracheal intubation when administered
183
Chapter 17  Ophthalmic surgery
Action to reduce risk
↑ Central venous
Vomiting
Avoidmorphine,medetomidine
pressure
 Gagging, coughing at
Adequate piane of anaesthesia prior to intubation
 intubation and exlubation 
Extubate slightly early to.avoid coughing
U Aeids eldo) auleoopir '(At by/bmi zi juejuay asuodsal aonpar ol snin
cats or fmg/kg i.v. in dogs]
Barking.crying
 Sedation, analgesia
Pressure on jugular veins
Lse cross leads or harness
 Avoid neck bandages
 Positioning in surgery to avoid pressure on neck area and a shght elevation of the head
 Care with jugular blood sampling
 Intrathoracic or intra-
Care with maximum inflation pressures during IPPV
abdominal pressure 
Avoid pressure on abdomen when lifting 
Avoid responses to intubation/extubation
↑ External pressure
Accidental pressure on
Care whnhadingmovingpsining for surgey
！globe
 Care with facemasks
Self-trauma
Analgesia
：
Sedation
...
Elizabethan collar
：.
 Bandage feet 
Use muscle relaxants
Stay sutures in sclera
↑ Arterial CO tension
Hypoventiltion
IPPV
 Hydrostatic pressure
Positioning during surgery
Shight elevation of head compared with body
Drugs
 Suxamethonium increases
Do not use when ↑ IOP to be avoided
 extraocufar muscle tone
 Ketamine increases 
}Do not use when ↑ IOP to be avoided
 extraocuiar mliscle tone
↑ Arterial blood pressure
Sympathetic stimulation
Ensure adequate plane of anaesthesia
Ensure good anaigesia
 Sedate as appropriate
Factors influencing intraocular pressure.
↑-3 minutes prior to intubation. Fentanyl usually
either spontaneous or manual, should aim to main-
has an onset time of 2-3 minutes. lf protective air-
tain the end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration within
way reflexes are diminished, care must be taken to
normal limits (35-45 mmHg (4.7--6.0 kPa)).
protect the airway to avoid aspiration of gastric
contents. Removing the endotracheal tube before
External pressure
normal reflexes return may also avoid coughing
External pressure on the globe is a particular risk dur-
lle ul ajeudoidde aq jou Aew ing 'buib6e6 pue
ing handling and restraint of the patient, which is par-
patients, such as brachycephalic breeds where
ticularly important at induction. Non-depolarizing
upper airway collapse may occur. Pressure around
neuromuscular-blocking agents, which may be used 
the neck due to leads, bandages, jugular blood
sampling and poor positioning under anaesthesia
 ocular surgery, can lower IOP by relaxing the extra-
can raise CVP by compressing the jugular veins. A
ocular muscles. Alternative positioning methods such
 slight elevation of the head reduces venous pres-
as stay sutures may increase the IOP, as well as poor
 sure and therefore lOP.
patient and head positioning and heavy drapes.
Preoperative measures such as good analgesia and
Arterial carbon dioxide concentration
sedation are heipful, as are bandaged paws and Eliza-
Hypoventilation may occur during anaesthesia, re-
bethan collars postoperatively to minimize self-trauma.
sulting in increased blood carbon dioxide tension
(PCO,) and subsequent vasodilation of ocular ves-
Drug effects
sels and elevation of IOP. Hyperventilation can re-
 Most general anaesthetic and analgesic drugs will
 lower or maintain IOP within normal imits, due to some
recent study showed that hyperventilation to achieve
depression of the cardiovascuiar system. Volatile
hypocapnia had no effect on lOP in dogs, probably
inhalational agents reduce or produce no significant
due to the intermittent positive pressure ventilation
 effects on IOP in dogs. Due to the interaction of vari-
(IPPV) increasing intrathoracic pressure and there-
ous drugs and factors during the perioperative period
fore CVP, with resultant effects on lOP. Ventilation,
it is difficult to predict the effect of an individual drug
184
Chapter 17  Ophthalmic surgery
on IOP in a particular case. However certain drugs
greater in young animals, due to a higher vagal tone in
-ua ae pue dol aseaioui Aueoubis oi umouy ene 
this age group. Anticholinergic drugs have adverse
 erally avoided in ocular procedures when an increase
effects on the heart such as tachycardia (which in-
in iOP could be detrimental. For example, drugs that
creases myocardial oxygen consumption) and
increase muscle tone, such as suxamethonium and
 arrhythmias. lif anticholinergic drugs are administered
ketamine, increase lOP due to contraction of the
as part of the premedication, their effect will be vari-
extraocular muscles. Ketamine also increases IOP in
abie and may be negligible during surgery. Retrobul-
dogs when used in combination with diazepam. Mor-
bar nerve blocks may reduce the incidence or degree
phine, hydromorphone and medetomidine can induce
of the reflex, but are associated with complications and
retching and vomiting, which may increase lOP. How-
the retrobulbar injection itself can induce the response.
ever a sedative drug combination including a low dose
It is important to be aware that the oculocardiac
of medetomidine may be preferable to sedate frac-
reflex may occur, particularly in young animals, to
tious or aggressive patients, where high leveis of re-
monitor the patient carefully and use a good balanced
straint are more likely to increase lOP. Although pre-
anaesthetic technique. lf the reflex occurs, the sur-
and intraoperative administration of parenteral anti-
gical stimulation should be immediately stopped, and
cholinergic drugs has not been associated with raised
the depth of anaesthesia assessed and adjusted
IOP in dogs, these drugs are usuaily avoided in
if appropriate. If a bradycardia or bradyarrhythmia
patients with pre-existing glaucoma.
continues, an anticholinergic should be adminis-
tered intravenously.
Arterial blood pressure
Arterial blood pressure has some influence on IOP by
Position of globe
affecting choroidal blood volume. Common causes of
Under a surgical plane of anaesthesia the globe of
hypertension under general anaesthesia (mean arte-
cats and dogs usually rotates ventromedially. Corneal
anbapeui apniou: (bhww oll< anssad pooa je
analgesia or depth of anaesthesia, which may be
bile and centrally positioned giobe (Figure 17.4). This
rapidly controled by potent opioids such as fentanyl
is usually achieved by the use of muscle relaxants,
：
(1-5 μg/kg i.v.).
stay sutures in the sclera. Other techniques. which
Cataract surgery
are not advised due to the risk of associated compli-
Postoperative hypertension (POH) is the term to de-
cations, are a retrobulbar nerve block or a deep plane
 scribe a temporary increase in IOP shortly after cata-
of anaesthesia (Figure 17.5). Commonly used non-
ract surgery. POH is common in the postoperative
depolarizing muscle relaxants include atracurium,
period. Studies have shown that this occurs 3-5 hours
vecuronium and pancuronium (see Chapter 15). IPPV
postoperatively in 18-48.9% of dogs undergoing cata-
is required during muscle paralysis. Extraocular mus-
ract surgery. Any further increase in IOP due to non-
cles are sensitive to the effects of muscle relaxants;
ocular factors should therefore be avoided.
longer than many other muscle groups, e.g. diaphragm
Oculocardiac reflex
and intercostal muscles. In this way, the globe can be
The oculocardiac reflex is infrequently reported in dogs 
 centrally positioned even if chest movements are de-
 and cats, but may be initiated during ocular surgery
tectable or several twitches are visible using a train-
and can cause bradycardia, arrhythmia or cardiac ar-
of-four stimulation on the peroneal or ulnar nerve. The
rest. Application of pressure on the globe, manipula-
selection of drug and dose will depend on the expected
tion or traction of the globe and extraocular tissues
length of the surgery, the cost of the drug, any con-
during surgery (e.g. enucleation) and retrobulbar nerve
current disease and the anaesthetic regime.
blocks can elicit the reflex. The afferent sensory com-
ponent of the reflex is transmitted via the ciliary nerves
of the ophthaimic branch of the trigeminal nerve to
A centrally
the trigeminal sensory nucleus. The efferent arm origi-
nates from the visceral motor nucleus of the vagus
positioned
and
nerve and so the impuise continues through the vagus
immobile
nerve to exert motor effects on the heart. Suggested
globe.
ways to reduce the likelihood of the reflex occurring
auld aenbape ue buiuieuieu apnjou asaul Arabns 
of anaesthesia, careful surgical technique, relaxafion
of extraocular muscles by the use of muscle relax-
 ants and moderate hypocapnia to reduce IOP.
The pre-emptive use of anticholinergic drugs (atro-
pine and glycopyrronium) to prevent the reflex is now
thought to be unnecessary for several reasons. The
incidence of the reflex is low; in one study only one out
of 72 dogs undergoing ocular surgery where muscle
relaxants were used showed cardiac signs that could
be attributed to the reflex. The incidence is likely to be 
185
Chapter 17 Ophthaimic surgery
Techniques
Currently used
Muscle relaxants
Monitor degree of paralysis withnerve stimulator
Lose normal signs of anaesthesia and pain
Reversible
Requires IPPV
Short acting
 Need to ensure no residual effectfully reversed
 Predictable response
before alowing spontaneous ventlation
Reduces IOP
Stay sutures
No requirement for drugs
Increases sugical dificulty
 No requirement for IPPV
Increases surgical and anaesthetic time
Increases IOP
Not advised
Deep plane of 
No need for additional drugs
 anaesthesia
 Unpredictable effects on globe 
Nerve block
Avoid use of systemic drugs
Complications: haemorrhage, globe rupture, optic
 nerve damage
Tear production
 beneficial for patients undergoing sedation or general
It is widely accepted that sedation and general an-
anaesthesia. Application every 90 minutes during the
aesthesia are associated with reduced tear produc-
anaesthetic and at appropriate intervals postopera-
tion. General anaesthesia significantly lowers tear
production in dogs for up to 24 hours following an-
tant in brachycephalic breeds, during prolonged
 aesthesia. The reduction in tear production was found 
general anaesthesia and following the administration
to be related to the length of the general anaesthetic,
of muscle relaxants or ketamine.
with anaesthetic durations over 2 hours producing a
longer effect. Various drugs have been associated with
reduced tear production in dogs, e.g. acepromazine,
Ocular pain
medetomidine, atropine, hydromorphone, diazepam,
butorphanol, xylazine, buprenorphine, fentanyl and
Analgesia for ocular surgery should aim to be pre-
emptive (before the noxious stimulus) and multi-
xylazine and butorphanol appears to be synergistic in
modal (using diferent classes of drugs) as much as
its reduction of tear production. Reduced tear produc-
possible. When planning an analgesic regime for an
tion can lead to corneal drying and, therefore, cor-
animal with ocular pain or undergoing ophthalmic sur-
neal ulceration. Tear substitutes are therefore
 gery, several considerations are important (Figure 17.6).
Consideration
Drug selection
[ntraocular pressure (IOP)
Glaucoma
 Avoid drugs which cause vomiting (morphine, medetomidine)
Eye at risk of rupture, e.g. deep corneal ulcer
After intraocular sugery
 Corneal healing
Corneal ulcer, corneal trauma
Alfter corneal or intraocular surgery
healing
NSAIDs may delay healing
Age of animal
Geriatric cataract surgery
Caution with NSAIDs if impaired renal/hepatic function
Concurrent disease
Diabetic patients*
Avoid steroids
Pupil size
Mydriasis required for:
Opioids may produce miosis (dogs), mydriasis (cats)
Phacoemulsification (cataract surgery)
Lendectomy
Concurrent medication
Long-term use of topical steroids
 Topical drugs may have systemic effects
 Degree of pain .:
Stages of intraocular or cornea surgery
Topical local anaesthetic prior to incision and intraoperatively
 associated with most pain are:
Shor-acting potent opioids (e.g.fentanyl) provide aditional
 Corneal incision
analgesia
Corneal sutures
Type of pain
 Intraocular (glaucoma, uveitis)
Systemic NSAIDs and opioids
Atropine for uveitis
Corneal sface,eg,conealulceration,cal
Additionally local anaesthetics for inital investigations or very
foreign body
short-term analgesia.Avoid sel-trauma (foot bandage,
Elizabethan colar)
 Corneal sensitivity . .
 Brachycephalic breeds have reduced corneal
Other breeds may have higher analgesic requirements
sensitivity
 Considerations in determining an analgesic regime for ocular pain.
186
Chapter 17  Ophthalmic surgery
Type of pain
The sensory nerve supply to the eye originates from
with either surface or intraocular pain. Signs of pain
the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve.
will depend on the patient, the severity of the disease
Nerves enter the corneal stroma at the limbus, and
 process and the condition itself. Surface pain, e.g. a
corneal ulcer, is typically acute and intense. It is tem-
the anterior stroma and epithelium. The central cor-
porarily alleviated by topical local anaesthesia (see
nea has the greatest density of nerve endings and
below) for diagnostic purposes or for very short-term
is therefore the most sensitive part of the cornea.
analgesia (Figure 17.8).
The corneal epithelium and anterior stroma are
more densely populated with sensory neurons and
 pain receptors than the deeper corneal layers (Fig-
ure 17.7). In clinical terms this means that a super-
ficial ulcer is often more painful than a deeper ulcer,
although the latter is more serious. There are
breed-associated variations in the sensitivity of the
cornea to painful stimuli. Brachycephalic breeds of
dogs and cats have the least sensitive corneas
trast to dolichocephalic breeds, which may have
 higher analgesic requirements. in addition to pain
 receptors, the cornea has pressure receptors within
the deeper stroma; these are associated with pain
in giaucoma.
Corneal
epithelium
Stroma
Anterior
chamber
Superficial
corneal
ulcer
Deep
[(a] Ocular surface pain before topical local
corneal
anaesthetic. (b) Ocuiar surface pain afier
ulcer
local anaesthetic.
Intraocular pain occurs with glaucoma or uveitis.
In contrast to surface pain, intraocuiar pain is not al-
Increased
leviated by topical anaesthesia. Intraocular pain is
intraocular
characterized by dullness and depression, as well as
pressure
blepharospasm, lacrimation and photophobia. A
patient may present with both ocular surface and intra-
点Pressure receptors
ocular pain, e.g. a corneal insult and secondary uvei-
 Indicates pain
tis {reflex or axonal uveitis). Systemic non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opioids are
：
 Schematic diagram of a cross-section of the
widely used to provide ocular analgesia but it is also
canine cornea, showing the sensory nerve 
important to address the ocular condition, for exam-
supply and how this affects the degree of pain 
ple by reducing lOP in glaucoma, and by relieving
 associated with deep and superficial corneal ulcers.
painful uveal muscular spasm (associated with mio-
sis in uveitis) with topical atropine.
Ocular pain can be considered simply as surface
The degree of pain is predictable in some in-
 pain (cornea and conjunctiva) and intraocular pain.
stances. An example is cataract surgery (phaco-
The classic clinical signs of ocular pain include blepha-
emuisification) in which most pain is anticipated at the
rospasm, increased lacrimation and photophobia. Self-
jeauoo aut bujnp Aabins aul jo pua pue bujuuibag
trauma is also a very common sign of ocular
incision and suturing, respectively.
187
Chapter 17  Ophthalmic surgery
Drugs
Topicai NSAIDs are used perioperatively and aiso
 in the management of ocular inflammatory conditions
Local anaesthetics
 such as keratitis and uveitis. Flurbiprofen is most com-
Although topical local anaesthetics are very effective
in providing short-term analgesia for ocular surface
contrast to ketorolac, which is more often used for
 pain, they are epitheliotoxic and impede corneal heal-
keratitis and uveitis. The mechanism of action is prf-
ing, and are therefore contraindicated for the treat-
marily by the inhibition of prostaglandin production,
 ment of pain associated with corneal ulcers. Their use
 although a direct analgesic effect of topical NSAIDs
should be limited to diagnostic purposes and for an-
on corneal nerve endings has also been postulated.
NSAIDs may also reduce aqueous outflow and so
monly used topical local anaesthetics include
should be used cautiously in patients with severe
 proxymetacaine (proparacaine) and amethocaine (tet-
 intraocular inflammation when secondary glaucoma
racaine). Side effects such as pain on application and
is a concern. Topical NSAIDs may adversely affect
chemosis are more common with amethocaine than
 corneal healing and their use should be minimized or
with proxymetacaine. Both drugs have a rapid onset 
avoided with corneal ulceration.
of action (less than 15 seconds). The serial applica-
tion of topical anaesthetic eye drops has been reported
Opioids
to increase both the duration and depth of surface
Methadone is a pure mu opioid receptor agonist that
anaesthesia. Retrobulbar injection of lidocaine or
produces excellent analgesia, mild sedation and.
bupivacaine can provide analgesia prior to enuclea-
when compared with morphine, has the advantage
tion, but may be associated with complications and is
of not inducing vomiting. Hydromorphone can be
uncommonly performed.
 Used postoperatively without inducing vomiting, or
The safety of intraocular lidocaine for use follow-
can be given intravenously for intraoperative anal-
ing intraocular surgery has recently been studied.
gesia after induction of anaesthesia. Doses can be
Intracameral (into the anterior chamber) injection of
repeated and more potent opioids, such as fentanyl 
preservative-free 1% and 2% lidocaine caused no 
adverse effects in dogs. Another study evaluated the
the required analgesic effect. Buprenorphine is a
analgesic effects of intravenous lidocaine during
partial mu opioid receptor agonist and so may not
intraocular surgery in dogs, administered pre-
-se Aiabins jeinoo ro, eisabieue alenbape apiaoid
emptively as a bolus of 1 mg/kg, followed by a con-
Sociated with a high degree of pain. Furthermore,
tinuous rate infusion of 1.5 mg/kg/h. This provided
the intraoperafive use of potent mu opioid agonists
-ui ue ym pauiene pel ol luaeainbe eisabieue
is restricted as their analgesic effects may be an-
venous infusion of morphine (bolus of 0.15 mg/kg fo]-
tagonized by buprenorphine. Opioids also affect pu-
lowed by 0.1 mg/kg/h). No adverse effects on heart
pil size and this is discussed later.
rate or blood pressure were detected.
Opioid receptors (delta and mu) have been found 
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
 The use of a topical 1% morphine solution in dogs
NSAIDs can be administered systemically or topically.
NSAIDs exhibit analgesic and anti-inflammatory
with corneal ulcers has been shown to provide ocular
jo uoonpoid aui buionpay pue buuaaaid Aq sioea
analgesia with no adverse effect on corneal healing.
 prostaglandins (see Chapter 9). The release of prosta-
However topical morphine is rarely, if ever, used in
glandins into the eye can result in various changes
clinical practice.
(Figure 17.9). Ocular inffammation should be minimized
to prevent serious sequelae such as cataract forma-
tion, retinal degeneration and glaucoma. Prostaglandins
Ophthalmic drugs relevant to
are also thought to be involved in the axonal reflex in
anaesthesia
.
dogs, in which an insult to the cornea, conjunctiva or
eyelid can cause anterior uveitis.
Figure 17.10 summarizes the potential systemic ef-
Systemic NSAIDs such as carprofen and meloxi-
fects of drugs used in ophthalmology.
cam are used preoperatively primarily for analgesia
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
and to prevent ocular inflammation during intraocular
surgery. Commencing NSAID therapy several hours
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors may be used forthe long-
preoperatively, or the day before if possible, appears
term treatment of glaucoma. lOP is reduced by the in-
to have beneficial ocular effects.
hibition of carbonic anhydrase, which is involved in
aqueous humour production. Systemic carbonic anhy-
 drase inhibitors (e.g. acetazolamide) can produce sig-
Vascular permeability changes
nificant side effects due to reduced bicarbonate ion
Vasodilation
reabsorption in the proximal renal tubules. Hyper-
Breakdown of blood-aqueous barrier
chloraemic metabolic acidosis and hypokalaemia may
Miosis
result, particularly if the animal has a reduced appe-
Intraocular pressure changes
tite. Clinical signs include vomiting. diarrhoea, polyuria,
Photophobia
Reduction of ocular pain threshold
polydipsia, panting, weakness and anorexia. Topical
formulations of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g.
Effects of prostaglandins and subsequent
dorzolamide) have now largely replaced their systemic
 inilammation on the eye (Giuliano, 2004).
counterparts due to a minimal risk of side effects.
188
Chapter 17  Ophthalmic surgery
Timing.of
Type of drug
Route of
Possible systemic effects
uoneoifdde"
Preoperative
Acetazolamide
Carbonic anhydrase
 Systermic -
Reduce IOP
 Metabolic acidosis, hypokalaemia,
medication
inhibiior
intravenous,
nyperchloraemia, hypocalcaemia 
orai
Vomiting, diarrhoea, anorexia, weakness
.
Brinzolamide
Carbonic anhydrase
Topical
Reduce IOP
Mirianal
 Dorzolamide 
inhibitor
Timolol
Beta-1 selective
Reduce OP
 Bradycardia
Betaxoloi
beta-blocker
Apraclonidine
 Alpha-2 adrenoceptor
Topical
Reduice IOP
Bradycardia
agonist
Mydriasis (dog)
Toxicity in cats
!Miosis (cat)
Pilocarpine
Parasympathomimetic
Topical 
Miosis
Vomiting, diarhoea, arrhythmia, bronchospasm
 Mannitol 
 Osmotic diuretic
Systemic -
Reduce lOP
Dehydration, electrolyte disturbances,
 intravenous
hyponatraemia, plasma hyperosmolarity
Yolume expansion
When renal failure: risk of hypervolaemia.
 pulmonary oedema, cardiac failure 
 Glycerol
Osmotic diuretic
 Systemic -
Reduce IOP
Vomiting, dahea, dehyration, risk f re
oral
failure
Prednisolone
 Steroid 
Topical
Reduce
 latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism 
inflammation
Flurbiprofen
NSAIDs
 Topical 
Redlice
Minimal generaly safe to use with concurrent
Ketorolac
 intlammation 
 systemic steroids)
Intraoperative
Phenylephrine
Alpha-1 adrenergic
Topical
Mydriasis
Hypertension
LESe
}agonist 
Reflex bradycardia
Atropine
Anticholinergic
Topical
Mydriasis
Tachycardia
Cycloplegia
 Cardiac arrhythmias
{raised lOP}
 Constipation
Hypersaivation (atropine is an ant-sialogogue but
 is bitter, so topical eyedrops may cause 
 paradoxical hyperptyalism in cats and some dogs)
Bronchodilation
Acetylcholine
Neurotransmilter
intracameral
I Miosis
Bradycardia
Hypotension
Adrenaline
Alpha and beta
Intracameral
Mydriasis
Tachycardia
 adrenoreceptor
Hypertension
agonist
Arrhythmias
Systemic effects of drugs used in ophthalmology.
Osmotic diuretics
glaucoma and keratoconjunctivitis sicca, may cause
Osmotic diuretics such as mannitol or glycerol are
sometimes used prior to anaesthesia to reduce IOP in 
may produce changes associated with hyperadreno-
acute situations, e.g. lens luxation and glaucoma. Man-
corticism, e.g. polyuria, polydipsia and increased
nitol causes an initial increase in cardiac preload, which
alkaline phosphatase.
may precede dehydration and hyponatraemia caused
by diuresis. These drugs should therefore be avoided
Phenylephrine
in cases of renal insufficiency or cardiac failure.
Phenylephrine is sometimes used perioperatively for
haemostasis due to its vasoconstrictive effect and to
Topical ocular drugs
produce mydriasis. Hypertension with reflex brady-
Topical ocular drugs may have systemic effects due
cardia in conscious and anaesthetized dogs due to
to uptake across the cornea, ocular blood vessels,
the topical application of 2.5% and 10% solutions of
nasolacrimal and pharyngeal mucosa and by inges-
phenylephrine has been reported. In these cases, very
tion. Systemic effects are variable and depend on fac-
low dose acepromazine (1-5 μg/kg i.v.) was suffi-
tors such as the dose and voiume applied, contact
cient to treat phenylephrine-induced hypertension.
time with the ocular surface and bodyweight. Topical
Phenylephrine should be avoided in patients with con-
beta-blockers; used in glaucoma, could potentially
diftions that are associated with systemic hyperten-
produce systemic effects of bradycardia and bron-
chospasm. Pilocarpine; used in the management of
and renal disease.
189
Chapter 17  Ophthalmic surgery
Adrenaline
factors, and animals can broadly be divided into those
Intracameral adrenaline (epinephrine) is frequently
requiring intraocular surgery, ocular surface surgery and
used during intraocular surgery to produce mydria-
adnexal surgery (Figures 17.11 and 17.12).
sis. It is administered either as a single injection or as
An important consideration is whether preoperative
increases in IOP will be detrimental to the eye. Exam-
Tachycardia, hypertension or arrhythmias are occa-
ples include deep corneal ulcer, full thickness corneal
sionally observed affter intracameral injection of
[aceration, iris prolapse and anterior lens luxation. In
adrenaline. Petersen-Jones and Clutton (1994) found 
these cases preoperative rises in loP should be
that by using a balanced anaesthetic technique and
avoided by using harnesses rather than neck leads, by
maintaining monitored parameters within normal lim-
using gentle restraint during examination and intra-
-l pue uooalur bn oot) augeuaipe jejnooeui 'sl!
venous catheter placement and by using sedation as
gating solution containing 2 μg/ml) was not associated
appropriate, particularly to reduce barking. Premedi-
with cardiac effects, even in patients anaesthetized
cation producing a moderate to marked degree of se-
with halothane. However. halothane can potentiate
dation has the advantage of reducing the amount of
 catecholamine-induced arrhythmias and is probably
restraint needed to handle fractious or boisterous ani-
best avoided in this situation.
mals with fragile globes. Acepromazine and methadone
(or buprenorphine or hydromorphone) are good choices
Acetylcholine
for routine cases; low doses of medetomidine or
Intracameral acetylcholine is sometimes used to
midazolam (in cats) can improve sedation. As
achieve miosis after phacoemulsification and has been
medetomidine and hydromorphone can induce vomit-
associated with hypotension and bradycardia in a
ing. each case should be assessed individually to de-
small number of geriatric humans.
termine the greatest risk to the eye. Blind or partially
sighted animals may be particularly nervous in a new
environment and so verbal reassurance, gentle hand-
Effects of anaesthetic and analgesic
ling and careful leading when waiking are important.
drugs on the eye
Pupil size is a consideration in certain intraocular pro-
cedures, such as cataract extraction and lendectomy.
when mydriasis is required to enable surgical access.
Topical mydriatics, such as tropicamide and atropine,
Diabetes mellitus
and intracameral adrenaline are examples of drugs
Hyperadrenocorticism
frequentfy administered to produce mydriasis. Over the 
Brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome
perioperative period many drugs can potentially affect
Cardiac disease
pupil size, in addition to factors such as anaesthetic
Systemic hypertension
depth and the species involved. In the clinical setting
Renal disease
where several topical and systemic drugs are used to
Hypottyroidism
prepare the animal for ocular surgery, the effects of 
individual drugs become confusing and Lnimportant.
NSAIDS
 Different studies have shown different effects for the
 Steroids
 same drugs but there are some well described exam-
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
ples. Opioids can produce varying effects dependent
on the type of opioid and the species. Parenteral mor-
phine and hydromorphone result in miosis in dogs (di-
Affects drug selection, e.g. muscle relaxants - vecuronium avoided .
rect stimulation of the oculomotor nucleus), whereas
in hepatic disease, pancuroniurm avoided in renaf disease
they cause mydriasis in cats (catecholamine release
Avoid osmotic diuretics in renal disease or cardiac failure
from the adrenal glands). Ketamine causes a marked
mydriasis. Clinical experience has shown methadone
to be an excellent choice of opioid for intraocular sur-
 Sedation may be required in aggressive, boisterous animals
gery. Being pure mu agonists, methadone or hydro-
morphone provide good analgesia and mydriasis
E.g. intraocular and corneal surgery - locaf anaesthetics reduce
appears to be readily achieved with standard topical
 and intracameral agents. The effects of anaesthetic and
 Duunns pue uoislou jeauroo o asuodsal 
analgesic drugs on IOP have been discussed.
Whenjncreases in IOP should be mininized
 Pre- and intraoperative most important.for deep cornea ulcers
Anaesthetic management
 intra- and postoperative important during phacoemuisification or for
cataract surgery
Preoperative assessment
A full clinical examination and detailed history from the
 Often needed for corneal and intraocular surgery
owner are particularly important as many animals pre-
Must provide IPPV, monitor degree of neuromuscular block, reversal.
senting for ocular surgery are geriatric and may have
agents
concurrent disease. Diabetic patients should ideally be
stabilized prior to general anaesthesia (see Chapter
 Considerations in formulating an anaesthetic
25). The anaesthetic regime will depend on several
plan for ocular surgery.
190
Chapter 17  Ophthalmic surgery
Site of ocularSurgical procedure
Muscle relaxants
Considerations
surgery
intraocular
Phacoemulsifiation for
May be diabetic
Yes
cataracts
May be blind
Avoid ↑ IOP intra- and postoperatively
Corneal incision and sutures likely to produce most response to surgery
Lendectomy for lens 
 Avoid ↑ IOP perioperatively
Yes
luxation
 May be glaucomatous and painful
Intraocular tumour
 Avoid ↑ IOP intra- and postoperatively
Yes
excision or biopsy
Haemorrhage risk
Ocular trauma,
May involve any intraocular structures
Yes
intraocular foreign
 Assess for and treat other injuries, e.g. head trauma 
body
Analgesia
Avoid ↑ 1OP
yous no sheuoweu h uoelges ajeiadoaid anbal ren n
Corneal surface
Keratectomy
 Analgesia - topical local anaesthetics 
Yes, but not
essential
e.g. topical anaestheics, topical NSAIDs
Yes
 Conjunctival or corneal
Avoid ↑ IOP as risk of globe rupture
grafts, corneal trauma,
iris prolapse
Cautionwithdugsthatdlaycornealhaling
 Corneal foreign body.
·
Avoid ↑IOP as risk of globe rupture
Yes, but not 
. removal
 Pain - topical local anaesthetics 
essential
 Caution with drugs that delay corneal healing
Adnexal
 Eyelid and eyelash
 Soft tissue pain and inflanmation - analgesia with NSAiDs and opioids
No
Aiabans
Risk of self-trauma postoperatively
Nictitans gland surgery
 Parotid duct 
 transposition
Turmour resection
Biopsy
Globe
Enucleation
Risk of haemorrhage
No
Avoid ↑ IOP if risk of globe rupture 
1.
Monitor for oculocardiac reflex
Retrobulbar anaesthesia
Considerations relevant to different types of ocular surgeries.
An intravenous catheter placed in the saphenous
right-angled connectors are also useful but increase
vein, as opposed to the cephalic vein, improves ve-
dead space. Securing the tube to the mandible avoids
nous access during ocular surgery. Intravenous in-
interference with the surgical site. As space may be
duction, with combinations of propofol or thiopental
restricted near the patient's head by surgical equip-
with diazepam (0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.v.) and/or fentanyl
ment, elongated anaesthetic breathing systems
(2 μg/kg i.v.), has several advantages over a mask
may be needed (Figure 17.13). Tubing with a smooth
induction with inhalational agents for patients with frag
ile globes. The mask itself can exert external pres-
sure on the globe and the slower induction with
inhalational agents may resuit in more struggling and
stress, all potential causes of raised IOP. Brachy-
cephalic breeds are predisposed to corneal ulcers,
which may require surgical intervention. Preoxy-
 genation and a rapid induction sequence are particu-
larly important in these breeds to allow endotracheal
intubation and control of ventilation. Hypoventilation
should be avoided during induction to prevent hyper-
capnia and an increase in lOP.
is important, particularly as IPPV will be needed
when muscle relaxants are administered. Armoured
 An example of the layout in an ophthalmology
 endotracheal tubes are more resilient to kinking, and
theatre.
191
Chapter 17  Ophihalmic surgery
internal surface will help to reduce resistance in long
access to the head to monitor depth of anaesthesia,
 breathing systems, but IPPV may be needed to pre-
 and pain and a light plane of anaesthesia during neuro-
vent hypoventilation.
muscular blockade can produce tachycardia and
hypertension. Direct monitoring using an arterial cath-
Maintenance
eter (e.g. placed in the dorsal pedai artery) is the most 
Isoflurane and sevoflurane vaporized in oxygen and
 accurate way to measure blood pressure and allows
nitrous oxide are excellent choices for maintaining
 collection of arterial blood samples to measure serial
anaesthesia. Halothane may potentiate arrhythmias
glucose levels in diabetic patients. Doppler and oscil-
associated with intraocular adrenaline. lsoflurane and
lometric non-invasive blood pressure measurements
 sevoflurane are associated with rapid recoveries from
are easy to perform, but can be inaccurate in certain
anaesthesia, an advantage in diabetic patients. An
circumstances (see Chapter 7).
isotonic crystalloid such as lactated Ringer's solution
The peroneal nerve of the hindlimb is the most read-
is usualy infused intravenously at 10 ml/kg/h during
ily accessible site to attach a nerve stimulator and this
anaesthesia. Glucose-containing intravenous fluids
should not interfere with the surgeon (Figure 17.15).
may be required in hypoglycaemic diabetic animals,
e.g. 5% glucose in either 0.9% saline solution or lac-
tated Ringer's solution.
Attention shouid be paid to maintaining the ani-
mal's body temperature, particularly as some ocular
surgeries are time consuming and hypothermia can
affect the duration of action of drugs, e.g. the degra-
dation of atracurium is temperature dependent. Dur-
 ing phacoemulsification the irrigating solution can leak
on to the patient's head, further cooling the patient.
Heat and moisture exchangers, low-flow anaesthesia
(using a circle system or mini Lack where possible),
Photograph: showing tho positioning of
 insulation, air warmers and water-beds are all ways
clectrodes for stimulation of the peronea! nerve.
to prevent hypothermia.
Instrumentation of the patient must be completed
before the surgeon drapes the surgical site: as ac-
Recovery
cess is then very limited (Figure 17.14). Capnography
Adequate reversal of neuromuscular blockade should 
is extremely useful to ensure that end-tidal carbon
be monitored using a nerve stimulator. The nerve
dioxide levels are maintained within normal limits dur-
stimulator may be used to ensure that there are four
ing IPPV. Disconnection of the endotracheal tube or
 equal twitches on the train-of-four mode, and two equal
connector from the anaesthetic breathing system can
twitches on a double-burst stimulation mode before
occur and is more difficult to detect immediately with-
olt a capnograph trace. Pulse oximetry probes can
ously. This is achieved either by allowing the neuro-
be placed on the tongue, or on more accessible sites
muscular-blocking agent to wear off. or by
such as the vulva, prepuce, digits or tail. Monitoring
administering an anticholinesterase and anticholiner-
of heart rate and blood pressure is important for sev-
 gic combination (see Chapter 15). The adequacy of
 eral reasons but especially because there are poten-
 spontaneous ventilation can be assessed by observ-
tial systemic effects associated with topical and
ing the patient's chest movemenis and by ensuring
intracameral drugs (see above). Also there is limited 
normal end-tidal carbon dioxide concentrations (35-
45 mmHg) and pulse oximetry readings (over 95%)
before extubation. Tidal volume can be measured with 
a Wright's respirometer attached to the endotrachea!
tube, but these delicate devices can be expensive to
purchase. Alternatively, to ensure there is enough res-
piratory muscle tone. the rebreathing bag can be de-
tached (do this in a well ventilated room) and a hand 
temporarily placed under the bag attachment pipe to
seal the circuit. when the dog breathes, the lack of
 gas reservoir will cause the circuit pressure to become
negative. A dog should be able to produce -10 to
-15 cmH,O circuit pressure. Ensure the bag is replaced
as soon as the test has been performed.
The eye may be more fragile on recovery than in-
duction, e.g. phacoemulsification, or less fragile, e.g.
conjunctival graft. However, in all cases action should
be taken to prevent rises in IOP. Extubation should 
avoid eliciting a cough, and so may be performed
 earlier than normal in appropriate animals. The re-
 An illustration of the restricted access for the
 anaesthetist.
period shouid be as calm as possible to minimize the
192
Chapter 17  Ophthalmic sSurgery
...
....
risk of intraocular haemorrhage or ocular trauma. Gen-
segment of the eyes in dogs. American Journal of Veterinary
.......
tle, quiet handling and good analgesia are essential.
Research65(10).1325-1330
Giuliano EA (2004) Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory frugs in veterinary
Sedation is important in excited and disorientated ani-
Ophthalmology. Veterinary Clinics of North Anerica: Smalf Animar
mals and those who are barking or crying despite an-
Practice 34(3).707-723
Gum GG, Gelatt KN and Ofri R (1999) Physiology of the eye. In:
algesia. Physical trauma to the eye can occur while
Veterinary Ophthamology.3rdedn,ed.KNGelat p.154.Lippincatt.
the patient is moved, during a poor recovery or by
Wiliams ana Wikins, Philadelphia
Hendrix DVH, Ward DA and Barnhill MA (2002) Effects of anti-
inflammatory drugs and preservatives on morphologic
 ages to distal limbs and the use of Elizabethan col-
lars can help prevent self-trauma. Opioids can be
tissue culture. Veterinary Ophthalmoiogy 5(2), 127-135
Hering IP,Bobofchak MA,Landry MP and Ward DL(2005) Duration ot
effect and effect of multiple doses ot topicat ophthaimic 0.5%
ized and systemic NSAIDs are often continued longer
into the postoperative period. Acepromazine (20 μug/kg 
Journal oi Veterinary Research 66(1), 77-80
:
Herring 1P. Jacobson JD and Pickete JP (2004) Cardiovascular eifects
j.v.) is aiso useful in the postoperative period to lessen
of topical ophthalmic 10% phenylephrine in dogs. Veterinary
dysphoria and restlessness.
Ophthaimoiogy 7(1). 41-46
Herring IP, Pickett JP,Champagne ES and Marini M (200o) Evaluation
 Ol aqueous tear producticn in cogs following general anaesthesia.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Associatlon 36(5), 427-
Acknowledgements
430
Hotmeister EH, Mosunic CB. Torres BT et al. (2005) Effects of diazepam.
The author would like to thank Heidi Featherstone BVetMed DvOphthal
ketamine, and their combination on intraccular pressure in normal
Dip ECVO MRCVS, Davies Veterinary Specialists, UK for reviewing this
1.
chapter and for ophthalmology advice and Dr David Gould BSc( Hons)
BVM&S PhD DVOphthal Dip ECvO MRCVs. Davies Veterinary Spe
cialiss, UK for ophthalmology advice.
Veterinary Ophthaimology 1(2-3). 81-84
1
in eucapnic and hypocapnic isofilurane-anaesthetised dogs.
：
References and further reading
American Journal of Veterinary Research 65(2). 179-182
Millichamp NJ, Dziezyc J and Olsen JW (1991) Efiect of flurbiprofen on
 Alrmeida DE, Rezende ML, Nunes N and Laus JL (2004) Evaluation of 
facility of aqueous outflow in the eyes of dogs. American Journal of
intraocular pressure in association with cardiovascular parameters
Veterinary Research 52(9). 1448-1451
in normocapnic dogs anaesthetised with sevoflurane and
PascoePJ,IkiwJE,StilesJandSmith EM(1994)Arterial hypertension
desflurane. Veterinary Ophthaimoiogy 7(4), 265-269
associated with topical ocular phenylephrine in dogs. Journal of
 Barrett PM, Scagliotti RH. Merideth RE, Jackson PA and Alarcon FL
lhe American Veterinary Medical Association 205(11). 1562-1564
(199t) Absolute corneal sensitivity and corneal trigeminal nerve 
Petersen-Jones SM and Clutton RE (1994) Use of intraocular
adrenaline during cataract extractions in dogs. Veterinary Record
Ophthaimology 1(4). 245-254
135(13). 306-307
Barfield JM. Holmes TJ and Raccio-Robak N (1994) A comparison of
Samuelson DA (199g) Ophthalmic anatomy. [n: Veterinary
proparacaine and tetracaine eye anaesthetics. Academic
Ophtharmology. 3rd edn, ed. KN Gelatt, p. 46. Lippincott, Williams
Emergency Medicine 1(4). 364-367
and Wilkins, Philadelphia
Biricik HS. Ceylan C. Sakar M (2004) Effects of pethidine on tear
Smith LJ, Bentley E. Shih A and Miller PE (2004) Systemic licocaine
production in dogs. Veterinary Record 155(18). 564-565
Blocker T and van der Woerdt A (2001) A comparison of corneal
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Anaigesia 3f(1). 53-63
 sensitivity between Brachycephalic and Domestic Short-haired cats.
Smith PJ, Brooks DE. Lazarus JA. Kubilis PS and Gelatt KN (1996)
Veterinary Ophthaimology 4(2). 127-130
Ocular hypertension following cataract surgery in dogs:139 cases
Brinkley Jr JR and HenrickA (1984) Vascular hypotension and bradycardia
(1992-1993).Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
.
following intraocular injectionof acetylcholine during cataract surgery.
Association 209(1), 105-111
American Journal of Ophthaimology 97(1], 40-42
Stephan DD, Vestre WA. Stiles J and Krohne S {2003) Changes in
1.
Chahory S. Clerc B, Guez J and Sanaa M (2003) Intraocutar pressure
intraocular pressure and pupil size following intramuscular
development after cataract surgery: a prospective study in 50 dogs
(1998-2000). Veterinary Ophthaimoiogy 6(2).105-112
in clinicaly normai dogs. Veterinary Opntha/mofogy 6(1), 73-76
 Chen X. Gallar J and Belmonte C (1997) Reduction by anti-inflarmmatory
Stiltes J, Honda CN, Krohne SG and Kazacos EA (2003) Effect of topical
drugs of the response of corneal sensory nerve fibres to chemicaf
administration of 1% morpiine sulphate solution on signs of pain
and cornealwoundhealingindcgs.AmericanJournalofVeterinary
11
irritation. fnvestigative Ophthaimoiogy and Visual Science 38(10).
1944-1953
Research 64(7).813-818
 Clutton RE, Boyd C, Richards DLS and Schwink K (1988) Significance
Sullivan TC, Hellyer PW, Lee DD and Davidson MG (1998) Respiratory
of the oculocardiac reiex during ophthalmic surgery in the dog.
function ard extraocular muscle paralysis folowing administration
Journal of Small Anirmal Practice 29. 573-579
DiBartola SP (2o00) Metabolic acid-base disorders. In: Fiuid therapy in
125-128
Small Animal Practice, 2nd edn, ed. SP DiBartola. pp. 211-240.
Wang YM, Chung KC. Lu HF et al. (2003) Lidocaine:the optimal ltiming
WB Saunders, Philadelphia
ofintravenous administration in atenuationof inctease of intraocular
1.
 Dodam JR, Branson KR and Martin DD (1998) Elfects of intramuscular
 pressure during tracheal intubation. Acta Anaesthesiologica Sinica
41(2), 71-75
Veterinary Ophthalmology 1(1). 57-59
Ward DA(1999) Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics. In: Veterinary
Ophthaimoiogy. 3rd edn, ed. KN Gelat. pp. 339-340. Lippincof.
！
possibly associated with intraocular injection of acetylcholine. DICP:
Wiliams and Wilkins. Philadelphia
the AnnaisofPharmacotherapy 25(11).1178-1180
Ward DA. Ferguson DC, Ward SL. Green K and Kaswan RL (1992)
Frischmeyer KJ, Miler PE, Bellay Y, Smedes SL and Brunson DB (193)
Comparison of the blood-aqueousbarrierstabilisingeffectsof steroidal
Parenteral anticholinergics in dogs with normal and elevated
and non steroidal anti-inflammatory agents in the dog. Progress in
intraocular pressure.Veterinary Surgery 22(3),230-234
Gerding PA, Turner TL. Hamor RE and Schaeffer DJ (2004) Effects of
Wilkie DA (1990) Control of ocular inflammation. Veterinary Clinics of
 intracameral injection of preservative-free liocaine on the anterior
North America: Small Animal Practice 20(3). 693-713
193
Dental and oral surgery
Tanya Duke-Novakovski
Introduction
problems such as hypercapnia and potential hypox-
aemia. The inflated cuff can cause damage to the
The patient population presented for dental or max-
mucosal lining of the trachea, and should be deflated
ilofacial surgery can be varied, but many patients
and reinflated after extreme position changes. Over-
will pose a greater anaesthetic risk because of
inflation of the cuff, and/or rotating patient position
their age, brachycephalic anatomy or due to airway
through 180 degrees without temporarily disconnect-
problems caused by trauma or cancer. Procedures
ing the endotracheal tube from the circuit can cause
-noas Aemie asod ueo yoau pue peay eui buialoau
tracheal damage or rupture, especially in cats. Inspi-
rity concerns, risk of haemorrhage and difficult moni-
ration against an obstructed airway caused by a kinked
toring conditions if access to the head is denied. This
endotracheal tube may lead to dyspnoea, cyanosis and
chapter addresses some of the concerns regarding
pulmonary oedema. If extreme flexion of the head is
administration of an anaesthetic to a patient pre-
necessary, a guarded endotracheal tube can be used.
sented for dental or oral surgery.
These tubes have a stiff, spiral wire running through
the endotracheal tube wall and are less prone to
kinking. In spontaneously breathing patients, inad-
Principles and potential problems
vertent disconnection alows air breathing, reduced
inspired anaesthetic concentrations and decreased
Airway security
depth of anaesthesia. Surgical drapes conceal acci-
The airway should be adequately secured using endo-
dental circuit disconnection unless sudden empty-
tracheal intubation, as debris, blood and irrigation flu-
ing of the rebreathing bag is observed. Apnoea
ids in the oral cavity will enter unprotected airways
alarms and capnographs are useful for detecting ac-
and cause aspiration pneumonia. This potentially fa-
cidental disconnection.
tal condition is easier to prevent than cure. Endotracheal
tubes shouid be checked prior to use for defective
Long anaesthetic periods
cuffs and obstructed lumens. The length should be
Lengthy procedures require close attention to ife sup
cut to fit the patient from mid neck to the level of the
port. Oxygen should be delivered at an inspired con-
incisor teeth. A properly positioned endotracheal tube
centration of at least 33% to compensate for the
jo ysu aul pue aoeds peap snieiedde aonpau m
anaesthesia-induced deterioration in pulmonary func-
endobronchial intubation. Excessively long endo-
tion, even in healthy, young patients (hypoventilation,
tracheal tubes protruding from the oral cavity are prone
reduced functional residual capacity, atelectasis and
to kinking and are difficult to secure to the jaw with 
ventilation/perfusion mismatch).
gauze bandage. Knots placed around the endo-
Reduced cardiac output and arterial blood pressure
tracheal tube itself can become loose in the presence
 produced by the administration of anaesthetic drugs
of irrigation fluids and saliva, and increase the risk of
accidental extubation. Knots should be tied around 
catheter. Intravenous Hartmann's (lactated Ringer's)
the endotracheal tube connector for greater security
solution should be administered at a rate of 10 ml/kg/h.
and not tied around the endotracheal tube. Pharyn.
 Catheters are best removed when the patient is fully
conscious following recovery from anaesthesia.
but it is imperative that it is removed before extuba-
Hypothermia results from lengthy anaesthesia time
tion. A length of damp gauze bandage is superior to
 and the use of cool irrigation fluids. Hypothermia can
individual surgical swabs since bandage can be
cause anticholinergic-resistant bradycardia, reduced
packed tightly around the endotracheal tube, and is
cardiac output and haemoconcentration. Cardiac fib-
tess likely to be forgotten if the free end is left visible.
rillation can occur at a body temperature of about
During manipulations of the head, kinking of the
28°℃. Requirements for anaesthetic agents are re-
endotracheal tube, extubation and circuit disconnec-
duced due to hypothermia and care should be taken
tions are possible. These problems are common dur-
not to administer a relative overdose of anaesthetic
ing diagnostic imaging as the patient is positioned for
agent. External heat can be supplied with heating blan-
radiographs in a darkened room. Flexion of the neck
kets, warmed intravenous and irrigation fluids, and
has the potential to move the caudal tip of the
commercial forced warm air heating devices. Ther-
endotracheal tube into a bronchus, which can cause
mal injuries due to 'hot spots' are rarely produced by
194
Chapter 18  Dental and orai surgery
circulating warm water blankets, but may occur when
Patients requiring dental procedures
using electrical heating mats. Patient insulation can
be provided with towels, bubble packing or aluminium
Geriatric patients
foil. Hyperthermia can occasionally occur in large,
Dental procedures range from simple deciduous teeth
heavy-coated dogs connected to rebreathing circuits
extractions in young, healthy patients to lengthy, com-
for long periods. Active cooling should be initiated
plicated procedures in older, systemically compro-
before damage occurs to vital organs. Body tempera-
mised patients. Most patients requiring anaesthesia
ture should be monitored during long procedures in
for dental procedures are considered to be geriatric
order to avoid hypo- or hyperthermia.
(75-80% of the animal's anticipated lifespan is com-
pleted), Even clinicaly healthy geriatric patients have
Haemorrhage
physiological changes that can influence the course
Blood loss and hypovolaemia may occur in some pro-
of anaesthesia. Oider patients are distressed and
cedures. Loss should be estimated either by weigh-
confused by a change in routine and require constant 
ing blood-soaked swabs or measuring the amounf of
reassurance. Age-related changes in the cardio-
blood in a suction jar. intravenous fluid rates should
pulmonary system include:
be increased to 30-40 ml/kg/h to compensate for
hypotension. As blood loss approaches 20% of circu-
Decreased ability to compensate for blood
lating volume, fluid replacement therapy with whole
pressure and circulating volume changes
blood or packed red blood cells should begin. Col-
30% decrease in cardiac output
loids such as gelatins, dextrans or starches can be
Decreased lung compliance
used at a dose of up to 20 ml/kg. buf while fhey
 High small-airway closing volume
 support tissue perfusion, they are not a replacement
 Decreased partial pressure of oxygen in arterial
for red blood celis. If haemorrhage is anticipated
blood (P,O2).
during the procedure, cats and dogs should be
cross-matched with a healthy donor or blood-typed
 A noticeable increase in circulation time is seen
beforehand.
during induction, and further increments of injectable
An aiternative to cross-matching with a donor is
anaesthetic agents should not be given too soon.
autologous transfusion. A few days prior to surgery,
 Chapter 28 contains further information on geriatric
10% of the patient's blood volume is removed and
anaesthesia.
replaced with intravenous fluids. The blood is stored
at 4°C in acid-citrate-dextrose transfusion packs until
Brachycephalic patients
required. Before potentially haemorrhagic procedures.
Many brachycephalic patients wil require dental or
the patient should have a full haemotological exami-
 maxilofacial procedures, and these patients pose an
 nation and clotting profile performed. See Chapter 16
anaesthetic challenge. Upper airway obstruction from
for further information.
stenotic nares, elongated soft palate, laryngeal sac-
If haemorrhage is anticipated, it might be prudent
cule eversion, laryngeal collapse, laryngeal oedema
to avoid vasodilating drugs such as acepromazine in
and hypoplastic trachea should be anticipated. The
the premedication. Some veterinary surgeons might
degree of obstruction may be assessed from the clini-
argue, however, that moderate hypotension would 
cal history and pre-anaesthetic physical examination.
decrease blood loss.
rection at the time of planned dental procedures. Cor
Haemostasis
pulmonale may result from severe chronic upper air-
Vasoconstrictors such as adrenaline should not be used
way obstruction and any clinical signs thereof should 
for haemostasis if the patient is anaesthetized with halo-
be investigated further. lnduction of anaesthesia
thane. A few drops can be used with caution in a
causes relaxation of pharyngeal musculature and
1:20,oo0 dilution if the patient is anaesthetized with
upper airway obstruction is increased until endo-
isoflurane, and monitored with an electrocardiogram.
 tracheal intubation is performed, and the obstruction 
Phenylephrine at the same dilution is less arrhythmo-
bypassed with the endotracheal tube. Xylazine and
genic, but even with a few drops, this drug can be
medetomidine should be avoided during premedica-
absorbed and increase systemic vascular resistance
 tion as these drugs exacerbate upper airway obstruc-
through alpha-adrenergic receptor stimulation.
tion through their muscle relaxation properties.
Mild sedation using a low dose of acepromazine
Analgesia
with either buprenorphine or pethidine (meperidine)
The head and neck are sensitive areas of the body,
or butorphanol is usualy adequate in dogs, Boxers 
and some procedures produce strong surgical stimu-
can be prone fo vasovagal syncope with acepro-
lation, resulting in a variable plane of anaesthesia. A
mazine, and either they should concurrently receive
widely varying plane is often the result of poor anal-
an anticholinergic or the phenothiazine should be
 gesia. Opioids should be provided at the time of pre-
avoided. Fractious dogs should not be muzzled, but
medication, and local nerve blocks considered prior to
an Elizabethan collar can be useful to prevent han-
surgery (details of nerve blocks are provided in Chap-
 dlers from being injured. Preoxygenation by mask for
ter 10). Further increments of injectable opioids can be 
 5 minutes will help prevent hypoxaemia during induc-
provided intraoperatively during lengthy procedures
tion, but mask induction using an inhalational agent
and/or nitrous oxide can be administered. Analgesics
should be avoided where possible. Mask induction
should be continued into the recovery period.
takes longer and the dog is prone to further airway
195
 Chapter 18 Dental and oral surgery
obstruction until conditions are suitable for intubation.
the reduction of their undesirable side effects. Com-
A rapid, reliable induction technique should be used 
binations of acepromazine and opioid are suitable in
with such drugs as thiopental, propotol, alfaxalone or
most cases. Alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonists should
ketamine/benzodiazepine, and endotracheal intuba-
only be used in young. heaithy patients, and only when
tion rapidiy performed. Alfaxalone/alfadolone can be
 there is a full appreciation of the side effects. Oxygen 
used in brachycephalic cats.
and ventilatory support must be available when these
The best way to avoid problems with upper airway
drugs are used.
obstruction following extubation is to use anaesthetic
 Anticholinergics can reduce undesirable parasym-
drugs with rapid elimination. Induction drugs with rela-
pathetic effects, such as salivation and bradycardia.
tively short plasma half-lives, such as propofol or a
 The duration of action of glycopyrronium is 2-3 hours 
ketamine/benzodiazepine combination, ensure a rapid 
 and it is a more potent antisialogogue than atropine.
recovery, and return of the patient's ability to maintain
Further information can be found in Chapter 12.
its own airway. Isoflurane and sevoffurane provide
more rapid recoveries than halothane.
Induction
Even by taking these precautions, once the endo-
The passage from consciousness to unconsciousness
tracheal tube is removed, there is stifl a risk of
should be smooth and excitement-free. in healthy
obstruction until the patient is fully awake. Obstruction
 dogs and cats, thiopental, propofol, ketamine/benzo-
can be alleviated by pulling the patient's tongue
 diazepine and steroid-based anaesthetics (alfaxalone 
aheinooue oi uado yinou st! buidaey pue spemo!
or alfaxalone/alfadolone) are recommended as they
mouth breathing. Hypoxia can be alleviated by admin-
 produce a reliable, rapid induction. In patients with
istering oxygen. Placing the patient in sternal recum-
cardiopulmonary compromise or severe hepatic or
bency allows more uniform expansion of the lungs, and 
renal disease, they should be used with caution (see
may promote more rapid return to consciousness.
 Chapters 19, 20 and 22). Xylazine/ketamine or
If dyspnoea is observed because the extubated
medetomidine/ketamine combinations for induction of
patient has been administered a potent mu opioid ago-
anaesthesia should not be used in geriatric or debili
nist, such as morphine, methadone or hydromorphone,
tated patients. See Chapter 13 for further details re-
for postoperative analgesia, an alternative to reintu-
garding injectable drugs.
bation may be to reverse the agonist. Low doses of
naloxone can be used to reverse sedation, although
Maintenance
some analgesia may also be reversed. Butorphano!
For short procedures of less than 15 minutes, incre-
(0.2 mg/kg i.v. over 1 minute) can also be used for
 mental boluses of short-acting injectable anaesth-
reversal and to provide analgesia.
etics, such as thiopental, propofol, benzodiazepine/
ketamine and alfaxalone or alfaxalone/alfadolone,
can be used. Barbiturates and propofol, however, do
Anaesthesia for routine denta!
not provide effective anaigesia for invasive proce-
procedures
dures. Dental procedures can be lengthy and this
will increase risks of deterioration in physiological
 Pre-anaesthetic preparation
status, especially in older, compromised patients, and
It is important to ensure that a thorough clinical ex-
anaesthesia is best maintained with an inhalational
amination has been performed on the patient prior
technigue. The technique involves the administra-
to administration of an anaesthetic. Many procedures
tion of oxygen and greatly improves oxygen delivery
are considered to be routine, and clients may
at tissue levels.
believe that anaesthetizing their pet will be straight-
forward. in older patients there is increasing like-
lihood of systemic disease, which may have gone
Anaesthetic management for trauma
unnoticed by the client. A thorough examination wil
and elective oral surgery
help to eliminate unforeseen problems in the
perioperative period. Elective procedures can be
Patients requiring elective procedures, such as hemi-
delayed until the patient is stable, and urgent pro-
mandibulectomy, can be thoroughly examined, and
cedures can be undertaken with the veterinary
any concurrent disease stabilized before anaesthe-
surgeon (and client) cognizant of problems that may 
sia is induced. Any consequences of the surgical pro-
occur. Further information regarding systemic dis-
cedure, such as haemorrhage, should be anticipated.
ease and anaesthesia may be found in other chap-
The upper airway should be examined for potential
ters on anaesthetic management.
difficuities with intubation. Patients with traumatic in-
juries must be stabilized, and other potential injuries
Premedication
addressed before anaesthesia. Most procedures can
 Many geriatric patients are likely to be distressed by
be managed with conventional orotracheal intubation, 
the upheaval in their routine and association with
but occasionally passing the endotracheal tube
 strangers in unfamiliar surroundings. Premedication 
through a pharyngotomy site, or a tracheotomy, may
provides a calming effect and makes the patient more
be necessary (see below).
manageable. Important considerations for dental
 Preoxygenation should be performed in case there
anaesthesia include the provision of intraoperative
are difficulties with intubation. Once the patient is sta-
analgesia with an opioid, the ability to reduce the
 ble; rapid-sequence induction techniques after light 
amount of major depressant anaesthetic agents and
 premedication (if used at all) can be used to establish
196
Chapter 18 Dental and oral surgery
an airway. Maintenance of anaesthesia can be pro-
Special techniques
vided by inhalational techniques. Positioning for sur-
 gery is important and the endotracheal tube must be 
The difficult airway
securely tied to prevent accidental disconnections.
Occasionally, altermative techniques are required to
Right-angled adaptors can be attached to the endo-
 secure an airway. Conventional laryngoscopy and in-
tracheal tube adaptor to enable breathing systems to
tubation techniques may be impossible to perform in
be diverted away from the surgical site. Breathing
traumatized patients, patients with cancer and patients
systems with heavy valves at the patient end (Magill)
-nsia loi yhnoua apim smel jlal uado ol algeun aie oum
should be avoided since they could place drag on the 
alization. The following techniques can be attempted if
endotracheal tube.
necessary. A wide range of endotracheal tube diameters
Surgical drapes may make examination of eye
should be selected for all techniques. An emergency
position impossible and monitors measuring end-tidal
tracheotomy kit should also be available in case the
anaesthetic agent concentration are expensive, al-
 patient gets into difficulties during the intubation proc-
 ssai 'ainpaooid jo adk siui loy injasn Aias ybnoul
ess. Anaesthesia can be maintained using incremen-
expensive pulse oximeters and capnographs can aid
tal doses of short-acting injectable anaesthetic drugs
decisions regarding anaesthetic depth. It should be
 Until inhalational techniques can be used. Preoxygen-
ation for a measured 5 minutes is necessary for all
oximeter probes) placed on the head area are se-
patients with anticipated intubation difficulties. A feed-
cured, otherwise they may become dislodged during
ing tube attached to an oxygen line may be slid into the
the procedure and can be difficult to replace. Alterna-
trachea temporarily to insufflate oxygen if the patienf
tive sites should be used if possible.
becomes hypoxaemic during the intubation procedure.
Placing an endotracheal tube using a guide stylet
Recovery and analgesia
A fairly stiff feeding tube or equivalent plastic tubing can
be used as a guide over which an endotracheal tube
Good nursing, analgesics, warmth, fluids and contin-
can be placed into the trachea. The guide is twice the
uous observation will help to eliminate postoperative 
length of the endotracheai tube and should be carefully
problems. Before extubation the pharyngeal area
 inserted into the trachea using a laryngoscope. The
should be inspected for fluids, blood clots and foreign
laryngoscope is then removed and the chosen endo-
objects so they can be removed. Suction apparatus
is useful to ensure that the pharynx is dry. Cats should
 guide the endotracheal tube into the correct position.
be closely watched during recovery, as they are prone
ae sebessed jeseu aul j uogonnsgo Aemuie laddn ol
Placing an endotracheal tube using a
occluded with blood and debris. Until cats are fully
bronchoscope
recovered from the effects of the anaesthetic, they
The endotracheal tube can be placed over a narrow
appear reluctant to mouth breathe after extubation.
bronchoscope and the distal end of the bronchoscope
Anaesthetic agents providing rapid recovery are use-
directed into the trachea. Once the bronchoscope is in
ful to decrease the time from extubation until the cat
the trachea the endotracheal tube can be slid off the
is fully aware of its surroundings.
bronchoscope and secured. This technique has limit-
Delirious recoveries may be the result of pain.
afions in small dogs and cats as the narrowest diameter
excitatory anaesthetic agents or hypoxia.
'yonoua s aa ou A algeiae adoosououong jo
 Patients recovering from oral surgery often try to
rub their faces, and sedatives, analgesics or an Eliza-
 Retrograde placement of an endotracheal tube
bethan collar may help prevent self-inflicted trauma.
A long guide wire, such as a stiff feeding tube, is in-
For restless patients, acepromazine can be adminis-
serted into the trachea via a small tracheotomy and
tered at a low dose (0.02 mg/kg i.v.). Some patients 
will greatly benefit from oxygen administration by mask 
passed over the end within the mouth and inserted
 or nasal catheter during recovery.
into the trachea. The guide is then removed.
Analgesics should be provided perioperatively
(see Chapters 9 and 10). Opioids are the analgesics
Pharyngotomy for diversion of the
endotracheal tube
administered systemically. Continuous infusions of
Occasionally, the endotracheal tube may be required
morphine, lidocaine and/or ketamine can be used
fo pass from the trachea through a temporary pharyn-
during the procedure and may be continued into the
gotomy to connect with the breathing circuit. This al-
recovery period when pain is anticipated to be severe
lows the surgeon access to the oral cavity without the
(see Chapter 13). Regional nerve blockade can be
hindrance of an endotracheai tube. Once the endo-
tracheal tube is in place, a pharyngotomy can be per-
and infraorbital blocks with local anaesthetics. Plac-
formed and the proximal end of the endotracheal tube 
ing the local anaesthetic before surgery can decrease
removed from its adaptor and passed mediolaterally
the amount of other anaesthetic drugs needed
through the pharyngotomy site, and the adaptor recon-
and lower the postoperative requirement for anal-
nected allowing anaesthesia to continue with an
 gesics. Fentanyl patches and newer non-steroidal
 inhalational technique. Injectable anaesthetic drugs
anti-inflammatory drugs, such as meloxicam or
(propofol, thiopental) may be required to maintain an-
 carprofen, are also usefu!.
 aesthesia during movement of the endotracheal tube.
197
Chapter 18 Dental and oral surgery
After surgical preparation of the cervical area and
Feeding tubes
angle of the mandible, an index finger is introduced 
In patients that cannot feed and drink normally.
into the oral cavity. The finger locates the pyriform
a nasogastric, pharyngostomy, oesophagostomy
sinus rostral to the epihyoid bone (Figure 18.1). The
 Or gastrostomy tube offers an alternative method of
tissues are incised and dissected through to the oral
providing nutrition and fluids (see BSAVA Manual of
cavity. The forceps may need to be thrust through the
Canine and Feline Emergency and Critical Care:
mucosa, and their end grasps the proximal end of
Crowe, 1986). Basic information is presented here
the endotracheal tube to pull the tube laterally. The
regarding the first three tube positions.
incision can be closed in a routine manner once it is
not required.
Indwelling nasogastric intubation
After desensitizing the nasal mucosa, a lubricated 5
or 6 French polyvinyl infant feeding tube is passed
into the ventral nasal meatus. Placement into the
oesophagus is easy in the anaesthetized patient with
an endotracheal tube. In conscious patients the head
should be heid with the nose pointing down while the
 tube is advanced as this helps prevent accidental in-
sertion into the trachea. The tube should be advanced
until the distal end is positioned in the distal oesopha-
gus (preferred location) or in the stomach. The stylet,
if used, should then be removed. Placement should
be verified, by radiography or by auscultation of bub-
bles when air or sterile saline is instilled through the
tube. The tube should then be capped and sutured in
place with butterfies made from sticky tape. An Eliza-
bethan coHar will be necessary in some patients to
prevent them from removing the tube. Although easy
to perform, this technique is limited to short periods
 of feeding with liquidized foods.
18.1
 Placement of an endotracheal tube through a 
 pharyngotomy site.
Pharyngostomy tube
This tube is placed by a technique similar to that de-
scribed for a pharyngotomy endotracheal tube, but
long-term maintenance can result in dysfunction of
Elective tracheotomy
the larynx and aspiration. The technique of placement
A patient that can otherwise breathe normaly, but
is therefore modified slightly in order that the tube exits
cannot open its mouth, should have anaesthesia in-
as caudodorsally as possible, close to the entrance
duced and maintained with incremental boluses of an 
to the oesophagus. In the modified technique, the in-
 injectable anaesthetic agent until the jaws are opened 
cision is made in the lateral wall of the pharynx,
or a tracheotomy is performed.
 caudodorsal to the hyoid apparatus.
Elective tracheotomies can be performed under
aseptic conditions while there is an orotracheal tube
Oesophagostomy tube
in place. The ventral surface of the trachea at the
This site is currently the preferred position for place-
tevel of the second, third or fourth tracheal rings is 
 ment of a feeding tube. It avoids the complications of
exposed by a midline incision and the sternohyoideus
peritonitis from gastrotomy tubes, and the risks of as-
muscles retracted. Two stabilizing sutures are placed
piration and damage to mucosa from the previously
around tracheal rings at the site of tracheal incision
described sites. Under anaesthesia, the lateral cervi-
cal region is clipped and prepared for surgery; the leff 
tween rings is made through the annular ligament
side is commonly used, but the right side can be used
and mucosa up to 65% of the circumference of the
if necessary. Curved forceps are inserted into the proxj-
trachea. Alternatively. a U-shaped ventral tracheal
mal cervical oesophagus via the pharynx. The tips of
flap is created based on the second tracheal ring
the forceps are then turned laterally and pressure ap-
and extending two rings distally. The flap is raised
plied so the instrument can be palpated. A skin incision
as a hinge to allow placement of the tracheotomy
large enough to accommodate the feeding tube is made
tube. This flap is used for long-term intubation as it
over the tips of the forceps. The forceps can be pushed
prevents excessive pressure of the tube on the sur-
through the oesophagus, or an incision can be made
rounding tissue. Postoperatively the incision should
painseawaid s! agni bupeey eul 'sbop jabiei u!
be leff to granulate, but this does require intensive
and marked from stomach or distal oesophagus to
care to allow cleaning of the tracheotomy site and
 incision site. The distal end is grasped by the for-
constant observation of the patient. Some veteri-
ceps and pulled through the oesophagus out of the
nary surgeons prefer to close the incision postopera-
mouth. With the aid of the forceps the distal end
tively, but there may be a risk of subcutaneous
is then turned on itself to pass back into the oeso-
emphysema, localized sweling and subsequent risk
phagus until the loop disappears. The distal tip is
of airway obstruction.
198
Chapter 18 Dental and oral surgery
method helps to straighten the tube, and limit kinks
Tracheal rupture in cats: 16 cases. Journal of the American
(Crowe and Devey, 1997). An alternative technique
Veterinary Medical Association 214, 508-512
Hartsfield SM (1990) Anesthetic problems of the geriatric dental patient.
is to place a van Noort oesophagotomy tube using
 Probiems in Veterinary Medicine 2. 24-45
ihe appropriate introducer.
Hobson HP (1995) Brachycephalic syndrome. Seminars in Veterinary
King L and Hammond R (1999) Manual of Canine and Feline
Emergency and Critical Care. BSAVA Publications. Cheltenham
 References and further reading
Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E and Pernell RT (200o) Tracheal
rupture associated with intubation in cats: 20 cases. Journai of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 216, 1592-1595
：
Crowe DT (1986) Enteral nutriton for crticallyill or injured patients.
Muir Ww Il1 and Hubbell JAE (1995) Handbook of Veterinary
Part I, Il Ill, The Compendium on Continuing Education for the
Anaesthesia, 2nd edn. Mosby, St Louis
Practicing Veterinarian 8. 603-826
 Rochette J (2005) Regional anesthesia and anaigesia for oral and dental
Crowe DT and Devey JJ (1997) Esophagotomy tubes for feeding
procedures. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Smafl Animal
Practice 35. 1041-1058
patients. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
Quandt JE, Robinson EP, Walter PA and Raffe MR (1993) Endotracheal
33,393-403
tube displacement during cervical manipulation in the dog.
：
Harcie EM, Spodnick GJ, Gilson SD, Benson JA and Hawkins EC (1999)
Veterinary Surgery 22, 235-239
.
...
199
Cardiovascular disease
R. Eddie Clutton
：
Introduction
 Reversible risk factors are identified and treated
preoperatively
The cardiovascular system consists of the heart, blood
Cardiovascular reserve is recruited by
vessels and controlling elements of the autonomic
preoperative preparation
The anaesthetics used offset, rather than 
and left circulations: the right delivers venous blood
aggravate, the haemodynamic effects of the
to the lungs for oxygenation, whilst the left maintains
condition
blood pressure and drives tissue perfusion, i.e. main-
The adverse haemodynamic effects of surgery
tains delivery of adequate volumes of oxygenated
are understood and minimized
blood (DO,) to peripheral tissue per unit time so that
 Problems of secondary complications, altered drug
whole body oxygen requirements ( VO2) are met. Thus,
 behaviour and drug interactions are recognized 
A range of autonomic nervous and 
ing peripheral blood flow, including:
cardiovascular (adjunct) drugs is available
 Diseases of the heart, i.e. myocardium, valves
 Perioperative physiological monitoring is
and the cardiac conducting system 
adequate.
Arterial disease
Impaired autonomic nervous control of 
cardiovascular function
Effect
 Abnormal blood flow characteristics
Reduced drug
Greater sensitivity to injectable anaesthetics;
Hypovolaemia.
volume of 
 Feduced doses and/or infusion rates
Cardiovascular disease is frequently encountered 
distribution
required. This is greatest with drugs given by
in companion animal practice: congenital cardiac
 intravenous rather than intramuscular or
 subcutaneous injection
 anomalies are common, while cardiopulmonary func-
tion deteriorates with age. Acquired cardiac disease is
Slower circulation
 Sfower response after intravenous injection;
common in dogs and cats.Animals with cardiovascular
time
 longer delay required between incremental 
disease may require an anaesthetic for diagnostic tests,
injections
for the surgical correction of anomalies or for opera-
Poor peripheral
tions unrelated to the condition. Cardiovascular disease
perfusion
 subcutaneous or oral drug administration
increases risk from anaesthesia because:
Reduced cardiac
ncreased rate of inhalation anaesthetic
 Cardiovascular depression is the most important 
ndino
 uptake. More rapid induction rate and a more 
side effect of most anaesthetics; anaesthesia
rapid response to altered vaporizer setings.
Greater attention required to vaporizer
increases the likelihood of cardiovascular failure
and death
settings
 Cardiovascular disease affects other organ systems
Reduced renal
Reduced renal clearance of drugs.Metabolic
in ways that increase anaesthetic risk. The most
 perfusion
 acidosis.increases sensitivity to weak acidic.
important affect the heart itself, e.g. chronic
 drugs, e.g thiopental. non-steroidat anti-.
hypertension causes ventricular hypertrophy
*Hypoalbuminaemia increases
Cardiovascular diseases alter drug disposition
 unbound:bound drug fraction, increasing 
(Figure 19.1)
 sensitivity to albumin-bound compounds
Cardiovascular therapy involves drugs (Figures
 Reduced hepatic :
Diminished extraction of drugs undergoing
19.2, 19.3 and 19.4) which may interact with
blood flow
extensive hepatic metabolism; prolonged
 anaesthetics or produce adverse effects during
efect
anaesthesia.
Increased
Slower onset and response to altered‘
 Risks from anaesthesia are reduced if:
pulmonary
 concentrations of inhalation anaesthetics.
ventilation/
An accurate diagnosis is established.
perfusion inequality
 Management depends on identifying and 
Lnderstanding the condition's primary
 Pharmacokinetic effects of cardiovascular
(haemodynamic) and secondary effects
disease.
200
Chapter 19  Cardiovascular disease
Tndication
Side:effects:
Heart failure
Rapid intravenous: using 250 μg/kg
Perioperative arhythmias: sinus block, atrioventricular (AV)
 Atrial premature
injectable soltion, prepare 10-20
block, AV junctional rhythm, atrial and venticular ectopic
complexes
μg/kg.Inject 50% i.v. and wait 3060
 beats, ventricular tachycardia
Atrial tachycardia
minutes. Give 25% dose i.v. and wait
Anorexia; vomiting: diarrhoea: lethargy;: ataxia. Toxic signs
Atrialf fibiliation
 another 30-60 minutes before giving 
 occur at lower concentrations in presence of 
Sinus tachycardia
 the final aliquot, if necessary
hypokalaemia. Toxicity enhanced by nyperkalaemia.
due to heart failure
Rapid oral: Using tablets, 10-30 μg/kg
 alkalosis, hypoxaemia, hypercalcaemia,
is given at presentation and again at
hypomagnesaemia
12 hours
Monitor ECG throughout rapid digitlization.Any
Maintenance: 10-20 μg/kg divided q12h
possibity that preoperative bradycardia/bradyarrhythmias
result from digoxin toxicity should prompt administration of
a test dose of atropine 20 μg/kg to ensure intraoperative
heart rate increasesare possible
Diuretics
Loop
 Rapid elimination of 
 Furosemide: 2-5 mg/kg every hour i.v,
 Should be used only with vasodilators, it.e. ACE inhibitors 
excessive fluid
 rapid onset and efective in dogs and
Hypovolaemia; hypotension
cats
Hypokalaemia aggravates digoxin toxicity
Then 14 mg/kg i.m. or orallyq8-24h
Metabolic alkalosis; hypochloraemia
thereafter
 Use carefully in conditions in which cardiac output relies
 on ventricular filling pressures
Monitoreffectbyweight loss
Thiazides
 Slow elimination of
Hydrochlorothiazide: 2-4mgkg orally
As above
 excessive fuid
qi2h
.Potassium-sparing
 Slow elimination of
Spironolactone: 1-2 mg/kg orally
Plasma potassium levels unchanged
excessive fluid
g12-24h
Amiloride: 0.125 mg/kg orally q24h
Phosphodiesterase 
See below
inhibitors
Potassitum
Hypokalaemia
Cats 2-6 mmol/day orally
Hyperkalaemia and arrythmias when plasma levels
folfowing prolonged
Dogs 0.2-0.5 mmol/kg oraly q8h.
 exceed 7 mmol/. Potassium-sparing diuretics 
diuretictherapy
(spironolactone, amiloride and triamterene) do not warrant
 and/or cachexia
K+ supplementation
 Drugs for preoperative preparation of animals in heart failure. Sodium intake should be restricted to 10-40
 mg/kg/day (0.1-0.4% diet dry matter). If possible, cases should receive a formulated low-sociur diet or a
prescription diet, e.g. Hill's k/d or h/d.
Indications
Glyceryl trinitrate
Emergency venodiltionf
Ointment applied q6-12h to medial pinna:
Hypotension, tachycardia, azotaemia
afterload reduction, e.g..
Dogs 6-50 mm
pulmonary oedema
Cats 3-6 mm
Nitroprusside
Rapid afterload reduction
Infusion: t-15 μg/kg/minute (dogs)
Hypotension, tachycardia, azotaemia
 Rapid effects; monitor blood pressure
Hydralazine.
Reduce afterload (arteriolar
 0.5-3.0 mg/kg orally q12h.(dogs)
 Acute: hypotension, tachycardia
dilationgacutemiral
Chronic:hypernatraemiahypokalaemia
 vaive regurgitation
 Alpha-1 antagonists.
Reduce afferload
Prazosin:
Hypotension, tachycardia, depression,
Dogs <15 kg 1 mg oraly q8-12h
weakness
Dogs >15kg 2 mg orally q8-12h
 Effects wane with constant use'
Phenoxybenzamine:
Dogs 0.2-1.5 mg/kg orally q12h
b Aeo byuj-osie
ACE inhibitors
 Non-emergency afterload control
 Enalapril:
Hypovolaemia, hypotension, tachycardia,
...
Dogs 0.251 mg/kg orally q12-24h
hyperkaiaemia, May aggravate.
Cats 0.25 mg/kg oraly q12-24h
1 hypotensive efects of acepromazine (use
Benazepril:
lower acepromazine dose and prepare for
Dogs 0.25-0.5 mg/kg orally q24h
 crystalloid infusion}
Cats 0.5-1.0 mg/kg orally q24h
tImidapril:
Dogs and cats 0.25 mg/kg orally q24h
Ramiprit:
Dogs 0.125 mg/kg oraly q24h
201
Chapter 19  Cardiovascular disease
Drug
Dose
Slde effects
Phosphodiesterase*
Mixed effects: inotropy.
Pimobendan:
inhibitors
 chronotropy, diuresis,
 Dogs 0.2-0.6 mg/kg orally q24h 
vasodilation
Propeniophylline:
Dogs 2.5-3 mg/kg orally q12h
 Calcium channel
Vasodilation and weak
Amlodipine:
blockers
negative chronotropic and 
Dogs 0.05-0.1 mg/kg orally qf2-24h
inotropic effects
Cats 0.625-1.25 mg orally q24h
(continued) Vasodilators for preoperative preparation of animals in heart failure
6nid
Indications.
Dose
Type 1a
Ventricular arrhythmias and
Procainamide 4-8mg/kg over 5minutes
Procainamide causes myocardial
 ventricular tachycardia
then 25-50 μg/kg/minute
depression,hypotensionandECG
 abnormalities if given rapidly
Malignant ventricular arrhythmias.
Quinidine 6-10 mg/kg i.m. or 6-20 mg/kg
Hypotension, arrhythmias
 refractory supraventricular
oraly g6-8h (dogs)
 tachycardia (SVT), acute atrial
fibrillation
Type 1b
 Malignant ventricular arrhythmias
Lidocaine 2-4 mg/kg i.v. then 25-75
μg/kg/minute
Type 2
Tachyarrhythmias
Propranolol:
Hypotension, bradycardia,
50 μg/kg i.v. every 2 minutes to eect
 bronchospasm, obtunded sympathetic.
maintenance 0.25-1 mg/kg orally q8h
 responses to hypovolaemia, 
(dogs & cats)
hypercapnia, hypoxaemia etc.
Atenolol:
Acute aggravation of congestive
Dogs 0.5-2.0 mg/kg orally q12h
failure
Cats 6.25-12.5mg/cat orallyq24h
Type 3
Ventricular arrhythmias
Amiodarone:
Bradycardia, atrioventricular blockade
Dogs 10-15 mg/kg orally qt2h for
hypotension
1 week then 5-7.5 mg/kg q12h for
2 weeks, thereafter 7.5 mg/kg g24h
Type 4
SVT, ventricular tacnycardia, atrial
Diltiazem:
 Bradycardia, other arrhythmias,
Calcium channel
fibrilation
Dogs 0.5-1.5 mg/kg oraly qah
 hypotension, acute aggravation of
blockers
Cats 1.75-2.5mg/kg orallyq812h
 congestive failure
Verapamil:
 Dogs and cats 0.5-1.0 mg/kg orally q8h
Antimuscarinics
Bradyarrhythmias
Atropine 20-40 μg/kg i.m. or s.c.
Tachycardia
 Glycopyrronium 5-10 ug/kg i.m. or s.0.
lsopropamide 2.5-5 mg/kg orally q8-12h
Propantheline:
Dogs 1-2 mg/kg orally q8-12h
Cats 7.5 mg/kg orally q8-12h
Beta-1 agonists
 Bradyarrhythmias
Isoprenaline 5-10 mg orally q6-8h (dogs)
Severe tachycardia
Terbutaline:
Dogs 1.25-5 mg/dog orally q8-12h
Cais 300 ug-1.25 mg/cat orally q8-12h
Magnesiuim
Refractory ventricular arrhythmias
Dogs and cats 0.5 mmol/kg/day by infusion
Cardiovascular disease:
fits' (seizures), no single sign or test predicts an ani-
management
mal's capacity to tolerate anaesthesia and surgery.
Overall status must accommodate both the haemo-
Preoperative examination
dynamic derangement and the effect of secondary
Preoperative examination establishes the diagnosis
changes. However, the most useful and practical in-
 and predicts the capacity of the cardiovascular sys-
dex of cardiopuimonary “fitness', at least in dogs, is
 tem to withstand anaesthesia and surgery. It forms
exercise folerance.
the basis of preoperative preparation and anaesthetic
A thorough medical history review and physical ex-
technique selection. While the most important indica-
amination may establish a diagnosis, although more
tors of severe cardiovascular disease are diminished
complex studies, such as radiography, electrocardio-
exercise tolerance, dyspnoea, syncopal episodes and
graphy, arterial blood gas analysis, ultrasonography and
202
Chapter 19 Cardiovascular disease
cardiac catheterization, are offen required. The stress
Primary condition
associated with such investigations in conscious ani-
Uncontrolled cardiac failure is a contraindication to
mals may produce spurious test results, or worse, may
 general anaesthesia and must be treated. Cardiac
precipitate deterioration. Veterinary cardiologists should
function can be improved by the following steps:
be recruited to establish the diagnosis if necessary.
1. Eliminating retained fluids with diuretics,
diac chamber enlargement and assist in identifying
sodium-free diets and interventions such as
pericardiocentesis.
pulmonary changes. Animals in extremis should be
examined in the lateral decubital position while being
2.
 Improving myocardial contraction with
pimobendan, digoxin, beta-1 agonist drugs or
supplied with oxygen.
phosphodiesterase inhibitors.
Electrocardiography shouid be performed on most
 3. Reducing cardiac work with vasodilators, cage 
cases (certainly all dogs) with cardiovascular disease,
rest and anxiolytic drugs.
especially when pulse irregularities are detected. A
4. Controlling arrhythmias persisting after steps 1-3.
cursory examination suffices for risk assessment be-
cause arrhythmias are more important in anaesthe-
General details are given in Figures 19.2 and 19.3.
sia than chamber enlargement or axis deviation. A
Specific details, which vary according to the condi-
single lead electrocardiogram (ECG) can be taken
tion, are described below. Some arrhythmias, e.g.
from the standing or resting orthopnoeic animal. Many
third-degree atrioventricular (AV) block, arise de novo
sedatives, e.g. alpha-2 agonists. are arrhythmogenic
while some, e.g. acepromazine, are anti-arrhythmic.
are solely responsible for inadequate cardiac outpuf.
Arterial blood gas analysis quantifies the lungs'
These are treated with suitable anti-arrhythmic drugs
ability to oxygenate blood and may be useful for risk
or by pacemaker implantation.
assessment in cases with cor pulmonale. Arteria
 Cardiac failure may result from non-cardiac disease,
puncture may be stressful, which will affect results by
e.g. hyperthyroidism and phaeochromocytoma, in which
lowering carbon dioxide and increasing or decreas-
case treatment must address the inciting condition.
ing oxygen tension.
Venous blood samples should be taken to deter-
Secondary complications
Secondary effects of cardiopulmonary disease which
disease, low cardiac output or passive venous con-
are life-threatening, e.g. ventricular arrhythmias, war-
gestion are present. The haematocrit, plasma haemo-
rant immediate therapy. Other secondary effects may 
globin concentration, serum protein and plasma
persist after the primary condition is treated because
electrolyte levels (sodium, potassium and chloride)
of irreversible pathology. In all cases, the effect of any
should also be examined.
cardiovascular condition on vital tissue perfusion
should be assessed.
Sedation/anaesthesia for diagnostic tests
Sedation or anaesthesia may be required for some
Arrhythmias: These are the most important second-
tests. Sedation may seem safer and more convenient
ary complication because:
than general anaesthesia. However, sedative effects
 Some reduce cardiac output and cause
may be unpredictable, provide an inadequate duration 
hypotension. The haemodynamic significance of
benign arrhythmias may increase in cardiac disease
to provide the conditions required for invasive physio-
 Untreated, benign arrhythmias may degenerate
logical measurement and tracheal intubation (should 
into lethal rhythms such as ventricular fibrillation,
ventilatory support become necessary). In contrast,
asystole or electromechanical dissociation during
general anaesthesia allows tracheal intubation and in-
surgery. Veterinary surgeons must be able to
termittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV). The
differentiate malignant and benign arrhythmias from 
depth of anaesthesia can be adjusted during the investi-
artefacts and be able to rapidly treat the former
gation, according to the degree of stimulation. General
anaesthesia with volatile agents provides rapid recov-
indicate a deterioration in the myocardial
eries after prolonged investigations because their elimi-
environment as a result of poor management,
 nation is independent of hepatic and renal function.
e.g hypoxia, hypercapnia and changes in pH.
temperature and electrolyte values.
Preoperative preparation
Preoperative preparation aims to reduce risk by re-
Some arrhythmias resolve as cardiac function im-
versing the effects of pre-existing disease; adequate
proves. If they do not, an alternative cause must be
preoperative preparation can reduce the risk of an-
investigated and/or non-specific anti-arrhythmic
aesthesia in most cases, and depends on the extent
therapy instituted (see Figure 19.4). For simplicity,
of dysfunction present and the intended operation. The
preoperative arrhythmias are categorized here as
need for adequate preparation must be balanced
bradyarrhythmias and tachyarrhythmias.
against the pressing needs for surgery. Elective op-
erations should be postponed until therapy has
Bradyarrhythmias: Preoperative bradycardia may be
achieved its maximum effect, and undesirable drug
effects are controlled. The primary condition must be
treated first, as most secondary complications resolve
cythaemia) or hypothyroidism. It may be iatrogenic
spontaneously with improved cardiovascular function.
(digoxin and beta-1 antagonists) or idiopathic, e.g.
203
Chapter 19 Cardiovascular disease
canine sick sinus syndrome. Bradycardia (or brady-
rate is tested first with atropine (Figure 19.5) and then
arrhythmia) requires investigation because further
isoprenaline (Figure 19.6). A positive response indi-
slowing is likely during anaesthesia. At very low heart
cates the appropriate therapy for controlling
rates, reduced cardiac output and coronary arterial
intraoperative bradyarrhythmias. If neither increase
flow may lead to cardiac arrest.
heart rate, surgery should be postponed, conducted
When emergency surgery is needed in animals
at the subject's peril, or artificial ventricular pacing
with bradyarrhythmias, the heart's ability to increase
should be instituted.
Drug class
Indicattons
Type 1a
Ventricular arrhythmias and
Procainamide 4-8 mg/kg over 5 minutes then
 Procainamide causes myocardial
 ventricular tachycardia
25-50 μg/kg/minute
depression, hypotension and
 ECG abnormalities if given rapidly
Type 1b
Malignant ventricular
Lidocaine 2-4 mg/kg i.v. then 25-75 μg/kg/minute
arrhythmias
Type 2. :
Tachyarrhythmias
Propranolot 50 μg/kg i.v. every 2 minutes to effect,
Hypotension, bradycardia,
 maintenance 0.25-1 mg/kg orally q8h (dogs and cats)
bronchospasm, obtunded
 Esmofol 50-100 μg/kg every 5 minutes to effect, then 
 sympaihetic responses to
inftuse 50-200 μg/kg/minute (dogs and cais)
 hypovolaemia, hypercapnia,
 hypoxaemia, etc, acute
aggravationof congestive failure
Type 4
Supraventricular
Verapamil:
arrhythmias
Dogs 50 μg/kg i.v. over 10 minutes, repeat four times
 25 jg/kg doses at 5 minute intervals
Cats 20 目g/kg i.v. over 3 minutes, repeat eight times
 at 5 rminute intervals 
Refractory ventricular
Magnesium sulphate 0.5 mmol/kg/day by infusion (cats
arrhythmias
(sbop pue
Antimuscarinics  Hypotension due to slow
Atropine 20-40 μg/kg i.v.
heart rate, bradycardia,
Glycopyrronium 5-10 μg/kg i.v.
bradyarrhythmias
Negative
Idiopathic tachycardia,
Morphine 0.25-0.5 mg/kg i.y.
Monitor heart rate and ECG;
chronotropes
tachyarrhythmias
 Alfentanil 1-5 μg/kg every 5 minutes i.v.
severe bradycardia and
Fentanyl 1-25ug/kg ivrepeated every 20 minutes or so
hypotension in overdose
Digoxin 5-10 μg/kg i.v.
Neostigmine 25-50 μg/kg i.v.
Edrophoniurn 1 mg/kg i.v.
Anti-arrhythmic drugs used for rapid control of haemodynamic variables during anaesthesia.
Drug
Beta-1
 Hypotension due to poor myocardial
Dobutamaine 1-20 ug/kg/minute
Monitor heart rate (HR) and
agonists·
 contractilty, and/or bradycardia
Dopamine 1-20 μg/kg/minute
 ECG; severe tachycardia.
lsoprenaline 10-100 μg/kg/minute
hypertension and ventricular
Adrenalie 22-33 μg/kg i.v. then 0.01-0.1 μg/kg/minute 
arrhythmias in overdose
Beta-1
Tachycardia, tachyarrhythmias,
Propranolol 50 μg/kg every 2 minutes
Monitor HR and ECG; severe
antagonists
arrhythmias associated withmyocardial
Esmolol50-100ug/kgevery5minutestoeffect,
 bradycardia and hypotension 
hypoxia
then intuse 50-200 μg/kg/minute (dogs and cats)
in overdose
Hypotension due to reduced cardiac
output in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Hypotension due to excessive heart rate
Alpha-1
Hypotension due to alpha-1 antagonists
 Phenylephrine 10 μg/kg every 5-15 minutes i.v.
Monitor HR and urine output;
agonists
 and/or inadequate systemic vascular
Noradrenaline 0.01-0.05 μg/kg/minute iv
 bradycardia and oliguria in
resistance
overdose
Alpha-1
Hypertension due to excessive alpha-1
Phentolamine 25-100 μg/kg i.v.
Monitor HR and blood
antagonists
agonist activity, myocardial hypoxia due
 pressure (BP); hypotension
tohigh afterioad
in overdose
VasodilatorsSevere hypertension/rapid aftertad
Sodium nitroprusside infusion: 1~15 ug/kg/minutei.v.
Hypotension, tachycardia,
reduction
(s6op)
azotaemia
 Rapid effects; monitor BP
 Emergency venodilation/aterload
Glyoery trinitrate ointment 0.6-5 cm (dogs)
Hypotension, tachycardia,
reduction (pulemonary oedema)
0.6-1.25 cm(cats)q6-12htomedial pinna
azotaemia
Rapid effects; monitor BP
Adjunct drugs used for rapid control of haerodynamic variables during anaesthesia.
204
Chapter 19  Cardiovascular disease
Tachyarrhythmias: Preoperative tachycardia or tachy-
Blood pH changes: Blood gas abnormalities caused
arrhythmia should be investigated because they may
jeopardize myocardial oxygen balance (m(D-VO2)
 condition and create self-reinforcing cycles. For exam-
(Figure 19.7). Myocardial hypoxia may result in ven-
ple, low cardiac output causes tissue hypoperfusion
tricular arrhythmias and eventualy cardiac arrest.
and metabolic acidosis. The latter further depresses
This is likely when catecholamines are released (Fig-
 cardiac contractility. Treatment should be directed at
the primary lesion whether it be hypoperfusion, renal
sage and ocular pressure, may convert atrial
failure or inadequate pulmonary perfusion.
tachycardia to sinus rhythm, but rarely do, in which 
case digoxin, beta-1 antagonists or calcium channel
Polycythaemia: Polycythaemia (haematocrit >0.55)
blockers are required.
results from any condition causing hypoxia, e.g. right-
to-ieft intrapuimonary (neoplasm, bronchitis) or
Factors reducing myocardial oxygen delivery (mDO,)
increases blood viscosity and mimics elevated sys-
temic vascular resistance. The latter increases ven-
Low blood oxygen tension (POg)
tricular wal tension during systole, which increases
Low haemoglobin concentration
 oxygen demand and eventually leads to ventricular
Coronary vasospasm (severe hypocapnia)
Low arterial blood pressure
failure. In peripheral tissue, viscous blood 'sludges' in
 Increased heart raie
capilaries and limits delivery of oxygenated biood.
High haematocrit values are lowered preoperatively
by normovolaemic haemodilution: the simultaneous
 Increased heart raie
removal of blood and infusion of plasma, colloids or
 Systolic walltension, afterload 
crystaloid solutions.
Contractility
Basal metabolic rate 
Right heart failure: Right ventricular failure raises
Factors affecting myocardial oxygen balance
central venous pressure (CVP) and favours capillary
(m(D-V)O). Note that tachycardia is 
transudation throughout the body, resulting in pleural
particularly dangerous as it simultaneousiy increases
and/or pericardial effusion, ascites, hepato- and
 oxygen demand while reducing oxygen delivery.
splenomegaly and/or peripheral oedema. Pleural and
pericardial effusions may restrict ventilation while peri-
 cardial fluid accumulation impedes cardiac filing (car-
diac tamponade).
Noxious surgical stimulation ± inadequate anaesthesia/analgesia
Renal dysfunction: Hyperkalaemia associated with
 Endotracheal intubation under light' anaesthesia
renal dysfunction is arrhythmogenic and must be low-
Hypotension
ered with sodium bicarbonate, insulin-glucose solu-
Hypoxaemia
tions or cation-exchange resins, or its effects
Hypercapnia
Hypoglycaemia
Hyperthermia 
In extreme cases, peritoneal dialysis may be required.
Severe hypothermia
Azotaemia (as well as hyperkalaemia and acid-
Postoperative pain
aemia) can cause bradyarrhythmias and increase
Endocrine disease
myocardial sensitivity to anaesthetics. The nature of
treatment depends on whether failure is predominantly
Hyperthyroidism
renal or prerenal.
Phaeochromocytoma
Hypoaibuminaemia renders animals sensitive to
Drugs
albumin-bound drugs like thiopental, while lowered
Antimuscarinic drugs
plasma oncotic pressure facilitates pulmonary oedema
Beta agonist drugs
formation. In conjunction with high CVP, hypoalbumin-
Thyroxine
aemia contributes to peritoneal, pleural and pericar-
 Phosphodiesterase innibitors
dial effusions.
 Factors increasing perioperative sympathetic
Liver dysfunction: Preoperative coagulation tests are
 nervous activity.
mandatory if there is any suspicion of impaired clot-
ting. Coagulopathies are treated using preoperative
Pulmonary oedema: Pulmonary oedema indicates
fresh blood infusion, even before minor operations
left heart failure and occurs in mitral valve incompe
such as dentistry.
tence, mitral stenosis and aortic stenosis (Figure 19.9).
Adequate blood glucose concentrations (4. 1--14.8
It must be treated preoperatively because it decreases
mmol/) must be maintained perioperatively with intra-
venous dextrose solutions. Impaired cerebral glucose
work of breathing and impairs oxygenation. The
delivery, which is more likely with cardiovascular dis-
management of congestive cardiac failure will resolve
ease, will result in severe neuronal damage.
pulmonary oedema in chronic cases. In acute epi-
 Severe hepatic dysfunction may also impair the
sodes, diuretics (e.g. furosemide) and vasodilators
rate of elimination of long-acting drugs like pentobar-
(e.g. hydraiazine) may be required.
bital and acepromazine.
205
Chapter 19  Cardiovascular disease
Category
Exampie
Problems.
Low cardiac
Fixed
Obstructive
 Mitral and aortic
 HR unable to inctrease output in
Maintain or increase HR (nat >20% 
ouput
(valvular)
 regurgitation and
response to challenge. lntolerant 
resting!
 stenosis; pulmonary
of any changes afiecting cardiac
 Maintain sinus rhythm 
hypertension
outpuf
Cardiac
 Increased systemic vascular
resistance (SVR) causes
Avoid falls in SVR
tamponade
hypertension; more irmportantly.
Fixed heart
Canine sick sinus
 reduced SVR, venomotor tone or 
Avoid myocardial depressionmaintain
 rate (HR)
syndrome
heart rate causes marked
contractility
hypotension
Ventricular
Cardiomyopathy
Avoid myocardial ischaemia
'End-stage' heart
Maintain preload
disease
Variable
Inefficient 
 Ventricuiar tachycardia
Myocardial hypoxia, hypotension 
Reduce HR and variables decreasing.
HR
 myocardial oxygen balance
Hypothyroidism
Myocardiat hypoxia, hypotension
Increase HR
lnadequate
 Cardiomyopathy
Myocardial hypoxia, hypotension
Maintain contractlity
contractility
‘End-stage' heart
Minimize variables decreasing 
 disease
 myocardial oxygen balance
Inadequate
Hypovolaemia;
Hypotension
Maintain preload
preload
}septicaemia
IncreaseSVR
Avoid high inflation pressures during
IPPV
Excessive
Polycythaemia.
Myocardial hypoxia, arhythmias,
Reduce SVR or pulamonary vascular
afterload
hypertension, cor
 end-organ damage in brain,
resistance
pumonale
 eyes, heart, kidneys and
peripheral vessels
High cardiac output
Secondary to
 Slow induction of anaesthesia
 Avoid increases in HR
hypermetabolic
 with volatile agents
Suppress myocardial contractity
conditions:
 Increased risk of myocardial
Suppress afterload
hyperthyroidism.
hypoxia, arrhythmias
 Avoid catecholamine release
 phaeochromocyloma,
High output faiure in response 
hypercapnia
t0 catecholamines
 Classification of cardiac failure.
Other considerations in preoperative
Hypokalaemia caused by loop diuretics: This
preparation
should be treated preoperatively because hypokal-
 aemia prevents anti-arrhythmic drugs converting ven-
Effective circulating blood volume: Preoperative
tricular tachycardia to sinus rhythm. The treatment of
fluid deficits must be resolved and the overzealous
choice is oral potassium supplementation, although
 use of diuretics avoided in those conditions in which
crystalloid infusions with added potassium chioride
cardiac output depends on preload.
may be required in collapsed animals. The infusion
rate should ensure that potassium administration does
Anaemia: A haemoglobin concentration of 120-150 g/
not exceed 0.5 mmol/kg/h and the ECG should be
is required to produce a normal arterial blood oxygen
monitored (see Figure 19.2 and Chapter 22).
content of 16.1-20.t ml/dl. In anaemia, maintaining
delivery of adequate volumes of oxygenated blood
Pyrexia: This stimulates cardiovascular activity by in-
depends on commensurate rises in cardiac output.
creasing the metabolic rate and raising oxygen and
This increases myocardial work which, in the face of
glucose consumption and carbon dioxide production.
reduced arterial blood oxygen content, may lead to
Beyond this there is little problem with mild hyper-
myocardial hypoxia. Anaemia should be resolved
 metabolism per se, although the cause must be iden-
preoperatively by blood transfusion with fresh whole
tified; there is considerable risk when pyrexia results
 from endocarditis or meningitis. Some antibiotics, e.g.
blood in acute (haemorrhagic) losses, or packed cells
(haematocrit >0.65) in chronic (normovolaemic) anae-
aminoglycosides and chloramphenicol, may interact 
mia. Stored blood should be transfused 24 hours
adversely with anaesthetic drugs.
preoperatively to allow in vitro storage lesions to re-
solve. Over-transfusion must be avoided as it in-
Drugs in preoperative preparation: Many drugs
 creases ventricular afterload and promotes pulmonary
Used to treat heart failure (see Figures 19.2, 19.3 and
oedema, whilst also excessively increasing preload.
19.4) produce undesirable side effects and complicate
206
Chapter 19  Cardiovascular disease
anaesthesia. For example, digoxin causes arrhyih-
Drug selection
mias, and opinions differ over its preoperative use.
 The goals of anaesthesia in animals with cardiovas-
Some recommend that animals in cardiac failure
 cular disease are to:
facing elective operations should be digitalized but
have the morning dose withheld on the day of opera-
 Provide analgesia and muscle relaxation for
tion. However, digitalized animals facing emergency
surgery
 operations should not have the drug withdrawn. In 
Optimize myocardial and tissue oxygenation by
ensuring adequate blood oxygenation
the infusion of inotropes such as dobutamine may
Maintain cardiac output at levels that meet tissue
be as effective, and less hazardous than rapid intra-
perfusion
venous digitalization. lit is felt that antimuscarinic drugs
Maintain systemic arterial blood pressure at
should not be used in digitalized animals as their action
levels that sustain major organ (cerebral,
negates digoxin's positive effects.
 coronary, renal and hepatic) blood flow
As a rule, attempting to limit potential interactions
Preserve a positive myocardial oxygen balance.
cause more problems than are solved. The fear of
The chosen anaesthetic should:
interactions should not be used as an excuse for in-
pauodisod si Aebins Mieapi uogenedaid aienbepe
Reverse the haemodynamic disorder by
until therapy has achieved a maximai effect, and drug
mimicking the effects of medical therapy. This 
:
side efects have been minimized.
requires a knowledge of drug effects
(summarized in Figure 19.10)
Be compatible with drugs used perioperatively to
Anaesthetic techniques
improve cardiovascular function
 Be suitable in the presence of secondary cerebral,.
Major surgery can be performed in sedated animals
using local anaesthesia, providing the surgical site is
Be minimally affected by altered pharmacokinetics.
amenable to local anaesthetic techniques. This op-
tion is made more feasibie when nerve locators are
As a rule, the drugs chosen should have minimal
used. However, high sedative doses may cause
effects on myocardial contractility and peripheral ve-
greater physiological disturbance than a properly ad-
nous tone. Selecting the most appropriate anaesthetic
 ministered general anaesthetic, and local anaesthetic
for a given case is simplified by categorizing acquired
injected into the spinal or epidural space can cause
severe hypotension under certain circumstances.
selection is made difficult by the virtual absence of
Pre-anaesthetic medication with a neuroleptan-
data on anaesthetic drug behaviour in companion
algesic combination (e.g. acepromazine and
animals with cardiovascular disease. The information
buprenorphine), induction with an ultra short-acting
summarized in Figure 19.6 is simplified and errone-
 injectable anaesthetic (e.g. propofol) and light gen-
ously implies that drug behaviour is predictable. How-
eral anaesthesia produced with a volatile anaesthetic
lopue saseasip Ag pabueyo Auanbal s! l! laae
(and possibly nitrous oxide) provides adequate con-
co-administered medication. A preoccupation with
ditions for minor operations in animais with modest
drug suitability based on theoretical haemodynamic
disease, providing attention is paid to ventilation, tem-
effects diverts attention from the fact that other
perature, circulating blood volume and perioperative
perioperative factors, e.g. hypovolaemia, hypothermia
analgesia. However, this approach would be inad-
and pain, may criticaily exacerbate cardiovascuiar
equate in cases with advanced disease undergoing
dysfunction. In any case, the adverse haemodynamic
major operations because it wouid not prevent the
effect of an anaesthetic can often be negated: the
autonomic nervous responses fo noxious (surgical)
myocardial depressant effect of halothane is reversed
stimulation, which adversely affect cardiovascular
to some degree by infusing fluids and inotropes.
function. In these cases, a balanced anaesthetic tech-
The assumption that newer anaesthetics are safer
nique is more appropriate. This involves using the low-
for animais with cardiovascuiar disease is misconceived
est dose of anaesthetic capable of producing
and dangerous. Druigs often behave differently in ani-
unconsciousness (which minimizes myocardial de-
mals with cardiovascular disease and so, when using
pression) with a potent analgesic (to obtund reflex
unfamiliar drugs, it is difficult to determine if an unde-
responses to surgery) and a muscle relaxant (to im-
sirable effect is normal, or reflects deteriorating condi-
prove surgical conditions). Nitrous oxide is frequently
tions. Anaesthetics perceived as 'safer' might provide
included because it has few cardiovascuiar effects and
a temptation to anaesthetize cases which would previ-
reduces the delivered concentration of volatile agent
ously have been regarded as unacceptable risks. Un-
required to produce a given depth of anaesthesia.
der these circumstances, the use of unfamiliar drugs
Balanced anaesthesia is not without complications:
(which are unlikely to be safer) in susceptible subjects
neuromuscular-blocking agents eliminate both spon-
may have dire consequences. Ultimately, anaesthetic
taneous respiration and the most obvious sign of in-
risk depends as much on the veterinary surgeon's ex-
adequate anaesthesia: movement. Pre-emptive and
perience with a drug as it does on the drug's known
polymodal analgesic techniques should be used in
adverse cardiovascular effects. It is better to choose
major operations with the objective of minimizing. if 
any fundamentally safe (and familiar) technique over
not eliminating, postoperative pain.
 one which may in theory be more appropriate, but which 
207
Chapter 19 Cardiovascular disease
 Heart  Systemic
Aeuoujnd
Drug.
Electrocardiogram
ratevascular
arterial
 vascuiar
 resistanceblood
resistance
/pressure
pressure
Acepromazine
↓
？
Type tb anti-arrhythmic effect. may
cause some slowing. primary
 atrioventricular block 
Diazepam 
《
?
Midazolam
?
？
？
Morphine
个
？
↑
Bradycardia. bradyarrhythmias,
 though tachycardia/hypotension
(histamine release) may folow rapid
 intravenous injection of any opioid 
 Pethidine 
ai
十
11
?
↑
(meperidine)
Butorphanol
↓
？
?
}--
Buprenorphine
Atropine
1
Tachycardia, ventricular arrhythmias 
Xylazine
↑-
1?
Bradycardiaprimary and secondary
Medetomidine
AV blockade. Xylazine may 'sensitie'
 myocardium to catecholamines 
Thiopental
 Occasionally causes transient
ventricular arrhythmias
Saffan"
↑
个
↑
(alfaxalone)
alfadolone}
Ketamine
↑
个个
？
?
 Propofol
↓
1?
11
？
?
Etomidate
12
?
？
Halothane 
√
个
Sensitizes myocardiurm to
catecholamines
Jsoflurane
↑
}
↑
N,O
4
个
Desflurane
←
Sevoflurane
1
？
Fentanyl
个
？
Bradycardia, bradyarrhythmias
(negated by co-injection of atropine)
 Allentanil
个
？
Bradycardia, bradyarhythmias
 (negated by co-injection of atropine) 
Summary of the haemodynamic effects of sedatives and anaesthetics. Data have been cderived from several
species and sources. Drug effects will be influenced by physiological, pathological and pharmacological
may be seen. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g. carproien and ketoprofen) have not been included in this list 
because of minimal direct haemodynamic effects. ↑ = Increased; ↓ = Decreased: → = No change; <→↑ = No or slightly
is unfamiliar. However, this recommendation should not
morphine, except when increases in heart rate are
be taken as one of support for familiar, yet fundamen-
desired, when pethidine (meperidine) is used instead.
 tally unsafe, techniques.
Neuroleptanalgesic combinations are safe in cats:
morphine (0.1-0.25 mg/kg) does not produce unde-
Pre-anaesthetic medication
sirable neurological effects providing it is injected
Neuroleptanalgesic combinations based on low dose
 intramuscularly with acepromazine (0.05-0.1 mg/kg).
acepromazine and opioids are useful in dogs and cats.
 Diazepam- or midazolam-based combinations of-
The opioid chosen depends on several factors, includ-
fer theoretical benefits because benzodiazepines are
ing its haemodynamic effects. The author favours
largely devoid of cardiovascular effect. However, they
208
Chapter 19  Cardiovascular disease
are unreliable sedatives and often cause stimulation,
to the facemask but do not cause apnoea, so induc-
even in depressed animals. They are useful in cats
tion with the volatile agent continues. Despite atmos-
 combined with ketamine and/or acepromazine.
pheric pollution, the technique aliows for rapid
 Medetomidine should not be used for pre-anaes-
recovery when problems arise.
thetic medication in sick animals. The availability of
Induction by facemask, or by the combination of
an antagonist (atipamezole) does not justify its use,
facemask with subanaesthetic doses of intravenous
or that of other alpha-2 agonists. in high-risk cases
agents, is feasible in well sedated cats. Chamber in-
 because of the cardiovascular changes they produce
 duction is another option in well sedated animals be-
(see Chapter 12).
cause it obviates the need for stressful restraint and
Antimuscarinic drugs (atropine and glycopyr-
ensures continuous oxygen delivery.
ronium) may be used to increase heart rate, or to pre-
Transient ventricular arrhythmias are not uncom-
：
vent bradycardia if this is likely to develop. However,
 mon during induction. The incidence seems to be re-
:
they should not be used routinely as they cause
duced if intravenous anaesthetic solutions are diluted,
arrhythmias in animals whose myocardial oxygen
balance is precarious. There appears to be little evi-
theless, syringes pre-filed with rapidly acting anti-
dence for the widespread conviction that glyco-
arrhythmic drugs (e.g. lidocaine and atropine) should
pyrronium is safer than atropine.
 be available and the ECG monitored throughout.
 Post-induction apnoea is normal with intravenous
severely debilitated and/or deeply sedated animals
anaesthetics, especially propofol, and may cause
should be monitored closely, though unobtrusively.
haemoglobin desaturation. However, apnoea follow-
There are advantages in applying the ECG and other
ing normal doses is inconsequential providing the tra-
physiological monitors at this time, providing they do
chea is intubated briskiy and the lungs inflated with
not upset the subject. In very sick animals, central ve-
oxygen-enriched gas, at a rate of two to three breaths
nous and/or arterial catheters may be placed under local
per minute.
 anaesthesia, while enriching inspired air with oxygen
will rarely do harm at this stage and can be achieved in
Maintenance
several ways, e.g. nasal or transtracheal catheteriza-
Ideally, the drugs used to provide surgical conditions 
tion if the direct application of a mask is resented.
should be non-cumulative and preserve cardiovas-
cular function. Volatile anaesthetics profoundly de-
Induction
press haemodynamic function and so the minimum
Induction of anaesthesia must be stress-free and not
effective dose, i.e. the dose just preventing autonomic
unduly compromise haemodynamic function. The
nervous responses to surgery. must always be used.
objective is to provide conditions just sufficient for
The minimum effective dose is lowered (and haemo-
atraumatic tracheal intubation using a minimum ef-
dynamic function preserved) by other drugs, notably
fective dose of anaesthetic. However, anaesthesia
nitrous oxide, opioid analgesics, lidocaine, ketamine
must be adequate for tracheal intubation otherwise
and benzodiazepines (see Chapter 13). The infusion
ventricular arrhythmias may arise, at least in dogs.
 of combinations of drugs to reduce volatie anaesthetic
'Bucking' against the endotracheal tube also promotes
requirements aiso exerts desirable polymodal and pre-
lung collapse. Neglecting to intubate fhe airway of
emptive analgesic effects. The author favours an
 animals with cardiovascular disease is indefensible.
alfentanil-ketamine combination, infused at doses of 
There are no ideal induction techniques. Some vet-
1 and 10 μg/kg/minute, respectively. Similar objec-
erinary surgeons favour either drug combinations, or
tives have been met elsewhere using a morphine, lido-
a series of drugs given in sequence for their minimal
 caine and ketamine combination (Muir et al., 2003).
cardiovascular effects: benzodiazepines and opioids
 By relieving volatile anaesthetics from the task of
feature predominately in these techniques. However,
relaxing skeletal muscle, neuromuscular-blocking
most have their own specific disadvantages and offer
 agents also lower anaesthetic requirements. In veteri-
 nary anaesthesia, inhalant anaesthesia still offers con-
or propofol. Etomidate is popular in the USA because
of its minimal effects on cardiovascular function. Prob-
lems with intravenous anaesthetics usually arise from
Body position
a failure to appreciate abnormal pharmacokinetics (see
Extreme body positions must be avoided: head-up
Figure 19.1) rather than from drug effects per se. Any
body positions reduce venous return while severe
ultra short-acting injectable anaesthetic is suitable, pro-
head-down positions impair breathing, reduce func-
viding the minimum effective dose is given carefully,
i.e. a normal dose is prepared, but a lower than normal
pressure. Excessive thoracic limb fixation with ties may
dose given initiaily, and at a slower rate. A longer inter-
lower chest wall compliance and increase the work of
val must be left between deciding that intubation con-
breathing in spontaneously breathing animals.
ditions are inadequate, and making further injections.
 In severely compromised, sedated animals, the
Depth of anaesthesia
author uses halothane or sevoflurane delivered in a
Anaesthetic overdose and inadequate anaesthesia
1 :2 oxygen:nitrous oxide mixture by facemask. At the
are equally undesirable in animals with unstable
first sign of resistance to the mask, a hypnotic dose
cardiovascular function. Stress responses to surgery
-U1 s! (by/bu 1) jojodoid 1o (by/bw 0-1) (euado1 10
involving catecholamine release increase whole-body
jected intravenously. These doses eliminate reaction
oxygen demand, heart rate, cardiac contractility and
209
Chapter 19 Cardiovascular disease
afterload and so threaten myocardial oxygen balance.
arteriosus, because they limit volume-loading of the
Inadequate anaesthesia produced with theoretically
[eft ventricle. Positive inflation pressures also oppose
appropriate drugs is probably more hazardous than
pulmonary transudative forces and should be used if
adequate conditions provided by inappropriate agents.
pulmonary oedema is likely.
 In one study, increasing the inspired concentration of
halothane, a notorious arrhythmogenic drug, was ef-
Fluid balance
Fluid loss, haemorrhage or venodilation are poorly
dogs and cats (Muir et al., 1988). Pre-emptive and
polymodal pain therapy are very desirable in cases
needed to maintain cardiac output, e.g. cardiac tam-
with cardiovascular disease.
ponade. In such cases, a large-bore catheter should 
Anaesthetic overdose depresses cardiovascular
be dedicated to fluid administration. ldeally. fluids are
function and so the depth of anaesthesia must be
-gg ayll-lol-ay!, e uo pue isol aie Aaul se paoeidal
sis. Body fluids are lost as blood (haemorrhage), urine,
variations in surgical stimulation and maintained us-
 ing minimum effective doses. Autonomic nervous re-
and surgical site, and as transudate into a third-space
 sponses to surgery are best controlled with potent
created by surgery (third-space losses). Only haem-
 anaigesics, e.g. intravenous alfentanil or fentanyl,
orrhage and urinary loss are easily quantified. Blood
rather than intravenous or inhalational anaesthetics.
loss is measured by weighing swabs (1 ml blood
weighs 1.3 g) and for each 1 ml blood shed, 1 ml blood
Surgical manipulation
or colloid solution or 3 ml of crystalloid solution are 
During operations involving thoracic viscera, unavoid-
given. Third-space losses into damaged tissue are
able manipulation of the heart and great vessels may
impossible to quantify but many accept that crystal-
limit cardiac output. Rotating the heart kinks the great
loid solution infusions of 5, 10 or 15 ml/kg/h in dogs,
veins and impairs ventricular filling. Accidental epi-
or 3, 6 or 9 ml/kg/hin cats compensate for the effects
cardial stimulation with surgical instruments produces
of mild, moderate and major operations, respectively.
ventricular ectopic beats while the use of cold irriga-
Concessions are necessary when ideal' fluids
 tion fluids impairs contractility.
are unavailable. The common statement that sodium-
containing solutions should not be used in animals
Ventilatory mode
with cardiac disease is a counsel of perfection and
Cardiovascular disease frequently affects pulmonary
when critical perioperative hypovolaemia arises, the
function. The end result(s) of ventilatory inadequacy
rapid administration of any isotonic fluid will be fife-
(hypoxia, hypercapnia or both) are poorly tolerated
saving (a sodium load can be dealt with later using
by animals with cardiovascular disease. Hypoxia and
loop diuretics).
hypercapnia are arrhythmogenic because they simul-
Increased ventricuiar pre- and afterload and re-
taneously promote sympathetic nervous activity (and
duced pulmonary compliance resuit from over-trans-
 solicit an increase in cardiac work) while impairing
fusion with blood and colloid, and to a lesser extent
 myocardial contractility.
 crystalloid solutions, and must be avoided in cases
Anaesthetized, spontaneously breathing animals
with left heart failure as it may lead to puimonary
normally hypoventilate and retain carbon dioxide. How-
oedema. Haemorrhage during corrective cardiovas-
ever, the thoracic pump is preserved and providing res-
cular surgery is usually not excessive but the aorta or
piratory depression is not severe, cardiac output is not
 puimonary artery can be inadvertently damaged, with
unduly depressed. Severe hypoventilation may occur
critical results. The means of rapidly transfusing large
in animals with chest wall and neural lesions (see Chap-
volumes of blood or colloid, i.e. adequate fluid stocks
ter 20). Controlled ventilation is required whenever
 and a pressurizing device, should be available.
spontaneous breathing fails to maintain normal arte-
rial blood gas values. However, by raising the mean
Body temperature
intrathoracic pressure, it inhibits the thoracolumbar
pump and causes systemic hypotension. Pulmonary
mals undergoing surgery for the correction of cardiac
 anomalies in which viscera are exposed for prolonged
momentarily lowers right ventricular stroke volume. This
 periods. This is undesirable as hypothermia depresses
may be hazardous when puimonary blood flow is re-
ventilation, increases blood viscosity and shifts the
duced, i.e. in pulmonary embolism, severe pulmonary
oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve to the left.
valve stenosis or pulmonary hypertension, when inju-
Arrhythmias arise spontaneously in the chilled heart,
dicious 1PPV may critically lower pulmonary blood flow.
with ventricular fibrillation becoming increasingly likely
Careful IPPV, which is usualy advantageous in
as temperatures approach 28cC. In recovery, hyp0-
animals with cardiovascular disease, achieves an
thermia initiates shivering, which increases whole
adequate minute ventilation volume with minimal el-
body oxygen requirements four-fold. The core tem-
evation of the mean intrathoracic pressure. This re-
perature should be preserved throughout the
 perioperative period using prophylactic. rather than
short (about 1:3), that airway pressures are kept at a
active, measures. rrigation fluids should be warmed
minimum (idealy 15-20 cmHO) and that there is no
to 37°C before use.
 positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). High infla-
Deliberate hypothermia involves actively cooling
tion pressures may be beneticial in conditions char-
acterized by left-to-right shunts, e.g. patent ductus
to reduce oxygen requirements during periods of
210
Chapter 19  Cardiovascular disease
deliberate circulatory arrest. At these temperatures, the
Cardiovascular adjunct drugs
artificial support of both pulmonary and cardiovascular
Rapid- and short-acting formulations of drugs used
function (cardiopulmonary bypass) is mandatory.
surgery to offset adverse haemodynamic events, pro-
Monitoring
viding they are safe when given intravenously. Haemo-
There is no single measure of adequate cardio-
dynamic problems encountered during anaesthesia
in animals with cardiovascular disease, and their treat-
vascular function during anaesthesia and so an
ment, are examined in Figure 19.6. The control of
overall picture is gained by measuring and interpret-
intraoperative arrythmias is detailed in Figure 19.5.
ing many variables. In cases with modest cardio-
vascular disease undergoing minor surgery, a
Recovery
minimum acceptable level of monitoring would in-
 Problems during recovery are most common in cases
clude the continuous surveillance of unconscious-
which have not undergone corrective surgery, because
 ness, pulse rate and quality (by palpation). mucous
the cardiovascular system has now to contend with
membrane colour, capillary refill time, respiratory
pain, hypoventilation and hypothermia. Intraoperative
rate, depth and rhythm, core (oesophageal) tempera-
monitoring and medications should continue until urine
tures, absolute blood loss, the rate of bleeding and
output is adequate, the ECG is stable and the extremi-
blood colour at the surgical site. If skin temperature
 ties are warm and perfused. Pain must be aggressively
is measured simultaneously, the core-peripheral
managed, preferably with a polymodal approach; after
temperature gradient, which may reflect tissue
cranial laparotomy or thoracotomy, pain from the inci-
perfusion, can be calculated. Heart and lung sounds
 sion site discourages deep breathing and promotes ung
are most easily monitored using an oesophageal
 coltapse. Periodic repositioning may be necessary in
stethoscope. The high prevalence of cardiac arrhyth-
animals which do not inspire deeply. Inspired gas should
mias in companion animal anaesthesia justifies ECG
be enriched with oxygen until the animal can maintain
monitoring, while simplicity and the value of infor-
adequately saturated haemoglobin (saturation of
mation supports the measurement of urine output.
haemoglobin with oxygen measured by pulse oximeter
Measuring CvP is useful in cases where cardiac
(S,O2) >90%) while breathing room air. This is espe-
 cially important in the shivering animal.
metry is easy to perform and gives vital information,
providing the probe permits accurate measurement.
Devices with a bouncing' plethysmograph are use-
Acquired cardiovascular conditions
ful because they display puisatile blood flow and in-
dicate mechanical cardiac activity. in high-risk cases,
In veterinary practice, it is common for acquired cardio-
arterial blood pressure should be monitored directly.
vascular diseases to complicate anaesthesia in older
Capnography is useful as a guide to effective IPPV,
animals presented for straightforward operations. The
and to give early warning of critical haemodynamic
following sections describe the anaesthetic manage-
events. The major advantages of capnography and
ment for common examples of cardiovascular condi-
sis in general practice is that they are economically
tions listed in Figure 19.9.
feasible. However, the inexperienced are advised
Mitral valve incompetence
against the indiscriminate use of complicated elec-
Mitral valvular incompetence resulting from endo-
tronic monitors in high-risk cases as these may, in
cardiosis begins as a fixed, low cardiac output condi
producing excessive information of varying quality,
tion. During systole, a proportion of the stroke volume
detract from the appraisal of vital signs. In any case,
flows back into the left atrium (Figure 19.11). Later,
monitoring a given variable can only be fully justified
ventricular failure supervenes, with atrial fibrillation and
pulmonary oedema complicating the clinical picture.
and make an appropriate response.
In time, high back pressure from the pulmonary veins 
leads to right ventricular and congestive failure.
Neuromuscular blockade
Preoperative preparation aims to enhance aortic
Neuromuscular-blocking agents are useful in animals
flow, reduce the regurgitant fraction of stroke volume
with severe cardiovascular disease when adminis-
and control pulmonary oedema. This is achieved with
tered by individuals trained in their use. The penalty
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, diu-
for misuse by the inexperienced is high. Atracurium,
retics, beta-1 agonists, pimobendan, cage rest and
vecuronium and rocuronium are devoid of significant
low-sodium diets. Atrial fibrillation, if present, should
cardiovascular effects and may be used to improve
be converted to sinus rhythm preoperatively because
surgical conditions and facilitate IPPV (see Chapter
the atrial contribution to ventricuiar filling becomes
15). Overdose, which may prolong recovery, is
more important when cardiac output is reduced by
avoided if drug administration is based on continu-
disease. This often occurs incidentally with afterload-
ous monitoring of neuromuscular transmission.
uooe luenbinbar aun buionpan :Adeiayi buonpai
Postoperative hypoventilation is prevented if neuro-
volume reduces left atrial dilation.
muscular block is antagonized; an edrophonium
Anaesthesia is managed as for fixed, low-output
(1 mg/kg) and atropine (40 μg/kg) mixture injected
conditions. However, in unprepared animals facing
over 2 minutes does not produce autonomic nervous
emergency operations, the problem is one of low
or ECG changes in dogs.
cardiac output and poor contractility (see Dilated
211
Chapter 19  Cardiovascular disease
cardiomyopathy, below). In addition to the haemo-
Mitral valve stenosis
dynamic objectives listed in Figure 19.10, anaes-
Managing mitral valve stenosis, which fixes cardiac
thesia in animals with leaking mitral valves shouid
output by limiting left ventricular filing during diastole.
aim to:
is a considerably greater challenge than mitral valve
regurgitation. In this condition, cardiac output depends
 Produce mild reductions in systemic vascular
on blood transfer across the stenotic valve (Figure
resistance (promotes forward fiow)
19.12). This is greatest at slow heart rates (increases
 Produce modest increases (<i0% preoperative
diastolic filling time) and when sinus rhythm, rather
values) in heart rate (reduces regurgitant
than atrial fibrillation, is present. However, the small
fraction and prevents falls in diastolic pressure
left ventricle limits stroke volume and heart rate slow-
 and hence coronary perfusion)
ing may cause hypotension. Coincidental increases
Avoid bradycardia and hypertension (which
in left atrial and pulmonary venous pressures lead to
 increases valvular regurgitation).
atrial fibrillation and pulmonary oedema, respectively.
As in any fixed low-output condition, anaesthesia must:
 Maintain cardiac output
 Maintain, or produce modest increases in,
Aorta
heart rate
Maintain systemic vascular resistance
Maintain sinus rhythm
Avoid injudicious IPPV
RA
CrVC
Aorta
A
RA
CVC
RV
Mitral valve incompetence. CrvC = Cranial
vena cava; CVC = Caudal vena cava;
LA = Left atrium: LV = Left ventricle; PA = Pulmonary
artery: PV = Pulmonary vein; RA = Rignt atrium;
RV =' Right ventricle.
CVC
RV
Pre-anaesthetic medication with low dose ace-
9 Mitral valve stenosis. CrvC = Craniai vena
promazine combined with an opioid agonist drug
cava: CVC = Caudal vena cava; LA = Left
with chronotropic activities, e.g. pethidine (meperi-
atrium; LV = Left ventricle; PA = Pulmonary artery; 
dine), usually provides adequate sedation whilst
PV = Puimonary vein; RA = Right atrium: RV = Right 
fulfilling haemodynamic objectives. High dose
ventricle.
acepromazine may cause hypotension, particularly
if ACE inhibitors have been given. Of the ultra short-
The challenge here is in maintaining cardiac out-
acting intravenous anaesthetics suitable for induc-
put whilst avoiding pulmonary oedema by over
tion in animals with mild to moderate disease,
transfusion or by increasing right ventricular output.
etomidate has the least depressant effects. A venous
Fluids must be given on a strict 'as needed' basis,
catheter should be placed before induction so that
while inotropes should only be used when signs of
fluids can be infused in case venodilation (as occurs
right ventricular failure are present. Cardiac output
 with thiopental) reduces ventricuiar filing. In severely
relies on the maintenance of heart rate and systemic
affected animais, a combined mask/intravenous
vascular resistance. The latter shouid be maintained
technique is suitable. Isoflurane has several advan-
with alpha-1 agonist drugs; peripheral vasodilators will
tages over halothane in these cases. Nitrous oxide
cause severe hypotension. while IPPV restricts
mildly increases systemic vascuiar resistance but
 pulmonary fluid transudation, it increases right vent-
the benefits of inclusion usuaily outweigh the disad-
ricuiar afterload and so must be imposed judiciously.
vantages. Ventricular preload should be maintained
Furthermore, the lungs may have limited compliance
using intravenous fiuids, while IPPV is of value when
(being engorged with extra blood) and require higher
there are signs of pulmonary oedema.
pressures for inflation.
212
Chapter 19  Cardiovascuiar disease
Cardiac tamponade
It may occasionally be more convenient to posi-
The pericardium is only slightly distensible and so
tion the temporary pacing wire under general anaes-
space-occupying masses or effusions within the peri-
thesia, when there is a real risk of cardiac arrest. The
cardial sacreadily raise intrapericardial pressure and
risk is reduced in the following ways:
restrict atrial and right ventricular filing. This reduces
left ventricular stroke volume and renders cardiac
Choosing pre-anaesthetic medication that does
output dependent upon heart rate, while arterial and
not reduce heart rate or increase systemic
venular constriction maintain blood pressure. When
vascular resistance
the elastic limits of the pericardial sac are reached, a
Making available intravenous drugs which have
small volume increment causes disproportionate rises
proven chronotropic effect in the subject
in intrapericardial pressure and a critical reduction in
Monitoring the ECG as soon as pre-anaesthetic
cardiac outpuf.
medication is given
Some causes of cardiac tamponade, e.g. congeni-
 Attempting endotracheal intubation only once the
animal is adequately anaesthetized (any ultra
amenable to surgical treatment. Preoperatively, peri-
short-acting intravenous anaesthetic is suitable)
cardial effusions must be relieved (pericardiocentesis),
 Making provisions for emergency transvenous
 Diuretics must be used carefully in animals with signs
 pacing and direct current (DC) defibrillation.
of oedema: over-use may reduce right-sided filling
 pressure. Anaesthesia should aim to:
Dilated (congestive) cardiomyopathy
Large-breed male dogs are predisposed to dilated
Avoid any reduction in heart rate
(congestive) cardiomyopathy (DCM), which is char-
Avoid any reduction in systemic vascular
acterized by severe left ventricular systolic dysfunc-
resistance.
tion. The left ventricle is thin-walled, flabby and dilated.
Both atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are common
Bradycardia will critically reduce cardiac output;
and most dogs eventually develop both left and right
positive chronotropes must be available and ready for
heart failure, with pulmonary oedema. While some
use. Adequate cardiac output also depends on ad-
 dogs respond to therapy, others die suddenly. In cats,
equate ventricular filling pressure; hypovolaemia and
DCM results from taurine deficiency, produces char-
other factors limiting venous return must be avoided.
acteristic signs of right, not left, failure, and responds
 If IPPV is necessary, a low tidal volume/high frequency
to dietary taurine supplementation (250 mg q12h).
 pattern willachieve alveolar ventilation with minimum
Animals with DCM can die suddeniy under anaes-
effects on mean intrathoracic pressure. CVP should
thesia and so adequate preoperative preparation is
be monitored because it reflects right ventricular fill.
mandatory. Therapy involves management of pleural
ing pressures. (lt should also fall dramatically after
pericardectomy.) Drugs causing marked arteriolar or
(with furosemide) and heart failure (with pimobendan,
venular dilation must be avoided where possible.
digoxin. furosemide and vasodilators such as ACE in
hibitors, prazosin or hydralazine). This is particularly
Canine sick sinus syndrome
important when atrial fibrillation is present. The haemo-
Artificial pacemaker implantafion is required when
dynamic goals of anaesthesia are to:
spontaneous cardiac pacemaker activity fails to initi-
ate adequate cardiac output, e.g. in dogs with high-
Maintain cardiac output
grade second-degree heart block, third-degree heart
 Avoid factors reducing myocardial oxygen balance.
block, persistent atrial standstill and canine 'sick sin-
us syndrome'. Slow preoperative heart rates may
 Preoperative heart rate should be preserved and
respond to drugs such as isopropamide, propanthe-
arrhythmias treated as they arise. lsoflurane offers
line, isoprenaline or terbutaline. This indicates drugs
pue sadooui yhnoune aueuloey leao sabeueape
 chronotropes may still be required. Venous return must
implantation bradycardia, e.g. atropine, glycopyr-
be maintained using fluids.
ronium or isoprenaline, and which should be made
 available before anaesthesia begins.
Traumatic myocarditis (myocardial
The operation usually takes place in two stages.
contusions)
A temporary pacing wire is passed via the external
Blunt thoracic trauma of sufficient force to contuse
jugular vein into the right ventricle, often under neuro-
 the epicardium (and fracture a thoracic limb) frequently
leptanalgesia and the infiltration of overlying tissue
results in ventricular arrhythmias which develop
with local anaesthetic. Once the electrode tip of the
24~48 hours later. These, combined with other effects
pacemaker wire is located at the right ventricular
of injury, e.g. pain, anxiety and hypovolaemia, pro-
 apex (under fluoroscopy) and the heart is 'captured'
duce an inefficiently high heart rate which threatens
(i.e. responds to the pacemaker unit), then general
myocardial oxygen balance and makes ventricular
anaesthesia can be induced with little risk, and
fibrilation more likely. Other consequences of trauma,
e.g. electrolyte and acid-base disturbances, also pro-
 sue of the neck or abdomen. The latter approach
 mote arrhythmias. Road traffic accident cases with
involves thoracotomy: the pacing wire is passed
thoracic limb fractures and/or thoracic injury should
through the diaphragm before iis insertion into the
undergo ECG examination preoperatively. The treat-
ventricular epicardium.
ment of arrhythmias is aimed at reducing plasma
213
Chapter 19  Cardiovascuiar disease
Cor pulmonale
catecholamine levels and involves anxiolysis and an-
algesia, cage rest, the administration of oxygen and
Risks from anaesthesia are high in cor pulmonale
the restoration of effective circulating blood volume.
 because problems with lung pathology and right ven
Low dose acepromazine with morphine given intra-
tricular failure are combined. Right ventricular pathol
muscularly eliminates arrhythmias in many cases. In
 ogy secondary to pulmonary hypertension resulis from
others, lidocaine infusion may be necessary. given
lung diseases like chronic bronchitis and bronchiecta-
as an intravenous bolus and followed by a constant
sis. Chronic hypoxia arising from lung disease causes
rate infusion. Procainamide may be necessary on the
pulmonary vasoconstriction and aggravates the con-
rare occasions that lidocaine fails. In animals with trau-
dition. Pulmonary hypertension eventually leads to
matic myocarditis. the haemodynamic effects of an-
right-sided congestive heart failure.
aesthesia should:
Elective operations are postponed until all rever-
sible elements of pulmonary disease have been
 Reduce heart rate
treated and putmonary arteriai pressure lowered. The
latter is achieved most simply with oxygen, which re-
balance
verses pulmonary hypoxic vasoconstriction. In chronic
Suppress arrhythmias.
conditions, bronchodilators and antibiotics may be
beneficial (see Chapter 20). If right-sided failure is
Neuroleptanalgesic combinations are suitable for
present, cage rest, low-salt diets and short-term diu-
pre-anaesthetic medication. Preoperative anti-arrhyth-
retic therapy shouid be imposed. Positive inotropes
mic therapy, i.e. lidocaine infusion, should be main-
(e.g. pimobendan and digoxin) should only be used
tained throughout the operative period and into
if signs of congestive failure are obvious. Polycyth-
recovery if necessary. Anaesthetics slowing or reduc-
aemia may necessitate normovolaemic haemodilution.
ing myocardial oxygen demand, e.g. halothane, may
In treating pulmonary hypertension, vasodilators may
be more suitable than those which maintain cardiac
aa pinous os aalos kaun ueui sueigod alou asneo
output, e.g. isoflurane and sevoflurane.
Used carefully, if at all. Anaesthesia should aim to:
Hypovolaemia: absolute and relative
 Maintain or reduce pulmonary vascular
When intravascular volume losses exceed gains, e.g.
resistance
haemorrhage, polyuria, vomiting and diarrhoea, ef-
Avoid excessive lung inflation pressures.
fective circulating blood volume falls and limits ven-
tricular preload, causing a low, variable cardiac output
Nitrous oxide increases puimonary vascular resist-
state. This also occurs when a normal volume circu-
ance and this has led many to condemn its use in
lates within an expanded vascular bed, e.g. in vaso-
cases with pulmonary hypertension. However, vola.
dilation caused by Gram-negative septicaemia.
tile anaesthetics reduce pulmonary vascular resist-
Restoring efective circulating blood volume obviates
ance to a greater extent and so compensate for this.
the problems associated with absoiute or relative
If IPPV is required, the airway pressures imposed must 
be the lowest required for adequate lung inflation.
 poned until this is achieved. A greater challenge arises 
in cases requiring anaesthesia before fluid resuscita-
 Canine hypertension
tion is complete, e.g. when post-traumatic emergency
 Anaesthesia in dogs with hypertension is complicated
surgery is required to locate and control internal haem-
in at least four ways:
orrhage. In these cases, anaesthesia must:
Increased left ventricular afterload and mass
 Maintain ventricular filing pressures
jeopardizes myocardial oxygen balance
+
Maintain systemic vascular resistance
Hypertension occurs in diseases which elevate
Avoid high lung inflation pressures.
risk, e.g. polycythaemia and primary renal
disease
Ventricular filling pressures are maintained with
Chronic hypertension damages the brain, eyes;
intravenous fluids. Fluid balance should be monitored
heart, kidneys and peripheral vessels
critically by accurately recording gains (i.e. infused
Chronic hypertension shifts the autoregulation 
*
volume) against losses (e.g. haemorrhage and urine).
curve for renal and cerebral perfusion to the
CVP is the preferred indicator of volume adequacy
right. Blood flow in these organs becomes
although the rate and degree of jugular venous dis-
pressure-dependent at relatively high values.
tension after digital occlusion at the thoracic inlet pro-
Blood pressure values that would ensure
vides an estimate. Systemic vascular resistance is
adequate perfusion in normotensive animals are
preserved by avoiding vasodilatory drugs and/or giv-
inadequate in hypertensive cases.
ing alpha-1 agonists. Acepromazine should not be
used at doses >12.5 μg/kg, if at ail. Great care is re-
Anaesthesia should be delayed, if possible, until 
quired in giving all injectabie drugs because the vol-
normal arterial pressure is restored with low-sodium
ume of distribution is smaller (see Figure 19.1).
diets, diuretics, high doses of ACE inhibitors, beta-1
Surgical anaesthesia should rely more on high doses
antagonists, alpha-f antagonists or calcium channel
of analgesics rather than inhaled anaesthetics. High
blockers such as amlodipine. This may take several
intrathoracic pressures must be avoided if IPPV is im-
weeks. when faced with non-elective operations,
posed, as these reduce venous return.
anaesthesia must:
214
Chapter 19 Cardiovascular disease
 Maintain or modestly increase blood pressure
afterload are decreased, all of which lower cardiac
Maintain or modestly reduce systemic vascular
output when HCM is present. Often asymptomatic,
resistance
its first signs may be puimonary oedema or sudden
 Avoid factors reducing myocardial oxygen balance.
death during anaesthesia.
Cats with HCM must not be stressed preoperatively
Management depends on extensive monitoring 
(see Feline hyperthyroidism, above) but should re
and the judicious use of both inotropes and vasoactive 
ceive supplemental oxygen. Heart failure, if present,
adjunct drugs because it is not possible to achieve
is controlled with furosemide and vasodilators (glyceryl
these haemodynamic goals simultaneously. Preoper-
 trinitrate ointment, benazepril or enalapril). Calcium
ative heart rate should be preserved and arrhythmias
 channel blockers, such as diltiazem, exert a useful
treated if they arise. lsoflurane offers some advan-
anti-arrhythmic and a positive lusitropic effect. Tachy-
tages over halothane, although inotropes and chrono-
cardia may respond to atenolol. Pulmonary oedema,
fropes may still be required. Venous return must be
if present, is treated using oxygen, furosemide, cage
maintained with intravenous fluid administration.
 rest and glyceryl trinitrate ointment, while pleural ef-
fusions are relieved by thoracocentesis. The goals of
Feline hyperthyroidism
anaesthesia are to:
See also Chapter 25. Thyroidectomy is the treatment 
of choice for hyperthyroidism. However, the pre-
 Prevent heart rate increases
1:
operative restoration of euthyroidism and normal
Suppress contractility
.
 cardiac output using methimazole (2.5 mg orally q12h) 
Suppress ventricular arrhythmias
for 2-3 weeks is necessary, otherwise anaesthesia is
 Maintain filling pressures
complicated by the presence of high-output cardiac
 Maintain or increase systemic vascuiar resistance
failure and ventricular arrhythmias. Occasionally,
Avoid all factors reducing myocardial oxygen
emergency (non-thyroid) surgery may be necessary
balance.
 in unprepared animals. in these patients, pre-induc-
tion stress (caused by excessive restraint, an unsym-
 Haiothane may have advantages over isoflurane
pathetic environmenf, pain, etc.) must be minimized.
in this condition. intraoperative hypotension should
Consequently, oxygen, which may be needed to alle-
be treated with alpha-1 agonists such as phenyl-
viate dyspnoea, should be given by chamber, rather
 ephrine, rather than beta-1 agonists, while hyperten-
than mask. Pre- and intraoperative cardiac hyperac-
sion should be controlled by increasing the delivered
tivity and arrhythmias must be managed with beta-1
concentration of volatile agent; vasodilators are Ln-
 antagonist drugs, such as propranolol or esmolol. The
suitable. High perioperative heart rates arising from
goals of anaesthesia are to:
surgical stimulation should be controlled with analge-
sics such as alfentanil; beta-1 antagonists may be
 Avoid all factors reducing myocardial oxygen
Used if the cause is non-physiological.
balance
 Suppress ventricular arrhythmias.
Congenital cardiovascular
Acepromazine exerts useful anti-arrhythmic effects 
conditions
and should be included in pre-anaesthetic medica-
tion. If subsequent sedation is inadequate, a cham-
Cardiac anomalies may be asymptomatic in young 
animals requiring incidental operations, and present
prove less stressful than an intravenous technique.
 litle challenge beyond the haemodynamic effects of
Anaesthetics increasing or maintaining heart rate and
 the lesion itself. However, some anomalies are asso-
contractility (e.g. ketamine, isoflurane) are probably
ciated with rapid cardiovascular deterioration. In these,
less safe than those with a depressant effect (e.g.
limited cardiovascular reserve may be criticaly eroded
halothane). Drugs increasing afterload and ventricu-
when invasive operations are performed on immature
lar wall tension, e.g. alpha-2 agonists, should not be
animals. The small size of very young animals makes
used, while the factors listed in Figure 19.8 must be
anaesthesia and surgery technically difficult, while
avoided. The other effects of elevated metabolic rate
physiological immaturity creates further problems.
(increased oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide
However, the advantages of postponing surgery are
production) should be considered when setting flows
less significant than the disadvantage of a dispropor-
to breathing systems and when IPPV is imposed.
tionately increasing anaesthetic risk. lt is nearly al-
ways safer to perform surgery on young, smallanimals
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
rather than wait until the subject is larger and in ad-
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is rare in dogs 
vanced cardiac failure.
but is not uncommon in young to middle-aged male
Accidental hypothermia is aimost inevitable dur-
cats. It may occur secondary to hyperthyroidism. In
ing surgical correction of cardiac anomalies:
some cases of HCM, a muscular subaortic stenosis
forms during systole, which momentarily restricts left 
 Smali subjects have a high surface area:volume
ventricular outflow and promotes mitral regurgitation.
ratio
The effects of obstruction are greater when heart rate
The subjects are physiologically immature
and myocardial contractility are increased and when
 Operations are long
teft ventricular diastolic volume and ventricular
A large visceral surface is exposed
215
Chapter 19 Cardiovascular disease
Animals are 'deeply' anaesthetized
The lungs are ventilated with cold medical gases
 Irrigation fluids, which are extensively used, may
CrVC
Aorta
 be inadequately warmed.
Advanced techniques often required during cardio-
A
vascular surgery, e.g. thoracotomy, cardiopulmonary
bypass and induced hypothermia, complicate anaes-
thesia, influence drug disposition and, when performed
RA
Congenital conditions can be classified in the same 
way as acquired disorders (see Figure 19.9) but fur-
 ther description is frequently necessary. Many anoma-
lies are characterized by abnormal left-to-right or
right-to-left conduits, through which blood shunts be-
tween the left (systemic) and right (pulmonary) circula-
tion. Shunts are frequently of major clinical significance.
Left-to-right shunts are found in the more common
form of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). atrial septal
CVC
defects (ASDs) and ventricular septal defects (VSDs)
RV
and are associated with massive increases in pulmo-
[a]
nary blood flow and volume overload of either the left
(PDA), right (ASD) or both (VSD) ventricles.
 Right-to-left shunts are characterized by oxygen-
resistant cyanosis and polycythaemia and are more
rvt
orta
dangerous. They are present in PDAs complicated
by persistent pulmonary hypertension (see below). In
all types, puimonary flow is reduced so response to
 inhaled anaesthetics is sluggish while thoracic limb--
brain circulation time is more rapid.
Patent ductus arteriosus
RA
In the most common type of PDA, a proportion of left 
ventricular output enters the pulmonary artery and
recirculates through the lung, i.e. there is a leff-to-right 
 shunt (Figure 19.13a). The reduced ejection fraction
entering the descending aorta leads to hypotension in 
V
the absence of compensation. Diastolic blood pressure
is typically low as the low resistance pulmonary ves-
sels provide 'run-off'. in time, the increased leff ven-
CVC
tricular volume load and right ventricular pressure load 
RV
(b)
 surgical ligation of the ductus arteriosus.
Postparturient pulmonary vascular resistance
19ta Ial Left-to-right patent ductus arteriosus.
remains high in some cases, and the resulting pulmo-
(b] Right-to-left patent ductus arteriosus.
CrVC = Cranial vena cava; CvC = Caudal vena cava;
nary hypertension causes ductal blood to flow in a
LA = Left atrium; LV = Left ventricle; PA = Puimonary
right-to-left direction (Figure 19.13b). This is charac-
artery: PV = Pulmonary vein; RA = Right atrium:
terized by cyanotic mucous membranes in the rear half
RV =' Right ventricle.
of the body, e.g. the penis, and normal mucous mem-
branes in cranial structures. This occurs because
to minimize, and yet maintain, a left-to-right pressure
 oxygenated blood still flows down the brachiocephalic
 gradient. This is achieved by anaesthetics which:
irunk and left subclavian artery which arise from the
aorta proximal to the ductus. Surgery is inadvisable in
Maintain cardiac output 
these cases because the ductus arteriosus functions
Avoid profound decreases in systemic vascular
 as a relief valve; ligation precipitates right heart failure.
resistance
Beyond the challenges of thoracotomy, anaesthe-
 Avoid marked increases in pulmonary vascular
sia and surgery in young, asymptomatic dogs carry
resistance.
few problems. Risk increases if surgery is delayed
and decompensation occurs; left atrial dilation may
 Cardiac output is maintained with fluids and
 precede fibrillation. When signs of heart failure are
inotropes given to maintain, or produce slight in-
present, the animal should be stabilized and treatment 
creases in, heart rate. A modest reduction in systemic
vascular resistance is desirable. as this increases
pulmonary congestion and pulmonary oedema is mini-
 systemic blood flow, reduces right ventricular afterload
mal. During surgery, the haemodynamic objectives are
 and may reduce leff-to-right blood flow before ligation.
216
Chapter 19  Cardiovascular disease
These effects are likely to be achieved with isoflurane
Signs of right ventricular failure must be treated
or sevoflurane. Excessive lung inflation pressures are
before an operation because the ventricle will be sen-
undesirable; increasing pulmonary over systemic vas-
sitive to the depressant effects of anaesthetics and
cular resistance could cause right-to-left shunting
IPPV. The haemodynamic goals of anaesthesia are to:
during parts of the cardiac cycle and lower SpO2. 1n-
creased pulmonary blood flow means the level of un-
Maintain myocardial contractility
consciousness changes sluggishly after vaporizer
 Maintain or modestly reduce heart rate
settings are changed.
Maintain right ventricular preload
 Ductal ligation is often associated with a transient
Avoid excessive lung inflation pressures.
reflex bradycardia (Bramham's sign) arising in response
to raised diastolic pressure. lf this occurs, the ligature
Any volatile anaesthetic is suitable for this opera-
should be slackened and re-tightened more slowly.
tion; isofiurane and sevoflurane maintain contractility
There is no justification for atropine in this situation.
but halothane reduces heart rate and so improves right
Ligation of a right-to-left shunting PDA is rarely
ventricular filling. Dobutamine may be used to increase
performed, although occasionally it may be necessary
right ventricular contractility providing it does not in-
to anaesthetize affected animais for incidental opera-
crease heart rate. Adequate preload should be main-
tions. These patients are at considerable risk from an-
tained by infusing fluids.
aesthesia because they are usually hypoxic (PO, <60
mmHg (<7.9 kPa)) and polycythaemic. Attempts
Aortic stenosis
should be made to reverse the shunt, by the judicious
Stenotic aortic valves (Figure 19.15) restrict left ven-
use of alpha-1 agonists such as phenylephrine, which
tricular output and initiate hypertrophy and greater
increase systemic vascular resistance, and alpha-2
o  s   m n
antagonists, such as tolazoline, which lower pulmo-
gen balance. This is particularly hazardous because
nary vascular resistance.
reduced diastolic arterial pressure, which is character-
istic of aortic stenosis, leads to a critical reduction in
Pulmonic stenosis
In limiting right ventricuiar outflow, stenotic pulmonary
arteries arise from the aorta downstream from the sten-
valves raise right ventricular systolic pressures, which
otic valves). The condition can be treated by valvotomy
may render the tricuspid valve incompetent and cause
(which necessitates cardiopulmonary bypass) or bal-
right atrial enlargement (Figure 19.14). In time, the
loon valvuloplasty (which does not). Animals with this
right ventricle hypertrophies and then fails. The con-
 condition may require incidental operations.
dition is corrected by surgery or balloon valvuloplasty.
The latter involves passing a balloon-tipped catheter
via the jugular vein, the right atrium and the right ven-
tricle up the pulmonary outflow tract and into the ste-
CrVC
Aorta
nosis. The balloon is then inflated with the intent of
physically dilating the stenosis.
CrVC
ore
RA
RA
CVC
RV
e Aortic stenosis. CrvC = Cranial vena cava:
CvC = Caudal vena cava; LA = Lefi atrium:
LV = Left ventricle; PA = Pulmonary artery; PV = Pulmonary
CVC
vein; RA = Right atrium: RV = Right veniricie.
RV
Advanced cases with congestive failure respond 
poorly to diuretics, low-salt diets and rest, although
 Pulmonic stenosis. CrVC = Cranial vena cava
beta adrenergic antagonists may be beneficial in long-
CVC = Caudai vena cava; LA = Left atrium;
LV = Left ventricle: PA = Pulmonary artery;
term management of increased intraventricular pres-
PV = Pulmonary vein:; RA = Right atrium; RV = Right
ventricle.
anaesthesia are to:
217
Chapter 19 Cardiovascular disease
 Avoid hypotension by maintaining systemic
 vascular resistance, not increasing cardiac
Dause
output
Inadequately treated/
. See Figures 19.2, 19.5 and 19.6
 Maintain heart rate within 20% of preoperative
recurring preoperative
values
causes
Avoid factors reducing myocardial oxygen
Anaesthetics
Estabish causative agent; consider
balance.
 positive chronotropes 
Arrhythmias are common in this condition and
Anaesthetic overdose
Reduce delivered concentration of
cause severe reductions in cardiac output. Bradycar-
 inhaled drug and ventiate lungs
 dia lowers cardiac output because the stroke volume
Hypothermia 
 End surgery and re-warm; consider
is fixed, while tachycardia decreases the time for car-
 gastric or colonic lavage
diac filing. In these cases, slight reductions in blood 
Hypertension
 Consider vasodilators and/or beta-1
pressure cause disproportionately large reductions in
 antagonists
coronary arterial filling pressure and delivery of oxy-
 genated blood to the myocardium. Maintaining sinus
Vagal stimulation
Check surgery
rhythm is important as the left ventricle depends on
Hyperkalaemia
Hyperventiate, with oxygen, give
synchronized atrial contractions to assure left ventricu-
 bicarbonate (1 mmol/kg over 10 minutes)
lar filling (junctional or escape rhythms must be con-
trolled as they arise). Intravascular fluid volume must
 Severe acidosis
Hyperventilate Hungs with oxygen and
 give bicarbonate [as above)
be maintained. Providing heart rate and rhythm are
 Severe hypoglycaemia
50% dextrose
and effective circulating blood volume is maintained,
Severe hypoxia
Ventiate lungs with 100% oxygen
the most likely cause of intraoperative hypotension is
Terminal myocardial'*
Initiate cerebral-cardiopulmonary
drug-induced vasodilation. This must be remedied 
promptly with alpha-1 agonists.
hypoxia
resuscitation (CCPR)
2916
 Causes of intraoperative bradyarrhythmias and
Ventricular septal defect
Suggested treatment. Note that 'lightening'
The consequences of a ventricular septal defect
(VSD) depend on its size and the shunt direction.
started, are the simplest treatments for drug-induced 
The latter depends on the right-to-left ventricuiar
bradycardia. Antimuscarinic drugs safely reverse
 pressure differential which in turn depends on pul-
opioid-induced bradycardia but their use with alpha-2
 monary and systemic vascular resistance, respec-
agonists is controversial. when bradycardia.
tively. Normally, blood flows left to right, because
bradyarrhythmias or atrioventricular conduction blocks
can be linked with specific surgical manipulations,
left ventricular pressures exceed those in the right.
j0 fenal aui pue papuadsns eq isnu Aiabins
However, chronic hypoxia causes pulmonary hyper-
anaesthesia assessed. 'Light animais should have 
tension, which may increase pulmonary vascular
anaesthesia and surgery continued more gently. if the
resistance to the point where shunt flow ceases or
 problem persists then atropine, glycopyrronium or
changes direction.
isoprenaline should be given.
Anaesthesia for surgical correction requires cardio-
tomy and cardiopulmonary bypass. However, dogs
Tachyarrhythmias
with vSD may require anaesthesia for other opera-
Severe tachycardia reduces cardiac output and threaf-
tions. Cardiac failure must be treated if present. The
ens myocardial oxygen balance; both are particularly
haemodynamic goal of anaesthesia is to maintain a
undesirable in animals with myocardial disease. Un-
left-to-right shunt. This occurs if anaesthetics main-
expectedly high heart rates may disclose an unde-
tain systemic vascular resistance above pulmonary
tected hypovolaemia or another physiological
vascular resistance.
derangement (Figure 19.17). The rate of change 0f
Blood pressure should be maintained with alpha-1
agonists, while high lung inffation pressures should
rate increases suggest inadequate anaesthesia or sur-
be avoided.
gical stimulation, while insidious changes indicate
 progressively deteriorating blood gas values or hypo-
volaemia. The following responses are appropriate
Management of intraoperative
whenever tachycardia or tachyarrhythmias arise:
 arrhythmias
The level of unconsciousness is evaluated, and 
In general, intraoperative arrhythmias are more likely
 any possible link between surgery and rhythm
and of greater consequence in animals with cardio-
disturbance examined. if one exists, anaesthesia
vascular disease. For simplicity, they have been
is deepened and surgery continued with gentler 
divided here into brady- and tachyarrhythmias.
 manipulation. If this is unsuccessful, short-acting
vagomimetic opioids such as alfentanil or
Bradyarrhythmias
morphine should be given
Any factor listed in Figure 19.16 may slow heart rate
Several lung inflations with oxygen-rich gas are
during anaesthesia and cause significant hypotension
imposed. These often suppress arrhythmias
and coronary hypoperftision.
resulting from hypercapnia and/or hypoxaemia
218
Chapter 19 Cardiovascular disease
ventricular fibrillation and cardiac arrest. Tachy-
"Cause"
Response
arrhythmias must be treated aggressively,initially
Inadequate
using the three responses described above. Lidocaine
lncrease inspired concentration of volatile
anaesthesia or
agent, low dose of intravenous
analgesia
anaesthetic, alfentanil or fentanyl (see
tive. However, its beneficial effects are often short-
Figure 19.5]
lived and, aithough repeated injections can be given,
IPPV
it is preferable to give lidocaine (mixed with normal
Hypercapnia
saline) as a constant rate infusion (see Figure f9.4).
Hypoxaemia
Provide 100% oxygen and IPPV
If lidocaine is ineffective, intravenous procainamide
Hypotension, shock,
may be used. Alternatively, magnesium sulphate
Rapid intravenous fluids
septicaemia
Drugs
Discontinue beta-1 agonists, it given (see
tachycardia. cardioversion with an externally synchro-
Figure 19.5)
nized DC non-phasic defibrillator in conjunction with
Hyperthermia
Consider.abdominal lavage with ice-cold
lidocaine should be attempted. lf lethal rhythms
fuids
arise, then cerebral-cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Hypokalaemia
Give KCI (0.05 mmol/kg over 1 minute,
(CCPR) must be initiated.
repeat if necessary)
Note that intraoperative ventricular premature com-
plexes arising in digitalized animals may indicate a
"lIdiopathic tachycardia
See Figure 19.5, non-specific negative
relative digoxin overdose caused by hypokaiaemia.
chronotropes
The commonest cause of this is respiratory alkalosis,
Hyperthyroidism
See Figure 19.5, non-specific negative
i.e.excessive mechanicai ventilation. In minor cases,
chronotropes
areduction in alveolar ventilation may effect a cure,
otherwise pofassium chloride (up to 0.05 mmol/kg)
Causes of intraoperative tachycardia and
shouid be given intravenously over 1 minute. A re-
suggesled treatment
peated dose may be necessary.
Fluid infusion rate is increased. This often slows
heart rates elevated by hypovolaemia or
References and further reading
hypotension. although the response may be
Atlee JE (199o) Perioperative Cardiac Dysrhythmias: Mechanisms,
slow and modest,
Recognition,Management. Year Book Medical Publishers,Chicago
Muir WW.Hubbell JAE and Flaherty S (1988) Increasing halothane
Intraoperative ventricular arrhythmias
concentration abolishes anesthesia-associated arrhythmias in cats
and dogs.Journal of the Anerican VeterinaryMedical Association
Untreated tachyarrhythmias may degenerate into
192, 1730-1735
more dangerous rhythms: over time, multifocal
Muir Ww. Wiese AJ and March PA (2003) Efects of morphine, lidocaine,
ketamine, and morphine-lidocaine-ketamine drug combinations on
ventricular premature complexes can convert to a
minimum alveolar concentration in dogs anesthetized with
ventricular tachycardia, which in turn can lead to
isofurane. American Journal of Veterinary Research 64, 1155-1160
sease
R. Eddie Clutton
Introduction
derangements cause arrhythmias, whilst chronic
hypoxia leads to polycythaemia
 Respiratory disease is often encountered in compan-
-ul ebins Aeuow gnd-uou iof pajuasaid sjewjue uo!
involve drugs affecting anaesthesia
fectious respiratory diseases are common and the
 Pulmonary disease alters the uptake of 
lungs of older animals living in urban environments
inhalation anaesthetics 
may suffer from the effects of air pollution. Pulmonary
function deteriorates with age, and the lungs are a
alveolar space are life-threatening and demand
common target for metastatic disease. Conditions
immediate treatment.
characterized by chronic vomiting are associated with
 aspiration pneumonia.
The risk from anaesthesia in animals with pulmo-
The principal function of the pulmonary system is
nary disease is reduced if:
gas exchange, i.e. to replenish venous blood with oxy-
 gen and to remove carbon dioxide. This depends on 
 An accurate diagnosis is established
The underlying pathophysiological processes
ventilation: the bulk flow of fresh gas into the alveolil. in
turn, ventilation depends on an unobstructed airway 
are understood
Pulmonary function is improved preoperatively
and an effective respiratory muscle effort, and is con-
The anaesthetic offsets, rather than aggravates,
trolled by medullary respiratory centres. The latter in-
 the efects of underlying pathophysiological
crease ventilation in response to high plasma carbon
dioxide levels (>40 mmHg (>5.3 kPa)) and/or low
processes
oxygen tensions.Eficient gas exchange aso depends
 Perioperative physiological monitoring is adequate.
on processes within the lung that match alveolar venti-
lation (V) with alveolar perfusion (Q). On this basis,
Difficult orotracheal intubation
pulmonary disease can be defined broadly as any
process threatening gas exchange, i.e. any condition:
Conditions preventing mouth opening and orotracheal
Obstructing the airway
intubation are seldom associated with other respira-
Impairing respiratory muscle effort
tory disease, so affected animals breathe normally
Depressing the neural control of breathing
when conscious. However, it may be impossible to
Impairing ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) ratios.
secure the airway affer induction, so it is then at risk
from soft tissue obstruction and/or the aspiration of
In this chapter, respiratory disease has been cat-
egorized as:
stomach contents. Conditions complicating oro-
tracheal intubation include:
 Difficult orotracheal intubation
Upper airway obstruction
Eosinophilic myositis
Hypoventilation caused by abnormal chest wall
Movement-limiting temporomandibular joint
(TMJ) pathology
and neural function
Impaired oxygenation caused by V/Q
Jaw fractures
 discrepancies (chronic obstructive pulmonary
Painful or space-occupying orbital pathology.
disease, asthma/bronchoconstriction).
 o s  s
Pulmonary disease increases risk from anaesthe-
their circumvention by performing tracheotomy under
deep sedation and local anaesthesia. However, in
sia because:
many cases the condition's significance may not be
Anaesthetics suppress protective upper airway
recognized until the animal is unconscious and at-
reffexes, impair mucociliary function, depress 
tempted intubation proves dificult or impossible.
ventilation and derange processes ensuring
If tracheotomy under sedation is not possible, the
V/Q matching
animal must be rendered unconscious, the mouth for-
 Pulmonary disease affects other organ systems
cibly opened and the trachea intubated as rapidly as
in ways that increase risk, e.g. blood gas
possible. A means of transtracheal oxygenation and
220
Chapter 20 Respiratory disease
intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) (i.e.
Management of life-threatening upper
tracheotomy) must be available in case this is impos-
airway obstruction
sible. Steps must be taken to lower the risk of regur-
 Animals with near-complete upper airway obstruction
 gitation and aspiration (adequate fasting and
present in extremis, i.e. collapsed and cyanotic. These
avoidance of morphine and alpha-2 agonists) and of
patients must be preoxygenated (during the brisk
excessive salivation (alpha-2 agonists, high dose 
ketamine, etomidate). Before induction, oxygen by
mask may prove advantageous.
downstream from the obstruction, or as close to the
The ideal induction technique, i.e. that which would
thoracic inlet as possible. An emergency tracheotomy
provide analgesia yet preserve breathing. does not
is then performed with or without local anaesthetic
exist, but diazepam-ketamine combinations are pre-
bnp bunoe Aipidei ylm paonpoid uoepas io/pue
ferred over thiopental, propofol or alfaxalone. Once the 
combinations, e.g. intravenous acepromazine
animal is unconscious (and in sternal recumbency)
(6y/6n g-9'2) uuane pue (6y/w g0'0-9200)
 strong gauze straps are passed over the mandible and
Later, a more permanent tracheostomy is performed
maxilla and sufficient force exerted until the mouth can
under general anaesthesia.
be opened and the glottis identified. When painful TMJ
pathology is present, profound analgesia or deep
Management of less severe obstruction
 general anaesthesia is required to prevent reactions
With less critical cases, the problem is diagnosed and
to TMJ articulation. If the mouth cannot be opened, so
temporarily alleviated at presentation, with corrective
 direct laryngoscopy is impossible, a blind intubation 
surgery being performed either immediately or at a
technique must be attempted, as in the horse. Non-
later date. The clinical signs of upper airway obstruc-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be 
tion (stridor, stertor, dyspnoea, increased inspiratory
 given before the animal recovers from anaesthesia.
effort) are aggravated by hyperventilation, which is
：
when many show signs of severe discomfort.
brought about by physical exertion, anxiety, excite-
ment or hyperthermia. This occurs because of the
Bernouli effect: an increase in gas velocity, which
Upper airway obstruction
occurs when gases traverse a constriction, lowers the
pressure at that point and promotes collapse (Figure
Upper airway obstruction can range in severity from
20.2). Consequently, the initial treatment of upper air-
cases with mildly stertorious breathing to life-threat-
way obstruction aims to calm the animal by using
ening emergencies, necessitating immediate endo-
sedatives and respiratory depressant drugs if neces-
tracheal intubation or tracheotomy. It may resuit from
sary. Low dose acepromazine (0.025-0.05 mg/kg),.
the anatomical peculiarities of brachycephalic breeds
combined with a non-emetic opioid, e.g. methadone
or be acquired, for example:
or butorphanol, is suitable for this purpose. Body tem-
perature, if elevated, should be reduced in a stress-
Laryngeal hemiparalysis
free manner using cold wet towels and fans. Enriching
 Subepiglottic cysts
inspired gas with oxygen is beneficial if achieved in a
 Intermandibular masses
non-stressful way. Intravenous access, attempted
 Laryngospasm
 once the animal is calm, facilitates the administration
Pharyngeal and retropharyngeal:
of further sedatives if required. It also allows intra-
Neoplasia (Figure 20.1)
venous anaesthetics to be given for the purpose of
Abscessation
performing upper airway examination, emergency
Oedema
tracheotomy {in cases where the aforementioned
Haemorrhage
measures fail to relieve dyspnoea) and the surgical
Air (pneumomediastinum)
correction of the precipitating condition.
 Collapsing trachea
latrogenic:
一
 Laryngeal surgery
Tracheal surgery.
Retropharyngeai
mass causing
obstruction of the 
airway.
The Bernoulli effeci. Gas flowing through a
 conduit accelerates across a constriction, e.g.
a colfapsing trachea, which creates a fal in pressure in 
the conduit ard promotes its collapse.
221
Chapter 20  Respiratory disease
Once a suitable degree of either sedation or an-
wall moves. This helps the veterinary surgeon link
aesthesia and jaw relaxation are present, the orophar-
ynx and upper respiratory tract are examined under
direct vision, using a bright light source and a long-
which if injected intravenously at 0.5-1.1 mg/kg in
biaded laryngoscope. The retropharyngeal area and 
lightly anaesthetized animals (as indicated by jaw
trachea are paipated for unusual structures, which
relaxation in the presence of positive palpebral and
may compress the airway. The effects of obstructive
toe-pinch withdrawals) produces passive. paradoxi-
lesions are relieved by passing an adequately sized
cal arytenoid motion in dogs with laryngeal paralysis;
endotracheal tube beyond the obstruction site be-
i.e. the arytenoid cartilages are drawn inward by
 cause this allows oxygen to be delivered and the lungs
negative airway pressure on inhalation, and are forced
to be inflated (and protected) until a normal airway is
apart by exhaled air. Respiratory effort and depth
restored. However, tracheal intubation may not be
possible if space-occupying pharyngeal lesions ob-
paralysis because of complete glottic constriction dur-
struct the view of the rima glottidis and make blind 
ing inspiration.
intubation impossible. For these reasons, facilities for
During prolonged laryngeal examination, blood
emergency tracheotomy should always be available.
-Axo ue bujoanp Ag peuieiuleu aq ueo sleel uabrxo
In cases where the obstruction cannot be bypassed
gen stream from a narrow bore tube towards the rima
by endotracheal tubes, e.g. cases of distal cervical/
glottidis at rates of 1-5 Vminute. Once a diagnosis is
intrathoracic tracheal collapse, endotracheal intuba-
made, the animal may be allowed to recover although 
tion is still required as it allows the imposition of con-
most cases will proceed to surgery. In this case, an-
trolled hyperventilation: overcoming the animal's
 aesthesia is deepened using volatile agents delivered
 spontaneous breathing efforts with IPPV overcomes
by mask, or by intravenous anaesthetic, until condi-
all forces promoting airway collapse.
tions for endotracheal intubation are present.
Maintaining anaesthesia for laryngeal tie-back
Laryngeal paralysis
surgery presents no extraordinary challenges provid-
Disturbed motor innervation of laryngeal muscles re-
ing that the endotracheal tube tip lies distal to the glot-
sults in varying degrees of laryngeal paralysis. Idio.
tis. Airway discontinuity is rarely a problem as surgery
pathic acquired laryngeal paralysis occurs most
does not broach the airway. Postoperative complica-
commonly in older, large-breed dogs, while a heredi-
tions are minimized by keeping the animal calm (se-
tary form is less frequently encountered in puppies.
buybnoo pue uoezieoos buluaaaid pue (paiep
In its mildest form, affected dogs present with exer-
-xa jeabuel ee uanib (ouydoing jo) auydion
cise intolerance, a chronic honking cough, inspiratory
stridor and a change in the bark. Diagnosis is made
Postoperative swelling may be reduced by the
under anaesthesia by visual examination of the vocal
presurgical administration of NSAIDs.
foids and treatment involves a laryngeal tie-back op-
eration. Both procedures are commonly performed
Brachycephalic obstructive airway
during the same anaesthetic although surgery may
syndrome
sometimes be postponed to allow inflammation and
 In brachycephalic breeds, upper airway gas flow is
oedema to subside.
restricted by the combination of stenotic nares, soft 
Anaesthesia for the diagnosis of laryngeal para-
palate disfodgement and the entrainment of superflu-
lysis requires attention because anaesthetics affect
ous pharyngeal tissue into the hypoplastic tracheal
laryngeal activity and can complicate diagnosis. Pre-
airway. The prolonged imposition of abnormally high
anaesthetic medication should produce a calm and
negative inspiratory pressures eventually causes
anxiety-free animal, but high opioid doses are best
laryngeal saccule eversion, nasopharyngeal inflam-
avoided because breathing must continue through-
mation and arytenoid cartilage collapse.
out induction. After pre-anaesthetic medication with
The management of severely dyspnoeic, brachy-
neuroleptanalgesic combinations, anaesthesia is
 cephalic dogs is similar to that for cases with laryngeal
best induced using sevoffurane delivered by mask
paralysis, with one exception. while sedative-anxiolytic
until adequate jaw relaxation allows direct laryngo-
drugs improve ventilation by slowing inspiratory flows,
eabuniel pue panouai uaui s! ysew aul Adoos 
 they also relax naso- and oropharyngeai smooth mus-
function assessed until jaw tone and/or head move-
cle, which might aggravate obstruction. For this rea-
ment precludes further investigation, when the mask
son, any animal with signs of brachycephalic obstruc-
is re-applied. The cycle of deepening anaesthesia
tive airway syndrome (BOAS) must remain under
-inp eisauisaeue buluanyb pue uoeodde ysem Aa
continuous surveilance from the time sedatives are
ing laryngeal examination can be repeated until a
given until either anaesthesia is induced and the tra-
diagnosis is established. when no pre-anaesthetic
chea intubated (or a tracheotomy performed) or all
medication is given, minimum effective doses of
signs of sedation have waned. ln conjunction with the
thiopental have been recommended for laryngeal
brachycephalic state, BOAS increases anaesthetic
examination because it has the least effect on ary-
risk in dogs facing corrective or incidental (non-
tenoid function.
airway) surgery:
?
Diagnosis involves examining the vocal folds to
ensure they abduct symmetrically and adequately
 Sedative pre-anaesthetic medication may
-ue lasosqo ue Ag paeioej s! pue 'uoendsun uo
exacerbate dyspnoea (see above). Very low
nouncing inspiration and expiration when the chest
dose acepromazine (12.5 μg/kg) combined with
222
Chapter 20 Respiratory disease
butorphanol (before minor superficial surgery) or
Tracheal surgery
stronger anaigesics, e.g. pethidine (meperidine),
in all other cases, is satisfactory
Anaesthetic chailenges during tracheal surgery are:
At induction, the loss of protective airway
A
reflexes may result in total airway obstruction.
postoperative airway obstruction. The former can lead
Therefore, preparation for rapid endotracheal
to breathing system disconnection, endotracheal tube
intubation (or tracheotomy) must be complete.
obstruction and cuff damage or deflation.
The ideal induction agent does not exist.
Tracheal surgery per se presents no problems,
Thiopental produces a rapid loss of
 providing the endotracheal tube tip and cuff lie distal
consciousness and allows brisk intubation, but in
to the point of surgery, as this wil allow IPPV to be
recovery contributes to residual sedation and
imposed whilst preventing environmental contamina-
tion with anaesthetic. Postoperative airway obstruc-
reflexes necessitate tracheal extubation (which
tion may result from haemorrhage, postoperative
is most likely after short procedures). Propofol
 given over 45-60 seconds (in an attempt to
iatrogenic recurrent laryngeal nerve trauma. Pre-
avoid hypotension and apnoea) does not allow
emptive glucocorticoids or NSAIDs will reduce post-
rapid airway control, although it provides a rapid
 operative swelling, while tracheobronchial suction
and complete recovery, which means that
applied before endotracheal extubation should clear
protective airway reflexes are strong when
the airway and reduce the risk of distal airway col-
returning pharyngeal activity prompts
lapse and/or postoperative coughing.
extubation, The use of anti-tussive drugs,
e.g. butorphanol, may prolong tolerance of
endotracheal tubes. This is desirable because
Chest wall/neural and pulmonary
it prolongs the time available for effective
conditions
 oxygenation, volatile anaesthetic elimination
and injected drug clearance
Conditions affecting the lower airway, chest wall and
Redundant facial skin complicates head
the control of breathing are seldom emergencies and
 presentation for endotracheal intubation.
 S0 preoperative preparation is possible. Anaesthesia
 Bandage strips passed behind the canine teeth
 in animals with pulmonary disease is straightforward,
(under the maxilla and over the mandible), in a
-lepun s! AbojoisAydouied buAuapun aul bupinoid
way that everts labial skin from the oral cavity,
stood and reversed.
circumvent these problems 
 Abnormal canine teeth and jaw development
Preoperative examination
render traditional mouth gags insecure. This is
A thorough review of the medical history and
less important when tapes are used, as above
physical examination may establish a diagnosis,
Redundant pharyngeal soft tissue may obscure
although more complex procedures, such as radio-
the rima glottidis and hamper intubation. The
graphy, electrocardiography (ECG), arterial blood 
use of tapes, an experienced assistant and a
gas analysis, uftrasonography, primitive lung func-
laryngoscope greatly facilitates intubation. An
tion tests and bronchoscopy. may be required. lt
assistant elevates the head at about 45° by
should be appreciated that many investigations
liting the two ends of the maxillary strip, while
the anaesthetist opens the mouth by pulling
severe dyspnoea.
downwards on both mandibular strips
The giottis and trachea are commonly much
Haematology
smaller than anticipated. Therefore, a range of
tube sizes (from 5.0 mm) should be made
An elevated haematocrit provides supporting evidence
available
for significant cardiopulmonary disease because
The risk of airway obstruction persists during
chronic hypoxia causes secondary polycythaemia.
recovery, after tracheal extubation. After
It should be appreciated that a polycythaemic ani-
 mal may appear cyanotic even when oxygen satura-
corrective airway surgery, blood clots.
tion is normal.
haemorrhage and swelling may counter the
benefits of a surgically corrected airway. In
Aiabins Aemuje bulobjapun jou sbop '1sehuoo
Arterial blood gas analysis
are likely to obstruct if sedation persists after 
Arterial blood gas analysis provides useful quantita-
endotracheal extubation. For this reason,
tive information on the lungs' ability to oxygenate
insoluble inhalant anaesthetics, e.g. nitrous
blood, eliminate carbon dioxide and influence acid-
oxide with either sevoflurane or isoflurane,
base status. Venous samples are less useful as they
should be used in preference to halothane.
do not reflect pulmonary function.
 Postoperative pain causes panting and will
promote obstruction. Pre-emptive NSAIDs
Thoracocentesis
and butorphanol may provide adequate
Aspiration through an 18-21 gauge needle or a
analgesia for minor procedures but the use
14-16 gauge intravenous cannula inserted through
of local anaesthetics should be considered
the seventh or eighth intercostal space can relieve
after major surgery.
dyspnoea and assist diagnosis when accumulated air
223
Chapter 20 Respiratory disease
or liquid prevent adequate lung expansion. Needles
Anaesthesia of animals with chest wall
 or cannulae are normally inserted at the lateral point
and neural disorders
 of the thorax, although more dorsal (air) or ventral
Figure 20.3 lists conditions in which bulk gas flow
(liquid) sites are used if the nature of the fluid is known
into the aiveoli is inadequate for maintaining normal 
(see Chapter 21 for further details).
carbon dioxide levels (oxygenation may not be
impaired). Animals with these conditions develop
Radiography
severe hypercapnia, respiratory acidosis and pos-
Radiographs are valuable for examining intra-
sibly hypoxaemia when sedated or anaesthetized
thoracic lesions. For animals with respiratory em-
unless the lungs are periodically inflated with at
least 20% oxygen.
barrassment, inappropriate positioning in the lateral
and/or dorsal position may cause distress and
Before surgery. an attempt should be made to
 struggling, and is potentially hazardous. Dyspnoea
address the cause (Figure 20.3), as in many cases
related to body position (orthopnoea) is avoided
this will limit the adverse haemodynamic effects of
IPPV. Pre-anaesthetic medication must not impair
by using the lateral decubitus and dorsoventral
projections.
spontaneous breathing and the animal should not be
left unattended until anaesthesia is induced. During
this interval, inspired gas should be enriched with
Pulse oximetry
 Puise oximetry is well tolerated and may be applied
short-acting intravenous agent providing the trachea
in the conscious animal breathing air. It should be
is intubated without unnecessary delay. When restric-
 appreciated that low oxygen saturation of haemoglobin
tive chest wall changes and/or impaired neural con-
(S,O2 values <90%) may be due to factors other than
trol are the only contributors to respiratory depression,
puimonary disease.
the risk of anaesthesia effectively disappears once
the trachea is intubated and periodic lung inflation
Bronchoscopy
begun. However, some conditions also involve pur-
The introduction of flexible bronchoscopes that can
be passed through gas-tight grommets of suitable
in which case additional measures are required.
endotracheal swivel connectors has greatly facili-
When painful chest wali lesions (e.g. pleurisy) pre-
tated bronchoscopy, although, in very small animals.
vent adequate ventilation, the administration of anal-
effective ventilation ceases if the endoscope obstructs
 gesics, even those with respiratory depressant effects,
the airway.
improves breathing.
Aetiology
Neural ftactors
Overdose with depressant drugs
Antagonism
Intracranial tumours
Methods reducing intracranial pressure
Severe hypothermia or hyperthermia
Restore normal temperature 
Infection: meningitis or encephalitis
Antibiotics
 Head trauma
 Methods reducing intracranial pressure 
Status epilepticus
Anticonvulsant therapy
Pleural resistance
 Pleuropericardial herniation 
No immediate treatment; head-up position
Diaphragmatic herniation
No immediate treatment; head-up position
Pleuritis (pain)
 Anaigesics
Hydro-, pyo-. pneumo,chylothorax
Thoracocentesis; drain
Haemothorax
Thoracocentesis; drain, autotransfuse
Abdominal resistance
Pancreatis (pain)
 Analgesics
Tympany
 Gastric decompression
.
Haemoperitoneum
Abdominal paracentesis; autotransfusion
Pregnancy
Impose head-up position 
Pyometra
 impose head-up position
Ascites
Abdominal paracentesis; slow drainage
 Causes and preoperative treatment of chest wali/neural conditions. Note that hypoventlation caused by pain
may disappear once consciousness is lost. There is risk of vascuiogenic shock if iarge volumes of fluid are
during aspiration and preparations macie for the rapid administration of crystalloid solution, piasma substitute solution or
whole blood. (continues)
224
Chapter 20 Respiratory disease
"Aetiology
Location,
Thoracic wall resistance
Obesity
 Weight reduction programme if possible
Restrictive bandaging
Remove if possible 
Flail chest
Apply bandages: anaigesics
Injury (pain)
 Analgesics
Sketetal abnormalities, e.g kyphosis, ordosis, pectus excavaium
No treatment
Myasthenia gravis
Physostigmine, corticosteroids
Lower airway obstruction
 Collapsing trachea
 Sedation, endotracheal intubation 
Foreign body
Bronchoscopy
Neoplasia
None
 Oedema
See Chapter 19
Cardiomegaly
Diuretics, see Chapter 19
 Pulmonary resistance
Pulmonary oedema
See Chapter 19
 Extensive fiborosis 
No treatment
 Pulmonary hypertension 
Oxygen
(coninued) Causes and preoperative treatment of chest wall/neural conditions. Note that hypoventilation.
should be monitored curing aspiration and preparations made for the rapid administration of crystalloid solution, plasma
substitute solution or whole blood.
Pulmonary conditions
Pulmonary contusion
Embolism
In some conditions, blood oxygenation improves by
Chronic bronchitis
 simply enriching inspired gas with oxygen. In others,
Chronic emphysema
endotracheal intubation and periodic lung inflation with
Heart-lung anomalies
oxygen (rather than air) are necessary. Specific thera-
 Pulmonary oedema.
pies are required when chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) or bronchospasm are present.
 Preoperative preparation with drugs that produce
Inadequate oxygenation
a *wide, dry and clean' airway (Figure 20.4) aims
to relieve reversible pathology and optimize pul-
Many conditions altering V/Q ratios and/or retarding
 gas difusion across the alveoiar-capillary membrane
monary function. Attempts to improve ventricular
function may be appropriate in conditions charac-
 are associated with a diminished ability to oxygenate
blood. These include:
terized by chronic pulmonary hypertension (see
Chapter 19). When disease is severe, the option of
Neoplasia
using local anaesthetic techniques and sedation
Pneumonia
should be considered.
Side effects.
Dose
Antibiotics.
Bacterial intection of the
For Gram-negative, a fluoroquinoione is generally used (e.g. enrofioxacin
 Potentiaf for adverse
respiralcry tree
5 mgikg crally q24h)
 interactions wih
lncreased airway secretions
For Gram-posive, amoxicilin-cavulanate (11-22 mgkg orally q12h), or ampicilin
anaesthetics
(10-20 mgkg orally q12n) plus β-lactam to extend spectrum for anaerobes
Doxycycline (10 mgikg orally q24h) or a iluoroquinolone for suspected
Borietella pneumonia
inhabalionof gentamicininnebulied salinemaybeusefu forGram-negaive
pneumonia (inciuding Borderella)
Conduct Gram stain to guide initial therapy; final antibiotic chcice based cn 
culure and sensitivityresults: many Gram-regative pathogens have
unpredictable sensilivies
Drugs used for preoperative preparation of animals with pulmonary diseases. (continues)
225
Chapter 20  Respiratory disease
Drugs
Indication
'Side-effects
Diuretics
Puimonary oedema and viral  See Chapter 19
ind ani66e n
pneumicnias (these have 
conditions by increasing.
 obstructive and restrictive
the viscosity of airway.
 compcrents and enhance
secretions
.
V/Q discrepancies)
Conditons with increased
lung water
Bronchodilators
May produce intrapuimonary 'steal when gas flow is restricted by external airway compression. Aiway diaticn in healthy lung cdiverts inspired 
gas fromt affected region whose V/Q raliois then further iowered
Bronchoconstriction
Antimuscarinics
 Atropine 40 μgikg i.v.
Airway secretions made.
more viscid
Beta-2 agonists
Bronchoconstriction
Terbutaline:
一
Dog 1.25-5 mg/dog orally q8-12h
Cal 0.31.25mgca raly 12
Phosphodiesterase  Bronchoconstriction
Aminophyltine:
inhibitors
Dogs 10 mgikg i.v. q6-8h 
Cais 6.6 mgikg orallyq12hor 2-5 mg/kg slow i.
 Etamiphylline:
Cats and dogs <10 kg 70-140 mg i.m., s.0. or t100 mg orally q8h
Dogs 10-30 kg 140-420 mg .m., s.c. or 100-300 mg oraly q8h
49b A120 6 00-008 10 '3's "w't 6u 002-02s Dy 08< s600
Theophyine:
Cats 10-20 mg/kg oraly q12-24h, or 2-5 mgikg siow i.v.in emergencies
4-21b Ae1o 6y;bu 0z 1o '48-gb x1 6ybu 01 sb00
Glucocorticoids
To suppresstissue reaction 
Methylprednisolone:
Hypothalamic-pituitary
 assacialed with pulmonary
Feline asthrma 1-2 mg/kg i.m. depot every 1-3 weeks 
 axis depression
 contusion, smoke ihalation
Dogs (for CNS trauma) 30 mg/kg i.v. within 8 hours, then 15 mg/kg i.v., 2 and
 injury and volutrauma
 6 hours later; then 2.5 mg/kg infused over 48 hours 
Prednisolone:
Feline asthma 1mg/kg oraly q12h for 10-14 days, tapering to 0.2 mg/kg q48h
Antihistamines
Bronchoconstriction
 Chlorphenamine:
 Sedation; potentiation of 
Small dogs 2-4 mg orally q8-12h
sedatives
Large dogs 4-8 mgkgorally q8-12h
 Cats 2 mg/cat orally q12h
Anti-tussives
 Non-productive and
Codeine:
Respiralory depression;
exhausting coughing
Dogs 0.5-2 mg/kg oraly g12h
 sedation, potentiatlion of
 Butorphanol:
sedatives
Dogs 0.05-0.1 mg/kg i.m., s.c. or 0.5-1 mg/kg orally q6-12h
Cats 0.05-0.5 mg/kg i.mm., s.c. q6-8h
Mlucolytis
To facilitate clearance of
 Bromkexine:
viscid secretions
Dcgs 315 mg/dog i.m. q12h, 2-2.5 mg/kg orally q12h
Cais 3 mgicati.m. q24h. 1 mg/kg orally q24h
Acetylcysteine: Nebulize 50 mg as a 2% solulion in salne over 30-60 minutes or
instil1-2mlof a 20%solution into he trachea
(continued) Drugs lised for preoperative preparation of anirnals with pulronary diseases.
Pulmonary contusions
Pre-anaesthetic medication with drugs with pro-
found respiratory depressant effects should not be
After blunt thoracic trauma, bleeding from ruptured
used. Acepromazine and low dose opioids are suit-
pulmonary capillaries into the alveolar interstitium and
able in dogs and cats, while low dose ketamine
spaces produces dyspnoea and areas of lung incap-
(2.5-5 mg/kg) with or without midazolam may be used
able of gas exchange. The ideal treatment is cage
in cats. Animals must be preoxygenated. Ventilation 
rest and oxygen enrichment of inspired gas. However.
should be controlled during anaesthesia: spontane-
animals with pulmonary contusions may occasionally
ous ventilation tends to cauise hypoventilation, which
require anaesthesia for life-saving procedures, e.g.
leads to further atelectasis and further shunting.
control of internal haemorrhage.A principal concern
 Clearly, 100% oxygen should be given throughout to 
with pulmonary contusions is the limitation they place
maximize diffusion gradients across abnormally large
 on blood volume restoration, which, if overzealous,
diffusion paths. Low inflation pressures must be used
leads to pulmonary oedema and a worsening of lung
in any condition in which pulmonary damage is ikely,
function. Contusions complicate the management of
e.g. trauma.
 pulmonary oedema with furosemide, because, while
226
Chapter 20 Respiratory disease
the diuretic does not resolve the effects of extra-
Single high doses of methyiprednisolone given
vasated erythrocytes, it does reduce the effective cir-
soon after injury improves the outcome in human sub-
culating blood volume and increase alveolar dead
jects (see Figure 20.4). Repeated doses are ill
space. A disappointing response to oxygen therapy
advised because burn victims are often critically
might prompt endotracheal intubation and IPPV; how-
immunosuppressed.
ever, structural weaknesses in the lung make trauma
Airway damage affer manifests 2-4 days as a
from inflation more likely. If IPPV is attempted the in-
 necrotizing tracheobronchitis, characterized by copi-
flation pressures must be the lowest consistent with
ous exudation and coughing. Management now con-
iung expansion and the animal must nof be allowed
sists of oxygen inhalation, saline nebulization,
to 'fight' the ventilator.
coupage (judicious thumping of the chest wall in an
attempt to loosen viscid airway secretion) and
Smoke inhalation
bronchodilators. Antibiotics are withheld until signs of
Animals with severe burn injuries may first require
bacterial infection are present and antibiotic sensitiv-
ity established. During this period, burn victims enter
agement and damage assessment. Later, repeated
 a profoundly hypermetabolic phase, in which oxygen 
wound debridement and dressing, and skin grafting
 and giucose consumption and carbon dioxide produc-
operations may be necessary. Smoke inhalation in-
tion are greatly elevated.
jury complicates anaesthesia in burn victims and, in
Profound sedation/anaesthesia are required for
conjunction with severe fluid loss, end-organ failure,
juanbal e sabueuo bulsseip pue juawapuqep punom
hypercatabolism, pain and overwhelming sepsis, con-
intervals during this period. On these occasions, the
tributes greatly to morbidity and mortality.
implications of the animal's pulmonary dysfunction,
lrrespective of burn severity, the initiai approach
hypermetabolism, immunosuppression and unstable
 to burns management is: airway protection, intra-
venous access, pain relief and fluid resuscitation.
ing analgesia is a priority and this supports the ag-
There may be significant problems with the acute pain
 gressive use of opioids, ketamine and lidocaine in
 of the injury (including an acute neuropathic element)
 conjunction with volatile agenis whenever an anaes-
so pain relief should be aggressive and prompt.
thetic is required (see Chapters 9 and 13).
Ketamine and morphine have much to commend their
use, while cold, sterile water exerts an immediate ef-
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
fect. NSAlDs should be withheld until renal function
Chronic obstructive puimonary disease refers to con-
 is established. When severe burns are present, the
 ditions in which chronic bronchitis and/or emphysema
infusion of drugs with pre-emptive analgesic efects,
 cause irreversible airflow limitations.
e.g. lidocaine, ketamine and morphine, should be in-
stituted (see Chapters 9 and 13).
The airway may become critically compromised
Chronic bronchitis
Chronic bronchitis describes conditions in which
soon after burning. Oedema resuiting from thermal
mucoid bronchial secretion production is increased.
injury of the respiratory epithelium and crystalloid re-
It is common in older dogs from urban environments.
suscitation can rapidly result in complete airway ob-
The presence of excessive mucus predisposes to
infection, distal airway closure (atelectasis) and
required when severe dyspnoea is linked with facial
bronchopneumonia. Atelectasis causes chronic hypo-
burns, soot staining of the nostrils and singed vibris-
 xaemia, which results in polycythaemia and cor
sae. Tracheotomy may seem a suitable option, but in
human burn patients it is associated with a high inci-
pulmonale. Hypoventilation resuits in chronic hyper-
capnia, which desensitizes the respiratory centres
dence of infections and tracheal stenosis. Conditions
for intubation are achieved after a period of
to the effects of carbon dioxide. Chronic bronchitis
is characterized by:
preoxygenation using a combined mask/intravenous
technique. The minimum effective dose of intravenous
agents with analgesic properties (e.g. alfentanil or
Hypersensitive respiratory reflexes (bucking,
sufentanil and ketamine) should be favoured. The
bronchospasm)
endotracheai tube should be sterile and have a high-
 Hypoxic respiratory drive. This is nearly
volume, low-pressure cuff. Sterile lidocaine gel should 
 abolished by anaesthetics and if animals
 breathe an oxygen mixture in recovery.
be applied before intubation.
 Direct thermal injury usually occurs above the
hypercapnia and even carbon dioxide
glottis and is uncommon below the trachea, although
narcosis may occur
a chemical tracheobronchitis resulting from inhala-
Increased sensitivity to respiratory depressants.
tion of the incomplete products of combustion may
develop in the distal airway. inhalation injury can be
Emphysema
complicated by aldehydes, carbon monoxide and
tn emphysema, abnormally large air spaces distal to
cyanide toxicity. The last two combine irreversibly
 the terminal bronchioles and destruction of alveolar
with haemoglobin and lower arterial oxygen content.
walls cause loss of lung elastic recoil, resulting in over-
Furthermore, their inhalation along with high carbon
expansion and early closure of airways during expi-
dioxide concentrations and low oxygen concen-
ration, which causes gas trapping. Ventilation is
trations produces narcosis. Animals should be
usually well maintained, albeit by an exaggerated ef-
given 1oo% oxygen to breathe from the outset.
fort. Expiration is prolonged in emphysema,
227
Chapter 20 Respiratory disease
Where appropriate, local anaesthetic techniques
volutrauma are real and high when emphysema
and sedation should be used in cases with advanced
is present
 COPD because the risk from general anaesthesia is 
A slow inspiratory cycle allows greater inspired
great. When general anaesthesia is unavoidable, ex-
 gas dispersal through open and partially
blocked airways
preoperative therapy is to make the pulmonary tree
A long expiratory pause is required to alow
clean (sterile), dry and wide by using antibiotics,
emphysematous lung units to empty
antispasmodics. mucolytics, steroids and broncho-
The minute volume of ventilation should be 
dilators. Drugs may be used to soften secretions, while
increased to accommodate the increased 
 coupage may prove beneficial. Other drugs used
alveolar deadspace volume.
preoperatively to improve pulmonary function are de-
scribed in Figure 20.4. Antibacterial treatments should
If nitrous oxide is used, an inspired concentration
of 50% should not be exceeded. Dry, cold medical
should not be given unless chronic coughing is un-
 gases make airway secretions more viscid, while many
productive and exhausting. Inspired gas enrichment
drugs and anaesthetics impair the function of the
with oxygen is desirable, although gases should be
mucociliary carpet. Therefore, gases should be hu-
warmed and humidified using heated humidifiers or
midified and warmed and rebreathing systems should
nebulizers. Cold, dry medical gases inspissate mu-
be used whenever possible. Heat and moisture ex-
Buisseiddns Ag aoueeao sl jedwi lauung pue sno
changers inserted between the endotracheal tube
the activity of the mucociliary carpet.
connector and the breathing system inexpensively fulfil
Low dose acepromazine is suitable for pre-
this function (see Chapter 5). Tracheobronchial suc-
anaesthetic medication but may not always provide
tion should be performed as often as possible. An
the degree of sedation required. Anti-sialagogues
 Oesophageal stethoscope is a useful guide to the pro-
should be avoided as they inspissate secretions,
gression of accumulated secretion.
while atropine inhibits the mucocilary carpet. Opioids 
During recovery, the endotracheal tube should be
should not be used for pre-anaesthetic medication
[eft in situ for as long as possible in order to continue
because (with other CNS depressant drugs) they
endobronchial suctioning. Postoperative pulse oxime-
 contribute to hypoventilation, and by suppressing
try should be performed because inspired gas oxy-
the cough reflex they promote mucus accumulation.
 gen enrichment, while necessary, may suppress 
High doses should only be used if profound anal-
ventilation. Doxapram infusions may be useful in this 
gesia is desired and an effective means of tracheo-
context, although dose information does not exist for
bronchial aspiration is available. Where possible,
companion animals. Supplemental oxygen should be
analgesia should be achieved with NsAlDs and
humidified, otherwise it will impair expectoration.
local anaesthetic techniques. After pre-anaesthetic
If there is any suspicion that respiratory disease is
medication (and throughout the perioperative period).
caused by infectious agents, breathing systems and
animals must be positioned so that purulent
 endotracheal tubes must be sterilized or discarded.
material from infected lung cannot drain into healthy
tissue.
Bronchoconstriction
Induction should be smooth and a suitable level of
In some conditions, including asthma in cats, broncho-
anaesthesia achieved after induction, so that tracheal
 constriction occurs because of local chemical media-
intubation does not stimulate hyperactive laryngeal
tors initiating bronchospasm. Bronchoconstriction can
and cough reflexes and bronchospasm. There is no
also result from proliferative changes in the airway
ideal intravenous agent or technique for this pur.
(chronic bronchitis), Preoperative bronchodilators may
 pose. Mask inductions (which involve the inspiration 
 of high oxygen concentrations) may seem ill advised
is narrowed by bronchoconstriction. Severe broncho-
in the presence of impaired respiratory function;
spasm may critically limit bulk gas flow, while even
 however, this should be weighed against the prob-
minor disturbances will affect the distribution of gas
lems resulting from injectable agents, i.e. hypoten-
to well perfused lung units.
 sion and apnoea.
 Preoperative preparation aims to restore airway
 During anaesthesia, ventilation should be control-
 flow using antispasmodics, steroids, antihistamines
led because:
and beta-2 agonists (see Figure 20.4). Handling must
High inspired oxygen concentrations may
bronchospasm. Animals that have been receiving
depress ventilation
glucocorticoids for prolonged periods may have sup-
Airway turbulence may critically increase the
pressed adrenal function and require additional ster-
work of breathing and may impair lung
oid treatment perioperatively.
 Pre-anaesthetic medication with acepromazine
expansion.
and/or low dose ketamine is satisfactory; the former
has antihistamine properties while the latter is a
However, the ventilatory pattern should be
bronchodilator. Morphine or meperidine have a pro-
modified:
pensity to release histamine and should not be used.
Atropine may be useful in some types of obstructive
 In chronic bronchitis high airway pressures are
disorders because it causes bronchodilation, and it 
needed for lung inflation. However, the risks of
may reduce airway secretions.
228
Chapter 2o Respiratory disease
Thiopental or alfaxalone (in the form of Saffan)
 be given intravenously. In emergencies, adrenaline
should probably not be used for induction as both can
at 0.22 mg/kg may be required. Beta-1 antagonists
provoke bronchospasm. In sedated cats, a chamber
should not be used in animals prone to asthma.
induction with sevoflurane or halothane is probably
ideal because there is little stress and both halothane
and sevoflurane are potent bronchodilators. Alterna-
References and further reading
tively, ketamine may be used: in human patients at
least, it has potent bronchodilator effects.
Tobias K. Jackson AM & Harvey RC (2004) Efects of doxapram HCI
If asthmatic problems arise during surgery, amino-
on laryngeal function of normal dogs and dogs with naturally
occurring laryngeal paralysis. Veterinary Anaesthesia and
 phylline or another phosphodiesterase inhibitor should
Anaigesia 31, 258-263
229
Thoracic surgery
Peter J. Pascoe
Introduction
(restrictive diseases such as pulmonary oedema, pneu-
monia, fibrosis or pleural effusion) tend to adopt a rapid
Opening the thoracic cavity is stil required for many
shallow ventilatory pattern, whereas patients with
procedures, but there is increasing use of less inva-
obstructive diseases (laryngeal paralysis, collapsing
trachea, small airway disease) tend to adopt a slower
diectomy and lung lobectomy and using implantable
pattern with increased respiratory effort. In these cases
coils to treat patent ductus arteriosus do not require a
 large intercostal incision. These advances may provide
extrathoracic causes) from an expiratory dyspnoea
Jess surgical morbidity but the veterinary surgeon must
(intrathoracic lesions) may help to direct the clinician
 still be cognizant of the underlying pathophysiology of
to the site of the lesion. Observing the movement of
the condition and the planned procedure in order to
the chest and diaphragm may help to differentiate a
 arrive at a suitable and safe anaesthetic technique.
problem with motor function from a pulmonary lesion.
Arrhythmias of the diaphragm and intercostal mus-
cles can lead to paradoxical breathing where the tho-
Preoperative evaluation
racic wall collapses on inspiration as the diaphragm
moves caudally and the abdomen expands. This
Whenever the thoracic wall is breached, this has sig-
pattern could be associated with a severe respiratory
nificant effects on the pulmonary system and so it is
obstruction, paralysis of the intercostal muscles or a
important to perform a careful evaluation of this be-
lesion of the central nervous system (CNS) which has
fore embarking on thoracic surgery. Preoperative
altered normal respiratory rhythm generation.
evaluation is also covered in Chapter 2 but repetition
Examination of the mucous membranes for signs
here will help to reinforce the importance of thorough
of cyanosis, flushing or slow capillary refll time may
patient assessment before thoracic surgery.
help to direct further examination. Mucous membrane
colour has limitations for the diagnosis of hypoxaemia.
History
Cyanosis, if present, is a strong predictor for hypox-
Historical information about the patient is as impor-
aemia, although studies in humans have shown that
tant in the evaluation of respiratory disease as it is in
 clinicians are not very good at detecting cyanosis, even
any condition to aid in an accurate diagnosis. Chronic
in patients with significant desaturation (Figure 21.1).
conditions may indicate a slowly changing condition.
The appearance of the membranes may be affected
by ambient light (some fluorescent lights in particular)
serve is such that a chronically progressive disease
 and it is also necessary for at least 15 g/l of desaturated
may present acutely because the animal may show
haemoglobin to be present for cyanosis to be seen.
very few signs with small lesions in the lung or tho-
racic cavity. A question that is often not asked in small
animal patients relates to exercise tolerance; this can
 give important information with regard to the likely risk
of anaesthetizing the animal. The patient with poor
 exercise tolerance (due to some intrathoracic lesion)
ance. Another question that may provide some useful
insight is whether the animal adopts any strange pos-
tures when it sleeps; an animal with a bilateral pleural
effusion may have learned to sleep in a relatively
upright position while an animal with unilateral
changes may always sleep on one side.
Pulmonary function
When presented with a patient with a respiratory com-
plaint, careful observation can help to establish the type
2
 Cyanosis of the tongue in a dog with
of lesion. Patients with poor compliance of the lung
hypoxaemia.
230
Chapter 21  Thoracic surgery
Flushing of the mucous membranes may occur with
Cardiovascular function
 hypercapnia. but there are other things that wil cause
Observation of the patient for venous distension and
this, and so it is not a pathognomonic sign. Capillary
pulsations in the jugular vein should be carried out
refll time, if definitely prolonged, is a reasonable indi-
before handling the animal. Observation of vessels
cator of poor circulation, but it too is a relatively insen-
may not be feasible in many breeds because of long
sitive test. Capillary refill time depends on ambient
hair. Following this it is important to feel the pulse and
temperature, amount of pressure applied to the sur-
get some sense of its character both centrally (femo-
face and the body temperature of the patient.
ral artery) and peripherally (dorsal pedal or radial ar-
Auscultation of the lungs and trachea should be
teries). A weak pulse is usually much more evident at 
 carried out to try to identify the location and nature of
a peripheral site than at the central vessel.
the lesion. Percussion of the lung field may also be
Auscultation of the heart must be carried out to char-
helpful in detecting areas of hypo- or hyperresonance
acterize any abnormalities. If a murmur or arrhythmia
associated with fluid/solid masses or pneumothorax,
is heard, the veterinary surgeon needs to decide
respectively. If the examination of the patient at this
whether further investigation is required. This must be
point indicates the need for radiographic or uitrasono-
predicated by the other lesions present in the animal
graphic studies, these should be carried out. These
and the resources of the client, but it is generally ad-
studies may be better able to locafe and define a le-
visable to obtain as much information as possible about
sion that has been difficult to elucidate on physica!
cardiac function prior to anaesthesia. This is particu-
examination, and determine the surgical approach that
larly the case when a thoracic procedure is contem-
is to be taken.
plated, as the surgery may have significant effects on
 Preoperative measurement of respiratory volumes
cardiac function. Radiographs are helpful in delineat-
can be done relatively simpiy using a tight-fitting mask 
ing the size of the heart and whether left heart failure
and a wright's respirometer or an electronic spiro-
is present, but much more definitive information can
meter. This may help to indicate whether the patient 
be obtained from ultrasonography. M-mode or two-
is hyper- or hypopnoeic (normal minute ventilation for
dimensional echocardiography can differentiate a peri-
 921 s! sio jo, pue a1nu/by/w 99 4 01z sl s6op
cardial effusion from an enlarged heart and can define
64 ml/kg/minute) but it does not define the extent of
the dimensions of cardiac structures and how they re-
change that has occurred because the individual ani-
late to normal. Doppler echocardiography can detect 
mal's normai minute ventilation is not known. There
 abnormal blood flow and be used to estimate the pres-
may also be alterations in the exchange of gas across
sure gradient across stenotic vessels. Ultrasonography
the alveolar membrane due to the disease process,
can also define the shortening fraction of the heart,
resulting in hypoventilation (increased P,CO,) despite
which is a measure of contractility. The results from
an increase in minute volume.
such tests should determine whether the animal is an
Measurement of blood gases defines the degree of
appropriate candidate for surgical intervention or
 change in the respiratory system. Arterial samples can
usually be obtained from a dorsal pedal or femoral
artery. The validity of the results obtained trom such a
trocardiogram (ECG) helps to define both changes in
sample will depend, to some extent, on how the ani-
the size of the heart (axis deviations) and any
mal behaved during the collection of the sample. lf the
arrhythmias encountered during the examination.
animal is greatly stressed by the procedure it tends to
An arterial blood gas sample should be taken if 
hyperventlate, which may mask the degree of hypox-
the investigation suggests any right-ito-left shunting
aemia and decrease the arterial carbon dioxide ten-
or low cardiac output. lf an animal with a righf-to-left
sion (P.CO2). f a sample is to be taken from a dyspnoeic
shunt has a PO of <60 mmHg (<8 kPa) on room air.
animal that objects to being restrained, the attempt
-ui sueombis e jeul ainsua oi papaau sl aieo peaio
should be abandoned. Venous samples can be used
crease in right-sided pressures or decrease in left-
to obtain information with regard to acid-base status
sided pressures is not created, both of which could
and P,CO, if the sample can be obtained by free flow
exacerbate the shunt.
without occluding the vessel. A sample from the jugu-
lar vein is best used for this as it is the largest accessi-
Clinical pathology
ble vein and is least likely to collapse on to the needle
Before undertaking such a major surgical interven-
during aspiration. These values may be significantly
tion it is appropriate to obtain a complete blood count
different from arterial values if there is a low cardiac
and biochemical profile to rule out further unrecog-
output or a great increase in carbon dioxide production
nized intercurrent disease. An increased haematocrit 
and should be interpreted with caution.
may be evidence of a chronic hypoxaemia while a
 If a patient has any indication of fluid in the chest, a
decreased value may represent chronic ilness or
 thoracocentesis should be performed to obtain a sam-
blood loss. Anaemia may not be tolerated well in an
ple for further diagnostic investigations. A thoracocen-
animal with poor cardiac output, and it is imperative
tesis is best carried out using a butterfly needle, teat
that this be taken into account when making a deci-
cannula or intravenous catheter. A reguiar hypodermic
sion about preoperative or intraoperative transfusion.
needle is very sharp and is more likely to lacerate
Dogs and cats tolerate a haematocrit of 0.15-0.2 1/l
the lung. It is important to establish that the end of the 
needle/catheter has entered the thoracic cavity before 
is maintained, However, an animal with a relatively
a negative result is accepted, for example, where a
fixed cardiac output (e.g. aortic stenosis) may barely
 short butterfly needle is used on an obese patient.
survive at a haematocrit of 0.3 I/l.
231
Chapter 21  Thoracic surgery
Preparation
rib, thus ensuring that the chest tube will not retract 
very far from that site.
Puimonary
With any surgery involving entry into the thoracic
Any conditions amenable to treatment before an
cavity, it is essential to be able to ventilate the patient.
animal is taken to surgery should be treated. lf the
This can be achieved simply by having someone
animal has pneumonia that can be treated with anti-
squeeze the resevoir bag intermittently, but this is la-
biotics, without risk of developing a further infection,
bour-intensive, so ventilation is usually achieved with 
this should be done as long as the surgery can be
the assistance of a mechanical device (see Chapter 
delayed. If the pleural space, pericardium or abdo-
 6). Before anaesthetizing the patient, it is important 
men is full of air or fluid, it should be drained as much
1 leun pue buuoaunj s! noieuaa aul jeui ainsua oi
as possible before carrying on with surgery. The ani
will work for that particular animal. This is likely to be
mal wifth ascites has a decreased ability to ventilate
a problem with some units when they are used on
and may show significant hypotension if put in dorsal
very small or very large patients; some machines are 
recumbency. The fluid can usually be drained using a
not able to provide small enough volumes for patients 
catheter (14-16 gauge) entering the abdomen
<5 kg, while others do not cope with giant breeds
3-10 cm from the midline midway between the ribs
weighing 70-100 kg. Although not essential, the au-
and the peivic limb on the right side. If the left side is
thor has found it very helpful to be able to apply posi-
used, care must be taken to avoid penetrating the
tive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) or continuous
 spleen. Drainage of fluid in this way should be carried 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) to his patients once
 out slowly so that there is a slow change of pressure
the thoracic cavity has been opened. Under normal
in the abdomen. An animal that has compensated
circumstances the tendency of the lung to colapse is
for an increase in intra-abdominal pressure due to
balanced by the tendency of the thoracic wall to spring
 ascites may suffer from a massive hypotension and
outwards. Once the chest is opened the 'adhesion'
cardiovascular collapse if the intra-abdominal pres-
between the chest wall and the lung is broken and
sure is relieved too quickly. This is usualy not an
the lung collapses to a smaller volume. Once this has 
issue since it is hard to remove fluid rapidly with such
epll aul aseaioul ol leylle Aresseoau s! t! pauaddey
 a narrow access to the fluid (14 gauge catheter).
Pleural drainage can be achieved with minimal
 adequate gas exchange. In the author's experience,
restraint in most animals, but cats with pleuritis are
the addition of PEEP/CPAP has been helpful in
often extremely fractious and may need an analgesic
reducing the atelectasis often associated with intra-
thoracic procedures. This effect can be achieved by
Opioids, such as hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg i.m.) and
adding a resistance to the expiratory limb of the cir-
butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg i.m.), provide analgesia while
cuit. The simplest method is to take the expiratory limb
also giving some sedation, which is beneficial in these
 and pass it through a beaker of water, with the depth
cases. After administering the opioid, the animal
should be placed in an oxygen-rich environment and
of PEEP; if the hose is 7 cm under water then the
 allowed to rest for 15-20 minutes before attempting
PEEP should be 7 cmHzO. The same thing can be
to drain the chest. Ultrasonography can be used to
achieved by putting the scavenge hose from the ven-
 guide placement of the drainage catheter, to minimize
 tilator under water, although this should be tested with
the risk of penetrating vital structures and assist in
the individual ventilator since some machines do not
locating pockets of fluids if loculation has occurred.
 work properly when back pressure is exerted on this
Animals with air or fluid in the pleural space should
side of the circuit. This approach is often inconven-
be evaluated for risk of a rapid return of the fluid after
jent because it can be hard to scavenge the gas after
it has been drained. An animal with a pleural effusion 
it has bubbied through the water. Commercial PEEP
could be tapped and drained several hours before
valves can be purchased which will apply a certain
thoracic surgery, with minimal chance of the fluid re-
pressure. The valves usually come with preset val-
turning within that time frame. On the other hand, an
ues of 2.5, 5 and 10 cmH,O and they can be used in
animal which has a haemo- or pneumothorax may
 sequence in order to provide 7.5 or 12.5 cmH,O pres-
have such rapid recrudescence that the only option is
sure. Some ventiators are equipped with a CPAP
to place a chest drain and apply continuous control-
 setting and the value required is dialled into the ma-
led suction. If it is not possible to maintain suction
chine. With any of these techniques, a manometer
during transport to the operating room, the chest drain
 placed in the circuit allows the measurement of the
should be clamped off or connected to a water trap or
effect produced by the PEEP/CPAP manoeuvre. The
Heimlich valve so that air cannot enter the pleural
author normally aims for a value of 3-7 cmH,O on the
space. The chest drain should be a multifenestrated 
 basis of the effects on circulation, gas exchange and
catheter which is directed toward the cranioventral
surgical access.
quadrant of the thoracic cavity. It should be sutured in
When preparing patients for a computed tomo-
place using a technique which will ensure that the
 graphy (CT) scan, it is best to induce and maintain
fenestrations cannot be pulled out and exposed
 anaesthesia with the patient in sternal recumbency
to the atmosphere. A criss-cross (Roman bootlace,
untilt the scans are complete. Small areas of atelec-
 Chinese fingertrap) pattern is often used for this, but
tasis form rapidly in dogs and these denser areas of
this may still allow for excessive movement in a dog
tissue may hide lesions that wouid be seen if the
with loose skin. A secure attachment can be achieved
 lUung was fully expanded, With modern CT technology
by passing the suture through the periosteum on one
it is usually possible to scan a thorax in under 60
232
Chapter 21  Thoracic surgery
Guide loop
15 mm endotracheal
lube con
adosopua
Bronchoscopy
1
 blood voiume and that the veterinary surgeon moni-
.tors the effect on blood pressure during the scan.
Endabranchial
Arndt muliport
lackercatheter
alrway adapter
When dealing with some tracheal surgeries, for
example, surgeries involving tracheai resection,it may
Blccker
七
be necessary to place a tracheotomy tube during sur-
gery and be able to continue the delivery of anaes-
thetic through this new tube. For these cases it is
essential to have a range of sterile tracheostomy or
endotracheal tubes and a sterile circuit availabie so
 Diagram of the Arndt endobronchial blocker
system. The adapter is connecied ro the
that these can be placed in the surgical field without
endotracheal tube and the anaesthetic circuit is attached
risk of contamination. Before proceeding with place-
to the right-anglec port. The endoscope can then be put
 ment of a tracheostomy fube, check that all the con-
down the central port while the endobronchial blocking
nections between tubes are compatible to prevent any
catheter is fed down the angled side port. The loop is
delays in switching from one circuit to the other.
slipped over the enc of Ihe bronchoscope and the
If the patient has a pulmonary mass which may be
catheter and endoscope can be advanced fogether. The
balloon is shown inflated io lustrate its shape but it 
an abscess or a tumour with a necrotic centre, it may
would not normaily be inflated until placed into the
be helpful to employ a bronchial blocker in order to
airway. Once it is in place lhe endoscope is removed and
prevent material from the lesion being expelled into 
the central port closed. The screw cap on ihe side port is
the lower lung during the surgery. There are some
tightened to fix the catheter in place. The blocked lung 
endotracheal tubes designed for humans (e.g. TCB
can be defated or PEEP can be applied through the
Univent), which can be used for this purpose in some
catheter. Drawing adapted from Cook Medical diagrarns.
smal dogs (the maximum tube size has an internal
diameter of 9.0 mm and the catheter used for occlud.
The final approach for these cases is to use a
-sn Ag (shop yebiel joj jous ool s! snuouog eui bu!
double-lumen tube, which allows intubation of one
ing the curves of the tube and catheter, it is possible
mainstem bronchus and functional separation of the
to direct the catheter into the left or right mainstem
other. This has been described a number of times by
bronchus blindly, although it is very difficult to know 
various authors but has been difficult to apply clini-
its exact location in the airway. The catheter also has
caliy because of the anatomy of the canine respira-
an end-hole, so that it is possible to slowly deflate or
tory tract (see section on thoracoscopy). If none of
reinflate the lung beyond the balloon occiusion. The
these approaches is possible, the surgeon should
main disadvantage with these tubes is that the main
clamp the bronchus of the lobe nearest the lesion or,
jube is a 'D' shape (in cross-section), which means
if that is not accessible, clamp the mainstem bron-
that a very small endoscope is needed in order to visu-
chus until the mass has been removed. Before the
alize the placement of the catheter.
transected bronchus is closed, the airway should be
Another alternative is to use a Fogarty catheter; this
suctioned to remove any maferial.
can be placed in the airway before the endotracheal
ube so that it goes down the side of the endotracheal
Cardiovascular
tube. Once the animal is in position, an endoscope can
Before carrying out a thoracotomy on a patient with
be used to guide the Fogarty catheter into the appro-
cardiovascular disease, it is important to optimize medi-
priate bronchus, and then the balloon on the catheter
cal therapy that may improve the patient's condition, if
can be inflated to occlude that airway. The two main
the procedure can be delayed. If vasodilators, inotropes,
 disadvantages with this technique are that there is no
diuretics or anti-arrhythmic drugs can improve the func-
end-hole in a Fogarty catheter, and that it is very easy
tion of the cardiovascular system, this therapy should 
for the catheter to become dislodged and slip back into
be instituted for long enough to make a difference. Cats
 the trachea. lf this happens, an immediate total airway
with hyperthyroidism and associated cardiac changes
occlusion develops, which requires that the balloon be
should be given carbimazole or methimazole for at least
deflated and the catheter repositioned. A better ver-
1 week before the surgery, as the mortality rate is much
sion of this, the Arndt bronchial blocker, allows the cath-
higher without such treatment.
eter to be passed down the endotracheal tube with a
For patients with bradycardia that is non-respon-
loop over the endoscope (Figure 21.2). This system
 sive to anticholinergic therapy, or that have sick sinus
comes with an adapter that alows connection of the
syndrome, it is advisable to place a temporary pace-
breathing system while the endoscope is passed
maker until the permanent one can be implanted. This
yn og euoug eu pue od auo yon
can usualy be achieved by placing an introducer (a
 another. By passing the endoscope into the required 
large thin-wailed catheter) into a saphenous vein us-
bronchus, the blocker can be directed appropriately.
ing local anaesthesia and then advancing the pacing
One version of this catheter has a pear-shaped
lead up to the heart from this site. The author avoids
balloon that makes it less likely to dislodge from the
using the jugular vein, if possible, when placing a tem-
airway. These catheters also have an end-hole to
porary pacemaker prior to a permanent transvenous
 allow inflation/deflation of the blocked lung.
pacemaker, so that both vessels are availabie for this
233
Chapter 21  Thoracic sSurgery
purpose if needed. If the patient is too small for a
for the brief period required to open the pleura. This
saphenous approach, the lead can be introduced via
reduces the risk of accidental injury to the lung during 
the jugular vein (Figure 21.3).
entry into the chest. A lateral thoracotomy may involve
An animal with a pericardial effusion of sufficient
a single intercostal space or may entail the removal of
magnitude to cause a restriction of myocardial func-
one or more ribs. If surgery involves the heart, media-
tion should have the fluid drained prior to surgery. This
stinum or oesophagus, it is likely that the surgeon will
is typically carried out using a needle or catheter, and
need to pack off the lung in the surgical field. This should 
the intent is to drain enough fluid off to release any
be done carefully so that minimal gas exchange sur-
 pressure in the pericarcdiai sac. The animal is usually
ssaidwoo ol arejudoidde osje s! l! inq 'isol si eale aoey
positioned in left lateral recumbency and access is
the lung fairly completely since, by reducing the com-
 gained through the right fourth to sixth intercostal space.
pliance of the upper lung, more gas will be directed to
the lower lung field. However, it is expected that this
is ideal since the catheter can be left in place during
manoeuvre will decrease the available exchange sur-
the aspiration of fluid, minimizing the risk of trauma to
face resulting in a decrease in the PO2.
the heart. This is best done using ultrasonographic
With a stermal approach, it is unlikely that the lung
guidance so that the myocardium is not traumatized.
fields need to be compressed, but the alteration in
the orientation of the heart can lead to some decrease
fluid therapy in order to increase central venous pres-
sure (CvP: preload on the heart). As surgery proceeds,
it is often noticed that certain manipulations cause a
 sudden dramatic decrease.in arterial blood pressure.
The surgeon and the anaesthetist should work to-
gether to define these deleterious events so that their
effects can be minimized. it is more common to see
cardiac arrhythmias with a ventral approach; this
should be monitored carefully and therapy initiated if
the arrhythmias appear to be detrimental to cardio-
vascular function.
Nitrous oxide (NzO) is contraindicated during any
in gas pockets in the pleura. Since the pleural space
is well vascularized and is in direct contact with the
 lung containing NzO, the N,O diffuses down the con-
centration gradient and can double the volume of a
closed pneumothorax in 10-15 minutes.
Analgesia
Analgesia for thoracotomy can be provided in a number
of ways. A lateral thoracotomy appears to cause less
pain than a sternotomy, and many dogs will show few
signs of pain after a single intercostal incision if other
muscle groups have not been transected. An epidural
Temporary pacemaker inserted through an
injection of an opioid with or without a local anaesthetic
 introducer in the jugular vein. The piciure
certainly provides some analgesia for a thoracotomy:
 aul punoibaiot eui ui loieiauab buioed aui smous
and it can be given before the surgery starts to provide
and will have a constant regulated heart rate during the
some pre-ermptive effect. This also provides bilateral
induction and rmaintenance of anaesthesia.
analgesia so it is useful for both a lateral and sternal
incision. An epidural catheter can be placed via the
The risk of surgical blood loss should be assessed
lumbosacral space and its tip advanced up to the mid-
prior to the procedure and, using the current haem-
thoracic region. This can be used to deliver morphine
atocrit and cardiovascular status of the patient, a
and/or a local anaesthetic by intermittent boluses or by
 decision should be made as to whether blood is
 continuous infusion and can be left in place for several
 going to be needed. If blood is likely to be needed,
days after the surgery to provide ongoing analgesia.
the necessary arrangements should be made to
Intercostal nerve blocks have been used for a lateral
 obtain an adequate supply of cross-matched blood or
approach and provide some analgesia, but when ap-
 packed red cells for that patient.
plied before surgery they are unlikely to give analgesia
over more than half the thorax. This is because the
Surgical approach
dorsai branch of the intercostal nerve branches off close
Both a lateral and ventral approach to the chest in-
to the spinal cord, and it supplies the cutaneous struc-
volve some risk of damage to the underlying struc-
tures to about halfway down the thoracic wall. The block
tures as the pleura is incised. The veterinary surgeon
 can be done more effectively once the chest is opened,
should establish controlled ventilationbefore the tho-
by injecting the nerves from inside the thorax aiming
rax is opened and should be able to stop ventilation
out towards the vertebrae where the nerves exit the
234
Chapter 21  Thoracic surgery
canal. An interpleural block can be carried out after the
Haemodynamic monitoring should include at least
chest has been closed. For a lateral thoracotomy,
some measure of blood pressure, preferably with a
the animal is placed in dorsolateral recumbency and
transducer attached to an arterial catheter that also
the local anaesthetic (usually 0.1-0.2% bupivacaine
allows multiple sampling of blood for blood gas meas-
at 1-2 mg/kg) is injected through the chest drain. The
urement. In some conditions it may also be beneficia!
anaesthetic tends to go to the part of the chest closest
to be able to monitor CVP and/or pulmonary arterial
to the table and diffuse through the thoracic wall into
pressure.
the intercostal nerves. For a sternotomy, the locai an-
aesthetic is injected through the chest drain with the
animal in sternal recumbency. In both instances the
Individual conditions
animal should be left in that position for at least 10 min-
utes after the injection, so that the drug has time to get
Trauma
taken up into the relevant tissues.
Trauma to the chest wall requiring immediate surgi-
cal intervention includes a flail chest, puncture wounds
Monitoring
isnu Awoonoui e buobapun (wjue ue buouo
layed intervention may be made for fractured ribs al-
allow the veterinary surgeon to establish the adequacy
though these are rarely repaired.
of ventilation, to diagnose arrhythmias and to provide
An animal with a fiail chest may be unable to ven-
information on changes in cardiac function, especially
tilate normally, and the flail segment is pulled inwards
when the animal has cardiac disease. The monitoring
every time the animal inhales. This makes ventilation
of ventilation without being able to measure airway pres-
very inefficient and the animai may be hypoxaemic
sure, minute ventilation, end-tidal carbon dioxide
and hypercapnic. Some dogs and cats seem to cope
(PETCO2) or PCO, is difficult once the chest is open
quite well with a three- or four-rib fiail segment and
since the chest does not move in a manner that allows
may not become hypoxaemic. While preparing to
tidal volumes to be estimated. The list of monitoring
anaesthetize such a patient, the inspired gas should
techniques above is ordered in increasing desirability.
be supplemented with oxygen and the animal should
Airway pressure indicates the force being applied to
be positioned with the flail segment down. This will
-aoui Aue anf ou sap ing waisss Aeuound au
minimize the ventilatory effects of the flail and improve
tion about gas exchange. it is expected that peak pres-
ventilation. The anaesthetic technique should be
sures in the 10-15 and 10-20 cmH,O range would be
aimed at gaining rapid control of the airway. This is
normal for the cat and dog, respectively. If higher pres-
best achieved using drugs with a rapid onset of ac-
sures are required to achieve adequate inflation, it may
tion such as thiopental or etomidate. Propofol has a
be an indication of decreased airway compliance.
slower onset of action (1-2 minutes) and should be
Minute ventilation is a more accurate representation of 
given slowly in order to minimize the respiratory de-
how much gas is being moved in and out of the lungs
pression and hypotension which can occur. Ketamine
aenbape aaey am jaulaym sn lel ou saop limis ina
and tiletamine both take about 60 seconds to take
exchange. End-tidal carbon dioxide should reflect the
effect, which is not ideal under these circumstances.
value for PCO2, but there is often a discrepancy be-
Opioids, used for induction, also take at least 2 min-
tween the two values and this is not readily predict-
utes to reach peak effect. Once the animal is intu-
able. The two values are usually close enough in
 bated, it shouid be ventiated until the flail segment 
patients with normal lungs for clinicians not to be greatly
 has been stabilized. Since a fractured rib couid dam-
under- or over-ventilating the patient, and a capnograph.
age the lung, it is essential to monitor the patient care-
is a non-invasive monitor with continuous sampling that
fully for signs of pneumothorax developing during this
provides rapid feedback on changes in ventilation. Ar-
procedure.
terial or free-flow lingual venous blood gas samples
will provide definitive assessment of ventilation. Apulse
Diaphragmatic hernia
oximeter is very helpfu! in cases where desaturation
 Diaphragmatic hernias may be traumatic or congeni-
may be expected (e.g. extensive pulmonary disease,
right-to-left shunt) or where other techniques for meas-
sive force being applied to the abdomen, causing
uring ventiation are not available. A pulse oximeter pro-
viscera to rupture through the diaphragm into the chest.
vides limited information on the early changes
Most of these patients present with dyspnoea, although
associated with ventilation/perfusion mismatching or
some animals can be totally asymptomatic. The
alterations in shunt fraction, but if desaturation occurs
animal may be presented in extremis immediately
it is likely to be sensed by the monitor and the veteri-
post-trauma, or the hernia may be discovered as an
nary surgeon warned before it is too late. A combina-
tion of capnography, arterial blood gas monitoring and
ultrasonograms. The liver is the most common organ
pulse oximetry is ideal for these cases since the two
to herniate and so some cases present with ascites
non-invasive, continuous monitors can be checked in-
 and hepatic dysfunction. The severity of the dyspnoea
termittently by the measurement of blood gases, al-
usually relates to the loss of space in the chest for
lowing more accurate interpretation of the values
 normal pulmonary function, and it may be helpful, when
displayed. Electrocardiography is essential for these
 handling these animals, to lift them on to their hindlegs 
cases to allow diagnosis of arrhythmias. Early diagno-
so that their back is perpendicular to the ground. Many
sis and management may prevent progression to ven-
of these animals have fractured limbs, pulmonary con-
tricular fibrillation.
tusions and myocardial trauma, and these other lesions
235
Chapter 21 Thoracic surgery
need to be assessed before proceeding with repair of
anterior surface of the diaphragm; this approach has
the diaphragmatic hernia. The timing of surgical repair
been quite successful as long as the location of the
is controversial; one author suggests that one should
hernia has been adequately defined (e.g. right lateral
'never let the sun go down' on a diaphragmatic hernia,
thoracotomy for a right-sided hernia). Before the her-
even in cases where the diagnosis has been made
nia has been completely repaired, it is helpful to place
months after the traumatic incident. The justification
a chest drain so that air can be drained from the tho-
 for immediate repair is that it is quite possible for more
racic cavity and the normal negative pleural pressure
abdominal content to shift into the thoracic cavity and 
re-established.
for animals to become severely dyspnoeic, or even die,
overnight, and this author has seen examples of such
Space-occupying lesions not associated
incidents. The disadvantages of carrying out the repair
with the cardiopulmonary system:
the same day may relate to scheduling conflicts and
thymoma
wanting to have the animal fully resuscitated and
The most common tumours to be found in the tho-
stable before proceeding with the repair. This author
racic cavity, which do not involve the heart or lungs,
favours not delaying since fhere is usually time to
are thymomas. These can be of considerable size and
provide adequate restoration of circulating volume
interfere with pulmonary function by compression of
(after trauma), while an animal that decompensates
the trachea, or affect venous return by compressing
 can die in a matter of minutes. Preoperative prepara-
the cranial vena cava. Myasthenia gravis is also as-
tion of the patient is important: cases of acute trauma
sociated with thymoma and may be recognized by a
need to receive adequate fluid therapy and should be
history of regurgitation or by the presence of a
preoxygenated before induction.
megaoesophagus on thoracic radiographs. This con-
 Premedication with an opioid, at low doses, and with 
dition may lead to aspiration pneumonia, and so ex-
an anticholinergic is appropriate. In the recently trau-
tra care needs to be taken while handling these
 matized patient (<5 days), acepromazine is avoided
patients during induction and recovery (see sections
as it may exacerbate hypotension in such animals, and
in Chapters 22 and 26 for details on dealing with
it can cause splenic enlargement. Preoxygenation
megaoesophagus). Patients with myasthenia are nor-
 should be carried out for 5 minutes, using a tight-fitting
 mally being treated with an anticholinesterase (physo-
 mask in order to increase the inspired oxygen concen-
stigmine). This therapy should be given on the morning 
tration to >95%. The mask shouid be kept on during
of surgery if the signs of myasthenia have been rela-
the induction until the animal is ready to be intubated.
tively severe, The presence of long-acting anticho-
Induction with a dissociative agent, propofol or
linesterases may alter the duration of action of some
 etomidafe, is ideal; this alows rapid control of the air-
 opioids. The response to muscle relaxants is variable,
way so that the animal can be ventilated immediately.
but in general these patients tend to have an increased
Thiopental commonly causes splenic enlargement,
sensitivity to these drugs. lf it is necessary to give
which could lead to severe respiratory distress if the
a non-depolarizing relaxant (which is rarely neces-
spleen is wholly or partially in the chest.
sary), the patient should receive small doses while
Once the animal is intubated, positive-pressure
the response is monitored (see Chapter 15).
ventilation should be initiated. It seems to be impor-
The patient should be premedicated according to
os ipide. ool bunj oeioalae puedxa-al on nou juel
the severity of compromise caused by the thymoma.
the aim should be to use higher respiratory frequen-
Routine premedication would be acceptable in a young
cies with lower peak airway pressures. Oxygenation
 active patient with few clinical signs, whereas a patient
of the arterial blood should be carefully monitored, as
with prominent signs should be given minimal pre-
this author has found it difficult to avoid hypoxaemia
medication. Before induction the patient should be
if tidal volume is restricted excessively. The concern
preoxygenated and a suction apparatus should
with rapid re-expansion of the lung is that this has
be immediately available if the animal has a mega-
pidei e aaey oi speau bnup uoonpui aul 'snbeydosao
physiology of this condition is still not known but there
onset in cases of megaoesophagus, but if megaoes0-
is an increase in vascular permeability resulting from
phagus is not present, the induction technique is not
the production of reactive oxygen species. The con-
 overly important. Maintenance with an inhalant would
traction of endothelial cells responsible for the in-
be typical. A second intravenous catheter should be
ol isjuobeue ue Aq payoolq aq ueo yeal pin paseaio
placed in case more than one infusion is necessary.
the small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) signal-
Some of these tumours wrap around the major blood
ling pathway (rho) and its target protein (rho-associ-
vessels, so significant blood loss is possible, and there
ated coiled-coil-forming protein kinase, ROCK). The
should be blood available for transfusion.
aim with these cases is to provide adequate ventila-
tion to prevent hypoxaemia and hypercapnia but not
 Oesophageal lesions including persistent
to re-expand the lung. Once the hernia has been re-
right aortic arch
paired and the air evacuated from the chest, the lung
Access to the oesophagus in the thorax may require
will be expanded gradually by the animal, hopefully
a thoracotomy. Congenital lesions, such as persist-
allowing enough time to prevent acute injury.
ent right aortic arch (PRAA) or other aortic arch
The usual approach to a diaphragmatic hernia is
anomalies, may cause a restrictive lesion of the
via a midine laparotomy, with extension of the inci-
oesophagus. These animals are therefore prone to
sion into the sternum if necessary. Some advocate a
similar problems to those seen with megaoesophagus
lateral thoracotomy and repair of the hernia from the
from other causes and should be handled as such.
236
Chapter 21  Thoracic surgery
While PRAA is usualy an avascular remnant, some
Preoperatively, it is often difficult to differentiate
of the other anomalies causing oesophageal stricture
between a puimonary abscess and a tumour. If it is
may be associated with viable blood vessels, and sig-
suspected that the lesion may be an abscess or a
nificant blood loss can occur, The patient should have
tumour with a necrotic centre, then the precautions
two venous catheters placed, and blood transfusions
 described in the section on preparing patients with
 should be available. For oesophageal tears or foreign
pulmonary disease should be taken. it is also wise to
bodies, the greatest risks are from infection and
have a suction device available if the above meas-
pneumothorax. The latter can occur if the foreign
ures fail to contain the pus. Any major drainage of
object has damaged some lung as well as the
pus into the lower lung carries a very poor prognosis
oesophagus. If this is likely, due to the nature or posi-
for the patient.
tion of the foreign body, the animal should have a chest 
Another concern with such lesions is that there may
 drain placed before intermittent positive pressure ven-
 be adhesions between the lung and the parietal pleura,
tilation (IPPV) is initiated.
 such that entry through the pleura results in entry into
the lesion. The anaesthetist should be prepared to
Pulmonary lesions
handle the blood loss or air leakage that can occur
Most of these cases will have some degree of respi-
under these circumstances.
Lung lobe torsion is usually treated by excision of
 prior to induction. Ideally, the mask should be left on
 the lobe, and this is normally a relatively straight-
for 5 minutes prior to induction, and during induction
forward procedure, especially if if is done using
until the animal is ready to be intubated. if the mask
advanced stapling techniques. Apart from the consid-
is removed, the animal will begin to breathe room air 
erations above (preoxygenation, ventilation, etc.) there 
and, since there are no oxygen 'stores' in the body.
are no major new considerations for this surgery.
the benefit of preoxygenation will be lost within a few
breaths. If the animal will not tolerate a mask, a bag
Chylothorax
over the head may be tolerated better: a plastic
Concerns with chylothorax and other pleural effusions 
peau ayl laao paoeid ag ueo jaui uabixo ue ylim beg
 relate to the amount of fluid in the chest and with ad-
and closed on to the neck. lf fhis technique is not
hesions that may have formed to the parietal pleura,
feasible, it may be necessary to start the induction
increasing the chance of pulmonary injury when the 
 and place the mask as soon as the animal begins to
thoracic cavity is opened. lf possible, attempts should
lose consciousness. Although it may take up to 5
be made to drain the fluid off the chest before anaes-
minutes to reach peak POz, the initial rise is steep
 thesia to improve intraoperative ventilation. Blood loss
and the animal will benefit from even a few breaths
is minimal if the lymphatic duct is tied off or a drain-
of 100% oxygen.
age system is implanted into the diaphragm, but it can 
 Pneumothorax is usually a result of damage to the
 be substantial if a pieurodesis is performed.
 lung or major airways. If there is any concern that air
Pericardiectomy
a chest drain should be placed and the animal con-
Pericardiectomy may be undertaken for a pericardial
 nected to a continuous suction device. lf the amount
effusion or for a pericardial constriction. Animals with 
of air in the thorax is minimal and there does not
 cardiac tamponade, where intrapericardial pressure
appear to be any ongoing leakage, it may be safe
approaches the right ventricular diastolic filing pres-
not to place a chest drain, as long as the time from
sure, are at immediate risk of circulatory collapse. An
induction to entrance into the thoracic cavity is short.
 intrapericardial pressure of 9 mmHg can cause a 60%
Jf it is known that there will be significant ongoing air 
reduction in cardiac output while pressures as high
leakage from pulmonary tissue until the surgeon can 
as 12-13 mmHg may be tolerated. Drainage of fluid 
oversew or remove the damage; a total intravenous
from the pericardium should be carried out to relieve
 anaesthetic technique should be considered. This
these symptoms before the animal is anaesthetized.
is to avoid leakage of inhalant into the thoracic cavity
 The preferred approach for pericardiectomy is via ster-
 so that surgeons and assistants do not have to breathe
notomy, since this gives the best access to the peri-
in waste anaesthetic gases. For this purpose, a
cardium, but a lateral approach may be used in some
 propofol/opioid infusion technique is ideal; propofol
cases. Pericardiectomy may also be amenable to
is given at 0.1-0.3 mg/kg/minute while an opioid
 endoscopic approaches (see below). If an animal with
such as fentanyl can be given at 0.3-1.0 μg/kg/minute.
 cardiac tamponade must be anaesthetized, it should
In cats, the dose of fentanyl should not exceed
be pretreated with fiuids to ensure optimum venous
0.4 μug/kg/minute.
return and a technique used which minimizes reduc-
Animals with pulmonary contusions need to be
tions in myocardial contractility and heart rate (heart 
ventilated very carefully, because there is some fisk
 rate is usually elevated in an attempt to maintain car-
that the vessel rupture responsible for the contusion
diac output in the presence of a reduced stroke vol-
can be opened up again by stretching the lung
ume). Etomidate would be the ideal induction drug
 excessively. Further haemorrhage into the lung may
for this purpose but an opioid induction could be used 
cause a significant loss of gas exchange area and
 as long as care is taken not to allow the heart rate to
lead to severe respiratory compromise. Ventilation
 decrease significantly. Once the animal is intubated,
of these animals should be with low tidal volumes
 it is recommended that spontaneous ventilation be 
and high frequencies (e.g. 20 breaths per minute,
 maintained to minimize any further reduction in ve-
tidal volume 10 ml/kg).
 nous return. However, it has aiso been shown that
237
Chapter 21  Thoracic surgery
hypercapnia will further decrease cardiac output so it
part of this reflex. The author typicaly uses the anti-
is better to use IPPV than to allow hypercapnia to
cholinergic at the time of premedication, although it
develop. f IPPV is used, it is best to use higher breath-
could be given closer to the time of ligation. Monitor-
ing frequencies in order to limit peak airway pressures,
ing of direct arterial blood pressure in these cases
and not to use PEEP. Dobutamine is probably the best 
 enables assessment of moment-to-moment changes
drug to use to improve cardiac output, since it delays
 and is also of use in ensuring that the ductus has been
the onset of tissue hypoxia when compared with nor-
adrenaline. However, dopamine also increases car-
 pressure as soon as the ductus is tied off(Figure 21.4).
the tamponade has been reduced, anaesthetic man-
agement of these patients during pericardiectomy is
relatively straightforward. Ventricular arrhythmias are
common during manipulation of the pericardium and
0l uibag asaui aseo u pueu uo eg pinous euieoopl os
alter haemodynamic function. Haemorrhage may be
marked if a decortication of the epicardium is under-
taken and it is necessary to have adequate supplies
Arterial blood pressure and ECG tracing from
of typed and cross-matched blood to cope with ex-
'uoisnjooo snionp jualed e bulobiapun bop e
Note the increase in diastolic pressure with minimai
cessive blood loss.
change in systolic pressuro. The heart rate decreases
 from i28 to 108 beats per minute in response to the
Patent ductus arteriosus
incrcased pressure (baroreceptor response). The trace is
Most animals anaesthetized for correction of a patent
at 6.25 mm/second.
young and are usually in good health apart from the
 Patients with signs of cardiac failure or pulmonary
changes caused by the PDA. In the early stages, there
oedema should be treated with diuretics and positive
are very few myocardial changes associated with a
inotropes for 1-2 days prior to surgery. The anaes-
PDA. However, if the ductus is large and/or the lesion 
thetic technique should attempt to maintain myocar-
has not been recognized early, there can be signifi-
dial function as much as possible and not cause further
cant enlargement of the left ventricle, with cardiac
 decreases in SVR. Premedication with an opioid-
failure due to volume overload occurring terminaly.
anticholinergic combination is useful, and induction
If surgery is performed before significant changes
with an opioid-benzodiazepine technique or etomidate
with or without benzodiazepine is preferred. Mainte-
 nary surgeon. Patients presented at an early age will
 nance of anaesthesia in these patients can be with a
have lower than adult blood pressures due to their
standard inhalant, unless signs of myocardial failure
 stage of development and one should expect diastolic
are present, in which case a balanced technique com-
pressure to be very low before ligation of the ductus,
bining an opioid and/or a muscle relaxant with the in-
because of the connection of the systemic circulation
halant would be in order. Patients with a right-to-left
to the low-resistance pulmonary system. Because of
shunt are rarely amenable to surgical correction, since
this, phenothiazines and butyrophenones should
closure of the duct often results in right heart failure
due to the pulmonary hypertension. If such an animal 
blockade will tend to decrease systemic vascular
needs to be anaesthetized for part of the diagnostic
resistance (SVR), decreasing diastolic pressure still
work-up or for other reasons, the regimen described
further. The maintenance of diastolic pressure is
for the PDA with some degree of heart failure should
important in the effectiveness of coronary perfusion.
 be used. It is important to maintain or increase SVR
Systolic pressures are usually normal to high but,
while aiming to reduce (or at least not increase) pul-
because of the low diastolic pressure, the mean
 monary vascular resistance.
pressure is also normal or reduced and is often in the
 Non-surgical repair of the PDA is being used more 
 50-60 mmHg range during the approach to the duc-
often; for this procedure it is necessary to insert a cath-
tus. Positive inotropes may increase systolic pressure
eter into the aorta from the femoral artery, or in very
and also increase mean pressure but should only
 smal dogs a carotid approach may be used. The tip of
be used if systolic pressures fall below 90 mmHg. Peri-
the catheter is positioned at the entrance to the PDA
pheral vasoconstrictors should not be used since an
 and a coil is released into the ductus. Anaesthetic tech-
increased SVR will tend to increase the shunt through
niques for these cases are similar to those described
the ductus and may lead to pulmonary oedema.
for the surgical approach except that a thoracotomy is
If there are problems with the dissection of the
 not necessary, obviating the requirement for IPPv (al-
ductus, it is possible to lose large quantities of blood 
though it may be needed for other reasons).
very quickly. A second intravenous catheter should
be placed so that fluids can be given rapidly if needed,
Puimonic stenosis
-onp aun t algenoaey Aenei st aooino eul yonoue
 Management of dogs with puimonic stenosis is nor-
：
tus is ruptured. Before the ductus is ligated, it is wise
 mally by balloon valvuloplasty, which does not require
to give an anticholinergic because the sudden change
a thoracotomy. In small patients, or those with very
in blood pressure associated with ligation can elicit a
narrow stenosis, surgery may be necessary. This can
strong baroreceptor reflex, which can even cause
-oou je ssedhg Aeuowindopreo jnoum euo ag
thermia: the usual technique is to place a patch over
238
Chapter 21  Thoracic Surgery
aiso diferent. Many cases of aortic stenosis have a
the puimonary outflow and then cut through the ste-
nosis, leaving the wall of the pulmonary artery open
 dynamic component, which is exacerbated if a posi-
into the patch that has been applied.
tive inotrope is given. For these animals the author typi-
Dogs with pulmonic stenosis usually present with
cally uses phenylephrine (2-5 μg/kg slow bolus i.v.
right ventricular hypertrophy, although it is very rare for
followed by infusion of 0.1-1 μg/kg/minute) to treat 
 them to be in right hear failure. Animals with pressure
hypotension, because the dose can be titrated to pro-
 gradients of <40 mmHg across the stenosis are at low
duce alpha-1 mediated vasoconstriction with minimal
risk for anaesthetic complications and may be handled 
 positive inotropic effect. For closed aortic valvotomy,
in a relatively routine fashion. Animals with gradients
the same technigues are used but the animal should
be cross-matched before surgery and have at least two
should be regarded as having an increased anaesthetic
 patent intravenous catheters, Lidocaine may be started
risk, although it is uncommon to see problems with
prior to ventriculotomy.
these cases until the gradient exceeds 80 mmHg. Right
ventricular hypertrophy makes these animals more
Thoracoscopy
prone to reduced myocardial perfusion and ventricular
This may be used for diagnostic purposes (e.g. biopsy
arrhythmias. The anaesthetic technique chosen should 
of a mass) or for surgical approaches (e.g. pericar-
aim to minimize the possibility of bradycardia; since
diectomy, PDA, PRAA, thoracic duct ligation or lung 
the right ventricle is thick and non-compliant, cardiac
lobectomy). The basic procedure involves the intro-
output is more dependent on heart rate than in a nor-
duction of a rigid or flexible fibreoptic endoscope into
mal animal. At the same time, a tachycardia tends to
the thoracic cavity, and the use of air or another gas
increase myocardial oxygen demand, while shorten-
 to create a pneumothorax, allowing visualization of
ing diastole and reducing coronary perfusion. These
intrathoracic structures. One or more other ports are
two changes may lead to myocardial ischaemia and
usually placed to allow the introduction of a gas or
 precipitate severe arrhythmias. Premedication should 
instruments required for the surgical manipulation. The
approach may be made laterally with the animal in
cardia. Opioids combined with low doses of anti-
cholinergics usually achieve this aim. lnduction of
animal in dorsal recumbency. For the lateral approach 
anaesthesia can be carried out using etomidate with
it is necessary to collapse the upper lung and so it is
or without a benzodiazepine as the technique of choice.
advantageous if seiective one-lung ventilation (OLV)
because there is minimal change in heart rate or
can be performed. in the dog, the right lung is about 
 contractility. An opioid-benzodiazepine technique can
1.5 times the size of the left lung and receives almost
 be used as long as an anticholinergic has been given
60% of the biood supply. It is possible to achieve
previously, and the heart rate is monitored carefully
adequate ventilation of the animal using just the right 
during induction. Maintenance of anaesthesia can be
lung although some desaturation can occur during the
with an inhalant such as isoflurane, or a balanced tech-
first few minutes. Some of the approaches to OLV are
nique can be used with the addition of an opioid or
outlined above, but the preferred method is to use a
N,O. Lidocaine should be readily availabie as a first-
double-iumen tube so that if a bilaterai thoracoscopic
line treatment for ventricular arrhythmias which may
 procedure is undertaken, one can collapse each lung 
occur during therapy. Animals with a dynamic compo-
nent to their stenosis should receive phenylephrine to
used in dogs are the Robertshaw type (Figure 21.5),
treat hypotension as described below (aortic stenosis).
which have a long and short tube with two cuffs. The
If a surgical approach is used for this condition,
longer tube is placed in the bronchus while the shorter
 the anaesthetist should prepare as above but add a
tube should remain in the trachea. Once the cuffs are
second venous access and have blood products avail-
inflated the right and left lungs should be functionally
able for rapid transfusion.
isolated from each other. The tubes are supplied as
left and right versions: the right tube has an orifice in
Aortic stenosis
the side of the cuff that, in humans, is supposed to be
Aortic stenosis (see also Chapter 19) is also associ-
placed at fhe entrance to the bronchus of the right
ated with ventricuiar hypertrophy caused by a pres-
 upper lobe. This does not work well in dogs because
sure overload. Balloon valvuloplasty for this condition
 of the position of the right apical lobe bronchus and it
has been very disappointing, and even results with sur-
is difficult to place an endobronchial tube on the right
gical correction using cardiopulmonary bypass (beyond 
side without losing ventilation to the right apical and
the scope of this text) appear to be no better than medi-
(a'tz anbie) buni aul jo saqol (eippiw) oeipieo
cal therapy. Closed aortic valvotomy has also been de-
Because of this difference in anatomy, it is usual to
scribed. This requires a thoracotomy and carries a
 Use a left-sided Robertshaw tube. The cuffs of these
significant risk of haemorrhage and cardiac arrhyth-
tubes are bright blue to improve visualization and an
 mias. ff an animal with aortic stenosis must be anaes-
endoscope is necessary to ensure correct placement
thetized for diagnostic procedures or non-cardiac
 of the tube. Human studies have shown that blind
 Surgery then most of the comments above (dealing with
 positioning results in a high incidence of malpositioning 
(38-78%). The endoscope should be passed down
more concern with reduction in' SVR as coronary
both tubes to ensure that the ends of the tubes are in 
 perfusion may be reduced if this occurs: and so the
the correct place (not impacted against a bronchial
phenothiazines and butyrophenones are usually
wall and that the right tube has not slipped into the
avoided. Management of intraoperative hypotension is 
left main bronchus), and that the cuff is adequately
239
Chapter 21  Thoracic surgery
is an attempt to minimize these changes and to
hold the airways open. However, the ideal value
of the PEEP is not easy to determine, since too
low a value will not have any effect and too high
a value will increase pulmonary intravascular
pressure. Increased pulmonary intravascular
pressure may decrease cardiac output and may
also shunt blood into the upper unventilated 
lung. Nevertheless, in humans the application of
10 cmHzO PEEP to the dependent lung has
been shown to improve PO, in patients with a
PO2<80 mmHg (<10.7 kPa). In normal dogs,
1
5 cmH,O PEEP applied to the dependent lung 
does not significantly improve P:O2 or decrease
cardiac output
Application of CPAP to the non-dependent lung.
 This is applied to the upper lung before deflation 
is alowed to occur, or after a large tidal volume,
 so that the pressure is applied before the lung 
 has collapsed. An adjustable, disposable CPAP
valve can be bought for this application (Broncho-
Cath? with CPAP system). The CPAP valve is
pue aqn, jeauoeyjopua bunj leddn aul ol paldde
 oxygen is given at 5 I/minute. This approach allows
 some mass diffusion of oxygen into the upper
lung and improves oxygenation more than the
 application of PEEP to the dependent lung alone 
 Use of high-frequency ventilation to the non-
Diagram of the trachea and bronchi of the dog
 dependent lung. In one human study, this gave 
a with the placement of a Roberishaw iube in the
 comparable results to the application of CPAP in
left mainstem bronchus. Note the proximity of the distal 
end of the tube to the bronchi in: the left cranial lobe
terms of P.O, but interfered less with cardiac
 showing the likelinrood of occiuding one or rmore of
ol Aiaallep uabixo laeg buipiaoud snun indino
these bronchi
the tissues. In this study, a high-frequency jet 
ventilator (HFJV) was used, set at a rate of 150
inflated in the correct position. For the larger sizes of
breaths per minute. The author has not had
(ube (39 and 41 French) a 4.9 mm (outside diameter)
success with this technique in dogs.
bronchoscope will work, but something less than 4.2
mm will be needed for the smaller tubes (28-37
If it is necessary to turn the dog over and examine
French). This technique remains impractical in many
the other hemithorax endoscopically, the use of a dou-
canine patients because Robertshaw tubes are de-
ble-lumen tube enables the process to be reversed, so
signed for humans and are too short to be used in
that the lung that was collapsed can be re-expanded
dogs over about 20 kg. This makes the Arndt endo-
while the other lung is deflated.
bronchial blockade technique the most practical and
Using the subxiphoid approach (e.g. for pericardi-
versatile approach for OLV (see Figure 21.2).
ectomy), it may be unnecessary to use a double-
If a lateral approach is being used, then the
lumen tube since both sides may need to be kept at
dependent lung is ventilated while the upper non-
relatively low volumes in order to improve visualiza-
dependent lung is collapsed. OLV appears to be
tion. It is essential in these procedures for the surgeon
adequate for the removal of carbon dioxide, but there
and anaesthetist to coordinate their activities to achieve
is a significant risk of lower-than-normal P,O, because
maximum visibility for the surgeon while maintaining
of the loss of exchange area and shunting of blood
 adequate oxygenation. This often requires the use of
through the non-ventilated lung. Studies examining
hand ventiation to provide irregular ventilatory cycles
OLV in normal animals have shown that despite the
between bouts of surgical activity. The use of a dou-
decrease in PaO, delivery of oxygen to the periphery
ble-lumen tube may allow more flexibility in achieving
.
is unchanged because haemogiobin is still fully satu-
the best ventilation with the least interference with sur-
rated and cardiac output does not change very much.
 gery. Using PEEP/CPAP for this approach may also
However, it is common to perform thoracoscopy on
be beneficial in improving oxygenation.
animals with abnormal lungs and so hypoxaemia is
 Animals undergoing thoracoscopy should be moni-
 always a concern. Strategies to improve oxygen ex-
tored using pulse oximetry, so that any desaturation
change include:
poppe aul Aidwoid paieal pue pezjubooai aq ueo
 of capnography, electrocardiography, direct arterial
Application of PEEP to the dependent lung. The 
pressure and CVP measurement (CVP will be affected 
 combination of gravity, weight of the heart and
by the amount of air or carbon dioxide in the chest 
surgical manipulation all tend to induce collapse
making it easier to recognize excessive pneumo-
of the dependent lung. The application of PEEP
 thorax) adds considerably to the ability to recognize
240
Chapter 21  Thoracic surgery
problems early and treat them immediately. Once the
may be limited to one lung (if the endoscope is 
thoracoscopic procedure has been finished, air should
in a bronchus) or may need to be discontinued if
be removed from the chest and a chest drain placed.
the endoscope's ports are needed for other
so that any remaining air can be removed or any sub-
equipment (e.g. suction or sampling)
sequent haemorrhage or air leaks recognized.
A catheter can be placed in the trachea and
oxygen insufflated directly. This method provides
Bronchoscopy
high concentrations of oxygen but does nothing
Most patients undergoing bronchoscopy are likely to
for removal of carbon dioxide. Care must be
have compromised pulmonary function, and therefore
taken that the catheter is securely attached to
oxygen supplementation is important. As with cardiac
the tubing supplying the oxygen so that it does
condifions, it is helpful to reduce risks associated with
not get dislodged into the trachea
bronchoscopy by providing supportive treatment be-
A catheter can be placed in the trachea and
fore anaesthesia. In asthmatic cats, pretreatment with
attached to an HFJV. This has the advantage of 
inhaled terbutaline can reduce the likelihood of acute
providing high concentrations of oxygen while
bronchoconstriction. In larger animals, it is possible
also oscillating the gas in the airway, thus
to use a standard endoscope and pass it through a
enhancing the removal of carbon dioxide. The
diaphragm on an elbow attached to the endotracheal
author typically runs the HFJV at 180 breaths
tube. A double-diaphragm arrangement is less likely
per minute and adjusts the pressure so that 
to leak and will be less hazardous to the personnel
there is slight chest movement with each pulse;
this often gives PCO values in the normal
ment the animal can be kept anaesthetized with an
range.
inhalant delivered in oxygen, thus achieving the best
 oxygenation possible. Iit is also feasible to ventilate
These patients should be monitored carefully and
the animal should this be necessary. In smaller
continuously. A pulse oximeter is ideal because
patients, where it is not possible to pass the endo-
desaturation often occurs, as the bronchoscope blocks
scope through an appropriately sized endotracheal
off various portions of the lung. The bronchoscope
tube, or where the arrangement above is not avail-
should be moved or completely removed if desatura-
able, it is necessary to maintain anaesthesia with an
tion occurs. When biopsies are being performed there
injectable technique. For short procedures this can
may be significant haemorrhage into the airway. com-
probably be achieved with most of the injectable an-
promising gas exchange still further. Blood should be
aesthetics, but for longer procedures the author typi-
removed using the suction channel on the endoscope
caily uses propofol. This drug will provide a rapidly
if possible. Occasionally a biopsy may rupture an air-
adjustable depth of anaesthesia with a smooth recov-
way or there may be sufficient pathology in the lower
airway that spontaneous rupture occurs. This mani-
different methods:
fests as rapid desaturation, an increase in respiratory
rate and a change in pulmonary compliance, Evacu-
 An oxygen source can be attached to one of the
ation of air from the pleural space should be under-
channels of the endoscope. This method will
taken immediately and a chest drain placed to allow
deliver oxygen deep into the lung, but supply
further removal of air over the next few hours.
Endotracheal
aqm
Diaphragms
Endoscope
Anaesthetic
delivery
Waste anaesthetic
gas scavenging
 Diagram and picture of the adapter used for bronchoscopy. The doubie diaphragm created with this
 arrangement reduces the amount of anaesthetic spilling inio the room: while ailowing the delivery of inhaled
anaesthetics with positive pressure ventilation if needed.
241
Chapter 21  Thoracic surgery
Once the bronchoscopic examination is finished,
References and further reading
the animai can be intubated and maintained on oxy-
gen. An inhalant can be used to continue anaesthe-
Arndt GA. DeLessio ST, Kranner PW et al. (1999) One-lung ventilation
sia if necessary, or the animal can remain on oxygen
when intubation is dificult - presentation of a new enoobronchial
blocker. Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica 43, 356-358
until it is ready to be extubated. Continued monitoring
Bailey CS. Kitchell RL. Haghighi SS and Johnson RD (1984) Cutaneous
with pulse oximetry and oxygen supplementation into
innervation of the tharax and abdomen gf the dog. American Journai
the recovery period are essential for these patients to
of Veterinary Research 45, 1689-1698
Baraff LJ (1993) Capillary refll is ita useful clinical sign? Pediatrics 92.
ensure that they do not become hypoxaemic.
723-724
Barnett HB, Holland JG and Josenhans WT (1982) When does central
cyanosis become detectable? Clinical and Investigative Medicine
5.39-43
Postoperative care
Benumof J (1993) The position of a double-lumen tube shouid be
Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia 7, 513-514
Many animals undergoing thoracic procedures are at
Brasmer TH (1984) A is for Airway. In: The Acutely Traumatized Small
risk for postoperative hypoxaemia. This can be mini-
Animal Patient, pp. 55-95. WB Saunders. Philadepnia
mized by taking the following precautions:
Brownlie SE, Cobb MA, Chambers J, Jackson G and Thomas S (1991)
Percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty in four dogs with pulrnonic
stenosis.Journal of SmatAnimal Practice32,65-169
 Make every effort to ensure that the animal is
CantwellSL,ukeTWalshJPetal.2000)ne-lungversustw-ng
normothermic by the time it is recovering. An
ventilation in the anesthetized dog: a comparison of
cardiopulmonary parameters.Veterinary Surgery29,365-373
Cohen E, Eisenkraft J. Thys D. Kirschner P and Kaplan J (1988)
itself up may increase its oxygen consumption 
Oxygenation and hemodynamic changes during one-lung
ventilation: effects of CPAP10. PEEP10, and CPAP10/PEEP10.
by 300%. lf the animal has poor pulmonary
Journaf of Cardiothoracic Anesthesia 2, 34-40
function, this extra demand may exacerbate
Cohen E, Thys DM, Eisenkraft JB and Kaplan JA (1985) PEEP during
any hypoxaemia
one lung anesthesia improves oxygenation in patients with low
arterial PaO. Anesthesia and Anaigesia 64. 201
Ensure that the animal has received analgesics
(if necessary). and monitor the recovery
recognition of arterial anoxemia. American Journar of Medical
Science 214, 1-6
carefully so that the animal emerges calmly
Dhokarikar P, Caywood DD, Ogburn PN, Stobie D and Burtnick NL (1995)
from the anaesthetic. It may be necessary to
give a tranquillizer if the animal becomes 
Elliott AR, Steffey EP, Jarvis KA and Marshall BE (1991) Unilateral
agitated during recovery. A rough recovery
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in the dog. pony and miniature
will be accompanied by huge increases in 
swine. Respiration Physioiogy 85, 355-369
Fitzpatrick RK and Crowe DTJ (1986) Nasal oxygen administration in
oxygen consumption, which may contribute
dogs and cats:experimentaland clinical investigations.Journat of
to the hypoxaemia
the American Animal Hospital Association 22, 293-300
Place a chest drain and provide timely
ventilatory acclimation to chronic hypoxia by the awake cat.
intermitent drainage or continuous suction if 
RespirationPhysiology58207-221
there is any risk of pneumo- or haemothorax.
Garcia F, Prandi D. Pena T et al. (1998) Examination of the thoracic
cavity and lung lobectomy bymeans of thoracoscopy in dogs.
Remove the chest drain as soon as it is deemed
Canadian Veterinary Journar 39, 285-291
safe to do so
Gillespie DJ and Hyatt RE (1974) Respiratory mechanics in the
Provide an enriched supply of oxygen. A
unanesthetized dog. Journal of Appried Physioiogy 36, 98-102
  e i  a   m  
facemask can be used in the early
temperature on capillary refill in healthy children. Pediatrics 92,
postoperative period, as long as the animal
699-702
tolerates it. A tight-fitting mask allows delivery
Goss GA, Hayes JA and Burdon JG (1988) Deoxyhaemoglobin
of 100% oxygen but, uniess the animal is
concentrations in the detection of central cyanosis. Thorax 43.
212-213
deeply sedated, this requires someone to be
Grifka RG, Miller MW, Frischmeyer KJ and Mullins CE (1996)
with the animal all the time: most animals do
Transcatheter occlusion of a patent ductus arteriosus in a
Newfoundland puppy using the Gianturco-Grifka vascular occlusion
device. Journal of Veterinary Internat Medicine 10, 42-44
of 100% oxygen can also be achieved by
Kienle RD (1998a) Aortic stenosis. In: Smafl Aninal Cardiovascular
placing a nasal insufflation catheter during the
Medicine, 1st edn, ed. MD Kitleson and RD Kienle, pp. 260-272.
Mosby, St. Louis 
 se uonelhnsu! uebixo bujuuibag pue ainpaooud
Kienle RD (1998b) Congenital pulrmonic stenosis. In: Small Animal
soon as the animal is extubated. This technique
Cardiovascuiar Medicine, Ist edn, ed. MD Kittleson and RD Kienle,
pp. 248-259. Mosby, St. Louis
is less efficacious in larger animals, but does
Kitchell RL. Whalen LR, Bailey CS and Lohse CL (1980)
increase the inspired oxygen fraction (FO2)to
 Electrophysiologic studies of cutaneous nerves of the thoracic limb
some extent and continues to deliver oxygen
of the dog. American Journal of Veterinary Research 41, 61~76
Koller ME. Smith B, Sjostrand U and Brevik H (1983) Effects of hypo-,
while the animal is being examined or treated.
ngrmo-, and hypercarbia in dogs with acute cardiac tamponade.
A more certain method of supplying high
Anesthesia and Anaigesia 62, 181-185
LeFlore JL and Engle wD (2005) Capillary refilltime is an unreliable 
concentrations of oxygen is to place the
indicator of cardiovascular status in term neonates. Advances in
animal in an oxygen cage. Inspired oxygen
Neonatal Care 5,147-154
concentration can be adjusted according to the
Linn K and Orton EC (1992) Closed transventricular dilation of discrete
needs of the patient, but it is difficult to handle 
subvalvular aortic stenosis in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 21. 441-445
MartinMWS.GodmanM,Fuentes VLetal.t992)Assessment of baloon
the animal without losing the benefit of the
pulmonary valvuloplasty in six dogs. Journal of Smalf Animal
increased oxygen
Practice 33,443-449
Martins JB, Manuel WJ, Marcus ML and Kerber RE {1980) Comparative
 If surgery has been carried out on the heart or
effects of catecholamines in cardiac tamponade: experimental and
lungs, the animal must be monitored carefully for
clinical studies. American Journal of Cardiofogy 46, 59-66
Matila I,TakkunenO.MatilaPet al.(1984)Cardiac tamponade and
signs of respiratory distress, cardiac
different modes of artificiat ventiation. Acta Anaesthesiologica
arrhythmias, congestive heart failure or shock.
Scandinavica 28,236-240
242
Chapter 21 Thoracic surgery
.·
Meurs KM, Lehmkuhl LB and Bonagura JD (2005) Survival times in
Saunders AB, Miler MW. Gordon SG and Bahr A (2004) Pulmonary
 dogs with severe subvaivular aortic stenosis treated with balloon
embolization of vascular occlusion coils in dogs with patent ductus
valvuloplasty or atenolol. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
arteriosus. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 18, 663-666
Association 227, 420-424
Sawafuji M. Ishizaka A. Kohno M et al. (2005) Role of Rho-kinase
 Morgan-Hughes JO (1968a) Fluorescent lighting and cyanosis. Nursing
in reexpansion pulmonary edema in rabbits. American Journal
Mirror and Midwives Journal 126. 51
Morgan-Hughes JO (1968b) Lighting and cyanosis. Britsh Journal of
L946-953
Anaesthesia 40. 503-507
Schriger DL and Saraff LJ (1991) Capillary refill - is it a useiul 
Mure M, Domino KB, Robertson T. Hlastala MP and Glenny RW (1998)
predictor of hypovolemic states? Annais of Emergency Medicine
 Puimonary blood flow does not redistribute in dogs with reposition
20.601-605
from supine to left lateral position. Anesthesioiogy 89, 483-492
Snaps FR, McEntee K, Saunders JH et al. (1998) Treatment of patent
 Nakatsuka M, Wetstein L and Keenan R (1988) Unilateral high-irequency
jet ventiltion during one-ung ventilation for thoracotomy. Annals
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 39, 196-
of Thoracic Surgery 46. 654-660
199
 Orton EC, Herndon GD. Boon JA et al. (2000) Influence of open surgical
Staudte KL, Gibson NR, Read RA and Edwards GA (2004) Evaluation
correction on intermediate-term outcomein dogs with subvalvular
of closed pericardiat patch grafting for management of severe
aortic stenosis: 44 cases (1991-1998). Journal of the American
puimonic stenosis. Australian Veterinary Journal 82, 33-37
Veterinary Medical Association 216. 364-367
：
Pascoe PJ (t988) Oxygen and ventlatory support for the criticai patient.
hernia by thoracotomy in 49 dogs and 72 cais. Veterinary Quarterly
Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Small Animal) 3.
8,177-183
202-209
Thompson SE and Johnson JM (1991) Analgesia in dogs after intercostal 
 Pascoe PJ and Dyson DH (1993) Analgesia after lateral thoracotomy in
thoracotomy. A comparison of morphine, selective intercostai nerve
block. and interpleural regional analgesia with bupivacaine.
Surgery 22,t41-147
Veterinary Surgery 20. 73-77
 Popilskis S, Kohn D, Sanchez JA and Gorman P (1991) Epidural vs.
VadeBoncouer TR,Riegler FXand Pelligrino DA (1990) The effects cf
two diferent volumes of 0.5% bupivacaine in a canine model of
Veterinary Surgery 20, 462-467
interpleural analgesia. Regional Anesthesia 15, 67-72
Popilskis S, Kohn DF, Laurent L and Danio P (1993) Efficacy ofepidural
Wagner AE. Gaynor JS. Duniop CI. Allen SL and Demme WC (1998)
morphine versus intravenous morphine for post-thoracotomy pain
Monitoring adequacy of ventilation by capnometry during
in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Anaesthesia 20, 21-25
thoracotomy in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 212. 377-379
anesthetics in the dog: differential somatic neural blockade.
Anesthesiology 71. 744-750
MifersAnesthesia, 6th edn.ed. RD Miler, pp. 1847-1940. Elsevier/
RiqueleM,MonnetE,Kunig ST.GaynorJS,WagnerAE,Corlis D
Churchill Livingstone, Philadelphia
 and Saiman MD (2005a) Cardiopulrmonary changes induced during
one-lung ventilation in anesthetized dogs with a closed thoracic
cavity. American Journal of Veterinary Research 66, 973-977
(Small Animal) 1, 318~326
Riquelme M, Monnet E, Kudnig ST et al. (2005b) Cardiopuimonary
Zhang H,Spapen Hand VincentJL(1994)Effects of dobutamine and
norepinephrine on oxygen availabity in tamponade-induced
ventilation in anesthetized dogs with a closed thoracic cavity.
stagnant hypoxia: a prospective, randomized, contralled study.
American Journal of Veterinary Research 66. 978-983
Critical Care Medicine 22, 299-305
243
Gastrointestinal and
hepatic disease
Rachel C. Bennett
introduction
The oesophagus
The principal function of the gastrointestinal tract is to 
 Conditions of the oesophagus fall into three broad 
supply the body with water, electrolytes and nutrienis.
categories: obstruction, disorders of motility and
 Each division of the gastrointestinal tract is adapted
inflammation.
for specific functions, e.g. passage of food in the
 oesophagus, the storage and initiation of digestion of
Obstruction
food in the stomach and the digestion and absorption
 Obstructive disorders can result from foreign bodies,
of nutrients in the small intestine and proximal colon.
strictures and vascular ring anomalies. Other possible
Patients with diseases of the gastrointestinal tract
differential diagnoses include extraluminal masses,
o anp onuw pue uoepaap wo lens uao
gastro-oesophageal intussusception, oesophageal
digestive impairment and increased metabolic demands
diverticulum and hiatal hernia.
due to the nature of their illness. Apart from the meta-
Oesophageal foreign bodies are usually removed 
bolic disturbances associated with gastrointestinal prob-
under general anaesthesia. These patients often
lems, these animals may be severely nauseous, and
appear to be very uncomfortable and depressed, par-
experiencing extreme discomfort or pain.
ticularly if the material has been present for some time.
The presence of gastrointestinal disease has
The provision of analgesia prior to anaesthesia will help
associated anaesthetic implications, e.g. hypo-
to relieve the discomfort and subsequently reduce the
proteinaemia leads to reduced protein binding and
dose of other anaesthetic drugs. Opioids are commonly
an enhanced effect following drug administration.
used for this purpose: buprenorphine (0.01-0.02
An emaciated patient with a reduced muscle mass
mg/kg): methadone (0.2-0.5 mg/kg); or pethidine
and diminished fat stores may have an altered
(meperidine) (2-5 mg/kg) would all be acceptable.
volume of distribution and a prolonged duration of
Those drugs known to induce vomiting (e.g. morphine)
drug action. Emaciated animals may develop hypo-
should arguably be avoided. The use of non-steroidal
thermia more rapidly than a normal healthy patient.
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is inadvisable given
Liver disease may impair the production of clotting
the possibility of oesophageal mucosal damage.
factors. leading to coagulopathy and anaemia. Dis-
Patients may present with some degree of dehy-
eases of the endocrine pancreas lead to abnormali-
 dration. An intravenous catheter should be placed and
ties in glucose homeostasis.
fluid therapy given both prior to anaesthesia and
The assessment of patients with disease of the
during the procedure. The rate and type of fluid is
alimentary tract and associated organs should, there-
dependent upon an assessment of hydration status
fore, anticipate the systemic effects of these diseases
at the time of initial presentation and the type of
and how they may affect intraoperative management 
electrolyte disturbance, although replacement solu-
and postoperative care. lt is the veterinary surgeon's 
tions such as 0.9% sodium chloride and lactated Ring-
er's (Hartmann's) solution are commonly used.
fore surgery. In human medicine it has been shown
The presence of objects, e.g. bones. within the
 that nutritional support improves patient outcome, as
oesophagus prevents the passage of saliva and in-
well as reducing patient mortality. Information on
gested material into the stomach. Fluid, saliva and
perioperative nutritional support can be found in the
food material can all accumulate cranial to the ob-
BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency and
struction and may be regurgitated at the time of an-
Critical Care.
aesthetic induction with the attendant risk of aspiration.
There are very few prospective randomized clini-
Equipment for suction of the oropharynx should be
cal studies in veterinary medicine that have investi-
available to remove food and fluid at this time.
gated the pros and cons of different anaesthetic
Prior to the induction of anaesthesia, the animal
techniques for use in patients with gastrointestinal,
 should be positioned in sternal recumbency with its
hepatic or pancreatic disease. Therefore much of 
head elevated. The assistant should keep the head
the information discussed here is either anecdotal or
elevated until the patient's airway has been intubated
extrapolated from the human field. Specific contra-
and the cuff inflated. This reduces the risk of reflux of
indications to drug use are discussed in the relevant
fluid and aspiration at a time when the patient has
sections of the chapter.
lost its protective laryngeal reflexes.
244
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
Anaesthesia is usually induced with propofol.
although other rapidly acting drugs, such as thiopental,
.
.
ketamine and etomidate (see Chapter 13), would also
be suitable and can be titrated to effect. These induction
drugs may be administered with diazepam or midazolam,
thereby reducing the dose of the induction drug.
In humans the use of cricoid pressure is also im-
8
plemented, i.e. pressure applied over the cricoid car-
tilage to occlude the cesophagus and prevent material 
passing into the oropharynx. This technique has not
been documented in dogs or cats.
 Once the endotracheal tube cuff has been inflated,
suction can be used to remove any food or fluid from
the oesophagus. Even with an endotracheal tube in
 place, material can still seep around the cuff. At the
end of the procedure the endotracheal tube should
ideally be removed with the cuff fully or partially
inflated to withdraw any material that may have lodged
 Bilateral pneumothorax after removal of an
proximal to it. If the patient attempts to vomit or reflux
 oesophageal foreign booy in a dog. This was
during induction, the head should be lowered below
detected at the end of anaesthesia as a fall in oxygen
the level of the body allowing fluid to drain out. The
saturation (S,Oz) when the cog was breathing room air.
 pharynx should then be swabbed out and cleaned as
Oxygen therapy via nasal catheter was required until 
much as possible before intubation is attempted.
thoracocentesis was performed.
Neuromuscular-blocking drugs can be used to aid
removal of the foreign body. This is most efective in
 It is important to assess the ventilatory pattern fol-
dogs, where the entire length of the oesophagus is 
lowing removal of the foreign object. Signs of pneumo-
made up of striated muscle. Neuromuscular-blocking
thorax may include dyspnoea, decreased breath
drugs produce relaxation of the oesophageal muscle
 sounds on thoracic auscultation, resistance to manual
and aid removal of the object via the mouth or pas-
inflation of the lungs, expansion of the thorax (i.e.
 sage into the stomach. Thistechnique can aiso be used
 movement of the chest wall outwards when the integ-
in cats, although the caudal third of the oesophagus is
rity of the pleural space has been breached) and
composed of smooth muscle and therefore it is less
hypoxaemia. A pulse oximeter is invaluable in assess-
likely to provide full relaxation if the foreign body is 
ment of oxygenation since it rapidly indicates changes.
located in this region. A short-acting non-depolarizing
If any of these signs are present and appear to be
muscle relaxant is most appropriate for this purpose
 progressive then rupture of the oesophagus must be
(e.g. vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg). The duration of action is 
considered. In this instance, the animal should be
approximately 20 minutes, which should provide suff-
maintained under general anaesthesia using 100%
cient time for removal of the foreign material. An alter-
oxygen. If time and facilities allow, thoracic radio-
native option in cats would be mivacurium (see Chapter
graphy should be performed to confirm the diagno
15), but this drug is not suitable for use in dogs due to
 sis, although if it is impossible to take a radiograph
its prolonged duration of action in this species. The use
then percutaneous drainage of the chest must be per.
of neuromuscular-blocking drugs necessitates artificial
formed. This may simply mean drainage with a nee.
ventilation, either manually or mechanically.
dle and syringe, or the use of chest drains, until
 Patients need to be assessed after the procedure
 oxygenation improves and ventilation reverts to a more
normal pattern. Patients need to be monitored in re-
this can be provided with further doses of an opioid.
covery to ensure they are able to maintain their oxy-
e.g. buprenorphine.
The longer the foreign body is present, the greater
It is useful to place an intranasal catheter before the
the likelihood of pressure necrosis leading to dam-
end of anaesthesia to allow administration of supple-
age of the mucosa, submucosa and the external lay-
mentai oxygen should the patient's condition subse-
ers of the oesophageal wall. This can result in
quently deteriorate. It is also worthwhie leaving an
 oesophagitis and ulceration and it may also affect
intravenous catheter in place in case further anaes-
 oesophageal motility.
thesia or sedation is required.
Oesophageal strictures may develop following for-
 Given the possible need for thoracic surgery in
eign body obstruction, reflux of gastric contents (e.g.
these patients,some veterinary surgeonsrecommend
during general anaesthesia) or the ingestion of caus-
referral to institutions which have the means to deal
tic substances. They are treated by gradual oesopha-
with all of these possible sequelae.
 geal dilation using either bougies or balloons inflated
 intraluminally. This procedure is always associated
Megaoesophagus
with the risk of oesophageal rupture and iatrogenic
Motility problems of the cesophagus generally lead to
 pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax (see below
megaoesophagus. Although surgical correction of this
and Figure 22.1). The oesophageal mucosa can be
problem is rarely attempted, anaesthesia of animals
with megaoesophagus may be required. Thoracic radio-
to identify any perforations.
graphs ideally should be taken prior to anaesthesia to
245
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
 assess whether aspiration pneumonia is present and
Oesophagitis
to determine if further treatment is required prior to
In veterinary patients, oesophagitis is associated with
surgery (assuming the procedure is elective).
chronic vomiting, ingestion of caustic materials and
Opioids form the mainstay of premedication and
gastro-oesophageal reflux (GOR) during anaesthesia.
anaesthesia is usually induced with propofol. The
Oesophagitis following anaesthesia is a relatively rare
advantages of this drug are the rapid onset of action 
occurrence, despite the fact that 16-17% of patients
and the fact that it can be given to effect. The rapid
experience an episode of GOR during anaesthesia.
ae slewe peul sueaw osje Aaaooal qoows pu
However, if reflux does occur it can lead to oesopha-
capable of protecting their airway as soon as possible
geal stricture formation. it is therefore important to
after the procedure is completed. During the induc-
lavage the oesophagus if gastric or intestinal fluid is
tion of anaesthesia, the patient should be managed
regurgitated during anaesthesia. This can be done with 
in the manner described earlier, i.e. with the head ele-
a simple urinary catheter or alternatively with a
vated to reduce the risk of food material being regur-
double-lumen suction catheter, if available. The latter
 gitated and aspirated (Figure 22.2). The airway should
is better suited to this purpose but rather more ex-
be intubated as soon as possible and the cuiff of the
pensive. Water or saline is infused until the aspirated 
endotracheal tube inflated to avoid material gaining
material is clear and colourless. It is also advisable to
access to the animal's airway. At the end of surgery
give sucralfate and Hz-receptor antagonists (e.g.
it is worthwhile checking the oropharynx to identify
ranitidine) to try to protect the oesophagus from the
any food material. This should be removed to reduce
effects of gastric or intestinal fluid.
 the risk of aspiration during recovery.
Oesophagitis should be suspected when animals
recovering from general anaesthesia salivate pro-
fusely, repeatedly attempt to swallow or show signs
of pain during swallowing. These patients usuaily re-
 spond to treatment with sucralfate and ranitidine and 
these animals are generally fed by mouth. if
oesophagitis is secondary to the presence of a for-
eign body, then it may be preferable to place a gas-
trostomy (PEG) tube and feed via this, thereby giving
the oesophagus time to heal.
A recent study investigated the efect of adminis-
tering metoclopramide to patients during general
anaesthesia to determine whether this would prevent
GOR from occurring (Wilson et al., 2006). Administra-
tion of metoclopramide by bolus and constant rate in-
fusion at doses much higher than commonly used
Cat with dysautonomia and megacesophagus
 positioned for endotracheal intubation. Note
in anaesthetized dogs undergoing orthopaedic surgery.
that sternal recumbency and head elevation should be
 In human anaesthesia, routine pretreatment of patients
maintained until the trachea is intubated, and the
endotracheal tube cuff infiated, to minimize the risk of 
not specifically recommended. At this time, it is unclear
regurgilation and aspiration.
Aeuaiea u! pasn ag pinous shnip aseui ieyiaum
patients that have a previous history of oesophagitis or
Animals presenting for surgical correction of vas-
abnormal gastro-oesophageal motility.
cular ring anomalies may have some degree of mega-
Theoretically, anticholinergic drugs could increase
oesophagus (Figure 22.3). The severity of this depends
the likelihood of reftux and the possibility of pulmo-
 on the time taken to diagnose the condition. Anaes-
nary aspiration, by decreasing lower oesophagea
thetic management of patients for thoracic surgery is
 discussed in Chapter 21. Special consideration must
potential side effect and the human literature does
 also be given to the size and age of these patients.
not state that a history of reflux oesophagitis is a
contraindication to the use of antichoinergic drugs.
The stomach and intestines
Surgery of the stomach and intestines can involve a
wide range of conditions that may be acute in onset
or more longstanding. The most common indications
for anaesthesia and surgery in general practice are
probably removal of gastrointestinal foreign bodies.
treatment of gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV) and
 performance of gastrointestinal biopsies.
 Given the function of the gastrointestinal tract, al-
terations in extracellular volume are common and may
22.3
 Chest radiograph of a dog with a vascular ring
be severe. Acute volume depletion can result from
anomaly and megaoesophagus.
246
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
gastrointestinal bleeding, hypersecretion accompanied
 plasma lactate concentration. Volume resuscitation is
by inadequate fluid replacement, or third-space losses 
usually performed with a balanced electrolyte sofu-
(e.g. as a result of GDV). In addition to hypovolaemia,
tion given intravenously at a rate of 40-90 ml/kg per
gastrointestinal disease may lead to electrolyte and
hour. Hypertonic saline may provide a more rapid
acid-base disturbances. The degree of dehydration
means of volume resuscitation (4-6 m/kg i.v.; see
should be assessed by clinical examination, and meas-
Chapter 16), but it must be followed by the adminis-
urements of packed cell volume (PCV), total protein
tration of isotonic crystaloid solutions. Colloids may
(TP), electrolytes and acid-base status before anaes-
also be used and provide a more sustained restora-
 thesia and surgery. The extent of the volume deficit
tion of circulating volume.
guides the rate of volume administration prior to an-
It is useful to have at least two intravenous cath-
aesthesia, whist the nature of the loss enables more
eters in place in order to allow both rapid volume
informed decisions to be made regarding fluid therapy
Keul Aiebins buunp sseooe Asea pue uonenosnsa!
are also useful if several different drugs or fluids need
should be restored before anaesthesia, thereby improv-
to be administered during surgery, some of which
ing cardiovascular stability. 'High' gastrointestinal
may be incompatible, e.g. sodium bicarbonate can-
 obstruction tends to lead to metabolic alkalosis due to
not be given with dopamine or solutions containing
the loss of acidic gastric contents, whereas loss of duo-
calcium; blood products (where citrate has been used 
denal contents results in metabolic acidosis. Animals
for anticoagulation) should not be given with solu-
 that are alkalotic benefit from an acidifying solution,
tions containing calcium such as lactated Ringer's
such as 0.9% sodium chloride, whereas animals that
(Hartmann's) solution.
are acidotic are usually treated with lactated Ringer's
Premedication may be achieved with an opioid. If
(Hartmann's) solution or acetated polyionic solutions.
the animal is very depressed, a reduced dose should
Depending on the extent of volume depletion, mul-
be given. In cases where the animal is very debili-
tiple intravenous catheters may be required to allow
tated, no premedication may be required, although
 the administration of crystalloids, colloids or blood prod-
analgesia will still be necessary postoperatively. Ani-
ucts perioperatively. Central venous catheters may be
mals should be preoxygenated via a facemask. Wher-
indicated for the measurement of central venous pres-
ever possible, monitoring equipment should be placed
 sure and an arterial catheter may be necessary for the
before the induction of anaesthesia. Electrocardio-
 measurement of arterial blood pressure.
graphic pads on the feet allow the heart rate and
The choice of drugs for premedication, and for
rhythm to be assessed continuously. A Doppler probe
induction and maintenance of anaesthesia, is dic-
piaced over a peripheral artery alows non-invasive
tated again by the severity of the condition and the
measurement of blood pressure and also is an indi-
degree of dehydration. Opioids usually form part of 
cator of peripheral perfusion. If an arterial catheter
premedication and may also be used for the induc-
has been placed, then direct blood pressure monitor-
tion of anaesthesia, Propofol is arguably the most
ing can be performed if facilities allow.
widely used induction drug nowadays and anaesthe-
Anaesthesia may be induced with a combination
sia is usually maintained with either isoflurane or
of an opioid and benzodiazepine (e.g. fentanyl
sevoflurane in oxygen. Nitrous oxide is not used
0.01--0.02 mg/kg i.v. and diazepam 0.2-0.5 mg/kg
routinely due to its tendency to cause further disten-
i.v.; sufentanil 0.005 mg/kg and midazolam 0.1-0.6
sion of the gastrointestinal tract.
mg/kg i.v.; hydromorphone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.v. and 
diazepam 0.2-0.5 mg/kg; or methadone 0.1-0.6
Gastric dilatation-volvulus
mg/kg i.v. and diazepam 0.2-0.5 mg/kg i.v.). Alterna-
GDV leads to hypovolaemic shock because of a
tively, etomidate may be used in combination with
reduction in venous return. The dilated stomach
diazepam. These drugs have minimal impact on the
obstructs blood flow through the caudal vena cava,
while the increase in gastric pressure decreases blood
commonly used in hypovolaemic animals undergoing
flow through the portal vein. The obstruction to blood 
surgery. Whichever technique is used, it is important
ui aseaioep e ol speel slessas oml asaul ul moll
to administer drugs slowly and to effect; in this way
venous return (and subsequently cardiac output) since
the risk of overdose is reduced. In theory ketamine
venous return is the major determinant of cardiac
and diazepam would be acceptable: ketamine causes
 output. Reduction of cardiac output results in a failure
a release of noradrenaline from postganglionic nerve
 to maintain tissue perfusion, with the classical signs
terminals and thereby increases sympathetic tone.
 of shock: vasoconstriction leading to poor peripheral
Blood pressure is maintained, there is little effect on
pulse quality, palor of mucous membranes, cold
myocardial contractility and ventilation is fairly well
 extremities and tachycardia. Therefore it is essential
maintained. However, there is concern about the use
to stabilize these patients before anaesthesia and sur-
of ketamine in patients who already have increased
sympathetic tone. In these patients, a dramatic de-
venous fluids to restore circulating blood volume.
crease in blood pressure can occur after the induc-
 Blood samples taken prior to treatment provide an
tion of anaesthesia. Ketamine should therefore be
initial reference point and allow the efficacy of treat-
used judiciously in patients with GDV. Thiopental and
ment to be assessed later. Typical blood tests include
 propofol are known to cause hypoventilation and res-
PCV, TP, urea, blood glucose and plasma electrolytes.
piratory depression after intravenous administration.
Other laboratory tests that may be required include
 Thiopental is known to induce ventricular arrhythmias
 activated clotting time, colloid osmotic pressure and
247
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
 sensitize the myocardium to catecholamines. In these
Cardiac arrhythmias are associated with GDV in
instances it is best to use drugs that are familiar and
the dog. Monitoring of the electrocardiogram (ECG)
to give them slowly and to effect. In the recent
allows the veterinary surgeon to detect arrhythmias and
CEPSAF (Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative
instigate treatment if required. Lidocaine is used to treat
Small Animal Fatalities) study performed in the UK,
ventricular premature contractions. This can be given
propofol did not appear to be better or safer than thio-
as a bolus (1-2 mg/kg), which can be followed by
 pental, although the need for emergency surgery was
a constant rate infusion (50-i00 μg/kg/minute).
associated with an increased risk of mortality.
With infusions, the patient should be monitored for
 Maintenance of anaesthesia can be achieved with
signs of lidocaine toxicity (e.g. muscle fasciculations,
 either isoflurane or sevoflurane in oxygen. Either of
seizures) since the rate of elimination may be de-
these drugs is preferable to halothane, which sensi-
 creased in these animals. Procainamide may be used
tizes the heart to the arrhythmogenic effects of
in those patients refractory to the effects of lidocaine
catecholamines. Sevoflurane is less soluble than
(see Chapter 19).
isoflurane, although itis stillpossible to achieve a rapid
 It is useful to monitor PCV and TP during surgery
change in the depth of anaesthesia when either of these
as torsion of the stomach and spleen can sometimes
 drugs is used. Both isoflurane and sevoflurane produce
cause rupture of major vessels. The extent of blood
dose-dependent cardiovascular and respiratory depres-
loss is not apparent until intravenous fluid administra-
sion, leading to hypotension and hypoventilation. There-
tion restores blood volume and highlights an earlier
fore, a balanced technique may be more appropriate
period of blood loss. PCVs in the range of 10-12%
in these patients using a potent short-acting opioid given
have been measured in individuals that have bled
by intravenous infusion (e.g. fentanyl, remifentanil) in
preoperatively. Major haemorhage requires admin-
addition to a neuromuscular-blocking drug. Opioids
istration of either packed red blood cells or fresh whole
cause a significant reduction in the minimum alveolar
blood (see Chapter 16). Loss of large volumes of blood
concentration (MAC) of inhalants, but do not resulf 
is also associated with the loss of clotting factors and
in hypotension per se; in this way the unwanted side
platelets. Loss of clotting factors can be treated with
effects of the volatile anaesthetic may be minimized.
fresh frozen plasma, fresh plasma or whole blood.
Use of potent opioids causes profound respiratory de-
Frozen plasma is deficient in the labile factors V and
pression, and patients generally require mechanical
VIll. Low platelet numbers require treatment with
ventilation to prevent respiratory acidosis. Intermittent
 platelet-rich plasma or fresh whole blood.
positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) causes a reduc-
tion in venous return and thereby leads to a drop in
Gastroduodenoscopy
systemic arterial blood pressure; this effect is exacer-
This is a diagnostic procedure commonly performed
bated in animals that are hypovolaemic, in which case 
in dogs and cats. Patients often have a history of
further volume resuscitation will be required.
 chronic vomiting or chronic diarrhoea and, although
Anaesthetic monitoring should include electro-
 they can appear bright, there is usually some degree
cardiography, measurement of blood pressure (ideally
of dehydration. They may also be emaciated and
measured directly), body temperature, arterial blood
often relatively old. Hydration status should be
gases and acid-base status. If neuromuscular-
assessed at preoperative examination and intra-
blocking drugs are used, a peripheral nerve stimulator
venous fuid therapy administered overnight if the
should ideally be available to monitor the blockade (see
patient is clearly hypovolaemic and/or has electrolyte
Chapter 15). This is particularly important in patients
imbalance. A balanced electrolyte solution, such as
where there may be acid-base abnormalities.
lactated Ringer's (Hartmann's) solution, can be used
Measurement of pH, arterial blood gases, bicar-
bonate and base excess allows the veterinary sur-
inappetent, fluids should be supplemented with
geon to determine the cause of an acidosis or
 potassium chloride (Figure 22.4). Care should be
alkalosis. Severe acidosis is commonly treated with
employed if these solutions are given during anaes-
sodium bicarbonate (NaHCOs). The quantity of so-
 thesia and it is advisable to use a separate intravenous
dium bicarbonate to be administered can be calcu-
lated using the following formula:
containing high concentrations of potassium.
NaHCO,(mmol) =
0.3 x base excess (mmol/l) x bodyweight (kg)
Serum
Amount of kc! 
It is common practice to calculate the deficit and
potassium:
(mmolj ta add to
infusion-rate.
 then aim to replace one third of this over a 20-30-minute
(mmoll),
250 ml fluid
(ml/kg/h 
 period. Rapid administration of sodium bicarbonate is
<2.0
20
6
associated with hypotension and acidosis of the cen-
2.1-2.5
15
.
tral nervous system (CNS). Following treatment, the
8
magnitude of the systemic acidosis can be reassessed
2.6-3.0
10
12
and further sodium bicarbonate given if required.
3.1-3.5
7
16
Administration of sodium bicarbonate leads to an in-
crease in partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide
 Intravenous fluid potassium supplementation
(P,CO:) and ventiation needs to be augmented if 
 to correct hypokalaemia. Data from Muir and
further respiratory acidosis is to be avoided.
Dibartola, 1983.
248
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
Patients are usually premedicated with an opioid 
liver disease may dictate fhe anaesthetic drugs
for this procedure. A phenothiazine such as aceproma-
that can be used: alfaxaione may be preferable to
zine (0.01-0.03 mg/kg) can be used, providing patients
propofol in cats with: liver disease due to their inabil-
are not hypovolaemic and aged. Commonly used
ity to metabolize phenols, whilst isoflurane should
opioids include buprenorphine (0.01-0.02 mg/kg),
be used for maintenance of anaesthesia.
(euuadau) auplyad (by/bw t'o-ho) jouydioina
au1 (6y/6w 9'0-2'0) auopeuew pue (by/6w 9-2)
Percutaneous placement of gastrostomy
choice is dependent upon the temperament of the
tubes
patient, age, severity of their condition and presence 
This is a relatively straightforward procedure to per-
of concurrent illness. Some veterinary surgeons
form, although patients presenting for it can be ex-
prefer to avoid the use of opioids, because of their
 tremely debilitated from inadequate food intake fon
tendency to increase gastroduodenal sphincter tone.
 days or even weeks. lt is important to ensure that they
and use acepromazine alone: in the author's experi-
ence this does not provide a sufficient degree of
restoration of circulating blood volume, increasing
 sedation/anxiolysis.
 colloid osmotic pressure, and treating anaemia or co-
Propofol is commonly used for the induction of an-
agulation defects. Opioids form the mainstay for pre-
aesthesia, combined with diazepam, although any of
medication, e.g. buprenorphine (0.01-0.02 mg/kg) or
the other available induction agents coufd be used.
methadone (0.2-0.5 mg/kg). Other sedatives or tran-
Anaesthesia is maintained with isoflurane or sevo-
quillizers may not be required.
flurane in oxygen. Nitrous oxide is probably best
avoided because of its ability to diffuse into gas-fled 
spaces, thus leading to further increases in gastric and 
Gastric ulceration
duodenal volume during the procedure (there may also
The use of NsAIDs is the second most common
be health and safety implications if the nitrous oxide is 
cause of gastric ulcer formation in people; several
removed and vented into the immediate vicinity at the
studies have also investigated the occurrence of
end of the procedure).
gastric ulceration in dogs given NSAIDS. In healthy
Routine anaesthetic monitoring of these patients
dogs, meloxicam is not associated with gastric
 should include electrocardiography, indirect blood
ulcers although concurrent administration wifth dexa-
(for S,Oa) and temperature. Measurement of S,O, is
ulceration, once again highlighting the importance
 particularly useful since inflation of the stomach can
of avoiding the administration of corticosteroids and
lead to cranial displacement of the diaphragm, lead.
NSAIDs simultaneously.
ing to a reduction in functional residuai capacity and
 Dachshunds presenting with intervertebral disc
hypoxaemia, identified as rapid desaturation. This can
prolapse have a high incidence of gastroduodenal
be rectified by deflation of the stomach until S.O, im-
ulceration, with a prevalence of 76% in one study. The 
proves. Irrespective of changes in S,O2. deflation
 administration of ulcerogenic medication prior to ad-
-aoid aut jo pua aul le paoad aq seme pinous
mission does not influence the prevalence (Dowdle
dure. Anaesthetic depth can change quite dramati-
et al., 2003). Another study found no improvement
cally, especially when the endoscope is advanced into
when misoprostol (2 μg/kg orally q8h) or omeprazole
 the duodenum. Supplemental doses of a short-acting
(0.7 mg/kg orally q24h) were administered (Neiger et
opioid such as fentanyl may be used to obtund noci-
al., 2000). However, the treatment was only used for
 ceptive reflexes, It is routine to place a gag in the ani-
a maximum of 6 days. This study confirmed the high
mal's mouth to avoid any damage to the expensive
incidence of gastrointestinal lesions in patients with
and fragile endoscope. If regurgitation occurs during 
intervertebral disc disease.
the procedure, the oesophagus should be lavaged with 
A comparison of ketoprofen, carprofen and
water and any material present in the oropharynx
meloxicam with control animals showed no statisti-
should be removed by suction.
cally significant difference in the occurrence of gas-
Analgesics are not routinely administered follow-
 trointestinal lesions between the three drugs and the
ing this procedure, although, if anaigesia is required,
 control group. Animals receiving carprofen showed the
opioids are the drugs of choice and NsAIDs should
fewest and least severe lesions. None of the dogs
be avoided due to the risk of further gastric mucosal
showed any clinical signs related to the gastrointesti-
damage.
nal lesions (Forsyth et al., 1998).
Certain breeds of dog (e.g. German Shepherd
Inflammatory bowel disease
 Dogs) seem to be particularly sensitive to the effects
Management of anaesthesia requires preoperative
 of ibuprofen on gastrointestinal ulcer formation, whilst
evaluation of intravascular fluid volume and electro-
Labrador Retrievers show a lower incidence of
lyte status. lnflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in
gastrointestinal ulceration (Poortinga and Hunger-
humans is associated with anaemia and liver dis-
ford. 1998). There are also many reports of gastro-
ease and these should be identified prior to anaes-
intestinal ulceration and perforation in dogs given
thesia. If corticosteroids have been used in the
NSAlDs for varying periods of time. The list of
previous medical management of the condition, fur-
absolute contraindications for the use of NSAIDs
ther doses may be required during anaesthesia if
include: gastric ulceration or gastrointestinal dis-
there is any possibility that normal adrenal function 
 order of any kind; dehydration; hypotension associ-
has been suppressed (see Chapter 25). Underlying 
ated with low effective circulating blood volume
249
 Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal anc hepatic disease
Perineal hernias may be uni- or bilateral, and sur-
insufficiency; intervertebral disc disease: geriatric
gical correction can be prolonged. These patients are
patients; trauma cases; patients in shock; thrombo-
often geriatric, with an increased risk of concurrent 
cytopenia; von Willebrand's disease; use of other
disease. During the initial clinical examination, it is
NSAlDs or corticosteroids concurrently: and
important to determine whether the urinary bladder
patients with severe or poorly controlled asthma
has prolapsed into the hernia and blood biochemistry
(Mathews, 1996).
should be performed to rule out uraemia.
In hurmans, infection with Helicobacter pylori is a
 Premedication can be achieved with combinations
common cause of gastric and duodenal ulceration.
of opioids and sedatives such as acepromazine. An-
Although Helicobacter spp. occur in both cats and
aesthesia can be induced with any of the commonly
dogs, there is no correlation between the existence
used induction drugs and maintained with isoflurane
of the bacteria and the occurrence of gastric ulcers in
Aobins buinban sluaied uabixo ui aueinoaes jo
dogs and the link is tenuous in cats.
for perineal hernia repair are positioned in ventral re-
 Dogs presenting with mast cell tumours are known
 cumbency with their rear end elevated and their head
to have elevated levels of plasma histamine, which
down. This results in diaphragmatic compression and
leads to increased gastric acid secretion and an as-
impaired ventilation, which is exacerbated if the patient
sociated risk of gastric ulceration (Fox et al., 1990).
is overweight and aged. Intermittent positive pressure
Therefore, it is routine in these animals to give
ventilation (IPPV) can be used from the start of sur-
H,-receptor antagonists, such as chlorpheniramine or
gery to avoid the inevitable hypoventilation. Alterna-
diphenhydramine, and H-receptor antagonists (e.g.
tively, ventilation can be assessed using capnography
ranitidine) before surgery. H;-receptor antagonists also
asn oi uoisioap aun buyew aiojag Aneoids pue
have sedative effects; giving them as part of the pre-
IPPV. A sandbag is routinely placed under the pubis
medication allows any sedation to take effect prior to
to prevent compression of the abdomen and thereby
the induction of anaesthesia.
aid ventilation (Figure 22.5).
The large intestine, rectum and perineum
Constipation and obstipation are common clinical
problems affecting both dogs and cats. Animals may
have a history of vomiting, anorexia and weight loss.
If the problem has been present for some time patients
may be dehydrated, underweight and debilitated.
Treatment depends on the severity of the condition,
although general anaesthesia is often necessary to
remove impacted material. If dehydration is present,
to the anaesthetic. Blood samples should be taken to
determine PCV, TP, electrolytes and acid-base sta-
tus and the results should be used to guide fluid
therapy. Some enema stimulants may precipitate
vomiting, which will need to be managed during the
anaesthetic. Severely constipated or obstipated ani-
the removal of impacted faeces. They can suffer from
extreme discomfort and the use of epidural opioids
may be warranted to ease their pain and aid defeca-
tion. Ketamine (0.5 mg/kgi.v.) has also been used to
provide pain relief.
 Megacolon is recognized in cats and sometimes
in dogs. It may be the end result of chronic mech-
anical obstruction (e.g. healed, malaligned pelvic
fractures) or functional colonic obstruction, Most
cases of feline megacolon are idiopathic and repre-
 Positioning of a dog on a perineaf stand for
 perineal surgery Note the sandbag under the
sent end-stage colonic dysfunction. Colectomy is
pubis (dashed circie). This raises the abdomen a litte,
indicated in cases of megacolon, trauma, perfora-
decreases intra-aodominal pressure and permits the 
tion, neoplasia and necrotic or irreducible intus-
diaphragin to move more easly. Care must be taken to
susception. A pull-through resection of the colon is
avoid too much tension on the leg ties to prevent rerve
 usually performed when an anastomosis must be
and muscle camage.
 made in the pelvic canal. Anaesthesia can be induced
with any of the commonly available drugs such as
In contrast, animals presenting for correction of
propofol, alfaxalone/alfadolone, thiopental or
atresia ani are very young and often very small, with
ketamine. Analgesia can be provided by opioids
considerable potential for hypothermia and hypo-
and NSAIDs. An epidural injection can be given, al-
glycaemia if the surgical time is prolonged.
though abnormal pelvic anatomy can make this
Perianal fistulae are now treated with immunosup-
more difficult.
pressive therapy and rarely require surgery.
250
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
Anal gland (anal sac) resection is required when
The liver is the production site for most of the
there is evidence of recurring infection or of anal gland 
 clotting factors, apart from factor Vlil (synthesized in
adenocarcinoma. The latter may be associated with
a paraneoplastic syndrome causing persistent hyper-
inhibitors of coagulation: antithrombinIll, antiplasmin
and fibrinolytic proteins, e.g. plasminogen, It is the 
hyperparathyroidism is attributed to the secretion of a
site of vitamin K-dependent activation of factors l,
parathyroid-fike hormone by the tumour. Clinical signs
Vll, IX and X. Traditionally, measurement of clotting
：
of polyuria, polydipsia, muscle weakness, vomiting
times, i.e. prothrombin time (PT) and activated par-
and constipation may be seen. The problem needs to
tial thromboplastin time (APTT), has been used to
be addressed prior to anaesthesia to prevent acute
determine whether clotting ability is impaired. Coagu-
renal failure. Intravenous administration of 0.9%
Jation tests are relatively poor predictors of an ani-
saline at maintenance rates (or higher) promotes
mal's tendency to bleed and therefore it should be
diuresis and protects tubular epithelial cells from the
assumed that animals with hepatobiliary disease
toxic effects of hypercalcaemia.
have a greater than normal risk of bleeding after pro-
Any of the conditions described above can result
cedures involving the liver. PIVKA (proteins induced
in pain, either as a direct result of the presenting com-
by vitamin K absence or antagonists) has been
plaint or secondary to a surgical procedure. Many of
shown to be a more sensitive indicator of clotting
them are treated by the use of parenterally adminis-
ability than the PT and APTT.
tered opioids and NSAIDs. The use of morphine given
Hypoglycaemia can result due to impaired ability
epidurally prior to the start of surgery is particularly
of the liver to synthesize glucose. lIt is worthwhile to
beneficial, since many of these conditions are chronic
measure this at the start of anaesthesia or preopera-
and patients may have undergone repeated rectal
tively and supplement if it is low, e.g. 3.5 mmol/l
examinations, adding to their discomfort and hyper-
or less.
sensitivity. Epidural analgesia also makes it easier for
One of the principal functions of the liver is the
them to defecate postoperatively.
conversion of lipid-soluble compounds to water-
soluble versions, which can be excreted in the urine
or bile. Microsomal enzymes within the endoplasmic
The liver
reticulum of the hepatocyte are responsible for drug
metabolism. This is usualy a two-stage process with
The most common indications requiring anaesthesia
initiai oxidation or reduction, followed by conjugation
of patients with hepatic conditions are performance
with glucuronic or sulphuric acid. The microsomal
of liver biopsy for diagnostic purposes, surgical cor-
 enzymes referred to as the mixed function oxidase
rection of congenital portosystemic shunts and sur-
system utilize oxygen and cytochromes. Diseases of
gery for removal of hepatic tumours. Surgery of the
the liver can impair the activity of these enzymes lead-
biliary tract may be required following abdominal
ing to a prolonged duration of drug action. For this
trauma or as a result of biliary tract obstruction.
reason, it is important in cases of liver disease to use
Liver function
ible. Severely jaundiced patients are more likely to
The liver is the site of production of albumin and also
many of the coagulation factors. lt is important in
In human patients, it is advocated that diuresis be
protein, lipid and carbohydrate metabolism and also
established with mannitol preoperatively and antibiotic
the metabolism and excretion of many drugs. There-
therapy started.
fore abnormal liver function due to congenital or
Hepatic dysfunction does not alter the elimination 
jo Aue to joedw! ue aaey ueo suopuoo panboe
of atracurium, presumably because of the role of
all of these functions.
Hofmann degradation in the cessation of its effects
Albumin concentration is related to the synthetic
  o oa e h i )
capacity of the liver. Binding of a drug to plasma pro-
the presence of hepatic dysfunction or biliary tract
teins restricts its distribution and may influence the
obstruction is not increased until the dose exceeds
elimination of the drug from the body. A reduction in
0.1 mg/kg in humans.
the albumin concentration leads to an increase in the
In humans, it is still unclear what the ideal drug
fraction of the unbound drug and an enhanced effect
when highly protein-bound drugs are administered.
disease. However, patients with chronic liver dis-
aan aie shnp g pepioae s! walgoid jeuaiod siu
ease have decreased hepatic blood flow caused
slowly, to effect. Plasma protein binding is classified
by increased vascufar resistance in the portal vein.
as follows:
Therefore, hepatic blood flow and hepatocyte oxy-
genation are more dependent on hepatic arterial
High = >80%
blood flow than is the case in normal patients. The
Moderate = 50-80%
portal venous system is essentially a passive vas-
Low = <50%.
cular system, such that intraoperative decreases in
systemic arterial pressure and cardiac output can
Propofoi and diazepam are highly protein-bound,
result in reductions in portal vein blood flow. In
whereas thiopental is moderately protein-bound. In
animal models, hepatic blood flow appears to be
the dog ketamine has low plasma protein binding
adequately maintained during the administration
(45%), as does morphine (12%).
of isoflurane, desflurane and sevoflurane but not
251
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
of halothane. The ability of the hepatic artery to
severe coagulopathy, with associated abnormalities
vasodilate in response to decreases in portal vein
in the PT and APTT; in this instance the administra-
blood flow is blunted by high volatile and intravenous
tion of fresh frozen plasma is required to provide
anaesthetic concentrations. It is therefore advisable
coaguiation factors. Ultrasound-guided liver biopsy
to use balanced anaesthetic techniques, combining
carries less risk of haemorrhage and also less risk
volatile anaesthetics with nitrous oxide and short-
of infection than other techniques.
acting opioids.
After biopsy. animals should be checked for any
aie Aaul Aydeibouosen buisn buipaelg jo subis
Hepatic injury and volatile anaesthetics
hospitalized overnight and pulse rate and quality and
Halothane hepatitis is a rare but life-threatening 
mucous membrane colour are monitored to ensure
form of hepatic dysfunction, which is believed to be
that haemorrhage is not pronounced and ongoing.
an immune-mediated condition in genetically suscep-
Patients can be premedicated with an opioid such
tible human patients. The major evidence for this
as pethidine (meperidine), which has a reasonably
is the presence of lgG antibodies in the majority
short duration of action. This allows assessment of
of patients diagnosed with the condition. The anti-
whether the hepatic disease will resuit in a prolonged
bodies are directed against liver microsomal proteins
duration of action. It is also considered to be a good
on the surfaces of hepatocytes, which have been
sedative and analgesic drug. It has been advocated
covalently modified by the reactive oxidative
in the past because it reduces the tendency of patients
trifluoroacetyl halide metabolite of halothane. The
to pant and allows better visualization of the liver by
acetylation of liver protein changes these proteins
the ultrasonographer. Anaesthesia can be induced
from 'self' to 'non-self', which results in the forma-
with propofol and maintained with isoflurane in oxy-
tion of antibodies against this new protein and a
gen, Benzodiazepines are not used because their ef-
form of autoimmune hepatitis. It is thought that the
fects can be prolonged in animals with hepatic
subsequent antigen-antibody interactions are
dysfunction. Intravenous fluids are routinely used in
responsible for the liver injury described as halo-
these patients.
thane hepatitis. There is one report of halothane
hepatitis in the dog. Like halothane, the fluorinated
Ligation of portosystemic shunts
volatile anaesthetics isoflurane, enflurane and
Animals with portosystemic shunts (PSS) tend to
desflurane may form trifluoroacetyl metabolites, re-
have increases in bile acids, total bilirubin, fasting
 sulting in cross-sensitivity with halothane. The inci-
ammonia concentrations, white blood cell count and
dence of hepatitis after these anaesthetics is lower
hepatic enzymes (alkaline phosphatase (ALP), aspar-
than after halothane because the degree of meta-
tate transaminase (AST) and alanine aminotrans-
bolism is so much less. There are no reports of hepa-
ferase (ALT)). In some cases these patients have
titis following the use of isoflurane. The chemical
 prolonged bleeding times, although this is uncom-
structure of sevoflurane is such that it does not
mon. Blood urea, blood glucose and total protein
undergo metabolism to trifluoroacetylated metabo-
concentrations and PCV tend to decrease, often with
lites in dogs or cats. lnstead it is metabolized to
low albumin values. Dogs and cats with PsS are also
hexafluoroisopropanol, inorganic fluoride and form-
prone to hepatic encephalopathy, which can mani.
aldehyde. Theoretically, patients sensitized to either
fest as anything from mild depression to coma. Medi-
halothane, isoflurane or desflurane could be anaes-
cal management should be instigated prior to surgery,
thetized safely with sevoflurane.
and usually inciudes antibiotics, lactulose and a low-
Volatile anaesthetics may produce mild post-
protein diet (with an increased ratio of branched chain
operative liver enzyme abnormalities, which prob-
to aromatic amino acids), in an attempt to optimize
ably refiect alterations in hepatic oxygen delivery
the patient's condition and reduce the likelihood of
relative to demand leading to inadequate hepatocyte
postoperative complications.
oxygenation. In humans the cytosolic liver enzyme
 Patients with hepatic disease often have an exag-
α-glutathione S-transferase is a more sensitive
gerated response to centrally acting drugs. Increased
marker of hepatocellular damage than other liver
cerebral sensitivity results from an increase in the
enzyme markers. This enzyme has been shown to
number of central gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
increase following anaesthesia using isoflurane,
receptors during chronic liver failure. Hepatic dys-
desflurane and sevoflurane.
function results in a decrease in the ability of the liver
 to metabolize and inactivate drugs.A low plasma pro-
Liverbiopsy
tein concentration means that the volume of distri-
Before this procedure is undertaken all dogs and
bution of drugs that bind to albumin is reduced,
cats should have PT and APTT measured, and ide-
leading to a relative drug overdose. The clearance
ally also a platelet count. Impaired prothrombin
of drugs with a high hepatic extraction ratio is affected
production (due to biliary obstruction and the ab-
by reduction in hepatic blood flow, which occurs in
sence of bile salts to facilitate gastrointestinal
PSS and cirrhosis.
absorption of vitamin K) is usually reversed by
parenteral vitamin K therapy. Because of the high
istry should indicate whether intraoperative colloids
and/or blood products will be required. Animals with
many clinicians routinely pretreat all patients with
intrahepatic shunts are more likely to lose blood dur-
parenteral vitamin K for 24 hours prior to liver
ing surgery, and a cross-match should be performed
jo aouasaid aur u! paieoipuieuoo si Asdoig Asdoig
for whole blood or packed red cells with a suitable
252
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
donor. It is important that blood should be relatively
 hepatic metabolism and little effect upon hepatic
fresh (i.e. less than 1 week old) since ammonia
 blood flow. Sevoflurane would also be an appropri-
 concentrations increase with storage time, and admini-
ate choice since it too undergoes littie hepatic me-
stration of more ammonia may compromise neuro-
tabolism and studies in human liver transplant
logical outcome. Similarly, plasma products should be
patients have demonstrated alternative sites of me-
 fresh or fresh frozen to reduce the ammonia burden
tabolism. The use of mask induction obviates the
 given. Brain ammonia concentrations may be in-
need for the injectable anaesthetic drugs and their
creased with an alkalosis, so it is important not to 
hepatic metabolism. Since sevoflurane is less irri-
hyperventilate these patients.
tant to the airways, induction of anaesthesia with this
Animals with PSS have a poorly developed liver
drug can be smoother than that seen with isoflurane.
 with abnormal circulation, This may result in altered
uptake, metabolism and elimination of drugs, with
therefore induction time is short.
variable consequences. Opioids are commonly used
 Patients with PSS are often hypotensive even at
 since they generally provide good cardiovascular sta-
light levels of anaesthesia and therefore a balanced
bility. The liver is the major site of biotransformation
anaesthetic technique is helpful. Neuromuscular-
for most opioids, with the major metabolic pathway
 blocking drugs can be used to provide muscle relaxa-
being oxidation. The exceptions are morphine and
tion without the need for high vaporizer settings.
buprenorphine (which primarily undergo glucuroni-
Atracurium is the drug of choice because it under-
dation) and remifentanil (which is cleared by ester
 goes Hofmann elimination.
 hydrolysis). Although glucuronidation is considered 
 A peripheral intravenous catheter allows the
 to be less affected than oxidative metabolism in hu-
administration of intravenous fluids. Iif total protein
man patients with cirrhosis, the clearance of mor-
uazon ysau io pioloo onauuns e (/b og>) moi s!
 phine is decreased and oral bioavaiibility increased
plasma can be administered throughout anaes-
in these patients. The consequence of reduced drug
thesia and surgery at 5 ml/kg/h. This provides
 metabolism is drug accumulation in the body, espe-
intravascular volume support, helps to maintain col-
 cially with repeated administration. One study per-
loid osmotic pressure and also allows the admini-
formed in dogs with clinical hepatic disease showed 
 stration of clotting factors if fresh frozen plasma is
 an increased duration of action and altered elimina-
used. It may be useful to ptace a second intra-
tion of pethidine (meperidine). Use of pethidine can
 result in the accumuiation of the metabolite norpethi-
A central venous catheter allows measurement of
dine, which can cause seizures. On the other hand,
 CVP during shunt ligation. Nowadays most single
the analgesic activity of morphine relies on transfor-
jo uoesdde Ag paieal aie sunus oedauexa
mation into the active metabolite. If metabolism is
an ameroid ring and there are fewer dramatic
decreased in patients with chronic liver disease, the
changes in venous return and arterial blood pres-
analgesic action of these drugs may be compro-
 sure. Another technique used for treatment of these
mised. Finally, the disposition of a few opioids. such
aberrant blood vessels is transvenous coil emboli-
as fentanyl, sufentanil and remifentanil, appears to
zation. There is little information on the anaesthetic
be unaffected in liver disease. Therefore it is recom-
management used for this procedure, aithough the
mended that low doses and/or short-acting drugs be
 same considerations exist.
used. Patients should be assessed carefully before
Arterial catheters allow rapid measurement of
administering further doses of drug in order to avoid
 arterial blood pressure although the Doppler technique
accumulation. ldeally, one should select agents that
can also be used if an arterial catheter cannot be
may be reversed.
 placed. The dorsal pedal artery is most commonly
Premedication is usually with an opioid (e.g.
used but auricular, radial and lingual arteries can all 
methadone 0.2-0.3 mg/kg) with or without an anti-
be catheterized percutanously. An intra-arterial cath-
cholinergic. Young animals are readily sedated with
eter allows not only measurement of blood pressure
low doses of opioids. The use of phenothiazines is
 but also sample collection for blood gas anaiysis and 
not recommended, due in part to their relatively long
measurement of TP, PCV and blood glucose. Blood
duration of action and their effects on systemic blood
glucose should also be measured after the induction
pressure. The use of alpha-2 agonists is not recom-
of anaesthesia and hypoglycaemia is treated by the
mended due to their profound effects on the cardio-
administration of 5% glucose solution in the intrave-
vascular system.
nous fluid. A peripheral nerve stimulator should be
Anaesthesia can be induced either with propofol,
placed before the administration of neuromuscular-
or with isoflurane or sevoflurane in oxygen, delivered 
blocking drugs. This can be located over the facial
 by facemask. The animal is intubated and anaes.
nerve or the radial or ulnar nerve, whichever is easi-
thesia maintained with a volatile anaesthetic. Stud-
est to access.
jes performed in people suggest that either isoflurane
 Monitoring body temperature is aiso important in
 or sevoflurane should be suitable for maintenance
 small patients since they have a large surface area to
 volume ratio and readily lose core body heat due to
recoveries; while ketamine could be used, it is not
the open abdominal cavity and the sofutions used for
ideal because of the CNS side effects produced
 and because it is usually given with a benzodiaze-
tained using warm water blankets or hot air blankets
pine. Isoflurane is considered to be the drug of choice
placed around the patient; those designed for use with
in patients with liver disease due to the minimal
babies are especially useful.
253
Chapter 22  Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
parenterally administered opioids and also via the
administration of epidural morphine. Lumbosacral 
epidural injection is usually performed after the induc-
tion of anaesthesia. Preservative-free morphine is
given at 0.1 mg/kg, diluted to a volume of 0.3 ml/kg to
a maximum volume of 6 ml. This seems to provide
satisfactory analgesia despite the fact that surgery is
via a cranial abdominal approach.
 Postoperative monitoring is required to ensure
portal hypertension does not occur. This is unlikely if
an ameroid ring has been used. Seizures may occur
postoperatively and there are reports of treatment with
low dose propofol infusions (1-3.5 mg/kg boluses
followed by infusion at 0.05-0.25 mg/kg/minute).
22.6
Anaesthetized cat with oesophagotomy
tube. This patient had suffered a road traffic
Removal of hepatic tumours
 accident a week before and had been inappetent since
Surgery for removal of hepatic tumours can be chal-
then. Hepatic lipidosis ceveloped and the cat was
lenging: the major anaesthetic and surgicai problem
anaesthetized for cesophagotomy tube placement to
allow enteral jeeding.
 is haemorrhage. Reductions in venous return may also
occur due to occlusion of the caudal vena cava dur-
ing surgical manipulation of the liver. Coagulation
by mask initially until the patient can be intubated.
times should be assessed prior to surgery and ideally
Anticholinergics should also be avoided because they
fresh frozen plasma and blood should be available.
The surgical approach may require a large incision
effectiveness of any nutritional support.
 and this should be borne in mind when postoperative
 analgesia is selected. lf there is no indication of
Anticonvulsant therapy and anaesthesia
coagulopathy, the use of epidural analgesics, such
The incidence of epilepsy in the canine population is
as preservative-free morphine, can provide long-
estimated to be 2% and a proportion of these animals
lasting and profound analgesia.
will receive anticonvulsant therapy. It is not uncom-
It is routine to place two intravenous catheters to
mon to anaesthetize patients who are receiving
enable the administration of multiple forms of intra-
anticonvuisant drugs such as phenobarbital and
venous fluid therapy, e.g. crystalloids and blood. Ide-
potassium bromide. Liver enzymes should be moni-
 ally, an arterial catheter and central venous catheter
Dl uoneoaid aunoi e se Adeiaun bunp paion
 should also be placed to allow rapid assessment of 
 assess liver damage/function along with plasma drug
 arterial blood pressure and central venous pressure,
concentrations. These drugs can cause microsomal
thus guiding volume replacement.
 enzyme induction leading to an increased anaesthetic
Opioids form the mainstay of postoperative pain
drug requirement and a shorter duration of action. In
control. NSAIDs arguably should be avoided if there
 the author's experience this does not appear to have
is any concern about adequate liver function, which
a clinically perceptible effect.
makes multirmodal pain control more difficult. Alterna-
tive modalities would include lidocaine infusion, which
Diseases of the biliary tract
 seems to be effective in the control of visceral pain
 Emergency surgery for acute cholecystitis or common
(see below). However, one should bear in mind that 
bile duct obstruction is often associated with vomiting
lidocaine is metabolized in the liver.
Chronic cholestasis can impair the absorption of fat-
Feline hepatic lipidosis
 soluble vitamins, such as vitamin K. Coagulation times,
Many cats with hepatic lipidosis may require anaes-
ideally PT, APTT and PIVKA, shouid be measured
prior to surgery. If PT and/or PIVKA are prolonged
stomy tubes (Figure 22.6). lt is recommended that
then parenteral supplementation with vitamin K is
injectable agents requiring hepatic metabolism are
required. Treatment may take 24-48 hours of repeated
avoided. Prolonged anaesthetic recovery is reported
intramuscular injections to be effective. If surgery
to occur in such patients following administration of
needs to be performed sooner, the use of fresh fro-
oxymorphone (and probably hydromorphone),
 zen plasma should be considered in order to replace
 propofol, diazepam, etomidate and ketamine. Life-
factors Il, Vll, IX and X. These patients can have ileus
threatening haemolytic anaemia has been found to
and should be considered to be at an increased risk
occur folowing injection of etomidate and diazepam
for pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents.
preparations (which contain propylene glycol), as well 
Morphine causes constriction of the sphincter of
as injection of propofol. Therefore, premedication is 
Oddi with an increase in pressure within the common
provided with a relatively short-acting opioid such as
bile duct. The pressure may increase 10-fold with a
pethidine (meperidine) at a low dose. Doses in the
duration of effect of 2 or more hours. For this reason
range of 0.1-0.2 mg/kg have been advocated by other
morphine is contraindicated in patients with conditions
authors. It is recommended that anaesthesia is induced
of the gallbladder and biliary tract. Pethidine and fen-
and maintained with isoflurane (or sevoflurane) given
tanyl may also increase constriction at the sphincter
254
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
of Oddi, although pressures in the bile duct do not
clinical signs, ultrasonography and abdominocen-
 jncrease to the same extent as those seen with mor-
tesis. Intravenous fluid therapy is indicated prior to
phine. Pentazocine increases sphincter constriction,
surgery in an attempt to stabilize the cardiovascular
but nalbuphine and buprenorphine seem to have mini-
system. Hypoproteinaemia is often present and this
 mal effect. Butorphanol increases the pressure more
should be treated with colloids, such as hetastarch
 than nalbuphine but less than fentanyi.
at 1-3 ml/kg/h. Multiple intravenous catheters are
required to allow rapid fluid administration and to
overcome the problems of giving fluids which are
Pancreatic disease
incompatible with one another. A multilumen jugular
catheter is useful, not only for fluid administration but
 Anaesthetic management of patients with diabetes
also for measurement of central venous pressure.
mellitus and insulinoma is covered in Chapter 25.
Arterial catheters allow accurate measurement of
arterial blood pressure and aid anaesthetic manage-
Pancreatitis
ment, although they are difficult to place in severely
Uncommonly, patients presenting with acute pancrea-
hypovolaemic, endotoxaemic patients. In this instance
titis require anaesthesia and surgery. This is gener-
arterial blood pressure can be measured using a
ally based on ultrasonographic signs of pancreatic
Doppler technique.
abscessation. The incidence of pancreatitis in the
Anaesthesia can be induced with a combination
 canine and feline population is currently unknown and
of a short-acting opioid (e.g. fentanyl, 10 μg/kg) and
is the subject of ongoing research. The aetiology is 
diazepam at 0.5 mg/kg. Maintenance may be achieved 
also believed to differ between human and canine
with isoflurane or sevoflurane in oxygen, combined
patients. Pancreatitis is considered to be one of the 
with a fentanyl infusion at 0.3-0.7 μg/kg/minute
most painful conditions encountered in small animal
and/or lidocaine at 25-50 μg/kg/minute.
medicine and pain management is problematic. In
It is common to place a PEG tube to ensure an
humans alcohol abuse and gallstones are aetiologi-
adequate food intake postoperatively, since these
cal iactors in 60-80% of patients with acute pancrea-
animals are frequently inappetent following surgery.
titis; 10% of cases are idiopathic; and the other 10%
A urinary catheter is required to alow measurement
are due to miscellaneous causes (e.g. trauma, inher-
of urine output and to guide fluid therapy post-
ited conditions and vascular abnormalities). In dogs.
operatively. This should always be placed using an
 genetic factors appear to have the greatest influence
aseptic technique.
on the aetiology of the condition.
In humans, there are case reports of pancreatitis
developing after short-term and prolonged propofol
Visceral pain control
administration. This is thought to be associated with
propofol administration or be pre-existing. In animals
Documentation of pain in animals with medical condi-
with pancreatitis, it may be wise to avoid the use of
tions of the abdomen or neoplasia of the abdominal
drugs that contain lipid emulsion (e.g. propofol and
organs is sparse, despite the fact that pain is often
diazepam). However, studies in healthy rats have
the major presenting sign in human patients. Combi-
failed to demonstrate any direct relationship between
nations of opioids and NSAIDs are frequently used
propofol and pancreatitis. There are also reports in
for the treatment of visceral pain, most commonly fol-
 human medicine of pancreatitis develaping in patients
[owing ovariohysterectomy or castration. Buprenor-
pazgnjos shnp Agenbie pue aseasip s, buysno ym
phine (0.01-0.02 mg/kg) and carprofen (4 mg/kg i.v.
 in a lipid emulsion should also be avoided in these indi-
or s.c.) or meloxicam (0.2 mg/kg i.v. or s.c. in dogs
viduals. A study performed at the Queen's Veterinary
and 0.3 mg/kg s.c. in cats) are offen used.
School Hospital,Universityof Cambridge, failed t shw
Newer drug treatments are now being used for the
 any link between the use of propofol for the induction
alleviation of visceral pain originating from the abdomi-
 of anaesthesia and elevation in pancreatic enzyme
nal cavity. These inciude:
 levels, although triglyceride levels were increased.
 Pancreatic pain can be extremely difficult to treat
Lidocaine at 1 mg/kg i.v., followed by a constant
 successfully. ft may be unresponsive to opioids or
rate intravenous infusion at 25-50 μg/kg/minute
NSAIDs and other alternatives are under investiga-
Ketamine at 0.5 mg/kg i.v. followed by
pe suisnu ausiey suoisngi ueoog be uo
10 μg/kg/minute during anaesthesia (reduced
epidural analgesia. In humans, the coeliac ganglion
to 2 μg/kg/minute following surgery) (Wagner
 can be anaesthetized although this has never been
et al., 2002)
 attempted in veterinary species.
Medetomidine at 1 μg/kg/h
Morphine at 0.1 mg/kg/h.
Peritonitis
Other drugs are also currently under investigation.
Constant rate infusions generally require the use of
syringe drivers to ensure accurate delivery, although
all of the drugs listed above can be added to a 500 ml
With the means to provide intensive care pre- and
bag of 0.9% saline and given with the maintenance
fluid therapy (Figure 22.7).
255
Chapter 22 Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease
Drug (concentrationDose forintravenous infusion
Intusion rate
/gin
add to.0.5 1of0.9% saline add to.1.0 1 of 0.9% saline (m/kg/h)
Morphine (10 mg/ml)
13
30
60
3
Lidocaine (20 mg/ml)
 50 (give loading dose 0f t mg/kg 
500
1000
3
slowly intravenously befcre siarting
infusionj
Ketamine (100 mg/ml)
3 (give loading dose of 0.5 mg/kg i.v.
30
60
3
 before starting infusion}
Medetomidine (1 mg/ml)
)0.01-0.02 (give loading dose of
10.2
0.4
2-3
1 (uoisnjuj buueis aiojag w1 by/bii 1-t'o 
Intraverous infusions for relief of visceral pain in dogs. Morphine, lidocaine and keiamine may be
adminisrered individually or in combination (they may be mixed in the same bag of 0.9% saline).
Medetomidine shouid be administered alone. The bag should be mixed well after drug addiion and labellied ciearly. With
infusion should be stopped after 24 hours to reassess the patient. This is also important because some drugs are
should be discarded after 24 hours and new solutions made.
References and further reading
Desophagealrefuxwithout hiatalhernia.WoridJournalofSurgery
American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preoperative
1,445
Fasting (1999) Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the
Hugonnard M, Leblond A, Keroack S, Cadore JL and Troncy E (2004)
use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary
 Atitudes and concerns of French veterinarians towards pain and
aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective
analgesia in dogs and cats. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
 procedures: a report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists
31.154-163
management in dogs and cats. Canadian Veterinary Journai 37,
 evaluation of the gastroduodenal mucosa to determine the safety
539-545
of short-term concurrent administration of meloxicam and
Muir ww and Dibartola SP (1983) Fluid therapy. In: Current Veterinary
dexamethasone in healthy dogs.American Journal of Veterinary
Theraoy Vff,ed.RW Kirk, pp. 28-40.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
Research 64(11). 1369-1375
Neiger R.Gaschen F and Jaggy A (200o) Gastric mucosal lesions in
Dowdle SM, Joubert KE, Lambrechts NE, Lobetti RG and Pardini AD
dogs with acute intervertebral disc disease: characterization and
(2003) The prevalence of subclinical gastraduodenal ulceration in
effects of omeprazole ormisoprostol.Journalof Veterinary Interna
Dachshunds with intervertebral disc prolapse.Journal of the South
Medicine 14. 33-36
African Veterinary Association 74, 77-81
 Poortinga EW and Hungerford LL (1998) A case-controlled study of
 Elwood C (2006) Diagnosis and management of canine oesophageal
acute ibuprofen toxicity in dogs. Preventive Veterinary Medicine
disease andregurgitation,InPractice281421
35.115-124
Forsyih SF, Guiford WG, Haslett SJ and Godfrey J (1998) Endoscopy
Rombeau JL, Barot LR. Williamson CE and Mulien JR (1982)
of the gastroduodenal mucosa after carprofen, meloxicam and
 Preoperative total parenteral nutrition and surgical outcome in
ketoprofen administration in dogs.Journal of Small Animal Practice
 patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Armerican Journar of
39. 421-424
Surgery 143(1). 139-143
Fox LE, Rosenthal RC, Twedt DC et al. (1990) Plasma histamine and
Wagner AE. Walton JA, Hellyer PW, Gaynor JS and Mama KR (2002)
gastrin concentrations in 17 dogs with mast celltumors. Journal of
Use of low doses of ketamine administered by constant rate infusion
Veterinary Internar Medicine4,242-246
as an adjunct for postoperative analgesia in dogs. Journal of the
Heldmann E, Holt DE.Brockman DJ, Brown DC and Perkowski SZ
American Veterinary Medical Association 221. 72-75
treatment of poriosystemic shunts. Journal of Srmalf Animal Practice
On gastroesophageal reflux in anesthetized dogs. American Journa!
40(12). 590-594
of Veterinary Research 67(1). 26-31
.
256
Urogenital disease
Petro Dobromylskyj
Introduction
be markedly improved by the ability to measure elec-
trolytes and acid-base status. Even so, simple
Patients with urogenital disease present a range of
acceptance of the results needs tempering with the
knowledge that they may not reflect whole body sta-
from the stable chronic renal failure patient through to
tus, and that they may change rapidly with therapy.
the ruptured pyometra case. For non-urgent cases.
In chronic renal failure (CRF), the patient is often
preoperative stabilization may be planned well in
polyuric, polydipsic and uraemic, with weight loss, de-
advance, whereas for the acute emergency patient
pression, halitosis, anorexia, anaemia and occasional
minimal time will be available. in these cases there must 
vomiting and diarrhoea. The remaining functional
be clear-cut priorities before induction of anaesthesia.
nephrons can only cope with limited sodium and water
In addition, some patients may present with severe
loads. Approximately 30% of patients with chronic renal
problems, such as acute renal failure, which require
failure may be hypertensive (defined as a systolic blood
medical management. Anaesthesia for correction of any
pressure >180 mmHg) and receiving medication for
concurrent surgical problem will be delayed.
this, normally a calcium channel-blocking agent. Hyper-
tension makes the patient intolerant to the anaesthetic
state, with swings between hypertension and, more
Renal failure
likely, severe hypotension. The lowest acceptabte
figure for mean arterial pressure should also be set
Pathophysiology
higher for uncontrolled hypertensive patients (i.e.
In addition to the excretion of waste products, the kid-
80-90 mmHg rather than 60 mmHg). A patient with
neys have a major role in controlling the volume and
 compensated CRF can decompensate with use of
composition of blood and tissue fluids. Abnormalities
anaesthetic drugs and in the presence of hypovolaemia
：
of renal function can produce life-threatening changes
and hypotension. It is important to be sure the kidneys
in these variables over both the long and short term.
are producing urine before anaesthesia is induced and
In addition, a number of pathologicai conditions of the
therapy should be planned for correction of deficits and
urogenital system can have major effects on cardio-
replacement of ongoing losses.
vascular function, many of which are mediated through
In addition to controlling blood volume and com-
the kidneys.
position, the kidney is the source of erythropoietin and
Healthy kidneys convert approximately 5% of car-
chronic renal failure is frequently associated with a
diac output into primitive urine, the vast majority of
non-regenerative anaemia. There is also a tendency
which is reabsorbed. Selective reabsorption and se-
for an animal in renal failure to develop gastric ulcera-
cretion of plasma components and metabolic waste
tion and bleeding, and thus a reduced haematocrit is
products determine the changes in composition of the
 very likely. lf mild, this may simply emphasize the need
blood produced by the kidneys. As this system fails,
to avoid hypoxaemia at all stages of anaesthesia and
the ability of the veterinary surgeon to manipulate
recovery. If severe, then intervention to improve oxy-
these plasma variables becomes necessary for patient
gen-carrying capacity is needed. Oxyglobin, packed
survival. Manipulation of electrolyte values into nor-
red blood cells or whole blood administration are the
mal reference ranges is achieved through appropri-
options available (see Chapter 16). Oxygen delivery
ate fluid selection. As measurement of blood volume
to the tissues can also be maximized by maintaining
is technically difficult, the aim is to produce a circula-
cardiac output (heart rate and stroke volume).
tion that delivers adequate oxygenated haemoglobin 
There are several physiological changes that have
to the tissues.
effects on drug action in renal failure. It is common for 
Fluid therapy, therefore, becomes an essential tool
albumin levels to be low (*nephrotic syndrome'), so
for controlling blood volume, pH and electrolyte sta-
highly protein-bound agents such as thiopental and
tus. This applies across the range of problems. from
propofol may need marked dose reductions. The ability
a patient with stable chronic renal failure undergoing
to titrate administration of an induction agent closely
an elective procedure to one with acute postrenal
to effect, even if that involves administration over sev-
obstruction. While estimations of fluid disturbances
eral minutes, can minimize the problem of relative
can often be made from clinical examination and
overdose under these circumstances. Slow titration
 also facilitates the dose reductions needed due to the
257
Chapter 23 Urogenital disease
presence of uraemia and metabolic acidosis. Rela-
 Uraemia may be reduced by ensuring an adequate
tively few drugs are primarily excreted in the urine.
preload is maintained with intravenous fluids, but in 
The two most problematical in the past were the neuro-
severe renal failure the only effective method for re-
muscular-blocking drugs gallamine and pancuronium,
ducing uraemia preoperatively may be dialysis. Peri-
but these have minimal use in current veterinary an-
toneal dialysis is effective and practicable using a
aesthesia. Of more concern are drugs such as
glucose-rich sodium chloride-based dialysate. In ad-
morphine, ketamine and diazepam, all of which have
dition to removing metabolic waste products, dialysis
active metabolites that are primarily excreted via the
will also remove fluid from the circulation and provide
kidneys. Hydromorphone is normally rapidly excreted
glucose. Fluid balance must be maintained with intra-
through the kidneys as parent drug and metabolites
venous replacement and potassium concentration
(6-hydroxy epimers).
monitored closely, particularly as the hyperglycaemia
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) all
will be associated with an jnsulin response, which will
act by blocking the production of prostaglandins and
result in a net movement of potassium into the intra-
leukotrienes, which control renal blood flow autoregu-
cellular compartment. Haemodialysis is a referral pro-
lation and glomerular filtration pressure. Inhibition of
cedure in those countries where it is available.
this control system can result in marked deterioration
Hyperkalaemia is a rare finding in CRF (more com-
of renal function. Opioid analgesics and regional
mon in acute renal failure) but must be corrected
analgesia using local anaesthetics are devoid of this 
preoperatively as discussed below.
effect and are the preferred analgesic techniques.
A patient in acute renal failure (ARF) with hyper-
kalaemia and in uraemic crisis is severely compro-
Preoperative assessment and
mised and should not be anaesthetized. Fluid deficits,
stabilization
electrolyte imbalances, increased level of uraemia and
Patients with compensated CRF should, in addition to
decreased urine production should be corrected over
their routine clinical examination, have renal function,
the 24 hours before anaesthesia is induced.
electrolytes (including sodium, potassium, chloride,
For emergency procedures, the essentials are res-
bicarbonate and inorganic phosphate) and packed cell
toration of an adequate blood volume and a potas-
volume (PCV) measured. Arterial blood pressure can
sium concentration within the normal physiological
be estimated preoperatively using a Doppler or oscillo-
range, correction of metabolic acidosis and reduction 
 metric technique. Hypertension should be controlled,
of uraemia.
most commonly by using amlodipine, although calcium
Anaesthetic management
under anaesthesia. Medication should, however, be
Intravenous access is mandatory for patients in renal
continued up to and including the day of anaesthesia.
failure to allow closely controlled fluid and drug admin-
 providing it can be administered without food.
 istration. For patients undergoing major or prolonged 
 Urinalysis, including specific gravity, protein con-
surgery. measurement of central venous pressure
centration and bacteriology, is usefui for assessing
(CVP) is useful to assess circulating volume status.
patient status.
Placement of a central venous catheter is normally
For an elective procedure. hypokalaemia should
performed after induction of anaesthesia, unless the
be corrected with oral potassium supplementation.
patient is moribund. While the absolute value of CVP
Metabolic acidosis can be corrected with oral sodium
may be of limited clinical significance (see Chapter 7),
bicarbonate, although bicarbonate precursors, such
trend analysis will allow avoidance of volume overload
as potassium citrate, can be used to combine treat-
from over-aggressive fluid therapy. Inadequate correc-
tion of volume loss manifests as a progressive fall in
Hyperphosphataemia should be controlled with oral
CVP. A progressive rise in central venous pressure with
phosphate-binding agents. Uraemia can be partly
fluid therapy combined with a low urine output is highly
managed by dietary changes appropriate for a renal
 Suggestive of acute renal failure.
failure patient. As dietary management is rarely
 Arterial blood pressure may be monitored invasively
effective in advanced renal failure, a period of perito-
for major procedures or non-invasively for minor pro-
neal dialysis may be needed prior to general anaes-
 cedures. Doppler techniques have the advantage of
thesia. in urgent circumstances, correction using
providing qualitative information about trends in peri-
potassium-enriched intravenous fluids should be per-
pheral blood flow and are not reliant on a stable cardiac
formed with caution, typically not extending the infu-
rhythm, unlike oscillometric methods. Underestimation
sion rate beyond 0.5 mmol/kg/h and monitoring the
of systolic pressure by Doppler techniques is quite
electrocardiogram (ECG) for markers of potassium
 marked in cats and the value obtained is closer to mean
overdose. Repeated plasma potassium measurement
arterial pressure than systolic pressure. While under-
 estimation acts as a'safety net' against hypotension, it
Glucose-containing solutions should be used with
could potentialy result in volume overload and this must
care, as the insulin response produced will lower
be considered before aggressive fluid therapy is used
plasma potassium concentration further.
 to treat a perceived hypotension problem.
Metabolic acidosis can be controlled preopera-
 Pulse oximetry is particularly useful in recovery;
tively with intravenous sodium bicarbonate as
where drug-induced hypoxaemia can easily be elimi-
needed. Accurate dosage requires plasma bicar-
nated using supplementary oxygen. This is essen-
bonate measurements and care must be taken to
tial when dealing with a severely anaemic patient
avoid hypernatraemia.
where oxygen delivery is compromised despite full
258
Chapter 23 Urogenital disease
haemoglobin saturation and arterial desaturation
Whichever induction agent is chosen, attention to
would lead to rapid worsening of tissue hypoxia.
oxygenation is obligatory. A mask or chamber induc-
Capnography allows detection of hypoventilation
 tion will normally provide excellent oxygenation at the
and facilitates accurate setting of the ventilator (if one 
cost of poor airway control.
is used). Anaesthetic gas monitoring is useful if low-
flow circle circuits are used with larger patienis, al-
Inhalant anaesthetics
though ultimately the cardiovascular variables are
Sevoflurane metabolism results in production of some
more likely to dictate inhalation agent concentration.
fluoride ions, although no renal or hepatic changes
Because many chronic renal failure patients are
are found in healthy dogs. Prolonged use of this agent 
very thin, protection against hypothermia is also es-
is probably best avoided in patients with severe renal
sential. Active warming, reflective coatings, insuiation 
compromise. Isoflurane would appear to be the pre-
and heat and moisture exchangers all have a role in
ferred choice in view of cardiac rhythm stability (when
maintaining normothermia. It is also essentiai to keep
a catecholamine infusion may be required for both
the anaesthetic time to a minimum.
inotropic and vasopressor effects) and good recov-
ery profile. Nitrous oxide can be used to minimize the 
Premedication
concentration of volatile agent and the attendant cardio-
 Preoperative preparation of these patients will have
respiratory depression. While volatile agents depress
frequently involved placement of an intravenous cath-
renal nerve sympathetic activity (vasodilation), nitrous
eter some time before general anaesthesia. Under
oxide can increase sympathetic activity (vasocon-
these circumstances, premedication for chemical re-
striction). The improvement in cardiac output from
straint is often not needed and the benefits of seda-
decreased volatile agent administration may offset
tion should be weighed against the disadvantages of
the vasoconstriction caused by nitrous oxide.
possible prolonged duration of action, or failure to clear
Normocapnia (35-45mmHg (4.6-6 kPa)) is desir-
metabolites of the sedative.
able to avoid hypercapnia-induced sympathetic nerv-
Analgesia with a mu agonist opioid may be ben-
ous system activation and intermittent positive
eficial; morphine (0.1-0.3 mg/kg i.m., s.c.), hydro-
pressure ventilation (IPPV) may be needed to achieve
auopy 1o (o's "w1 by/bw 1'0-s0'0) 9uoydiou
this. Long-term IPPV reduces renal blood flow and
(0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.m., s.c.) are the preferred agents.
causes fluid retention. The benefits of short-term IPPV
NSAIDs are in general best avoided. Carprofen might 
during anaesthesia are the elimination of drug-induced 
be used if an NSAID is considered essential, but may
respiratory acidosis and effective control of votatile
be better administered postoperatively when the blood
agent uptake and elimination. The risk:benefit ratio is
volume and pressure changes associated with anaes-
determined by the needs of the individual patient.
thesia and surgery are stable.
 Short-acting opioids, such as fentanyl and its deriva-
 In view of the frequent cardiovascular problems
tives, are appropriate for intraoperative reflex suppres-
present in these patients, alpha-2 agonists are prob-
sion, but IPPV will be mandatory with these agents.
ably best avoided. For uncooperative cats, a chamber
induction may be necessary. This can also be used 
Muscle relaxants
to allow blood sampling and catheter placement in
With the commonly used neuromuscular-blocking
very fractious cats. Acepromazine at low dose rates
drugs, there are only minor concerns in patients with
(0.01-0.03 mg/kg) may allow less stressful management
renal failure. Vecuronium is longer acting in patients
 of these patients with minimal effect on blood pressure.
with CRF than in normal patients, but the effect is
small. Atracurium duration is unaffected, although, in 
Induction
humans, renal failure may predispose to the build-up
Selection of an induction agent may be influenced by
of the toxic metabolite, laudanosine, if prolonged use 
the need to avoid both hypotension and sympathetic
is undertaken. This is unlikely to be a probiem with
nervous system activation, in order to prevent diver-
the duration of administration likely to be needed in
sion of blood from the renal circulation:
veterinary patients.
A low dose of midazoiam (0.1 mg/kg i.v.)
Postoperative care
immediately followed by a slow infusion of
propofol (1-3 mg/kg i.v.) over several minutes
Analgesia
has much to recommend it, provided that oxygen
Analgesia needs will be determined by the surgery
is administered throughout the process
performed. Local anaesthetic blocks may be particu-
Thiopental is probably best avoided in patients
larly appropriate, and epidural administration of mor-
with low muscle mass and little fat reserve as
phine is also useful. Epidural opioids will generally
there is minimal scope for recovery by
have no effect on either arterial blood pressure or renal
redistribution
prostaglandin metabolism. Inclusion of a local anaes-
Etomidate (0.25-1.0mg/kg i.v.) following
thetic may result in unacceptable hypotension due to
diazepam (0.25-0.5 mg/kg i.v.) has minimal
blockade of the spinai sympathetic outflow, but can
cardiovascular side effects
reduce sympathetic discharge to renal arteries. If hypo-
Alfaxalone (Saffan; Alfaxan) has an excellent
tension is managed, then local anaesthetics could
safety record but may, in common with rapidly
be used. Arterial blood pressure should be monitored
administered propofol, be associated with 
and hypotension treated with intravenous fluids,
unacceptably low mean arterial blood pressure.
vasopressors and/or inotropes (see below).
259
Chapter 23  Urogerital disease
Supplementary pure agonist opioids can be given
particular, low dose dopamine is rarely used in
parenterally should epidural morphine produce inad-
human anuric patients; furosemide is preferred if
equate pain control. In the immediate recovery
volume overload needs correction.
period, the intravenous route of administration is pre-
ferred in order to obtain rapid control of emergence
pain. Histamine release with clinical doses of intra-
Postrenal failure: urethral
venous morphine appears to be rare and has not been
obstruction and bladder rupture
recorded with: methadone or hydromorphone. Later
Pathophysiology
increments may be given subcutaneously, provided
Complete urethral obstruction and rupture of the uri-
fluid balance is controlled.
nary tract are the two commonest causes of postrenal
Morphine is extensively metabolized to both mor-
failure in cats and dogs. Both of these are primarily
phine 6-glucuronide and morphine 3-glucuronide and
surgical problems requiring anaesthesia for their cor-
both of these may accumulate in renal failure patients.
rection. Postrenal failure results in a wide range of
As morphine 6-glucuronide is analgesic and morphine
metabolic derangements which are life-threatening yet
3-gtucuronide can produce hyperalgesia and
potentialy reversible: particularly hyperkalaemia and
neuroexcitation, careful observation of the effects of
metabolic acidosis. In addition, many patients will have 
supplementary doses is needed. For systemic dos-
been vomiting and, in some, this may be severe
ing, methadone may have some advantage in that it
-jajunoo Aeu pioe ojuiseb jo ssol eui ieul ybnoua
has no active metabolites, in the dog at least.
balance the underlying renal metabolic acidosis. Res-
Hydromorphone can also be used in cats and dogs
piratory acid-base disturbances may include either
(0.05-0.1 mg/kg i.m.). The situation in cats is less clear
 alkalosis (secondary to pain-induced tachypnoea) or
as they do not normally use glucuronide conjugation
 acidosis from restriction of diaphragmatic movement
for drug elimination; buprenorphine (0.01 mg/kg) has
(appeig pepuelsip Aissoib io wnetoiiedoin ol enp)
been shown to be more effective in experimental
models than morphine (0.2 mg/kg). In the late post-
Preoperative assessment and stabilization
operative period, when pain is less severe,
Assessment and treatment of hyperkalaemia is the ini-
buprenorphine is probably the drug of choice for both
tial priority. In addiion, sodium, chloride, haematocrit,
dogs and cats due to its longer duration of action com-
urea and creatinine measurements are useful. Assess-
pared to pure agonist opioids.
ment of acid-base disturbance needs a minimum of pH
and bicarbonate measurements, if these are available.
Fluid therapy
 In the absence of potassium measurements, some
Intravenous fluid therapy should continue in recov-
 indication of potassium status may be available from
ery. While lactated Ringer's (Hartmann's) solution is
the ECG (Figures 23.1 and 23.2). ECG changes do
not in general become obvious until plasma potas-
lar support, it will provide an excessive sodium load
sium concentration is >7 mmol/l, and therefore vis-
for a patient in renal failure. Use of a half-strength
ible ECG abnormalities indicate that potassium
sodium chloride solution (0.45%) or a 0.18% sodium
management is urgently needed before anaesthesia.
chloride solution with 4% dextrose is more logical. All
fluids shouid contain at least 5 mmol/l of potassium.
and more may be added based on measured plasma
Small or absent P waves
potassium levels (see also Chapters 22 and 25).
Peaked Twave
Prolonged P-R interval
Decreased urine output intra- or postoperatively is
Increased duration of QRS complex
a serious problem in CRF patients, and may indicate 
Shortened Q-T interval 
the development of ARF. Correction of reduced renal
perfusion pressure using a bolus of lactated Ringer's
ECG markers of hyperkalaemia. These are
solution with monitoring of central venous and arterial
 detectable with a plasma polassium >7 mmol/l 
pressures may correct the situation. The use of adrena-
and become progressively more obvious, particulariy
line or noradrenaline infusions (initially 0.1-1.0 μg/kg/
with potassium concantrations >9 mmol/l.
minute, then titrated to efect) to support the cardiovas-
 cular system does not appear to cause the anticipated
 problem of renal vasoconstriction in human studies.
Cardiovascular support with an inotrope appears
 to be better for minimizing renal damage than leav-
ing hypotension untreated. If the cardiovascular sys-
tem is stable and anuria persists, urine output may
be re-established with osmotic diuretics (glucose and
mannitol are readily available). Of the loop diuretics,
furosemide is the most commonly used. Low dose
dopamine is an effective method of stimulating urine
output in humans that has been used extensively in
Lead Il ECG from a 6-month-old kitten with
the past. Unfortunately, although diuresis may be
 renal dysplasia and a potassium concentration 
of 14 mmol/l. No P waves and a deep negative T wave
useful in managing volume overload incurred during 
are compatible with hyperkalaemia of this severity. but
cardiovascular management, there is little evidence
there is no bradycardia and the QRS complex is relatively
that this diuresis is protective of renal function. In
nor mal in duration.
260
Chapter 23 Urogenital disease
Of the management options available (Figure
23.3). the use of a calcium salt as a physiological
Alpha-2 agonists are contraindicated, due to their
antagonist to the effect of hyperkalaemia on cardiac
efects on the cardiovascular system and their sup-
myocytes is probably the most straightforward
 pression of endogenous insulin production, thus per-
approach, although it does not lower potassium
mitting hyperglycaemia. This insulin suppression will
concentration. The effect is rapid and can be folowed
interfere with the use of glucose in the management
on ECG. While the duration of effect is short, it does
of hyperkalaemia as insulin is required for the treat-
allow time to instigate measures that do lower plasma
ment to work. Phenothiazines may be safe at low dose
potassium concentration. Clearly. dilution with potas-
rates but there is little indication for their inclusion.
sium-free fluids will achieve this more rapidly than Lse
of lactated Ringer's (Hartmann's) solution, but the ad-
diazepines may be used both for their anaesthetic-
ministration of fluid containing 5 mmol/l potassium wil
sparing and muscle relaxant effects, with minimal
still reduce a plasma potassium concentration of 9
effect on the cardiorespiratory system.
mmoi/l. However, because many patients are mildly
hyponatraemic, dextrose-supplemented normal saline
Induction
will correct this while promoting endogenous insulin
Uraemic patients are likely to be extremely sensitive to
 secretion to drive potassium back into the intracel-
anaesthetic induction agents. Drugs that can be ad-
lular domain. A commercial 0.9% saline solution with
ministered very slowly, to effect, are preferred and
5% glucose is available, or alternatively a 10% glu-
hence propofol is particularly useful. Etomidate may
cose soiution can be prepared by adding 200 ml of a
also be used in view of its good cardiovascular profile.
50% glucose solution to a litre of 0.9% saline.
Alternatively ketamine (2.5-5.0 mg/kg i.v.) combined
with diazepam (0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.v.) may be used for
induction as the initial recovery from ketamine is due
Calcium gluconate 10% (0.5 ml/kg slowly i.v. (over 10-20 minutes)
with ECG monitoring
to redistribution rather than either metabolism or ex-
50% Dextrose (1-2 ml/kg i.v.); allows endogenous insulin 
cretion, so a singie dose of 5 mg/kg or less is unlikely
 production to lower blood potassiunm
to produce a protracted recovery. Co-administration of
Sodium bicarbonate (1-2 mmol/kg i.v.); corrects or reduces
an opioid or benzodiazepine willfurther reduce the dose
metabolic acidosis
 of induction agent required. Rapid-onset, short-acting
Insulin (neutra) (0.25 IU/kg i.v. plus 2 g/lU dextrose i.v., followed by
 opioids such as fentanyl (3 μg/kg i.v.) or alfentanil (10
 intravenous fluids containing glucose], Monitor for hypoglycaemia
palwl jo aie jng shop ul jnjasn isow aui aue (a! by/bn
Drain peritoneal urine if appropriate; peritoneal dialysis
Dilute potassurm with potassium-free intravenous fluids
with these agents can lead to profound hypotension;
an anticholinergic included in premedication will avoid
 Methods for managerent of hyperkataemia.
this problem, or it can be used as treatment.
Preoxygenation should protect against hypox-
Correction of metabolic acidosis with bicarbonate
 aemia during the period of respiratory depression in-
will produce similar intracellular movement of potas.
variably associated with slow parenteral inductions.
sium (see Chapter 16).
 particularly those involving opioids.
Maintenance
In cases of ruptured urinary tract, the drainage of po-
tassium-rich urine from the abdomen is beneficial; once
During maintenance of anaesthesia, there is no ben-
efit from a respiratory acidosis superimposed on a
a peritoneal catheter is placed, it can be used to irri-
gate the peritoneum with a warmed potassium-free
metabolic acidosis, so 1PPV is the preferred method 
solution. Direct loss of fluid into the inflamed perito.
of ventilation. The use of capnography to monitor the
neum will contribute to hypovolaemia, and fuid loss in 
effectiveness of ventilation is extremely useful.
excess of the estimated urine volume will need to be
Isoflurane is probably superior to halothane because
replaced as part of management. In cases of urethral
of its reduced tendency to provoke arrhythmias if
inotrope infusions are needed. It is unclear whether
obstruction, cystocentesis will provide immediate tem-
porary management. Placement of a prepubic balloon-
 sevoflurane would have any significant advantage
tipped cystostomy tube will allow repeated drainage of
over isoflurane in these patients.
urine if surgery must be delayed for any significant
Good oxygenation is paramount and at least 50%
period. Some urgency is still required for relief of
inspired oxygen is preferred until a reliable pulse oxi-
urinary obstruction, as progressive damage to the
meter reading is available, at which point increased
urethrat lining will occur with prolonged calculus reten-
inspired nitrous oxide may be used to minimize the
tion. It is also occasionally practical to pass a fine gauge
need for volatile agent. Alternatively pure oxygen may
urinary catheter past relatively small or porous stones
be used as the carrier gas and an opioid, adminis-
thesia, at the cost of some increased urethral trauma.
nitrous oxide.
 Neuromuscular blockade is not needed for either
Anaesthetic management
feline patients with urethral obstruction, or for simple
retropulsion of uroliths in dogs where the plan is for
Premedication
ing rupture of the bladder or urethra, neuromuscular
of premedication, as patients will already have
blockade may be of marked benefit for surgical access.
261
Chapter 23 Urogenital disease
Atracurium or vecuronium may be used. A modest in-
and will normally require volume replacement.
crease in duration of action of vecuronium may occur
Endotoxaemia is also possible in severe cases and
will require aggressive antibiotic treatment and cardio-
or durations of administration. Prolonged administra-
vascular support.
tion would make monitoring with a peripheral nerve
Acid--base disturbances may range from alkalosis
stimulator obligatory (see Chapter 15).
(secondary to chloride loss from persistent vomiting)
Arterial blood pressure, preferably estimated by
Doppler for short procedures, or by direct measure-
Under these conditions there is no logical method of
ment for major procedures, gives an overall picture of
determining acid-base status without in-house meas-
 the effect of the anaesthetic on the cardiovascular
uremenf. Electrolyte disturbances are equally impor-
 system. Oscilometers may be useful when the pulse
tant, with particular attention paid to plasma potassium
is regular. Eiectrocardiography is essential for an-
 concentration. while uncorrected acid-base distur-
alysis of arrhythmias in those patients with abnormal
bances may be tolerable for short periods. extremes of
 potassium concentrations. Repeated measurements
hypo- or hyperkalaemia, either primary or secondary
of plasma potassium and acid-base status allow
to pH changes, are never acceptable.
logical management of fluid therapy. lt is particularly
The dehydration produced by continuous dilute
important to avoid over-treatment of hyperkalaemia,
urine output with concurrent severe vomiting is cap-
as the resulting hypokalaemia has its own associ-
able of producing extreme plasma volume deficits.
ated problems.
Clinical assessment can be aided by haematocrit
measurement (see Chapter 16). Many dogs with
Cardiovascular collapse
chronic pyometra will have pre-existing anaemia sec-
Cardiovascular collapse can occur quite suddenly in
ondary to chronic infection before crisis, coupled with.
these patients and is particularly probable in poorly sta-
acute blood loss into the uterine contents. Relatively
bilized patients. Drainage of large volumes of perito-
normal haematocrit values in dehydrated patients may
neal fluid/urine under anaesthesia can remove
drop rapidly following fiuid resuscitation.
The reproductive cycle of the bitch, with elevated
allow marked loss of protein-rich fluid through the
blood progesterone levels in the postoestrous period,
infiamed peritoneal lining. During anaesthesia for
predisposes to insulin resistance and the increased like-
cystocentesis or urethral catheterization, the sudden
lihood of new-onset diabetes in the postoestrous
loss of severe visceral nociceptive input from the
period. As this is the commonest time for the develop-
u el peyeu e aeidioaid Aew lappela papuaisi
 ment of pyometra, the possibility of concurrent diabe-
plasma catecholamine levels, with associated cardio-
tes should be considered in all cases. Emergency
vascular collapse. Immediate resuscitation with fluids
ovariohysterectomy in a criticaily ill patient without de-
-jou no aueuape) sadoou! pue (jenu! y/by/w 0o)
tecting and managing any concurrent diabetes is likely
adrenaline at 0.1-1.0 μg/kg/minute, titrated to effect)
to result in severe ketoacidosis and poor outcome.
will be needed, combined with appropriate reassess-
Endotoxaemia is associated with marked insulin resist-
ment of anaesthetic delivery.
ance and will further complicate management.
Postoperative care
Preoperative assessment and stabilization
Analgesia provided by opioids will be needed for all
On the basis of the above considerations it would ap-
patients. Any opioid-induced tendency to urinary re-
pear that clinical assessment of dehydration, haem-
tention will be immaterial, as an indwelling urinary
atology. electrolytes, renal function, blood and urine 
catheter should be placed to allow monitoring of
 glucose and, if available, acid-base measurements are
urine output. In general, a urine output of >1 ml/kg/h.
the preferred tools for assessing the morbidity of a pyo-
is acceptable.
 metra patient. Preoperative assessment may reveal a
Some patients will show a marked postoperative
clinically healthy patient that requires little more than
diuresis, which may need fluid therapy well in excess
 an elective ovariohysterectomy with the normal care-
 of maintenance requirements. Monitoring of electro-
ful attention to fluid balance appropriate to a patient
lytes and acid-base status should be continued for at
undergoing a laparotomy. Intravenous access, fluid
least 24 hours after anaesthesia, and until normal oral
therapy and appropriate monitoring are essential.
intake is restored.
For critically ill patients major resuscitation is ap-
propriate preoperatively. There is little justification for
immediate surgery without at least partial correction
Pyometra
of fluid deficits and potassium abnormalities. Hyper-
ui se totuwoo se aq oi leadde lou saop euaeiey
Pathophysiology
postrenal failure patients, but conversion of a normal
The majority of reproductive tract surgery in female
potassium concentration to a hypokalaemic value can 
animals requires access to the abdominal cavity. The
be inadvertently achieved. This can even occur while
using lactated Ringer's (Hartmann's) solution, despite 
ectomy is undoubtedly pyometra, Animais may be
its potassium content of 5 mmol/l, especially if therapy
presented with a range of metabolic disturbances,
corrects an unmeasured metabolic acidosis.
For patients with a large estimated volume deficit.
treme abnormalities of fluid, electrolyte and acid-
central venous access is desirable. Central venous
base balance. Concurrent prerenal failure is common
catheters have the advantages of a potentially larger
262
Chapter 23 Urogenial disease
bore relative fo peripheral venous lines, and are
cause histamine release allows bolus administration.
less likely to be contaminated with either vomit or
 Methadone, fentanyl, sufentanil or alfentanil are use.
vaginal discharge.
ful agents. Even hydromorphone (0.15 mg/kg i.v.) can 
While a single central venous pressure measure-
be used. Preoxygenation by close-fitting facemask is
ment is of relatively little use because of the large
started before opioid administration. Time is allowed
variation in values found in dogs. response to a fluid
for the opioid to take effect and small increments of
challenge can be a useful guide to the efficacy of
propofol or midazolam are then given until intubation 
therapy. A prompt rise, followed by return to baseline,
ssaiddns o Alge jood seu welozepiin 'alqissod s!
can be taken as an indication that fluid administration
swallowing reflexes, even if the patient is surgically
can be continued. A sustained rise following a bolus
unresponsive. This is much less noticeable when
suggests caution and close monitoring for signs of
 propofol or ketamine/diazepam is used for induction.
pulmonary oedema (see Chapter 7).
Following intubation, the patient is then ventilated
 Although polydipsia and polyuria are common signs
mechanicaily (or manually) with enough volatile agent
of pyometra, severe hypovolaemia (which can occur
to produce good surgical conditions and a stable car-
rapidly once vomiting limits water intake) can result in
diovascular system. In generai, short-acting opioids
 anuria due to prerenal failure. Restoration of urine out-
need to be administered by either constant rate infu-
put is essential in these patients prior to anaesthesia.
sion or frequenily repeated boluses to maintain sta-
The advantages of an indwelling urinary catheter must
ble operating conditions. Longer-acting drugs such
be weighed against its presence in a highly contami-
as methadone or hydromorphone will often provide
nated vagina. In general the problems of iatrogenic
intense analgesia for the duration of surgery.
cystitis are probably less than those caused by unde-
tected anuria, so a urinary catheter can be justified.
Monitoring
Patients with a ruptured pyometra require aggres-
Monitoring during anaesthesia shouid folow normal
sive treatment prior to anaesthesia as they will have
protocols for major surgery. Arterial blood pressure is
septicaemia and frequently have severe hypotension
the main guide for avoiding relative overdose of an-
that is refractory to fluid therapy. in addition to fluid 
aesthetic agents in these critically ill patients.
and antibiotic therapy, support with inotropes may be
Capnography will demonstrate when spontaneous
needed. When open drainage of the abdomen is re-
ventilation is adequate, although in the absence of
quired, attention to fluid and electrolyte balance and
a ventilator one is limited to manual support of breath-
enteral nutrition are essential, as massive loss of 
ing if hypercapnia is detected. Although pulse oximetry
 protein-rich fluid will be ongoing for severail days.
provides limited information about a healthy patient 
breathing high concentrations of oxygen, if there is
Anaesthetic management
serious lung pathology hypoxaemia may occur. How-
ever, in all patients, pulse oximetry is parficularly use-
Premedication
ful to detect hypoxaemia during recovery Measurement
Premedication may be varied to suit the severity of
of anaesthetic gas and inspired oxygen concentrations
the illness. Moribund patients require lifte if any pre-
is helpful if low-flow circle systems are used.
medication. Apparently healthy patients may be pre-
Septicaemic patients can develop severe hypoten-
medicated as routine, for example with very low dose
sion during anaesthesia due to a combination of
acepromazine (0.01-0.03 mg/kg) and an opioicd.
hypovolaemia, depressed cardiac output and periph-
eral vasodilation. These patients will be critically ill
Induction and maintenance
and require both central venous and arterial pressure
Induction of anaesihesia should be performed slowly,
monitoring to guide management of the circulation.
titrating the induction agent carefully to effect. Propofol
Initial management of hypotension with crystalloid may
may have some advantage under these circumstances
be supplemented with colloid preparations (see Chap-
as administration over several minutes is usually ex-
ter 16). In those patients where anaemia is present,
citement free and allows continued oxygen administra-
whole blood or Oxyglobin provide combined colloid
tion by mask throughout the process. Boluses of
and oxygen-carrying capacity.
-se Auanba are rayi se pepioae aa pnous lojodaid
-ue aeudoudde pue Adeeul pin eenbape ueum 
sociated with a marked fall in blood pressure. induc-
tion of anaesthesia with propofol is associated with an
biood pressure, inotropes and vasopressors are
increased risk of postoperative wound infections and
needed to provide an adequate perfusion pressure
might be better avoided in septicaemic patients.
for vital organs. Adrenaline is the most readily avail
Seriously ill dogs are best managed with a high-
able agent suitable for cardiovascular support. As a
dose opioid, or diazepam-etomidate induction, or an 
1! 'siuobe loidaoouaipe-eieg pue -eudie pauigwoo
opioid followed by ketamine/benzodiazepine (see
increases both cardiac output and peripheral vascu-
euan aie suoonpul pioido asop ybin (el eideyo
lar resistance. An initial infusion rate of 0.1 μg/kg/minute
ally associated with cardiovascular stabiity but marked
can be titrated upwards to 1.0 μg/kg/minute depend-
ing on response. Noradrenaline can be used at the
profound bradycardia at those dose rates used to
same dose rate as adrenaline and has greater selec-
minimize the requirement for other induction agents.
tivity for alpha adrenoceptors; it will also effectively
Therefore, a small dose of atropine or glycopyrronium
raise blood pressure. There is some concern that us-
may be needed immediately prior to induction. Choos-
ing a rapid-onset opioid with minimal tendency to
to the splanchnic and renal beds, as it undoubtedly
263
Chapter 23 Urogenital disease
does in healthy animals. Under conditions of
been involved in their investigation, there is always
endotoxaemia with marked peripheral vasodilation,
the possibility of iatrogenic infection in the cyst with
this is less relevant and improvement in perfusion
major septic consequences.
Testicular torsion is a rare occurrence in normal
compromise. Dobutamine may be used at 5-10 μg/
entire male dogs, but somewhat more common if there
kg/minute provided preload is adequate, but results
is a testicular tumour. Although these patients have
with this agent in dogs appear variable.
lost minimal blood volume, they are likely to present 
in extreme pain, which will need aggressive manage-
Postoperative care
ment preoperatively and prompt surgery. Postopera-
 The main requirements in recovery are analgesia and
tive management should be routine.
a stable cardiorespiratory system. If a high dose of
long-acting opioid or an ongoing opioid infusion is 
used, there is the possibility of drug-induced respira-
References and further reading
tory depression in recovery. Drug-induced hypox-
aemia is easily corrected with supplementary oxygen,
Cauikett NA, Cantwell SL and Houston DM (1998) A comparison oi
 indirect blood pressure monitoring techniques in the anesthetized 
but it must be borne in mind that this does not correct
cat.Veterinary Surgery 27.370-377
the associated hypercapnia. Modest hypercapnia is
Cone EJ. Phelps BA and Gorodetzky CW (1977) Urinary excretion of
ate postoperative period.
 Ongoing fluid therapy with continual electrolyte 
in renal dysfunction. Clinical Pharrmacokinetics 31(6), 410-422
and acid-base assessment are also essential post-
Dyson D (1992) Anesthiesia for patients with stable end-stage renal
disease. Veterinary Clinics of North America Smal Animal Practice
operatively, depending on the condition of the patient.
22(2). 469-471
In the postoperative period, critically ill patients may
Ishida Y, Tomori K, Nakamoto H, Imai H and Suzuki H (2003) Eifects af
be given parenteral feeding via the central venous
antihypertensive drugs on peritoneal vessels in hypertensive dogs with
mild renal insufficiency. Advances in Perilonear Dialysis 19, t0-14
line used for fluid administration and CVP measure-
Kalthum W and Waterman AE (1990) The renal excretion of pethidine
ment. Alternatively, feeding though an oesophag-
administered postoperatively to male dogs. British Veterinary
Journa/ 146(3). 243-248
ostomy or gastrostomy tube placed during surgery
Ma H and Zhuang X (2002) Selection of neuromuscular blocking agents
is a more physiological route of nutrition, provided
in patients undergoing renal transplantation under general
 anesthesia. Chinese Medical Journal (Engl) 115(11). 1692-1696
vomiting has stopped. Oral intake of food and water
Martis L, Lynch S, Napoli MD and Woods FF (i981) Biotransformation
are the most reliable markers for discontinuation of
of sevoflurane in dogs and rats. Anesthesia and Anaigesia 60(4),
 intravenous support.
186-191
Milne RW, McLean CF, Mather LE et al. (1997)} Influence of renat iailure
on the disposition of morphine, morphine-3-glucuronide and
morphine-6-glucuronide in sheep during intravenous infusion with
morphine.JournatofPharmacology andExperimentatTherapeutics
Other genital conditions
282(2). 779-786
Par-Soo CK. Wang C. Chakrabarti MK and Whitwarm JG (2001)
There are several other reproductive problems that
sympathetic activity in rabbits. European Journal of Anaesthesiology
require a similar approach to the classic pyometra
17(5). 311-318
Robertson SA, Hauptman JG, Nachreimer RE and Richter MA (2001)
case. in particular, prostatic abscesses in male dogs
 Effects of acetylpromazine or morphine on urine production in
may be large and associated with septicaemia. Al-
halothane-anesthetized dogs. American Journal of Veterinary
though these are primarily managed medically in the
Research 62(12). 1922-1927
 Schenk HD, Radke J, Ensink FB et af. (1995) Interactions between renal
-ausaeue alnban Aieniuasa Aew Aaut 'sabeis jeu!
and general hemodynamics in fentanyl, droperidol, ketamine:
sia for drainage or marsupialization. As for the pyo-
thiopental and in peridural anesthesia - animal studies.
Anaesthesiology and Reanimation 20(3), 60-70
metra patient, this requires good abdominal access
 Sun L, Suzuki Y, Takata M and Miyasaka K (1997) Repeated low fow
 in a seriously ill animal and management as for pyo-
 metra would be appropriate.
beagles. Matsui 46(3), 351-357
Wright M (1982) Pharmacologic effects of ketamine and its use in
Paraprostatic cysts may require anaesthesia for
veterinary medicine. Journal of the Anerican Veterinary Medical
 marsupialization but do not usually involve septicae-
Association 180, 1462-1471
mia. A routine protocol for major abdominal surgery
Yeh SY, Krebs HA and Changchit A (198t) Urinary excretion of
meperidine and its metabolites. Journal of Pharmaceuticaf Science
would be appropriate. However, if paracentesis has
70(8). 867-870
264
Caesarean section
Robert E. Meyer
Introduction
were administration of isoflurane for induction and
maintenance (34%), and administration of propofol for
Although much has been published on the subject of
induction followed by administration of isoflurane for
Caesarean section anaesthesia for dogs and cats.
maintenance (30%).
 there are limited case-based data available to sup-
A later analysis of the same data showed that the
 port or recommend best veterinary practice. The pur
following factors increased the likelihood of all pup-
pose of this chapter is to review the recent veterinary
pies surviving following delivery:
literature on small animal Caesarean section, to re-
view the relevant pharmacological and physiological
 Surgery was not an emergency
changes that occur in the parturient small animal
■
 Dam was not brachycephalic
 patient, and make best-practice recommendations for
 Four puppies or fewer in the litter
 maternal and neonatal patient care.
No naturally delivered or deformed puppies
 All puppies breathed spontaneously at birth.
At least one puppy vocalized spontaneously at birth
Review of outcome studies in small
 Neither methoxyfiurane nor xylazine was part of
arimals
 the anaesthetic protocol.
Dogs
Methoxyflurane (used by four practices on 19 lit-
 Puppy mortality rates are slightly higher for Caesar-
ters) and the alpha-2 agonist xylazine (used by seven
ean section accompanying dystocia than for normal
practices on 23 litters) were associated with dead-
birth. In problem-free vaginal deliveries, the normal
born puppies. However, 13/23 litters exposed to
proportion of dead-born puppies is reported to be
xyiazine were also exposed to ketamine. The authors
between 2.2 and 4.6% and the proportion of puppies
acknowledge that xylazine may have adversely in-
that die in the immediate neonatal period is similar.
fluenced the ketamine data in their study. No other
When dystocia is not followed by Caesarean section.
15.6% of puppies are stiliborn and 7.9% of live pup-
associated with puppy survival at time of birth. It must
pies may die soon after birth.
be noted that methoxyflurane and halothane are no
Moon et af. (1998), in a multicentre prospective
longer available in the USA.
case series study, reported perioperative management
Similarly, no anaesthetic agents were positively or
and mortality rates for 808 bitches undergoing Cae-
negatively associated with neonatal survival at 2
sarean section in North America between December
hours, suggesting there were no differences in residual
1994 and February 1997. For 3410 puppies delivered
anaesthetic effects at this time. This finding runs coun-
by Caesarean section, survival rates were 92% im-
ter to the clinical impression that anaesthetic drugs
mediately following delivery. 87% at 2 hours and 80%
with a longer duration of action (e.g. long-acting
at 7 days. In 76% of the litters (614/807), all puppies
opioids, cyclohexamines, benzodiazepines) might
 delivered by Caesarean section were born alive. By
influence puppy survival, when residual depressant
 comparison, the survival rates for 498 puppies born
effects have been reported in human babies and in
naturally during the study were 86% immediately fol-
primates after Caesarean section. The authors specu-
lowing delivery, 83% at 2 hours and 75% at 7 days.
late that differences between drugs were not appar-
Maternal mortality rate was reported to be 1% (9/808): 
ent at 2 hours because all dams and puppies were
however, 5 of these deaths (56%) were attributed to
still experiencing generalized depression following
 pneumonia. Given the study design, it is not known at
anaesthesia and surgery. Both propofol and isoflurane
what stage the pneumonia occurred, but aspiration
were associated with improved neonatal viability at 7
seems the likely cause. Surgery was performed on
days, although the authors acknowledge that these
an emergency basis in 58% of the cases (453/776),
agents may have been positively influenced by the
most commonly on the Bulldog, Labrador Retriever,
presence of spontaneous vocalization and by litter size
Boxer, Corgi and Chihuahua breeds. Breeds associ-
in their analysis.
ated with elective surgery were Bulldog, Labrador
Using the same data set, Moon-Massat and Erb
Retriever, Mastiff, Golden Retriever and Yorkshire
(2002) reported factors affecting puppy 'vigour', de-
Terrier. The most common methods of anaesthesia
fined as spontaneous breathing and vocalizing within 
265
Chapter 24 Caesarean section
2 minutes of delivery. The use of inhaled anaesthet-
puppies that died within the first 20 minutes after
ics decreased the odds that all puppies would be
 delivery (e.g. no spontaneous ventilation). Consid-
.
breathing or any puppies wouid be moving at deliv-
ery, emphasizing the need for light levels of inhala-
duration of time that the dam had been in labour prior
tion anaesthesia. The use of ketamine decreased the
to Caesarean section, but this was mitigated some-
odds that all puppies would be breathing spontane-
jo legwnu aui uo paseg uoeossejo dnoin Ag ieym
live and dead puppies born prior to Caesarean
with no puppies spontaneously moving at birth. This
section. When no puppies had been born prior to
finding is consistent with other prospective and retro-
Caesarean section (Figure 24.1), subsequent post-
spective veterinary reports, but runs counter to rec-
operative puppy survival rates reported by Funkquist
ommendations for human obstetrical practice (see
et al. for propofol-isoflurane anaesthesia (89%) are
below). Moon-Massat and Erb were not able to deter-
 mine the reason for this difference between puppies
by Moon et al. (1998).
and human infants within the confines of their retro-
In a prospective clinical study, Luna et al. (2004)
spective study. Although the use of inhaled anaes-
examined the effect of four different anaesthetic com-
thetics, ketamine and thiobarbiturates adversely
binations on neurological and cardiorespiratory activ-
 influenced puppy vigour at delivery, these drugs did 
ity in puppies at birth. Chlorpromazine (0.5 mg/kg i.v.)
 not influence neonatai mortality.
was administered to 24 at-term bitches. Six bitches
 Neonatal survival rates following propofol induc-
were in each group and received either thiopental (8
tion and isoflurane maintenance were reported by
mg/kg i.v.), midazolam (0.5 mg/kg i.v.) with ketamine
Funkquist et a. (1997) in a prospective clinical study
(2.0 mg/kg i.v.) or propofol (5 mg/kg i.v.) prior to
where 141 bitches underwent emergency Caesar-
enflurane maintenance, or epidural anaesthesia with
ean section. Anaesthesia was induced with propofol
lidocaine (2.5 mg/kg; 2% solution) and bupivacaine
(6.5 mg/kg i.v,) followed by isoflurane in 65% nitrous 
(0.625 mg/kg; 0.5% solution) with adrenaline prior to
oxide and 35% oxygen for maintenance. An inten-
Caesarean section. Puppy neurological reflexes were
tional 20-minute delay was permitted following in-
reported to be least depressed by epidural anaes-
duction and before delivery of puppies to allow time
thesia, followed by propofol-enflurane, thiopental-
for propofol clearance. Of 412 puppies delivered by
enflurane and midazolam-ketamine-enflurane. There
Caesarean section, 71% (293) survived, 3% (13)
was no difference in puppy heart rate at delivery
were born alive but died within 20 minutes of deliv-
between groups, although respiratory rate was
ery, and 26% (106) were stillborn. Puppy viability was
highest in puppies delivered after epidural anaes-
described as 'often...alert on delivery; most typically
thesia and lowest in the propofol group and the
however, they were initially lethargic but suddenly
became lively and remained so after massaging and
dams receiving midazolam-ketamine died within the
respiratory stimulation'. Funkquist et af. retrospec-
first 24 hours after surgery and one of the 24 puppies 
tively compared their propofol-isoflurane results with
from dams receiving propofol-enflurane died 1 hour
their own prior work, where Caesarean section was
after anaesthesia. The authors concede that differ-
performed using epidural lidocaine anaesthesia or
ences in mortality between groups cannot be attrib-
intravenous thiopental administered to effect followed
uted solely to the anaesthetic induction agents
by immediate delivery of puppies (Figure 24.1). The
because other factors, such as duration of labour and
data were further subdivided into groups depending
puppy condition, may contribute to mortality.
on whether puppies had been born prior to Caesar-
Conventional wisdom holds that prolonged anaes-
 ean section. The puppy mortality rate during the first
thesia time or a long delivery time are both associ-
24 hours was highest with thiopental (20%) and low-
ated with increased neonatal mortality due to fetal
est with propofol-isoflurane (6%) and epidural an-
exposure to anaesthesia as well as reduction in uter-
aesthesia with lidocaine (4%). These rates include
ine perfusion associated with surgical incision and 
Group
Epidural idocaine
3
Propofolisolurane/N
0-372pups
RY
Immedate surgical renoval20minute delay ater induction
n-121 pups
Group 1 (no puppies born prior.
83% (229/277)
56% (32/57)
89% (197/221]
to Caesarean sectionj
Group 2 (only live puppies born 
72% (46/64)
34% (12/35)
70% (55/79}
prior to Caesarean section)
Groups 3 (both live and dead puppies born:
71% (22/31)
7% (2/29)
68% (54/80)
prior to Caesarean section) and 4 (only dead
puppies born prior to Caesarean section) 
protocols.
266
Chapter 24 Caesarean section
manipulation. Indeed, when propofol was used for
induction, Funkquist et al. (1997) allowed 20 minutes
Caesarean section accompanied by en bloc resec-
to elapse prior to puppy delivery in order to permit
tion of the ovaries and uterus. A 58% incidence of
fetal clearance; in contrast, in their earlier study deliv-
dead-born kittens was reported in this group of cats;
ery was immediately initiated folowing thiopental in-
of live-born kittens, 10% died during the first week ex
duction in an attempt to limit fetal exposure. Luna et 
utero. One queen died 9 days affter surgery as a re-
sult of an ongoing coagulopathy, Without scientific data
lowing injectabte induction and the start of inhalant
to support a best-practice approach, anaesthetic
maintenance, and 30 minutes following epidural an-
choice for feline Caesarean section will continue to
aesthesia. Surprisingly, Moon-Massat and Erb (2002)
depend largely on the drugs and facilities available,
found no evidence that a very short time between in-
as well as the veterinarian's understanding of the
duction of anaesthesia and delivery was advanta
physiological and pharmacological changes accom-
geous, and puppy survival was not affected by either
panying pregnancy.
long anaesthesia time (defined as >45 minutes) or a
long delivery time (>10 minutes).
Applied physiology of pregnancy
Cats
In contrast to dogs, very few outcome data are avail-
 A number of physiological changes are present in the
able for feline Caesarean section. In one study of fe-
line dystocia, 123 Caesarean sections were performed
aesthetic management. These changes are detailed
but no outcome data were given for either maternal
below and summarized in Figure 24.2.
Physialogical change
 Decrease in FRC, TLV
Closer to alveolar closing
Atelectasis
Intermittent sighs during surgery
capacity
Higher oxygen requirements and an
If apnoea occurs
Hypoxaemia occurs quickly
5-7 minutes of preoxygenation with
increase in V.
mask at arateof5-6 l/minute;oxygen
suppementationdring sugery
 Decreased FRC and increased VA
Uptake of inhalant
 Inhalational overdose possiole 
Vigilant attention to anaesthetic
 anaesthetics is more 
depth
 rapidly achieved 
Increases in cardiac output and blood
I If not maintained,
 Decreased blood flow to the
Blood pressure monitoring.
voume
hypotension
fetus
 intravenous fluids intraoperatively
± pre- and postoperatively
 Delay in compensatory cardiovascular
 Less responsive to 
Continued hypoperfusioninface
Prophylactic therapy; imnediate
reflexes to blood loss and hypovolaemia
 therapeutic measures
 of standard treatment; anaemia 
 aggressive treatment
 as a result of volume lcading 
 Sedative effects of progesterone;
Anaesthetic requirements
Apparent sensitivty to
Vigilant atention to anaesthetic
oestrogen and progesterone-activated 
}and drug clearance 
anaesthetics; overdose with
depth
pain transmission prevention 
}decreased
 injectables or inhalants possible
Delayed gastric emptying
Increased likelinood of 
Rapid induction technique and
}stomach ingesta
protection of the airway
Decreased oesophageal sphincter tone
 Increased incidence of
Regurgitation and aspiration on
Extubatewhenaryngeareffexes
{regurgitation
 induction or recovery causing
present
 aspiration pneumonia with
increased pulmonary damage
lncreased gastrin levels 
Low pH of gastric luid
Diaphragm pushed
 Enlarged abdomen
Hypoventilation, hypotension
Assist venlation give oxygenand
 forward
 intravenous fluids
 Physioiogical changes that occur during pregnancy and affeci the anaesthetic management of the patient.
and Moon (2001).
267
Chapter 24 Caesarean section
 Oxygen consumption is increased by 20% in the 
Increased progesterone levels during pregnancy
parturient patient. To meet this increased oxygen de-
lead to delayed gastric emptying, increased gastric
mand, tidal volume is increased by 40% and respira-
volume and reduced gastro-oesophageal sphincter
tory frequency by 10%, to provide a 50% increase in
tone. The increasing physical size of the uterus causes
alveolar ventilation. In addition, cranial displacement
displacement of the pylorus, and increased gastrin
of the diaphragm reduces total lung volume and func-
levels result in lowered gastric pH. These gastro-
tional residual capacity by 20% due to reductions in
 intestinal changes can result in:
both the expiratory reserve and residual volumes. The
sum of these respiratory changes means:
Reduced lung volumes
 lncreased risk of regurgitation and aspiration
 Without supplemental oxygen, the parturient will 
during induction or recovery
desaturate quickly should apnoea occur
Increased pulmonary damage following
 Induction with inhaled anaesthetics, and subsequent
accidental aspiration.
changes in anaesthetic depth, will occur much 
 faster than in the non-parturient patient.
Pharmacological considerations
Maternal plasma volume increases more than red
blood cell volume, leading to the 'relative anaemia' of 
 Placental transfer occurs with every anaesthetic in
 pregnancy. Anaemia is greater as the number of fetuses
common use, regardless of whether the drug
i5
increases. Cardiac output increases 40%, with in-
injected or inhaled. The endotheliocortical placenta
of dogs and cats allows rapid transfer of drugs
the increase and heart rate for the rest. Autoregulation
from the mother to the fetus. Puppies and kittens
 of fetal blood flow does not occur, as uteroplacental
delivered by Caesarean section will therefore be
 perfusion is pressure-dependent. Compensatory
exposed to whatever anaesthetics have been admin-
cardiovascular reflexes to blood loss and hypovolae-
istered to their mother.
mia may be delayed, and the parturient patient may
The amount of drug delivered to the placenta de-
be less responsive to vasopressor or chronotrope
pends on placental blood flow and maternal protein
therapy. Colloids may be more effective in treating
binding, while the amount of drug available to the
hypotension than crystalloids for intravenous fluid
fetus depends on placental uptake and fetal meta-
loading. Ephedrine treatment of hypotension in the par-
bolism and clearance. Drugs cross biological mem-
 turient patient is controversial. In women undergoing
branes by simple diffusion as governed by the Fick
Caesarean section, the use of ephedrine to treat hypo-
principle, which states:
tension associated with spinal anaesthesia resulted in
fetal acidaemia and lower umbilical artery pH. Although
Q/t = KA (C - C)/D
dorsal recumbency leads to aortocaval depression and
reduced uterine perfusion in women, anatomical dif-
where Q/t = rate of diffusion, K = diffusion con-
ferences and greater collateral circulation tend to pre-
stant, A = available surface area for exchange,
 serve uterine perfusion in small animais. Because of
Cn = concentration of free drug in maternal blood,
these circulatory changes:
C; = concentration of free drug in fetal blood, and
D = diffusion barrier thickness. The diffusion constant
 Maternal blood pressure should be routinely
monitored during Caesarean section
(K) is determined by factors such as molecular size,
If maternal hypotension occurs, fetal perfusion
lipid solubility and ionization. Drugs with molecular
weights <500 Daltons readily cross the placenta, while
发:
will be reduced
 Intravenous fluid loading is the first choice for
drugs of 500-1000 Daltons will be more restricted.
 Most anaesthetic drugs have molecular weights that
treating maternal hypotension.
 permit unimpeded transfer.
Anaesthetic requirement is reduced 25-40% dur-
Highly lipid-soluble drugs cross biological mem-
branes more easily. Non-ionized forms of drugs are
ing pregnancy. This is due to a combination of in-
 Creased progesterone and progesterone metabolite
more lipophilic than their ionized forms, and thus
levels, which are potent positive allosteric modulators
cross membranes more readily. Opioids and local
of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A(GABA,) receptors,
 anaesthetics are weak bases, with relatively low ioni-
and increased hormonal prevention of pain transmis-
zation and considerable lipid solubility. This means
sion, activated by oestrogen and progesterone dur-
that maternal-to-fetal concentration gradients are
Dl anp pabiobua aie suiaa peinpidg Koueubaid bui
important with these agents, as only "free', non-
 protein-bound, drug is available for transfer. At equi-
：
increased collateral blood flow, which decreases the
librium, the concentrations of non-ionized drug in
......
%og-og Aq saoeds piny jeuidsoigaiao pue jeinpida
the fetal and maternal circulations will be similar. In
As a result:
an acidotic fetus, however, there is a tendency for a
 Anaesthetic overdose is more likely unless
weak base to exist in the ionized form, which cannot
 inhaled or injectable anaesthetic doses are
diffuse back across the placenta into the maternal
appropriately reduced
plasma. This is known as 'ion trapping' and can cause
A smaler volume of local anaesthetic is required
drug accumulation of opioids or local anaesthetics
for lumbosacral epidural or spinal anaesthesia to
within fetal tissues and plasma, especially with high
ascend to a specific dermatome.
 or repeated dosing.
268
Chapter 24 Caesarean section
Anaesthetic recommendations
Specific anaesthetic recommendations for Caesarean
section in dogs and cats are provided in Figure 24.3.
In general, when faced with an elective or emergency
Caesarean section in a small animal, one should:
Choose drugs with short duration of action or
drugs with specific antagonists available
(Figure 24.4)
Use the lowest possible dose of injectable or
inhaled anaesthetic agents, realizing that the 
parturient patient has substantialy lower
anaesthetic requirements. A general rule of
thumb is to reduce anaesthetic dose by 30-60%
Anaesthetic agents promoting rapid recovery
of the mother allow her to care for her puppies
Use local anaesthetic techniques when possible
as soon as possible, but puppies should not be placed
and appropriate
with mothers still under anaesthetic effects.
Monitor blood pressure and provide intravenous
fluid support
Provide supplemental oxygen to all patients 
it remains prudent to continue to recommend control
Provide endotracheal intubation if general
measures that reduce occupational exposure without
anaesthesia is used.
compromising patient safety. The author's personal
 choice is mask induction for cats and very small dogs,
When faced with an emergency Caesarean sec-
and injectable induction followed by inhalant mainte-
tion, it may be better to use a familiar technique rather
nance for larger dogs.
than one not used before, even if the familiar tech-
 The use of premedication will depend on the situ-
nique is less than ideal for this purpose. For general
ation. By relieving maternal anxiety and distress,
anaesthesia, one can either mask with an inhalant or
premedicants can help maintain uterine perfusion.
induce with an injectable agent and maintain with an
They also reduce the maternal dose of induction and
inhalant. When general anaesthesia is selected, the
maintenance agents, thus helping to reduce fetal drug
airway should be secured as quickly as possible to
exposure. A heaithy animal presenting for elective
 prevent maternal aspiration. The advantage of mask
Caesarean section will probably need premedication,
induction is that it is a simple technique that most
while a depressed, toxic animal presenting as an
 practitioners are familiar with and fetal depression is
emergency will need much less, if any.
rapidly reversed after delivery with the onset of spon-
taneous breathing. The disadvantages are that
Mu agonist opioids
maternal aspiration is a possibility prior to endotra-
The mu agonist opioids (e.g. morphine, pethidine 
cheal intubation, and personnel are exposed to waste
(meperidine), methadone, hydromorphone, fentanyl)
 anaesthetic gases. Alithough the health effects of long-
can provide preoperative sedation and supplemental
term exposure to trace concentrations of anaesthet-
intraoperative analgesia with minimal cardiovascular
ics in the operating room environment appear minimal.
effecis. Disadvantages include maternal respiratory
Elective
Emergency patient in poor  Precautions/concerns
health
heath
 Opioid premedication plus 
 Opioid premedication plus 
 ± Opioid premedication 
May induce hypotension - measure blood 
epidural lidocaine
epidural lidocaine
 plus epidural lidocaine 
 pressure and be prepared to treat
Opioid premedication plus local 
Local linfiltation of the
May not provide adequate analgesia- be
 infiltration of the abdominal wal
abdominal wall
 prepared to induce general anaesthesia
Mask induction and
Mask induction and maintenance
Mask induclion and 
Be aware of regurgitation/aspiration risk 
maintenance
maintenance
and only use if risk is low
Opioid premedication plus 
Opicid premedication plus
Propofolinhalant
Propofol may cause significant
propofoi/inhalant
propofolinnalant
hypotension in patient in poor health
Opioid premedication plus 
Opioid premedication plus
± Opioid premedication
 May see myoclonus with etomidate - add.
etomidate/inhalant
etomidate/inhalant
 plus etomidate/inhalant
low dose diazeparm (0.01-0.02 mg/kg) or
 jentanyl (2-5 μg/kg) intravenously
Recommended techniques of anaesthesia for Caesarean soction in dogs and cats. Adapted from Pascoe and
Moon (2001).
269
Chapter 24  Caesarean section
 depression requiring assisted ventilation, and possi-
 barbiturates are associated with higher Apgar scores
ble bradycardia. If repeated or intraoperative redosing
(see later) and less neonatal depression at birth than
se panalad s! (s! by/br ol-e) (Auejuey 'pejoadxa s!
 either midazolam or propofol, due to rapid decline in
it is less likely to become ion-trapped in the acidotic
fetal levels. Induction to umbilical cord clamp times
fetus than longer-acting opioids. Bradycardia often
occurs following opioid administration; atropine is the
fetal levels of these agents, and therefore little
antimuscarinic of choice as glycopyrronium does not 
human neonatal depression occurs when delivery is
cross the placenta and the neonates will probably be
delayed for at least 10 minutes. It cannot be deter-
bradycardic as well. The antagonist naloxone can be
 mined from Moon et a/'s retrospective analyses when
used to reverse neonatal opioid depression (0.01-0.02
thiobarbiturates were administered relative to time
mg/kg); if needed, naloxone should be specifically
of delivery. In light of the human medical experience,
administered to the neonate following delivery to avoid
Aew awooino Addnd eui aienoads ueo euo danamou
reversing maternal analgesia. Concurrent benzodiaze-
have improved in the thiopental group in the
pine administration and mu agonist opioid for anaes-
Funkquist et al. (1997) report if more time had been
thetic premedication or induction is not recommended
allowed to pass prior to delivery.
for bitches undergoing Caesarean section (see later).
Like propofol, the ultra short-acting barbiturates
can have significant adverse cardiovascular effects
Phenothiazines
and should be used cautiously in depressed or criti-
Phenothiazines (e.g. acepromazine, chlorpromazine)
cally ill patients.
are not ideal premedication agents. The neonate has
reduced ability to metabolize drugs hepatically, and
Etomidate
phenothiazines have properties of prolonged seda-
 In critically depressed canine patients, a small intra-
tion and alpha-1 mediated vasodilation leading to the 
venous dose of fentanyl can be given prior to induc-
possibility of hypotension in the mother. Nonetheless,
tion with etomidate. If etomidate is not available, a
-u! ym peieioosse aq ol weas lou op suebe asaul
reasonable alternative would be to substitute a low
creased maternal or neonatal mortality and, if judged
-uadolue jo (by/bu z-t) lojodoid jo asop snouaaglu!
necessary, can be used effectively at low doses.
tal (2-5 mg/kg) together with lidocaine (0.25-1 mg/kg
i.v.) to facilitate endotracheal intubation, to start an
Propofol
inhaled anaesthetic such as isoflurane or sevoflurane,
Propofol induction is associated with better neonatal
and wait at least 10 minutes prior to surgical delivery
outcome. Propofol crosses the placenta and reaches
for fetal levels to decline.
the fetus within 2 minutes of administration. Maternal
levels are three times higher than fetal levels follow-
Alfaxalone/alfadolone
ing a single bolus intravenous dose and six to nine
Alfaxalone/alfadolone (Saffan?; 4-6 mg/kg) has been
'uosnjui snonunuoo jo snou i bumoog lauey sal
demonstrating a placental barrier effect. Mean resi-
section because it undergoes rapid clearance from
dence times (mean time that a drug resides in the
the circulation and produces minimal respiratory de-
body) are similar for the mother and fetus following a
pression. Anecdotally, kittens delivered by Caesarean
single intravenous bolus but increased in the fetus 
section using affaxalone/alfadolone are reported to
with continuous infusion. Fetal elimination is prolonged
appear sleepy. There are currently no outcome stud-
following a single bolus or continuous infusion, with
ies evaluating the use of alfaxolone/alfadolone for fe-
half-lives more than twice those observed for the
line Caesarean section.
mother. Plasma protein binding for propofol is higher
Benzodiazepines
in the mother than in the fetus, and this tends to limit 
placental transfer as only unbound drug can pass.
Benzodiazepines should be used cautiously, if at all
However, as propofol may bind less to fetal plasma
In dogs and cats presenting for Caesarean section.
proteins than to maternal plasma proteins, it is specu-
Benzodiazepines are lipophilic, undissociated agents
lated that the free fraction of fetal drug may be higher
that readily penetrate membranes. Rapid placental
and likely to be pharmacologically active. Based on 
transfer with significant fetal uptake occurs with these
the above, the use of continuous infusion or multiple
agents and elimination from the newborn is quite slow.
bolus injections of propofol for Caesarean section
 In veterinary medicine, these agents are used mainly.
anaesthesia cannot be recommended.
for their centrally mediated muscle relaxant effects and
Propofol can have significant adverse cardiovas-
 are frequently combined with other injectable anaes-
cular effects and should be used cautiously in de-
thetics, such as the dissociative ketamine. In human
pressed or critically il patients to avoid reduction of
obstetrical practice, maternal benzodiazepine admin-
cardiac output and uterine perfusion.
istration during labour is associated with iower Apgar
and neurobehavioural scores and *floppy infant syn-
Thiobarbiturate
drome', with symptoms ranging from mild sedation,
Recent outcome studies have shown reduced puppy
'sads oleoude ot 'yons ol aoueonjal pue ejuoodsy
-oiul bumolo, Aeow Addnd pasealoui pue snobi
 cyanosis and impaired metabolic responses to cold
barbiturate administration. The ultra short-acting bar-
stress. Similar depression of neurological reflexes
biturate thiopental is quite lipid soluble and readily
following midazolam-ketamine-enflurane anaesthe-
crosses the placenta following intravenous adminis-
sia has been observed in puppies. It is not known
tration. In human infants, however, ultra short-acting
whether neonatal kittens are neurologically depressed
270
Chapter 24 Caesarean section
by benzodiazepines, but this seems likely. A specific
dose can be administered into the subarachnoid
antagonist, flumazenil (0.01-0.03 mg/kg; 0.1 mg/ml),
space. Care must be taken not to push the needle to
is available. Although flumazenil does not seem to be
the floor of the spinal canal and penetrate the dis-
effective in cats, it can be tried.
tended epidural veins.
Hypotension secondary to temporary midthoracic
Ketamine
sympathetic blockade may occur with spinal anaes-
Ketamine provides better maternal cardiovascular sta-
thesia, and respiratory compromise or arrest can oc-
bility, especially in sick or depressed animais, but pro-
cur should the block ascend to the cervical region.
vides more fetal depression, necessitating intensive
Hypotension associated with spinal anaesthesia can
resuscitation. Although ketamine does not affect puppy
reduce uterine blood flow and umbilical cord pH more
Caesarean section, reduces spontaneous breathing
thetics can cause fetal depression when ion-trapped
at birth and reduces puppy neurological reflexes. Be-
within an acidotic fetus, but this is usually a problem
cause ketamine and other dissociative anaesthetics,
only when very high or repeat doses are administered.
Such as Telazol (tiletamine/zolazepam), require con-
current benzodiazepine administration, these agents
Postoperative analgesia
 pue Aesseoau Ajanlosge j! Aluo pesn aq osje pinous
Both the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
then only at the lowest practical dose.
(NSAIDs) and the opioids are useful drugs for con-
trolling maternal post-Caesarean pain, The NSAIDs
A!pha-2 agonists
are particularly attractive as they are unlikely to pro-
The alpha-2 agonists increase puppy mortality, prob-
duce maternal depression, identified by Moon et al.
ably by reducing uterine perfusion. Moon et al. (2000)
(2000) as a cause of reduced litter survival. NSAIDs
found that puppies were more likely to be dead at de-
(carprofen, meloxicam) should be administered prior
livery when xylazine was administered. Bradycardia,
to surgery for optimal postoperative pain control. Al-
hypertension and hypoxia lasting 20 minutes occurred
though platelet aggregation is reduced by NSAIDs,
in fetal lambs when xylazine was administered to
bleeding times are not increased following ketoprofen,
awake pregnant ewes. Goats receiving 40 μg/kg of
meloxicam or carprofen. Both NSAIDs and opioids will
medetomidine i.m. (equivalent to a canine dose of
partition into breast milk, however the amounts are
33 μg/kg) demonstrated a 50% reduction in uterine
very low such that postoperative use of these drugs
blood flow, resuiting in fetal hypoxaemia and acid-
for maternal pain control is considered safe for breast-
 osis. The alpha-2 agonists should be avoided in small
 feeding human infants.
animal Caesarean section.
Fluids
Local anaesthetics
 A balanced isotonic crystalloid solution (e.g. lactated 
Local anaesthetic techniques are generally consid-
 Ringer's solution) should be administered intra-
ered the 'gold standard' in terms of optimal fetal and
sanpaooid jeojbins buunp y/by/lw ol-g re Alsnouea
 maternal viability, although neonatal puppy survival
to maintain uterine perfusion. As previously stated,
rates are equivalent with epidural lidocaine and
colloids (e.g. 6% hetastarch) may be more effective
propofol-isoflurane general anaesthesia. When de-
in treating hypotension (see Chapter 16).
ciding to use local anaesthetic techniques, it is nec-
essary to take into account the time and skill required
as well as the amount of adjunctive sedative or tran-
Neonatal resuscitation
quillizer drugs that may be necessary to gain mater-
nal cooperation. On the other hand, local blocks can
A warm, dry box should be prepared ahead of time to
effectively augment analgesia and reduce the amount
receive the neonates. Immediately following delivery,
of more depressing systemic agents required when
the neonate should be placed on a clean dry warm
given concurrently with general anaesthesia.
towel and any membranes and fluid cleared from its
Caesarean section can be performed using a sim-
nose and mouth. Suction equipment is usefui, but
ple local infiltrative line block (up to 2 mg/kg lidocaine
cotton-tipped swabs and a bulb syringe can be used
diluted to the volume required to infiltrate the incision
effectively. Vigorous body rubbing is used to dry the
site); once the puppies or kittens have been deliv-
neonate and to stimulate spontaneous breathing.
ered, an inhaled anaesthetic with or without an opioid
Swinging the neonate to clear fluids probably does
can be administered if needed for closure.
not help much and may even be harmful. Mouth-to-
Jones (2001) recenty reviewed epidural anaes-
mouth resuscitation can be used if there is difficuity
thesia in small animals. Lidocaine (2-3 mg/kg, up to
taking the first breath, or the trachea can be intubated 
6 ml maximum volume) is the preferred agent for Cae-
to permit positive pressure ventilation.
sarean section due to its quick onset and relatively
A slow heart rate, as determined by auscultation,
short duration of action; adrenaline (5 μg/ml) may
aleoipu Aew Xydeibouosenn lajddoa no 'uonedied 
be added to prolong maternai analgesia and further
 neonatal hypoxia. Neonatal oxygen therapy has the
reduce systemic uptake. Should the dura mater be
potential to raise newborn arterial oxygen tension sig-
penetrated by the needle and cerebrospinal fluid ob-
 nificantly. Growing evidence from both animal and
tained, as is likely in cats and smali dogs, an attempt
human studies, however, suggests that 100% oxy-
can be made to replace the needle into the epidural
 space; alternatively, 50% of the calculated epidural 
ing physiology and cerebral circulation due to free
271
Chapter 24  Caesarean section
radical formation. Room air is seemingly as effec-
newborns whose mothers received spinal versus gen-
tive as 100% oxygen for neonatal resuscitation, with
eral anaesthesia for Caesarean section, but is not spe-
reduced neonatai mortality reported in human infants 
cific for the effects of anaesthesia on neonates.
resuscitated with room air, and no evidence of harm.
Although a complete Apgar score for each puppy in a
Oxygen should still be available during resuscitation,
litter would be impractical, Luna et al. (2004) applied 
however, especially for compromised neonates (Fig-
an Apgar-like evaluation system (heart and respiratory
ure 24.5).
rate; the withdrawal, suction and anogenital reflexes; 
and the magnum and flexion reflexes) to evaluate
neonatal depression effectively following elective
Caesarean section. Similar studies in cats under-
 going Caesarean section using such a scoring system
would be very useful in improving patient care.
Anaesthesia for pregnant patients
 not undergoing Caesarean section
ent patients undergoing non-obstetrical operative pro-
avoidance of intrauterine fetal hypoxaemia and acid-
osis due to reduced uterine perfusion. In this situa-
Puppies hypoventilating from the effects of
fion, the fetus is a passive recipient of maternal
 anaesthetic agents may require supplemental
anaesthesia and is generaly only affected indirectly
the inspired oxygen to 100%.
by maternal haemodynamic or ventilatory changes.
No anaesthetic, opioid, sedative-hypnotic or anxiolytic 
Although opioids were not identified during Cae-
drug appears to be teratogenic nor safer than another
sarean section as risk factors, naloxone (1-10 μg/kg)
 drug for this purpose.
can be administered intramuscularly, into the neo-
When the fetuses are to be kiled at the time of
natal umbilical vein, or dripped sublingually to reverse
ovariohysterectomy. the goal is to anaesthetize the fe-
opioid depression, if deemed necessary. lIt is difficult
tuses in utero so that they can be euthanased without
to recommend the routine use of doxapram, an
 distress. The anaesthetic plan for the dam should take
analeptic used as a respiratory stimulant, for neonatal 
into consideration all the physiological and pharmaco-
resuscitation. Doxapram is rarely used in resuscita-
logical changes associated with pregnancy. As stated
tion of human infants, is not effective during hypox-
 previously, the fetuses will be passively anaesthetized
aemia, and is unlikely to result in a positive response
 by maternal exposure to the induction and maintenance
when administered to a neonate that is hypoxaemic
agents. An overdose of pentobarbital is administered
due to hypoventilation.
 intraperitoneally or intravenously via the umbilical vein
Acupuncture stimulation of the governor vessel
to each fetus immediately after the uterus has been
26 point (GV 26) has been successfully used to resus-
removed from the dam to ensure death.
citate neonatal kittens following Caesarean section.
A hypodermic 25 gauge 1.6 cm needle can be used
instead of a traditional acupuncture needle. The
References
needle is inserted in the midline of the most dorsal
Andaluz A. TusellJ, Trasserres O et al. (2003) Transplacental transfer
asou aul pue dll jaddn aui uaamlag eaie aul jo loadse
 of propofol in pregnant ewes. Veterinary Journal 166, 198-204
(philtrum). The needie hub is held between the thumb
Andersen AC (1957) Puppy production in the weaning age. Journal of
and index finger and the needle pressed 2-4 mm into
the American Veterinary Medical Association130,151-158
Baka NE,BayoumeuF,outroyMand LaxenaireMC(2002)Colostrum
the skin and subcutaneous tissue. Vigorous needle
 morphine concentrations during postcesarean intravenous patient-
stimulation is continued until signs of arousal are ob-
contraolled analgesia. Anesthesia and Analgesia 94, 184-187
Brock N (1996) Anesthesia for canine cesarean section. Canadian
served. Acupuncture treatment of GV 26 may stimu-
VeterinaryJourna/37,117-118
late the sympathetic nervous system, as well as the
Ceileno D, Capogna G, Emanueli M et al.(1993) Which induction drug
respiratory and cardiovascular systems.
 Seymour (1999) suggested applying Apgar scoring 
and midazolam. Journal of Ctinicat Anesthesia 5, 284-288
D'AlessioJG and Ramanathan J(1998) Eiects of maternal anesthesia
 to examine neonatal survival following Caesarean sec-
in the neonate.Seminars in Perinatology22.350-362
Deneuche AJ, Dufayet C, Goby L. Fayolle P and Desbois C (2004)
tion in small animals. Apgar scores, named after the
 Analgesic comparison of meloxicam or ketoprofen for orthopedic
medical anaesthetist Virginia Apgar, are used to as-
surgery in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 33, 650-660
sess the condition of human infants at birth. Each of
Edwards JE, Rudy AC, Wermeling DP, Desai N and McNamara PJ (2003)
Hydromorphone transfer into breast milk after intranasal
.
five physical signs traditionally used by anaesthetists
administration. Pharmacotheraoy 23, 153-158
to monitor patient condition: heart rate, respiratory ef-
 Ekstrand C and Linde-Forsberg C (1994) Dystocia in the cat: a
retrospective study of 155 cases.Journal ofSmatlAnimal Practice
fort, muscle tone, reflex irritability and colour, are scored
 at 1. 5 and 10 minutes following birth. The scores pro-
35, 459-464
Erden V, Yangin Z. Erkalp K et al. (2005) Increased progesterone
vide a snapshot of the newborm's status and the effec-
producion during the luteal phase of menstruation may decrease
anesthetic requirement. Anesthesia and Analgesia 101, 1007-1011 
fiveness of resuscitation over time. The Apgar score is
Fresno L,Moll J,Penalba B et al. (2005)Effects ot preoperative
sufficiently sensitive to detect differences between
272
Chapter 24 Caesarean section
 buccal mucosal bleeding time, and haematological indices in dogs
Dregnancy and lactation. Reproductive Toxicology 8, 461-475
Meyer RE (1999) Anesthesia hazards to animal workers. Occupational
138-140
Medicine14,225-234
Funkquist PME, Nyman GC, Lofgren A-MJ and Fahlbrink EM (1997)
Moon PF, Erb HN, Ludders JW, Gleed RD and Pascoe PJ (1998)
 Use of propofol-isoflurane as an anesthetic regirmen for cesarean
 Perioperative management and mortality rates of dogs undergoing
section in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medicat
cesarean section in the United States and Canada. Journal of the
Association 211, 313-317
American Veterinary Medical Association 213. 365-369
Gin T, Yau G, Jong W et al. (1991) Disposition of propofol at caesarean
Moon PF, Ero HN, Ludders JW. Gieed RD and Pascoe PJ (2000)
section and in the postpartum period. British Journal of Anaesthesia
 Perioperative risk factors for puppies delivered by cesarean section
67. 49-53
in the United States and Canada. Journal of the American Animal
Gintzler AR and Liu NJ (2001) The maternal spinal cord: biochemical
Hospital Association 36, 359-368
and physiological correlates of steroid-activated antinociceptive
processes. Progress in Brain Research 133, 83-97
with puppy vigor after delivery by cesarean section. Journat of the
Hale TW. McDonald R and Boger J (2004) Transter of celecoxib into
American Animal Hospital Association38,90-96
human milk. Journal of Human Lactation 20, 397-403
Herman NL, LiAT, Van Decar TK et al. (2000) Transfer of methohexital
anesthesia. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal
across the perfused human placenta. Journal of Clinical Anesthesia
Practice 31. 315-341
12, 25-30
 Perez R, Sepulveda L and SantaMaria A (1991) Xylazine administration 
Hicktord FH. Barr SC and Erb HN (2001) Effect of carprofen on
to pregnant sheep: Effects on maternal and fetal cardiovascular
hemostatic variables in dogs.American Journal of Veterinary
function, pH, and blood gases. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica
Research 62. 1642-1646
Suppiement 87. 181-183
Ikiw JE, Farver TB. Suter C. McNeal D and Stefey EP (2002) The
Reynolds F and Seed P (2005) Anaesthesia for Caesarean section
 effeci of intravenous administration of variable-dose flumazenil after
636-653
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 25. 181-188
 e so   (   e  s
Johnston SD and RaksilS (1987) Fetal loss in the dog and cat. Veterinary
treatment for dystocia in dogs and cats. Veterinary Surgery 23,
Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 17, 535-554
48-52
Sakamoto H, Kirihara H, Fujki M. Miura N and Misumi K (1997) The
Journa/161,123-131
effects of medetomidine on maternal and fetal cardiovascular and
Lascelles BD, Cripps PJ, Jones A and Waterman-Pearson AE (1998)
pulmonary function, intrauterine pressure and uterire blood flow in
Efficacy and kinetics of carprofen, administered preoperatively or
pregnant goats. Experimentat Animails 46, 6773
postoperatively, for the prevention of pain in dogs undergoing
 Seymour C (1999) Caesarean Section. In: Manual of Small Aninal
：
Anaesthesia and Anaigesia, ed. C Seymour and R Gleed, pp.217-
Lemke KA, Runyon CL and Horney BS (2002) Effects of preoperalive
 222. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
administration of ketoprofen on whole blood platelet aggregation.
 Skarda RT (1999) Anesthesia case of the month: Dystocia, cesarean
buccal mucosal bleeding time, and hematologic indices in dogs
section and acupuncture resuscitation of newborn kittens. Journal
：
undergoing elective ovariohysterectomy. Journaf of ihe American
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 214, 37-39
Veterinary Medical Association 220, 1818-1822
Spigset O and Hagg S (200o) Analgesics and breast-feeding: safety
considerations. Paediatric Drugs 2, 223-238
analgesia and anesthesia: a review. Canadian Journal of
Stoelting RK and Dierdorf SF (2002) Diseases associated with
Anesthesia 51. 586--609
pregnancy.In: Anesthesia and Co-existing disease, 4th edn, p.672.
Luna SPL, Cassu RN, Castro GB etal. (2004) Eifects oi iour anaesthetic
Churchill Livingston, New York
protocols on the neurological and cardliorespiratory variables of puppies
Tan A, Schulze A.ODonnellCP and Davis PG (2005) Air versus oxygen
born by caesarean section. Veterinary Record 154, 387-389
forresuscitationof infants at bith.Cochrane Database ofSystematic
McElhatton PR (1994) The effects of benzodiazepine use during
Reviews 18, CD002273
273
Endocrine disease
Craig Johnson and Elizabeth J. Norman
Introduction
Cortex
The endocrine system plays a major role in the main-
-
tenance of the body's internal environment and the
Midbrain
regulation of growth and development. Many impor-
tant physiological systems, such as glucose and
calcium homeostasis, are controlled by the endocrine
Hypothalamus
system, which utilizes complex negative feedback
loops based on the release of hormones into the
blood. The target organs of different hormones can
Tissue trauma
Release Df pyrogens
vary from small groups of cells in specific tissues
Intection
Release oi eicosanoids
(e.g. the prostaglandins of the female reproductive
cycle) to all the cells of the body (e.g. insulin). This
Hypothermia
means that the effects of various hormones can be
Acidosis
widespread and dramatic and also that disorders of
Hypoxia
the endocrine system can have far-reaching effecis
upon the body.
Hypotenslon 
 The endocrine system is important in anaesthesia
Nociception
in two ways:
Disease
Its function is affected by physiological insults
Long-term restraint
such as surgical procedures. An endocrine
response to surgery, which is usually called the
 The sensory arm of the stress reponse.
stress response, is seen to a greater or lesser
extent in healthy patients 
The alterations in function caused by disorders
of the endocrine system can alter the response
Higher CNS centres
of the patient to anaesthesia and cause
additional perioperative management problems
for the veterinary surgeon.
CRH
Pituitary
Sympathetic
The stress response
nerves
The 'stress response' is the term used to cover the
ACTH
Parasympathetic
response of a normal endocrine system to a noxious
nerves
stimulus. In general terms, the stress responses
elicited by different noxious stimuli are qualitatively
Noradrenaline
similar and only vary in their magnitude and duration.
Adrenal 
Stress responses can be caused by a variety of nox-
ious stimuli in various combinations. The stimuli (or
Adrenal
stressors) are detected by the body in various ways
medulla
and the response is orchestrated by the hypothalamo-
Cortisol
Adrenaline
pituitary axis, which acts as a common pathway in
the generation of the response. The sensory and ef.
fector arms of the stress response are ilustrated in
Target tissues
Figures 25.1 and 25.2.
The stress response initiates a number of altera-
The effector arm of the stress response.
tions in metabolic activity that can persist for severa!
ACTH = Adrenocorticotrophic hormone;
days affer the stress of surgery. The changes are
CRH = Corticotropin-releasing hormone.
274
Chapter 25 Endocrine disease
aimed at preserving homeostasis in the face of stimuli
 The alterations in endocrine function that comprise
that are a serious threat to life. In the initial phase of 
the stress response are appropriate to the preserva-
the stress response, the body conserves sodium and
tion of life after 'natural' insults such as severe trauma.
 water and enters a catabolic state with negative nitro-
 Unfortunately. many of the stimuli that initiate a stress
 gen balance. Later in the course of the response, an 
response (see Figure 25.1) occur in the surgical
 anabolic phase is entered.
patient. In this situation the stress response may be
The first phase aims to preserve blood volume (and
less appropriate. For example, where careful atten-
 thus tissue perfusion) and ensures that there are
 tion is paid to perioperative fluid balance, the sodium 
 adequate metabolic substrates in the blood for the
 conservation seen in the stress response is not re-
continuation of function of the vital organs. Increased 
quired. It may actually be detrimental to the patient
plasma catecholamine concentrations form an integ-
and can exacerbate such conditions as congestive
ral part of this phase of the stress response by divert-
heart failure and acute renal failure.
ing blood flow to the essential organs of the body.
The stress response can be decreased by reduc-
There are also increases in other catabolic hormone
ing the number and magnitude of noxious stimuli to
concentrations, such as glucagon and cortisol, and
which a patient is subjected during anaesthesia. Good 
 concomitant decreases in anabolic hormone concen-
anaesthetic practice should ensure that stressors such 
 trations, such as insuin and testosterone.
as hypoxaemia, hypothermia, hypotension, acidosis,
The second phase of the stress response begins
 etc. are minimized throughout the course of the an-
the process of healing damaged tissues. Metabolism
aesthetic. In addition, the perception of nociceptive 
becomes largely anabolic, with the increased cellular 
stimuli can be minimized by the use of carefully
Uptake of substrates and the manufacture of proteins.
 planned multimodal analgesia.
The changes in plasma hormone concentrations and
 Some anaesthetic agents, such as the alpha-2
metabolic nitrogen balance that occur in both phases
agonists and etomidate, seem to block the stress
of the stress response are summarized in Figure 25.3.
The two phases are sometimes referred to as the ebb
 sensory input. This direct blocking of the response
and flow of the stress response.
itself, rather than reduction by the removal of
 stressors, can be detrimental to the patient. It seems 
that the inability to mount a stress response in situa-
tions where the body perceives that one is required
can be very dangerous and even result in the death
of the patient. It may be advisable to stimulate a
stress response artificially by the administration of
giucocorticoids in patients where the endogenous
stress response may be inhibited by, for example,
Time
hypoadrenocorticism, hyperadrenocorticism or
chronic steroid therapy. In these cases: production
of endogenous corticosteroid is not regulated by the 
normal mechanisms and so the endocrine changes 
that characterize the stress response may only be
triggered in response to an increase in steroid
hormone concentrations greater than that which
the body is able to produce. Exogenous steroids can
 be used to initiate the stress response, allowing the 
Time
patient to respond to the stressful situation in a rela-
fively normal way.
Plasma insulin
centrator
Anaesthesia for some specific
endocrinopathies
Time
The adrenal gland
 The adrenal glands are composed of two parts: the
inner medulla and the outer cortex. The medulla
secretes the catecholamines adrenaline and nor-
adrenaline, while the cortex secretes cortisol, aldo-
trogen
sterone and over 30 other steroid hormones. The
cortical hormones are involved in many regulatory
 processes such as sodium homeostasis and the stress
Time
response. Diseases of the adrenal glands usually
involve release of too much or too little of one or more
of the above hormones. The wide range of target
 Metabolic and homonal changes associaied
organs of the adrenat hormones means that these
with the stress response.
diseases can have dramatic effects upon the patient.
275
Chapter 25 Endocrine disease
Cushing's syndrome (hyperadrenocorticism)
include respiratory muscle weakness, abdominal en-
Cushing's syndrome results from the secretion of ex-
largement, pulmonary mineralization and interstitial
cessive amounts of glucocorticoids by the adrenal
disease, and puimonary thromboembolism.
cortex. This may be due to adrenal neoplasia or to
Most untreated and inadequately treated dogs
the overstimulation of a normal adrenal gland by ex-
with hyperadrenocorticism are hypertensive and some
cessive amounts of adrenocorticotrophic hormone
12% are severely so, with systolic pressures above 190
(ACTH) produced by a pituitary tumour. Although treat-
mmHg. The cause of hypertension is not wel under-
ment of Cushing's syndrome is usually achieved by
 stood and multiple mechanisms may be involved, such
medical therapy, animals with this condition often re-
as activation of mineralocorticoid receptors by high lev-
quire anaesthesia and present particular problems for
the veterinary surgeon.
to catecholamines, activation of the renin-angiotensin 
The main physiological changes are listed in
system and increased vasopressor responsiveness. In
Figure 25.4. Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have
spite of the potential for water and sodium retention in
alveolar-arterial oxygen gradients above normal,
these cases, polyuria and polydipsia are extremely
and significant resting hypoxaemia is common. Fac-
common in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. When
tors likely to contribute to this ventilatory dysfunction
deprived of water, most can concentrate their urine,
but this response may be inadequate. Replacement
fluid therapy is therefore important to avoid hypovol-
 aemia and dehydration, but must be carefully balanced
Slow tissue healing
Lethargy
to ensure that any hypertension is not worsened.
Polydipsia/polyuria
Hypoxaemia
 In these patients the veterinary surgeon should
Hypercoagulability
Polyphagia
concentrate on the maintenance of adequate perfusion 
Muscle wasting
 Abdominal enlargement
and the avoidance of perioperative hypertension and
Skin changes
hypoxaemia. Preoxygenation and the provision of in-
ae Aeaeledoisod suoisual uabrxo pandsui paseaio
very important. When good fluid balance has been
Bradycardia
Weight loss
Weakness
 assured, premedication with a low dose of aceprom-
Dehydration
Lethargy
 azine combined with an opioid will reduce afterload
Syncope
Polydipsia/polyuria
and provide a useful reduction in the dose require-
ments of other anaesthetic agents, although doses
Diabetes melitus
that provide noticeable sedation should be avoided
Loss of glucose homeosiasis
Polydipsia/polyuria
because of the concomitant respiratory depression.
Ketoacidosis
Weight ioss
Abdominal enlargement is common, reflecting a
combination of hepatomegaly, increased abdominal
Diabetic ketoacidosis
fat, a large bladder and abdominal muscle weakness.
Dehydration 
Severe hyperglycaemia
During anaesthesia, care should be taken to position
Hypovolaemia
Vomniting
the animal so that the weight of the abdominal con-
Metabolic acidosis
Anorexia
tents does not compromise respiratory function or
Sodium deficiency
CNS depression
Total body potassium deficit
 Undertying serious illnesses
biood flow in the vena cava.
 Alterations in the structure of connective tissue can
have implications for the ability of the tissues to heal
after surgery. Skin thinning and reduced elasticity can
Htypertrophic cardiomyopathy
 Compromised renal function
Hypertension
Weight loss
 make placement of intravenous cannulae difficult.
Tachyarrhythmias
Potyuria and polydipsia 
Care should be taken with cannuiae or other intra-
Tachypnoea and dyspnoea
Vomiting
venous injections, as aiterations in collagen forma-
Nervous or aggressive behaviour
Polypihagia
tion can make patients prone to bruising.
Animals with hyperadrenocorticism are at in-
Creased risk of pulmonary thromboembolism. Circu-
Obesity
Reduced drug metabolism
Lethargy
Bradycardia
lating concentrations of procoagulant factors are
Intraoperative hypotension
increased and the anticoaguiant antithrombin Ill is de-
Hypothermia
Creased, producing a hypercoagulable state. The pre-
 disposition to thromboembolism is further exacerbated
Intermittent weakness 
Arrhythmias
pe shoioei se liam se sisdas pue uoisuanadsy Aa
Intermittent hypertension
Reduced blood volume
promote vascular stasis such as increased haemat-
Intermittent tachycardia
Polyuria/polydipsia
 ocrit, obesity and prolonged periods of recumbency.
Intermittent tachypnoea or panting 
Acute collapse
Preoperative assessment of antithrombin Ill concen-
Intermittent anxiety
Acute haemorrhage
trations may aid in determining the degree of risk of
thromboembolism. Prophylaxis with plasma to in-
crease antithrombin Ill levels combined with heparin
Non-regenerative anaemia
Pyrexia
Thrombocytopenia
and hetastarch to reduce clotting may be indicated.
immunosuppression 
especialy when a major surgical procedure, such as
 Major physiological changes of the common
 adrenalectomy, is planned. A regimen recommended
 endocrinopathies relevant to the veterinary
by Feldman and Nelson (2004a) is to administer a
surgeon.
 transfusion of plasma with 35 lU/kg of heparin added.
276
Chapter 25 Endocrine disease
Heparin is continued subcutaneously after surgery,
parenteral desoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP)
with an initial dose of 35 IU/kg tapering over 4 days,
(2.2 mg/kg every 25 days) or oral fludrocortisone
and on the fifth postoperative day a single hetastarch
(0.01-0.02 mg/kg/day) can be used.
transfusion is administered. The anaesthetic and an-
 The need for glucocorticoid support during stress-
algesic plan should aim to encourage early ambula-
ful procedures or surgeries also needs to be remem-
tion in the patient so that prolonged recumbency is
bered in dogs on long-term medical therapy for
avoided. Postoperative analgesia shouid be based
hyperadrenocorticism. Dogs well controlled on
 around continued opioid therapy; non-steroidal anti-
mitotane are functionally hypoadrenocorticoid and are
inflammatory drugs (NSAlDs) shouid only be consid-
unable to respond appropriately with increased
ered with extreme caufion as they may precipitate
gluicocortiocoid secretion during stress. Even though
renal failure or gastrointestinal ulceration in animals 
trilostane is a relatively short-acting enzyme blocker,
with high endogenous steroid concentrations.
it can produce prolonged adrenal suppression in some
：
Dogs that develop pulmonary thromboembolism
 papaau ag sle se uoeuawalddns piolars pue sbop
usualy have acute onset of dyspnoea, tachypnoea
during anaesthesia.
and cyanosis. Radiographic changes include pleural
effusion, pulmonary infltrates, increased diameter
Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism)
and blunting of pulmonary arteries, decreased
The main clinical signs relevant to the veterinary sur-
vascularity of affected lung lobes and increased
geon are listed in Figure 25.4. Most patients with Ad-
vascularity of unaffected lung lobes. At times, however,
dison's disease will have been previously stabilized
no radiographic abnormalities are seen. Blood gas
with medical therapy at the time of surgery. The main 
analysis usuaily reveals hypoxaemia (P:O2 <70 mmHg;
<9.3 kPa) and hypocapnia (P:CO 12-30 mmHg;
response to surgery simiiar to that seen in healthy
1.5-4 kPa). Treatment is symptomatic and should be
 animals. Healthy patients undergoing major surgery
aimed at increasing inspired oxygen fraction and sup-
develop a 5-10-fold increase in cortisol production.
porting the cardiac output. Heparinization will prevent
If the patient is unable to produce this increase in
：
the formation of new clots, but will not dissolve those
endogenous glucocorticoid, it is important that
that have already formed. There are many suggested
exogenous therapy is provided to prevent adrenal
protocols for heparin therapy, with different doses and
crisis and circulatory collapse in the perioperative
routes of administration being suggested. One proto-
period. lt should be noted that resuscitation with fiu-
pue 'n'! uueday by/ni og jo asop jeui ue aajb oi si joo
ids and positive inotropes may be ineffective in the
 continue with an infusion of 5-50 IU/kg/h. The aim is to
 absence of sufficient plasma steroids and this in itseif
 prolong the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)
 may increase the suspicion that Addison's disease is
by 1.5 or 2 times the reference value. Regular monitor
ing of APTT is very important to ensure that anticoagu-
 It is estimated that the adrenal glands of normal
lation is adequate but not excessive.
jo by/bu o' i Alajewlxoidde alaloes shop pessansun
In dogs and cats undergoing adrenalectomy, ster.
cortisol each day. Bearing in mind the relative gluco-
oid replacement therapy will be needed during an-
corticoid potencies of various synthetic steroids, this
aesthesia. If bilateral adrenalectomy is performed,
corresponds to a dose of 1.0 mg/kg/day of hydrocorti-
both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid supplemen-
sone, 0.25 mg/kg/day prednisolone or 0.03 mg/kg/day
tation will be required. When uniliateral adrenalectomy
 of dexamethasone. During the stress of surgery, doses
is performed to remove a functioning adrenocortical
 5-10 times higher should be provided. For minor
tumour, glucocorticoid replacement is always required
surgery, a quick return to maintenance requirements
acutely, but mineralocorticoid replacement is not usu-
is likely. whereas for major procedures at least 3 days
ally required. Chronic suppression of pituitary ACTH
of high glucocorticoid requirements should be antici-
secretion will have resulted in atrophy of the adrenal
pated. If complications such as fever or ongoing blood
zona fasciculata and zona reticularis in the contra-
or protein loss continue, then 'stress doses' should
lateral gland, but the zona glomerulosa (and hence
be continued until these have resolved. After resolu-
aldosterone secretion) is usually spared. Preferences
tion, a weaning dose regimen can be used to return
for the type of glucocorticoid and the route used vary.
 to maintenance requirements. A suggested protocol
Suggested protocols include dexamethasone 0.05-0.1
shop ui Aabins buunp juawaogida, piooooonjb io
mg/kg as an intravenous infusion over 6 hours and
with adrenal insufficiency is given in Figure 25.5. De-
hydrocortisone continuous infusion at 625 μg/kg/h.
spite the importance of perioperative glucocorticoid
However, a higher hydrocortisone dose may be more
administration, the drug should be withdrawn as soon
appropriate since the plasma cortisol concentrations
as possible after surgery as side effects may include
obtained by continuous hydrocortisone infusion in
delayed healing and immunosuppression, leading to 
 an increased risk of postoperative infection.
less than those seen in normal dogs. Areducing dose
 Animals receiving chronic doses of corticosteroids
of glucocorticoids is then administered in the days after
(including progestogens) for treatment of non-adrena!
surgery, depending on the degree of adrenal suppres-
conditions will also have a less than normal adrenal
 sion. Mineralocorticoid support can be provided dur-
response to stress and may be at risk of circulatory
snoueaenui elejdai-unipos jo asn aut Ag Alebins bu!
collapse if not adequately supplemented. The degree
fluids and/or hydrocortisone (which has both gluco-
of adrenal suppression wili vary depending on the type,
corticoid and mineralocorticoid activity). For longer
Lodn osje pue Adeieul pioieis jo uonenp pue asop
term mineralocorticoid support postoperatively.
individual factors. An ACTH stimulation test prior to
277
Chapter 25  Endocrine disease
Majorsurgery
Preoperatively
Preoperatively
either
either
Hydrocortisone 4-5 mg/kg
· Hydrocortisone 4-5 mg/kg
0
Dexamethasone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Dexamethasone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Or
JO
·Prednisolone sodiuin succinate 1.0-2.0 mg/kg
 Prednisolone sodium succinate 1.0-2.0 mg/kg
Immediately postoperatively
Iramediately postoperatively
either
erther
· Hydrocortisone 4-5 mg/kg
Hydrocortisone 4-5 mg/kg
Or
or
:Dexamethasone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Dexamethasone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
or
:Prednisolone sodiumi succinate 1.0-2.0 mg/kg
Prednisolone sodium succinate 1.0-2.0 mg/kg
Post recovery
Post recovery for 3 days
Back to normal maintenance regimen
either
Prednisotone/prednisone 0.5 mg/kg twice daily
Or
Cortisone/nydrocortisone 2.5 mg/kg twice daily
Dexamethasone 0.1. mg/kg once daily for 3 days
Day 4
Back to normal maintenance regimen
 Suggested protocol for glucocorticoid supplementation during surgery in dogs with adrenal insufficiency
255 (adapted from the recommendations of Peterson et al. 1984). Similar doses may be administered by any route.
elective procedures may be useful to help judge the
and third-degree heart block. Hypotension following
degree of suppression and guide the need for supple-
tumour excision is a common problem and may require
 mentation. When severe suppression is present, a
 unusually high volume fluid replacement. Hypotension
-ouaipeodsy Arewjd ioi pasn jeut ol sewis joooiond
is multifactorial, arising from a combination of the
 corticism as described above would be suitable during
the stress of surgery.
and impaired sympathetic reflexes.
 Preoperative stabilization for 1-2 weeks with al-
Phaeochromocytoma
pha adrenergic-blocking agents is currently recom-
This is a rare tumour of the cells of the adrenal me-
mended to reduce hypertension, restore circulating
dulla, which secretes catecholamines. Many of the
fluid volume and promote a smoother anaesthetic in-
clinical features of phaeochromocytoma are a result
duction in dogs. Phenoxybenzamine can be adminis-
of activation of alpha and beta adrenergic receptors
tered at doses of 0.25 mg/kg twice daily and the dose
by secreted catecholamines, but signs may also re-
gradually increased until either a maximum dose of
sult from tumour metastasis, obstruction of vessels
2.5 mg/kg twice daly is reached, or signs of hypoten-
such as the posterior vena cava, or haemorrhage from
sion or adverse drug reactions occur. Severe tachy-
the turmour. Secretion of catecholamines may be epi-
cardia can be treated with beta adrenergic blockers,
ooaies buisneo shoioe, aui 'snonuuoo io oios 
such as propranolol 0.2-1 mg/kg three times daily or
amine release in a particular patient are variable and 
atenolol 0.2-1 mg/kg once or twice daily. It is very
 Unpredictable. These tumours are not innervated and
important that beta adrenergic blockade only be per.
release of catecholamines from them may occur in-
formed after initiation of alpha adrenergic blockade,
dependent of increased sympathetic activity. Apply-
as a reduction in beta receptor-mediated vasodilation
ing pressure to or handling the tumour can lead to
could severely exacerbate hypertension.
catecholamine release. Various drugs, including
 Such preoperative therapy significantly improves
tricyclic antidepressants, droperidol, glucagon,
surgical outcomes in humans but does not completely
metoclopramide, phenothiazines, naloxone and
prevent complications. Electrocardiography and arte-
tyramine-containing foods, such as some cheeses,
rial blood pressure monitoring during anaesthesia are
ui saposida anisueledsy aiendioaid on pauodau aie
essential and it is useful to have appropriate drugs and
humans with phaeochromocytoma. Times of particu-
fluids ready before the induction of anaesthesia. Pre-
lar risk in dogs are during anaesthetic induction and
anaesthetic and anaesthetic drugs with the potential
surgical manipulation of the tumour.
to increase complications in animals with phaeochromo-
The veterinary surgeon should be ready to deal
cytoma include morphine, atropine, acepromazine,
with sudden, unpredictable and severe changes in
chlorpromazine, droperidol, halothane, suxamethonium
heart rate and blood pressure, tachy- and bradyarrhyth-
(succinylcholine) and atracurium. However, the choice
mias and haemorrhage. Blood pressure may reach
of agents used is less important than good preoperative
values of 300 mmHg and heart rate over 250 beats
 management, careful induction and monitoring.
per minute. Various arrhythmias may occur, including
 Intraoperatively, alpha adrenergic blockade can be
ventricular premature contractions, atrial tachycardia
 continued with phentolamine to counter hypertension.
7
278
Chapter 25 Endocrine disease
A loading dose of 0.1 mg/kg i.v. is followed by a con-
tinuous infusion at 1--2 μg/kg/minute. If hypertension.
changes relevant to the veterinary surgeon are listed
tachycardia or arrhythmias persist with this therapy. beta.
in Figure 25.4. There are no particular limitations on
blockade with the short-acting drug esmolol can be
the type of anaesthetic agents that can be used in
given. A loading dose of 0.t mg/kg i.v. is followed by a
diabetic animals, and a regimen should be chosen
 continuous infusion at 50-70 μg/kg/minute. Magnesium
which suits the experience of the veterinary surgeon
sulphate can also be used to reduce hypertension at
and the concurrent disorders being investigated or
a dose of 30 mg/kg over 10 minutes. Treatment of
 treated. Short-acting agents have the advantage of
hypotension involves reduction or discontinuation of
allowing the animal to resume eating as soon as pos-
phentolamine and volume expansion with crystalloids
sible after the procedure. The use of regional anaes-
or colloids. These measures are usually effective in
thetic techniques for surgery involving limbs, pelvis
 countering hypotension and alpha adrenergic agonist
and eyes may reduce the hormonal and hyperglycae-
 therapy is not usually required. In addition to these
mic response to stress. The management of blood
drugs, a selection of anti-arrhythmics, such as lidocaine,
glucose in the perioperative period is the main addi-
propranoiol and verapamil, should be readily available.
tional task of the veterinary surgeon.
Complications can continue into the postoperative
Although continued insulin administration during
period, and careful monitoring, including blood pres-
fasting may cause concern about the risk of hypo-
sure, should be continued for 24—48 hours.
glycaemia developing, insulin activity is still important
Disorders of glucose homeostasis
during fasting to enable tissue uptake of nutrients. In
The two most common conditions in this group are
addition, release of stress hormones such as cortico-
steroids and catecholamines promotes gluconeo-
diabetes mellitus and insulinoma. These conditions
result in either a functional lack of (diabetes mellitus),
requirement. Thus, insulin should not be withheld un-
or abundance of (insulinoma) circulating insulin. In
less there is evidence of residual insulin activity from
both cases the normai homeostatic mechanisms are
the previous dose. Close monitoring of blood glucose
breached, and the animal loses its ability to regulate
blood glucose concentration adequately. Long-term
and balancing of insulin activity with dextrose infusion
are used to maintain blood glucose in the target range
effects upon the body's metabolic processes can be
 of 8.3--14 mmoll in the perioperative period. Surgery
dramatic, resulting in various conditions such as
should be scheduled for the morning. This reduces the
chronic intermittent hypoglycaemia, ketoacidosis and
need for a long period of fasting and allows better man-
dehydration. During the perioperative period, there can
be sudden alterations in plasma glucose concentra-
agement of the early postoperative period.
Various recommendations are made regarding the
tion, which are masked by anaesthesia and so can
go unnoticed. In the worst instance, severe brain
proportion of the animal's normal insulin dose to ad-
minister on the morning of anaesthesia. Feldman and 
damage can occur which does not become apparent
 Nelson recommend doses varying from one quarter to
until the end of anaesthesia.
half the animal's usual dose, according to the morning
The metabolic and endocrine changes caused by
pre-insulin blood glucose concentration (Figure 25.6).
anaesthesia and surgery alter the balance of glucose
homeostasis, and so the maintenance of perfect bal-
ance is not a realistic goal even in patients that are
Pre-insulin blood glucose 5.5 mmol/: no insulin administered,
veterinary surgeon should be first to prevent hypo-
begin 2.5-5% dextrose infusion
glycaemia at any time during management of the case,
Pre-insulin blood glucose 5.5-11 mmoi/l: one quarter usual insulin
to prevent prolonged or severe hyperglycaemia (and
dose, begin 2.5-5% dextrose infusion 
the development of ketoacidosis) and to maintain
Pre-insulin blood glucose >11 mmoll: half usual insulin dose,
normal fluid and electrolyte balance.
withhold dextrose infusion until blood glucose <8.3 mrmol/l 
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetic patients present for anaesthesia for a vari-
Every 30-60 mainutes
ety of procedures: some procedures are an essential
Goal 8.3-14 mmol
part of the management of the condition (e.g. a bitch
in season requiring ovariohysterectomy), some are
Blood gltucose <8.3 mmoll, increase/begin dextrose infusion
indirectly related to the condition (e.g. cataract re-
Blood glucose 8.3-14 mmol/, maintain dextrose infusion.rate
 moval) and some are unrelated to the diabetes. Where
Blood glucose >14 mmol/,reduce dexirose infusion rate
 possible, anaesthesia should only be undertaken once
Blood ghucose >16 mmoll,discontinue dextrose infusion
the diabetes is adequately confrolled by medical man-
agement. Animals that are not properly controled may
be ketoacidotic and/or have unpredictable changes
Administered if blood glucose remains >16 mmoll for more than
in blood glucose concentrations during anaesthesia.
1 hour after cessation of dextrose intusion
Ketoacidotic patients often have severe metabolic dys-
Give 20% of usual insulin dose in the form of soluble insuln
function, including altered protein binding and hepatic
intramuscularly
Repeat no more irequently than every 4 hours
function. This can make them unusually sensitive to
anaesthetic agents and can greatly increase fhe
Protocol for blood glucose management 
duration of action of these drugs. Poor perioperative
during anaesthesia of diabetic cats and dogs
glycaemic control may also increase the risk of
279
Chapter 25  Endocrine disease
No insulin is given to animals in which the pre-insulin
the concurrent presence of hyponatraemia usually
prevents severe hyperosmolarity. Magnesium and
previously administered insulin. In cats, it has been
recommended that the ful usual insulin dose be given 
develop with therapy for ketoacidosis. An underlying
 as long as glucose can be measured before and dur-
serious illness frequently coexists. Common under-
 ing surgery. Of more importance than the iniial dose
lying conditions in dogs and cats include pancreatitis,
 given is the careful monitoring of blood glucose. This 
bacterial infection including sepsis, cholangiohepatitis,
should be checked every 15 minutes during anaesthe-
renal failure, cardiac disease, hyperadrenocorticism
sia, reducing to every 30 minutes for the rest of the
and dioestrus.
 perioperative period. A 2.5-5% dextrose infusion can
 Elective procedures requiring anaesthesia should
be administered at rates varying around 2-4 ml/kg/h
not be undertaken if ketonuria is present, although it is
to lower or raise blood glucose. If severe hyperglycae-
reasonably safe to proceed with emergency anaesthe-
mia (>16 mmol/l) occurs, indicating the need for addi-
sia once improvements in tissue perfusion and acid
tional insulin, short-acting soluble (neutral) insulin can
base status have been achieved and blood glucose
be administered either intramuscularly or by continu-
 concentration has declined to <16 mmol/l.
 Qus infusion. Continuous infusion of insulin may have
In emergency patients, stabilization of cardiovas-
 advantages in enabling closer control of blood glucose
cular status is a priority and will, in itself, begin to ad-
than intermitent administration. but requires the use 
 of an infusion or syringe pump.
with diabetic ketoacidosis. Electrolyte and acid-base
 Animals on twice-daily insulin can often be returned
status should be determined frequently and fluid
to their usual insulin and feeding regimen on the
therapy should be tailored to correct imbalances. Use
evening of surgery. Animals which remain inappetent
of hypotonic solutions (such as 0.45% NaCl) should
can be maintained on a dextrose infusion and regular
be avoided. The metabolic acidosis does not usually
insulin given every 6 hours (depending on blood glu-
require specific treatment, as it often resolves with
 cose concentrations) until their condition improves.
fluid and insulin therapy. Potassium supplementation
If a long procedure and recovery are anticipated,
will be needed in all patients, but may need to be de-
 potassium supplementation in fluids should also be
layed in some if blood potassium levels are initially
provided according to the guidelines in Figure 25.7.
high. Specific therapy with insulin and glucose can
follow this initial fluid and resuscitative therapy.
Protocols for insulin therapy in diabetic ketoacidosis
involve administration of soluble (neutral) insulin in-
termittently. given either by intramuscular injection or
40
by continuous intravenous infusion. Dextrose infusions
3.0-3.5
are used to maintain blood glucose between 11 and
2.5-3.0
50
14 mmol/l during insulin therapy. It is important to rec-
2.0-2.5
160
ognize that, even if initial therapy has reduced blood
 glucose to this target level without the use of insulin,
<2.0
80
insulin must still be administered in order to reverse
 Guidelines for potassium supplementation of
ketosis. Close monitoring of central nervous system
(CNS) status, blood glucose, electrolytes, urine out-
 intravenous fluids for anorexic animals on
put and other cardiovascular parameters is needed,
insuin therapy. Note that potassium administration rates 
 should never exceed 0.5 mmol/kg/h.
as well as blood gas analysis if this is available. Dex-
trose and insulin therapy can be continued during
Cats stabilized on glipizide shouid not receive this
-saoau se pouad aaeadoisod aut oui pue Arefins 
 on the morning of surgery; blood glucose should be 
sary. These patients often have greatly impaired
monitored and treated with short-acting soluble insu-
 hepatic function, and any drugs that rely upon hepatic
lin and dextrose as outlined for diabetics on insulin.
metabolism should be used cautiously.
 Sulphonylureas inferfere with the mechanisms which
 protect the heart against ischaemic events and, for
Insulinoma
this reason, it has been recommended that human
 Insulinomas are adenocarcinomas of the beta cels of
the islets of Langerhans. They secrete insulin, result-
cedures in which cardiac perfusion may be compro-
 ing in intermitent bouts of hypoglycaemia that may be
mised. It is not known whether such effects are
clinically important in diabetic cats.
muscle fasciculations and behavioural changes. Epi-
sodes may be precipitated by fasting, eating, excite-
Diabetic ketoacidosis
ment or exercise. Insulinomas tend to be smal, and
Ketoacidotic diabetic patients have severe metabolic
exploratory surgery is often required to confirm a diag-
abnormalities, which make them very poor candidates
nosis, as well as for treatment. insulinomas often
for anaesthesia (see Figure 25.4). They are usually
metastasize to the liver, but removal of the pancreatic
dehydrated, hypovolaemic, acidotic and sodium-
tumour can resuit in remission for 12 months or more.
 deficient. There is a total body potassium deficit, but
 Surgical resection of an insulinoma presents sev-
the blood potassium concentration will vary accord-
eral challenges for the veterinary surgeon. Afected
ing to the state of renal perfusion and may not reflect
dogs are usually old and may have concurrent disorders
that need consideration, although the main concern
280
Chapter 25  Endocrine disease
specific to insulinoma is the prevention of severe hypo-
systolic murmur, tachyarrhythmia, cardiac gallop, or
glycaemia. Although animals with chronic hypoglycae-
hypertension to congestive heart failure. Cardiac ef-
 mia may become adapted and display few clinical signs.
fects arise as a consequence of increased cardiac
further decreases in blood glucose, even small ones.
 output required to meet the demands of the increased
can result in CNS damage and possibly death.
metabolic rate and gradually lead to hypertrophic car-
Preoperative management of blood glucose can
usually be achieved with small frequent meals and
thyroid cats but severe hypertension may be limited 
 corticosteroid therapy. During pre-anaesthetic fasting.
to cats with concurrent renal disease. Respiratory
 intravenous fluid therapy with 2.5-5% dextrose should
muscle weakness and decreased pulmonary compli-
be provided and blood glucose monitored frequentiy.
ance contribute to tachypnoea and dyspnoea at rest.
The aim is to maintain blood glucose concentration
The development of congestive cardiac failure may
above 2.2 mmol/l, but euglycaemia does not have to
lead to pleural etfusion and worsen dyspnoea.
be attained. It is important not to cause hyperglycae-
Hyperthyroid cats have increased renal blood flow
mia, which may provoke release of excessive quanti-
 and glomerular filtration rate with polyuria with com-
ties of insulin from the tumour. For this reason, fluids
 pensatory polydipsia. The presence of concurrent 
containing >5% dextrose should not be used. If
renal failure may be masked by the effect of increased 
2.5-5% dextrose infusion is insufficient to prevent hypo-
glomeruiar filtration rate and by loss of muscle mass,
：
which reduces serum creatinine concentration. Urea
sone over 6 hours in intravenous fluids may be helpful
tends to increase due to increased protein catabo-
lism. Despite the frequent elevation of hepatic en-
istered by constant rate infusion at 5-10 ng/kg/minute.
 zymes in hyperthyroid cats, histological examination
Frequent monitoring of blood glucose should continue
 of liver tissue reveals only mild to moderate changes
 Aabins bumolol pue pojad angerado au inoybnoiu
and decreased hepatic function is unlikely in the ab-
Animals may be hypogiycaemic, normoglycaemic or
sence of concurrent liver disease. Rather, the veteri-
hyperglycaemic after surgery. Hyperglycaemia that
nary surgeon should anticipate enhanced hepatic
 occurs following removal of insulinoma tissue is a re-
 metabolism of drugs because of the increased meta-
flection of insufficient insulin release by the atrophied
 bolic rate. lonized hypocalcaemia is found in 27-50%
non-neoplastic beta cells that remain. This hyper-
of untreated hyperthyroid cats (although total calcium
glycaemia is usually transient, but insulin therapy may
be required if it persists for more than a few days.
aemia in the absence of azotaemia occurs in 20-43%.
Postoperative pancreatitis is a common complica-
Treatment with thiourylenes (carbimazole or me-
tion of pancreatic handling during surgery. The vet-
thimazole) for 6-12 weeks to reduce total thyroxine
erinary surgeon can help to minimize the risk of
concentrations to within the reference range before
pancreatitis by ensuring that fluid therapy prior to and
during surgery is sufficient to encourage good pan-
mortality. In cats where tachycardia and arrhythmias
are not controlled by thiourylene therapy alone, pro-
 is avoided. Following surgery, it should be assumed
pranolol or atenolol should be given for at least 3-5
that animals do have pancreatitis and food withheld
days prior to surgery. A dose of propranolol of 2.5-5
for the first 1 -2 postoperative days.
mg every 8 hours has been recommended, but hyper-
The anaesthetic management for pancreatic sur-
thyroid cats have increased absorption and decreased
gery and for patients with pancreatitis is described in
clearance of propranolol: a low dose should therefore
Chapter 22.
be used initially and gradually increased if needed.
Heart rate is a good indicator of the adequacy of beta
The thyroid glands
adrenergic blockade. For atenoiol; a dose of 2 mg/kg
or 6.25 mg/cat once daily is recommended. Pro-
Feline hyperthyroidism
pranolol may cause bronchospasm in cats with a his-
Hyperthyroidism (see also Chapter 19) is commonly
tory of asthma or reactive airway disease (as a result 
seen in old cats with thyroid adenomas or adeno-
of beta-2 adrenergic blockade).
matous hyperplasia. The physiological changes re-
The details of the final anaesthetic plan will vary
sulting from chronic thyroid hormone excess involve
from case to case, depending upon the relative se-
all body systems and can create a fragile metabolic
verity of the clinical signs. In cats with a relatively
and cardiorespiratory state. Preoperative medical
 healthy cardiovascular system, opioid-based premedi-
 therapy is desirable to stabilize patients before either 
cation can be followed by induction of anaesthesia
elective procedures or definitive treatment with sur-
with propofol or alfaxalone. Atropine should never be
gery or radioiodine. On occasion, however, sedation
given to these cases (except as an emergency drug)
of uncontrolled hyperthyroid cats must be undertaken
 as the increase in myocardial oxygen consumption
tion or other diagnostic procedures. Cats with hyper-
blockade can be catastrophic. Ketamine should also
be avoided because it causes central stimuiation of
the sympathetic system, which may facilitate cardiac
and develop tachyarrhythmias with restraint.
arrhythmias. When the cat's temperament or degree
The physiological changes of most importance to
of cardiomyopathy would make restraint for intra-
the veterinary surgeon are listed in Figure 25.4. Car-
 venous cannulation dangerously stressful, an induction
diac abnormalities are common and may range from
chamber can be used with sevofiurane or isoflurane 
281
Chapter 25  Endocrine disease
to produce a slow and relatively stress-free induction.
are usually subtle. Loss of the inotropic and chrono
When induction of anaesthesia proceeds before intra-
tropic effects of thyroid hormone leads to reductions
venous access is secured, a cannula should be placed
in stroke volume, heart rate, arterial blood pressure
as soon as possible because sudden changes in cardio-
and contractility. Peripheral vascular resistance is in-
vascular function may require the urgent administra-
creased and blood volume is reduced. These changes
tion of intravenous drugs. Throughout anaesthesia,
reduce blood flow to tissues but this is balanced
 careful attention should be paid to general homeostatic
by decreased peripheral oxygen requirement. Hypo-
mechanisms such as fluid balance and thermoregula-
thyroidism may worsen pre-existing cardiac disease,
tion. The clinical condition of these cases can change
but on its own is unlikely to cause clinically significant
with alarming rapidity and attention to detail can pay
cardiac dysfunction. Assumptions about the causal
dividends in minimizing later complications.
nature of associations between many signs such as
Anaesthesia should be monitored very closely to
megaoesophagus, laryngeal paralysis, bleeding dis-
ensure that an adequate plane is achieved without a
 dangerous degree of carciovascular depression. Op-
joural abnormalities are unfounded and probably
timal anaesthesia will reduce the incidence of cardiac
reflect a common breed disposition. The veterinary
arrhythmias; a reduction in inhalation agent and in-
Surgeon need not be concerned that these conditions
crease in inspired oxygen tension should be consid-
ue u teui bop pioayoday e u! Alayll alow Aue ae 
ered if arrhythmias do occur. Even so, sudden changes 
other of the same age and breed.
can occur and itis advisable to have a number of drugs
For elective procedures, stabilization of the hypo-
drawn into syringes readily to hand. Atropine (an anti-
thyroid state with thyroxine therapy is recommended.
cholinergic), a beta adrenergic antagonist (e.g. esmolol)
Improvement in some signs, such as lethargy, occurs
within a week, but other signs can take weeks to months
will cope with bradycardia, tachycardia and inadequate
to resolve. Cardiovascular signs, such as reduced heart
anaesthesia, respectively. It is advisable to have an
emergency resuscitation box to hand in case of more
severe complications.
istic to delay surgery until full resolution of all signs has
 Hypocalcaemia following thyroidectomy occurs in
 occurred. In practice, anaesthesia even in uncontrolled
15-82% of cats undergoing bilateral thyroidectomy,
hypothyroid dogs carries little additionai risk when care
depending on the surgical technique used, and is likely
is taken. Of main concern is the delay in metabolism
to be due to manipulation and stretching of parathyroid
and excretion of drugs; this may prolong recovery and
vesseis, with subsequent thrombosis. However, while
may require adjustments in dosage. It is particularly
calcium concentrations should be monitored postopera-
 noticeable with drugs that are metabolized by the hep-
tively, treatment is not needed unless the cat develops
atic cytochrome P450 enzymes. Because so many
clinical signs of hypocalcaemia. Therapy with calcium
drugs share this metabolic pathway, it is difficult to
and vitamin D should be aimed at resolving clinical signs 
design an anaesthetic protocol that avoids such meta-
of hypocalcaemia while keeping serum calcium levels
bolism entirely. The most important principle is to
as low as possible. Hypocalcaemia commonly occurs
 choose short-acting agents and to use minimal doses.
within 1-3 days of surgery and blood calcium concen-
Close attention to patient monitoring will assist in
trations should be monitored once or twice daily for
optimizing this aspect of anaesthesia.
5 days postoperatively. f serum calcium is still within
 Negative inotropic drugs should be avoided. This
the reference range 48 hours after surgery, develop-
is particularly true of halothane, which can cause
ment of hypocalcaemia is unlikely.
a pronounced reduction in contractility since sarco-
In some circumstances, hyperthyroid cats may
plasmic calcium uptake can already be reduced. The
require sedation for routine procedures such as blood
reduced heat production in the hypothyroid state wil
sampling or radioiodine administration. Pethidine
-ue aq ol spaau siyl pue eauodsy ol asodsipaid
(meperidine) at a dose of 2-4 mg/kg i.m. has proved 
ticipated. In humans; other complications occurring
to be safe and effective in these cases.
 in severely hypothyroid patients include perioperative
hypotension and gastrointestinal hypomotility Hypo-
Canine hypothyroidism
ventilation may also occur as a result of the abdomi-
Hypothyroidism is a common endocrinopathy of dogs.
nal contents causing pressure on the diaphragm,
Thyroid hormone deficiency affects most body tissues,
and remedial steps should be taken if the end-tidal
although changes are insidious and tend not to com-
carbon dioxide is too high.
promise homeostasis severely. There is a decrease
in basal metabolic rate with a reduction in the rate of
Male feminizing syndrome (Sertoli cell
synthesis, mobilization and degradation of protein,
tumours)
 carbohydrate and ipids. Heat production and energy
Male feminizing syndrome is produced by testicular
expenditure are reduced. In most affected dogs, derm-
tumours that produce excessive quantities of oestro-
atological signs are accompanied by signs of de-
 gens or their precursors. Sertoli celltumours are most
creased metabolism, including lethargy, exercise
commonly associated with this syndrome, and it is
intolerance, weight gain and weakness. A mild anae-
more likely to affect dogs with abdominally located
mia is present in about one third of cases. Several
testes. Clinical signs include dermatological and
other signs are infrequently reported including
polyneuropathy, vestibular disease, facial paralysis,
veterinary surgeon is the possibility of bone marrow
bradycardia, vomiting and diarrhoea. Cardiac effects
suppression, which occurs in some affected dogs.
282
Chapter 25 Endocrine disease
Haematological changes are characterized by an ini-
976. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Feldman EC and Neison Rw (2004c) Feline nyperthyroidism
tial neutrophilia, followed by a severe pancytopenia.
(thyrotoxicosis). In: Canine and Feline Endocrinoiogy and
Clinical signs of anaemia, haemorrhage and infection
Reproduction, 3rd edn, ed. EC Feldman and Rw Nelson, pp. 152-
may be present and stabilization with blood products
218. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Feldman EC and Nelson RW (2004d) Pheochromocytoma ard multiple
(see Chapter 16) is likely to be required before sur-
endocrine neoplasia. In: Canine and Feline Endocrinoiogy and
gery. Despite castration and supportive care, most
Reproduction, 3rd edn, ed. EC Feldman and Rw Nelson, pp. 440-
463. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Fischer JR, Smith SA and Harkin KR (2000) Glucagon constant-rate
hypoglycemic crisis in the dog. Journal of the Anrerican Animar
Summary
Hospital Ass0ciation 36(1). 27-32
Flanders JA (1994) Surgical therapy of the thyroid. Veterinary Clinics of
North America: Smal Anirmal Practice 24(3). 607-621
 The above discussion has dealt with anaesthesia for
Flanders JA, Harvey HJ and Erb HN (1987) Feline thyroidectomy. A
comparison of postoperative hypocalcemia associated with three
patients with common endocrine disorders. There are
dilterent surgicai techniques. Veterinary Surgery 16(5), 362-366
 many more unusual disorders of this system. when
Gilson SD, Withrow SJ and Orton EC (1994) Surgicai treatment of
pheochromocytoma: technique, comiplications, and results in six
planning management strategies for these cases, the
dogs. Veterinary Surgery 23(3), 195~200
 best starting point is a thorough understanding of the
Jacobs G. Whittem T, Sams R, Calvert C and Ferguson D (1997)
Pharmacokinetics of propranolol in healthy cats during euthyroid
and hyperthyroid states. American Journal of Veterinary Research
 cases, the major concern is how best to monitor and
58(4), 398-403
compensate for a specific failure of the patient's
homeostatic mechanisms. It should, however, be re-
Biochemical basis for the hypercoagulable state seen in Cushing's
syndrome. Archives of Surgery 136(9), 1003-1007
 membered that these animals may be unable to com-
James MP (1989) Use of magnesium sulphate in the anaesthetic
pensate for major stressors, and so the anaesthetic
management of phaeochromocytoma: a review of 17 anaesthetics.
British Journal of Anaesthesia 62(6), 616-623
protocol should be chosen to minimize the metabolic
Kemppainen RJ (1986) Principles of glucocorticoid therapy in nonendacrine 
insult of the surgical procedure.
disease. In: Current Veterinary Therapy IX. Smalf Animar Practice,
ed. RW Kirk, pp. 954-962. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Kobayashi DL, Peterson ME, Graves TK, Lesser M and Nichols CE (1990) 
References and further reading
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 4(2). 58-62
Maher ER and McNeil EA (1997) Pheochromocytoma in dogs and cats.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Smafi Animal Practice 27(2),
359-380
and osteocalcin in the serum of hyperthyroid cats. Canadian
Mooney CT(2001) Feline hyperthyroidism. trish Veterinary Journa/54(8),
Veterinary Jourmal 37(12), 735-739
397-406
Atkins CE (1997) Thyrotoxic heart disease.In: Consutations in Feline
 Nichols R (1997) Complications and concurrent disease associated with
internal Medicine, 3rd edn, ed. JR August, pp. 279-285. WB
canine hyperadrenocorticism. Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Saunders Company, Philadelphia
Smalf Arimal Practice 27(2). 309-320
Barber PJ and Eliot J (1996) Study of calcium homeostasis in feline
 Ortega TM, Feidman EC, Nelson RW, Wilits N and Cowgill LD (1996)
hyperthyroidism.Journal ofSmalfAnimalPractice37(12),575-582
Systemic arterial blood pressure and urine protein/creatinine ratio
 Behrend EN (1999) Medical therapy of feline hyperthyroidism.
in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. Journal of the American
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
Veterinary Medical Association 209(10). 1724-1729
Veterinarian 21(3). 235-244
Panciera DL (1997) Treatment of hypothyroidism: consequences and
Berry CR, Hawkins EC, Hurley KJ and Monce K (2000) Frequency of
complications. Canine Practice 22(1), 57-58
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Journal of Vererinary Internal
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Smatf Animal Practice 31(5).
Medicine 14(2). 151-156
935-950
Birchard SJ,PetersonMEandJacobsonA(1984)Surgical treatment of
 Peterson ME, Birchard SJ and Mehlhaff CJ (1984) Anesthetic and
feline hyperthyroidism:results of 85cases.Journalofthe American
surgical management of endocrine disorders.Veterinary Clinics of
Animat Hospitaf Association 20(5). 705-709
North America: Smat Animal Practice 14(4), 911-925
Church DB, Emslie DR and Watson ADJ (1999) Plasma cortisol
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Cavanagh PG et al. (1983) Feline
 concentrations following cortisone infusion in dogs before and after
treatment with cortisone acetate. Australian Veterinary Journal
131 cases. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
77(10), 671-673
183(1). 103--110
Rand JS and Martin GJ (2001) Management of feline diabetes melitus.
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xilf: Smaff Animal Practice, ed.
Veterinary Clinics of Norh America: Small Animal Practice 31(5),
JD Bonagura, pp. 337-339. wB Saunders, Philadelphia.
881-913
Dluhy RG, Lawrence JE and Wiliams GH (2003) Endocrine
Reed Larsen P and Davies TF (2002) Hypothyroidism and thyroiditis.
hypertension. in: Wifiams Textbook of Endocrinotogy, 1oth edn,
In: Wiiams Textbook of Endocrinotogy. 1oth edn, ed. PR Larsen et
ed. P Reed Larsen et al, pp. 552-585. WB Saunders Company.
al., pp. 423-455. WB Saunders, Phitadelphia
Philadelphia 
Ellit J, Barber PJ, Syme HM. Rawtings JM and Markwell PJ (2001)
managing the diabetic patient. Best Practice and Research Clinicaf
Feline hypertension: clinical findings and response to
Anaesthesiology 18(4), 631-643
antihyperensive treatment in 30 cases. Journal of Smalf Animar
Shapiro LE and Surks MI (2001) Hypothyroidism.In:Principles and
Practice 42(3).122-129
PracticeofEndocrinoiogyandMtablismrdedndKLeckr
Feldman EC and Nelson RW (2004a) Canine hyperadrenocorticism
pp. 445-454. Lippincott williams and wilkins, Philadetphia 
(Cushing's syndrome). In: Canine and Feline Endocrinoiogy and
Thoday KL and Mooney CT {1992) Historical, clinical and laboratory
Reproduction, 3rd edn, ed. EC Feldman and Rw Nelson, pp. 252-
features of 126 hyperthyroid cats. Veterinary Record 131(12).
357. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
257-264
Feldman EC and Nelson RW (2004b) Disorders of the testes and
Welches CD, Scaveli TD, Mathiesen DT and Peterson ME (1989)
epididymides. In: Canine and Feline Endocrinoiogy and
Occurrence of problems after three techniques of bilateral
Reproduction, 3rd edn, ed. EC Feidman and Rw Nelson, pp. 961
thyroidectomy in cats.Veterinary Surgery 18(5), 392-396
283
Neurological disease
Elizabeth Leece
Introduction
ICP = 5 mmHg
Neurological disease may be caused by intracranial
disease, spinal disease or neuromuscular disease.
Anaesthesia may be performed for diagnostic inves-
tigation, surgical intervention or supportive manage-
MAP
70 mmHg
ment of neurological disease, whilst other patients with
neurological non-related problems may require anaes-
thesia for other conditions. As ever, a thorough un-
derstanding of pathophysiology and the effects of
 anaesthesia in each situation is important in design-
ing an appropriate anaesthetic protocol.
[a)
Intracranial disease
ICP = 15 mmHg
The most common intracranial disease in veterinary
patients is epilepsy, although other conditions, such
as head trauma and neoplasia, may be presenfed for
diagnosis and treatment. Good understanding of
MAP
adoidde smole AoloisAud pue Awoieueoinau
70 mmHg
anaesthetic handling.
Pathophysiology
The function of the brain is dependent on maintenance
of cerebral circulation within the restricted space of the
cranium. intracranial disease or injury interferes with the
control of cerebral circulation, predisposing to further
(b)
ischaemic damage. Anaesthesia should maintain nor-
mal neurophysiology whilst limiting the extent of sec-
ICP=20 mmHg
ondary damage. There are four intracranial constituents:
Brain
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Arterial blood
MAP
Venous blood
70 mmHg
These structures are essentially non-compressible,
although CSF and venous blood are connected to low-
pressure systems outside the cranium and can be dis-
placed if intracranial pressure (ICP) rises (Figure 26.1).
Increased ICP may occur because of trauma, haema-
toma, oedema or space-occupying lesions (SOLs).
[c)
Initially, displacement allows good compensation and
Schematic diagrams showing normal and
a relatively stable ICP with increasing volume. How-
 raised ICP. [a) The normal intracranial
ever, once compensation is exhausted, ICP will rise
compartments made up of the brain (80%), CSF (10%)
rapidly (Figure 26.2). Since space is limited in the pos-
and blood (10%) and their communication with the low-
terior fossa, ICP increases relatively early in the case
 pressure systems. As the brain is displaced by either
of SOLs in this area and secondary hydrocephalus may
[b)] a space-occupying lesion (SOL) or (c] by trauma
and haemaioma, CSF volume is reduced. As ICP
occur due to CSF outflow obstruction. Tentorial and
increases, it opposes the driving pressure of the mean 
tonsillar herniation of the brain matter may occur at the
 arterial blood pressure (MAP) and cerebral perfusion
upper limit of ICP or if sudden increases in ICP occur.
pressure (CPP) falls.
284
Chapter 26 Neurological disease
range, blood flow is dependent on mean arteriai blood
pressure (Figure 26.3). Autoregulation may be im-
paired in the injured brain and sudden changes in
blood pressure, such as increases in response to
 surgery, should be avoided. Drugs that maintain auto-
regulation should be administered.
CP
A
fntracranial volume
Initially, compensatory mechanisms
and iCP remains relatively stable (A). Once these
mechanisms are exhausted, ICP rises dramatically with 
only small volume increases (B).
50
100
150
The aim of neuroanaesthesia is to optimize physi-
MAP (mmHg)
ology with specific aims, including:
263
Autoregulation maintains a constant cerebral
 Maintenance of cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP)
blood flow (CBF) over a wide range of
Maintenance of autoregulation
perfusion pressures (CPP or MAP) in the healthy brain.
Maintenance of flow-metabolism coupling
Outside this range, or in an injured brain where
Maintenance of carbon dioxide reactivity
autoregulatory mechanismns are lost. CBF is directly
Reduction in ICP
related to the perfusion pressure.
Avoidance of sudden increases in ICP
 Cerebral protection minimizing primary and
Flow-metabolism coupling: Cerebral blood flow is
secondary damage.
 normally well matched to metabolic requirements al-
though certain agents may interfere with this coupling.
Cerebral blood flow
The primary goal of anaesthesia is to maintain cer-
Chemical: As arterial carbon dioxide levels (P,CO2)
ebral blood flow (CBF). which is related to CPP and
increase, cerebral vasodilation occurs in a linear fash-
cerebral vascular resistance (CVR):
ion (Figure 26.4). At the other extreme, maximal vas0-
constriction occurs at low levels. Prolonged, severe
CPP
hyperventilation (P:CO <26 mmHg (<3.5 kPa)) has
CBF：
CVR
 been shown to be detrimental in human head trauma
patients, although short periods of hyperventilation
Many factors affecting these variables can be
(PCO, 26-30 mmHg (3.5-4.0 kPa)) may be bene-
 manipulated by the veterinary surgeon.
instigated. In general, PCO, should be maintained
Cerebral perfusion pressure
between 30 and 33 mmHg (4.0 and 4.5 kPa) with inter-
CPP is determined by the mean arterial blood pres-
mittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV).
 sure (MAP), opposed by the intracranial pressure:
CPP = MAP-ICP
 Perfusion is directly dependent on MAP and the
Vasoconstriction
O
Vasodllatlon
anaesthetist should pay particular attention to blood
 pressure monitoring, and maintenance of cardiac out-
put and systemic vascular resistance. Cardiovascu-
lar depression should be minimized, whilst fluid
CBF
therapy is important in maintaining venous return and
blood volume. It is advisable to maintain CPP above
70 mmHg in patients with intracranial pathology, which
correlates to a MAP of 70-80 mmHg. The head should
not be elevated more than 30 degrees, otherwise a
2.5
5.0
7.5
higher MAP wouid be required.
PaCO2(kPa)
Mz CBF is linearly related to P.CO2. apart ifrom
Cerebral vascular resistance
extreme hypo- or hypercapnia when maximum
vasoconstriction or vasodiation occurs. Maintenance of
Autoregulation: In the normal brain, blood flow is
 PCO, at the low end of the normal range is usefui in
maintained at a constant level over a wide range of
reducing blood volume without the risk of excessive 
perfusion pressures (50-150 mmHg). Outside this
vasoconstriction and ischaemia.
285
Chapter 26  Neurological disease
Hypoxaemia results in vasodilation of cerebral
Diuretics are classically used to reduce raised
Aeneadoned pepioae ag pinays pue ainenosea
ICP although it is important to maintain hydration with
Some anaesthetic agents alter vascular tone.
 appropriate fluid therapy:
Inhalational agents cause a dose-dependent vaso-
 dilation although carbon dioxide reactivity is main-
 Mannitol decreases blood viscosity by increasing
tained with sevoflurane and isoflurane to a similar
blood volume. Improved rheology increases
degree, with maintenance of normocapnia counter-
oxygen delivery to the brain resulting in 
acting vasodilation. Propofol causes vasoconstriction,
 vasoconstriction and a rapid reduction in ICP.
so it is recommended in neuroanaesthesia.
After 15-30 minutes, fluid will move down the
increased osmotic gradient from the
Intracranial pressure
extravascular to the intravascular fluid
Normal ICP is 0-10 mmHg.
compartment resulting in reduced brain volume.
Clinical signs of raised ICP include depression,
Low doses of mannitol are used (0.2-1 g/kg i.v.
pupillary changes, alterations in respiratory pattern
se pajeadai ag Aeu pue (sainuu oz-ol laao
and cardiovascular abnormalities. Currently ICP is
required. CRls of mannitol do not produce the 
same osmotic effect and bolus administration is
netic resonance imaging (MRl) findings may be sug-
 gestive of raised ICP (Figure 26.5).
preferred
Loop diuretics reduce CSF production as well
With severely raised ICP, vital medullary centres
as reducing brain fluid. Furosemide (0.5-1
may be compressed, resulting in the Cushing's triad
mg/kg i.v.) has been used in conjunction with
(hypertension, bradycardia and respiratory distur-
 mannitol in patients with life-threatening
bances). The patient aims to maintain perfusion by
increased ICP.
increasing blood pressure. Hypertension, with a con-
comitant bradycardia. is seen and ventricular
Pre-anaesthetic considerations for
arrhythmias commonly occur in veterinary patients. It 
 is imperative that therapy is instituted to decrease ICP
patients with raised ICP
 and maintain CPP in these cases, as opposed to treat-
If raised ICP is suspected, mannitol administration may
be beneficial. A full range of haematology and bio-
ing the secondary cardiovascular effects.
chemical tests should be performed. Many cats with
Adequate CPP is more important than ICP per
intracranial disease may be dehydrated. Eiectrolyte
se, but the anaesthetist can decrease lCP in a
abnormalities are common and alterations in sodium
number of ways:
should be corrected; the time period over which this
 Positioning: head slightly elevated (no more than 
should be performed depends on the rapidity of on-
30 degrees)
set. A baseline urine specific gravity measurement is
Avoiding increases in central venous pressure
 usefui to guide fluid therapy.
(CVP) (avoid jugular occlusion, give pelvic
Premedication will depend on the mental status
support, minimize peak inspiratory pressure
of the patient. Opioids are useful and do not cause
during IPPV and use a smooth intubation 
respiratory depression in these patients at low
technique with no coughing)
clinical doses. Morphine should not be used since
Mannitol (0.2-1 g/kg i.v. over 10-20 minutes)
this may result in vomiting and lead to a massive
Furosemide (0.5-1 mg/kg i.v., constant rate
increase in ICP. Occasionally more profound seda-
infusion (CRI) 1 mg/kg/h)
tion may be required, particularly in cats, and low
IPPV to maintain normocapnia
doses (1-5 μg/kg) of medetomidine have been used 
Intravenous lidocaine has been shown to
although their effects on cerebral vasculature are not 
decrease ICP in veterinary patients.
well documented (Figure 26.6).
：1/1208
[a)
H = . 2051: L. 
 MRI findings may be suggestive oi raised ICP. Reduced ventricular size, loss of normal gyral architecture and 
&s midline shift are good indicators of raised ICP on (a] the transverse scan, whilst [b] a sagittal scan is
assessed as a guide for treatment.
286
Chapter 26 Neurological disease
ACP
Suggested doses in raised ICP
uebe:
Acepromazine
Clinically relevant doses do not appear to affect
10-30 μg/kg i.m.
incidence of seizures
Medeiomidine
 Cerebral vascular effects not fully understood
1~5 μug/kg i.mn.
Dose-dependent systemic cardiovascular effecis (i.v, > t.m.)
 SQ Use with caution with raised ICP. May cause vomaiting
Decreases low-metabolism coupling
Opioids
No direct effect on ICP rhigh doses may cause
Methadone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.m.
hypoventiltion, ↑ PCO)
Butorphanol 0.2-0.5 mg/kg i.m.
Avoid morphine which may cause vomiting
Buprenorphine 10-20 μg/kg s.c./i.m.
 Bradycardia with bolus administration therefore CRI
Fentanyl 2-5 μg/kg i.m./i.v. q20minutes
 more suitable during maintenance (Figure 26.7)
Fentanyl patch 3-5 ug/kg/h
Benzodiazepines
Potentiate respiratory depression seen with induction agents
0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.v.
 Summary of the neurological effects of cormmonly used agents fof premedication.
Anaesthetic considerations for patients
cardiovascular stability during craniectomy in dogs.
with raised ICP
 Remifentanil is well suited to neuroanaesthesia due to
Patients should be preoxygenated to minimize hypox-
its rapid elimination and recovery of respiratory func-
aemia during induction. itis important that an adequate
tion. in humans, sevoflurane is emerging as the most 
plane of anaesthesia is achieved prior to atftempts to
intubate the trachea. Coughing will cause a profound 
been used in cats and dogs in association with opioid
increase in ICP, whilst the cardiovascular changes 
infusions. Opioid infusions are useful to minimize the
associated with poor intubation need to be avoided.
 amount of anaesthetic required whist obtunding abrupt
Lidocaine, 1 mg/kg i.v. given 1 minute prior to induc-
apio snon abins oi asuodsan ui da u sabue
tion, may be used to minimize these responses. Lido-
should be avoided. A summary of maintenance agents
caine has also been shown to decrease ICP. Care
 in neuroanaesthesia is given in Figure 26.8.
should be taken when intubating patients with caudal
Extensive monitoring, including direct blood pres-
fossa disease since abnormal head position may be
Sure, is vital, particularly during surgery when abrupt
detrimental. Both propofol and thiopental are suitable
changes in cardiovascular parameters may indicate
induction agents and may be combined with opioids
 associated brainstem compromise. Increased CvP is
such as fentanyl to decrease the response to intuba-
avoided as it opposes jugular drainage. CVP is a guide
aq pinous Aydeiboudeo pue Addl (/'9z ainbiy) uo!
for fluid replacement following haemorrhage. Jugular
implemented immediately following intubation and
catheters may be used for this purpose although oc-
end-tidal carbon dioxide maintained between 30 and
clusion during placement can be detrimental. Periph-
33 mmHg (4 and 4.5 kPa) throughout. The minimal
erally inserted central catheters may be introduced into
peak inspiratory pressures required to maintain opti-
the thoracic caudal vena cava via the medial saphen-
mal carbon dioxide levels should be used during IPPV
ous vein (Figure 26.9). The use of neuromuscular-
to minimize increased intrathoracic pressure and,
blocking agents, such as vecuronium or atracurium,
therefore, central venous pressures.
will help decrease peak inspiratory pressure whilst mini-
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIvA) has been sug-
 mizing movement. Low hear rates are commonly seen
 gested as the preferred anaesthetic technique in humans
 in neuroanaesthesia, particularly with TIVA, and should
and dogs although there is now emerging evidence
 not be treated with the administration of anticholiner-
Suggesting sevoflurane may be the ideal agent. A vari-
gic agents unless MAP is affected. These drugs will
able rate infusion (VRl) of propofol 0.1-0.4 mg/kg/minute 
 mask changes in cardiovascular status associated with
with alfentanil 0.5-2 μg/kg/minute provides good
surgery or brainstem compression.
：
ICP SeizureComments
Dose
Propotof
. Should be administered slowly to effect to. avoid profound :
1-8 mg/kg i.v.
:
.:
 respiratory depression
.Thiopental..
.
Not suitable for CRF
：
. 5-10 mg/kg i.v.
.Ketarmine
 Larger doses may increase ICP due to muscle rigidity and
 2-5 mg/kg i.m. combined with 
.:.
 increase.sympathetic tone
benzodiazepine
Avoid in patients.with seizures
 Has been used in aggressive cats for premedication with
midazolam at low doses
 Summary of the neurological effects of induction agents.
287
Chapter 26 Neurological disease
LICP
aunzies
Fentanyt
Good cardiovascular stability
Bolus 1-2 μg/kg i.v.
May accumulate withprolonged CRI
CRI 2-5 μg/kg/h i.v.
 Alentani 
 Can be used for prolonged CRIs
0.5-2 μg/kg/minute i.v.
Provide analgesia before discontiruing CRI
 Remifentanil 
Does not rely on liver metabolism and so is rapidly elininated
0.2-0.5 μg/kg/minute i.v.
Provide anaigesia before discontinuing CRI
Propofol
√
个
 Cerebral vasoconstriction resuits in good operating conditions
 0.1-0.4 mg/kg/minute i.v.
 Prolonged CRis should be avoided in cats
Sevoflurane
 Maintains autoregulation and flow-metabolism coupling
<2xMAC
Improved cardiovascular characteristics and easily titratable
 to effect
Indicaied for neuroanaesthesia
Isofiurane
个
Similar to sevoflurane but less favourable neuroanaesthesia
<1.5x MAC
characteristics
Haiothane
个
Interferes with flow-metabolism coupling
 Not recommended
jou pous os pue Addl Aq palnbal aq louueo uoeosea
 pesn eq 
Enflurane
↑
↑
Do not use in neuroanaesthesia
Not recommended
Nitrous oxide
Increases cerebral metabolic demand and CBF
Not recommended
Summary of the neurological effects of agents used for the rmaintenance of anaesthesia.
be blood typed prior to surgery in case a blood trans-
 fusion is required. Placement of an indwelling urinary
A peripheraly inserted 
 catheter for urine output measurement is useful.
centraf calheter in a
cat. The catheter is 
Postoperative care
measured to the
correct length from the
 Following surgery, the patient should remain anaes-
point of the insertion in
thetized until it is normothermic and any haemorrhage
the medial saphenous
has been corrected. Prolonged anaesthesia and ven-
vein to just caudal to 
tilation may be beneficial in patients where there has 
the heart base prior to
been marked surgical retraction or haemorrhage (Fig-
placement via a 'peel
ure 26.10). Patients with severely raised 1CP and those
away'techniclie.
Central jugular
catheters may also be
longed recoveries. If ventilation is to be continued, a
used but occlusion of 
mixiure of air and oxygen should be used. Ideally a 
the vessel during
 smooth, rapid recovery is desirable to allow early
placement may
neurological assessment and sevoflurane provides
decrease venous
drainage from the
these favourable characteristics. Good analgesia is
brain.
required during this time,
Intraoperatively, normal (0.9%) saline is usually
chosen over lactated Ringer's (Hartmann's) solution,
Normosol or Plasmalyte as these are slightly hypotonic
(see Chapter 16). Lactated Ringer's also contains cal-
cium, which is implicated in secondary brain injury.
Hyperchloraemic acidosis may occur with prolonged
infusions of normal saline. Routine surgical fluid rates
(10 ml/kg/h) are usualy used unless higher rates are
required, for example during haemorrhage. Hypoten-
sion and haemorrhage may be treated with colloids or
 A patient in recovery maintained under 
hypertonic saline. Haemoglobin oxygen carriers
 anaesthesia using TIvA. Patients may be
recovered in either sterral or lateral recumbency. Sternal
.:
(Oxyglobin') may be used in severe haemorrhage to
recumbency may allow better spontaneous ventilatory
maintain oxygen delivery although its effects on cer-
function, although care must be taken in arthritic 
ebral vasculature are poorly understood. Cats should
patients, and jugular occlusion should be avoided.
288
Chapter 26 Neurological disease
anp eibeydskp pue snbeudosaoebaw jo ysju aul
is vital to maintain adequate perfusion to meet meta-
to cranial nerve damage, particularly with caudal fossa 
 bolic requirements. Analgesia is also required and may
 surgery, makes it advisable to withhold food for 24
aid in patient assessment. Hypotension and hypoxae-
hours. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG)
mia are associated with a poor outcome in humans
tubes should be placed for nutritional support in cases
'painbai aie Adelaul pue bujoiuow anissaibbe pue
of head trauma and caudal fossa surgery.
Morbidity and mortality is significantly reduced if a CPP
Dementia, seen as inappropriate behaviour or cir-
>70 mmHg is targeted. Fluid therapy should be admin-
cling, may be encountered folowing surgical trauma 
istered to improve MAP and CVP and to normalize heart 
rate. Small volumes of hypertonic saline (1-4 ml/kg) or
m 'suaed eseul u! panbal uaho si uoepas
 colloids are initially preferred for resuscitation, thus
t'0-1'o) lojodoud io (6y/6n 01-s) auizewoidaoe
avoiding large volumes of relatively hypotonic crystal-
loids. Mild haemodilution (PCV 30-35%) is desirable
also display hypertension, which may exacerbate
because it improves cerebral oxygen delivery. Oxygen
haemorrhage. If MAP approaches 140 mmHg, beta-
 Supplementation is beneficial during initial assessment
blockers such as esmolol (50-100 μg/kg i.v. bolus
 and prior to anaesthesia.
Hyperventilation can be detrimental in the com-
slow i.v. bolus repeated to effect or 0.1 mg/kg/h CRl
promised brain due to vasoconstriction, although mild
titrated to effect) may be used, whiist acepromazine
hyperventilation may be beneficial in the short term 
can also help decrease blood pressure.
during stabilization.
Seizure activity should be controled. Transfrontal
The use of steroids is contraindicated in head
approaches carry the risk of sneezing and aspiration,
trauma and they may in fact be detrimental. In par-
and pharyngeal packs should be placed preopera-
ticular they will cause hypergiycaemia. Severity of
fively. Subcutaneous emphysema may develop,
head trauma in veterinary patients correlates with the
whilst pneumocephalus presents with neurological
degree of hyperglycaemia and, since glucose is
deterioration. Constipation may be seen postopera-
 linked to increased brain injury, steroids and glucose-
tively, particularly in cats, and straining to defecate
containing fluids should be avoided. Occasionally,
massively increases ICP. Patients that may be de-
diabetes insipidus may result from head trauma, and
hydrated and receive opioids should be rehydrated
 careful monitoring of urine output and specific gravity
and warm saline enemas are occasionally adminis-
is helpful.
 tered under anaesthesia.
 Postoperatively, seizure activity may develop and
should be controlled to limit further injury. Nutrifional 
Analgesia
 support should be provided for comatose patients and
Humans report headaches following craniotomy and
 those with facial fractures.
it is not unreasonable to assume that similar pain is
experienced by veterinary patients. Caudal fossa sur-
 Anaesthesia for patients with space-occupying
gery is more painful than the supratentorial approach.
lesions
Patients with increased ICP appear depressed, whist 
 Steroids are often used preoperatively to reduce
cats are often aggressive, perhaps suggesting pain.
peritumour oedema and, in this situation, can dramati
A multimodal approach to analgesia should be
 cally improve clinical signs. Their use should be con-
adopted in these cases. Opioids may be used at clini-
tinued perioperatively. Positioning for caudal fossa
cal doses, although morphine should be avaided due
surgery involves flexion of the neck (Figure 26.11) and
to vomiting. Care must be taken in severely obtunded
 armoured tubes (see Chapter 5) are useful. Jugular
patients and drugs titrated to effect. Pupil size and
obstruction should be avoided.
responsiveness may be affected, particularly in cats,
interfering with neurological assessment. Non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be
used if the patient is not receiving steroids; paraceta-
mol (acetaminophen) may be a useful additional agent
for neurological pain in dogs. Following craniotomy,
local anaesthetic infiltration around the surgical wound
provides immediate postoperative analgesia. Intra-
venous lidocaine infusions may also be useful for
analgesia due to a reduction in iCP.
Anaesthetic considerations for specific
conditions
Anaesthesia for head trauma
The first 48 hours following head trauma are critical,
 Positioning of the patient for caudal fossa
injury and ongoing haemorrhage and inflammation or
 surgery or suboccipital craniectomy involves
 oedema. Anaesthesia may be required for manage-
flexion of the neck. An armoured endotracheal tube
avoids kinking and airway occlusion. Juguiar occlusion 
ment of the case, imaging or treatment of other
 must be prevented, whilsi encotracheal tube connectors
injuries. Thorough systematic evaluation must estab-
must be secure. Capnography is useful for detection of
lish the presence of other injuries. Rapid resuscitation 
 disconnection from the circuit.
289
Chapter 26 Neurological disease
Brain relaxation is important to allow surgica
seen during recovery from intravenous sedation.
access without excessive traction on the tissue. Man-
These are often localized to the head and neck.
 nitol can be administered prior to dural opening, to
 Patients should be monitored closely during this time
aid relaxation. Meningioma removal can be associ-
ated with marked haemorrhage, particularly in cats,
actual seizure activity. Temperature and glucose
which can be minimized by reducing CVP.
levels shouid be checked prior to weaning these
patients off the infusions. Sevoflurane or isoflurane
Hydrocephalus
Patients may be presented for shunt placement to
trol, although endotracheal intubation and careful
direct CSF from the ventricular system to the peri-
toneal cavity. Preoperative stabilization of patients
require a high level of supportive care including:
includes reducing CSF production. Intraoperative use
of opioids is advisable to avoid stimulation from the
Airway management
tunnelling of the catheter subcutaneouisly.
 Respiratory monitoring
·
Adequate bedding
Anaesthesia for epileptic patients
·
Turning every 4 hours
Seizure activity should be differentiated from syncopal
 Bladder care, preferably by placing an indwelling 
attacks and extracranial causes, such as hypoglycae.
urinary catheter
mia or hepatic disease. Anti-epileptic drugs alter bio-
Eyes should be lubricated at least every 6 hours
chemistry results: phenobarbital increases alkaline
If intubated, oral hygiene should be addressed 
phosphatase and decreasing calcium levels, whilst
including cuff deflation and repositioning.
potassium bromide will falsely elevate chloride val-
changing endotracheal tube (tubes with low-
ues. These drugs cause polydipsia, and water should
pressure, high-volume cuffs are preferred) and
be available until premedication, Intravenous access
 moistening of the mouth.
should be secured and patients observed, allowing
prompt seizure treatment. Anti-epileptic medications
Anaesthesia for patients with vestibular disease
should not be discontinued perioperatively.
Anaesthesia for vestibular disease will often result
 Premedication should minimize stress whilst pro-
in a degree of decompensation for 24--48 hours
viding analgesia. Manufacturers of acepromazine ad-
postoperatively and owners should be warned of
....
Dideide u! pasn eg jou pjnous bnap aul teul esia
this. The use of short-acting agents is advisable, with
patients, since high doses of a similar drug reportedly
low dose medetomidine and propofol resulting in
caused a reduction in seizure threshold. However,
rapid and complete recoveries. Nausea may be seen
acepromazine has been used at clinically relevant
following anaesthesia.
doses (5--70 μg/kg i.v., i.m.) in epileptic patients and
does not alter the incidence of seizures (Tobias et a.,
2006). Opioids provide good sedation and analgesia
Spinal disease
 without altering seizure activity, whilst low dose alpha-2
agonists improve sedation in excitable patients.
Spinal cord injury may occur because of intervertebral
Benzodiazepines can cause dysphoria in non-seizuring
disc disease, fibrocartilagenous embolism, neoplasia,
 patients and should not be used alone. Propofol and
trauma or congenital instability. Anaesthesia may also
thiopental are suitable induction agents, whilst ketamine
be required for the diagnosis of discospondylitis or
should be avoided. Sevoflurane and isoflurane have
meningitis. Destabilization of the spinal column or
Surgical trauma may resulf in further deterioration of
halothane and they are the inhalational agents of
neurological signs. Patients will encounter varying
choice. TIVA with propofol is suitable for maintenance 
degrees of pain and can develop severe neuropathic
and is used for long-term control of status epilepticus.
pain, which can be extremely difficult to manage.
Mask induction may result in excitement and is best 
avoided. Patients should be monitored carefully in a
Anaesthesia for spinal disease
quiet recovery environment.
Patients may exhibit pain due to compression of neu-
ronal tissue. Analgesia should be provided in the pre-
Anaesthesia for seizure management
 medication to allow placement of intravenous catheters 
：
without the need for excessive restraint. A multimodal
cus or cluster seizures) prevents further neurological
analgesic protocol should be adopted, including opioids 
damage and minimizes hypoxaemia, hypoglycaemia
and NSAIDs with additional drugs as required. This is
and hyperthermia. lnitially diazepam (0.2-2 mg/kg i.v.
 particularly important for patients with severe neck pain,
especially during intubation. An accessible, wide-bore
may be used whilst loading with other anti-epileptic
intravenous catheter should be available for rapid fluid
agents is achieved. Refractory seizure activity may
replacement where haemorrhage is anticipated.
require further sedation or anaesthesia. Propofol
 Careful positioning for the different procedures is
(4--8 mg/kg i.v. followed by sedation with CRl 0.1-0.4
important to minimize excessive venous pressure,
mg/kg/minute) is useful, although respiratory moni-
which may exacerbate venous haemorrhage (see
toring is required. Pentobarbital may also be used
below). Judicious use of IPPV may be beneficial for
initially at 2-15 mg/kg i.v., followed by CRI 0.1--0.2
control of PaCO, because ventilation is often impaired
mg/kg/minute. Occasionally muscle tremors may be
by excessive surgical pressure. Hypercapnia causes
290
Chapter 26 Neurological disease
vasodilation and may contribute to blood loss. IPPV
 Haemorrhage is commonly encountered during
also maintains a rhythmical respiratory pattern, thus
spinal surgery and blood loss, and MAP should
helping the surgeon,
be monitored. Hypothermia develops during pro-
Intraoperative analgesia may be supplemented with 
longed procedures in smaller patients and should
intravenous infusions of short-acting opioids, such as
be minimized.
fentanyl and alfentanil. Ketamine infusions are proving
Aebins euids jee pue buunp jnjesn Aewanxa ag ol
Analgesia for patients with spinal disease
 and also provide neuroprotection (Figure 26.12). Oc-
Neuropathic pain is now well recognized in human
casionally, marked autonomic responses are encoun-
patients but may be dificult to identify in animais.
tered during drilling, when distortion of the vertebral
Neuropathic pain may be difficult to treat with stand-
column can cause dynamic compression at the site of 
ard analgesic techniques such as opioids and
intervertebral disc extrusion, and also during manipu-
NSAIDs and a multimodal approach needs to be
lation of disc material. This is more common in chronic 
adopted. Neuropathic pain may result from a variety
conditions with nerve root entrapment. The use of opioid
of reasons, including traumatic injury to nerves,
boluses or intravenous lidocaine (loading dose 1 mg/kg 
 nerve root entrapment, neoplasia (such as brachial
followed by CRl 25-50 μg/kg/minute) may be helpful.
plexus neoplasia), discospondylitis and meningitis.
Many drugs have neuroprotective properties, al-
Animals manifest pain in several ways. such as de-
though this has not translated into clinical benefits in
pression and withdrawal from human interaction,
i auag jo aq ol umous juabe Auo aul 'suewny
anorexia, aggression or hyperaesthesia. Many
spinal trauma is high dose methylprednisolone
protocols have been used for these patients, includ-
(MPSS) if given within 8 hours after injury, due to free
ing N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists, sys-
radical scavenging properties during this speciic time
temic local anaesthetics, alpha-2 adrenoceptor
period, rather than anti-inflammatory actions. MPSS
agonists, gabapentin and tricyclic antidepressants
should not be used in the presence of voluntary
(Figure 26.14). If management is not satisfactory
motor function, since prognosis is good without ster-
with high dose opioids and NSAIDs, a combination
oid use. lIf given after 8 hours, steroids may in fact be
of intravenous lidocaine and ketamine can prove
detrimental to the patient, with many side effects re-
extremely useful whilst the underlying cause is in-
 ported. There is absolutely no indication for their use
vestigated and treated. Lidocaine infusions can
at this time. Despite documented side effects in vet-
be continued for several days in normovolaemic
erinary species, many spinal injury patients receive
patients without liver disease, although tolerance
steroids due to the anti-inflammatory action; however,
 may develop. Once treatment for the underlying con-
NSAIDs should be the primary choice. Suggested
dition has been initiated, a gradual tapering of the
protocols for MPSS are shown in Figure 26.13.
dose allows assessment of pain.
Up to 3 hours
30.mg/kg i.v. foltowed.by 15 mg/kg.i.v. at
 2 and 6 hours after initial injection·
30 mg/kg i.v folowed by 5.4 mg/kg/h for
24 hours
38 hours.
 30 mg/kg i. followed by.15 mg/kg i.v. at
 2 and 6 hours afterinitial injection then
2.5mg/kg/h for42hours
30 mg/kg i.v followed by 5.4 mg/kg/h for
48hours
Over8hours
Contraindicated
26.13
Suggested protocols for the use of MPSS in
 patients with acute spinal trauma within the 
26.12
 Ketamine infusions may be continued
first 8 hours following injury (adapted from Bracken,
 posioperatively for 12-24 hours and appear
2002). Gastric protectanis shouid be used concomitanily
substantially to reduce opioid requirements.
with steroid treatment.
Drug
Opioids
Methadone 0.2-0.5 mg/kg s.c./i.m:
 Good for inflammatory paini but not very effective for
:.....
1 Morphine 0.2-0.5 mg/kg s.c/f.m./l.v.
 neuropathic pain. High doses may be required
 0.1-0.4 mg/kg/h CRI following loading dose
Methadnemayhave someMA antagnis efectand
Fentanyl CRt 0.02-0.2 μg/kg/iminute
An ued oyedanau u asn ro paeipu a ew os
Buprenorphine 20 μg/kg s.c.fi.m.fl.v.
accumulate with repeated administration 
Fentanyl patch 3-5 ug/kg/h
Fentanyl patches have a long onset time and may not 
 achieve significant plasma levels
Analgesic agents and doses used in acute and/or chronic neuropathic pain. (continues)
291
Chapter 26 Neurological disease
Drug
342
NSAIDs
Carprofen 4 mg/kg orally/s./i.v.
 Should be used in conjunction with other anaigesic
Meloxicam:
 modalities
Dogs 0.2 mg/kg s.c./orally then 0.1 mg/kg q24h
Cats 0.3 mg/kg s.c/orally then 0.1 mg/kg q24h for 4 days
Paracetamol
10 mg/kg orally/iv. q12h
May be useful for meningitis or pain caused by intracranial
(acetaminophen)
disease. May be used in conjunction with opicids. Do not
use in cats
Lidocaine
a/bybni 0-92 l0 Ao pamolloy x1 bybw 1 esop bupeo7
 Tolerance may develop during prolorged infusions. Dose 
i.v.
 should be decreased in hypovolaemic patients o those with
↓ liver disease
Ketamine
 50-100 μgikg i.m./i.v. bolus
NMDA antagonist 
5-10 g/kg/minate i.y. infusion
Alpha-2 agonists
Medetonidine:
Tolerance may develop during prolonged infusions and so
 2-5 ug/kg i.m.
Aew sanou gt< suoisnui pasnlpe og oi peau Aew asop
Loading dose 1 μg/kg i.v. folowed by CRl 1-2 μg/kg/h .v.
have decreased efficacy
：
Gabapentin
5 mg/kg orally q12h
Side effect of mild sedation. Drug should not be
discontinued abruptly
Amitriptyline
Cats 0.251 mg/kg orally q24h
 Side effects include nausea and depression
：
 Dogs 1-2 mg/kg orally q12h
ued ouedonau auauo jopue ainoe ui pasn sasop pue stuabe pisabjeuy (penuuoo)
Preservative-free morphine (0.1 mg/kg) or hydro-
plasma transfusions where appropriate (see Chapter
01 Ajeoidot pedde ag ueo (by/bu so'o) auoydiow
16) whilst drugs affecting platelet function should be
the spinal cord prior to closure in dorsal procedures,
avoided, such as acepromazine and certain NSAIDs.
 although efficacy has not been assessed in animals.
 Spinal and epidural morphine are undergoing investi-
Dorsal approach to the spinal cord
Haemorrhage is the most common complication of
laminectomy. The anaesthetist can help minimize blood
Postoperative care
loss by reducing venous pressures. Minimal peak in-
Movement should be restricted, minimizing the risk of
 spiratory presstre should be used in ventilated patients
 further haemorrhage, haematoma formation and result-
and excessive abdominal pressure avoided by posi-
ant neurological deterioration. Some patients require
((gt'gz ainbig) ieppelg aui buAidwa pue buluol
sedation, which can be achieved with opioid analge-
sic agents, alpha-2 agonists or acepromazine. Recum-
bent patients should be turned every 4 hours to
 minimize positional atelectasis, and padded bedding
should be provided to minimize bruising and the de-
velopment of pressure sores. If prolonged recum-
bency or bladder dysfunction is expected an indwelling
Urinary catheter should be placed.
 A small percentage of patients with cervical spinal
disorders require postoperative ventilatory support.
 Patients undergoing surgery or suffering injury at this
level should be assessed at the end of the anaes-
thetic for adequate ventilatory function. Cyanosis may
 be seen if the patient is not receiving oxygen supple.
mentation, although hypercapnia is a more reliable
Abdominal pressure should be minimized in
indicator of such dysfunction.
joddns e buineid Aa Aouagunoai jeuiais
(sandbag or padding) underneath the pelvis to elevate it.
The bladder should aiso be emptied prior to surgery.
Anaesthetic considerations for specific
Decreased intra-abdominat pressure will improve
spinal surgeries
venous drainage from the vertebral canal, minimizing
 bieeding at surgery.
Cervical spondylopathy
"Wobbler' surgery is often performed on Dobermanns 
Ventral slot surgery
and a buccal mucosal bleeding time test should be
 During ventral slot surgery, the trachea and vagal trunk
performed prior to surgery. along with von willebrand's
are retracted to allow surgical access. Neuromuscu-
assessment if possible. Patients with von Willebrand's
lar-blocking agents may allow improved surgical
disease should be managed with desmopressin and
access. Excessive traction on the trachea may affect
292
Chapter 26  Neurological disease
ments if pressure-cycied ventilators are used. latro-
genic damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerves will
lation may cause bradycardia and retractors should
be repositioned. Anticholinergic drugs are rarely re-
quired. The patient is positioned with the neck fully
extended (Figure 26.16) and care must be taken not
to allow the head to be lower than the body since this
may exacerbate haemorrhage. The head should not
be higher than the body, as air embolism may occur
during venous haemorrhage. Direct or indirect blood
atantoaxiai subluxation is vital. The head and
 neck are kept in a horizontal plane and in a neuira!
is commonly encountered on the ventral approach,
position. Preoxygenation is worthwhile in these patients 
due to the anatomy of the venous sinuses. Surgery at
whilst a laryngoscope can aid intubation.
the level of the cervical vertebrae may result in respi-
Care must also be taken when positioning for
ratory compromise and should be monitored with
capnography and pulse oximetry. Arterial blood gas
imaging. A supportive neck brace is applied (Figure
analysis may also be helpful.
 prior to surgical intervention. This presents further prob-
lems for the anaesthetist during recovery and should
not be too tight, avoiding compression of the pharyn-
 geal area. lf the brace is too tight or poorly positioned,
the patient may also experience difficuity in swallow-
ing, potentially resulting in upper airway obstruction or
aspiration pneumonia. when anaesthetizing these
aul buoddns abepueg eu Aebins ol oud sluaned
brace should be cut prior to induction to allow rapid
removal of the entire brace if difficulty intubating is en-
countered. Suction should be available.
Patient positioning for ventral slot surgery
usually involves severe neck extension.
Atlantoaxial subluxation
Atlantoaxial subluxation is perhaps one of the most
challenging spinal conditions for anaesthetists. Typi-
cally a congenital or developmental condition affect-
ing immature toy breed dogs, it causes instability of
the atlantoaxial joint with acute or chronic cord com-
Oxygen supplementation is often required
pression. Damage at this level can cause respiratory
during recovery or prior to induction of patients 
with: neck braces. If cyanosis deveiops the neck brace
compromise or failure and patients must be handled
should be loosened or reapplied. During indluction the 
with great care, particularly at induction. Adequate
supporting bandage should be cut to allow rapid removal
sedation wil allow intravenous catheter placement
if difficulties arise at intubation
with minimal restraint. Struggling at this time could 
result in rapid deterioration. A rapid, intravenous in-
Spinal trauma
duction technique causing minimal respiratory depres-
Cases with spinal trauma should be stabilized on a
board prior to transport. Life-threatening conditions,
suitable. It is advisable to avoid benzodiazepines,
such as ruptured bladder, haemorrhage, lung or
since profound muscle relaxation may result in further
myocardial contusions and pneumothorax, should
 destabilization of the joint. Preoxygenation should be
be ruled out. lntravenous access should be secured,
 carried out by the flow by' technique prior to induc-
fluid therapy instigated and analgesia administered,
tion if tolerated. The head and neck should be sup-
ideally using intravenous opioids in the first instance.
 ported in a neutral position during induction and the
Cardiopulmonary parameters should be stabilized
patient positioned in lateral recumbency for intuba-
prior to anaesthesia.
tion. The head and neck shouid be kept in the hori-
eul yum pajoddns mel jeddn aul pue aueid ejuoz
Meningitis
head remaining in a neutral position for intubation
 Patients with meningitis may be extremely dificult to
(Figure 26.17). The use of a laryngoscope is extremely
 restrain due to severe pain and hyperaesthesia. The
useful during intubation.
judicious use of iow dose medetomidine (1-5 μg/kg i.m.)
293
Chapter 26  Neurological disease
in combination with an opioid should allow handling
trachea should be intubated rapidly and the cuff in-
·
for catheter placement. lIntravenous analgesic agents 
such as lidocaine or ketamine may be used, whilst
-said buiAdde Aq uoegnui buunp pawoued ag Aew
low dose medetomidine may be required in animals
sure either side of the trachea just below the larynx to
suiffering extreme pain.
minimize regurgitation. Suction should be available
to clear any pharyngeal fluid or material. In dysphagic
patients, excessive volumes of saliva may be present
Neuropathies and neuromuscular
-diay Alawaxa aie sgems Ap pue xuseudoio su uy
disease
ful for tongue retraction, whilst suction or the use of 
sponge swabs may also be required.
Animals may present with focal or generalized mus-
Intraoperative monitoring of ventilation is important
cular weakness due to neuropathies or neuromuscular
and IPPV is required if hypoventilation occurs. Breath-
disease. Neuromuscular disease may present as
ing systems should have minimal resistance. The use
muscular rigidity in tetanus, necessitating anaes-
 of inhalant agents results in rapid elimination and re-
thesia to provide supportive care such as ventilation
 covery, minimizing respiratory depression and improv-
and nutrition.
ing airway protection. In MG patients, the paipebral
It is important to rule out treatable metabolic causes 
reflex may diminish with repeated stimulation and may
prior to anaesthesia, such as electrolyte abnormali-
 not be a reliable indicator of depth of anaesthesia.
ties. Myopathies may be associated with steroid use,
Neuromuscular-blocking agents may be used at
as well as certain endocrinopathies such as hypothy-
low doses in patients with neuromuscular disease (see 
roidism and hyperadrenocorticsm (see Chapter 25).
Chapter 15). Monitoring using a nerve stimulator is
Immune-mediated myasthenia gravis (MG) is one
mandatory.
 of the common neuromuscular diseases affecting dogs
In severely affected patients undergoing diagnos-
and cats. The disease may be focal or generalized,
tic procedures, postoperative supportive care should
with some animals presenting in acute fulminating MG
be planned. 1n animals with megaoesophagus or dys-
requiring anaesthesia. A reduction in functional post-
phagia, a PEG tube should be placed for nutrition,
synaptic acetylcholine receptors causes muscular
weakness with sustained activity. Megaoesophagus
require tracheotomy to allow prolonged ventilatory
and dysphagia are common findings in MG and have
support. Nasogastric and oesophagostomy tubes are
important implications for anaesthesia. MG is associ-
avoided in patients with oesophageal dysfunction.
ated with mediastinal thymoma and this shouid be ruled 
 Baseline thoracic radiographs should be taken in case
out before surgical excision (see Chapter 21). Surgical 
aspiration pneumonia develops.
stress may exacerbate MG causing deterioration
Anaesthesia for patients with tetanus requires the
General anaesthesia is preferred to heavy seda-
 same general considerations as above. lt is impor-
：
tion to allow airway control and ventilatory support.
tant to provide a quiet, darkened recovery area to
Benzodiazepines and alpha-2 agonists exacerbate
minimize stimulation. In severely affected patients,
muscular weakness and should be avoided. Opioids
tracheotomy is advisable for both airway management
will provide sedation with or without acepromazine,
and IPPV. Sedatives such as acepromazine have
although morphine should be avoided in patients with
been used to decrease response to stimulation.
suspected megaoesophagus. Radiographs to rule out
 Partial inflation of the endotracheal tube cuff dur-
megaoesophagus should be taken prior to induction
ing extubation allows secretions to be drawn into the
of anaesthesia. Following preoxygenation, a rapid in-
 oropharynx from the airway. The pharynx should be
travenous induction technique using propofot or thio-
supported higher than the nose allowing secretions
pental allows rapid airway control. The patient should
or regurgitant fluid to drain through the mouth, mini-
be maintained in sternal recumbency prior to intuba-
mizing the risk of aspiration (Figure 26.20). Adequate
tion, with the head kept in an elevated position to pre-
vent regurgitation and aspiration (Figure 26.19). The
26.19
 Patients with: suspected megaoesophagus
should be maintained in sternal recumbency
 The pharynx shoulo be raised above the level
 of the nose to allow fhuid to drain from the
aspiration. The cuff should be fully inflated before the
oropharynx following extubation of patients with
head is lowered and suction should be available.
BibeudsAp jo snbeudosaoebau
294
Chapter 26  Neurological disease
analgesia should always be provided because se-
myelography. possibly due to the relatively larger vol-
axe oi alge eq jou Aew sjuaed pale Aaiaa 
ume of injectate compared to CSF volume. Cervical
normal signs of pain. In certain conditions steroids
injection of contrast carries a higher risk than lumbar
may be required for treatment, so NSAIDs should be
 injection and the latter technique should be performed
avoided. Patients may be unable to generate heat by
where possible. Rostral flow of contrast to the basal
shivering and postoperative hypothermia may result.
subarachnoid space and ventricular system is mini-
Patients should be turned regularly to minimize
atelectasis. Pulse oximetry is a useful monitor of ven-
taining the head in an elevated position afterwards. It 
 tilation in patients not receiving oxygen supplementa-
may also be advisable to avoid the use of agents that
tion and may be used as a guide for oxygen therapy.
may lower the seizure threshold (see Figures 26.6
Arterial blood gas analysis is an invaluable monitor-
and 26.7). Seizures are normally successfully con-
ing tool for impending respiratory failure as P.CO2
trolled with intravenous or rectal diazepam.
increases and can be used as a guide for the imple-
mentation of IPPV.
Anaesthesia for computed tomography
Accessibility is the major problem encountered during
computed tomography (CT) scanning. Often patients
Anaesthesia for neurological
are heavily sedated for this short procedure with drug
diagnostic procedures
combinations such as medetomidine and an opioid.
Patients with suspected raised ICP should be anaes-
Anaesthesia for cerebrospinal fluid
thetized and IPPV provided. It is important to ensure
sampling
intravenous access, whilst monitoring should be as
CSF may be sampled from the atlanto-occipital space
standard. Some endotracheal tubes have radio-opaque
or lumbar intervertebral spaces. Cervical sampling
markers that can interfere with scan quality.
carries increased risk due to spinal cord trauma and
the proximity to the brainstem. If raised ICP is sus-
Anaesthesia for magnetic resonance
pected, CsF sampling should be avoided, although
imaging
the risk of tonsillar herniation can be minimized by
 Anaesthesia for MRl has the problem of accessibility,
the judicious use of hyperventilation, sometimes in
plus limitations regarding MRl compatible equipment.
combination with osmotic diuretics. The patient should
All staff should be fully trained to avoid accidenfal use of
be adequately anaesthetized to prevent movement
ferromagnetic material, which can become projectile,
during collection and ideally an armoured tube should
 causing injury to patients, personnel and equipment.
be used (see Chapter 5) and 100% oxygen supplied
Most patients should be anaesthetized, since scan
during the procedure. Venfilatory effort and the
capnograph should be observed for signs of respira-
artefacts, which may be more significant during cer-
tory tract obstruction, as older endotracheal tubes may
'kink' during flexion of the neck.
comatose patients undergo brain MRI without any
anaesthesia. These patients are positioned in sternal
Anaesthesiaforelectromyography
or lateral recumbency, avoiding compression of the
This technique generally involves patients with neuro-
jugular veins, and are monitored as normal since rapid
muscular disease and there should be particular
decompensation may necessitate ventilation. Induc-
tion of anaesthesia should be performed outside the
emphasis on ventilatory monitoring and support. En-
vironmental electrical interference may be a prob-
scanner room if possible.
lem. An adequate plane of anaesthesia minimizes
Hypothermia occurs in smaller patients and is sig-
patient interference and reaction to nerve conduc-
nificant in those undergoing surgery. Good insulation 
tion velocity studies.
should be provided and MRl fans turned off.
The intravenous contrast agents may occasion-
Anaesthesia for myelography
ally result in an anaphylactoid reaction and monitor-
Myelography is a relatively safe diagnostic tool for
ing is vital, with a progressive fall in the end-tidal
spinal cord disease. Intrathecal injection of contrast
carbon dioxide giving the first indication. Cardiopul-
medium causes mild meningitis whilst more serious
and the patient should be removed.
hypotension, tachypnoea, tachycardia, bradycardia.
arrhythmias and cardiac arrest. The resultant menin-
MRI anaesthetic and monitoring equipment
 geal iritation should be managed with anti-inflamma-
These topics are covered in Chapters 4 and 5.
tory agents.
Seizures may be the result of chemotoxicity and
References and further reading
hyperosmolality, with newer contrast media theoreti-
cally being less epileptogenic. Generalized seizures
Bracken MB (2002) Steroids for acute spinal cord injury. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 3. CD001046
although may be seen some hours later. Dogs over
 on the use of acepromazine maleate in dogs with seizures, Journal
20 kg have a higher incidence of seizures following
of the American Animal Hospital Association 42. 283-289
295
Paediatric patients
Daniel Holden
Introduction
intima to oxygenated blood causes contraction of its
muscular layer, resulting in attenuation and closure.
Newborn dogs and cats are termed neonates until 4
The resulting increase in left atrial pressure causes
weeks of age and paediatric until 12 weeks old. Al-
closure of the foramen ovale. These changes are
though patients of this age range are not common
shown in diagrammatic form in Figure 27.2. The
candidates for anaesthesia, situations do arise where
changes are initiaily functional and do not normally
an anaesthetic may be necessary (investigation and 
become anatomical for several weeks, and major
surgical correction of congenital abnormalities, re-
changes in arterial oxygen tension or acid-base
straint for diagnostic procedures, blood sampling, can-
nulation). The diferences in anatomy, physiology and 
and re-open fetal circulatory pathways.
 pharmacology between neonatal/paediatric patients
Cardiac output in the paediatric patient is prim-
：
and adults should be appreciated. Equipment selec-
arily rate dependent. This is due to the relatively large 
tion is also important.
percentage of non-contractile cardiac mass and low
ventricular compliance. As a result, stroke volume is
effectively fixed and increases in preload and afterload
Comparative anatomy, physiology
and pharmacology
 Fetal circulation
Some values for selected physiological measurements
Lungs':
in paediatric dogs and cats are shown in Figure 27.1.
CO2
"Parameter
Rectal temperature
35.4-36°℃ (96-97F)
Left
Increases to 37.7*℃ (100*F) after
Atria
FO
4 weeks of age
Heart rate
210-300 beats/minute
Arterial blood pressure
Systolic 70-82 mmHg
Ventricles
Mean 56-66 mmHg
 Diastolic 40-52 mmHg 
Haematocrit
35-45% at birth
Pulmonary
Aorta
25-35% at 28 days
artery
DA
Haemoglobin
110-140 g/l at birth
80-90 g/l at 28 days
Body
Respiratory rate
 20-36 breaths/minute
CO2
Normal values for seiected physiological
O2
 parameters in puppies and kittens.
.. Placenta:
Cardiovascular system
Systemic vascular resistance rises and pulmonary
 Schematic representation of the fetal
vascular resistance falls abruptly immediately affer
circulation as compared with the adult
birth. As the alveoli inflate, a more rigid scaffold for
circulation. In the fetus, relatively lite blood goes to the
pulmonary vessels is created and vascular tone falls
lungs (dashed line) compared with thai passing through
as oxygen tension increases. Rapid cessation of pla-
the placenia, where oxygenation occurs. A considerable
cental blood flow causes the rise in systemic vascu-
wne hel eul os nybu aus uoi sassed pooa jo sunoue
through the forarmen ovale (FO) and from the pulmonary
lar resistance. These changes in vascular tone
artery to the aorta through the ductus arteriosus (DA).
combine to reverse blood flow through the (still paf-
Reproduced from Brown and Koziowski (1997) with
ent) ductus arteriosus, and exposure of the ductal
permission trom the publisher. (continues)
296
Chapter 27 Paediatric patients
 systems are employed, Intermittent positive pressure
Adult circulation
ventilation (1PPV) is aiso strongly recommended in
：
patients under 6-8 weeks, although great care should
Lungs
be taken to avoid barotrauma. Most ventilators suit-
+
O2
 able for patients of this size are pressure cycled to
avoid such problems (see Chapter 6).
Hepatic function
RA
LA
Of main relevance to the anaesthetist is the immatu-
rity of the hepatic microsomal enzyme systems re-
sponsible for the metabolism and transformation of
RV
LV
many anaesthetic and analgesic drugs. These sys-
tems are not considered fully functional until at
least 8 weeks of age and therefore drugs under-
going extensive hepatic metabolism should be
avoided; if this is not possible, doses should be re-
duced and significantly longer elimination half-lives 
should be expected.
.Body
Glycogen storage in the neonatal and paediatric
liver is minimal and any excessive fasting or delay in
CO2
feeding after anaesthesia results in rapid exhaus-
tion of stores, leading to hypoglycaemia. Glucose-
 pebuojoid buunp pelnbei eq Aew spiny buujeiuoo
(continueci) Schematic reprosentation of ithe
 fetal circulation as compared with the aault
Surgical procedures.
circulation. In the felus, relatively littie blood goes to the 
lungs (dashed line) compared with that passing through
Renal function and fiuid balance
the placenta, where oxygenation occurs. A considerable
Adult plasma aibumin levels are not fully attained un-
amount of blood passes from the right to lhe left atrium 
til approximately 8 weeks of age and therefore highly
through the foramen ovale (FO) and from the pulmonary
protein-bound drugs (e.g. propofol) will exert a greater
artery to the aorta through the ductus arteriosus (DA).
LA = Left atrium; LV = Left ventricle; RA = Right atrium;
immediate effect due to the greater proportion of free
RV = Right ventricle. Reproduced from Brown and
drug in circulation.
Kozlowski (1997) with permission from the publisher.
Total body water content and extracelluiar fluid
volume are higher than in adult animais, resulting in
 an increased volume of distribution of many water-
are poorly tolerated, The parasympathetic dominance 
soluble drugs. A greater tendency to dehydrate with
that exists in the immature heart also means that
smaler fluid losses also exists
the bradycardic effects of drugs such as opioids and
Renal function is also reduced in the first 6-8
alpha-2 agonists may induce severe hypotension. As a
weeks of life; paediatric patients cannot tolerate large
result of these factors, paediatric patients are less well
volumes of fluid administered rapidly and are less well
able to tolerate blood loss than adults and losses of
able to concentrate urine than adults. Rapidly admin-
as little as 5 ml/kg may cause significant hypotension.
istered solute loads are tolerated poorly and all intra-
 Haemopoiesis does not effectively commence until 
vascular fluids shouid be given carefully via syringe
 2-3 months of age; before this haemoglobin concen-
pump or burette infusion set. Flow regulators placed
trations are lower than those of adults, further reduc-
in the administration ine (Figure 27.3) are also useful
ing the tolerance fo surgical haemorrhage.
to avoid overtransfusion.
Respiratory system
Differences in anatomy, compared with adults, are
 marked. The tongue is relatively large and the upper
F
 airway narrow, meaning that airway obstruction is likely
without intubation. Airway resistance and work of
breathing are aiso increased. Functional residual ca-
ing volume (volume at which small airways close).
tors mean that airway closure and hypoventilation are
major risks, especially in the presence of potent res-
piratory depressants such as anaesthetic agents.
Tissue oxygen demand is two to three times
greater in paediatric patients; resting respiratory rate
 Flow regulators. Note that the flow rates 
 indicated on the reguator should be used for
 is higher and the respiratory pattern is sinusoidal with
reference only, as considerable variation can occur
litte or no end-expiratory pause. Hypoxaemia and
between indicated and actual flow rate. (a) Dial-faced
rebreathing are therefore potential risks unless ad-
flow regulator. (b) Twist-action flow regulator. (Courtesy
equafe fresh gas flows through anaesthetic breathing
of Mark Lever, Infusion Concepts Ltd.)
297
Chapter 27  Paediatric patients
Temperature regulation
Sedatives
Low subcutaneous fat reserves, a high surface
 Opioid analgesics
Anticholinergics.
less ability to shiver and a higher critical temperature
(the point at which metabolic activity is required to
Drugs used for sedation, analgesia and chemical
maintain a normal core temperature) all mean that
paediatric and neonatal patients are at major risk of
are shown in Figure 27.4. The importance of accu-
rate weighing (and therefore accurate dosage) of such
sia and surgery. Every attempt should be made to
small patients cannot be overemphasized. If neces-
minimize anaesthetic and surgical time. The impor-
aedoidde ue u! panp eg oi paau Aew sbnup Kes
tance of insulating materials, warming devices, mini-
solution (usually 5% dextrose or 0.9% saline) to allow
mal use of surgical preparation solutions and the
more accurate dosing.
maintenance of a high ambient temperature cannot
Sedatives
be overemphasized. warm water mattresses and
warm air blower devices such as the Bair Huggers
Benzodiazepines can provide consistently effective
(see Chapter 3, Figure 3.5) are extremely useful.
sedation in paediatric patients (unlike adults), although
 some paradoxical excitement may occasionaily be
 seen. Cardiovascular depression is minimal with good
Preoperative preparation and
skeletal muscle relaxation, but some respiratory de-
premedication
! wagoid e aq Aeu eaoude pue jnooo seop uoissaid
other depressant drugs (especially opioids) are given.
It is both unnecessary and unwise to withhold food
Because these agents undergo extensive hepatic
from unweaned puppies and kittens prior to anaes-
metabolism, care should be taken to avoid overdosage
thesia. Excessive fasting may promote hypoglycae-
in patients less than 8 weeks of age. Of the available
mia and predispose to hypothermia. Patients over 6
 agents (none of which are licensed for use in veteri-
weeks old may require starvation for a maximum of
 nary species in the UK), diazepam and midazolam
 2-3 hours; withholding of water is not required.
The decision to give a premedicant drug depends
is a specific benzodiazepine anfagonist available for
upon many factors (such as underlying disease, du-
human use which may prove useful should
ration of surgery and familiarity with the drugs used),
perioperative respiratory insufficiency occur; its short
-u! jo ssop ui uoonpal peuaiod aun jejauae ui ing
duration of action (approximately 1 hour) may mean
duction and maintenance agents, as well as the ben-
0l palnbal aie (A! by/6ri og-ot) sesop jeadai jeu1
efit of providing intra- and postoperative analgesia,
reverse the effects of the initial drug.
make some form of premedication seem a sensible
Acepromazine is probably the most common rou-
option. The main classes of drug which may be con-
tine premedicant in use in veterinary practice and can
sidered for use as premedicants are:
Dose (mg/kg)
Comments
Acepromazine
0.01-0.03
 S.c.i.m./i.v.
Avoid in patients under 8 weeks or in debilitation/dehydration
Diazepam
0.1-0.4
s.c.fi.m. (emulsion i.v.)
 Non-intravenous uptake may be variable
Midazolam
0.1-0.25
 i.m/i.v.
 Shorter duration than diazepam
Flumazenil
0.1
i.v.
Benzodiazepine antagonist; short duration (50-60 minutes)
Xylazine
1-2
s.c./l.m.fi.v.
Marked cardiorespiratory side effects; avoid under 12 weeks
Medetomidine
0.005--0.04
 s.c.fi.m./i.v.
More potent and ionger-acting than xylazine
Atipamezole
0.2-0.4
i.m.
 Alpha-2 antagonist
Pethidine (meperidine)
11-4
S.C./i.m. (NOT i.v.)
: Rapid onset; 2-3 hour duration
Morphine
0.05-0.3 (epidural: 0.1
s.o.fi.m./slow i.v.
4-5 hour duration. May cause bradycardia; use with an
 in 0.25ml/kg NaCl}
anticholinergic
Buprenorphine
10.01-0.03
s.c./i.m./f.v.
Slow onset of action (35-40 minutes)
Butorphanol
0.05-0.3
s.c.fl.m..v.
 Useful sedative; analgesic eficacy uncertain
Naloxone.
 0.01-0.1
i.m.fi.y.
Opioid reversal agent; wllreverse analgesia Short dation
(30-60 minutes)
Ketamine
0.5-3 [t.v.), 5-10 (i.m.)
i.m./il.v.
Analgesic; very usetul with benzodiazepines
Atropine
0.02-0.04
s.c.fi.m./i.v.
Rapid onset; used tor herapy ot bradycardia
Glycopyrronium
0.01-0.02
S.c.f.m.i.v.
 Slower onset; does not cross blood-brain barrier?
 Drugs used for sedation, chemical restraint and analgesia in paediatrics.
298
Chapter 27 Paediatric patients
 patients at doses no greater than 0.03 mg/kg. In very
technically challenging and is most easily accom-
young (less than 8 weeks) or debilitated patients,
plished after induction and endotracheal intubation.
acepromazine can cause profound and long-lasting
induction of anaesthesia with volatile agents is rapid
 sedation, together with cardiovascular collapse and
due to the low FRC and relative increase in alveolar
 hypothermia due to peripheral vasodilation; its use is
ventilation. The ideal facemask should conform rea-
 contraindicated in these circumstances.
sonably well to the patient's face because illfitting
 The alpha-2 agonist agents are very effective seda-
masks effectively increase deadspace and may pro-
tives with some analgesic properties, but can produce
long induction of anaesthesia.
 dramatic bradycardia (of particular importance in these
The most common volatile agents currently em-
patients due to their highly rate-dependent cardiac
ployed in veterinary practice are isoflurane and
output) and respiratory depression. These drugs are
sevoflurane. A more detailed discussion of both agents
 also extensively metabolized in the liver, and their use
should probably be avoided in anything other than fit
pects of its pharmacology that make sevoflurane very
 healthy adult patients.
suitable for paediatric anaesthetic cases. Its blood/
gas partifion coefficient (0.68) is significantly lower
Opioid analgesic agents
than that of isoflurane (1.43), meaning that uptake and 
 Opioid analgesic agents are capable of providing
elimination (and therefore induction and recovery) are
profound analgesia both intra- and postoperatively.
likely to be much more rapid. The decrease in blood
 and will also reduce the dose of other agents required
solubility is matched by a decrease in potency, with a
 to induce and maintain anaesthesia. The onset and
 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of 2-2.6%,
duration of drug effects will vary considerably accord-
meaning that higher vaporizer settings are required.
ing to which agent is used. The two most potentially
Sevoflurane produces dose-dependent respiratory
serious side effects of opioids in paediatric patients
 and cardiovascular depression in a manner similar to
are bradycardia (which can result in marked falls in
isoflurane, although heart rate may be better main-
cardiac output and blood pressure due to the rate
tained. In contrast to isoflurane, sevoflurane has a
dependency of these parameters) and respiratory
relatively mild, inoffensive odour that makes it more
depression (which may be compounded by adminis-
suitable for mask induction, although some early stud-
tration of other agents). Shorter-acting agents, such 
ies in adult animals suggests that this might not be
 as pethidine (meperidine) which has a duration of 
significantly superior to other agents. Due to its con-
action of 2-3 hours, may be more versatile. lt
siderable expense, many clinicians choose to induce
may be prudent to have pure antagonist agents
anaesthesia in paediatric patients by mask with
 such as naloxone available if excessive respiratory
sevoflurane, and then switch to isoflurane for mainte-
depression occurs.
 nance once intubation is achieved. It should be re.-
Opioids are most commonly administered by intra-
membered that mask or chamber inductions with any
 muscular injection, but the use of subcutaneous, epi-
 agent significantly increase atmospheric pollution with
dural or even intra-articular routes should be considered
anaesthetic gases.
to provide analgesia while minimizing side effects.
For those patients with significant dyspnoea or
other evidence of hypoxaemia, or those at increased 
Anticholinergic agents
uodn uojendse juanbasgns pue uoenbinbal jo ysu
The parasympathetic dominance and high rate de-
 induction, administration of a rapidly acting intrave-
pendency of cardiac output make the pre-anaesthetic
 nous induction agent with rapid endotracheal intuba-
administration of an anficholinergic agent a sensible
tion is preferable.
option, although there is some evidence to suggest
Regardless of the induction technique employed,
that these agents may not be effective in puppies and
a wide range of endotracheal tube sizes and an
kittens less than 2 weeks of age due to autonomic
effective laryngoscope (Miller or Robertshaw blade
immaturity. Glycopyrronium and atropine are the most
size 0 or oo are very usefulj or other light source
common anticholinergic agents in use. In addition to
should be readily available in order to establish a
reducing the incidence and severity of bradycardia.
patent airway. Commercially avaitable endotracheal 
they also reduce respiratory tract secretions, thereby
tubes are made down to 1.0 mm; anything smaller is
best constructed in advance from an intravenous
of its slower onset of action, glycopyrronium may be
catheter or similar. All intubations should be per-
preferable to atropine because of its longer duration
formed with the utmost care, as damage to delicate
and decreased tendency to produce sinus tachy-
 structures and subsequent laryngeal oedema and
cardia, aithough both drugs may be used intra-
spasm are easily produced.
venously to treat acute bradyarrhythmias.
Intravenous anaesthetic agents
Of the available agents, propofol and ketamine are
Induction of anaesthesia
probably the most commonly used. Because of their
low muscle and fat mass, relatively low plasma pro-
Volatile anaesthetic agents
tein levels and immature hepatic enzyme pathways,
In the vast majority of neonatal patients, the accepted
induction method of choice is by mask using a vola-
 sensitivity to, and prolonged recovery from, barbitu-
tile agent such as isoflurane or sevoflurane, as intra-
rate anaesthesia. This group of drugs is therefore best
 avoided in animals under 8-10 weeks of age.
299
Chapter 27  Paediatric patients
 Propofol is an ultra short-acting hypnotic that may
Lack or Magill systems for iong periods as marked
be used for induction and maintenance of anaesthesia
rebreathing can occur. If automatic ventilators are be-
by incremental dosage or infusion (see Chapter 13).
aens aou a suaisss papr-ainssaid 'pesn bu
for paediatric patients to avoid the risk of barotrauma
as the drug is highly lipid soluble and requires hepatic
(see Chapter 6). Preset airway pressures should not
metabolism (although extrahepatic metabolism has
exceed 15-20 cmH2O.
been described in the dog). Slower hepatic clearance
 Every effort to conserve body temperature should
w Aew shop ym paedwo sieo ul poodod jo
be made. Insuiating blankets, bubble wrap and warmed
slower recovery times in this species.
 cotton wool can all be wrapped around the patient and
Ketamine should be used in combination with some
a surgical window prepared. Surgical preparation
 solutions should be applied with sterile swabs to mini-
the most suitable in paediatric patients. Ketamine is
mize evaporative heat loss. The ambient temperature
an attractive agent for use in these individuals due
of the operating area should be kept as high as pos-
.
to its anaigesic properties and relative lack of cardio-
 sible and all intravenous fluids should be warmed. Heat
pulmonary depressant effects, but the drug does
undergo extensive hepatic metabolism (with active
but may increase the work of breathing in small sub-
metabolites) and renal elimination and should therefore
jects, as well as adding to apparatus deadspace.
be used with care in neonates and paediatric patients.
Intraoperative fluid administration is desirable in
Although laryngeal reflexes are maintained under
order to replace insensible losses, as well as to pro-
ketamine anaesthesia, marked salivation can occur,
vide haemodynamic support. Puppies and kittens are
which may compromise an unprotected airway. lts use
relatively intolerant of an acute fluid load and therefore
should probably be restricted to induction of anaesthe-
rates of administration should not exceed 10 ml/kg/h.
sia, or use in lower doses together with benzodiazepines
The use of syringe drivers or infusion pumps greatly
to provide immobilization for minor procedures.
facilitates accurate fluid therapy in these patients,
although burette-type giving sets are equally effective.
Dexirose-containing low-salt solutions (e.g. 0.18%
Maintenance of anaesthesia
 sodium chloride in 4% glucose or 5% dextrose in water)
are the most suitable, although in the event of signifi-
Constant and meticulous attention should be paid to
cant blood loss (more than 10% of blood volume) an
maintenance of a patent airway and adequate venti-
equal volume of colloid or fresh whole blood is indi-
lation, because drug-induced respiratory inadequacy
cated for restoration of circulating volume. Surgicai
and airway obstruction are common complications.
swabs can be weighed to assess blood loss: 1 ml of
Oxygen should always be provided even if anaesthe-
blood weighs approximately 1.3 g. Although isotonic
sia is maintained with intravenous agents. Nitrous
 crystalloid fluids can be administered subcutaneously,
oxide can be used to hasten induction via the 'sec-
the intravenous or intraosseous routes are infinitely
ond gas' effect (see Chapter 14), but the high oxygen
preferable for longer-term or more rapid administration.
consumption of the neonatal animal may mean that
its use throughout the surgical procedure may not be
desirable because it reduces the inspired oxygen con-
Monitoring during anaesthesia
centration. If nitrous oxide is used, it should not con-
stitute greater than half of the inspired gas mixture.
 Monitoring of the paediatric patient should be attentive 
The anaesthetic breathing system used should have
 and adverse trends should be identified and acted upon
minimai apparatus deadspace, a low circuit volume and
early. Although an increasing array of sophisticated
minimal internal resistance to gas flow. The Jackson-
electronic monitoring equipment is available for veteri-
Rees modification of Ayre's T-piece is usualiy suitable;
nary anaesthesia, there is no substitute for the con-
some 20-30 variations of the T-piece have been de-
stant physical presence of an attentive, knowledgeable
scribed, but the valveless models are most suitable.
individual actively monitoring the patient's vital signs.
hnoip ag ueo beg pepua-uado ue won buibuaaios
It should also be remembered that total anaesthetic
and torsion of the bag about its long axis can lead to
time can be significantly increased by the setting up
occlusion and barotrauma; the bag should therefore
 of various monitoring systems and introduction of in-
be in constant view of the veterinary surgeon and taped
vasive monitoring lines, particularly if the veterinary
in a safe position if necessary. More recently, a valved
surgeon is unfamiliar with them.
T-piece (Mapleson D; see Chapter 5) has become
Monitoring of respiratory and cardiac sounds is best
popular; this has a closed bag with an exhaust valve
achieved with a precordial or oesophageal stethoscope.
between the bag and expiratory limb. Use of the T-piece
and an electrocardiograph will allow assessment of
requires high fresh gas flows (2.5--3 times minute
cardiac rhythm. Several devices are available for the
-uods buunp buiuieaieu pioae Alalaldoo ol anio
non-invasive oscillometric measurement of arterial
taneous ventilation) which will precipitate hypothermia.
blood pressure; vagaries in patient limb dimensions
Patients over 5 kg in weight can be maintained using
relative to cuff size may produce very variable resulits 
 other non-rebreathing systems such as the Bain, Lack
 in some patients, especially at low pressures. The cuff 
or Magill, or human paediatric circle absorber systems.
width should be approximately 40% of limb circum-
The Bain system can still be used in patients <5 kg in
ference. Use of a Doppler flow probe with a sphygmo-
countries where the T-piece is not available. Positive
manometer cuff (see Chapter 7) gives reliable readings
pressure ventilation should not be performed with the
of systolic pressure but not of diastolic pressure.
300
 Chapter 27 Paediatric patients
Invasive monitoring of arterial blood pressure is not only
As previously mentioned, maintenance of adequate
technically demanding (requiring cannulation of an
body temperature is essential. Core temperature should
undoubtedly smaill peripheral artery) but potentially
be monitored frequently via a deep rectal or oesopha-
expensive due to the equipment required. Assessment
geal probe. Soil temperature probes or thermistor
of the adequacy of the circulation in practice is there-
probes designed for catering can often be purchased
fore often somewhat qualitative and relies on subjec-
cheaply and adapted for use at minimal cost. Com-
tive assessment of pulse pressure, capillary refill time,
 parisons can be made with peripheral (e.g. interdigital)
urine output and mucous membrane colour. This can
temperature readings in order to assess the adequacy
be difficult in a small patient draped up for surgery, so
of peripheral perfusion; a core-periphery gradient of
preparation should ensure that adequate visibility
greater than 4°C is indicative of inadequate peri-
under the drapes is maintained.
pheral perfusion.
Basic monitoring of respiratory function consists of
assessing respiratory rate and depth by visualization.
of chest wall excursions (the surgeon should be
Postoperative care
actively discouraged from leaning on the patient or
leaving surgical instruments resting on the patient's
As with any patient, constant attention should be paid
chest or abdomen) and movement of the reservoir bag,
to the airway, breathing and circulation. Human
together with sounds heard via the stethoscope. Sim-
neonatal incubators are ideal for recovery because
ple respiratory monitors that detect temperature
they allow constant visualization of the patient and
 changes or movement of gases in the airway are avail-
enable a warm, humid and oxygenated environment
able; however, false values may be registered due to
to be maintained without the need for physical re-
passive movement of air caused by manipulation of
straint. lf necessary the airway should be cleared of
jiews ool ag Aew sjuaed awos pue 'xeioul s,juaned au
secretions and extubation performed as late as pos-
to generate suficient air movement to register a breath.
sible. Oxygen supplementation should be provided
Pulse oximeters provide a useful method of non-
until recovery from anaesthesia is complete and nor-
invasive respiratory monitoring in veterinary anaes-
mal body temperature is achieved. If respiration
thesia. These devices require a peripheral pulse to
appears inadequate, or there is evidence of hypo-
-ad kue aioaiui pue uooung ci lapno ui uasaid ag
ventilation or desaturation, positive pressure ventila-
pheral vasoconstriction or reduction in pulse pressure
tion with 100% oxygen should be instituted until the
can result in a loss of signal. Many of the probes are 
 patient is capable of maintaining normal ventilation.
sprung in order to maintain tissue contact; in delicate
 The danger of postoperative hypothermia and its 
tissues such as the tongue of a puppy or kitten, the
attendant complications in paediatric and neonatal
Aeu aqoud au uuim bujds aul Aq paonpoid ainssaid
patients has already been emphasized. However, re-
effectively eliminate blood flow at the probe site, again 
warming of the hypothermic neonate should be done
resulting in loss of signal. The majority of available
slowly, as aggressive external heating may not only
probes will not read through excessively hairy or
pigmented skin, making effective probe placement
tensive crisis due to rapid peripheral vasodilation. In-
difficult, although oesophageal and rectal reflectance
stalation (and removal after 5 minutes) of 10 ml/kg
probes are also available.
warmed isotonic fluids into the rectum may be useful
 Adequacy of ventilation can be monitored by
to elevate core temperature; lavage of the urinary blad-
 capnography. Constant capnographic monitoring is
der with warm fluids has also been described and
expensive but allows rapid and accurate monitoring
 appears clinically effective. Thermal support should
of ventilation and early detection of apnoea, discon-
be maintained after normal body temperature has
nection, severe cardiovascular complications, venous
been reached, as relapse into hypothermia can occur
air embolism, airway obstruction and low cardiac out-
in young patients.
put. Capnography in small pafients may be hampered
Postoperative analgesia is a major concern in
by the small tidal volumes in neonates and paediatric
neonafes and paediatric patients, not only because
animais, as sampled gas is subject to great potential
significant pain is morally and ethically unacceptable,
dilution by fresh gas flows from breathing systems.
but also because it may inhibit normal feeding behav-
This may resuit in 'peaking' of the waveform and an
iour. Treatment of pain in very young animals is also
artificially low end-tidal carbon dioxide value. This
complicated by differences in neonatal pain behav-
problem can be ameliorated by the use of
iour patterns compared with those of adult animals,
capnographs with a lower gas sampling rate; newer
which may not be as obvious. This may make recog-
models may sample as litfle as 5-10 ml/minute. In
nition of the characteristic signs of pain difficult, but
addition, use of a smaller deadspace volume side-
does not mean that pain is experienced to a lesser
stream adaptor, or inserting a needle through the wall
degree. The preoperative use of opioids, such as
of the endotracheal tube, will create a more normal
pethidine (meperidine), morphine or buprenorphine,
capnogram, but the needle may become blocked or
provides excellent analgesia postoperatively but ex-
aspirate moisture. Mainstream capnography avoids
cessive or supplemental doses may produce respira-
gas sampling artefacts but many of the adapters pro-
tory depression. This is not a contraindication to their
duce excessive apparatus deadspace between the
use, but does mean that doses should be carefully
breathing system and endotracheal tube; this can be
calculated and administered. Consideration should 
avoided by using neonatal adaptors which have a
also be given to other techniques such as local
much smaller deadspace volume (as liftle as 0.5 ml).
anaesthetic blocks (see Chapter 10). Local anaesthetic
301
chapter 27 Paediatric patients
solutions should be diluted by 50% to reduce the
and cardiovascular function. Excessive surgical skin
 potential for overdosage. Bupivacaine is a relatively
 preparations should be removed because strong. un-
long-acting local anaesthetic agent with a duration of
familiar odours may precipitate rejection of the neonate
 by its mother. Any surgical dressing or supports ap-
up to 8 hours that can be used for effective regional
anaesthesia. Care should be taken not to exceed a
plied should not inhibit the patient's ability to feed or
 total dose of 2 mg/kg. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drink. Early nutritional support should be instituted if
drugs (NSAlDs) are used extensively for relief of post-
any evidence of a failure to feed within 24 hours of
operative pain in veterinary species; their extensive
 surgery is observed. Parenteral fluid administration
hepatic metabolism may make toxic effects more likely
should continue at maintenance rates until voluntary
in paediatric or neonatal animals and doses should
fluid intake has returned to normal levels.
be reduced by 50-75% in these patients.
Scant information exists on the use of epidural
analgesia in such patients. Anecdotal sources histori-
References and further reading
cally used sacrococcygeal epidural analgesia for tail
Brown H and Kozlowski R (1997) Physiofogy and pharmacology of the
docking in neonates and have recommended a total
heart. Blackwell Science, Oxtord
Grundy SA (2006) Clinically relevant physiology ot the neonate.
dose of 1 mg/kg lidocaine and 0.1 mg/kg morphine.
Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice 36(3)
In patients under 3 months of age bupivacaine should
443-459
probably be avoided due to its greater potential for
Hosgood G (1998) Small Animal Paediatic Medicine and Surgery.
cardiotoxicity.
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
Mathews KA(2005)Anaigesia for the pregnant,lactating and neonatal
Every effort should be made to restore normal feed-
to pediatric cat and dog. Journat of Veterinary Emergency and
ing and behaviour as soon as possible after anaes-
Critical Care 15(4). 273-284
thesia. Unweaned neonates should be returned to the
 Pascoe PJ and Moon PF (2001) Periparturient and neonataf anesthesia.
Veterinary Clinics of NorthAmerica Smal Animal Practice 31(2).
dam as soon as they are able to maintain respiratory
315-340
302
Geriatric patients
Gina Neiger-Aeschbacher
Introduction
increases with age. Once maturity has been reached,
 age-related changes occur in all organ systems of oth-
erwise healthy dogs and cats: geriatric patients show
and cats has increased, thus augmenting the number
physiological regression in organ functions or in their
of dogs and cats considered geriatric. The term 'geri-
mechanisms of compensation. These processes are
sjeujue asoui auap ol pasn kjuanbai isow s! one
progressive and irreversible. Their relevance for seda-
that have reached 75--80% of their breed-specific ex-
tion and anaesthesia of heaithy geriatric dogs and cats
pected lifespans. Some consider dogs older than 8
is discussed below. With improved technology and
years and cais older than 12 years of age as geriatric.
education, owners of geriatric dogs or cats will increas-
The chronological age may not match the physiologi-
ingly consent to sedation or anaesthesia for various
 cal age as breed size, genetics, nutrition, environment
procedures and interventions.
and other factors influence the aging process. In gen-
eral, smaller dogs live longer than large and giant-breed
 dogs. Geriatric patients now comprise one quarter and
Comparative anatomy, physiology
 possibly up to one third of the total patient population
and pharmacology
in private veterinary practice. Aging in itself is not a
disease, but geriatric patients are more vulnerable than
in geriatric dogs and cats is shown in Figure 28.1.
Organ systemActivity/performance reduced
Activity/pertormance increased
Cardiovascular
Blood voume, cardiac output, baroreceptor 
Circulation time,vagal tone,
Reduction in cardiac reserve capacity:
 activity, autoregulation of blood flow
vascular changes (thickened elastic
decreased abity to maintain blood
fibres, increased wall collagen
 pressure under anaesthesia; longer 
content, vesse wallcalcificationj,
 circulation time (bolus injectable
 cardiac arrhythmias second-degree
anaesthetic takes longer to effect);
 heart block, bundte branch block.
 more rapid inhalational anaesthetic
 ventricular premature contractions
induction (reduced cardiac output)
or atrial fiorillation]
Respiratory
Lung elasticity, respiratory rate, idal volume,
Functional residual capacity
 Decreased functional reserve, lower
 minute volume, oxygen consumption, carbon 
PO
 strengtih of muscles of respiration, chest wall 
compiance, elastic recoil, vital capacity.
 protective airway reflexes 
Liver
 Functional mass, blood fliow (secondary to
Susceptibility to hypothermia and
 Prolonged metabolism and excretion 
 reduced cardiac output), microsomal enzyme
reduced ability to maintain blood
of drugs (hepatic conjugation):
 activity, intrinsic metabolic activity (protein
glucose
hypoproteinaemia; hypoglycaemia
production, impaired cloting function}
Kidneys
 Renal blood flow (secondary to reduced
 Predisposition to acidosis 
Less tolerant of dehydration and
 cardiac output, glomerular filtration rate.
acute blood loss; overhydration 
 functional kidney mass (due to fewer
(excessive fluid therapy) may lead to
functional nephrons), abilty to concentrate 
pulmonary oedema and compromised
urine and secrete hydrogen ions 
 respiratory system; reduced renal
clearance of drugs
Nervous
Cerebral pefusion; oxygen consumption,
 Destruction of neurotransmitters 
 Enhanced effect of local and general
brain mass due to neural degeneration,
 anaesthetic drugs, increased 
myelin sheath, production of 
 Susceptibility to cardiopulmonary
 neurotransmitters, thernmoregulation,
 depression and hypothermia when
 sympathetic response to stress
linked to anaesthesia less resistance
 to stress,more anxiety
303
Chapter 28 Geriatric patients
Cardiovascular system
and excretion of drugs, especially those that undergo
Several changes have been reported and all are con-
conjugation. The reduction in cardiac output will de-
uoonpai e ol peal Aeul sayebol lueojubis palapis
crease liver blood flow, which in turn will influence the
int cardiac reserve capacity. This can limit the patient's
rate of hepatic metabolism and drug excretion.
ability to compensate for cardiovascular changes that
may occur during sedation and anaesthesia.
Clinical implications
Progressive or degenerative cardiac diseases are
 Prolonged recovery: there should be judicious use
common, with mitral regurgitation being the most
 important. Dilated cardiomyopathy, myocardial fibrosis 
of drugs that have a long duration of action (e.g.
47
 and arterial hypertension are also frequently seen in
acepromazine), that rely on hepatic conjugation 
the geriatric dog. In conjunction with changes in the
for metabolism or that cannot be reversed.
conduction system, the likelihood of cardiac arrhythmias
 Pre-anaesthetic haematology and serum
(second-degree heart block, bundle branch block, ven-
chemistry are recommended to assess hepatic
tricular premature contractions or atrial fibrillation) in-
function; clotting profiles are necessary before
creases. With stress and anxiety in the peri-anaesthetic
ultrasound-guided intermal organ biopsy or surgery.
period, pre-existing arrhythmias can be exacerbated.
Avoid or treat hypotension (assess plane of
Certain anaesthetic agents also influence cardiac con-
anaesthesia, fluid administration and the use of
duction in all dogs and cats, irrespective of age. Fol-
 inotropic agents) to prevent reduction in liver
lowing the administration of alpha-2 adrenergic agonists
blood flow, which will affect drug metabolism.
(e.g. medetomidine), bradycardia and second-degree
Kidney
heart block can be observed; following thiopentail, ven-
tricular premature contractions or ventricular bigeminy:
Changes within the kidney lead to a reduction in func-
following ketamine, tachycardia.
tional reserve: the geriatric patient is predisposed to
Circulation time is increased and the responsive-
acidosis and the reduction in renal blood flow leads
ness to circulating catecholamines is reduced.
to reduced renal clearance of drugs. The extent of
renal dysfunction should be properly assessed and a
Clinical implications
reduced clearance of parent drug or its metabolites
Avoid extreme changes in heart rate (bradycardia,
Additional drug sensitivity can be caused through urae-
tachycardia), sudden changes in arterial blood
mic conditions.
pressure (hypotension, hypertension) and
 Clinical implications
increased vascular resistance.
Avoid or use with caution (reduce dose, titrate to
Pre-anaesthetic biochemistry and electrolyte
effect) those sedative and anaesthetic drugs that
analysis are advised.
may be arrhythmogenic.
Avoid hypovolaemia, hypotension, hypoxia and
hypercapnia because of a possible effect on
Respiratory system
renal blood flow (i.e. reduction).
The changes in the respiratory system, listed in Fig-
 Monitor urine production (1-2 ml/kg/h) curing
ure 28.1, have all been reported in otherwise healthy
and after sedation and general anaesthesia.
geriatric patients. Collectively they result in decreased
Reduced or non-existent urine output is a strong
respiratory functional reserve, which can become sig-
indicator of hypotension and inadequate renal
nificant when sedative or anaesthetic agents cause
perfusion and warns of impending renal damage
mild to moderate respiratory depression.
caused by ischaemia.
Be careful with drugs that depend on renal
Clinical implications
4. 
excretion (e.g. ketamine in the cat).
 Avoid marked hypoxia and hypercapnia; oxygen
Nervous system
7
supplementation (intubation, facemask, nasal
Cognitive, sensory, motor and autonomic nervous
cannula) should be used for both sedated and
performance can be altered in the geriatric cat and
 anaesthetized patients. Preoxygenation prior to
dog. The changes within the central and peripheral
induction is important, giving a decreased
nervous systems dictate a reduction in doses of all
likelihood of hypoxia between induction of
sedative and anaesthetic (volatile and injectable)
anaesthesia and endotracheal intubation.
paonpai st uoewoui ssaooid oi Alge eul 'sonp
 Pathological lung changes (e.g. pulmonary
(senility) and anxiety increases, especialy in unfamil-
neoplasia, pneumonia, bulae) will have an
iar surroundings.
intensified effect in geriatric patients.
 Avoid respiratory depression. Monitoring should
Pharmacology
include pulse oximetry, capnography and, ideally,
The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic proper
blood gas analyses to assess ventilatory efficiency.
 ties of sedative and anaesthetic drugs change with age.
Decreased cardiac output results in reduced re-
Liver
gional and organ blood flow, which in turn results in
reduced drug absorption capacity, drug hepatic
cant way with increasing age, although reduced micro-
metabolism and renal clearance capacity. Preferen-
somal enzyme activity can prolong drug metabolism
tial blood distribution in the geriatric dog and cat is to
304
Chapter 28 Geriatric patients
 heart and brain, which can lead to a relative drug over-
The free (non-protein-bound) portion of a drug is
dose. The process of aging also includes a change in
responsible for the pharmacodynamic (therapeutic)
body composition, with a decrease in lean body mass
response. For highly protein-bound drugs, hypopro-
Apoq jeiot buisealoap snyt 'te, Apog ui aseaoui ue pue
teinaemia leads to an increased concentration of free 
water and cell mass. This affects plasma concentra-
drug in the plasma and a lower dose is necessary to
tion of water-soluble and lipid-soluble drugs by chang-
achieve the therapeutic effect.
ing their volumes of distribution and plasma elimination
 Detailed knowledge of the drugs used for seda-
half-lives. The result is a prolongation of the drug's
tion and anaesthesia is necessary to provide appro-
 retention time in the body.
priate care. The most frequently used drugs are
The number or density of receptors within the tar-
described below and in Figure 28.2. No anaesthetic
get tissue, the binding affinity to receptors and
drug is absolutely contraindicated in the geriatric dog
changes in homoeostatic mechanisms influence the
and cat, but there is no perfect anaesthetic for these 
response to a drug. This highlights the importance of
patients. Desirable properties include:
 tailoring drug dosage and dosing interval to the indj-
vidual patient. However, pre-existing renal, hepatic
Fast and complete recovery (e.g. isoflurane,
and cardiac disease make it difficult to determine the
sevoflurane)
actual safe and effective drug dosages for this age
Reversibility (e.g. opioids, benzodiazepines)
 group. Reliable data in animals are rare and are mosily
Minimal or no metabolism required for drug 
extrapolated from geriatric human patients.
elimination (e.g. etomidate, isoflurane, sevoflurane)
The geriatric patient also frequently receives mul-
Few adverse side effects (e.g. opioids,
tiple drugs to treat other diseases; this increases the
benzodiazepines)
likelihood that one drug might affect the metabolism
 Clinically insignificant intrinsic toxicity (e.g. opioids,
of one (or more) of the other drugs.
 benzodiazepines, isoflurane, sevoflurane).
Drug
General properles
Dose (mgikg), route.
 patient 
 dosng interval.
Pheriothiazine
 Tranquiliaion 
 ↑ Tranquilizaicn
Volume expansion
Acepromazine:
Sedation
↑Recovery fime
Bood pressure monioring
0.01-0.03 Ev.im./s.c.once.
Hepaic metaboism
ao suo asop pan aneadud e bal e 
maxinmum total dose 0.5 mg
Hypotension via peripheral
vasodilation}
Avoid ir case of dehydration, acute
vasodilation
haermorbage, iver dysiunction, maor
 Anti-arrhythmogeric
surgery
Long duration of action
Not reversible
Benzcdiazepine
 Tranquilizaton
More profcund sedation
If required reverse effects witn lumazeni
Diazepan: 0.1-0.4 i.v.
Minimal cardicrespiratory effects
↑ Tranquilization and ↑ dwration 
(0.02-0.1 mgkg iv to effect)
Midazoam: 0,1-0.2 i.v.il.m. 
Anticonvuisant
feffect incaseof mpaired
 Shori duraticn of action
 hepatic metabolism
Hepatic metabolism
Reversible
podo
Bradycarcia can be prevented
Use witcautnadtitratetedesied
 Pethicine (meperidine): 
Drug-dependent mild to strong
 withthe cautious use of
effect
3-5 i.m. q0.5-1h
 analgesic effet
anticholinergic drugs
Oxygen supplementation 
Marphine:
Menimat cardiovascular effects
Respiratory depression can
Endotracheal inubation mandaory fof
0.05-0.3 i.v.il.m.q2-4h
Drug- and dose-cependent
case comlications in geriatric
general anaesthesia
Fentanyl:
bradycardia ang vespiratory
patients vith tle iunctional
Be prepared io assist or contol ventlaion
0.005-0.01 i.v q0.5h
depression
respiratory reserve
lfreqiredreverseallffesinlig
Hydromorphore:
Hepatic meiabolisn
analgesia) with naloxone (0.02-0.1 mgikg
0.05-0.1 wim g2-4h
 anaesthetic requiremen
eft preveanalesiaig
Methadone:
Reversiole
 e.g. butoxphano, ralouphire or
0.05-0.3iv.A.m.q2-4h
Some are Controllea Drugs
buprenophine
Butorphanol:
0.1-0.5 i.v.fi.m. q1-4h
Buprenorphine:
0.005-0.02 i.v.4.m. q4-8n
Barbiturate (ultra
Hypnosis
↑Physiclogical drug effect
Adminisier pre-anaesthetic sedative
(buoe-ous
Cardiovascular cepressont.
( plasma protein binding,  tean
aalgesic medication for drug-sparing effect
t .5-12 sowly i.y. once
Cardiac anhythmia
bogy mass and water, ↑ ial
Tirale slowly lo effect using ilite soiution 
Respratory cepression
depots, ↓ hepatic function)
Use single dose only
Initial apnoea
 Margin of satety
Stast monitoring prior to induction phase
Vasodiltion
 and administer cxygen
Redistrioutios to leanfal body
Protect ainway by endotracheal intubation
compartments eads to arousal
Be prepared to control venliatior
Hepatic metabolism 
 Overview of the most important injectable sedative, anaesthetic and analgesic substances and their use in ihe
 geriatric dog and cat (further details may be found in Chapters 9. 12 and 13). ↑ = Prolonged, increased,
augmented;: ↓ = Decreased, reduced, minimized. (continues)
305
Chapter 28  Geriatric patients
Drug
General properties
Dose (mgkg.route,
patent
dosing.interval
Dissociative
Dissociative anaesthesia
个 Myocardial oxygen
Administer oxygen
Kelarmine:
anaesthetic.
 Stimufation of the sympatheic :
uondunsuo
Protect aiway by endotrachealintubation
1-3 iv. once with benzodiazepire
nervous system
↑ Secrelions may inffuence
especially in cats
Tachycardia.
 airway patency
 Administer sedative/tranquillier to
↑Secretions.eg aiway
↑ Recovery time 非 underlying
ameliorate muscle sifness ard rigidify 
Muscle rigidity'
renalhepatic disease
Seizure potentiai
(6p] syedau pue jeo) eued
metabolism
Propofof
Hypnosis
Margin of satety
Adminislar pre-anaesthetic sedative!
Propofol:
 Cardicvascular depresion
↑Lkelhocd of respiratory
 anagesic medicationfor dugsparing effet
2-6 slowly i.v singie bolus.
Respiratory depresson, apnoea
depression and apnoea followed
Administer oxygen
 multipe injecticons or infusion 
Redistribution to leanifat body
by haemoglobin iesakuration and
Ttrate slowly (60-90 seconds) to effect
comparmentsleadstoarousal
cyanosis
Prtect ainway by encotrachea intubation
 Short duration of action
Be preparedto control ventlation
Rapid, smooth: recovery
 Provide acdequate pain relief
Hapid (mostfy hepatic)..
metabolism
No analgesic property
Etomiciate
Hiypnosis
↓Margin of safety
Adiniser pre-anaesthetic sedative
Etomidate:
Minimal cardiovasc[ar effects
 analgesic medication o further improve
0.5-3 iv single holus 
Respiratory depressicn
indacion and recovery qualy
Short duration of action
Aomirister oxygen
Rapid recovery
Protect airway by endotracheal inibation 
Rapid hepaic metabolism
Bepreparedtoontroentlation
Reduction of acdrenal
Provide adequate pain relief
 coricosteroid secretion"
Avoid inpatints wih pre-existing adreal
Occasional retching and
 corticosteroid deficiency 
myoclonus during induction of
uriconsciousress
Non-steroidal
 inffammatin
Lkelhood of hepalc, renal and
Prcvide adequate flid therapy and monitor
  Carprofen:
 anti-inflammatory
Relieve mild to moderate pain -
gastrointesinasideecs
 support systemic blood pressure lo sustain
2-4 i.v/s.c,
-onup
Cortparably long duration of.
satisfactory rena perfusion
Meloxicam:
Observe for gastroinlestinal and renal side
0.2 S.C.
Not controlled substances
efects as wellas pfatelet dysfunction if used
Ketoproien:
for several days posioperatively or in case
0.51 i.v./i.m/s.c.
of long-term preoperative administraticn 
 Recuce length of therapy in the
postoperative period to the minimum
Avoid in pallents vit multiple poblems
such as dehydraon, hypotension.
hyponatraemia hepatic disease, sepsis
Judicious use in patients on angictensin-
converting enzyime(ACE} inhibitors
(continued) Overview of the most important injectabie sedative, anaesthetic and analgesic substances and
pobuooid = ↓ (et pue zh '6 saideu ui punoi ag Aeu slleiap leni) eo pue bop oeae aui ui asn jioul 
increased, augmented; ↓ = Decreased, reduced, minimized.
Dosage adjustment (either drug dose or interva!
Anticholinergic agents
of drug administration), especially of injectable seda-
Anticholinergic agents (e.g. atropine, glycopyr-
tive and anaesthetic drugs, is necessary for the geri-
ronium) should be used with caution. They should
atric patient. Some information is available from
only be used to treat bradyarrhythmias if the heart
package inserts of human sedative or anaesthetic
rate is too slow to maintain adequate arterial blood
drugs but extrapolations need to be made carefully.
pressure and thus perfusion of vital organs. Routine
Final adjustments need to be made folowing patient
significantly increases myocardial oxygen demand
Sedation or pre-anaesthetic tranquillization will
and may cause myocardial hypoxia, followed by
help to reduce the anxiety and stress caused by sepa-
arrhythmias and cardiac failure. Their dose should
be titrated to effect (e.g. to counterbalance the
treatment. The individual requirements for sedation
bradycardia caused by a pure opioid agonist), gen-
or analgesia will be dictated by the patient (physical
erally administering one half to two thirds of the
status, pre-existing disease, concurrent medication)
normal drug dose to reduce the likelihood of tachy-
and the planned diagnostic or surgical procedure. In-
cardia. Glycopyrronium, although not licensed for
discriminate use of drugs is not an option in this age
the dog and cat, is a better choice than atropine
group. A detailed description of sedative and anaes-
in the geriatric patient because it has fewer adverse
thetic drugs can be found elsewhere in this manual.
effects.
306
Chapter 28 Geriatric patients
Phenothiazines
most important reasons for its judicious use. Because
Phenothiazines (e.g. acepromazine) should be used
of its long duration of action, tiletamine (combined with
with care. The advantages and disadvantages of
zolazepam in commercially available preparations) is
acepromazine have to be assessed in each individual,
not recommended for geriatric patients.
but low doses in combination with an opioid can pro-
vide excellent sedation.
Propofol and etomidate
 Propofol and etomidate are useful as induction agents
Benzodiazepines
becalise of a short duration of action, a comparatively
Benzodiazepines, such as diazepam and midazolam,
smooth onset of unconsciousness and relatively com-
are a better choice than acepromazine and cause
plete and rapid recovery. Nevertheless, appropriate
 more reliable sedation in the geriatric patient than they
patient care (e.g. oxygen supplementation) and moni-
do in the younger patient. Reduced hepatic function
toring (e.g. ventilation) remain very important.
will prolong the duration of action of benzodiazepines.
When used alone, their cardiorespiratory side effects
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
are minimal. However, depending on the individual 
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) must 
patient and the requirements for sedation or anaes-
be used with caution because many geriatric patients
thesia, diazepam and midazolam are usually com-
are on constant anti-inflammatory medication for
bined with other drugs, e.g. butorphanol (opioid) or
 osteoarthritis. Their use should be avoided in patients
ketamine, in selected patients.
with hepatic, renal or gastrointestinal problems or
 those with platelet dysfunction.
 Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists
Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists (e.g. medetomidine) are
Volatile anaesthetic agents
best avoided because of their profound effects on the
Volatile anaesthetic agents should be selected de-
cardiovascular, respiratory and central nervous sys-
pending on their speed of uptake and elimination, their
tems. in geriatric patients with a healthy cardiovascu-
effect on cardiovascular function and extent of met-
lar system, their advantages (reversibility) and
abolism. lsoflurane and sevoflurane are appropriate
disadvantages (bradycardia, atrioventricular conduc-
choices for the geriatric patient because of:
tion block, increased peripheral vascular resistance,
hypertension) need to be carefully balanced against
 A fast induction of anaesthesia and recovery
each other.
 Compared with halothane, better preservation of
cardiac output and splanchnic perfusion
Opioids
Clinically insignificant hepatic and renal
Opioids provide sedation and analgesia with minimal
metabolism.
cardiovascular effects. They reduce anaesthetic
requirements for other drugs and can be heipful for
Despite the administration of a high percentage of
 induction and maintenance of anaesthesia. Respira-
 oxygen in the inspired gas mixture, a particularly criti-
tory depression is a side effect, which, in combination
cal period is the induction of anaesthesia using a
with other respiratory depressant drugs (e.g.
facemask or a chamber, because a high concentra-
isoflurane), can cause complications in geriatric
tion of anaesthetic vapour is inspired. The undesir-
 patients with little functional respiratory reserve. A pure
able environmental polution and exposure of
mu opioid agonist (e.g. morphine, fentanyl) provides
personnel to anaesthetic vapours are other concerns 
better pain relief but also affects heart rate and the
during mask induction.
respiratory centre more than a partial agonist (e.g.
Important, dose-dependent effects (e.g. depth of
buprenorphine or butorphanol). Advantages
PuE 5
anaesthesia, respiratory depression. vasodilation,
disadvantages of opioid use need to be carefully con-
hypotension) require carefui monitoring in the anaes-
sidered in each individual.
thetized geriatric patient. Pain relief is inadequate if
volatile anaesthetics are used alone: halothane,
Ultra short-acting barbiturates
isoflurane and sevoflurane are best used in a bal-
Ultra short-acting barbiturates are best used only in
anced, multimodal anaesthetic protocol.
 -e bnip aui esneoag sieo pue shop oueuab Aulleau
fects are enhanced and the margin of safety is de-
 creased in patients of this age group (see Figure 28.2).
Preoperative preparation
Thiopental should be used as a single dose, titrated
slowly to effect, to provide unconsciousness adequate
Evaluation of the geriatric dog and cat prior to seda-
for endotracheal intubation; this minimizes the like-
tion or anaesthesia needs to address all major organ
 lihood of side effects and prolonged recovery.
 systems and should include a complete account of all
previously and currently administered medication (tra-
Ketamine
ditional and homoeopathic medication, vitamins, food
Ketamine, together with a benzodiazepine, should be
supplements). It is advantageous if the patient is
 used with caution for induction and maintenance of
known to the veterinary surgeon, e.g. through earlier
anaesthesia. Myocardial hypoxia, an increased like-
 annual health checks and vaccinations. If a cardiac
Jihood of airway and pulmonary complications (i.e. in-
murmur or cardiac arrhythmia is auscultated, a car-
creased airway secretions) and, to a lesser extent,
diac work-up should be initiated to determine the
the possibility of seizure activity in the dog are the
causes and its effects on cardiac function. A thorough
307
Chapter 28 Geriatric patients
clinical examination should be followed by additional
Both sedated and anaesthetized patients need
investigations such as haematology, serum biochem-
careful monitoring. The extent of monitoring will de-
istry, urinalysis and diagnostic imaging. The extent of
pend on the general health status of the patient, the
these additional diagnostic steps will depend on the
invasiveness of the procedure performed and the
history, the results of the clinical examination and the 
available equipment, but should be as complete and
planned procedure. Depending on these findings, a
as continuous as feasible under practice conditions.
modification of the sedative or anaesthetic technique 
 Minimal monitoring should include:
might become mandatory. Owners must be kept in-
.:
formed about all intended actions and their consent
 Pulse rate, rhythm and quality
(including for the use of non-licensed drugs) is. of
Respiratory rate, rhythm and estimation of tidal
+
course, essential.
volume
Intravenous access is crucial for fluid and intra-
Arterial blood pressure (non-invasive:
venous drug administration. ldeally, at least one
oscilometric method, Doppler)
peripheral intravenous catheter should be aseptically
·
Core body temperature
placed prior to administration of any sedative or an-
Capnography.
aesthetic drugs.
Intravenous fluid administration (5-10 ml/kg/h)
 Further peri-anaesthetic monitoring (e.g. invasive
 using a balanced electrolyte solution is a reasonable
 arterial and central venous blood pressure measure-
choice. Glucose and electrolyte supplementation need
ment, arterial pH and blood gases, haematocrit and
to be addressed individually. The rate of fluid admin-
plasma total protein, electrolytes and blood glucose)
istration is governed by coexisting problems, such as
needs to be chosen on an individual basis to improve
hypoproteinaemia and cardiovascular disease, and
patient care. In general, monitoring will be more in-
needs to be adjusted accordingly. Fluid administra-
tensive in geriatric compared with younger patients.
tion may be necessary for hours and even days fol-
 An important part of the sedative or anaesthetic
lowing anaesthesia and surgery.
protocol, especially for geriatric patients, is adequate
 Pre-anaesthetic fasting should be kept to a mini-
preparation for critical situations and emergencies.
mum. In general, a period of 8 hours is sufficient. Water
The minimal and maximal tolerated values of all
should be withdrawn 1 hour prior to premedication. If
physiological parameters (e.g. heart rate, systolic,
dehydration is of concern, fluid administration at
mean and diastolic arterial blood pressures and pain
 maintenance rates can be started at this time.
scoring) must be outlined to all staff involved and
action for immediate correction or treatment needs
to be established.
Duration of hospitalization should be kept to a mini-
Anaesthetic maintenance,
mum for geriatric patients because they tolerate stress
monitoring and support
less well than younger dogs and cats. In general they
profit from attentive care, such as:
The advantages and disadvantages of sedation ver-
.
sus general anaesthesia need to be assessed indi-
Appropriate cage bedding to improve comfort
vidually. General anaesthesia incorporating a volatile
·
Careful positioning during the intervention
anaesthetic offers particular advantages:
because of reduced joint flexibility
Support and maintenance of normal body
A secure airway achieved by endotracheal
temperature (e.g. warm intravenous fluids,
intubation
blankets. forced air warmer) because of a
 Ease of controlled ventilation
decreased thermoregulatory capacity. This
Administration of 100% oxygen
heips to avert problems such as shivering;
A high degree of control because of rapid drug
cardiac arrhythmias, reduced drug
uptake and elimination
metabolism, prolonged recovery, increased
A low hepatic and renal burden because of
infection risk and delayed wound healing
 minimal drug metabolism.
Judicious fluid therapy to correct individual
deficits and to maintain appropriate perfusion
Isoflurane and sevoffurane have fewer side efects
 and oxygen delivery to tissues but avoiding
(e.g. better preservation of cardiac output and splanch-
volume overload
nic perfusion) than halothane, which should only be
Adequate nutrition, avoiding long pre-
used in healthy geriatric dogs and cats. Sevoflurane
anaesthetic fasting and postoperative periods 
is the preferred agent when performing a mask in-
of food refusal and the risk of a catabolic state.
duction technique.
The food should be palatable and may need
It is important to understand that age itself is not a
to be individually prepared
risk factor butASA status (see Chapter 2), duration of
Appropriate time periods of restful sleep to
anaesthesia and type of surgery will increase the like-
enhance recovery and to minimize general
lihood of peri-anaesthetic complications and morbid-
fatigue.
ity. Adequate pain relief, achieved either by using
systemic analgesics or by local anaesthetic blocks, is 
Geriatric patients should be anaesthetized early
essential. Carefully planned analgesia will not prolong 
 but rather enhance the speed of recovery.
rienced staff observation.
308
Chapter 28  Geriatric patients
Summary
 check-ups in the weeks following a lengthy
 anaesthetic period may be required for geriatric
Indiscriminate use of drugs should be avoided in this
patients with renai or hepatic disease.
age group: appropriate drug selection is essential.
 Stress caused by separation from the owner, time
There is no perect sedative or anaesthetic drug. No 
anaesthetic drug is contraindicated absolutely and the
spent in the hospital environment, the effects of se-
mainstays of sedation and anaesthesia for the geri-
dation/anaesthesia and the diagnostic or surgical pro-
atric dog and cat are:
cedure can exacerbate pre-existing but normally
covert pathology. Special care and constant observa-
 Early oxygen supplementation
tion during the entire peri-anaesthetic period are
 Cautious drug selection: familiarity with the drug
needed, but geriatric dogs and cats are not at a higher
 is more important than perfect drug 
risk for complications than younger patients as long
pharmacology
as age-related changes in physiology are understood.
Administration of small doses of the selected 
However, the ASA status wif influence peri-anaes-
drug titrated to a desired effect, whenever
 thetic morbidity and complications.
possible choosing the slow intravenous route
Avoidance of any drug that is not absoiutely 
References and further reading
necessary, i.e. 'keeping it simple'
Rapid airway control and maintenance of airway
Fortney W (2005) Geriatrics. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
patency
Animai Practice 35(3)
Immediate treatment of undesirable changes
Harvey RC and Paddleford RR (1999) Management of geriatric patients
- a common occurrence. Veterinary Clinics of North America Small
and aberrations from preset cut-of points in 
Animal Practice 29(3). 683-699
physiological parameters
Hosgood G and Schol DT (1998) Evaluation of age as a risk factor for
perianesthetic morbidity and mortality in the dog. Journal of
Careful attention to detail in patient support,
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 8, 222-236
monitoring (including all drug effects) and care
Hosgood G and Scholl DT (2002) Evaluation of age and American
during the entire period of sedation/anaesthesia
Society of Anesthesigtogists (ASA) physical status as a risk factor
for perianesthetic morbidity and mortality in the cat. Journaf of
until complete recovery. Frequent postoperative
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 12, 9-15
309
Anaesthetic comp
accidents and
I emergenc
Christine Egger
Introduction
effect in each individual animal, according to its
physical status, is particularly important in
Some anaesthetic complications are common,
avoiding a relative overdose of anaesthetic drugs.
asas snoaeu euao aui Aa pesneo aie pue
Lack of pre-anaesthetic stabilization and peri-
(CNS) and cardiopulmonary depressant effects
anaesthetic monitoring and vigilance can lead to
of drugs used in anaesthesia, the procedure
an increased incidence of anaesthetic
performed, or both.
emergencies.
Many anaesthetic drugs decrease cardiac output.
When complications do occur, appropriate
blood pressure, heart rate, tidal volume.
evaluation, management and documentation are
respiratory rate and body temperature regulation.
critical to minimize or eliminate negative outcomes.
 Complications arising from the surgical procedure
 Having a plan of action to deal with these
itself may result in further depression of cardiac
events, should they occur, will result in improved
output and ventilation (i.e. haemorrhage,
 patient outcome.
pneumothorax, head-up positioning).
Human error is a frequent cause of problems
encountered during anaesthetic management,
Anaesthetic complications
stressing the importance of vigilance when
 monitoring patients during the peri-anaesthetic
Respiratory complications
period.
Respiratory complications: including hypoventilation,
 Correct calculation of anaesthetic drug dosages
 ventilation to perfusion mismatch, atelectasis and air-
is critical to avoid absolute overdosage, as most
way obstruction will ultimately result in hypoxaemia,
anaesthetic drugs have a narrow therapeutic index.
hypercapnia, or both, if not recognized and corrected
 Careful titration of drugs to achieve the desired
(Figure 29.1).
Dyspnoea:
Upper airway
Brachycephalics
 Oxygen
Obstructive
(inspiratory dyspnoea)
 Soft palatie entrapmenit
Exiend head and neck and pul tongue. forward :
pulmonary disease
Laryngeal or tracheal obstruction 
 Suction airway
Laryngeal paralysis
Endotracheal intubation
 Head bandage ioo tight
Steroids and diuretics
Kinked endotracheal tube
+Sedation
. L.ower airway
Bronchospasm..
Oxygen..
(expiratory dyspnoea).
Asthma
Bronchodiator
Anaphylaxis
f Steroids, antihistamines 
Restrictive
Intrinsic:
Pulmonary oedema, pneumonia.
UabAxo
.....
puimonary disease
. infiltrates, ARDS
Thoracocentesis
{rapid, shallow
Extrinsic:
 Pneumothorax, pleural effusion, 
Endotracheal intubation, IPPV 
....
breaths) ·
 increased intra-abdominal pressure 
Alveolar recruitment manoeuvre
Hypoxia
.V/Q mismatch and'
Apnoea/hypoventilation
.Oxygen:
：
right-to-left
Atelectasis
 Endotracheal intubation and IPPV
ntrapumonary
Inadequate FO::
 Alveolar recruitment mangeuvre...
shunting
Airway obstruction
 Reversal of CNS depressant drugs:
！
Restrictive ung disease
Thoracocentesis'*
Severe anaemia
Bronchodilators, diuretics .
Severe hypotension
Haemoglobin.transfusion.
Cardiac arrest
. Sympathomimetic support ± CPR
9
FRC = Functional residual capacity; Gl = Gastrointestinal; IPPV = Intermitent positive pressure ventilation; LOS = Lower 
310
Clinical sign
Aetiology
LA
Hypoventilation
Reduced FRC
Positioning,relaxation ofrespiratory
Endotracheal intubation, 1PPV
 Reduced minute
muscles
 Reverse respiratory depressant drugs if effects
ventilation (RR or TV)
Respiratory depressant drugs
are severe
 Abdominal distension 
Reduce abdomminal distension
Hypotension, hypothermia 
Correct hypotension, hypothermia
Airway obstruction
 Correct airway obstruction
Respiratory arrest  Depression of
 Anaesthetics overdose
 Endotracheal intubation 
brainstem
Reflex apnoea
PPY
respiratory centres
Brainstem injury
1 CPR
Cardiac arrest
Hyperventilation
1Increased minute
 Inadequate depth of anaesthesia
 Check depth of anaesthesia and increase if required 
 ventilation (RR and/or 
Hypercapnia, hypoxaemia
 Check absorber granules, one-way valves, fresh gas
TV)
Hyperthermia
fiow and the breathing circuit 
Aspiration
 Aspiration of Gl 
Drugs that decrease LOS tone
Appropriate fasting.
contents 
Factors that delay gastric emptying
 Rapid intravenous induction and control of ainway in
Aspiration of blood.
{pain, fear, opioids)
fed patients
saliva, mucus or pus
Increased intra-abdominal pressure 
Pre- or post-reatment with prokinetic drugs,
[pregnancy, ascites, Gl obstruction)
Hblockers, or proton pump inhibitors 
 Prolonged anaesthesia
 Position head down to allow pharyngeal area to drain
 Suction and lavage of oesophagus
 Sucralfate
(continued) Common respiratory complications of general anaesthesia. ARDS = Acute respiratory distress
syndrome; CNS = Central nervous system; CPR = Cardiopulmonary resuscitation: FO = Fraction of inspired
Pathophysiological effects of hypoxaemia and
 The net response to hypoxaemia depends on
hypercapnia
the severity, which determines the magnitude
and balance between the inhibitory and 
Effectsofhypoxaemiaon thecardiovascular
excitatory components.
system:
The balance may vary according to the type and
depth of anaesthesia and the degree of pre-
The end products of aerobic metabolism
existing cardiovascular disease.
(oxidative phosphorylation) are carbon dioxide
 Mild arterial hypoxaemia (saturation of
and water, which are normally easily excreted.
 haemoglobin with oxygen in arterial blood (S:O2)
There is a cessation of oxidative phosphorylation
80-90%) causes general activation of the
when mitochondrial oxygen level falls below a
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and release
critical level, resulting in anaerobic metabolism
of catecholamines:
and the ineficient production of adenosine
Heart rate, stroke volume, myocardial
triphosphate (ATP).
contractility and cardiac output increase
The main anaerobic metabolites are hydrogen
Systemic vascular resistance increases
 and lactate jons, which are not easily excreted
slightly and mild hypertension may occur.
 and accumulate in the circulation, resulting in 
With moderate arterial hypoxaemia(S:O 60-80%)
acidosis and a base deficit.
local vasodilation may predominate and
 The clinical manifestations of hypoxaemia are
 systemic vascular resistance and blood
usually related to symptoms arising from the
pressure decrease:
 most vulnerable organs: brain, heart, spinal
 Heart rate may continue to increase because
cord, kidney or liver.
of the baroreceptor reflex response to
The cardiovascular response to hypoxaemia is a
decreased blood pressure.
 product of neural and humoral reflexes and
With severe hypoxaemia (S:O2 <60%) local
direct effects:
depressant effects dominate and blood
 The reflex responses occur first and result
pressure falls rapidly, the heart rate slows.
from aortic and carotid chemoreceptors and 
shock develops and ventricular fibrillation or 
baroreceptors and central cerebral
asystole follow.
stimulation
In sedated or anaesthetized patients, the early
The humoral reflex effects result from
SNS reactivity to hypoxaemia may be reduced,
 catecholamine and renin-angiotensin release 
and hypoxaemia may manifest clinically as
These reflexes are excitatory and
bradycardia, severe hypotension and
vasoconstrictive
cardiovascular collapse.
The direct local vascular effects of
Hypoxaemia also promotes cardiac arrhythmias,
hypoxaemia are inhibitory and vasodilatory.
as a result of a decrease in the myocardial
and occur later.
oxygen supply:demand ratio:
311
 Arterial hypoxaemia may directly decrease
 In addition, severe hypoxaemia will result in
myocardial oxygen delivery (decreased
inadequate supply of oxygen to the brainstem,
oxygen content)
resulting in depressed respiration and eventual
Hypoxaemia results in tachycardia,
apnoea.
increasing myocardial oxygen consumption
and allowing less time for diastolic filling and
 General effects of anaesthesia on the
 coronary artery perfusion, resulting in
 respiratory system
reduced oxygen supply
Early increased systemic blood pressure
Ventilation/perfusion (alveolar ventilation to
 causes an increased afterload on the left 
 perfusion ratio) (V/Q) mismatch is a common
ventricle, which increases left ventricular
 complication of general anaesthesia.
oxygen demand
 Air left within the lungs at end-expiration, called
Late systemic hypotension may decrease
functional residual capacity, is reduced with
diastolic perfusion pressure, further
general anaesthesia, particularly with the patient
decreasing oxygen supply
in dorsal recumbency, and this decrease in
 If myocardial areas become hypoxic or
 functional residual capacity leads to V/Q mismatch
ischaemic, ventricular premature contractions 
or reduced aiveolar ventilation (hypoventilation).
(VPCs), ventricular tachycardia and
 When the functional residual capacity is close to
ventricular fibrillation can occur.
or less than the closing volume of the lung, the
small airways begin to close, resuiting in
Effects of hypercapnia on the cardiovascular
atelectasis and right-to-left shunting of blood in
system:
the pulmonary vasculature and consequent
hypoxaemia.
Hypercapnia, like hypoxaemia, can cause direct
 Causes of V/Q mismatch are atelectasis, patient
depression of both cardiac muscle and vascular
positioning. accidental endobronchial intubation, 
smooth muscle, and at the same time cause
bronchospasm, pneumonia, acute respiratory
reflex stimulation of the sympathoadrenal system.
distress syndrome (ARDS), airway obstruction,
Mild hypercapnia (partial pressure of carbon 
hypoventilation and pulmonary arterial
dioxide in arterial blood (P,CO2) 45-59 mmHg
hypotension.
(6-8 kPa)) results in mild SNS stimulation,
 Brainstem respiratory centres are depressed by
tachycardia and mild hypertension.
 general anaesthetics and mu agonist opioids;
With moderate to severe hypercapnia (P,CO2
resuiting in a shift in the carbon dioxide
60-90 mmHg (8-11.3 kPa)) SNS stimulation first
response curve (level of carbon dioxide at which
results in tachycardia and hypertension.
inspiration is triggered), and reduced hypoxic
increasing myocardial oxygen demand, and later
respiratory drive.
results in decreased myocardial oxygen supply.
 Reduced compliance and increased resistance
 due to tachycardia and late hypotension.
 of the thorax and lungs with general anaesthesia
 Hypercapnia can also cause ventricular
 results in a change to a diaphragmatic breathing 
arrhythmias, including ventricular fibrillation.
pattern.
With severe hypercapnia (P,CO, >90 mmHg
 Cilial paralysis, mucosal drying and depressed 
(12 kPa)) severe CNS depression occurs.
airway reflexes (such as airway protective
Hypercapnia can impair oxygenation due to
reflexes) also impair respiratory function
displacement of oxygen in the alveolus by the
 during anaesthesia.
high concentration of carbon dioxide, resulting in
 decreased alveolar and arterial oxygen
Obstructive pulmonary disease
concentration.
 Hypercapnia causes a shit in the oxyhaemoglobin 
Pathophysiology:
dissociation curve to the right, facilitating oxygen
off-loading and tissue oxygenation.
 During inspiration, work is done against elastic
Hypercapnia results in leakage of potassium
 and resistive forces in the lungs, and any
from liver cells into plasma as a result of glucose
increase in resistance to airflow will increase the
release and mobilization in response to the
work of breathing.
Increase in plasma catecholamines.
 Obstruction of the upper or lower airways can
 have a marked effect on the resistance and the
Effects of hypoxaemia and hypercapnia on the
work of breathing, and animals will tend to
respiratory system:
ventilate in order to minimize this work.
With obstructed airways, the animal wil ventilate
 Both hypercapnia and hypoxaemia cause
 to minimize the resistance forces, resulting in a
stimulation of respiration and an increase in
reduced respiratory rate and increased tidal
minute ventiation, although this response is
volume to maintain minute ventilation.
reduced with many anaesthetic drugs.
The ability to compensate for the increased work
At a P,CO, of >100 mmHg (13.3 kPa), respiratory
 of breathing is reduced under the effects of
stimulation is reduced, and will eventually stop
many anaesthetic drugs, and many anaesthetics 
altogether, due to depression of the brainstem.
result in increased relaxation of tissues in the
312
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
pharyngeal area, causing further obstruction and
Positive pressure ventilation may be required if
increased resistance.
the intrathoracic trachea or main stem bronchi
 Reduced minute ventilation can resulf in 
are collapsed.
hypercapnia and hypoxaemia.
Sedation may be helpful, but avoid heavy
sedation in brachycephalic breeds, as relaxation
Upper airway obstruction (inspiratory dyspnoea):
of redundant pharyngeal tissue makes
obstruction more likely.
 Partial obstruction will result in inspiratory
stridor, with slow, deep breaths. Chest wal!
Lower airway obstruction (expiratory dyspnoea):
moving 'in' during inspiration may be observed.
 Full obstruction results in pronounced
Causes:
paradoxical breathing (abdomen expands and
thorax contracts during inspiration) and
 Bronchospasm (usually occurs during light levels
hyperextension of head and neck.
of anaesthesia).
 Jf inspiratory efforts are severe, the upper airway
Bronchitis.
may undergo a dynamic inspiratory compression
Asthma.
because of the marked pressure gradient in the
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
 Anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions.
upper airway.
Prolonged obstruction and intense respiratory
effort can result in puimonary oedema and acute
Treatment: See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
lung injury.
 Supplemental oxygen (nasal cannula, mask or
Causes:
endotracheal intubation).
Deepen anaesthesia (ketamine and volatile 
 Soft palate entrapment (heavily sedated, non-
agents are good bronchodilators).
 intubated patients).
Bronchodilator administration:
 Adrenaline, albuterol, clenbuterol, terbutaline
 Brachycephalic airway syndrome (breed
Aminophylline, theophylline.
predisposition),
Steroids (methylprednisolone. dexamethasone).
Laryngeal spasm (common during light levels of
Antihistamines (diphenhydramine).
anaesthesia).
Laryngeal paralysis (breed predisposition).
 Use a 'slow and deep' ventilation pattern, rather
than fast and shallow'.
Laryngeal or pharyngeal inflammation or 
oedema (trauma during intubation, or prolonged
Restrictive pulmonary disease
pressure of the endotracheal tube).
Laryngeal or tracheal collapse (breed
Pathophysiology:
predisposition).
Laryngeal, pharyngeal, tracheal or nasal
 Restrictive pulmonary diseases resuit in a
obstruction (blood, mucus, vomitus, saliva,
tendency for the lungs to collapse and become
tumour, foreign body).
less complianf.
Kinked or blocked endotracheal tube (over-
 Decreased lung compliance and increased lung
 inflation of endotracheal tube cuff).
elastance can result from disease processes
Too tight head and/or neck bandage (usually a
extrinsic to the lungs, such as intrathoracic
problem after extubation).
disease, or intrinsic to the lungs, such as with a
 No gas flow into breathing circuit (rebreathing 
change in surfactant or bronchial mucus or an 
bag will be collapsed).
 alteration of elastic tissue of the lungs (fibrosis,
age).
Treatment: See Figure 29.6 for drug doses.
Decreased compliance results in increased work
of breathing to overcome the elastic forces and 
 Extend head and neck and pul tongue forward
expand the lungs.
to open airways, maintain in sternal recumbency.
 To minimize the work of breathing, a rapid
 Provide supplemental oxygen (nasal cannula, 
shallow breathing pattern is adopted to minimize
mask, intratracheal oxygen).
the elastic forces involved.
 Suction airway, including the endotracheal tube,
Many anaesthetic agents decrease the
as required. A small amount of saline may help
respiratory rate, decreasing the ability of the 
break up solid mucus, folowed by suction.
patient to compensate.
 Endotracheal intubation or emergency
Hypoventilation and V/Q mismatch under
tracheostomy may be necessary.
anaesthesia will resuit in increased atelectasis,
 Steroid and diuretic administration to reduce 
also reducing lung compliance.
inflammation and oedema.
 Maintain intubation and general anaesthesia
Intrinsic restrictive puimonary disorders:
until swelling resolves, extubate early with
supplemental oxygen (nasal cannula or mask).
These disorders reduce surfactant and bronchial
 Maintain in sternal recumbency, with extended
mucus, and increase lung water, reducing
head and neck and the tongue pulled forward.
compliance.
313
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
 Causes include acute respiratory distress
 Cyanotic mucous membrane colour occurs when
syndrome (ARDS), pulmonary oedema,
15 g/ of haemoglobin is not carrying oxygen. This
pneumonia, lung consolidation, pulmonary
colour change may be difficult to see in anaemic 
inflitrates (infection, pulmonary disease, trauma,
patients and under poor lighting conditions.
ventilator induced injury, endotoxaemia).
Hypoxaemia is possible without hypercapnia
(ventilated patient receiving low inspired oxygen).
Extrinsic restrictive puimonary disorders:
Causes:
：
 These disorders alter gas exchange by
interfering with normal fung expansion.
Increased intrapulmonary shunting due to
 Causes include pneumothorax, pleural effusions,
atelectasis is the most common cause of
mediastinal masses, neuromuscular disorders,
hypoxaemia during and following general
and increased intra-abdominal pressure from 
anaesthesia:
 ascites, pregnancy or gastrointestinal
 Decreased functional residual capacity leads
obstruction.
to V/Q mismatch and hypoventilation 
When the functional residual capacity is close
Treatment: See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
to or less than the closing volume of the lung,
the small airways begin to close, resulting in 
Thoracocentesis to remove fluid or air
atelectasis and right-to-left shunting of blood 
(diagnostic and therapeutic).
in the puimonary vasculature and consequent
Placement of chest tubes may be required (see
hypoxaemia
Chapter 21).
Hypoventilation in a patient not receiving 
 Supplemental oxygen (nasal cannula, mask or 
supplemental oxygen (on 'room air' or 21%
endotracheal intubation).
fraction inspired O, (FO2)) will result in
Treat cause (ARDS, endotoxaemia, pulmonary
hypoxaemia, even without the presence of
disease, infection; detailed treatments are
atelectasis.
beyond the scope of this book).
 Inadequate inspired oxygen:
Consider drugs such as furosemide,
Airway obstruction
corticosteroids, antimicrobials, bronchodilators,
Bronchoconstriction
surfactant therapy.
Inadequate oxygen flow (low FO2).
 Alveolar recruitment procedure (sigh): use
Apnoea or respiratory arrest:
reservoir bag to obtain a peak airway pressure
 Induction apnoea secondary to thiopental,
of 30-40 cmHz0 for 40-60 seconds to reinflate
propofol or ketamine administration
atelectatic alveoli.
Relative or absolute overdosage of
Increase peak airway pressure during positive
anaesthetic drugs.
 pressure ventilation to reinflate alveoli and
 Pulmonary parenchymal disease (oedema,
reduce atelectasis.
pneumonia, parenchymal infiltrates).
 Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) to
Intrathoracic disease (pneumothorax, pleural
reduce and prevent atelectasis.
effusion).
Try a fast and shallow' ventilation pattern, rather
 Severe anaemia and inadequate oxygen
than 'slow and deep'.
 carrying capacity.
Long-term ventilator therapy using expensive,
Severe decrease in cardiac output (shock) or
specially designed critical care ventilators may
cardiac arrest.
be required for some conditions. Details of
patient management are found in books and 
Treatment: See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
articles on critical care.
 Preoxygenate with mask for 5 minutes prior to
Hypoxaemia
anaesthetic induction, particularly in patients 
This is where arterial oxygen tension is <60 mmHg
with respiratory disease or in which difficult 
(<8 kPa).
endotracheal intubation is anticipated. Placing
 buaowei uaui pue ebeo uabAxo u juaned
 Early clinical signs of hypoxaemia include
patient to induction area without continuing
restlessness, dysphoria, tachycardia, cardiac
oxygen therapy is not adequate.
irritability (arrhythmias) and hypertension,
 Provide supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula,
Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern may be
 mask, or endotracheal intubation to increase FOz
observed (increasing tidal volume followed by
whenever hypoxaemia is observed or suspected.
decreasing tidal volume separated by long
 Intubate and provide oxygen and positive
expiratory pause).
 pressure ventilation to patients in which oxygen
CNS depression, bradycardia, hypotension and
insufflation alone is inadequate to maintain
cardiac arrest are late, often terminal, signs.
oxygen saturation >91%.
 Pulse oximetry is useful in place of arterial blood 
 Increase peak airway pressure (up to 40 cmH,O)
gas analysis:
during IPPV to re-expand atelectatic alveoli
 A haemoglobin oxygen saturation of <90% is
(alveolar recruitment manoeuvre) and consider the
equivalent to P.O2 <60 mmHg (<8 kPa).
Use of positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP).
314
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencie5
Thoracocentesis to remove intrathoracic air or
 The pain of thoracic injury (fractured ribs, flfail
effusion (± chest tube placement).
chest) will contribute to hypoventlation.
Treat pulmonary disease (diuretics, antibiotics,
 Partial obstruction of the airway and increased
bronchodilators).
work of breathing:
Improve cardiac output, blood pressure and
 Brachycephalic animals 
pulmonary perfusion (fluid therapy,
Obstruction of the endotracheal tube with
sympathomimetic therapy).
mucus, blood
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, as required.
Kinking of the endotracheal tube
Increase oxygen-carrying capacity
Placement of inappropriately small
(haemoglobin) via transfusion of whole blood,
endotracheal tube.
packed red blood cels, or oxygen-carrying
solutions (Oxyglobin) (see Chapter 16).
Treatment: See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
Decrease oxygen consumption due to pain,
shivering or fever (analgesics, antipyretics).
Endotracheal intubation (or reintubation), oxygen
therapy and positive pressure ventilation.
Hypoventilation
 Improve CNS perfusion with fluid therapy and
This is reduced minute ventilation, reduced tidal vol-
sympathomimetic support.
Ume and/or respiratory rate.
 Lighten depth of anaesthesia.
 Warm patient to normothermia using warm
Arterial pCO, >45 mmHg (6 kPa) is indicative of
intravenous and lavage fluids, circulating warm
hypoventilation.
water blankets, and forced warm air blankets.
End-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring is useful if
 Administer appropriate anaigesics for chest 
arterial blood gas analysis is not available.
trauma.
 Patients receiving 100% oxygen under
 Relieve abdominal distension.
anaesthesia are unlikely to become hypoxaemic
 Consider reversing CNS depressant drugs
during hypoventilation, but patients that are on 
where possible.
room air (21% FO2) will become hypoxaemic.
Apnoea/respiratory arrest
Causes:
Causes:
 Induction of anaesthesia and dorsal recumbency
can reduce functional residual capacity by more
 Rapid intravenous administration of propofol,
than 25%.
thiopental or ketamine/benzodiazepine
Loss of normal end-expiratory diaphragmatic
combination.
tone allows the abdominal contents to rise
 Overdosage of barbiturates, propofol, volatile
further up against the diaphragm, resulting in 
agents, opioids, ketamine.
decreased lung volume and reduced chest and
 Reflex apnoea secondary to visceral traction or
lung compliance.
endotracheal intubation.
 Decreased functional residual capacity leads to
 Brainstem injury.
increased V/Q mismatch, alveolar
 Cardiac arrest.
hypoventilation and atelectasis and right-to-left
 Equipment failure (closed pop-off valve,
shunting of blood in the pulmonary vasculature.
ventilator stopped).
 Steep head-down position of greater than 30
degrees to horizontal can reduce functional
Treatment:
residual capacity even more, as the intrathoracic
blood volume increases and the abdominal
Endotracheal intubation.
organs impinge on the diaphragm.
Positive pressure ventilation with oxygen
 Use of mu agonist opioids, barbiturates, propofol
supplementation.
and voiatile agents, which directly depress the
Lighten anaesthetic depth.
brainstem respiratory centres, can result in
 Check anaesthetic equipment.
reduced minute venfilation.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Abdominal distension (ascites, uroabdomen,
pregnancy. gastrointestinal obstruction,
Hyperventilation
haemoabdomen) will also contribute to
hypoventilation.
 Increased minute ventiation (increased tidal 
 Severe hypotension, resulting in inadequate 
volume and/or respiratory rate).
perfusion of CNS respiratory centres, will cause 
hypoventilation and possibly Cheyne-Stokes
Causes:
breathing patiern (repeated pattern of
 progressively increasing tidat volume, then
 Inadequate anaesthetic depth and response to
progressively decreasing tidal volume followed
painful stimuiation.
by a long expiratory pause).
Hypercapnia:
 Hypothermia will also cause depression of CNS
End-tidal carbon dioxide monitor extremely
respiratory centres and result in hypoventilation.
useful in this situation
315
Increased inspired and expired carbon
 Pretreatment with H, blockers (famotidine,
dioxide due to:
ranitidine), which decrease gastric volume and
 Exhausted absorber granules
increase the pH of gastric contents.
Stuck or missing one-way valve(s)
Pretreatment with proton pump inhibitors
Improper connection of the breathing 
(omeprazole) to raise gastric pH.
circuit
Insufficient fresh gas flow with a non-
Treatmentonceregurgitation occurs:
rebreathing circuit.
Hypoxaemia (hypoxic drive overrides carbon
Leave endotracheal tube in oesophagus if
dioxide control of breathing)
accidental oesophageal intubation triggers
 Panting due to opioid administration.
vomiting, to facilitate drainage away from
Hyperthermia.
pharyngeal and laryngeal areas. Place another
 Increased carbon dioxide production or
endotracheal tube into trachea and inflate cuff,
administration (malignant hyperthermia, 
then remove first endotracheal tube.
laparoscopy using carbon dioxide -
-will see
 Check endotracheal cuff infiation and security
Increased expired carbon dioxide).
of airway.
 Position with head down so that material flows
Treatment:
Out of the mouth.
 Suction to remove material from nasal and oral
 Increase anaesthetic depth and/or administer
 pharynx, oral cavity and oesophagus.
additional analgesics if not due to hypercapnia
Flush oesophagus with saline, possibly followed
or hypoxaemia.
by sodium citrate (30 ml) in a large dog, or
Ventilate lungs to remove carbon dioxide.
 administer sucralfate to prevent oesophagitis
Check anaesthetic circuit, one-way valves
 and stricture formation.
(quickly remove, dry, and replace; ensure correct
 Leave stomach tube in place, to facilitate
size is used), and/or change absorber granules.
 drainage away from pharyngeal and laryngeal
Increase fresh gas fow if using a non-
 areas. If patient has regurgitated once, it may
rebreathing circuit.
do so again.
See causes and correction of hypoxaemia
 Suction again prior to extubation and extubate
earlier in the chapter.
with the cuff slightly inflated.
 Turn off heating blankets, use cool intravenous
fluids.
Barotrauma or volutrauma
Aspiration
 Trauma from pressure or sheer stress resulting 
Regurgitation and aspiration of stomach
 in ruptured alveoli and pneumomediastinum 
and pneumothorax.
contents.
 Aspiration of saliva, blood or mucus.
 Hypoxaemia and cardiac arrest will follow if it is
Can be silent (not observed).
not recognized and treated immediately.
Predisposing factors include:
Causes of barotrauma:
Drugs that relax the lower oesophageal
Repetitive, excessive peak airway pressure
sphincter, such as atropine, glycopyrronium,
with positive pressure ventilation 
opioids, thiopental and volatile anaesthetics
(barotrauma).
Factors that delay gastric emptying, such as
 Repetitive collapse and re-expansion of normal
fear, anxiety, pain, shock, opioids and
or diseased lung during positive pressure
anticholinergics
ventilation (volutrauma).
 Increased intra-abdominal pressure (pregnancy,
 Closed pop-off valve will result in barotrauma,
obesity, abdominal effusion, gastrointestinal
but will also result in decreased venous return
obstruction or head-down positioning)
 and cardiac arrest.
 Prolonged anaesthesia (>2 hours).
Treatment of barotrauma:
Preventive measures:
Avoid high peak airway pressures >40 cmH,O in
Appropriate pre-anaesthetic fasting.
healthy iungs and >18 cmHzO in diseased or
Rapid intravenous induction to allow rapid
compromised lungs.
control of the airway. Use an endotracheal tube
Use smaller tidal volume (5-8 ml/kg), lower peak 
with a leak-tested inflated cuff that can provide a
airway pressures (10-14 cmH,O), and faster
seal at 20 cmH,O.
rate (20-25 breaths/minute) to ventilate patients
Pretreatment with metoclopramide (prokinetic),
with compromised lungs.
Thoracocentesis to correct pneumothorax.
tone, speeds gastric emptying and lowers gastric
Administer oxygen.
fluid volume.
Check for a puise.
316
Chapter 29
9Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
Cardiovascular complications
Depression of baroreceptor reflex control of
arterial pressure to varying degrees.
For information on cardiovascular complications,see
These effects result in reduced venous return;
Figure 29.2.
hypotension, bradycardia and a decrease in 
cardiac output, and are exacerbated in a
Pathophysiology of cardiovascular
failing heart.
complications
Volatile anaesthetics and thiobarbiturates can
sensitize the myocardium to the arrhythmogenic
Many anaesthetics (volatile and injectable)
effects of adrenaline and can prevent or facilitate
 produce a dose-related:
the development of atrial or ventricutar
 Depression of leff ventricular (LV), right
 arhythmias during myocardial ischaemia or
ventricular (RV), and left atrial (LA)
infarction, depending upon the volatile
myocardial contractility (negative inotropy) by
 anaesthetic concentration and the extent of
altering intracellular Ca?+ homeostasis
pre-existing myocardial disease.
 Decrease in LV diastolic function (negative
Volatile anaesthetics are relatively weak
lusitropy)
coronary vasodilators that are not capable of
 Decrease in LV afterload due to vasodilation
 producing coronary steal at typically used
and a reduction in systemic vascular resistance
clinical concentrations.
Clinical sign
Treatment
.
Bradyarrhythmias
Potent mu opioids
Anticholinergic
 Sinus bradycardia
High vagal tone
Butorphanof or naloxone to reverse muopioid effects
Atrioventricular (AV) block
Hypothermia
Warm patient
(fist and second degree)
 CNS disease and increased ICP
Decrease ICP
Sinus arrest
Hyperkalaemia ·
 Correct hyperkalaemia
 Atrial standstill
Addisonian crisis
Tachyarrhythmias
 Drug-induced (atropine)
Rule out or treat underlying cause
· Sinus tachycardia
 SNS stimulation: pain, hypoxaemia, awareness,
Beta blockers (esmolol or propranolol)
 Atrial tachycardia
hyperthermia, anaemia, hypotension, hypovolaemia 
 Atrial fibrllation 
Myocardial disease
Ventricular arrhythmias
 Hypoxia, myocardial ischaemia, traumatic
Rule out or treat underlying cause
Ventricular premature
mlyocarditis, GDV, splenic disease, hypercapnia,
Lidocaine, procainamide, mexiletine 
contractions
acid-base imbalance,electrolyte mbalance,drug
Magnesium suiphate
Ventricular tachycardia 
effects (thiobarbiturates)
CPR
Ventricular fibrillation
Hypotension
Decreased venous return:
Increase intravascuar volume with balanced, isotonic.
Vasodilation
 crystalloid or colloid administration'
Hypovolaemia
Thoracocentesis
Pericardiocentesis
IPPV
Pericardial effusion ·
Open pop-off valve
Tension pneurmothorax
 Reduce surgical traction
 Closed pop-of valve
Surgical packing and retraction of organs 
IPPV
Severe bradycardia
.....
Vasodilation (volae anaesthetics, propotol and
: Administer a vasoconstrictor:
Dopamine
 thiopental cause vasodilation)
Ephedrine .
Adrenaline'
Vasopressin!
Ventricular dysfunction
Administer a positive inotrope:
Dobutamine:
Dopamine
:.·
Ephedrine
Adrenaline
Hypertension
Pain
Rule out or treat underiying cause'
Hypoxaemia ::
..
Beta blockers.
.
 Hypercapnia 
ACE inhibitors
Metabolic acidosis
Underlying renal or cardiac disease
 Common cardiovascular complications of general anaesthesia. ACE = Angiotensin converting enzyme;
CNS = Centrai nervous system; CPR = Cardiopulmonary resuscitation; GDV = Gastric cilatation-volvulus;
nervous system.
317
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
Volatile anaesthetics exert important
Causes:
 cardioprotective effects against reversible and
irreversible myocardial ischaemia in
 Drug-induced (anticholinergics, particularly
atropine).
experimental animals by activating intracellular
signal transduction pathways.
Sympathetic nervous system stimulation due to:
Pain
Cardiac arrhythmias
Awareness
Hyperthermia
.
Hypotension
Bradyarrhythmias
Hypovolaemia
 Severe bradyarrhythmias can greatiy reduce
Hypoxaemia
cardiac output and tissue perfusion, particularly
Hypercapnia
if there is limited ability to increase stroke
Hypoglycaemia
volume by either increased contractility or
Hyperthyroidism
vasoconstriction and increased venous return.
Anaemia
Phaeochromocytoma
Severe bradyarrhythmias can result in syncope
in awake animals, and severe hypotension in 
Myocardial disease.
anaesthetized animals.
Bradyarrhythmias seen under anaesthesia
Treatment: See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
inciude:
Correct underlying problem (pain, awareness,
 Sinus bradycardia
hypovolaemia, anaemia, hypoxaemia,
 Atrioventricular (AV) block (first and second
hypercapnia, hypoglycaemia).
degree)
Treat with beta blockers (propranolol or esmolol)
Sinus arrest
if tachycardia is resulting in decreased time for
Atrial standstill.
 diastolic filling and for myocardial perfusion,
cardiac output is decreased and the underlying
Causes:
 cause cannot be found.
Drug effects (high dose mu agonist opioids.
Ventricular arrhythmias
alpha-2 adrenergic agonists).
CNS disease, particularly if there is increased
The specialized conduction system of the heart
intracraniai pressure (ICP).
is responsible for:
Hypothermia.
 Initiating cardiac depolarization 
High vagai tone.
Coordinating the electrical impulses
Vagal stimulation (i.e. during surgery).
throughout the atria and ventricles
Hyperkalaemia.
Coordinating ventricuiar contractions,
essential for effective cardiac output from the
Treatment: See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
ventricles.
 It is critical that excitation and contraction be
 Anticholinergic (atropine or glycopyrronium).
coordinated, to maintain adequate cardiac 
Use naloxone to reverse opioids.
 output and tissue perfusion.
Reduce ICP (mannitol).
 Common types of ventricular arrhythmias seen 
Warm patient.
 under anaesthesia:
Correct hyperkalaemia (dextrose, sodium
Ventricular premature contractions (VPCs)
bicarbonate, insulin; see Chapter 23).
Ventricular tachycardia
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation(ventricular
Ventricular fibrillation.
standstill):
Atropine
Causes:
Adrenaline
Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV).
Isoproterenol (if bradycardia refractory to
 Splenic trauma, torsion, tumour, splenomegaiy.
adrenaline or atropine).
Traumatic myocarditis.
Hypoxaemia and myocardial ischaemia
Atrial tachyarrhythmias
(hypotension, severe anaemia).
Hypercapnia and acid-base imbaiance.
Severe tachyarrhythmias greatly reduce cardiac
Electrolyte imbalance (hypokalaemia,
 output and tissue perfusion due to decreased
hypomagnesaemia).
time for diastolic filling, reduced ejection time
Drug effects (thiobarbiturates, halothane,
 and reduced time for coronary perfusion,
ketamine).
resulting in myocardial ischaemia.
Types of tachyarrhythmia seen under
Treatment: See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
anaesthesia include:
 Sinus tachycardia
Treat underlying problem (hypoxaemia,
 Atrial tachycardia
hypercapnia, electrolyte or acid-base
Atrial fibrillation.
imbalance, surgical correction).
318
Supplemental oxygen.
Myocardial depression (decreased contractility):
Alter anaesthetic protocol or stop anaesthetic
Drug-induced (thiopental, halothane)
drug administration.
Hypoxaemia or ischaemia-induced
Lidocaine bolus injection ± continuous rate
Acid-base disturbance (respiratory or
infusion.
 metabolic acidosis)
Procainamide.
Endotoxaemia
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ventricular
Electrolyte imbalance
fibrillation).
Cardiomyopathy
Catecholamine depletion.
Electrolyte abnormalities observed with
 Cardiac arrhythmias that decrease cardiac
:indino
electrocardiography
Bradycardia
Hyperkalaemia results in peaked T waves, QRS
AV block
Tachycardia
widening, P-R prolongation, loss of P waves,
loss of R wave amplitude, ST depression.
Atrial fibrillation
Ventricular tachycardia.
Hypokalaemia results in T wave fiattening/
 Obstruction of venous return:
inversion, prominent U wave, increased P wave,
P-R prolongation, ST depression.
 IPPV - increased intrathoracic pressure will
 decrease venous refurn to the heart,
Hypercalcaemia results in shortening of Q-T
reducing cardiac output 
 interval, shortened ST segment.
Pericardial effusion
Hypocalcaemia results in prolongation of Q-T
interval.
Tumours (especially mediastinal)
Tension pneumothorax
Hypermagnesaemia results in prolonged P-R
Surgical packing
 interval, widened QRS.
 Retraction of organs (cranial abdominal
Hypomagnesaemia results in increased P-R and
 Q-T intervals, myocardial irritability, potentiation 
surgery).
 Reflex hypotension (vagal reflex):
of digoxin toxicity.
一
Excessive traction or pressure on the eye or
viscera.
Hypotension
Treatment
Pathophysiology
See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
 Blood pressure is a measure of the force driving
 Reduce amount of injectable or inhalational
anaesthetics by administering additional
tissue perfusion.
analgesics with anaesthetic-sparing effects (mu
A mean arterial blood pressure of at least
60 mmHig is necessary for perfusion of vital
agonist opioids, ketamine, lidocaine).
 Correct absolute and relative hypovolaemia and
organs, such as the brain, hear and kidneys.
 provide for ongoing losses with crystaloids,
Hypoperfusion of vital organs and the
colloids or blood products.
extremities results in inadequate tissue delivery
 Administer an infusion of balanced, crystalloid,
of oxygen and removal of waste products, and
 isotonic solution during anaesthesia and surgery
clinical signs of shock and subsequent organ 
at 5-10 ml/kg/h.
dysfunction.
 Bolus intravenous administration of 20-30 ml/kg
of balanced, isotonic, crystalloid solution, or
Causes
 5-20 ml/kg of colloid solution (maximum 20 ml/kg/
 24 hours) to increase intravascular volume.
Hypovolaemia:
 Attempt crystalloid fluid bolus up to twice in
Haemorrhage
patients without underlying cardiac disease or
 Pre-existing fluid deficits
 oliguric or anuric renal failure.
 Fiuid loss due to evaporation and 'third
 Correct hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, acid-base 
spacing'
and electrolyte disturbances.
 Relative hypovolaemia due to vasodilation
Treat bradyarrhythmias (anticholinergics), and
Inadequate intraoperative fluid
tachyarrhythmias (treat cause of sympathetic
administration.
 nervous system stimulation, or beta blocker
Vasodilation:
therapy) that may be affecting cardiac output.
 Anaesthetic drug-induced -- barbiturates,
 Stop surgical retraction of viscera or the globe if
propofol, volatile agents, epidural
a vagal reflex occurs, and administer an
administration of local anaesthetics
anticholinergic.
 Severe metabolic or respiratory acidosis
Reduce tidal volume and peak airway pressure
Severe hypoxaemia
Endotoxaemia
 an inspiration:expiration ratio of 1:2 or 1:3 to
Septicaemia
 minimize the negative haemodynamic effects of 
 Anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions.
positive pressure ventilation.
319
chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
 Provide sympathomimetic support:
Note that early stages of hypoxaemia, hypercap-
 Anticholinergics (chronotropic)
nia, and metabolic acidosis result in sympathetic nerv-
Dobutamine (a beta-1 adrenergic agonist and
ous system stimuiation, tachycardia, peripheral
a positive inotrope)
vasoconstriction and hypertension. As the hypoxae-
 Dopamine (D:. D2, beta and alpha adrenergic
mia and acid-base disturbances become more se-
agonist causing positive inotropy.
vere, myocardial depression and vasodilation result
in hypotension and reduced cardiac output.
venous return)
Ephedrine (aipha and beta adrenergic
Treatment
agonist, provides inotropic and chronotropic
See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
 support, as well as vasoconstriction of great
Treat underlying cause, if possible.
veins to increase venous return)
Noradrenaline (mainly an alpha adrenergic
Beta adrenergic blockers (esmoiol, propranolol)
or ACE inhibitors (enalapril) may be required.
agonist, providing arterial vasoconstriction).
 Temporary increase in isoflurane or sevoflurane
Short-term treatment for refractory
levels during catecholamine release
hypotension with endotoxaemia
(phaeochromocytoma or adrenal gland
Phenylephrine (alpha adrenergic agonist
stimulation) or magnesium sulphate
providing arterial vasoconstriction).
 Acepromazine to treat hypertension from
Treatment for excessive alpha adrenergic
 blockade and vasodilation. Short-term use
(see Chapter 17).
only (<20 minutes)
 Adrenaline (aipha and beta agonist and
Haemorrhage
provides inotropic and chronotropic support,
as well as arterial vasoconstriction
 Haemorrhage results in a decrease in plasma
(vasodilation in the muscle beds).
volume and haemoglobin concentration, reducing
Excessive vasoconstriction will decrease
the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood.
splanchnic perfusion). Useful for
As the haemoglobin concentration declines, the
cardiopulmonary arrest or refractory
body responds by:
hypotension with endotoxaemia
Increasing cardiac output (increased heart 
Vasopressin (causes arterial
rate, increased systemic vascular resistance.
vasoconstriction and venoconstriction to
increased contractility and stroke volume)
increase venous return). Used for
Increasing uptake of oxygen (increased tidal
cardiopulmonary resuscitation or
volume and respiratory rate)
vasodifatory shock in patients that do not
Increasing extraction of oxygen within the
respond to dopamine, noradrenaline or
tissues (increased extraction ratio).
adrenaline (i.e. septic shock).
 Once maximal increases in ventifation, cardiac
output and oxygen extraction have occurred,
Hypertension
delivery of oxygen to the tissues becomes 
compromised, in spite of an increase in SNS
tone and cardiac output in response to
Arterial blood pressure is the most important
haemorrhage, oxygen content must be
determinant of left ventricular afterload and 
increased or signs of inadequate tissue delivery
cardiac work.
of oxygen (shock) will develop.
Hypertension results in increased myocardial
Total blood volume can be estimated as 60-70
work and increased myocardial oxygen demand.
ml/kg in cats and 80-90 ml/kg in dogs.
which could result in myocardial ischaemia and 
Replace blood lost with blood products (whole
cardiac arrhythmias.
blood, packed red blood cells or artificial 
Hypertension can result in retinopathy, blindness
haemoglobin solutions) when there has been a
and renal failure.
 Sudden hypertension during anaesthesia is an
loss of ≥20% of total blood volume in relatively
healthy patients, and ≥10% of total blood volume 
indication of SNS stimulation, and possible
in debilitated patients.
causes must be ruled out.
Blood loss of less than 20% in healthy animals
paieal aq ueo siewiue paieiigap ui %ol pue
Causes
with crystalloid or colloid solutions to restore
intravascular volume.
Pain,
 Replace estimated lost blood volume with
Mild hypoxaemia.
balanced electrolyte solution (e.g. lactated 
Hypercapnia.
 Ringer's (Hartmann's) at three times the
Metabolic acidosis.
volume lost.
 Underlying renal or cardiac disease.
Replace the fost volume with colloid solution
Phaeochromocytoma.
(etherified starch, dextrans, whole blood) at 
Stimulation of adrenal glands during surgery.
equal the volume lost.
Use of phenylephrine during ophthalmic
Hypertonic saline (7.5%) at 4 ml/kg.
surgery.
 See Chapter 16 for details of blood transfusion.
320
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
Miscellaneous complications
 Central cholinergic syndrome (excessive use of
atropine).
For information on miscellaneous complications, see
Ketamine-induced psychotomimetic effects.
Figure 29.3.
Opioid-induced dysphoria (most common with
mu agonists and butorphanol).
Excitement or dysphoria on recovery
Treatment
Causes
See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
Pain.
 Determine and treat underlying problem.
+
 Full urinary bladder.
Sedation with acepromazine. a benzodiazepine
Hypoxaemia.
or alpha-2 agonist.
Hypotension.
Naloxone reversal if opioid-induced dysphoria is
Metabolic or respiratory acidosis.
suspected.
Compllcaton
CaLses
Treatment-"
Excitement or dysphoria on 
Pain
 Treat underlying probtem
recovery
Hypoxaemia
 Sedation or tranquillization:
Hypotension
Acepromazine (0.01-0.05 mg/kg)
 Full urinary bladder
Diazepam or midazolam (0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
 Metabolic or respiratory acidosis
Medetomidine (1-5 μg/kg)
Drug-induced (mu agonist opioids, ketamine)
Buiorphanol or naloxone to reverse mu opiate effects
Pralonged recovery
Hypoventilation
 Correct underlying problems of hypothermia, hypotension,
Hypothermia
hypoxaemia
Hypotension
Reverse mu agonist opiates with butorphanol or nafoxone
Hypoxaenia
Administer intravenous tluids to improve renal and hepatic
Hypercarbia
 perfusion
] Metaboic acidosis
Reduce renal or hepatic function 
Hypothermia
 Redistriboution of heat from body core to
 periphery with vasodifation
premedication,nduction, surgery nd recovery periods
 Cold anaesthetic gases
Use ciculating warm water or warm air blankets 
Coid ambient temperature
Use warm intravenous and lavage tluids 
 Cold intravenous and surgical favage fluids
Reduce surgery time 
Open body cavities
seale fianooal pue Aiabins jo alneredwel luagwe eseaioul 
 CNS depression
Provide suppiemental oxygen in recovery to meet metabolic
Reduced muscle tone resulting in reduced
oxygen requirements that can greatly increase due to
 muscle heat generated
shivering
Prolonged anaesthesia
Hyperthermia
Thyroid storm
 Turn off supplemental heat 
Heavy-coated dog breeds
Administer room temperature or slighty cooler fluids
 Heavy drapes, heating blankets, heat lamps 
Alcohol t inguinal and axillary regions
 Tiletamine/zolazepam
Cool with a fan
 Administer acepromazine
Hypoglycaemia
Neonates and paediatrics
Supplement glucose in at-risk patients.
 Well controlled diabetics
Monitor blood glucose every 30-60 minutes during
Sepsis
anaesthesia and treat hypoglycaemia as it occurs
 Insulinoma :
Check for hypoglycaemia in a cases of prolonged recovery
from anaesthesia
Oliguria or anuria (urine
 Pre-existing renal disease
Fluid chalenge with balanced, isotonic crystalloid
production <0.5 ml/kg)
nadequate replacement of fluid deficits and
(20-30 ml/kg) or colloid (5-20 ml/kg) to replace tluid deficits
 ongoing losses
Diuretic administration (ie. furosemide)
Hypotension:
Dextrose or mannitol to cause an osmotic diuresis
Use of anti-prostaglandin drugs in the face of
Dopamine or dobutamine to increase cardiac output and.
! hypotension and renal hypoperusion 
 renal perfusion
Mu opioid agonists (rnorphine)
Myopathy
Poor positioning during surgery
Appropriatepadding and positioning,particularlywith large
Neuropathy
Inadequate padding of muscles and nerves on
 and giant-breed dogs
hard tables
 Reduce anaesthesia time
Prolonged duration of anaesthesia
 Monitor blood pressure and maintain normal blood pressure
Prolonged, severe hypotension
 during anaesthesia 
 Miscellaneous anaesthetic complications.
321
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies 
Hypothermia
Hyperthermia
Pathophysiology
Hyperthermia results in disruption of enzyme
activity, denaturation of proteins, coagulopathy
Hypothermia results in CNS depression.
bradycardia, hypotension, hypoventilation,
and cell death.
decreased basal metabolic rate, decreased urine
 Organs most susceptible to damage from
 production, decreased anaesthetic drug 
hyperthermia are the brain, heart, kidneys
requirements and decreased oxygen
 and liver.
Hyperthermia can be passive (due to excessive
requirements.
 patient heating from external sources) or active
 Hypothermia results in slowed metabolism of 
(fever, thyroid storm, malignant hyperthermia).
drugs and hypoventilation, delaying recovery
from injectable and volatile anaesthetics.
Hypothermia can result in a coagulopathy by
Causes
decreasing the activity of the enzymes
associated with the clotting cascade and
Thyroid storm.
decreasing platelet function.
Heavy-coated breeds.
Hypothermia results in intense shivering in the
Use of tiletamine/zolazepam (Telazol, Zoletil).
recovery period, increasing metabolic activity
Warm ambient temperature.
and tissue oxygen demand, and can result in 
 Large dogs and rebreathing systems that
hypoxaemia, myocardial ischaemia,
maintain humidity.
hypercapnia, metabolic acidosis and cardiac
arrhythmias.
Treatment and prevention
Hypothermia contributes to increased
postoperative infection rates, by suppressing
 Monitor body temperature, especially with 
immune function and by causing 
forced arm air blankets, since over-heating
thermoregulatory vasoconstriction, decreasing
is possible.
oxygen delivery to the wound.
 To prevent accidental skin burns provide
Hypothermia resuits in 'thermal discomfort' in the
insulation between warm water heating blankets
recovery period, which is an additional stressor
 and exposed skin.
for the animal.
Turn down or turn off heating blankets.
Hypothermia is neuroprotective and
 Administer room temperature or slightly cooler
cardioprotective and mild hypothermia can
fluids.
reduce intracranial pressure.
·
Apply alcohol to inguinal and axillary regions.
Cool with a fan.
Causes
Regularly service and maintain heating devices.
 Common anaesthetic complication due to
Hypoglycaemia
redistribution of heat from the body core to the
Because the CNS requires glucose as a major en-
periphery with vasodilation.
ergy source, hypoglycaemia during anaesthesia can
 Cold ambient temperature of operating room and
result in an unexplained increase in depth of anaes-
recovery areas and exposure of body cavities to
 thesia, tachycardia and hypertension, prolonged re-
room air.
covery or failure to recover from anaesthesia, and
Using cool fluids intravenously or for surgical
seizures or muscle tremors during recovery.
lavage.
All volatile anaesthetics decrease the normal
Causes
vasoconstrictive response to hypothermia and
 promote heat loss.
Hypoglycaemia is common in neonatal and paediat-
ric patients, but can also occur with well controlled
diabetics during fasting, and in patients with septicae-
Treatment
mia or insulinoma.
 Use circulating warm water or warm air blankets
 during surgery and recovery.
Treatment
Insulate patient with bubble packing, aluminium
foil and towels.
 Supplement glucose in neonates, paediatrics 
Surgical lavage with warm fluids.
and insulinoma patients by administering 5%
Reduce surgical time.
dextrose in sterile water (D5w) (not a volume
Increase ambient temperature of the operating
replacement fluid); 0or add 50 ml 50% dextrose
room and recovery room.
to 11 lactated Ringer's (Hartmann's) to provide
Warm intravenous fluids prior to administration.
a 2.5% dextrose solution for volume
 Reduce dose of volatile agent to avoid relative
replacement.
overdosage as hypothermia decreases
 Monitor blood glucose during anaesthesia and
anaesthetic requirements.
recovery in patients predisposed to
 Use heat and moisture exchangers (see
hypoglycaemia and supplement glucose as
Chapter 5).
necessary.
322
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
Myopathy or neuropathy
Causes
Pathophysiology
Pre-existing renal disease.
The main mechanism for development of myopathy
 Inadequate fluid replacement for deficits and
(myositis) under anaesthesia is hypoperfusion and
ongoing losses.
ischaemic damage due to prolonged compression,
Hypotension, particularly if severe or prolonged.
j0 aoe, ayi u sbnup upueibeisoid-jue jo esn
'uoisuaioday pabuoloid soypue bupped ajenbapeu!
hypotension and renal hypoperfusion.
The main mechanisms for perioperative
 peripheral neuropathies include:
Treatment
Stretch
 Compression
Balanced, isotonic, crystalloid intravenous fluid
Generalized ischaemia
challenge of 20-30 ml/kg/h if no underlying 
Metabolic derangement (diabetes mellitus,
cardiac disease.
severe anaemia)
Coloid administration at 5-20 ml/kg/h
 Surgical resection.
(maximum of 20 ml/kg/24 hours).
 buunp saaeu jo Anjui oi suojoeei jeuoxy
 Diuretic administration.
anaesthesia include:
 Dextrose or mannitol to create an osmotic
 Transient ischaemic nerve block - no.
diuresis.
structural nerve damage and lasts only
 Dopamine or dobutamine to increase cardiac
minutes
 output and improve renal perfusion.
Neuropraxia - demyelination of peripheral
fibres of the nerve trunk, recoverable in
Prolonged recovery
4-6 weeks
Axonotmesis -- complete disruption of the
Causes
axons within an intact nerve sheath.
recovery depends on regeneration of the
Hypoventilation will prolong recovery from
distal nerve and complete recovery is
volatile anaesthetics that are dependent upon
unlikely
exhalation for termination of effect.
Neurotmesis - complete nerve disruption,
 Hypercapnia, hypoxaemia, metabolic acidosis
surgical repair, if possible, wil return only
 and hypoglycaemia will cause CNS depression 
partia! function.
and delay recovery.
Hypotension results in decreased perfusion of
liver and kidneys, resulting in delayed
Causes
metabolism of anaesthetic drugs.
Poor positioning on surgical table (limbs in
 Hypothermia results in hypoventilation, and 
 also slowed metabolism of other anaesthetic
hyperextension).
drugs.
Inadequate padding of muscles and nerves.
Hepatic and renal disease can slow metabolism
Prolonged duration of anaesthesia.
 and excretion of drugs.
Prolonged or severe hypotension.
Most common in large-breed dogs.
Treatment
See Figure 29.6 for drug doses.
Treatment and prevention
Correct hypercapnia, hypoxaemia, acidosis,
 Prevention with adequate padding, careful
 hypoglycaemia and hypothermia.
positioning, reduced duration of anaesthesia and
Reverse respiratory depressant effects of mu
prevention of hypotension.
agonist opioids with butorphanol titrated to effect.
Treat with intravenous fluids, anti-inflammatory
 Maintain on intravenous fluids to maintain renal
drugs (steroids or non-steroidal anti-
and hepatic perfusion.
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)), analgesics,
sedatives, vasodilators.
Anaesthetic mishaps and accidents
Oliguria or anuria
Anaesthetic mishaps can be categorized as prevent-
Pathophysiology of oliguria and anuria under
able and unpreventable. Unpreventable mishaps in-
anaesthesia
clude idiosyncratic drug reactions. The vast majority
of accidents are preventable. and commonly due to
Urine production of <0.5 ml/kg/h is considered
human error, or equipment malfunctions.
inadequate.
The primary mechanism for oliguria or anuria
Common human errors
under anaesthesia is reduced perfusion of
the kidneys, and a reduction in glomerular
 Unrecognized breathing circuit disconnection.
filtration rate.
Anaesthesia machine not set up properly:
323
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
 Lack of adequate training and familiarity with
anaesthetic equipment
Recognition of anaphylaxis from clinical signs 
No machine check prior to inducing
Dyspnoea, decreased pulmonary compliance, cedema
anaesthesia.
Tachypnoea, hypoxaemia, tachycardia, arrhythmias
Administration errors:
Hypotension, urticaria
 Drug interactions with concurrent
medications
 Stop administration of antigen and anaesthetic drugs
Wrong dose (underdosage, relative or
Maintain airway and 1PPV with 100% oxygen
 absolute overdosage)
Wrong route of administration 
Wrong syringe (always label syringes)
Adrenaline 0.01-0.2 mg/kg f.v./i.o./i.t.
Wrong drug.
Antihistamine (diphenhydramine 2.2 mg/kg i.v.)
Airway mismanagement:
Inadequate ventilation (wrong IPPV setting)
Begin intravascular volume expansion
intubation
 Balanced, isotonic crystalloid
 Premature extubation
20-90 ml/kg/h (dogs); 20-70 ml/kg/h (cats)
Colloid 5-20 ml/kg 
Inadequate oxygen flowmeter settings
Laryngeal injuries - vocal fold paralysis,
1
.★
granuloma, arytenoid dislocation
Catecholamine infusions:
Tracheal perforation
Dopamine 5-10 pg/kg/minute
 Chemical tracheitis (inadequately rinsed
 Bronchodilator: adrenaline 
tubes after cleaning with a chemical
Corticosteroids (dexamethasone, methylprednisolone)
disinfectant)
Tracheal ischaemic necrosis or rupture.
 Algorithm for anaphylaxis during anaesthesia.
 Fluid mismanagement:
i.o. = Intraosseous; i.t. = Intratracheal;
Fluid overloading
1.v. = Intravenous.
Wrong type of fluid
Intravenous line disconnection
Hypersensitivity reactions are divided into four
 Not priming administration set and fluid line.
types:
Burns:
Heating pads (never use electrical heating
Type I (immediate)
pads or push any heating blanket into body
Type Il (cytotoxic)
with positioning pads)
Type Il (immune complex)
Radiant heat lamps
Type IV (delayed, cell-mediated).
Airway burns (some types of lasers).
Corneal abrasions or ulcers.
Type I (immediate) hypersensitivity reactions are
Post-anaesthetic blindness or renal failure
the most common and life-threatening hypersensitiv-
secondary to hypotension and inadequate 
ity reactions that occur in the peri-anaesthetic period.
cardiopulmonary support:
 An example of a type Il hypersensitivity reaction that
might occur during anaesthesia is haemolytic trans-
 anaesthesia and inadequate perfusion of the
fusion reactions.
optic nerve or kidneys.
Anaphylaxis (type I hypersensitivity) reaction
(mediated by lgE)
Common equipment malfunction
Anaphylaxis is an exaggerated response to an
 Breathing circuit disconnected or not set up
allergen and appears within minutes of exposure
correctly.
Oxygen flowmeter turned off.
to the antigen in a sensitized patient; it is most
commonly seen with antibiotic administration in
Monitoring device failure.
the peri-anaesthetic period.
Ventilator failure.
Previous exposure results in production of
Unfilled or overfilled volatile anaesthetic 
allergen-specific IgE antibodies which cause
vaporizers
mast cell and basophil activation and the
Exhausted absorber granules.
release of chemical mediators, including
 Stuck or missing one-way valves.
leukotrienes, histamine, prostaglandins,
kinins and platelet-activating factor, on
subsequent exposure.
Anaesthetic emergencies
 Anaphylaxis manifests as urticaria, angioedema,
laryngeal cedema, pulmonary oedema,
Anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions
bronchoconstriction, hypoxaemia, vasodilation,
(type I - immediate)
increased membrane permeability,.
For information on anaphylactic reactions see
hypovolaemia, hypotension, tachycardia,
Figure 29.4.
arrhythmias, shock and death.
324
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
Anaphylactoid (type I hypersensitivity) reaction
 Discontinue drug administration and al!
(not mediated by IgE or other antigen/antibody
anaesthetic agents.
interactions)
Administer supplemental oxygen in order to
maintain normal oxygen saturation
 Anaphylactoid reactions manifest similarly to
(endotracheal intubation and 100% FO: may be 
anaphylactic reactions, and urticaria,
required to maintain oxygenation).
angioedema, laryngeal oedema. pulmonary
Intravenous fluids up to shock rate (see
oedema, bronchoconstriction, hypoxaemia,
Chapter 16).
vasodilation, increased membrane permeability.
Adrenaline for bronchodilation and 
hypovolaemia, hypotension, tachycardia,
vasoconstriction.
arrhythmias, shock and death can occur.
Antihistamine: diphenhydramine.
Anaphylactoid reactions do not require previous
Aminophylline for bronchodilation.
exposure to the antigen.
Steroids: methylprednisolone or
Anaphylactoid reactions are more common than
dexamethasone.
anaphylactic reactions in the peri-anaesthetic
Sodium bicarbonate 0.5-1 mmol/kg for severe
period.
metabolic acidosis.
 The triggering drug directly causes mast cell
 degranulation or causes activation of 
Cardiopulmonary arrest
complement.
See Figures 29.5 and 29.6 for information on cardio-
This can occur with any drug, but has been
pulmonary arrest (CPA).
reported to occur with opioids, muscle relaxants,
 NSAiDs, dextrans, thiopental, propofol and
radiocontrast agents.
What is cardiopulmonary arrest?
Treatment of anaphylactoid and anaphylactic
Sudden, unexpected cessation of functional
reactions
ventilation and circulation.
See Figure 29.6 for drug dosages.
Cardiac arrest and respiratory arrest may occur
simultaneously, but if respiratory arrest occurs
 Anaphylactic and anaphlylactoid reactions are
first, cardiac arrest will immediately follow unless 
clinically indistinguishable, both life-threatening.
there is rapid resuscitative intervention to restore
and treated in the same way.
 circulation and ventilation.
ginBCLS
Breathir
Circulation
Veniricular fibrilkation
Asystoie
Pulseless electrical activity(PEA)
Continue BCLS
UabAxo%oouuaAed
vontiltionwith100%cxygen
Conlinue BCLS
Continue BCLS.
Hypervs
Hyperventlation wih 100% cxygen
Irtravenous access
Intravenous access
Adrenaline i.v.i.o.: 0.01-0.1 mg/kg
Continue BCLS
Treat cause:hypoxaemia, acidosis
Debrillae eaiy and as irequenlyas needed
Adrenaline i.v/io: 0.01-0.1 mg/kg
Actrenaling (subsequent deses)
Adrenalineiv/.o.0.01-0.1mg/kg
0.1-0.2 n
t.t:0.1-0.2mgkg
Continue BCLS
i.v/i.0./i.1.
Continue BCES
Adrenaline (subsequent doses)
Delibrilate at 4 jkg
Isoproterenol
3060 seconds afer lidocaine
Refractory bradycardia or asystote
0.10.2 mg/kg f.y/i.o./i.t.
Repeat every 3-5 minutes
Continue BCLS
Adrenaline (second and subsequent doses
0.tm0.2 mgkg iyio.At, repeat every
 Defibrillate at 4 jkg
CPR algorithm for pulseless cardiopulmonary arrest. BCLS = Basic cardiac ife support; i.0.
=Intraosseous;
i.t. = Intratra.cheal; i.v. = Intravenous.
325
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
Indicatlons"
Possible sideeffects
Atropine
Bradycardia
0.01-0.02 mg/kg i.v.
Tachycardia
Atrioventricular (AV) block
 Central cholinergic syndrome
Sinus arrest
Ventricuiar asystole
Aminophylline 
Bronchospasm
Dogs: 2-6 mg/kg i.m., $.c., or siowly
Tachycardia
Asthma
 i.v. (over 15 minutes)
Arrmhythmias
Anaphytaxis
Cats: 2-4 mg/kg i.m, s.c. orly
Hypotension
Aibutero!
Bronchospasm
0.15 mg/kg inhaled
Tachycardia
Asthma
Arrhythmias
Anaphylaxis
Hypotension
Calcium
 Known hypocalcaemia
0.1-0.3 ml/kg 10% CaCf, slowly i.v.
Bradycardia
Calcium channel blocker overdosage
0.5-1 ml/kg of 10% calcim
Arrhythmias
guconate, slowly i.v.
Coricosteraids
Anti-inffammation
Dexamethasone: 0.5-1 mg/kg i.v.
Infection 
Stabiization of blood vessels
Methylprednisoloe: 20 mg/kg i.v.
Gastrointestinal or renal ischaemia 
Analgesia
Diphenhydramine
{Antihistamine
 2.2 mg/kg i.v. or i.m.
Hypotension if given rapidly intravenously
Dobutamine
Hypotension
 2-10 μg/kg/minute i.v.
 Fachycardia
 Myocardial dysfunction
Arhythmias
Dopamine
 Renal failure
2-20 μg/kg/minute i.v.
Tachycardia
Hypotension
Arrhythmias
Myocardial dysfunction
Vasodilation
Ephedrine
Hypotension
0.03-0.06 mg/kg i.v.
Tachycardlia
Arrhythmias
Adrenaline
Hypotension
0.01-0.2 mg/kg i.v/f.o.fi.t.
Tachycardia
Refractory bradycardia
0.01-0.03 ug/kg/minute
Arrhythmias
Anaphylaxis
Cardiopulmonary arrest
Esmolol
Beta blocker
 50-200 μg/kg/minute i.v.
Hypotension
Hypertension
Tachycardia
Furosemide
Diuretic
1-2 mg/kg i.v.
Excessive diuresis
 Pulmonary oedema
Hypokalaemia
Cerebral oedema
Laryngeal cedema
Glycopyrronium
Bradycardia
0.01 mg/kg i.v.
Tachycardia
Isoproterenol
Refractory bradycardia
0.01-0.1 μg/kg/minute i.v.
Hypotension
Ventricular asystoie
Lidocaire
Vertricular premature contractions 
Dogs: 1-2 mg/kg iv:
Bradycardia
Ventricular tachycaroia
20-100 μg/kg/minute i..
Hypotension
Cats:0.25-0.75 mg/kg, slowly i.v.
Seizures
Magnesium.
Given with: prolonged cardiopuimonary
 30 mg/kg i.v. over 10 minutes
Hypotension
suiphate
arrest or intractable ventricular fiorllation
CNS depression
Procainamide
Ventricular premature contractions
Dogs: 10-20 mg/kg i.v;
 Bradycardia
Ventricufar tachycardia
25-50 ug/kg/minute i.v.
Hypotension 
 entricular fiorilation 
Cats: 8-20 mg/kg i.m, or s.0.
Seizures
Terbutaline
Bronchospasm
Dogs: 0.01 mg/kg i.v.
 Tachycardia 
}Asthma
 Cats: 0.01 mg/kg s.c.
:Hypotension
Anaphylaxis
Arrhythmias
Sodium 
Metabolic acidosis
0.5 mmol/kg i.v. over 20-30 minutes
Metabolic alkalosis
bicarbanaie
During CPR:
Respiratory arrest if given too quickly
· li pre-existing metabolic acidosis 
Hyperosmolality
 >10 mminutes of CPR
Vasopressin
Vasodilatory shock (sepsis)
 0.1-0.6 IU/kg once i.v.
Severe vasoconstriction
Patients in ventricfarfibriftation
Arrhythmias
unresponrsive to defibrilation or adrenaline
 Emergency drugs used during general anaesthesia in cats and dogs. CPR = Cardiopuirmonary resuscitation;
i.m. = Intramuscular; i.o. = Intraosseous; i.t. = Intratracheal; i.v. Intravenous; s.c. = Subcutaneous.
326
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
 CPA results in decreased delivery of oxygen to
Signs of cardiopulmonary arrest
the tissues and decreased removal of carbon
These include:
dioxide. The anaerobic conditions result in
 increased production of lactate and hydrogen
 Collapse, loss of consciousness, no skeletal
muscle tone
lons. A severe oxygen debt and mixed respiratory
and metabolic acidosis quickly develop.
Loss of palpable central pulses, such as the
 Irreversible neurological damage will occur
femoral pulse
within 3 minutes of depriving the brain of oxygen
Lack of heart sounds detectable by auscultation
("three minute emergency').
Agonal gasping or absent ventilation
Multiple organ failure (cardiac, renal, hepati,
Fixed, dilated pupils (occurs within 45 seconds 
etc.) is possible.
of arrest)
 Reperfusion injury is an inevitable sequela to
Cyanotic or pale mucous membranes (capillary
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), and can 
refill time and mucous membrane colour can
worsen damage to vital tissues.
remain normal for up to 2 minutes after cardiac
arrest, depending on the underlying cause)
Goals of CPR
 Abnormal ECG
 Note: pulseless electrical activity (PEA) can
 Restore and maximize coronary and cerebral
perfusion.
has occurred.
Restore normal cardiac rhythm.
Restore effective respiratory exchange.
Prevention and readiness
Prevent irreversible neurological damage.
 Monitoring and prevention of hypoxaemia,
Prevent irreversible damage to heart, kidneys
hypercapnia, hypovolaemia, hypotension and
and other vital organs.
hypothermia of patients in the intensive care unit 
Prevent further arrest.
(ICU) and patients under anaesthesia.
 CPR and emergency cardiac care should be
Fully stocked emergency cart.
considered at any time a patient cannot
Dosage wall chart.
adequately oxygenate or perfuse vital organs.
Equipment: airway suction, endotracheal tubes
and laryngoscope, tracheotomy kit, 100% oxygen,
Common causes of cardiopulmonary arrest in
the peri-anaesthetic period
means of ventilation, intravenous or intraosseous
catheters, fluids, chest tube placement kit,
thoracotomy kit and electrical defibrillator.
Hypoxaemia.
Hypercapnia.
Basic cardiac life support
Eiectrolyte abnormalities (hyperkalaemia).
The ABCs of CPR are the procedures required to sus-
Acid-base abnormalities.
 tain artificial ventilation and coronary and cerebral
Hypotension, hypovolaemia, shock.
 perfusion while you correct the underlying problem
Hypothermia.
 and include:
Autonomic nervous system (ANS) imbalance
(vagal stimulation).
Airway management 
Sensitization of the myocardium to
Breathing
catecholamines (xylazine, halothane).
Circulation.
Pre-existing cardiac disease.
Anaesthetic agent overdose.
Airway management (A):
Severe trauma, systemic or metabolic disease.
Significant underlying cardiac or respiratory
Endotracheal intubation is the most common
disease.
technique to obtain control of the airway.
Use of a laryngoscope will greatly facilitate 
 Signs of impending cardiac arrest
visualization of the glottis and will avoidi
These include:
 oesophageal intubation.
Suction may be required to remove blood,
 Changes in respiratory rate, depth and pattern,
saliva, gastrointestinal contents, mucus, pus.
such as bradypnoea or agonal gasping
Weak, irregular pulses, tachycardia, ventricular 
been correctly placed, secure in place and
premature contractions
inflate the cuff to ensure there is an airtight seal
Bradycardia, particularly in patients who are
between the tracheal mucosa and the
hypoxaemic prior to CPA
endotracheal tube.
Hypotension, as well as poor response to
When attempting intubation of an animal when 
sympathomimetic agents
working alone, place the animal in dorsal 
 Cyanotic or grey mucous membranes
recumbency to aid visualization and
Hypothermia, despite attempts to warm the
endotracheal tube placement.
patient
A tight-fitting facemask can be used in animals
 Sudden and unexplained increase in depth of
that are difficult or impossible to intubate
anaesthesia.
orotracheally, or if you are awaiting help.
327
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
Laryngeal mask airways, used commonly in
 External chest compressions are attempted at a
humans, can aid in ventilation of animals difficult
rate of 60-120/minute.
to intubate.
 Effective perfusion of the heart and brain are
 Tracheotomy is sometimes necessary in patients
best achieved when chest compression
that cannot be intubated due to anatomical
consumes 50% of the duty cycle, with the
difficulties or obstructions blocking the airway
remaining 50% devoted to the relaxation phase,
(e.g. bones, balls).
allowing blood to flow into the chest and heart.
 Percutaneous tracheal cannulation:
The goal of chest compressions is to maximize
Used to provide oxygen when endotracheal
vital organ perfusion by maximizing the force 
intubation or tracheotomy cannot be performed 
and rate of compressions.
 Involves inserting a long. over-the-needle
 catheter between the tracheal rings, and
Mechanism of blood flow during CPR: Two theo-
insuifflation of oxygen through the catheter
eul wsjueuoaw aul se pasodoid uaag aaey sa
 during chest compressions
 creates forward blood flow with external chest com-
 This technique does not allow positive
pressions in CPR.
pressure ventilation; it does provide some
oxygenation during resuscitation.
Cardiac pump theory:
 If positive pressure ventilation is not possible 
 during resuscitation, oxygenation may still be
 Compression of the chest wall over the heart
 adequate as long as effective chest 
directly compresses the heart chambers to
 compressions are administered, along with
Create forward blood flow.
supplemental oxygen.
This technique involves placing the patient in 
right lateral recumbency and compressing the
Breathing (B):
chest wall directly over the heart.
This technique is most likely to be important in 
 Assess pulse after giving two breaths; if no pulse.
animals <10 kg with compliant chest walls (cats,
 continue ventilation and begin chest compressions.
 small dogs, rabbits, ferrets).
 Ideally, intermittent positive pressure ventilation 
This technique is not as effective in patients with
(IPPV) is administered with 100% oxygen
non-compliant chest walls (e.g. patients with 
whenever possible, to maximize oxygen delivery
to the tissues.
pneumothorax or hydrothorax), obese animals or
 animals with barrel-shaped chests (e.g.
 Commonly performed using an anaesthetic
Bulldogs). Placing these patients in dorsal
circuit and reservoir bag.
recumbency and compressing the sternum will 
The reservoir bag should be 6-10 times the patient's
improve the efficacy of this method.
tidal volume; tidal volume is 10-15 ml/kg.
 Bag-valve devices (paediatric and adult sizes).
Thoracic pump theory:
also called 'Ambu' bags, can be used along
with supplemental oxygen (can deliver up to
 According to this theory, positive intrathoracic
100% oxygen).
 IPPV should be administered at a rate of
pressure created with chest wal compression
increases pressure in all intrathoracic structures
 20-40/minute (1:1 ratio with compressions).
 Airway pressure during IPPV should be
(including the heart and major arteries), creating 
forward blood flow.
<30 cmH,O to avoid barotrauma and excessive
 The great veins collapse and the atrioventricular
decreases in venous return to the heart, but may
valves close to prevent retrograde blood flow.
need to be higher in patients with poor
 This technique is most important in animals ≥10 kg
pulmonary and thoracic compliance.
Efficacy of ventilation is assessed by observing
and animals with poorly compliant chest walls.
 This technique also becomes more important 
 the degree of chest expansion, mucous membrane
than the cardiac pump techniques as CPR
colour improvement and airway resistance.
An end-tidal carbon dioxide of >14 mmHg
continues, as the heart becomes less compliant
during prolonged CPR,
indicates good CPR technique. Pulse oximetry
 When using this technique, it is important to 
jo Aenb jood jo asnoeg uoouny pou Aew
maximize high intrathoracic pressure using the 
non-existent pulse.
following:
 Jugular vein blood gas analysis is more
 Place the patient in dorsal recumbency,
 indicative of body state compared with arterial
support with sandbags and compress over
 gas analysis during CPA.
sternum.
Circulation (C):
 Place the patient in lateral recumbency and 
compress the chest wall at the widest point of
 Reassess circulation after intubation and a few
the ribs.
seconds of IPPV in order to ascertain if the 
Use simultaneous chest compressions and
patient is stil in cardiac arrest.
IPPV.
Chest compressions must be begun as early as
 Restrict abdominal movement with
possible and should not be stopped, if possible,
 continuous abdominal compression or by
during resuscitation.
using abdominal wrapping.
328
 Keep airway pressure low between chest
Atropine:
compressions (i.e. no IPPV between
compressions) to aid venous return.
·
 For severe bradycardia or asystole.
Blocks vagal reflexes.
Determinants of vital organ perfusion during CPR:
Isoproterenol:
 During conventional (closed chest) CPR,
cerebral and myocardial flows are less than 5%
For refractory bradycardia or asystole.
of the pre-arrest values and renal and hepatic
blood flow is 1-5% of pre-arrest values.
Dopamine:
 Cerebral perfusion pressure and cerebral blood 
flow are dependent on the gradient between the
For shock, hypotension.
carotid arterial pressure and the intracranial
 If patient has bradycardia unresponsive to 
pressure during systole (during thoracic
anticholinergics.
compression),
The greater the pressure generated during chest
Dobutamine:
compression, the greater the cerebral perfusion
 pressure, resuiting in improved cerebral perfusion.
 For shock. hypotension.
 Myocardial perfusion pressure and myocardial
blood flow are dependent on the pressure
Sodium bicarbonate:
 gradient between the aorta and right atrium
during diastole (release phase of thoracic
 Not routinely used during CPR, unless it is used 
compression), so allowing adequate time for
to treat a pre-existing metabolic acidosis,
venous return is critical.
hyperkalaemia or Addisonian crisis.
NaHCO, is also administered after 10 minutes of
 Force, rate and duration of chest compression
CPR, since the patient is almost certainly
during CPR will determine the effectiveness of
 organ perfusion during CPR.
acidotic at this point.
Irrespective of the mechanism of forward blood
flow during CPR, increasing the force and rate of
Calcium:
chest compressions will significantly increase
 Not routinely used during CPR unless there is a pre-
the arterial pressure.
existing hypocalcaemia, hyperkalaemia or calcium
 Detection of a central pulse, end-tidal carbon 
channel blocker toxicity.
dioxide >14 mmHg (1.9 kPa), pupil constriction,
return of reflexes and flow on Doppler probe pliaced 
Magnesium suiphate:
on the eye are signs of good CPR technique.
 Given with prolonged CPA or intractable
Advanced cardiac life support
ventricular fibrillation.
These (DEF) are the procedures that specifically treat
Lidocaine:
 the cause of arrest and restore normal cardiac function:
Drugs
For ventricular tachycardia.
Electrocardiography
Cats may be more sensitive to lidocaine and are
.
Fluid therapy.
usually given low doses.
 Lidocaine is also a free radical scavenger, and
Drugs (D): See Figure 29.6 for drug doses.
may offset some of the reperfusion injury.
Adrenaline:
Mannitol:
 For asystole and bradycardia unresponsive to
anticholinergics.
 Osmotic diuretic sometimes given during and 
Causes vasoconstriction, offsetting the
after CPR to help offset the development of
vasodilation and pooling of blood that occurs 
cerebral oedema in the resuscitafed patient.
with cardiac arrest.
 Positive inotrope increases cardiac contractility.
Steroids:
Improves cerebral and cardiac perfusion, due to
beta-2 agonist effects.
 Occasionally given after resuscitation to prevent
Positive chronotrope and stimulates sinoatrial
the development of cerebral oedema and offset
node.
the effects of shock and reperfusion injury.
Vasopressin:
Routes of administration:
 Indicated in patients with vasodilatory shock,
Central venous catheter:
 and patients in ventricular fibrillation who are
unresponsive to defibrillation or adrenaline.
A cranial vena cava or jugular catheter is the
 Dosage is unknown for animals, but the 
best route for administration of drugs in an
standard human dosage is approximately
arrested patient, as this results in delivery of the
0.1-0.6 units/kg i.v., once only.
drug close to the heart.
329
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
intratracheal:
Puiseless electrical activity: This occurs when there
Several drugs, such as adrenaline, atropine,
tivity to cause adequate cardiac output.
vasopressin and lidocaine, can be given via the
Causes of PEA include:
endotracheal tube.
The dose used is doubled and it is administered
Predisposing factors: hypovolaemia, hypoxaemia,
 into the distal trachea via a sterile canine
acidosis, hypothermia, hyper- or hypokalaemia,
urinary catheter.
tension pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade
 Once the breathing system is reattached and
There may be a depletion of myocardial oxygen
IPPV begins, the drug is rapidly dispersed
 and ATP stores. resulting in inability of the heart
throughout the lungs, and is rapidly absorbed.
 muscle to contract.
Intraosseous catheter (tibia, radius or uina):
Treatment of PEA involves:
 Administration of drugs via this route can be as
 Basic cardiac life support (Airway, Breathing,
fast as through a central venous catheter. The 
Circulation)
 medullary cavity does not collapse during CPA.
Adrenaline
Atropine
Peripheral venous catheter:
 Dexamethasone
 Electrical defibriliation.
 lt can take up to 2 minutes for drugs
administered via a peripheral catheter to reach
Ventricuiar asystole: This is the absence of electrical
the heart during CPR.
 and mechanical cardiac activity - the flat-line' on the
A flush of 10-30 ml of saline may be necessary
 ECG. Causes of ventricular asystole include:
for the drug to reach the heart.
 Occasionally, surgical cut-down to the vein may
 Increased vagal tone
 be attempted in order to isolate and catheterize
Oculocardiac reflex
the vein.
Vasovagal response to manipulation of
abdominal viscera
Intracardiac:
Hyperkalaemia
Severe hypoxaemia.
Direct injection of drugs into the heart chamber
 is always indicated during open-chest CPR.
Treatment of ventricular asystole invoives:
 During closed-chest CPR, this technique is only
used if there is no existing venous catheter or if 
 Basic cardiac life support
 intratracheal administration has faiied.
 Adrenaline
 This technique is associated with several
Atropine.
disadvantages:
Chest compressions must be terminated
Ventricular fibrillation:
while the intracardiac injection is attempted 
 Risk of laceration of coronary arteries or
Chaotic, disorganized, ectopic venticular activity
lung tissue
resulting in sustained systole.
 Injection of drug into the heart wall, rather
 Because the activity is disorganized, no effective
than the heart chamber, can result in
 cardiac output occurs.
 intractable ventricular fibrillation.
Since there is no diastolic period in ventricular
fibrilation, no myocardial perfusion can occur 
Intralingual:
 and the myocardium is very rapidly depleted of
its ATP stores.
Aoa u! pesn uello sl onbjuyoal lenbuljenul aul 
smail mammals (mice, rats) and in neonates
 Causes of ventricular fibrillation include:
(puppies and kittens).
There is a rich vascular plexus at the base of the
 Predisposing factors: hypovolaemia,
tongue, and drugs injected at this site can be
hypoxaemia, acidosis, hypothermia, hyper- or
rapidly absorbed.
hypokalaemia
 Frequently the end result of severe multisystem
Electrocardiography (E): Placement of ECG leads
dysfunction.
is important for identification of the arrhythmia that
Treatment of ventricular fibrillation involves:
therapy. Common arrest arrhythmias in veterinary
 Basic cardiac life support
patients include:
Electrical DC countershock with a defibrillator, as
Pulseless electrical activity (PEA) (also know as
 soon as ventricular fibrillation is identified; apply
electromechanical dissociation (EMD) or
countershocks very closely together
pulseless idioventricular rhythm)
 Fibrillation results in rapid depletion of cardiac
Ventricular asystole
ATP stores, so rapid correction wili be more
Ventricular fibrillation.
likely to result in a successful outcome
330
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
 Defibrillate during expiration, when lungs are at
 Severe hypotension due to drug
their smalest, to minimize the chance of burning
overdosage.
lung tissue and decrease resistance to flow of
the countershock
Signs of successfu! resuscitation include the
 Pharmaceutical treatment can include:
following:
 Adrenaline (may change “fine' fibrillation 
to 'coarse' fibrilation, which is easier to
 Decreased pupil size (from fixed and dilated)
convert)
Return of the pupillary light reflex and palpebral
Atropine
reflex
Lidocaine.
 Return of spontaneous ventilation
 Return of airway protective reflexes.
Fluid administration (F):
Post-resuscitative life support
 Shock volumes are only administered if CPA was
due to or preceded by severe volume depletion
 Post-resuscitative life support measures are.
(haemorrhage, severe dehydration, anaphylactic
undertaken to optimize cardiac output, blood
or distributive shock):
90 ml/kg/h in dogs
volume, blood pressure, tissue perfusion,
一
60 ml/kg/h in cats.
oxygenation, oxygen-carrying capacity,
acid-base and electrolyte balance and
 CPA results in a relative vascular volume loss as
 organ function.
severe vasodilation results in pooling of blood in
Monitor electrolytes, acid-base status, central
the periphery and decreased venous return.
Fluid rates used during CPR are:
venous pressure, body temperature and urine
output and provide supportive measures to
 30 ml/kg/h in dogs
 maintain homeostasis of these parameters.
20 ml/kg/h in cats.
 Administer supplemental oxygen: the
 Many types of fluids commonly found in
successfully resuscitated patient is likely to have
veterinary practice can be used, including 
lactated Ringer's solution, 0.9% NaCl, other
pulmonary contusions, pulmonary oedema,
pneumothorax, cerebral oedema and/or cardiac
crystalloids, colloids or whole blood.
 Avoid fluids containing glucose (such as D5W)
 arrhythmias. Oxygen will help to offset some of
these problems.
as these have been associated with poorer
 Maximize oxygen-carrying capacity and tissue
neurological recovery and outcome.
delivery of oxygen by maintaining
Open-chest CPR versus closed-chest CPR:
normovolaemia, normotension and adequate
haemoglobin concentration.
Closed-chest CPR will, at most, generate approxi-
 Maintenance of adequate blood pressure may
mately 20-30% of the normal cardiac output, while
 open-chest CPR will generate 60-80% of the normal
require inotropic support agents: dobutamine,
dopamine. adrenaline infusions may be
cardiac output.
 indicated in the post-resuscitation period.
 Nutritional support should always be considered
Indications for open-chest CPR:
in the post-resuscitation period.
 No palpable femoral pulses within 5-10 minutes
of beginning basic cardiac life support with
Cerebral resuscitation
external chest compressions.
No return of spontaneous cardiac contraction
Rapid restoration of cerebral perfusion and
after 10 minutes of basic and advanced CPR,
 oxygenation is critical for effective cerebral
despite generating good palpable pulses.
resuscitation.
Chest cavity or abdomen already exposed
 Cerebral oedema, hypoxaemia, hypoventilation
(thoracotomy or laparotomy).
and increased ICP are all possible sequelae to
Any conditions that interfere with generation of
 CPA due to pralonged cerebral hypoxia and
high intrathoracic pressure, such as:
post-resuscitation reperfusion injury.
 Pneumothorax, pleural effusion, or any
 Maximizing mean arterial pressure while
severe chest pathology
minimizing increases in intracranial pressure is
Diaphragmatic hernia
necessary to maintain adequate cerebral
Flail chest
 perfusion pressure.
Very large or obese animals (very non-
 A high-normal perfusion pressure can
compliant chests)
 augment collateral cerebral blood flow and
Severe pericardial effusion
has been shown to result in improvement in
Tracheal or bronchial disruption
neurological function.
Conditions associated with low systemic
 Mean arterial pressure should be maintained
 arterial and venous pressures (poor venous 
between 70 and 80 mmHg. but higher mean 
return):
arterial pressure may be required to maintain
 Severe haemorrhage
cerebral perfusion if there is a pre-existing
 Septic, anaphylactic or distributive shock
increased ICP (i.e. trauma, tumour).
331
41
Chapter 29 Anaesthetic complications, accidents and emergencies
 Adequate volume loading and sympathomimetic
References and further reading
 support may be required to maintain cerebral 
Beale RJ. Hollenberg SM, Vincent JL and Parrillo JE (2004) Vasopressin 
perfusion.
 anf inotropic support in septic shock: an evidence based review.
Maintaining a normal haemoglobin concentration 
Critical Care Medlicine 32(11). S455-465
 and oxygen saturation is critical post-CPA. It is 
Cole SG, Otto CM and Hughes D (2002) Cardiopuimonary cerebral
resuscitation in small animals - a clinical practice review (part 1).
imperative to avoid global tissue hypoxia and 
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 12(4). 261-267
worsening of the increased ICP and neurofogical
damage.
resuscitation in small animals - a clinical practice review (part 2).
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 13(1).13-23
 Slight hyperventilation may also be indicated for
Den Ouden DT and Meinders AE (2005) Vasopressin: physiology and
 24-48 hours, as mild hypocarbia will decrease
clinical use in patients with vasodilatory shock: a review. The
Nethertands Journal of Medicine 63(1): 4-13
cerebral blood flow, offsetting elevations in ICP.
Holmes CL, Patel RM, Russell JA and Walley KR (2001) Physiology of 
 Steroids and mannitol are administered to offset 
vasopressin retevant to management of septic shock. Chest 120,
the reperfusion injury and decrease any cerebral
989-1002
Macintire DK, Drobatz KJ, Haskins S and Saxon WD (2004) Manual of
oedema.
Publishers.Ames,fowa
Furosemide may be administered to offset
 Stoelting RK (1999) Pharmacology & Physiology in Anesthetic Practice.
cerebral oedema.
 3rd edn. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia
Keep head slightly elevated and avoid jugular
Tranguilli, WJ (2006) Lumb and Jones Veterinary Anesthesia and
Anaigesia4thedn.lackwellPublishersmeslwa
compression to avoid increased ICP.
Wingfield WE and Raffe MR (2002) The Veterinary ICuU Book. Teton
Monitor for and control seizures.
NewMedia, Jackson, Wyoming
332
Page numbers in italics indicate figures
Allodynia 82
 Alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonists
blocking of stress response 275
ABC in cardiopuimonary resuscitation 327-8
co-administration of atropine 124
Accidents 323-4
contraindications 124
ACE inhibitors, pre-anaesthetic assessment 10
effects on body systems 123-4
Acepromazine
general anaesthesia following 123 
anti-arrhythmic effects 215, 259
patient selection 124
anti-emetic action 91. 122
reversal with atipamezole 124
Boxer sensitivity 122
sedation 122
combinations 
use in geriatric patients 307
anaesthesia 141
 use in paediatric patients 299
premedication/sedation 126,128 129, 130. 208, 212.
221,222,226, 228,250, 263
 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) scale of physical 
comparisonwithmedetomidine
129
status 6
effects on tear production.
186
and premedication/sedation 127-30
haemodynamic effects 208
Amethocaine as analgesic 188
neuroleptanaigesia 122
Y-Aminobutyric acid see GABA
neurological effects 287
Aminophylline 226.326
pharmacology 121-2
Amiodarone 202
postoperative 197
Amitryptiline29t
premedication 128,190,249,250,298-9
Amlodipine 214
sedation 16, 93, 121-2. 128, 289
AMPA (c-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid)
Use in geriatric patients 305
receptors 83
use in paediatric patients 298
Anaemia 206
Acetylcholine 190
Anaesthesia
receptors 157
accidents 323-4
Acetylcysteine 226
aims 1
Acidaemia 71
balanced 148-9
Acid-base disturbance, muscle relaxant choice 163
for caesarean section 265-71
Acidosis 248, 258, 262
Acupuncture
choice of technique 1-2
analgesia 116-17
complications 310-23
neonatal resuscitation 272
consent 4-5
1 adeau piny 'ssoi pog aino
for dental surgery 196
Acute pain, assessment 84-6
depth 64,77
Acute renal failure 258
duty of care 4
Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism)276, 277-8
effects of NMBAs 160-1
Adrenal glands 275
emergencies 324-32
Adrenalectomy 276.277
in endocrine disease 275-83
Adrenaline 107, 190, 195, 204, 260, 262,263,271, 326, 329
epidural 113-14
Adrenocortical system,effects of etomidate 140
equipment see Anaesthetic machines
Age and anaesthetic choice 2
for gastrointestinal surgery 247, 249. 250
Airway
in geriatric patients 308.
emergency management 327-8
humanitarian considerations 1
obstruction 13, 22t-3, 313
indications  1 
postoperative complications 12-13
infiltration 107
pressure gauges 76
interpleural 108
security in oral surgery 194
intra-articular 108
Alarms on gas pipeline 22
intravenous 133-49
Albumin, ftuid therapy 166, 170-1
legislation 1, 2-3
Albuterol 326
local 104-14
Alfaxalone 135, 137, 143, 196, 259
low-flow 38-9
Alfaxalone/alfadalone (Saffan)
negligence 4
haemodynamic effects 208
in neurological disease 287-8, 289-95
 as intravenous anaesthetic 143-4, 196, 270
for ocular surgery190-3
Alfentanil
for oral surgery 196-7
 anaesthesia induction 261, 263
in paediatric patients 299-301
as analgesic 95, 188, 291
patient monitoring 62~78
as anti-arrhythmic 204
patient pre-assessment 6-11
balanced anaesthesia 148
patient preparation 7
combinations 209. 221, 287
in pregnancy 272
"06 sbop ui asop
recovery see Recovery
haemodynamic effects 208
regional 104-14
neurological effects 288
in respiratory disease 223, 224
TIVA146.147
role of support staff 5
Alkalaemia 71
in spinal disease 290-1
Alkalosis 262
for thoracic surgery 235-42
333
Index
topical 107
Arrhythmias
total intravenous (TIVA) 145-8
as anaesthetic complications 317-19
in urogenital disease 258-9,261-2, 263-4
in aortic stenosis 2i8
Anaesthetic agents
in GDV 248
inhalant 
intraoperative 218-19
advantages 150
in phaeochromgcytoma 278
anaesthetic index 152
postoperative 15
breathing systems 151
secondary 203-5
disadvantages 150
ventricular 238
Arterial blood pressure measurement 72-3, 253, 258, 263
ASA scale of physical status 6,11
monitoring 77
Aspiration 3f1, 316
uptake into the body 151-2
Aspirin 98
use in geriatric patients 307
Assisted ventlation see Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
volume calculation 154 
Atenolol 202, 215, 281
waste gases 154
Atipamezole
intravenous
 reversai af medetomidine 121, 124
barbiturates 134-8
use in paediatric patients 298
dissociative agents 140-3
Attantoaxial subluxation 293
induction doses 137
Atracurium 162, 211, 251, 253, 259, 262, 287
local anaesthetics 104-14
Atropine 93
non-barbiturates 139
as anti-arrhythmic 202. 204, 263, 270
steroids 143-4
as bronchodilator 228
(see also specific agents)
CO-administration with edrephonium 164
Anaesthetic index 152
co-administration with medetomidine 124
Anaesthetic machines 18-29
back bar 24-5
effects on tear production _186
emergency air-intake valve _26
as emergency drug 326.329
emergency oxygen flush 26
haemodynamic effects 208
flowmeters 23-4
premedication/sedation 121,209,226
 sano sess
use in paediatric patients 298
gas supplies 18-22
Auricuilotemporal nerve blockade in dogs 108-9
malfunction 324
Auscultation 64
MRl-compatible 48 
Automatic ventilators see Ventilators
overpressure valve 26
Autotransfusion 181
oxygen failure alarm 26
Azotaemia 205
pressure gauges 22-3
pressure regulators 23
pre-use checks 29.62
Back bar 24-25
safety valve 26
vaporizer position 28
vaporizers 26-9
Bacterial filter59
Anal gland/anal sac resection 251
Bain breathing system 31, 32-3
Analgesia
Barbiurates
after adrenalectomy 277
properties 135
after caesarean section 271
use in geriatric patients 307
after craniotomy 289
(see aiso specific agents)
 in dental/oral surgery
194.197
Barium as CO,absorbent 36
endogenous 84
Barotrauma 316-17
epidural 113, 114
Behaviour and pain assessment 84-5, 87
in neonates 302
Benazepril 201
after hepatic surgery 254
Benzodiazepines
afterintestinal surgery 251
anticonvulsant effects 125
non-pharmacological 115-19
combinations
forocularpain 186-8
anaesthesia induction 263
in cesophageal surgery244
premedication/sedation _127, 130
for paediatric patients 298, 301-2
effects on body systems 125
for pancreatic pain 255
neurological effects287
after portosystemic shunt ligation 254
reversal with flumazenil 125, 271
afterrenal surgery 259-60
sedation 125 
in spinal disease 29f-2 
 use in geriatric patients 307
systemic 89-103
Bernoulli effect 221
for thoracotomy 234-5
Beta blockers, pre-anaesthetic assessment 10
for visceral pain 255-6
Biliary tract disease 254-5
Biopsy, liver 252
adjunctive 102-3
Bird Mark 7 ventilator 53
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 96-102
Blood
opioids 89-96
circulation, fetal versus adult 296-7
pharmacology 89-92, 97-9
coagulation, effects of NSAIDs 98
(see also specific agents)
gas"
Anaphylactoid reaction 325
abnormalities 205
Anaphyiaxis 324
analysis, principles 71
Animais (Scientfic Procedures) Act 1986 3
glucose
Antibiotics
management 279-80, 281
effects on neuromuscuiar blockade 163
in sedation 131
pre-anaesthetic assessment 10
parameters, pre-anaesthetic assessment 8-9 
 Anticholinergic agents 126
pressure
use in geriatric patients 306
arterial 72-3, 185
central venous 73-4. 183-4
Anticholinesterases, antagonism of NMBAs 164, 192
monitoring 72-4
Anticonvulsants,effects on NMBAs 163
transfusion
Anuria. as anaesthetic complication 321, 323
adverse reactions 182
Aortic stenosis 217-18, 239
autotransfusion 181, 195
Apgar scoring 272
cross-matching
1178
Apnoea 315-16
indications 177-8
Apparatus deadspace 30
patient monitoring 181
Arndt bronchial blocker 233
preparation180
Arnica montana 118
in PSS ligation 252-3
334
Index
rate of administration 181
combinations
route 180
anaesthesia 141,142
volume calculation 180
 premedication/sedation  128
types.
dose in cats 93
cats 179-80
dose in dogs 91
dogs. 178-9
effects on isoflurane MAC 151
Body condition, pre-anaesthetic assessment 7
effects on tear production 186
Body fuid compartments 167
haemodynamic effects 208
Body temperature
pharmacology 95-6.
effects of acepramazine 122
premedication/sedation _ 121, 128, 249
reversal of mu agonist 96.
effects of opioids 92
use in geriatric patients 305
effects of tiletamine/zolazepam 142
use in paediatric patients 298
monitoring 76
postoperative 16
in sedation 131
Caesarean section
 in paediatric patients 298, 300
anaesthesia 269-71
Bowen technique 116 
neonatal resuscitation 271-2
Boxer
postoperative care 27f
anaesthetic considerations 9
review of outcome studies
 sensitivity to acepromazine 122, 195
in cats267
 Brachial plexus nerve blockade 
in dogs 265-7
in cats 111-12
Calcium, as emergency drug 326,329
in dogs109
Calcium chloride
 Brachycephalic breeds
 in COgabsorbents 37
anaesthetic considerations 9
dental surgery 195-6
Calcium gluconate 173,261
Brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome (BOAS) 222-3
Calcium hydroxide as CO absorbent 36
Bradyarrhythmias 203-4, 218, 317, 318
Calcium sulphate in COabsorbents 37
Brain tumours 289-90
Cancer, pain 81
Breathing systems 30-41
(Anawoudes) Audeiboudey
 care and maintenance 40-1
during iPPV 59
checking 39
interpretation 67-9
classification 31
MRI-compatible 48
components 30
in paediatric patients 301
F circuit 38
principles 65-7
hazards 40
in sedation 131
for inhalant anaesthetics 151
with pulse oximetry 71
leak testing 39
Carbimazole 281
MRI-compatibie 48
Carban dioxide
for paediatric patients 300
absorption 30, 36-7
with COabsorption
arterial, effects on 1OP 183-4
circle 35.36
cylinders 19
to-and-fro35-6
end-tidal, capnography 67-9
without COabsorption
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 188, 189
Bain 31,32-3
Cardiac disease see Cardiovascular system, disease
Humphrey ADE 32, 34-5
Cardiac glycosides, pre-anaesthetic assessment 10
Lack 32,33,34
Cardiac pump theory 328
Magill 32, 33
Cardiac tamponade213
T-piece 31-2
Cardiogenic oscillations, capnogram 66
Breathing tubes 30
Cardiomyopathy
Breeds, significance for anaesthesia 2. 9
dlilated 213
Bromhexine 226
hypertrophic 215
Bronchitis, chronic 227
Bronchocanstriction 228-9
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 325, 327-9
Bronchoscopy 224.241-2
Cardiovascular system
Bupivacaine
anaesthetic complications 317-20
as analgesic 235
bupivacaine toxicity 106
in paediatric patients 302
collapse in renal failure 262
epidural anaesthesia 113, 114
disease
as interpleural anaesthetic 108, 235
acquired 211-15
as intra-articular anaesthetic 108
anaesthetic selection 207-8
peripheral nerve blockade 108, 109, 110, 11t, 112
anaesthetic technique 207, 209-11 
pharmacology 107
cangenital 215-18
as topical anaesthetic 107
fluid therapy 175
toxicity 105, 106
intraoperative arrhythmias 218-19
Buprenorphine
pharmacakinetic effects 200
as analgesic 95,244, 245,255,260, 291
postoperative care 211
in paediatric patients 301
premedication 208-9
combinations
preoperative drug treatment 201-2
anaesthesia 141
preoperative examination 202-3
premedication/sedation 128
preoperative preparation 203-7
dose in cats 93
(see aiso individuaf conditions)
dose in dogs 91
effects of acepromazine 122
effects on isoflurane MAC 151
effects of alfaxaione-alfadalone 144
effects on tear production 186
effects of benzodiazepines 125
haemadynamic effects 208
effects of etomicdate 140
pharmacology 95
effects of IPPV 60
premedication/sedation 121, 128, 249
effects of ketamine 141
Use in geriatric patients 305
effects of medetomidine 123
use in paediatic patients 298
effects of opioids 91, 125.0
Burns
effects of pentobarbital
138
airway damage 227.
effects of propofol 139
muscle relaxant choice 163
effects of thiopental 136
Butorphanol 125 
effects of tiletarmine/zolazepam 143
as analgesic 95-6,232
in geriatric patients 304
as anti-fussive 96, 226
lidocaine toxicity 106
335
Index
mepivacaine toxicity 106
Congested cardiomyopathy 213
monitoring 72-5.131
Consciousness, postoperative assessment 15-16
in paediatric patients 296-7
s
postoperative complications 15
Constipation and opioids 126
 pre-anaesthetic assessment 7, 9
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 232240
Carprofen
Car pulmonale 214
as analgesic 100. 188,197, 255,259, 292
Corticosteroids as emergency drugs 326
dose in cats 100
Cortisone278
66shop uesop
COX-1 83.97
side efiects 100
COX-2 83,97
use in geriatric patients 306
CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure) 232, 240
Caitilage, effects of NSAIDs 98
CPR (cardiovascular resuscitation) 325, 327-9
Cataract surgery. postoperative hypertension 185
 Cranial nerve blockade
Catheters
in cats 111 
 intravenous piacement 133
in dogs 108-9
types 133-4
Crystalloids
Cats
hypertonic 166. 167, 168-9
adjunctive analgesics 102
hypotonic 167
 anaesthesia induction doses 137
isotonic 166.167,168
anaesthetic index of inhalant agents 152
Cushing's syndrome (hyperadrenocorticism) 276-7
blood transfusion volume 180
Cyanosis 230
blood types 179-80
Cyclo-oxygenase see COX
bupivacaine toxicity 106
Cystostomy 261
caesarean section 267
central catheter 288
fentanyl patch dose 94
D5W166
hyperthyroidism 281-2
Deadspace, definition 30
intravenous anaesthetics 135
Dementia 289
ketamine combinations 128-9
Dentistry
lidocaine toxicity106
anaesthesia 196
MAC of inhaiant agents 150, 151
brachycephalic patients 195-3
NSAIDs 100
geriatric patients 195
opioid analgesics 92-3
patient preparation 196
premedication/sedation combinations 128-9
postoperative care 197
regional nerve blockade 111-12
premedication 196
TIVA147
(see aiso Oral surgery)
 Central nervous system
Depth of anaesthesia 64,77
bupivacaine toxicity 106
Deracoxib
disease, fluid therapy 176
as analgesic 101
effects of ketarmine 140, 141
dose in dogs 99
effects of thiopental 136
Desflurane 
effects of tiletamine 143
characteristics 153
lidocaine toxicity106
haemodynamic effects 208
ropivacaine toxicity 106
vaporizers 27.28
Centrai sensitization 82-3
Desmopressin acetate 181
Central venous pressure
Desoxycorticosterone pivalate 277
effects on intraocular pressure 183-4
Dexamethasone 277.278
measurement 73-4
Dexmedetomidine 122, 149
principles 73
Dextrans 167, 170
in pyometra 263
Dextrose 173, 280
inrenalfailure258
Diabetes
Cerebral blood flow (CBF) 285-6
mellitus 276.279-80
Cerebral cortex and pain experience 80
postoestrous 262
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) 285
Diabetic ketoacidosis 276, 280
Cerebral resuscitation 331-2
Diaphragmatic hernia 235-6
Cerebral vascular resistance 285
Diazepam
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sampling 295
combinations
anaesthesia induction 137, 145, 191, 201, 247, 255, 259.
CGRP (calcitonin gene-related peptide) 83
261,263
premedication/sedation 128 129,208
effects on isoflurane MAC 151
Chiropractice,analgesia 116
effects on tear production 186
Chlorpheniramine 226,250
  
Cholecystitis 254
premedication/sedation 121, 125, 128, 129
Cholestasis 254
seizure control 138, 290
Chronic branchitis 227
use in geriatric patients 305
Chronic otitis externa 108
use in paediatric patients 298
Chronic pain, assessment 86-7
Digoxin 201, 204
Chronic renal failure257-8
Dilated cardiomyopathy 213
Chylothorax 237
Diltiazem 202, 215
Circle breathing system 35, 36
Diphenhydramine 250. 326
Client communication before anaesthesia 7
Diprenorphine, as analgesic 96
Clomipramine, pre-anaesthetic assessment 11 
Dirofitaria immitis(heartworm), pre-anaesthetic assessment 8
Codeine
Dobermann, anaesthetic considerations 9
as analgesic 95
Dobutamine 204.217, 238, 264, 326, 329
as anti-tussive 226
Dogs
 Cold application, analgesia 115
 adjunctive anaigesics 102
Colectomy 250
anaesthesia induction doses 137
Colloid osmotic pressure (COP) 168
ht sube eeyu jo xapuonausee
Colloids 169-70
blood types 178-9
hyperoncotic 167
bupivacaine toxicity 106_
iso-oncotic 166
caesarean section 265-7
in oral surgery 195
fentany patch dose 94
 Common peroneal nerve biockade
hypothyroidism 282
in cats 112.
intravenous anaesthetics 135
in dogs111
lidocaine toxicity 106
Computed tomography 232, 295
MAC of inhalant agents 150, 151
336
Index
mepivacaine toxicity 106
Euphoria and opioids 91
neuroleptanalgesia 145
Euthanasia, fetal 272
NSAIDS 99
Excitement on recovery 321
Extubation 12
premedicatian/sedation combinations 128-9
Eye
regional nerve blockade 108-1t
 effects of anaesthetics/analgesics 190
ropivacainetoxicity106
globe position 185-6
TIVA 146
intraocular pressure 183-5
Dopamine 204, 326.329
ocuar drugs 188-90
Doppler method for arterial blood pressure 72, 73
oculocardiac reflex 185
Double-burst stimulation 159
pain 186-8
Duty of care 4
Dysphoria
and opioids91
on recovery 321
Dyspnoea 15, 310, 313
F circuit 38
 Dysrhythmias see Arrhythmias
Facemasks 44
Fasting before anaesthesia 7
Feeding tubes, placement 198-9 
ECG see Electrocardiography
Fentany!
Echocardiography before anaesthesia 9
Edrophonium
 anaesthesia induction 261, 263.
as analgesic 94~5,188. 270, 291
as anti-arrhythmic 204
as NMBA antagonist 164
as anti-arrhythmic 204
balanced anaesthesia 148
Electric/electromagnetic fields, anaigesia 117-18
ElectroacupunctureeffectsonisofluraneAC
combinations, anaesthesia induction 191, 247. 255
151
Electrocardiography (electrocardiogram,ECG)
dose in cats 92, 94
dose in dogs 90, 94
before anaesthesia 9
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation 330
effects on tear production 186
hyperkalaemia 260
in endotracheal intubation 183, 184
MRl-compatible 48
haemodynamic effects 208
principles 74-5
neuroleptanalgesia 145
in sedation 131
neurological effects 288
Electrolyte abnormalities
patches 94-5.197.291
as anaesthetic complication 319
effects on isoflurane MAC 151
rmuscle relaxant choice 163
pharmacology 94-5
Electromyography 295
seizure control 138
Emergence delirium 16
side effects 94.95
Emergencies
TIVA 146,147
 anaphylactoid reaction 325
use in geriatic patients 305
anaphylaxis 324
Fick principle 268
cardiopulmonary arrest 325-31
Firocoxib
drugs for 326
as analgesic 102
Emphysema 227-8
dose in dogs
99
Enalapril 201
Flail chest 235
Endocrine system
Flowmeters 23-4
disease 275-83
Flow regulators 297
(see aiso specific disorders)
Fludrocortisone 277
stress response 274-5
Fluid therapy
Endotoxaemia 262, 264
after renal surgery 260_
Endotracheal tubes
in caesarean section 271
armoured 289
jn cardiopulmonary resuscitation 331
bronchial biocker systems 233
in cardiovascular disease 210
cuf types 41
in CNS disease 176
intubation 42-3, 161, 197-8, 246
ffuid dynamics 166-8
materials 4f
fuid selection174
MRl-compatible 48
fuid types 166-7
for ocuar surgery 191
for paediatric patients 299
albumin 170-1
colloids 169-70
right-angled 196
hypertonic solutions 168-9
selection 42
Enfurane, neurological effects 288
isotonic crystalloids 168
oxygen-carrying solutions 171
Ephedrine
as emergency drug 326
in gastric disease 247
in geriatric patients 308
pre-anaesthetic assessment 11
Epidural anaesthesia/analgesia 112-14
haemoglobin restoration 172-3
in heart disease 175
in hepatic surgery 252, 253,254
in cats 114
for colectomy 250
for hypokalaemia 248,280
for hypoproteinaemia 255
in dogs112-14
in insulinoma 281
intraoperative cansiderations 174-5
in neonates 302
afterrenal surgery259
in oesophageal surgery 244
for thoracotomy
234
in oliguria 175--6
Epilepsy 254,290
oxygen delivery 171-2
Ergonomics 65
in paediatric patients 300
Esmolol 204, 279,289.326
patient monitoring 176-7
Etamiphylline 226
postoperative considerations 129
Etodolac
pre-anaesthetic considerations
173-4
as analgesic 102
in premedication/sedation 132
dose in dogs 99
in raised ICP 286, 288
Etomidate
supplements 173
blocking of stress response 275
volume restoration 172
combinations, anaesthesia induction 263, 269, 270
Flumazenil 121, 125, 271. 298,
Flurbiprofen, as analgesic 188
as intavenous anaesthetic 135, 137, 139-40. 235, 237. 239.
Fogarty catheter 233
247,259.261
Functional pain 81
Use in geriatric patients 306, 307
Furosemide 201, 260, 286, 326
337
Index
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) 83. 84
Hetastarch 166,170,255
Gabapentin,as analgesic 102, 291
History taking pre-anaesthesia 6-7
Gallamine 258
Homoeopathy, analgesia 118
Gas cylinders 18-21
HSA see Albumin
MRI-compatible 48
Humidifiers 47
Gas exchange (respiratory), postoperative monitoring 13
Humphrey ADE system 32, 34-5
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV) 247-8
Hydralazine 201
Gastric ulceration 249-50
Hydration status, pre-anaesthetic assessment 7
Gastroduodenoscopy 248-9
Hydrocephalus 290
Gastrointestinat system
Hydrochiorothiazide 201
disease 244-51
Hydrocortisone 277, 278
(see aiso specifc conditions)
Hydromorphone
effects of NSAIDs 98
anaesthesia induction263
effects of opioids 91.126
a5 analgesic 93-4, 188, 202. 246, 260, 292
pre-anaesthetic assessment 8
combinations
Gastrostomy tube placement 249
anaesthesia 145, 247
Gelofusine 170
premedication/sedation128
Geriatric patients
dose in cats 92
care 308
dose in dogs 90
dental surgery 195
effects on tear production 186
monitoring 308
pharmacology 93
pharmacology 304-7
premedication/sedation 121, 128, 129
physiological changes 303-4
side effects 93-4,126
premedicant choice 130 
use in geriatric patients 305
preoperative preparation 307-8
Hydroxyethyl starch (HES) 167
Glasgow Composite Pain Scale (GCMPS) 86
5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) see Serotonin
Glipizide 280
Hyperadrenocorticism 276-7
Glucocorticoid supplementation 277. 278
Hyperalgesia 82
Glucose
Hypercapnia 40,50,311-12
blood level management 279-80, 281
dypercortisolaemia 277
influid therapy 168, 174, 176
Hyperglycaemia 280
Glycerol 189
Hyperkalaemia 205, 258,260
Glyceryl trinitrate 201, 204
Hyperphosphataemia 258
Glycopyrronium
Hypersensitivity reactions 324-5
as anti-arrhythmic 202, 204, 263
Hypertension
comparison with atropine
126
as anaesthetic complication 317, 319-20
as emergency drug 326
in cats 215
premedication/sedation 121, 196, 209
in dogs 214-15
use in geriatic patients 306
postoperative 15
use in paediatric patients 298
Hyperthermia
Great auricular nerve blockade in dogs 109
as anaesthetic complication 321, 322
Greyhounds
in low-flow anaesthesia 40, 76 
 anaesthetic considerations 10
and opioids 92.93
effects of thiopental 136
in oral surgery
195
recovery after propofol 139
postoperative 16
Hyperthyroidism 276
incats281-2
Haemaccel 166
Hypertonic saline
Haemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve 70
adverse effects 169
Haemorrhage
characteristics 166
as anaesthetic complication 320
Hypertrophic cardionyopathy 215
in oral surgery 195
Hyperventilation289,311
Haemostasis, drug interactions 195
Hypoadrenocorticism 276, 277-8
Haemothorax 232
Hypoalbuminaemia _205
Hallowell EMC ventilator 55
Hypocalcaemia 282
Halothane
Hypoglycaemia 251
anaesthesia in cardiac patients 209, 215
as anaesthetic complication 321, 322
anaesthetic index 152
Hypokalaemia 206. 248, 258
characteristics 152
Hypotension -
haemodynamic effects 208
as anaesthetic complication 317, 319-20
and hepatitis 252
in phaeochromocytoma 278
MAC 150
postoperative 15
neurological effects 288
Hypothermia 76
vaporizers 28
 as anaesthetic complication 321. 322
Hazards of breathing systems 40
in cardiac surgery 210, 215-16
Head trauma 289
and opioids92
Health and safety
in oral surgery 194
scavenging systems 45-7
 in paediatric patients 301
waste gases 154
postoperative 16
exposure minimization 47
in renal failure 259
Heart failure 201-2,203,205,206
Hypothyroidism 276
Heart rate indicator 72
in dogs 282
Heartworm status, pre-anaesthetic assessment 8
Hypoventilation_ 13, 49.282. 311. 315
Heat
Hypovolaemia 214
application, analgesia f15 
Hypovolaemic shock 247
and moisture exchangers 47
fluid therapy174-5
Helicobacter 250
Hypoxaemia 13. 70, 71, 311-312, 314-15
Heparin 277
Hypoxia 40.310
Hepatic disease
effects on drug metabolism 251, 253 
[PPV effects 61 
Ibuprofen 249
muscle relaxant choice 163
[midapril  201
Hepatic lipidosis, in cats 254
Inadequate oxygenation 225-6
Hepatis and halothane 252
Indicators in CO,absorbents 37
Hepatotoxicity of NSAIDs 98
nductionchambers45
Herbal therapy, anaigesia 118
Interior alveolar nerve blockade in cats 111
Hernia, diaphragmatic 235-6
Infiltration anaesthesia107
338
Index
Inflammatory bowel disease 249
haemodynamic effects 208
Inflammatory pain 81
as intravenous anaesthetic 135, 137, 140-2
 Infraorbitai nerve blockade in cats 111
in geriatricpatients306,307
Infusion pumps 147-8
in paediatric patients 299,300
Inhalant anaesthetic agents
neurological effects 287
advantages 150
pre-anaesthetic assessment 10-11
anaesthetic index 152
premedication/sedation 128. 129
 breathing systems 151
recovery 141
disadvantages 150
Ketoacidosis, diabetic 276,280
effects on NMBAs 163
Ketoprofen
general characteristics 152-4
as anaigesic 101
MAC 150-1
dose in cats 100
monitoring 77
dose in dogs 99
uptake into the body 151-2
use in geriatric patients _306
use in geriatric patients 307
Ketorolac, as anagesic 188
volurme calculation 154
Kidney function,in geriatric patients 304
waste gases 154
Kittens
(see aiso specific agents)
 physiological parameters 296
Injectable anaesthesia/anaesthetics see Intravenous
premedicant choice130
 anaesthesia, Intravenous anaesthetic agents 
survival after caesarean delivery 265-7
Insulin 279-80
Komesaroff anaesthetic machine 28, 29
Insulinoma 280-1
Intercostal nerve block 234
incats 112
Lack breathing system 31, 32, 33-4
in dogs 110
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV)
Laryngeal mask airways 43-4
Laryngeal oedema 13
in cardiacpatients 210
Laryngeal paralysis 222
Laryngeal spasm 13
in intestinal surgery_ 250
 patient monitoring 59
Laryngoscopes 44-5
 physiological effects 59-61
Laser light, analgesia 118
Leak testing in breathing systems 39
preventing spontaneous ventilation 58
Legal considerations for anaesthesia 1, 2-3
in raised ICP 287
Levobupivacaine, pharmacology 107
in spinal disease 290-1
Lidocaine
in urogenitai surgery 259, 261
as analgesic 102. 188, 197,254, 255, 256, 289, 291, 294
weaning 59
tnterpleural nerve block 235
as anti-arrhythmic 202,204.219,239,287
lntervertebral disc disease 249
balanced anaesthesia 149
Intracardiac drug administration 330
effects on isoflurane MAC 151
as emergency drug 326, 329
Intracranial pressure (IcP} 284-5, 286
in endotracheal intubation 183,184, 270
raised 286-8
Intralingual drug administration 330
as epidural anaesthetic/analgesic 113, 114, 266, 269, 271, 302
as interpleural anaesthetic108
Intraocular pressure (IOP) 183-5
 Intravenous anaesthesia
as intra-anticular anaesthetic 108
total (TIVA) 145-8
peripheral nerve blockade 108. 109, 110, 111, 112
venous access 133-4
pharmacclogy 107
Intravenous anaesthetic agents
as topical anaesthetic 107
barbiturates 134-8
toxicity 105,106
dissociative agents 140-3
Life support 331
effects on muscle relaxants 163
Liquid oxygen storage 21
non-barbiturates 139
Liver
steroids 143-4
biopsy 252
(see also specific agents)
 disease, effects on drug metabalism 251
Intubation 161
(see alsg specific conditions)
aids 44
function 251
problems 220-1
in geriatric patients 304
lechniques 42-3, 197, 246
in paediatric patients 297
 JPPV see intermittent positive pressure ventilation
Local anaesthesia
Isoflurane
analgesia 102
anaesthesia 192, 248, 249, 250, 252, 253, 254, 255, 259,
in caesarean section 271
261,266
epidural 112-14
in paediatric patients 299
iniltration107
anaesthetic index 152
interpleural 108
characteristics 153
intra-articular 108
effects of morphine 93
intravenous regional 108
haemodynamic effects 208
musclerelaxation156
MAC 150
for ocular pain 187,188
 effects of drugs 151.
 peripheral nerve blockade
neurological effects 288
in cats f11-12
vaporizers28
in dogs 108-11
Isoprenaline 202, 204
pharmacology 104-5.107
lsopropamide 202
in thoracotomy 234-235
Isoproterenol 326,329
topical 107
toxicity 105-6
Low-flow anaesthesia 38-9
Ketamine
Lung lobe torsion 237
as analgesic 102,197, 250, 255, 256, 291, 294
in paediatric patients 298
balanced anaesthesia 148
 MAC see Minimum alveolar concentrations
bradycardia management 124
Magill breathing system 31, 32, 33
combinations
Magnesium suiphate 326, 329
anaesthesia 141, 196,209
as anti-arrhythmic 204, 219
induction 137, 201, 261, 263
t uewalddns ping snoueau
premedication/sedation 127,128.129,130
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
effects on intraocular pressure 185
anaesthesia for 295
effects on isoflurane MAC 151
compatible anaesthetic equipment 47-8
fetal depression 271
raised intracranial pressure 286
339
Index
Mandibular nerve blockade in dogs 108
contraindications in bilary tract disease 254
Manley ventilators 55-6
CRI93
Mannitol 173, 189.286, 329
dose in cats 92
Massage,analgesia 115-16
dose in dogs 90
Mast cell tumours 250
effects on isoflurane MAC 93, 151
Maxillary nerve blockade in dogs 108
haemodynamic effecis 208 
Measured flow vaporizers 27
pharmacology 92
Mechanical ventilation 232
premedication/sedation 92. 93. 121. 128, 129, 208
(see also intermittent positive pressure ventilation)
side effects 93, 126
Medetomidine
use in geriatric patients 305
anaesthesia 148,290
use in paediatric patients 298
as analgesic 102, 103, 255, 256, 291, 293
Mucous membrane colour 63, 230-1
co-administration with atropine 124
Muscle relaxation
combinations
agents
anaesthesia 141. 142
 antagonists 164-5
haemodynamic effects 208
depolarizing 161-2
premedication/sedation 16. 93, 122, 126,127, 128, 129,
interactions with other drugs 163
130,295
non-depolarizing 162-3
contraindications 124, 130
selection 163-4
effects on body systems 123
indications 161
effects on general anaesthesia 123
mechanisms 156-7
effects on tear production 186
neuromuscular blackade patterns 157
neurological effects 287
in ocular surgery 191
partial reversal with atipamezole_ 124-5
in oesophageal surgery 245
premedication/sedation 121, 122, 128, 129,190, 286
patient monitoring 158-61
use in paediatric patients 298
reversal 164-5
Megacolon 250
(see aiso specific agents)
Megaoesophagus 236,246
Myasthenia gravis 236.294
Meloxicam
 muscle relaxant choice 163-4
as analgesic 100-1, 188, 197,255, 259, 291
Mydriasis 190
dose in cats 100
and hydromorphone 94
dose in dogs. 99
and opioids 91-2
use in geriatric patients 306
Myelography 295
Meningitis 293-4
Myocarditis, traumatic 213-14
Meperidine see Pethidine
Myopathy, as anaesthetic complication 321, 323
Mepivacaine
pharmacology 107
toxicity106
Nalmefene, as analgesic 96
Methadone
Nalorpnine, as analgesic 96
 anaesthesia induction 263
Naloxone
as analgesic 93.188,244,260.291
as analgesic 96
combinations
dose in cats 93
anaesthesia 145. 247
dose in dogs 91
premedication/sedation 128, 129
reversal of opioids 121, 270, 272
dose in cats 92
use in paediatric patients 298
dose in dogs 90
Naltrexone, as analgesic 96 
premedication/sedation 121. 128, 129. 190. 249, 253
Nasogastric tube placement 198-9
use in geriatric patients 305
Neck brace 293
Methimazole 215, 281
Methohexital as intravenous anaesthetic 136
Neonates, resuscitation 271-2
N-Methyl-D-aspartate see NMDA
Neorokinin 83
Methyiprednisolone 226, 291
Neostigmine
Metoclopramide 246
as anti-arrhythmic 204
Midazolam 
as NMBA antagonist 164
combinations
Nervous system, in geriatric patients 304
anaesthesia 142
Neural blockade
induction 137, 145,247,259
in cats 11f-12
premedication/sedation_ 128, 129. 130, 208
in dogs 108-11
 haemodynamic effects 208
Neuroleptanalgesia 122, 144-5, 207, 214
premedication/sedation 121, 125, 128. 129, 190
Neurological disease
seizure control 138, 290
 intracranial 284-90
use in geriatic patients 305
neuromuscular 294-5
use in paediatric patients298
spinal 290-4
Mineralocorticoid supplementation 277
(see also specific diseases)
Miniature Schnauzer, anaesthetic considerations 9
 Neurological examination before anaesthesia 8
Mini-Lack breathing system 32, 33. 34
Neuromuscular-blocking agents
Minimum alveolar concentrations, inhafant anaesthetics 150-1
antagonists 164-5
Minute volume, definition 30
in cardiovascular disease 211
Miosis
effects on anaesthetic depth 160-1
and hydromorphone 94
pharmacology 157.161-3
and opioids 91-2
selection 163-4
Misoprostol 98, 249
(see also specific agents)
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 3
 Neuromuscular disease 294-5
Mitral valve
Neuromuscular junction 156
incompetence 211-12
monitoring 158-60
stenosis 212
 Neuronal plasticity and pain 82
Mivacurium, as rmuscle relaxant 162
Neuropathic pain 81, 291-2
Monoamine systems 84
 Neuropathy, as anaesthetic complication 321, 323
Morphine
Neuropeptides 83
as analgesic 92-3, 197, 255, 256, 259, 260, 291.292, 301
Neurotransmitters and nociceptive pain 82-3
epidural13,114,251,54,2
Nitroprusside 201, 204
as anti-arrhythmic 204
Nitrous oxide
balanced anaesthesia149
characteristics 153-4
characteristics 92-3
cylinders 19
combinations 
haemodynamic effects 141, 142
analgesia 92
MAC150
premedication/sedation 93, 128, 130 
neurological effects 288
340
Index
NMBAs see Neuromuscular-blocking agents
supplementation
NMDA
for hronchoscopy 241
 antagonists, pre-anaesthetic assessment 10
for neonates 272
receptors 83
postoperative 13-15
Nociception 79-81, 105
in premedication/sedation 131-2
Noise sensitivity and opioids 92
preoperative 195,196
Non-steroidal anti-inftammatory drugs
in pyormetra 264
as analgesics 96-102.188
in renal failure 261
contraindications 99
Oxyglobin 171.263
doses in cats 100
Oxypolygelatin167
66 sbop ui sasop
pharmacology 97-9
pre-anaesthetic assessment 10
Pacemaker implantation 213, 203-4 
use in geriatric patients 307
Paediatric patients
Noradrenaline 204,260,262.263
NSAIDs see Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
anaesthesia
induction 299-300
Numerical rating scale (NRS) of pain 85
maintenance 300
Nursing care in pain management 115 
analgesia 299
 Nutraceulicals, pre-anaesthetic assessment 11
 anatomy and physiology 296-8
anticholinergic agents 299
Oostructive pulmonary disease 312-13
postoperative care 301-2
Oculocardiac reflex 185
premedication 298 
Oesophageal disease 236-7, 244-6
preoperative preparation 298
(see aiso specific conditions)
sedatives298-9
Oesophageal stethoscope 65
(see aiso Kittens, Neonates, Puppies)
Oesophageal strictures 245
Pain
allodynia 82
 Oesophagostomy tube placement 199
assessment
Oliguria
acute 84-5
as anaesthetic complication 321, 323
chronic 86-7
fluid therapy 175-6
 scoring systems 85-6
Omeprazole 249
in cancer 81
Oncotic pressure 168
central sensitization 82-3
One-lung ventiation 239-40
functional 81 
One-way valves 30
hyperalgesia 82
Opioids"
inflammatory 81
agonists 90, 92-5
inhibitory systems 84
analgesia 188, 195. 197
management see Analgesia
antagonists 90,96
neuroanatomy 80
combinations, premedication/sedation 126, 130
neuropathic 81.291-2
doses in cats 92-3
neurotransmitters 82-3
doses in dogs 90-1
nociceptive 79-81
effects on body systems 126
plasticity 82
mixed agonistiantagonists 90, 95-6
ocular 187
neurologicaleffects287
peripheral sensitization 80, 82 
partial agonists 90, 95
physiology 79-84
pharmacology 89-92
postoperative 8f-2
pre-anaesthetic assessment 10
receptors 79-80
premedication/sedation 125,130
Pancreatitis 255
receptors 84, 90
as postoperative complication 281
use in geriatric patients 307
Pancuronium t63.258
use in paediatric patients 299
Paracetamot 289,291
(see aiso specific drugs)
Paraprostatic cysts 264
Oral surgery
Paravertebral brachial plexus block 109
airway security 194
Patent ductus arteriosus 216-17, 238
anaesthesia 196-7
 Patient monitoring 62-78
analgesia 195,197
airway pressure 76
haemorrhage
195
auscultation 64
haemostasis 195
blood gas analysis 71
hyperthermia 195
blood glucose 131.280
hypothermia 194
blood pressure 72-4
intubation 197
in blood transfusion 181
patient preparation 196
body temperature 76. 131
pharyngotomy 197-8
in bronchoscopy 241
postoperative care 197
capnography (capnometry)65-9,71.131
feeding tubes 198-9
cardiovascular 72-5, 131.211
tracheotomy198
depth of anaesthesia 64,77
(see also Dentistry)
during IPPV 59 
Org 25969,as NMBA antagonist 165
electrocardiography 74-5, 131
Oscillometry, arterial blood pressure 72.73
equipment selection 77-8
Osmosis 167
in feline hyperthyroidism 282
Osmotic pressure 167
in fuid therapy176-7
in gastrointestinal surgery 248, 249 
Ovariohysterectomy 272
geriatric patients 308
Overpressure valve 26
heart rate 72
Oxygen
in hepatic surgery 253
analyser 76
in MRI 295
-carrying solutions
171
mucous membrane colour 63
concentrators 21
in neuromuscuiar disease 295
cylinders 19
neuromuscular junction 158-60
delivery. equation 171
in ocular surgery 192
emergency flush 26
after oesophageal surgery 245
extraction 177
paediatric patients 300-1
failure alarm 26
postoperative 12-13, 15-16
haemoglobin dissociation curve 70 
pulse 63
lquid 21
pulse oximetry 69-71
341
Index
respiratory 75-6, 131
Potassium hydroxide as CO,absorbent 36
sedation 131
Prazosin 201
spirometry_76
Prednisolone 189, 226, 278
strategy 77--8
Pregnancy
in: thoracoscopy 240-1
anaesthetic considerations 272
in thoracotomy_235
physiological efects 267-8
urine output 77
Premedication
in urogenital surgery 258, 263
aims 120
Patient positioning for neurological surgery 289, 292, 293, 294
in bronchoconstriction 228
Patient temperament and anaesthetic choice 2
for caesarean section 269
PEEP (positive end expiratory pressure) 232, 240
for cardiovascular surgery 208-9, 212, 215
Pentastarch 166, 170
for dental surgery 196
Pentobarbital
drugs 121-31
 as intravenous anaesthetic 136-8
(see also specific drugs)
fetal euthanasia 272
inepilepsy290
seizure control 138, 290
for gastrointestinal surgery 247, 249. 250
Pericardiectormy 237-8
for hepatic surgery 253, 254.
Pericardiocentesis 234
for liver biopsy252
Perineal hernias 250
in paediatric patients 298
Peripheral nerve stimulation in muscle relaxation 160 
patient monitoring 131
Peripheral sensitization 80, 82
patient support 131-2
Peritonitis 255
Peroneal nerve stimulation 192
selection 127-31
Pethidine (meperidine)
for urogenital surgery 259, 261, 263
as analgesic 93, 244
 Preoperative assessment
combinations, premedication/sedation 128
in cardiovascular disease 202-3
dose in cats 92
ineye surgery 190-2
dose in dogs 90
geriatric patients 307-8
effects on tear production 186
in respiratory disease 223-4
haemodynamic effects 208
premedication/sedation 93. 121, 128, 208, 249, 252, 254, 282
in urogenital disease 258, 260-1, 262-3
use in geriatric patients 305
Pressure gauges 22-3
use in paediatric patients 298
 Pressure regulators 23-4
Phaeochromocytoma 276, 278-9
Prilocaine 107
Pharyngostomy tube placement 199
Procainamide 202, 204, 326
Pharyngotomy 197-8
Prolonged recovery
17, 321, 323
Propantheline 202
Phenothiazines
Propofol
effects on body systems 122
as intravenous anaesthetic 135, 138-9, 196, 209, 223, 235,
sedation 121-2
246, 247,252, 253, 257,270. 290
use in geriatric patients 307
in geriatric patients 306,307
Phenoxybenzamine 20t, 278
in paediatric patients 299, 300
Phentolamine 204,279
combinations.anaesthesia 266, 269,287
induction 191,249,259,270
Phenylephrine 189, 195, 204, 217, 239
Phenylpropanolamine, pre-anaesthetic assessment 11
 haemodynamic effecis 208
Physical examination before anaesthesia 7-8
neurological effects 287.288
Pilocarpine 189
sedation 127
Pin index system 20
seizure control 138. 254, 290
 Pipeline gas supply 20-2
TIVA 146.147
Propranolol 202, 204, 281
 Placental transfer of anaesthetics 268
Prostaglandin receptors 83
 Plasma protein binding 251
Prostatic abscess 264
Plasmagel 166
 Plenum vaporizers 26
Protection of Animals (Anaesthetics) Act 1964 3
Proxymetacaine, as analgesic 188
filling 27-8
Pseudoephedrine, pre-anaesthetic assessment 11
measured flow 27
Pulmonary contusions 226-7, 237
pre-use checking 28
Pulmonary oedema 205
temperature-compensated (TEC) 27
Pulrmonary thromboembolism 276, 277
Pleural drainage 232
Pulmonic stenosis 217,238-9
Pneumothorax 232.237,245
Pulse 63
Pneupac ventiPAC ventilator 53-5
 Polycythaemia_205
Pulse oximetry 13
MRl-compatible 48
Polygeline 170
in paediatric patients 301
Portosystemic shunt ligation 252-3
 Positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) 232, 240
principles 69-71
in renal failure 258
 Positive pressure ventilation (PPV) 236
in respiratory disease 224
(see also Intermittent positive pressure ventilation)
Puppies
Postoperative care
physiological parameters 296
 after adrenaiectorny 277
 after caesarean section 271
premedicant choice 130
resuscitation 272
after cardiovascular surgery 211
survival after caesarean delivery 265-7
after dental/oral surgery
after craniotomy 288-9
Pyometra 262-4
197
Pyrexia 206
for geriatric patients 308
after acular surgery 192-3
oxygen therapy13-15
for paediatric patients 301-2
Quinidine 202
pain management 16
patient comfort 16
patient monitoring 12-13, 15-16
 Radial, ulnar and median nerve block in cats 112
recovery room 12
Radial,ulnarmedian andmusculocutaneousRUMM)erve
after spinal surgery 292
block in dogs 110
after thoracic surgery 242
Radiography before anaesthesia 9
 after urogenital surgery 259-60, 262, 264
Radiotherapy, analgesia 118
Potassium, supplementation 280
Ramipril 201
Potassium chloride 173, 248 
Rebreathing, definition 30
342
Index
Recovery
Schrader probes and sockets 21-2, 25
consciousness levels 16-17
Screen 65
facilities 12 
Sedation
prolonged 17,321,323
aims 120
Regional anaesthesia 108
benzodiazepines 125
(see also focal anaesthesia)
for dental surgery 195
 Regional nerve blockade
depth 131
in cats 111-12
for geriatic patients 306
for dental surgery 197
medetomidine 122
in dogs 108-1t
opioids 125
Remifentanil
for paediatric patients 298-9 
anaesthesia 148, 287
patient monitoring 131
as analgesic 95
patient support 131-2
dose in dogs 91
pharmacology120
neuralogical effects 288
phenothiazines 121-2
TIVA 146.147
Seizures 254,290
Renal disease, muscle relaxant choice 163
Selegiine, pre-anaesthetic assessment 11
Renal failure
Sensitization
anaesthesia induction 259
central 82-3
effecis on drug action 257-8
peripheral 80, 83
fluid therapy 260
Serotonin 83.84
muscle relaxants 259
Sertoli cell tumours 282-3
pathophysiology 257-8
Sevoflurane
patient assessment 258
anaesthesia 192.209, 248, 249, 250, 252, 253, 254,255
patient monitoring 258-3
 in paediatric patients 299
postoperative care 259-60
anaesthetic index 152
premedication 259
characteristics 153
Renal system
haemodynamic effects 141. 142
effects of IPPV 60-1
MAC150
effects of NSAIDs 98
neurological effects 288
 in paediatric patients 297
vaporizers 27,28
Reservoir bag 30
Shock, fluid therapy 174-5
Respiratory arrest 311, 315-16
Sick sinus syndrome 213
Respiratory rate counters 75
Signalment, pre-anaesthetic assessment 6-7
 Respiratory system
Siica in CO,absorbents 37
 anaesthetic complications 310-16
Simple descriptive scale (SDS) of pain 85
disease
Skin, pre-anaesthetic assessment 8
 chest wal/neural conditions 223-5
Smoke inhalation 227
difficultintubation 220-1
Sodium bicarbonate 173.248,258,326,329
pulrmonary conditions 225-9
Sodium hydroxide as CO,absorbent 36
tracheal surgery 223
Species and anaesthetic choice 2
upper airway obstruction 221-3
Spinal cord
(see aiso specific conditions)
dorsal approach 292
effects of acepromazine 122
injury, muscle relaxant choice 163
effects of etomidate 140
Spinal disease
effects of IPPV 59~60
anaesthesia 290-1
effects of ketarmine 141
analgesia 291-2
effects of medetomidine 123
postoperative care 292
effects of opioids 91,126
(see aiso specific disorders)
effects of propofol 139
Spinal trauma 293
effects of thiopental 136
Spirometers 76
effects of tiletamine/zolazepam 143
Spironolactone 201
in geriatric patients 304
Stephens' anaesthetic machine 28, 29 
monitoring 75-6
Steroids
postoperative _12-15
as emergency drugs 329
in sedation 131
contraindication in head trauma 289
obstruction 131
replacement therapy after adrenalectomy 277-8
in paediatric patients 297
Stress response 274-5
pre-anaesthetic assessment 8
Succinylcholine, effects on intraocular pressure 185 
Respirormeters see Spirometers
Sucralfate 98
Sufentanil
Resuscitation
anaesthesia induction 263
cardiopulmonary 327-31
as analgesic95
cerebral 331-2
balanced anaesthesia 148
neonates 271-2
combinations, anaesthesia induction 247
 Retropharyngeal mass 221
dose in dogs 90
Rhizotomy 118
neuroleptanalgesia 145
Ringer's solution, characteristics 166
TIVA. 147
Robertshaw tube 240
Surgery
Rocuronum 163,211
anaesthetic choice 2
Romifidine combinations, anaesthesia 142
caesarean section 265-73
Ropivacaine
cardiovascular 211-9
pharmacology 107
dental/oral 194-9
toxicity106
gastrointestinal 244-56
Ruta graveolens 118
indications for muscle relaxation 161
neurological 287-95
ophthalmic 183-93
Safety valve on anaesthetic machine 26
respiratory 221-9
Saffan see Alfaxalone/Alfadalone 
thoracic 230-43
Saline 
tracheal 223
hypertonic 166
urogenital 258-64
isotonic 166
Suxamethonium as muscie relaxant 161-2
Saphenous nerve blockade
in cats 112
in dogs 110, 111
Scavenging systems 46-7
Tachyarrhythmias 205, 218-19, 317. 318
MRl-compatible 48
Target-controlled infusion 147
343
Index
Tear substitutes 186
Urinary tract, rupture 260
Temperature-compensated(TEC)vaporizers27
Urine output
Tepoxalin
efiects of medetomidine 123
as anaigesic 102
effects of opioids 92
dose in dogs
66
patient monitoring 77
Terbutaline 202,326
Urogenitai disease
Testicular torsion 264
anaesthetic management 258-9,261-2,263-4
Tetanic stimulation 159
cardiovascular collapse 282
Tetanus 294
patient assessment 258. 260-1, 262-3
Tetrastarch 170
postoperative care 258-60,262,264
Theophylline 226
(see also specific conditions)
Thiopental
accidental perivascular injection 134
as intravenous anaesthetic 135,136,137,196,209.223,
Valves30
235.266.270.290
Vaporizers 26-9
combinations, anaesthesia induction 191
draw-over 26
haemodynamic effects 208
in-circuit anaesthetic machines 28-9
neurologicaleffects 287
periormance 27
use in geriatric patients
305
plenum 26-7
Third spacing of fluid 175
positioning 28
Thoracic pump theory 328
Vascular ring anomaly246
Thoracic surgery
Vasodilators in heart failure 201-2
analgesia2345
Vasopressin 326. 329
for aortic stenosis 239
Vecuroniurm 162-3,211, 245,251,259,262, 287
bronchoscopy_241-2
Venous admixture 13
chylothorax237
Ventilation/perfusion ratio 220
for diaphragmatic hernia 235-6
Ventilators
for oesophageal lesions 236-7
Bird Mark7 53
for patent ductus arteriosus 238
classification 50-2
patient monitoring 235
Howell EMC 55 
patient preparation 232-4
Manley55
pericardiectomy 237-8
Pneupac venti-PAC 53-5
postoperative care 242
pressure-controlled 51-2
preoperativeevaluation230-2
selection 52-3
for pulmonary lesions 237
set-up and use 53-8
for pulmonic stenosis 238-9
triggering 52
thoracoscopy 239-41
Vetronicru Merlin 56-7
for thymoma 236
Vetronic"SAV03 58
for trauma 235
volume-controlled 50-1
Thoracocentesis 223-4, 231
Ventral slot surgery 292-3
Thoracoscopy 239-41
Ventricular arrhythmias 219, 238. 317,318-19
Thoracotomy see Thoracic surgery
Ventricular asystole 330
Thymoma236
Ventricular fibrillation 330-1
Thyroid function, pre-anaesthetic assessment 8
Ventricular septal defect 218
Thyroxine 282
Verapamil 202, 204
Tibial nerve blockade
Vertebral stabiization 118
in cats 112
Vestibular disease 290
in dogs111
Veterinary nurse, role in anaesthesia 5
Tidal volume. definition 30
Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966 2
Tiletamine/Zolazepam
Veterinary technician, role in anaesthesia 5
as intravenous anaesthetic_135. 137,142-3
Vetronic* Merlin ventilator 56--7
premedication/sedation 125. 127, 128, 129
Vetronic"*SAv03 ventilator_ 58
To-and-fro breathing system 35-6
Visual analogue scale (VAS) of pain 85
Tolazoline 217
Vomiting
Tolfenamic acid
and hydromorphone 94, 126
as analgesic 101
and morphine 126
dose in cats
100
dose in dogs 99
Topical anaesthesia 107
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIvA) 145-8, 287
Waste gases 154
Toxicity of local anaesthetics 105-6
minimizing exposure 47
I-piece breathing systems 31-2
scavenging systems 45-7
Tracheal surgery 223
MRt-compatible 48
water
Tracheostomy 221
Tracheotomy 198,22
in CO,absorbents 37
Train-of-four 158-9
deprivation before anaesthesia 7
Tramadol
as analgesic 96
dose in dogs 91
Xylazine 122
 pre-anaesthetic assessment 10
combinations
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), analgesia 117
anaesthesia 141
Transtusion see Blaod
haemodynamic effects 208
Jrauma, significance for anaesthesia 9
effects on tear production 
186
use in paediatric patients 298
Ulceration. gastric 249
Upper airway obstruction 221-3
Zeolite in CO absorbents 37
Urethral obstruction 260-2
Zolazepam + tiletamine see Tiletamine/zolazepam