BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline
British
Small Animal
Endocrinology
Veterinary
Association
Third edition
Edited by
Carmel T. Mooney
09
and Mark E. Peterson
BSAvA Manual of
Canine and Feline
Endocrinology
Third edition
Editors:
Carmel T. Mooney
MVBMPhilPhDDipECVIM-CAMRCVS
Department of SmallAnimal Clinical Studies,Faculty ofVeterinaryMedicine,
UniversityCollegeDublin,Belfield,Dublin4,Republicof lreland
and
Mark E. Peterson
DVMDipACVIM
Caspary Institute and the Bobst Hospital of The Animal Medical Center,
510East62ndStreet,NewYork,NewYork10021,USA
156
6129
Published by:
British Small Animal VeterinaryAssociation
WoodrowHouse,1TelfordWay,Waterwells
BusinessPark,Quedgeley,GloucesterGL2AB
A Company Limited by Guarantee inEngland.
RegisteredCompany No.2837793.
Registered as a Charity.
Copyright2004BSAVA
inaretrival ystm,rranmittednormryanymans,ltrnc
mechanical,photocopying,recordingorotherwisewithoutpriorwritten
permission of the copyrignt halder.
A catalogue record forthisbookis available from the British Library.
ISBN0905214722
The publlshersand contributors cannot takeresponsibilityforinfrmation
provided on dosages andmethods of application of drugs mentioned in
thispulicaionDetaiofthiskindmustbverifiedbyinividualusers
from the appropriate literature.
Typeset andprintedby:FusionDesignWarehamDorsetUK
MITRA
b0*8/+*99
Moo b
Other titles in the
BSAVA Manuals series:
Manual of Advanced Veterinary Nursing
Manual of Canine and Fefine Behaviourai Medicine
Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency and Critical Care
Manuai of Canine and Feline Gastroenteroiogy
Manual of Canine & Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
Manuai of Canine and Feline infectious Diseases
Manuai of Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology
Manual of Canine and Feline Neurology
Manuai of Canine and Feline Oncoiogy
Manuai of Canine and Feline Wound Management and Reconstruction
Manuai of Companion Animal Nutrition and Feeding
Manual of Exotic Pets
Manual of Ornamental Fish
Manual of Psittacine Birds
Manuai of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery
Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfow!
Manual of Reptiles
ManualofSmallAnimalAnaesthesia andAnaigesia
Manual of Small Animal Cardiorespiratory Medicine and Surgery
Manual of SmallAnimal Clinical Pathology
Manuai of Small Animal Dentistry
Manuai of Small Animal Dermatology
Manual of Small Animal Diagnostic Imaging
Manual of Small Animal Fracture Repair and Management
Manual of Small Animal Ophthaimoiogy
Manuai of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Manual of Veterinary Care
Manual of Veterinary Nursing
Manuai of Wildlife Casualties
 For information on these and all BSAVA publications please visit our website: www.bsava.com
List of contributors
V
Foreword
vil
Preface
vii
1
Collection, storage and transport of samples
1
Ray F. Nachreiner and Kent R. Refsai
2
Hormone assays
6
Robert J. Kemppainen
3
Hormone reference ranges and protocols
11
Carmei T. Mooney and Mark E. Peterson
Investigation of polyuria and polydipsia
16
△
Mark E. Peterson and Rhett Nichois
5
Investigation of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
26
Penney J. Barber
Investigation of feline hypokalaemia
43
6
ElieMardell and Andy Sparkes
7
Investigation of hyperlipidaemia
49
Joan Duncan
8
Investigatlon of symmetrlcal alopecia in dogs
57
Ross Bond
9
The uncontrollable diabetic
66
Peter A. Graham
10
Canine hypothyroidism
76
Richard M. Dixon
11
Feline hyperthyroidism
95
Carmei T. Mooney and Mark E. Peterson
12
Canine diabetes mellitus
112
Richard W. Neison
13
Feline diabetes mellitus
129
Jacquie Rand and Rhett Marshal!
14
Diabetic ketoacldosls
142
Deborah S. Greco
15
Canine hyperadrenocorticism
150
Michael E. Herrtage
16.
Canine hypoadrenocorticism
172
David B. Church
17
Pituitary dwarfism
181
Hans S. Kooistra
18
Acromegaly
187
Mark E. Peterson
19
Unusual thyroid disorders
193
Carmei T. Mooney and Boyd R. Jones
ii
20
Diagnosis and treatment of insulinoma
200
Peter P. Kintzer
21
Feline hyperadrenocortlclsm
205
Mark E. Peterson
22
Feline hypoadrenocorticism
213
Mark E. Peterson
23
Phaeochromocytoma
217
Susan E. Lana and David Twedt
24
Unusual gastrointestinal endocrine disorders
222
Jorg M. Steiner
25
Autoimmune polyglandular disease
229
PeterA.Graham
index
233
iv
Contributors
Penney J. Barber BVM&S PhD DSAM (Fel) DipECVIM-CA MRCVS
Ross Bond BVMS PhD DVD DipECVD MRCVS
Hatfield, Herts AL9 7TA
David B. Church BVSc PhD MACVSc MRCVS
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, The Royal Veterinary Callege, Hawkshead Lane, North Mymms,
Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA
Richard Dixon SVMs PhD CertVR MRCVS
The Hermitage, Chudleigh Convent, Chudleigh, Devon TQ13 0DR
Joan Duncan BVMS PhD DipRCPath CertVR MACVS
IDEXX Laboratories Ltd, Grange House, Sandbeck Way, Wetherby, West Yorkshire LS22 4DN
Peter A. Graham BVMS PhD CertVR DipECVCP MRCVS
Cambridge Specialist Laboratory Services, Unit C, Peek House, Grove Road, Sawston, Cambridge CB2 4TJ
Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OES
Deborah S. Greco DVM PhD DipACVIM
Caspary Institute and the Bobst Hospital of The Animal Medical Center, 510 East 62nd Strest, New York,
NY 10021.USA
Boyd R. Jones BVSc FACvSc DipECVIM MRCvS
Robert Kemppainen DvM PhD
Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA
Peter P. Kintzer DvM DipACVIM
Bost Road Animal Hospital, Springfield, MA 01119, USA
Hans S. Kooistra DVM PhD DlpECVIM-CA
 Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Utrecht University, PO Box 80.154, NL-3508 TD
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Susan E. Lana DvM Ms DipACVIM
Animal Cancer Center, Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State University, 300 West Drake,
Fort Collins, CO 80526, USA
 Ellie Mardell MA VeMB MRCVS
The Animal Health Trust, Centre for Small Animal Studies, Lanwades Park, Kentford, Newmarket,
Suffolk CB8 7UU
Rhett Marshall BvSc MACvSc
The University of Queensland and Creek Road Cat Clinics, 189 Creek Road, Mt Gravatt,
Queensland 4122, Australia
Carmel T. Mooney MVB MPhil PhD DipECVIM-CA MACVS
Department of Small Animal Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin 4,Republic of Ireland
Ray F. Nachreiner DvM PhD
Endocrine Section, Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health, Michigan State University.
PO Box 30076, Lansing, MI 48909-7576, USA
Richard W.Nelson DVM DipACvIM
CA 95616, USA
Rhett Nichols DVM DipACVIM
Antech Diagnostics, 1111 Marcus Avenue, Suite M28, Lake Success, NY 11042, USA
Mark E. Peterson DVM DipACVIM
NY 10021, USA
Jacquie Rand BVSc (Hons) DvSc DipACVIM
Centre for Companion Animal Health and Diabetes and Obesity Unit, School of Veterinary Science,
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 4072, Australia
Kent R. Refsal DvM PhD
Endocrine Section, Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health, Michigan State University,
PO Box 30076, Lansing. Ml 48909-7576. USA
Andy Sparkes BVetMed PhD DipECVIM MRCVS
The Feline Unit, The Animal Health Trust, Lanwades Park, Kentford, Newmarket, Suffolk CB8 7UU
Jorg M. Steiner med.vet Dr med.vet PhD DipACvIM DipECV1M-CA
David C. Twedt DVM DipACVIM
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA
vi
Foreword
The third editionof the BSAVA Manuai of Canine and Feline Endocrinology
jo anos Apeai e saplaoid pue pejepdn pue pesei Ajelalduco ueeq sau
ss       s
Veterinary nurses and technicians with a special interest in endocrinology
will also find it useful for their studies. The authors represent a truly
international field of expertise and, with an editor from both the Republic of
across the world.
better understanding of the signs and diagnosis of endocrine disorders. Of
particular use is the first section, which describes the types of hormone assay
and provides an easy-to-read interpretation of the results. The rest of the
book takes both a problem-oriented and a disease-specific approach, with
a section on uncommon and emerging disorders.
The BSAVA would like to thank the editors, Carmel Mooney and Mark
Peterson, for all their hard work in preparing this manual. without our
waui amo am pue snu aul onpod jou pinoo uoeiossy aul 'soune
 a debtof gratitude for taking time out of their busy lives to write their chapters.
Committee, and his committee and of course to the team at Woodrow House;
without their efforts this manual could not have been produced.
Freda Scott-Park BVM&S PhD MRCVS
BSAVA President 2003-2004
vii
Preface
This is the third edition of the BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Endocrinoiogy and in the six
therapies for endocrine disorders in dogs and cats.
The new Endocrinology rmanual is once again constructed to provide a ready source of
practical information for veterinary surgeons in general practice. It differs from other books in this
[eue ems ui uowoo ae peui selqoid buepisuoo Ag lalqns eut sayoodde  se pa
The book is divided into four sections. The first section deals with hormone measurements
types of assay available are evaluated, providing the practitioner with important information for
 appropriate selection of laboratory and method. This is followed by a quick-reference section on 
interpretation of the hormone test results and includes the protocols for dynamic endocrine
function tests, all of which are cross-referenced to their relevant source.
In keeping with the tradition of the second edition, the following section deals with the
endocrine disorders. Here, the problems of polyuria and polydipsia., hypocalcaemia and
hypercalcaemia, hypokalaemia, hyperlipidaemia, alopecia and uncontrollable diabetes mellitus
are considered. Each chapter provides an overview of the problem, discusses the clinical
approach and differential diagnosis, and details the methods of laboratory investigation, and
where specifically required, therapeutic principles.
The third section incorporates complete and detailed chapters that concentrate upon the
most common endocrine disorders encountered in dogs and cats. These include canine
hypothyroidism, feline hyperthyroidism, canine and feline diabetes mellitus, diabeticketoacidosis
and canine hyperadrenocorticism and hypoadrenocorticism. lt is in this section that the greatest
differences from the last manual are seen. The revolutionary advances in endocrinology overthe
last six years are all discussed in depth. These include the use of canine thyrotropin (canine
thyroid stimulating hormone (cTSH)) for investigation of hypothyroidism,the use of trilostane for
the management of hyperadrenocarticism, the management of feline hyperthyroidism with
methimazole, and new information on the aetiology of feline diabetes mellitus allowing for more
rational and effective therapy.
In the final section, uncommon andemerging endocrine disorders affecting dogs and cats are
discussed. The chapters on pituitary dwarfism, acromegaly, feline hyperadrenocorticism,
phaeochromocytoma, unusual gastrointestinal disorders and autoimmune polyglandular
disease have been reviewed and updated from the last manual. In addition, new for this edition
are chapters on unusual thyroid disorders (covering both feline hypothyroidism and canine
hyperthyroidism), insulinoma and feline hypoadrenocorticism.
The new edition of the BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Endocrinoiogy will provide the
most up to date information for vets in practice including those with a speciic interest in
specialist qualifications in small animal internal medicine will also find the manual invaluable.
All of the authors are renowned in their field and their contributions impart an intermational feel
 in the UK are included and the manual should appeal to a worldwide audience. We hope that this
new edition of the Manualof Canine and Feline Endocrinologywillprove tobe arelevant resource
for al those, like us, who are interested in this fascinating and rapidly progressing discipline.
Carmel T. Mooney
Mark E. Peterson
February 2004
!!IA
Collection,
oe
anc
transport
sam
Ray F. Nachreiner and Kent R. Refsal
Introduction
thelong-established techniquesofradioimmunoassay
(RIA)(see Chapter2)to methods that do notrely on
Hormone testingcontinuestoassume aprominentrole
radioactivity.lt is important that as changes in hormone
in small animal practice,andnewand ongoing clinical
testingoccur,there is continual evaluation of sample
studiesprovide further insight into the interpretation of
qualityandsample handlingsothat thebestresults are
testresults.There are continuous efforts to evaluate
achieved.Thischapteroutinesfactorstoconsiderwhen
new hormone assays for diagnostic application,and
collecting, storing, and handling samples for hormone
laboratoriesnowfacethechallengeofchanging from
assay.All relevantdataaresummarized inFigure 1.1.
Analyte
Sample type
Handing considerations
Interfering factors
Comments from human
assays
Adrenocorticotropic
EDTA plasma
Siliconized glass or plastic tubes
Lipaemia
hormone
Centrifuge ASAP
Freeze forprolonged storage
Avoid repeated freeze-thaw cycles
Protease inhibitcrs help preservation
Must be shioped overnight express
Must be cold whenreceived at laboratory
Aldosterone
SerumorEDTA/
None listed
EDTA yields results 15%higher
heparinized plasma
Stable for7 days at 2-8°℃
Corisol
Serum or EDTA!
Degradation at 72hours at >20°℃
None listed
Avoid repeated freeze-thaw
heparinized plasma
Ship express oronfrozen gelpacks
cycles
Gastrin
Serum only
Ship on frozen gelpacks
None listed
Lipaemia/haemolysis interfere
Freeze forprolonged storage
Ship frozen
Growth hormone
EDTA plasma
Freeze for transport
Ship express in frozen gelpacks
Insulin
Serum or EDTA/
Serious degradation at >4°℃C
Lipaemia
Serum yields approximately 9%
heparinized plasma
Refrigerate or freeze
Haemolysis
higher
Ship on frozen gel packs <72hours
Haemolysis speeds degradation
Insulin-like growth
Serum orEDTA
Quite stable during shipment
None listed
For chemiluminescent assay
factor-1
heparinized plasma
avoid EDTA/heparinized plasma
Avoid repeated freeze-thaw
cycles
Plasmarenin
EDTA plasma
Pre-chilled blod collection tubes
None listed
Avoid heparin
activity
Add aprotinin
Centrifugeinrefrigerated centrifuge
Freeze and storeinplastictubes
Ship frozen on dry ice
Must remain frozenuntilassay
1.1
Handling suggestions for hormone and hormone-related analytes.(continues)
Chapter1
Collection,storage and transportof samples
Analyte
Sample type
Handling considerations
Interfering factors
Comments from human
assays
Parathormone
Serum or EDTA!
Significant degradation at >20°℃
None listed
Avoid repeated freeze-thaw
heparinizedplasma
Ship on frozen gel packs
cycles
Overnight express
Stabilitymay be improved in
Protease inhibitors help but 4°Cbest
EDTAplasma
Parathormone
EDTA plasma
Significant degradation at >20°℃
Not tested
Centrifuge within 2 hours
related protein
Ship on frozen gel packs
Freeze if stored more than
Overnight express
4hours
Progesterone
Serum or EDTA/
Quite stable during shipment
Direct assays need
Avoid repeated freeze-thaw
heparinizedplasma
special validation
cycles
Extraction procedures
are valid on samples
of various origins
Reverse
Serum or EDTA/
Not tested
Grosslipaemia and severe
trliodothyronine
heparinized plasma
haemolysisinterfere
Only stable for 24hours at
2-8℃
Freeze for longer storage
Avoid repeated freeze-thaw
cycles
Testosterone
Serumor
Appears to be stable at 20°℃
Direct assays need
EDTA plasma approximately
heparinized plasma
Freeze forlong storage
special validation
10%lower
Extraction procedures
are valid on samples
of various origin
Thyroxine,free
Serum
5 days at 20°℃ not a problem
Severe lipaemia
(dialysis)
5 days at 37℃ the measured concentration
is higher than it should be
Thyroxine, total
Serum
Room temperature for 7 days not a problem
None listed
Avid EDTA or citrate plasma
Freeze for longer storage
Avoid repeated freeze-thaw
cycles
Thyroxine, free
Serum
Room temperature for7 days not a problem
Not tested
Avoid EDTA or citrateplasma
(2-step)
Freezeforlongerstorage
Gross lipaemia interferes
7days at 37°C themeasured concentration
Avoid sample agitation
islowerthanit shouldbe
Triodothyronine,
Serum
Lipaemia
2-8°℃ for only 24 hours
free (direct)
Avoid sample agitation
Thyroglobulin
Serum or blood spot
Stable at room temperature
None listed
Avoid gross haemolysis/
autoantibody
Blood spotmust remain dry
lipaemiaand hyperbilirubinaemia
for chemiluminescence
Avoid freeze-thaw cycles
Thyroid stimulating
Serum
Stable at room temperature
None listed
Avoid gross haemolysist
hormone
Freeze for long storage
lipaemia for chemiluminescence
Freeze-thawcycles donot destroy
Vasopressin
EDTA plasma
Pre-chilled blcod collection tubes
Not tested
Avoid platelets
Add aprotinin
Centrifuge in refrigerated centriftuge
Freeze and storein plastic tubes
Ship frozen on dry ice
25-hydroxy
SerumorEDTA/
Sample handling notcritical
Not tested
vitamin D
heparinized plasma
1.25-dihydroxy
Serum orEDTA
Not fested
No additives or preservatives
vitamin D
plasma
6months at-15°Cnoproblem
1.1
(continued)Handling suggestions forhormone andhormone-related analytes.
2
Chapter 1 Collection, storage and transport of samples
Sample collection
immunoradiometricassay (IRMA). These studies were
completed on freshly collected and processed sam-
Serum or plasma?
jo buploy pebuojod jeuaym umouy lou s! ll 'sald
Most hormones can be measured accurately in serum
-je aaey pinom seqnn loieiedas u poolg paleiedas
samples; exceptions, which require EDTA as an anti-
fected the outcome of the hormone immunoassays. At
coagulant, are:
 present, there is uncertainty abaut whether the use of
separator tubes alters the results of chemiluminescent
 Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
immunoassays when used in veterinary diagnostics.
Growth hormone (GH)
Vasopressin (antidiuretic horrnone (ADH))
Special considerations
 Parathormone related protein (parathyroid
hormone related protein (PTHrP))
Proteolysis
 Renin activity.
Special sample handling is required for hormones such
as ACTH, parathormone (parathyroid hormone (PTH),
Cortisolis alsooftenassayed in EDTAorheparinized
insulin and vasopressin, as they are affected by the
 plasma because, in same animals, it adheres to the red
proteolytic enzymes present in serum and plasma.
blood cells after extended contact. If blood samples
Generally, cooling slows the activity of proteolytic en-
are centrifuged within 30 minutes of collection, cortisol
zymes, and other compounds, such as aprotinin, can
 assay results are reasonably comparable in both
also inhibit their activity. Tubes with aprotinin added are
serum and plasma, and either can be used.
available in some countriesin Europe, butare not readily
The measurement of progesterone from cattle sam-
accessible in the USA. Aprctinin, if available, offers a
ples poses a problem because red blood cell enzymes
significant advantage for transportation of protein and
metabolize the progesterone, thus falsely lowering the
peptide hormones. Ofthe protein hormones, thyrotropin
result. However, dogs and cats do not have such an
ue eq ol swees (Hsl) euowoy bujelnwgs plaau)
enzyme and therefore special handling (cooling and
exception as itis quite stable in both serum and plasma,
rapid sample processing) is not required.
even at 37?℃; hence, special sample handling is not
 If plasma samples are used, care should be taken
required.
because fibrin can precipitate, plug pipette tips and
Haemolysls
invalidate results. Overall, centrifuging samples shortly
after collection or after the blood has clotted is always
Many laboratories use RIA or IRMA procedures for
the best approach. For example, rapid separation of
hormone assays. These procedures are quite rabust
the plasma or serum ensures a valid sample and
and unaffected by slight haemolysis. However, severe
avoids haemolysis if the sample was inadvertently
haemolysis, which occurs when a whole blood sample
frozen or handled inappropriately.
is frozen or if the sample is shaken hard enough to
 Problems can also occur in samples with barriers,
 disrupt cell membranes, causes questionable results.
As morelaboratories changetoenzyme immunoassays
such as the serum separator tubes, if the barrier is
dislodged during transport.
and other procedures with colorimetric and
chemiluminescent endpoints, haemolysis becomes a
heparinized plasma or serum is required and it is best
more significant factor. Haemolysis can be avoided by
to follow their directions.
 using an appropriate collection technique and rapid
separation of plasma or serum.
Tube types
ACTH is a relatively small molecule that adsorbs to
Lipaemia
glass. Silicone coating can prevent this occurring but
 Excess lipid in blood, or lipaemia, is not a problem for
plastic tubes seem to overcome the problem. Hence,
most RlA or IRMA procedures. However, there is
an EDTA plastic or siliconized glass tube should be
concern fhat the high content of triglycerides and
used to collect and centrifuge a blood sample, using a
plastic tube for transportation.
binding properties in hormane immunoassays and
thereby alter the true concentration of the hormone
Serum separator tubes
present. Direct analogue RlAs for serum free
Serum separator tubes contain a gel-like substance
triodathyronine (T3) seem to be the most sensitive to
with a density between that of blood cells and serum.
lipaemia, where seemingly spurious elevations of free
After centrifugation, this gelatinous material forms a
T3 (not due to assay interference by T3 autoantibodies)
barrier between the serum and the clotted blood. The
are often associated with samples that are grossly
benefits of a separator tube are that they allow for a
lipaemic. The authors have used two analogue-based
more rapid separation of serum from cellular compo-
free T3 RlAs over the past 15 years and both assays
nents of bload and provide a means to hald serum for
seem equally susceptible to this effect. Some ACTH
laboratory testing without transfer to another tube. It is
assays are also known to be affected.
critical that the material used for the gel barrier is inert,
Lipaemia can be a problem for hormone assays
with respect to absorption or alteration of the sub-
that use a colorimetric indicator. If lipaemia has previ-
stance being measured, and it should not cause inter-
 ously been recognized in an animal's serum sample,
ference in the assay methodology. Small-scale studies
the clinician may recommend a period of fasting (no
 completed by the authors have shown that the separa-
longer than overnight) before the scheduled time of
tor tubes have no effect on the results from RlA or
endocrine testing. Severe lipaemia or hyperlipidaemia
3
Chapter 1Collection,storage and transport of samples
that may occurwith some endocrine and metabolic
studies use times and temperatures that represent
disordersis oftennotresalved with fasting and thusthe
those towhich samples are subjected during transpor-
clinician may have to use the samples available. It is
tation, e.g. incubation periods of 4-7 days at tempera-
not yet known whether ultracentrifugation orthe treat-
turesof4C,2022C,and37C.hilesomehormones
ment ofserum toclear lipaemia interfereswith endo-
degradebecauseofconditionsduring transportation
crine test resultsinveterinarypatients.
it is interesting tonote that measured concentrations of
Episodichormone secretion
freethyroxine(T4)by dialysis actually increase.The
Anumberofhormonesarereleasedepisodicallybythe
binding globulins either seem to lose some of their
pituitarybecause ofpulsatilesecretion of theirrespec-
affinity for T4 or some of the binding proteins degrade
tivereleasinghormonesfrom the hypothalamus.Many
andthefreefractionbecomesgreater.Asummaryofthe
speciespossesssuchcycles,whichappear tolastfor
percentage change in hormone concentrations under
approximately1or2hours.Hence,a samplecollected
different conditions,using validated RIA and IRMA
at the endofacyclecouldyield lowervaluescompared
techniques, is presented in Figure 1.2.
to one collected at the peak. Reference ranges usually
take such peaks and troughs into consideration.A
definitediurnalorcircadianpattern existsforsome
Hormone
Temperature
Number
Percentage
hormonesin some species and thereforesampling is
(°C)
of days
hormone
recommended at a particular time of day.Such pat-
remaining
terns are lessimportantin dogs and cats.Forexample,
Adrenocorticotropic
22
1
80
a misconception in adrenal function testing is that dogs
hormone
followadiurnal harmonerelease pattern similarto that
22
3
65
ofhumans and horses(lowest at night and highest in
Aldosterone
22
7
95
themorning).Infact,cortisolandACTHreleaseindogs
37
7
12
follows arandom episodicpattern that cannotbe
Cortisol
22
predicted using sleep-wake information.Hence,ad
>
95
renal function testing canbe accomplished atanytime
37
3
35
of the day or night.
Insulin
忆
3
90
lonized calcium
37
3
52
Measurement of ionized calcium (iCa) is often used in
Insulin-like growth
22
7
105
conjunction with PTHandvitamin D assays.There is an
factor-1
37
7
103
inverserelationbetweeniCa andpH such thatwhenpH
Parathormone
increases,aconcentrationsdecrease,andviceversa.
6
7
65
Ideally,bloodsamplesforaniCa assay arehandled to
24
7
19
minimize exposure to air and the assay completed
Parathormone
4
4
97
immediatelyaftercollection.SamplescollectedinEDTA
related protein
areunsuitable,becauseEDTAbindscalcium.Samples
37
4
82
foraniCa assayare often sent to commercial laborato-
Thyroxine,free
4
7
105
ries,greatly increasing the likelihoodfor simultaneous
(dialysis)
37
changes in pH and iCa over time. Fortunately, the
7
160
changesinpHandiCa occurinalinearmannerandthus
Thyroxine,total
22
7
95
anaccuratepredictionofiCaatpH7.4canbemadefrom
37
75
direct results.Many analysers used foriCa measure-
Thyroxine,free
22
ment provide output of the actual pH andiCareadings
>
105
(direct)
plus an iCa concentration adjusted topH 7.4. The
37
77
adjusted iCavalueon theprintout iscalculated from a
Triodothyronine,
22
75
human-derived regression equation,which isunsuit-
total
able for animals.Veterinary laboratories must develop
37
48
specificregression equationsappropriate for the ana-
Triodothyronine,
22
7
85
lyserused andtheindividualspeciesofinterest.lfthepH
free
30
isalteredsignificantly(usuallybelowpH6orabovepH
Thyroid stimulating
20
4
110
adjustmentof thepHwithHCl or NaOHcanbeused to
hormone
37
4
98
get the sampleback into a readable range.
Vasopressin
4
1
59
22
1
Sample storage and transportation
25-hydroxy
4
6
105
vitamin D
Effects of temperature
22
6
95
A numberof studieshavebeenperformed todetermine
1.2
Percentage ofhormonercmaining after
theeffectsof timeand temperatureonthestabilityof
hormones in canine serum samples.Generally,these
varying numbers of days.
Chapter 1  Collection, storage and transporl of samples
Containers for transportation
the entire package isincubated at 22°℃, and below 10°℃
A number of containers for sample transportation are
for 8 hours when the entire package is incubated at
 available commercially. One suitable container is a
37*℃. These temperatures help preserve many hor-
polystyrene box measuring 20 cm x 16 cm x 13 cm
mones for overnight delivery. However, samples for
with walls 2.4 cm thick. The box contains two 450 g gel
 plasma renin activity orvasopressin assay require trans-
packs; when the gel packs are frozan at -18 to -24°℃
partation on dry ice. Most hormone samples can be
(the temperature of household freezer compartments),
transported to laboratories at some distance provided
a 2 ml sample can remain below 7°℃ for 24 hours when
specific conditions for the samples are met.
5
Hormone ass
Robert J. Kemppainen
Introduction
accomplished bypouring out the liquid from the tubes
The use of assays to measure circulating hormone
following an appropriateincubationperiod.
concentrationsincompanionanimalspresents several
The alternative method (double-antibody method)
challenges:these substancescirculateinrelativelylow
involvestheadditionofasecond,anti-immunoglobulin
amounts(oftenlower thanfor the same hormone in
antibody that binds to the anti-hormone antibody (with
humans);discrimination between hormone types can
or without tracerattached)toform complexesof large
be challenging (e.g. steroids are allderived from chol-
molecularweight.Separationof thelargemolecular
esterol);and the structureof protein hormones can be
weightcomplexesfromremainingfree tracercanthen
significantlydifferent between species.The discovery
be achieved by centrifugation.
thatantibodiescanbeproduced thatselectivelydis-
criminatebetweenhormonesandbind to themwith
Anti-hormone
high affinity,togetherwith the development of methods
to tagor labelhormones forsensitivedetection has
Radiolabelled
inpatient sample
revolutionized endocrinology.Today,many hormone
hormone
assays usedbyveterinary endocrine diagnosticlabo-
Addedto
Afler
Amountof
Amountof
ratories are produced as “kits' designed for human
Tube
Separation
Radioactivity
samples.Providedthatsufficientcareistakentoevalu-
Unknown
ate thevalidityof thesekits:mostperformwellwhen
samples from companion animals are used.Fortu-
+++
nately,inrecent years,more assays are being pro-
duced that are specificfor hormones in dogs and cats.
Common hormone assay design
Thereareseveral methodswhereby circulating hor-
mones can be measured in dogs and cats.The follow-
ingaccount summarizesthese togetherwiththeir
advantagesand disadvantages.
Radioimmunoassay
Radioimmunoassay(RIA)(Figure 2.1) is the original
methodofcompetitiveimmunoassayemployed for
accuratemeasurementoflowcirculating hormone
concentrations.Briefly,themethodemploysapolyclonal
Radioimmunoassay
ormonoclanal antibodyspecificto the hormone being
measured.
Schematicrepresentation ofa competitive
2.1
ThenextcrucialcomponentinanRIAisradiolabelled
radioimmuncassay(RIA).Threerepresentative
tubes are shown.all containing equivalent amounts of
hormone,often referred to astracer'The tracer is
anti-hcrmone antibody(green)andradiclabelled harmcne
added to thetube togetherwith diluted anti-hormone
(tracer)(red）.Only the amount of unlabelled hormone
antibody-thetracerbindstothe limitednumberof
(olue),cerived from stancards or patient samples,varies.
sites on the antibody.Thus,in thetube thereisaportion
Unlabe led hormono and tracer hormone comipete for the
of thetracerbound tothe antibodyand anotherportion
antibody bincing sites available.Fellowing an incubation
that remains free.
period-in which the soluticn reaches a dynamic
equilibrium-bound hormone is separated from frco
It is thennecessaryto separate thebound tracer
hormone and the amount ofradioactivity is determined.As
from the freeportion.This is most commonly accom-
the amcunt of unlabelled hormone ina sample increases,
plished using one of two methods.ln coated tube
a srmaller prcportion of the tracerisbound and thus the
assays,the antibodyisattachedtothewallsof thetest
levcl ofradioactivityintheboundfraclionis lower.
6
Chapter2Hormoneassays
In the reaction described above,the percentage of
nostics).In two-site IRMAs,hormone isrecognizedby
two different antibodies and theseassaystherefore
hormone antibody is referred to as‘total binding'.For
tend tobemore specificthan traditional RlAs.How-
extrapolationofpatienthormoneconcentration,a set
of tubes is used to establisha standard curve.Stand-
of hormone recognition across species.
ardscontain tracerand anti-hormone antibody,added
in identical amounts as in the total binding tube, but in.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbentassay and
additionreceive increasing(and known)amounts of
enzyme immunoassay
non-labelled hormone.Thisnon-labelled orcold hor-
Increasingly,assay methods that avoid the use of
mone competeswiththe tracerforthe limited number
radioisotopes are being developed.Inenzyme-linked
of binding sites present until a dynamic equilibrium is
immunosorbent assay(ELiSA)and enzyme immu-
reached.Asa consequence,the amountofradioactiv-
noassay(EiA)methods,hormonesortheirantibodies
ity inthebound fractionprogressivelydeclinesindirect
aretaggedwith anenzyme detectablebyanenzyme-
proportiontotheamountofnon-labelled hormone
specific substrate.These assayshave been devel-
added （Figure 2.2a).The data relating the known
oped ina wide variety of formats(indirect,direct
concentration of non-labelled hormone addedversus
competitive,antibody sandwich,etc.)dependingon
theamountofbound radioactivity areplotted(by com-
whetherit isthe antibodyorhormone(antigen)that is
puter)to generate a standard curve.Unknowns (pa-
bound to thewell ofamicrotitreplate andwhichofthe
tient samples)aresimilarlymixedwithanti-hormone
twois enzyme-tagged.Anexampleofa competitive
antibodyandtracerandtheresultantboundradioactiv-
EIA,using an enzyme-tagged hormone,is the use of
ity measured andcomparedwith thestandard curve.
microtitre plate wells coated with antibody against
The hormone concentration in thepatient sample can
rabbit lgG.Standards,patient samples,rabbit-
thenbe extrapolated.
derivedfirst antibody,and enzyme-tagged hormone
(e.g.tagged withhorseradishperoxidase or alkaline
Immunoradiometricassay
phosphatase) are added to thevarious wells.Follow-
In immunoradiometric(IRMA)assays,the hormone to
ingincubationandwashing,anenzyme substratethat
bemeasuredbinds toaradiolabelledanti-hormone
changes colour (or fluoresces) in the presence of the
antibodythatispresent in thereactioninexcessive
enzyme,is added.This allows detection of the en-
quantities.VariousformsofIRMAareavailable,butthe
zyme-tagged hormone in the wells. In this format,
onemostcommonlyused inveterinarymedicine isthe
increasing amountsof standard(or hormone inpa-
two-siteor sandwich IRMA(Figure 2.3).Inthis system,
tient samples)willdisplace moreenzyme-tagged
two antibodies specific to thehormone are employed.
hormone from binding:and thereforeresult in less
Oneof these antibodiesisradiolabelled and theother
enzyme activity.
isbound toasolid substrate,suchasthetesttubewall
These assayshave several advantagesover iso-
orabead.Whenaddedtothe tubeswith these antibod-
topesystems,includinglonger shelf-life,noxposure
ies, the hormone present in standards or patient sam-
to radioisotopes and easierwaste disposal.The princi-
plesbinds withboth antibodiestoforma sandwich.The
pal limitationof thesemethodsrelatesto theirsensitiv-
quantityofradioactivityretained onthetube orbead is
ity orabilitytodistinguishreliablyhormone
directly related to thehormone concentration(Figure
concentrationsin thelowrange typical of thoseoften
2.2b).Examplesoftwo-siteIRMAsinclude an assayfor
encountered in dogs and cats.
canine thyrotropin (thyroid stimulating hormone(TSH))
ELISA-based,in-house assays are available for
(DiagnosticProducts Corporation)andone foradreno-
measurementof manyhormones including total thy-
corticotropic hormone(ACTH) developed forhumans
roxine (T4) and cortisol. Surprisingly.relatively few
but also valid in dogs and cats (Nichols Institute Diag-
controlled comparative studies have beenpublished
2.2
llustration of the
(a)
(b)
standard curves
associaled with(a) a
competitiveradioimmunoassay
punoq
pui
and (b) a lwo-sile
immunoradiometric assay.
C
Rad
Increasing standard or
Increasing standard or
patieni sample
patient sample
Two-site
Radioimmunoassay
immunoradiometric assay
了
Chapter2
Hormone assays
2.3
Schematicrepresentation of a two-
Anti-hormone
site immunoradiometric assay
antibodyon
Standardorhormone
(IRMA).In contrast to racioimmunoassay,two-
tubewall
inpatientsample
siteIRMAemploys lwo antibodiesagainst the
Radiolabelled
normone,one bound to a support and another
anti-hormone
thatisradiolabeiledanoinsolution.The
antibody
presence of unlabcllcd hormone permits
Addedto
After
Amountof
Amountof
fcrmation of a'sandwich'with associated
Tube
Separation
Radioactivity
Standardor
radioactivily.The amount of radioactivity is
Unknown
therefore higher in tubeswith larger amounts of
unlabelledhormone.
Tube1
Tube2
+++
Tube3
Two-siteimmunoradiometricassay
evaluating theirpertormance againstestablishedRIA
Assays for free hormones
methods.lnonerecent study,total T4concentrations
Insome instancesit maybepreferabletomeasurefree
in serum from dogs andcatswere compared using
rather than bound or total hormone concentration. Cert-
bothavalidatedRIAandanin-houseELISA-based
ainlyforT4,the circulating freeconcentrationis thought
assay (Lurye etal.,2002).The results showed consid-
toreflect thyroid statusmoreaccuratelythantotal T4.lt
erablediscrepancy inthemeasured total T4concen-
is thisfraction thatdelivershormoneintotargetcellsand
tration.Inover50%ofthe samples analysed,adifferent
provides negative feedback to thehypothalamus and
clinical decisionwould havebeenreached if the other
pituitaryforadjustment ofTSH secretion.Measurement
assay had been used.Because the RiA method has
offreeT4isconsideredoneofthebestteststo diagnose
beenclearlyvalidated and clinicallyproven,it was
hypo- and hyperthyroidism in dogs and cats,respec-
tively(Chapters 10 and 11).Difficultiesencountered in
was not reliable.lt ispossible that future enhance-
freeT4measurementrelatetoitscirculationinminute
ments in this technology will produce in-house assays
quantities (nearly a thousand timeslower than that of
withasensitivity and accuracysimilartothatofRIA.
total T4) and thefact that thedesign of the assaymay
Increasingly,automated systems arebeing devel-
affect thereported concentration.
oped forhormone assay.Most are designed foruse
withhuman samples,butmanyareequallyvalid for
measurement in veterinary patients.One method in-
serum andplasma hormone determinationsin dogs
volves the use of an analogue of T4(so called ana-
andcats.Oftenthesesystemsuse anenzyme,tagged
employs a dialysis procedure(direct dialysisorequilib-
reaction conditions similar to those described above.
rium dialysis). In an analogue-free T4 assay, a modi-
Theinstrumentperformspipetting,washing,substrate
fied formof T4isusedastracerinaRIA.This analogue
addition,and measurement of signal.Many types of
advanced signal generationand detection methods
sampleforantibodybinding.These assays,developed
areutilized in these various formats(chemilumines-
for humanuse,havebeencriticized fortheirinaccura
cence,fluorescence polarization). There have been
cies especially in situations where samples from pa-
continuous improvements in theserecentlysuch that
tients with non-thyroidal illness are evaluated (Moore
atleastsomeveterinaryassaysperformedonthese
andEastman,1996).Thisrelates,atleastinpart to the
instruments perform equivalently to RIA.
fact thattheT4analoguebindstoalbumin and the
8
Chapter 2  Hormone assays
 alterations in concentration of this protein potentially
sample in a single assay run (intra-assay) or in re-
influence results. Another concern, particularly in rela-
peated assays run on different days (inter-assay).
 tion to companion animals, is that the type, concentra-
Usually, laboratories monitor assay precision by meas-
tion and affinity of T4 binding proteins are different in 
uring a hormone in one sample stored in multiple
dogs and cats from those in humans, potentially affect-
aliquots. In general, reasonable precision is a variabil-
ing the validity of the technique. Overall, it appears that
 ity of less than 15% for both intra- and inter-assay
results from analogue-free T4 assays are of itle value
measurements. Besides the obvious importance of
in the diagnosis of thyroid disease in dogs and cats.
obtaining consistent and reliable resulis, such variabil-
A better method of free T4 estimation involves
ity illustrates potential errors if clinical decisions are
equilibrium or direct dialysis available in kit form for
simply based on whether a number is within or outside
human use (Nichols Institute Diagnostics). In this sys-
a reference range. To illustrate, let us assume that the
term, undiluted patient sample is pipetted into a dialysis
 reference range for canine total T4 is 20-50 nmol/l and 
chamber. Free T4 diffuses across the dialysis mem-
asamplefrom a suspecthypothyroid dog is reported as
brane into a bufferfrom which itcan be measured using
 21 nmol/l, a value inside the reference range. Consid-
a sensitive RlA. This method is more expensive than
the analogue free T4 RlA, primarily because it re-
tration determined using that same sample a day later
quires use of a dialysis chamber for each patient
sample, but it provides a significantly more accurate
(healthy) nmol/l. The inherent variability in hormone
assessment of actual free T4 concentration.
assays should be considered in the clinical assess-
ment whenever a patient's value falls near the estab-
lished reference or cut-off limits.
Practical considerations related to
assay validation
Specificity
Specificity relates to how well a particular antibody
Assays for hormone measurement in dogs and cats
recognizes a specific hormone and whether closely
 should be evaluated to ensure their diagnostic validity
related hormones can compete for binding sites. Most
 before widespread use. Validation usually necessi-
assay kits provide some data regarding the cross-
tates assessment of sansitivity, precision, specificity
reactivity of closely related hormones. The presence of
and accuracy.
significant cross-reactivity does not necessarily render
an assay useless. Insituations where the cross-reacting
Sensitivity
material is either unlikely to be present or is present in
The sensitivity of an assay is the lowest concentration
extremely low amounts, it is largely irrelevant. However,
that can be measured accurately. Sensitivity is related
significant cross-reactivity can affect clinical interpreta-
to several characteristics of the assayreagents includ-
tion in certain circumstances. For example, many com-
ing affinity of antibody and the type of tag on the
monly used assays for cortisol have significant
labelled hormone. Sensitivity is especially important in
cross-reaction with prednisone and prednisolone. Im-
veterinary samples as low concentrations of certain
munoreactive cortisol concentrations in patients receiv-
hormones are frequently encountered in dogs and
ing these steroids reflect contributions from both the
cats. It is important to establish that assays primarily
 synthetic steroid and the endogenous hormone. Meas-
used to discriminate low-normal from low concentra-
ured cortisol values in dogs treated with prednisolone/
tions are capable of producing consistent and accurate
prednisone may overestimate the true endogenous
results when concentrations within this range are en-
concentration. Such a sifuation often occurs during
countered. This issue is of particular importance when
ACTH response testing to monitor mitotane therapy in
using a human laboratory to measure total T4 in
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism when concurrently
samples from dogs and cats as most human assays
treated with exogenous steroids. It is usually best to
are not sufficiently sensitive for veterinary use. The
withhold these drugs (assuming they are administered
standard curve can be 'extrapolated' by the computer
orally) for at least 24 hours prior to sampling.
software to estimate low concentratians but this should
Another important test of assay validity is to ob-
be avoided. Only assays with proven capability of
serve that serial dilutions of a patient sample yields
reliably measuring the normally low concentrations of
consistent results, when corrected for the dilution fac-
total T4 found in dog and cat serum should be used.
tor. That is, a 50% dilution should give a value approxi-
Assay sensitivity is also important in relation to the
mately half of the original. Such parallelism
current first-generation' assay for canine TSH. Sam-
demonstrates that the immunoreactive material (hor-
ples fram many euthyroid dogs have undetectable
mone) present in the patientsample is reacting with the
TSH concentrations. The sensitivity of the assay sim-
 antibody in a manner similar to the standard.
ply lies above the low end of the reference range.
Whenever a new assay is being evaluated for
Consequently, the main value of canine TSH measure-
clinical use, it is also prudent to demonstrate that
ment is to detect the elevated concentrations expected
 in: dogs with primary hypothyroidism.
decreases when influenced by the established regula-
tors of hormonal secretion. For example, cortisol con-
 Precision
centrations should increase and decrease in response
 Assay precision gauges the repraducibility of hormone
to administration of ACTH and dexamethasone, re-
results usually by repeated measurement of a single
spectively.
9
Chapter 2  Hormone assays
1
Blological activity
Hormone concentrations reported when using com-
from free separation employed in the assay. ln the
 petitive assays reflect their immunoreactivity: that is,
more common situations where the assay uses either
the ability to be recognized by a binding site on an
 an antibody bound to the tube wall or a double-antibody
antibody. However, this does not always correlate with
separation that does not precipitate canine IgG, the
biological activity. The latter relates to the ability of the
 reported value willbe falsely elevated. if a method is
hormone to be recognized by a receptor located either
used such as charcoal addition that pellets the free
 on a target cells surface ar in its interior. In most cases,
fraction, then the reported value will be artefactually
the hormone concentrations reported by a testing
low. The most common finding encountered in most
[aboratory are biologically relevant and reflect the
commercial laboratories is an elevated total T3 con-
status of the particular endocrine tissue in question.
centration in a patient being evaluated for hypothy-
 Nevertheless, it is possible to encounter situations and
roidism. The marked discrepancy between the
 conditions in patients where the assayed values are
laboratory result and clinical appearance usually
not reflective of the true amount of biologically active
prompts a recommendation to test specifically for the
hormone. For example, some pituitary tumours will
 presence of the antibody or to use an alternative test.
produce and oversecrete multiple molecular-weight
In patients with autoantibadies to T3 or T4, measure-
forms of ACTH. An ACTH RIA wilikely recognize all of
 ment of free T4 by dialysis and canine TSH are reason-
these molecules,butonlya fractionmaybebiologically
able alternatives.
active.
Steraid hormones (e.g. cortisol, testosterone, pro-
 gesterone) are chemically identical across species.
Specific issues related to veterinary use
Consequently, assays designed to detect these hor-
of hormone assays
mones in one species can reliably be used in other
It is important to understand the potential inffuence of
species providing matrix effects have been taken into
matrix effects when using competitive immunoassays
consideration. However, the chemical composition of 
in samples from different species. Matrix effects refer
protein and polypeptide hormones can vary signifi-
to the composition of the solution used to dilute the
cantly between species. For example, TSH exhibits
standards, which can affect total binding and thus the
species variation that account, at least in part, for the
slope and shape ofthe standard curve. ldeally,it is best
fact that assays for human TsH cannot be used to
to prepare the standards in the same media as that of
measure TSH reliably in serum from dogs. Some
the patient samples (i.e. canine sera used to produce
assays for protein and polypeptide hormones perform
standard curves for canine total T4 assay). However, in
well in a variety of species, while others totally fail.
most RIA kits, standards are prepared and diluted in
It is usually possible to get a 'number' when assay-
human serum or buffer. In these circumstances, dem-
 ing serum or plasma from a dog or cat in any assay. The
onstration of parallelism (see above) between the
critical question is obviously whether that number has
standard curve and diluted patient samples helps to
any physiological relevance ta the endocrine organ
ensure thatthe matrix effects are minimal. if parallelism
being evaluated. Evaluation of any assay for use
cannot be demonstrated, it may be best to try to create
across species must involve factors such as confirma-
standards using serum devoid of hormone from the
 tion of dilutional parallelism and demonstrate that val-
relevant species. Matrix effects can obviously influ-
ues change as expected based on what is known about
ence hormone assay results and in part account for the
the hormone, as well as consideration of the possible
contribution of cross-reacting materials.
hormone are determined and compared between test-
Veterinary surgeons relying on hormone assays to
ing laboratories. This is one reason why it is important 
 evaluate endocrine function in their patients should
for each laboratory to establish its own reference
ensure that the laboratory uses a valid assay proce-
ranges for a particular hormone.
dure for samples from dogs and cats. In addition, the
 Non-harmonal factors present in samples can pro-
laboratory should provide laboratory-specificreference
foundly influence hormone assay results. Some of
ranges for dogs and cats. When using human labora-
these factors, which are assay-specific, include the
tories, users should enquire whether the assays have
presence and type of anticoagulant used, the method
been validated and modified to allow for detection of
of sample collection and storage and the presence of
the normally low levels of certain hormones in the
abnormal amounts of lipids or other materials, which
species under investigation.
may adversely affect hormone-antibady recognition.
The presence of circulating autoantibodies against a
particular hormone can also affect its measurerment.
 References and further reading
This is primarily a concern in hypothyroid dogs as they
can develop autoantibodies against triodothyronine
Lurya JC, Behrend EN and Kemppainen RJ (2002) Evaluatlon of an
(T3) and, less commonly, to T4 (see Chapter 10).
 in-house enzyme- linked immunosorbent assay for guantiative
measurement of serum total thyroxine concentration in dogs and
auowuoy loy pasn Aesse jo adki aui uo bunpuadea
Cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
 measurement, these autoantibodies may affect results
221,243-249
 Moore WT and Eastman RC (1996) Laboralory evaluatlon of diseases
artefactually by either elevating or lowering the re-
Of the thyroid. In: Diagnostic Endocrinology, Z edn, ed. WT
 ported concentration. Whether the effect is to elevate
Moore and RC Eastman, pp.177-209 Mosoy, St Louis
10
Hormone reference
ranges and protocols
Carmel T. Mooney and Mark E. Peterson
Introduction
Analyte
Slunit
Conventional Conversion
This chapterisintended as a quick reference guide to
unit
factor
the indications and interpretation of specifichormone
Aldosterone
analyses.Allof theranges quotedareguidelines only
nmoll
Ip/bu
0.0277
andeachindividual laboratoryshouldprovideitsown
Adrenocorticotropic
pmoll
pg/ml
0.22
referenceranges.In addition,itis advisabletofollow
hormone
theexactprotocolrecommendedbythelaboratoryfor
dynamic function tests.Where applicable,cross-refer-
Cortisol
nmoll
ug/dl
27.59
encing to other chapters for further information is
included.Unlessspecificallyindicated concentrations
Epinephrine (adrenaline)
pmoll
pg/ml
5.46
referto those in serum/plasma.Special sample han-
Glucagon
dlingisrequiredforsomehormonesand isdetailed
ng/1
pg/ml
elsewhere(see Chapter 1).
Growth hormone
ng/ml
17-Hydroxyprogesterone
nmol
ng/1
3.026
Hormone concentrations
Insulin
pmoll
μlU/ml
7.175
Guideline reference ranges are outlined in Figure 3.1
andconversionofcommonlyusedconcentrationsfrom
Insulin-like growth
nmoll
ng/ml
0.131
conventional to Systeme Internationale (Sl) units are
factor-1
outlined in Figure 3.2.
Norepinephrine
nmoll
pg/ml
0.006
(noradrenaline)
Hormone
Guideline ranges
Dags
Oestrogen (Oestradicl)
pmol
pg/ml
3.671
Cats
Thyroxine,total(nmoll)
15-50
15-60
Parathormone (parathyroid
ng/l
pgiml 
Thyroxine,free (pmol)
10-45
10-45
hormone)
Triodothyronine,total(nmoll)
0.5-2.5
0.5-2.5
Progesterone
nmol
ng/ml
3.18
Canine thyrotropin (thyroid
Testosterone
nmol/
ng/ml
3.47
stimulating hormone)(μg/)
<0.6
Adrenccorticotropic hormone
Thyrotropin (thyroid
ng/ml
(ACTH)(pmol/l)
3-10
3-10
stimulating hormone)
Cartisol (nmoll)
Pre-ACTH
20-250
20-250
Thyroxine,total
nmol/
Ip,6r1
12.87
Post-ACTH
200-450
200-450
Urinecorisolcreatininerati
<10x106
<10x10-6
Thyroxine,free
pmol
ngidl
12.87
Parathyroid hormone
Triodothyronine,total
nmol
Ip/6u
0.0154
(parathormone)(ng/)
10-60
3-25
35-140
35-140
Triodothyronine,free
pmol/l
Ip/6d
0.0154
Insulin (pmol)
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (nmol)
26.2-104.8
26.2-104.8
Vitamin D(1.25-
pmoll
pgiml
2.6
Growth hormone (μg/l)
2-5
2-5
dihydroxycholecalciferol)
17-hydroxyprogesterone (nmol/)
VitaminD (25-
nmol/l
ngiml
2.496
Pre-ACTH
<1.0-1.9
hydroxychalecalciferol)
Post-ACTH
1.0-5.5
3.2
Sl and conventional units. Measurermerits ir1
Guidelinereferenceranges for the commonly
conventional units are multip ied by the
3.1
requested hormones.
conversion factor to give concentrations inSi units.
11
Chapter 3  Hormone reference ranges and protocols
Summary of availability and uses of
Canine thyrotropin (thyroid stimulating
common hormones and related
hormone)
substances
Widely available
Total thyroxine
Indications:
Widely available
 Diagnosis of canine hypothyroidism when
Indications:
combined with total or free T4 (see Chapter 10)
 Screening test for hypothyroidism (see
 Adjunct to total T4 for monitoring thyroid
hormone supplementatian therapy (see
Chapters 10 and 19)
 Sensitive but non-specific indicator
Chapter 10).
 Diagnosis of canine hypothyroidism when
combined with canine thyrotropin (canine
Use in dynamic function tests:
thyroid stimulating hormone (cTSH) (see
TRH response test - not considered
Chapter 10)
diagnostically useful (see Chapter 10).
 Diagnosis of feline hypothyroidism in kittens
(see Chapter 19)
Thyroglobulin autoantlbodies
Monitoring thyroid hormone supplementation
therapy (see Chapter 10). Values are
 Specialized laboratory
expected to exceed 35 nmol/l, aiming for 50-
60 nmol/l six hours post daily medication
Indications:
 Diagnosis of feline and canine
Marker of lymphocytic thyroiditis in
hyperthyroidism (see Chapters 11 and 19)
hypothyroid dogs (see Chapter 10)
 Extremely specific indicator
 Marker of possible impending hypothyroidism
Monitoring antithyroid medication (see
in euthyroid dogs (see Chapter 10).
Chapter 11)
Prognostic indicator (see Chapters 10 and 11).
Cortisol
 Use in dynamic function tests:
 TSH response test
Widely available
一
Thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH)
response test
 Indications:
Triodothyronine (T3) suppression test.
 Basal cortisol concentrations not
diagnostically valuable
Free thyroxine
 Urinary cortisol:creatinine ratio may be
valuable as a screening test for hyperadreno-
 Specialized laboratory:
corticism (see Chapters 15 and 21)
 Equilibrium dialysis recammanded.
Values >100 x 10-s are suggestive of
pituitary-dependent disease in dogs with
Indications:
hyperadrenocorticism (see Chapter 15).
 Diagnosis af feline hyperthyraidism 
A more sensitive but less specific
 Use in dynamic function tests:
diagnostic test than total thyroxine (T4)
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
(see Chapter 11)
Diagnosis of canine hypothyroidism
response test
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test.
 A more specific diagnostic test than total
T4 (see Chapter 10). Particularly useful for
 differentiating non-thyroidal illness or drug
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
therapy from hypothyroidism as a cause of 
low total T4 and reference range cTSH
Specialized laboratory
concentrations.
Indications:
Total triodothyronine
Differentiation of pituitary-dependent from
 adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
Widely available
Values >6.2 pmol/l are consistent with the
former and values <1.1 pmol/l with the latter
Indications:
(see Chapter 10)
 No advantage over total T4 as a diagnostic
Investigation of primary and secondary
test for investigating thyroid disorders.
hypoadrenocorticism (see Chaptor 16).
Values >200 pmol/l are usually found
 Use in dynamic function tests:
with primary hypoadrenocorticism and
 Monitoring tablet administration in the T3
values <5 pmol1 with secondary
 suppression test.
hypoadrenocorticism.
12
Chapter 3  Hormone reference ranges and protocols
Insulin
azotaemia, are highly suggestive of primary
hyperparathyroidism. Extremely elevated
, Specialized laboratory
concentrations may also be found with renal
disease but in these cases ionized calcium 
Indications:
concentrations are usually within or below the
 Assessment of pancreatic function in diabetes
reference range. Low to low-normal values in 
mellitus (see Chapters 9 and 12). Values in
association with hypercalcaemia are highly
excess of 275 pmol/l have been associated
suggestive of non-parathyroid causes of
with permanent remission of diabetes mellitus
hypercalcaemia (e.g. malignancy-associated
in metoestrus bitches subjected to early
hypercalcaemia or hypervitaminosis D)
ovariohysterectomy. Values >125 pmol/
 Diagnosis of hypoparathyroidism (see
 suggest the presence of at least some
Chapter 16). Values are low to low-normal in
functional pancreatic beta cells
association with hypocalcaemia.
 Diagnosis of insulinoma (see Chapter 20).
Blood glucose concentrations must be
17-hydroxyprogesterone
 assessed simultaneausly. Values above and in
the mid to high end of the reference range in
Specialized laboratory
the face of hypoglycaemia are consistent with
a diagnosis of insulinoma. Values in the low
 Indications:
end of the reference range are equivocal and
 Assessment of basal concentrations are not
values below the reference range in the face of
diagnostically valuable.
hypoglycaemia exclude adiagnosis ofinsulinoma.
The use of traditional or amended insulin:glucose
 Use in dynamic function tests:
 ratios are no longer recommended.
 ACTH response test.
一
Growth hormone
Dynamic function tests
Specialized laboratory
Dynamic function tests are indicated to confirm a
Indications:
diagnosis of an endocrine disorder, particularly where
 Basal growth hormone (GH) concentrations are
results of basal hormane analyses overlap between
not diagnostically valuable for diagnosing
healthy, sick and affected animals. In addition, dy-
 pituitary dwarfism
namic function tests may be used to accurately predict
Diagnosis of acromegaly in dogs and cats
the site of malfunction when one or more abnormalities
(see Chapter 18).
 are capable of producing the same end result.
 Use in dynamic function tests:
Thyrotropin (thyroid stimulating hormone)
As part of clonidine, xylazine or GH releasing
response test
hormone stimulation tests for the diagnosis of
pituitary dwarfism (see Chapter 17). Values 
Indications:
show no significant rise in affected dogs but
Confirmation of hypothyroidism in dogs (see
increase 2-4-fold in unaffected animals.
Chapter 10)
Investigation of feline hyperthyrcidism when
Insulin-like growth factor-1
total T4 values are equivocal (see Chapter 11)
 Confirmation of hypothyroidism in cats (see
· Speciallzed laboratory
Chapter 19).
·Indications:
Method:
 Diagnosis of pituitary dwarfism. Mean values
Measurement of total T4 before and 6 hours
are approximately 8 nmoll in dwarf German 
after the intravenous administration of 0.1
Shepherd dogs (see Chapter 17)
IU/kg (dogs) or 0.5 IU/kg (cats) bovine TSH
Diagnosis of acromegaly (see Chapter 18).
Recombinant human TSH can also be used
Values >131 nmol/l are consistent with such a
intravenously at a dose of 75 μg (dogs <20
 diagnosisifappropriate clinical signs are present.
Bn 0z'0-920'0 pue (6y 02< s6op) 6n 001 (6
(cats). Samples are taken at 4-6 hours after 
Parathormone (parathyroid hormone)
administration in dogs and 6-8 hours after
administration in cats.
 Specialized laboratory
.
Interpretation:
Indications:
Post-TSH total T4 concentrations increase
Investigation of hypercalcaemia (see Chapter
 over 1.5 times the basal concentration and
5). High or high-normal values in association
exceed 30 nmol/l in healthy dogs. Post-TSH
with hypercalcaemia and in the absence of
total T4 concentrations do not exceed 20
13
Chapter 3  Hormone reference ranges and protocols
nmol/l in hypothyroid dogs. Values between
<20 nmol/l with >50% suppression of basal
these ranges are equivocal and may be the
values in healthy cats. Serum totai T4
result of hypothyroidism, non-thyroidal illness 
 concentrations remain >20 nmol/l with <50%
or concurrent drug therapy
 suppression in hyperthyroid cats. In both
Total T4 concentrations usually dauble after
cases serum total T3 concentrations increase.
 TSH administration in healthy cats but do not 
significantly increase in patients with:
Adrenocorticotropic hormone response test
hyperthyroidism (mid reference range basal
total T4 concentrations) or hypothyroidism
Indications:
(low basal total T4 concentrations).
一
 Diagnosis of canine hyperadrenocorticism
and canine and feline hypoadrenocorticism
Thyrotropin releasing hormone response
(see Chapters 15, 16 and 22)
test
 Combined with dexamethasone suppression
for the diagnosis of feline hyperadrenocorticism
Indications:
(see below and Chapter 21)
 Confirming euthyroidism in dogs or cats
 Monitoring efficacy of mitotane or trilostane
suspected of hypothyroidism (see Chapters
therapy
10 and 19)
 Investigation of alopecia X.
Diagnosis of feline hyperthyroidism when
total T4 concentrations are equivocal (see
Method:
Chapter 11).
一
 Measurement of circulating cortisol
concentrations before and 30-60 minutes
Methad:
after the intravenous or intramuscular
 Measurement of serum total T4
 injection of 250 μg (dogs >5 kg) or 125 μg
concentrations before and 4 hours after the
(dogs <5 kg) synthetic ACTH (tetracosactide,
intravenous administration of 0.5 mg (dogs) or
cosyntropin). In cats synthetic ACTH is
0.1 mg/kg (cats) TRH. Doses as low as 0.2
injected intravenously at a dose of 125 μg:
Apoq) 6w I'0 pue (6y 9< 1ybiam Apoq) 6w
samples are taken before injection and 60-90
weight <5 kg) have also been used in dogs.
minutes after. In both dogs and cats lower
 Side-effects are common particularly in cats.
ACTH doses can also stimulate cortisol
The ACTH response test is carried out 6 hours
Interpretation:
 after trilostane administration for monitoring
 Post-TRH total T4 concentrations increase
therapeutic efficacy in dogs. Timing is
over 1.5 times the basal concentration
unimportant in dogs treated with mitotane
representing an increment of >6 nmol/l in.
 17-hydroxyprogesterone concentrations are
healthy dogs. Values below this are
simultaneously measured for diagnosis of
consistent with hypothyroidisrn, non-thyroidal
alopecia X in dogs.
illness or drug therapy but occasionally occur
in healthy dogs
Interpretation:
Post-TRH total T4 concentrations are Usually
 Post-ACTH cortisol concentrations are usually
>60% higher than the basal concentration in
below 450 nmoll in healthy dogs. Post-ACTH
healthy cats. increases <50% are consistent 
cortisol concentraticns that exceed 600 nmoll
with hyperthyroidism in cats with high basal
are consistent with a diagnosis of
concentrations and with hypothyroidism or 
hyperadrenocorticism. Reference range
severe non-thyroidal illness in cats with low
values do not exclude a diagnosis
basal total T4 concentrations.
In both dogs and cats with
hypoadrenocorticism, basal cortisol
Triodothyronine suppression test
concentrations are low (<50 nmol/l, but often 
<20 nmol/l) and show little or no increase
·Indications:
following ACTH administration. Similar results
 Diagnosis of feline hyperthyroidism in
are seen after long-term therapy with
equivocal cases (see Chapter 11).
 glucocorticoids or progesterone
Successful mitotane therapy is associated
+Method:
with pre- and post-ACTH cortisol values
 Measurement of serum total T4
between 20 and 120 nmol/l. Post-ACTH
concentrations before and 2-4 hours after 7
cortisol values should be >20 and <150 nmol/
consecutive 8 hourly aral doses of 15-25 μg
in dogs treated with trilostane
liothyronine. Simuitaneous measurement of
Post-ACTH 17-hydroxyprogesterone
serum total T3 concentrations ensures adequate
concentrations usually exceed 6.5 pmol/l in
 compliance in administering the drug.
 dogs with alopecia X. Similar values are also
seen in dogs with typical and atypical
Interpretatian:
hyperadrenocorticism and in dogs with non-
 Serum total T4 concentrations decrease to
adrenal illness (see Chapter 15).
14
Chapter 3
 Hormone reference ranges and protocols
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
Comblned high-dose dexamethasone
suppression and adrenocorticotropic
 Indications:
hormone response test
 Diagnosis of canine hyperadrenocorticism
(see Chapter 15)
Indications:
Differentiation of adrenal tumour from
 Diagnosis af feline hyperadrenocarticism (see
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in
Chapter 21).
dogs (see Chapter 15).
Method:
Method:
 Measurerment of circulating cortisol
 Measurement of circulating cortisol
concentrations before and 4 hours after the
concentrations before and 3-4 and 8 hours
 intravenous administration of 0.1 mg/kg
after the intravenous administration of 0.01-
dexamethasone, followed by the immediate
0.015 mg/kg dexamethasone.
 intravenous administration of 125 μg ACTH
and measurement of cortisol concentrations
Interpretation:
1 hour later.
Post-dexamethasone cortisol concentrations
that exceed 40 nmol/l at 8 hours are
Interpretation:
cansistent with a diagnosis of
 Falure to suppress cortisol
hyperadrenocorticism. Suppression at 3 hours
concentrations after dexamethasone with
followed by escape or suppression >50% of
 an exaggerated response to ACTH is
baseline concentrations throughout the test is
consistent with a diagnosis of feline
consistent with pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.
hyperadrenocorticism.
15
hve
and
Mark E. Peterson and Rhett Nichols
Introduction
large neurons that originate in the supraoptic and
paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus and project
 Polydipsia is defined as a fluid intake >90-1 00
through the pituitary stalk to terminate on capillary
ml/kg/day in dogs and >45 ml/kg/day in cats.
plexuses scattered throughout the posteriar lobe (pars 
Polyunia is defined as a urine output >50 ml/kg/
nervosa) of the pituitary gland. These plexuses drain
day in both dogs and cats (Hardy, 1982; Feldman
into the systemic circulation through the cavernous
and Nelson, 1996; Di8artola, 2000).
 sinuses and superior vena cava.
A healthy dog or cat drinks approximately 20-90 ml/kgy
 Stimulation of ADH secretion
day, depending on the moisture content of its diet, and
 The most important stimulus for ADH secretion under
normal urine cutput varies between 20-45 ml/kg/day
physiological conditions is the influence of plasma
(Breitschwerdt 1981; Barsanti et al., 2000; DiBartola,
osmolality on the hypothalamic receptors. At a
2000). Thirst and the renal control of salt and water
 plasma osmolaity below the minimum threshold level
 excretion are the two main mechanisms for balancing
(approximately 280 mOsm/l), ADH is suppressed to
water intake with water loss.
a low or undetectable concentration. Above the
There are many potential causes of polyuria and
minimum threshoid level, the circulating ADH concen-
polydipsia. Primary disorders of water balance (i.e.
 tration increases dramatically in direct proportion to an 
central diabetes insipidus, primary nephrogenic diabe-
increase in plasma osmolality. An increase in plasma 
-waoun yhnoue (eisdiphlod Arewd pue snprdisui sal
osmolality of only 1-2% is sufficient to increase the 
mon, should always be considered in the differential
secretion of ADH (DiBartola, 2000; Robertson, 2001).
diagnosis of polyuria and polydipsia. In general, ani-
A number of non-osmotic variables also influences
mals with these disorders have only one laboratory
ADH secretion. The secretion of ADH can be
 stimulated by volume depletion (>5-10%), a reduction
lality. In most instances the more common causes of
in blood volume or arteriaf pressure. nausea,
hypoglycaemia, the renin-angiotensin system and
chronic renal failure, pyelonephritis and pyometra)
non-specific factors such as pain, emotion and
have other specific and obvious abnormalities on
exercise (Feldman and Nelson, 1996; DiBartola, 2000;
screening laboratory tests (complete blood cell count,
Robertson, 2001). In addition, a number of drugs and
serum biochemical profile and urinalysis). In some
cases, however, a low urine SG is the only abnormality
either the secretion of ADH or its effects at the level of
found in animals with these latter disorders. The work-
the distal renal tubule (Feldman and Nelson, 1996;
up for polyuria and polydipsia can be tedious, time-
Dunn, 1998; DiBartola, 2000).
consuming, expensive, confusing and not without
significant patient morbidity, especially in those dogs
Actlon of ADH
and cats with normal or near-normal screening labora-
The principal, if not the only, important biological
tory test results. This chapterfocuses on the diagnostic
 action of ADH is to conserve body fluids by reducing
approach, especially the problems associated with
the rate of urine production (Feidman and Neison,
testing, and the treatment of dogs and cats with dis-
1996; Robertson, 2001). This antidiuretic actian is
orders of water balance.
achieved by promoting the reabsorption of solute-free
water from fitrate in the distal tubules and collecting
 ducts of the kidney, thereby reducing the rate of urine
Physiology of water balance
flow.
ADH exerts this effect by binding to specific
Arginine vasopressin (antidiuretic
receptors, designated V, receptors, which are located
hormone)
on the serosal surfaces of the renai tubularcells. In the
The nine amino-acid peptide arginine vasopressin is
absence of ADH the V, receptors are inactive and the
the antidiuretic hormone (ADH) in most mammals,
cells lining the collecting ducts are impermeable to
including dogs and cats (Feldman and Nelson, 1996;
water (DiBartola, 2000; Cohen and Post, 2002). The
DiBartala, 2000). Antidiuretic hormone is produced by
diluted filtrate (which issues from the proximal
16
Chapter4Investigationof polyuria andpolydipsia
nephron)passesunmodified into the distal tubules and
abilitytoconcentrateurine,nomatterwhat the
collecting ducts,and is excreted as largevolumesof
circulating ADH concentration is.It is also
unconcentratedurine-aconditioncommonlyreferred
importanttorememberthatinanimalswithearly
to aswater diuresis.
renal failure,azotaemia does not developuntil
In contrast,whenADHispresent,the activated
three-quarters of the nephrons havebecome
receptors increase production of cyclicAMP,which
non-functional
increases the permeability of the renal tubular cells to
Inasmuchasincreasedmedullaryhypertonicity is
waterbyincreasing the numberof aqueouschannels
thedrivingforceforpassivewaterreabsorption in
(membrane proteins known as aquaporins) on the
the distal tubule andcollecting duct in the
luminal membrane（DiBartola,2000;Robertson,2001;
presenceof ADH,areduction inmedullary solute
Cohen and Post,2002).This increasedpermeability
concentration(medullarywashout)will alsoresult
allowsfor thepassivemovementofwaterfromthe
in diluteurine and excessive water losseven in
hypotonic tubular lumen to the hypertonic medullary
the presence of excessive ADH secretion.The
interstitium.This results in the production of concen-
tonicityof therenal medullaryinterstitium is
trated urine.
decreased tosomedegreewith allpolyuric
ADH,in addition to its action of increasing the
disorders(DiBartola,2000).
reabsorptionofwaterinthekidneys,alsoincreasesthe
permeability of themedullary collecting ducts to urea.
This effectofenhancingureareabsorptionisimportant
Causes ofpolyuria and polydipsia
in thepathogenesisofmedullary solutewashout in
many of the chronic polyuric states.Chronic diuresis,
Thecausesofpolyuria andpolydipsia canbedivided
nomatterwhatthecause,commonlyleadstodepletion
intothosethatcauseprimarypolydipsia(withsecond-
of urea from the renal medullary interstitium as a result
arypolyuria)and those thatcauseprimarypolyuria
of impairedreleaseof ADHorits actionon therenal
(with compensatory polydipsia).These are listed in
tubules.
Figure 4.1.The major cause of primary polydipsia in
dogsispsychogenicpolydipsia.Incontrast,the causes
Thirstmechanism
The capacity ofADH to curtail water loss is limited
besubdividedintothe categoriesof:central diabetes
becauseit cannotreduce therate of urineoutput below
insipidus;primarynephrogenicdiabetesinsipidus;sec-
theamountrequiredtoexcreteagivensoluteload.
ondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus;and osmotic
MoreoverDHhaslittleifanyapacitytreduceh
diuresis.
evaporation of water from the lungs(i.e.via panting)
and saliva.Toprevent dehydration some additional
mechanism is necessary to ensure that these irreduc-
Primary polydipsia
iblerenalandextrarenalwaterlossesarealways
Psychogenic polydipsia (compulsive water drinking)
replaced.Thisvital functionisperformedbythethirst
Dipsogenic diabetes insipidus (thirst centre abnormality)
mechanism (Feldman and Nelson,1996;DiBartola,
Metabolic disorders (e.g.hyperthyroidism,hepatic failure)
2000;Robertson,2001).
Thirst is regulated, primarily, by hypothalamic
Primary polyuria
osmoreceptorsthatareextremely sensitivetochanges
Central diabetes insipidus (neurogenic,cranial, ADH-responsive):
in the extracellularfluid osmolality.The osmoticthres-
Idiopathic
hold at which thirst begins is slightlyhigher than the
Trauma-induced
thresholdforstimulationofADHsecretion,therefore,
Neoplastic
thethirst mechanism isnotgenerally stimulateduntil
Primary nephrogenicdiabetes insipidus congenital or famiial)
maximum stimulationofADHhas occurred(Robertson,
Secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (acquired):
2001).ThiscombinationofADHreleaseandthebody's
Acromegaly
Chronic renal disease
thirst mechanism ensures the maintenance of normal
Drug administration
waterbalanceaswellasanormal osmoticconcentra-
Liverdisease
tion of body fluids.
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypercalcaemia
Conditions for maximal urine
Hyperthyroidism
concentration
Hypcadrenocorticism
In order for an animal to concentrate itsurine,the
Hypckalaemia
fllowing three conditions must bemet (Hardy,1982;
Postobstructive diuresis
FeldmanandNelson,1996;DiBartola,2000;Behrend,
Pyelonephritis
2002):
Pyometra
Osmotic diuresis (increased renal tubular solute load):
Diabetesmelitus
As described above,theremustbeanadequate
Primary renal glycosuria (e.g.Fanconi sydrome)
secretionofADH and thekidneysmustbeable
Postobstructive diuresis
torespond normallytoitsaction
Renal failure
At least one-third of the nephrons in both kidneys
must befunctional;if greater than two-thirds of
Differential diagnosis of polyuria and polydipsia
4.1
the nephronmass is lost,thekidneys lose their
in dogs and cats.
17
Chapter 4  Investigation of polyuria and polydipsia
 Primary polydipsia
of the underlying illness or disorder. Again, renal med-
 Primary polydipsia is usually the manifestation of a
ullary washout can contribute to polyuria in animals
behavioural problem triggered by an environmental or
with any of these disorders because increased tubular
emotional stimulus (Feldman and Nelson, 1996;
flow and valume decreases the reabsorption of sodium
Barsanti et al., 20o0]. Affected animals are typicaly
 and urea, and reduces the medulliary interstitial hyper-
hyperactive dogs kept in an exercise-restrictive envi-
tonicity of the kidneys.
ronment. This form of primary polydipsia has also been
Osmotic diuresis occurs when the concentration of
referred to as psychogenic polydipsia or compulsive
an osmotic solute (e.g. urea, glucose) present in the
water drinking. Although psychogenic polydipsia de-
 glomerular filtrate exceeds the proximal tubular capa-
velops most commonly in dogs, it does appear to
 city for reabsorption. This impairs the passive reab-
 sorption of water and results in increased obligatory
tation of hyperthyroidism (Peterson et al., 1983). Pri-
water loss. Conditions in which solute or osmotic
mary polydipsia could also result from a defect in the
diuresis contributes to polyuria include diabetes melitus,
 thirst mechanism leading to excessive thirst; the cause
primary renal glucosuria and chronic renal failure as
of this dipsogenic diabetes insipidus is usually idio-
well as the diuresis that follows relief of a postrenal
 pathic but may result from a variety of infectious,
obstruction (postobstructive diuresis).
neoplastic or traumatic brain injuries. All of the causes
of primary polydipsia are associated with suppression
Initial diagnostic approach
of ADH secretion secondary to excessive thirst.
 Primary polyuria
Differentiating between the causes of polyuria and
polydipsia is relatively easy when the different dis-
Central diabetes insipidus (also called pituitary, neuro-
orders are manifested in their classic forms. For
genic, cranialorADH-responsive diabetes insipidus) is
peay umouy e jee sdolenap peun eunajod 'aldwexa
 a rare condition caused by a complete or partial defi-
trauma, continues afterwater restriction and decreases
ciency of ADH (Feldman and Nelson, 1996; Harb et al.,
after ADH administration does not require additional
1996). Deficiency of ADH varies in severity but in the
tests to justify the diagnosis of central diabetes insip-
Jo ssor Ag pesneo Alqegoud s! l! sjewjue jo Auofew
idus. A diagnosis of congenital nephrogenic diabetes
destruction of most of the ADH-producing neurons. 1n
insipidus is equally clear if polyuria occurs in.a young
most dogs and cats, the cause of central diabetes
 animal with similarly affected liter mates that have
insipidus is idiopathic, although the disorder may be
normal screening laboratory tests (including renal func-
familial in some cases. Less commonly, the disorder
tion), negative urine culfures and whose polyuria fails
develops as a sequel to head trauma, neoplasia (i.e.
to respond to fluid restriction or administration of ADH
invasive pituitary tumour or tumour metastasis to the
analogues (e.g. desmopressin). Often, however, the
pituitary gland or hypothalamus) or hypophysectomy
clinical setting is of minimal help in making a diagnosis
for treatment of hyperadrenocorticism (Feldman and 
and it is then necessary to perform more detailed
Nelson, 1996; Harb etal., 1996). In the broadest sense,
diagnostic tests. The initial information gathered should
 the term nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may be used
allow the inclusion or exclusion of the many common
to describe a diverse group of disorders in which
medical disorders associated with polyuria and poly-
structural or functional abnormalities interfere with the
 dipsia before a diagnostic work-up forthe less cammon
 ability of the kidneys to concentrate urine. In animais
disorders of central diabetes insipidus, primary neph-
with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, the renal tubules
rogenicdiabetes insipidus or psychogenic polydipsiais
are insensitive to the antidiuretic effects cf ADH, de-
embarked upon.
 spite appropriate ADH release from the pituitary gland
(Breitschwerdt, 1981; Feldman and Nelson, 1996;
Signaiment and history
Barsanti et al., 2000; Cohen and Post, 2002).
An accurate history is invaluable when initially investi-
 Primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is an ex-
gating an animal with polyuria and polydipsia and may
help to rule out some of the more common differential
diagnoses (Figure 4.2). When an owner complains of
diabetes insipidus, in contrast, is the most common
an animal's excessive urination, it is important to first
cause of polyuria and polydipsia in dogs and cats and
determine it polyuria and polydipsia truly exist as
 may be caused by a number of renal, endocrine and
opposed to dysuria, pollakiuria, stranguria or inconti-
metabolic disorders. These disorders include:
nence. Consideration must also be given to the ani-
mal's age, breed and sex, reproductive history, overall
Renal failure
health, diet, enviranmental factors and recent drug
+
Pyelonephritis
 administration.
+
Hyperadrerocorticism
Hypokalaemia
Age, breed, sex and reproductive history
Hypercalcaemia
Some disorders that cause polyuria and polydipsia
Liver disease
deveiop more frequently in certain age groups or
Pyometra.
breeds of dog or cat. For example, hyperadrenocorti-
cism - one of the most common causes of polyuria and
Many of the acquired forms of nephrogenic diabe-
polycipsia in dogs-typicallydevelops in middle-to old-
tes insipidus are potentially reversible with correction
aged smaller breeds such as the Miniature Poodle
18
Chapter 4Investigation ofpolyuria andpolydipsia
Overall health
Signalment and history
The presence of non-specific clinical signs(e.g.ano-
rexia,polyphagia,lethargy,weightlossorgain)maybe
Age,breedandsex
Reproductive history (intact female?)
helpful in determining the cause of the polyuria and
Changes in diet or environment?
palydipsia.Forexample,lethargyandgastrointestinal
Overallgeneralheathweightlossorgainlethargyvomiingr
signs could suggesthepatic diease,renal failurer
diarrhoea?)
hypoadrenocorticism. Polyphagia could suggest
Appetitenormal,increased or decreased?
Drug administrationglucocticoidsanticonvusants,diureti)
hyperthyroidism or diabetesmellitus in cats.Weight
Physical examination
gain is common in animals with hyperadrenocorticism,
whereasweight lossisone of the mostcommon signs
Kidneys small or misshapen? (chronic renal disease)
in hyperthyroid cats.
Kidneys large? (pyelonephritis, lymphosarcoma)
Hepatmegaly?hyeradrenorticsmdiabtmelt
Peripherallymphaderopathy?(lymphosarcoma with hypercalcaemia)
Diet
Perianal mass?(anal sac adenocarcinoma with hypercalcaemia)
When evaluating an animal withpolyuria andpolydip
Vaginal discharge?(pyometra)
sia,the nature and composition of the diet should
Alopecia? Pot belly?(hyperadrenocoricism)
always be taken into account (Dunn,1998).This is
Thyroid mass?(hyperthyroidism)
the time of adietchange.Because the watercontentin
Completeblood countCBC),serumbiochemicalprofileand
foodisanimportantsource,dogsorcatsfedprimarily
electrolytes,serum thyroxine
dry food invariablydrink morewater than thosefed
High urea or creatinine?(renal failure)
canned food.Feeding alow-protein diet canresult in
Hyperglycaemia? (diabetes melitus)
renal medullary washout and polyuria (Dunn,1998).
High alkaline phosphatase activity (hyperadrenocorticism)
Hyperchalesteralaemia?(hyperadrenocorticism)
Recent drug administration
Hypercalcaemia?
Hypokalaemia?
Inall animalswithpolyuria andpolydipsia any current
High thyroxine? (hyperthyroidism)
orrecent administration of drugs shouldberuled out.
Complete urinalysis and urine culture
dipsiaincludeglucocorticoids,phenobarbitalprimidone
Lowurinesecificgravity(contimsanddefinespolyuria)
and diuretics (Feldman and Nelson, 1996). Chronic
Proteinuria?hyradrenocorticismpymetapyelneprits
administration of progestogens to intact bitches for
gomerulonephritis)
oestrous suppressioncanlead toacromegaly(growth
Glucosuria ketonuria?(diabetes mellitus)
hormone excess),whichcausessecondary diabetes
Active urine sediment?(infection, pyelonephrits)
mellitus (and polyuria and polydipsia) in many dogs
Positivebacterial cuture?(inection,yelonepris
(see Chapter 18).
Abdominal radiography orultrasonography
Environmental factors
Smalkidneyswithil-definedrenal oriregularborder(renal failure)
In dogs with primary polydipsia it may be possible to
Increasedcoricalchogenicityindistinctcorcmedullaryjuctn
identifya stressful lifestylechange thatprecededthe
(renal failure)
Dilated renal pelvis (pyelonephritis)
onset ofpolydipsia andpolyuria.Common examples
include thearrival of a newbaby:ormovingtoa new
lnitial work-up forpolyuria and polydipsia in
houseorapartment.Incontrast,polyuriathatdevelops
4.2
dogs and cats.
afterhead trauma could suggest damage to theADH-
secreting neurans or disruption of the pituitary stalk
(Peterson,1984).Mostof the othercommoncausesof
resulting in central diabetes insipidus.
polyuria and polydipsia(e.g.diabetes mellitus.renal
disease and pyometra) are also found in olderanimals
Physical examination
butprimarypolydipsiaoccursmostfrequentlyinyoung:
Many commondisorders associatedwithpolyuria and
hyperexcitable,large-breed dogs (Feldman and
polydipsiacanberuled outbyperforminga carefuland
Nelson,1996).Renal failure,diabetes melltus and
complete physicalexamination(Figure4.3).One should
hyperthyroidism-the threemostcommoncausesof
especiallycarefullypalpate theanimal'sabdomento
polyuria andpolydipsia incats-alltypicallydevelop in
evaluate kidney and liversize.In intact bitches external
older-aged cats.
genitalia should be examined for vaginal discharge
The reproductive historymay also provide helpful
suggestive ofpyometra.Lymph nodes should becare-
clues as to the cause ofpolyuria and polydipsia,
fullypalpated as generalized enlargement could sug-
especially in dogs.For example,pyometrais typically
gest lymphoma withsecondaryhypercalcaemia.The
a disorderofmiddle-agedintactbitches,withclinical
perianal area should alsobe carefully palpated,par
signsofpolyuria andpolydipsia developingduringor
ticularlyinbitches,foranalsacadenocarcinoma,which
immediately afterthe dioestrousphase of the oestrous
can also cause hypercalcaemia.Findings suggestive
cycle (Dun,1998).With hyperadrenocorticism,intat
ofhyperadrenocorticism include potbelly,bilaterally
bitchesmayshowprolongedanoestrus,whereasmales
symmetrical hair lossandhepatomegaly.In animals
maydeveloptesticularatrophyorhaveadecreased
with pyelonephritis,fever or perirenal pain may be
libido(Peterson,1984).
present.Thepresenceofcataractsindogs,orhindlimb
19
Chapter 4Investigationof polyuria and polydipsia
dogs and cats.These are listed in Figure4.3inorderof
Dogs
most to least common.Recommended initial diagnos-
Hyperadrenocorticism
tic tests include:
Diabetes melitus
Complete blood cell count (CBC)
Chronic renal failure
Pyelonephris
Serumbiochemical profilewithelectrolytes
Serum total thyroxine (T4) determination in
Pyometra
Hypercalcaemia
middle-aged toolder cats
Psychogenic polydipia
。
Complete urinalysis with culture and sensitivity.
Diabetes insipidus
Liver disease
Acarefulevaluationofthisinitialdatabase,together
Hypoadrerocorticism
with thehistoryandresultsofphysical examination,
Acromegaly
usually provides the diagnosis immediately (e.g.overt
renal failure,hyperthyroidismordiabetesmellitus)or
Cats
offerscluesto theunderlyingcauseof thepolyuria and
Chronic renal failure
polydipsia (see Figure 4.2).For example, dogs with
Diabetesmellitus
hyperadrenocorticism commonly have a stress
Hyperthyroidism
leucogram(i.e.neutrophilia,lymphopenia and eosino-
Hypercalcaemia
penia).Over90%of dogswithhyperadrenocorticism
Pyelonephritis
Hypokalaemia
Acromegaly
whereasoverhalfhavehypercholesterolaemia
Postoostructive diuresis
(Peterson,1984).
Hyperadrenocorticism
In contrast,physicalexamination findings and rou-
Hypoadrenocorticism
tinebloodworkaregenerallyunremarkableinanimals
Diabetes insipidus
with less common causes ofpolyuria and polydipsia
such as central diabetes insipidus,primary nephro-
4.3
Differential'rule outs'forpolyuria and polydipsia
genic diabetes insipidusandpsychogenicpolydipsia.
indogsand cats,listed frommosttoleastcommon.
Whenabnormalitiesarepresent,theyareusuallysec-
ondary todehydrationcausedbywaterrestrictionby
neuropathyincats,suggests diabetesmellitus.ncats,
theowner.Suchabnormalitiesmayincludea slightly
one should always palpate the cervicalarea fora
increasedpackedcellvolume(PcV)orhypernatraemia.
thyroidnodulebecausehyperthyroidismisarelatively
common cause of polyuria and polydipsia(Peterson et
Complete urinalysis
al,1983).
Urinalysisisamajorkeyindetermining thepresence of
Incontrast,dogs andcatswithdiabetesinsipiduor
a waterbalanceproblemand thedisordercausing the
polyuria andpolydipsia (see Figure 4.2).The most
andactive and seldomshowanyabnormalitieson
important features of urinalysis are:the SG or osmo-
physicalexamination.Dehydration israrelydetected
lality;the presence or absence of glucose,protein or
asthiswoulddeveloponly if the animal's accessto
bacteria;and the cellularityof the sample.
waterhadbeenrestrictedby the owner.
A urine SG <1.030 in dogs and<1.035 in cats
suggests a concentrating defect and supports the
Measurement ofwater consumption
complaint of polyuria （Feldman and Nelson,1996;
Behrend,2002).Persistent glycosuria isdiagnosticfor
polydipsiaistoestablish thattheproblem actually
primaryrenal glycosuriaor,morecommonly,diabetes
exists,preferablybyacombinationofhistory,random
melitus.Significantproteinuria in the presence of an
urineSGdeterminationsand,inecessaryhomemea
inactive urinary sediment and dilute urine canbeasso-
urementofwaterconsumptionoverseveral days.
ciatedwithhyperadrenocorticism,pyelonephritis,pyo-
Ifthe dailywaterintakeisfound tobenormalorif a
metra or glomerulonephritis.
randomurineSG determinationis>1.035,additional
An active urine sediment （pyuria,haematuria or
history shouldbeobtainedtoruleoutotherurinarytract
bacteriuria) in a sample obtained by catheterization or
disorders(such asurinaryincontinence ordysuria)that
cystocentesis supports urinary tract infection and pos-
commonly are confused with polyuria.lf,however,
sible pyelonephritis.Because urine sediment exami-
random urine SG areconsistently<1.030 in dogs and
nationmaybemisleadinginan extremely dilute urine
<1.035incats,and daily water intake is>100 ml/kg for
sample,aurine culture should always be done torule
dogs and45ml/kg forcats,polyuria andpolydipsia are
out pyelonephritis,regardless of sediment examina-
indeedpresentanda diagnosticwork-uptodetermine
tion findings.
the cause is warranted.
Furtherdiagnosticwork-up
Screening laboratory tests
If theresults of the screening laboratory tests are
unhelpful the direction of further diagnostic work-up
Initial minimum database
can often be based on the urine SG (Figure 4.4).For
Once a problem of water balance is confirmed,a
example,dogs and catswithSG>1.030-1.035,with-
out glycosuria,areprobably not polyuric and needno
more commoncauses ofpolyuria andpolydipsia in
furtherwork-up:at leastforpolyuria andpolydipsia.
20
Chapter4Investigationofpolyuria andpolydipsia
(cats),early renal insufficiency or pyelonephritis,as
Urine SG<1.008
wellaspsychogenicpolydipsia andpartial forms of
diabetes insipidus.
Psychogenic polydipsia
Again,when considering animals with urine SG
Diabetes insipidus (complete)
>1.0o8 hyperadrenocorticism and hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism (cats)
should firstberuledout.With thisgroupof disorders,
Urine SG between 1.008 and 1.029
pyelonephritisandearlyrenalinsufficiency should next
beruledoutbefore evaluating theanimal forpsycho-
Atypical hyperadrenocorticism (most common!)
genicpolydipsia and diabetes insipiduswithawater
Earyrenal disease
deprivationtest.Performing awaterdeprivationtestas
Typical and occul pyelonephritis
adiagnostic tool in the face ofunsuspectedrenal
Hyperthyrcidism (cats)
insufficiencyorpyelonephritiscould induceovertrenal
Psychogenic poiydipsia
Diabetes insipidus (patial)
failure or urosepsis（Feldman and Nelson,1996;
Barsanti et al.,2000;DiBartola,2000;Nichols,2001).
Urine SG>1.030(without glycosuria)
Toavoid thiscomplication,a sensible approachistodo
Probably not polyuric
thefollowing:
No furtherwork-up forpolyuriaand polydipsianeeded.
1.Perform a urine cuiture tohelp exclude
Diferential diagnosis based on urine specific
pyelonephritis andassociatedurinarytractinfection.
4.4
gravity(SG)ceterminationin animalswith
2.
Evaluaterenal size and architectureby
normal results of inilial screening tests(CBC,serum
abdominalradiographyor,preferably,renal
biochemical profilc and urinalysis).
ultrasonography.The uitrasonographic
appearanceofrenalparenchymal disease
UrineSG1.008:AurineSG consistently<1.008ina
(chronic renal failure) includes increased cortical
middle-aged to older dog is usually associated with
echogenicity and loss of a distinct
diabetes insipidus,psychogenicpolydipsia,oratypical
corticomedullary junction (Konde,1985).The
hyperadrenocorticism.In dogs with atypica/ hyper-
kidneys may appear smaller than normal and
adrenocorticism,palyuria and polydipsia are major
have an illdefined or irregular border.Similar
clinical signs but other characteristic clinical signs are
ultrasonographic findings,in addition to a dilated
mild orabsent(Barsantietal.,2000;Nichols,2001). In
renai peivis,are characteristic of
addition,these dogs with atypical disease lack the
pyelonephritis.
serumbiochemical abnormalitiescommonly associ-
atedwithhyperadrenocorticism(i.e.elevated serum
If urine culture results are negative and radio-
ALPactivity and hypercholesterolaemia).Results of
graphic orultrasonographic findings are equivocal,a
adrenal function tests in these dogs are usually con-
creatinineoriohexolclearancetest(Brownetal.,1996;
sistentwithmild hyperadrenocorticism.
DiBartola,2000) or renal biopsy may be indicated. In
In general,when considering polyuric dogs with a
rare cases,the urine culture maybe negative even if
urine SG of<1.008,hyperadrenocorticism should be
pyelonephritis is present.lf clinical orultrasonographic
ruled out first before testingforcentral diabetes insip-
findings suggest occult pyelonephritis,a therapeutic
idus and psychogenicpolydipsia.There are several
trial with an appropriate antibiotic(e.g.enrofloxacin)
reasonsformaking thisrecommendation:thelattertwo
should be instituted.
disorders of water metabolism aremuchiesscommon
than hyperadrenocorticism (see Figure 4.3); the diag-
nostictestsofchoice to differentiate these disorders-
Specific tests to differentiate
thewaterdeprivationtestora therapeutictrial withthe
diabetes insipidus from primary
ADH analogue desmopressin-are time-consuming
polydipsia
and expensive (Feldman and Nelson,1996;Nichols,
Several different diagnostic approachescanbeused
spondtothese testsina manner similar to dogswith
to confirmcentral diabetesinsipidus,nephrogenicdia-
central diabetes insipidus,resulting ina misdiagnosis
(Mulnix et al.,1976;Hardy,1982).
Thewaterdeprivationtest isgenerallyconsideredby
In cats,a urine SG consistently<1.008 is associ-
most authoritiestobe thebest diagnostic test to differ-
ated with eitherdiabetes insipidus or hyperthyroidism.
entiatebetweenthese disorders.However,thewater
Obviously, hyperthyroidism shouid be ruled out first
deprivationtestislabourintensive,difficult toperform
beforeinitiating testing proceduresfor diabetes insip-
correctly,unpleasant for the animal,reliesheavilyon
idus.It is alsoimportant torealize that the finding of a
repeatedemptyingofthebladderandcanlead to
urineSG<1.008 in a catordogexcludesmild (occult)
untoward complications andmisdiagnosisinsome
renal disease,so precautions associated with the
animals.
water deprivation test arenot necessary.
A simplerdiagnostic approach that is especially
appealing in clinical practice is evaluation of the ani-
UrineSGbetween 1.008and1.029:AurineSGof
mal'sresponse to trial therapywiththe ADH analogue,
1.008-1.012orgreater(but<1.030)canbe associated
desmopressin.This approach is less complicated and
with hyperadrenocorticism（dogs),hyperthyroidism
time consuming than the water deprivation test,and
21
.
Chapter 4  Investigation of polyuria and polydipsia
certainly easier on the animal. The cost of the two
Stage 2 - Abrupt water deprivation: The goal of
approaches varies according to circumstances but is
Stage 2 is to achieve maximal ADH secretion and
often comparable.
concentration of urine. This would be expected to occur
after a 3-5 % loss of body weight. This procedure must
Water deprivation test
be done in the veterinary clinic and is best started early
The water deprivation test is the time-honoured test
in the day because the animal must be evaluated
commonly used to differentiate central diabetes insip-
frequently.
idus, primary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and pri-
To start the test the animal's bladder is completely
mary (psychogenic) polydipsia (Mulnix et al., 1976).
emptied and the urine SG (or osmolality) recorded, an
This fest is designed to determine whether endo-
exact body weight is obtained and all water and food
genous ADH is released in response to dehydration
removed. At 1-2-hour intervals, the urinary bladder is 
s o Ajewou puodsal ueo sheupiy aun jeuaum pue
again completely emptied, the urine SG (or osmolality)
increased circulating concentrations.
measured and the animal is reweighed (to monitor for
The water deprivation test should be performed
dehydration). Although urine osmolality is generally
only after all other causes of polyuria and palydipsia
 considered to be more accurate thanurine SG (Feldman
have been ruled out, limiting the differential diagnosis
and Nelson, 1996), determination of urine osmolality is
to central diabetes insipidus, primary nephrogenic dia-
expensive and the results are rlot immediately avail-
betes insipidus and psychogenic palydipsia (see Fig-
able to the clinician. Thus, urine SG and body weight
ure 4.3). Failure to recognizethe more common polyuric
assume great importance for decision making during
syndromes such as pyometra. pyelonephritis, early
the abrupt water deprivation test. In order to obtain an
renal insufficiency, hypercalcaemia or hyperadreno-
exact body weight, use of accurate digital scales
corticism may lead to an incorrect or inconclusive
(paediatric/infant digital scales for cats and small dogs)
diagnosis. Even more importantly, use of the water
is strongly recommended.
deprivation test in these patients may be dangerous.
To empty the animal's urinary bladder completely
Potential complications associated with the water dep-
transurethral catheterization may be used. However,
rivation test include: severe dehydration; renal failure;
because the bladder must be emptied completely
and urosepsis in the unsuspected case of early renal
many times at frequent intervals, the use of an indwell-
insuficiency or pyelonephritis.
ing urinary catheter should be considered, especially in
females. In either case, the use of prophylactic anti-
Protocol
biotic cover should be considered because of the
It is recommended that the water deprivation test be
 combined risk for infection of low urine SG and cath-
performed in three consecutive stages:
eterization.
 The water deprivation testis continued until there is
1.0
Gradual water restriction
either a 5% loss of body weight or the urine SG is
2.F
Followed immediately by abrupt water
>1.030 in dogs (1.035 in cats). The major difficulty with
deprivation
the water deprivation test is that its duration can never
 3. Followed immediately by an ADH (desmopressin)
be accurately predicted. Although most dogs and cats 
Tesponse test if necessary.
with either central diabetes insipidus or primary neph-
rogenic diabetes insipidus lose 5% of their body weight 
Stage 7 - Gradual water restriction: To minimize the
within a few hours, many animals will fail to reach the 
effects of renal medullary washout on test results.
 5% dehydration endpoint by the end of the working
 progressive water restriction before abrupt water dep-
day. In that situation, the patient can be transferred to
rivation is recommended. Prolonged polyuria, no mat-
a facility with overnight care so that monitoring of urine
ter what the cause, leads to renal medullary washout;
SG and body weight can continue ovarnight. Alterna-
such medullary washout impairs the ability of the renal
tively, overnight access to water in maintenance
tubule to concentrate urine, even in the presence of
amounts (2.5-3.0 ml/kg/h) can be provided; the follow-
high circulating concentrations of ADH and may affect
ing morning, water is once again withdrawn and moni-
the ability of the water deprivation test to differentiate
toring continued until a 5% loss of body weight or
between the causes of polyuria and polydipsia (Hardy,
concentrated urine SG is reached.
1982; Feldman and Nelson, 1996; DiBartola, 2000).
 To evaluate the results of the water deprivation test,
One common protocol for gradual water restriction
 the time taken for dehydration to develop and the final
 is for the owner to begin reducing the amount of water
SG reached are reviewed (Figure 4.5). Dogs and cats
provided to the animal 3 days before the abrupt water
with complete central or primary nephrogenic diabetes
deprivation test is performed in the hospital. During the
initial 24 hours, the dog or cat is alowed twice its
hours; they cannot concentrate urine above a SG of
normal daily water requirement (120-150 ml/kg) di-
1.007 even after severe dehydration. In contrast, ani-
vided into 6-8 small portions.During the next 24hours,
mals with partial central diabetes insipidus or primary
80-100 ml/kg should be given, and over the last 24
(psychogenic) polydipsia may take much longer (1-4
hours, normal maintenance requirements (60-80 ml/
days) to become dehydrated. Dogs and cats with
kg) should be provided (Feldman and Nelson, 1996;
partial central diabetes insipidus can concentrate urine
Behrend, 2002). During the period of gradual water
above a SG of 1.008 after dehydration, but their urine
restriction, owners should feed dry food and monitor
SG remains <1.020. Dogs with psychogenic polydipsia
the animal's body weight on a daily basis.
can usually increase their urine SG above 1.030 by the
22
Chapter4Investigationofpolyuriaandpolydipsia
Disorder
Random urine
Urine SG after
Urine SG after
Water consumption
SG
water deprivation
desmopressin
after desmopressin
administration
therapeutictrial
Central diabetes insipidus (complete)
1.001-1.007
<1.008
Increase to >1.010-1.015
>50% decrease
Central diabetes insipidus (partial)
1.001-1.007
1.008-1.020
Increase to >1.015
>50% decrease
Primarynephrogenicdiabetesinsipidus
1.001-1.007
<1.008
No change (remains <1.008)
No decrease
Primary polydipsia
1.001-1.020
>1.030
No additional increase
Usuallyno decrease
(<50% decrease)
Differentiating central diabotes insipicus,primaryephrogenicdiabetesinsipidus andprimarypolydipsia,using
4.5
endpointof the test(i.e.aftera 5%loss of body weight)
Misdiagnosis associatedwith thewater
andneednofurtherinvestigation.
deprivation test
Theresults ofwater deprivation and desmopressin
Stage3-Response tointravenousdesmopressin:
response testing are not always straightforward;re-
If the dog orcat has lost5%ormore of its original body
sultscanbedifficult tointerpret andmayevenleadto
weightafterwaterdeprivationbuttheurineSGremains
misdiagnosis.Measurement of the plasma ADH con-
<1.015,an ADH(desmopressin)response test should
centration(see below)may help improve diagnostic
beperformed.Water can nowbeprovided inmainte-
accuracy,but thisscostly,pecial samplehandling
nance amounts (2.5-3.0 ml/kg/h);larger amounts
required and it isnotwidelyavailable.
shouldbe avoided as there is the potential dangerof
Themostcommonproblem of interpretationlead-
overhydration andinductionofcerebraloedema when
ing to misdiagnosisprobablyinvolvespolyuric dogs
desmopressin is administered.Again, this portion of
withunsuspected atypical hyperadrenocorticism.Dis-
the test isbeststartedearlyinthedaybecausethe
tinctionbetweendogswithpartialcentral diabetes
animal mustbeevaluated frequently.
insipidus or psychogenic polydipsia,and those with
Toperform thistest,thesyntheticanalogueofH,
hyperadrenocorticism,can be difficult to impossible
desmopressin,is given intravenously.Although
based onresults ofthe waterdeprivationtest(Feldman
desmopressiniscommerciallyavailableasaparenteral
and Nelson,1996;Barsanti et al.,2000).Dogs with
hyperadrenocorticismcommonlyexhibit eithera com-
formulationis expensive.Theintranasalpreparationof
pleteability to concentrateurineafter dehydration
desmopressin (100 μg/ml), which is cheaper, can be
(ylggesting psychogenicpolydipsia) or an incomplete
used instead (Nichols and Hohenhaus,1994;Barsanti
abilityto concentrate urineafter dehydrationfollowed
etal.,2000;DiBartola,2000:Nichols,2000).However,
byafurtherincreaseofSGto>1.020afterdesmopressin
because this intranasal preparation is not sterile it is
administration(suggesting partial central diabetes in-
best topassit throughabacteriostatic filter and then
sipidus).Misdiagnosisofhyperadrenocorticismismost
transferthe solutiontoa sterilevial beforeintravenous
easily avoided by screening for this disorder using a
administration.After the intravenous administration of
urine cortisol:creatinine ratio,adrenocorticotropic
10-20 ug desmopressin,the urine SG(orosmolality)is
hormone(ACTH)response test,or low-dose dexam-
monitoredevery2hoursfor8-10hours andthen at12
ethasone suppression test beforewaterdeprivation.
and24hours(Feldman andNelson,1996;Barsantiet
al.,2000;Nichols,2001).The maximum response to
Circulating ADH concentrations
intravenousdesmopressinusually occurs 4-8hours
Measurementofendogenous plasmaADH concentra-
after administration,althoughitmaytakeas longas24
hours in some dogs and cats.
diabetesinsipidusfromprimarypolydipsia inhuman
Interpretation of theresults of the desmopressin
patients.Thesemeasurementsareparticularlyhelpful
response test is again dependent upon the maximum
when donebeforeand afterwaterdeprivation,and
SGreached,withapositiveresponsebeing arisein
compared with the concurrentplasma and urine
urine SG(seeFigure4.5).Dogs and cats withcomplete
osmolalites.After 5%dehydration,theplasma ADH
centraldiabetes insipidus cannot concentrate urine
concentrationgenerallyremainslowinpatientswith
above a SGof 1.007after5%dehydration,whereas
central diabetes insipidus,whereas a high-normal to
animals with partial central diabetes insipidus can
high concentration is found in patients with nephro-
concentrate urine slightly after dehydration but the SG
genic diabetes insipidus (Robertson, 2001). Most
remains<1.015-1.020.Both dogs andcats with cen-
patients with primary polydipsiahave a circulating ADH
tral diabetes insipidus show a positive response to
valuethatremainswithinthereferencerange.
desmopressin (an increase in urine SG to>1.010-
Onlyafewreportshave beenpublished concerning
1.015).Patients with congenital nephrogenic diabetes
the use of the plasma ADH concentration in the difer-
insipidus are unable toconcentrate urineafterwater
ential diagnosis of polyuria and polydipsia in dogs and
restriction ordesmopressin administration.
cats,but the results appear similar to those found in
23
:1
Chapter 4  1nvestigation of polyuria and polydipsia
human patients (Biewenga et al., 1987; Brown et al.,
 ability in animals with central diabetes insipidus. His-
1993). It is claar, however, that more extensive studies
torically, ADH tannate in oil, an extract of ADH pre-
 on larger numbers of animals with primary disorders of
pared from bovine and porcine pituitary glands, was
polyuria and polydipsia need to be carried out before
administered every 2-3 days as needed to control
routine use of plasma ADH determinations can be
polyuria and polydipsia. Because this product is no
recommended. In addition, because of high cost,
longer available, desmopressin acetate, a synthetic
limited availability and special sample handling.
analogue of ADH with prolonged and enhanced anti-
 measurement of plasma ADH concentrations may not
diuretic activity, has become the drug of choice for the
be a practical test for most veterinary surgeons or
pue sbop u! snpidisu! seleqeip jejuen jo juewean
owners.
cats.
Evaluation of the response to a
Formulations of desmopressin acetate
therapeutlc trial with desmopressin
Desmopressin acetate is available in preparations for
A simpler and more practical method of diagnosis that
parenteral, intranasal or oral administration. The inject-
 can be recommended as an alternative to water depriv-
able sterile solution of desmopressin acetate (4 μg/ml)
ation and ADH response testing is evaluation of the
is useful for diagnostic testing but can be used subcu-
clinical response to a closely monitored therapeutic
taneously for long-term treatment in animals that either
trial with desmopressin (Nichols and Hohenhaus, 1994;
do not tolerate or fail to absorb the drug given by the
Feldman and Nelson, 1996; Nichols, 2000). A thera-
oral or conjunctival routes. Because the cost of the 
peutic trial with desmopressin can also be considered
injectable desmopressin is approximately 7-20 times
higher per μg than the intranasal preparation, the
test has failed to establish a definitive diagnosis. Again,
intranasal form of desmopressin - although not de-
before a desmopressin trial is initiated, it is extremely
important to rule out all other common causes of
ously to dogs and cats ideally after sterilization af the
preparation (by passing through abacteriostaticfilter).
differential diagnosis to central diabetes insipidus, pri-
Clinically the intranasal and injectable preparations of
desmopressin induce indistinguishable responses when 
(psychogenic) polydipsia.
 administered parenterally.
To perform the test, the owner should first measure
The intranasal preparation of desmopressin is sup-
the animal's 24-hour water intake for 2-3 days before
plied as a solution (1o0 μg/mil) in which one drop of
desmopressin is initiated, allowing free-choice water
nasal solution corresponds to 1.5-4.0 μg of desmo-
intake. The dog or cat is then treated with therapeutic
pressin. A tubercuin or insuin syringe may be used for
dosages of desmopressin (see below), which should 
more accurate dosing. Although administration of medi-
be administered either subcutaneously or by the con-
cation to dogs and cats via the intranasal route is
junctival route for 5-7 days. During this treatrnent period
possible it is not well tolerated by many animals, Either
the owner should continue to measure the animal's daily
placing drops in the canjunctival sac or injecting the
 water intake and monitor the degree of urine output. The
solution subcutaneously (after sterilization of the intra-
 serum sodium concentration can also be monitored to
nasal solution) is a more suitable alternative for most
ensure that hyponatraemia has not developed.
dogs and cats.
A dramatic reduction in water intake (>50 % of pre-
The oral preparation of desmopressin is available
 treatment measurements) and polyuria strongly sug-
as 0.1-0.2 mg tablets, with each 0.1 mg roughly
gests a diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus, whereas
comparable to 5 μg (1 large drop) of the intranasal
a lack of any reduction in polydipsia and polyuria is
preparation. In some dogs and cats, oral administra-
most consistent with primary nephrogenic diabetes
fian of desmopressin daes not appear to control signs
insipidus. With more prolonged treatment water con-
of polyuria and polydipsia as effectively as subcutane-
sumption and urine output should completely normal-
 ous or conjunctival administration of the drug.
ize in animals with central diabetes insipidus.
Ainsn eisdpkiod (uaboyosd) aewudym soa
 Regimen of long-term treatment with
have no or only minimal reduction in water intake affer
desmopressin
desmopressin treatment, even after prolonged admin-
In dogs and cats with central diabetes insipidus daily
istration. Occasionally, however, desmopressin treat-
administration of desmopressin completely eliminates
ment of dogs with primary polydipsia greatly reduces
 polyuria and polydipsia. However, because of indi-
polyuria without affecting their increased water intake.
vidual differences in absorption and metabolism, the
resulting in the development of water intoxication and
dose required to achieve complete, around-the-clock
 severe hyponatraemia.
control varies from patient to patient.
Recommended initial doses of desmopressin vary
depending on the route of administration and the size
Treatment of diabetes insipidus and
of the animal. lf the conjunctival route is employed,
primary polyuria
once or twice daily is usually sufficient to control
Treatment of central diabetes insipidus
polyuria. If the subcutaneous route of administration is
used a starting dose of 2-5 μg once or twice daily is
lary hypertonicity and a normal urinary concentrating
given; whereas, with the oral tablets an initial dose of
Chapter4Investigationofpolyuria andpolydipsia
0.1mg once to twice daily is initiated.Nomatterwhat
pet because of financial concerns.Because polyuria
routeofadministration,thedailydoseshouldbegradu-
and polydipsia donot pose a serious health hazard in
ally adjusted as needed to control signs of polydipsia
these animals(as long as adequate accesstowateris
and polyuria.Although the duration of effect of
available),treatment is not essential or mandatory.
desmopressinvaries from8-24hours,a single daily
Mostuntreated animals arehoused in anenvironment
treatment (generally given in the evening in order to
(usually outdoors) in which the polyuria is acceptable.
In dogs andcatswith complete diabetes insipidus
control of water intake.
however,it is imperative that the water never be
Desmopressinis safe fordogs and catswith central
restricted,sincetheinabilitytoconcentrateurinemay
diabetes insipidus.Adverse effects of desmopressin
leadtodehydrationandpossiblyevendeathfrom
areuncommon,butdevelopmentofwaterintoxication
neurological complications.
andhyponatraemiaduring treatmentwiththedrugis
possible.To avoid this potential problem it is recom-
mended thatsubsequent dosesof desmopressin are
References and further reading
only administered when the polyuria returns.The prin-
BarsantiJA,DiBartolaSPandFincoDR(20oo)Diagnostlicapproach
preparationsin the treatment ofcentral diabetesinsip-
topolyuria and polydipsia.In:Kirk'sCurrentVeterinary Tnerapy
Xl SmallAnimalPractice,ed.JD Bonagura,pp.831-835.WB
idus isthe drug'sconsiderable expense.Theoral route
Saunders,Philadelphia
of administration is the most expensive while the sub-
Behrend EN(2002) Managing diabetesinsipidusandothercauses of
cutaneousroute of administrationisgenerallythemost
polyuriaandpolydipsia.VeterinaryMedicine97,753-761
Biewenga WJ,van denBrom WEand Mol JA(1987)The use of
cost-effective.
argininevasopressinmeasurementsinthepolyuricdog.Tjidschrift
voor diergeneeskunde112Suppl1,117S-120S
BreitschwerdiEB(1981)Clinicalabnormalitiesofurineconcentration
Treatmentofprimarynephrogenic
diabetes insipidus
PracticingVeterinarian3,412-414
Thiazidediureticshavebeenused,withsomepartial
Brown BA,PetersonME and Robertson GL(1993) Evaluation of the
plasma vasopressin,plasma sodium,and urine osmolality
success, to treat animals with nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus.Theadministration ofa thiazidediuretic
diabetesinsipidusournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicin7113
results in mild dehydration,enhanced proximal renal
（1996)Evaluationofasingleinjctinmethod,uingiohexolfr
tubularreabsorptionofsodium anddecreaseddelivery
estimating glomerularfiltrationrateincatsand dogs.American
of tubularfluid to the distal nephron,and maycause a
JournalofVeterinaryResearch57,105-110
Cohen M and Post GS(2002) Water transport in the kidney and
reductioninurineoutput(Breitschwerdt,1981;Feldman
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.Journa!ofVeterinary Internal
and Nelson,1996)
Medicine16,510-517
DiBartola SP(20oo)Disorders of sodium and water:hypernatremia
Oraladministrationof chlorothiazide(20-40mg/kg.
and hyponatremia.In:FluidTherapy inSmallAnimalPractice,
twice daily) or hydrochlorothiazide (2.5-5.0 mg/kg,
ed.SPDiBartla,.4572.WBSaunersPhiladpia
twice daily)has been used in dog and cats with neph-
Dunn JK(1998) The dog with polydipsia and polyuria.In:BSAVA
Manual ofSmallAnimalEndocrinology.2dedned.AGTorrance
rogenic diabetes insipidus.Thiazidesreduceurine
and CTMooney,p.9SAVACheltenam
output upto50%in some animalsbutaretotally
FeldmanECand NelsonRW(1996)Walermetabolism and diabeles
ineffective in others.These drugs areno longerwidely
insipidus.In:Canine and Feline EndocrinologyandReproduction,
2dFa
available.Restriction of dietary sodium and protein
Philadelphia
mayreduce the amountof solute thatmustbe excreted
HarbMF,snRwFeldmanC,ollMoncrieffCandGriy
SM (1996) Central diabetes insipidus in dogs:20 casas (1986-
intotheurineeachday,anditmayalsohelpreduce
1995).Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
obligatorywaterloss andpolyuria in thesepatients.
209,1884-1888
Hardy RM(1982)Disorders of watermetabolism.Veterinary Clinics
Treatment ofprimary polyuria
of NorthAmerica:SmallAnimalPractice12.353-373
Konde LJ (1985)Sonography of the kidney.Veterinary Clinics of
In dogswithpsychogenicprimarypolydipsia,attempts
NorihAmerica:SmallAnimalPractice15.1149-1158
canbemade toreducedailywater intakegradually
Mulnix JA, Rijnberk A and Hendriks HJ (1976) Evaluation of a
modifiedwater-deprivationtestfordiagnosisofpolyuricdisorders
(over 1-3 months) to a volume of 60-80 ml/kg,which
indogs.Journa!of theAmericanVeterinaryMedical Association
iswithin the high-normal limitsfor clinicallyhealthy
169,1327-1330
Nichols R(2ooo)Clinical useofthevasopressinanalogueDDAVPfor
dogs.The total 24-hour water volume should be di-
the diagnosisand treatmentofdiabetesinsipidus.In:Kirk's
vided into severalaliquotsgiven throughout theday.In
CurrentVeterinaryTherapy.Xill.SmallAnimalPracticeedD
many dogs,such limiting of water intake serves to
Bonagura,p.325-326.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
NicholsR(2001)Polyuria andpolydipsia.Diagnostic approachand
breakthe cycle ofprimarypolydipsia andresultant
problemsassociatedwithpatientevaluation.VeterinaryClinics
polyuria,with waterintakespontaneouslyreturning to
ofNorthAmerica:SmallAnima!Practice31,833-844
normal.Othertechniques,such asbehaviourmodifica-
Nichols Rand Hohenhaus AE(1994) Use ofthe vasopressin analogue
desmopressinforpolyuriaandbleedingdisorders.Journalofthe
tionwith increasedexercise,bringinganotherpetinto
AmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation205,168-173
thehome,ormoving the dogto alargerliving environ-
PetersonME（1984）Hyperadrenocoricism.Veterinary Clinics of
NorthAmerica:SmallAnimalPractice14,731-749
ment oranareain which morecontactwithpeople is
Peterson ME,Kintzer PP,Cavanagh PG,Fox PR,Ferguson DC
possiblemaybehelpfulinresolvingthepolydipsiaand
Johnson GF and Becker DV (1983)Feline hyperthyroidism:
associatedpolyuria in these dogs.
pretreatment clinical and labaratory evaluation of 131 cases.
Jourmal of theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation183,
103-110
No treatment
Robertsan GL(2001)Antidiuretic hormone.Normal and disordered
In some dogs and cats with diabetes insipidus or
functian.Endocrinologyand MetabolismClinics of NorthAmerica
30,671-694
nves
hypercalcaemia
and hypocalcaemia
Penney J. Barber
Introduction
trolled predominately by one endocrine axis involving
parathormone (parathyroid hormone (PTH), the ac-
 Calcium is the most abundant cation in the mammalian.
tive form of vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
body. The majority (99%) is found in the skeleton, in the
(1,25(OH),D) or calcitriol) and calcitonin, collectively
form of hydroxyapatite, Ca:,(PO)(OH),, the remain-
termed the calcitropic hormones. Phosphate concen-
der being present in the extracellular fluids and soft
tration appears to be controlled less stringently and its
tissues. In bone, calcium salts provide the structural
regulation is generally considered to be secondary to
rigidity of the skeleton, with a further vital function as a
that of calcium.
calcium reserve. There is a pool of exchangeable
PTH is a polypeptide hormone that is secreted from
calcium present on bone surfaces. Exchange occurs
the chief cells of the parathyroid glands, principally in
between this pool, the calcium incorporated within
response to hypocalcaemia. It acts to normalize serum
bone, andextra-andintracellular calcium. This reserve
calcium concentrations. Calcitonin, produced by the
is vital to the precise control of circulating calcium
parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland in response to
concentrations.
acute hypercalcaemia, acts to inhibit osteoclastic bone
 Calcium is essential for many important functions 
resorption. The response of calcitonin to more chronic
including:
changes in calcium concentrations is incampletely
understood.
Neuromuscular excitability
 Membrane permeability
Distribution of circulating calcium and phosphate
Muscle contraction
Serum calcium is distributed between three definable
Blood coagulation
fractions. In healthy animals, approximately 50% is
Enzymatic reactions
 present as free hydrated calcium ions and the remain-
Hormone release.
der is bound. The latter fraction is further divided into
Calcium is an important second messenger within
total calcium, and complex bound making up the final
cells, regulating their response to various signals.
1 0%. The majority of protein bound calcium is bound to
Intracellular calcium is maintained at much lower con-
albumin. Calcium in the complex bound fraction is
centrations than serum calcium. Increases in the intra-
associated with low molecular weight ligands such as
cellular calcium concantration lead to dysfunction and
bicarbonate,lactate,citrate and phosphate.Itis gener-
eventual cell death.
ally considered that ionized calcium is the biologically
 Given the importance of calcium to so many biologi-
active form and the fraction subjectto rigid homeostatio
cal processes, particularly its effects on excitable tis-
control.
sues, complex homeostatic mechanisms exist to
 Serum phosphorus consists of inorganic phos-
maintain concentrations within a relatively narrow range.
phate, phospholipids and phosphate esters. As cal-
The regulation of serum calcium concentrations is
cium and phosphate exist in serum close to their
 oml au pue aleydsoyd jo yeul di payull Agealixau
saturation point, an increase in one causes a reciprocal
must always be considered together when approach-
decrease in the other, via the formation of insoluble
ing clinical disorders of calcium. The presence of
complexes. Soft tissue calcification is most severe
hypocalcaemia or hypercalcaemia indicates disruption
when the calcium phosphate product is >5.0.
of the normal homeostatic controls, although, a disor-
der of calcium balance cannot be excluded on the basis 
Parathyroid glands
of a normal plasma calcium concentration.
There are two pairs of parathyroid glands in the dog
and cat, the external (cranial) and internal (caudal)
parathyroid glands, both of which are closely associ-
Pathophysiology
ated with the thyroid gland. The cranial parathyroid
glands are located outside the connective tissue cap-
Physiology of calclum homeostasis
sule of the thyroid gland, and the caudal parathyroid
There is a complex relationship between calcium and
glands are inside the capsule embedded within thyroid
phosphate, with homeostasis of these minerals con-
tissue. Ectopic (but usually paratracheal) and acces-
26
Chapter5
Investigationofhypercalcaemiaandhypocalcaemia
soryparathyroid glands arenot uncommon.Thechief
Actionsofparathyroidhormone
cellsthatsecretePTHform themajorcell type and are
The principal function of PTH is to maintain the circu-
arranged in clusters or cords.
lating calciumconcentration within a narrowrange via
its actions on bone and kidney.Secondary to this
Parathyroid hormone
function,PTHregulatescirculatingphosphateconcen
Parathyroidhormoneis an84aminoacid,single-chain
tration.The broad functionsof PTH are:
polypeptide.The amino acid sequence of PTH is
knownfora numberofspeciesincluding the dog and
Tostimulate thereleaseofcalcium and
cat(Toribioetal.,2002)andshowsamarkeddegree
phosphate frombone
of conservation,particularly of the biologically active
To increase thereabsorption of calcium and
amino terminus(N-terminal amino acids 1-34).
inhibitthereabsorptionofphosphatefromthe
The cells of the parathyroid gland contain few
glomerularfiltrate
secretorygranules asthemajorityof PTH synthesized
To stimulatetheactivityof the1alpha
isproteolytically degraded within the chief cells.
hydroxylaseenzymelocatedintheproximal
Therefore the secretory productof the glands
tubules of the kidney,so increasing the synthesis
consists ofintact hormone and fragments-principally
of1,25（OH)Dand therefore indirectlyincreasing
inactive,carboxylterminalfragments.Theparathyroid
the intestinal absorptionof calciumand
gland appearsto synthesizeexcessive quantitiesof
phosphate.The synthesis of 1,25（OH)D is
PTH.Theamount ofPTH available for secretion is
inhibitedbyhigh concentrations of phosphate.
controlled by calcium-dependent degradation,so that
Pathogenesis of disorders of calcium
merelydecreasingtherateofdegradationwill allow
homeostasis
increased secretion.In the longer term,the rate of
parathyroidcell proliferationwill also influencesecre-
torycapacity
Hypoparathyroidism-whereparathyroid
The principal secretagogue for PTH is a low extra-
secretion isreduced
cellularionized calcium concentration.An inverse sig-
Hyperparathyroidism-where parathyroid
moidalrelationshipexistsbetweentheextracellular
secretion is increased.
calciumconcentrationandPTHsecretion,with anon-
suppressible element toPTH secretion even atvery
These diseases may then be subdivided intopri
high calcium concentrations. In normocalcaemia the
mary orsecondary categories.In primary disorders the
rateof PTH secretion is only slightly greater than that
pathologyislocatedwithintheparathyroidgland,with
at maximally suppressed levels.Theparathyroid gland
secretion being inappropriate relative to the prevailing
isprimed torespond toevensmall hypocalcaemic
mineral balance.In secondary conditions a pathologi-
challenges with a marked increase in the rate of PTH
cal stateoutwiththeparathyroidglandaltersmineral
secretion.
homeostasisand the glandresponds in an appropriate
The second majorregulatorofPTH secretion is
mannerto attempttocorrect theimbalance.Anydisor-
1,25(OH)D.This regulation occurs at the level of PTH
der influencing calcium homeostasis has the potential
genetranscriptiontoinhibit thesynthesisof PTHwith
tolead tosecondaryparathyroid disease.
othervitamin Dmetaboliteshaving similarbut less
potenteffects.In contrastphosphate acts,as calcium,
Methods of assessment
decreasing the stabilityof PTH mRNA and decreasing
The expected biochemical and hormonal changes in
PTH synthesis (Moallem et al.,1998).
parathyroid disorders are summarized in Figure 5.1.
Primary
Primary
Secondary
Hyper-
hyperpara-
hypopara-
renal hyper-
vitaminosisD
hypercalcaemia
thyroidism
thyroidism
parathyroidism
of malignancy
Totalcalcium
↑
↑
IorNor↑
↑
↑
lonized calcium
↑
↑
↓or N
↑
↑
Phosphatea
N101
Nort
↑
↑
orN
PTH
Nor t
↑
、
PTHrP
N
N
Nort
N
↑
1,25(OH),D
IorNor↑
NJOT
N0
IorNortb
↓
25(OH)D3
N
N
N
Nor tb
N
Expected bicchemical andhormonal findings invaricus diseasesof calciumhomeostasisforbothdogs and cats.
5.1
Shading incicates thaf this parameter would notnormally be assayec in this disease and therefore accurate data are
not availablePhcsohatc concentrationsmaybe elevated inanimals whereconcurrent rena failure limits the abilityof the
kidney toexcrete excessphosphate.Thenature of the vilaminD toxicily will determinewheter 1,25（OH),Dor25（OH)D
concenalions are elevatedN,normal;PTH,parathyroid hormone (parathormone);PTHrP,parathyroid hormone-related
27
Chapter 5  Investigation of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
Calcium
Accurate measurement of ionized calcium concen-
Most laboratory assessments of calcium status involve
trations is possible using ion selective electrode (ISE)
the measurement of serum total calcium, which in-
systems that measure the electrochemical potential of
cludes the ionized, bound and complexed calcium
fractions. Although in many situations total calcium
Due to the effects of pH and temperature on the
concentrations parallel those of ionized calcium, meas-
equilibrium between the three fractions, samples for
urement of ionized calcium is always the ideal when
ionized calcium measurement need to be handled as
assessing calcium homeostasis.
for blood gas analysis. Ideally, samples should be
collected with minimal exposure to air and analysed
Total calcium
immediately. Exposure to air leads to loss of carbon
Young animals tend to have higher serum calcium
dioxide, an increase in pH, increased calcium binding
concentrations than adults. This is associated with
increased bone turnover and growth and is offen ac-
tion of ionized calcium. Therefore, measurements are
companied by similar increases in phosphate and
usually made in-house using accurate hand held and
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) concantrations.
desk top systems that are now available. Alternatively.
 Alterations in serum albumin or protein concentra-
if in-house analysis is not available, it is possible,
tion can have a major influance on the total calcium
although less preferable, to measure ionized calcium
concentration with a positive linear relationship exist-
in samples posted to external laboratories (within 72
ing between these parameters. Investigation of this
hours of collection) (Schenck et al., 1995) (see Chapter
phenomenon has allowed the derivation of formulae to
1). The quantity and type of heparin used as anticoagu-
adjust total calcium concentrations for abnormalities in 
lant may significantly affect the ionized calcium meas-
serum protein concentrations in the dog (Meuten etal.,
'wnjeo bupug Ag pue uonp Ag yoa juawan
1982).
Lyophilized, calcium-titrated heparin is preferred.
Adjusted total Ca (mmol/l) =
Parathyroid hormone
total Ca (mmol/l) - (0.025 x albumin (g/l) + 0.875
The presence of insufficient or excess PTH may be
predicted from a combination of parathyroid pathology
Adjusted total Ca (mmol/l) =
total Ca (mmoll) - (0.01 x total protein (g/l) + 0.825
and serum calcium concentrations, but definitive diag-
nosis of hyperparathyroidism or hypoparathyroidism,
In dogs with hyper- or hypoproteinaemia these
by definition, requires the measurement of PTH.
equations provide a useful estimate of calcium status;
Parathyroid hormone circulates as a mixture of
aul jeyiaum uo juapuadap bujea pasn uojenbe eul
intact hormone and various inactive mid-region and
altered protein concentrations are due to changes in
carboxyl terminal fragments. These fragments have a.
albumin alone or both albumin and globulin concentra-
longer plasma half-life and a higher plasma concentra--
 tions. However, recent evidence suggests that in many
tion than the intact molecule and are cleared from the
situations, particularly if other disease (such as renal
circulation by renal excretion, accumulating when
failure) is present rather than a simple alteration in
glomerular filtration rate is reduced. Parathyroid hor-
albumin or total protein concentration, these equations 
mone is generally measured by irnmunoassay tech-
do not accurately correct total calcium concentrations
niques using two-site assays (with antibodies to both
(Schenck and Chew, 2003). Therefore, whenever pos-
the amino and carboxyl terminals) ensuring only intact,
sible, and especially in cases of concurrent renal
biologically active hormone is measured. Given the
failure, ionized calcium concentrations should be meas-
'Hld uewny ol Hld auey pue aujueo jo kooowou
ured. Although a similar relationship exists in the cat it
commercial assays for human PTH have been vali-
is too variable to allow the derivation of such correction 
dated for use in the dog and cat. Recent studies have
equations (Flanders et al., 1989).
shown that the assay for intact hormone not only reacts
When an abnormal calcium value is found the result
should be confirmed ona second sample to ensure the
majority of which are 7-84 PTH. This has resulted in
condition is persistent, prior to starting extensive inves-
the dovelopment of a specific *whole' PTH assay that
tigations. When a disorder of calcium homeostasis is
does not detect these fragments. This assay for 'whole'
suspected serum protein, phosphate, urea and creati-
PTH, although validated for the dog (Estepa et al..
nine concentrations should be measured simultane-
 2003) has not yet been assessed in clinical cases.
ously to allow correct interpretation of the results.
Parathyroid hormone is a relatively labile hormone
and samples should be appropriately handled to pre-
lonized calclum
vent erroneously low results (see Chapter 1). Fasting
The distribution of calcium between the three fractions;
mid-morning samples are recommended in humans to
ianized, complexed and protein bound; is controlled by
correspond to the nadir in PTH secretion, so allowing
the law of mass action and is dependent upon the
concentration of calcium and binding ligands, as well
 from healthy subjects. There is no evidence to suggest 
as pH, Measurement of ionized calcium concentra-
 otherwise in dogs or cats.
tions is particularly useful in conditions such as renal
It is vital samples are taken before therapy is
failure, where there isconcurrent alteration in a number
started. Interpretation of PTH concentration .requires
of these parameters, and total calcium is likely to be a
simultaneous measurement of calcium. In the normal
poor reflection of calcium status.
animal hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia should be
28
Chapter 5
Investigation of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
！
accompanied by low and high PTH concentrations,
ducer, linear array transducers give improved visuali-
respectively, parathyroid secretion being appropriate
zation of the near field and superficial structures such
 t0 correct the derangement in calcium concentrations.
as the thyroid region. Due to their small size, parathy-
roid glands are not routinely seen on ultrasonographic
.
Parathyroid hormone-related protein
Parathormone-related protein (parathyroid hormone-
anechoic structures of <2 mm in diameter. It has been
related protein (PTHrP)) was first isolated as the pri-
suggested that the ultrasonographic identification of a
...
mary factor responsible for humoral hypercalcaemia of
parathyroid gland >4 mm in diameter is highly suspi-
malignancy (HHM), having effects analogous to those
cious for parathyroid adenoma cr carcinoma (Wisner
of PTH. Both PTH and PTHrP utilizethe same receptor;
et al., 1997; Sueda and Stefanacci, 2000); however,
however, the physiological role of PTHrP appears to be
hyperplastic glands secondary to chronic renal failure
.-. .
more complicated. PTHrP is produced in many tissues
have been reported to exceed these measurements
and appears to act locally in an autocrine or paracrine
(Reusch et al., 2000). Differentiation of hyperplastic
manner, to regulate cell growth and differentiation
and neoplastic lesions on the basis cf parathyroid size
amongst other functions (Strewler, 2000).
 and number is likely to be difficult given that hyperpla-
The hypercalcaemic effects of PTHrP are due to
sia can lead to marked and asymmetric parathyroid
enlargement, and that multiple neoplastic lesions are
of the amino terminal to thatof PTH. Beyond this region
not uncommon. Ultrasonography is most likely to be
 the two molecules are very dissimilarand hence PTHrP
useful in the preoperative localization of abnormall
is not detected in assays for PTH. Human assays for
parathyraid glands after a diagnosis of primary hyper-
 PTHrP have been used successfully to measure PTHrP
parathyroidism has been made. The technique is de-
and diagnose HHM in dogs and cats. Care is required
pendent on operator experience and false-negative
in sample handling as PTHrP is susceptible to proteo-
results are not uncommon.
lytic degradation (see Chapter 1).
 Parathyroid scintigraphy has also been used in the
localization of lesions in primary hyperparathyroidism.
Vitamin D
The preferred radionuclide is technetium-99m-
Although initially classed as a vitamin, in humans
sestamibi (99mTc-sestamibi) which is taken up by both
vitamin D is a conditionally essentiat nutrient, since
the thyroid and parathyroid glands. Therefore a dual
exposure to ultraviolet radiation negates the dietary
isotope subtraction (using smTc-pertechnetate or 12 to
requirement. Dogs and cats are unable to synthesize
identify thyroid tissue) or a single isotope dual phase
adequate amounts of vitamin D3 by photosynthesis
(making use of the persistence of the isotope in abnor-
and are cansequently dependent on dietary vitamin D,
 mal parathyroid tfissue) scan is used. However, the use
making this a true vitamin in these species. Vitamin D
of dual phase smTc-sestamibi scintigraphy had a poor
metabolites derived from vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol, of
plant origin) and vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol, of animal 
mic dogs (Matwichuk et al., 2000).
origin) are equally bioactive. Both are ingested in the
diet and absorbed in a similar manner to other fat-
Parathyroid pathology
 soluble compounds.
In some cases direct examination and biopsy may be
Vitamin D itself is not biclogically active and under-
required to completely evaluate parathyroid pathology.
goes conversion to more polar metabolites prior to
Classically parathyroid hyperplasia -implies an abnor-
biological activity. The majority of the initial conversion 
mality involving all parathyroid tissue, presumably as a.
occurs in the liver to produce a very weakly active
response to a secretory stimulus affecting all the glands,
metabolite, calcidiol (25(OH)D), which is the major
 such as that present in cases of secondary hyperpara-
circulating form of vitamin D. Subsequently, 25(OH)D
thyroidism. Autonomous secretion of hormone gener-
is further hydroxylated in tha proximal tubular cells of
 ally involves neoplastictissue withthe remaining normal
the kidney, by a mitochondrial 1 alpha-hydroxylase
tissue becoming atrophied.
enzyme,to the active metabolite 1,25(OH),D. This final 
 Unfortunately, the division of hyperparathyroidism
 phase of activation of vitamin D is very closely regu-
into primary and secondary disease on the basis of
lated and is the rate-limiting reaction of this synthetic
 parathyroid pathology is not this.simple. Firstly, abnor-
process.
mal tissue may appear normal on gross examination
The metabolites of vitamin D are chemically identi-
and secondly the criteria for distinguishing adenomas
cal across all species and so measurement of25(OH)D
from hyperplasia on the basis of gland histology are not
and 1,25(OH),D using human assays is possible in
well established. Indeed, pathologists tend to rely on
both dogs and cats.
the gross description of the glands, a tentative diagno
sis being based on the number of glands affected (one
Examination of the parathyroid glands
enlarged gland implies adenoma, whereas multiple
In cats, but not usually dogs. it is possible to palpate
-Ay yonouy (eiseidiediy sadwi suawabea puejo
enlarged parathyroid glands in a manner similar to
perplasia affects all parathyroid glands, the increase in 
palpation for goitre.
 the size of each gland is not necessarily uniform, even
A number of reports are now available describing
when the stimulus for enlargementis the same for each
the ultrasonographic evaluation of the parathyroid
 gland. It is possible for an apparently normal sized
glands in the cat and dog (Wisner and Nyland, 1998).
gland to be hyperplastic or contain areas of hyperplas-
Imaging is best carried out using a 7.5-10 MHz trans-
tic tissue, which must then be distinguished on histo-
29
Chapter5
Investigationofhypercalcaemia andhypocalcaemia
logy. At the other exireme hyperplasia can become
quencesof hypercalcaemia,includingreduced tubular
nodularinnature,termssuchasnodularhyperplasiaor
reabsorption of sodium,impaired responsiveness to
adenomatoushyperplasia are then utilized.Although
vasopressin(antidiuretichormone(ADH))andrenal
hyperplasiaisgenerallyassociatedwithsecondary
medullarywashout,combine to cause a decrease in
disease,parathyroidhyperplasiahasbeenrecorded
urine concentrating ability and subsequentpolyuria
asacause of primary hyperparathyroidism inboth the
with compensatorypolydipsia.Subsequently,nephro-
cat and dog（Thompson et al.,1984;DeVries et al.,
1993; Savary et al., 2000).
concentrating ability.Therefore,in the face of hyper-
calcaemia,urine specific gravity (SG)cannot be used
Hypercalcaemia
Calciumphosphate or calcium oxalate crystalluria
and urolith formation（Figure 5.3)may occur in
Clinical features
animalswithprolonged hypercalciuriaresultingfrom
Mild hypercalcaemiaresultsinfew,ifany,linicalsigns
hypercalcaemia.
that tendtobenon-specific.Moresevere clinical signs
areusuallyassociatedwithaconcurrentproblem
(e.g.neoplasia),the development of renal failure or
severehypercalcaemia.The severityof clinical signs
dependsnotonlyon themagnitudebut also therateof
developmentand durationof thehypercalcaemia.The
presence of acidosis will magnify the effects of hyper-
calcaemia by increasing the proportion of calcium in
the ionized fraction.The typical signs of hypercalcae-
mia in dogs are listed inFigure5.2,although clinical
signsrelating to the underlying disease maybe super-
®
imposed onthispicture.Incontrasttothe dog the most
®
frequently recorded clinical signs of hypercalcaemia in
the cat are anorexia and lethargy,with polyuria and
(a)
polydipsia being more rarely noted.
Polyuria and polydipsia
Impaired response of renal tubules to antidiuretichomone
.
Impaired renal tubular resorptionofsodium andchloride
Medullary washout
Secondary to renal damage
Weakess, deresson, mental dunes
Depressed excitability of muscular and nervous tissue
Anorexiavomiting and constipation
Decreased excitability of smooth muscle of the
gastrointestinal tract
Via effect on the central nervous system
Pancreatitis(rare)
Muscle twitching shivering and seizures
(b)
Cardiac arrhythmias
Lower urinary tract signs
Due to presence of urinary tract infection or calculi
Soft tissue calcification
5.2
Clinical features associated with
hypercalcaemia in dogs.
Hypercalcaemia may cause both functional (i.e.
reversible) and structural renal changes,manifest as
azotaemia,polyuria andpolydipsia.Azotaemia inhy-
percalcaemic animalsmaybepre-renal as aresult of
extracellularfluidvolumecontraction(anorexia,vomit
(c
ing andpolyuria)andrenal vasoconstriction,ordue to
intrinsicrenal failure,usually chronicbutmorerarely
(a,b) Unstained urine seciment examination
5.3
acute.Intrinsicrenal damage is causedby sustained
demonstrating calcium oxalate crystals in a cat
renalvasoconstriction resultingin ischaemicinjury and
with idiopathic hypercalcaemia.(a) Calcium oxalate
the direct toxic effect of calcium,particularly on the
cihydrate crystal showingcharacleristicappearance.
(b)Calcium oxalate monohydratemay aopcar in a number
renaltubularcells.Thesedirect toxiceffectsofcalcium
of differenl forms includingpalisade'haoit as shown here.
arepotentiated by highPTH concentrations as this
(c) Calcium cxalate urolithsrcmoved from the bladderof
increases calcium entry into cells.Functional conse-
the same cat.
30
Chapter5
Investigationofhypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
Differential diagnosis
therapy,as reducing the magnitude of the hypercal-
Theprincipal differential diagnosesforhypercalcae-
caemiamaymake thePTHconcentrationmoredifficult
mia are listed inFigure5.4.In dogs themostcommon
to interpret.Unfortunately,there is often a delay in
cause ofhypercalcaemia is inassociation withmalig-
receiving theresults of PTH assay.Given that malig-
nancy,followed byhypoadrenocorticism(Elliott et al,
nancy isthemost commoncause of hypercalcaemia.
1991).In cats hypercalcaemia is a much less common
non-invasive diagnostic tests to search for a malig-
electrolyte disturbance,althoughitis againmostcom-
nancy couldbe started in this interval,particularly if
monlyassociated withmalignancy(Savaryetal.,2000).
clinical signs are severe.
Laboratory errorimproper sample handling
Treatment
Immature animals
Thedefinitivetherapyforhypercalcaemiaisremovalof
Lipaemia/haemoconcentration
the underlying cause.However,supportive therapy
Hyperproteinaemia
mayberequired to decrease serum calcium concen-
Hypercalcaemia of malignancy
trationswhilewaitingfora definitivediagnosisto be
Lymphosarcoma
established,fordefinitivetreatment totake effect,orn
Apocrine cell adenocarcinoma of the anal sac
caseswherethecauseof thehypercalcaemiacannot
Multiple myeloma
be treated effectively.Therequirement for supportive
Squamous cell carcinoma
therapy should be basedon theclinical conditionof the
Thyroid adenocarcinoma
patient.Hypercalcaemiawith concurrent hyperphosph-
Primary hyperparathyroidism
ataemiapredisposesthepatienttosoft tissuecalcifica-
Parathyroid gland adenoma (cystadenoma)
tion and thesecasesshould alwaysbeconsidered for
Parathyroid gland carcinoma
immediate therapy.Supportive treatments toreduce
Prmary hyplasiaof theparathyrid gla
hypercalcaemia are listed inFigure 5.5.In themajority
Hereditaryneonatalhyperparathyroidism
of cases simple measures, including parenteral fluid
Chronic and acute renal failure
therapyandadministrationof furosemide,willbesuffi-
Hypoadrenocoricism
cienttoreducehypercalcaemiato acceptablelevels
Hypervitaminosis D
pending a definitive diagnosis.
Calciferol- or chalecalciferol-containing rodenticides
Topical preparations for treatment of psoriasis (calcipatriol,
Fluid therapy
calcitriol,tacalcitol)
Commonly hypercalcaemic patients are dehydrated,
Solanummalacoxylon,Trisetumfiavescens)
whichexacerbates the extentand clinical signsof the
latrogenic oversupplementation
hypercalcaemia.Rehydration followed by moderate
Diseases causing local bone destruction
extracellularfluidvolume expansionreducestheeffect
Bone metastases
of dehydration and encourages a natriuresis and
Septic bone disease
calciuresis,oftenbeing sufficient alonetoadequately
Systemic mycoses
reduce thehypercalcaemia.Physiological saline,with
Granulomatous diseases
supplementary potassium if required,is thepreferred
Hypervitaminosis A
fluid as it containsno additional calciumand isrela-
Excessive calcium supplementation
tivelyhigh insodiumcomparedwith Hartmann'ssolu-
Idiopathic hypercalcaemia in cats
tion.Thehighloadoffilteredsodium competeswith
calciumforrenaltubularresorption.Assumingnoother
5.4
Differential diagnosis of hypercalcacmia.
contraindications exist,dehydration should be cor-
rected over4-6hours,with mildvolume expansion
Diagnosis
usuallybeing achievedusing a fluidvolumeof twoor
On documenting hypercalcaemia,a second sample
three timesmaintenancerequirements.
shouldbe assessed in an attempt toruleout transientor
artefactual hypercalcaemia.Ideally this should be
Diuretics
confirmed as truehypercalcaemiabymeasurement of
The loop diureticfurosemide promotes calciuresis and
ionizedcalcium.Thediagnosticinvestigationmust then
maybehelpful in reducing serum calcium concentra-
concentrateondetermining the actual aetiologyof the
tions.Thiazidediureticsshouldbeavoided asthese
hypercalcaemia,toprovide anaccurateprognosis and
optimize treatment.Symptomatictherapyforhypercal-
bate hypercalcaemia.Thedosesoffurosemidequoted
caemiamayberequiredwhile these investigationsare
underway.However,drugs,particularlyglucocorticoids,
animals and lowerdoses areoftenadequatetoreduce
which would interfere with this process,should be
calcium concentrations in clinical cases.lIt is essential
avoided until all diagnostictestsarecomplete.
howeverthat thediuresisinducediscompensatedforby
The first stage in the investigation is to determine
increasedparenteral fluidvolumestoensure dehydra-
whether thehypercalcaemiaiscausedbyprimary
tion does not occur and that plasma potassium concen-
parathyroiddiseaseora disorderofcalcium
trations aremaintained within thereferencerange.
homeostasis outwith the parathyroid glands(to which
the glands areresponding appropriately)bymeasuring
Glucocorticoids
the plasma PTH concentration.Again this sample
Glucocorticoids reduce serum calcium concentrations
should be taken prior to treatment,including fluid
in animalswithhypercalcaemia duetolymphoma,
31
Agent
Dose
Precautions
Saline diuresis
0.9% saline
2-3 xmaintenance rates
Potassiumsupplementationmayberequired;monitor
forfluidoverloadparticulalyitrenalinsufficency
present
Diuretics
Furosemide
5 mg/kg bolus i..followed by infusion f up ta
Ensure maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance
5 mg/kg/h
or 2mg/kg intravenously every 8hours
Glucocorticoids
Prednisolone
1-2mg/kg orally every 12-24hours
Contraindicated unless diagnosis alreadymade;
interfereswithdiagnostictestsandmayrender
neoplasiaresistant to chemotherapy
Alkalotics
Sodium
Calculated dose: base deficit x 0.3 x body weight (kg)
Especiallyusefulin animals in which acidosis
bicarbonate
- one-quarter to cne-third of total given as slow
exacerbates hypercalcaemia
intravenous bolusover30minutesthenreassess
Empirical dose:0.5mmol/kgi.v.over30minutes
Calcitonina
Salcatonin-
4-6 IUkg s.c.ori.m.every B-24hours
Limitedreportsofuseindogsandcatsffectsshort
synthetic salmon
lived
calcitonin
Bisphosphonatesa
Clodronate
20-25 mgkg diluted in 500 ml 0.9% saline as
Limited reportsof use in dogs and cats; volume
infusion over4 hours
of dilutionmayhave tobealtered according
Pamidronate
1.3-2.0 mg/kg in 150ml 0.9% saline as infusion
to body weight
over2hours
5.5
Acutomedical management of hypercalcaemia.Primary causes should be investigated and treated.All fluid
deficitsshouldbe corrected simultaneously.aNoveterinary licensed products available.
multiplemyeloma,thymoma,hypoadrenocorticism,hy-
resistancetothedrugoftendevelopingafterafew
pervitaminosisDandA,andgranulomatousdisease,
days.
but arerelatively ineffective in hypercalcaemiaresult-
Bisphosphonatesarepyrophosphateanalogues
ing from other causes.Themechanism of action of
and arepotent inhibitorsofosteoclast-mediated bone
glucocorticoids inreducing hypercalcaemia is incom-
resorption.Clodronate(Petrie,1996)andpamidronate
pletelyunderstoodbutincludesareduction inbone
(Rumbeiha etal.,200o) have beenused as infusions in
resorption,decreased intestinal absorption and in-
saline to treat hypercalcaemia.
creasedrenal excretionof calcium.However,themost
dramaticdecreasesincalciumoccur inanimalswith
lymphoma where there isa decrease inneoplastic
Hypocalcaemia
tissue mass due to lymphocytolysis. It is essential that
glucocorticoids are not used prior to achieving a diag-
Clinical features
nosis,as the lympholyticeffects make definitive his-
The clinical signs of hypocalcaemia are similarregard-
topathologicaldiagnosisoflymphomadifficult,ifnot
less of the underlying cause.However,the severity of
impossible.Equallytheuseofglucocorticoid therapy
the signswilldepend on the magnitudeof thehypocal-
alone,priortochemotherapy,inlymphomacasesmay
caemia and therateofchange in ionizedcalcium
induceresistance to thecytotoxicdrugs anddecrease
concentrations,although,clinicalsigns arerarelynoted
responserate and survival time.
unlessserumcalciumconcentrationsare<1.5mmol/1.
Concurrent electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities
Others
may alter theseverityofclinical signs,hypocalcaemia
Inmosthypercalcaemicanimalsvolume expansion
and diuretic therapy will be sufficient to control the
The typical clinical signsofhypocalcaemia arelistedin
hypercalcaemia until a diagnosisis achieved and de
Figure 5.6.
finitive therapy canbe instigated.Occasionallymore
The mostnotable signsrelate to the effect of
aggressive treatment isrequired on along-termbasis
calcium on theexcitable tissues of the neuromuscular
toresolve intractablehypercalcaemia.Bothcalcitonin
system,increasing theexcitabilityofboth thecentral
and bisphosphonateshavebeen used to treat hyper-
andperipheral nervous system.The neuromuscular
calcaemia indogs,but theyareexpensiveand should
signs tend to be episodicin nature.Spontaneous nerve
beusedwithcautionasvery littleinformationis avail-
fibre discharge leads to tetanic contraction ofperiph-
ableontheiruse inveterinarymedicine.
eral skeletal muscles and muscle tremors or
Calcitonin is the antagonisticpeptide hormone to
fasciculations.These often occurabout theface and
PTH andactsprincipallybyinhibiting boneresorption.
vibrissae,especiallyinacutehypocalcaemia.Seizures
Calcitonin (from salmon)or salcatonin (synthetic or
generallystartasfocal muscle fasciculations,which
then generalize, and are thought to be initiated by
The magnitude of the decrease incalcium is unpredict-
central rather than peripheral mechanisms.Seizures,
able,with a relatively short duration of action and
especially in dogs,offen occur in association with
32
Chapter5
Investigationofhypercalcaemia andhypocalcaemia
thehypercalcaemia theatrophiedparathyroidglands
Focalmuslamsrfciulatinmorswithngty
cannot secrete sufficientPTH inresponse to an acute
Gait changesataxiaorstiffgait)
hypocalcaemic stimulus and clinical signs of hypocal-
Tetany and generalized seizures
caemiamayoccur(seeTreatmentofprimaryhyperpara-
Increased excitability of central and peripheral nervous
thyroidism).Most of the other conditions listed
system
Spontaneous discharge of nerve fibres
causemildortransientdecreasesinionizedcalcium
Weaknss,dpressin,hy
andonlyrarely are these decreases sufficient to
Anorexiavomiting and diarrhoea
require treatment.
Nervousness, aggressivebehaviour
Probably attributable to pain caused by muscle cramping
Facial rubing,biing or icing at pas, api
Laboratory errorimproper sample handling
Probably atributable topain caused bymuscle cramping or
Hypoproteinaemia
paraesthesias
Chronic and acute renal failure
Cardiac arrhythmia
Puerperal tetany (eclampsia)
Prolongation of ST segment and QTinterval
Acutepancreatitis
Bradycardia and tachyarrhythmia
Feline urinary tractobstruction/post-renal azotaemia
Panting
Primary hypoparathyroidism
Lenticularcataracts
Third eyelid prolapse (cats)
Idiopathic atrophy/immune-mediated destruction of
Pyrexia:
parathyroid glands
Probably atributable to increased muscular activity
Disease of neck causing damage to parathyroid glards
Rapid correction of chronic hypercalcaemia (with concurrent
5.6
Clinical signs associated with hypocalcaemia.
parathyroid atrophy)
Ethylene glycol toxicity
Nutrtional secondary hyperparathyroidism
exercise,excitementorstressleadingtomanyanimals
Drug-induced
exhibiting neuromuscular signs on presentation at the
Anticonvulsant therapy
veterinary surgery or during hospitalization.Seizures
Phosphate-containing enemas
inducedbyhypocalcaemia differfrom thoseof idio-
Transfusion using citrated blood
Sodium bicarbonate
EDTA
whenrelaxed and the animal tends toretainconscious-
nessand urinary continence.Seizures maylast from
Hypomagnesaemia
Criticallyillanimals (systemiciflammatory response syndrome)
1to 30 minutes and oftenresolve spontaneously.
Tumourlysis syndrome
Recurrence is common despite treatment with
Intestinal malabsorption
anticonvulsants.
Rhabdomyolysis or severe soft tissue trauma
Behavioural changes may be noted,particularly in
Medullary carcinomaof thethyroid(C-celltumour resulting in
dogswithchronichypocalcaemia,including:
hypersecretion of calcitonin)
Restlessness
5.7
Differenlial diagnosis of hypocalcaemia.
。
Excitation
Growling
Aggression.
Diagnosis
The clinical approach tohypocalcaemiadependson
Thesechangeshavebeen attributed toeitherpar-
thepresentationof the case.A lowserumcalcium
aesthesia or pain associatedwithmuscular tetany.
concentrationismostoftenfound onroutine laboratory
Facerubbing and intensechewing at the carpi and
screening of an animal that isnotshowing obvious
distal limbs may also be seen for similar reasons.
clinical signs ofhypacalcaemia.The most common
Anorexiaandlethargyarecommonsignsincatswith
cause of hypocalcaemia is hypoproteinaemia,particu-
hypocalcaemia.Ophthalmological examination may
larly low albumin concentrations. Ideally,measure-
reveal cataracts that typically appear as bilaterally
ment of ionizedcalcium shouldbeused toverify
symmetrical，multiple,punctate opacities in the ante
changes in total calcium concentration.
riorandposterior subcapsularregion of thelens(len-
In asymptomaticcases the clinicianshouldattempt
ticular cataracts).
todetermineareasonforthehypocalcaemia and
correct this if possible.Calcium supplementationis not
Differential diagnosis
usuallyindicated if thehypocalcaemiaisasymptomatic
Theprincipal differential diagnosesforhypocalcaemia
andmildto moderateinnature;however,itisimportant
arelisted inFigure5.7.Although hypocalcaemiais a
tomonitorserumcalcium concentrationstoensure the
relatively common biochemical finding,hypocalcae-
hypocalcaemiaresolvesafter treatmentof theunder-
mia sufficient to cause clinical signsisrelatively rare.
lying disorder.Measurement of PTH concentration is
Puerperal tetany andprimaryhypoparathyroidism are
essential inanyanimal where the hypocalcaemia does
the twoconditionsmostcommonlyassociatedwith
notresolve.
clinical signs of hypocalcaemia.In chronic hypercal-
Hypocalcaemic casespresentingwithneuromus-
caemia(either due toprimaryhyperparathyroidism or
cular signs,particularly tetany r seizures,require
due to extra parathyroid causes) there is atrophy of the
emergency calcium administration,usuallyprior to a
remaining normal parathyroid tissue.Onreversal of
definitive diagnosis being made.lItis important in such
33
Chapter 5Investigation of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
a case toobtainabloodsample,ideallybeforetreat
monitoring heart rate and,ideally,using electro-
ment,to document the presence of hypocalcaemia.
cardiography to detect signs of cardiotoxicity.
Although treatment to control seizures(usually di-
Unlessthe underlying causeof thehypocalcaemia
is addressed clinical signswillrecuratavariableperiod
seizures due tohypocalcaemia tend torecurdespite
after the initial bolus of calcium.Therefore,ongoing
anticonvulsant therapy.
In thevastmajorityof hypocalcaemic casesthe
a continuous infusion or intermittent subcutaneous
diagnosis isapparent fromthehistory,clinical exami-
injections.lf administered subcutaneously calcium
nation and routine serumbiochemistry.An otherwise
gluconatemustbeuseddilutedwithanequalvolume
healthy animal,with clinical signsrelating tohypocal-
ofsaline,andeven thenhasbeen associatedwith the
caemia,but normal renal function and no obvious
developmentof calcinosis cutis;therefore subcutane-
alternative diagnoses is highly suggestive of primary
ous administration should be avoided wherever possi-
hypoparathyroidism. A blood sample to document in-
ble.Preferably,calcium should be administered in
appropriately lowPTHconcentration shouldbetaken,
fluids,bycontinuousinfusion,avoiding fluidsthatcon-
tain lactate,bicarbonateorphosphatewhichmay lead
gency presentation of many of these cases this op-
toprecipitation of calcium salts.The dosageis again
portunityisfrequentlymissed.However,itisessential
basedon theelemental calcium concentration and
that the sample forPTH assayis taken during a period
adjusted according to theseverityof thehypocalcae-
ofdocumented,moderatehypocalcaemiainorderto
mia and theresponse of the serum calcium concentra-
assess the appropriateness of the PTH concentration,
tion.Thosecasesrequiring chronic therapy should be
and thismaynecessitate cautiousbut temporarywith-
startedimmediatelyonoralcalciumsaltsandvitamin D
drawal of treatment. Concurrent measurement of
as,dependent on the preparation used,vitamin D
serummagnesium isalsorecommendedassevere
takesa numberofdaysbefore themaximaleffect is
hypomagnesaemiamay induceafunctional hypo-
achieved.
parathyraidism andendorganPTH resistance in hu-
mans, although this is not well characterized in either
Chronic therapy
dogs or cats.
Oral calcium supplements are generally administered
in the early stages of treatment although may be
Treatment
discontinued once the animal is stable. Two main
In symptamatic cases treatment(Figure 5.8)can be
transport processescontributeto theintestinal absorp-
divided into acute and chronic (oral) phases. Ani-
tionofcalcium:
malswithacutebut transienthypocalcaemia,suchas
eclampsia,merelyrequireacutecalciumreplacement.
Non-saturable- paracellular absorption by
Chronic and indeed life-long therapy is required in
passive diffusion
animalswithprimaryhypoparathyroidism.
Saturable-active transcellularabsorptionwhich
is under physiological regulation by vitamin D.
Acute therapy
Emergency treatment of hypocalcaemic tetany or sei-
Passive diffusion occurs due to the concentration
zuresiswith intravenous administration ofcalcium
gradientbetweentheintestinal lumenand theblood
salts.The dosage varies with the calcium preparation
andsobecomes increasinglyimportant at higherlumi-
used asit isbased on the elemental calciumcontent.
nal calcium concentrations;whereas at low luminal
Calcium gluconate is usually the salt of choice as,
calcium concentrations active transportpredominates.
unlike calcium chloride, it is minimally irritant if inad
vertently administeredperivascularly.Calciumisad-
ensureadequate luminal calcium concentrationsand
ministered slowlytoeffectover10-20minutes,while
permit passive calcium absorption to cover the lag
Drug
Dose
Precautions
Acute
Calcium
5-15mg/kgelemental calcium slowlyi.v.toeffectover
Monito frbradyardiuddelvationf
10-20 minutes (0.5-1.5ml/kg 10%calcium gluconate)
segment or shortening of QT interval on ECG
Sub-acute
Calcium
As above diluted 1:1 ratio with 0.9% saline administered s.c.
Undiluted calciumsolutions areiritantsuse salinefor
every6-8hours
dilution or precipitationmay occur
or 60-90mg/kg/day elemental calcium added to i.y.fluids
Subcutaneous administration should be avoided
(2.5ml/kg 10%calcium gluconate every 6-8hours)
ifpossible
Chronic (oral)
Calcium
25-100mg/kg/day elemental calcium in divided doses
Once staeonViaminD thrapy, dietarycalm
alone may be sufficient
VitaminD
Dihydrotachysterol 0.010.03mgkg orally dallyor every
Approximate time to maximal effect 7 days
second day
Approximate time to maximal efect 4 days
or calcitril 0.01-0.03μgkgday orally
Approximate time tomaximal effect<4 days
Treatment of hypocalcaemia.*1 mg caicium = 11.2 mg calcium gluconate =7.7 mg calcium lactate = 2.5 mg
5.8
calciumcarbonate.bNoveterinary licensed products available.
34
Chapter 5  Investigation of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
period until vitamin D treatment has maximized intes-
 tration should be discontinued and the calcium content
tinal calcium absorption. Subsequently, normal dietary
of the diet reduced until the calcium concentration
calcium is usually sufficient in the presence of vitamin
returns to the reference range, when therapy can be
D treatment and supplemental calcium can be gradu-
restarted at a lower dose.
ally discontinued. Calcium carbonate is generally used
 as this contains the greatest proportion of elemental
calcium, thus reducing the number of pills to be admin-
Primary parathyroid disorders
istered, and in addifion acts as an intestinal phosphate
!
binding agent.
Primary hyperparathyroidism
1:
Vitamin D metabolites vary markedly intheir activity
and half-life.
Pathophysiology
Primary hyperparathyroidism is characterized by an
 Calcitriol is the bialogically active hormone and
excessive, autonomous secretion of PTH causing hy-
....
therefore the most potent of the metabolites. lt 
percalcaemia, usually caused by a parathyroid aden-
has a rapid onset of action and a short half-life,
oma, although carcinoma and multiple adenomas
allowing prompt adjustment of the dose should
have also been described (Berger and Feldman, 1987;
：.
hypercalcaemia occur. Calcitriol is therefore the
Kallet et al., 1991). Primary hyperplasia has aiso been
rmetabolite of choice in hypocalcaemia. However,
reported as a cause of primary hyperparathyroidism
the available tablet size (250 and 500 ng) and
either alone (De Vries et al., 1993) or as part of the
requirement for accurate dosing mean that it is
multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes. In
 not suitable for use in smaller patients without
humans, MEN type 1 and MEN type 2A syndromes
reformulation.
may involve parathyroid hyperplasia or neoplasia, but
Alfacalcidoi (1 alpha-hydroxycholecalciferol)
 the condition has not been well characterized in veteri-
requires 25 hydroxylation in the liver to produce
 nary medicine. Primary hyperplasia of all four parathy-
the active hormone. As the 25-hydroxylase
roid glands was reported as a cause of hypercalcaemia
activity is relatively unregulated, alfacalcidol has
 in two German Shepherd puppies (Thompson at.al,
1984).
a liquid preparation (250 and 500 ng capsules
and oral liquid 2 μg/ml) more accurate dosing is
Clinical features
possible.
Similarly dihydrotachysterol, a synthetic vitamin
Signalment: Primary hyperparathyroidism is consid-
D analogue, also requires 25 hydroxylation in the
ered a relatively rare congition in the dog and even
liver before activity. Due to structural differences
rarer in the cat. Primary hyperparathyroidism typically
it has reduced affinity for vitamin D receptors and
 affects older animals, with no sex predisposition. There
more lipid solubility, increasing the dose required
appears to be a familial predispositioninthe Keeshond,
and giving a longer half-life (due to storage in
with parathyroid hyperplasia and multiple or recurrent 
fat). The longer half-life makes the management
adenomas also more common in this breed.
of hypercalcaemia due to overdosage difficult, as
a lag period of 2-3 weeks may be seen before
Clinical signs: Clinical signs in dogs with primary
calcium concentrations decrease in response to
hyperparathyroidism are those of chronic hypercal-
withdrawal of the drug.
caemia and tend to be mild, insidious and non-specific
Ergocalciferol, although inexpensive, has an
unless there is concurrent disease or renal failure. In
extremely long half-life taking several weeks to
the cat the most frequent clinical signs reported are
reach maximal effect and so is unsuitable for use
-dase ebe yonoyje bugjwon pue exaioue heyal
in hypocalcaemia.
tomatic cases may cccur. The polydipsia and polyuria
noted in dogs is less commonly reported in the cat.
Loading doses, from the upper end of the dosage
Clinical signs relating to the lower urinary tract, usually
range, are usually employed ta reduce the time taken
attributed to urolithiasis resulting from hypercalciuria,
to achieve the required serum calcium concentration.
[may also be seen. Urinary tract infections (UTls) are
Given the longer half-life of dihydrotachysterol com-
seen in approximately 25% of dogs with primary hyper-
pared with other vitamin D metabolites, a loading dose
parathyrcidism. Predisposing factors include dilute urine
is particularly important although, once stable, every
and the presence of uroliths. PTH alters acid-base
other day therapy may be feasible. It is important to
handling by the kidney in humans, leading to increased 
make adjustments gradually (increasing the dose by
urinary bicarbonate excretion and the production of
25% orless) and to monitor serum calcium concentra-
alkaline urine, although this has not been investigated
tions closely in the early stages of stabilization. The aim
in the dog or cat.
is to stabilize the patient with calcium concentrations
 Physical examination is generally unremarkable in
at, or just below, the lower limit of the reference range.
 dogs and cats with primary.hyperparathyroidism. Pal-
This willreduce the possibility of inadvertent hypercal-
pation of the cervical region may reveal a mass in cats
caemia and stimulate any residual parathyroid tissue
with primary hyperparathyroidism (present in approxi-
to secrete PTH. Regular monitoring of serum calcium
concentrations to facilitate dosage adjustment is es-
 palpable in dogs with the disease and any palpable
sential. If hypercalcaemia occurs, vitamin D adminis-
 mass is more likely to represent a nan-parathyroid
35
Chapter 5Investigation ofhypercalcaemia andhypocalcaemia
neoplasticlesion suchasa thyroid carcinomaorlym-
planning.but is not essential.Ultrasonography is prov-
phoma.Dehydration may be noted in some cases,
ing themostusefultooltoevaluatetheparathyroid
along withmild,generalizedmuscle weakness and
glands.Selectivevenous sampling forPTH measure-
abnormalitiesrelating to urolithiasis.Despite this ab-
ment(Feldmanetal.,1997)andradionuclidescanning
sence af findings,a thorough physical examination,
are technicallymore difficult and havenotproven as
includingrectal examination and carefulpalpation of
useful.
peripheral lymph nodes,is essential as theprincipal
Treatment
Surgical removal of the abnormal parathyroid tissue is
Diagnosis
the treatmentofchoiceforprimaryhyperparathyroidism.
Serumcalcium,bothtotaland ionized,willbeelevated.
Prior to surgeryit isadvisable tousefluid therapy to
Azotaemiamaybepresentdepending on theduration
rehydratetheanimaland attempttoreduce the severity
andseverity of the hypercalcaemia.Animals with pri-
of thehypercalcaemia.
maryhyperparathyroidismtypicallyhavelowor low
During surgery the ventral and dorsal surfaces of
normal serum phosphate concentration,due to the
both thyroid-parathyroid complexes should be exam-
phosphaturiceffectof PTH.However,if renal function
ined.Anyenlargedordiscolouredparathyroid tissue
is impaired,the abilityof thekidneytoexcretethe
shouldberemoved.Parathyroidadenomasmaybe as
increased phosphate loadwill decrease and hyper-
small as 2 mm in diameter but identification is usually
phosphataemia may develop.Although anincrease in
relatively easy as the remaining normal tissue is atro-
thebone isoenzymeofserumALPwill theoreticallybe
phied(Figure5.9).Externalparathyroid gland adeno
associated withincreased bone turnover,caused by
excessive PTH,a mild increase in total ALP is only
parathyroidism.Routinehaematologyand the remain-
derof thebiochemistryprofile areusuallywithinnormal
limitsandtherefore contributelittle toa diagnosis
ofprimary hyperparathyroidism,but are essential to
eliminate other causes of hypercalcaemia.
Definitive diagnosis isby demonstration of aninap-
propriately elevated PTH concentration in the pres-
ence of hypercalcaemia.In an animal
Iwith
hypercalcaemia and normal parathyroid glands,PTH
secretion should be suppressed.In an animal with
hypercalcaemia,a PTH concentrationabove or at the
5.9
Intraoperativeviewof aparathyroid adenoma
aprimaryparathyroiddisorder.Although,PTHconcen-
affecting the exlernal parathyroid gland ina dog.
trationswithin thereference range are inappropriate in
the face of hypercalcaemia,if possible supportive
masare easilyremoved butexcisionof adenomasof
evidence should be sought before a diagnosis of pri-
the internal parathyroid glandsmay requireremoval of
maryhyperparathyroidism ismade.Thismayinclude
the entire thyroid-parathyroid complex on the affected
ruling out other causes,repeating the PTH assay or
side.Carcinomasmaybe locallyinvasive.Itisimpera-
documenting an enlarged parathyroid gland on ultra-
tive that at least oneparathyroid gland isleft intact,to
sonography.Azotaemic animalsrepresenta diagnos-
prevent permanent hypoparathyroidism. lf no abnor-
ticdilemmaasthecombinationofelevatedtotalcalcium,
mal parathyroid tissuecanbevisualizedit ispossible
PTH andphosphateconcentrationsmayoccurin both
that ectopicparathyroid tissue isresponsiblefor the
primaryhyperparathyroidism andsecondaryrenal hy-
hyperparathyroidism.A thorough inspection of the
perparathyroidismassociatedwithchronicrenal fail-
ventralneckshould be made,although a gland in the
ure(see Secondary renal hyperparathyroidism).
cranial mediastinum is always apossibility.Ingeneral,
Given the slow turnaround time for PTH assays,
having located the abnormal gland,parathyroid sur-
investigationofmorecommoncausesofhypercalcae-
gery isrelativelystraightforward.
mia,such asmalignancy,canbe started in thedogr
In thedogprimaryhyperparathyroidismhas also
catwithhypercalcaemiaonce asamplehasbeen
been successfully treated using the percutaneous
submitted forPTHassay.The extentand invasiveness
ultrasonographically guided techniques of chemical
oftheseinvestigationswilldependonbothfinancial
ablation（ethanol injection）（Long et al.,1999）or
considerationsand theseverityof theclinical signs.
radiofrequency heat ablation(Pollard et al.,2001). In
Preliminary investigations should include atleast
the majorityof dogsthese techniqueswere successful
screeninglaboratorytestsandthoracicand abdominal
inreducingcalciumconcentrationswithin2dayswith
imaging.
relatively few minor complications (e.g. dysphonia).
Once a diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism
Chronic hypercalcaemia leadsto atrophy of healthy
ismadetreatmentconsistsofsurgicalexplorationof
parathyroid tissue.Surgicalremoval of the autono-
theneck toidentifyand removeabnormalparathyroid
mouslysecretingglandwilllead toarapiddecline in
tissue.Presurgical localization of the abnormal tissue
PTH levels and relative hypoparathyroidism. Clinical
signsofhypacalcaemia maybe severe and occur
36
suddenly. Postoperatively itis essential that the patient 
pathic primary hypoparafhyroidism commonly affects
is monitored closely for clinical signs of hypocalcaemia
younger cats, with some cases occurring in cats of <1
and serum calcium concentrations are assessed peri-
 as an aetiology. There appears to be no obvious sex or
mia will depend on the duration and severity of the
eo ayt lo bop eut jeyia u uoisodspaid paaig
within seven days of surgery. Opinion varies as to
Clinical signs: The clinical signs and physical exami-
whether routine preventive therapy for hypocalcaemia
nation findings are the same as those of hypocal-
should be considered or whether treatment should be
caemia. Cases are characterized by intermittent
reserved for individuals showing clinical signs.
neurological or neuromuscular signs including muscle
Initiating treatment for hypocalcaemia before the
tremors, tetany and seizures.
onset of clinicai signs removes the hypocalcaemic
Physical examination is relatively unremarkable,
stimulus to reverse parathyroid atrophy and actively
although it is not uncommon for dogs to be aggressive
inhibits PTH secretion. However, treatment with vita-
 or resent handling. This is considered to be due to the
 min D metabolites (depending on the metabolite) re-
 anticipation of pain caused by muscle cramping asso-
quires a few days to achieve maximal effect and so
ciated withi handling. Neuromuscular signs may de-
 starting therapy as calcium levels decline or even
velop in a previously clinically heaithy dog, induced by
initiating treatmentbefore surgery (24-36 hours betore
 the stimulation of a visit to the veterinary clinic (termed
latent tetany). Cardiac arrhythmia and cataracts may
i:
There are no hard and fast rules and the decision when
also be found on initial physical examination.
eui uo pabpnf aq pinoys wsipioisueedodky jean ol
Diagnosis
to monitor cases (both in terms of observation and the
 Initial evaluation of the patient should aim to exclude
ease with which serum calcium concentration can be
 any obvious causes of clinical hypocaicaemia. A pre-
assessed) and the status of the patient. Treatment is as
 sumptive diagnosis is then based on the presence of a
for primary hypoparathyroidism and should be aimed
Jow serum calcium concentration, both total and ion-
at keeping plasma calcium concentrations just below
ized, in an animal with normal renal function. Serum
the normal range, to stimulate PTH secretion in the
total calcium concentrations are usually very low,
atrophied giands. In most cases hypoparathyroidism is
<1.5 mmol/l being usual. In the absence of the phos-
transient and treatment can gradually be withdrawn
phaturic effect of PTH, hyperphosphataemia is com-
over a few months. In some cases, however, the
mon on biochemical evaluation and further increases
postoperative stabilization of serum calcium can be a
the suspicion for primary hypoparathyroidism. Eleva-
major challenge and a significant expense for the
 tion of alanine amino transferase (ALT) concentration
client.
 has been reported in the cat, although the significance
-yeediadhy Aewid ym seo pue shop hnpe ul
of this finding is unclear. Other biochemical abnormali-
roidism the prognosis is good with resolution of the
ties are unusual.
hypercalcaemia after surgery. Recurrence of primary
Response to treatment with calcium and vitamin D
hyperparathyroidism due to the development of further
 metabolites further confirms the presumptive diagno-
 parathyroid neoplasia is rare in dogs and cats.
sis. Treatment for hypoparathyroidism is life long and
 therefore it is recommended that a definitive diagnosis
 Primary hypoparathyroidism
be made by measuring the PTH concentration. It is
important to obtain samples while hypocalcaemia is
Pathophysiology
 present and before long-term therapy is started. PTH
 Primary hypoparathyroidism is characterized by an
concentrations in primary hypoparathyroidism are in-
absolute or relative deficiency of PTH leading to hypo-
calcaemia. Primary hypoparathyroidism may be caused
 mia, which in the normal animal would provide a potent
by any process that leads to damage or destruction of
stimulus for PTH secretion. A concentration of PTH
the parathyroid glands. This may include iatrogenic
below the reference range is evidence of absolute
hypoparathyroidism following thyrcid or parathyroid
hypoparathyroidism. However, a normal PTH concen-
surgery, neoplastic infiltration ofthe parathyroid glands
tration in the face of hypocalcaemia is stil inappropri-
or trauma to the neck. Idiopathic primary hypoparathy-
ate and indicates relative hypoparathyroidism,
roidism is caused by atrophy of all the parathyroid
consistent with a diagnosis of primary hypopara-
glands, probably due to a lymphocytic parathyroiditis,
thyroidism. Although parathyroid biopsy may provide
the aetiology of which is unknown but may be immune-
information regarding the aetiology of the hypo
mediated (Bruyette and Feldman, 1988; Peterson et
parathyroidism, it is not essential to the diagnosis, now
al., 1991).
measurement of PTH is widely available. Indeed in
these cases it can be difficult to'identify the parathyroid
Clinical features
 glands accurately at the time of surgery because of
severe atrophy.
Signalmenf: Primary hypoparathyroidism is also con-
sidered a relatively rare condition in both the dog and
Treatment
 With life-long therapy and careful monitoring, primary
with any age of dog being affected. in contrast, idio-
 hypoparathyroidism has an excellent prognosis. As
37
Chapter 5  Investigation of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
PTH replacement is not possible, long-term manage-
cium concentrations, and so many of these cases wil
ment is with an active form of vitamin D and, at least in
have no or only mild hypocalcaemia.
the initial stages, calcium, either oral or parenteral
depending on the severity of the clinical signs (see
Nutritional secondary
Treatment of hypocalcaemia).
hyperparathyroidism
The main difficulty in treating these cases is in the
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism resultsfrom
initial stabilization, when periods of hypo- or hypercal-
a dietary imbalance, typically seen in animals fed
caemia requiring dosage adjustment are not uncom-
predominantly meat diets that are low in calcium and
mon. The frequency of monitoring plasma calcium
high in phosphate. The effects are compounded by
concentrations will depend on the severity of the hy-
diets low in vitamin D. The condition is now quite rare
 pocalcaemia, butinitially blood calcium concentrations
as most dogs and cats are fed nutritionally balanced
should be measured onl a daily to weekly basis. Any
diets. The presentation is very characteristic, typically
 changes to therapy should be made gradually, allow-
occurring in young growing animals, showing skeletal
ing ample time for the maximal effect of the chosen
signs. The diagnosis is based on the radiological
vitamin D metabolite to be achieved. Increases in
features in combination with an appropriate dietary
history. Radiographically there is ageneral decrease in
be <25%. The detection of hypercalcaemia should be
treated by withdrawal of all calcium and vitamin D
in some cases pathological fractures (usually folding or
compression fractures). In most cases plasma bio-
restarting at a lower dose. Once the target serum
 chemistry is normal with calcium concentrations within
 calcium concentration has been achieved long-term
monitoring, usually once every 3 months, is required to
parathyroidism. In severe cases an animal may be
ensure stability.
hypocalcaemic. Plasma phosphate and ALP concen-
In healthy animals PTH causes significant renal
trations may be slightly elevated, although this is a
calcium resorption. In the treated, stable hypoparathy-
common finding in healthy, young animals.
raid patient, the absence of PTH leads to significant
 The starting point for treatment is to assess the 
hypercalciuria. Consequences of this increased renal 
degree of deformity already present. In some cases,
filtered load of calcium include urolithiasis and nephro-
particularly those with vertebral fractures, euthanasia
 calcinosis, although this has not been investigated in
may be the only sensible option. Close confinement is
dogs or cats with treated hypoparathyroidism. The
essential to prevent further injury. Parenteral calcium
aui busonpal jo Kem e se paisabens uaeq sey Adeiau
ment af hypoparathyraidism is just below the lower limit 
severe pain associated with the condition and analge-
of the reference range as, theoretically, this will lessen
sia is very important. Primary therapy consists of
the potential for hypercalcaemia, reduce calciuria and
 providing a nutritionally balanced diet. The prognosis
 provide a continuing stimulus for hypertrophy of any
for these cases is generally good, dependent on the
remaining functional parathyroid tissue.
degree of skeletal deformity, with bone mineral being
restored slowly over months.
Secondary parathyroid disease
Secondary renal hyperparathyroidism
Chronic renal failure inevitably leads to the condition of
 Mechanisms of secondary parathyroid
secondary renal hyperparathyroidism (RHPTH) with
disease
elevated PTH concentrations and eventual parathy-
In secondary parathyroid disorders apathological state
roid hyperplasia. The primary aetiological factor (Fig-
ure 5.10) is phosphate retention due to the inability of
and the parathyroid gland responds in an appropriate
the failing kidneys to excrete sufficient phosphate,
manner. Initially these conditions are completely re-
leading to hypocalcaemia. A relative deficiency of
versible if the underlying mineral imbalance is cor-
1,25(OH),D also contributes to increased PTH secre-
rected. With chronicity, however, atrophy or hyperplasia.
tion and the tendency to hypocalcaemia. An effective
will limit the ability of the parathyroid glands to respond
response of the parathyraid gland maintains normal
appropriately to changes in caicium homeostasis. Al--
extracellular calcium concentrations at the expense of
though theoretically any disorder of calcium homeo-
the adverse effects of excessive circulating PTH, prin-
 stasis, other than primary hypo- and hyperpara-
cipally renal osteodystrophy.
thyroidism, will lead to secondary parathyroid disease.
Classically renal osteodystrophy is recognized as
the two conditians commonly classified as secondary
'rubberjaw' caused by the demineralization of the bone
 parathyroid disorders are:
of the mandible with concurrent proliferation of connec-
tive tissue. Clinical signs of renal osteodystrophy are
relatively rare unless RHPTH is chronic and severe or
 Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
there is a high rate of bone turnover, such as in
immature animals. The hyperphosphataemia and hy-
The hyperparathyroidism occurs secondary to hy-
pocalcaemia, vitamin D deficiency or hyperphosph-
calcification; this may be one mechanism by which
ataemia. However, increased PTH secretion is
RHPTH can contribute to the progression of chronic
appropriate, as it attempts to normalize plasma cal-
renal failure.
38
Chapter5
Investigationofhypercalcaemia andhypocalcaemia
Phosphate retention
Phosphate restriction
Dietary phosphate restriction
filtrtion rate (GFR) falls
Commercial restricted phosphaterenal diets
Home made renal' diets
Decreased concentrations of calcitriol
Intestinal phosphate binding agents
Damage torenaltubulesfurther lowersrenal capacitytosynthesize
Aluminiumhydroxide30-100mg/kg/day,dividedwithmeals
 Calcium carbonate 30-100 mg/kg/day, divided with meals 
calcitriol
Increasedphosphateconcentrationsinproximaltubularcellsinhibit1
Form non-absorbable salls of phosphate in food and
intestinal scrtins,threforebestmixedwitfoodrivn
immediately prior to meal
lonized hypocalcaemia
Adverse effects:
Unpalatable
Relative calcitriol deficiencyreducescalcium uptake from theintestine
Nausea and anorexia
Constipation
Formationof complexeswith phosphateleading to soft tissue
calcification
Hypophosphataemia
Skeletal resistance to the action of PTH
Aluminium toxicity or hypercalcaemia.
Vitamin D therapy
Abnormal parathyroid gland function
Calcitriol1.5-3.5ngkg/day
PTH synthess and secretionincreases,stmulated bylowionized
calcium,lackofcalcitriol and possiblyhyperphosphataemia
Alfacalcidol 1.5-3.5 ng/kg/day
Set point forionized calcium control of PTH secretion is raised such
Directly inhibits PTH secretion but beneficial efects unproven
that PTHsecretionocursathigherconcentrationsofionizedcalcum,
Serum calcium concentrations should bemonitored closely (at least
allowing excessive PTH secretion even at normal blood lonized
weekly)
calcium concentrations
Adverse effects:
Hypercalcaemia and
Parathyroid gland hyperplasia
hyperphosphataemia.
Pathophysiologyof secondaryrenal
Treatment of secondaryrenal
5.10
5.11
hiyperparalhyroidism.
hyperparathyroidism.
A normo-or hypocalcaemic animal with chronic
Non-parathyroid causes of calcium
renal failure and hyperphosphataemia will almostcer-
imbalance
tainlyhaveRHPTH.Ifphosphate concentrationsare
within the reference range then PTH must be meas-
Hypercalcaemia ofmalignancy
ured topermit assessmentof the degree of hyperpara-
Hypercalcaemia of malignancyis a paraneoplastic
thyroidism.The total calcium concentrationin renal
syndrome.ltis the most commonform of hypercalcae-
failureisvariable andinfluenced by the totalprotein
mia in both the dog and cat, although still considered
concentrationand theconcentrationof lowmolecular
relativelyrare in thecat.There are twomechanismsby
weight ligands,suchascitrate(whichmaybeelevated
whichaneoplasmmaycausehypercalcaemia:
inrenal failure).Mild elevations of total calcium,par-
ticularly in dogs withrenal failure,are common al-
In tumours that involveboneorbonemarrow,
though ionizedcalcium is usually normal or low.In an
production of locally acting bone-resorbing
animal presenting withrenal insufficiency and hyper-
factorsmay stimulateosteoclasticbone
calcaemiaitisimportanttotrytodetermine whetherthe
resorption andso calciumrelease-termed
hypercalcaemiainduced therenal failureortherenal
osteolytichypercalcaemia
failure induced the hypercalcaemia. In hypercalcae-
More commonlya tumour,not necessarily
miacausedbyeitherprimaryhyperparathyroidismor
associatedwithbone,producesahumoral factar
RHPTH,PTH concentrations will be elevated. The
thatstimulates generalized boneresorption-
complex aetiology of the hypercalcaemia of renal fail-
HHM.
ure makes correction equations inaccurate,hence itis
imperativetomeasureionizedcalciumtoreliably as-
One of the principal mediators of HHMisPTHrP,a
sesscalcium status.
largemoleculewithanaminoterminal fragment that
Although thebenefits of normalizingPTH concen-
structurally resemblesPTH,giving theprotein aPTH-
trationinRHPTHhaveyettobeproven,preventionof
likeaction.Other factorsimplicatedinHHMinclude
phosphateretention iscentral to the management of
calcitriol and cytokines suchas interleukin-1 and tu-
chronicrenal failureandhasbeenshown toreduce
mour necrosis factor-alpha and-beta.The tumours
RHPTH (Elliott et al.,200o).Treatment (Figure 5.11)
commonlyassociated with HHM in the dog include
consistsprimarilyof dietary phosphate restrictionusing
lymphoma,apocrineglandadenocarcinomaandmore
reducedphosphate diets.lf dietarymanagement fails
rarelythymoma andvariouscarcinomas.Onlya limited
to decreaseserumphosphateconcentration additional
numberofcasesof HHM havebeenreportedinthe cat
and,unlike the dog,HHMisnotcommonin lymphoma
phate binding agents.Therapy with low dose calcitriol
despitetheprevalenceof thisfelineneoplasm.
hasbeen recommended(Nagode et al.,1996)but is
Dogswith HHM generallyexhibit more clinical signs
thanthosewithprimaryhyperparathyroidism,relatingto
sorptionof both calcium and phosphate,potentiating
both the hypercalcaemia and the underlyingneoplastic
soft tissue calcification.
condition.The physical examination shouldincludepal-
39
Chapter 5  Investigation of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
pation of all peripheral lymph nodes and a thorough
tion and necrosis, particularly of the gastraintestinal
rectal and perirectal examination to assess for neopla-
tract, myocardium, kidneys and vasculature, resulting
，
sia. Enlargement of the sublumbar lymph nodes is
in vomiting and haematemesis, acute renal failure,
frequently seen with metastasis of apocrine gland carci-
cardiac dysrhythmias and failure, ataxia, muscle spasms
nomas of the anal sac. If evidence of a neoplastic
and seizures, with eventual shock and death in the
condition is found this will then be the focus of the
 most severe cases. Other clinical signs are the same
diagnostic evaluation. In the absence of such findings
as those of hypercalcaemia and include polyuria, poly-
plasma PTH should be measured. The hypercalcaemia
dipsia, anorexia, constipation, tremors and lethargy.
of malignancy will cause suppression of PTH secretion
 Increases in serum calcium concentration and mild
and, as the assay does not detect PTHrP, PTH levels
 hyperphosphataemia are seen within 24 hours of in-
should be low or low normal. Suppressed PTH levels in
 gestion, and azotaemia is also common. Diagnosis is
a persistently hypercalcaemic animal with no obvious
usually based on the history cambined with the clinical
signs of neoplasia requires a more extensive search for
 presentation. A definitive diagnosis can be made by
occult malignancy. This may include imaging of the
 measurement of serum vitamin D concentrations, the
abdomen and thorax and biopsy of lymph nodes, bone
 metabolite measured depending on the nature of the
marrow and perhaps spleen and liver. Measurement of
toxicity. Treatment is as for hypercalcaemia, with ag-
plasma PTHrP concentrations is relatively widely avail-
gressive supportive therapy. if there is known recent
able. However, the concentrations are not elevated in
exposure, the animal should be induced to vomit and
all animals with hypercalcaemia of malignancy, so
activated charcoal administered to limit absorption.
the absence of elevated PTHrP concentrations does
not exclude this diagnosis.
Hypovitaminosis D
Treatment of the underlying neoplasia should re-
Hypovitaminosis D may occur due to insufficient
solve the hypercalcaemia, although general support-
dietary intake (often as a component of nutritional
ive measures may be required until this is effective or
secondary hyperparathyroidism), secondary to
if the neoplasia can not be successfully treated.
gastrointestinal malabsorptive syndrames, or due ta
Persistence of the hypercalcaemia despite appropri-
defects in the production or action of 1,25(OH),D.
ate treatment of the malignancy suggests incomplete
Dietary insufficiency of vitamin D is now rare in domes-
removal of the tumour, metastatic disease or tumour
tic pets. Hypovitaminosis D wil impair gastraintestinal
recurrence.
absorption of calcium, leading to a secondary hyper-
parathyroidism, usually sufficient to prevent clinical
Disorders of calcitonin production
auog jn esuadxe aul e png eiwaooday jo suais
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid glands has been
 mineral. Deficiency occurring in the immature animal
reported in the dog. In the majority of cases the clinical
therefore produces clinical signs of rickets, whereas in
 presentation is that of a malignant thyraid tumour.
the adult it causes osteomalacia.
Clinical signs associated with increased calcitonin
In humans two forms of hereditary vitamin D-
secretion and subsequent hypocalcaemia are rarely
dependent rickets are recognized:
recognized.
Type I is characterized by severe rickets and is due
Disorders of calcitriol
to absent or defective renal 1 alpha-hydroxylase
activity. It therefore responds to physiological
Hypervltamlnosls D
administration of an active form of vitamin D
Toxicity of excess calciferol, ergocalciferol, vitamin D
Type Il is a form of vitamin D resistance caused
metabolites and their analogues is termed hypervita-
by mutations in the vitamin D receptor, which in 
minosis D. Causes of vitamin D toxicosis include:
some cases will respond to high dose
overzealous dietary supplementation; iatrogenic from
 administration of active vitamin D.
overtreatment of hypoparathyroidism; and accidental
ingestion of vitamin D-containing rodenticides, plants
These conditions are poorly characterized in the
containing glycosides of calcitriol, and topical prepara-
veterinary literature.
tlons for the treatment of psoriasis.
Cholecalciferol, the active ingredient in many
Granulomatous disease
rodenticides, is rapidly metabolized to 25(OH)D. Regu-
 On stimulation, normal macrophages are capable of
lation of further hydroxylation of 25(OH)D by PTH
activating 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH),D. Hypercalcaemia
maintains relatively normal concentrations of
may be associated with granulomatous disease; this is
1 ,25(OH),D. At pharmacological concentrations
thought to be due to the autonomous production of
25(OH)D competes with 1,25(OH),D for vitamin D
1,25(OH),D by macrophages, although 1,25(OH),D
receptors. having similar actions to 1,25(OH),D. The
concentrations have not been measured in al cases.
principal effect is to increase gastrointestinal absorp-
Hypercalcaemia has been reported in non-infectious
tion of calcium and bone resorption, leading to hyper-
 granulomatous panniculitis, blastomycosis, disseminated
calcaemia and hyperphosphataemia. The clinical signs
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, schistosomiasis
and severity of the illness depend on the quantity of
 and mycobacterial disease (Figure 5.12).
vitamin D ingested. Vitarmin D tends to be cumulative
The hypercalcaemia is generally mild and should
and mineral metabolism may be perturbed for 2-3
resolve with appropriate treatment of the underlying
weeks. Severe toxicity causes soft tissue mineraliza-
disease.
40
Chapter5
Investigationofhypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
catswithnaturallyoccurringchronicrenalfailure:effectofdietary
management.Journa/ofSmallAnimalPractice.41,235-242
EstpaCdGaPanTriM
Aguilera-Tejero E(2003)Dynamicsof secretionandmetabolism
by theintactandwholePTHassays.Nephrology,Dialysisand
Transplant18,1101-1107
Feldman EC and Nelson Rw (2000)Hypercalcemia and primary
XiedDnaura345348Wadersiladh
Feldman EC and Nelson RW (2003a) Hypercalcemia and primary
hyperparathyroidism.In:Canine andFelineEndocrinoiogyand
Reproduction3edn,ed.ECFeldmanandRWNelson,pp.660
715.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Feldman EC and Nelson Rw (2003b)Hypocalcemia and primary
hypoparathyroidism.In:Canineand Feline Endocrinology and
Reproducion.3ednd.ECFeldmanandRWNelsonp.716
742.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
FeldmanEC,WisnerER,NlsonRWFeldmanMSandKennedyC
(1997) Comparison of results of hormonal analysis of samples
obtained from selected venous sites versus cervical
Lateralthoracicradiographshowing
ultrasonographyforlocalizingparathyroidmassesindogs.Journal
5.12
calcificalion of thewallof the aorta inacat with
of theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation211,5456
FlandersJA,ScarletJM,BlueJTandNethS1989)Adjustmentf
hypercalcacmia secondary to mycobacterial disease.
total serum calcium concentration for binding to albumin and
protein in cats:291cases(1986-1987).Jouma/of the American
ldiopathichypercalcaemia in cats
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation194,1609-1611
Kallet AJ,Richter KP,Feldman ECand BrumDE （1991)Primary
An increasing numberof cats are beingreportedwith
moderatehypercalcaemiawithnoobviousidentifiable
cause afterroutine investigation(Midkiff et al.,2000).
Long CD,GoldsteinREHornof WJ,Feldman ECandNyland TG
(1999) Percutaneous ultrasound-guided chemical parathyroid
Affected cats are young to middle-aged and long-
haired cats appear to be predisposed.The hypercal-
Journalof theAmericanVeterinary MedicaiAssociation215,
caemia is truewith increasesinboth totaland ionized
217-221
Matwichuk CL,Taylor SM,Daniel GB,Wilkinson AA,Matte GG
calcium.Clinical signs are eitherminimal or those of
DudzicEM and Shrnon CL(200o) Double-phase parathyroid
hypercalcaemia,includinganorexia,lethargyandpoly-
scintigraphyindogsusing technetium-99m-sestamibi.Veterinary
Radiology andUltrasound41,461-469
uria and palydipsia.Some affected catsare azotaemic
Meuten DJ,Chew DJ,Capen CC and Kociba GJ (1982) Relationship
and evidence of nephrocalcinosis maybe seen on
ofserumtotalcalciumtoalbumin andtotalproteinindogs.Journal
imaging. Feline idiopathic hypercalcaemia has also
oftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicaiAss0ciation180,63-67
beenassociatedwithcalciumoxalateurolithiasis,in-
(2000)Idiopathichypercaicemiaincats.Journa!ofVeierinary
cluding ureteral uroliths.Theresponse of the parathy-
interna/Medicine14,619-626
roid glands is normal,with plasma PTH concentration
MoallemE,KilavR,SilverJandNaveh-ManyT(1998)RNA-protein
bindingandpost-transcriptionalregulationofparathyroidhormone
being normal or low and PTHrP usually undetectable.
gene expressionbycalciumand phosphate.JournalofBiological
An association has been noted with cats fed acidifying
Chemistry273,5253-5259
diets.Various treatments have been tried in these
Nagode LA,ChewPJ and Podell M(19g6) Benefits of calcitriol
therapy and serum phosphorus control in dogs and catswith
cases including dietary modification (high fibre tore-
chronic renal failure.Veterinary Clinics of NorthAmerica:Small
duce the availabilityof calcium)orprednisolone/pred-
Animal Practice26,1293-1330
Peterson MEJamesKMWallaceM,Timothy SD and Joseph RJ
nisone.It isimportant if such a case is suspected that
a thoroughdiagnosticinvestigationiscarriedcuttorule
VeterinarynternaMedicine5,4751
Petrie G (1996) Management of hyparcalcamia using
outknowncauses ofhypercalcaemiapriorto sympto-
dichloromethylene bisphosphonate(clodronate).Proceedlingsof
matic treatment.
theEuropeanSocietyof VeterinaryInterna!Medicine6,80
PollardRE,LongCD,NelsonRW,HornofWJand FeldmanEC(2001)
Percutaneous ultrasonographically guidedradiofrequency heat
References and further reading
ablation for treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs.
Journai of theAmericanVeierinary MedicalAssociation218,
1106-1110
dogs:21cases(1976-1986).Journalof theAmerican Veterinary
ReuschE,TmsaimmerC,HorauNttC,trerS,Gla
MedicalAssociation191,350-356
TM,Schlilner Eand Pospischil A(2000) Ultrasonography of the
BruyelteDSandFeldman EC(1988)Primary hypoparathyraidism in
thedogepartf15casesandreviwofpreviouslyrepored
chronicrenalfailureindogs.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinary
cases.JounalofVeierinary InternalMedicine2,7-14
MedicaiAssociation217,1849-1852
Chew DJ and Nagode LA(20o0)Treatment of hypoparathyroidism.
Rosol TJ,ChewDJ,NagodeLAand SchenckP(200o)Disordersof
In:Kirk'sCurrentVeterinaryTherapyXI.ed.JDBonagurap
calcium:hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia.In:Fluid Therapy in
340-345.WBSaundersPhiladelphia
WBSaunders,Philadelphia
RumbWigralDuMalnWEr
and hypocalcemia:parathyroid hormone,vitamin Dmetabolites.
R,Kaneene JB and Frese KK (2000) Use of pamidronate
parathyroid hormone-relatedpeptide,and ionized caicium.ln:
disodium to reduce cholecalciferol-induced toxicosis in dogs.
Kirk'sCurrentVeterinaryTherapyXll.ed.JDBonagura,pp.378
AmericanJournal ofVeterinaryResearch61,913
383.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Sevary KCM.Price GSandVadenSL(2000)Hypercalcemiaincats:
DeVries SE,Feldman EC,Nelson RW and Kennedy PC (1993)
aretrospective study of 71 cases （1991-1997). Joumal of
Primaryparathyroid glandhyperplasiaindogs:sixcases(1982-
Veterinary IniernalMedicine14,184-189
1991).Journal of theAmericanVeterinary Medical Association
SchenckPA,ChewDJ and Brooks CL(1995)Effects of storage on
202,1132-1136
serum ionised calcium and pH values in clinically normal dogs.
ElliotbnMuKraMandacknKF）
AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch56,304-307
Hypercalcaemia inthedog:astudyof 40cases.Journalof Small
AnimalPracticc.32,564571
disorders-Part 1ProceedingsoftheAmerican Collegeof
ElliotJawlingsMarkwellPJandBarbrPJ2000urvivalf
VeterinaryInternalMedicine21sAnnualForumpp.517-518
41
Chapter 5 Investigation of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia
Vasilopulos RJ and Mackin A (2003) Humoral hypercalcemia of
protein.NewEnglandJournal ofMedicine342,177-185
malignancy: pathophysiology andclinical signs. Compendium on
an jo uoineaa punosenn (ooo) ar joouejas pue in epang 
parathyraid glands in two hypercalcemic cats. Veterinary
127
Vasilopulos RJ and Mackin A (2003) Humoral hypercalcemia of
malignancy:diagnosis and lreatment. Campendiumon Continuing
In German Shepherd Dogs:a disorderof probable genetic origin.
WisnerERand Nyland TG(199B)Utrasonography of the hyraidand
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian25, 129-135
VeterinaryPathofogy21,370376
parathyroid glands. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
Toribio RE, Kahn CW, Chew DJ, Capen CC and Rosol TJ (2002)
Aninal Practice 28, 973-991
Wisner ER, Panninck D, Biller DS, Feldman EC, Drake C and Nyland
feline preproparathyroichonmone.AmericanJournalofVeterinary
TG(1i997)High-resolutionparathyroid sonography.Veterirary
Research63,194-197
Radiology andUltrasound38,462-466
42
Investigation of feline
hypokalaemia
Ellie Mardell and Andy Sparkes
Introduction
extracellular compartment into the cells in exchange
for hydrogen ions when these are required in the
In healthy animals, plasma potassium levels are main-
 plasma/serum, are important in the immediate correc-
tained within narrow limits by complex neuroendocrine
tion of alkalaemia. In addition, increased rena! potas-
homeostatic mechanisms. Of the total body potas-
sium excretion in exchange for hydrogen jon
sium, only 2-5% is located within the plasma; a tiny
 conservation can act as a more long-term correction
fraction is located in the interstitial fluid and the major-
mechanism for alkalaemia.
ity, approximately 95-98%, is in the intracellular com-
partment, a large praportion of which (approximately
80%) is located within muscle cells. In healthy animals,
Potassium homeostasis
extracellular potassiurm concentrations are maintained
 at 4-5 mmol/, compared with concentrations of 140--
Dietary potassium is actively absorbed in the small
150 mmol/l within muscle cells.
intestine. Although potassium is a component of many
fluids secreted into the intestinal tract, it is also actively
reabsorbed in healthy individuals. Potassium excre-
The role of potassium
tion is largely (>90%) via the kidneys. Typically. 80
90% of filtered potassium is reabsorbed early in the
 Potassium is the major intracellular cation, acting as a
 nephron, in the proximal convoluted tubule and loop of
Henle. The remaining 10-20% is delivered to the distal
negatively charged intracellular proteins and
tubule and collecting duct. Here, potassium and so-
 biomolecules. In contrast to potassium, sodium is the
dium resorption and secretion is adjusted to maintain
homeostasis. Large numbersof Na+-K+ ATPase pumps
sodium will diffuse freely across cell membranes ac-
on the basal cell membrane create a high intracellular
cording to their concentration gradients, their normal
concentration of potassium, so that it can diffuse down
distribution is maintained against the concentration
the concentration gradient into the tubular lumeni for
gradient fhrough active transpart by sodium-potas-
excretion in the urine. In healthy animals, approx-
-...
sium adenosinetriphosphatase (Na+-K+ ATPase)
imately 15% of filtered potassium is excreted in the
pumps located within cell membranes.
urine. In animals with hypokalaemia, the amount of
 The relative sodium and potassium concentrations
potassium lost in the urine can be < 1% of that which is
 are important in maintaining the correctelectrical charge
filtered. In animals with hyparkalaemia, active potas-
across the membranes of nerve and muscle cells, with
sium secretion by the tubules may increase potassium
the inside of the cell being negative with respect to the
loss in urine to >200% of that which is filtered.
outside. A rapid sodium influx is required to generate
In addition to urinary losses, small amounts (<10%)
 an action potential (depolarization), and following this 
of potassium are excreted in the faeces, having been
there is a rapid efflux of potassium resulting in
exchanged with luminal sodium in the large intestine.
repolarization of the cell. Cardiac muscle is more
 specialized, and has a variable permeability to potas-
Control mechanisms
sium that contributes to the automatic generation of an
 action potential. Following depolarization and genera-
Aldosterone
tion of an action potential, the cutflow of potassium
 Aldosterone is the principal hormone responsible for
from cardiac cells is about five times slower than from
control of serum potassium levels and is the major
skeletal muscle resulting in gradual repolarization.
mineralocorticoid produced by the adrenal gland. Pro-
This causes a drawn out 'plateau' action potentlal,
duction and secretion is mainiy stimulated by hyper-
permiting prolonged contraction of the cardiac mus-
kalaemia, hyponatraemia and renal hypotension (acting
cle, and a refractory period that avoids the possibility of
via the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, RAAS).
tetanic spasm.
Potassium also has a major role in acid-base
release of aldosterane, include acidosis and adreno-
balance, as it diffuses easily across cell membranes.
corticotropic hormone (ACTH). The primary functions
Transcellular shifts, where potassium diffuses from the 
of aldosterone are to contribute to the reguiation of
43
Chapter 6Investigation of feline hypckalaemia
serumsodiumandpotassiumconcentrations(increas-
ing theformer and decreasing the latter) andextracel-
Reduced potassium intake
lular fluid volume.
Inappetence/anorexia
Aldosteroneactsdirectlytoincrease thenumber
Potassium-depleted diet
ofopensodium channelsinthecell membranesof
Potassium-deficient intravenousfluid
therenal tubularepithelium,andtoincrease theactivity
of Na+-K+ATPase.Increased cellularresorption of
Potassium translocation
sodium is counterbalanced by greaterexcretion of po-
Alkalaemia
tassium into the tubularlumen.In addition,aldosterone
Insulin administration
enters the cells of the distal tubular epithelium,andvia
Diabeticketoacidosis
Bicarbonate administration
activationofnuclearDNA,stimulatestheproductionof
Periodic hypokalaemia (Burmese)
the Na+-K+ATPase that transport cations across tubu-
lar cell membranes.Again this leads to increased
Hypothermia
Stimulation by catechalamines
resorptionof sodium from thetubular lumeninto the
epithelial cells.Aldosterone alsoincreases thenumber
Gastrointestinal loss of potassium
ofopen potassium channels in the membranes,thus
Vomiting
facilitatinglossofpotassiuminto thetubularlumen.The
Diarrhoea
excretionof hydrogen,magnesiumandammoniumions
Malabsorption
is alsoincreased under the influence of aldosterone.
Renal loss of potassium
Fluidresorptionfrom therenal tubular lumen is
increased inresponsetoaldosteroneasit followsthe
Polyuria
movementofsodiumionsthatexert themajorosmotic
Chronic renal failure
pressure.This results in an increased circulating vol-
Acute renal failure (polyuric phase)
Diuretic administration (loop or thiazide)
ume and increased blood pressure.
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Renin and angiotensin II
Hyperadrenocorticism
Renin is produced bycells of the afferent arterioles in
Renal tubular acidosis
thekidneyformingpartofthejuxtaglomerularappara-
Endocrine disease
tus.Under normal physiological circumstances,in-
Hyperthyroidism
creased secretion ofrenin occurs in response to:
Hyperadrenocorticism
adrenoreceptor stimulation;decreased activation of
stretch receptors in the juxtaglomerular apparatus(de-
Other diseases
creased arteriolar pressure); and activation of sodium
Hepatic failure
andchloridechemoreceptorslocated in the macula
Portal hypertension
densa (thepart of the juxtaglomerularapparatus asso-
Congestive heart fallure
ciated with the distal renal tubule).
Angiotensinogen,aproteinsynthesizedbytheliver,
6.1
Differential diagnosis of feline hypokalaemia.
is convertedto angiotensinIbytheactivityofrenin,and
this in turn is converted to angiotensin ll by angi-
otensin-convertingenzymes(ACEs) locatedprimarily
cases are mild,buthypokalaemia canbeprofound
in the lungs.Angiotensin Il has many functions de-
withsevereconsequences.lngeneral,hypokalaemia
signed toincrease cardiacoutput andcirculatoryvol-
can occur because of reduced potassium intake,
ume including:
translocationofpotassiumfromtheextracellular to
the intracellular space,or an increased loss of
Generalizedvasoconstriction
potassiumviathekidneys orthe gastrointestinal tract.
Stimulation of norepinephrine(noradrenaline)
Wheneverhypokalaemiaisidentified,particularlyif
release
it issevereand/orprolonged,manydifferentialdiag
Preferential constriction of efferent arterioles in
noses have tobe considered.Pseudohypokalaemia
the kidney
can occur if there is significant lipaemia at the time of
The stimulation of thirst
sampling,orextremehyperproteinaemia.Conversely,
Releaseof vasopressin(anti-diuretichormone
hypokalaemia canbe masked due topoor sampling
(ADH).
techniqueorif thereisEDTA contaminationofblood
In addition,angiotensinll acts upon the cellsof the
samples.
zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex to cause in-
Reduced intake
creased synthesis,andrelease,ofaldosterone(stimu-
Reduced dietary intake ofpotassium,usually due to
lating sodiumretention andpotassiumexcretion at the
inappetence and/or anorexia,is rarely enough on its
distal tubule)
own to cause significant hypokalaemia.However,it
may be a causeof mild hypokalaemia ormayexacer-
Potential causes
batehypokalaemiafromanotherunderlyingdisease
process.In thepast,commercial diets low ormargin-
Hypokalaemia is commonly encountered in feline
allylowinpotassiumhavebeenshown to contribute
patients for a variety of reasons (Figure 6.1).Most
significantlyto severehypokalaemia(Dowetal.,1987),
44
Chapter 6  Investigation of feline hypokalaemia
especially where other mechanisms were contributing
Renal loss
to excessive loss of potassium through the kidneys
(e.g. existing renal failure, high protein diet, feeding f
Chronic renal failure
an acidifying diet), Supplementation of commercial
Chronic renal failure (CRF) is one of the most common
diets with higher levels of potassium has largely over-
causes of hypokalaemia in the cat. Numerous mecha-
come this problem.
nisms lead to this condition:
Translocation
 Polyuria increases urinary loss of potassium (see
below), and the inappetence or anorexia.
Acid-base disorders and diabetes mellitus
associated with uraemia will decrease dietary
Intracellular translocation of potassium occurs as a
intake
rapid response to alkalaemia. Conversely during acid-
 The RAAS is potentially activated in several
aemia, potassium ions move from the cells into the
ways, increasing aldosterone-mediated renal
extracellular space in exchange for hydrogen jons.
potassium losses. Dehydration and
Insulin administration will also cause translocation of
hypovolaemia will cause reduced renal perfusion
potassium into the cells. Thus, when treatment of
and RAAS activation. Renal perfusion may be 
uncontrolled diabetes melitus is instituted, there is a
reduced further by inflammation and fibrosis of 
tendency for hypokalaemia to occur, particularly as the
the parenchyma, which inevitably also affects
diuresis induced by hyperglycaemia continues in the
renal arterioles
initial stages, and leads to increased renal potassium
 Increased levels of angiotensin ll also cause
loss. lf there is diabetic ketoacidosis the situation is
 release of catecholamines, which encourages
further compounded (see Chapter 14). As the acid-
cellular uptake of potassium and may contribute
aemia begins to resolve, potassium diffuses back into
to hypokalaemia
the intracellular compartment, further reducing serum
The chronic metabolic acidosis that occurs in
 concentrations of potassium. Additionally, intravenous
CRF, due to reduced capacity of the kidney to
fluid therapy will have a dilutian effecf on serum potas-
excrete hydrogen ions, also paradoxically
sium concentrations unless potassium is appropriately
contributes to hypokalaemia.
supplemented. If potassium needs are not addressed,
 the resultant hypokalaemia can be profound.
In addition to these established mechanisms, a
Translocation of potassium can also occur with
proportion of cats with CRF develop severe hypokalae-
hypothermia and in response ta catecholamines.
mia, due to excess kaliuresis, where the precise under-
lying pathogenesis remains obscure.
Periodic hypokalaemia in Burmese cats
If hypokalaemia becomes chronic, it can itself lead 
Episodic hypokalaemia has been described as an
 to or exacerbate renal dysfunction. Renal vasocon-
inherited condition in Burmese cats from both Europe
striction, reduced responsiveness to vasopressin, in-
and New Zealand. Affected cats typically present be-
 creased renal ammoniagenesis and interstitial nephritis
tween 2 and 6 months of age with episodes of
 are all probably involved in the pathogenesis of
polymyopathy secondary to severe hypokalaemia.
hypokalaemic nephropathy. Hypokalaemia can thus
become a self-perpetuating problem, as the resultant
the extracellular to the intracellular compartment is
renal compromise may lead to further potassium loss.
thought to be the underlying mechanism behind this
oiouad, oi jeuis aq o sieadde hl pue uopuos
Primary hyperaldosteronism
hypokalaemic paralysis'in humans. Occasionallyolder
Primary hyperaldosteronism (or Conn's syndrome) is
cats (up to 2 years of age) present with this condition.
 caused by a functional tumour of the zona glomerulosa
Although further studies are required, it is thought to be
of the adrenal gland. Aithough relatively few cases
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. The signs
 have beenreported, both benign adenoma and adeno-
may be worsened by stress/exercise, possibly through
carcinoma have been found. The presenting signs of
catecholamine-mediated exacerbation of potassium
primary hyperaldosteronism usually relate either to
translocation.
hypokalaemia, to hypertension, or sometimes to both.
Gastrolntestinal loss
 and secondary hyperaldosteronism. It may be asymp-
Acute or chronic vomiting and/or diarrhaea can lead to
tomatic, and only detected by indirect blood pressure
a greatly increased gastrointestinal loss of potassium.
measurement, or the cat may present with hyperten-
 Small intestinal diarrhoea can result in significant fae-
sive cardiac, ocular or neurological signs. Hyperten-
cal loss of potassium, particularly if malabsorption
 sion initially occurs with inappropriate sodium and
 compromises resorption of the ion. Gastric and small
water retention leading to hypervolaemia. It is thought
intestinal secretions contain potassium that is normally
 that a pressure diuresis follows, but the hypertension
reabsorbed but is lost if the animal vomits. If vomiting
 can persist, as an increase inthe sodium concentration
is severe or chronic, hypovolaemia may also result,
 within vascular smooth muscle causes increased va-
 and this can exacerbate hypokalaemia through RAAS
soconstriction, resulting in an increased vascular re-
 activation. Metabolic alkalosis can also result from
sistance.
persistent vomiting, and this will further exacerbate
In humans, serum potassium levels do not neces-
hypokalaemia.
sarily remain consistently low in hyperaldosteronism
45
Chapter 6  Investigation of feline hypokalaemia
and marked fluctuations can occur. Serum creatine
 Thoracic radiography should also be performed as
kinase (CK) values may therefore indicate that there is,
carcinomas can metastasize to the lungs.
ar has been, intermittent hypokalaemia (as CK will
remain elevated longer than the potassium remains
Polyuria/acute renal failure
low). Generally, potassium concentrations must drop
Polyuria, whatever its underlying causes, tends to in-
to <2.5 mmol/l for significant leakage of CK to occur.
crease renal potassium loss. This occurs as increased
There is also a tendency for metabolic alkalosis to
renal tubular flow rate creates an increased concentra-
occur with hyperaldosteronism, due to the increased
tion gradient for the excretion of potassium into the
renal excretion of hydrogen and ammonium ions that
Jumen. Thus acute renal failure, which is usually associ-
occurs along with potassium excretion.
ated with the development of hyperkalaemia, may sub-
 Primary hyperaldosteronism is not considered a
sequently lead to hypokalaemia in the polyuric phase. In
common condition in the cat. However, it has been
 male cats that have had urethral obstruction, the
  u nb si m poa
postobstructive diuresis phase can be a cause of
(Eger et al., 1983; Ahn 1994; Flood et al., 1999) and
hypokalaemia. After prolonged obstruction, the kidneys
many now regard this as an important and under-
may take several days to regain their concentrating
diagnosed endocrinopathy.
 ability, and in this time uncontrolled polyuria can lead to
 significant potassium loss. This may be exacerbated if
Laboratory investigations: Primary hyperaldoster-
onism is often not suspected unless hypokalaemia or
appropriate action taken (i.e. administering intravenous
hypertension is found during routine evaluations. In-
fluid containing adequate potassium).
vestigations into the cause of hypokalaemia and/or
hypertension are warranted in all cases. In older cats
Diuretic therapy
with hypokalaemia, assessment of renal function, se-
 Prolonged or aggressive use of certain diuretics can
rum glucose and thyroid status are important, but if
lead to iatrogenic hypokalaemia. Loop diuretics (e.g.
these are normal and other causes of the findings are
furosemide) act to reduce sodium resorption from the
not cbvious, testing for primary hyperaldosteronism is
tubular lumen at the level of the ascending loop of
 appropriate. Interpretation of tests may be difficult in
Henle. Because they act proximal to the site of aldo-
some cases as primary hyperaldosteronism can occur
sterone-stimulated sodium-potassium exchange,
concurrently with another disease causing secondary
greater amounts of sodium are presented to the
hyperaldosteronism. This is particularly important if
sodium-potassium exchange pumps and greater
CRF is present, as the development of primary hyper-
amounts of potassium are lost into the luminal fluid in
aldosteronism may exacerbate CRF through the de-
exchange forthe sodium. Loop diuretics are potent and
velopment of hypckalaemic nephropathy leading to a
 can cause significant hypokalaemia. Thiazide diuretics
 complex presentation. Therefore, results of investiga-
antagonize the renal resorption of sodium in the loop of
 tions should be interpreted carefully.
 Henle and the early distal tubule. As the distal tubule
Measurementofurinary fractionalexcretionofelec-
reabsorbs less sodium, the thiazides are milder diuret-
 trolytes is a simple test. In the face of hypokalaemia, if
ics and less prone to cause significant potassium loss.
 potassium excretion is high, or even normal, it confirms
Both kinds of diuretic also have the potential to cause
that there is inappropriate renal loss of potassium
hypavolaemia, which would be a stimulus for RAAS
(indicative of inappropriate aldosterone activity or inap-
activation and could exacerbate hypokalaemia.
propriate renal tubular handling), ratherthan decreased
intake or gastrointestinal loss. Fractional clearance
Renal tubular acidosis
values for potassium in healthy cats are reported to be
 Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is an uncomman disorder
up to 15-20%.
in cats, characterized by metabolic acldosis due to
Circulating aldosterone can be assayed relatively
defective renal acid-base handling. In distal RTA there
easily and isessential to document hyperaldosteronism.
is defective secretion of hydrogen ions at the distal
However, the most reliable way to differentiate be-
tubule due to congenital or acquired defects. Renal
tween primary and secondary hyperaldosteronism is to
sodium wasting is common, causing hypovolaemia
measure plasma renin activity concurrently. A high
 and an increased release of aldosterone, which pro-
aldosterone with a low or low-normal renin concentra-
motes urine potassium loss and hypokalaemia. In
tion indicates autonomous secretion of aldosterone
proximal RTA, there is defective absorption of bicarba-
whereas, secondary hyperaldosteronism is typically
nate ions in the proximal tubule, again leading to
associated with increased renin activity. Unfortunately
increased sodium delivery to the distal tubule. In-
 assays of plasma renin activity are not widely available
creased sodium excretion can result in secondary
andspecial sample handling is required (see Chapter 1).
hyperaldosteronism and the potentialto develop hypo-
kalaemia that can be exacerbated by administration of
sodium bicarbonate to treat the acidosis.
 graphy are valuable aids in the diagnosis of adrenal
tumours and as primary hyperaldosteronism in cats is
Hyperthyroidism
usually due to a macroadenoma, this will ba clearly
Hyperthyroidism can be associated with the develop-
 visible on examination. In addition, ultrasonography is
 ment of mild, and occasionally severe, hypokalaemia.
valuable for the assessmentof invasion of surrounding
The pathogenesis of this is not fully elucidated. It
structures and/or metastasis to abdominal organs.
appears that thyroid hormones stimulate the RAAS
46
Chapter 6
Investigationoffelinehypokalaemia
eitherdirectlyorindirectly,whichcanleadtohyperten
6.2
sion insome cases,although the effectis inconsistent.
Typical
In addition,there is an increase in circulating
ventroflexionof
catecholamines in the hyperthyroid state.lt ispossible
thereckina
that one orboth of thesemechanismsmay contribute
hypokalaemic cat.
tohypokalaemia in this disorder,although in humans
with thyrotoxicosis-associatedhypokalaemianumer-
ousothermechanismshavebeenpostulated(Magsino
and Ryan,2000).
Otherdiseases
Otherdiseasesthatmay alsolead tohypokalaemia,
onesecretion),particularlyif thereisascitesorcirrho-
sis.Hyperadrenocorticismis anotherpossible cause of
hypokalaemia,partly due to the directweakmineralo-
carticoid effect ofendogenous corticosteroids,and
effectofACTHonaldosteronerelease.However,the
effect israrely significant enough to cause overt hypo-
also develop as a consequence,as wellas acause of,
kalaemia,andhyperadrenocorticismisrare incats.
hypokalaemia.
Congestive heart failure also leads to RAAS activa-
Thepresence of other clinical signswill usually
tionsecondary toreduced cardiacoutput,and inre-
relate totheunderlying disease thathas caused the
sponse to sympatheticnervous system stimulation.
hypokalaemia (e.g.renal failure,hyperthyroidism, pri-
Hypokalaemia is a possible consequence of this, par-
mary hyperaldosteronism).
ticularlyifdiureticsareusedunlessanACEinhibitors
administered concurrently.
Treatment
Clinical features
Thetreatmentofhypokalaemiashouldbeaimedat
managementoftheunderlyingcause,withintravenous
Overt clinical signsof hypokalaemia aregenerallynot
and/oraral potassium supplementation asnecessary.
seen until the serum concentration falls below3.0
Inmanycasesthehypokalaemia canbeavoided if the
mmol/l.Aswouldbeexpectedfromthechief functions
underlyingmechanismsofitsdevelopment arefully
ofpotassium,itistheneuromuscularandcardiovascu-
appreciated.
Signs typicallyinclude generalizedskeletal muscu-
General principles
lar weakness,which can be profound.Affected cats
Intravenous fluid therapy canbea causeorcontribu-
classicallypresentwith aplantigrade stance on the
toryfactorinthedevelopmentofhypokalaemia,and
hind limbs.and ventroflexion of the neck(Figure 6.2).
conversely is also anessential partofthemanagement
The latter occurs as thecat lacks a nuchal ligament.
of severe hypokalaemia(DiBartola et al.,2000).To
Othersignsincludeastiff,stiltedgaitandawide-based
meet normal potassium requirements,intravenous
stance.Earlypotassium deficiency causes hyper-
fluids shouldcontain 20 mmol/l ofpotassiumwhen
polarization of muscle fibre membranes,increasing
infused at maintenancerates.Supplementation in the
theirrestingpotentialand thusreducing theirexcitabil-
face of hypokalaemia is commonly recommended
ity(i.e.alargerinfluxofsodiumisrequiredtodepolarize
using the guidelines inFigure 6.3.
the cells)and thus inducing muscle weakness.More
chronic andseverehypokalaemiacausesmusclefibre
Serum potassium
Required potassium(mmol)
hypopolarization,leading to extreme muscle weak-
concentration(mmol/)
per litre of fluids
ness and eventual rhabdomyolysis.This can be ac-
companiedby,sometimesveryprofound,elevationsf
<2.0
80
circulating CK concentrations.
2.1-2.5
60
Myocardial contractilityis alsoreducedbyhypo-
kalaemia,cardiac output falls,and arrhythmias may
2.6-3.0
40
occurduetodisturbedmyocardialmembranepotentials.
3.1-3.5
30
Changes on electrocardiographic(ECG)examination
include decreased Twave amplitude,ST segment
>3.5,<5.0
20
depression,and supraventricular and ventricular
General guidelines for potassiurm
arrhythmias.However,cardiacchanges areseenless
6.3
supplementation based on serum
frequently thanpolymyopathy.
concentrations.These guicelines are based on fluids at
Ifhypokalaemia is chronic.renal damage may
maintenanceratesand shouldbe adjusted accordingly if
occurasaconsequenceofhypokalaemicnephropathy
a fasterrate is being used.Infusion rales should not
(seeabove).Similarlyinappetenceoranorexia may
exceed apotassiumacministrationof C.5mmol/kg/h.
47
Chapter 6  Investigation of feline hypokalaemia
Where possible, potassium supplementationis given
empirically at a dose rate of 0.625-1.25 mg per cat
orally. Several potassium salts are available, but pot-
 once daily, and blood pressure should be measured a
assium gluconate is most commonly used as itis better
week after commencing therapy to assess the re-
tolerated than others (causes less gastrointestinal irri-
sponse.
tation). Doses are extremely variable, and adjusted
If surgery is not possible ar advisable, the condition 
according to clinical need and response. In general,
 may be managed medically, at least in the short term. As 
 initial doses in the order of 2 mmol twice daily are
with preoperative stabilization, the most suitable agent
recommended.
to use is spironolactone, along with oral potassium
 supplementation and amlodipine as necessary. There
Specific considerations
are a number of reports of cats with primary hyperaldos-
teronism that have been successfully managed with
Chronic renal failure
 medical treatment for prolonged periods of time.
Potassium monitoring in patients with CRF is crucial,
Aa pabeuew aq shemle pinoys ejwaeleyodky pue
Dluretic therapy
appropriate supplementation. It has been suggested
Although furosemide is the most commonly used diu-
that even normokalaemic cats with CRF could be
retic in cats,itis a potent loop diuretic with the potential
"whole body' potassium-depleted and might benefit
to induce profound hypokalaemia. Cats receiving furo-
from potassium supplementation. However, at least
semide should therefore have serum potassium con-
one study has evaluated this (Theisen et al., 1997) and
centrations monitored; and if hypokalaemia develops
beneficial effects were only found in those cats with
consideration should be given to using agents less
documented hypokalaemia. Supplementation of
likely to induce hypokalaemia (e.g. thiazides) and/or
normokalaemic cats is not therefore recommended.
combining therapy with a potassium-sparing agent
such as spironolactone.
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Surgical removal of the affected gland is the treatment
Periodic hypokalaemia in Burmese cats
of choice in cases where a unilateral discrete non-
 Experience with this problem suggests that some af-
invasive tumour is suspected, as this is curative. Uni-
fected cats require very high doses oforal potassium to
lateral adrenalectomy is a straightforward prccedure in
maintain control of serum potassium concentratians.
the cat solong as there is no.local invasion, for example
 Many affected cats appear to improve spontaneously
to the caudal vena cava. The prognosis is good after
 and the condition may resolve by the time they are 1-
complete removal of an adenoma, although it is possi-
2 years of age. However,in others (up to 50% of cases)
 ble for disease to develop subsequently in the contra-
persistent supplementation is required.
lateral gland.
 Preoperative stabilization with correction of hypo-
kalaemia and hypertension is important. Oral potas-
References and further reading
sium supplementation is advisable, particularly if the
condition has been long-standing and severe deficits
Ahn A (t994) Hyperaldosteronism in cats. Seminars in Veterinary
Medicine and Surgery (Smal Animal9, 153-157
of whole body potassium may have occurred. The
DiBartola SP and Autran de Morals H (200o) Disorders of potassium.
amcunt given can be adjusted freely on an individual
In: Fluid Therapy in Smgl Animal Prectice, 2 edn, ed. SP
DiBartola,p3-107.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
basis as necessary. Spironolactone is an aldosterone
Dow SW, Fetman MJ, LeCouter RA and Hamar DW(1987) Potassium
antagonist, competing for its receptor site in the renal
depletian in cats: renal and dietary influences, youma! of the
tubule, and is a very effective agent to use in cases of
American Veterinary Medical Association 191, 1569-1575
hyperaldosteranism (starting from 2-4 mg/kg sid). It
hyperaldosteronlsm (Conn's syndrome) in a cat; a case report
reduces both hypokalaemia and hypertension medi-
and review of comparalive aspects. Journal of Small Animal
ated by the excessive levels of aldosterone. If this is
Practice 24,293-307
insufficient to cantrol hypertension, additional therapy
hyperaldosteronism in two cats, Journal of the American Animat
with agents such as amlodipine is indicated. Amlodipine
Hospital Association 35,411-416
is a calcium channel blocker, and a powerful hypoten-
ad ad x (o)  u e H sn
sive agent, mediating its effect by inhibiting the influx of 
Theisen SK,Diatola SF,RadinMJ,ChewDJ,Bufington CA and
Southern Medical Journal93,996-1003
calcium through slow calcium channels in the vascular
Dow Sw (1997) Muscle potassium content and potassium
 smooth muscle (thus causing vasodilation) and, to a
 gluconate supplementalionin normokalaemic cais with naturally.
occurring chronicrenal falure.Jourmal ofVeterinary internat
lesser extent, myocardial cells. Amlodipine is used
Medicine 11, 212-217
48
Investigation
ot
hvper
Joan Duncan
Introduction
Chylomicron
Transport of dietarylipid (predominantly
triglyceride) from the intestines to the peripheral
Hyperlipidaemia is defined as an increase in plasma
tissues and liver
cholesterol and/or triglyceride concentrations. The
condition may arise as the result of a primary defect in
Very low density
Export of hepatic triglyceride and cholesterol to
lipoprotein(VLDL)
peripheral tissues.Mcdifed by the action of
lipoproteinmetabolismor asaconsequenceofan
lipoprotein lipase and hepatic lipase to form
underlying systemic disease.
LDL(see below)
Lowdensity
Delivery of cholesterol toperipheraltissues
Lipid metabolism in the dogandcat
lipoprotein(LDL)
High density
Transport of excess cholesterol from peripheral
Thefollowing outline of lipidmetabolism isbasedon
lipoprotein(HDL)
tissues to theliver(for excretion or export
observations in the dog, cat and humans.
elsewhere)
Donates apoC-lland E to chylomicrons and
VLDLlitingdeivrfthconten
The lipids
these lipoproteins to the tissue,and their
Lipidsarewater-insolublebiomolecules.
remnants to the liver
ApoA-I
Structural componentfHDLactivateslecithin
The most abundant are the triglycerides,which
chclesterol acyl transferase (LCAT)
accumulateincellularcytoplasm,particularlyin
adipocytes,where theyprovide a store of
ApoB4a
Structural component of chylomicrons and
chemical energy for physiological requirements.
VLDL(dog only)
Triglycerides are hydrolysed by lipase enzymes,
ApoB.o
Structural component of VLDL and LDL
releasing fatty acids for utilizationbytissues.
ApoC-Il
Activates lipoprotein lipase
Thepolarlipids,i.e.cholesterol and
ApoE
Bindstohepaticreceptorsfaclitatingremoval
phospholipids,are alsonecessaryfornormal
of chylomicrons and VLDL from the circulation
physiological function.Both are structural
Lipoprotein lipase
Located at the endothelial surface (binding
components of cellularmembranes and
(LpL)
released by heparin treatment)
cholesterol is an essentialprecursor of steroid
Action: hydrolysis of triglyceride in chylomicrons
hormones,vitamins and bile acids.The liver
andVLDL
produces approximately50%of thebady's
Hepaticlipase
cholesterolrequirements,withtheremainder
Endotheliallipase
Action:hydrolysis of triglyceride inVLDL
beingproduced byperipheral tissues orderived
Lecithin cholesterol
Located in HDL
from the diet. Cholesterol may exist in the free or
acyl transferase
Action: esterification of cholesterol in HDL,
esterified formbutmost is transported as
(LCAT)
allowing free chalesterol tomove into HDL from
cholesterol esters.
tissues
The lipoproteins
The function of the lipoprcteins, apclipoproteins
Lipoproteins arelipid-protein complexesthat transport
7.1
(apo) and the enizymes involved in lipid
lipidsthrough theplasma to theperipheral tissues.
metabolism.
Lipoprotein structure
Lipoprotein classes
Lipoproteins arecomposedofa surfacecoat-contain-
Thereare anumberof discretepopulationsof
ing phospholipid,freecholesteroland apolipoproteins
lipoproteins thatcan be classified on thebasis of:
(apo)-surrounding a hydrophobic lipid centre that
containsmainly triglycerides andcholesterol esters.
Size
Apolipoproteinsare specificproteinsthatdirect the
。
Density
lipoproteins to their sites of metabolism,and act as
。
Lipid content
cofactors in the enzymatic reactions of lipid metaba-
Apolipoprotein content
lism (Figure 7.1).
Electrophoreticmobility.
49
Chapter 7Investigation of hyperlipidaemia
Theclassesrecognizedin thedogare:chylomicrons;
ApoC-ll activateslipoprotein lipase-bound to
very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs):low density
tissue endothelium-which hydrolyses the
lipoproteins(LDLs)and high density lipoproteins
chylomicroncore triglycerides,liberatingfatty
(HDLS).
acidsforuptakeby theperipheral tissues.
The role of lipoprotein lipase is to regulate the
Lipoprotein function
provisionoffattyacidsforoxidationinskeletal
Lipoprateins have specific functions (see Figure 7.1)
muscle and for storage inadipose tissue.
anduniquemetabolicpathways.However,coordin-
The activityof lipoprotein lipase ismodified bya
ated interactions between lipoproteinpopulations and
variety of hormonesincludinginsulin,glucagon
the tissues are necessarytoensure efficient mobiliza-
and catecholamines.
tionof lipid and to allowthebodytorespond tophysio-
Theremaining chylomicronremnantisrelatively
logical demands.
deficient in triglyceride and enriched in
cholesterolester.lt isremoved from the
Lipid transport
circuiationbya hepaticreceptor.
Chylomicrons
Thus,chylomicrons areresponsibleforthedelivery
Chylomicronstransportdietarylipidtotheliverand
of dietary triglycerides to the tissues and of thecholes
peripheraltissues(Figure7.2).Chylomicronsareformed
terol ester-enriched remnant to the liver.
in the cellsof the intestinal lumen and contain:
Verylow density lipoproteins(VLDLs)
Triglycerides
VLDLsarethemajorplasmavehicleofendogenous
Asmall amountofcholesterol
triglyceride thathasbeensynthesizedbytheliveror
。
ApoB48
redistributed after thehepaticuptakeofother
lipoproteins(seeFigure7.2).Inadditiontotriglycerides,
Following secretion from the luminal cells, the
VLDLs carry cholesterol and apoBoo (also Ba in the
chylomicrons enterthe intestinal lactealandlymphatic
dog). Secretion of VLDLs is influenced by nutritional
system,where they transferto the thoracicduct and
and metabolic changes.
finally,intothecirculation.Chylomicronsynthesis,there-
fore,accompaniesdietaryfatabsorptionand thislipo-
Uponentering the circulation,VLDLsacquire
protein classmaybe detected intheplasma in the
apoC-ll and apoE from HDL.
postprandial state.
ApoC-ll activates lipoprotein lipase - bound to
tissue endothelium-which hydrolyses theVLDL
After entering the circulation,chylomicrons
core triglycerides,liberating fatty acids for uptake
acquire apoC-ll and apoE from HDLs.
by the peripheral tissues.
VLDL
LIVER HDL
VLDL)
CM
HDL
remnant
remnant
CHDL
ApoC-Il
LDL
HDL
ApoC-ll
FFA
LpL
LpL
CMGUT
LDL
LCAT
LDL
Chol
FFA
PERIPHERALTISSUES
7.2
A schematicrepresentation of lipid metabolism in the dog.ApoC-ll:apolipoprotein donated by HDL activates
liooprotein lipasc; Chol: cholesterol;CM:chylomicron;FFA:free fally acids;LCAT:esterification of cholestercl by
lipasereleases FFAto lissue.
50
Chapter7Investigationofhyperlipidaemia
TheremainingVLDLremnantcompriseslarge
on thedegreeof lipaemia andthemethodologyof the
moleculesrelativelydeficient in triglyceride and
test;potential effectsare listed inFigure7.3.Diagnos
enriched in cholesterol ester.These areremoved
ticlaboratoriesandthemanufacturersofpoint-of-care
fromthecirculationbyhepaticmembrane
analysersare able toprovide informationregarding the
receptors.
effect of lipaemia on their specific methodologies.The
Small cholesterol esterenrichedVLDLsare
visual appraisal ofaspunserum orplasma samplefor
modified toLDLs by hepatic lipase-bound to the
thepresence of lipaemia is anessential component of
hepaticendothelium.
anybiochemical analysisand allowstheoperatorto
predict anyinterferencewith subsequent analyses.
Low density lipoproteins (LDLs)
Refrigerationofa samplehelpstoclear the sample
LDLis themajorcholesterol carrierinhumanplasma,
ofchylomicrons,which float to the top,forming a
andisconsidered tobe themainparticipating lipopro-
cream'layer;plasmacollectedfrombelowthislayer
tein in the development of atherosclerosis.LDL is
maybe suitableforanalysis.Chemical clearing agents
removed from thecirculation by a cell surfacereceptor
areoccasionallyusedbutmay themselves induce
found in the liver and peripheral tissues,ensuring
artefact.The triglyceride concentration must be ana-
deliveryofcholesteroltoawidevarietyof tissues.
lysed inanaliquotof theoriginalsamplethathasnot
been cleared.Furtheraliquotscanbecleared forother
High density lipoproteins (HDLs)
biochemical tests.
In the dogandcat,HDListhemajorcarrierofplasma
Theeffectof lipaemiaonlaboratorytestsmaybe
cholesterol.HDLreturns cholesterol from the peri-
compoundedbyinvitrohaemolysisthatisfrequently
pheral tissuetotheliverwhereitmaybestored,used
noted in lipaemicsamples.The degree ofhaemolysis
in thesynthesisofbileacids,excretedorredistributed
mayberelatedtothelengthofcontacttimewiththered
(see Figure7.2).In addition HDL donates apoC-lland
cells.Therefore,rapid analysis orimmediate separa
apoEto chylomiconsandVLDLs,facilitating theme-
tionofthecellsfrom theplasmamayreduce this
tabolism of these lipoproteins. There are individual
phenomenon.For biochemical tests, preparation of
HDL subfractions,which are classified on thebasis of
plasma(whichcanbeseparatedimmediately)rather
their density.cholesterol content,electrophoretic mo-
than serum, is useful.
bility and apolipoprotein content.
Newly formed HDL,containing apoA-I isproduced
by theliver and intestine.Freecholesterol isdrawn
Parameter
Potentialeffect
tissuesinto theimmatureHDL,whereitisesterifiedby
of lipaemia
theactionoflecithincholesterolacyltransferase(LCAT),
Albumin
Decreased
forming the mature HDLparticle.Progressive accumu-
Aikaline phosphatase (ALP)
increased
lation of cholesterol results inexpansionof the macro-
molecules which is ultimately removed from the
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
Increased
circulation by hepaticreceptors.Thecholesterolesters
Amylase
Decreased
in thecoreof HDLs arenot transferredto otherlipopro-
tein species,but are directed to the liverforexcretion.
Aspartate aminotransterase (AST)
Increased
The containment of cholesterol esterswithin the HDL
Bile acids
Increased
class and their efficient uptake byhepaticreceptors
Birubin
mayplay a major role in the protection of the dog from
Increased
atherosclerosis.Inthe dog,continued expansionof the
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Variable
HDLwith cholesterol estersresultsin formation of a
Caicium
Increased
fraction named HDL,(also sometimes called HDL-C),
which isincreased in hypercholesterolaemicdogs.
Cholesterol
Variable
Creatinine
Increased
Laboratory measurement of lipids
Electrolytesby ion specific electrode
Not affected
and lipoproteins
Electrolytes byflame photometry (rarelyused)
Decreased
Hyperlipidaemia isoftennoted during routinelabora-
Gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT)
Variable
tory investigations.The measurement of plasma chol-
Glucose
Increased
esterol and triglyceridecan easilybeperformedusing
Haemoglobin
Increased
point-of-carebiochemistryanalysersand large-scale
commercial analysers.
Lipase
Decreased
Effects of lipaemia
Mean cellhaemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
ncreased
Phosphorus
ncreased
mia)hasa variableeffectonarange of laboratory tests
Total protein (refractometer)
Increased
thatrelyon theabsorptionorreflectanceoflight
(Burkhard and Meyer,1995).The magnitude and di-
7.3
The effect of lipaemia on biochemical tests.
rection of thechange caused by the lipaemia depends
51
Chapter7Investigation of hyperlipidaemia
Lipoprotein characterization
Where fasting hyperlipidaemiahasbeen identified,
Physiological hyperlipidaemia
further characterization may be achieved by perform-
Postprandial hyperriglyceridaemia
ingquantitativeorsemi-quantitativelipoprotein analy-
sis.Hypertriglyceridaemia associated with increased
Secondary hyperlipidaemia
chylomicronsmaybedifferentiated from thatassoci-
Diabetes melitus
ated with increasedVLDL quite easily in the practice
Hypothyroidism
laboratory.Plasma samples are stored overnight at
Hyperadrenocorticism
4°C:chylomicrons floattothetopofthe sampleforming
Cholestatic liver disease
a‘cream'layer;anincreaseinVLDLis characterized
Glomerulonephritis
byan overallopalescence of the plasma(Figure 7.4).
Non-nephrotic renal disease
Laboratory confirmation of thepresenceof theseand
Drug induced: glucocorticoid therapy;megestrol acetate (cat)
the otherclassesof lipoproteinsis achieved bylipopro-
Inherited hyperlipidaemia (proven or suspected)
tein electrophoresis or combined ultracentrifugation/
Inherited hyperchylomicronaemia in the cat
precipitation techniques.These methods arenot rou-
Idiopathic hyperlipidaemia in the Miniature Schnauzer
Hypercholesterolaemia in the Briard
ratories in theUKandelsewhere;however,theuse of
Idiopathic hyperlipidaemia
humanlaboratoriesforlipoproteinelectrophoresisis
not recommended.
7.5
The classification of hyperlipidaemia.
7.4
A'cream'layer cf
chylomicrons above an
opalescent plasma containing
Secondary hyperlipidaemia
VLDLsina sarmple from a cog with
Plasma lipidabnormalitiesareafrequentconsequence
combined diabotos mcllitus and
of systemicdisease,particularly endocrine disease,
hypothyroicism.
sincemany hormones influence the activity of lipopro-
tein lipase.
Endocrine diseases
Hypothyraidism,diabetes mellitus,and hyperadreno-
corticism are mostcommonly accompaniedby mild to
marked hypercholesterolaemia,butindividualpatients
may also have concurrent mild tomarked
hypertriglyceridaemia.
The lipid abnormalities associated with insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus are heterogenous but
may include increased concentrations of HDL and LDL
secondarytoimpaired lipoproteinremoval from the
circulation,and increased VLDL as a consequence of
decreasedlipoprotein lipase activity(Barrie etal.,1993).
 Decreased enzyme activity and impaired hepatic up-
takeof lipoproteinscontributetothedevelopmentof the
lipidabnormalitiesassociatedwithhypothyroidism
(increased concentrations of HDL,LDL and possibly
VLDL), and hyperadrenocorticism (increased concen-
trations of LDL and possibly VLDL). In the cat,hyper-
Classification ofhyperlipidaemia
lipidaemia is associated with diabetesmellitus.
Hyperlipidaemiamaybeclassifiedaccordingtothe
Cholestaticdisease andpancreatitis
underlying cause(where this can be determined),or
Cholestaticdiseaseiscommonlyassociatedwithmod-
otherwise is termed idiopathic(Figure7.5).
eratetomarkedhypercholesterolaemia,whichresolves
with correction of theunderlying disease.Historically,
Physiological hyperlipidaemia
it wasproposed that canine pancreatitis caused
Theabsorptionofdietaryfatfrom theintestinesis
hypertriglyceridaemia.Morerecently it hasbecome
accompaniedby theformationofchylomicrons.The
accepted that marked hypertriglyceridaemia maypre-
accumulationofthesetriglyceride-richlipoproteinslends
disposeanindividualtopancreatitis,ratherthandevel
a turbidity tothe serumorplasma ofnormal individuals
opment of lipid changes being a consequence of
(lipaemia)which clears within 4-6hours after eating.
pancreatic inflammation.
Chylomicron clearance isslowerinpatientsfedahigh
fat diet (Downs etal.,1997).Postprandiallipaemia is a
Renal disease
common cause of hypertriglyceridaemia inroutine
The association betweennephrotic syndrome and
blood samples.
hyperlipidaemia iswell recognized although it hasnot
52
Chapter7Irivestigation of hyperlipidaemia
been studied extensivelyin dogs and cats.Glomeru-
Idiopathichyperlipidaemiais alsoreported inBea
lonephritishasbeenassociatedwith a varietyof lipid
gleswhilemildhypercholesterolaemia,withoutclinical
abnormalities,including mild to moderate hyper-
manifestations,hasbeenreported inBriards in the UK
cholesterolaemia andmild tomarked hypertriglycerid-
(Watson et al.,1993).
aemia.Hypercholesterolaemia may alsobea
An inheriteddefectof lipoprotein lipase activity is
consequenceof renal disease in the cat.
recognizedas thecause offamilial hyperchylo-
Currently,there is considerable interest in thefac
micronaemia in cats(Peritz etal.,1990;Watson et al.
tors involved in theprogression of renal disease.
1992). The defect,which has been recognized in
kittens andyoungadults,resultsinthe accumulationof
In humans,it has been proposed that
chylomicrons andVLDLin theplasma of fastedcats.
hyperlipoproteinaemia (increases in VLDL and
Peritz et al.(1990) identified a point mutation that
LDL concentration particularly) results in damage
prevents lipoprotein lipase binding with the endothelial
to,or compositional changes of,mesangial celis.
surface.However,recently reported cases of feline
In the dog,non-nephroticrenal disease has been
hyperchylomicronaemia in theUKhavenotdemon-
associatedwith a shift from HDL to LDL,and
strated this mutation (Gunn-Moore et al.,1997).In
increases in the triglyceride content ofboth of
addition,many of these kittens were profoundly
these lipoproteinclasses(Down andKrawiec,1996).
anaemic,with fatal consequences. The cause of the
It is unlikely that hyperlipidaemia in isolation,
anaemiaand thenature ofitsrelationship to the
causes renal injury,butit may contribute to the
hypertriglyceridaemia havenotbeen determined.lt is
progression of renal injury in thepresence of
likelythatacombinationof hereditaryand environmen-
other additional factors such as hypertension.
tal factorsmaycontributetothepathophysiology.
Cancer
Cancer cachexia inhumans and animals hasbeen
Clinical manifestations
associatedwithabnormalitiesof lipidmetabolism.In
onestudy of canine lymphoma(Ogilvieet al.,1994),
The pathalogical consequences of hyperlipidaemia
dogswith disease had significantlyhigher concentra-
may be classified according to the role of
tions of total triglyceride secondary to increased tri-
hypertriglyceridaemia orhypercholesterolaemia in the
glyceride in the VLDL, HDL and LDL fractions. In
induction of lesions (Figure 7.6).
humans,it is proposed that metabolic alterationsmay
berelated to thetumourtype,butextensiveresearchin
veterinary patients has not been performed.
Hypertriglyceridaemia
Anorexia
Drugs
Abdominal pain
Drugs thatmay cause an increase incholesterol con-
Vomiting
centration include:corticosteroids;phenytoin;and
Diarrhoea
methimazole(Burkhard and Meyer,1995).An increase
Lipaemia retinalis
in triglyceride concentrationmay be notedwith
Lipid-laden aqueous humour
corticosteroids,oestrogens and cholestyramine
Seizures
Peripheral neuropathies
(Burkhard and Meyer,1995).Megestrol acetate is re-
ported to cause hyperlipidaemia in cats(Bauer,1992).
Hypercholesterolaemia
It is possible that some drugs affect the concentra-
Arcus lipaides corneae
tionof individual lipoproteinfractionsorthekineticsof
Atherosclerosis
lipidmetabolism,but these are unlikely tobe readily
detected given the limited useof lipoproteinmeasure
7.6
ments in veterinary medicine.
Clinical manifestations of hyperlipicaemia.
Inherited and idiopathichyperlipidaemia
Hypertriglyceridaemia
Primary defects of lipoprotein metabolism in the dog
arerare.
Dogs
ldiopathichyperlipidaemiaintheMiniatureSchnau-
Affected dogsmaypresent withrecurrent,buf offenself-
zeris thoughttobe theresult of aninherited defect,the
limiting,pisodesofabdominalpain,anorexiavomiting
exact nature of which hasnot been elucidated.The
anddiarrhoea.Theabdominal pain is frequentlydifficult
clinicalentityischaracterizedbyhypertriglyceridaemia
tolocalizeand thereisrarelydemonstrableradiographic
associated with increased VLDL and may have accom-
or clinical pathological evidence of pancreatitis.
panying hyperchylomicronaemia(Whitneyetal.,1993).
Proposed mechanismsinclude:
In Miniature Schnauzers,the clinical signs of
hypertriglyceridaemiaareusuallyrecognized
IncreasedproductionofVLDL
after4yearsof age,andmay progress in
Reduced clearance of VLDL secondary to
severity as the patient ages.
decreased lipoprotein lipase activity
Lipaemia retinalis(pale pink appearance of the
Ahepatic membrane receptor defect with impaired
retinal vessels in the non-tapetal fundus) and
lipoproteinremnant clearance(Bauer,2000).
lipid-ladenaqueoushumourareocular
53
Chapter7Investigation of hyperlipidaemia
manifestationsof marked hypertriglyceridaemia
Hess etal.(2003) demonstrated thatdogs with athero-
(Crispin,1993).
sclerosisaremorelikelytohaveconcurrentdiabetes
Generalized seizureshavebeen noted in
mellitusorhypothyroidism thandogswithoutvascular
MiniatureSchnauzerswithvariabletriglyceride
change.
concentrations(Rogersetal.,1975;Bodkin,1992).
Avariety of clinical signs arenoted,depending
upon the organ or tissue affected.In one review of 14
Therelationshipbetweenneurological signs and
dogs with atherosclerosis(Zeiss and Waddle,1995),
hyperlipidaemia has not been proven but in some
five dogs werecollapsed atclinicalpresentation,three
hadpancreatitis andfive displayedneurological signs.
convulsant medication)hasproduced resolution of the
The neurological signs included ataxia, dysmetria and
clinical signs.
stupor.Twocases had iliac thrombosis.Only two dogs
showedthetypical dermatological lesionsofhypo-
Cats
thyroidism.
In thecat,hypertriglyceridaemiahasbeenassociated
A further studyof canine atherosclerosisproposed
with lipaemiaretinalis,lethargyand anorexiainkittens
obesityasarisk factor for atherosclerosis(Kagawa et
andyoung adult cats.Some cases presented at 8-9
al.,1998).However,a more detailed investigation of
monthsof agewithperipheral neuropathiesrelated to
the interactionbetweenobesity,lipoprotein metabo-
the developmentof xanthomas(lipid granulomas) over
lismandformationof the atheroscleroticlesionwould
bony prominences and at sitesof trauma.Horner's
be required to support thisproposal.
Thepathalogical effectsof hypercholesterolaemia
are commonbutresolveafter2-3monthsofdietaryfat
in the cathave notbeenextensively studied.
restriction(Jones,1993)
Hypercholesterolaemia
Diagnosis
In dogs,hypercholesterolaemiahasbeen associated
with the development of arcus lipoides corneae,an
Pathological hyperlipidaemia should initiallybe con-
annularlipidinfiltrationoftheperipheralcorneaand
firmed ina fasting sample(12-16hours) followed by
perilimbal zone of the sclera.Inaddition,systemic
exclusion of underlying metabolicor endocrine dis-
hyperlipidaemia may contributeto theprogression of
ease(Figure7.7).lf sucha disease isrecognized then
further lipid investigation is usually unnecessary.
(Crispin,1993)
In dogs with primary or idiopathic hyperlipidaemia,
Spontaneousatherosclerosisisararecomplication
itmaybenecessary to further categorize the lipid
of marked hypercholesteralaemia,buthasbeennoted
disturbances so that any drug therapy required at a
in dogswith thyroid dysfunction and diabetesmellitus.
later stage can be selected appropriately.
The investigation of
Hyperlipidaemia (HLP)
7.7
hyperlipidaemia in the dcg.
Fasted sample?
No
Yes
Fast (12-16h)
Lipids within
refererceinterval
Hyperlipidaemia]
Physiological
Is there underlying
hyperlipidaemia
crug therapy?
Yes
Secondaryhyperlipidaemia
Treat disease and monitorlipids
Miniature Schnauzer
s
No
Idiapathic
hyperlipidaemia
Idiopathichyperlipidaemia
54
Chapter 7  Investigation of hyperlipidaemia
Management
 bile acid-binding resin may be considered in cases of
significant hypercholesterolaemia that are poorly re-
With the possible exception of neoplasia, the plasma
sponsive to dietary therapy. However, although the
lipid alterations of dogs and cats with secondary hyper-
drug reduces the cholesterol concentration it may also
lipidaemia often resolve after successful stabilization
increase the plasma triglyceride concentration sec-
or treatment of the underlying disease process. The 
ondary to increased VLDL synthesis.
 following guidelines may be used for the management
of persistent, inherited or idiopathic hyperlipidaemias.
Cats
Kiftens with familiai hyperchylomicronaemia should be
Dogs
 weaned and maintained on a low fat diet. Additional
 Dogs with a fasting plasma triglyceride concentration
methods of lowering plasma lipid concentrations in the
> 5.5 mmoll may be at risk of developing pancreatitis,
cat have rarely proved necessary, but gemfibrizol
and lipid-lowering intervention should be instituted.
(7.5mg/kg bid) is reported to reduce the triglyceride
 Hypertriglyceridaemic dogs presenting with signs
 concentration in cats resistant to the effect of dietary fat
typical of acute pancreatitis should be treated
restriction alone (Jones, 1995).
 symptomatically, including the maintenance of fluid 
and electrolyte balance and the withdrawal of food
Summary
where necessary. The primary approach is the reduc-
 The successful management of the clinical manifesta-
 tion of the dietary fat intake. A number of balanced low
tions of hyperlipidaemia in the dog and cat depends
fat, high fibre diets are commercially available in canned.
upon the recognition and treatment of underlying sys-
and dry formulations. The diets should be fed accord-
temic disease and, where necessary, the introduction
 ing to the manufacturer's guidelines, exceptin the case
of a fat-restricted diet followed by regular clinical and 
 of obese animals where a weight reduction programme
laboratory evaluation. Further medication should be
should be instituted.
undertaken with care.
Hyperchylomicronaemia, in isolation, may be easier
to control with dietary fat restriction than mixed
hyperlipoproteinaemia characterized by increased
References and further reading
 chylomicrons and VLDL (Bauer, 2000).
 In many dogs it is difficult to achieve plasma con-
Barrie J, Watson TDG, Stear MJ and Nash AS (1993) Plasma
centrations within laboratory reference ranges and
of age, gender and endocrine disease. Journal of Smaff Anima!
 therefore the goal of therapy is to maintain a triglycer-
Practice 34, 507-512
ide concentration < 5.5 mmolf. In same dogs it may be
BauerJE(1992)Diet-induced alterations of lipoproteinmetabolism.
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
necessary to use medical therapy in addition to dietary
201,1691-1694
fat restriction.
 Bauer JE (2000] Hyperlipidemias. In: Textbook of Veterinary Interna!
A number of lipid-lowering therapies, including fish
Medicine, 5"edn,ed.SJEtinger and EC Feldman, pp.283-292.
WB Saunders. Philadelphia
oils (n-3 fatty acids) and gemfibrizol are used in human
 Bodkin K (1992) Seizures associated with hyperlipoproteinemia in a
medicine, where their selection is determined by the
Miniature Schnavzer.Canine Practice17,1115
Burkhard MJ and Meyer DJ(1995) Causes and effects ofinterterance
 nature of the underlying abnormality. These products
with clinical laboratory measurements and examinations, In:
are rot licensed for use in the dog and cat, although
Kirk's Curent aterinaryTheray X, edDBonagura pp14
there are now widespread anecdotal reports to support 
 20. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Crispin SM (1993) Ocular manifestations of hyperlipopratelnaemia.
their use in dogs.
Journal of Smail Animal Praclice 34, 500-506
Down LK and Krawiec DR (1996) Dyslipoproteinemia of chronicrenal
 Fish oils at 10-30 mg/kg daily and gemfibrizol at
failure: its relevance to canine progressive kidney disease.
Compendium on the Continuing Education for the Practicing
150-300 mg orally daily have successfully reduced
Veterinarian 18. 65-74
the triglyceride concentration in patients resistant
Downs LG, Crispin SM, LeGrande-Defretin V, Perez-Camargo G,
to the effect of dietary fat restriction alone.
on plasma lipids and lipoproteins of six Labrador Relrievers.
 Mild abdominal discomfort is reported by some
Research in Veterinary Science 63,175-181
human patients receiving gemfibrizol but the drug
Gunn-Moore DA, Watson TDG, Dodkin SJ, Blaxter AC, Crispin SM
appears to be well tolerated in dogs.
anaemia in kittens. The Veterinary Record 140, 355-359
+
 Niacin is used in human medicine to reduce LDL
Hess RS, Kass PH and Van Winkle TJ (2003) Associalioan between
 cholesterol and promote HDL. lt has been
diabetes melitus, hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism and
aiherosclerosis in dogs. Journal of Veterinary intemal Medicinc
reported to reduce the serum triglyceride in dogs
17,489-494
given 100 mg niacin daily. However, other 
 Jones BR (1993) Inherited hyperchylomicronaemia inthe cat. Journal
of Small Animai Praclice34,493-499
investigators had to discontinue the drug ater a
 Jones BR (1995) Feline hyperlipidemia. In: Textbook of Veterinary
few days due to the deveiopment of facial
Internal Medicine, 4m edn, ed. SJ Etinger and EC Feldman, pp.
erythema and pruritus (Bauer, 2000).
1410-1414. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Kagawa Y, Hirayama K, Uchida E, Izumisawa Y, Yamuguchi M,
Kotani T, Niyama M, Yoshino T and Taniyarna H (1998) Sys-
Until controlled therapeutic trials have been con-
temic atherosclerosis in dogs: histopathological and immuna-
ducted, lipid-lowering drugs should be used with cau-
histochamlcal studies ofatherosclerotlc leslons. Joumal of Com-
parative Pathology 118, 195-206
tion and the animals monitored at frequent intervals.
Ogilvie GK, Ford RB, Vail DM, Walters LM, Salrnan MD, Babineau C
Hypercholesterolaemia is a less common clinical
concern, given the relative resistance of dogs to the
withlymphoma.JounalofVeterinary internalMedicine8,62-66
Peritz LN, Brunzell JD, Harvey-Clarke C, Prilchard PH, Jones BR and
development of atherosclerosis. Cholestyramine, a
 Hayden MR (1990) Characterlzation of a lipoprolein llpase class 
55
Chapter 7  Investigation of hyperlipidaemia
[Ill type dafect in hypertriglyceridemic cats. Clinical and
Llpoproteln llpase funcllan and gene structure.Jouma!of Smal!
nvest
ligative Medicine 13,259-263
Animal Practice 33, 207-212
Whitney MS,Boon GD,RebarAH, Story JA and Botoms GD (1993)
Ultracentrifugal and eleclrophoretic characterislics of the plasma
Medical Assoclation 166, 1087-1091
Watson P, Simpson Kw Odedra RM and Bedford PGC (1993)
hyperlipaproteinemia. Journail of Veterinary internal Medicine7,
Hypercholesterolaamia in Briards in the United Kingdom.
253-260
Research in Veterinary Science 54, 80-85
 Zeiss CJ and Waddle G (1995) Hypothyroidism and atherosclerosis
Watson TDG, Gaffney D, Mooney CT, Thompson H, Packard CJ and
indogs.Compendium on fhe Continuing Educationfor thc
Practicing Veterinanan 17, 1117-1128
56
Investigation of symmetrical
alopecia in dogs
Ross Bond
Introduction
Thetelogenorrestingphaseischaracterizedby
a period of apparent inactivity duringwhich the
Abnormalitiesof thehaircoat areusuallyrecognized
fully grown hair remains anchored in the follicle
by dog owners early in the course of a disease.
by an expanded andkeratinized base known as
Alopecia-absence of hair inan area where it is
a 'club'. The hair shaft is normally retained in the
normallypresent-orhypotrichosis-partial hair loss
follicleduring catagenor telogenunlessremoved
maypresentnorisk tothepatientand maybe
by vigorous grooming.
nothing more than a cosmeticproblem,albeit one
whichmay cause theowner considerabledistress.
Alternatively,it maybe a manifestation of an internal
disease with potentially serious consequences.A
methodicalapproachand accuratediagnosisare
prerequisitesforsuccessful managementofthese
cases. The purpose of this chapter is to present
anoverviewofthebiologyofhairgrowthandthe
mechanisms by which alopecia may develop,and
tosuggest an approach to the diagnosis of symmetri-
cal alopecia in dogs,with emphasis on cutaneous
endocrine disorders and theirimpersonators'
Anatomy and physiology
Regenerating
germcells
Dogs generallypossessa dense haircoat thatcovers
the entire skinsurface,with the exception of thenasal
ProanagenI-IV
MesanagenStageV
planum,footpads,lips,teats and anus. The length,
thickness,densityand colourvarybetweenindividuals
Sebaceousgland
and especiallybetween breeds.Dogs exhibit com-
pound hairfollicle grouping whereby a primaryhairand
2-15secondary hairsemerge through thesamepore.
There are100-600hairfollicleostiapersquare centi-
metre(Kristensen,1975).Hair hasimportant thermo-
regulatory,protective and sensory functions.
Thehairgrowthcycle
A cyclical pattern ofhairshedding,followed bynew
Germcells
growth andreplacementhas evoived.
Dermal
The growing or anagenphase ischaracterized by
papilla
the production of ahair shaft.Stem cells located
StageVI
Catagen
Telogen
in the hair matrix (Figure 8.1) give rise to a
Melanagen
populationofepidermalcellsthatdifferentiate
8.1
The hairgrowth cycle.Anagen,the active
andkeratinize,forming the hair shaff and inner
growth phase,is divided into 6 stages,
root sheath.Anagen usually accountsfor80-
Proanagen slages I-IV,Mesanagen stageVand
90%of the duration of the hair growth cycle.
Metanagen stage Vl.During these stagcs,the hair follicle
The cessation of active hair growth signalsthe
Telogen represenls the resting phase of the hair follicle and
onsetof catagen,a short transitional phase
catagen is the transitional period between the growthi and
duringwhich theinferiorsection of thehairfollicle
resting periods.(@Anita Patel first published in BSAVA
undergoes regression.
ManualofSmallAnima!Dermatology,2edlition.)
57
Chapter 8 Investigation of symmetrical alopecia in dogs
Shedding of thehaironlyoccurs afterthenext
associatedwithendocrinopathiesare themostcom-
anagen phase has begun and a new hair shaft
moncauseofsymmetricalalopeciainthedog.Follicular
has entered the follicularcanal.
dysplasias,diseases characterized by incomplete or
abnormallyformedhairfolliclesandhair shafts,are
Inthedog,thehairgrowthcycleineachbodyregion
lesscommonbutmay clinicallycloselyresemble an
is asynchronous and the hair coat isreplaced in a
endocrinopathy.Some authors use the term'follicular
mosaicpattern.
dystrophyto describe these diseases(Gross et al.,
Regulation
1992;YagerandWilcock,1994;Dunstan,1995),which
impliesa disorder of structureand functioncaused by
Thehair growth cyclereflects theintrinsicrhythmic
abnormal nutrition of the tissues.
activityof thefollicle,whichresultslargelyfromlocal
malpapilla cells(see Figure 8.1)are a permanent and
stablepopulationofspecializedfibroblaststhatinteract
Diagnostic approach
withthefollicularepidermisduringembryonicdevelop-
ment.lnaddition throughoutadult life,they are thought
Alopecia maybeafeatureof myriad skin diseases,
toprovidespecificfactorsthatstimulatebothepider-
including:
mal proliferationandfollicularmorphogenesis(Jahoda
and Oliver,1990).
Parasitic
Systemicfactors arealsoimportant and several
Allergic
hormonal systems influence follicular activity.Hor-
，
Endocrine
monesprobablyfacilitateseasonal changes infollicular
Neoplastic conditions.
activityinresponse toenvironmental factors,such as
The list of differential diagnoses for dogs with
1991).Gonadal,thyroidal,adrenocortical,pituitaryand
symmetrical alopecia accompanied by markedpruri-
pineal hormoneshavebeenshowntoinfluencethehair
tus and cutaneousinflammationis oftenlengthy,anda
growth cycleinmanyspecies.Forexample,thyroxine
detailed discussion of the approach to thispresenta-
(T4) accelerates therate ofhair growth andreduces
tionisbeyond the scope of this chapter.（For further
the durationoftelogen,whereascorticosteroidsgener-
informationseeChapter12of theBSAVAManualof
ally inhibit follicular activity(Ebling et al.,1991).
Small AnimalDermatology,2ru edition).
However, symmetrical alopeciawithout historical
Pathophysiology
orclinicalevidenceofcutaneousinflammation isa
relatively common presentation,and the presence of
Dunstan(1995) described an approach to diseases of
symmetrical skin lesionsusuallyimpliesa systemically
hair follicles basedonpathophysiologicalprocesses
mediated disease.Acquired,bilaterally symmetrical,
thatprovides a useful frameworkfor consideration of
non-pruritic alopecia witheasily epilated hairs and
thepossiblecauses of alopecia.Diseasescharacter-
variabledisturbances of skin and hairpigmentation is
izedbyalopecia canbe divided intoscarring(orpoten-
theclassicalpresentationofatrophichairfollicledis-
tially scarring) and non-scarring disorders.
easesassociatedwithhormonaldisorders.However,it
In scarringalopecia,thereisdestructionordistor
is important to considera numberof'endocrine imper-
tion of the follicle,usually as a consequence of an
sonators',suchascolourdilutionalopeciaandfollicular
inflammatoryprocess,whichmeansthathairregrowth
dysplasias,when faced with this presentation.The
is not possible.A common example would be deep
diagnostic approach tosymmetrical alopecia isinitially
pyoderma secondary to demodicosis.
based uponaconsiderationofthehistoricalandclinical
By contrast,non-scarring alopecias generally re-
features.Further tests,which are usually required to
sult fromstructuralorgrowthcycleabnormalitiesofthe
establisha definitive diagnosis in suchcases,are
folliclewithoutinflammation,andcanbeclassifiedinto
selected basedon the historical and clinical findings
four subtypes(Figure8.2).Of these,atrophic diseases
(Figures 8.3 and 8.4).
Sub-types
Mechanism
Examples
Atrophic alopecias
Abnormal hair growth cycle leading toa shortenedanagen-prolonged
Hypothyroidism,hyperadrenocorticism
telogen phase (follicles are'asleep)
Follicular dysplasias
Disarderofmorphogensor structural proteinscausingmalformationof
Congenital alopecia in Chinese crested dogs
shaft or follicle such that hair growth is impossible
Matrixcell/melanocyte
Abnormal dispersal ofmelanosomes andordisruptionofmatrixcells
Colurdlnacal
abnormalities
dysplasia
Traumatic alopecias
Hair removed in pruritic or psychogenicdisease
Alopecia in allergic skin diseases
8.2
Types of non-scarring alopecia in the dog according to Dunstan(1995)
58
Chapter8Investigationof symmetrical alopecia in dogs
Bilaterally symmetrical
alopecia in a dog
Grass inflammation
Pruritus/self trauma
No pruritus
sufficient to cause alopecia
sufficient to cause alopecia
No inflammation
Traumatic alopecia?
Age of onset?
Scarring alopecia?
Consider infections,
Acquired
Congenital
ectoparasites,
hypersensitivites,others
Biopsy
Skin scrapes, cultures,
一
cytology,biopsyasindicated
Ectodermal defect?
Otherhistorical or
Norelationship to
Dilute coat colour?
clinical features of
coat colour
Black hairs only?
endocrine disease
→
No other special
Biopsy, trichogram, scrape
Skin scrape, haemogram,
clinicalfeatures
biochemical profile,
gonadal status, dynamic
Colour dilution alopecia
tests of endocrine function
Biopsy, trichogram, scrape
Black hair follicular
dysplasia
Specific endocrinological
diagnosis?
Atrophic changes
Dystrophic changes
Folliculardystrophy
Telogen/catagen
Anagen
predominating
predominating
Cyclical?
Acquired pattern
alopecia?
Seasonal flank
alopecia
8.3
Suggested approach to the diagnosis of symmetrical alopecia in the dog. A case exampie is shown in Figure 8.4.
A6-year-oldneutered femaleblackCockerSpanielwaspresentedinAugustwitha4monthhistoryof progressivenon-pruritic symmetricalalopeciaof
the flanks. She was in good health otherwise.
The physcalexaminationshowednlyalopeciawithoutinflammationheremaininghairscouldbeeasilypilatedintheaffcted areasThere
werenootherpecialfeaturesindicativefendocrineorsystmicdiseasebutapreviusblopsytakenbyanotherveterinarysurgeonshwedatrophic
changeswith telogehairs predminatingThis wasintpretedby the pathologist asbeing consistent withanendocrin disase;dysplastcchanges
was sought
History and clinicalexaminations confimed no pruritus oriflammationThe age of onset excluded acongenitl disorderThe dog was black all
over,andaelationshitcatcolourcouldntbedetmined.arasitesweretfoundonskinscrapingsHamogramandbichemicalprofilswere
normalThridstimulationtestsandow-dosedexamethasonesupressiontestswereormal.Whilawaitingthereulsfthelaboratrytestshair
regrowth was evident, and ccmplete regrowth was observed within2months.
Thesefindingsaremostconsitentwitseasonalflankalopecianthiscaselopeciarecurreddringtheextpringandthehasrerewaainin
the autumn,confirming the diagnosis.No treatment was given.
8.4
Caseexample:Symmctrical alopecia.
59
Chapter8Investigationof symmetrical alopecia indogs
History
which havebeenrecognized in Curly CoatedRetriev-
A general medical and dermatological history is re-
ers,lrish Water Spaniels,Portuguese Water Dogs.
quired in all casesofskin disease.However,there are
SiberianHuskies,DobermannPinscherandotherbreeds
anumberofpointsofparticularrelevanceincasesof
(Miller,1990b:Gross et al., 1992;Miller and Scott,
symmetricalalopecia.
1995;Scottetal.,2001a).Acquired pattern alopeciais
most often seen in dachshunds (Figure 8.6).
Breed
Breedpredilections(Figures8.5and8.6)havebeen
Ageatonset
reportedformanyof theacquired endocrinediseases
Theageof thedogat theonsetofalopeciacanbe
and areofparticularimportanceinfolliculardysplasias,
helpfui.Forexample,congenital ectodermal defects
Disease
Underlying pathology
Breed predilection
Age at
Clinical signs (other
Special dermatological
onset
than skin)
features
Hypothyroidism
Lymphocytic thyroiditis
Various,large
2-10years
Lethargy/exercise
Cocl, puffy, thickened
oridiopathic atrophy
breeds
intolerance,weight gain,
skin (uncommon)
bradycardia,corneal
lipid deposits
Hyperadrenocorticism
Pituitary or adrenal
Various,poodles,
6-12years
Abdominal enlargement,
Calcinosis cutis, thin sin,
(spontaneous)
neoplasia
dachshunds,
hepatomegaly, muscle
prominent superfical
terriers
wasting,ticulra
vessels
AlopeciaX
Abnormal adrenocortical
Pomeranians,
1-5 years
None
Hair regrowth at sites of
stercoidogenesis. Mild
Keeshund,Miniature
biopsy or other trauma to
hyperadrenocorticism?
Pcodle.Chow Chow
the skin
Samoyed, Alaskan
Malamute
Functional testicular
Hormone (oestrogen)
Notreported
Adult
Testicular mass, retained 
None
tumour(male)
productionfrom
testes. prostatomegaly.
testicular neoplasia
attractiveness to male
dogs, gynaecomastia,
pendulous prepuce
Hyperoestrogenism
Ovarian cysts'or
Not reported
Adult
Enlargednipples and
None
(female)
functional neoplasia
vulva,irregularr
prolonged oestrus,or
prior oestrogen therapy?
8.5
alopecia.(Intended only as a guide.In sorme cases,the listed featuresmay be absent).
Disease
Underlying pathology
Breed predilection
Age of
Clinical signs(other
Main diagnostic
onset
than skin)
features
Telogen effluvium
Synchronouscessation
Not reported
Variablie
Often nil,previous
Rapid spontaneous
of anagen, followedby
systemic disease or
resolution.Stressful event
shedding and regrowth
physiological stress
1-3months previously
Seasonalffank
Unknown. Related to
Dobermann Pinscher,
1-12years
None
Cyclical or seasonal
alopecia
photopericd?
Boxer, Airedale
(usually
course.Exclude other
Possibly mediated via
Terrier,chnauzr
between
diseases
pineal gland and
2and6
melatonin
years)
Oestrogen-responsive
Unknown.
Not reported
Infantilevuliva?Urinary
Exclude other diseases.
dermatosis
incontinence?
Response to therapy
(care)
Testosterone-
Unknown
Not reported
Adult
None
Exclude other diseases.
responsive dermatosis
Response to therapy
(care)
Acquired pattern
Unknown
Manchester Terrier,
6-12
None
Histopathology:
alopecia (pattern
dachshunds, Boston
months
miniaturization of hair
baldness)
Terer,Whipet
follicles
Atrophichair follicle ciseases of unknown or non-hormonal cetiology thatmaypresent as symmetrical alopecia.
8.6
60
Chapter8Investigation of symmetrical alopecia in dogs
causing alopecia frombirthareoccasionallyencoun-
Drug administration
tered(Ihrke etal,1993;Hoskins,2001).Symmetrical,
The clinician should enquire about previous drug ad-
gross non-inflammatory alopecia acquired during the
ministration; for example, long-term glucocorticoid
first year of life is suggestive of:
therapymay cause iatrogenichyperglucocorticoidism.
In addition,oestrogens and cytotoxic drugs,such as
Some follicular dysplasias
cyclophosphamide,mayalsointerferewithhairgrowth.
Matrixcell/melanocyteabnormalities
Theresponse,orlackofresponse,toprevious therapy
Congenital endocrine diseases,e.g.congenital
mayalsobehelpful;forexample,failureofhairregrowth
hypothyroidism orpituitary dwarfism.
appropriate dose suggests that hypothyroidism is un-
The most common acquired endocrine diseases,
likely.
hypothyroidismand hyperadrenocorticism,are usually
Clinical features
seen inmiddle-aged or elderly dogs.
A general physical examination can reveal clinical
Pruritus
signs in othersystems thatmayberelated totheskin
A history of moderateor severepruritus in a dog
disease,particularlyindogswithhypothyroidim,yr
adrenocorticism and abnormalities of thereproductive
withsymmetricalalopecia mayindicatea traumatic
aetiology or a scarring (inflammatory) disease.How-
system(seeFigures 8.5and8.6).Although,itisimpor-
tant to appreciate that clinical signsmaybe confined to
ever,dogs with basic non-inflammatory diseases
such as endocrinopathies,mayalsobepruritic if the
the skin in some dogswith these diseases,additional
disease is complicated bya secondary microbial
physical findingscanbe very helpfulfor listing differen-
infection,the most common being staphylococcal
tial diagnosesinorderofpriority,enablingfurthertests
pyoderma.If the distribution and severity of the pyo-
tobeperformed in a rational order.Thereader is
derma lesionsdonot correlatewith thedegreeof
referredtootherchaptersin thistextforcomprehen-
sive accounts of endocrine diseases of the dog.
ordysplasticfolliculardiseaseunderlying theskin
Dermatological abnormalities
infection.Re-evaluation afterantimicrobial therapy
Physical examination of the skin should allow the
maybe helpful in such cases.
clinicianto determine whethertheresultant alopecia is
a scarring or non-scarring form.
Signsofinternal disease
In endocrine diseases such as hypothyroidism and
Scarring alapeciasmay showa predominance of
hyperadrenocorticism,theremaybehistoricalfeatures
lesions such aserythema,papules,pustules,
indicating abnormalitiesofother organ systems.For
furuncles and crusts.
example,the owners of dogs with hyperadrenocorti-
Alopeciawithoutcutaneousinflammationsuggests
either an atrophic disease,a follicular dysplasia,
Inhypothyroidism,theownermaydescribesignswhich
ormatrixcell/melanocyte abnormalities.
reflect the slowing of cellular metabolism, such as
lethargy and weight gain.
Coat colour change:Colour dilution alopecia
(Figure 8.7) should be strongly suspected if thedog
Recent stressful events
hasadilute coatcolour(e.g.blueDobermannPinscher)
Telogen effluvium(telogen defluxion) is a transient
Blackhairfollicular dysplasia shouldbeconsidered if
disorderofexcessivehairsheddingresulting froma
the alopecia is confined to black(ordark) haired areas;
synchronouscessationof anagen,and usually follows
thesetwodiseasesusuallydevelopduringthefirstyear
pregnacyttvrlssrsmila
of life(Carlotti,1990;Miller,1990a).
event that hasoccurred in the1-3monthspreviously.
Seasonal or cyclical episodes
Seasonal or cyclical episodesofnon-inflammatory
symmetrical truncalalopecia followedbyspontaneous
hair regrowth are typical of seasonal flank alopecia
(Miller and Dunstan,1993;Curtis,1995）,and also
occasionally occurs in follicular dysplasias,such as
thatseen in thePortugueseWaterDog(Miller and
Scott,1995).
Reproductive history
Male dogs withoestrogen-producingtesticulartumours
may have a history of signs suggesting feminization
(attractiveness to male dogs, gynaecomastia, pendu-
lous prepuce). Anoestrus and infertility may be re-
ported in hypothyroid bitches,and prolonged oestrus
hasbeenreported inbitcheswithovariandisorders
Diffuse truncal hypotrichosis in a Dobermann
and hyperoestrogenism(DavidsonandFeldman,1995).
8.7
Pinscherwith colour dilution alopecia.
61
Chapter 8Investigation of symmetrical alopecia in dogs
A lightening of the coat colour(leucotrichia) isnot
Additional skin lesions:Dogs with symmetrical
uncommon in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.
alopeciashouldbecarefullyevaluatedfor additional
Changes in coat colour and coat quality are also seen
skin lesions.Comedones (blackheads),which are
inmany of the folliculardysplasias(Gross et al.,1992).
dilatedhairfolliclespluggedwithkeratinandsebaceous
The presence of miniaturized ('velus') hairs is a key
debris,commonly develop in endocrine diseases
feature inacquiredpattern alopecia(patternbaldness,
However,theymay alsobe seen in demodicosis and
seeFigure8.6),arare disease usually seen indachs-
inprimarydefects ofkeratinization affecting the
hunds thatpresent with symmetrical non-inflammatory
upper portion of the hair follicle.Thinning of the
alopecia of the pinnae and/or the ventrum(Scott et al.
skin with prominent subcutaneous vessels occurs
2001a).
in hyperadrenocorticism,whereas dogs with
hypothyroidismmay have thickened skin due to
Hyperpigmentation:Intense hyperpigmentation of
increased deposition of cermal mucin(myxoedema).
the alopecicareasismostcommonly seenindogs with
In hyperadrenocorticism,the deposition of calcium
seasonal flankalopecia and'alopeciaX'.AlopeciaXis
salts along dermal collagen fibres mayresult in
apoorly defined disorder principallyrecognized in
calcinosiscutis;lesions consist ofyellow or white
‘plush-coated breeds such as the Pomeranian,
papules,nodulesandplaqueswhichfeelfirmand gritty
MiniaturePoodle,Chow Chow,Keeshond,Samoyed
when palpated.
andAlaskanMalamute.Thisdisorderhaspreviously
Laboratoryinvestigation
beentermed:
Laboratory tests arerequired for the definitive diagno-
Adrenal sexhormoneimbalance
sis of most cases of symmetrical alopecia.
Growthhormone-responsivedermatosis
Adult-onset hyposomatotropism
Skin scrapingsandplucked hairs
The microscopic examination of skin scrapings for
Castration-responsive dermatosis
demodicid mites isprobablywarranted inall cases of
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Pseudo-Cushing's disease.
canine alopecia.In dogs with non-inflammatory sym-
metricalalopecia microscopeexaminationsofplucked
hairs (trichograms) and skin biopsy specimens may
Thesenamesreflect thelackofclearunderstand-
also be of value. Dysplastic diseases and melanocyte
ing of the pathogenesis,althoughrecent data suggest
thatthisconditionis associatedwithmildpituitary-
hairs with structural abnormalities,which canbe de-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism(Cerundolo et al.,
2001).Alopecia isoftenfirstobserved between1and
tected by microscopy;for example,large melanin
clumpswithhairshaftdistortionandfracturemaybe
5yearsofage.Bothmale and female:neutered and
seen incolourdilution alopecia and blackhairfollicular
entire,dogsare affected.Symmetricalalopecia affects
dysplasia(Miller,1990a;Hargis etal.,1991).Alterna-
thetrunk,caudalthighs,perineumoreck,andchanges
incoatcolourand coatqualitymayalsobeseen(Figure
tively,thepresence of largenumbersofeasilyepilated
'club'hairs suggests the arrest of the hair growth cycle
8.8).Hairregrowthisoften observed at sitesof trauma.
in the telogenphase,asseen in endocrine diseases.
such as skinbiopsy sites.
Skin biopsy
Skin biopsy is required for the diagnosis of folicular
dysplasiasandmatrixcel/melanocyteabnormalities.
Biopsies arealsoindicated incases where the diagno-
sis cannot bereadilyconfirmed byother means.As a
general rule,multiple biopsy specimens should be
obtained from the most alopecic areas(Gross et al.,
1992);samples from marginal areas may be confusing
because growing hairs may still be present.
However,in alopecia areata,arare disease asso-
ciated withalymphocytic cellularinfiltratecentred
around the hair matrix and dermal papilla,the key
histopathological feature maybe observed only in
specimens obtained from theperiphery of the lesion.
Fewof theatrophicdiseasescanbedefinitivelydiag-
nosed by histopathological examination of skin alone;
otherclinical or laboratorydata areusuallyrequired.
However, certain histopathological features sug-
gesting oneparticular farmaf endocrine disease over
anothermaybepresentinoccasional specimens,and
Bilaterallysymmetrical alopeciawith intense
theabsence of particularchangesmay allowthe endo-
8.8
hyperpigmentation on the caudal aspect of the
thighs in a 3-year-old Chow Chowwith alopccia X.
logical changes in hair follicle diseases canbe subtle
62
Chapter 8
3Investigationof symmetrical alopeciaindogs
aveterinarypathologistwithaspecial interestinskin
laboratory testresultssuggesthypothyroidismand/or
disease.Thereader isreferred to dermatopathology
hyperadrenocorticism.Thyroid and adrenal function
texts foramore detaileddiscussionof this area.
should also beroutinelyassessed in dogs thathave
atraphicfolliculardiseaseswithout otherhistorical,clini-
Screeninglaboratorytests
cal and laboratory features of endocrine diseases.This
Urine and blood shouldbe obtained from dogs sus-
pected of having an endocrine disease for
and hyperadrenocorticism do not occur in all cases.
haematologicalandbiochemical analyses as appropri-
ate.Thebiochemical profile should include,at least,
Oestrogens:Basal oestradiol concentrations are
measurements of:
elevated insomedogswithhyperoestrogenism,but
ithasbeennoted thatthesecanbenormalevenin
Totalprotein
affected dogs.It hasbeen suggested in these cases
Albumin
thathyperoestrogenism resultsfrom the excessive
Alkaline phosphatase
production ofotherhormones such as oestrone and
Alanine aminotransferase
oestriol(Paradis,2002).
Bilirubin
Calcium
17-Hydroxyprogesterone:The measurement of
Phosphate
17-hydroxyprogesteronebefore and afterstimulation
Urea
by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) has been
Creatinine
recommendedin theinvestigationof dogswith alo-
Cholesterol
peciaXasanindicatorofabnormal steroidogenesis
Glucose.
(Schmeitzeletal.,1995;Cerundoloetal.,2001).Con-
centrationsof17-hydroxyprogesterone were elevated
Urinalysis should include:a chemistry strip; sedi-
post-ACTH stimulation inall31affectedPomeranians
mentexamination;measurementofspecificgravity;
studiedbyCerundoloetal.(2001).Whilstanelevation
and possiblybacterial culture.Thelaboratoryfindings
of 17-hydroxyprogesterone supports,inpart,adiagn-
may support a diagnosisof aparticular endocrine
sis ofalopeciaX,followingexclusionofclassical hyper-
disease, and specific hormone assays can then be
adrenocorticism and hypothyroidism,the role of the
performed as indicated (Figure 8.9).
hormone in the development of hair loss isunclear.
Hormone assays
Specific assaysformost of therelevant hormones are
Treatment
readily available.Often,dynamic testsof endocrine
function arerequired becausebasal hormone concen-
Specifictreatmentis availableformostof theendo-
trationsmayfluctuatewidelyinresponsetobothphysio-
crinopathiesbut is notpossible in dogs with follicular
logical and pathological factors(Scott et al.,2001b).
dysplasiasormatrix cell/melanocyteabnormalities.
Ingeneral,the treatmentof dogswith symmetrical
Thyroid and adrenal function:Tests designed to
alopecia by hormonal supplementation,without a
assess thyroid and adrenal function(see Chapters10
specificindicationbased onlaboratorytesting,is to
and15)aremandatoryin dogs whenclinical signsand
be discouraged.
Disease
Haemogram
Blood biochemical
Urinalysis
Hormone assays
profile
Hypothyroidism
Normocytic,nomochromic,
Hypercholesterolaemia,
Normal
Low basal total or free T4 and high TSH
 non-regenerative anaemia
hypertriglyceridaemia
concentrations.Lack of T4 stimulation in
response to TSH or TRH administration
Hyperadrenocorticism
Stress leucogram
Elevated ALP,
Specific gravity
Excessive cortisolresponse to ACTH
elevatedALT,elvatd
at<1.015,
administration. Elevated urine
cholesterol
Urinary tract
cortisol:creatinine ratio.lnadequate
infection
suppression of cortisol affer administration of
low-dose of dexamethasone
Hyperoestrogenism
Non-regenerative anaemia,
Normal
Normal
Elevated oestradiol or other oestrogens?
thrombocytopenia,myelod
hyperplasia or hypoplasia
AlopeciaX
Normal
Normal
Normal
High concentrationsof17-hydroxyprogesterone
in response to ACTH administration
8.9
Results of laboratory tests in dogs with symrmetrical alopecia caused by endocrinopathies.(Intenccdonly as
a guide.In some cases,the listed featuresmay be absent).ACTH,adrenocorticotropic harmone:
ALP,alkaline phosphatase;ALT,alanine aminotransferase;T4 thyroxine:TRH,lhyroid releasing hormone:
TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone.
63
Chapter 8  Investigation of symmetrical alopecia in dogs
Hypothyroidism and
Follicular dysplasias and matrix cell/
hyperadrenocorticism
melanocyte abnormalities
Treatment of hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorti-
Only palliative therapy is available for dogs with follicular
cism is described in Chapters 10 and 15.
dysplasias and matrix cel/melanocyte abnormalities.
Alopecia X
antibacterial agent effective against Staphylococcus
Dogs with alopecia X may respond to: castration;
intermedius, such as lincomycin or cefalexin. Topical
trilostane; methyltestosterone; mitotane; or growth
hormone (Schmeitzel et al., 1995). Castration of the
 scaling disorders, and as adjunctive therapy in super-
ficial pyoderma.
intact male dog may be the first treatment of choice.
Trilostane is an inhibitor of 3-beta-hydroxystercid
References and further reading
UK for the treatment of canine hyperadrenocorticism
(Neiger et al., 2002). Cerundola et al. (unpublished
data) successfully treated 8 of 8 Miniature Poodles and
and colourmutant alopecia:clinical and histopathologicalaspects.
14 of 16 Pomeranians with alopecia X, using trilostane
In:Advancas in Veterinary Dermatoiogy. Vol 1. ed. C von
Tscharner and REw Halliwell, p.43 46.Bailliere Tindall, London
bw 09 pue by 9> sbop 10, Aiep aouo Ae1o 6w 0g 1e
Cerundolo R, Lloyd DH, Evans H, Mol JA, Vaessen MMAR, Kooistra
orally once daily for dogs >5 kg. Hair regrowth was
poodles is associated with mild pituitary-dependent
usually noted within 4-8 weeks.
Mitotane is often effective in the treatment of this
disorder. An initial dose of 15-25 mg/kg orally daily for
Utrecht (The Nelherlands), August 2001, pp. 29-31
 5 days is followed by maintenance doses of 15-25
alopeciaVeterinaryDematoiogyNewsetter17,5354
mg/kg orally every 7-14 days (Schmeitzel and Parker,
1993; Schmeitzel et al., 1995). Patients should be
reproductive and growth hormone status ol dogs affected by
idiopathic recurrent llank alopecia. Journa! of Small Animal
carefully monitored for signs of hypocortisolaemia,
Practice 37, 417-422
hyperkalaemia and hyponatraemia, particularly during
Davidson AP and Feldman EC (1995) Ovarian and gestrus cycle
initial therapy. Hair regrowth is often evident within
abnormalities in the bitch. In: Textbook of Veterinary internal
4-12 weeks.
1613.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
In neutered male dogs, methyltestosterone supple-
 Dunstan Rw (1995) A pathomechanistic approach to diseases of the
hair folicie. Veterinary Dematoiogy Newsletter 17, 37-41
 mentation at 1 mg/kg orally every other day (maximum
Ebling FJG, Hale PA and Randall VA (19g1) Hormones and hair
dose 30 mg) for 3 months, followed by weekly mainte-
growth, In: Physiofogy, Biochemisiry, and Molecular Biology of
the Skin, ed, LA Goldsmith, pp. 660-696. Oxford University
nance therapy. may be attempted. However, behav-
Press, New York
joural changes, seborrhoea oleosa and hepatic disease
Foster AP and Foil CS (2003) BSAVA Manual of Small Animal
 are potential adverse effects (Schmeitzel et al., 1995).
Dermatology, 2"d edn. BSAVA, Gloucester
Gross TL, ihrke PJ and Walder EJ (1992) Veterinary
Although some dogs respond favourably to growth
Dermatopathoiogy:amacroscopicandmicroscopicevaluation
hormone supplementation, this hormone
is
ofcanine andfeline skin disease,pp.273-309Mosby Year Boak,
immunogenic, potentially diabetogenic and dificult to
SI. Louis
Hargis AM, Brignac MM, Kareem Al-Bagdadi FA, Muggli F and
obtain and therefore cannot be recommended.
MundallA(1991)Black hairfoliculardysplasiainblackandwhite
Saluki dogs:diferentiationfrom colour mutant alopeciainthe
Dobarman Pinscher by microscopic examination of hairs.
Oestrogen- and testosterone-responsive
Veterinary Dermatology 2, 69-83
Hoskins JD (2001) The skin and claws. In: Veterinary Pediatrics, ed.
dermatoses
A response to trial therapy is required to establish the
hrkePMueleRSandStannardAA(19Generalzedcngenil
JM Hoskins,pp.225-261. WB Saundars, Philadelphia
diagnosis of both oestrogen-respansive and testoster-
hypotrichosis Ina femaleRotweiler.Veterinary Dermatoiogy4,
65-69
one-responsive dermatoses;these diagnoses are rarely
Jahoda CAB and Oliver RF (1g90) The dermal paplla and the growh
made in carefully evaluated cases. Supplementation
ofhair.In:HairandHarDiseases,ed.CEOrfanos and RHaple,
with oestrogen ortestosterone is potentially hazardous
pp. 19-44. Springer-Verlag, Berlin
and they should cnly be used in cases where other
Histology af the hairy skin of dogs and cats. Nordisk
more common endocrine diseases have been ex-
Veterinaermedicin27,593-603
Miller WH (1990a) Colour dilution alopecia in Doberman Pinschers
cluded definitively. Some owners prefer to accept the
with blue or fawn coat colours: a study on the lncidence and
alopecia once the clinician has explained the potential
histopathology of this disorderVeterinaryDermatoiogy1,113
adverse effects of supplementation with these hor-
MillerWH(1990b)Folliculardysplasiainadultblackand redDobemman
122
mones. Dogs with gonadal neoplasia withoutevidence
Pinschers. Vaterinary Darmatology 1, 181-187
of metastases should be neutered.
Miller MA and Dunslan RW (1993) Seasonal ftank alopecia in Boxers
and Airedale terriers: 24 cases (1985-1992). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 203, 1567-1572
Seasonal flank alopecia
 Therapy is not currently available for seasonal flank
Water dog.VeterinaryDermatology6,6774
alopecia; however, in one study Paradis (1995)
Trilostane treatment of 78 dogs with pituitary-dependent
reported that the next predicted episode of alopecia
hyperadrenocorticism. Veterinary Record 150, 799-804
 Paradis, M (1995) Canine recurrent fank alopecia: treatment with
melatonin.Proccedings of the American Coflege of Veterinary
nine dogs treated. There is no rationale for supplemen-
Darmatology Annua/ Meeting,Santa Fe.1995,p.49
tation with thyroid, reproductive and growth hormones
DarmatoiogyStudyGroupProceedings,AutunMeeting.Harow
 in seasonal flank alopecia (Curtis et al., 1996),
pp.39-46
64
Chapter 8 Investigation of symmetrical alopecia in dogs
 Paradis M and Carundolo R (2003) An approach to symmetrical
Pergamon Press, Oxford
alopecia in the dog. In: BSAvA Manual of Sniall Animat
Scott DW, Miller WH and Gnffin CE (2001 a) Acgulred alopecia. Mulier
Dermatology, 2edn,d.APFosler and CS Fol,pp.9.
ang Kirk's SmaffAnimafDermatofogy,gp.887-912. WB Saunders,
BSAVA, Gloucester
Philadelphia
Schmeitzcl LP, Lothrop CD and Rosenkrantz WS (1995) Cangenital
adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome.In:Kirk's Current Veterinary
disease. Mullor and Kirk's Small Animat Dermatoiogy pp. 780
Therapy Xif, ed. JD Bonagura, Pp. 600-604. W8 Saunders,
885. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Philadalphla
Yager JA and Wilcock BP (1994) Alropinic dermatoses. In: Colour
Schmcitzel LP and Parker W (i993) Growlh hormone and sex
Atias and Text of Surgical Pathology in the Dog and Cat.
Dermatopathology and Skin Tunors. pp. 217-237. Wolfc
Publishing,Lontan
65
The uncontrollable diabetic
Peter A. Graham
Introduction
content of Figure 9.1 is self-explanatory,some is
discussed inChapters12and 13and theremainder
Most diabeticdogs and cats can be stabilizedand
requiringfurtherexplanation isdiscussedbelow.
managedwithoutdifficuitybut thereareoccasional
individuals,orphasesofanindividualstherapy,which
maybe described asdifficult toregulate'or'uncontrol-
lable'.Thepoint at whicha diabetic animalis described
Insulin
asuncontrollable'is not easily defined.It often de-
Past expiry date
pendson the expectationsof the attendingveterinary
Heated
surgeon.Thesevary from one clinicianto anotherand
Frozen
areoften over-ambitious.An expectation that diabetic
Violently shaken
controlimpliesbloodglucose concentrationswithinthe
Diluted
referencerange during every part of each24-hour
Antigenicinrecipient because of speciesoforigin
period,withonceoreventwicedailyinsulininjections,
Inappropriate duration of activity
is unrealistic. lf a more appropriate goal of reasonable
Poor absorption
glycaemic control with abolition of clinical signs is
Administration of insulin
chosenmoresuccessfulmanagementwillbeachieved
and maintained.Narrow control of blood glucose
Poor injection technique
concentrations is important in human diabetic
Improper use of syringes
management if long-term diabeticcomplicationsareto
mappropriate syringetype (40IU or100IU/ml syringes)
Unsuitable injection sites
such fine control of blood glucose concentration is
Case management
unnecessary.
Before determining howbest to investigateand
mconsistentandnappropriateexercise,dietayandinsulin
manage anuncontrollablediabetic,ithelps to define
regimens
the nature of theproblem.Difficult diabeticswillusually
Improperinsulin dose and dose adjustments
fall into one of three categories:
Incorrect interpretation of laboratory data
Those thatappeartohavedramaticfluctuations
Endogenous
in insulinrequirement,which maymanifestas
periods of hypoglycaemia interspersed with
Obesity
Metoestrus
periods ofpolyuria and polydipsia,indicating
Hyperadrenocorticism
hyperglycaemia
Those that gointoremission
Hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Those that appear to have persistent,
Acromegaly
unusuallyhighrequirementsforinsulin
Chronic inflammatory conditions(especially pancreatis)
(commonly defined as >1.5 IU/kg per injection
Spontaneous remission/honeymoon'phase
on twicedaily protocols and >2 IU/kgper
Stress
injectionon once dailyprotocols)without
Infections(especially oral cavity and urinary tract)
associated clinical control.
Renal insufficiency
Hepaticinsufficiency
Cardiac disease
Most dogs can be expected to stabilize at insulin
Glucagonoma
doses in the range of 1.0 IU/kg perinjection orless for
Phaeochromocytoma
twice daily regimens and 1.0-1.5IU/kg perinjection for
Non-endocrine neoplasia
daily therapy.Requirements for cats are similar.
Hyperlipidaemia
Whethertheuncontrollablediabetichasfluctuating
Concurrent use of diabetogenic drugs (glucocorticoidsprogestogens)
orsimplyhigh insulinrequirementsthere are four
categoriesofpotential causes thatrequire considera-
Summary of the fou categcries of potentiai
9.1
tion.These are summarized in Figure 9.1.Muchof the
causesforuncontrcllablediabeles.
66
Chapter 9  The uncontrollable diabetic
Insulin
However, the development of antibodies is a rare
cause of insulin resistance and because of the disrup-
Handling of insulin
tion in diabetic management following a change of
Like all medications, insulin has a finite shelf-life and
preparation, such a course should anly be undertaken
efficacy cannot be guaranteed past its expiry date.
after elimination of the more common problems. Al-
As a peptide hormone, insulin can be damaged or
thiough antibodies against exogenous insulin are pro-
denatured by extremes of heat or cold, or by vigorous
duced in treated diabetic cats, their effect on glycaemic
or violent shaking. For long-term storage, vials of
'ye le biuaoh) patenjeaa Aliny ueag jou sey pojjuoo
insulin should be refrigerated but care shouid be
2000); traditionally they have not been considered
taken to ensure the vial is not in a place where it is
problematic.
subject to freezing. Keeping an opened vial at room
temperature is permissible if it will be used within
Duration of activity
4-6 weeks of opening and is not subjected to
 Insulin preparations of inappropriate short duration
extremes of temperature. Insulated pouches, with or
may be associated with hyperglycaemia and a return of
without frozen gel pack inserts, can be purchased to
clinical signs in the latter part of the inter-injection
keep insulin cool when traveling. Insulin preparations
period. Short duration of insulin activity can be pre-
are often diluted to improve accuracy of dosing in cats 
sumed in cats treated with ance daily lente injections.
suoe.edaid peinlp jo asn aui inq sbop llews pue
It is also frequently observed in dogs treated with once
should always be considered a potential cause of
 daily lente insulin and in cats treated once daily with the
 diabetic instability.
supposed long-acting preparations ultralente and PZl.
Short duration of insulin action may present as a
Anti-insulin antibodies
persistent high insulin requirement. However, in many
Insulin preparations are of porcine, bovine or
cases, the initial response is to increase the insulin
recombinanthuman type and variations in insulin struc-
dose, frequently on a daily basis, promoting the induc-
ture occur between species (Smith, 1966: Hallden et
tion of insulin-induced hyperglycaemia (Somagyi
al., 1986). Porcine insulin is identical to canine insulin,
overswing) (see below). The generation of a 12-24-
human differs from canine by one and bovine differs by
hour blood glucose curve will assist in the identification
two amino acids. Compared with feline insulin, bovine
of short duration of insulin action.
Jnoy Ag uewny pue sau Aq auood auo ko sia
amino acids. Therefore, porcine and bovine are con-
Absorption of insulin
sidared the least antigenic insulins in dogs and cats,
For chronic management of diabetes mellitus, insulin
respectively.
preparations are modified to delay subcutaneous ab-
The developrment of anti-insulin antibodies in dia-
sorption and prolong the duration of activity (see Chap-
betic dogs is being increasingly recognized. In most
ter 12). However, in some animals, particularly cats,
cases their significance is unclear but they do not
 the long-acting insulin preparations (PZland ultralente)
appear to result in widespread diabetic instability.
may be so poorly absorbed from subcutaneous sites
However, antigenicity may not necessarily be a disad-
that there is an impression of high insulin requirements
vantage. A modest titre of anti-insulin antibodies may
(Broussard and Peterson, 1994). Measurement of se-
help prolong the duration of insulin action e.g. in dogs
rial post injection circulating insulin concentrations
treated with bovine insulin. This may be a therapeuti-
may assist in definitive documentation of this pheno-
cally useful attribute but has not yet been scientifically
menon. However, insulin analyses are expensive and 
proven. ln contrast, in some dogs, the presence of anti-
therapeutic concentrations of insulin pcorly defined for
insulin antibodies potentially results in poor glycaemic
dogs and cats. A simpler and more rational approach
control, the frequent need for dose adjustment or
would be to change to an intermediate-duration insulin
severe insuin resistance. In humans, sufficiently high
such as lente, twice daily if necessary, and monitor the
titres of anti-insulin antibodies may necessitate persist-
effect. Obviously hypoglycaemia is a serious risk if a
ently high insulin requirements, possibly with poor
similar dose of an intermediate-acting preparatian is
recovery from hypoglycaemic episodes as insulin con-
Used. The dose of insulin should be decreased to the
tinues to be released from insulin-antibody complexes
starting doses recommended in Chapters 12 and 13.
(Bolli et al., 1984).
 Antibodies may form as part of the initial pathologi-
cal process as well as in response to exogenous
Insulin administration
insulin, irrespective of species of origin. Dogs treated
with porcine insulin have a lower prevalence of
Early in any investigation of a difficult diabetic an
anti-insulin antibodies than those treated with bovine
assurance that the insulin is being successfully admin-
or human types (Davison et al., 2002), but once
istered is required. lf clienteducationis adequate atthe
antibodies have formed against one species of insulin
beginning of therapy then problems due to insulin
 administration should seldom be encountered. How-
species (Davison et al., 2003). If significant antibody
ever, many owners have had no prior experience of
production is suspected, a changeto the least antigenic
injections and find it a daunting experience. Problems 
insulin available may reduce insulin requirements but 
that are often encountered include:
because of inter-species cross-reactivity it may take
weeks or months for significant recovery.
· Failure fo read the dose accurately
67
Chapter 9 The uncontrollable diabetic
Failure to restrain animal properly
visits from extended family, particularly younger mem-
Injection into hair
bers, may result in extra tit-bits or sweets being offered.
Withdrawing air rather than insulin from vial
Whilst diet is equally important in cats, the effects of
Discarding insulin with air from the syringe before
exercise are less clear-cut.
injection.
Insulin must be administered at consistent times
from day to day coinciding with an appropriate feeding
If there is doubt about administration technigue, the
regimen. Altering injection times, skipping injections
 owner should be asked to demonstrate their injection
 and unintentional repeated injections at the same time 
routine, using sterile saline if necessary, in front of the
are all potential problems. These are more frequent in 
veterinary surgeon or nurse. lf regulatory difficulty is a
households where more than one member is respon-
new aspect of a case previously well controlled for a
sible for treating the patient, particularly if there is no 
long time, then such a demonstration may be less
agreed method of record keeping.
relevant and the implication of criticism may have a
negative effect on client relations.
Insulin dose
Syringe type
small breed diabetic dogs, may, when faced with their
insulin is supplied as 100 IU/ml or 40 IU/ml and thetype
first diabetic Rottweiler, believe that the insulin dose of
unsuy au yorew isnw (jw/ml oo, no ot) abuuss jo
50 IU/injection required to control the condition is an
preparation. Insulin syringes may also be supplied in
Aaewixoidde ag ls Aew ll yhnoule esop ensseoxa
0.3 ml, 0.5 ml and 1.0 ml sizes. Owners often become
1.0 lU/kg. Thinking of typical dose adjustments as
confused over IU, ml and 0.1 ml gradations and
percentage changes to current dose rather than as
different size syringes. Although this is avoided if a
absolute 1 or 2 iU will take account of the considerable
consistent syringe type is used, it is a potential cause
variation in the sizes of diabetic animals. Further inves-
of difficulties in glycaemic regulation, particularly when
tigation of 'unstable' diabetics may not be necessary if
owners abtain their supplies from multiple sources or
the dose boing used has not yet been adequately
pharmacies that are not linked to the responsible
increased to those levels considered acceptable for
veterinary practice. Changing froma 100 lU/ml syringe
stabilization (see above).
to a 40 1U/ml syringe results in2.5x greater dose if units
are. read from the syringe; potentially causing hypo-
Somogyi phenomenon
Inappropriately high doses of insulin may promote the
ance if the reverse happens. Human pharmacies.
 development of insulin-induced hyperglycaemia
which do not have 40 1lU/ml insulin, may instead supply
(Somogyi overswing). The Somogyi phenomenon re-
0.5 ml 10o IU/ml syringes. In addlition, even with
sults from a normal physiological response to the
100 IU/ml, owners may need to be reminded that in 1.0
development of hypoglycaemia induced by excessive
ml syringe sizes a division is 2 units whereas in 0.5 or
insulin. Both a low blood glucose concentration (<3.5
0.3 ml it is 1 unit.
mmol/l) and a rapid precipitous decline in blood glu-
Injection site
diabetogenic hormones (epinephrine (adrenaline),
 Insulin injected into large poorly perfused subcutane-
glucagon) that serve to increase the blood glucose
ous fat deposits may be less well absorbed than insulin
concentration within hours. Hyperglycaemia is usually
 injected inta more lean areas. In addition, repeated 
injections of insulin can induce a low-grade reaction in
cannot secrete insulin to dampen the phenomenon.
the subcutaneous tissue. The associated inflammation
Traditionally, the Somogyi overswing was associ-
 and fibrosis potentially impairs insulin absorption. In
ated with management regimens that used morning
 both scenarios rotation of the injection site and injec-
urine glucose measurements as a means to predict
tion into areas where there is greater movement, e.g.
insulin dose requirements. Today, it is more often
over the thoracic wall, are usually curative.
associated with inappropriate use of once daily
intermediate-acting insulin with unrecognized short
duration of activity, particularly when the insulin dose
Case management
has been increased to attempt to control the signs of
 Diet, exerclse and injectlon regimens
frequent dose increments also potentially induce the
Both diet and exercise can have considerable effects
 Somogyi phenomenon. In most cases of Somogyi
 on blood glucose concentrations in diabetic animals.
overswing, the insulin dose is exceptionally high (>2
 Persistent overfeeding or provision of diets high in
IU/kg). However, lower doses can also induce this
 soluble carbahydrates (semi-moist diets) may cause
phenomenon particularly in toy breeds. In addition,
persistently high insulin requirements. Failure to feed a
Somogyi overswing can also, although rarely, occur
diet consistent in volume, calorific content, composi-
in animals on twice daily insulin injections when the
tion and timing from day today may cause a fuctuating
insulin requirement. Similarly, dramatic changes in the
 interval and the appropriate compensatory dose
level of exercise can also cause fluctuating insulin
adjustments and alterations in feeding regimens have
requirement. For example, weekends and holidays are
not been implemented. Generation of a 12-24-hour
frequently associated with increased exercise and
blood glucose curve will help identify the Somogyi
68
Chapter 9
 The uncontrollable diabetic
 overswing. However, in affected animals there may
Endogenaus causes of poor
be a pattern of dramatic fluctuation in requirement
glycaemic control
 with days of hypoglycaemic episodes foliowed by
3-4 days of apparently increased requirement
Concurrent illness and diabetogenic drugs potentially
because of the persistence of the induced and potent 
cause problems before the interaction of insulin with
insulin antagonists (Feldman and Nelson, 1996).
its receptors (pre-receptor), at the receptor or at steps
Measurement of circulating fructosamine concen-
distal to the interaction of insulin with its receptors.
tration may be of some benefit in investigating cases
Pre-receptor problems reduce the free metabolicaliy
with Somogyi overswing. Low fructosamine values and
active insulin concentration, and include increased
insulin degradation and insulin-binding antibodies.
generaily indicate excessive insulin dose. However,
Receptor problems include aiterations in insulin-receptor
 binding affinity and concentration and insulin receptor
 concantrations, vaiues may inappropriately indicate
antibodies. Post-receptor probiems are difficult to
 reasonable diabetic control in cases where there are
distinguish and in reaity probably occur alongside
wide swings in glucose concentration from high to
pre-recaptorandreceptor problems. Conditions caus-
low. Similarly high values indicative of poor glycaemic
ing these problems are usually, but not exclusively,
 control can also occur.
associated with increased insulin requirement.
Whether the increased requirement is persistent or
Dose adjustments
fluctuating depends on the dynamic nature of the
When insulin dose adjustments are made, it may take
concurrent problem. For example, the increase.in
 a few days for circulating blood glucose concentrations
requirement associated with bacterial infections or
to equilibrate. Frequent and particularly daily, dose
 sepsis may fluctuate as the disease waxes and wanes
 adjustments can result in apparent diabetic instability
or resolves, but the increased requirement associ-
and promote the Sornogyi overswing. In addition, large
 ated with hyperadrenocorticism is likely to be more
 incremental dose adjustments (>20%) also increase
persistent.
the likelihood of Somogyi overswing. If large incremen-
A significant proportion of diabetic dogs have
tal dose adjustments are used in combination with
been reported to have a concurrent illness at the time
 correspondingly large decrements in dose, there will
 of diagnosis. in one study, 21% had positive urine
be confusion when retrospectively reviewing records 
bacterial cultures, 16% had dermatitis or otitis and
 to determine the cause of fluctuating requirements.
13% had acute pancreatitis (Hess et al., 2000).
Modest dose adjustments of approximately 10% should
In cats, approximately 22% have been reported to
be the norm in all but hypoglycaemic and very hyper-
have concurrent disease, the most common of which
glycaemic animals.
were hyperthyroidism, inflammatory bowel disease,
Diabetic monitoring
Peterson, 1996).
The timing or method of diabetic monitoring may lead
to a diagnosis of poor control when it is adequate.
Obesity
Using single blood glucose measurements
is
 Obesity affects insulin receptor number and affinity and
 arguably the worst method for confirming or refuting
contributes significanily to the pathogenesis of human
diabetic instability uniess its limitations are consid-
and feline type 2 diabetes mellitus (see Chapter 13).
ered and understood. A single blood glucose concen-
Some obese diabetic cats recover from the disease
tration may be high, wihin reference range or low at
 following dietary restriction and weight loss.However.
any random time point in an unstable diabetic animal.
dietary restriction in obese cats must be gradual to avoid
In addition, stress, particularly in cats but also in
hepatic lipidosis. All obese diabetic animals benefit to
 fractious dogs, can induce hyperglycaemia. Blood
some degree from weight loss even if their insulin
glucose concentrations must also be considered in
requirements do not appear excessively high,
light of the management regimen being used. For
example, blood glucose concentrations are likely to
Metoestrus
be more elevated 24 hours post injection in dogs on
Both progesterone and exogenous progestogens ex-
single daily injections of intermediate-duration insulin
compared with those on twice daily management.
growth hormone (GH) production by mammary tissue
However, this does not necessarily mean that blood
that escapes into the systemic circulation in bitches.
glucose concentrations were poorly controlled during
Diabetic bitchas should be spayed to avoid the dra-
the previous day or more importanily, that there is
matic effect that a recent oestrus can have on insulin.
 room to further increase their dose. Worse still, such
requirements. Insulin doses in excess of 10 IU/kg are
misunderstanding can lead to more serious problems
not unheard of during these periods and the decrease
such as Somogyi overswing if doses are subse-
in dose at the end of the progesterone phase has to be
quently increased.
aggressive to avoid hypoglycaemia. In some cases,
 Overall, when assessing animals, all parameters
early ovariohysterectomy is' associated with perma-
for monitoring glycaemic control should be evaiuated
nent diabetic remission if the onsetof the diabetes was
together including owners' perception of control, physi-
associated with arecent oestrus. This isparticularlythe
cal examination findings, and blood glucose and
case if the patient has endogenous plasma insulin
fructosamine concentrations.
concentrations >275pmoll (Graham and Nash, 1997b).
69
Chapter 9  The uncontrollable diabetic
In those cases with high endogenous insulin pro-
Treatment
duction, hypoglycaemia remains a risk in the first few
If treatment of hyperadrenocorticism is attempted in
days after ovariohysterectomy even when exogenous
diabetic animals, caretul monitoring of blood and urine
insulin is withdrawn. Support with glucose-containing
glucose is required. Removal of the source of insulin
 intravenous fluids may be required.
 antagonism can cause a dramatic reduction in insulin
 Synthetic progestogens have a similar effect on GH
requirement, increasing the riskoflife-threatening hypo-
production and these are unsuitable alternatives to
glycaemia (Blaxter and Gruffydd-Jones, 1990).
ovariohysterectomy for reproductive control in bitches.
There are several treatment options available
In cats, there is no systemic 'leak' of GH from the
for dogs with concurrent hyperadrenocorticism. lf
 mammary glands. However, progestogens can have
 adrenalectomy is considered, insulin doses following
strong glucocorticoid effects in cats and consequently
surgery need to be withheld or dramatically reduced
may still be diabetogenic/insulin antagonistic in this
depending on the blood glucose response. Alterna-
species albeit by a different mechanism.
tively, if a pre-surgical endogenous serum insulin 
concentration is high, the risk of postoperative hy-
Hyperadrenocorticism
poglycaemia is greater. For endogenous serum insulin
Hyperadrenocarticism is commonly found in associa-
measurements, exogenous insulin is withheld for
 tion with canine diabetes mellitus. It is estimated that
24-30 hours. This should be performed earlier in the
up to 20% of referred diabetic dogs have concurrent
diagnostic work-up and not in the days immediately
hyperadrenocorticism (Graham, 1995; Hess et al.,
preceding surgery.
 2000). In general practice, the prevalence is likely to be
Mitotane (o,p'-DDD) therapy is also feasible for the 
lower and diagnostic testing should be limited to those
treatment of diabetic dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.
 with appropriate clinical features. Diagnostic testing
Because of the potential for inducing dramatic reduc-
protocols described in Chapters 3 and 15 should be
tions in insulin requirement and hypoglycaemia, low-
followed but care should be taken in interpretation of
dose mitotane therapy (25 mg/kg per day versus 50
 adrenal function tests when poorly controlled diabetes
mg/kg per day) with prednisolone/prednisone (0.4 mg/
mellitus is present. The diagnosis should be made
kg per day) has been recommended for induction
 only if there are supportive historical and clinical signs
(Peterson etal., 1981). However, carefuldiabetic moni-
in addition to abnormal laboratory results. False-
toring and insulin dose adjustment can allow the insti-
positive results for hyperadrenocorticism are common
tution of the more usual 50 mg/kg approach without
'sbop olegeip pasoubeip Ameu lo paleinbai Auood u
additional exogenous prednisolone/prednisone. Dur-
This is attributed to the chronic stressful nature of
diabetes melitus and consequent pituitary-adrenal
hyperactivity.
doses of mitotane and so lower dose 'every second day"
Cortisol is an insulin antagonist agent, so diabetic
animals with hyperadrenocorticism will tend to have
Significant suppression of adrenal function must be
high insulin requirements (Peterson etal., 1981; Blaxter
achieved (post-adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
and Gruffydd-Jones, 1990). Some affected animals
response test cortisol concentrations <120 nmol/l) to
retain the abiity to produce their own insulin but once
ensure stable insulin requirements. The alternative
 overt clinical diabetes mellitus appears, exogenous
adrenocorticolytic protocol (Den Hertog et al., 1999)
insulin therapy is usualily required to control the hyper-
which aims to chemicaly ablate adrenal function, is
glycaemia, at least in part, and to avoid the possible
particularly tempting for use in dogs with concurrent
 development of ketoacidosis. If further deterioration of
diabetes mellitus because it takes hyperadrenocorti-
endogenous insulin production occurs (via glucose
cism 'out-of-the-picture' and allows treatment and
 toxicity or beta cell exhaustion) together with increased
dose adjustmentto focus solely on the diabetes mellitus.
 production of cortisol, then an increasing exogenous
Whilst there are limited scientific data to support such
requirement is seen.
a treatment regimen, some clinical endocrinologists
When hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus
advocate it as the most appropriate treatment option
-leday eyl jeu Ajeyl!l s! l! Auannouoo juesaid ene
(Mooney, personal communication).
adrenocorticism causes, or at least contributes to, the
The use of trilostane to manage hyperadrenocorti-
development of the diabetic condition. However, suc-
cism in diabetic dogs is likely to follow similar principles,
cessful therapy of hyperadrenocorticism is rarely asso-
i.e. careful initial therapy but an aggressive long-term
ciated with complete reversal of the diabetic state.
approach. However, clinical experience is still limited.
Treatment of the diabetes should always take prec-
As with mitotane therapy, the possible impact of aggres-
edence, even though high insulin doses may be needed.
sive trilostane therapy on mineralocorticoid function
This is for two reasons. Firstly, a confident diagnosis of
deserves special consideration.
In one study,dogs with concurrent diabetes melitus
made in a diabetic that is not under some degree of
and hyperadrenocorticism had a median survival time
control. Secondly, and more importantly, diabetes
mellitus is the more life-threatening of the two dis-
diabetes alone (Graham and Nash, 1997a). However,
eases. Hyperadrenocorticism in itself is not normally
this difference may in part be due to the much older age
a life-threatening condition although its presence
 of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism at the time of diag-
can predispose to some complications with a poor
nosis (10.61 years versus 8.14 for the dogs with
prognosis.
diabetes mellitus alone).
70
Chapter 9  The uncontrollable diabetic
Hyperadrenocorticism is relatively uncommon in
dogs (Gilson et al., 1994) and cats, and glucagonoma
cats compared with dogs, but it is almost always
has been recorded in dogs (Gross et al.. 1990;
associated with diabetes mellitus. The diagnosis and
Allenspach et al., 2000). When associated with diabe-
treatment of feline hyperadrenocorticism is covered in 
tes melitus, a persistentiy high insulin requirement is
detail in Chapter 21.
likely. Glucagonoma is offen associated with the devel-
opment of hepatocutaneous syndrome, although this
Thyroid dysfunction
is mostly seen in non-glucagonoma-based diabetes.
Both canine hypothyroidism and feline hyperthyroidism
This syndrome manifests as a severe crusting derma-
can be associated with increased insulin requirements
topathy affecting the distal limbs, face and perineum
in animals with diabetes melitus (Hoenig and Ferguson,
often in association with hepatic cirrhosis. In some
1992; Ford et al., 1993). Thyroxine (T4) has insulin
cases, the skin disease is unmanageable and because
antagonistic properties accounting for the insulin re-
of the associated discomfort, euthanasia is the only
sistance encountered in hyperthyroidism.
realistic option.
The mechanisms of insulin resistance in hypothy-
roid dogs are less well defined but may be related to an
Pancreatitis
 overall decrease in the metabolic rate. The diagnosis of
The presence of pancreatitis may be associated with
canine hypo- and feline hyperthyroidism are described
 both persistently elevated and fluctuating insulin re-
 in Chapters 10 and 11, respectively.1n diabetic animals
quirements. Recently diagnosed diabetic dogs occa-
 particular care should be taken to account for the low
sionally have concurrent pancreatitis, and insulin
T4 state of medical illness. This is associated with a
requirements may fall as the condition resolves. This is
lowering of the circulating total T4 concentration, lead-
presumably due to a degree of pancreatic recovery
ing ta an erroneous diagnosis of hypothyraidism in
and/or a decrease in the production of stress hor-
euthyroid dogs or of euthyroidism in mildly hyperthy-
mones. Which of the two diseases is cause and which
roid cats if used as the sole diagnostic test. The
 presence of diabetes mellitus and its subsequent treat-
animal to animal. The effect of pancreatitis on islet cells
ment also potentially influences thryotropin (thyroid
can no. doubt cause or worsen diabetes, but poorly
stimulating hormone (TSH)) concentrations in hypo-
controlled diabetes mellitus (and the often associated
thyroid dogs.
Measurement of free T4 by equilibrium dialysis is
creatitis. The presence of hyperglycaemia as a compli-
 [ess likely to be influenced by non-thyroidal illness and
cation of acute pancreatitis is considered a poor
is possibly the best single test to assess fhyroid func-
prognostic indicator. In the case of chronic low-grade
tion in diabetic dogs and cats. Standard T4 supplemen-
or recurring pancreatitis there may be a history of poor
tation or antithyroid drug therapy recommendations
control, variable appetite, fluctuating and/or high
apply to those animals with concurrent diabetes
insulin requirements.
mellitus but care should be taken to monitor insulin
Unfortunately. these cases are often difficult to
requirements in the post-treatment period. The
diagnose because of the poor diagnostic efficiency of
decrease in insulin requirement seen in dogs treated
current laboratory tests (e.g. serum amylase, lipase,
with T4 therapy is often slower and less dramatic than
trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLi). As new tests, such
is seen folowing the treatment for other causes of
as canine and feline pancreatic lipase and skilled
 insulin resistance. A similar effect might be expected in
treated hyperthyroid cats.
diagnosis may become more straightforward. Affected
Other endocrine disorders
approach is employed, the patient should continue to
Acromegaly, although rare, is one ofthe most common
receive insulin to suppress ketogenesis, with support-
forms of endocrine neoplasia associated with persist-
ive glucose-containing fluids if necessary. An insulin 
ent insulin resistance in diabetic cats (Peterson et af.
dose approximately half of the patient's usuaf.or ex-
1990) (see Chapter 18). Excessive circulating GH
pected dose should control ketogenesis with a low risk
concentration, produced by a neoplastic pituitary
of hypoglycaemia.
gland, acts as a powerful insulin antagonistic agent.
 Acromegaly also occurs in dogs but has only everbeen
Hepatic insufficiency
assoclated with GH induction by endogenous or
The presence of hepatic cirrhosis in diabetic dogs
exogenous progestogens (Eigenmann and Venker-
tends to cause either persistently high insulin require-
van Haagen, 1981) (see Chapter 18). Diagnosis is
 ments or fluctuating low requirements. The reason for
based on the measurement of insulin-like growth
the diversity is not clear but it could depend on a
factor 1 (IGF-1) or GH in animals displaying appropri-
differential failure to metabolize and clear insulin and
ate clinical signs (see Chapters 17 and 18). lt is also
glucagon from the circulation. The measurement of
worth pointing out that elevated GH concentrations
serum hepatic' enzymes is of limited value in diagnos-
 may be found in metoestrus bitches and potentially in
ing hepatic disease in diabetig dogs. Fairly controlled
 animals which have been subject to chronic hypogly-
diabetic dogs may have elevated enzyme concentra-
caemia due to insulin overdose. GH secretion forms
tions, and animals with advanced cirrhosis may have
 part of the long-term response to hypoglycaemia (Bolli
normal or low enzyme concentrations. Pre- and post-
et al., 1984).
prandial bile acid concentratlons are usefu! because
Phaeochromocytoma has been recorded in both
these will be normal or only modestly increased in well
71
Chapter 9  The uncontrollable diabetic
controlled diabetics. Plasma ammonia concentrations
pressure. This is cansidered the best explanation for
are helpful in animals displaying neurological signs
spontaneous remission of type 2 diabetes mellitus in
 that are not associated with hypoglycaemia.
proved glycaemic control include weight loss and with-
Miscellaneous disorders
drawal of diabetogenic drugs.
Renal failure, bacterial infections and almost any other
Animals going into remission, for whatever reason,
 illness can potentially lead to insulin resistance medi-
 present their own management difficulties for the vet-
 ated through an increase in glucagon and perhaps
erinary surgeon and owner. Often, the occurrence of
cortisol concentrations (lhle and Nelson, 1991;
hypoglycaemic episodes is the first indication that
McGuinness, 1994). Whether the increase in insulin
remission has occurred but in close monitoring regi-
requirement fluctuates or is persistent depends on the
mens persistent negative urine or low blood glucose or
 persistence of the underiying ilness. The most com-
a history of doses declining to less than 0.25 IU/kg
 mon locations of bacterial infection in diabetics include
serve as early alarm bells. Low, or more probably non-
the oral cavity and urinary tract.
diabetic, reference range fructosamine concentrations
can also helpindicate when an animal's insulin require-
Diabetogenic drugs
ment has fallen (or disappeared). Blood glucose curves 
The two main classes of diabetogenic drugs used in
in cases of diabetic remission may fit with Somogyi
small animal practice are glucocorticoids and
 overswing, or insulin overdose ar show a too good to
 progestogens. The administration of T4 can also have
be true' levelof glycaemic control, dependingon whether
 an effect on insulin requirement, but because of the
the insulin dose has been decreasing to meetthe lower
requirements. Once therapyis withdrawn, owners must
roidism, this will depend on the adequacy or possible
then be vigilant for a return of clinical signs of diabetes.
over-administration of the T4 therapy. The diabetogenic
Remission may be short-lived and a return of the
drugs have a complicating effect on diabetic manage-
diabetes is often unpredictable. Strategies to deal with
ment but they are not wholly contraindicated if used
this scenario include fortnightly urine glucose checks
appropriately.
during remission periods and a higher intensity moni-
Glucocorticoids are expected to increase insulin
toring of insulin requirement in animals with a history of 
requirements during the period of their administration.
remissions.
Thus both the owner and practitioner need to be aware
 of the probable need for increased insulin dose and
declining dose as treatment is withdrawn. Additionally.
Investigation
both need to understand that the development of
polydipsia may be associated with the glucocorticoid
 Before initiating an investigation of an apparently diffi-
therapy rather than indicating diabetic instability. Dur-
cult diabetic, assess the overall clinical picture includ-
 ing periods of glucocarticoid use, water intake cannat 
ing the patient's:
be used as an indicator of diabetic control.
Attitude
Remission/relapse
 History (insulin dose, water intake, neurological
Spontaneous remission of diabetes mellitus can occur
events)
particularly in cats that have beenoverweightorreceiv-
Weight
ing diabetogenic therapies (see Chapter 13), and in
Physical examination findings.
 dogs which became diabetic in association with met-
 Oastrus (see above). Early in the course of treatment,
 Theseare good predlictors ofdiabetic control (Briggs
insulin requirements may also occasionally reduce or
 et al., 2000) and unless something is clearly awry,
disappear and increase again after a few weeks or
there may be litle value in pursuing an investigation.
months, in a manner similar to the common 'Honey-
moon' phase of human type 1 diabetes mellitus. How-
Stage 1
ever, all animals that have been diabetic once are at
Gather information - this should include:
increased risk of becoming diabetic again, particularly
 after periods of stress oriless, and owners should be
Signalment and history - in particular the use of 
made aware of the signs indicating a return of the
diabetogenic agents, history of
condition.
ovariohysterectomy and the nature of the
Glucose toxicity is a conceptual term used to de-
difficulty in glycaemic regulation including
scribe the negative effects that chronic hyperglycae-
persistence/recurrence of clinical signs and
mia can have oninsulin-producing islet cells. The effect
evidence of hypoglycaemia. Signalment will
 on islet cells is initially reversible but with time or
assist in assessing the relative likelihood of 
increased severity it can become permanent. This
underlying illnesses. For example, in a
phenomenonis mostclearly seen in feline diabetics but
3-year-old insulin-resistant diabetic dog,
may also have a role in canine metoestrus-associated
hypothyroidism rather than hyperadrenocorticism
diabetes mellitus. lf an animal's islet cells are suffering
is expected
glucose toxicity but it is still in a reversible phase.
The owner's impression of the degree of 
insulin requirements may decline and even abate sim-
therapeutic success
ply by controlling blood glucose and relieving the 'toxic'
 Physical examination findings
72
Chapter9
The uncontrollablediabetic
Diabeticdiaries'detailing insulin doses,daily
Stage3
water consumption,urineorbloodglucose
If theproblem hasnotbeen identified create a blood
resultsandothercommentssuch aslevel of
glucose curve. Samples forblood glucose are taken at
appetite
2-hourly intervals for12hours if thepatient isontwice
Laboratory indicators of diabetic control,such as
dailyinjections,andfor24hoursifthepatientisononce
fructosamine, if available.
daily injections,and theresults examined farpotential
explanationsof diabetic instability(Figure9.2).Hourly
Stage2
samplingaroundthetimeoftheexpectednadirmay
TakeactionindicatedbydeficienciesidentifiedinStage
increase thechancesof identifyingahypoglycaemic
1.For example,outdated insulin shouldbereplaced,
point in Somogyi overswing cases.In addition,if a
clients should bere-educated concerning consistency
durationof insulineffectsignificantly longer than the
of dietandexercise,alterationstothetimingofglucose
inter-injectionperiod issuspected and ameasureof its
monitoringstrategyshouldbemade,insulinshouldbe
extent is desired, then an extended sampling period of
withdrawn if theanimal appearstobe inremissionand
18or30hours wouldbehelpful.
theownershouldbe educated about therecurrence of
diabetic signs.Reverting to arecognized stabilization/
If single point blood glucose monitoring samples
havebeenpreviouslyused,checkthat theyhave
is alsorecommended.
been being taken at an appropriate time of day
10
E
10
2
14
12
(a)
Hours
(c)
Hours
121416132022
2
(q)
Hours
(d)
Hours
9.2
Examples of 24-hour bloodglucose curves.Grey area: target nadir range.Yellcw area:acceplablerange in
treated diabetic animals.
of anunderlying disorder,diabeticremission and during theaccumulatingperiodof insuinwitha duralion longer than lhe
inter-injection period.In some cver-dosed cases(
) there is more or less persistent hypoglycaemia.This is
particularly the case in degs with limited fuel reserves(e.g.underweight and emaciated animals).In other cases (-
inlo the next injection period a confusing picture cf dramatic luctuation in insulin dose efiecl can be seen.
(c) Short durationof insulin actian.The insulin dose isappropriate,because the glucose nadir is in the targetrange,but
Iwice caily therapyor long-duration insulinwouldbemoreappropriate for thisdog.Increasing theproporlionof the daily
ration fed in thefirst meal andincreasing the insulin dosewouid be an inferior alternative whichmight improve the curve.
relatedinsulin antagonismshould alsobe corsidered,parlicularlyin hospilalizedcats.
73
2781
Chapter 9  The uncontrollable diabetic
(identify time of nadir concentration).
 atic investigation appropriate to the animal's signal-
Identify the duration of insulin effect - a duration of
ment, history and clinical features.
effect of <16 hours on once daily insulin indicates
a need for twice daily therapy when there is poor
Carry out serum chemistry and haematology
clinical response (decrease dose and re-stabilize),
profiles to help identify occult sepsis, renal or
If the patient is on twice daily therapy and there is
hepatic dysfunction and perhaps
 a duration of effect of <6-10 hours, switching to a 
hyperadrenocorticism or hypothyroidism.
more long-acting preparation or using a thrice
 Urinalysis assists the identification of urinary tract
daily regimen should be considered.
 infection or renal dysfunction.
Is insulin-induced hyperglycaemia (Somogyi
Conduct specific investigations for suspected
overswing) present? If blood glucose falls to <3.5
disorders.for example:
mmol/l or drops precipitously (e.g. from >20
ACTH response test, low-dose
mmol/l to 5 mmol/l in 2-3 hours) and then rises
 dexamethasone suppression test, urinary
above 15 mmol/l within one inter-injection period,
cortisol:creatinine ratio, ultrasonography,
:1
then insulin induced hyperglycaemia is probable.
computed tomography
Reduc9 the insulin dose 25-30% and monitor
Pre- and postprandial bile acid 
clinical effect or repeat serial glucose curve.
concentrations, plasma ammonia, hepatic
 Is persistent hypoglycaemia present? Some
ultrasonography
patients receiving an insulin dose greater than
Serum total T4, free T4 by dialysis, cTSH,
their requirements (decreased requirement not
TSH or thyratropin releasing hormone (TRH)
matched with insulin dose or remission) will show
response tests, T3 suppression test
persistent hypoglycaemia rather than fhe classic
Serum progesterone, IGF-1 or GH
Somogyi phenomenon. Depending on the dose
 Serum amylase, lipase and TLI
and history, the insulin should be reduced or
concentrations and/or abdominal
discontinued.
ultrasonography
Little decrease in glucose concentration following
 Urinary catecholamines, serum glucagon
injection of a 'normal' or high (>2 IU/kg) dose of 
 measurement (limited information available
insulin indicates the presence of insulin 
concerning validity of tests or reference
resistance, which may be due to concurrent
ranges)
disorders. Defective insulin, prolanged Somogyi
 To investigate poor absorption of PZl or
effect (i.e. from insulin-induced hyperglycaemia
ultralente insulin, decrease dose and change to
 on previous day), severe hospitalization/sampling
 twice daily lente insulin and monitor the clinical
stress, anti-insulin antibodies or poor insulin
effect or repeat serial glucose analyses.
 absorption will also create little or no response on
Consider insulin antibody analyses or test
a blood glucose curve.
 treatment with minimally antigenic insulin
(porcine for dogs, bovine for cats).
The over-interpretation of blood glucose curves
should be avoided and conclusions limited to those
 On some occasions no cause for resistance or
above (nadir, duration, insulin-induced-hyperglycae-
 fluctuation can be found and symptomatic therapy is
 mia and failure torespond). Using blood glucose curves
 required until more evidence for a particular problem is
to fine-tune' insulin dose is inherently problematic
 gathered. Fluctuations in requirement should be fol-
because of the significant variability in curves from one
lowed with frequentchanges in dose indicated by close
day to the next in the same patient under the same
monitoring of blood or urine glucose concentrations
management conditions. In one study, comparing two
and fructosamine concentrations. Animals with high
consecutive blood glucose curves on three occasions
insulin requirements need to continue receiving high
 in 10 dogs revealed opposite dose adjustment recom-
doses of insulin. There is no maximum or dangerous
mendations on 27% of occasions (Fleeman and Rand,
dose of insulin that applies to all animals. If an animal
2001).
persistently requires 4 iU/kg of subcutaneous insulin to
The potent phenomenon of stress hyperglycaemia
control its clinical signs and no underlying problem can
in cats aiso makes hospital-based blood glucosecurves
be identified then that dose is safe for that animal to
of questionable value in this species if insulin resist-
receive.
ance has been identified. Home glucose monitoring of
diabetic pets has been proposed as a way to obtain
blood glucose curves free from the stress caused by
References and further reading
the hospital environment (Casella et a., 2003). Only
with practice would such a technique become 'stress
Allanspach K, Arnold P, Glaus T, Hauser B, Wolf C, Eberlet C and
KomminothP(20oojGlucagon-producingneuroendocrlne tumour
free' and while many owners are willing and able a few
associated with hypoaminoacidaemia and skin lesions. journa!
 are not. Whetherthe home-derived curves are any less
of Smaif Anima! Practice 41, 402-406
 affected by stress than hospital based curves has yet
BlaxterACand Grnuffydd-JonesTJ(1g90} Concurentdiabetes melitus
to be established.
Stage 4
 PE and Gerich JE (1984) Abnormal glucose counterregulalion
If insulin resistance is identified, then initiate a system-
affer subcutaneous insulin ininsulin-dependent diabetes melius.
New England Joumal of Medicine 310, 1706-1711
74
Chapter 9The uncontrollable diabetic
Briggs CE, Nelson Rw, Feldman EC. Ellot DA and Neal L (2000)
Gilson SD, Withrow SJ, Wheeler S and Twedt DC (1994)
Reliability ot history and physical examination for assessing
Pheochromocytoma in 50 dogs. Journal of Veterinary internal
control of glycemla in dogs with diabetes melitus (1995-1998).
Medicine 8, 228-232
JournaloltheAmericanVeterinaryMedica/Association217,48-
Graham PA (1995) Cinical and Epidemlological Studies on Canine
53
Diabetes Melitus, PhD Thesis, University of Glasgow
 Broussard JD and Petersan ME (1994) Comparison of wo ultralenle
Graham PA and Nash AS (1997a) Survival data analysls applled to
canine diabetes melitus (Abstract) Journal of Veterinary internal
cats. American Journai of Veterirary Research 55, 127-131
Medicine 11, 142
Graham PA and Nash AS (1997b) Metestrus-associated diabeles
of blood glucose cgncentration by owners of diabetic dogs.
mellitus in the dog (Abstractj Journal of Veterinary internal
Journal of Small Animal Practice 44, 298-305
Medlcine 11,123
Crenshaw KL and Peterson ME (1996) Pretreatiment clinical and
Gross TL, O'Brien TD, Davies AP and Long RE (1990) Glucagon-
producing pancreaticendocrinetumarsIntwodogs withsuperficial
[1992-1994) Journa!of the American Veterinary Medical
necrolytic dermatis.Joumalofthe AmericanVeterinary Medical
Association 209, 943-949
Association 197, 1619-1622
Davison LJ,Ristic JM,Herrtage ME, Ramsey IK and Catchpole B
Hallden G, GalvelinG, Mutt V and Jomvall H(198e) Characterisation
(2002) Anti-insulin antibadies in diabetic dogs treated with 2
of cal insulin. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysiology 241,
20-27
Congress p.171
Hess RS, Saunders HM, Van Winke TJ and Ward CR (2000)
 Davison LJ. Ristic JM, Hetage ME, Ramsey IK and Catchpole B
 Concurrent disorders In dogs wlh diabetes melitus: 221 cases
[1993-1998). Journal gf (he American Veterinary Medical
diabeles melitus Veterinary Immunoiogy and /mmunopathology
Assaciation 217, 1166-1173
91,53-60
Hoenig M and Ferguson DC (1992) Glucose tolerance and insulin
Den Hertog E, Brakman JCA, Teske E,Koositra HS.Rijnberk A
Veterinary Science 53, 338-341
Hoenig M, Reusch C and Peterson ME (2000) Beta cell and insulin
Varerinary Record 144, 12-17
antibodies in treated and untrealed diabetic cats.Veterinary
Eigenmann JE and Venker-van Haagen AJ (1981) Progcslagen-
induced and spantaneous canine acromegaly due to reversible
Ihle SL and Nelson RW(1991) Insulin resistance and diabetes
growthhormoneoverproduction:clinicalpicture andpathogenesis.
melitus.TheCompendiumofContinuing Education/SmailAnimal)
Jounalof theAmericanAnimaHospitaAsociation17,1322
13,197-205
 Feldman EC andNelson RW (1996) Diabetes melitus. In: Canine and
McGuinness OP (1994) The impact of infection on gluconeogenesis
Felinendorilogyndrodution2dndCFemn
In the canscious dag. Shock 2, 336-343
and RW Nelson, pp. 339-391. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Peterson ME, Greco DS, Randolph JF, Moroff SD and Lothrop CD
 Fleeman LM and Rand JS (2003) Evaluation of day-to-day variability
[1990) Acromegaly in 14 cats. Journal of Veterinary internal
Bf sarial blood glucose concantration curves in diabetic dogs.
Medicine 4, 192-201
Jgurna! of the American Veterinary Medical Association 222,
 Peterson ME. Nesbit GH and Schaer M (1981) Dlagnosis and 
317-321
management of concurrent diabetes melitus and hyper-
Ford SL, Nelson Rw, Feldman EC and Niva D (1993) Insulin
adrenocorticism in30dogs.Journatof theAmericanVeterinary
resistance inthreedogs with hypothyraidismanddiabetesmallitus.
Medical Association 178, 66-69
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 202,
Smith LF (1966) Species vaniatign in the amino acid sequenice of
1478-1480
 insulin. Amarican Journal of Medicine 40, 662-666
75
Canine hypothyroidism
Richard M. Dixon
Introduction
stimulatoryeffectof increased TSH.There is thicken-
ingofthebasementmembraneandreplacementof
Hypothyroidism isone of the most common yet chal-
normal thyroid tissuewithmature fibrousconnective
lenging endocrine diseases recognized in small animal
tissue.This process is progressive and total thyroidal
destruction may take months or years，after which
atelyit isasatisfying conditiontomanagewith an
thereremainsvirtuallynofunctionalthyroidtissue.ltis
excellentlong-termprognosis.However,the challenge
posed byhypothyroidismarisesfrom thevariation in
developwhen approximately75%of thegland is de-
clinical presentationsand thedilemma createdbythe
stroyed.Clearly therefore,there is a period of time
selectionof the most appropriatetestsfor diagnosis-
duringwhich there is significant pathology and a pro-
thisisoftenfurther complicated byconfusionover
interpretationoftheresults.However,recentadvances
hypothyroidismhasnotyetbecome apparent.
in both therange and accuracy of tests availablehave
Lymphocyticthyroiditis is more prevalent in certain
significantly improved theability of the clinician to
breeds of dogs and particular family lines suggesting a
confirmadiagnosis and treatdogswithhypothyroidism
genetic component to the condition.Studieshave
confidently.Hypothyroidismisrareincats andcovered
demonstratedfamilial inheritanceinBoxers.Borzois
in detail in Chapter 19.
and GreatDanes(Conawayetal.,1985).Whilst there
Aetiology
In dogs, the thyroid gland is a vascular bilobed struc-
ture located lateral to theproximal trachealrings.It is
responsiblefor theproduction of the active thyroid
hormones,thyroxine(T4)and triodothyronine (T3)
under the controlling influence of thyrotropin(thyroid
stimulating hormone(TSH) from the pituitary gland
and thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) from the
hypothalamus.Hypothyroidism canpotentially arise
froma defectinanyof theseareas.However,nadult
dogs,spontaneoushypothyroidism is usuallyprimary
anda consequence of pathology of the thyraid gland
10.1
Histopathological section of a canine thyraid
gland with lymphocytic thyroiditis.Ncte the
itself,most commonly defined as either lymphocytic
infammatorycellinfiltrate,replacingnormal thyroid tissue
thyroiditisor idiopathic thyroidal atrophy(Gosselin et
al.,1981).Spontaneous hypothyroidism can also re-
sult from disorders of the pituitary gland or
hypothalamus,so-called central hypothyroidism,al-
though this is of minor importance in dogs.
Lymphocytic thyroiditis
Approximately half of all cases of adult-onset hypothy-
roidismresult from lymphocyticthyroiditis(Gosselinet
al.,1981).The aetiology of lymphocytic thyroiditis is
believed tobe immune-mediated.Histologically,lym-
phocyticthyroiditisischaracterized bymultifocal or
diffuseinfiltrationof thethyroid glandbylymphocytes,
macrophages and plasma cells (Figure 10.1). The
follicularepithelial cellswhich arenormally cubaidal in
10.2
Histological section of ahealthy canine thyroid
appearance (Figure 10.2) become columnar underthe
gland.
76
Chapter1o Canine hypothyroidism
is still nogenetictest to identifydogspredisposedtothe
frequentlyreported thatcentral hypothyroidism ac-
development of lymphocytic thyroiditis,epidemiologi-
cal studies of the prevalence of thyroglobulin
ofhypothyroidism.However,spontaneouscentralhypo-
autoantibodies （TgAAs),a marker of lymphocytic
thyroidismhasrarelybeenreliablydocumented in
thyroiditis,have confirmed that certain breeds are
dogs.The most common cause of central hypothy-
over-represented.
roidism is suppression of pituitary TSH secretion by
exogenous glucocorticoid administration orspontane-
Idiopathicthyroidal atrophy
oushyperadrenocorticism.However,thisisa tempo-
Idiopathicthyroidal atrophy accountsfor mostof the
raryandreversibleconditioninwhichtreatmentof the
remaining non-thyroiditis casesof hypothyroidism and
underlying cause is curative and thyroid hormone
ischaracterizedbydegenerationof follicularcellswith
supplementation is not indicated. Central hypothy-
reduction in follicular size and replacement of the
roidismmayalsoresultfromcongenital TSHdeficiency
normalparenchymal tissuewith adipose connective
(seebelow) or as a result of pituitary neoplasia.Defi-
tissue (Gosselin et al.,1981)(Figure 10.3).Like lym-
ciency of TRH,althoughreported inhumans,hasnot
phocyticthyroiditis the underlyingcauseof thisproc
beenrecognized in dogs.
ess is unknown but histologically it appears to be a
non-inflammatory degenerativeprocessquite distinct
Congenital hypothyroidism
from lymphocytic thyroiditis.The degeneration has
Congenital hypothyroidismisreportedindogs although
beensuggested tobe theendstageoflymphocytic
it is uncommon.Itispossible that the true incidence is
thyroiditis.Epidemiologicalanalysis has shown that
higherthanreported,sincemanyaffectedpuppiesdie
hypothyroiddogswithlymphocyticthyroiditis,asshown
earlyin life and arepresumablycategorized simply as
by increased circulatingTgAAs,are typically several
fading puppy’syndrome.Mostcases are thoughttobe
yearsyoungerthan those animalsthatareTgAAnega-
caused bythyroid hypoplasia,aplasia ordysgenesis,
tive. Thus it has been suggested that lymphocytic
thyroiditis may subsequently progress to non-inflam-
also been reported with congenital central hypothy-
matoryidiopathic atrophy.However,histopathological
roidism. Congenital hypothyroidism typically causes
examination of affectedglandsrarelydemonstrates a
disproportionatedwarism,helpingdifferentiateitfrom
concurrent inflammatoryinfitrate,suggesting that the
pituitarydwarfsthathavegrowthhormonedeficiency
aetialogymaydifferfromthatof lymphocyticthyroiditis.
(see Chapter 17).The abnormal physical appearance
in congenital hypothyroidism develops as a conse
quence ofepiphyseal dysgenesis and delayed epiphy-
seal maturation,one of the hallmarks of the condition.
Affected puppiespresent withdisproportionatelywide
may also exhibit some of the signs typical of the adult-
onset disease.Chronic osteoarthritis is a common
long-term complication in surviving dogs dueto the
developmental joint abnormalities.Impaired mental
functionis alsocommonparticularlyif instigation of
treatment is delayed.
If congenital hypothyroidismissuspected,interpre-
tation of thyroid hormone concentrationsmust take
account of the higher values encountered inpuppies
than in adults.Puppies up to three monthsof age
typicallyhavecirculatingT4values2-5 times greater
10.3
Histopathologicalsectionofacaninethyroid
glandwith idicoathicthyroidal atrophy.Notethe
than adult dogs. Congenital hypothyroidism should
loss of normal thyroid parenchyma but aosence of any
alsoberuledout in dogs being evaluated forpituitary
inflammatory infiltrate.
dwarfism,ashypothyroidism has the capacity to sup-
press growth hormone secretion.
Other causes of primary hypothyroidism
Other causes of primary hypothyroidism include
neoplastic destruction,anti-thyroid medication,radia-
Prevalence
tion therapy and congenital defects(see below)al-
though these are uncommonin dogs.
Adult-onset hypothyroidism is undoubtedly one of the
most common endocrine disorders of dogs.However,
Central hypothyroidism
historically epidemiclogical studies of the condition
Central hypothyroidism is caused by failure of normal
have been complicatedby inconsistencies in the diag-
TSH secretionby the thyrotropic cellsof thepituitary
nosticcriteriaused toconfirmthedisease,particularly
gland.The absence of thyroidal stimulationresults in
the useof testsnow considered unreliable.Conse-
atrophicdegenerationcharacterizedbyfolliculardis-
quentlyestimationof theprevalenceof hypothyroidism
tension andflatteningof the follicular epithelium and
variesbetweenstudiesbut the truefigureprobably lies
isreadilydistinguishablefrom thechanges typical of
between 0.2-0.6%of the general canine population
themorecommon idiopathic thyroidal atrophy.It is
(Panciera,1994).
77
Chapter10 Canine hypothyroidism
Clinical features
commonfeaturesinvolvingtheneuromuscular,cardio-
vascular,reproductive,ophthalmological and
Signalment
gastrointestinal systems are alsopossible.
Althoughalmostanybreedcandevelophypothyroidism,
purebred dogs are most commonly affected （Figure
Category
Clinical sign
10.4)reflecting,atleastinpart,thegeneticinfluencen
Dermatological
Hair thinning
the development ofthecondition.Dobermann
Pinschrsvranid
Poorqualityyrritlar
Rat tail
larlycockers,settersandterrierbreedsaremoreprone
Hyperpigmentation
tohypothyroidism and the indexof suspicionfor the
Pyoderma
diseaseshouldbeincreasedinthese breeds(Panciera,
Seborrhoea sicca
1994;Dixon et al.,1999).
Seborrhoea cleosa
Otitis
Skin thickening
Retrievers
Spaniels
Metabolic
Lethargy
Terriers
Crossbreeds
Weight gain
Exercise intolerance
Dobermanns
■
Others
Mental dullness
Bradycardia
19%
Generalized weakness
Neuromuscular
Polyneuropathies
38%
Peripheral vestibular disease
Facial nerve paralysis
Central nervous system(CNS) signs,seizures,
12%
ataxia,circling
Weakness
Proprioceptive deficits
6%
Others
Corneal lidosis
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
12%
13%
Reduced myocardial function
Reproductive abnormalies
10.4
Distributionof breed typeof52dogswithconfirmed
Smallintestinal bacterial overgrowth and
hyoothyraidism.(Data from Dixon(1999).)
diarrhoea
Concurrentimmune-mediated endocrinopathies
Thedisease ismostcommoninmiddle-aged and
10.5
Clinical signs of adult-onset hypothyroicism.
young as2years.Mean ageat the timeof diagnosisis
approximately7years.Largebreedsapparentlyhave
Dermatologicalabnormalities
an earlier age of onset than small breed dogs. In
Thyroid hormonesplay several important rolesin the
addition,high-riskbreedshavea tendencyto develop
maintenanceof dermalhealth.Dermatological abnor-
the conditionat an earlier age.
malities canbeextensiveand arereported in approxi-
Malesandfemalesarebothatbroadlysimilarrisk
mately 80% of affected dogs.The particular
ofdeveloping hypothyroidism,although some studies
analysingverylargenumbersofcasesdemonstratea
duration of the disease.
femalebias.Neutered animals,particularlyfemales,are
at increased riskcompared with theirintactcounterparts.
Scaling and scurfing:Hyperkeratosis causing scal-
ingandscurfing of theskin andpoor qualityhaircoatis
Clinical signs
common(Figure 10.6).The recognitionof excessive
Thyroidhormoneshavewiderangingeffectsandmul-
tiple organsystems are typically affected in hypothy-
roidism （Figure 10.5).Thyroid hormones affect most
body tissuesand actmainly astranscriptionfactors to
modify geneexpression.Ata cellular level,thyroid
hormonesinfluencemultiplemetabolicprocessesfrom
regulation ofmitochondrial oxygen demand,to the
control of protein synthesis.As a consequence,the
onsetof thedisease isinsidiouslyprogressive and
althoughthe clinicalsignscanbevaried and extensive,
most arenon-specific(Panciera,1994,2001).
Most (>70%of cases) hypothyraid dogs present
withavarietyofmetabolicsignsinassociationwith
dermatologicalabnormalities(Dixon etal.,1999).How-
10.6
Poor quality.scurfy hair coat in a dog with
ever,these can occur alone anda variety ofless
hypothyroidism.
78
Chapter 10
Canine hypothyroidism
dandrufforadryanddullcoatisoftennotedinthe early
10.9
stages of the disorder.Otitis externa isreported in a
numberof hypothyroid dogs and dryness andscaling
Nasal alopecia is
anuncommcn
of theexternal earcanal maybenoted.
butrecognized
complication
Alopecia:Thyroid hormones are necessary for the
associated with
initiation of the anagenphase of thehairfollicle cycle.
hypothyroidism.
Absenceof thyroid hormonesresultsinpersistenceof
thetelogengrowthphase;hairsbecomeeasilyepilated
and eventually alopecia results(see Chapter 8).This
commonlybeginsin areas undergoing friction such as
the neck in dogs that wear collars, and on the tail
resulting in the typical'rat-tail appearanceof hypothy-
roidism(Figure 10.7).Affectedanimals commonly de-
(Figure 10.8),but focal,multifocal and asymmetrical
alopecia can also occur.Hair loss slowlyprogresses
and will ultimately affect the flanks and trunk.The
extremities areusuallysparedalthoughgiantbreeds
maysufferfrom alopeciaof the extremitieswhilstthe
trunkremainsrelatively unaffected.Dorsal nasal alo-
Myxoedema:Accumulationofmucopolysaccharides
pecia has been reported to be a feature of hypothy-
and hyaluronicacid in the skinoccurs due to an
roidism inretrieversbut alsooccurs inotherbreeds
imbalance inthenormal thyroid-controlledproduction
(Figure 10.9).
and degradation of thesemolecules.It results in myx-
oedematous skin thickening. This skin thickening can
10.7
giverisetoa'tragic'facialexpressionwith thickening of
So-called'rat-tail
the lips,thickenedskinover the forehead anddrooping
appearanceina
of the eyelids(Figure 10.10).
untreated
hypothyroidism.
10.10
So-called'tragic'facial expression associated
withhypothyroidism.
Secondary infection:Thyroid hormones assist hu-
moral and cellular immune responses,and conse-
quently hypothyroidismreducesresistancetoinfection.
Secondaryrecurrentandpersistentsuperficial and
roidismas isMalasseziainfection.These infections
maybepoorlyresponsive to therapy until the hypothy-
roidism is controlled.Pyoderma and the associated
pruritusmayresultin self-excoriation and trauma,
whichcancomplicatetheclinicaland histopathological
appearance.
Other changes:The remaining hair coat in affected
dogsisusuallydryandbrittleandmaybecome lighter
incolourduetoenvironmentalbleaching.
Hyperpigmentation is common and is particularlyno-
ticeableover alopecicregions.Comedonesmay also
Generalized corsal alopecia in a hypothyroid
benotedparticularlyon theventrum and seborrhoea
10.8
dog.
affectsupto40%of hypothyroid dogs.
79
Chapter 10  Canine hypoihyroidism
Some variation in lesion type and distribution may
Weight gain and obesity: The link between hypothy-
be breed-related, with Arctic breeds often losing pri-
roidism and obesity is generally overstated. Obesity
mary hairs giving the remaining hair coat a woolly
affects appraximately 25% of the canine population
appearance. Hypertrichosis is reported in Boxers and
whereas the prevalence of hypothyroidism is esti-
Irish Setters.
mated as 0.2-0.6%. Clearly hypothyroidism is a rare
cause of canine obesity. However, there is no doubt
Histopathological appearance: The dermatohisto-
that weight gain is a common finding in affected dogs
pathological features of hypothyroidism are generally
occurring in approximately 40% of cases during the few
considered non-specific and consistent with a number
months prior to initial presentation. Some affected
of possible endocrine diseases. The most common
dogs exhibit marked weight gain, occasionally weigh-
changes include:
ing >75% of their expected breed-average. Despite
this, a large proportion of hypothyroid dogs do not gain
+ Predominance of telogen phase hair follicles that
significant weight and hypothyroidism cannot be ruled
may be atrophic or hyperkeratotic
out based on a lack of this finding alone.
Dermal thickening
+
+
Myxoedema
Cold intolerance: Cold intolerance or heat seeking is
Vacuolation of the arrector pili muscles.
reported in approximately 10% of hypothyroid dogs.
However, the presence of heat seeking is actually of
The high incidence of concurrent skin infection is
litle diagnostic value, as it is also a common feature of
 partly responsible for the inflammatory lesions that are
euthyroid dogs.
frequently present. Irritation associated with sebor-
rhoea may also contribute to its development. Inflam-
Neuromuscular abnormalities
matory changes generally consist of dermal and
Over recent years there appears to have been an
periadnexal accumulation of neutrophils, macrophages.
increasing awareness of neurological findings in hy-
lymphocytes and plasma cells. Folliculitis is generally
pothyroid dogs. It is unclear whether this reflects a
the consequence of a secondary infection. lf severe,
genuine increase in incidence or more likely increased
these inflammatory changes have the ability to ob-
index of suspicion for hypothyroidism in fhese cases.
scure some of the more subtle histopathological find-
Reported clinical findings include localized and periph-
ings associated with hypothyroidism, and samples for
eral neuropathies and central nervous system (CNS)
skin biopsy should preferably be collected fram areas
signs (Jaggy and Oliver, 1994).
that are not obviously infected or inflamed.
Pathophysiology: The pathological basis for most
Metabolic abnormalities
central or generalized neuromuscular abnormalities is
A range of signs caused by hypothyroidism including
thought to be reduced axonal transport due to failure
lethargy, exercise intolerance, weight gain and weak-
of the sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatase
ness are collectively described as metabolic abnor-
(ATPase) pump. Histological abnormalities in these 
malities and occur in up to 85% of hypothyroid dogs
dogs reveai axonal degeneration and demyelination.
{Dixon et al., 1999). These signs are considered to be
Accumulation of myxoedematous fluid within the dural
manifestations of a reduction in metabolic rate. In
sheaths is thought to be responsible for some of the
hypothyroid humans, basal metabolic rate reduces by
more commonly seen peripheral neuropathies.
up to 40% and the rate of heat praduction falls reflecting
 the reduction in a wide variety of energy-generating
Clinicai manifestations: Lower motor neuron (LMN)
reactions. The onset of metabolic signs in dogs is
disease, peripheral vestibular disease, megaoeso-
typically insidiaus often making their appreciation by
phagus, laryngeal paralysis, myopathies, generalized
owners particularly difficult. However, the clinical re-
sponse folowing appropriate therapy can be dramatic,
 reportedly associated with hypothyroidism, although, it
retrospectively confirming the extent ofthe problem. At
is likely that this is responsible for only a small percent-
[east one 'metabolic' sign is recognized in approxi-
age of such cases. Clinical neurological abnormalities
mately 85% of hypothyraid dogs.
 are reported in as many as 75% of hypothyroid human
patients. in dogs, abnormalities on electromyogram
Lethargy: Lethargy is the most common metabolic
 are mors common than are reparts of clinical abnor-
change, affecting up to 80% of cases. The duration of
malities, suggesting that subclinical neuropathies or
the underlying illness appears to correspond with the
myopathies may be more common. The lower inci-
 severity of lethargy. In some cases this is profound and
dence of neuromuscular clinical signs reportedly asso-
it is not uncommon for hypothyroid dogs to fall asleep
ciated with hypothyroidism in dogs may reflect the
during a consultation if given the opportunity.
malities in this species.
Exercise intolerance: Exercise intolerance affects
just over 25% of all cases, although many owners
Lowermotorneuron disease:LMN disease may present
 confuse lethargy with exercise intolerance. Frequently
 as generalized weakness. Progression in affected dogs
dogs appear to have a normal capacity for short-term
 can vary from subtle gait alteratians to paraparesis and
exercise, or when excited will behave in a normall
tetraparesis. Ataxia and dysmetria, possibly in asso-
manner. However, this is short-lived and thereafter
ciation with reduced or absent proprioception, is also
affected dogs need to rest or sleep excessively.
recognized.
80
Chapter 10  Canine hypothyroidism
Laryngeal paralysis and megaoesophagus: There is
 Other changes: Other cardiovascular abnormalities
minimat evidence that hypothyroidism causes either
associated with hypathyroidism include bradycardia, a
laryngealparalysis or megaoesophagus, both of which
weak apex beat and arrhythmias. Electrocardiographic
are undoubtedly much more common than could be
{ECG) abnormalities include small QRS complexes,
accounted for by hypothyroidism alone. The evalua-
inverted T waves and sinus bradycardia. These changes
tion of such affected cases for hypothyroidism should
usually reverse with appropriate thyroid hormone
only be considered when other more common causes
replacement therapy (THRT).
have been excluded and/or there are additional clini-
cal and clinicopathological features suggestive of
Reproductive abnormalities
thyroid dysfunction.
Clinical reproductive abnormalities including persist-
ent anoestrus, galactorrhoea, infertility and a pro-
Myxoedema coma: The most striking presentation of
longed interoestrus intervalin the bitch, and decreased
hypothyroidism is myxoedema coma, a rare complica-
fertility and libido in males, have all been attributed to
tion of advanced hypothyroidism. Affected dogs present 
hypothyroidism (Johnson, 1994). An increased inci-
 stuporous or comatose, with severely impaired mental
dence of abortion, premature deaths and low birth
capacity, subnormal thermoregulatory control and car-
weights have also been reported. However, as the
 diovascular and respiratory suppression. Affected dogs
ability to accurately confirm hypothyroidism improves,
are likely to have been hypothyroid for prolonged
the incidence of reproductive signs appears to be
periods and myxoedema coma may be the end result
feature as a consequence of increased circulating
prolactin concentrations. This is presumably caused
be related to the thyroid disease. Treatment consists
by increased generalized stimulation of the pituitary
of thyroid hormone supplementation (see below)
 gland by TRH. Reproductive abnormalities are ex-
 alongside appropriate medicai suppartive care includ.
 pected to resolve on restorafion of euthyroidism.
 ing: passive warming, intravenous fluid and glucose
 Hypothyroidism ls a popular topic within much of
administration, mechanical respiratory support and
the dog breeding community, both in the UK and
 antibiotic and glucocorticoid therapy. This presenta-
 abroad, and the pressure from some individuals to link
tion is rare but when it does occur the prognosis is
poor reproductive performance of their bitch or dog to
guarded.
thyroid dysfunction is often considerable. However.
whilst hypothyroidism may be one of the considera-
Cardiovascular abnormalities
tions in such cases it is undoubtedly one of the more
Thyroid hormones have a direct positive inotropic
Uncommon causes (Johnson, 2o02).
effect on the myocardium. In addition they stimulate
myocardial hypertrophy and increase the respansive-
Other clinical signs
ness of the heart to adrenergic stimulation. Thyroid
Corneal lipidosis occurs in a small number of hypothy-
hormone deficiency therefore has the potential to
roid dogs as a consequence of alterations in the lipid
impair cardiac function. However, it is doubtful
 profile of affected animals, lts response to appropriate
whether hypothyroidism in dogs actually causes
clinically significant cardiac disease. Nevertheless, in
tion of lipid values that accompanies successful treat-
dogs with pre-existing heart disease, cardiac function
ment. Keratoconjunctivits sicca has also been reporfed
is worsened by concurrent hypothyroidism. This pre-
in association with hypothyroidism.
sumably reflects the reduced responsiveness of the
In recent years, evaluation of hypothyroidism as a
cardiac muscle in hypothyroid states, potentially push-
 possible cause of behavioural abnormalities, particu-
ing a dog from compensating to decompensated heart
[arly aggression, has been studied. At this time, there
failure.
remains ittle evidence of any true causal relationship.
Hypothyroidism has been reported in association
Dllated cardiomyopathy: The most widely reported
with smallintestinal bacterial overgrowth in a few dogs.
cardiac disease linked to hypothyroidism in dogs is
This is presumed secondary to reduced gastrointestinal
dilated cardiomyopathy, and there is little doubt that
 motility, a feature also recognized in human hypothy-
an association between both conditions exists. How-
 roid patients in whom constipation is a known compli-
ever, there is no clear evidence of a causal relation-
cation.
ship and the main link is likely to be similar breed
Hypothyroidism.may be encountered in association
predispositions for both diseases. Recent studies
with other immune-mediated endocrine diseases. The
have documented the presence of both conditions
-uss yejnpueibkiod ym shop jo uoneuasaid jeoui
concurrently in a large number of Dobermann 
dromes reflects the combination of diseases present -
Pinschers (Calvert et ai., 1998). However, dilated
 these are discussed in more detail in Chapter 25.
cardiomyopathy was also frequently reported in indi-
Finally, a frequent misconception is that polyuria
viduals of the same breed in which thyroid function
and polydipsia are clinical tfeatures of hypothyroidism.
was normal. Reduced myocardial contractility (as
Identification of these abnormalities appears to prompt
requests for evaluation of thyroid function in commer-
been documented in hypothyroid dogs with improve-
ciai diagnostic laboratories. However, there is no pub-
 ment following appropriate treatment for the hypo-
lished evidence of any association between polyuria
thyroidism.
and polydipsia and canine hypothyroidism.
81
Chapter 10 Caninehypothyroidism
Diagnosis
General approach
Therecommended steps in investigating suspected
Before anyreviewof thevarious available tests it is
hypothyroidism are depicted inFigure10.11 and sum-
imperativethatthreeimportantissuesaretakeninto
marized asfollows:
consideration:
Appropriate clinical signs of hypothyroidismmust
Hypothyroidism is a clinical diagnosis,not a
be present.
laboratoryone.Laboratory tests should be
Evaluatedrug therapy and,if likely tointerfere
2.
employed tosupportorrefutea clinical suspicion
with endocrine testing,postponeuntil aftersuch
but cannotbeused inisolation
therapy has been withdrawn.
Noneof the existing endocrinetests is100%
3.ExcludeNTlsasfaras ispractical,byperforming
accurate
routine biochemical and haematological
The influence of commonly used medications
investigations and any additional appropriate
andnon-thyroidal illnesses(NTls)on the
diagnostic tests.
thyroidgland and thyroid testresultsshould
4.Once thyroid testing is considered appropriate,
notbeunderestimated.Medicationsin
performfirst line diagnostic thyroid tests(total T4
common use in veterinarypractice,and a
and canine TSH(cTSH).
numberof clinically similarNTisregularly
5.If results are equivocal eitherwait andretest after
produce thyraid function test results that can
6weeks orperform second line diagnostictests
easilybemisinterpreted asreflecting
(freeT4by dialysis and/or TgAA).
hypothyroidism.
6.lf resuilts are stillequivocal ideally wait andretest
again.However,if no further diagnostic options
Awarenessof thesefactorsand implementationof
are available and suspicion of hypothyroidism is
a testingregimenthattakesthemintoaccount,will
still high,considera therapeutic trial as a
improvethe accuracyofthefinal diagnosis.
diagnostic test.
Appropriate clinical signs
Clinicalexclusionof likely
non-thyroidal illnesses
Routinebiochemistryandhaematology
testingforexclusionof likely
Non-thyroidal illness suspected or
non-thyroidal ilinesses
confirmed
First line endocrine tests:
Non-thyroidal illiness
Non-thyroidal illness
total T4andcTSH measurement
excluded
confirmed
Lowtotal T4and
Normaltotal T4and
Discordantresults
Wait andretest
high cTSH
normalcTSH
(e.g.low total T4,normal
after6weeks
cTSHornormal total T4
and increased cTSH)
Hypothyroid
Euthyroid
Second line endocrine
tests
Results still
FreeT4and/orTgAA:
contactlaboratoryfor
unclear
interpretation of results
Start/stoptherapeutictrialregimen
10.11
Schematicroprcsentationof stops for diagnostic testing cf hypothyroidism.T4,thyroxine;TgAA,thyroglobulin
autoantibodies;TSH,thyrcid stimulating hormone.
82
Chapter 1o  Canine hypothyroidism
Routine biochemical and haematological
Creatlne kinase
tests
An increase in creatine kinase (Ck) activity is com-
There are a number of well described biochemical and
monly reported as a feature of hypothyroidism and has
haematological abnormalities associated with hypothy-
previously been attributed to decreased clearance
roidism in both humans and dogs. These include, most
from the circulation (Karlsberg and Roberts, 1978).
commonly, hyperlipidaemia and anaemia and when
The significance of hypothyroid myopathy' as an un-
present they help to provide supportive evidence of
derlying cause appears doubtful because studies of
hypothyroidism (Panciera, 1994). However, because
hypothyroid dogs with and without myopathies found
 of the high incidence of similar abnormalities in dogs
no correlation with circulating CK concentrations. In
with NTls the predictive value of most routine param-
one recent study (Dixon et al., 1999), mild increases
gters for hypothyroidism is relatively poor (Dixon et al.,
in CK activity were reported in 35% of hypothyroid
1999). The main value of routine biochemical and
dogs. However, euthyroid dogs with similar presenting
haematological testing is primarily to assist in the
 signs also had increased values in 35% of cases.
exclusion of NTls. In one study of routine clinicopatho-
Circulating CK activity therefore appears to have little
logical abnormalities in hypothyroid dogs and sick
or no diagnostic value in the investigation of hypo-
euthyroid animals presenting with similar clinical signs,
thyroidism.
the most useful predictive findings were an increase in
circulating cholesterol concentration and gamma-
Liver enzymes
 glutamyl transferase (GGT) activity, and a reduction in
Mild increases in liver enzymes, particularly aikalirnie
 red blood cell (RBC) and neutrophil counts (Dixon et
phosphatase (ALP) and GGT, are present in approxi-
al. 1999).
mately 30% of hypothyroid dogs. This is presumed to
be a consequence of mild hepatic lipid deposition
Triglyceride and cholesterol
associated with hypothyroidism. However, the diag-
Hypothyroidism is associated with both a reduction
nostic utility of increased liver enzyme results is limited 
 in the rate of lipid degradation, and a reduction in
 as similar increases are a common finding in a wide
lipid synthesis. However, the former is affected to a
range of NTls. However, marked increases in liver
greater extent and the net effect is therefore an
enzymes, particularly ALP, should prompt considera-
accumulation of lipids within the circulation. The princi-
tion of NTIs - hyperadrenocorticism being the most
pal changes are accumulation of high density
obvious example.
lipoproteins (HDLs), low density lipoproteins (LDLs)
and possibly very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs)
Fructosamine
Although circulating fructosamine concentrations are
(see Chapter 7).
Hypercholesterolaemia is commonly reported, oc-
known to be increased in human hypothyroid patients,
curring in up to 80% of affected dogs. Hypertrigly-
little attention has been given to this test in dogs other
ceridaemia is also present in a similar proportion of
 than as a diagnostic and monitoring tool in diabetes
cases, Whilst hyperlipidaemia is also a common fea-
 melitus. Increased values in hypothyroidism are caused
ture of other endocrine disorders, notably diabetes
 by a reduction in protein turnover rather than any
 mellitus and hyperadrenocorticism, the magnitude of
the cholesterol increase in hypothyroidism is typically
following exclusion of dogs with diabetes melitus,
 greater, and circulating cholesteralconcentrations >20
fructosamine had a diagnostic specificity for hypothy-
mmol/l are not uncommon. Thus, whilst hypercholes-
roidism of >80% (Dixon ef al., 1999). Given the relative
teralaemia is not specific for hypothyroidism, an unu-
ease with which diabetes mellitus can usually be ex-
cluded, fructosamine is a useful additional screening
consideration,
nitude of the increase is much less marked than in
Anaemia
diabetes melitus. Typical results from hypothyroid
A mild normocytic and normochromic anaemia affects
dogs are af the top end of the reference range
 approximately 40-50% of hypothyraid dogs. This is a
(approximately 300 μmol/l) rather than markedly
consequence of reduced peripheral metabolic activity
above it (Reusch et al., 2002). Whilst the diagnosis of
and a reduction in tissue oxygen demand. The severity
hypothyroidism cannot be based on fructosamine
of the anaemia generally reflects the chronicity of the
measurements alone, this test may be of particular use
hypothyroidism. Typically it is mild (e.g. RBC values
in those cases where initial thyroid test resuits are
5.0-5.5 x 1012/l) or RBC values are at the low end of the
equivocal, as sequential fructosamine values may
[aboratory reference range.
provide supportive evidence of hypothyroidism in
Traditionally, hypothyroidism was thought to be
individual cases.
associated with a variety of haemostatic abnormalities,
 in particular Von willebrand's disease. It is now clear
Endocrine tests
that coagulopathies are nof a feature of hypothy-
roidism per se although undoubtedly certain breeds,
Thyroid physlology
notably Dobermann Pinschers, commonly suffer from
 An understanding of the normal production and control
both conditions. Anaemia with morphological evidence.
mechanisms of the thyroid harmones is essential to
of increased regeneration should prompt considera-
understand the performance of the individual diag-
tion of another underlying cause.
nostic tests.
83
Chapter 10 Caninehypothyroidism
Thyroid hormoneproduction:Avarietyof iodinated
substancesareproduced andreleasedfrom the thy-
Hypothalamus
roid gland into the circulation.However,only the
iodothyroninesT3and T4areconsidered tohaveany
significant biological activity.The principal product of
the thyroidgland isT4,which isentirelyderived from
thyroidal synthesis.By contrast,only approximately
TRH
halfofall circulatingT3originatesfromthyroidalpro-
+↓
duction,theremainderbeingproduced byperipheral
deiodinationofT4intheskinliver,keletalmuscleand
Pituitary
kidneysand therefore T4canbe considered to act
essentiallyasapro-hormone.Mostof theT3islocated
intracellularly,with only about 20%being presentinthe
circulation.T3is3-5times more metabolically active
thanT4.
Transportofthyroid hormones:In thecirculation,
theiodothyroninesarepresentmainlyboundtoplasma
proteins: thyroid-binding globulin (TBG),albumin and
thyroid-binding prealbumin（TBPA,transthyretin).A
TSH
minorfractionofT3andT4isalsocarriedbycirculating
lipoproteins.The protein-bound hormone acts solely
asareservoir tomaintainadequatefreehormone
concentrations. In dogs the unbound (free) fraction of
T4 accounts for approximately0.1%of the total hor-
mone,comparedwithapproximately1%of T3which
circulates unbound.These values are higher than the
correspanding humanvalues due to lower binding
affinitiesandlowerconcentrationsof themajorcarrier
Healthy thyroid gland
proteins in dogs than in humans.This isofparticular
relevancebecausewhilst absolutefreeT4concentra-
tions are similarinhumans and dogs,total T4concen-
10.12
Contrcl of thyroid function.T3,triodothyronine;
trations are considerably lower in dogs.Thus assays
T4,thyroxine:TRH, thyrotrcpin rclcasing
designed for human usemustbe modified to measure
hormone;TSH,thyrotropin(tnyroid stimulating hormone):
total T4 concentrationsin dogs.Thereduced affinity of
+，stimulation;-,inhibition
the thyroid hormonesfortheircarrierproteinsindogs
isresponsiblefor the considerablymorerapid hor-
mone turnoverin dogs comparedwith humans.Corre-
1.Reviewthedog'scurrentandrecentdrugtherapy:
Unfortunatelyanassortmentofcommonlyusedmedi-
hours in dogs compared with about7 days inhumans.
cationscanprofoundly alter thyroidfunction and thy-
roid testresults.In practice this situation is confounded
Control of thyroid hormone production:Circulating
by thefactthatmanyof thecases evaluatedfor
thyroid hormone concentrationsareregulated through
hypothyroidism have dermatological complaints and
a classical negative feedback mechanism (Figure
mayhavereceivedarangeoftherapiesbefore the
10.12).The main stimulus for their synthesis and
decision toevaluate thyroid function is taken.Of the
secretionis arise in serum TSH concentration.TSH is
medications potentially used in these cases,
synthesized and secreted from thepars distalis of the
glucocorticoids andpotentiated sulphonamides are
pituitary gland underthe tonic stimulationof TRH.The
common.These drugs not only interfere with thyroid
secretion of TSH ismainly inhibited by the negative
testresultsbutpotentiallyresult in clinical signs that
feedbackeffectofcirculating freeT4,whichentersthe
canbe attributed to hypothyroidism.
pituitaryand isdeiodinated toT3.Acomplicatednet
Ideally these drugsshouldbewithdrawnprior to
workof neuropeptides andneuratransmitters,includ
testing forhypothyroidism.Thewithdrawal periodwill
ing dopamine and somatostatin,also modulate TSH
clearlyvary from drug to drug,itsdose and length of
release.Thyroid hormones also inhibit thereleaseof
treatment.Inpracticearuleofthumbisa 6-week
TRH further suppressing TSH and therefore thyroid
withdrawalperiodforglucocorticoids,potentiatedsul-
hormone secretion.
phonamides and anyother drugsknown to interfere
with thyroid function.Thispostponement of testing
Pre-testingrecommendations
helps avoidsmanyof thepitfalls associatedwithinter-
Oneof themainproblems ininterpretation of thyroid
pretationofapparentlyconflicting thyroidhormone test
related endocrinetestsistheinterference fromNTls
results. In cases where withdrawal is impossible,the
anddrug therapy.There are therefore tworecom
likelyimpactof thedrugs used shouldbe considered
mended steps that should be taken priortoperforming
and themost appropriatetestorthe oneleast likelyto
thyroid function tests in dogs.
be affected should be selected.
84
Chapter 10 Caninehypothyroidism
2.lnvestigateandexcludenon-thyroidalcausesof
2003).The reduction is caused by glucocorticoid
the clinical signs:lronically,exclusionof NTlsasfar
mediatedTSHsuppression,reducedserum
asispractical,isprobablythemostcommonlymissed
thyroid hormoneprotein binding and altered
but arguably the single most useful stage inreliably
peripheral hormone metabolism.Circulating
confirming hypothyroidism. This pre-investigation
cytokines,including interleukins and tumour
necrosis factor(TNF)may playa rolein the
altogether.f testingsperformed inthefaceofNTs,t
development of some of these changes inNTls.
isdifficult to confirm hypothyroidism.The effects of
The effect of NTl iswidelyrecognizedbut
NTls on thyroid tests vary depending on the nature and
particularly common inhyperadrenocorticism
severity of the illness.
(Ferguson and Peterson,1992),neoplastic
diseases (Vail et al.,1994),diabetes mellitus,
Total T4
hypoadrenocorticism,renal failure,hepatic
Basalserum total T4estimation hastraditionallybeen
disease,pyoderma(Hall etal,1993) and a
themainstay forthediagnosisofcaninehypothy-
roidism andremainsanexcellentfirst line diagnostic
care(Elliot et al.,1995).As a general rule the
test for the disease.The advantages and disadvan-
magnitude of suppressionreflects the severityof
tages of this test are summarized inFigure 10.13.
illnessandlessmetabolicallysevereillnesses
mayinfact havelittle impact onthyroidfunction
(Paradis et al.,2003).Aspreviouslyreported in
Advantages
humans and cats, the likelihood of recovery from
NTIs is inversely proportional to the magnitude of
Inexpensive and sensitivemarker forhypothyroidism
Widely available and easily measured
suppression of total T4 concentrations.
Referencerange values suggesthypothyroidismisunlikely
Numerouscategoriesofdrugsused inveterinary
practice alsointerferewith thyroidhormone
Disadvantages
metabolism (Figure 10.15) and can suppress
Low values do not confirm hypothyroidism
total T4 values.These include glucocorticoids
Decreased inelderlydogs andcertainbreeds
(Torres etal.,1991),anticonvulsants(Gaskill et
Subnormal at random times during the day
al.,1999;Kantrowitz et al.,1999;Muller et al,
Decreased by most NTls
2000),non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Decreasedystroidsbtuatn-stridantiflammar
(NSAIDs)(Daminet etal.,2003) and potentiated
druigs (NSAIDs) and sulphonamides
sulphonamides.Withdrawal of these drugs
should be consideredprior to testing for
10.13
The advantages and disadvantages of total
thyroxine (T4) measurermients for the diagnosis
hypothyroidism(see above).
of hypcthyrcidism in dogs.NTI,non-thyroidal illness.
Drug
Effect
Diagnosticperformance:There is universal agree
Glucocoricoids
Decrease totalT4and freeT4concentrations
ment that circulating total T4 is usually subnormal in
hypothyroidism.In most studies，<5%of hypothyroid
NSAIDS
Decrease total T4 concentration
dogs have reference range or increased values
Sulphonamides
Decrease total T4 and increase cTSH
(Peterson et al.,1997;Scott-Moncrieff et al.,1998;
concentrations
Dixon and Mooney,1999a).Unfortunately,whilst the
Barbiturates
Decrease total and free T4 concentrations
diagnostic sensitivity(i.e.the percentage of affected
dogs with subnormal values) isundoubtedly high at
Thyroid hormone
Decreases cTSH through negative feedback
more than95%,thespecificity(i.e.the abilityofthetest
replacement therapy
thus inhibits spontanecus thyroid function
to exclude unaffected animals) is much Jower at ap-
Some of the common drug therapies known to
proximately70%(Figure 10.14).
10.15
affect thyroid functicn tests in degs. NSAIDs,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs;T4,thyroxine;
LowtotalT4valuesineuthyroiddogs:Thespecificity
TSH.thyroia stimulating hormone.
of total T4 isparticularlypoorfora number of reasons.
In addition to these abnormalcauses,normal
Thesuppressive effectof NTls and certain drug
physiological mechanismscan also decrease total T4.
therapiesoncirculating total T4valuesis
potentiallyprofound(Ferguson 1988;Elliot et al,
Healthydogsexhibit fluctuationof total T4values
1995;Gaskill et al.,1999;Kantrowitz et al.,1999,
below thereferencerange ona dailybasis(Miller
2001;Daminet et al.,2003;Daminetand Ferguson,
et al.,1992).Unfortunately there isno circadian
Total T4(nmol)
FreeT4(pmoll)
CTSH(μg/)
Combined total T4 and cTSH
Combined free T4 and cTSH
Sensitivty
100%
B0%
87%
87%
%08
Speciicity
75%
93%
82%
92%
97%
10.14
Diagnosticperformance of total ancfree T4 andcTSHinisolationand in combination,forcanine
85
Chapter 10 Canine hypothyrcidism
patterntothisfluctuationandsono
cTSHvalue is increasedbut total T4 iswithin the
recommendationson timing samplescan
reference range),specific antibody testing can be
begiven.
performed.However,thisisnotwidely availableand
Larger and medium-sized dogsnormallyhave
alternativelyfreeT4andorTgAAtestingcanbe
decreasedcirculatingtotal T4valuescompared
performed.AlmostalldogswithdetectableT4AAs are
withsmall breeds.Thereis alsoa marked
alsopositivefor TgAAs and this can be used as an
decreaseinvaluesinsighthounds,such as
indirectassessmentof thelikelihoodofantibodyinter-
Greyhounds,Wolfhounds and Salukis(Gaughan
ference.Free T4 by dialysis is not susceptible to
and Bruyette,2001)
antibodyinterference,since thedialysis step filters
Agealsoinfluencescirculating total T4values,
out the antibodies.
whichprogressivelydecline from themid-normal
range in middle-aged animals,tolow-normal
Canine TSH
values in elderlypatients.This is a normal
Measurementof cTSH concentrationshasrevolution-
physiological feature that isof importance
ized testingfor canine hypothyroidism.In primary hy-
because a highpercentageofdogsevaluated for
pothyroidism,there is a loss of normal regulatory
hypothyroidism are geriatric.
feedback onpituitary synthesisand secretionof cTSH.
The influence of gender on thyroid hormone
As the vast majority of hypothyroid dogs have primary
concentrations has been evaluated in several
hypothyraidism,increased circulating cTSH concen-
largestudieswith conflictingresults.Malesand
trations are expected. The advantages and disadvan-
femaleshavesimilarresultsbuttotal T4values
tages of this test are summarized inFigure 10.16.
appear toincrease duringprogesterone-
dominated phasesof theoestrus cycle inbitches.
However,giventhatvaluestend toremainwithin
Advantages
referencerange,these changes areunlikelyto
Helps differentatelowT4ofhypothyroidismfromothercauses
have any clinical significance.
Disadvantages
Given the range of factors that can result in low
Should notbeinterpretedalone
total T4values,it is clear that subnormal values
IncreasedbycertaindrugsandrecoveryfromNTI
cannot confirm hypothyroidismbutratherserve notto
Withinreferencerangein20%hypothyroid dogs
rule outsuchadiagnosis.Incontrast,referencerange
Potentially increased in compensating hypothyrcidism
valuesruleout hypothyroidismwithfewexceptions
10.16
The advantages and disadvantages of canine
(seebelow).
thyrotropin(cTSH)measurements forthe
diagnosisof hypothyroidism in dogs.NTl,non-thyroical
Referencerange/hightotal T4valuesinhypothy-
illness;T4, thyroxine.
roid dogs:In dogs,the presence of circulating T4
autoantibodies(T4AAs)can interfere with actual total
Whenelevatedabove thereferencerange(topof
T4 measurements using most commercial methodolo-
the referencerange is approximately 0.6μg/),values
gies.The exact effect depends on the measurement
method employed but inthe majorityofcases,
T4
antibodiesartefactuallyincrease the measured total
areidentified.No convincing explanation existsfor the
T4 concentration.Thyroid hormone antibodies de-
reasonfor such dramaticincreases,although anecdo-
velop in a subset of dogs with lymphocytic thyroiditis.
tal evidence suggests that cTSH increases may be
These dogs produce antibodies against a specific
particularlyprominent in the early stages of thyroid
epitopeon the thyroglobulin molecule.corresponding
dysfunction as thepituitary glandattemptstocompen-
toT4（T4AA)orT3（T3AA）.Inone studyof over
sate for the progressively failing thyroid gland (Dixon
280,000samplessubmittedforthyroid evaluation in
andMooney,1999b).Subsequentalterationsintheset
theUSA,1%of all samplessubmitted hadbothmeas-
pointof thepituitarygland,withprogressivelyreducing
urableT3AAs andT4AAs.T3AAsalonewere detected
sensitivity toincreasedTRH,isapossibleexplanation
in4.6%ofallsamplescomparedwith0.6%withT4AAs
forthelowervaluesmorecommonlyseenbutfurther
alone(Nachreiner et al.,2002).
study isrequired in this area.
T4AAs andT3AAshave noclinical effectbut are
importantbecause of theirpotential tointerferewith
Diagnostic performance:Measurement of circulat-
T3 and T4immunoassay.Their presence may result
ing cTSH in isolation is notrecommended,as it has
in total T4valueswithinratherthanbelowtherefer-
both adiagnosticsensitivity and specificityof approxi-
ence range orin some cases marked increaseswell
mately80%(Peterson et al.1997;Scott-Moncrieff et
above theupper limitof thereferencerange.Massive
al,1998;Dixon and Mooney,1999a) (see Figure
increases in apparent total T4 concentrationpose
10.14).It is therefore usually recommended as a first
little diagnosticproblem assuchresultsraise suspi-
linetesttogetherwitha total T4estimation(Figure
cionofT4AAs,particularlyifothertestresultssupport
10.17).The specificity ofcombined decreased total T4
hypothyroidism.However,thereal problem is those
and increased cTSH is>95% in most published stud-
casesinwhichmeasuredT4isincreased fromitstrue
ies.Thiscombination of tests has therefore become
subnormal value into the reference range.lf suspi-
the halmarkfor theinitial laboratorydiagnosisof hy-
ciousof thepresenceof T4AAs(forexample if the
pothyroidism.Togetherwith theuseoffreeT4and
86
Chapter 10 Canine hypothyroidism
TgAAas second line diagnostictests,thevastmajority
total T4 and concurrent referencerange cTSH
of dogs canreliablybe categorized as either hypothy-
values.
roid or euthyroid.
The existence of varying isoforms of cTSH has
been postulated to explain referencerange cTSH
values in hypothyroid dogs,although this isyet to
Total T4
TotalT4
be reliably documented indogs.
decreased
normal
It has also been suggested that pituitary
CTSH
·Non-thyroidal illness
.Euthyroid
exhaustion may occur in longstanding cases of
normal
·Drug therapy
hypothyroidism with consequent reduction in
· (20%hypothyroid dogs)
cTSH secreting capacity.This too is unproven as
littleworkhasbeendone toevaluatechangesin
Recommend wait
End thyroid investigation
cTSH concentrations at varying stages of thyroid
and retestor
dysfunction in dogs.
perform second
line testing
CTSH
Hypothyraid
Suiphonamide therapy
High canine TSH values in euthyroid dogs:Ele-
increased
Recovery from
vated cTSHvaluesin euthyroid dogs arenotasgreat
non-thyroidal illness
a diagnostic concern as referencerange values in
T4 antibody interterence
Treat with
Withdraw sulphonamide
a variety of reasons.
T4therapy
therapyand retest; wait
recovery complete and
cTSH may be increased in the early stages of
retest; perform free T4
thyroiddisease forsome timebeforetotal T4
measurement to exclude
values decline and clinical signs become
antibody interference
apparent. This so-called compensating
hypothyroidism may explain increased cTSH in
10.17
Use anc interpretaticnof total T4and cTSH as
some euthyroid dogs. However, by definition
first line'endocrine tests.
such dogs should notbeexhibiting clinical signs
and so are unlikely to undergoroutine testing in
ReferencerangecanineTSHvaluesinhypothyroid
practice.Such animals may occasionally be
dogs: While circulating cTSH concentrations are in-
identifiedduringroutinescreeningprogrammes
creased above thereferencerange in themajority of
such as those used byanumberof breed clubs.
hypothyroid dogs, a significant proportion have refer-
Avarietyofdrugspotentiallyresult inincreased
encerangevalues.Avariety ofpossible explanations
cTSH concentrations.Oneof the mostcommonly
have been proposed.
encountered drugswith thiseffect are the
potentiated sulphonamides(Panciera andPost,
Although not documented in all studies,there is
1992).These drugs interfere with thyroid
some evidence that concurrent NTlscan
hormone synthesiswithin the thyroid gland itself
decreasecTSH concentrationsinto thereference
andpotentiallycausea temporaryreversible
range in hypothyroid dogs.In order to avoid any
state of thyroid hormone deficiency associated
possible interference,the concurrent illness
with increased circulating cTSHvalues.There
shouldbe treatedor at leaststabilizedpriorto
appearstobesomevariation ineffect depending
testing for hypothyroidism.
on the specificpreparation,dose and the
Concurrent drug therapy,particularlywith
duration of therapy but itisclear that total T4
glucocorticoids,isknown to suppress cTSH
values can decrease and cTSHvalues increase
valuesand may decrease concentrationsintothe
withinoneandtwoweeksof starting therapy,
reference range in hypothyroid dogs. Drug
respectively.The suppressive effect can be
withdrawal shouldbeattemptedbeforecTSH
profound, and prolonged treatment may induce a
measurement.
clinical state ofhypothyroidism.Withdrawal of the
Some studieshave suggested random fluctuation
drug usuallyresults in completeresolution within
ofcTSHinto thereferencerangeatvarioustimes
weeks.A transient reboundperiod duringwhich
during the dayalthougha definite circadian
TSH is temporarily increased after cessation of
rhythm hasnot been identified.Repeated cTSH
glucocorticoid therapy is recognized in humans
measurement may beuseful if this is suspected.
and may occur in dogs. A mild increase in cTSH
Inappropriately lowcTSH values are expected in
has alsobeenreported asa consequenceof
central hypothyroidism.However,in contrast to
phenobarbital-containing anticonvulsant
the situation in humans,the current cTSH assay
treatment but the increase is not of any
isincapableof distinguishing lowfromreference
diagnostic significance.
rangevalues.As aresult central hypothyroidism
Therecoveryphaseof NTishas alsobeen
could be associated withreferencerange values.
associatedwith temporary increases in
circulating TSH concentrations in both humans
are centrallymediated,sucha diagnosis could
and dogs.This is presumed to reflect increased
not account fortheproportion of dogswithlaw
demandfor thyroid hormoneproductionwith the
87
Chapter 10 Canine hypothyroidism
progressivereturn to euthyroidism.Testing
cases,afree T4concentration mayhelp differentiate
thyroid functionduringknownrecovery fromNTls
genuine hypothyroidism(lowvalues)fromNTls(refer-
should thereforebeavoided,ifpossible,until the
encerange values).
animal is clinically stable.
Referencerange free T4values in hypothyroid
FreeT4
FreeT4isthemetabolicallyactive fractionof T4and
freeT4valueswithin thereferencerange,albeit at the
representsthehormonefraction that isavailablefor
lowend.Thisprobably reflects an attempt to maintain
tissue uptake.Theoretically its measurement should
adequate free T4concentrations in the faceof early
provide themost accurate assessmentof cellular thy-
hypothyroidism.There is some evidence that hypothy-
roid status.The advantages and disadvantages of this
roiddogswith low-normal freeT4valueshavemore
test are summarized in Figure 10.18.
thyroidalreservetissue than thosewithsubnormal free
T4 values.
Advantages
LowfreeT4values in euthyroid dogs:There is no
Less atfected byNTls and drug therapiesthan totalT4
Decreasedvalues aremore specific for hypothyroidism than totalT4
therapiesandNTls,albeit toalesserextent thantotal
Disadvantages
T4.However,free T4 concentrations are only
suppressed by severe illnesses.Recent studies have
Mustbemeasured byequilibriumdialysis
also demonstrateddecreased freeT4concentrations
More expensive than total T4
Canalsobe decreased in severeNTls orbycertain drugs
following treatmentwithphenobarbital-containing
May be low-normal in early hypothyroidism
anticonvulsantmedications.Testingforhypothyroidism
should be delayed until after such therapy is
The advantages and disadvantages cf free T4
withdrawn.However,given the nature of the cases
10.18
measurements for the diagnosis of
receiving such medications,complete withdrawal of
hypothyroidism in dogs.NTI,non-thyroidal ilness;T4,
the drug is often notachievable.Efforts should
thyroxine.
bemade toreduce thedosebutultimatelythe
interpretation of results from dogs receiving these
Assaymethods:ThemethodusedtomeasurefreeT4
therapies should be approached with caution.
concentrationsisimportant.Onlyonemethodcurrently
Hyperadrenocorticism andexogenousglucocorticaid
inroutineuse,which employs equilibrium dialysis,is
therapyalsohavethecapacitytolowercirculating free
considered to bea genuine free hormone method.
T4 values.
Using this techniquemeasurement of freeT4 is a two-
step procedure.The test takes longerto complete (24-
Thyroglobulin autoantibodies (TgAAs)
48 hours)and iscorrespondinglymore expensivethan
Thyroglobulinis a large molecularweight glyco-
methodsfortotal hormone analysis.
protein and a normal component of the thyroid gland.
The spontaneous developmentofantibodies to
The first step involves the dialysis of the test
normal thyroid tissue,including thyroglobulin is a
sample across a membrane impermeable toT4-
recognized finding in dogs with lymphocytic
binding proteins and anti-T4 antibodies.Only free
thyroiditis.The development of TgAAs is caused
hormonecancrossthemembraneinto the
byinflammation and destructionof the thyroid gland
dialysate.
with consequent exposure of antigenic thyroid
Thesecond stepistosubject thedialysateto an
components.As may be anticipated from the under-
ultra sensitive T4radioimmunoassay.
lying pathology,TgAAs are only one of several anti-
bodiesproduced during theprogressionof lymphocytic
Most non-dialysis methodsare not true free hor-
thyroiditis in dogs.However,inrecent years areliable
mone assays,but attempt indirectlyto estimate free
canine-specific method for TgAA estimation has
hormone concentration.The most common of these
become commercially available.The advantages
are analoguemethodswhichprovidenomoreinforma-
and disadvantages of this test are summarized in
tion than a total T4 estimation alone.
Figure10.19.
Diagnosticperformance:FreeT4is theoretically not
affected byNTls.The diagnosticspecificity of free T4
Advantages
is>90%(Dixon and Mooney, 1999a) which is signifi-
Reliable method formeasurement now available
cantlybetter thanfortotal T4 (i.e.itisless likelytoresult
Apositiveresult confirms thyroid pathology
ina false-positive diagnosis ofhypothyroidism)(see
Figure 10.14).The sensitivity of free T4 for hypothy-
Disadvantages
roidismisapproximately80%,whichislowerthanthe
Provides no assessment of thyroid function
corresponding value for total T4.If free T4 measure-
Anegativeresult does notruleout hypothyroidism
mentisused asasecondlinediagnostictestitspoorer
sensitivityisrelativelyunimportant.Itishowever,par-
10.19
The advantages and cisadvantages of
ticularlyuseful incaseswheretotal T4isdecreased
thyroglobulinautcantibody measurementsfor
arcTSHremainswithinthereferencerange.Inthese
the diagrosis of hypothyroidism in dogs.
88
Chapter 10  Canine hypothyroidism
Diagnostic performance: The principal limitation of
Other dlagnostic tests
TgAA measurement is that not all dogs with hypothy-
roidism have lymphocyticthyroiditis (Dixon and Mooney.
Totaf triodothyronine (total T3): The diagnostic ac-
1999b) and even in those that do, TgAA positive dogs
curacy of total T3 is poorer than total T4 and as such
evantually become TgAA negative given time. There-
offers no real practical advantages. Consequently total
fore, whilst a positive TgAA result provides strong
 evidence of thyroid disease, a negative result does not
rule it out.
fact that only approximately half of the circulating
Identification of TgAAs provides no information on
fraction is directly secreted from thethyroid gland itself,
thyroid function. The test is therefore not recom-
the rest being produced by deiodination of T4 in the
mended for use alone, but is of value when used
peripheral tissues. This deiodination process is itself
alongside other markers of thyroid function such as
inhibited by NTis and the overlap between T3 values
total or free T4 and cTSH. TgAA measurement is of
from hypothyroid dogs and those with NTls is therefore 
particular value in cases with discordant T4 and cTSH
even more marked than is the case with total T4.
results. Since the presence of TgAAs is highly specific
for lymphocytic thyroiditis, a positive result is of par-
Dynamic thyrold functlon tests: A number of dy-
ticular help in those cases with the anticipated de-
namic thyroid function tests have been used in the
paoadxaun ing 'sanien tl aa io eioi ui asesia
past. With the advent of cTSH and free T4 tests, these
reference range cTSH resuits. Another advantage of
have largely fallen out of favour.
TgAA estimation is that it is unaffected by concurrant
 drug therapy. Measurement of TgAAs as a second
 The TSH response test has traditionally been
line test is frequently recommended in both these
considered the 'gold standard' for diagnosing
 situations.
canine hypothyroidism. Intravenous
administration of a supraphysiological dose of
Positive JgAA results in hypothyroid dogs: More
exogenous TSH, usually of bovine origin, results
than one-third of all hypothyroid dogs have a positive
in maximal stimulation of the thyroid gland.
TgAA result (Nachreiner et al.. 1998; Dixon and
Measurement of circulating total T4 values before
Mooney, 1999b). However, epidemiological analysis
and after administration provides an assessment 
 of the prevalence of TgAAs has shown considerable
 of the functional reserve capacity of the thyroid
breed and age variation (Nachreiner et ail., 2002).
and minimal stimulation is expected in 
Positive TgAA results peak in dogs between 4 and 6
hypathyroidism. This test remains more reliable
years of age. This subsequently declines, presum-
than any other single individual test for canine
ably as the thyroid tissue becomes ablated and the
hypothyroidism. However, supplies of bovine
 antigenic stimulus decreases. Certainly elderly dogs
TSH have become progressively more difficult to
>10 years of age are much less likely to have positive
source and some researchers have been
TgAA results, making testing of less value in older
investigating the value of recombinant human 
animals. Certain breeds are over-represented for
TSH as an alternative. However, the advent of
lymphocytic -thyroiditis and TgAA estimation is of
newer more reliable combined tests of canine
particular value in thase animals. Breeds with a higher
thyroid status, including free T4 by dialysis, cTSH
than average incidence of positive TgAA results in-
 and TgAA have largely obviated the need for
clude English Setters, Dalmatians, Basenjis, old
such a test in routine general veterinary practice.
English Sheepdogs, Boxers, Golden Retrievers
The TRH response test, whereby total T4 is
and Shetland Sheepdogs. The likelihood of identify-
measured before and after TRH administration,
ing a positive result increases considerably when
was once recommended as a useful alternative
testing a predisposed breed of the appropriate age
to the TSH response test. Unfortunately the TRH
 range and this should be borne in mind when select-
response test is considerably less reliable than
ing a second line test, and perhaps choosing between
the combined use of the currently available
free T4 and TgAAs.
baseline tests and therefore it is not
recommended. At best, a good response to TRH
Positive TgAA results in euthyroid dogs: Meas-
can confidently exclude hypothyroidism.
urement of TgAAs may also be used as a marker of
However, the iack of T4 response to TRH is not
thyroiditis in clinically healthy dogs. This is now used
confirmatory of hypothyroidism, being a common
by a large section of the dog breeding community to
finding in both a wide variety of NTls and in dogs
identify animals predisposed to hypothyroidism prior
receiving certain medications (Frank, 1996).
to breeding. In ane study which followed TgAA posi-
A number of investigators have evaluated the
response of TSH to TRH administration, primarily
5% of them developed hypothyroidism and a further
as a method of assessing pituitary function in
15% developed other abnormalities suggestive of
cases where central hypothyroidism is
worsening thyroid function (usually increased cTSH
suspected. in these studies, circulating cTSH
values). Whilst more extensive studies are required,
peaks approximately 20 minutes following 
TgAA estimation appears to be a potentially useful
 administration of intravenous TRH. A number of
marker for the subsequent development of thyroid
protocols have been used for this test, but 
dysfunction.
relatively low doses of TRH appear to be capable
89
Chapter1o Canine hypothyrcidism
of causing significant pituitary TSH stimulation
optimal,coupledwiththefactthatitspharmacological
whilstminimizingany side-effects.Apositive
actionsmayimprove some clinical signsin euthyroid
cTSHresponse toTRH in dogs isconsistent
dogs.Thyroid hormone supplementation suppresses
with‘normalpituitaryfunctionalthough thereis
thyroid function through negative feedback.Conse-
some doubtover the interpretationofapoor
quently,prolongedTHRTinaeuthyroiddogessentially
response.Humanswithprimaryhypothyroidism
creates a stateof functional hypothyroidismwhichcan
exhibitan exaggerated andprolongedTSH
takeweeksormonthstoresolveafterwithdrawalof
response to TRH compared with healthy
treatment.Theuseof a therapeutic trial isonly appro
humans.However,studies in dogs have failed to
priatewhen the indexof suspicionforhypothyroidism
demonstrate any sucheffect(Scott-Moncrieff and
remainshigh but where diagnostic testing hasrepeat-
Nelson,1998).
edlyproven equivocal.Therapeutictrials should be
considered alastresort'in these situations.
Therapeutictrial asadiagnostictest
A true therapeutic trial for diagnosticpurposes
TheuseofaT4therapeutictrialasadiagnosticmethod
involvessetting anobjective,quantifiable target by
hasprovedpopular amongst some cliniciansbut only
whichsuccessorfailure oftherapywillbe judged.
has merit in a small subsection of patients and only if
starting treatment and then,subject to confirming ad
used appropriately.Unfortunately,‘therapeutic trials’
equate dosing and satisfying thepre-defined targets.
as they aremostcommonlyperformed are oftenused
withdrawing therapy.This cessation is performed to
primarilytoremove thedifficultiesand/orexpense that
ensurethatany clinicalresolution is genuinely aconse-
isassociatedwithdiagnostictesting and to‘seewhat
quence of the treatment.Cessation of therapy should
happens'.This approach is not recommended. The
coincidewithareturn of clinical signs,which are then
principaldisadvantagesofatherapeutictrialarethe
expectedtoresolveiftherapyisreinstituted.Aprotocol
subsequent diagnosticproblems that thyroid hormone
foruse ofa therapeutictrialasadiagnostictestisgiven
supplementation cause,if the clinical response is sub-
in Figure 10.20.
10.20
Schematicrepresentationof
Determineobjectivegoal of therapy and
steps in the use of a
therapeutic trial for diagncsing
timescalewithinwhichassessmentwillbemade
(e.g.>50%hairregrowthwithin10weeks)
hyoothyroidism.T4,thyroxine;
TSH, thyroic stimulating hormone.
Starttreatment
Therapeutic
dosing inadequate
Confirm adequate dosing with
6-hourpost-administration total
T4andcTSHmeasurements
Increase dose and
wait7-10days
Continue treatment until either
clinical goals met or pre-
determined time limitreached
Clinical goals achieved
ou
yes
Withdrawtherapy
Clinical signs recur?
ou
Hypothyroidism
ruledout
Restart therapyusingprevious
dosageregimen
Clinical signs resolve?
no
yes
Hypothyroidism confirmed
06
Chapter 1o Canine hypothyroidism
Treatment and therapeutic
there isusually a smallincrease indoserequirement
monitoring
with time,although thefinal doserequiredvariescon-
siderablybetween differentindividuals.Dosingbased
Choice ofpreparation
onbody surfaceareamaybemorephysiological but in
All hypothyroid dogsrequire THRT and a variety of
practice a bodyweight-based system isadequate.
preparations are available.Various crudethyroid prod
Time ofadministration
uctsderived fromdesiccatedporcine,ovineorbovine
thyroid glands have beenused.However, synthetic
Thereisnocircadianreleaseof T4inhealthy dogs and
products arepreferable astheyhaveamore consistent
therefore thereisnonecessityto treat atanyparticular
bioavailability and longershelf-life.The useofgeneric
timeofday.However,morningdosingisrecommended
products is not advised because,licensing issues
toassistwith thesubsequentcollectionofmonitoring
samples as they are required 6 hours post-treatment.
aside,these products are reported to have a more
variablehormonecontentandresultinpeakthyroid
Clinical monitoring
hormoneconcentrationslowerandmorevariable than
Inmostrespects,it should not bepossible clinicallyto
those achievedwithproprietaryproducts.
differentiateoptimallytreatedhypothyroiddogsfrom
Both T3 and T4-containing products,as well as
normalhealthydogs.However,thetimetakentoachieve
combination products,have been marketed for the
anoptimal clinical responsevariesbetweenbody sys-
treatment of hypothyroidism.However, synthetic so
tem affected and theadequacyof therapy.
diumlevothyroxine therapyis the treatment of choice
asT4istheprincipal secretoryproductof the thyroid
Clinical signs
gland and isthephysiological‘pro-hormone'for the
Generally,metabolicsignssuchasmental dullnessand
morepotent T3.Re-establishment of normal circulat-
lethargyare amongst the first toimprove,oftenbeng
ingT4andT3concentrationsisthereforebestachieved
dramaticallybetterwithin7daysofstartingtreatment
by administration of T4. In the UK the only licensed
(Figure 10.21). Often, it is only after treatment com-
productfor treatmentof hypothyroidismis oral sodium
levothyroxine(Soloxine,ArnoldsVeterinaryProducts).
comes apparent. Improvements in cardiovascular
Anumberof syntheticT3productsforTHRTare
function and ECG changesshouldoccurduring thefirst
available outside theUK.However,T3administration
8weeksof treatment,although somecaseswill take
circumvents thenormal physiological process of T4
longer.Weight loss is aconsistent feature of successful
deiodination to T3.Consequently whilst circulating
treatment and a 10%weight reduction can be expected
total and free T3 concentrations maybewithin the
within3months ofstarting therapy.Treated dogscan
therapeutic range after T3 administration, total and
alsobeexpected tobecome moreactive and athletic.
freeT4 concentrations may remain subnormal.Admin-
presumablyasaconsequenceof the combinationof
istration of purely T3-containing products may result in
improved mental alertnessandweight loss.
adequate concentrations in organs such as theliver,
kidneys and heart which derive their T3 from the
circulation.However,thebrainandpituitaryglandmay
be deficientinT3ifcirculating concentrationsof freeT4
are subnormalConversely,ithasbeen suggestedthat
administratian of sufficient T3 toprovide adequate
brain andpituitary concentrationsmayresult in exces-
sive concentrations in other organs.
Choice ofdosingregimen
Dosing frequency
(a)
Manyauthorsrecommendtheuseofbidor even
occasionallytid dosing regimens.However,the clinical
response to sid therapy is usually excellent as long as
adequate peak circulating hormone concentrations
are achieved. This approach assists owner compli-
ance and isless expensive.Whilst the use of divided
dosing certainlyresultsinlessfluctuationof circulating
T4 concentrations,compared with administration of
thesametotaldose asasingle dailybolus,thebiologi-
cal action of thethyroid hormonesfarexceeds thatof
theplasmahalf-life.Thispresumably explains the
clinical successof daily therapy.
Dose
(b)
A starting THRT dose of 0.02 mg/kg/day isrecom-
10.21
Appearance of a hypothyrcid dog (a)before
mended indogs,withsubsequent adjustmentsbased
and(b)after successful thyroid hormone
on the results of monitoring test results.On average
replacement therapy.
91
Chapter 10 Caninehypothyroidism
Dermatological improvements canbe expected to
TotalT4
occurwithin1monthofstartingtreatment.Itiscommon
Laboratorymonitoringisaimedprimarilyatidentifying
foraperiodof increasedhair losstoprecederegrowth.
peakcirculating totalT4concentrationandconfirming
This apparentworseningmayconcernsomeowners
the expected decreaseincTSHvalues.Total T4meas-
urements are currentlypreferredoverfreeT4meas-
shedding in advanceof normal hairreplacement.It
urementsformonitoring purposesforthe simplereason
thatclinical resolutionhasbeencorrelatedwithspe-
phase oftreatment.Significanthairregrowthshould be
cific therapeutic ranges for total T4 but not free T4
obvious within 3 months of starting treatment although
values.Whilstit isprobable that freeT4fluctuation is
completeresolution maytakeafurther2-3months
lessmarkedfollowingtreatment thanistotal hormone
(Figure 10.22).It is common for the new hair to be
concentratian,peakcirculatingtotalT4measurement
lighterin colour thantheoriginal haircoat.Thecause
is satisfactory.Total T4determinations alsohave
of this is unclear but it appears toresolve over subse-
the advantage of being less expensive than free T4
quent follicular cycles.
measurement.
Hypothyroid dogs receiving sid treatment have a
Hairregrowth
markedincrease in circulating total T4valueswhich
10.22
following
peaks approximately6hourspost-treatment and then
thyroicreplacement
progressively declines until the next day's dose is
therapy.The tail shown is
administered(Figure 10.23).Inorder to identifypeak
that secn in Figurc 10.7
total T4values,itistherefore essential thatsamples
after thyroidhormone
are collected appraximately six hourspost-pill admin-
replacement therapy.
istration.To date there hasbeen only one study corre-
lating clinical performance andblood hormone
concentrations and this is used as the basis for the
recommendationsprovided(Dixon et al.,2002).Opti-
malpeakcirculating total T4 concentrationsshould be
in theregionof50-60nmol/l indogsreceiving sid
therapy.Values<35nmol/lareusuallyassociatedwith
an inadequate clinical response and an increase in
dosageisindicated.Markedincreases inpeaktotal T4
to90-100 nmol/1orgreaterareunnecessaryand
although dogs are usuallyresistant to severe clinical
thyrotoxicosis,suchvaluesshouldprobablyprompt a
decrease in the dose used.The magnitude of dose
The response of neurological signs to adequate
alterations is usuallydictatedby thenext available
THRTismore variableandsometimespoorerthanthat
tabletsize,eitherupordown.Thisisa fairlyempirical
ofother affected systems.Inhumanhypothyraidpa-
method but is adequate in most cases.
tients, some neurological abnormalities take several
yearstocompletelyresolveand thesamemaybetrue
Plasma total T4
for dogs.However,peripheral neuropathies typically
concentration (nmol)
improve within1-3monthsof starting treatment al-
80
thoughmildvestibularnerveabnormalitiesmaypersist
for4monthsormore.CNSsignsareexpectedtotake
longer to resolve although some,if not complete，
improvementcanbeexpectedwithin 6months.There
0
is limited evidence of improvement in laryngealparaly-
sis and megaoesophagus in affected dogs,but this
maymore likelyreflect the dubious causal linksbet-
ween theseconditions and hypothyroidism.Although
many dogspresentingwithmyxoedemacoma will not
6
81012
survive,those thatdo canbe expected to startimprov-
4
品
Time from treatment(hours)
ingoverthefirstfewdaysof intensivecare.
10.23
Schematicrepresentation of the variation in
Laboratorymonitoring
circulating total T4concentration after
administration of once daily synthetic I-thyroxine toa
Theultimategoalof therapyisclearly completereso-
hypothyroid dog.T4,thyroxine.
lutionof clinical abnormalities.However,therearenow
alsowelldefinedlaboratorygoalsthatcanbeexpected
Themeasurement of pre-pill or‘trough'T4values
to correspond with a good clinical resolution.Thera-
isstill used bysome clinicians.Therationaleforthis
peuticmonitoring canbeperformedwithin2weeks of
is toensure that T4valuesdonotfall substantially
starting therapyor after making subsequent dosage
beneath thereferencerangeindogs receiving THRT.
alterations,allowing fairlyrapid progresstowards iden-
However,maintenance of reference range T4 con-
tificationofafinalmaintenancedoseof THRT(Dixonet
centrations is not essential due to the prolonged
al.,2002).
biological half-lifeofT4comparedwithitscirculating
92
Chapter. 10  Canine hypothyroidism
half-life. Given the clinical studies which have corre-
improvement, should prompt consideration of an un-
[ated clinical resolution with peak T4 values there
derlying cause and an increase in drug dosage if
appropriate, foilowed by monitoring a fortnight later.
trough T4 measurements.
This process should be repeated until hormone
concentrations and/or clinical improvements are
Canine TSH
acceptable. Dogs with underlying gastrointestinal
Measurement of cTSH alongside total T4 inevitably
malabsorptive disease may demonstrate an increased
increases the expense of therapeutic monitoring. How-
THRT dose requirement to achieve adequate circu-
ever, is measurement is usually recommended as
lating hormone concentrations. Similarly, dogs re-
cTSH provides a longer-term assessment of the ad-
 ceiving concurrent glucocorticoid therapy may require
equacy of treatment, unlike total T4 which only pro-
a slight increase in dosage to achieve optimal control.
vides information concerning treatment on that particular
However, there is normally wide variation in dose
day. Measurement of cTSH can therefore assist in
requirements between individual hypothyroid dogs in
identifying poor owner compliance, i.o. where a par-
any case, and no alternative to appropriate clinical
ticular effor to administer the medication is made only
and laboratory monitoring followed by review of the
THRT dosage regimen.
on days corresponding to the monitoring visit. Unfortu-
that do not have increased pre-treatment cTSH values,
measurement during THRT is unlikely to be of any
Potential complications
additional value.
It is known that dogs are particularly resistant to the
cTSH values usually decrease quickly after the
thyrotoxic effects of excessive T4 supplementation,
institution of THRT back into the reference range, and
with some studies requiring up to 20 times the standard
frequently to the lowerend of that range. cTSH appears
dose of T4 to induce clinical thyrotoxicosis. However,
to be highly sensitive to the suppressive effects of
there is undoubtedly considerable inter-individual vari-
THRT such that suppression of cTSH may be achieved
ation although the reason for this remains unclear.
without achieving optimal clinical control. Therefore,
When they do occur, the clinical signs of thyrotoxicosis
whilst maintenance of an increased or high-normal
may include polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, panting,
cTSH value is strong evidence of suboptimal therapy.
weight loss, hyperactivity, tachycardia and pyrexia.
suppression of cTSH does not necessarily confirm
Most signs should resolve within a few days of with-
 adequate treatment.
drawing therapy.
A gradual introduction of THRT has been recom-
mended in dogs with decreased ability to metabolize
Routine serum biochemistry and haematology
T4 and which may be at increased risk of thyrotoxico-
Improvements in the routine clinicopathological abnor-
sis, such as hypoadrenocorticoid, elderly and cardiac
 malities associated with hypothyroidism folowing the
patients. However, these guidelines are taken from
instigation of THRT can be expected to occur broadly
human protocols and there is litle published evidence
in parallel with the clinical response. Circulating chol-
of complications associated with THRT in dogs with
esteroi and triglyceride values decrease dramatically.
concurrent illness. Nevertheless, one particular situ-
and within just 2 weeks of starting therapy may be
ation where caution is recommended is the treatment
within or approaching the reference range. Whilst RBC
of dogs with hypothyroidism and concurrent hypo-
values also start to improve quickly, this change is
adrenocorticism. A rapid increase in metabolic re-
ongoing and RBC values cantinue to increase during at
quirements is potentially dangerous in these dogs,
least the first 3 months of THRT. Fructosamine con-
cenfration decreases significantly following the start of
THRT as protein turnoverincreases(Dixon etal., 2002;
established and any life-threatening complications
of the Addison's disease resolved. The treatment of
 Reusch et al., 2002). This phenomenon is also recog-
hypothyroid dogs with concurrent insulin-dependent
uj abueyo Aue Aq pasneo jou s! pue sueuny u! pezju
diabetes mellitus may result in a reductian in the
 glycaemic control per se. Mild reductions in ALP activ-
animal's insulin requirement and alterations in the
ity are also reported. it is presumed that this reflects the
treatment of the diabetes should be anticipated be-
progressive normalization of hepatic metabolism in-
cluding the mobilization of hepatic lipid deposits once
fore starting thyroid hormone replacement.
THRT starts and weight loss begins.
Thyroid hormone supplementation in
Monitorlng intervals
myxoedema coma
It is recommended that monitoring samples for total T4
Apart fram the symptomatic treatment outlined above,
 and cTSH are collected fortnightly until adequate circu-
thyroid hormone supplementation is required in cases
lating hormone concentrations are achieved. If good
of myxoedema coma. Due to the decreased metabolic
clinical control is maintained then manitoring every
rate and potential hypovolaemia/dehydration, neither 
4-6 months thereafter is probably adequate.
 oral nor subcutaneous or intramuscular routes of
administration are adequate, at least initially. Sodium
Therapeutic failure
levothyrox:ne should be administered intravenously at
 Failure to achieve therapeutic circulating hormone
a dose of 5 μg/kg every 12 hours. Once stabilized, oral
concentrations, or absence of the expected clinical
administration can be substituted.
86
Chapter 10  Canine hypothyroidism
References and further reading
in Smafl Animal Practice 17, 129-132
Kantrowitz LB, Peterson ME, Trepanler LA, Melian C and Michols R
(1999) Serumttal thyroxine,totaliriodothyronine,ree thyroxine,
and ihyrotropin concentrations in aplleptic dogs lreated with
 McDermolt M (1998) Thyraid-stimulating hormone stimulation
anticonvulsants, journal of the American Veterinary Medical
tests in cardiomyopathic Doberman pinschers: a retrospective
Association 214, 1804-1808
study. journal of Veterinary lnternal Medicing 12, 343-348
Kantrowilz LB, Peterson ME, Melian C and Nichols R (2oo1) Serum
total thyroxine, totaltriodothyronine, freethyroxine. andthyrotropin
occurrence af lymphocytic thyroidis in Borzoi dogs. Amarican
concentrations in dogs with nanthyroidal disease. Journal of the
Journal of Medical Genelics 22, 409-414
American Velerinary Medical Association 219, 7B5-769
 Damlnet S, Crubels S, Duchateau L, Debunne A, van Gefferi C,
Karlsbarg RP and Roberts R (1978) Effect of altered thyrold functlon
Hoybergs Y, van Bree H and de Rick A (2003) Intluence of
on plasma creatinine kinase clearance in the dog. American
acetylsallcyllc acld and ketoprafen on canine thyrold functlon
journal of Physiology 235, E614-E618
tests. The Veierinary Jouma/ 166, 224-232
Miler AB, Nelson RW, Scot-Moncrieff JC, Neal L and Bottoms GD
ploskui uo sonup jo souanjul (eooz) oa uosnbiey pue s taujweo
[1992) Serial thyrcid hormone concentrations in heallhy euthyrold
function in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internat Medicine 17,
463-472
dermatis.BritishVeterinary Journal148,451-458
Dixon RM (1999) Canine thyroid function: a clinical and
Muller PB. Wolfsheimer KJ, Taboada J, Hosgood G, Partington BP and
Dixon RMand MooneyCT[1999a)Evaluationof serumfreethyroxine
on the thyroid and adrenal axis and adrenal function tests in dogs.
and thyrotropin concentrations in the diagnosis of canine
Journal of Vetennary internal Medicine 14, 157-164
hypothyroldlsm.Journal of Small AnimalPraclice 40,72-78
Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham PA and Bowman MM (2002)
Dixon RM and Mooney CT (t999b) Canine serum thyroglobulin
 autoantibodies in health, hypothyroidism and non-thyroidalilness.
with clinical signs of hypothyroldlsm, Journai of the American
Research inVeterinaryScience66,243-246
Veterinary Medica! Association 220, 466-471
Dixon RM, Reid SWJ and Moanay CT (1999) Epidemiological,
Nachrelner RF.Resal KR, Graham PA,HauptmanJ and Waison GL
clinical. haematologicaland biochemicalcharacteristicsofcanine
(1998)Prevalenceofautoantibodiestotiyroglobulinindogswith
hypothyroidism. The Veterinary Recorg 145, 481-487
nonthyroidal illness American Journal af Veterinary Research
 DixanRM, HaidSWJ and Mooney CT (2002) Treatmentandtherapeutic
59,951-955
monitoring of canine hypoihyroidism. Journai of Smail Animal
Panciera DL (1994) Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases (1987-1992).
Praclice 43,334-340
Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation204,
Elliot DA, King LG and Zerbe CA (1995) Thyroid hormone
761-767
cqncentrations in critlcally llIntensive care patients. The Journa!
of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 5, 17-23
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 31.
935-950
function lests in dogs. Campondium of Continuing Education
 Panciera DL anc Post K (1992) Effect of oral administration of
(Small Animal) 12, 1365-1377
Ferguson DC and Peterson ME (1992) Serum free and total
lodothyronine concentrations in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.
Parads M, Sauva F, CharestJ, efsal KR,Moreau Mand Dupuis J
Ameripan Joumal of Veterinary Fesearch 53, 1363-1640
Frank LA (19g6) Comparisonof thyrotropin-releasing hormone(TRH)
thyroid function. Canadian Veterinary Journai 44, 407-412
 to thyrotropin (TSH) stimulation forevaluating thyroid function in
Peterson ME, Melian C and Nichols R (1997) Measurement of
dogs. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 32.
481-487.
Gaskill CL, Burton SA, Gelens HCJ, lhle SL, Miller JB, Shaw DH
dogs.Journaiof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
 Brimacombe MB and Cribh AE (1999) Effecis of phenobarbltal
211,1396-1402
 Reusch CE, Gerber B and Boretti FS (2002) Serum fructosamine
concentrationsindogswith hypothyroidism.Veterinary Research
Veterinary Medical Association 215, 489-496
Communications 7, 531-536
Scoti Moncnieff JC and Nelson Rw (19s8) Chahges in serum thyroid
greyhounds. American Journai of Veterinary Research62, 1130--
 slimulating hormone concentration in response lo adminlstration
1133
Gosselin SJ, Capen CC and Martin SL (1981) Histologic and
dogs, and euthyroid dogs with concurrent disease. Journat of the
 ultrastrucural evaluation of thyroid lcsions associaled with
AnericanVeterinaryMedicaAsscciation213,1435-1438
hypotlhyraidism in dogs. Veterinary Pathology 18, 299-309
Scot-Moncrieff JC, Nelson RW, Bruner JM ang Williams DA (199B)
Hall1A,Campbell KL.Chambers MD and Davis CN (1993) Effectof
Comparison of serum concentrations of thyroid-stimulating
timelhoprim/sulfamethoxazole on thyrcid function in dogs with
hormone in healthy dogs, hypothyraid dogs, and euthyroid dogs
Pyaderma. Journatofthe Amenican Vetcrinary Medical Association
with concurrent disease. Journaf of the American Veterinary
202,1959-1962
Medlcal Association 212, 387-391
JaggyA and OliverJE(1994}Neurolcgicmanifestationsof thyroid
Torres SMF, McKeever PJ and Johnston SD (1991) EIfecl of oral
disease. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal
administration of prednlsolone on thyroid function in dogs.
Practic624,487-494
American Journaf of Veterinary Research 52, 416-421
Johnson CA(1994) Reproductive maniestations of thyroid diseas0.
Vail DM. Panciera DL and Ogivie GK (1994) Thyroid hormone
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practlce 24,
concentrations in dogs with chronic weight loss, with special
509-514
JolnsonCA(2002)ThyroldlssuesInreproductian.ClinicaTechniques
Teference to cancer cachexia. Journal of Veterinary fntema!
Medlaine 8 (2) 122-127
6
Feline hyperthyroidism
Carmel T. Mooney and Mark E. Peterson
Introduction
Histopathologically the feline disorder more closely
 resembles toxic nodular goitre, the second most com-
Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis) is a multisystemic
mon cause of hyperthyroidism in human patients.
disorder resulting from excessive circulating concen-
Similar to affected human tissue, adenomatous thyroid
 trations of the active thyroid hormones triodothyronine
tissue from hyperthyroid cats retains its histopatho-
(T3) and/or thyroxine (T4). First described in cats in
 uonouny pue moub oi sanuguoo pue aouejeadde jeojboj
1979, hyperthyroidism has emerged as the most com-
 in nude mice and when cultured in TSH-free media
mon endocrine disorder of this species and a disease
(Mooney, 2002). There are a variety of known and
frequently diagnosed in small animal practice. It is
suggested causes of toxic nodular goitre in humans.
unclear if this represents a true increase in the inci-
Somatic mutations of the TSH receptor gene are im-
dence of the disease, an increased awareness of the
 portant in the human disease. However, mutations
condition by practitioners and clients, a growing pet cat
between codons 66 and 530, allowing inclusion of the
population coupled with increased longevity or a com-
transmembrane and most of the extraceliular part of
bination of these.
the TSH receptor and corresponding to the majority of
human disease, have not been found in cats (Pearce et
al., 1997; Peeters et al., 2002).
Aetiology
Altered expression of the oncogene c-ras, and 
stimulatory and inhibitory G proteins and mutations in
Benign adenomatous hyperplasia (adenoma) of one
the G,alpha-gene have been identified in hyperthyroid
(<30% of cases), or more commonly both (>70% of
 cats but their role in the pathogenesis of the disease
cases), thyroid lobes is the most common pathological
remains unclear (Mooney, 2002; Peeters et al., 2002).
abnormality associated with hyperthyroidism in cats,
Given the relatively recent increase in the preva-
occurring in over 98% of cases. Microscopically, the
lence of the disease, several epidemiological studies
 normal thyroid follicular architecture is replaced by one
have attempted to identify potential risk factors for the
 or more readily discernible foci of hyperplastic tissue-
disease but a single dominant factor has not yet been 
forming nodules ranging from less than 1mm to over
isolated (Edinboro et al., 2002; Mooney, 2002). Two
 2cm in diameter. By contrast, thyroid carcinoma is a
 genetically related breeds (Siamese and Himalayan)
rare cause of hyperthyroidism in cais accounting for
 and male cats have been variably reported to be at
<2% of cases.
decreased and increased risk of developing hyper-
Thus far the underlying aetiology remains obscure
thyroidism, respectively.
and irrespective of the study it is difficult to dissociate
Although numerous environmental factors have
cause of, from effect of, hyperthyroidism in diseased
 been associated with increased risk of hyperthyroidism,
cats. Initially because of the prevalence of bilateral
such as the use of cat litter and regular use of
thyroid lobe involvement, it was speculated that the
parasiticides, the most commonly identified factor is
disease was similar to Graves' disease, a common
consuming a diet composed entirely or almost entirely
form of hyperthyroidism encountered in human pa-
of canned cat food. In addition, certain varieties of
tients. In this disease, autoantibodies are produced
 canned cat food (fish or liver and giblet flavour) and
that bind to the thyrotropin (thyroid stimulating hor-
cans with plastic linings and easy open lids have also
mone (TSH)) receptor mimicking its activity. Initial
been implicated. Because of this dietary association,
studies in hyperthyraid cats reported that certain
 jodine has been implicated in the pathogenesis of the
 autoantibodies (thyroid microsomal and antinuclear)
disease.
were notuncommon and suggestive of an autaimmune
 The iodine content of commercial cat food has been
aetiology. However, more recent studies, using a vari-
 reported to be extremely variable and often in excess
ety of more refined techniques, have failed to identify
 of recommended allowances (Mooney, 2002). It has
thyroid-stimulating irmmunoglobulins in hyperthyroid
been postulated that wide swings in daily iodine intake
cats (Mooney 2002, Nguyen et al., 2002). Increased
 may contribute to the development of thyroid disease.
 titres of growth-stimulating immunoglobulins have been
However, although circulating free T4 concentrations
demonstrated in hyperthyroid cats but their role in the
are acutely affected by varying intake, more prolonged
 pathogenesis of the condition remains unclear.
ingestion has no apparent effect (Mooney, 2002).
95
Chapter 11Felinehyperthyrcidism
Selenium also has an importantrole in theregula-
tionof thyroidfunctioninmanyspecies and although
Finding
Cats affected
the significance is unclear,circulating values appearto
Number
Percentage
be high in cats.possibly through increased intake
Weight loss
119
(Fosteretal.,2001).There aremany othergoitrogens
that catscouldbeexposedtoeitherthroughfoodorin
Polyphagia
98
77.8
the environment that may be of greater importance in
Polyuria/polydipsia
90
71.4
this species because most are metabolized by
glucuronidation,ametabolic pathway particularlyslow
Tachycardia
78
61.9
in thecat.Thepotentiallygoitrogenicsoyisoflavones,
Hyperactivity
70
55.6
genistein and daidzein,are common constituents of
commerciallyavailablecat foodsandmaybepresent
Diarrhoea (increased frequency or
64
50.8
in concentrations sufficientlyhighto exert some bio-
volume,steatorrhoea)
logical effect (Court and Freeman,2002).
Respiratory abnormalities
48
38.1
(tachypnoea, dyspnoea, coughing,
Clinical features
Other cardiac abnormalities
43
34.1
(powerfulapexbeat,murmurs,
Signalment
gallop rhythm,arrhythmias)
Hyperthyroidismisa disease ofmiddle-aged and older
cats with an average age at onset of 12 to 13 years.
Skin lesions (patchy or regional
40
31.8
Virtuallyallcats are>4yearsof agebutonly5%are
alopecia,mats,harsh dy coat,dry
or greasy seborhoea,thin skin)
youngerthan10years at the timeof diagnosis.There
has beenarecentreportof hyperthyroidism ina kitten,
Vomiting
38
30.2
but given that the histopathological appearancewas
Moderate temperature elevation
24
19.1
different,it is probable that it represents a distinct
disease entity(Gordonetal.,2003).Despite the previ-
Decreased activity
13
10.3
ous epidemiological studies discussed above,breedor
Decreased appetite
13
10.3
sex predispositions have not been recognized in large
Congestive cardiac failure
3.2
clinical studies.
Intermittentdecreased appetite
3
2.4
Clinical signs
Ventral neck flexion
0.8
Thyroidhormones areresponsible foravariety of
actionsincluding theregulationof heat production,and
Palpable goitre
123
97.6
carbohydrate,protein and lipidmetabolism.Theyalso
appear to interact with the central nervous system
11.1
History and clinical findings in 126 hyperthyroid
(CNS)by increasing overall sympathetic drive.Conse-
cats.(Reproduced with permission from Thoday
and Mooney,1992).
quently,excess thyroid hormone affectsvirtuallyevery
organ system.
Mostcatspresentwithavarietyofclinical signs
goitrearehighlysuggestiveof hyperthyroidism,butthe
reflectingmultiple organdysfunction althoughinsome
presenceorabsenceof anyoneparticularsigncannot
cats one clinical signmaypredominate.The signsvary
confirmorexcludethedisorder.Inaddition,becauseof
frommild toseveredependingonthedurationof the
thevariety of other different signs thatcanpotentially
condition,the ability of the cat to cope with thyroid
be causedbyhyperthyroidism,it isanimportantdiffer-
hormone excess and the presence orabsenceof
ential formanypresenting complaints in oldercats.
concomitant abnormalitiesin other organ systems.
The diseaseis insidiouslyprogressive and the signs,
General appearance
whenmildmaybeconsideredbyownersaspartofthe
Almostallanimalsexhibitsignsofmildtosevereweight
generalageingprocess.Forthisreason,severalmonths
loss,despitearmalrinreasedappetiterelcting
mayelapsebeforeveterinary attention is sought.
an overallincreaseinthe metabolic rate(Figure 11.2a).
However,because of increased awareness of the
This increase inmetabolicrate maybeaccompanied
conditionandearlierdiagnosis,cats,althoughpresent-
bya mild elevation inbody temperatureorheatintoler-
ingwithsimilar clinical signsarelesshighlysympto-
ance.lf allowed to progress untreated,muscle weak-
matic than 10-15 years ago (Peterson et al,1981;
ness/wasting,fatigability.emaciationandcachexiawill
Broussard andPeterson,1995).Occasionally,a diag-
ultimatelyresult,although this can take monthsto
nosisismadebeforeownersfullyrealize that theirpet
years.Severe muscle weakness demonstrated by
isill.The historical and clinical features of thelargest
ventroflexion of the neck,although rare,has been
groupofBritishcatsreported areoutlined inFigure
described andpresumablyrelatesto hyperthyroidism-
11.1 (Thoday and Mooney,1992).
induced hypokalaemia(seebelowand Chapter 6).A
Overall acombination ofcertainclinical signs in-
fewaffectedcatsexhibit intermittentperiodsofano-
cluding: weight loss despite a normal or increased
rexiaalternatingwithperiodsof normal orincreased
appetite;hyperactivity;intermittentgastrointestinaldis-
appetite but, this is often associated with concurrent
orders;tachycardia;cardiac murmur and palpable
non-thyroidal illnessrather thanhyperthyroidismper
96
Chapter 11Feline hyperthyroidism
Decreasedrenal medullarysolute concentration
because of increasedreral blood flow
Electrolyte abnormalities(e.g.hypokalaemia)
Primarypolydipsia becauseof a hypothalamic
disturbanceassociatedwith thyroid hormone
excess.
Skin changes
Inoldercase series,skin changes were common but
usuallylessofanownerconcernthanthemetabolic
changesdescribed.Short-haired cats frequentlypre-
sentedwithunkempt matted hairpresumablybecause
of a failure to groom, and long-haired cats presented
(a)
with alopecia,eitherbilaterally symmetrical orpatchy,
presumably as a result of excessive grooming (Figure
11.3a and b).The latter has been suggested to reflect
heatintolerance.Excessivenailgrowthwithincreased
fragility hasbeendescribed but is seen lessfrequently
today.
(b)
11.2
Hyperthyroid11-year-old domestic shorthair cat
anxious facial expression.(Reprcduced with permission
fromThoday anc Mconey.1992).
se.In the absence of concurrent illness,the mecha-
nism is unclear.
b
Hyperactivity,exhibited particularly as nervous
ness,restlessness and aggressive behaviour,may be
apparent.These signs may be more obviouswhen
attemptsaremadetorestraintheanimalandare
thereforeoftenmorenoticeabletoveterinary surgeons
than toownersthemselves.
Inextremecasestremormaybeapparentand
affected cats are often described as having an anxious
or frantic facial expression (Figure 11.2b).There is
events (e.g.blood sampling) can result in overt respi-
ratory distress,cardiac arrhythmias,dyspnoea and
eventuallyextremeweakness.Hyperthyroidcatsshould
thereforebehandledappropriatelyin thepractice
(b)
environment.Aimless pacing and easilyinterrupted
11.3
（a)Hyperthyroid14-year-oldpedigreelonghair
sleep patternshave been described and thispresum-
Cat with evidence cf alopecia.(o) 13-year-old
ablyreflectsastateofconfusion,anxietyandnervous-
Russian blue cat with extensive matting.
ness(Josephand Peterson,1992).Recently,although
rare,focal or generalized seizures characteristic of
Gastrointestinal features
epilepsyhavebeendescribed.Insuchcases,there is
Gastrointestinal signs are not uncommon and usually
areductionintheseverityof theseizuresorcomplete
includeintermittentvomiting and less commonly diar-
resolution after treatmentofthehyperthyroidism
rhoea.Vomiting mayresult from a direct action of
(Joseph and Peterson,1992).
thyroid hormoneson thechemoreceptortriggerzone
or from gastric stasis. It appears to be more common in
Polyuria and polydipsia
patients from multi-cat households,usually occurs
Polyuria andpolydipsia occur in<50%ofaffected
shortlyafterfeeding and therefore may simplybe
casesbut canbe marked in individual cats.Various
related to rapid overeating.In humans,rapid
mechanisms may beresponsible including:
gastrointestinal transit contributes to theincreased
frequency ofdefecation and diarrhoea.Inaddition,
Concurrent primaryrenal dysfunction-not
malabsorption and steatorrhoea mayresult fromex-
unexpected ina groupof aged cats
cessfatintakeassociatedwithpolyphagia,rapidgas-
97
Chapter 11  Feline hyperihyroidism
 tric emptying and intestinal transit and/or a reversible
ness due to chronic thyrotoxic myopathy and de-
reduction in pancreatic trypsin secretion. In cats, many
Creased compliance af the lungs are the most probable
 of these mechanisms have not been fully investigated.
explanations.
However, orocaecal transittime, as assessed by breath
 hydrogen measurements, appears to be accelerated in
Apathetic hyperthyroidism
hyperthyroid cats compared with healthy cats and
pue uoissandap io Ayede ym uasaid Ae s
those successfully treated for hyperthyroidism
anorexia rather than hyperactivity and polyphagia.
(Papasouliotis et al., 1993; Schlesinger et al., 1993).
Affected human patients usually have severe cardiac
complications induced by thyroid hormone excess. In
Cardiorespiratory features
cats, apathetic hyperthyroidism has also been associ-
 Cardiovascular signs are comman and frequently the
 ated with congestive cardiac failure. However, concur-
most significant findings on initial physical examina-
rent severe non-thyroidal illness such as renal failure or
tion. Tachycardia (heart rate >240 beats per minute),
neoplasia may also be complicating factors. lt is impor-
powerful apex beat and systolic murmurs are the most
tant in cats presenting as apathetic cases that other
common abnormalities encountered although occa-
illnesses are looked for as they may alter the therapeu-
sionally arrhythmias, particularly ectopic atrial and
ventricular arrhythmias, have been noted. In more
thyroidism was previously recorded in approximately
recent reports, systolic murmurs have been described
10% of cases, this is less commonly seen today.
 more frequently than tachycardia, and hyperthyroidism
is probably the single most important factor for the
Palpable goitre
development of murmurs in older cats.
In healthy cats, the thyroid gland is divided into two
The cardiac abnormalities are related to direct
distinct lobes positioned on either side of the trachea
effects of thyroid hormone on cardiac muscle and
 just below the cricoid cartilage and extending ventrally
indirect effects mediated through the interaction of
over the first five or six tracheal rings. The thyroid lobes
thyroid hormones with the adrenergic nervous system
are not normally palpable. In hyperthyroid cats either
 and cardiac changes that attempt to compensate for
unilateral or bilateral thyroid enlargement (goitre) is
altered peripheral tissue perfusion. These effects usu-
invariably present. Thyroid lobes are loosely attached
ally result in a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, although
to the surrounding tissues and tend to migrate ventrally
as they enlarge, occasionally moving through the thor-
(see below). Congestive cardiac failure associated
with a gallop rhythm, pleural effusion and/or pulmonary
tissue located anywhere from the base of the tongue to
oedema (coughing, dyspnoea, muffled heart sounds,
the base of the heart is occasionally involved in the
ascites) can develop, although this is uncommon. The
pathogenesis of the condition.
cardiomyopathy of hyperthyroidism is usually revers-
 Sometimes goitre is visible but more commonly
ible. However, in some cats, cardiomyopathy persists
palpation is required. To palpate for goitre the cat is
restrained by holding its front legs in a sitting position.
 cardiac defect or thyroid-hormone related irreversible
With the neck gently extended, the thumb and fore-
structural damage. Certainly in cats that develop con-
finger are placed on either side of the trachea and
gestive cardiac failure, maintenance of treatment for
swept carefully downwards from the larynx to the
their cardiac disease is required even with successful
manubrium. It is important to avoid hyperextension of
treatment of the hyperthyroidism.
the neck or the thyroid lobes may become embedded
Mild to moderate hypertension, reversible upon
in muscle or deviate retrotracheally and therefore be-
induction of euthyroidism, has bean documented in
come more difficult to palpate.
hyperthyroid cats (Kobayashi et al., 1990). Hyperten-
When there are difficulties in palpation, visualiza-
sion may be manifested clinically as hyperaemia of the
tion of small nodules may be aided by clipping the
pinnae and mucous membranes or, by the ocular
ventrocervical area and moistening the skin with alco-
findings of sudden onset blindness and retinal haemor-
hol. Intrathoracic goitre may become palpable by hold-
rhage, oedema or partial or complete detachment
ing the animal vertically with the head pointing
(Stiles et al., 1994). However, blindness and cbvious
downward. Another method for palpation of goitre
ocular abnormalities are uncommon in hyperthyroid
 involves the clinician positioned behind the cat. The cat
cats even in the presence of hypertension (Maggia et
is maintained in a standing position. To palpate each
al., 2000; van der Woerdt and Peterson, 2000).
thyroid lobe, the head is held with one hand and the
It is possible that severe hypertension only deve-
chin and head are elevated and turned 45 degrees
from the horizontal and vertical, respectively. The tip of
failure (Elliott et al., 20o1). When hypertension is mild,
the clinician's index finger is placed in the groove
it may simply retlect the reduced tolerance of hyper-
formed by the trachea and the sternothyroideus mus-
thyroid cats to stressful situations such as veterinary
examination and may explain why typical hypertensive
down to the thoracic inlet, evaluating each side in turn 
complications are rarely seen.
(Norsworthy et al., 2002a).
 Respiratory abnommalities, chiefly tachypnoea, pant-
The presence of a cervical mass is not always
ing and dyspnoea at rest are also common but tend to
associated with hyperthyroidism as any mass in this
occur most frequently during periods of stress. In the
area could undaubtedly represent lymph node en-
absence of cardiac failure, respiratory muscle weak-
largement or parathyroid neoplasia/hyperplasia. In
86
Chapter 11  Feline hyperthyroidism
 addition, if found in an apparently euthyroid individual,
and Thoday, 20oo). The bone isoenzyme can contri-
it is possible that hyperthyroidism eventually results as
bute up to 30% of total ALP activity.
aaoas pue moib ol senuuoo ainpou ploaun aul
 Approximately 90% of affected cats have an eleva-
excessive thyroid hormone. These cats require regular
 tion in at least one of the above enzymes. The degree of
re-examination (Norsworthy et al., 2002b).
elevation is correlated with serum thyroid hormone
concentrations and can be dramatic in severely thyro-
toxic cats. However, as a consequence, the degree of
Diagnosis
elevation tends to be sublle, if present at all, in early or
mild cases of hyperthyroidism. Concurrent and distinct
A variety of procedures have been recommended for
hepaticdisease should be suspected if there aremarked
investigation of hyperihyroidism. Often these sirmply
elevations in either ALT, ALP, AST or LDH but only
lend support to the diagnosis but may be useful particu-
 mildly elevated serum thyroid hormone concentrations.
larly if concurrent disorders are suspected and an
accurate prognosis is required. Detailed diagnostic
Urine and creatinine
imaging is usually only required in cats in which cardiac
 Mild to moderate increases in serum concentrations of
failure is suspected or when a cardiac arrhythmia has
jo %oz laso isng ui puno, aq Ae aujuneao pue ean
been detected. Specific thyroid function tests are nec-
hyperthyroid cats. Such a prevalence of renal dysfunc-
essary to confirm the diagnosis.
tion is not unexpected in a group of aged cats. How-
ever, the abnormalities could be exacerbated by the
Haematology
increased protein catabolism, hypertension and the
Haematological changes are of limited diagnostic value
possible pre-renal azotaemia of hyperthyroidisrm.
 although mild to moderate erythrocytosis (increased
In hyperthyroid cats without azotaemia, the circu-
packed cell volume (PCV), red blood cell (RBC) count
lating creatinine concentration is significantly lower
and haermoglobin concentration) and macrocytosis
thanin age-matched controls (Barber and Elliott, 1996).
have been described (Peterson et al., 198t). These
This may be related to a loss of muscle mass and/or a
reduction in the rate of its formation. This effect in
ated beta-adrenergic stimulation of erythrcid marrow
lowering creatinine has implications in assessing the
and increased production of erythropoietin resulting
from increased oxygen consumption. These findings
cats (see below).
have not been confirmed in all studies (Thoday and
Mooney, 1992) but when they do occur they are clini-
Phosphate and calcium
cally insignificant.
Increased phosphate concentration without evidence
Anaemia is a rare complication of hyperthyroidism,
of azotaemia occurs in approximately 35-45% of cats
 which in humans is related to bone marrow exhaustion
(Archer and Taylor, 1996; Barber and Ellioit, 1996). In
or iron or other micronutrient deficiencies. Although
thyrotoxic humans there is increased bone metabolism
attributed to the direct effects of thyroid hormones on
body formation does occur in hyperthyroid cats and
bone, which can lead to osteopenia and pathological
 platelet size may be increased (Mooney, 2001). Clini
fractures. Hyperthyroidism is associated with increased
cally, these abnormalities appear to have little effect.
serum concentrations of the bone isoenzyme of ALP,
Not surprisingly a stress leucogram, as shown by
osteocaicin and phosphate and with a tendency to-
mature neutrophilia usualy accompanied by lympho-
wards increased serum calcium and decreased
penia and eosinopenia, iscommon. Occasionally,there
parathormone (parathyroid hormone (PTH) and ac-
is a lymphocytosis and eosinophilia, which is thought to
tive vitamin D (1,25(OH),Ds) concentrations.
relate to a relative [ack of cortisol induced by thyroid
In hyperthyroid cats, serum total calcium concen-
hormone excess.
tration is largely unaffected but ionized calcium is
decreased and circulating PTH concentration increased.
 Serum biochemistry
In addition, elevated osteocalcin and non-suppressed
1,25(OH),D;concentrations have been found in a small
Liver enzymes
(     
Mild to marked elevations in the serum concentrations
Barber and Elliott, 1996). The reasons for the differ-
of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate amino-
ences between humans and cats and the exact aetiol-
transferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and
ogy of the changes is unclear. In addition, the clinical
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) are the most common
consequences of hyperphosphataemia, ionized hy-
and striking biochemical abnormalities of hyper-
pocalcaemia and hyperparathyroidism is unknown.
thyroidism. Histopathological examination of the liver
There may be implications tor skeletal integrity; the
usually reveals only modest and non-specific changes
increased secretion of PTH necessary to maintain
potentially caused by malnutrition, congestive cardiac
lonized calcium at the low end.or below the reference
failure, hepatic hypoxia, infections and direct toxic
range might contribute to.hypocalcaemia often en-
effects of thyroid hormones on the liver (Peterson et al.,
countered after surgical thyroidectomy (see below).
1981).
However, it is now clear that both liver and bone 
Other biochemical changes
contribute to the increase in serum ALP concentrations
A number of other clinicopathological changes have
(Horney et al., 1994; Archer and Taylor, 1996; Foster
been described in hyperthyroid cats but are either
66
Chapter11Feline hyperthyroidism
clinically insignificantor rarely encountered.Blood
ential fibre shortening,is also common (Bond et al.,
glucose concentrationsmay be mildly increased pre-
1988).These changesresolve or improve following
sumably reflecting a stress response. In cases with
successful treatment of thehyperthyroidism.Rarely.
pre-existing diabetes mellitus accelerated insulin cat-
hyperthyroidism isassociatedwithadilated form
abolism increasesrequirementsforexogenous insulin
of cardiomyopathywith echacardiographic evidence
(Feldman and Nelson,1996).In addition,circulating
ofreduced myocardialcontractility and marked
fructosamine concentrationis significantly lower
in
ventricular dilation.This is usually accompanied by
hyperthyroid thaninhealthycats,probablyasaresult
evidenceof severe congestivecardiacfailure(Jacobs
of increased protein turnover(Graham et al.,1999,
etal.,1986).
Reusch and Tomsa,1999).Caution must be used
whenusing fructosamineasameansofmonitoring
Electrocardiography
diabeticcatswith concurrent hyperthyroidism.Hypo-
Sinustachycardia(approximately60%ofcases)and
kalaemiahasoccasionallybeenassociatedwithhyper-
increasedRwaveamplitude inlead Il (approximately
thyraidism and should be suspected in any catwith
30-50%ofcases)wereoriginally the most frequent
evidenceof severe muscle weakness(Nemzeket al.,
electrocardiographic abnormalitiesrecorded in hyper-
1994).
thyroid cats (Peterson et al,1981,1982).Less com-
Otherbiochemicalparameterssuchascholesterol,
mon abnormalities includedprolonged QRSduration,
sodium,chloride,bilirubin,albumin and globulin are
shortenedQTinterval,intraventricularconductiondis-
largely unaffected by the hyperthyroid state(Figure
turbancesandavarietyofatrialandventricular
11.4).
arrhythmias. More recent studies have reported a
reducedprevalenceofthesedisordersbutanincreased
Haematology
prevalenceofrightbundlebranchblock(Broussard
and Peterson,1995;Foxet al.,1999).
Erythrocytosis
Macrocytosis
Thyroidfunctiontests
Leucocytosis
Neutrophilla
The diagnosis of hyperthyroidismis confirmed bydem-
Eosinopenia
onstrating increased thyroidal radioisotopeuptakeor
increasedproduction of the thyroid hormones.
Serum biochemistry
Elevated ALT
thyroid gland.T3 is three to five times more potent than
ElevatedALP
T4but approximately 60%of circulatingT3isproduced
Elevated AST
byextrathyroidal5'-deiodinationof T4.T4istherefore
Elevated LDH
oftenconsidered tobea pro-hormoneand activation to
Azotaemia
T3 a step autoregulated by peripheral tissues.
Hyperphosphataemia
Mid hyperglycaemia
Over99%of circulatingT4 isprotein-boundwhile
approximately 0.1%isfree and metabolically active.
Overall control of thyroid hormone production is pro-
11.4
Common haematological andbiochemicel
abnormalities associated with hyperthyrcidism.
videdbyanegativefeedbackmechanismofcirculating
T4 and T3on thyrotropinreleasing hormone(TRH)
Urinalysis
from thehypothalamus and TSH from the anterior
Urinalysis is generally unremarkable but useful in dif-
pituitary.Inhyperthyroid cats thereis autonomous and
ferentiatingother diseaseswith similar clinical signs
excessivesecretionofthyroid hormonesfromthe
suchas diabetes mellitus.Urine specific gravity(SG)is
abnormally functioning thyroid gland.
variable.
Thyroidal radioisotope uptake
Radiography and cardiac ultrasonography
Hyperthyroid catsusuallyexhibit increased thyroidal
Hyperthyroidismisassociatedwithalargelyreversible
hypertrophiccardiomyopathy.Inapproximately50%
99Maspertechnetate(99mTcO-)(Petersonetal.,1981;
of cats there is evidence of mild to severe cardiac
Mooney etal.,1992a:Daniel etal.,2002).Percentage
enlargement on thoracicradiography.This is accom-
uptake or increased thyroid:salivaryratiomay be cal-
paniedbyevidence of pleural effusion andpulmonary
culated andboth are strongly correlatedwithcirculat-
oedema in cases with congestive cardiac failure.
ing thyroid hormone concentrationandprovidean
Themostcommon echocardiographicabnormalities
extremely sensitive means ofdiagnosing hyper-
include:
thyroidism.
However,apart fromexpenseand the difficultiesin
Left ventricular hypertrophy (approximately 70%
dealing withradioisotopes,sophisticated computer-
of cases)
ized medical equipment isrequired.In addition,cau-
Left atrialorventriculardilation(70%and45%of
tion is advised in interpreting results fromcatspreviously
cases,respectively)
treatedwithantithyroid drugs asradioisotopeuptake
Interventricularseptumhypertrophy(40%ofcases)
drawal(Nieckarz andDaniel,2001).Qualitative thyroid
Myocardial hypercontractility,asindicated by in-
imaging may be useful in assessment of thyraid in-
creased shorteningfraction andvelocityof circumfer-
volvement prior to surgical thyroidectomy (see below).
100
Chapter11Feline hyperthyroidism
Basal total thyroid hormone concentrations
the lowendorbelowthereferencerange ineuthyroid
Elevated circulating concentrationsof total T4andT3
cats andcanbe usedasaprognosticindicator(Mooney
arethebiochemicalhallmarksof hyperthyroidism and
etal.,1996,Petersonetal.,2001).Similarly,marginally
areextremelyspecificforitsdiagnosiswithnofalse-
elevated serum total T4concentrationsmaybe sup-
positive resultsreported.Methods for their measure-
pressed to within the mid to high end of the reference
ment arereadilyaccessible,relativelycheapand do
rangeincatswithconcurrentmildhyperthyroidism and
not involve specific sampling requirements.Radio-
severe non-thyroidal disease (Peterson et al.,2001).
immunoassay(RIA)is thepreferredmethod,but non-
Occasionally,serum total T4 concentrations are sup-
isotopic in-house and automated techniques are
pressed tothelowendof thereferencerangein
becomingincreasinglypopular.Generallythesemeth-
hyperthyroidcats thatareextremelyill.In such cases,
odscorrelatereasonablywell withresultsofRlA ana-
the concurrent illness dictates the prognosis,and the
lysisbuttechnique and laboratoryspecificreference
existence ofhyperthyroidism is of lesserclinical signifi-
ranges should always be used.Assays intended for
cance.Approximately20%of hyperthyroid cats with
humanserumareacceptablebutmustbefullyvali-
reference range circulating total T4 concentrations
dated for use with cat serumand,asin the dog,
have anidentifiableconcurrent illness,theremaining
modified to allowformeasurement of the lowercircu-
majority are usually classified asmild orearly cases.
lating concentrations of hormone in this species.
Interpretation ofreferencerange total T4values:
TotalT3concentration:SerumtotalT4andT3con-
In early or mildlyhyperthyroid cats,serum total T4
centrations arehighlycorrelated in hyperthyroid cats
concentrationswilleventuallyincreaseinto the diag-
but measurement of total T4ispreferred.Over30%of
nosticthyrotoxicrangeonretesting three tosixweeks
hyperthyroid catshaveserum total T3concentration
later. However,in some cats. a longer interval is
within the reference range (Peterson et al.,2001).
requiredanditmaybejustifiabletowaituntil moreovert
Severe concurrent non-thyroidal illness could conceiv-
clinical signs develop.Concurrent hyperthyroidism
ably play a rale in suppressing total T3,as it does in
should always be suspected in severely ilcats with mid
humans,but this appears to be uncommon in cats.
tohighreferencerange serum total T4concentrations.
The majority of hyperthyroid cats with reference
Alternatively,measurement of circulating freeT4 con-
range total T3concentrationsareclassified asearlyor
centrations may provide a means of diagnosing hyper-
mildlyaffectedandcorrespondingserum total T4con-
thyroidism in these cats.
centration isusuallywithinoronlyjust above itsrefer-
encerange(usually<100 nmol/l).Itis likely that the T3
Basal free thyroxineconcentration
concentration would increase into the thyrotoxicrange
Serumfree and total T4 concentrations are highly
in thesecatsif thedisorderwasallowedtoprogress
correlated in hyperthyroidism.However,serum freeT4
untreated.Apossible explanation forreferencerange
concentrations,as measured byequilibrium dialysis,
total T3values in hyperthyroidism is that asT4 produc-
aremore consistently(over98%ofcases)elevated in
tion begins to increase inhyperthyroid cats,there isa
hyperthyroid cats (Peterson et al., 2001).More signif-
compensatorydecreaseinperipheralconversionofT4
cantly,serumfree T4 concentrations are elevated in
to the more active T3.
95% of hyperthyroid cats with reference range total T4
valuesresulting from mild disease and hormone fluc-
TotalT4concentration:Mosthyperthyroidcatsex-
tuation or the suppressive effect of concurrent non-
hibit anelevated circulating total T4 concentrationwith
thyroidalillness.
values up toapproximately 20 times the upper limit of
Althoughmeasurement of freeT4concentrationis
thereferencerangereported.
themostsensitive diagnostic test forhyperthyroidism,
there are somevalidargumentsagainst itsuse asa
cats (approximately 10% ofall cases and 40%of cases
replacement for total T4 estimation.Free T4 concen-
withmildhyperthyroidism)haveserumtotal T4con-
trations are onlytrulymeasuredbytechniques such as
centration within the reference range (Peterson et al,
equilibriumdialysis orultrafiltration.Controversy sur-
2001).Suchvaluesareusualywithin the mid tohigh
rounds thevalidity ofothermethods,particularly those
involving analogues,foraccuratelymeasuring freeT4
cannotbeexcludedincatsbydemonstrationofasingle
concentrations,and they provide no additional infor-
referencerange total T4 concentrationalone.
mationover total T4estimations alone.
Equilibriumdialysis isthetechniquemostfrequently
TotalT4fluctuation:Inearlyormildlyaffectedcases,
used butit ismoreexpensivethanatotal T4estimation
serumtotal T4concentrationscanrandomlyfluctuate
and isnotofferedby allcommercial laboratories.In
from above towithin thereference range(Peterson et
addition,it ismoresubject toerrorsduetoinappropr
al.,1987).Non-specificfluctuationofthyroid hormones
ate sample handing (see Chapter 1). More important,
occurs in all hyperthyroidcatsbut thedegree offluctua
however,isthe lossofdiagnosticspecificitywhenfree
tionis of litle diagnosticsignificanceincatswith apre-
T4 concentration is measured,asup to12%of sick
existing markedelevation of hormone concentration.
euthyroidcatshave elevatedcirculating freeT4con-
centrations (Mooney et al., 1996;Peterson et al,
Total T4 suppression by non-thyroidal illness:
2001).These cats generally have corresponding total
Severenon-thyroidal illness is also capableof signifi-
T4valuesin thelowerhalforbelowthereference
cantlysuppressing serum total T4concentrationsto
range.Caution istherefore advised inusing serum free
Chapter11Felinehyperthyrcidism
T4measurementsbyequilibriumdialysisasthesole
avoid false-positiveresults.Generally,thetest ismost
diagnostictestforhyperthyroidism.It ismorereliableif
useful in ruling outhyperthyroidismrather than con-
interpretedwithacorresponding total T4measure-
firming its existence.
ment.Amid tohighreferencerangetotal withelevated
freeT4concentrationisconsistentwith hyperthyroidism,
TSH response test:Due to its poor diagnosticper-
whereasalowtotalandelevatedfreeT4isusually
formancethistestisconsideredbymanytobeobso-
associated withnon-thyroidal illness.
lete.ExogenousTSH is apotent stimulatorof thyroid
Inall hyperthyroidcatswithanelevatedserum total
hormonesecretion.However,serum total T4concen-
T4concentration,freeT4concentrationisconcurrently
trationsshowlittle ornoincreasefollowing exogenous
high and its measurement adds no further diagnostic
bovineTSH administrationinhyperthyroid cats.This is
information.Given theexpenseof free T4measure-
presumablybecause thethyroid glandofaffectedcats
secretesthyroidhormonesindependentlyof TSHcon-
a total T4estimation and thehighprevalenceof el-
trolor that T4isalreadybeingproducedatanear
evated total T4values inhyperthyroidcats,it ismore
maximal rate with limited reserve capacity.Catswith
costeffectivetoinitiallymeasure totalT4concentration
equivocally elevated serum total T4 concentrations
alone.lfadiagnosisisnotconfirmedconsiderationcan
tend toproduce resultswhich are indistinguishable
begiventomeasurementofthecorresponding freeT4
fromhealthyanimalsandthetestisnolongerrecom-
concentration.
mendedfor evaluating hyperthyroidism.In addition,
bovineTSHisno longeravailableforparenteraladmin-
Further diagnostictests
istration.Recombinant humanTSH hasbeen evalu-
In themajorityofhyperthyroidcatswithreference
rangetotal T4concentration,identificationofconcur-
andeffectivereplacementforbovineTSH,ithasnotyet
rent disease,repeat totalT4analysisorsimultaneous
been evaluated in hyperthyroid cats and has a signifi-
measurementof free T4,allows confirmation of the
cant cost implication(Stegeman et al., 2003).
diagnosis.Further diagnostic tests are rarelyrequired.
However,dynamicthyroidfunction testshavebeen
TRHresponsetest:TRHislessexpensive and easier
recommended in thepast ashelpful in confirming a
toobtain than TSH.Serum total T4 concentrations
diagnosis of hyperthyroidism.Protocols and interpre-
increaseminimallyafterTRHadministrationinmildly
tive adviceforthesetests areoutlined inFigure11.5
hyperthyroid cats. Compared with the T3 suppression
but nowadays should be consideredonly in catswith
test,thistest isquicker and avoids tablet administra-
clinical signs suggestive of hyperthyroidismwhen re-
tion.However,TRH is associated with transient
peated totalT4concentrationremainswithinreference
adversereactionssuchassalivation,vomiting,tachyp
range,orfreeT4analysis isunavailable ordiagnosti-
noeaand defecation.naddition,resultsof thetestare
cally unhelpful. More detailed information an these
largelyindistinguishablebetweensickeuthyroid and
tests is available elsewhere(Mooney,2001).
hyperthyroid cats with concurrent disease,and totalT4
concentrationswithinorbelow thereferencerange
T3suppressiontest:Inhealthy individuals,T3has a
(Tomsaetal.,2001).
suppressive effect on pituitary TSH secretion and
subsequentlyonT4 production by the thyroid gland. In
hyperthyroidism,because of autonomous production
Treatment
of thyroid hormonesand chronicsuppression of TSH,
the suppressive effect ofT3 is lost.Thus,serum total
Thetreatmentof hyperthyroidismis aimed atremoving
T4concentrations showminimal ornodecrease in
or destroying abnormally functioning thyroid tissue,
hyperthyroidcatsfollowing exogenousT3administra-
pharmacological inhibition of thyroid hormone synthe-
tion.Simultaneous measurementof serum total T3
sisandrelease,orameliorationof theeffectsofexcess
concentrations is required to ensure compliant admin-
thyroid hormones on peripheral tissue. Currently, sur-
istrationand adequate absorptionof the drug and thus
gical thyroidectomy or thyroid ablation using radio-
T3 suppression
TSHresponse
TRHresponse
Drug
Liothyronine
Bovine TSH
Human TSH
TRH
Dose
15-25 μg every 8 hours for 7 doses
0.5IU/kg
0.025-0.20mg/cat
0.1mgkg
Route
Oral
Intravenous
Intravenous
Intravenous
Sampling times
0and 2-4 hours after last dose
1 and 6-8hours
0and4hours
Assay
Total T4
Total T4
Total T4
TotalT4
Interpretation:
Euthyroidism
<20 nmol1 with >50% suppression 
>100% increase
>100% increase
>60% increase
Hyperthyroidism
>20moll=<35%suppression
Minimal/no increase
Not determined
<50% increase
11.5
guidelinesonly.Each individual laboratory should furnish its ownreferencerange.
102
Chapter 11
Felinehyperthyroidism
Factors
Radioactive iodine therapy
Surgical thyroidectomy
Long-termmedical management
Persistentrecurrent
Rare
Possible if inappropriate
Common (dependent on owner/cat
hyperthyroidism
technique used)
compliance)
Time to achieve euthyroidism
1-20 weeks
Dependent on the prior treatment
3-15 days
used
Hospitalization
Variable(canbe prolonged)
1-10 days dependent on
Not required
postoperative complications)
Adversereactions
Minimal
Hypoparathyroidism common
Possible
Availablity
Limited
Skiled surgeonrequired
Always available
High
Intermediate
Can be significant if long-term
(cost of manitoring and treatment)
11.6
activeiodinearetheonlyreasonablecurativeoptions
thyroidism,whichmaybedesirableinseverelyaffected
available.Medical management isnon-curativeand
cases.Anaesthesia is avoided as are the peri- and
becauseof thiscannotberecommendedassole
postoperative complications associatedwith surgical
therapyfor therare cases of hyperfunctioning thyroid
carcinoma.Themajoradvantages and disadvantages
necessaryafterradioactiveiodineadministration.How-
of the main forms of therapy are outlined in Figure 11.6.
ever,medical management isnot curative,ishighly
Treatment is tailored toeach individual catconsidering
dependentonadequateownerandcatcompliance
the factors outlined inFigure 11.7.
and requires regular biochemical monitoring to ensure
theefficacyof treatment.It isthereforeoftenreserved
Severity of clinical thyrotoxicosis
for cats of advanced ageorfor those with concurrent
Presence/absence of concurrent illness
diseases,and forwhenownersrefuse,orfacilitiesare
Age of cat
not availablefor,eithersurgeryorradioactiveiodine
Access to/waiting list for radioactiveiodine therapy
Of all the treatment options,however,medical man-
Avallabilityfsiledsurgeon
agement istheonlyone withnolong-term effects and
thereforeisthebestoptionfortrialtherapywhen
deteriorationofrenalfunctionisapossibilitywhen
Potential complications
euthyroidism is restored.
Factors for consideration orior to selecting a
surgical thyroidectomytodecreasethemetabolicand
11.7
treatment modality tornyoerthyroidism in cats.
cardiaccomplicationsassociatedwithhyperthyroidism
and maybe desirable in providing symptomatic control
Medical management
whilst awaiting radioactiveiodine therapy.
Chronicmedical management is a practical treatment
The varietyof drugs,theirmode of action,dosage
option formany cats. lt requires no special facilities
regimens, indications and contraindications are de-
and isreadily available.There is arapid return to eu-
tailed in Figure 11.8.
Drug
Mode of action
Formulation
Indications
Dosage
Contraindications
Methimazole
Inhibition of thyroid peroxidase
5mg tablets
Prior to surgery
5 mgbid (tid)
Immediately prior to
catalyzedreactions
31therapy
Possiblealteration in thyroglubulin
Chronic
5 mg sid (bid)
If severe adverse
structure
management
reactions occur
Stable icdine
Inhibition of thyroid peroxidase
85 mg potassium iodate
Prior to surgery
21.25 mg tid
Alone, prior to
catalyzed reactions;inhibition of
tablets50mg free
from day 10-20
surgery;priorto 13]
hormone release
iodine)
before surgery
therapy
with propranolola
Beta,/Beta adrencceplor-blocking
10 mg tablets
2.5-5mgtid
Chronic management
agent
for 20 days
Beta, adrenoceptor-blocking agent 
25mg tablet
Prior to surgery
6.25-12.5mg
Atenolol
Aloneriortogy
25mg/5mlsyrup
Symptomatic
sid orbid
Chronic management
control
Calcium podate
lnhibits peripheral T4 toT3
500mg capsules
Prior to surgery
15 mg/kg bid
Prior t t1a therapy:
conversonreleasesiodine
chronic management
Drugs used in themeclica managementof feline hyperthyroicism.Propranolol,like atenolol,canbeused alone
for short-termsymptomatccontrol ofhyperthyroidism.
103
Chapter 11 Feline hyperthyroidism
Thioureylene antithyroid drugs
rebound effect is potentially beneficial when treating
These drugs (propylthiouracil, methimazole and
with radioactive iodine (Nieckarz and Daniel, 200t).
 carbimazole) are used for the preoperative contral of
However, a more recent study has shown that discon-
hyperthyrcidism because of their consistent reliable
tinuing methimazole for less than or longer than five
days prior to radioactive iodine therapy has no effect on
drugs currently available for chronic management.
treatment outcome (Chun et al., 2002).
Propyfthiouracil: This drug is associated with a high
Dosage regimens: In previous studies, methimazole
incidence of adverse reactions (immune-mediated
'ep/bw 9h-o1 jo abesop e le Aieo palaisuwpe
haemolytic anaemia and thrombocytopenia) and is no
divided every 8-12 hours depending on the severity of
longer recommended. Methimazole and carbimazole
the thyrotoxicosis, was successful in inducing euthy-
are therefore preferred for the treatment of hyper-
roidism in most hyperthryoid cats within 2-3 weeks
thyroid cats.
(Peterson et al., 1988).
Carbimazole was originaily recommended ata dose
 Carbimazole is available in many European
of 5 mg, at strict 8-hourly intervals (Mooney et al.
countries and Japan.
1992a). The length of time to achieve biochemical
 Methimazole is available in the USA and is
euthyroidism was correlated to the basal serum total
specifically licensed for treatment of feline
T4 concentration but usually occurred relatively rapidly
hyperthyroidism in the UK (Falimazole, Arnolds
within a mean of 5.7 days (range 3-15 days). Today
Veterinary Products).
hyperthyroid cats are diagnosed earlier and are less
severely affected than in these two previous studies.
Carbimazoie: This drug actually exerts its antithyroid
effect through immediate conversion to methimazole
low doses of carbimazole or methimazole (2.5-5 mg).
when administered orally. Serum concentrations of
Indeed for preoperative and rapid stabilization, methi-
methimazole achieved after carbimazole administra-
 mazole is licensed at a dose of 5 mgtwice daily forthree
tion are less than after a similar weight of methimazole
weeks. lf a2.5 mg preparation were available, itis likely
such that a 5 mg dose of carbimazole is appraximately
to be as successful in mildly affected cases.
equal to 3 mg of methimazole. This conversion was
 originally suggested to explain, at least in part, the
Preoperative therapy: After the initial treatment period,
differences in recommended dosages between the two
a serum total T4 concentration is assessed. If it is
agents (Peterson et al., 1988; Mooney et al., 1992b;
within the low end or below the reference range,
Peterson and Aucoin, 1993). However, given the differ-
thyroidectomy can be performed. The last dose is
ence in severity of thyrotoxicosis in affected cats today.
given on the morning of surgery. For severely affected
such differences have become less noticeable.
cats, even if biochemical euthyroidism is achieved, a
Carbimazole has also been suggested to be associ-
ated with a lower incidence of adverse reactions
before the animal is considered a reasonable surgical
(Mooney et al.; 1992a). However, the majority of seri-
candidate. The dose is adjusted as for long-term main-
ous adverse reactions arenot dose related. Carbimazole
tenance. lIf euthyroidism has not been achieved the
is tasteless whereas methimazole has a bitter taste
dose of carbimazole or methimazole can be aitered by
and may expiain the lower incidence of transient vom-
increasing the frequency of administration or altering
iting associated with carbimazole. However, methim-
 the dose in 2.5-5 mg increments. Lack of owner or cat
azole, as licensed for veterinary use, is sugar-coated
compliance should first be eliminated as a reason for a
and provided the tablet is not crushed, presumably
failure of therapy.
decreases the incidence of vomiting.
Long-term management:Once euthyroidism has been
Methimazole: By whatever means methimazole is
achieved, tha daily dosage is adjusted aiming for the
administered, it is actively concentrated by the thyroid
lowest possible dose that effectively maintains euthy-
 gland where it inhibits thyroid hormone synthesis but
roidism. In previous studies, it was shown that most
 not iodide trapping or release of preformed hormone.
cats require 10 mg methimazole per day - but a few
Methimazole has good oral bioavailability anda serum
required doses as high as 15-20 mg/day or as low as
half-life of between four and six hours. Despite this, the
2.5-5 mg/day (Peterson etal., 1988). The lower doses
intra-thyroidal residence time, where methimazole ex-
are probably adequate in the less severely hyper-
erts its effect, is likely to be up to 20 hours as it is in
thyroid cats seen today. However, only 5 mg tabiets are
:1
humans.
available, limiting the decrease in dose obtainable.
1.
The effect of prior methimazole treatment on even-
Although divided doses are most effective for rapid
tual outcome of radioactive iodine therapy is controver-
induction of euthyroidism, it has been reported that at
 sial. Ithas been suggested to enhance, worsen cr have
four weeks there is no significant difference in the
no effect on radiaiodine treatment. Although methima-
percentage of cats achieving euthyroidism using 2.5
zole does not inhibit thyroidal iodine uptake, current
mg administered twice daily versus 5 mg administered
administration adversely affects the effective half-life
once daily (Trepanier et al., 2003). Methimazole is
of radioactive iodine and is not recommended. How-
licensed at a dose of 5 mg once daily for chronic
ever, iodine uptake is enhanced in healthy cats affer
 management. Further increasing the dosing interval,
recent methimazole withdrawal and this short-term
results in recurrent hyperthyroidism. Carbimazale has
104
Chapter11Feline hyperthyroidism
beenrecommendedchronicallyatadoseof5mg
hyperthyroidcatsisnecessary.Antithyroid medication
administered twice daily(Mooney etal.,1992a).Again,
hasno effecton the underlyinglesion and the thyroid
as formethimazole,lower doses are probably ade-
quatefor thelessseverelyhyperthyroidcats.
ing an increased dosage long-term.
Elevated serum concentrationsof ALTand ALP
Route:While antithyroiddugs areroutinely adminis
declineprogressivelyaseuthyroidismis achieved(Fig-
teredorally,compliance canbeproblematicparticu-
ure11.9).Although,theirmeasurementcanbeusedas
larly in fractious orinappetent cats.Drug absorption is
alsopotentially affected by concurrent intestinal dis-
isadvised.ln somecatswithconcurrenthepatopathies,
ease and there are obvious difficulties in cats that
serum concentrations may not decline and without
vomit.Preliminary studies have shown thatmethim-
simultaneousmeasurementof total T4,anerroneous
azole ina pluroniclecithin organogel(PLO) is effective
diagnosis of poor therapeutic efficacy may be made.
inhyperthyroidcatswhenapplied transdermallyand
mayprovide auseful alternative tooraladministration
Adverse reactions:Most clinical adverse reactions
(Hoffman et al.,2003).
occur within the first three months of therapy.Mild
clinicalsideeffctsfvomitingwithorwithoutanorexi
Monitoring strategies:A serum total T4 concentra-
anddepression,occurinapproximately10-15%ofcats,
tion is measured:
usuallywithinthefirst3weeksoftherapywithcarbimazole
or methimazole.In most cases,these reactions are
3weeksaftercommencing therapyoraftereach
transient and donotrequirewithdrawalof thedrug.
dose adjustment
Earlyin the course of therapy,mild and transient
Once stability hasbeen attained every3-6
haematological abnormalities including lymphocytosis,
months oras indicated clinically.
eosinophilia orleucopenia occurinup to16%of cases
treatedwithmethimazoleandapproximately5%of
Theaimistomaintaintotal T4concentrationswithin
cases trealedwithcarbimazolebutinbothinstances
thelowerhalfofthereferencerange,ensuringthatfree
withoutany apparent clinicaleffect.
T4 concentrationsremainwithin theirreferencerange.
Self-induced excoriations of the head and neck
Clinical signsof hypothyroidism donot develop even
haveoccasionallybeendescribedusuallywithinthe
when total T4issuppressedbelow thereference
first6weeks of therapy.Permanentwithdrawal of the
range.This is presumablybecause corresponding T3
drug togetherwith symptomatic therapy isrequired.
concentrations tend toremain within thereference
More serious haematological complicationsoccur in
range, thereby, maintaining the metabolic rate. This
<5%ofcasestreatedwithmethimazoleandinclude
maybeduetoincreasedextrathyroidalconversion
agranulocytosis and thrombocytopeniaeitheralone or
from T4 or preferential thyroidal production of T3.
concurrentfyor,morerarely,mmune-mediatedhaemo-
However,if a circulating total T4 concentration is
lyticanaemia.These do not appear tobe doserelated
severely suppressed,the dosage of methimazole or
and are an equal riskwith carbimazole therapy.Com-
carbimazoleshouldifpossiblebedecreasedandth
plete blood andplatelet countshave been recom-
cat re-assessed accordingly.Regular assessment of
mendedeverytwoweeks,at leastforthefirst3months
of therapy,inordertodetect suchreactions.However,
because of the rarity and unpredictability of
0
haematological complications,assessment ofa com-
plete blood count,if clinical signsindicate,is a more
costeffectivewayof dealingwithsuchreactians.
A hepatopathy characterized by marked increases
(IU/I)
150
in liverenzymes andbilirubin concentration occurs in
<2%ofmethimazole treatedcats.Withdrawalof the
medicationand symptomatictherapyisrequired.Other,
rarelyreported side-effects,includeableeding ten-
100
dencywithout thrombocytopenia arprolongedclotting
timesandacquiredmyasthenia gravis(Mooney,2001).
Serum antinuclear antibodies（ANAs)develop in
approximately50%ofhyperthyroidcats treated on
50
highdosemethimazoletherapy(>15mg/day)forlonger
than6months（Peterson etal.,1988)Although clinical
signsof alupus-like syndrome havenotbeenreported,
decreasing the dailydosage isrecommendedasANA
5
13
17
21
formation appears to be dose-related.Similar investi-
Days of therapy
gationshavenotbeencarriedoutforcarbimazole
11.9
Theprogressive decline in serum alanine
therapy.
aminotransferase (ALT) concentrations in a
series of hyperthyroid cats that became euthyroid with
carbimazole at a dose of 5 mg tnrec times daily.
Alternativedrugs
(Rcproduced and modified withpermissian from Mooney
Occasionally alternativemedical therapies arerequired
etal.1992o).
incatsbecauseofadversereactionstomethimazoleor
105
Chapter 11Feline hyperthyroidism
for other specificreasons.For the most part, these
Surgical thyroidectomy
therapies are short-term and onlyrecommended prior
Surgical thyroidectomyis anextremelyeffectivetreat-
toamorepermanent treatment option.
mentforhyperthyroidismthatssimple,quick,curative
and costeffective.Inpractice,it isoften consideredthe
Propranololandatenolol:Thesearethemostfre-
treatmentofchoiceparticularlyifradioactiveiodineis
quentlyusedbeta-adrenoceptorblocking agentsin
unavailable.
hyperthyroid cats.Theyare used to symptomatically
control thetachycardia,tachypnoea,hypertensionand
Preoperative stabilization
Anaesthetizing hyperthyroid cats carries a significant
Althoughtraditionallyconsideredtohavenodiscernable
riskofcardiacand metaboliccomplicationsserious
effectonserum thyroidhormone concentrations,pro-
enoughtocausedeathand itisthereforenecessaryto
pranolol mayinhibitperipheral conversionof T4toT3.
control the production or effects of excess thyroid
These drugsarerecommended whenrapid control
hormone as outlined above.
of clinical signsis desirableandmaybe used eitherin
combination with stableiodine ormethimazole.Alone
Anaestheticmanagement
theyare auseful treatmentoptianfor cats awaiting
Once thehyperthyroidism iswellcontrolledavarietyof
radiation therapyorin those caseswhere there isa
routine anaestheticprotocols canbeused,with afew
delayedreturntoeuthyroidism aftertreatment be-
exceptions.Drugs which stimulate orpotentiate adren-
causeneitherhas anydirecteffectonthethyroidgland.
ergic activity, capable of inducing tachycardia and
Propranolol isa non-selectivebeta-adrenoceptor
arrhythmiasshould beavoidedwhiledrugscapableof
blockerand iscontraindicatedincatswithpre-existing
preventing such arrhythmias are preferred. Thus,
uncontrolled asthma or congestive cardiac failure.
acepromazine maleate is considered a useful pre-
Atenolol isoftenpreferredbecauseit isaselective
medicantand glycopyrroniumbromide isusuallyused
insteadofatropine.Xylazine and ketamine areavoided
whileisoflurane,if available,ispreferred overhalo
Stableiodine:Large dosesofstable iodineacutely
thane.Minimalanaesthetictimeand continualmonitor-
decreasetherateof thyroid hormonesynthesis(Wolff-
ing are essential.Ventricular arrhythmia is a possible
Chaikoff effect)andrelease,although,these effects
complication particularly if the hyperthyroidism is not
areerratic,inconsistent,short-livedandescape from
adequately controlledprior to surgery. lf such
inhibitioncanoccur.Inaddition,it is contraindicated
arrhythmiaspersistdespiteroutine anaestheticman-
priorto the administration of radioactive iodine and is
agement,propranolol(0.1 mgi.v.) may restore normal
associated with a highincidenceof adversereactions
sinus rhythm.
(excessive salivation and partial to complete ano
rexia) purportedly because of its brassy taste.For
Surgical technique
these reasonsit isnot used as sole therapy but
Aventral skinincision ismade from thelarynxto the
usuallyin associationwithbeta-adrenoceptorblock-
manubrium.The sternohyoideusand sternothyroideus
ing agents ina stagedregimen for short-term
muscles are separated byblunt dissection in the mid-
preoperative treatment (Foster and Thoday,1999).
line and gentlyretracted.Both thyroid lobes and the
Theprevalence ofside-effects canbereduced by
externalparathyroidglandscan thenbevisualized
placing the dose in a gelatin capsule. Using this
before excision（Figure 11.10).In addition, the right
combinationresultsinreferencerange serumtotal T3
recurrentlaryngeal nerve,which lies incloseproximity
concentrations in most cats and therefore clinical
to therightthyroid gland,canbeidentified andavoided.
improvement,although serum total T4concentra-
Following thyraidectomy,thesurgicalfield iscarefully
tions decrease inonly approximatelyone-third of
examined forhaemostasisbeforetheincisionisclosed
cases.Areported advantage of stable iodine is its
routinely.
apparenteffecton decreasing thevascularity and
friability of the thyroid gland but this is controversial.
Cholecystographicagents:Anumberoforal chole-
cystographic agents (e.g.calcium ipodate)decrease
lease of iodine as the drug is metabolized,and also
lattereffecthasbeenclearlydemonstrated inhyper-
thyroidcatswhereadministrationofcalciumipodate
wasassociatedwithclinicalimprovementandnormali-
zationof serum total T3concentrations inover60%of
cases (Murray and Peterson,1997).Waning of the
effect ispossibleafter3monthsoftherapyand
thereforecalcium ipodateisonlylikelytoserveas
11.10
Appearanceofbilateral thyroid lobe
an alternative to stable iodine in the short-term prepa-
enlargement al the lime ol surgery.The external
ration for surgery.Availability of calcium ipodate is
parathyroid glands areeasilyvisualized as small spherical
limited.
pale glands at the crania pcleof each thyroid lobe.
106
Chapter11Felinehyperthyroidism
Unilateral versus bilateral
In the absence of thyroid imaging, both thyroid
Bilateral lobe involvementoccursinover70%afcases
lobesshouldbecarefullyidentifiedand if abnormal in
and thusthemajorityofcatsrequirebilateral thyroid-
anyway,removed.lf a unilateral thyroidectomy is
ectomy.In many of these cases lobe enlargement is
carried outfuture monitoring forrecurrenceofthe
not symmetricalandthesmaller lobe maynotbe
condition is required.Routine bilateral thyroidectomy,
clearly palpable. The decision whether to perform a
whilst increasing therisk of postoperative complica-
unilateralorbilateral thyroidectamyisthereforeoften
tions,obviatestheneedfordecision-making atthetime
takenat the time of surgery.However,inup to15%of
of surgery.
normal and if leftinsitu willresult inrecurrenceof the
Intracapsularversusextracapsular
condition.Inunilateral cases,thereis atrophyof the
Two techniqueshavebeendescribedfor thyroidec-
contralateral lobebut thedistinctionbetweenwhat is
tomybothofwhichattempt topreservethecranial
considered normal and atrophic isnot clearly defined.
(external)parathyroidglandandmaintaineucalcaemia
If available,thyroid imaging is an extremely useful
(Figures 11.12 and 11.13).
procedure todetermineunilateralorbilateral lobe
involvement,alterationsin positionandthe site of
hyperfunctioning ectopic/accessory tissue or distant
metastases from a functioning thyroid carcinoma
(Peterson and Becker,1984).This canbe carried out
using 1231,131lor 9mTcOThe latteris usually preferred
becauseof itsshorthalf-lifeandimaging time,relative
inexpense,lowradiation dose andconsistentimage
quality(Figure11.11)butobviouslyaccesstoagamma
camera is required.High resolution ultrasonography,
inexperienced hands,maybeanalternative tothyroid
imagingbut larger studies arerequiredforits evalua-
tion (Wisner et al.,1994).
11.12
Intracapsularthyroidectomy Thethyroid
capsule is incised and the thyrcid lobe
remcved.For themodified intracapsular technique the
capsule is subsequently excised.
(a)
11.13
Exlracapsularthyroidectomy.The thyroid lobe
(b)
Unilateral (a) and bilateral (b) thyroid lobe
vascular supply to the external parathyroid glands.For the
11.11
invclvernent as detected by thyroid imaging
modified technique,bipolar cauteryisused insteadof
using pertechnetato.
ligatures.
107
Chapter 11   Feline hyperlhyroidism
The choice of technique is unimportant if a unilat-
and expense of two surgical procedures (Flanders et
eral thyroidectomy is being carried cut because only
al., 1987; Norsworthy 1995).
one parathyraid gland is necessary ta maintaincalcium
homeostasis, but it requires careful consideration for
Biochemical hypocalcaemia alone does not warrant
bilateral thyroidectomy.
treatment but it should be instituted if clinical signs
develop. These signs include anorexia, vocalization,
The original intracapsular technique involved
irritability, muscle twitching, tetany and generalized
incision through the thyroid capsule and blunt
convulsians. The treatment of postoperative hypocal-
dissection of the thyroid lobe, leaving the capsule
caemia is outlined in more detail in Chapter 5.
in situ, thereby preserving the blood supply to the
 Hypoparathyroidism is rarely parmanent and re-
Cranial parathyraid gland. Hawever, this
covery of parathyroid tissue can occur days to months
technique is associated with a hlgh rate of
after surgery. Although this may be related to rever-
recurrence due to regrowth of tissue adherent to
sible parathyroid damage, it is possible that calcium
the capsule.
homeostasis is being maintained through a PTH-inde-
The original extracapsular technique involived
pendent mechanism (Flanders et al., 1991). If this is
removal of the intact thyroid lobe and capsule
the case, there is always the potential risk of develop-
with ligation of the cranial thyroid artery, while
ing signs of hypocalcaemia in the future and care
attempting to preserve blood supply to the cranial
should be taken to monitor these cats appropriately.
parathyroid gland. This technique significantly
decreases the rate of recurrence but is
Ofher: Rarer but potential complications include haem-
associated with an unacceptably high rate of
orrhage, Horner's syndrome, laryngeal oedema or
postoperative hypoparathyroidism.
paralysis and voice change. These can be avoided by
Both techniques have therefore been
a meticulous surgical technique.
successfully modified; the intracapsular 
Serum total T4 concentrations are usually ow for
technique by removal of the majority of the
weeks to months after surgical thyraidectomy but even-
capsule after thyroid lobe rermoval and the
tually increase into the reference range. Treatment
with exogenous thyroxine is not indicated as perma-
instead of ligatures which minimizes blunt
nent hypothyroidism rarely occurs.
dissection around the cranial parathyroid glands
(Welches et al., 1989).
Recurrence of hyperthyroidlsm: This must also be
considered a potential complication. If a unilateral
There is no significant dlifference in the rate of
thyroidectomy was originally performed, development
postoperative hypocalcaemia or recurrence between
of lesions in the contralateral gland should pose no
these two modified techniques and both are consid-
additional surgical risk providing parathyroid function is
maintained. However, repeat thyroidectomies, follow-
cats. Haemorrhage obscuring the surgical field is a
ing recurrence after bilateral thyroidectomy, are not
recommended because of a higher incidence of severe
technique and for this reason and because of the shart
life-threatening complications (Welches et al., 1989).
 surgical time, the modifed extracapsular technique
 An alternative form of therapy for hyperthyroidism is
may be preferred.
indicated.
Postoperative complications
Radioactive iodine
The most significant postoperative complication is
Treatment with radioactive iodine is simple, safe and
hypocalcaemia. The tendency towards ionized hypo-
effective and is the best treatment for most hyper-
calcaemia and hyperparathyroidism in hyperthyroidism
thyroid cats. The radioisotope most commonly used is
may play some role in the development af postopera-
t3ll, which, like stable iodine, is concentrated by the
tive hypocalcaemia, but it is generally agreed that it 
thyroid gland. It has a half-life of approximately 8 days
only occurs if the parathyroid glands are injured,
and emits both beta-particles and gamma-radiation.
devascularized or inadvertently removed during the
The beta-particles cause 80% of the tissue damage.
course of surgery.
travel a maximum of 2 mm and have an average path
length of 400 μm. They are therefore locally destructive
Hypoparathyroidism and hypocalcaemia: Since only
but spare adjacent atrophic thyroid tissue, parathyroid
one parathyroid gland is required to maintain function,
tissue and other important cervical structures. 11l can
hypoparathyroidism only develops after bilateral thy-
be administered intravenously or orally, but the subcu-
 raidectomy. lf removal of the cranial parathyroid glands
taneous route is preferred and is equally effective, not
is noted at the time of surgery, small pieces can be
associated with gastrointestinal side-effects, safer for
transplanted into a muscular pouch in the neck where
revascularization and return of function may occur.
if necessary thereby avoiding anaesthesia.
Staged thyroidectomies (3-4 weeks apart) exploit this
The principle of treatment is to administer a dose of
phenomenon. Howavar, whichever technique is used
131| which willrestore euthyroidism whilst avoiding the
(traditional thyroidectomy or thyroparathyroidectomy
 of postoperative complications may not justify the risk
various parameters of iodine kinetics, before calcula-
108
Chapter 11 Feline hyperthyroidism
tion of the therapeutic dose. Whilst successful, access
tion rate (GFF), decrease circulating creatinine con-
to sophisticated and expensive nuclear medicine equip-
centration and mask underlying renal disease. All
 ment is required. Use of fixed high or low doses may
treatments for hyperthyroidism have been associated
result in over- orunder-treatment of a significant number
 with a decrease in GFR capable of unmasking latent
of animals. The estimation of a dose based on a scoring
renal disease (Graves etal., 1994; Adams et al., 1997;
 system that includes the severity of the clinical thyro-
 Becker etal., 2000; DiBartola and Brown, 2000). There-
toxicosis, elevation in circulating total T4 concentration 
fore renal dysfunction should always be considered a
and the size of the goitre as estimated by palpation, is
potential adverse reaction of treatment and assessed
currently the most popular method and is successful in 
if clinical signs develop.
over 90% of cases (Mooney, 1994; Peterson and
Predicting those cats in which renali failure is likely
Becker, 1995).
to develop is difficult. 1n the absence of methods for
accurately measuring GFR in practice, serum urea and
Complications
creatinine concentrations and urine SG should be
There are few complications of 1311 therapy. Persistent
carefully evaluated in individual cases. If any param-
hyperthyroidism - more common in severely affected
eter is considered abnormal then renal failure may
 cats with large goitre and extreme elevations in serum
develop on treatment of the hyperthyroidism. Antithy-
total T4 concentration - can be successfully managed
roid medication offers the optimum treatmant when
with a repeat injection, although, in some cats euthy-
there is evidence of pre-existing renal disease.
roidism spontaneously developswithinweeksto months
If there is no discernible deterioration of renal
of treatment. Permanent hypothyroidism is rare, as is
 function once euthyroidism has been achieved medi-
 recurrence affer successful treatment and other side-
cally, then other, more permanent, treatment options
effects are minimal (Slater et al., 1994). Several draw-
(surgery, radioactive iodine) may be considered. If
backs gxist. Facilities for 131l are available in only a few
renal function deteriorates, the effects of the drug will 
referral centres in the UK and post-treatment hospitali-
dissipate within 48 hours of withdrawal. The decision
zation requirements are approximately 4-8 weeks.
whethar to continue treatment for hyperthyroidism de-
Due to the popularity of the treatment, waiting lists may
pends on which of the two diseases is more severe.
be lengthy. This, and a possible delay in the return to
Maintenance of a mildly hyperthyroid state may be
 euthyroidism for up to 6 months in a small number of
beneficial in some cases. However, preliminary stud-
cats, may necessitate interim symptomatic control of
ies suggest that although there may be an initiai etfect
the thyrotoxicosis.
of treatment on GFR, long-term this is not progressive
- avoidance of hypothyraidism is important because it 
Prognosis
may have its own detrimental effect on GFR.
The long-term prognosis for cats treated with radio-
active iodine is excellent. In the largest study af 534
cats, median survival time was 24 months and 89, 72,
Thyroid carcinoma
52 and34%of cats were alive at 1, 2,3 and 4 years after
treatment, respectively (Peterson and Becker, 1995).
 Functional thyroid carcinoma accounts for <2% of
The most common causes of death in treated hyper-
cases and, in the authors' experience, approximately
thyroid cats are those normally associated with ageing,
50% of all cases of feline thyroid carcinoma. Affected
such as malignancy and renal disease (Slater et al.,
cats present with similar clinical signs to those with
2001).
benign adenomatous hyperplasia. Evidence of thyroid
carcinoma includes: palpable large multilobulated
Other therapies
masses in the neck; signs of distant metastases (usu-
[ntrathyroidal infuslon of ethanol causes tissue necro-
ally pulmonary): locally invasive appearance at the
sis and eventual induction of euthyraidism. Single
time of surgery or rapid recurrence following routine
injections in unilateral cases, preferably using ultra-
bilateral thyroidectomy or radioactive iodine therapy
sound guidance, are efficacious in inducing euthy-
(Turrel et al., 1988). Thyroid imaging usually reveals
roidism in hyperthyroid cats (Goldstein et al., 2001).
multifocal areas of increased uptake (Figure 11.14a
Staged injections in bilateral cases are less successful
and 11.14b).
 in treating hyperthyroidism (Wells et al., 2001). How-
 Cats presenting with distant metastatic disease
ever, percutaneous ethanol injection is associated with
carry a poor prognosis. In other cases, stabilization of
a high incidence of adverse reactions such as transient
the clinical signs can be achieved using methimazole,
dysphonia, Horner's syndrome,gagging and laryngeal
but because this drug is not cytotoxic the prognosis
paralysis, and therefore cannot be recommended for
remains guarded. Removal of all affected tissue is
treatment of hyperthyroid cats.
offen difficuit at the time of surgery and routine
Gene therapy could potentially be used to deliver
radioactive iodine therapy may not be effective
cytotoxicity specifically to abnormally functioning
because malignant tissue appears to concentrate
thyroid cells. However, a great deal of work is required
and retain iodine less eficiently than normal or
adenomatous cells. Therefore the optimum choice
practice.
appears to be surgical debulking followed by high
'uawaii yons yum Adeleu le (baw ooot<) asop
Effect of treatment on renal function
Hyperthyroidism is known to increase glomerular filtra-
(Guptill et al., 1995).
109
Chapter 11
1Feline hyperthyroidism
(thyrotoxicosis）.In:Canine and Feline Endocrinology and
Reproduction2edned.ECFeldmanandRWNelson,pp.118
166.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Flanders JA,Harvey HJ and Erb HN (1987)Feline thyroidectomy.A
differentsurgicaltechniques.VeterinarySurgery16,362-366
Flanders JA,Neth S,Erb HN and Kalfelz FA （1991)Functional
analysisof ectopic parathyroidactivity incats.AmericanJournal
ofVeterinaryResearch52,1336-1340
iodate in the presurgical management of hyperthyroid cats.
JournaiofSmallAnimalPractice40,307-315
Foster DJ and ThodayKL (200o) Tissue sources of serum alkaline
phosphalasein34hyperthyrcidcats:aqualitative andquantitative
study.ResearchinVetrinaryScience688994
(a)
FosterJ,ThdayLrthuRicolF,atlyAvnn
LabucR,McConnellM,Sharp M,ThomasJB and Beckett GJ
(2001)Seleniumstatusof catsinfourregionsof theworldand
comparison with reported incidence of hyperthyroidism incats in
thoseregions.AmericanJournal ofVeterinary Research 62,
934-937
FoxPR,PetersonME andBroussardJD(1999)Electrocardiographic
andradiographicchangesincatswithhyperthyraidism:comparison
of theAmericanAnima!HospitalAssociation352731
GoldstEnwiffnn
and Feldman EC (2001)Percutaneous ethanol injection for
treatmentofunilateralhyperplasticthyroidnodulesincats.Journa/
of theAmericanVelerinaryMedicalAssociation21812981302
hyperthyroidisminacat.JournaioftheAmericanAnima/Hospilai
Association396771
Graham PA,Mooney CT and Murray M(1999)Serum fructosamine
concentrations inhyperthyroidcats.AmericanJourna/of
(b)
VeterinaryResearch67,17i-175
GravesiviinFuMWa
11.14
Thyroid carcinoma.(a) Appearance of
Stickle RL (1994) Changes in renal function associated with
pertechnetatescan,showingmultiparcasof
treatment of hyperthyroidism in cats.American Journal of
uptake. (b) The same gland at the time of surgery.
VeterinaryResearch55,1745-1749
Guplill,ScotMonrieffCRanovitzEB.BlevinsWEohnSE
and DeNicola DB(1995)Response tohigh-doseradioactive
References and furtherreading
previouslyundergonesurgery.JournaioftheAmericanVeterinary
MedicaiAssociation207,1055-1058
AdamsWH,Daniel GB,Legendre AM,Gompf RE and Grove CA
HoffmanBMarksSLTaadosgoodGLndWolfshm
(1997) Changes in renal function in cats following treatment of
(2003) Transdermal methimazole treatment in cats with
hyperthyroidismusing111.VeterinaryRadiology andUltrasound
hyperthyrcidism.Joumal of FelineMedicineand Surgery5,77
38,231-238
82
ArcherFJandTaylorSM(1996)Alkaline phosphataseboneisoenzyme
HorneyBS,FamerAJHonorDJMacKenzieAandBurtonS（194)
and osteocalcin in the serumof hyperthyroid cats.Canadian
Agarosegelelectrophoresis of alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes
VeterinaryJournal37,735-739
in theserumof hyperthyroid cats.VeterinaryClinicalPathology
23,98-102
hyperthyroidismJournalofSmalAnimalPractice37,575582
Jacobs G,HutsonCDoughertyJand KirmayerA（1986)Congestive
heart failure associated with hyperthyroidism in cats. Joumal of
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation188,52-56
hyperthyroidism.Journalof the American Anima!Hospital
Joseph RJ andPeterson ME(1992)Review and comparison of
Association36,215-223
neuromuscular and central nervous systemmanifestations of
Bond BR,Fox PR,Peterson ME and Skavaril RV (1988)
Neurology3,114-119
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedica!Association192,
KbayaiDLnMErvTMndi
1546-1549
（199o)Hypertension in cats with chronic renal failureor
Broussard JD and Peterson ME(1995) Changes in clinical and
hyperthyroidism.JounalofVeterinaryInternaiMedicine458
62
1993.Joumalof theAmericanVeterinary Medical Association
MaggiF,racTCinsCEPiiraniSGilCad
206,302-305
Davidson MG(20oo)Ocularlesionsassociatedwith systemic
ChunR,GarrettLD,argeantJ,ShermanAandHoskinsonJ (202)
hypertension in cats:69 cases(1985-1998).Joumal of ihe
AmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation217,695-702
cats.VeterinaryRadiologyandUltrasound43,587-591
Mooney CT (1994) Radioactive iodine therapy for feline
Court MHand FreemanLM(2002)Identificationand concentrationof
hyperthyroidism:efficacy and administration routes.Journal of
soy isoflavonesin commercial cat foods.American Joumalof
Small AnimalPractice35,289-294
VeterinaryResearch63,181-185
Mooney CT (2001)Feline hyperthyroidism: diagnostics and
Daniel GB,harpDSNieckarJAandAdamsW(2002)Quantitativ
therapeutics.VeterinaryClinicsof NorthAmerica:SmallAnimal
thyroidscintigraphyasapredictorofserumthyroxinconcentration
Practice 31,963-983
innormal andhyperthyraid cats.VeterinaryRadiology and
Mooney CT (2002) Pathogenesis of hyperthyroidism. Journal of
Uitrasound43,374-382
FelineMedicineandSurgery4,167-169
DiBartolaSP andBrowni SA(2002)The kidney and hyperthyroidism.
Mooney CTLittleCJLand MacraeAW(1996) Effect of illness not
In:Kirk'sCurrentVeterinaryThrapyXid.JDBonagurap.
associatedwiththethyroidglandonserumtotaland freethyroxine
337-339.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
concentrationsincats.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Edinboro CH,Scott-MoncrieffC,TetrickMand Glickman LT(2002)
Association208,2004-2008
Dietary and environmentalriskfactorsforhyperthyroidisminpet
Mooney CT,ThodayKLandDoxeyDL(1992b) Carbimazole therapy
cats.Annaisof Epidemiology12,509
offelinehyperthyroidism.Journal ofSmallAnimalPractice33,
EllittJ,BarberPJ,SymeHM,RawlingsJMandMarkwellPJ (2001)
228-235
Feline hypertension: clinical findings and response to
Mooney CT,Thoday KL,Nicoll JJ and Doxey D (1992a) Qualitative
antihypertensive treatment in30cases.Journalof SmallAnimal
Practice42,122-129
technetium-99maspertechnetate.Veterinary Radiology and
Feldman EC and Nelson RW(1996)Feline hyperthyroidism
Ultrasound33,313-30
110
Chapter 11 Feline hyperthyrcidism
Murray LAS and Pelerson ME (1997) Ipodate as medical Ireatment In 
of 262 cats with hyperthyroldism. Jouma/of Vaternary Internal
12 cals with hyperhyroidism. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medicine 2, 150-157
Medical Assoclation 211, 63-67
 Paterson ME, Melian C and Nichols R (2001) Measurement of serum.
 Nemzek JA, Kruger JM, Walshaw R and Haupiman JG (1994) Acute
concenlrations of free thyroxine, total thyroxine, and total
inog ui ssausgam jenosnu pue eeeodu jo lesuo
hyperthyraid cais. Journat of the American Veterinary Medica!
nonthyroidal disease. Journalof the American Velerinary Medical
Associarion 205, 65-68
NguyenLQArsevenOKGerberH,SteinBS,JamesonJLand Kp
Association218,529-536
 Reusch CE and Tomsa K (199g) Serum fructosamine concentration
P (2002) Cloning of the cat TSH receptor and evidence against
In cats with overt hyperhyraidism. Journat af the American
anautoimmuneetiologyoffelinehyperthyroidism.Endocrinoiogy
Velerinary Medical Association 215, 1297-1300
143, 395-402
 Schlesingcr DP, Hubin Sl, Papich MG and Hamilton DL (1993) Use
 Nieckarz JA and Daniel GB (2001) The effect of methimazole an
af breath hydrogen rmeasurement to evaluate orocecal transit
 thyroid uptake of pertechnetate and radioiodine in normal cals.
Vaterinary Radiology and Uitrasound 42, 448-457
Canadlan Veterinary journal 57, B9-94
Slater MR, Geller S and Rogers K (2001) Long-term health and
 that preserves paralhyroid functlon. Vaterinary Medicine
Novermber, 1055-1063
131. Journa! of Veterinary internai Medicine 15, 47-51
Norsworthy GD, Adams VJ, McElhaney MR and Miios JA (2002a)
Slater MR,Komkov A,Robinson LE and Hightower D (1994）Long-
Retationship between semi-quantitative thyroid palpation and
term folow-up of hyperthyraid cats treated with iodine-131.
total thyroxine concantration in cats wilh and without
Veterinary Radiofogy and Ultrasound 35, 204-209
hyperthyraidism. Journalof Feline Medicine and Surgery4, 139-
Stegeman JR, Graham PA and Hauptmann JG (2003) Use of
Narswarthy GD,Adams VJ, McElnaney MR and Milios JA (2002b)
stimulation testing ol euthyroid cals. AmericanJourma! of
Palpable tnyroid and parathyroid nodules in asymptomatic cats.
VeterinaryResearch64149152
Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery 4, 145-151
Stiles J, Palzin DJand Bistner Sl(1994) Tha prevalence of relinopathy
Papasouliotis K, Muir P, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Galloway P, Smerdon T
and Cripps PJ (1993) Decreased orocaecal transit time,as
hyperthyroidlsm. Journal of rhe American Animal Hospital
Association30,56472
Research In Veterinary Scienca 55, 1 15-118
 Thoday KL ang Mooney CT (1992) Historical, clinical and laboratory
PearcHmiHugk
fealures of 126 hyperthyroid cats. Veterinary Record 131, 257-
KL, Kendall-Taylor P (1997) Mutational analysis of the lhyrotropin
264
genein sporadic and famiial feline thyratoxicosis. Thyroid7,
Tomsa K, Glaus TM, Kacl GM, Pospischil A and Reusch CE (2001)
923-927
Thyrotropint-releasing hormone stimulation test to assess thyroid
Peeters ME, Timmermans-Sprang and Mol JA (2002) Feline thyroid
functlon In severely sick cals. Journal of Veterinary internal
 adenomas are in part associated with mutations in the G, gene
Medicine15,89-93
and not wlth_ polymgrphisms found In the thyroiropin receptor.
Trepanier LA, Hoffman SB, Knoll M, Rodan I and Challoner L (2003)
Thyroid 12, 571-575
 Peterson ME and Aucoin DP (1993) Comparison of the disposltion of
methimazole incats withhyperthyroldlsm. /ournalor theAmerican
 carbimazolc and methimazole in clinicaly normal cats. Research
Veterinary Medical Associalion 222, 954-958
in Veterinary Science 54, 351-355
Turrel JM, Feldman EC, Nelson RW and Cain GR (1988) Thyroid
Pctcrson ME and Becker DV(1g84) Radionuclide thyroid imaging in
careinoma causing hyperthyraidism in cats:14 cases (1981-
135catwhyimrinaradogy27
1986).Journal oftheAmerican Veterinary MedicalAssociation
 Peterson ME and Becker DV (1995) Radigiodine lreatment of 524
193, 359-364
cais with hyperthyroidism. Journal of the American Veterinary
Van der Woerdt A and Peterson ME (20oo) Prevalence of ocular
Medica/Association207,1422-1428
abnormalities incals with hyperthyroidism.Journalof Veterinary
Peterson ME,Graves TK and Cavanagh I (1987) Serum thyroid
InternaMedicine14,202-203
hormone concentrations fuctuate in cals with hypertnyrololsm.
 Welches CD, Scavelli TD, Matthiesen DT and Peterson ME (1989)
Journal of Veterinary internal Medicine 1, 142-146
Occurrence of problens after three techniques of bilateral
Peterson ME, Keene B,Ferguson DC and Plpers FS (192)
thyroidectomyincats.Veterinary Surgary18392-396
Electrocardiographic findings in 45 cals wilh hyperthyroidism.
Wels AL, Long CD, Hornot WJ, Goldstein RE, Nyland TG, Nelson RW
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 180,
and Feldman EC (2001) Use of percutaneous ethanol injection
934-937
for treatment of bilateral hyperplastic thyroid nodules in cats.
Petarson ME, KIntzar PP, Cavanagh PG, Fox PR, Farguson DC,
Journat of the American Velerinary Medicat Associatlon-218,
Johnson GF ang Becker DV (1981) Feline hyperthyroidism:
1293-1297
pretreatment clinical and laboratory evaluation of 131 cases.
Wisner ER. Theon AP, Nyland TG and Hornof WJ [1994)
youmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 183,
Ultrasonagraphicexaminationofthe thyroid glandofhyparthyroid
103-110
 Pelerson ME, Kintzer PP and Hurvilz Al(1988) Methimazole tratment 
andUtrasound35,53-58
111
Canine diabetes mellitus
Richard W. Nelson
Introduction
dogs, this typically occurs when the blood glucose
concentration is >10-12mmoll. Glycosuria creates an
Diabetes melitus is a common endocrine disorder in
osmoticdiuresis, causing polyuria. Compensatory poly-
dogs. Unlike cats, virtually all dogs are insulin-depend-
dipsia prevents dehydration. The diminished periph-
ent at the time a diagnosis is made. The aetiology of
eral tissue utilization of ingested glucose resuits in
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) has been
weight loss as the body attempts to compensate for
poorly characterized in dogs but is undoubtedly mulfi-
perceived 'starvation.' Polyphagia results from failure
factorial. Genetic predispositions; immune-mediated
of the satiety centre to inhibit the feeding centre in the
destruction of beta cells; environmental factors, such
hypothalamus; a failure that results from an inability of
as infectious agents; insulin-antagonistic disease and
 glucose to enter the cells of the satiety centre during
drugs; obesity-induced insulin resistance and beta cell
insulin deficiency.
destruction, secandary to pancreatitis, are all potential
The four classic signs of diabetes mellitus are:
predisposing factors (Hoenig and Dawe, 1992; Guptil
et al., 1999). The most common pathological lesions in
·
 Polyuria
dogs with diabetes melitus are a reduction in the
Polydipsia
number and size of pancreatic islets, a decrease in the
·
 Polyphagia
number of beta cells within islets, and hydropic balloon-
Weight loss.
ing degeneration of beta cells.
Clinical recognition of non-insulin-dependent dia-
The severity of these signs is directly related to the
betas mellitus (NiDDM) and transient or reversible
severity of hyperglycaemia. As these signs become
 diabetes is extremely uncommon in dogs. Secondary
obvious to the owner, veterinary attention is sought.
diabetes mellitus occurs in dogs with subclinical diabe-
Occasionally. owners do not recognize these initial
tes subsequently treated with insulin-antagonistic drugs
signs in their dog and as the disorder progresses
(e.g. glucocorticoids or progestogens) or in the very
untreated, the risk of severe diabetic complications
early stages of an insulin-antagonistic disorder (e.g.
increases.
dioestrus in the bitch). Affected dogs have a reduced
but adequate mass of functional beta cells to maintain
carbohydrate tolerance when insulin resistance is not
Clinical features
present, butare unable to secrete an adequate amount
 of insulin to maintain euglycaemia in the presence of 
Signalment
insulin antagonism. Early recognition and correction of
Most dogs are 4-14 years old at the time diabetes
the insulin antagonism may re-establish euglycaemia
mellitus is diagnosed, with a peak prevalence at 7-10
without the need for long-term insulin therapy. Failure
years of age. Juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus occurs
in dogs <1 year of age but is uncommon. Bitches are
progressive loss of beta cells and the eventual devel-
affected about twice as frequently as males. Genetic
opment of IDDM.
predispositions for or against the development of
diabetes mellitus have been suggested by familial
associations in dogs (Figure 12.1) (Guptill et al., 1999;
Pathophysiology
Hess et a., 2000a).
Insulin deficiency is responsible for the clinical mani-
History
festations of diabetes mellitus. Insulin deficiency causes:
The histary of virtually all diabetic dogs includes poly-
decreased tissue utilization of glucose, amino acids
dipsia, polyuria, polyphagia and weight loss. Polyuria
and fatty acids; accelerated hepatic glycogenolysis
and gluconeogenesis; and accumulation of glucose in
results in glycosuria. Occasionally an owner brings in
the circulation, causing hyperglycaemia. As the blood 
a dog because of: sudden-onset blindness caused by
glucose concentration increases, the ability of the renal
cataract formation; or the acute development of sys-
tubular cells to resorb glucose from the glomerular
temic signs of illness as a result of progressive keto-
ultrafiltrate is exceeded, resulting in glycosuria. In
naemia and the development of metabolic acidosis.
112
Chapter12Canine diabetesmellitus
Highrisk
dogs are obesebut areotherwise in goodphysical
Australian Terrer
condition andremain reasonablybright.Dogswith
Standard Schnauzer
prolongeduntreateddiabetesmayhavelostweightbut
Miniature Schnauzer
arerarelyemaciated unless concurrent disease(e.g.
Bichon Frise
pancreatic exocrine insufficiency) is present.Lethargy
Spitz
maybeevident and thehaircoatmaybesparse,the
FoxTerrier
hairs dry,brittle and lustreless,and scalesfrom hyper-
Miniature Poodle
keratosis may be present.Diabetes-induced hepatic
Samoyed
lipidosis maycausehepatomegaly.Lenticularchanges
Cairn Terier
Keeshond
consistentwithcataractformationmaybeevident.
Additional abnormalitiesmaybeidentified in thecom-
Lowrisk
plicatedketoacidotic diabetic dog.DKA is discussed in
detail in Chapter 14.
German Shepherd dog
Collies
Shetland Sheepdog
Golden Retriever
Diagnosis
Cocker Spaniel
Australian Shepherd dog
A diagnosisof diabetes mellitusrequires thepresence
Labrador Retriever
ofappropriate clinical signs(i.e.polyuria,polydipsia,
Dobermann Pinscher
polyphagia,weight loss)and documentation of
persistent fastinghyperglycaemia and glycosuria.
12.1
Some cf the breedsrecognized to have high
Measurement ofblood glucoseconcentration using
anc lowriskfor develcping diabctcsmellitus
a point-of-care or portable hand-held blood glucose
based on analysisof theVeterinary Medical Database
(VMDB) from 1970 to1993.Mixed brccd dogswereuscd
monitoring device,and testing for the presence of
as the rcfcrence group for comparison with other breeds.
glycosuriausingurinereagent teststrips,allowarapid
(Data from Guptill et al.(1999).) The VMDB ccmorises
confirmation of diabetes mellitus.The concurrent
medical records of 24veterinary schocls in the USA and
documentationof ketonuria establishes a diagnosisof
Canada.VMDB caserecords ana ysed included those
diabeticketosis or ketoacidosis.lt is important to
from first hospital visits cf 6078 dogs with a diagnosis of
diabctcs melitus and 5922 randomly selected dogs with
documentbothpersistenthyperglycaemia andglyco-
first hospitalvisits for anydiagnosisotherthan diabetes
suria to establisha diagnosis ofdiabetesmellitus;
mellitusseen at the sameveterinary schools in the same
hyperglycaemiadifferentiatesdiabetesmellitusfrom
year.Only breeds withmore than 25cases of diabetes
primaryrenal glycosuria and glycosuria differentiates
mellitus are incluced.
glycaemia.
The classicsignsof diabetesmellitusmayhavegone
unnoticed orbeen considered irrelevant by the owner.
Routine laboratorytesting
The time sequence from the onset of initial clinical
A thorough evaluation ofroutine clinicopathological
signstothedevelopmentofdiabeticketoacidosis(DKA)
dataisrecommendedoncethediagnosisofdiabetes
or cataracts is unpredictable,ranging from days to
mellitus has beenestablished.Thiswill serve toidentify
weeks.
In all cases,obtaining a complete history is ex-
diabetic state (e.g.hyperadrenocorticism); that may
tremelyimportant to explore for concurrent disorders
result from the diabetes(e.g.bacterial cystitis);orthat
thatarealmost alwayspresent at thetime diabetes
may necessitate a modification of therapy (e.g.pan-
mellitus is diagnosed. Diagnosis and treatment of
creatitis).The minimum laboratory evaluation in any
concurrentdisordersplayan integralrole in thesuc-
‘healthy'or uncomplicated non-ketotic diabeticdog
should include:
oughhistoryisthefirststeptowardsidentificationof
these.
A completeblood count
Serumbiochemistry
Physicai examination
Urinalysiswith bacterial culture.
A thoroughphysical examination is imperative in any
dog suspected tohave diabetesmellitus,inpart,be
 Serum progesterone concentration should also be
cause of the high prevalence of concurrent disorders
determined ifdiabetesmellitusisdiagnosedinanintact
that can affectresponse to treatment.The physical
bitch,regardless of her cycling history，to rule out
examination findings in a dog with newly diagnosed
progestogen-induced diabetesmelitussecondaryto
diabetesmelitusdepend on the:
excessgrowthhormone(GH)secretionindioestrus.If
available,abdaminal ultrasound isindicated to assess
Duration of the conditionprior toits diagnosis
forpancreatitis,adrenomegaly,pyometra in an intact
Presence and severityof DKA
·Nature of any concurrent disorders.
tract.Potential clinicopathological abnormalitiesspe-
cificallyassociated withuncomplicateddiabetesmellitus
Theuncomplicatednon-ketoticdiabeticdoghasno
are listed inFigure 12.2.
113
Chapter12 Canine diabetesmellitus
uncomplicated diabetic.Anelevationin theseparam-
Complete blood count
etersmaybe due toprimaryrenal failure,orprerenal
Typically normal
uraemia,secondary to dehydration.Primaryrenal fail-
Neutrophilicleucocytosistoxicneutrophilifpancreatitisorinfctin
ure asaresultofglomerulosclerosis-damage specifi-
present
callyrelated tohyperglycaemia-isawellrecognized
Biochemistry panel
complicationin humansbut isuncommon indiabetic
dogs.Evaluation of urine specific gravity should help
Hyperglycaemia
differentiateprimaryrenal failurefromprerenal urae-
Hypercholesterolaemia
mia.Alterationsinserumelectrolytesandacid-base
Hypertrglyceridaemia (ipaemia)
parameters are not common in dogs with uncompli-
Increased alanine aminotransterase activity(ALT)
cated non-ketotic diabetes.
Increased alkaline phosphatase activity(ALP)
Urinalysis
Lipaemia andhyperlipidaemia:Hyperlipidaemia and
Urine specific gravity typically>1.025
obviouslipaemiaarecommonintheuntreateddiabetic
Glycosuria
patient.Uncontrolled diabetesmellitus isaccompa-
nied byanincrease inthe blood concentrationof
Variableketonuria
Proteinuria
triglycerides,cholesterol,variouslipoproteinfractions,
Bacteriuria
daemiaisresponsibleforthelipaemiathatcanbeseen
Ancllary tests
inaperipheral blood sample.Hypertriglyceridaemia
Hyperlipasaemia if pancreatitis present
arising from increasedchylomicron andvery lowden-
Hyperamylasaemia if pancreatitis present
sity lipoprotein (VLDL) concentrationsresults from
Serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity usually normal
insulin deficiency and theassociated curtailment in
Low with pancreatic exocrine insuficiency
lipoprotein lipase (LpL). Increased concentrations of
High with acute pancreatitis
VLDL also result from excesshepaticproduction (in-
Normal tohighwithchronic pancreatis
Variable serum baseline insulin concentration
ducedbyincreasedcirculatingfreefattyacids),obesity
IDDM:low,normal
and a high caloric intake (Unger and Foster,1998)
NIDDM: low, normal, increased
Circulating chalesterolconcentrations areincreased in
Insulinresistanceinduced:low,ormalncreasd
diabetics,buttheelevationisnotasmarkedfortrigly
eride concentrations.In humans,low density lipopro-
Clinicopathologicalabnormalitiescommcnlyfound
tein(LDL)concentrationsareincreasedandhighdensity
12.2
in dogs with uncomplicated ciabetes melitus.
lipoprotein(HDL)concentrations are often low.This
combination mayplay arole in the accelerated devel-
Complete blood count
opment of atheroscleroticvascular disease andcoro-
Results of a complete blood count (CBC)are usually
nary heart disease,which is the major long-term
unremarkable in theuncomplicated diabeticdog.
complication of diabetesmellitus in humans.Similar
mild polycythaemia may be present if the dog is dehy-
vascularcomplicationshavebeeninfrequentlydocu-
drated.Anelevationof thewhiteblood cell countmay
mented in diabetic dogs (Hess et al.,2003).Fortu-
be caused by an infectiousprocessar severe inflam-
nately,most lipid derangementscanbe improvedwith
mation, especially if an underlying pancreatitis
is
insulin and dietary therapy.
present.The presence of toxic or degenerative
neutrophilsor a significant shift toward immaturity of
Urinalysis
the cells supports thepresence of an infectiouspro-
Abnormalities identified on urinalysis that are consist-
cess as the cause of theleucocytosis.
ent with diabetesmellitusinclude:
Serumbiochemistry
Glycosuria
The prevalence and severityof abnormalitiesidentified
·
Ketonuria
in theserumbiochemistrypanelaredependentonthe
Proteinuria
duration of untreated diabetesmellitus and thepres-
Bacteriuria,withorwithout associatedpyuria and
ence ofconcurrent disease,most notablypancreatitis.
haematuria
Theserum biochemical panel is often unremarkable in
“healthy'diabetic dogs without significant concurrent
The dog with uncomplicated diabetes mellitus
disease,asidefromhyperglycaemiaand hypercholes-
usuallyhas glycosuria withoutketonuria.However,a
terolaemia.The most common abnormalities are:an
relativelyhealthydiabeticmayalsohavetracetosmall
increase inserum alanine transaminase and alkaline
amounts of ketonesin the urine.If large amounts of
phosphatase(ALP)activities;and hypercholesterolae-
ketones are present in the urine,especially in an
mia.The increase in liver enzyme activity is usually
animal with systemic signs of illness (e.g. lethargy,
mild and aresult of hepatic lipidosis.Serum ALP
vomiting,diarrhoea or dehydration),a diagnosis of
activities in excess of 500 lU/Ishould raise suspicionof
DKA shouldbe made and the animal treated appropri-
concurrent hyperadrenocorticism,especiallyif other
ately(see Chapter 14).
abnormalitiesconsistentwith hyperadrenocorticism
The presence and severityofglycosuria should be
are identified.The serum urea and creatinine concen-
trations are usuallywithin thereference range in the
(SG).Despite polyuria and polydipsia,urineSG typi-
114
Chapter12Canine diabetesmelitus
cally ranges from 1.025-1.035 inuntreated diabetic
additional findings on thelaboratory tests.Measure-
dogs,inpart,becauseof thelargeamountofglucose
mentofserumTLl is also used todiagnose exocrine
in theurine.Asageneralruleof thumb,2%or4+
pancreaticinsufficiency-anuncommoncomplicationof
glycosuria - as measured on urine reagent test strips
diabetes mellitus that presumably develops as a result
-will increase theurineSG 0.008-0.010 when meas-
ofchronicpancreatitis(WibergandWestermarck,2002).
uredbyrefractometry.Assuch,identificationofaurine
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency should besuspected
SG<1.020incombinationwith2%glycosuriasuggests
indiabeticdogsthataredifficulttoregulatewithinsulin
a concurrentpolyuric/polydipsicdisorder,most notably
and arethinoremaciated,despitepolyphagia.
hyperadrenocorticism orrenal insufficiency.
Proteinuria maybetheresultof urinary tractinfection
Insulinconcentration
Measurementof serum insulin concentration,either
basement membrane(Strubleetal.,1998).Because of
baselineorafterthe administrationofan insulinsecre-
thehighincidenceofinfection,theurinesedimentshould
tagogue,isnotaroutinepartofthediagnosticevaluation
be carefully inspectedfor changes consistentwith
of the newly diagnosed diabeticdog.Because thevast
infection,including the presence of white blood cells,
majorityof dogswithnewlydiagnosed diabetesmellitus
red blood cells,proteinandbacteria.Failure toidentify
have IDDMand serum insulin concentration is typically
pyuria and haematuria doesnotruleouturinary tract
in the lower half of normal or undetectable,routine
infection(McGuireetal.,2002).Duetotherelativelyhigh
measurement of serum insulin concentration is not a
prevalence of concurrent urinary tract infections in
cost-effective diagnosticprocedure.Dogs suspected to
bein the early stages of secondary diabetes,most
using an aseptic technique,should be submitted for
notably intact bitches in dioestrus,are exceptions.A
bacterial cultureandsensitivitytesting inall dogswith
baselineseruminsulinconcentration>125pmol/l sug-
newly diagnosed diabetes melitus,regardlessof the
gests the presence of a significant population of func-
findings on urinalysis (Hess et al.,2000b).
tional betacells andsecondarydiabetesmellitus.
Lipase and TLl concentration
Becauseoftherelativelyhighprevalenceofpancreatitis
Treatment
in diabetic dogs,blood tests to assessforitspresence
shouldalwaysbeconsideredinthenewlydiagnosed
Once thediagnosisof diabetesmellitusis established,
diabeticdog,especiallyif abdominal ultrasonographyis
dogsshould be considered to have IDDM and treat-
notavailable.Measurementof serumlipase andtrypsin-
mentwith insulininitiated.Dietandexerciseshould
like immunoreactivity(TLl) aremostcommonlyrecom-
alsobemodified and any concurrent disorder treated.
mended.In theory,dogs with concomitant active
pancreatitis should have an increase inserum lipase
Insulin
and TLI concentrations.Unfortunately,serum lipase
andTLl concentrations do not always correlate accu-
Type
ratelywith thepresenceorabsenceofpancreatitis
Commercial insuliniscategorizedby promptness,dura-
(Hess etal.,1998).Pancreatic enzyme concentrations
tion,and intensityof actionaftersubcutaneous adminis-
can be increased in dogs with a histologically con-
tration(Figures12.3and 12.4).Commonlyused insulins
firmed normal pancreas:andnormal in dogs with
for thelong-termmanagement of diabetics include:
histologically confirmed inflammation of thepancreas,
especiallywhen the inflammatoryprocess ischronic
Isophane(neutral protamine Hagedorn(NPH))
and mild.For these reasons,interpretationof serum
Lente
lipase and TLlresults should always be done incontext
Ultralente
with thehistory，physical examinationfindings and
。
Protamine zinc insulin (PZl)
Type of insulin
Route of administration
Onset of effect
Time of maximum effect
Duration of efect
Regular crystalline
iv.
Immediate
30minto2h
1-4h
i.m.
10-30min
1-4h
3-8h
S.C.
10-30min
1-5h
4-10h
NPH (isophane)a
S.c.
30 min to 2 h
2-10h
6-18h
Lentea
S.C.
30minto2h
2-10h
8-20h
Ultralente
S.C.
30min to8h
4-16 h
8-24h
Protamine zinc (PZI)
S.C.
30min to 8h
4-14h
6-28h
12.3
Propertiesof recombinanl human insulinpreparalionsused in diabetic dogs.Purified porcine insulin has similar
propertios;bovine/porcine and bovine insulin mixtures are less potent and may have a longer duration of action
than recombinant human insulins.Bovine lente (Insuvet Lente,Schering Plough).bovine PZi (Insuvet PZl)and porcine
lente(Caninsulin,Intervet)arelicensed foruse in theUKfor the long-termmanagement ofcanine diabetesmellitus.
Caninsulin is the only type availableas40 IU/ml.Initial insulins ot choice for the diabeticdog.
115
Chapter 12 Canine diabetesmellitus
NPH and PZI insulinpreparations contain the fish
asparaginewith glycine atpositionA21ontheA-chain
protein,protamine,and zinc to delayinsulin absorption
and adding two arginines to theC-terminusof the B-
and prolong the duration ofinsulin effect.The lente
chain of the insulinmolecule.These modifications
family of insulins rely on alterations in zinc content and
result ina shiftof theisoelectricpoint fromapHof5.4
the size of zinc-insulin crystals to alter the rate of
toward a neutral pH,which makes insulin glargine
absorptionfrom thesubcutaneoussite ofdeposition.
more soluble ata slightly acidicpH and less soluble at
Thelarger the crystals,the slower therate of absorp-
aphysiological pH than native human insulin.Asa
tion and the longer the duration ofeffect.The lente
consequence,insulinglargineformsmicroprecipitates
insulins contain no foreign protein (i.e.protamine).
in the subcutaneous tissue at thesiteof injectionfrom
Ultralenteisamicrocrystallinelong-actinginsulinprepa-
which small amountsofinsulinglargine are slowly
ration.Lente insulin is a mixture of threeparts short-
released.In humans,the slow sustained release of
acting,amorphousinsulin to sevenparts long-acting,
insulinglargine from thesemicroprecipitatesresultsin
microcrystalline insulin.Lente insulin is considered an
a relativelyconstantconcentration/timeprofileover a
intermediate-acting insulin,although plasma insulin
24-hour period with nopronounced peak in serum
concentrationsmayremainincreasedforlonger than
insulin.
14 hours following s.c. administration in some dogs
The glucose-lowering effect of insulin glargineis
(Graham et al.,1997).
similar to that ofhuman insulin;the onsetof action
following subcutaneousadministration isslawer than
Less potent
Insulin glargine
Longest duration
withNPHinsulinandthedurationofeffectisprolonged,
Ultralente
ofeffect
comparedwiththatofNPHinsulin(Owensetal.,2000)
Insulinglargineiscurrently recommended as abasal
Protamine zinc
insulin (i.e.sustained long-acting insulin used to inhibit
Lente
hepaticglucoseproduction)administeredoncea day
NPH
at bedtime and used in conjunctionwith eitherrapid-
70%NPH,
acting insulin analoguesor oral hypoglycaemic drugs
30% regular crystalline
in human diabetic patients. In the author's experience.
50%NPH,
50% regular crystalline
insulinglargine hasa durationofeffectrangingfrom10
to16hoursin most diabeticdogs.Currently,theuse of
Regular crystalline
insulinglarginein diabeticdogsisconsidered by the
Shortest duration
More potent
Insulin lyspro,aspart
ofeffect
authorwhen the shortdurationof effectof NPH and
lente insulin is a problem.We do not consider insulin
12.4
Categorizationof types ofcommercial insulin
basedonthe potency anc durationof efrect.Note
glargine a first choice insulin for the treatment of
the inverse relationship between the pctency and duralion
diabetes mellitus in dogs.
of effect.(Data from Nelson and Coutc (2003).)
Species of origin
Insulin lispro and aspart:Recently,recombinant
Foreach tyeofinsulin(i.PH,nte,tralente）t
DNA technology hasbeen appliedforthe productionof
clinicianmust also choose the speciesof insulintobe
insulin analogueswithfasterandslowerabsorption
s
characteristics than human insulin.Rapid-acting insu-
bovine/porcine combinations, purified bovine or por-
lin analogues include insulin lisproand insulinaspart.
cine,and recombinant human insulin.Approximately
Insulinlisproisproduced byinvertingthenaturalamino
90%of bovine/porcine insulin preparation is bovine
acid sequence of theB-chain at B28(proline)and B29
insulin.Chronic administration of a foreign protein (i.e.
insulin)may stimulate the formation ofanti-insulin
aspartic acid forproline in position B28.As a conse-
antibodies.Bovine insulin is antigenicindiabetic dogs
quence of these alterations,insulin lispro and insulin
and stimulates formation of anti-insulin antibodies in
aspart exhibit:monomeric behaviour in solution;a
40-65%of cases(Feldman etal.,1983;Haines,1986;
rapid absorption;faster pharmacodynamic action; and
Harb-Hauser et al.,1998;Davison et al.,2003a)
a shorter duration of effect than short-acting regular
In contrast,thedevelopmentof anti-insulinantibod-
crystalline insulin.Insulin lispro and insulin aspart are
iesfollowing chronicadministration ofrecombinant
the current preprandial insulins (i.e. insulin adminis-
human or porcine insulin to diabetic dogs appears
teredprior toeach meal)of choice for control of
uncommon(Feldman etal.,1983;Harb-Hauser etal.,
postprandial blood glucose concentrations inhuman
1998).Antibodies may affect the pharmacokinetics of
diabeticpatients,and aretypically administered three
the exogenouslyadministeredinsulin.Antibodies could
times a day priortoeach of the mainmeals(breakfast,
enhance andprolong thepharmacodynamic action by
lunchand dinner).Therole,ifany,of theseinsulinsfor
serving as a carrier,or they could reduce insulin action
the treatmentof diabetesmellitus indogs isyet tobe
by neutralization (Marshall et al.,1988;Lahtela et al.
determined.Because of their extremely short duration
1997). Antibodies may also have no apparent clinical
ofeffect,insulinlisproand insulinaspartwould haveto
effect on insulin dosage or status of glycaemic control.
be used in conjunction with a longer-acting insulin
In the author'sexperience:anti-insulin antibodypro-
preparation to maintain control of glycaemia.
ductionin diabeticdogscanalter the durationof insulin
activity and prolong its duration of action;or more
Insulin glargine: This is a long-acting insulin ana-
commonly,haveadeleteriousimpactoninsulineffec
logue that differs from human insulin by replacing
tiveness,abilitytomaintaincontrolofglycaemiaand,in
116
Chapter 12Canine diabetesmellitus
extreme cases,cause severe insulinresistance.Short
implemented.Establishingcantrolofglycaemiaiseasier
durationof insulin effect isa moreprevalentproblem
andproblems with hypoglycaemia and the Somogyi
withrecombinant human insulin thanwithbovine-
containing insulin preparations,presumably because
the initial insulin dose isrelativelylow.Dietary therapy
oflackofanti-insulin antibody production.However,
is initiated concurrently (see below). Recommenda-
the deleterious impact of anti-insulin antibodies on
tionsfor theuse ofbovinelenteandrecombinant
controlofglycaemiafaroutweighanypotentialbenefits
human lente insulin are similar to thoseforporcine
related to durationof insulineffect.
lente insulin.However,if there are problems with
stabilization,developmentof insulin antibodiesshould
Handling
be considered with bovine lente insulin;and short
Freezing and heating inactivates insulin in the bottie.
durationofinsulineffectshould beconsideredwith
human recombinant lente insulin.
lin,owners areinstructed to store insulin in the doorof
therefrigerator tomaintain aconstantenvironmentfor
Dietary therapy
the insulin preparation.Replacing the insulin with a
Adjustments in diet and feeding practices should
newbottle every month to avoid problemswith loss of
be directedatcorrectingorpreventingobesity,maintain
activityorsterilityisoffenadvocated.However,thereis
ing consistency in the timing and caloriccontent of the
probably no clinically significant loss of insulin action
meals and furnishing a diet that helps minimize the
with time, providing the insulin preparation is main-
tained and handled appropriately andused before its
(Figure 12.5). Correction of obesity and increasing the
expiry date.However,loss of insulin activity in the
fibrecontentof thediet areperhapsthe twomost benefi-
bottleshould always beconsideredapossibilitywhen
cial steps that can be taken to improve glycaemic control.
everclinical signs recur,regardless of thequantity of
insulin in the bottle and thelengthof time it hasbeen
Dietary composition
there (see Chapter9).
Dilution of insulinisa commonpractice,especially
Increased fibre content
Digestibe cabahydrate content>45% of metabolizable eney
for very small dogs.Although studies evaluating the
Fat content <30% of metabolizable energy
shelf-lifeofdiluted insulinhavenotbeenpublished,it
Protein content  30% of metabolizable energy
should bereplaced every 4-8 weeks.Only proprietary
insulindiluentwaterforinjectionorormalsalineshouid
be used.Evenusing theseguidelines,theefficacyofthe
glycol; avoid cangesindietunlessspecifiallyndcated
insulincannotbeguaranteedand thepharmacokinetics
Caloric intake and obesity
can be significantly altered, inadequacies that are
corrected when full-strength insulin is used.
Averagedailycaloricintakeingeriatricdogis40-60kcalkg
Forchronicmanagementof diabetesmellitus,insu-
Adjust dailycaloric intake onindividual basis
lin is injected subcutaneously and,with adequate in-
Eliminatebesityif retb
struction,mostownersaccomplishthiswithoutdifficulty.
increasing daly exercise
Pain on injection of insulin is usually caused by inap-
Decreasing daily caloric intake
Feedialritf 
propriate injection techniqueorsite of injectionand not
dabetariw
anadversereaction to insulin,perse.However,room
designed for weight loss
temperature insulinmaybebetter tolerated thancold
insulin when injected into animals that object to the
Feeding schedule
procedure,particularlywhenlargevolumesarebeing
Maintain consistent caloric content of themeals
used.naddition,chronicinjectionofinsulincanleadto
Maintain consistent timing of feeding
locallow-gradeinflammation and fibrosis anditis
Feed within time frame of insulin action
therefore preferable to rotate the injection site.Sys-
Feedone-haif of the totaldailycaloric intakeat timeof eachinsulin
temic allergicreactions toinsulin have not yet been
injection
confirmed in dogs.
Letnibbler'dogs continue tonibble throughout day and night
Jnitial therapy
Reccmmendations for dietary treatment ot
12.5
diabates mellitus in dogs.
An intermediate-acting insulin is the initial insulinof
choice for establishing controlof glycaemia in diabetic
dogs.enteinsulin is preferred toNPHbecauseofits
Weight reduction
longer duration of activity,and toPZi and ultralente
Obesity causes impairedglucasetolerance in dogs
becauseof itsmorepredictableeffect.Because the
and is an important factor accounting for variations in
overwheimingmajorityof diabeticdogsrequire lente
response to insulin therapy.Weightreduction improves
insulin twicea day,itispreferabletostartwith twice a
glucose tolerance in obese dogs,presumably by cor-
day insulin therapy (Hess and Ward, 2000). Porcine
recting obesity-induced insulinresistance.Successfu!
source insulin is often also preferred in order tomini-
weight reduction usually requires a combination of
mize development of anti-insulin antibodies,which
restriction of caloricintake,feeding low-calorie-dense
mayinterfere withcontrolof glycaemia(Feldmanet al.,
diets,andincreasingcaloricexpenditure throughexer-
1983)(see Chapter9).If porcine lente is selected,an
cise.Many,but not all,Jow-calorie-dense diets are
approximate dosage of 0.25 IU/kg twice a day is
simultaneously high in fibre.
117
Chapter. 12  Canine diabetes mellitus
High fibre diets
Exercise alsa has a glucose-lowering effect by increas-
 Diets containing increased fibre are beneficial for im-
ing the absorption of insulin from its injection site,
proving glycaemic control in diabetic dogs (Nelson et
increasing blood flow (and therefore insulin delivery).to
al., 1998; Graham et al., 2002). The ability cf the food
exercising muscles, stimulating translocation of glu-
fibre to form a viscous gel and thus impair convective
cose transporters in muscle cells, and increasing glu-
 transfer of glucose and water to the absorptive surface
cose effectiveness (i.e. ability of hyperglycaemia to
of the intestine appears to be of greatest importance in
promote glucose disposal at basal insulin concentra-
slowing intestinal glucose absorption. The more vis-
tions) (Phillips et al., 1996; Nishida et al., 2001).
cous soluble fibres (e.g. gums, pectin) slow glucose
The daily routine for diabetic dogs should include
diffusion to a greater degree than the less viscous
exercise,preferably atthe same time each day.Strenu-
insoluble fibres (e.g. lignin, cellulose) and, as such, are
ous and sporadic exercise can cause severe hypogly-
believed to be of greater benefit in improving control of
caemia and should be avoided. If unavoidable, the
glycaemia. Most commercial high fibre diets contain
insulin dose should be decreased in dogs subjected to
predominantly insoluble fibre, althaugh, diets contain-
 sporadic strenuous exercise on those days of antici-
ing mixtures of soluble and insoluble fibre are becom-
pated lncreased exercise. The reduction in insulin
ing available. The amount of fibra varies considerably
dose required to prevent hypoglycaemia is variable
 among products, ranging from 3-25% of dry matter
and determined by trial and error. The insulin dose
(normal diets contain <2% fibre on a dry matter basis).
should be decreased by 50% initially and further ad-
 in general, diets containing 12% or more insoluble fibre
justments made based on the occurrence of sympto-
 or, 8% or more of a mixture of soluble and insoluble
matic hypoglycaemia and the severity of polyuria and
fibre ona dry matter basis are most likely tobe effective
polydipsia that develops during the ensuing 24-48
 in improving glycaemic control in diabetic dogs.
hours. In addition, owners must be aware of the signs
Common complications of feeding high insolubie
of hypoglycaemia and have a source of glucose readily
fibre diets include:
available to give their dog should any of these signs
develop (see below).
 Excessive frequency of defecation, constipation
and obstipation
Control of concurrent problems
 Hypoglycaemia 1-2 weeks after increasing the
Concurrent disease and administration of insulin-
fibre content of the diet
 antagonistic drugs are commonly identified in the dog
Unwillingness or refusal to eat the diet.
with newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus (Hess et al.,
2000b; Peikes et al., 2001). Both can interfere with
 Specific complications of high soluble fibre diets
insulin metabolism (pre-receptor problem) and tissue
include:
responsiveness to insulin, as a result of a decreased
number of insulin receptors at the surface of the cell
 Soft to watery stools
 membrane and alterations in insulin receptor binding
Excessive flatulence
affinity (receptor problem). They can also impair one of
 Hypoglycaemia 1-2 weeks after increasing the 
several post-receptor steps responsible for activation
fibre content of the diet
of glucose transport systems.
Unwillingness or refusal to eat the diet.
These problems can lead to insulin resistance
which may be mild and easily overcome by increasing
1f firm stools or constipation become a problem with
the dosage of insulin, or may be severe, causing
high insoluble fibre diets, a mixture of insoluble and
sustained and marked hyperglycaamia regardless of
soluble fibre diets can be fed or soluble fibre (e.g.
the type and dosage of insulin administered. Some
psyllium, canned pumpkin) can be added to the diet to
causes of insulin resistance are readily apparent at the
time diabetes mellitus is diagnosed, forexample, abes-
rhoea, or flatulence, become a problem with high
ity and the administration of insulin-antagonistic drugs
 soluble fibre diets, insoluble fibrecan be added and the
(e.g. glucocorticoids),. and can easily be dealt with.
quantity of the soluble fibre decreased. Problems with
Other causes of insulin resistance are not readily
 palatability are usually a result of too rapid a switch
apparent and require an extensive diagnostic evalua-
from the dog's usual diet to the high fibre diet or occur
tion for identification. In general, any concurrent inflam-
 as a result of boredom after consuming the high fibre
matory, infectious, hormonal or neoplastic disorder
diet for months. Periodic changes in the types of high
can cause insulin resistance and interfere with the
fibre diets and mixtures of diets can help alleviate the
effectiveness of insulin therapy. Their identification
problem with boredom. Finally, high fibre diets should
 and treatment plays an integral role in the successful
un sbop olaqeip peieioewa Jo ujul ol pal aq iou
management of the diabetic dog. The investigation of
control of glycaemia is established and a normal body
insulin resistance is discussed in detail in Chapter 9.
weight attained using a more calorie-dense, lower fibre
diet, designed for maintenance.
 Initial adjustments in insulin therapy
Diabetic dogs require several days to equilibrate to
Exercise
changes in insulin dosage or preparation.
Exercise plays an important role in maintaining glycae-
mic contral by helping to promote weight loss and
Hospitalization
 eliminating the insulin resistance induced by obesity.
Newly diagnosed diabetic dogs are typically hospital-
118
Chapter 12 Canine diabetes mellitus
ized forno morethan 24-48 hourstofinishthe diagnos-
Failure to achieve glycaemic control
tic evaluation and begin insulin therapy. During hospi-
Control of glycaemia can be established in most dogs
talization, blood glucose concentrations are generally
using doses ≤1.0 IU of insulin/kg administered twice
determined at the time insulin is administered and 3, 6
each day. If after the initial stabilization period of
and 9 hours later. The intent is to identity hypoglycae-
approximately 1 month,thereis poor control ofclinical
mia (blood gilucose <4 mmoll) in those dogs that are 
signsand the dose has not approached this value, then
unusually sensitive to the actions of insulin. lf hypogly-
insulin underdosage should be considered and gradual
caemia occurs, the insulin dosage is decreased priorto
dose incremenfs introduced each week. The effective-
 sending the dog home (see hypoglycaemia below).
ness of the change in therapy should be evaluated as
The insulin dasage is not adjusted in those dogs
which remain hyperglycaemic during the first few days
tions (see below). f the insulin dose exceeds 1.5 lu/kg
of insulin therapy. The objective during this first visit is
per injection without adequate glycaemic control, then
notto establish perfect glycaemic controi before send-
further investigations to determine the reason for treat-
ing the dog home. Rather, it is to begin to reverse the
ment failure are indicated (see recurrence and persist-
 metabolic derangements induced by the disease, al-
ence of clinical signs below).
low the dog to equilibrate to the insulin and change in
Many factors affect the dog's glycaemic control
diet, teachthe owner how to administer insulin and give
from day to day including:
the owner a few days to become accustomed to treat-
ing their dog at home. Adjustments in insulin therapy
Variations in insulin administration and
are made on subsequent evaluations, once the owner
and dog have become accustomed to the treatment
 Dietary indiscretions and caloric intake
regimen.
Amount of exercise
Variables that affect insulin responsiveness (e.g.
Home care
 stress, concurrent inflammation, infection).
After discharge, diabetic dogs are typically evaluated
weekly until an effective insulin treatment protocol is
 As a consequence, the insulin dosage required to
idenified. Using this regimen, owners are informed
maintain glycaemiccontroi typicaily changes with time.
that it wil take approximately one month to establish a
Initially, a fixed dosage of insulin is administered at
 satisfactory insulin freatment protocol, assuming un-
home and changes in insulin dosage are made only
identified insulin-antagonistic disease is not present.
after the owner consults with the veterinary surgeon.
The goals of therapy are also explained to the owner.
Adjustments in insulin dosage are common and even-
During this month, changes in insulin dosage, type and
tuaily a range of insulin dosages required to maintain
 glycaemic controlis established. As the insulin dosage
should be anticipated by the owner.
range becomes apparent and as confidence is gained
At each weekly evaluation: the owner's subjective
in the owner's abiity to recognize signs of hypoglycae.
opinion of water intake, urine output and cverail heaith.
mia and hyperglycaemia, the owner is eventually al.
of their pet is discussed; a complete physical examina-
Jowed to make slightadjustments in.the insulin dosage
tion is performed; change in body weight noted; and
at home based on clinical observations of their pet's
seriai blood glucose measurements assessed. On the
well-being. However, owners must seek veterinary
day that the serial blood glucose curve is to be per-
attention if the dog remains symptomatic despite slight
formed, the insuin and feeding schedule used by the
adjustments in the insulin dosage.
owner should be maintained - the dog dropped off at
 the hospital early in the morning - and blood obtained
Additfonal therapies
for glucose determination every 1-2 hours throughout
the day (i.e. from 7-9 am to 4-6 pm).
Alpha-glucosldase Inhlbitors
Adjustments in insulin therapy are based on this 
Acarbose and miglitol are complex oligosaccharides of
 information, the dog is discharged and an appointment
microbial origin that competitively inhibit alpha
is scheduled for the following week to re-evaluate the
glucosidases (glucoamylase, sucrase, maltase and
response to any change in therapy. lf the animal
jsomaltase) in the brush border of the small intestinal
remains poorly controlled, the dose of insulin is gradu-
 mucosa. Inhibition of these enzymes delays digestion 
ally increased by 1 to 5 units/injection (depending on
of complex carbohydrates and disaccharides to
the size of the dog) per week. This gradual increase In
monosaccharides. This inhibition delays absorption of
dose helps prevent the induction of hypoglycaemia or
 glucose from the intestinal tract and decreases post-
the Somogyioverswing,especially in toy and miniature
prandial blood glucose concentrations.
breeds. If hypoglycaemia is noted either clinically or
 Placebo-controlled clinical studies recently com-
biochemically, the dosage shouid be decreased (see
 pleted in heathy and diabetic dogs documented a
hypogiycaemia below). Glycaemic control is attained
decrease in postprandial glucose absorption and insu-
 when clinical signs of diabetes have resolved, the dog
is healthy and interactive in the home environment, its
acarbose, compared with placebo; and a decrease in
body weight is stable, the owner is satisfied with the
 dally insulin dose, blood glucose and glycated protein
progress of therapy and, if possible, the blood glucose
 concentrations in diabetic dogs treated with acarbose,
concentrations range between approximately 5 and 15
campared with placebo (Robertson et al., 1999; Nel-
mmol/ throughout the day.
son et al., 2000).
119
Chapter 12  Canine diabetes melltus
Unfortunately, diarrhoea and weight loss as a result
History and physical examination
 of carbohydrate malassimilation were common ad-
The most important initial parameters to assess when
verse effects, occurring in approximately 35% of dogs.
evaluating control of glycaemia are:
Diarrhoea was more prevalent at higher doses of
acarbose {ie. 100 and 200 mg/dog) and typically
The owner's subjective opinion of the severity of
resolved within 2-3 days of discontinuing the medica-
clinical signs and overall health of their pet
tion. Because of its cost and the prevalence of adverse
 Findings on physical examination 
effects, acarbose should be reserved fortreating poorly
Stability of body weight.
controlled diabetic dogs where the exact cause cannot
be identified and insulin treatment, by itself, is ineffec-
 If the owner is happy with the results of treatment,
 tive in preventing clinical signs of diabetes. The initial
the physical examination is supportive of good glycae-
acarbose dosage is 12.5-25 mg per dog at each meal.
 mic control and the body weight is stable, the diabetic
The benefit of this drug is dependent on its interaction
dog is usually adequately controlled. It is preferable to
with the meal and it should be given only at the time of
consult with the owner and perform the physical exami-
feeding. A stepwise increase to 50 mg/dog and, inlarge
o 'oi loud Aep aun go buiuubag aut le bop auijo uo
dogs (>25 kg), afurther increase to 100 mg/dog can be
within, one hour of insulin administration, allowing
considered if glycaemic control is not improved after 2
 collection of blood for determination of glucose and
weeks using the lower dose. Adverse reactions (espe-
 serum fructosamine concentrations at that time.
cially diarrhoea) are more likely to occur atthese higher
doses.
Blood glucose concentration
In most weliregulated diabetic dogs, the blood glucose
Chromium
concentration measured prior to, or within, one hour of
Chromium is a ubiquitous frace elerment that exerts
insulin administration is between 7 and 16 mmol/l; the 
insulin-like effects in vitro. The exact mechanism of
blood glucose concentration measured 5-8 hours after
 action is not known but the overall effect of chromium
insulin administrationis between4 and9 mmof/l (Briggs
et al., 2o00). A blood glucose concentration measured
post-receptor mechanism of action. In one study, di-
near the time of insulin aoministration that is <7 mmol/
ora blood glucose concentration measured 5-1 0hours
results of an intravenous glucose tolerance test in
 after insulin administration that is <4 mmoi/l in a pre-
paea nou shop Aueay ym panedoo 'shop Aueay
 sumably well controlled diabetic dog raises concern of
with chromium (Spears et al., 1998).
 hypoglycaemia that is either asymptomatic or not rec-
 ognized by the owner. Measuremenf of serum
chromium picalinate supplementation on glucose tol-
fructosamine concentration may assist in definitively
erance in obese dogs during weight reduction (Gross
diagnosing such a situation (see circulating
et al., 2000) or a beneticial effect on control of glycae-
fructosamine concentration below).
mia in insulin-treated diabetic dogs (Schachter et al.
 If thie blood glucose concentration measured near
2001). Chromium picolinate can be purchased in health 
the time of insulin administration, or 5-8 hours after
food stores and pharmacies in some countries. It is
insulin administration, is >17 mmol/l or 11 mmol/l,
relatively inexpensive and there are no known toxic
respectively, poor control of glycaemia is possible
effects associated with its ingestion. Aithough prelimi-
particuiarly if the history and physical examination
nary studies failed to identify an effect on control of
findings are suggestive (Briggs ef al., 200o). Docu-
glycaemia, chromium picolinate treatment (200-400
menting an increased blood glucose concentration
mg/dog orally bid) could be considered in poorly con-
does not, by itself, confirm poor control of glycaemia.
trolled diabetic dogs where the exact cause cannot be
Stress or excitement can cause marked hyperglycae-
identified, and when insulin treatment, by itself, is
mia that does not reflect the dog's responsiveness to
ineffective in preventing clinical signs of diabetes.
insulin and can lead to the erroneous belief that the
diabetic dog is poorly controlled. If a discrepancy exists
Long-term monitoring of diabetic
blood glucose concentration, or the dog is fractiaus,
control
aggressive, excited or scared, and the blood glucose
concentration is known to be unreliable, measurement
The basic objective of insulin therapy is to eliminate the
 of serum fructosamine concentration should be done
clinical signs of diabetes melitus while avoiding the
to further evaluate status of glycaemic control.
common complications associated with the disease.
The devastating chronic complications of human dia-
Circulating fructosamine concentration
 betes (e.g. nephropathy, vasculopathy, coronary ar-
 Fructosamines are glycated proteins that result from
tery disease) require several decades to develop and
an irreversible non-enzymatic, insulin-independent
are uncommon in diabetic dogs. As such, the need to
binding of glucose to serum proteins. Serum
establish near normal blood glucose concentrations is
fructosamine concentrations are a marker of mean
 not necessary in diabeticdogs. Mosi owners are happy
blood glucose cancentration during the circulating
-dsse Alaal pue Aiay aie shop jsow pue
lifespan of the protein, which varies from 1 to 3 weeks
matic if blood glucose concentrations are kept between
 depending on the protein. The extent of glycosylation
 5 and 15 mmol/l for most of the day.
of serum proteins is directly related to the blood glu-
120
Chapter 12 Canine diabetesmellitus
Serum fructosamine concentrationsincreasewhen
Blood sample
1-2mlserum
glycaemic control of the diabetic dog worsens and
Freeze untl assayed
decreasewhenglycaemiccontrol improves.
Sample handling
Fructosamineismeasured inserum,whichshould
Methodology
Automated colorimetric assay using
befrozen and shipped on coldpacksovernight to the
nitroblue tetrazolium chloride
laboratory.Storage ofserumatroom temperature
Factors afecting results
Hypoproteinaemia and
overnight candecreaseserum fructosamineresultsby
hypoalbuminaemia (decrease),
10%.Eachiaboratoryshould provideitsownreference
hyperlipidaemia(decrease),azotaemia
range forhealthy dogswithpersistentlynormal blood
(decrease), storage af rcom
glucose concenfrations but interpretation of serum
temperature (decrease)
fructosamine ina diabeticdog must take intoconsid-
Normalrange
225-365μmoll
eration thefact thathyperglycaemia iscommon,even
in well controlled diabetic dogs (Figure 12.6).
Interpretation in diabetic dogs:
Based onareferencerange of225-365 umol/
Prolonged hypoglycaemia
<300 μmoll
(Briggs etal.,200o),mostowners arehappywith their
Excellentcontrol
350-400umoll
400-450μmol
dog'sresponse to insulin treatment if its fructosamine
Good control
Fair control
450-500μmol
concentrationiskeptbetween350-450μmol/1.Values
Poor control
>500μmoll
>500μmol/l suggest inadequatecontrol of thediabetic
state andvalues>600μmoll indicateseriouslackof
Samplehanding,methodology andrcference
glycaemic control,although neitheridentify the under-
12.6
lying problem(Figure 12.7).Serum fructosamine con-
dogs. These are guideline ranges only. Each laboratory
centrations in the lower halfof thenormal reference
shouldfurnishitscwn specificranges.
range(i.e.<300umol/l)orbelowthe normalreference
cose concentration;the higher the average blood glu-
range shouldraise concern for significantperiodsof
cose concentration during thepreceding 1-3weeks,
thehigher theserum fructosamine concentration,and
dose of insulin administered.
vice versa.Serum fructosamine concentration isnot
affected by acute increases in the blood glucose con-
Serial blood glucose curve
centration,as occurs with stress or excitement-
If an adjustment in insulin therapy is deemed neces-
induced hyperglycaemia,but can be affected by
sary afterreviewing the history,physicalexamination.
hypoalbuminaemia (<25 g/) and hyperlipidaemia
changes in body weight and serum fructosamine con-
(triglycerides>1.7mmol/)(ReuschandHaberer,2001).
centration,thenaserialbloodglucosecurveshouldbe
Serum fructosamine concentrations should be
generated-toprovideguidanceinmaking the adjust-
measured during theroutine evaluationofdiabetic
ment-unless bloodglucose measurements are unre
dogs,performed every36onths,norder to:
liable because of stress,aggression or excitement.
Theserial blood glucose curveprovidesguidelinesfor
Clarifytheeffectof stressorexcitement onblood
making rational adjustments in insulin therapy.
glucose concentrations
Evaluationofa serial blood glucose curveisonly
To investigate discrepancies between the history,
necessary indogs with clinical manifestations of hyper-
physical examination findingsandblood glucose
concentrations
amination,body weight,single blood glucose
Toassess the effectivenessof changes ininsulin
therapy.
centrationare evaluated initiallytopredictwhena
Mean biood glucose
12.7
concentration determined
600
12
cver an 8 hour period (MBG)
serum fructosamine and
500-
glycosylatea haermoglobin
10
concentration (Gly Hgb) in diabetic
dogs with poor control ot glycaemia.
Ten dogs had the Somogyi
400
8
30
phenomcnon(pinkbars)anc 12had
hyperadrenocorticism-induced
25
300
6
insulin resistance (black bars). Note
20
the similar gycated protein results in
bothgrcups.Although tne average
15
200
4
blood glucose concentration is lower
on the day hypog ycaemia is
10
identified in dogs with the Somogyi
100
2
phenomenon, high blcod glucose
5
concentrations on subsequcnt days
result in high glycated protein
0
0
0
MBGah
GlyHgb
concenfrations.SD,Standard
Fructosamine
(mmol/l+SD)
(μmol/I+SD)
(%+SD)
deviation.
121
Chapter12Caninediabetesmellitus
blood glucosecurveisrequired,thenthe frequencyof
vicesprovidebloodglucose concentrationsreason-
performing blood glucose curveswillbereduced.This
ablyclose to those obtained withreferencemethods,
inturnreducesthenumber ofvenepuncturesand
althoughresultsoften consistently over-orunderesti-
shortensthehospitalizationtime,therebyminimizing
mate actual glucose values(Figure 12.9)(Cohn et al,
thedog's aversion to theseevaluations and improving
2000;Wess and Reusch,2000a).
the chances of obtaining meaningful results when a
Inthe author'sexperience,blood glucose values
blood glucosecurve is actuallyperformed.
determinedbymost portable bloodglucosemonitoring
When assessing glycaemic control,the insulin and
devices are typically lower than actual glucose values
feedingschedule usedbytheownershouldbe main-
determined by referencemethods.This mayresult in
tained,thedog droppedoff at thehospital earlyin the
morning,andbloodobtainedforglucosedetermination
every 1-2hours throughout the day.Itis important to
is.Failure to consider this‘error'could result in insulin
maintain the dog's dailyroutineinorder toreduce the
underdosage and the potential for persistence of clini-
riskof inaccurate blood glucose results,caused by
cal signs despite what appear tobeacceptable'blood
inappetence in the hospital or insulin administrationat
glucoseresults.
an unusual time.Bymeasuring blood glucose concen-
tration every1-2hours throughout the day,the clini-
Adjustmentof insulin therapy
cianwillbeabletodetermine:
Insulin therapy should be adjusted based on interpre-
tation of a single serial blood glucose curve,with the
Whether the insuliniseffective
idealgoalof maintaining bloodglucoseconcentrations
The time of peak insulineffect(glucosenadir)
between5and15mmol1.Ownerperceptionsofclinical
The duration of insulin effect
response and change in serum fructosamine concen-
The severity of fluctuation inblood glucose
tratianshould thenbeused to assess the impactof the
concentrations in that particular dog.
insulin adjustment on control of glycaemia.Serum
fructosamineconcentrationsaremeasured2-3weeks
The blood glucose curve provides more information
after changing insulin therapy.lf the change in insulin
thanoneortwobasal glucoseevaluationswhenfully
therapy improves control of glycaemia,a decrease in
evaluating the effectsof a given insulin dose.This is
serumfructosamine concentration should occur.lf the
illustrated in Figure12.8.
serum fructosamine concentration is the same or has
increased,the changeisineffective in improving gly
25-
caemic control. In such cases,repeating the blood
ol/l)
glucose curve shouldbeconsidered.
20
(mm
Problems in performing blood glucose curves
Bloodglucose curves arenotwithoutproblems
15
(Fleeman and Rand, 2003).Performing blood glucose
curvesonmultiple,consecutivedaysshouldbeavoided
10-
In addition,informationgained fromapriorserialblood
glucosecurve shouldneverbe assumed toberepro-
con
5-
ducibleonsubsequentcurves.lnsomedogs,resultsof
serialbloodglucosecurvesmayvarydramaticallyfrom
0十
daytodayormonthtomonth,dependinginpart,onthe
08.00
12.00
16.00
20.00
actual amount of insulin administered and absorbed
Time of day
fromthe subcutaneoussiteofdeposition,aswellasthe
interactionbetweeninsulin,diet,exercise,stress,ex-
12.8
Blood glucose concentration curve in a
Dachshund receiving recombinant human lente
citement,presenceofconcurrentdisorders,andsecre-
insulin al 0.8 IU/kg bid (blue), a Miniature Poodle receiving
tion ofthe counter-regulatory hormones(i.e.glucagon,
rccombinant human lente insulin at 0.6 IU/kg bid (pink) and
epinephrine (adrenaline),cortisol, GH).in other dogs,
aTerrier-mixreceiving recomoinant human lente insulin at
blood glucosecurves arereasonablyconsistentfrom
1.1 IU/kg bid (green). Insulin and food was given to each
day today andmonth tomonth.
cog at 8am.Interpretation of the blood glucose curves
Lackof consistency inresultsof serial bloodglu-
suggestshor durationof insulin effectin theDachshund,
cose curves creates frustration for manyveterinary
insulin uncerdosagc in the Miniature Pcodle and the
Somogyi effect in the Terrier-mix. Nate lhal Ine blood
surgeons.It isimportant toremember that this lack of
glucose ccncentrations were similar in all cogs at 2pm and
consistencyisadirectreflectionofall thevariablesthat
4pm,anc thereforeresults at these times donot establish
affect the blood glucose concentrationin diabetics.
the diagncsis.(Data from Nelson and Couto (2003).)
Daily self monitoring of blood glucose concentrations
and frequent adjustments in insulin dose are recom-
Equipment
mended inhumandiabeticpatients tominimizethe
Bloodglucose concentrations aretypically determined
effect of thesevariablesoncontrolofglycaemia.A
byeitherapaint-of-careglucose analyserorhand-held
similar approach for diabetic dogswill undoubtedly
portable blood glucose monitoring device.Commer-
become more commonin the future ashome glucose
ciallyavailableportablebloodglucosemonitoring de-
monitoring techniques are refined.
122
Chapter12Canine diabetesmelitus
(mmol/l)
ce(mmol/
nce
4
68102141618202224252
2251012141618202224262830
Reference concentration(mmol/l)
Reference concentration(mmol/l)
(a)
(c)
(/ow)
ce
Differend
4
246810121416182022242528
2451012141618202224262830
Reference concentration(mmol/l)
Reference concentration (mmol/l)
(b)
(d)
12.9
Scatterplotsshowingthedifference inblood glucoseconcentraton obtainedwith 4porlableblood glucose
meters(a-d)versus concentrations obtainedwith reforcnco methods,forolood samples from 170 dogs.(Data
from Wess and Reusch (2000).)
Fornow,initialassessmentofcontrolofglycaemia
Insulineffectiveness.glucose nadirand duration of
isbasedon theowner'sperception of theirdiabetic
insulineffectarethecritical determinations from the
pet'shealthcombined withperiodicexaminations,and
serial blood glucosecurve.
blood glucose and fructosamine measurements.Se-
rial bloodglucosemeasurements are onlyindicated if
Insulineffectiveness:Theeffectivenessofinsulinis
hypoglycaemia or poor control is suspected. The pur-
the firstparameter to assess.Is the insulin effective in
pose of serial bloodglucosemeasurements istoobtain
lowering the blood glucose concentration?Theinsulin
aglimpseof the actionsof insulin in that diabetic
dosage,thehighest blood glucose concentration and
animal,toidentifyareason thatcouldexplainwhy the
thedifferencebetweenthehighestandlowestblood
diabeticdog ispoorlycontrolled and to assessthe
glucose concentrations(ie.blood glucose differential)
marginfor dose adjustment.
must be considered simultaneouslywhen assessing
insulin effectiveness.
Interpretation
If the insulin isnoteffective in lowering theblood
Thebloodglucosecurvewill allowtheveterinarysur-
glucose concentration,the clinician should consider
geon to assess the effectiveness of the administered
insulinunderdosageandthedifferentialsforinsulin
insulintolawerthebloodglucoseconcentration,deter-
ineffectiveness and resistance(see Chapter 9).In
mine the glucose nadir and the duration of insulin
general,insulin underdosage should be considered if
effect.lIdeally,allbloodglucoseconcentrationsshould
the insulin dosage is<1.0 lU/kgper injection in the
rangebetween5and15mmol/lduringthetimeperiod
diabetic dog;insulin ineffectiveness and resistance
betweeninsulininjections.Typically,the highest blood
shouldbeconsidered if the insulin dosage exceeds
glucose concentrationsoccurat the time af eachinsu-
lin injection but this is not always the case.
always bewary of the Somogyi phenomenon,espe-
123
Chapter 12  Canine diabetes mellitus
cially in toy and miniature breeds, and the effect of
mmol/l; is usually not changed if the glucose
stress on the blood glucose results.
nadir is between 7 and 9 mmal/l; and is
decreased approximately 10% if the glucose
Glucose nadir: If insulin is effective in lowering the
nadir is between 4 and 7 mmol/l.
blood glucose concentratian, the next parameter to
 assess is the lowest blood glucose concentration (i.e.
Control of glycaemia should be re-evaiuated 7-14
glucose nadir). The glucose nadir should ideally fall
days after initiating the new type of insulin and adjust-
between 5 and 7 mmoll. If the glucose nadir is >8
ments in the insulin dose made accordingly.
mmol/l the insulin dosage may need to be increased;
and if the nadir is <4 mmol1 the insulin dosage should
Evaluating aggressive, excitable or
be decreased. For the latter, the reduction in insulin
stressed patients
dosage depends on the amount of insulin given at the
Hyperglycaemia induced by stress, aggression or ex-
time the glucose curve is generated. If the diabetic dog
is receiving an'acceptable' dose of insulin (i.e. <1.0 Iu/
racy of the serial blood glucose curve. Stress can
kg/injection) the insulin dosage should be decreased
override the glucose-lowering effectof the insulin injec-
approximately 10-25%. If the dog is receiving a large
tion, causing high bload glucose concentrations de-
amount of insulin (e.g. >2.2 IU/kg/injection) glycaemic
spite the presence of adequate amounts of insulin in
reguiation should be started over again using the
 the circulation and leading to a spiralling path of: insulin
insulin dose recommended for the initial regulation of
overdosage → hypoglycaemia → Somogyi phenom-
the diabetic dog. Control of glycaemia should be re-
enon → poor control of glycaemia.
evaluated 7-14 days after initiating the naw dose of
The biggest factors inducing stress hyperglycae-
insulin and adjustments in the insulin dose made
mia are hospitalization and multiple venepunctures. An
accordingly.
alternative to hospital-generated blood glucose curves
is to have the owner generate the blood glucose curve
Duration of effect: This can be assessed if the glu-
at home using the ear or lip prick technique and a
portable home glucose monitoring device that allows
decrease in the blood glucose concentration after
the owner to touch the drop of blood on the ear or lip
insulin administration. Assessment of duration of insu-
with the end of the glucose-test strip (Casella et al.,
lin effect may not be valid when the blood glucose
2003). This technique can help minimize stress-
decreases to <4 mmal/ or decreases rapidly because
induced hyperglycaemia. In addition, there has been a
of the potential induction of the Somogyi phenomenon,
preliminary report of the use of a continuous glucose
monitoring device in dogs (Davison et al., 2003b);
insulin effect (see Chapter 9). The duration of effect is
however, more studies in diabetic dogs are required
roughly defined as the time from the insulin injection
before the device can be recommended for clinical use.
through the lowest glucose and until the blood glucose
 Alternatively, serum fructosamine concentrations
concentration exceeds f1-14 mmol/l. Duration of ef-
alone can be used to assess control of glycaemia and
fect of lente insulin is 10-14 hours in approximately
effectiveness of adjustments in insulin therapy in ag-
90% of diabetic dogs, necessitating twice daily insulin
 gressive, excitable or stressed diabetic dogs. If a
treatment: Dogs are usually symptomatic for diabetes
change in insulin therapy is deemed necessary, the
if the duration of insulin effect is <10 hours and may
clinician must make an educated guess as to where the
develop hypoglycaemia or the Somogyi phenomenon
problem lies (e.g. low insulin dose), make an adjust-
if the duration of insulin effect is >14 hours and the
ment in therapy, and rely on the change in subsequent
insulin is being administered twice a day.
serum fructosamine concentration to assess the ben-
efit of the change in treatment every 2-3 weeks. Home
Alteratlons in dosage
monitoring of urine glucose may also be helpful to
Adjustments in the dosage of insulin are often neces-
assess the efficacy of dose adjustment.
sary at the same time as alterations in type of insulin.
Adjustments in insulin dosage are usually dictated by
Urine glucose monitoring
the change in type of insulin and the glucose nadir.
Occasional homa monitoring of urine for glycosuria
Longer-acting insulin (i.e. ultralente, PZl, insulin
and ketonuria is helpful in those diabeticdogs that have
glargine) is less potent than intermediate-acting insulin
problems with recurring ketosis or hypoglycaemia, to
(i.e. NPH, lente). It takes more of a less potent insulin
determine whether ketonuria, or persistent negative
to get a comparable decrease in the blood glucose
glycosuria, is present, respectively. However, allowing
 concentration, compared with a more potent insulin.
owners to adjust daily insulin dosages based on morn-
ing urine glucose measurements should be avoided,
·
 When switching from a more potent to a less
except to decrease the insulin dose in dogs with
potent insulin, the dose of insulin is usually not
recurring hypoglycaemia and persistent negative gly-
changed if the glucose nadir is between 4 and 7
cosuria. The vast majority of diabetic dogs develop
mmol/l, and is increased approximately 10% if
complications as a result of owners being misled by
the glucose nadir is >7 mmol/l.
morning urine glucose concentrations particularly if
 When switching from a less potent to a more
frequent dose adjustments are made. On occasion
potent insulin, the dose of insulin is increased
evaluation of multiple urine samples obtained through-
 s  oh   %o1 Aewxdde
out the day and early evening may be helpful. The well
124
Chapter12 Canine diabetesmellitus
controlled diabeticdog should have urine that isfreeof
ractformation in14%ofdogsatthetime diabetes
glucosefor most of each24-hour period.Persistent
mellituswas diagnosed anda timeinterval for25%,
glycosuria throughout the day andnight suggests
50%,75%and 80%of the study population to develop
inadequate control of the diabeticstate and theneed
cataractsof60,170,370,and470days,respectively
foramorecompleteevaluationofdiabeticcontrolusing
(Beam et al.,1999).
the other techniques discussed in this section.
The pathogenesis of diabetic cataract formation is
thought toberelated to alteredosmoticrelationshipsin
thelensinducedbytheaccumulationofsorbitol and
Chronic complications of diabetes
mellitus
that cause an influx of water into thelens,leading to
swellingandruptureof thelensfibresandthe develop-
Complicationsresulting from diabetes oritstreatment
ment of cataracts(Richter et al.,2002).
are common(Figure 12.10) in dogs and include:
Cataract formation is anirreversibleprocess once
it begins andcan occurquiterapidly.Diabeticdogsthat
Blindnessand anterior uveitisresulting from
arepoorly controlled and haveproblemswithwide
cataract formation
fluctuations inblood glucoseconcentration seem es-
Hypoglycaemia
pecially atriskforrapid development ofcataracts.
Chronic pancreatitis
Blindness maybe cured byremoving the abnormal
Recurring infections
lens.Vision isrestoredinapproximately75-80%of
Poor glycaemic control
diabeticdogs thatundergocataractremoval.Factors
Ketoacidosis.
that affect the successof surgeryinclude:thedegree
of glycaemic control preceding the surgery; the pres-
Many owners arehesitant to treat their newly diag-
ence of retinal disease;and the presence of lens-
nosed diabeticdogbecauseofknowledgeregarding
induced uveitis.
chroniccomplicationsexperienced inhumandiabetic
patientsandconcern thatasimilarfateawaits their
Lens-induced uveitis
pet.However,owners should be assured that the
During embryogenesis,the lens is formed within its
devastating effects of human diabetes mellitus (e.g.
own capsule and its structural proteins arenotexposed
totheimmunesystem.Therefore,immunetoleranceto
require10-20yearsorlongertodevelop and therefore
the crystallineproteins does not develop.During cata-
are uncommon in diabetic dogs.Diabetes mellitus is a
ract formation and reabsorption,lens proteins are
disease of olderdogs andmost donot livebeyond5
exposed to local ocularimmune systems,resulting in
years from the time of diagnosis. In the author's expe-
inflammation and uveitis.Uveitis that occurs in
rience,owners are usually willing to‘tackle'the care of
associationwithareabsorbing,hypermaturecataract
a diabeticpetonce thefearsrelated tochroniccompli-
maydecrease the success of cataract surgery and
cations seen in human diabetics are alleviated.
must be controlled before surgery.The treatment of
lens-induced uveitis focuses on decreasing the
Common
inflammation and preventing further intraocular
damage.Topical ophthalmic corticosteroids are the
latrogenic hypoglycaemia
mostcommonlyused drugfor the controlofocular
Persistent polyuria, polydipsia,weight loss
inflammation.However,systemic absorption of
Cataracts
topically applied corticosteroids may cause insulin
Bacterial infectionsespecially in theurinary tract
Pancreatitis
antagonism and interferewith glycaemiccontrolof the
diabeticstate,especially intoy and miniature breeds.
Ketoacidosis
An alternative is the topicaladministration ofnon-
Uncommon
steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (e.g. 0.03%
Peripheral neuropathy
flurbiprofen) or ciclosporin.
Glomeruloneprpthyglmeruloslesis
Retinopathy
Hypoglycaemia
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Hypoglycaemia isa common complicationof insulin
Gastric paresis
therapy and typically occurs:following a sudden large
Diabetic diarrhoea
increaseintheinsulindose,withexcessiveoverlapof
Diabetic dermatopathy (i.e. superficial necrolytic dermatitis)
insulin action in dogs receiving insulin twice a day;
during unusually strenuous exercise;and following
12.10
Complications of diabetes mellitus in dogs.
prolonged inappetence.In these situations,severe
hypoglycaemia may occur before glucose counter-
regulation (i.e. secretion of glucagon, epinephrine,
Cataracts
cortisol and GH) is ableto compensateforandreverse
Cataractformation isthemostcommonandone of the
the hypoglycaemia.Signs ofhypoglycaemia include:
most important long-term complicationsofdiabetes
mellitus in the dog.Aretrospective cohort study on
Lethargy
the development of cataracts in 132 diabetic dogs-
Weakness
referred to a university-referral hospital -found cata-
Head tilting
。
125
Chapter 12  Canine diabetes mellitus
Ataxia
 Responsiveness to insulin caused by concurrent
+
Seizures
inflammatory, infectious, neoplastic or hormonal 
Cama.
disorders (i.e. insulin resistance).
The occurrence and severity of clinical signs is
The most common problams associated with insu-
dependent both on the rate of blood glucose decline
lin and the treatment regimen include insulin
and on the severity of hypoglycaemia. Symptomatic
underdosage, the Somogyi phenomenon and short
hypoglycaemia is treated with glucose administered as
duration of effect. Discrepancies in the parameters
food, sugar water, dextrose gel or intravenous dex-
used to assess glycaemic control, resulting in an erro-
trose. Whenever signs of hypoglycaemia occur, the
neous belief that the diabetic dog is poorly controlled,
 owner should be instructed to stop insulin therapy until
should also be considered. This is usually caused by
 glycosuria recurs. The adjustment in the subsequent 
erroneously high blood glucose concentrations that
insulin dosage is somewhat arbitrary; as a general rule
 suggest insulin ineffectiveness. These high values
of thumb, the insulin dosage initially should be de-
may be stress-induced and do not necessarily reflect
creased by 25-50% and subsequent adjustments in
the patient's responsiveness to insulin.
the dosage based on clinical response and results of
When evaluating a diabetic dog for suspected insu-
 blood glucose and fructosamine measurements.
lin inelfectiveness, it is important fhat all parameters
 If hypoglycaemia remains a recurring problem de-
used to assess glycaemic control be critically ana-
 spite reductions in the insulin dose, excessive overlap
lysed, most notably the owner's perceptions of how
in insulin action or reversion to a non-insulin-depend-
their dog is responding in the home environment,
ent diabetic state should be considered. Excessive
findings on physical examination, changes in body
overlap of insulin action results from twice a day
weight, and blood glucose and fructosamine concen-
administration of insulin whose duration of efect is
trations. If these are suggestive of poor control of the
considerably longer than 12 hours in that diabetic dog.
diabetic state, a diagnostic evaluation to identify the
 Resolution of an apparent insulin-dependent diabetic
cause is warranted, beginning with evaluation of the
state is uncommon in dogs and usually indicative of
owner's insulin administration technique, the biological
 secondary diabetes. Failure of glycosuria to recur
activity of the insulin preparation and its effectiveness
following a hypoglycaemic episode may also indicate
in aliering blood glucose concentrations. The investi-
impaired glucose counter-regulation. Impaired glucose
gation and management of poorly regulated diabetic
counter-regulation refers to a syndrome characterized
dogs is discussed in detail in Chapter 9. Poorly control-
 by decreased secretion ofglucagon and catecholamines
[ed diabetic dogs are at increased risk of developing
in response to acute hypoglycaemia, which develops
DKA particularly if a concurrent problem exists (see
in humans with chronic diabetes melitus, and results in
Chapter 14).
 Diabetic neuropathy
mia.
Asymptomatic hypoglycaemia may be identified
Although a common complication in the diabetic cat,
during avaluation of a serial blood glucose curve or by
diabetic neuropathy is infrequently recognized in the
demonstrating a serum fructosamine concentration in
 diabetic dog. Subclinical neuropathy is probably more
the lower half or below the reference range. However,
common than is severe neuropathy resulting in clinical
a high-end reference range or high fructosamine con-
signs. In the author's experience, clinical signs consist-
centration does not rule out asymptomatic hypoglycae-
ent with diabetic'neuropathy are most commonly rec-
mia, in part,because of hypoglycaemia-induced glucose
ognized in dogs that have been diabetic for a long
counterregulation (Somogyi phenomenon). Treatment 
period of time (i.e. 5 years cr longer). Clinical signs and
of asymptomatic hypoglycaemia involves decreasing
physical examination findings supportive of a coexist-
the dose of insulin, typically by 10-25% and assessing
ent neuropathy in the diabetic dog include weakness,
the clinical response, change in serum fructosamine
knuckling, abnormal gait, muscle atrophy, depressed
concentration and, in non-stressed dogs, blood
limb reflexes and deficits in postural reaction testing.
glucose concentrations. lf hypoglycaemia persists,
Diabetic neuropathy in the dog is primarily a distal
prolonged duration of activity of insulin, diabetic remis-
 polyneuropathy, characterized by segmental demyeli-
sion orimpaired counter-regulatory hormonal response
nation and remyelination; and axonal degeneration
to hypoglycaemia as discussed above should be
and regeneration. There is no specific treatment for
considered.
diabetic neuropathy besides meticulous metabolic
control of the diabetic state.
 Recurrence or persistence of clinical signs
 Recurrence or persistence of clinical signs of diabetes
Diabetic nephropathy
is the most comman 'complicatian' of insulin therapy in 
Although diabetic nephropathy has occasionally been
diabetic dogs. Recurrence or continuing clinical signs
reported in the dog, its clinical recognition appears to
suggests insulin ineffectiveness, whichis usually caused
be low. Histopathological findings in diabetic neph-
by problems with the:
evaluation of the dog; and on the degree of glycaemic
 Biological activity of the insulin or owner
contral but include membranous glomerulonephropathy
technique in administering insulin 
with fusion of the foot processes, glomerular and
Insulin itself or the treatment regimen
tubular basement membrane thickening, an increase
126
Chapter 12  Canine diabetes mellitus
in the mesangial matrix materiai, the presence of
References and further reading
subendothelial deposits, glomerular fibrosis, and
glomerulosclerosis.
 Beam S, Correa MT and Davidson MG (1999) A retrospective-cohort
 The pathogenic mechanism of diabetic nephro-
study on the development of cataracts in dogs with diabetes
pathy is unknown, but is undoubtedly multifactorial.
melius: 200 cases. Veterinary Ophthaimoiogy 2, 169-172
Brlggs C, Nalson RW, Feldman EC, Eliott DA and Neal LA (2000)
Ciinical signs depend on the severity of the glomerulo-
Reliabily ot history and physical examinalion findings for
ol rauiy aul jo age jeuoouny eyi pue sisoias
assessing contral of glycemia in dogs wlth diabetes melitus:53
excrete metabolic wastes. Initially, diabetic nephropa-
cases (1995-1998). Journal of the American Veterinary Medicat
Association 217,48-53
thy is manifested as severe proteinuria, primarily albu-
Casella M, Wess G, Hassig Mand Reusch CE (2003) Home monitoring
minuria, as a result of the glomerular dysfunction. As
of blood glucose concentration by owners of diabetic dogs.
the glomerular changes progress, glomerular filtration
Joumalof Small Animal Practice 44.298-305
 Cohn LA, McCaw DL, Tate DJ and Johnson JC (20c0) Assessment
becomes progressively impaired, resulting in the de-
velopmeni of azotaemia and eventually uraemia. With
and color test slrips for measuring blood glucose concentration
In dogs.Journalof the AmericanVeterinary Medicai Associalion
severe fibrosis of the giomeruli, oliguric and then anuric,
216, 198-202
renal failure develops. There is no specific treatment
Davison LJ, Ristic JM, Herrtage ME, Ramsey IK and Catchpola B
for diabetic nephropathy apart from meticulous meta-
(2003a) Anti-insulin antibodies in dogs with nalurally occurring
diabetesmelitus.Veterinary/mmunoiogyandimmunopathology
bolic control of the diabetic state, conservative medical
91,53-60
management of the renal insufficiency and control of
Davison LJ, Slater LA, Herrtage ME, Church DB, Judge S, Ristic JME
systemic hypertension.
monitoring syslem in diabelic dogs. Journat of Smalf Anima!
Practice 44, 435-442
Systemic hypertension
paonpey (e8et) Hr weiey pue Me uosjan, 'oa uewpiay
 Immunogenicity of pork insulin in dogs with spontaneous insulin-
Diabetes mellitus and hypertension commonly coexist
dependent diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 32 (Suppl 1} 153A
in dogs. In a recent study. the prevalence of hyperten-
Fleeman LM and Rand JS (2003) Evaluation of day-to-day variability
sion was 46% in 50 insulin-treated diabetic dogs.
 of serial blood glucose concentration curves in diabetic dogs.
Joumal of the American Veterinary Madical Associatfon 222,
where hypertension was defined as systalic, diastolic
317-321
 or mean blood pressure greaterthan 160, 100 and 120
 Graham PA, Maskell IE, Rawlings JM, Nash AS and Markwell PJ
mmHg, respectively (Struble et al., 1998). The devel-
(2002) Influence of a high tibre diet on glycaemic control and
 opment of hypertensian was associated with the dura-
Animal Practice 43, 67-73
tion of diabetes and an increased albumin:creatinine
 Graham PA, Nash AS and McKellar QA (1997) Pharmacokinetics of
a porclne Insulln zlnc suspension Iin dlabetic dogs. Journal of
ratio in the urine. Diastolic and mean blood pressure
Smaff Animal Praciice 38, 434438
were higher in dogs with longer duration of disease. A
 Gross KL, Wadekind KJ, Kirk CA, Schoanherr WD, Lowry SR, and
correlation between control of glycaemia and blood
Owen KQ (200oy Dielary chromium and carnitine supplementation
does not affect glucose tolerance in obese dogs. Journai of
pressure was not identified. Possible mechanisms
Veterinary internal Medicine 14, 345
associated with hypertension in diabetic dogs include:
Guptil L, Glickman LT and Glickman NW (1999) Is canine diabetes
disturbed lipid metabolism leading to reduced vascular
on tha increase? In: RecentAdvances in Clinica! Management o!
compliance; generalized glomerular hyperfiltration; or
Haines DM (1986) A re-examlnation af islatcellcytoplasmic antibodies 
 an immune-mediated microangiopathy affecting base-
in diabetic dogs. Veterinary Inmunology and Immunopathology
11, 225-233
ment membranes. Treatment for hypertension should
Harb-HauserM,NelsonRw,GershwinLand NealL(1998)Prevalence
be initiated if the systolic blood pressure is consistently
of insulin antibodies in diabetic dogs. Joumal of Veleninary
>160 mmHg.
Intarna Medicine 12, 213
Hess RS, Kass PH and Van Winkle TJ (2003) Association between
dlabetas melltus, hypathyroidism gr hyperadrenocorticism and
atherosclerosis in dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary Internal Medicinc
Prognosis
17, 489-494
The prognosis for dogs diagnosed with diabetes
oftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation216,1414-1417
Hess FS, Saunders HM, Van Winkle TJ, Shofer FS and Washabau
mellitus depends, in part, on owner commitment to
RJ (1998) Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic, and
treating the disorder, ease of glycaemic regulation,
ultrasonographic abnormalities in dogs with fatal acute
presence and reversibility of concurrent disorders, and
pancreatis: 70 cases (1986-1995). Journal of the American
Association of Veterinary Medicine 213, 665-670
avoidance of chronic complications associated with
Hess HS, Saunders HM, Van Winkle TS and Ward CR (2000b)
 the diabetic state. The mean survival time in diabetic
Concurrent disorders in dogs with diabetesmelitus: 221 cases
 dogs is approximately 3 years from time of diagnosis.
(1993-1998). Journal of the Amerlcan Veterinary Medical
Association217,1166-1173
This survival time is somewhat skewed because
Hess RS and Ward CR (2000) Effect of insulin dosage on glycemlc
dogs are usually 8 years or older at the time of
response in dogs with diabetes mellitus: 221 cases (1993-1998).
diagnosis and there is a relatively high mortality rate
Journa! of the American Veterinary Medicat Association 216,
217-221
during the first 6 months because of concurrent life-
Hoenig M and Dawe DL (1992) A qualitative assay for beta cell
 threatening or uncontrollable disease (e.g. ketoacid-
 antibadies. Prellmlnary results in dogs wlth diabetes melitus.
Veterinary immunology and Immunopathology 32, 195-203
osis, acute pancreattis, renal failure). Diabetic dogs
Lahtela JT, Knip M, Paul A, Antanen ↓ and Salml ↓ (1997) Severe
    s g   s 
antibody-mediated human insulin resistance: Successful
 than 5 years with the disease with proper care by the
treatment with the insulinanalog lispro.DiabetesCare20,7173
Marshall MO, Heding LG, Villumsen J, Akerblom HK, Baevre H,
Dahlguist G, Kjaergaard JJ, Knip M, Lundgren F, Ludvigson J
and good client-veterinary surgeon communicatian.
st af. (1988) Developmentoflnsulin antibodies, metaboliccontrgl
and β-cellfunction in newly diagnosedinsulin dependentdiabetic
Overall most diabetic dogs can live relatively normal
lives.
manocomponent porcine insulin.Diabetes Research9,169-175
127
Chapter 12 Canine diabetes mellitus
 McGuire NC, Shulrman A, Ridgway MD and Bollero G (2002) Delection
and cats with hypo- ar hyperproteinaemia, azotaemia.
 of occull urinary tract Infections in dogs with diabetes mellius.
 hyperlipidaemia andhyperbilirubinacmia. Veterinary Record148,
JournaloftheAmericanAnialHosoitalAsscciation3B541544
370-376
 Richter M, Gusceti F and Spiess B (2002) Aldose reductase activity
In: Smafl Animal ntemal Medicine 3 edn, ed. RW Nelson and
and glucose-related opacities in incubaled lenses from dogs and
CG Couto pp. 741-747. Mosby Inc., St Louis
cals. American Journal of Veterinary Research 63, 1591-1597
Nelson RW, Duesberg CA, Ford SL, Feldman EC, Davenport DJ,
Kiarnan C and Neal L (1998) Effecl of dietary insoluble fibre on
control of glycemia in dogs with naturallyacquired diabetes
and insulin concentrations in healthy dogs. American journal of
melitus.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
VeterinaryResearch6D541-545
212,380-386
SchachterS,NelsonRWandKirkCA(2001)Oralchromlumplcolinate
Nelson RW,RobertsanJ,Feldman EC,andBriggsC(2000)Effectf
and control of glycemia in insulin-treated diabelic dogs. yournar
the α-glucosidase inhibitor acarbose on control of glycemia in
of Vetennary Intenal Medicine 15, 379-384
dogs with naturaly acquirad diabetes mellitus. Journai of the
Spears JW,BrownTT,Sunvold GD and HayekMG(1998)Influence
 American Veterinary Medical Association 216, 1265-1269
of chromium on glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity. In:
Nishida Y, Higaki Y, Tokuyama K, Fujrni K, Kryanaga A, Shindo M,
Recent Advances In Canine and Feline Nutrition, Vol. ll, ed. GA
 Sato Y ang Tanaka H (2001) Effect of mild exercise training on
glucose efectivenessinhealthymen.Diabetes Care24,1008
1013
hypertension and proteinuria in dogs with naturally occurring
Owens DR, Coales PA. Luzio SD, TinbergenJP and KurzhalsR (2000)
diabetes melitus. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Pharmacokinetlcs of tz|-iabeled insulin glargine (HOE901) in
Ass0ciation213,822-825
Unger RH and Foster DW: Diabetes mellitus. (1998) In: Wiliams'
diferentsubcutaneous injectignsites. DiabetesCare 23,813-819
Texibook of Endocrinology. 9h edn, cd. JD wilson etal., p. 973-
Peikes H. Morris DS and Hess RS (2001) Dermatologic disorders in
1059. WB Saunders, Phlladelphla
dogs with dlabetes malltus: 45 cases (1986-2000). Journai of
he American Veterinary Medical Association 219, 203-208
glucose meters forusein dogs. Jouma/ofthe American Veterinary
 Philips SM, Han XX, Green HJ and Bonan A (1996) increments in
Medical Association 216, 203-209
skeletalmuscle GLUT-1 and GLUT-4 afterendurance training in
 Wiberg ME and Westermarck E (2002) Subclinicalexocrine pancreatic
humans.American jaurnal of Physiology270, E456-E462
Insuificiency in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medica!
 Reusch CE and Haberer B (2001} Evaluationi of fruclosamine in dogs
Association 220, 1183-1187
128
Feline diabetes mellitus
Jacquie Rand and Rhett Marshall
Introduction
Induce moderate insulin resistance (e.g.
hyperadrenocorticism or hyperthyroidism).
Diabetes mellitus is one of the most cammon endo-
crine disorders in cats. The prevalence varies: approxi-
Type 1 disease, previously called insulin-depend-
mately 1 in 200 in a primary-accession feline-only
ent or juvanile-onset diabetes mellitus, results from
practice (Baral et al., 2003): 1 in 100 using data from a
immune-mediated destruction of beta cells. This disor-
veterinary laboratory (Panciera et al., 1990); 1 in 400
der is rare in cats and only occasional cases of kittens
using data from referral institutians (Rand et al., 1997).
or cats with histological lesions or antibodies consist-
The prevalence observed in private practice appears
ent with such a pathogenesis are reported (Woods ef
to be increasing, presumably because of increased
af., 1994).
 awareness among veterinary practitioners, but also
 due to the increased occurrence of predisposing fac-
Type 2 diabetes melfitus
 tors in cats, particularly obesity and physical inactivity.
Type 2 disease was previously called adult-onset diabe-
Cats appear to be less predictable in their response
tes mellitus because approximately 70% of affected
to treatment than dogs. In some cats glycaemic contro!
people were older than 40 years of age at the time of
 is easily achieved whilst in others, consistent glycae-
diagnosis. However, as approximately 30% of new cases
 mic control is difficulft. Cats are prone to stress hyper-
occur in children and young adults, this term has now
glycaemia making interpretation of blood glucose
lost favour (Rasenblaom et al, 1999). In contrast, most
concentrations difficult. This can lead to inappropriate
cats are relatively older with thepeak incidence between
insulin dose adjustments that further confound the
10 and 13 years (Rand, 1999: Prahl et a., 2003).
situation.
Type 2 disease was also previously called non-
More significantly, the pathogenesis of feline and
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NiDDM) in hu-
 canine diabetes melitus is different. An understanding
lou op slueed jo %oz Aetewjxoidde asneoeg suaw
of these differences is important in order to help select
 require insulin to control the hyperglycaemia. How-
the most appropriate treatment and to predict why
ever, the remaining proportion is insulin-dependent.
certain problems occur. Although the majority of cats
Currently. only approximately 5-40% of diabetic cats
are initially insulin-dependent, a substantial proportion
with presumed type 2 disease can be controlled with-
undergo remission for variable periods of time, if good
 out insulin therapy. The different diagnostic criteria
 glycaemic cantrol is achieved and predisposing factors
used in both species may explain, at least in part, the
have resolved.
variation in the proportion of patients controlled without
 exogenous insulin therapy.
Pathogenesis
In humans, diagnosis is based on a fasting blood 
glucose concentration >7 mmol/l (Expert
In approximately 80-95% of cases, feline diabetes
Committee, 1997). This cut-off is recommended
 mellitus is analogousto human type2 diabetes mellitus.
because the incidence of microvascular
Both are characterized by an absolute ar relative
abnormalities, such as retinopathy, is significantly
deficiency of insulin, coupled with insulin resistance.
increased when fasting blood glucose
The remaining 5-20% of affected cats have other
concentration exceeds this value.
 specific types of diabetes mellitus. The prevalence of
 Most cats are not diagnosed until clinical signs
these cases tends to be higher in referral institutions
become evident, which is when blood glucose
than in general practice, presumably because more
concentration exceeds the renal threshold 
 atypical and problem cases are referred. In these
(>14-16 mmol/l). The effect of blood glucose
cases, the disorder is caused by a variety of diseases
concentrations between:7 mmol/l and the renal 
that:
threshold has not yet been examined. If cats
were classified as diabetic with such persistent
 Decrease beta cell numbers (e.g pancreatic
blood glucose concentrations, it is likely that a
adenocarcinoma or pancreatitis)
greater proportion would be truly non-insulin
Induce marked insulin resistance (e.g. acromegaly)
dependent.
129
Chapter 13Feline diabetesmellitus
Geneticandenvironmental factors
Inhumans,type 2diabetes mellitus results from a
Environmental
Genetic
combination ofageneticpredisposition andenviron-
causes
causes
mental factors.The latter are largely related to lifestyle
Insulinresistance
Obesity
Geneticfactors
and arepredominantlyphysical inactivity andobesity.
Physical inactivity
Obesity
The same factors also appear to be important in cats
Drugs
Gender
(Panciera et al,1990;Lederer et al.,2003).
Concurrentillness
Inhumans,type2disease isknown tobepolygenic
Stress
but todateonly some of the geneshavebeen identi-
Hyperglycaemia
fied.Mutationsin anyof thenumerous genes control-
Impaired insulin
Islet amyloid deposition
Islet amyloid
ling thesteps in insulinsecretionorinsulinsensitivity，
secretion
Pancreatitis
ceposition
or those that predispose toobesityorphysical inactiv-
Glucose toxicity
ity, could predispose to type 2 disease.
Lipid toxicity
In humans,certain families and ethnic groups (e.g.
Pima Indian andAustralianAborigines)haveahigher
Potential causes of insulin resistance and
13.1
incidenceoftype2diabetesmellitus.Although the
impaired insulin secretion.
majority of affected cats are domestic short-hairs,
Burmesecatsappear tobeoverrepresented at least
Obesity:This is the principal factor producing ac-
inAustralia,New Zealand and the UK（Rand et al.,
quiredinsulinresistance.lnonestudy,catsthatgained
1997;Wade et al.,1999;Gunn-Moore (personal com-
44%oftheirbodyweighthada50%decreaseininsulin
munication)). In Australia,approximately 1 in 50 Bur-
sensitivityandsome hadvaluesinthediabeticrange
mese cats are affected,comprising approximately
(Appleton et al.,2001).
20-38%of the diabeticpopulation,compared with
7-12%of the hospital population.In some families of
Physical inactivity:In humans and dogs physical
Burmese>10%of individuals areaffected.InBurmese
cats,diabetesmellitus isnot sex-linked or dominant
obesity.Physical inactivity and confinement indoors
and,the disease is likely multifactorialas it is in
hasrecentlybeenshowntopredisposetodiabetes
humans (Lederer et al.,2003).
mellitusinBurmese cats(Ledereretal.,2003).Today,
physicalinactivityiscommonparticularlyinurban cats
and especially in those animals confined indoors.
Impairedinsulinsecretion andinsulinresistance
Type2diabetesmellitus istheresultofimpaired insulin
Gender:Neuteredmalecatsareat twice theriskof
secretioncombinedwith impaired insulinaction.The
developing diabetesmellitus compared with neutered
latteriseitherreferredtoasdecreasedinsulinsensitiv-
female cats.Thisincreasedriskinneuteredmale cats
ity(defined as thedecrease inglucose for agiven
is likelyfrom twofactors:
amount of insulin) or as insulinresistance.Asinsulin
resistance increases,more insulin isrequired topro-
Evenwhenlean,neuteredmalestendtohavelower
duce the same glucose lowering effectthan when
insulin sensitivity and higher insulin concentration
insulin sensitivityis normal.Diabetic cats are six times
than females (Appleton et al.,2001)
less sensitive to insulin than normal cats and the
Males are at greater risk of developing obesity
magnitudeofinsulinresistance indiabeticcatsisthe
thanfemales-inone studywherecatswerefed
same as inhumanswith type2disease(Feldhahnet
ad libitum for10months,malesputon
al.,1998).
significantlymore weight than females despite a
Insulin-resistantindividualsattempt to compensate
similar starting weight (Appleton et al.,2001).
by increasing insulin secretion tomaintain a normal
Withweightgain,insulinsensitivityisfurther
blood glucose concentration.lmpaired glucose toler-
decreased and insulin concentration increased.
hyperinsulinaemia cannolonger be sustained be-
The combined tendency of underlying lower insulin
cause of beta cell failure.Themajor cause of beta cell
sensitivity andhigherinsulinconcentration,together
failure is exhaustion or burnout.As a result of chroni-
with their propensityfor obesity,likely explains the
cally increased insulinsecretion,beta cell damage（in
greaterriskofdiabetesmellitusinneuteredmalecats.
part mediated by oxidant damage) is induced trigger-
ing apoptosis（programmed cell death).Otherfactors
Drugs:Certain drugs,including glucocorticoids and
alsopromote loss ofbeta cellsand includemost
progestogens,cause insulin resistance particularly
commonly,islet amylaid deposition,glucose toxicity
when used chronicallyor long-acting formsare admin-
and pancreatitis.
istered.Repeated administration of these drugs is
Potential causes of insulinresistanceand impaired
associatedwithanincreasedriskofdeveloping diabe-
insulin secretion are summarized inFigure 13.1.
tes mellitus in cats (Henik et al.,1985;Lederer et al,
2003).However,relatively few cats develop overt
disease afterprolongeduseof these drugs.ltispossi
Causes of insulin resistance
ble thatinaffectedcats,underlying impairedglucose
Therearemanycausesof insulinresistance some of
tolerance is exacerbated by use of these drugs(Rand,
which may be interrelated.
1999).
130
Chapter 13  Feline diabetes mellitus
Genetic, dietary and evolutionary factors: In hu-
involved, aithough poorly understood. Higher secre-
mans, insulin sensitivity and insulin resistance are
tion rates leading to higher local amylin concentrations
 genetically determined. This has yet to be investigated
may be invalved in amyloid deposition, and it has been
in cats.
shown thatsome healthy cats are high amylin secretors
lImpaired glucose tolerance associated with the
(Appleton et al., 2002). A model of diabetes mellitus,
development of obesity has been demonstrated in
induced by insulin resistance from excess growth hor-
cats. There is also evidence that suggests some cats
mone (GH) and dexamethasone, has shown that cats
 are predisposed to developing impaired glucose intol-
with high amylin concentrations tend to have higher
erance prior to the onset of obesity (i.e. when the
 amyloid deposition than cats with lower amylin concen-
animal is lean) (Appleton et al., 2001). These cats have
trations (Hoenig, 1998). lt has also been proposed that
underlying low insulin sensitivity. Cats that have this
an abnormal processing of amylin leads to increased
predisposition when lean have been shown to be at an
increased risk of impaired glucose tolerance with weight
also predispose cats to amyloid deposition, as the
gain, and are likely at risk of diabetes mellitus particu-
apolipoprotein ApoE is a component of amyloid and
larly when obese.
 may furction as a nidus for amyloid formation (O'Brien,
The Thrifty Gene Theory and The Carmivore Con-
2002).
nection Theory were proposed to explain the high
 The loss of beta cells from amyloid deposition is
incidence of insulin resistance in some human
variable between cats. Cats tend to exhibit greater
 populations, butthe principles are also relevant to cats
 amyloid deposition than humans. In humans with type
(Neel, 1962; Brand Miller and Colagiuri, 1994). These
 2 diabetes melitus, usually <50% of islet volume is
replaced by amyloid, whereas insome cats, 80-90% of
survival advantage in feral cats particularly when high
the islet volume comprises amyloid and there is a
protein, low carbohydrate diets are being consumed.
corresponding increased loss of islet cells.
However, more recently, cats have undergone similar
lifestyle changes to humans, exacerbating insulin re-
Pancreatitis: This leads to a variable loss of beta cells.
sistance and increasing the demand on beta cells to
Approximately 50% of diabetic cats have histological
secrete insulin. Modern-day cats are physically inac-
evidence of pancreatitis (Goossens et al., 1998). How-
tive, eat excess calories, develop obesity and many
 ever, the inflammation is usually not severe enough to
have changed from a low to a relatively high carbohy-
cause diabetes mellitus alone and predominantly inr-
drate diet. Cats are obligate carnivores but some feline
volves the exocrine pancreatic tissue.
Hypertriglyceridaemia is associated with pancrea-
matter basis. Such diets result in higher postprandial
titis in humans and dogs. Triglyceride concentrations
insulin concenfrations compared with the traditional
are increased in obese cats (Hoenig et al., 2003).
low carbohydrate, high protein feline diets (Farraw et
Whether obesity contributes to subclinical pancreatitis
a., 2002). In inherently insulin resistant animals, the 
 and the subsequent loss of beta cells in cats remains
additional demands of high carbohydrate diets on
to be determined.
insulin sacretion likely increase the risk of beta cell
exhaustion and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Glucose and lipid toxicity: Insulin secretion appears
to be minimal in many diabetic cats when first pre-
Glucose toxicity: Insulin sensitivity is also decreased 
sented even when secretagogues, such as arginine,
by persistently high blood glucose concentrations and
phentolamine or a sulphonylurea, are used. Howgver,
is improved once therapy is instituted to reduce blood
circulating insulin concentrations do not necessarily
glucose concentrations.
indicate residual beta cell mass. Thus, some cats with
 na apparent increase in insulin concentration in re-
Causes of impaired insulin secretion
sponse to glucose (or a more potent secretagogue)
Insulin secretion in diabetic cats varies from almost
may achieve diabetic remission in as little as six weeks
nane to a reduced, but significant, amount. The loss of
affer institution of appropriate therapy to correct the
insulin secretion may not be irreversible; aithough, the 
hyperglycaemia. Thus impaired insulin secretion can
amount that is reversible varies between cats. How-
be reversible.
ever, there is no way of predicting which cats have the
Glucose toxicity may initially result in reversible
potential to regain sufficient insulin secretion to main-
suppression of insulin secretion. Glucose toxicity is
tain euglycaemia. lrreversible loss of insulin secretion
defined as “impaired insulin secretion resulting fram
may result from beta cell apoptosis, islet amyloid
deposition, glucose toxicity and/or pancreatitis.
cats, where blood glucose concentrations were main-
tained at 30 mmoi/f, minimal insulin secretion resuited 
Islet amyfoid deposition: Islet amyloid is a precipitate
after 3-7 days. ln addition, six of these cats became
ofthe hormone amylin, also called isletamyloid polypep-
diabetic with ketosis within 4 weeks and subsequently
tide (IAPP). Amylin is secreted by beta cells together
required 2 weeks of insulin treatment before
with insulin. lslet amyloid deposition potentially leads
euglycaemia was restored (Link, 2001).
to permanent loss of beta cells.
Glucose toxicity is dose-dependent and insulin is
For amyloid deposition to occur, it requires a par-
less suppressed with lower glucose concentrations.
ticular amyloidogenic amino acid sequence, which is
 Glucose toxicity is initially reversible but later causes
present in cats, dogs and humans. Other factors are
permanent loss of beta cells.
131
Chapter 13  Feline diabetes mellitus
increased circulating concentrations of fatty acids
Diagnosis
have a similar effect on beta cells. lt is difficult to
 separate individual mechanisms for glucose and lipid
A diagnosis of uncomplicated diabetes melitus is made
toxicity as diabetes mellitus usually results in concur-
based on the presence of appropriate clinical signs,
 rent hyperglycaemia and hyperlipidaemia. The effects
persistent fasting hyperglycaemia (blood glucose >16
 of glucose and lipid toxicity are similar and either may
mmoll) and glycosuria.
be responsible forthe reversible suppression of insulin
 secretion and/or beta cell destruction.
Blood glucose concentration
Cats are susceptible to stress-induced hyperglycae-
glucose/lipid toxicity it is important to decrease blaod
 mia and it is often difficult to differentiate this from early
glucose and lipid concentrations as soon as possibleto
diabetes mellitus. When obtaining blood samples it is
facilitate beta cell recovery (Link, 2001). However, it
 important to restrain the patient effectively as transient
can take from 1-12 weeks for beta cells to recover once
hyperglycaemia (blood glucose concentration up to 16
mmoll) can be induced in healthy cats simply by
[nsulin is the most potent glucose lowering drug and its
 struggling (Rand et al., 2002). Cats with blood glucose
Use as an initial therapy more effectively helps beta
concentrations <20 mmoll should have repeat blood
celis recover. With good glycaemic control, diabetic
 glucose measurements taken over the next 24 hours
remission is more likely.
either in hospital, or if possible, at home.
Urinalysis
Clinical features
 Clinical signs of diabetes mellitus become apparent
cnly when blood glucose concentration exceeds the
Diabetes mellitus typically occurs in cats >7 years of
renal threshold (>14-16 mmol/l). Above this threshold
age. Neutered male cats and obese cats are at in-
 glucose is not fully reabsorbed in the proximal tubules
creased risk and the Burmese breed is predisposed, at
 and osmotic diuresis occurs. Most diabetic cats have
least in Australia, New Zealand and the UK (see above).
urine glucose values of 3-4+ (scale 1+ to 4+). lf stress
hyperglycaemia is suspected urine collected at the
Uncomplicated diabetes mellitus
time of initial consultation usually contains minimal
The four classical signs of uncomplicated diabetes
 glucose and therefore aids diagnosis.
mellitus are:
Urine specific gravity (SG) is variable and can be
affected by the presence of glucose as a solute (in-
Polydipsia
creases SG) and the osmotic diuresis induced by
 Polyuria
glycosuria (decreases SG). Most cats present with
Polyphagia
values ranging from 1.026-1.035.
Weight loss.
Fructosamine concentration
Owners often associate polyphagia with 'good
Circulating fructosamine concentration is usually in-
health' and may delay consultation until significant
creased (often >400 μmol/l) in diabetic cats.
weight loss or hindlimb weakness (from peripheral
Fructosamine is formed by the irreversible non-
 neuropathy) ispresent. Diabeticcats oftencease groom-
enzymatic binding of blood glucose to serum proteins,
ing and may have an unkempt hair coat and sebor-
mainly albumin. Its measurement provides an estima-
rhoea sicca.
tion of prevailing blood glucose concentration over the
preceding 2-3 weeks. It is an important tool in identify-
Complicated diabetes mellitus
ing those cats with stress hyperglycaemia that may
Cats with diabetes mellitus that go undiagnosed or
have glycosuria but that do not have diabetes mellitus.
untreated are at risk of developing systemic ilness as
 In such cases, circulating fructosamine concentrations
a result of progressive ketonaemia and metabolic acido-
will be within the laboratory reference range.
sis. The time from onset of simple or uncomplicated
diabetes mellitus to developing ketoacidosis is unpre-
dictable, and can range from weeks to many months.
Treatment
Cats with ketoacidosis may have a history of uncompli-
cated disease but will also display such signs as:
 Once diabetes mellitus is diagnosed it is of vital impor-
tance to institute therapy as soon as possible. Reduc-
Depression
ing hyperglycaemia and hyperlipidaemia maximizes
Lethargy
+
the chance of preserving beta cell function and achiev-
·
 Dehydration
ing diabetic remission. Administration of insulin and/or
Anorexia
·
oral hypoglycaemic agents and dietary modification
Vomiting
+
are the principal therapies used for uncomplicated
Tachypnoea
diabetic cats.
Ketotic breath.
Cats that are bright and alert, eating and not dehy-
drated can be treated with subcutaneous insulin or oral
 Diabetic ketoacidosis is discussed in greater detail
hypoglycaemic drugs. However, some of these cats
 in Chapter 14.
-ieidsou buunp yoddns pin pelu wo heueq Aiu
132
Chapter 13Feline diabetes mellitus
zation,particularlyif fluid intake decreases and be-
dailyafter2weeks if therehavebeennoadverse
comesinadequatetomaintainhydration.
reactions and markedhyperglycaemiastillexists.Good
Thebasic goal of therapy is to achieve adequate
candidatesfor glipizide therapy are cats that arerea-
glycaemiccontroltoeliminate thepolyuria and polydip-
sonably healthy,non-ketotic,have no weight loss,
sia causedbyhyperglycaemia.Although euglycaemia
showminimal clinical signsand have no complicating
isideal,caremustbetakentoinsurehypoglycaemia
diseases.Emaciated,dehydrated,ketotic cats with
doesnot occurand thus aiming forperfect glycaemic
abnormalitiesnot attributable to simpleuntreated dia-
control should be avoided.
betes,arenot good candidates and should be stabi-
lizedwith insulin therapy first.
Oral hypoglycaemic agents
The major side-effects of glipizide arevomiting and
Depending on thepopulationof diabeticcatsstudied
anorexia,which usuallyoccurwithin anhourof admin-
and how early a diagnosis is made,up to30%of cats
istration.lf vomiting occursmedication should be
achieve adequateglycaemic control using oral hy-
stopped until it resolves and then bereinstituted at a
poglycaemic agents alone(Feldman et al.,1997).
lower dose,which can subsequently be gradually in-
Oral hypoglycaemicdrugs have a variety of actions
creased.Increased liver enzymes and icterus are seen
(Figure 13.2) including:
inabout10%oftreatedcatsandresolvewithwith-
drawal of thedrug.Although they maynotreappear if
Increasing insulinsecretionfrombetacells
alowerdoseisused,it isprudent tochangetoinsulin
Reducing peripheral insulinresistance
or to another oral hypoglycaemic agent.
Decreasing glucose absorption from the
The use of glipizide in diabetic catsraisesseveral
gastrointestinal tract
concerns.Firstly,if there is a delayed or inadequate
Inhibiting hepaticglucoseproduction.
response,persistent hyperglycaemiacanlead tocon-
tinuedbeta cell loss through glucose and lipid toxicity.
As sole agents,these drugs are only effective in
Secondly,glipizide stimulates the secretion of both
cats that have someremaining functional beta cells.
insulin andamylinfrom thepancreaticisletcells.These
Unfortunately,therearenotestscurrentlyavailable
drugstherefore,havethepotentialtoincrease amyloid
thataccurately identifycatswithresidual beta cell
deposition inislet cells andfurtherreducebeta cell
function.As aconsequence,caution is advisedinusing
function.In addition,chronicstimulation of insulin se
these drugs alone.Although injecting insulin canbe
cretionmayfurtherexacerbate the situationbypromot-
easierthanadministeringoralmedications,someown-
ingbeta cell exhaustion.
ers are unwilling to administer injectionsand thus
hypoglycaemic agents maybe lifesaving.However,if
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors
adequate glycaemic control is not achieved within
The alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, such as acarbose,
reduceintestinalglucose absorption byimpairingbrush-
caemic drugs alone,insulin administration shouldbe
border disaccharidase activity.This decreasesstarch
instituted.
digestionandsubsequentglucoseproductionfrom
foodsources.
Sulphonylurea drugs
Acarbose alone is not effective in the treatment of
Sulphonylureas primarily stimulate insulin secretion
feline diabetes mellitus,butcanbeused inconjunction
frompancreaticbeta cells and thereforerequire ad-
withinsulinand/orotheroralhypoglycaemicagentsto
equateresidualbeta cellfunction.
achievebetter glycaemic control.
Glipizide is the most widely used sulphonylurea in
Recommended dosages are12.5-25mg/cat orally
diabeticcats and therecommendedstarting doseis2.5
twice daily,givenwithfood.Side-effectsincludeflatu-
mg/cat twice daily.This canbe increased to5 mg twice
lence,loose stools and diarrhoea.Acarbose shouldnot
Agent and classification
Mechanism of action
Suggested dose rate
Sulphonylureas:
Predominantystimulateinsulinsecretionsomeefectoninsulinsensitivity
Glipizide
2.5-5 mg/cat bid
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors:
Reduce intestinal glucose absorption
Acarbose
12.5-25 mg/cat bid
Transition metals:
Improve insulin sensitivity;exactmechanismunknown
Chromium
200 mg/cat sid
Vanadium
0.2mg/kg per day in fodor
water
Thiazolidinediones:
Increaseinsulinsensitivity
Darglitazone
2mg/kg sid
Biguanides:
Inhibithepaticglucoeproductionandincreaseperipheralinsulinensitity
Meformin
5 mg/kg bid
13.2
treatmentofdiabetesmellitusinthecat.
133
Chapter 13  Feline diabetes mellitus 
be used in underweight cats because of its effects on
Insulin therapy
nutrient absorption. Although cats on a low carbohy-
Insulin therapy remains the preferred initial and long-
drate diet and treated with acarbose have been shown
term treatment of choice for diabetes mellitus in cats.
to have reduced insulin requirements and better gly-
Its effectiveness and safety may be enhanced when
caemic control, similar results are achievad feeding a
 combined with oral hypoglycaemic agents and dietary
low carbohydrate diet alone (Mazzaffero et al., 2003).
therapy.
Transition metals
 lnsulin preparations
Both chromium and vanadium potentiate insulin ac-
 Many insulin preparations are available for use in cats
tion, although the exact mechanism is unknown.
and they have been discussed in several reviews
 Chromium has been shown to produce small but
(Moise and Riemers, 1983; Nelson et al., 1992;
 significantdecreases in blood glucose concentration in
Broussard and Wallace, 1995; Dowling, 1995). Insum-
healthy cats (Appleton et al., 2002) but there are no
mary, good glycaemic control can be obtained using
reports of its efficacy in diabetic cats.
neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH orisophane), lente,
Vanadium is reported to reduce the insulin require-
 ultralente and protamine zinc insulin (PZl). PZI is the
ment of diabetic cats and has been shown to be
 preparation of choice as it has the longest duration of 
effective as a sole agent in the early stages of type 2
action.
disease when blood glucose concentration was rela-
tively low (Greco, 1997). The recommended dosage of
Pharmacokinetics: Peak action of lente typically oc-
vanadium (orthovanadate) is 0.2 mg/kg/day in food or
curs at4-5hours and duration is <12 hours (Martin and
water. Side-effects include anorexia and vomiting.
Rand, 2001). NPH insulin has a shorter duration of
which resolve upon withdrawal of the drug.
activity that may be <3 hours in many cats. Ultralente
There is renewed interest in both metals in human
has a slightly longer time to peak action and duration of
medicine, but further investigations into their use in
 action than lente. Pzl is longer acting than both lente
veterinary medicine is required before definite conclu-
and ultralente, with peak action occurring at approxi-
sions and recommendations are made.
Unless there is substantial endogenous insulin
ThlazolldInedlones
 secretion, the majority ofcats require twice daily dosing
Thiazolidinediones are insulin-sensitizing drugs that
of NPH, lente or ultralente to obtain good glycaemic
increase the response of muscle, liver and fat cells to
control. The duration of action of NPH and lente in
insulin. Their main effect is to decrease peripheral
 some cats is too short to achieve adequate control
insulin resistance and increase glucose uptake, stimu-
when used twice daily and more frequent administra-
lated by insulin in muscle. They have less effect on
tlon, or a change to a longer-acting insulin, is neces-
hepatic glucose production. As sole treatment these
sary. With PZl a few cats can be controlled with once
agents probably have limited usefulness in diabetic
daily dosing, but in most cats better glycaemic control
cats (Michels et al., 2000).
is obtained using twice daily dosing. Twice daily dosing
Troglitazone was withdrawn for human use be-
also reduces the risk of the animal developing hypo-
cause of an unacceptable prevalence of fatal hepatic
glycaemia. Whatever insulin is used, dosing every 12
necrosis. Toxicity studies have not been performed in
hours is ideal but variations of 1-2 hours rarely cause
cats. Darglitazone (2 mg/kg/day) improves insulin sen-
significant problems.
sitivity and decreases insulin, glucose and lipid con-
In general, the blood glucose lowering effect is
centrations in obese cats (Hoenig and Ferguson, 2003).
 more predictable with NPH and lente than for ultralente
 Other newer generation thiazolidinediones (e.g.
or PZl. Poor absorption of ultralente and PZl fram
pioglitazone and rosiglitazone)have demonstratedthe
 subcutaneous tissues occurs in approximately 20% of
same glucose lowering effect in humans as troglitazone.
cats and is believed to be the major factor contributing
Although not yet studied in diabetic cats, they willikely
 to a failure of glycaemic control when using these
be of greatest benefit when used in combination with
insulins.
insulin or other oral hypoglycaemic agents that stimu-
late insulin secretion.
Species of origin: lnsulin preparations are of porcine,
bovine or recombinant human type. Bovine insulin is
Biguanides
 most similar to feline insulin. The species of insulin can
Metformin is the most commonly used biguanide. It
 affect the duration of its action, with beef insulin being
exerts its effect by increasing peripheral insulin sensi-
longer acting than pork, and human insulin having the
tivity and inhibiting hepatic gluconeogenesis and gly-
shortest duration af action (Brange et al, 1990). Beef
cogenolysis.
or porcine insulin tend to be used preterentially in cats.
Metformin is one of the most widely used oral
 agents in humans for the treatment of type 2 diabetes
 Insulin glargine: Insulin glargine, a new long-acting
melitus. In cats, dosages of 25-50 mg/cat result in
 synthetlc insulin analogue, has shown encouraging
plasma concentrations similar to therapeutic doses in
results in preliminary studies in cats (Marshall and
humans. However, the results of clinical trials in cats
Rand, unpublished data).
have not been encouraging, particularly as a sole
After subcutaneous injection of glargine in humans,
agent, and it is difficult to make recommendations for
microprecipitates are formed in the subcutaneous tis-
its use.
sue slowly releasing insulin with no pronounced peak
134
Chapter 13  Feline diabetes mellitus
effect. In contrast, studies in healthy cats have shown 
performed daily for the first 2-3 days of therapy.
that there is a peak action at approximately 16 hours
If serial blood glucose curves cannot be obtained a
but with significant suppression of blood glucose con-
 more conservative initial dose of 1lU/cat per injection
centrations up to 24 hours in the majority of cases
should be used.
(Marshall and Rand, 2002). Preliminary trials of insulin
Cats should be hospitalized for the first 2-3 days of
 glargine in diabetic cats indicate better glycaemic con-
 therapy in order to ensure overdosing does not occur.
trol with higher diabetic remission rates than with lente
The insulin dose may be decreased if indicated by a
insulin. Studies in healthy cats indicate twice daily
blood glucose curve, but it is important that it is not
dosing provides optimal glycaemic controi and prelimi-
 increased in the first week of therapy. Interpretation of
nary studies in diabetic cats also support this regimen.
tha blood glucose curve is discussed below.
Insulin concenfratlon: Insulin concentration (40 IU/
Owner education
ml and 100 IU/ml) is an important factor when treating
 On discharge, clients should be educated on the ap-
diabetic cats because small doses are required. Prepa-
 propriate handling, storage and administration for the
rations available as 40 IU/ml (porcine lente) are easier
diu jo yoed v pasn abuuns pue ugnsu jo adai
to dose accurately than 1oo IU/ml (bovine and human
between the scapulae can be clipped to allow owners
 recombinant lente and Pzl) insulin. Insulin syringes are
to see the needle penetration, which is particuiarly
specifically designed for use with each concentration
useful until confidence and experience are gained.
 of insulin and are designaied IU40 or IU100 accord-
ingly. Consistently matching the right syringe with the
Dietary modification
right insulin is important to ensure accurate dosing.
 Dietary recommendations for diabetic cats have
Inadvertently changing syringes is a common source
changed in the last few years as more research data
of error. IU100 syringes are available in low-dose sizes
become available. What, when and how much is fed
(0.3 and 0.5 ml) and are particularly useful in cats for
 can have significant benefits in affected animals but will
small doses. However, caution is advised as the divi-
vary for individual cats if there is other concurent
sions on the 1 ml syringe represent 2 units but on the
disgase.
0.3 and 0.5 ml syringes the divisions represent 1 unit of
insulin. Most inisulins can be diluted, but this should
Type of food
only be done with a diluent provided or recommended
During the first few weeks of treatment, diabetic cats
by the manufacturer.
may have a reduced appetite, and palatability of food
is important to ensure adequate intake.
 Choice of preparation: The final choice of insulin is
High fibre diets were traditionally recommended for
based on the clinician's preference, commercial avail-
ability, owner convenience, licensing as a veterinary
product and suitability for the individual cat. In general,
such diets are no longer recommended. Only one
although NPH and lente are more predictable in action,
study on the effects of dietary fibre in diabetic cats has
their short duration of action leaves many cats with no
 been published in which a high fibre diet was compared
exogenous insulin action for approximately 4 haurs
with a very low fibre diet (Nelson ef al., 2000). Although
twice a day. Better continuous glycaemic control is
the high fibre diet was associated with lower mean
obtained in many cats using PZl or insulin glargine
blood glucose concentrations, the two diets had differ-
twice daily, although, time to peak action and the
 ent proportions of macronutrients, which made inter-
 glucose lowering effect is more variable.
pretation of the fibre effect difficult. There has been no
When available, licensed veterinary preparations
comparison with a moderate fibre diet typical of most
should be used. In the UK bovine lente (Insuvet Lente,
commercial feline diets.
Schering Plough), porcine lente (Caninsulin, Intervet)
The ideal combination of protein, carbohydrate, fat 
and bovine PZi (insuvet PZl, Schering Plough) are all
 and fibre to feed diabetic cats is currently unknown and
licensed for use in the cat.
requires further research. Cats have a much longer
Insulin dose
Peak glucose and insulin concentrations occur ap-
The degree of hyperglycaemia determines the starting
 proximately 6-12 hours after eating and do not return
insulin dose. Although the dose per kilogram in stable
to baseline until 14-24 hours, or more, after eating
 cats tends to be higher for longer-acting insulins com-
 depending on the particular diet fed. Postprandial
 pared with intermediate-acting insulins,the dose range
blood glucose concentration varies greatly depending
for all insulins in stable cats is wide.
on the carbohydrate content of the food. A diet contain-
A safe starting insulin dose for most catsis 0.25-0.5
 ing 47% of calories from carbohydrate produces mean
IU/kg based on ideal body weight. In general, cats with
 peak glucose concentrations of 8 mmol/l in healthy
marked hyperglycaemia (blood glucose concentration
cats, which are 20-30% higher than with a diet of 25%
 ≥20 mmoll) can be started on 0.5 IU/kg administered
of calories from carbohydrate, In general, diets low in
twice daily and those with moderate hyperglycaemia
 carbohydrates and high in protein reduce postprandial
(blood glucose concentration <20 mmoll) started on
 hyperglycaemia and insulin concentrations in healthy
0.25 IU/kg twice daily. The dose should be rounded
 cats (Farrow et al., 2002). Initial data from diabetic cats
down to the nearest unit, using 1 IU per injection as the
also suggest that low carbohydrate, high protein diets
minimum dose. A serial blood glucose curve should be
 result in better clinical control, reduced insulin require-
135
Chapter 13   Feline diabetes mellitus
 ments and increased rates of diabetic remission. Thus
need to be reduced if the cat is being fed twice daily and
 a commercial low carbohydrate, high protein diet should
one meal is missed. lf anorexia persists for 24 hours or
be used in diabetic cats, unless contraindicated by
more, the risk of hypoglycaemia is substantially in-
other disease.
creased, and dose adjustment is then required.
Care should be taken with cats diagnosed with
2 aaey Aew uiaoid ui yby sap se aseasp jeua
 Monitoring diabetic control
deleterious effect. For such cases, dietary manage-
 Response to treatment can be evaluated in a number
ment of the renal disease using a restricted protein diet
 of ways and no individual modality should be used as
should take precedence over dietary management of 
the sole parameter for adjusting therapy. The financial
diabetes mellitus. There is some anecdotal evidence
constraints of the owner, their work schedule and the
that renal diets low in protein but with higher levels of
amenability of the cat to handling must al be consid-
fat and carbohydrate may precipitate overt diabetes
ered when constructing a monitoring plan.
 mellitus in predisposed cats.
 A combination of owner assessment, clinical signs
Whether a very low carbohydrate, high fat diet is
and changes in body weight and water intake are often
superior to a moderate carbohydrate, moderate fat diet
the best indicators of glycaemic control. Good cbser-
has not been investigated.
vational skills by the owner and good communication
Amount of food
 Obesity in cats markedly reduces insulin sensitivity.
Owners should be encouraged to phone weekly with
Weight loss improves insulin sensitivity and may re-
updates on attitude, appetite, water intake and urina-
duce insulin requirements. In some cats, diabetic re-
tion and to discuss any problems they are experienc-
mission is obtained after weight loss and short-term
ing. In addition, serial blood glucose curves can be
insulin cr oral hypogiycaemic therapy. Obese cats
used to determine fhe direction and magnitude of any
should be fed 70% of their maintenance requirements.
change in insulin therapy. Urine glucose concentration
Aiming for a weight loss of 1-2% of body weight per
can be valuable in detecting diabetic remission. Meas-
week is ideal. Cats should be weighed every 2-3
urement of glycated proteins may be useful for long-
weeks to check effectivenass of calorie restriction and
term monitoring.
adjust the amount fed accordingly.
 Initially diabetic cats are evaluated every 1-4 weeks
Ideal weight cats should be fed maintenance calo-
until clinical signs of diabetes mellitus have resolved
ries (approximataly 60 kcal/kg/day) and checked regu-
 and the insulin dose has not changed for twa consecu-
larly to confirm weight is maintained. Diabetic cats
tive visits. Subsequently, cats are examined every
often have increased caloric requirements for mainte-
2-3 months depending on the level of glycaemic
 nance as glucose is lost in urine. Nutrient absarption
control achieved.
The insulin dose often needs to be increased over
or exocrine pancreatic dysfunction (Diehl, 1995). Cats
the first few weeks and then frequently has to be
that are overtly polyphagic because of poor glycaemic
decreased after several weeks of treatment. This de-
contro! should not have their caloric intake restricted.
 Underweight cats should be fed ad libitum until an
leading to improved insulin sensitivity and insulin se-
ideal body weight is achieved. Insulin requiremenfs 
cretion. Reduced insulin requirement may occur at any
may be higherin theearly phasesof treatment and may
time and may be sudden or gradual. However, some
need to be reduced, along with food intake, once ideal
 cats have an increased demand for insulin after several
body weight is achieved.
 months of therapy and this may be associated with
further beta cell loss. The majority of cats take between
Time of feeding
1-4 months to stabilize, although, in some cases itcan
The timing of feeding and insulin dosing is of critical
take longer than 6 months.
importance in human diabetics but is less important in
 diabetic caits. This is because postprandial hypergly-
Blood glucose determination
caemia lasts much longer in cats (14-24 hours) com-
Serial measurement of blood glucose is the most
 pared with humans (4-6 hours). In addiion, postprandial
Adeaui jo Aooe buouow oy poyew padaoo
glucose increase is minimal in cats fed a low carbo-
and determining changes in insulin dose. Single, ran-
hydrate diet.
dom or point blood glucose measurements are often
Traditionally, it has been recommended to feed
meaningless but may identify hypoglycaemia, particu-
non-obese diabetic cats ad libitumand feed obese cats
larly if measured around the time of peak insulin
multiple small meals containing their daily caloric al-
activity.
lowance in order to mimic the animal's natural feeding
 In generating a glucose curve, blood is best col-
habits. However, in general, feeding diabetic cats twice
[ected using a narrow gauge needle from a central or
daily at the time of insulin administration is most con-
peripheral vein, or via skin puncture. Using the jugular
venient for the owner and provides a glucose surge
vein is often easiest and least stressful for the cat.
around the time of maximal insulin action (Farrow etal.,
Applying local anaesthetic cream to the skin gvery four
2002).
hours reduces the pain and stress associated with
 As the postprandial period in the cat is very pro-
multiple venepunctures.
 longed arnd most insulins have their peak effect 4-10
Stress and physical struggling should be avaided
hours ater injection, the insulin dose does not usually
 as much as possible as this can induce marked hyper-
136
:1i
Chapter13Feinediabetesmellitus
glycaemia.Thisinterferes significantlywith interpreta-
used todetermine thedosingfrequencyandinsulin
tion of the glucose curve and mayresult in inappropri-
type. The absolute decrease in blood glucose from
ately increasing the insulin dose,resulting in
injection to nadir determineshowresponsive thecat is
hypoglycaemia oncedischarged.
to the current insulin type and dose.The mean glucose
Thefeeding regimen adoptedby theownershould
concentration over the day givesa measure of overall
be followed.However,some cats may not eat when
diabetic control but is rarely calculated.
hospitalized and feeding themorning meal athome
The aim of insulin therapy is to achieve adequate
maybe preferable.
glycaemiccontrof throughouttheday,whileminimizing
Blood glucose concentration ismeasured before
the risk of hypoglycaemia. Aiming for tight glycaemic
insulin administration andthenevery2hours for a
control should be avoided because this increases the
periodof12hours(orfor24hoursifoncedailyinsulin
animal'sriskof developinghypoglycaemia frominsulin
is being used),or twicemore fortwomore time points
overdose.With theinsulins currently available and
after a clear nadir is achieved. lf anadir hasnot
regimensrecommendedeuglycaemiaisrarelyachieved
occurred within 12hoursontwice daily dosing,the
for much of the day,except if the cat has significant
curve iscontinueduntil itisidentified.lf bloodglucose
endogenous insulin secretion oris being treatedwith
fallsto<5 mmol/l,samplesshould becollected every
insulin glargine.However,despite not achieving
hour todetermine thepresenceof hypoglycaemia.
Glucoseconcentrationcanbemeasuredrapidlyand
trolled.
economically byportable glucometers;although,they
Recommendationsfordosagechangesdifferslightly
may be less accurate than automated analysers.
between intermediate-acting and long-acting insulins
Glucoseconcentrations measured by portable
andare summarized inFigure 13.3.If there isa
glucometersaretypically1-2mmol/l lessthanwhen
discrepancybetweenrecommendationsthe lowest
measuredbyautomatedanalysersanditisrecom-
dose indicated should be used.
mended thateachpracticeregularlycomparesglucose
If the insulin dose is changed,the cat should bere-
valuestodeterminetheaccuracyoftheglucometer
examined at 1-2 week intervals.It is important that
beingused(Cohn etal.,2000;Wess and Reusch,2000).
changesininsulindosearenotmadesolelyonthe
Vacuumlancingdevicescanbeused toobtain
bloodglucose concentrations.Thenadirglucose meas-
blood fromtheinnersurfaceof thepinnaand arebeing
ured inhospital canvaryasmuchas5mmol/1fromday
increasinglyusedbyownerstogenerateserialblood
todaywiththe sameinsulin dose.Inter-dayvariations
glucose curves at home.Home monitoring is anattrac-
inbloodglucosevaluesmayresult fromvariationsin:
tive option,particularly for easily stressed cats.On
averagebloodglucoseconcentrationsobtainedinhos-
Theamount of insulin administered
pital are lower than thoseobtained athome,presum-
The absorption and action of the insulin
ablybecauseof theeffectofreduced foad intakewhen
Food intake andphysical activity.
hospitalized (Wess and Reusch,2000).
Unfortunately,themaincausesofvariability arecat
Interpretingbloodglucosecurves:Theblood glu-
related and cannot be controlled.For thisreason
cosecurve isused toassesstheneed foradjustments
insulindoseincreasesshouldbenomorethan1 IU/cat
ininsulin dose andtochecksuitabilityoftheinsulintype
perinjectionandphysicalexamination findingssuch as
and frequency of injection.The mostimportant param-
demeanour,haircoatconditionbodycondition,watr
eterfordetermining direction(increaseordecrease)of
intake and appetite should alsobe takenintoconsid-
dose change and amount,is the nadir blood glucose
eration.Often these first identify a need for dose
concentration.The time taken to reach the nadir and
changes and the blood glucose curve simply heips
the time taken for glucose to return to baseline,are
determine the magnitude and direction of the change.
Blood glucose parameter
Recommendation
Pre-insulin glucose is<12mmoll
Withhold insulin and check for diabeticremission
Pre-insulin glucose is 13-16mmoll
Total doseshouldbenomorethan1IU/catbidasremissionmaybeimpending
Nadir is<3mmoll
Reduce dose by50%
Nadiris3-5mmoll
Reduce dose by 1IU
Nadir is6-9mmol/
Keep dose the same
Nadir is >10mmoll
Increase dose by 1U
Nadir occurs within 3hours of insulin administration or
Use a longer-acting insulin
blood glucosereturns to baselinewithin 8hours
Nadir occurs at hours or later
Twicedalynistatnddrduily
administration may be used
13.3
Recommendations for changing insulin dose and frequency based onblood glucosemeasurements.
137
Chapter 13  Feline diabetes mellitus
Circulating glycated proteins
achieving good glycaemic control more difficult. The
Measurement of glycated proteins provides a ready
most common cause is the fractiaus cat, where multi-
means to assess chronic glycaemic control.
ple venepunctures are impossible. If serial blood glu-
Fructosamine provides information on glycaemic con-
cose measurements cannot be obtained then other
trol over the preceding 2-3 weeks. Measurement of
parameters should be used to evaluate the need for
glycated haemoglobin, formed by the non-enzymatic
dose adjustment.
irreversible binding of blood glucose to haemoglobin,
Fractious cats may be successfully treated and
 provides information on prevailing blood glucose con-
 monitored as outpatients using water intake. Insulin is
centration over the life of red blood cells (2-3 months).
administered conservatively at 1 IU/cat per injection
Fructosamine and glycated haemoglobin should not 
twice daily and daily water intake should be recorded.
be used as sole parameters on which to base insulin
The dose is subsequently increased by 1IU per injec-
dose changes but are particularly useful for identifying
tion one week later, if indicated, and then every 2-4
cats with good glycaemic control that develop stress-
weeks until water intake is <70 ml/kg/day (dry food) or
induced hyperglycaemia in hospital. Although labora-
20 ml/kg/day (canned food). This dose should then be
tory reference ranges vary, circulating fructosamine
maintained. If water intake falls below these values
concentrations >550 μmol/ usually indicate poor gly-
then the insulin dose should be reduced by 1lU per
 caemic control, while concentrations <400 μmol! indi-
injection. Measurement of urine glucose may also help
cate excellent control or impending diabetic remission.
identify cats that are overdosed with insulin or are
going into remission.
Water intake
If, using this regimen, the insulin dose increases to
Daily water intake is an important tool for evaluating
>2 IU/kg per injection using NPH or lente insulin,
diabetic cats. Blood glucose concentrations above the
without adequate control of clinical signs, a longer-
renal threshold (14-16 mmol/l) result in glycosuria,
acting insulin (PZl or glargine) should be used and the
osmotic diuresis and compensatory polydipsia. Meas-
 animal restabilized. Alternatively,if a long-acting insu-
urerment of water consumption at home is simpler,
lin is being used twice daily and the dose exceeds 2.5
cheaper and less stressful for the owner, cat and
JU/kg per injection, lente insulin at an initial dose of 0.5
clinician than measurement of blood glucose concen-
 IU/kg per injection should be used.
 tration. Volume of water consurmption correlates better
with the mean daily blood glucose concentration than
Diabetic remission (transient diabetes
does fructosamine concentration (Martin and Fand,
mellitus)
1999).
Diabetic cats may go into remission after treatment
Waterintake should be measured over consecutive
days to account for marked daily variation. In general,
betic remission usually occurs within 1-4 months of
therapy, when good glycaemic control has been
glycaemic control and insulin dose should not be
 achieved. Remission is more likely ifthere is resolution
changed. Water intake of >100 ml/kg/day indicates
of risk factors such as obesity or administration of
poor glycaemic control and adjustment of insulin dose
diabetogenic drugs (steroids and progestogens) that
is required.
decrease insulin sensitivity, or if there is resolution of
 Wet (canned) foods contain significant water and
an underlying disease (e.g. severe periodontal dis-
hence the type af diet also needs to be taken into
ease).
account. Healthy non-diabetic cats drink on average
Low carbohydrate, high protein diets have recently
<10 ml/kg/day if fed canned focd and <60 ml/kg/day if
 been shown to reduce insulin requirements and poten-
fed dry food. Diabetic cats with excellent glycaemic
 tially increase the chance of diabetic remission occur-
 control drink on average <20 ml/kg/day if fed canned
ring. Preliminary unpublished data from a study using
food and ≤70 ml/kg/day if fed dry foud. Care also needs
 insulin glargine or Pzl twice daily and a low carbohy-
to be taken to identify cats with renal disease that lack
drate, high protein diet (carbohydrate 6.5% of calories)
the ability to concentrate urine and are overtly polydip-
indicate that remission rates of >70% in the first 4
sic even with good glycaemic control.
months af therapy are possible (Marshall and Rand.
unpublished data).
Urine glucose measurements: Urine glucose con-
Water intake less than the thresholds described
centration in the cat should not be used as the sole
above and negative urine glucose output are usually
basis for insulin dose changes but may be useful to
good indicators of impending remission. These should
indicate when a dosage change is required. ff urine
be measured weekly at home, particularly during the
glucose is negative the cat may have exemplary dia-
first 4 months of therapy. Some cats in remission
betic control, but more often there is insulin overdose,
relapse weeks, months, oryears later and it is therefore
diabetic remission or impending remission. A urine
also important to monitor water intake or urine glucose
glucose of 2+ or less (scale 0--4+) is consistent with
 on a regular basis for cats in remission. Cats that
reasonable diabetic control and most treated diabetics
relapse may go into diabeticremission again with early
have a urine glucose of 2+-4+ when a random urine
institution of therapy.
sample is obtained.
Use of glucocorticoids in diabetic cats
Treating and evaluating fractious cats
Glucocorticoids decrease insulin sensitivity and are a
 Failure to obtain adequate blood glucose curves makes
risk factor for development of diabetes melitus in cats.
138
Chapter 13 Feline diabetes mellitus
However, many diabetic cats develop diseases requir-
IU100 to IU40 syringes and using the same divisions
ing glucocorticoid therapy. If such therapy is neces-
on the syringe to base the dose - this produces a 2.5
sary, use of repeated or long-acting steroids with
times overdose. Similarly, a change fram an IU100 0.5
systemic action should be avoided as it creates greater
ml toa 1 mlsyringe using thesamenumber of divisions.
difficulties with glycaemic control. Locally acting
results in a doubling of dose.
glucocorticoids should be used if possible or alterna-
Inappropriately increasing the insulin dose when
tive therapies investigated. lf chronic administration of
clinical signs persist as a result of inadequate duration
steroids is necessary the lowest effective dose should
 of insulin action, or when there is stress-induced hyper-
be used - once determined this should be maintained
giycaemia can also lead to hypoglycaemia.
as changes will affect daily insulin requirements. If
 In humans, hypoglycaemiais more likely to occur if
glucocorticoid therapy is withdrawn the insulin require-
the counter-regulatory response to hypoglycaemia is
ment may decline.
impaired. This is more frequent when glycaemic con-
trol is apparently good because subclinical episodes of
Anaesthesia in diabetic cats
hypoglycaemia rapidly impair counter-regulatory
Anaesthesia should be avoided until the diabetic cat
mechanisms.
has been on insulin therapy for at least 2 weeks. Cats
Cats with hypoglycaemia offen display weakness,
shauld receive their usual insulin dose the morning of
ataxia, disorientation and convulsions. lf owners sus-
 surgery but not be fed. Provided they have eaten the
pect hypoglycaemia, the cat should be offered food or
previous night there are rarely problems associated
force-fed glucose-containing syrup and veterinary at-
with hypoglycaemia.
tention sought immediately. lf clinical signs are present
Blood glucose concentration should be measured
and blood glucose is <3 mmal/l then 1 g/kg of glucose
prior to anaesthesia. Intravenous fluid therapy should 
(2 ml/kg of 50% glucose) should be given intrave-
consist of 2.5% glucose, if the blood glucose concen-
nously. Because of the delay between when signs of
tration is <14mmol/, or a balanced electrolyte solution
hypoglycaemiaare exhibited and presentation, acoun-
if blood glucose is >14mmal/l. Blood glucose should be
ter-regulatory response may have occurred resolving
measured every 30 minutes during prolonged anaes-
clinical signs with resultant hyperglycaemia at presen-
thesia and fluids changed as required.
tation. If hypoglycaemia is suspected, the insulin dose
 Cats can be fed as usual following anaesthesia and
should subsequently be reduced by 50% and a blood
their insulin injection given as normal at the next
 glucose curve performed within 2-3 days.
scheduled time. lf the cat has noteaten for 24 hours the
insulin dose should be reduced, or regular monitoring
Retinopathy and cataract formation
of blood glucose performed, to avoid hypoglycaemia.
Diabetic cats rarely develop cataracts, in contrast to
 General anaesthesia may induce mild insulin resist-
diabetic dogs where 75% develop cataracts within 12
ance for several days so glucose curves should be
months (Salgado et al., 2000). Recently. it has been
interpreted conservatively after anaesthesia.
 shown that high aldose reductase activity plays a key
role in the pathogenesis of diabetic cataracts in dogs
and cats. The fact that older cats have low aldose
Chronic complications of diabetes
reductase activity within their lenses, and diabetes
mellitus
mellitus usually occurs in older cats, may explain why
diabetic cataracts are rare in cats compared with dogs,
Persistence/recurrence of clinical signs
despite persistent hypergiycaemia (Richter et al., 2002).
If initial therapy with oral hypoglycaemic agents and/or
 Retinopathy is common in humans with subaptimal
dietary modification fails to achieve adequate glycae-
 glycaemic control but has not been reported in cats
mic control within 4-6 weeks, insulin therapy should be 
with naturally occurring disease.
instituted. If this fails, or if a cat initially treated with
insulin fails to stabilize or maintain stability, then a
Diabetic neuropathy
 number of factors must be considered. These include:
Diffuse sensorimotor neuropathy is evident in both
peivic and thoracic limbs with electrophysiclogicaltest-
 Failure of owners to properly administer the
ing in the majority of diabetic cats (Mizisin et al., 2002).
insulin
 The neuropathy is subclinical or mildly clinical in most
 Inactive or poorly mixed insulin 
cats and evident only as an inability to jump, weakness,
·
 Inadequate or excessive dose of insulin
wobbliness or physical inactivity. Plantigrade stance or
Inadequate duration of insulin action for the
obvious pelvic limb dysfunction associated with neuro-
dosing frequency
pathy occurs in approximately 8% of diabetic cats
 Poor absorption of insulin and insulin resistance.
frequently misdiagnosed as having spinal cord dis-
The investigation of unstable diabetics is covered in
ease. The cause of diabetic neuropathy is not yet fully
detail in Chapter 9.
understood. The most significant histological changes
involve Schwann cell injury and ballooning and splitting
Hypoglycaemia
of the myelin sheath. Good glycaemic control wil
Hypoglycaemia results from insulin overdose or from
reverse signs in many cats but in some cases evidence
 administering insulin to a cat in diabetic remission. A
of hindlimb neuropathy persists. Pimagedine (amino-
common cause of insulin overdose is changing from
guanidine hydrochloride), which inhibits formation of
139
Chapter13Felinediabetesmellitus
ing diet,excessbodyweightandphysicalinactivityare
involved in itspathogenesis.Although type 2 disease
is most common in cats the majority.at least initially,
are insulin-dependent.With goodglycaemic control a
substantial numberofdiabeticcatswill gointo clinical
remission.Diabeticremissionmaybe facilitated bya
lowcarbohydrate,highproteindietand insulinadmin-
istered twice daily.Newer long-acting insulin ana-
logues and increased availabilityofcommercial low
carbohydrate,highproteindietsmayimprove clinical
andglycaemiccontrolofdiabeticcats in the future.
Referencesand furtherreading
Appleton DJ,RandJS and Sunvold GD (2001) Insulin sensitivity
Plantigrace stance in a diabeticcat with
decreaseswithobesityandleancatswithlowinsulinsensitivity
13.4
peripherai neuropathy.
are at greatest risk of glucose intolerance with weight gain.
JournalofFelineMedicine andSurgery3,211-228
advanced glycated endproducts,hasshown encour-
Appleton DJ,Rand JS and Sunvold GD (2002)Dietary chromium
agingresults incatswith diabeticneuropathyina
andimgrovesglucose toleranceinnormal-weightcats.Journalof
preliminary clinical trial (Grundy and Nelson,unpub-
FelineMedicineandSurgery4,13-25
Baral RMandJS,CattMJandFarrowHA(2003）Prevalencf
lished data).
feline diabetesmelitusinafelineprivatepractice.Jounalf
VeterinaryinernalMdicin17,433-434
Diabetic nephropathy
Brand MillerJCand Colagiuri S(1994)The carnivore connection:
Renal insufficiencyoccurs in approximately20%of
1280-1286
diabeticcats.Histopathological changesinclude:
Brange J, Owens DR,Kang S and Volund A (1990) Monomeric
insulins andtheirexperimentaland clinicalimplications.Diabetes
Care13,923-954
Membranousglomerulonephropathy
BroussardJD andWallaceMS(1995) Insulin treatment of diabetes
Glomerular and tubularbasement membrane
mellitusinthedogandcat.In:Kirk'sCurrentVeterinaryTherapy
thickening
Cohn LA,McCawDLTateDJ and JohnsonJC(2000)Assessment
Glomerularfibrosis
Glomerulosclerosis.
and color test strips formeasuring blood glucose concentration
indogs.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicaiAssociation
216,198-202
Initiallycatsmayhavemarkedproteinuria and as
DiehlKJ(995)Long-termcomlicationsof diabatesmelitus,parIl:
glomerulardamageprogresses,azotaemiaandeven-
gastrointestinal and infecticus.Veterinary Clinics of Nortih
American.SmalAnimalPractice25,731751
tually uraemia may occur.Anuric renal failure may
Dowling PM (1995) Insulin therapy for dogs and cats, Canadian
developwithsevereglomerularfibrosis.Humanswith
VeterinaryJourna/36,577-579
Expert Committeeon theDiagnosisandClassification ofDiabetes
type2diabetesmellitusalsodevelopmanyof these
Mellitus(1997) Reportof theExpert Committee onthe diagnosis
changes.Althoughithasbeenhypothesizedthatchronic
and classificationof diabetesmellitus.DiabetesCare20,1183-
hyperinsulinaemiais thecauseofrenal disease,more
1197
Farrow HA,Rand JS and Sunvold GD (2002) The effect of high
recent evidence suggests thatit is associatedwith
protein，high fat or high carbahydrate diets on postprandia
hypertension,which is often secondary to obesity
glucose and insulin concentrations in normal cats.Joumal of
(Hall, 1997).
VeterinaryInternaMedicine16,360
FeldhahnJR,RandJSandMartinGM(1998）Insulinsensitivityin
normalanddiabeticcats,and normalcats under stress.Journal
ofVeterinaryinternaMedicine12,238
FeldmanECandNelson RW(1996)Diabetesmellitus.In:Canine and
Prognosis
FelineEndocrinoiogyandReproduction,2dedned.ECFeldman
andRWNelsonpp.339-391.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Theaveragesurvival timeinone studyof92diabetic
FeldmanEC,NelsonRWandFeldmanMS(1997)intensive50-week
cats was17months(Goossens etal.,1998).Mostcats
untreated diabetesmelitus.Journa/of theAmericanVeterinary
areolder than 10 yearsat diagnosis,and age and
MedicalAssociation210,772-777
concurrent disease affect the survival rate.Many cats
Responsetoinsulin treatment andsurvival in104catswith
do not live beyond 12 months after diagnosis.Diabetic
diabetesmellitus(1985-1995).JournalofVeterinary Iniernal
ketoacidosis,concurrent disease and poor glycaemic
Medicine12,1-6
control all reduce long-term survival.Catswithvery
GrecoDS(1997)Oral hypoglycaemicagents fornoninsulin-dependent
diabetesinthecat.SeminarsinVeterinaryMedicineandSurgery
enthusiastic anddedicatedownershaveagreater
(SmallAnimal)12,259-262
chanceofsurvival andbetterqualityof life than those
HallJE(1997) Mechanisms of abnormal renal sodium handling in
withlesscompliant andcommittedowners.
obesityhypertensian.AmericanJournaiofHypertension10,
49S-55S
Henik R,Olson Pand Rosychuk R (1985) Progestogen therapy in
cats.CompendiumonContinuingEducation forthePracticing
Veterinarian7,132-142
Summary
HoenigM(1998)Stages of beta cllfailure:the cat as a model for
diabetes mellitus.Proceedings ofthe American College of
Feline diabetesmellitus is a multifactorial disease
VeterinaryMedicineForum575-576
Hoenig M and FergusonD (2003)Effect of darglitazone on glucose
whereboth genetic andenvironmental factorsinclud-
clearance andlipid metabolism in obese cats.American Journal
140
Chapter 13  Feline diabetes mellitus
of Veterinary Rescarch 64, 1409-1413
SE. Kass PH, Davenport DJ, Kieman CT and Neal LA (2000)
Effectafdietaryinsalublefberoncontrolof glycemiaIncatswith
 obesity on lipid profiles in neutered male and lemale cais.
nalurally acquired diabeles melius. Journal of the American
Amarican Jouma! of Veterinary Research 64, 29g-303
Veterinary Medicine Assaciation 216, 1082-1088
Lederer R, Rand JS, Hughes IP and Fleeman LM (2003) Chronic or
O'Brien T(2002) Palhogenesis of feline diabeles mellitus. Molecuiar
recurring medical problems, dental disease, repeated
andCellularndocrinoiogy29213219
corticostercid treatment, and lowerphysicalactivily are associated
Panciera DL, Thomas CB, Eicker SW and Aikins CE (1990)
with diabetes in Burmese cats. Jovrnai of Veferinary internaf
Epizootiologic patterns of diabetes melius in cats: 333 cases
Medicine 17, 433
(19B0-19a6). Journal of the American Veterinary Medicine
Link KRJ (2001] Feline Diabetes: Diagnostics and Experimental
Association 197, 1504-1508
Modeling. PhD thesis, University of Queensland
 Prahl A, Glickman L, Guptl L, Glickman N and Tetrick M (2003) Time 
trends and risk factors fordiabetesmelitus incals.Proceedings:
 and pharmacodynamics of glargine, protamine zinc and porcine
American Coliage of Veterinary Intema! Medicina 2is Annual
lenteinsulins innormalcats Journatof Veterinary Internaf Medicine
Forum, p.1002
16, 358
 Rand JS (1997) Understanding feline diabetes Australian Veterinary
Martin G and Rand J (1999) Correlations between Monitoring
Practitioner 27, 17-26
parameters for insulin-treated diabetic cats. Journalof Veterinary
 Rand J (1999) Current understanding of teline diabetes: Part 1.
nternal Medicine 13, 269
Pathogenesis. Journat of Feline Medicine and Surgery 1, 143-
auod q/niot e jo Aoojoweud (tooz) sr puey pue g uuen
153
lenteinsulinpreparationindiabeticcats.Findingsduringthefirst
 Rand JS, Bobbermein LM and Hendrikz JK(1997) Over-representation
week and affer five or nineweeks of therapy.Joumal of Feline
ol Burmese in cats with diabctes melitus in Qucensland. Australian
Medicine and Surgery 3, 23-30
Veterinary Joumma!75, 402-405
Mazzalerro EM, Greco Ds. Turner AS and Fettman MJ (2003)
 RandJ, Kinmaird E, Baglioni A, Blackshaw J and Priest J (2002) Acute
Treatment of feline diabetes melitus usingan α-glucosidase
inhibitor and a low-carbohydrate diet. Jouma/ ofFeline Medicine
increased concentrations of lactate and norepinephrine.Jouma!
and Surgery 5, 183-189
of Veterinary Internal Madicine 16, 123-132
Michels G. Boudinot F. Ferguson D and Hoenig M (2000)
Pharmacakinetlcs of the Insulin-sensitlzing agent troglifazone in
cats. American Journal of Veterinary Research 61, 775-778
cats. Armerican Jourmai of Veterinary Research 63, 1591-1597
Mizisin AP, Shelton GD, Burgers ML, Powell HC and Cuddon PA
Rosenbloom AL,JoeJR,Young RS and Winter WE (199g) Emerging
(2002) Neurological complications associated with spontaneousty
epidemic of type 2 diabetes inyouth. Diabetes Care22,345-354
occurring feline diabetes mellius. ournafofNeuropathology and
 Salgado D, Reusch C and Spiess B (2000) Diabetic cataracts:
Experimentai Neurology 61, 872-884
differentincidence between dogs and cats. Schweizer Archiv fur
Moise NS and Riemers TJ(1983)Insulin therapyincats withdiabetes
Ticrheikunde142,349-353
melitus.JaurnaloftheAmerican Veterinary MedicalAssoclalion
Wade C, Gething M and Rand JS (1999) Evidence of a genelic basis
Neel JV (1962) Dlabetes mellitus: a thrlft genotype rendered
182,158.-164
 for diabetes melitus in Burmese cats. Journa! of Veterinary
intema/ Madicine 13, 269
detrimenial byprogress?ournai ofHuman Genetics 14,353
Wess G and Reusch CE (2oc0) Capillary blood sampling from the ear
362
of dogs and cats and use of portable meters to measure glucose
Nelsan Rw, Feldman EC and Devries SE [1992) Use of ultralente
concentraltion, Jourmai of Small Animal Practice 43, 60-66
insulin in cats with diabetes melitus. Joual of the American
Woods JP, Panciera DL, Snyder PS, Jackson MW and Smedes SL
Veterinary Medicine Association 200, 1828-1829
(1994) Diabetes mellitus in a kitten. Jourmal of the American
Nelson RW, Scat-Moncrieff JC, Feldman EC, Devries-Concannon
Animal Hospital Association 30, 177
141
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Deborah S. Greco
Introduction and pathophysiology
Shock
Possible death.
Diabetesmelitus is aheterogenous group of disorders
resulting fromanabsoluteorrelative deficiencyof
Hepaticlipidmetabolismbecomesderangedwith
insulinandisafairlycommonendocrinedisorderof
insulin deficiency,and non-esterified fatty acids are
both dogs and cats (see Chapters 12 and 13). It is
converted toacetyl-coenzyme A(acetyl-CoA)rather
characterizedbyhyperglycaemia thatresultsfrom
than being incorporated into triglycerides. Acetyl-CoA
impairedglucoseutilization,increasedgluconeogene-
accumulates in the liver and is converted into
sis and increased hepatic glycogenolysis. Decreased
acetoacetyl-CoAand then ultimatelyto ketones,
peripheral utilizationofglucoseleadstoaccumulation
including acetoacetic acid,beta-hydroxybutyratepri-
ofglucose intheserumfollowedbyleakageintothe
maryketone in dogs and cats) and acetone.Asinsulin
urine and osmotic diuresis.This causes the classic
deficiencyculminatesinDKA,accumulationof ketones
clinical signs of polyuria with compensatory polydipsia.
and lactic acid in theblood and lossofelectrolytesand
Impaired glucoseutilizationby thehypothalamicsati-
water in the urineresults in profound dehydration,
ety centre,combinedwith lossofcaloriesintheformof
hypovalaemia,metabolicacidosis and shock.
glycosuria,results in the clinical signs of polyphagia
Ketonuria and osmoticdiuresiscausedbyglyco-
and weightloss,respectively.Insulindeficiencyleads
suriaresult insodium andpotassium loss in theurine,
toprotein catabolism and contributes tothe clinical
exacerbatinghypovolaemia and dehydration.Nausea,
signs of weight loss and muscle atrophy.As a conse-
anorexia andvomiting,caused by stimulation of the
quence ofprotein catabolism,amino acids such as
chemoreceptor triggerzone viaketonaemia and hyper-
alanineareutilizedbythelivertopromotegluconeo-
glycaemia,contribute to thedehydration caused by
genesis and contribute to hyperglycaemia.
osmoticdiuresis.Dehydrationleadstofurtheraccumu-
Diabeticketoacidosis(DKA) is the culmination of
lation of glucose and ketones in the blood. Stress
diabetesmellitusthatresultsin:
hormones such as cortisol and epinephrine(adrena-
line)contribute to thehyperglycaemia in a vicious
Unrestrainedketonebodyformationin the liver
cycle.Eventually severe dehydrationmay result in
Metabolic acidosis
hyperviscosity,thromboembolism,severemetabolic
Severe dehydration
acidosis,renal failure and,finally,death（Figure14.1).
14.1
Pathophysiology
INSULINDEFICIENCY
and metabolic
abnormalities in diabelic
ketoacidosis.
Increasedglucose produclion
Increased lipolysis
anddecreasedutilization
Hypergl
Increasedbeta-oxidation
Hyperlpicaemia,
andketogenesis
hepaticlipidosis
Osmoticdiuresis
Abdominal
Ketonaemia
Increased
pain
H*ions
Dehydraticnand hypovolaem
Metabolicstress
Decreased glomerular
filtrationrate
Insulinresistance,
Acute renal
Hyperviscosity
ketogenesis,lipolysis,
feailure
and increased glucose
production
Thromboembclism
142
Chapter14Diabeticketoacidosis
History
Mostdogs andcatswithDkApresentwithaprevious
historyofuncomplicated diabetesmellitusincluding
polyuriaandpolydipsia,anddramaticrapidweightloss
14.2).Morerecenthistorical findings include anorexia
weakness,depression,vomiting anddiarrhoea.Occa
sionallyowners fail tonotice the significance of the
classical signs of diabetes mellitus and theanimals are
presentedsolelywithanacute historyofDKA.Itis also
possibleforDKA todevelopinpreviouslywell control-
led diabeticpatients.
14.3
Recumbent cat withseverehyperosmolar
coma.Note thenasogastric tube for slow
rehydrationwithenteralwater.
2002).Although portable glucose meters are com-
monly used tomonitorglucose concentrations inDKA,
caution is advised inrelying on these monitors for
baseline glucose concentrationsbecauseof inaccura-
cies in the face of severe hyperglycaemia.All DKA
patientshavearelativeorabsolutedeficiencyofinsulin
Diabetic dog showing severe weight lcss and
14.2
and excessivehepaticproductionofglucose,resulting
cachexia.
inhyperglycaemia.Hyperglycaemia isfurtherexacer-
bated by dehydration and thecorrespondingreduction
in glomerularfiltratianrate(GFR)and these factors are
Clinical features
important determinants of its severity.Thisis sup-
ported by the findings that:glucose concentrations
Themostcommonphysical examination findings in
exceed25mmol/1onlywhendehydrationissevere
DKAare:
enoughtoreduceGFRand thustheabilityof the
kidneys to excrete glucose;and fluid administration
Lethargy
alonecansignificantlyreduceblood glucose concen-
Depression
trations(Feldman and Nelson,1996).
Dehydration
Unkempt hair coat
in theDKApatientasaresultofhyperglycaemia,but
Muscle wasting.
thismaynotbedetected,inpartbecauseofconcurrent
hyponatraemia(Crenshaw andPeterson,1996;Kerl,
Hepatomegalyiscommon in both diabetic cats and
2001).Sodium and,to a lesser extent,potassium,
dogs.Cataractsare commonlyobserved in diabetic
glucose and ureaconcentrations are the determinants
dogs.Aplantigraderearlimb stanceresulting from
of thecalculatedserum osmolality.Referencevalues
diabetic neuropathy is often observed in diabetic cats.
forserum osmolality in dogs andcats areapproxi-
Other findings include:tachypnoea;weakness;vomit-
mately290-310mOsm/kg.Hyperosmolalityisgener-
ing and occasionally,a strong acetone odour on the
allymildenoughtoresolvewithintravenousfluid and
breath.Catscanpresent recumbentorcomatose and
insulin therapies.
this may be a manifestation ofmixed ketotic
Non-ketotichyperosmolardiabetesmelitusisde
hyperosmolar syndrome (Figure 14.3). Icterus can
fined by extreme hyperglycaemia (>30 mmol/l),
develop as aresult of the complicating factors of
hyperosmolality(>350 mOsm/kg),severe dehydra-
haemolysis,hepatic lipidosis or acute pancreatitis
tion,central nervous system(CNS) depression,a lack
ofketone formationand absentor mild metabolic
acidosis(Macintire,1995).Affected patients are more
Diagnosis
likelytohaveunderlyingrenal orcardiovasculardis-
ease and aremore likely tobenon-insulin-dependent
Laboratory findings
(Kerl,2001).Although this specific syndrome,as de-
Glucoseconcentrationismarkedlyelevated.Theaver-
finedinhumans,isuncommonlyencounteredinveteri-
ageblood glucose inpatientswithDKAis25mmol/l.
nary medicine,itisnotuncommontohaveketoticor
Valuescanrangefrom10to>50mmol/but the latter
non-ketoticdiabeticcats with significanthyperosmolality
ismorecharacteristicof hyperosmolarcoma(Connally,
and CNS alterations(Bruskiewiczet al.,1997).
143
Chapter 14  Diabetic ketoacidosis
Electrolyte concentrations
serum magnesium concentrations were significantly
decreased (Norris et al., 1999). Magnesium deficiency
Potassium: Most patients suffering from DKA have a
may be caused by poor oralintake,decrgased intestinal
total body potassium deficit due to anorexia and urinary
 absorption, increased renal loss, ar changes in distribu-
(osmotic diuresis) and gastrointestinal (vomiting and
tion as it is the second most abundantirntracellular cation
anorexia) losses. The metabolic acidosis, relative or
(Hansen, 2000). Clinical signs of hypomagnesaemia
absolute insulin deficiency and serum hypertonicity com-
include neuromuscular weakness and cardiac
bine to cause a shift of potassium from the intracellular
arrhythmias, signs that can also be seen with other
to the extracellular compartment. This is capable of
electrolyte alterations. Hypomagnesaemia can also
 masking the severity of total body hypokalaemia when
cause decreases in other electrolytes such as potas-
 plasma concentrations are measured. Insulin therapy.
sium and calcium. Correction of deficits may resalve
as well as correction of the acid-base disturbance with
electrolyte disturbances and may improve clinical out-
fluids and/or bicarbonate will drive serum potassium
come in the severely deficient patient (see Figure 14.4).
from the extracellular into the intracellular compartment,
potentially causing marked circulating hypokalaemia
Liver enzyme concentrations
(Greco, 1997a). Polyuric patients are predisposed to
Liver enzyme elevations are common in diabetes
severe hypokalaemia, while oliguric or anuric patients 
melitus. Further increases potentially occur in DKA.
are predisposed to severe hyperkalaemia.
Alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotrans-
ferase are mostcommonlyaffected and these increase
Sodium: (n general, DKA causes significant total body
 secondary to hypovolaemia. poor hepatic blood flow
sodium deficits. Excessive urinary loss of sodium re-
meysuaio) abewep jengaoaeday juanbasgns pue
suits from the osmotic diuresis induced by high glucose
and Peterson, 1996). Further increases in serum alka-
and ketone concentrations and the lack of insulin,
line phosphatase concentration may occur if pancrea-
which usually aids in reabsorption of sodium from the
titis and secondary cholestasis ensues. Cholesterol
distal nephron. Hyperglucagonaemia, vomiting and
and triglyceride concentrations may be elevated sec-
diarrhoea also contribute to the total body sodium loss.
ondary to derangements of lipid metabolism, due to the
Hyperosmolality may contribute to a low sodium con-
decreased levels of insulin.
centration because as osmolality increases, water is
drawn from the interstitium into the vascular space,
Metabolic acidosis
 thus diluting plasma sodium and chloride.
Metabolic acidosis is one of the most prominent fea-
tures of DKA. As ketone bodies accumulate in the
Inorganic phosphorus: Phosphate is the major intra-
blood and overwhelm the body's buffering capabilities,
cellular anion and is important for energy production
there is an increase in hydrogen ions and a decrease
and for maintenance of cell membranes. Concentra-
in bicarbonate. As dehydration worsens, blood flow to
tions are regulated by:
peripheral tissues decreases and the resulting lactic
acidosis may contribute to the acid-base derange.
 Dietary intake
 ment. Acidosis can manifest as:
Renal elimination
 Factors promating its movement into and out of
+
 Lethargy
cells
Vomiting
Vitamin D and parathyroid interactions.
+
 Hyperventilation 
*
 Decreased myocardial contractility
In DKA, circulating concentrations are usually within
 Peripheral vasodilation
reference range or increased initially because of de-
Stupor
+
hydration and/or renai disease. lnorganic phosphorus
Coma.
may also be low at presentation because of urinary loss
due to osmotic diuresis (wheeler, 1988). As long as
 Initiation of insulin therapy to stop ketogenesis and
renal function is not compromised, a significant de-
 fluid therapy to correct dehydration will help improve
crease in inorganic phosphorus should be anticipated
 the metabolic acidosis in most patients. Bicarbonate
with therapy. Following insulin administration, phos-
 supplementationshould be pursued with cautionandis
phate shifts to the intracellular compartment with glu-
generally not recommended unless the patient's blood
cose. Clinlcal signs of hypophosphataemia such as
pH is <7.1 or ihe serum bicarbonate is <12 mmol/l (see
haemolytic anaemia (also seen with Heinz bodies in
Figure 14.4).
 DKA), lethargy, depression and diarrhoea may de-
The anion gap may be normal or elevated. An
velop once concentrations reach 0.32 mmol/l.
 elevated value further characterizes the metabolic
 Oversupplementation of phosphate should be avoided
 acidosis caused by DKA. The anion gap is a represen-
as hypocalcaemia or metastatic calcification may re-
tation of the circulating anions not routinely measured
sult (Nichols and Crenshaw, 1995).
 on biochemical analyses. In DkA, the ketones become
unmeasured anions as they dissociate from ketoacids
Magnesium: Magnesium (total serum) is not measured
(Bruyette, 1997). However, if significant dehydration is
routinely, but concentrations may be abnormal in DKA.
present secondary to the osmotic diuresis and vomit-
A recent study in cats demonstrated high total serum
ing, lactic acidosis secondary to tissue hypoxia may
magnesium concentrations at presentation in patients
contribute to the unmeasured anions, thus increasing
with DKA; however, after 48 hours of therapy. total
the anion gap.
144
Chapter 14  Diabetic ketoacidosis
Urlnalysis
pyelonephritis
Circuiating urea and creatinine concentrations may
cholangiohepatitis
 inflammatory bowel disease (BD)
high in most patients as a reflection of severe de-
 eosinophilic granuloma complex
hydration, but renal insufficiency or failure is also a
prostatitis
possible cause for the elevation. Elevations of urea
 pyometra
and creatinine must be evaluated in light of the urine
 upper respiratory tract infection
specific gravity (SG). A low urine SG at presentation
pneumonia.
does not always guarantee a diagnosis of renal insuf-
ficiency or failure, as osmotic diuresis and chronic
Other concurrent diseases may include renal in-
hypokalaemia can contribute to low SG in diabetic
sufficiency or failure, hepatic lipidosis, neoplasia or
patients. Therefore, re-evaluation of urea, creatinine
congestive heart failure. Recent drug therapy may
and urine SG must be done after treatment of the
also precipitate a crisis, especially administration of
crisis. lIf urea and creatinine are initially elevated and
corticosteroids or progestogens. Therefore, further: :
remain static or increase with appropriate therapy,
diagnostic testing of the diabetic patient that presents
concurrent renal disease is strongly suspected.
in a crisis is essential, particularly abdominal radio-
The most important part of urinalysis is measure-
ooui se llem se Aydeibouosenin jopue Audenn
ment of glucose and katones. A positive result for
radiography and/or achocardiography if indicated.
glucose confirms diabetes mellitus and a positive
Additional festing for concurrent endocrine diseases.
result for ketones confirms DkA. However, a negative
 such as hyperthyroidism in cats and hypothyroidism
ketone result does nat definitively rule out ketosis.
 and hyperadrenocorticism in dogs, may also be indi-
The nitroprusside reagent used in urine sticks detects
cated but should be postponed until some control of
only acetoacetate and acetone. lt is not as sensitive
the diabetes mellitus is achieved as uncontrolled
for beta-hydroxybutyrate, the most prevalent ketone
disease may affect the results of the tests.
body and therefore may be negative in the face of
Ancillary tests for pancreatitis include abdomino-
ketosis. A recent study reported that beta-
centesis or diagnostic peritoneal lavage. Serum
hydroxybutyrate concentrations >1.9 mmol/l were the
amylase and lipase, if determined on presentation,
most sensitive indicator of DkA and that values >4.8
may be elevated in the absence of pancreatitis, sec-
 mmol/l were highly specific for diagnosis (Duarte et
 ondary to severe dehydration'or renal insufficiency.
al., 2002). Using a cut-off value of 3.8 mmol/l was
In these cases the demonstration of an elevated
associated with the best combination of specificity
circulating concentration of trypsin-like immuno-
(95%) and sensitivity (72%) for DKA.
reactivity (TLl) may be preferable for diagnosis. Cats
and dogs with acute necrotizing pancreatitis usually
Haematology
present with vomiting, abdominal pain and concurrent 
The presence of pyuria and haematuria on urinalysis,
DKA. Physical examination findings include icterus,
along with confirmation by examination of urine sedi-
cranial abdominai pain and abdominal effusion. Radio-
 ment, supports the presence of aurinary tract infection.
 graphs may reveal a ground glass' appearance of the
However, urine culture should be performed regard-
abdomen, and abdominal ultrasonography usually
less of urine sediment activity.
The haemogram may be normal at presentation,
pancreas. Concurrent hepatopathies are often present
but usually reveals a leucocytosis with a mature neu-
in patients with DKA but evaluation is complicated
trophilia (common in cais), or a stress leucogram.
by the effect of both the diabetes mellitus and DKA
There may be a regenerative or degenerative left shift 
on liver enzymes and liver function tests. Ultrasono-
graphy may be more usefulin these cases. Diagnostic
suggestive of a severe inflammatory and/or infectious
process. The red blood cellcount and haematocrit may
peritoneal lavage is usually necessary to demon-
be elevated due to dehydration. Heinz bodies, with or
strate inflammatory non-septic peritonitis and ab-
without anaemia, may be noted in cats, as feline
dominal lipase is often increased dramatically in
haemoglobin is uniquely susceptible to oxidative dam-
 affected cats and dogs.
age (Christopher et al., 1995).
Concurrent disease
Treatment
Frequently there is an underlying stressful event that
precipitates the shift from diabetes mellitus to DKA or
Treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis is outlined in
 non-ketotic hyperosmolar diabetes melitus. Impaired 
Figure 14.4 and includes the following steps in order
immune function secondary to diabetes melitus in-
of importance:
creases the risk of infections (Diehl, 1995). The precipi-
tating event may be:
1.
 Fluid therapy using 0.9%, saline initially, folowed 
by 2.5% or 5% dextrose as serum glucose falls
A urinary tract infection (UTI)
2.
Insulin therapy (low-dose i.m. or i.v.)
 Other infections (other than UTl) or an
3. Electrolyte supplementation (potassium,
inflammatory disorder such as:
phosphate, magnesium)
pancreatitis
4.Reversal of metabolic acidasis.
145
Chapter 14Diabeticketoacidosis
Step One:
s
Placeintravenouscatheter,preferablycentralvenous
1.
Estimate dehydration deficit(%)xBW(kg)x1000ml=no.ofml torehydrate
2.
Estimate daily maintenance needs:2.5ml/kgh x24 hours
3.
Estimateosses（vomiting,diarrhea）
Dehydration deficit+maintenance+losses=no.of ml of fluid/24h=hourly fluidrate
Fluid composition:
Blood glucose (mmol/l)
Fluids
Rate
Route
Frequency
>15
0.9%NaCI
Upto 90mlkg/h to rehydrate
i.v.
Every4h
12-15
0.45%NaCI
Up to90mlkg/h to rehydrate
i.v.
Every4h
B-12
0.45%NaCI plus 2.5% dextrose
Up to90ml/kg/h to rehydrate
i.v.
Every2h
6-8
0.45% NaCl plus 2.5% dextrose
Up to 90 mlkg/ht rhydrate
Every2h
6
0.45%NaCl plus 5% dextrose
Up to 90ml/kg/h to rehydrate
iV
Every2h
Monitor:PCV;total solids;Na;K;csmolality;CVP;urine output
StepTwo:
Insulin
Intravenous protocol (Regularonly),mixed in250mlNaCl0.9%ciscard50ml through tubing
Blood glucose (mmoll)
Rate
Route
Dose
Frequency
>15
10ml/h
iv.
1.1 IU/kg (cats), 2.2 IU/kg (dogs), or
Every 1-2h
hyperosmolar (cat or dog)
12-15
7ml/h
iv.
1.1IU/kg （cats）,2.2IU/kg (dogs）,or
Every 1-2h
hyperosmolar (cat or dog)
8-12
5ml/h
iv.
1.11Ukg (cats),22 U/kg (dgs),or
Every4h
hyperosmolar (cat or dog)
6-8
5ml/h
iv.
1.1IUkg (cats),22U/kg(dgs),or
Every4h
hyperosmolar (cat or dog)
6
Stopi.v.insulinbgin.c.inslin
0.1-0.4IU/kg
Every4h
Monitor blcod glucose
Intramuscularprotocol(Regular only)
Blood glucose (mmol/l)
Rate
Route
Dose
Frequency
>15
Ilnitil dose
i.m.
0.2 IU/kg
KunoH
>15
Hourly
i.m.
0.11U/kg
<15
Every4-6h
i.m.
0.1IU.kg
Every 4-6h
<15
Or, stop i.m.insulin and begin s.c.
0.1-0.4 IU/kg
Every 6-8h
insulin
Monitor:blood glucose
14.4
Stepwise lrealmenl of diabeticketoacidosis(Acapted from Greco,1997b.)(continucs)
146
Chapter 14 Diabeticketoacidosis
Step Three:
Electrolytes
Electrolyte concentration(mmoll)
Amount (mmoll)added to 1 litre of fluids
Maximum rate(ml/kg/h)
administered at maintenance rates
Potassium
3.6-5.0
20
26
3.1-3.5
30
16
2.6-3.5
40
12
2.1-2.5
60
2.0
80
7
Phosphate
0.32-0.65
0.01mmol phosphate/kg/h
Monitar serum inorganic phosphorus every 6h
<0.32
0.03mmol phosphate/kgh
Monitar serum inorganic phosphorus every 6h
Magnesium
<0.6
0.36-0.5mmolkgdayconstantrateifusn
Use 5% dextrose; magnesium is incompatible with
as chloride or sulphate
with calcium and sodium bicarbonate salutions
Step Four:
Acid-base balance
pH
Bicarbonate concentration(mmol/l)
Dose of bicarbonate and rate
<7.1
<12
mllintravenous =0.1xBW(kg)x(24-[HCO])over 2h
14.4
(continued)Stepwise treatmcnt of diabetic ketcacidosis(Adapted fromGreco,1997b.)
Fluid therapy
Insulin therapy
Fluid therapy should consist of 0.9% NaCl supple
In dogs,insulin therapy should be initiated as soon
mented withpotassium wheninsulin therapy is initi-
as possible using either intravenous insulin or low-
ated;however,hypernatraemic patients may be
dose intramuscular methods.Intravenous constant
rehydratedwithlactated Ringer'ssolution tolimit so-
rateinfusion(CRi)of regularinsulin is accomplished
dium load.Placement of a large central venous cath-
byplacement of twocatheters:aperipheral catheter
eterispreferredforintravenousaccessbecausecentral
for the insulin infusion,and a central catheter for
venous pressure (CVP)may be monitored,thereby
sampling bloodand administration of drugsand other
providing themeansto avoid overhydration.In addi-
fluids.A dosage of 2.2 IU/kg for dogs or 1.1IU/kg
tion,theneedforrepeatedvenepuncturenecessaryfor
forcatsofregularneutral,solble)insulinisdiluted
frequentmonitoringofglucose,electrolytesandblood
in250mlof saline.Approximately50mloffluid
gases iseliminated.
andinsulinareallowedtorunthroughtheintravenous
Rapid initiation of fluid therapyiskeyfor success-
dripsetand discarded because insulinbindsto the
ful treatment of the DKA patient.Fluid rates vary
plastic tubing.
depending on: degree of dehydration; maintenance
The‘species’of regularinsulin(bovine,porcine
requirements;continuing losses such as vomiting
or human) does not affect response but the type of
and diarrhoea;andpresence of diseases such as
insulin isvery important.Regular insulinmustbe
congestive heart failure and renal disease. Extreme
used;lente,ultralente,isophane andprotamine zinc
cautionshouldbe exercised when considering initi-
insulins should neverbe given intravenously.Using
ating fluid therapy with a hypotonic solution as
intravenous insulin administration,blood glucose
this increases the risk of cerebral oedema.Fluids
decreasestobelow15mmol/lafterapproximately
containing dextrose maybe required tomaintain
10 and16hours indogs and cats,respectively.Once
blood glucose concentrations as insulin treatment
thishasbeen achieved,the animal is maintained
for the DKA is continued.
on subcutaneous regular insulin (0.1-0.4 IU/kg, s.c.
147
9.51
Chapter 14 Diabetic ketoacidosis
every 4-6 hours) until it starts to eat and/orthe ketosis
Bload pressure
has resolved. Often, the transition from hospital to
With a central venous catheter in place, CVP can
home maintenance therapy can be made by using a
be monitored intermittently. Oscillometric or Doppler
low dose (1-2 IU) of regular insulin combined with
measurements can be used to monitor systemic
intermediate or long-acting maintenance insulin at
blood pressure.
the recommended dosages.
ECG
Electrolyte and acid-base therapy
 Monitoring lead ll ECGs can also be helpful not only if
Potassium should be supplemented as soon as insulin
cardiacdisease is present, but also to alert the clinician
therapy is initiated. While serum potassium may be
that serious electrolyte abnormalities may be develop-
 normal or elevated in DKA, the animal actually suffers
from total body depletion of potassium. Correction of
alteration of electrolyte replacement therapy.
the metabolic acidosis tends to drive potassium into the
Hypokalaemia may cause supraventricular and
intracellular campartment in exchange for hydrogen
ventricular arrhythmias such as:
lons. Insulin facilitates this exchange and the net effect
is a dramatic decrease in serum potassium, which
 Premature atrial and ventricular contractions
 must be attenuated with appropriate potassium sup-
 Sinus bradycardia
 plementation in fluids. Refractory hypokalaemia may
 Paroxysmal atrial or junctional tachycardia
be complicated by hypamagnesaemia. Supplementa-
 Atrioventricular block
tion of magnesium along with potassium as outlined in
Ventricular tachycardia
Figure 14.4 may be indicated in cats or dogs with
Ventricular fibrillatian.
hypokalaemia that is unresponsive to potassium
chloride supplementation.
Other ECG changes include ST segment depres-
 Serum and tissue phosphate may also be depleted
during a ketoacidotic crisis and some (one-third) of the
sion, QT prolongation and decreased amplitude and
biphasic T waves (Smith and Hadlock, 1995).
potassium supplementation should consist of potas-
Electrocardiographic signs of hyperkalaemia include:
sium phosphate, particularly in small dogs and cats
decreased P wave ampliude; prolonged PR and
who are most susceptible to haemolysis caused by
hypophosphataemia. Caution should be used as
QRS intervals; decreased R wave amplitude; ST
 segment depression; increased amplitude and sharply
 oversupplementation of phosphate can result in meta-
pointed T waves; bradycardia; atrial standstill; and
static calcification and hypocalcaemia. Bicarbonate
therapy may be necessary in some patients with blood
ventricular fibrillation.
pH <7.1 or if serum HCO, is <12 mmol/l. Caution is
 recommended as metabolic alkalosis may be difficult
Blood glucose
to reverse.
Blood glucose should be checked every 1-2 hours
 Monitoring response to treatment
via CRl or hourly intramuscular injections because
hypoglycaemia is a common but avoidable complica-
Hydration status
tion of therapy. Use of glucometers, which require only
Fluid therapy is one of the cornerstones of treatment of
a drop of blood, alows measurement of glucose with-
the diabetic patient but overhydration is a concern,
 cut induction of anaemia. Electrolyte values can change
especially if renal or cardiac disease is present.
rapidly with initiation of therapy and thus should be
 Objective measurements of hydration status in-
monitored every 4 hours. For the first 24-48 hours of
clude direct or indirect blood pressure measurements,
 therapy, blood glucose concentrations should not de-
as well as measuring CVP, urine output and specific
 cline below 12 mmol/l as lower values may predispose
the patient to development of cerebral oedema. After
gravity, body weight, serum osmolality, packed cell
volume (PCV) and total solids. Assessing the PCV and
the first day or two, if the patient is responding to
plasma for evidence of haamolysis in the
therapy, orif giving injections only every 4-6 hours, the
hypophosphataemic patient is important to evaluate
frequency of blood glucose determinations can be
for haemolytic anaemia.
reduced (i.e. every 4-6 hours).
Initially monitoring urine output via an indwelling
urinary catheter connected to a closed system is also
Electrolytes and blood gases
optimal to ensure the patient is not oliguric or anuric.
Serum electrolytes and blood gas analyses should be
This is especially important for the hyperosmolar pa-
performed 4-6 times daily during the first 24-48 hours
tient as severe hyperglycaemia (>30 mmol/l) is unlikely
when the patient is most critical. Electrolyte composi-
to occur without significant renal impairment or severe
tion of the fluids may need to be altered several times
dehydration and subsequent poor renal perfusion. A
a day depending on the results of electrolyte analyses.
minimum of 1.0-2.0 ml urine per kilogram of body
 Performing a urine dipstick test daily is also important
weight per hour should be produced. If output is less
to assess the degree of glucosuria and ketonuria. An
than optimal, check patency of the catheter, adequacy
of fluid administration (CvP, arterial blood pressure,
of successful therapy as the dipstick measures
 subjective signs, PCV/total solids, urine SG) and ad-
acetoacetic acid, the metabolite of the most prevalent 
 just therapy as needed.
ketone body, beta-hydroxybutyric acid.
148
Chapter 14  Diabetic ketoacidosis
 Duarta R, Slmoes DM, Franchini Ml, Marquezi ML, Ikesaki JH and
Prognosis
Kogika Mw (2002) Accuracy of serum beta-hydroxybutyrate
measurements for the dlagnosis of diabetic keto2cidosis in 116
The prognosis fordogs with diabetic ketoacidosis is fair
dogs. Journat of Veterinary Internat Modicinc 16,411-417
to good as long as the underlying disorder is treatable
(e.g. UT1, pneumonia, etc). With acute pancreatitis, the
and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction 2 edn, ed. EC
FeldmanandRwNelson,pp.392-421, WB Saunders, Philadalphia
 prognosis depends an the severity of the pancreatic
Greco DS (i997a) Endocnine emergencies. Part 1. Endocrine
disease in both dogs and cats. Cats with hyperosmolar
pancreatic disorders. Compendiun on Continuing Educalion for
the Practicing Veterinarian 19, 15-23
non-ketotic or mixed ketotic syndromes have a very
Grcco DS (1997b) Endocrine pancreatic emergencies. Compendium
poor prognosis.
 on Contunuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian, 19, 23-44
Hansen B (20oo) Disorders of magnesium. In: Fiuid Therapy in Small
Animal Pracuice 2d adn, ed. SP Dibartola, pp. 175-186, WB
Saungers, Philadelphia
 Ker ME (200i) Diabetic ketoacldosls: pathophysiology and clinical
References and further reading
and laboralory presentation. Compendium on Continuing
Education forthe Practicing Vaterinarian 23, 220-228
Bruskiewicz KA, Nelson RW, Feloiman ED and Griffey SM (1997)
Macintire DK (1995) Emergency therapy of diabetic crises:insulin
Diabetic ketosis and ketoacidosisin cats:42cases (1980-1995).
overdose, diabetic ketoacidosis, and hyperosmolar coma.
Jourmalofthe American Veterinary MedicaiAssociation211,188-
Veterinary Clinics of North America: SmallAnimal Practice 25(3),.
192
639-650
Bruyetle DS (1997) Diabetic ketoacidosis. Seminars in Veterinary
 Nlchols R and Crenshaw KL (1995) Complications and concurtent
Madicine and Surgery (Small Animai 12, 239-247
forms of diabetes melltus.Veterinary Clinics of North America:
formation associated wlth ketoacldosis in diabetic cats. Jouma!
Smalf AninaiPraclice25(3),B17-624
of Vetcrinary nternal Medicine9,24-31
Narrs CR, Nelson RW and Christopher MM (1999) Serum tatal and
ionized magnesiumconcentrations andurinaryfractionalexcretion
diabetic patient. Clinical Techniques in Smalt Animat Practice 2,
af magnesium jin cats with diabetes mellius and diabetic
73-78
ketoacidosis.Joumalof the American Vetcrinary Medical
Crenshaw KL and Pelerson ME [1996) Pretreatment clinical and
Assaciation 215, 1455-1459
laboralory evaluation of cats with diabetes meltus: 104 cases
 Smith FWK and Hadlock DJ (1995) Electrocardiography.1n: Manual
(1992-1994). joumal of the American Veterinary Medical
Ass0c/ati07209,943-949
Tilley,.4774,WBaunder,Philadephia
Diehl KJ(1995) Long-tem complications of diabetes melitus. Part Il:
Wheeler SL (19e8) Emergency management of the diabetic patient.
Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Small Animal) 3, 
America: Small Animal Practice 25(3), 731-751
265-273
149
Canine hyperadrenocorticism
Michael E. Herrtage
Introduction
Themedulla is adjacent to the zona reticularis and
comprises10-20%of thetotalvolumeof theadrenal
In the dog each adrenal gland is composed of a cortex
gland.The adrenal cortex produces about30 different
andamedulla,whichareembryologicallyandfunction-
hormones,many of which have little or no clinical
allyseparateendocrineglands.Thecortexisessential
significance.Thehormonescan bedivided into three
for lifebut themedulla isnot.Disordersof the adrenal
groups based on their predominant actions:
gland include hyperadrenocorticism(Cushing's dis-
ease),hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
Glucocorticoids-promote gluconeogenesis
phaeochromocytoma andprimaryhyperaldosteronism.
Mineralocorticoids-important in electrolyte and
Hyperadrenocorticism is associated with excessive
waterhomeostasis
production or administration of glucocorticoids and is
Sexhormones-produced in small quantities,
oneof the most commonlydiagnosed endocrino
particularlymalehormones thathaveweak
pathiesin the dog.Hyperadrenocorticism israre in the
androgenic activity.
catand isdescribed inChapter21.
Figure15.2isasimplifieddiagramshowing the
majorpathwaysofadrenal steroidbiosynthesisfrom
Physiology of the adrenal cortex
cholesteroland indicatestheenzymesinvolved in the
process.The principal glucocorticoid,cortisol and the
The adrenal cortexcompletelysurrounds themedulla
sexhormones areproduced inthe zona fasciculata
and consists of three distinct zones(Figure 15.1):
and zona reticularis.
The outerzona glomerulosa(arcuata) comprises
Regulationofglucocorticoid release
about25%of thecortex
Glucocorticoidreleaseiscontrolled almostentirelyby
Themiddlezonafasciculata comprises
adrenocorticotropichormone(ACTH) secreted by the
approximately60%
anteriorpituitary,whichntun,isregulatedbycortico
Theinnerzonareticularis accountsfor the
tropinreleasinghormone(CRH)fromthehypothalamus
remaining 15%of the cortex.
(Figure 15.3).CRH is secreted by neurons in the
15.1
Schematicdiagram
of the microscopic
Capsule
anatomy of a nomal adrcnal
cland.showing the different
Zona
Mineralocorticoid
layersand hehormones
glomerulosa
production
produced.
Zona
fasciculata
Glucocorticoid
procucton
Zona
Medulla
Catecholamine
150
Chapter 15 Canine hyperadrenocorticism
15.2
Cholesterol
Simplified diagram
of adrenal steroid
Side chain cleavage P450
biosynthesis.
Pregnenolone
17aipha hyairoxylase P450
17-alpha hydroxy
Dehydroepiandrosterc
pregnenolone
3-bete hydroxystercid
3-beta hydroxysteroid
oehyorogenase
dehydrogenase
Progesterone
21rydroxylase P450
17-alona hydroxyiaseP450
11deoxycorticosterone
17-alpha hydroxy progesterone
Androstenedione
11-betahydroxyiase P450
21 hydroxylase P450
1i-beta hydroxylase P450
1
Corticosterone
11deoxycortisol
21deoxycortisol
Testosterone
13-beta nydroxylase+
11-betahydroxylaseP450
21-beta hydroxylase P450
Aldosterone
Cortisol
Oestradiol
Mineralocorticoid
Glucocorticoid
Sexhormone
anteriorportionof theparaventricularnucleiwithin the
secretedinto thesystemic circulation causes cortisol
hypothalamus and is transported to the anterior pitui-
releasefrom the adrenalcortexwithserumconcentra-
tarybytheportal circulation,whereitstimulatesACTH
tionsrising almost immediately.Cortisol has direct
release.There isprobablyan internal orshort loop
negative feedback effects on:
negative feedback control by ACTH on CRH.ACTH
The hypothalamus to decrease formationof CRH
。
Theanteriorpituitarygland todecrease the
Hypothalamus
formationofACTH.
These feedbackmechanisms help regulate the
CRH
plasma concentrationof cortisol.
Secretionof CRHandACTHisnormallyepisodic
Ariterior
pituitary
and pulsatile,whichresults in fluctuating cortisol con-
centrations throughout the day.Diurnalvariation is
superimposed on this type of release.lt is usually
stated that in the dog CRH,ACTH and thus cortiso
ACTH
concentrations arehighest in the earlyhoursof the
morning,and that in thecat they are greatest in the
Stimulation
evening.However,a true circadian rhythm of cortisol
Nedalick
concentrations hasbeen difficult to confirm in the dog
and cat(KemppainenandSartin,1984;Petersonetal.
control
Cortisal
1988).The episodicreleaseof CRH and ACTH is
perpetuatedby thereciprocal effectofcortisol acting
through negative feedback control.This reciprocal
15.3
Regulation of glucoccrticoid release.
whenbothACTH andcortisol aremaintained at high
151
Chapter15 Caninehyperadrenocorticism
concentrations,because the effects of stress tend to
Stabilizinglysosomal membranestoreduce
override the normal negative feedbackcontrol.Chal-
thereleaseofproteolyticenzymesby
lenges to the immune system also activate the
damaged cells
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis as cytokines,
Decreasing capillary permeability,which prevents
principally interleukin-istimulate the release of CRH
lossofplasma into the tissues and alsoreduces
from the hypothalamus.
the migration of white bloodcells into the
inflamed area
Functions ofglucocorticoids
Depressing the ability of white blood cells to
Cortisol has more diverse effectson the body than
digest phagocytosed tissues, thus blocking
any other hormone.lts main effect is on carbo-
furtherreleaseof inflammatorymaterials
hydrate:protein and fat metabolism to promote
Suppressing the immune system, especially T
gluconeogenesis.
cells.Glucocorticoids decrease thenumber of
circulating lymphocytesand eosinophils.Cortisol
Effectson carbohydrate metabolism
in excess can decrease antibody production but
Cortisol stimulates gluconeogenesis in the liver by
anamnestic antibodyproduction,for example,
inducing the formationof hepaticgluconeogenicen-
boostervaccination,srelativelyresistant
zymes.One of the effects of increased gluconeogen-
compared toinitial responses
esisis amarked increaseinglycogen stores within the
Reducingfever
hepatocytes.Cortisolalso causes a moderate de-
Suppressing wound healing and scar formation.
crease in therate ofglucose utilization by cells in all
tissuesof thebody.Boththeincreasedrateofgluco-
All these effects of glucocorticoids havemarked
neogenesis and themoderatereductionin therateof
glucose utilization by cells cause theblood glucose
tions and are summarized inFigure 15.4.
concentration to rise.The increase in blood glucose
causessecondaryhyperinsulinaemia,which counters
glucocorticoidactivity.Thenetresult in thehealthy
Liver
animals is a balancebetween theseopposingfactors.
Increased gluconeogenesis
Increased glyccgen stores
Effects on proteinmetabolism
Induction of certain enzymes
Cortisol reduces protein stores in essentially allcells,
except those of the liver.Thisreduction is caused by
Muscle
decreased protein synthesis and increased catabo-
Increased proteincatabolism-musclewasting and weakness
lism.The catabolic actions of glucocorticoids on mus-
Bone
cle result in muscle wasting and weakness.Cortisol
Osteopeniaassociated withincreased proteincatabolismandnegative
probably intootherextrahepaticcells.Thiseffect,com-
calcium balance
bined with increased catabolism,leads to a rise in
Skin
blood amino acid concentrations.Increased plasma
concentrationofaminoacids,togetherwiththefactthat
cortisol enhances transport of amino acidsinto the
scarformation
hepaticcells,could accountforenhanced utilizationof
Blood
amino acidsbythe liver tocause sucheffectsas:
Erythrocytosis
Decrease in circulating lymphocytes
Increased conversionaf aminoacidstoglucose
Decrease in circulating eosinophils
(gluconeogenesis)
Increase in circulating neutrophils
Increased protein synthesis in the liver
Kidney
Increasedformationofplasmaproteinsby
the liver
Increasedglomerularfitrationrateandinterferencewithantidiuretic
Increaseddeamination ofaminoacidsby
hormone release or action(polyuria)
the liver.
Increased calcium excretion
Immune system
Effectsonfatmetabolism
Cortisolincreases lipolysis,whichresultsintherelease
Diminished inflammatory response
Reduced immune response
Insulin counters this effect byinhibiting lipolysis and
Adipose tissue
stimulating lipogenesis.Ketogenesis occurs if the ef-
Increased lipolysis
fects of insulin are exceeded.Adipose tissue tends to
Redistribution of fat deposits
beredistributed to the abdomen andbackof theneck
Pituitary and hypothalamus
in dogswithexcessconcentrationsofglucocorticoids.
Suppression of ACTH and CRH secretion
Anti-inflammatoryeffects
Glucocorticoidsmodifythe inflammatoryprocess and
15.4
Etfectscfglucocorticoids on diferent body
the immune response by:
systems.
152
Chapter15 Caninehyperadrenocorticism
Causes ofhyperadrenocorticism
hyperadrenocorticismvaries,thisisprobably
more todowith thefactthatdetectionofsmall
Hyperadrenocorticism can be spontaneousor iatro-
tumoursrequires careful microdissection,
genic.Spontaneouslyoccurring hyperadrenocorticism
experience and special stains.In one study using
maybeassociatedwith inappropriatesecretionof
immunocytochemical staining,>80%of dogs with
ACTH by the pituitary gland(pituitary-dependent
pituitary-dependenthyperadrenocorticismwere
hyperadrenocorticism)orassociatedwithaprimary
positive forpituitary adenomas(Peterson et al.,
adrenal disorder(adrenal-dependent hyperadreno-
1982a)
corticism)(Figure 15.5).
Macroadenomas:These are>10mm indiameter.
Only about 10-15%of dogshavelarge
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
corticotropicadenomasat the time of diagnosis
Pituitary-dependenthyperadrenocorticismaccountsfor
(Duesberg et al.,1995). These may compress
>80%ofdogswithnaturallyoccurringhyperadreno
theremaining pituitary gland and extend dorsally
corticism.Excessive ACTH secretion results in bilat-
into the hypothalamus(Figure 15.6).However,
eral adrenocortical hyperplasia and excess cortisol
they are generally slow growing and may not
secretion.Thereisa failure of the negative feedback
produce neurological signs. Although reported,
mechanismofcortisolonACTH.However,episodic
corticotropicadenocarcinomasarerare
secretionofACTHresults influctuating cortisol con-
Primaryfailureof the feedbackresponse:The
centrations,whichmayattimesfall within thereference
defectresponsible forpituitary-dependent
range.
It isgenerallyconsidered that>90%ofdogswith
pituitary tumour.Adenomas of the corticotropiccells of
thepars distalis andparsintermedia arethe most
Corticotropicadenomasof thepars distalis are more
common than thoseof theparsintermedia.However,
the latter areofspecificimportance becauseACTH
release by thepars intermedia is under direct neural
contrast,ACTHreleasebytheparsdistalisisunderthe
usual CRH control.The pathological changes in pitui-
tary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism include:
15.6
Pituitary macroadenoma found at post-mortem
in a 13-year-old GcldenRetrever which had
Microadenomas:These are<10 mm in diameter.
been successfully trcated for hyperadrenocorticism with
Although thereportedincidenceof corticotropic
mitotane for 5years.There were noneurolcgical signs
adenomasassociatedwithpituitary-dependent
associated with this tumour.
?CRH
?Failure ofnegative
?Adenoma
teedoeckcontrol
Cortisol
ACTH
ACTH
(a)
(q)
15.5
(a)The piluitary-adrenal axis in pituitary-cepencent hyperadrenocorticism.(b) The pituitary-adrenal axis in
adrenal-dependent hyperadrcnocorticism.
153
Chapter 15 Canine hyperadrenocorticism
hyperadrenocorticism notassociatedwith
pituitary neoplasia is unknown,but maybe
associatedwithexcessivestimulationofpituitary
corticotropiccellsbecause ofahypothalamic
disorder.Aprimaryfailure of thenegative
feedbackresponsebycortisol hasbeen
proposed.Others suspect an overproduction of
CRH from the hypothalamus that may cause
diffusehyperplasia of thecorticotropiccellsinthe
anteriorpituitary.
Froma clinicalpointofviewtheprecisepituitary
pathology is not of great importance unless neurologi-
cal signs arepresentat the time of diagnosisor,they
become apparent during initial treatment.
The cut surface of both adrenal glands from the
15.8
Adrenal-dependenthyperadrenocorticism
same case as Figure 15.7.Note the severe
cortical atrophy (pale rim) in the contralaleral adrenal.
The remaining 15-20%of spontaneous cases of
hyperadrenocorticism are caused byunilateral,or
mas andcarcinomas(Figure 15.8).Thisisanimportant
occasionallybilateral,adrenaltumours.Adrenocortical
considerationif the tumouristoberemoved surgically
tumours maybe benign ormalignant,although it can
as,postoperatively,the animal may not be able to
be difficult to distinguish between adenomas and car-
secretesufficientglucocorticoids andmayrequiretem-
cinomas histologically unless there is invasion or
porary supplementation. Temporary mineralocorticoid
metastasis.
supplementationmay alsobe required(see Surgical
adrenalectomy).
Adrenocortical adenomas:These areusually
small,well circumscribed tumours thatdonot
Otherpotentialcausesof
metastasize and are not locallyinvasive.
hyperadrenocorticism
Approximately50%arepartially calcified
There are also a fewreports of dogs with pituitary-
(Reusch and Feldman,1991).
dependent hyperadrenocorticism having concurrent
Adrenocortical carcinomas:These areusually
adrenal tumours(Grecoetal.,1999).Bilateral adrenal
large,locallyinvasive,haemorrhagic and
tumours have alsobeenreported,butappeartoberare
necrotic.Tumour calcification alsooccurs in50%
(Ford et al.,1993).EctopicACTHproduction would
of dogs(Reusch and Feldman;1991).
appear tobe a very rare cause of hyperadrenocorti-
Carcinomas,especially of the right adrenal gland,
cism in thedogwithonlyonesuspected casereported
frequentlyinvadethephrenicoabdominal vein
(Galacetal.,2003).However,inhumans a numberof
and caudal vena cava,and metastasizeto the
tumours,e.g.oat cellcarcinoma af the lung,are capa-
liver,lung and kidney (Figure 15.7).
ble of synthesizing and secreting excessive quantities
ofACTH.
In dogs, adrenocortical adenamas and carcinomas
occurwith approximately equal frequency.Thecortex
contiguousto the tumour and thatof the contralateral
Clinical features
gland atrophies in thepresenceof functianal adeno-
Signalment
Breed
Anybreed candevelophyperadrenocorticism but Poo-
dles,Dachshunds and small terriers(e.g.Yorkshire
Terrier,JackRussellTerrier,StaffordshireBullTerrier)
appearmore at risk of developing pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.Adrenocortical tumoursoccur
morefrequentlyinlargerbreedswith approximately
50%of dogs weighing>20kg(Reusch and Feldman,
1991).
Age
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism is usuallya
disease of the middle-agedtoolderdog,with anage
range of 2-16 years and a median age of 7-9 years.
Dogswithadrenal-dependenthyperadrenocorticism
15.7
An adrenocortical carcinoma of theright
adrenal gland invading the phrenicoabdominal
tend tobeolderranging between6 and16yearswith
vein.The caudal vena cava can be seen at the top of the
a median ageof 11-12years(Reusch and Feldman,
photograph.
1991).
154
Chapter15
Caninehyperadrenocorticism
Sex
missthis asasignofgood health.Avoracious appetite
There isno significant difference in sexdistribution in
scavengingorstealingfood,however,maygiverise
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism;however,
concern especially if the dogpreviouslyhad apoor
bitchesaremorelikelytodevelopadrenal tumours
appetite.Polyphagia is assumed to be a direct effect of
than males.Inone survey,between 60and 65%of
glucocorticoids.
female(Reusch and Feldman,1991).
Abdominal distension
Thepotbellied appearance is verycommon in hyper-
Clinical signs
adrenocorticism butmaybe so insidious thatowners
Affecteddogsusuallydevelopaclassiccombinationof
fail to recognize its significance (Figure 15.10).Ab-
clinical signs associatedwithincreased glucocorticoid
dominal distensionisassociatedwithredistribution of
concentrations and these are listed inFigure 15.9 in
fat to theabdomen,liverenlargementandwasting and
approximate decreasing order of frequency.Larger
weaknessof theabdominal muscles.The weakness of
breedsof dogsand thosewithrecentonsetofdisease,
theabdominal musclesmakespalpationof thependu-
however,mayonly showa few characteristicsigns
lousabdomeneasierand morerewarding.
rather than the classic array of clinical signs usually
observed in smaller breeds.
Polydipsia and polyuria
Polyphagia
Abdominal distension
Liver enlargement
Muscle wasting/weakness
Lethargypoorexercietolerance
Skin changes
Alopecia
Persistent anoestrus or testicular atrophy
Calcinosis cutis
Myotonia
Neurological signs
Hypertension
15.10
Asix-year-oldPoodle bitchwith pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism.Ncte the
15.9
Clinical signs of canine hyperadrenocorticism in
abdominal distension,muscle wasting,alopecia and thin
skin.
Hyperadrenocorticism hasaninsidious onset and
Musclewasting/weakness
is slowlyprogressiveovermanymonthsorevenyears.
Manyownersconsider theearly signsaspart of the
anceisusuallyconsideredbymostownerstobe
normal ageing process of their dog.In a few cases,
compatible with ageing.Only when muscleweakness
clinical signsmaybeintermittent withperiodsof remis-
becomessevere asreflectedbyaninabilityto climb
sion and relapse(Peterson et al,1982b)whilst in
stairsor jump intoa car does theowner become
others there may be an apparent rapid onset and
concerned.Lethargy,excessivepanting and poor ex-
progression of clinical signs.
ercise toleranceareprobablyanexpressionof muscle
wasting andweakness.Apartfromthe development of
Polydipsia and polyuria
apendulous abdomen,decreasedmusclemass may
Polydipsia(defined aswaterintake>100 ml/kgbody
benotedaround the limbs,over the spineorover the
weight/day) and polyuria (defined as urine production
temporal region.Muscle weakness is the result of
muscle wasting caused byprotein catabolism.
casesofhyperadrenocorticism.Excessive thirst,noct-
Occasionally,dogs with hyperadrenocorticism de-
uria,incontinence and/or urination in the house are
velop myotonia,characterized by persistent active
usuallyreportedbyowners.Polydipsia occurs second-
muscle contractions that continue aftervoluntary or
aryto thepolyuria,whichis onlypartiallyresponsiveto
involuntarystimuli.All limbsmaybeaffectedbutthe
water deprivation.The precise cause of thepolyuria
signs are usually more severe in the hindlimbs.Ani-
remainsobscurebutmaybeduetoincreased glomeru-
mals with myotonia walkwitha stiff stilted gait.The
lar filtration rate,inhibition of the release of arginine
affected limbsarerigid andrapidlyreturntoextension
vasopressin（antidiuretichormone(ADH),inhibitionof
theaction ofADH on the renal tubules orpossibly
flexionmaybedifficultorimpossibleto achievebe-
accelerated inactivation of ADH.Dogs with
cause of the persistent muscle tone.Spinal reflexes
macroadenomasmayshowsignsofconcurrentcentral
are difficult to elicit becauseof therigiditybutpain
diabetesinsipidusdue to compression of theposterior
sensation is normal.The musclesare usually slightly
lobeof thepituitary andhypothalamus.
hypertrophiedrather thanbeing atrophied and a myo-
tonicdimple can be elicitedby percussion of the
Polyphagia
affected muscle.Bizarre high frequency discharges
Increased appetite iscommonbut manyowners dis-
are noted on electromyography(Duncan et al,1977).
155
Chapter 15
Caninehyperadrenocorticism
These unusual myotonic and pseudomyotonic dis
Proteincatabolism,causing atrophiccollagen,also
chargesmay befound in some dogswithhyperadreno-
leads toexcessivebruisingfollowingvenepuncture or
corticism that do not show obvious clinical
otherminor trauma.Wound healing is extraordinarily
manifestationsof myotonia.
slow,presumablybecauseof inhibitionoffibroblast
proliferation and collagensynthesis.Healing wounds
Dermatologicalfeatures
often undergo dehiscenceandevenold scarsmay
The skin,paticularly over theventral abdomen,be-
start tobreakdown (Figure 15.14).
comes thin and inelastic.Elasticity can be assessed
15.14
clinicallybytenting theskinbetweenthethumband
forefinger(Figure 15.11). lnhealthy dogs the skin will
Partial breakdown
flowback toa smooth contourbutinanimalswith
of an abdominal
hyperadrenocorticism itremainstented(Figure15.12).
incision inaBoxer
Striaecanform asa resultof this inelasticity.The
with hyperadreno-
corticism.Note the
abdominalveinsareprominentandeasilyvisible
through the thin skin.There is oftenexcessive surface
striae totherignt
of the cranial end
scaleand comedones causedbyfollicularpluggingare
of incision.The
seen,especially around the nipples (Figure 15.13).
mark to theloft
Hyperpigmentation of the skin is rare in canine hyper-
represents 1cm.
adrenocorticism.
Calcinosis cutis is a frequent finding in biopsy
Tenting the skin on the ventral abdomen to
material from the skin;however,clinical evidenceof
15.11
assess elasticily.
calcinosis cutis is less common.The gross appear-
ance canvarybut thepredilectionsites are theneck
axillae,ventral abdomen and inguinal areas (Figures
15.15and 15.16).Calcinosis cutis usually appears as
a firm,slightlyelevated,whiteorcreamplaque sur-
rounded byarimoferythema.Largeplaques tend to
crack,become secondarily infected and develop a
crust containing white powdery material.The exact
pathogenesis isunknown butplasma calcium and
phosphateconcentrations are usuallynormal.
15.12
In hyperadrenocorticism,the skin is thin and
inelasic and remains lenled. Nole the
abdominal veins are visible through the thin skin
15.15
Skin in the inguinal area of a Poodlewith
hyperadrenocorticism. Focal areas of calcinosis
15.13
Comedones are seen around a nipple.The skin
cutis can be seen eroding through the epidermis.
is thin and abdominal veins are visible.
Comedones are also present.
156
Chapter 15 Canine hyperadrenocorticism
15.16
Diffusecalcinosiscutis involving the dorsal
15.17
A ten-ycar-old Chow Chowwith cepression,
aspect of the neck of a Staffordshire Bull Terricr.
aimless pacing and circling due to a pituitary
Tho skin is ulcerated and secondarily infected.
macroadencma.This dog had classic signs of
hyperadrenocorticism and alopecia around theneck.
Thinning of the hair coat leading tobilaterally sym-
metricalalopecia isfrequentlyseenwithhyperadreno-
renin,activation of therenin-angiotensinsystem,en-
corticism andoccursbecause of theinhibitory effect of
hancedvascularsensitivity tocatecholaminesand a
cortisolonthe anagenorgrowthphase of the haircycle
reductionofvasodilatorprostaglandins(Goy-Thollotet
(see Chapter 8).The remaining hair is dull and dry
al,2002).In themajorityofcases,amoderate degree
becauseitis in the telogenorresting phaseof the hair
of hypertension isnotassociated with clinical signsbut
cycle.The alopecia isnon-pruritic and affects mainly
hypertension-induced blindness,due to intraocular
the flanks.ventral abdomen and chest,perineum and
haemorhage and retinal detachment,has been re-
neck.The head,feet,and in some cases the tail,are
ported.Hypertensionmayalso exacerbateleftven-
usuallythelastareastobeaffected(seeFigure 15.10).
tricularhypertrophyand congestiveheart failure,and
The coat colouris often lighter than normal.Occasion-
cause glomerular damage and proteinuria.
ally,affecteddogsmaynotlosetheirhaircoatbutretain
it,becominghypertrichotic.When hairhasbeenclipped
Diagnosis
indogswithhyperadrenocorticism,itwillfrequentlyfail
toregrowor theregrowthwill bepoor orsparse.
Routinelaboratoryfindings
Themainhaematological,biochemical andurinalysis
Anoestrus/testicular atrophy
findings are listed in Figure 15.18.
Intactbitcheswith hyperadrenocorticism usuallycease
cyclingregularly.Thelengthofanoestrus,oftenyears;
indicatesthedurationofthediseaseprocess.In the
Haematology
intactmalebothtestesbecome softandspongy.Anoe-
Lymphopenia
(<1.5x10/）
strus and testicular atrophy occur due to the negative
Eosinopenia
(<0.2 x 10%/1)
feedbackeffectofhighconcentrationsofcortisolonthe
Neutrophila
pituitary,ashighcortisol concentrations alsosuppress
Monocytosis
secretion of gonadotropichormones.
Erythrocytosis
Thrombocytosis
Neurological signs
Biochemistry
Although uncommon at the time ofpresentation,a few
caseswill developneurological signsassociatedwith
a large functional pituitary tumour. The most common
Increased alanine aminotransferase
High normal fastingblood glucose.Rarelydiabetic
clinical signs aredullness,depression,disorientation,
Decreased blood urea
lossoflearnedbehaviour,anorexia,aimlesswander-
Increased cholesterol (>8 mmoll)
ing or pacing,head pressing,circling,ataxia,blind
Increased triglycerdes(ipaemicplasma/serum)
ness,anisocoria and seizures （Figure 15.17).More
ncreased bilesalts
often,however,neurological signsdevelop during ini-
Urinalysis
tial treatmentof pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorti-
cism with trilostane or mitotane.Once treatment is
Urine specific gravity <1.015 and often <1.008
instituted,thenegativefeedbackinhibitionofcortisol
Urinary tract infection
on thepituitaryglandand hypothalamus isremoved.
Urine protein
potentially allowing therapidenlargementofsome
Urine glucose (<10% of cases)
pituitary tumours,which results in oedema and
Other findings
increased intracranial pressure.
Low total thyroxine(T4)concentrations
Subnormal response to exogenous TSH/TRH
Hypertension
Increased parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentrations
Systemic hypertension occurs in >50% of dogs with
untreated hyperadrenocorticism.The mechanisms
15.18
Routine laboratory findings in canine
underlying the hypertension remain incompletely un-
hyperadrenccorlicism.TRH,thyrcidreleasing
derstood.Hypotheses include excessive secretionof
hormone;TSH,thyrcid stimulating hormone.
157
Chapter 15  Canine hyperadrenocorticism
Haematology
beta cells are destroyed, giving rise to overt diabetes
The most consistent haematological finding is a stress
mellitus.
leucogram with a relative and absolute lymphopenia.
-oydw47 (/01 x 2'0>) ejuedounsoe pue (1/s01 x g'1>)
Urea and creatinine: Blood urea concentration is
penia is most likely the resultof steroid lymphocytolysis
usually normal to decreased due to the continual
and eosinopenia results from bone marrow sequestra-
 urinary loss associated with glucocorticoid-induced
tion of eosinophils (Feldman and Nelson, 1996). Amild
diuresis. Serum creatinine concentration also tends to
to moderate neutrophilia and monocytosis may be
be in the low to normal range.
found and is thought to result from decreased capillary
margination and diapedesis associated with excess
 Chofestero! and triglyceride: Cholesterol and trigly-
glucocorticoids.
ceride concentrations are usually increased due to
 The red cell count is usually normal, although mild
glucocorticoid stimulation of lipolysis. Cholesterol is
 polycythaemia may occasionally be noted. Platelet
usually >8 mmol/l but this is not a specific finding as
counts may also be elevated. These findings are thought
cholesterol is also raised in hypothyroidism, diabetes
to result from stimulatory effects of glucocorticoids on
 mellitus, cholestatic liver disease and protein-losing
the bone marrow.
nephropathy, all of which may be differential diag-
noses. Hypertriglyceridaemia can also occur, although
Serum blochemlstry
less frequently, and is important as the resultant lipae-
mia can interfere with the accurate assessment of a
Aikalinephosphatase:Serum alkaline phosphatase
number of laboratory parameters. Hyperlipidaemia is
(ALP) concentrations are increased in >90% of cases
described in more detail in Chapter 7.
 of canine hyperadrenocorticism. The increase in se-
rum ALP concentration is commonly 5-40 times the
Electrolytes: Serum sodium, potassium, calcium and
 Upper end of the reference range, and is perhaps the
phosphate concentrations are usually within their re-
most sensitive biochemical screening test for hyper-
spective reference ranges.
adrenocorticism. The increased concentration occurs
because glucocorticoids, both endogenous or exo-
Bife acids: Resting and post prandial serum bile acid
genous, induce a specific hepatic isoenzyme of ALP
concentrations may show a mild to moderate elevation
that is unique to the dog. However, a normal serum
in some cases of hyperadrenocorticism due to steroid
ALP concentration does not exclude a diagnosis of
hepatopathy. When abnormal results are obtained it
hyperadrenocorticism and increases in serum ALP do
may prove difficult to differentiate hyperadrenocorti-
 occur in a variety of other conditions.
cism from primary liver disorders.
It was believed that discrimination between the
 glucocorticoid-induced and liver iscenzymes of ALP
Urinalysis
would provide a useful screening test for canine hyper-
adrenocorticism. The glucocorticoid-induced ALP is
Urine specific gravity: The specific gravity (SG) of
more heat stable than other serum isoenzymes of ALP
urine is usually <1.015 and is often hyposthenuric
in the dog. Initial studies were encouraging and sug-
(<1.008) provided water has not been withheld. Dogs
gested that glucocorticoid-induced isoenzyme meas-
with hyperadrenocorticism can usually concentrate
urement provided a more accurate assessment of
their urine if water is deprived but their concentrating
elevated serum ALP activity (Oluju et al., 1984). How-
 ability is frequently reduced. However, in some cases
ever subsequent studies have concluded that while
of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism with
 measurement ofthe glucocorticoid-induced isoenzyme
macroadenoma, compression of the posterior lobe of
of ALP is quite sensitive, it is not speciffc for spontane-
the pituitary gland and suprasellar extension into the
ous canine hyperadrenocorticism as the glucocorti-
hypcthalamus may cause disruption to ADH production
coid-induced isoenzyme can be increased in primary
and release and signs of central diabetes insipidus.
hepatopathies, diabetes mellitus, and in dogs treated
with anticonvulsants and glucocorticoids (Teske et al.,
Urinary tract infection: Urine collected by
1989).
cystocentesis should be analysed for infection, be-
cause urinary tract infections (UTis) occur in approx-
Alanineaminotransferase:Alanine aminctransferase
imately 50% of cases of hyperadrenocorticism. UTI
(ALT) is commonly elevated in hyperadrenocorticism,
occurs because urine is retained in an over-distended
but the increase is usually only mild. The elevation is
bladder as voiding is never complete due to muscle
believed to result from liver damage caused by giyco-
weakness. There is often little evidence of inflamma-
gen accumulation in hepatocytes.
tory cells in the sediment cf the urine and indeed few
clinical signs of UTl due to the immunosuppressive
 Glucose: Blood glucose is usually in the high end of
actlon of excess glucocorticoids. UTls can also ascend
 the reference range. About 10% of cases develop overt
to the kidneys and cause pyelonephritis.
diabetes mellitus - thisis caused by antagonism to the
action of insulin by the gluconeogenic effects of excess
Urine protein: Up to 45% of dogs with untreated
 glucocorticoids. Initially serum insulin concentrations
hyperadrenocorticism have proteinuria (defined as a
increase to maintain normoglycaemia but eventually
urine protein:creatinine ratio >1.0) .in the absence of
the pancreatic islet cells become exhausted and the
UTI (Hurley and Vaden, 1998). The proteinuria is
158
Chapter 15 Canine hyperadrenocorticism
usuallymildandinsomecasesmaybeassociatedwith
hyperadrenocorticismandtheextentof theunderlying
systemichypertension.
pathology so that treatment can be directed more
specificallyto theindividualpatient.However,findinga
Urine glucose:Glycosuria is present in the 10%of
pituitaryoradrenal massdoesnotnecessarilyimply
caseswithovertdiabetesmellitus.
the presence ofa functional tumour.Therefore,diag-
nosticimaging should alwaysbeinterpreted inasso-
Effectsonotherendocrine testresults
ciation with theclinicalsigns andendocrinetestresults.
Thyroid function tests:Serum total thyroxine (T4)
Radiography
and/or triodothyronine (T3) concentrations are de-
Radiographic examination of the thorax and abdomen
creased inapproximately70%of dogswithhyper-
is advisable in all cases of suspected orprovenhyper-
adrenocorticism (Peterson et al., 1984). In addition,
adrenocorticism.Althoughpositive diagnosticinforma-
>60%of dogswith lowserum total T4concentrations
tionis onlyobtained in the small numberof cases
alsohave lowfree T4concentrations(Ferguson and
whereadrenal enlargementormineralizationcanbe
Peterson,1992).The total T4response to thyrotropin
detected,thenumber andfrequencyofradiological
releasinghormone(TRH)orthyrotropin(thyroid stimu-
changes consistent with hyperadrenocorticism pro-
lating hormone(TSH)) administration usuallyparallels
videsa useful aid to diagnosis.ln addition,survey
a normal response,but actual values both pre-and
radiographs may reveal significant intercurrent dis-
post-TRH or TSH are subnormal (Peterson et al.,
ease,whichmightaltertheprognosis.Theradiological
1984).These effects arethought tobe dueto inhibition
signs ofhyperadrenocorticism have been reviewed
ofpituitaryTSHsecretionandabluntedTSHresponse
previously(Huntley et al.,1982) and the common
toTRH (Ramsey and Herrtage,1998).However, the
changesare listed inFigure 15.19.
situation is complex as in some cases of spontaneous
hyperadrenocorticism cTSH concentrations may be
Abdominal radiographs
increased.Theexactcausefor this alteration isnot
Liver enlargement
known,but may be due to excess cortisol altering
Good radiographic contrast 
thyroidhormone binding toplasmaproteins or,en-
Pot bellied appearance
hancedmetabolism of thyroid hormones.In one study,
Calcinosis cutis/sof tissuemineralization
an increasedfree T4fraction indicativeofreduced
Distended bladder
serumT4proteinbindingwasidentified innearly40%
Cystic calculi
ofdogs with hyperadrenocorticism (Ferguson and
Adrenal enlargementmineralization
Peterson,1992).
Osteopenia
Thoracic radiographs
Parathormone:Glucocorticoidsareknowntoincrease
urinary calcium excretion in canine hyperadrenocorti-
Tracheal and bronchial wallmineralization
Pulmonary metastasis from adrenocortical carcinoma
cism.lnordertomaintain normalcirculating concentra-
tionsof calcium,parathormone(parathyroid hormone
Osteopenia
Congestive heart failure (rare)
(PTH)) concentrations are increased in>80%ofcases
Pulmonary thrombcembolism (rare)
ofhyperadrenocorticism(Ramseyand Herrtage,2001).
PTH concentrations appear to become raised early in
Radiological signs compatible with
the courseof thedisease inboth pituitary and adrenal-
15.19
hyperadrenocorticism.
dependenthyperadrenocorticism.
Liver enlargement:Hepatomegaly is the most con-
Growthhormoneandinsulin-likegrowthfactor1:
sistent radiographic finding in hyperadrenocorticism.
Chronic glucocorticoid excess reduces spontaneous
There is goodradiographic contrast topermit easy
and stimulated growth hormone (GH)secretion by
identificationoftheabdominalstructuresbecause
enhancing release of somatostatin from
the
hypothalamus.Reduced GH secretionfrom thepitui-
tarymay result in reduced serum insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1) concentrations.
Insulin and C-peptide:It hasbeenshown that both
insulin and C-peptide（released in equimolar concen-
trations to insulin)concentrations are increased in
dogswithhyperadrenocorticism andthattheirresponse
toglucagonisexaggeratedwhen compared tohealthy
dogs (Montgomery et al.,1996). Peripheral insulin
resistanceproducedby cortisol explains this observa-
tionandultimatelymayresultinovertdiabetesmellitus.
15.20
Abdominalradiographofa CairnTerrierwilh
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.The
Diagnostic imaging
radiographic signs include hepatomegaly, pot bellied
Advances in diagnosticimaging have improved the
appearance,calcinosiscutis,dystrophiccalcificationin the
ability of clinicians toidentify the cause of spontaneous
softissues along thespine,enlargedbladderandosteopenia.
159
Chapter 15  Canine hyperadrenocorticism
of the large deposits of intra-abdominal fat. Hepato-
Skull: Plain radiographs of the skull are usually unre-
megaly may be mild to severe and the ventral lobe
warding. Cavernous sinus venography, however, has
borders vary between distinctly rounded and sharply
been used to identify large pituitary tumours (Lee and
wedged-shaped. The pot bellied appearance is usu-
Griffiths, 1972).
ally very obvious on the recumbent lateral projection
(Figure 15.20).
Abdominal ultrasonography
With high resolution ultrasound equipment it is possi-
Adrenai giand enlargement/mineralization: Normal
ble for an experienced ultrasonographer to image the
 adrenal glands are not visible on abdominal radia-
adrenal glands of most normal dogs. Large, obese and
graphs. Although adrenomegaly is the least common
deep-chested dogs provide the greatest challenge.
finding on abdominal radiographs, gross enlargement
The best images of the adrenal glands are obtained by
is suggestive, though not diagnostic, of an adrenocor-
 scanning from the right and left lateral intercostal and
tical carcinoma. Unilateral mineralization in the region
 abdominal approaches.
of an adrenal gland also suggests the possibility of an
adrenal tumour, aithough, the presence of mineraliza-
Locatfon: The right adrenal gland is more difficult to
tion can not be used to distinguish benign from malig-
image than the left because of its deeper and more
nant tumours as both adrenocortical adenomas and
cranial location under the ribs. The right adrenal gland
adrenocortical carcinomas can become calcified.
ween the cranial pole of the kidney and the caudal vena
Caicinosis cutls and soft tlssue mlneralization:
cava. The right adrenal gland is situated dorsal or
Calcinosis cutis tends to have a nodular mineralization
 dorsolateral to the caudal vena cava just cranial to the
 pattern, whereas calcification in the fascial planes, e.g.
cranial mesenteric artery. The left adrenal gland is
just dorsal to the thoracolumbar spine, tends to be
 more variable in location. It may be found anywhere
linear (see Figure 15.21). Mineralization may also be
from craniomedial to the left kidney to a more midline
seen in the renal pelvis, liver, gastric mucosa and 
position near the aorta, adjacent to the first or second
 abdominal aorta.
lumbar vertebra. The left adrenal gland is ventrolateral
to the aorta between the origin of the cranial
Urinary bladder: A grossly distended urinary bladder
 mesenteric artery and the left renal artery.
 may be seen radiographicaly even when the animal
has been allowed to urinate prior to the radiographic
Appearance: The normal adrenal gland is somewhat
examination. Cystic calculi may also be present and
flattened, bilobed and hypoechoic compared with the
are usually associated with UTi.
 surrounding tissues. The cranial lobe is larger with a
spatulate shape and the caudal lobe tapers distally.
Osteopenia:Objectiveevaluation of skeletal deminer-
The mid-region of the adrenal is narrowed and fre-
alization is notoriously difficult (Schwarz et al., 2000).
quently has a groove in which the phrenicoabdominal
However, occasionally the impression of osteopenia is
vein lies. The medulla of the normal adrenal gland is
 gained from a distinct reduction in radiographic density
slightly hyperechoic compared with the cortex. The
of the vertebral bodies relative to the vertebral end
 maximum dimensions (length x thickness) af normal
plates (see Figure 15.20).
canine adrenal glands are in the range 10-52 mm x
2-12 mm (Grooters etal., 1995; Douglass etal., 1997).
Tracheal and bronchial wall mineralization: Tra-
There is poor correlation between these dimensions
Auenball s! uoezjiaujw (im jelyouog pue jau
and body weight, and there are no published normal
seen radiographically in cases of hyperadrenocorti-
 adrenal measurements for different breeds of dog.
 cism. However, calcification of these structures can be
The challenge for the ultrasonographer is to con-
seen in normally ageing animals and is not considered
 highly significant (Owens and Drucker, 1977; Huntley
neoplastic glands. Although the adrenal glands of dogs
et al., 1982).
been characterized as being symmetrically enlarged
Other changes: The thoracic radiographs should also
and of normal conformation, the diagnosis of adrenal
be examined for evidence of lung metastasis from an
hyperplasia is a somewhat subjective evaluation.
 adrenocortical carcinoma, congestive heart failure and
Hyperplastic adrenal glands should be larger and easier
pulmonary thromboembolism. Pulmonarythromboem-
to image than normal glands but should still have a
bolism is a rare complication of hyperadrenocorticism,
normal, homogeneous hypoechoic pattern (Figure
which may be related to glomerular protein loss result-
15.21a). Some studies have shown that adrenal thick-
ing in decreased antithrombin Ill concentrations, and
 ness (ventrodorsal dimension) and width are signifi-
may be suspected when radiographic signs include
pleural effusion, increased diameter and blunting of
hyperadrenacarticism when compared with weight-
pulmonary arteries, decreased vascularity of the af-
and age-matched controls (Bartez etal., 1995; Grooters
fected lobes and overperfusion of the unobstructed
et al., 1996). However, although a thickness of >7.5
pulmonary vasculature (Fluckiger and Gomez, 1984;
mm for the left adrenal gland is considered to provide
LaRue and Murtaugh, 1990). However, in some cases
the best sensitivity and speclficlty as a diagnostic test
 of pulmonary thromboembolism the radiographs may
for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (Bartez
reveal no abnormalities.
et al., 1995), increases in adrenal thickness are not
160
Chapter15 Caninehyperadrenocorlicism
specificenough to warrant the useof adrenalultra-
Tumourdetection:Abdominal ultrasonographycan
sonography as a screening test forhyperadrenocorti-
also detect adrenocortical tumours(Kantrowitzet al.,
cismbecausethere isconsiderableoverlapbetween
1986)(Figure 15.21b). The presence of bilateral adre-
normaland hyperplasticadrenal glandmeasurements
nal tumours hasbeenreported but israre(Ford etal.,
(Gould etal.,2001).However,ultrasonographic iden-
1993). There is a propensity for malignant adrenal
tificationofbothadrenalglandsofsimilarsizewith
tumourstoinvadenearbyvesselsand surrounding
normal architecture,in a dog with clinical signs of
tissues;therefore,a thorough ultrasonographic exami-
hyperadrenocorticismandapositiveendocrine screen-
nation of adjacent vessels and tissues should beper-
ing test,confirms pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
formed (Figure 15.21c).Mineralization is frequently
corticism.
associated with bothbenign andmalignant adrenocor-
tical tumours in thedog and acousticshadowing may
aid inlocalizing the adrenal tumour.Ultrasonography,
however,cannotdifferentiatea functional adrenocor-
tical tumourfroma non-functionaltumour,aphaeochro-
mocytoma,a metastaticlesionoragranuloma.There
BADRENRL
are alsoafewreportsof dogswithpituitary-dependent
et al.,1999).Therefore clinical signs and endocrine
testresults areimportant fora full interpretation of the
imaging findings.lf an adrenal mass isidentified the
liver,spleenandkidneysshould alsobe examined for
evidenceofmetastases.
(a)
Computed tomography andmagneticresonance
EAR
imaging
1.5CH
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
SLOPECN
imaging (MRl)have proved useful in the diagnosis of
adrenal tumours,adrenal hyperplasia and large pitui-
FAR
tarytumoursbutbothtechniquesareexpensiveand
110
notalways widely available（Voorhoutet al.,1988:
GAIN
Bertoyetal.,1995:Duesberg etal.,1995).Inone study
comparing abdominal survey radiography with CT for
thedetectionofadrenocorticaltumours,CTaccurately
localizedall tumourswhereas abdominal radiography
accuratelylocalizedonly55%of thecases(Voorhout
etal.,1990).Thiswas due to the fact that tumours<20
mm indiameter couldnot beseenon abdominal
(b)
radiographs.CT can alsoidentify invasion of the cau-
dalvena cavabythe tumour and adhesionsbetween
the adrenal gland and the caudal vena cava.
Althoughno comparative studieshave been car-
riedoutin dogs,MRI hasbeenfound tobesuperiorto
CT in detecting ACTH-secreting tumoursof thepitui-
tary gland in humans.MRI is extremely sensitive and
can detectpituitarytumoursas smallas3mmat their
greatest height(Bertoy et al.,1995).Approximately
50%of dogswith pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocor-
ticism havea detectablepituitary masson MRI(Figure
15.22).There is a tendency for the mass to grow
despite treatment ofhyperadrenocorticism with
(c)
trilostane or mitotane;however,there is no way to
15.21
predict whichof themassesare likely togrowand to
(a) Ultrasoncgraph of the right adrenal of an
become clinicallyapparent(Bertoy etal,1996).Corre-
8-year-old crossbreed dog withpituitary-dependent
lationbetweenpituitarytumoursize andpresenceof
hyperadrenocorticism showing the thickened hypoechoic
cortex surrounding a normal echogcnic medulla.
neurological signs is not clear cut.Large pituitary
tumours（upto12mm indiameter)havebeenshown
German Shepherdbilchwith an adrenal-dependcnt
tobe present without causing neurological signs,
hyperadrenocorticism.The adrenal tumour is the large
whereaspituitarymassesranging in size from 8-24
mixed echogenic mass in the centre of the scan that has
mm may be associated with neurological signs
(Duesberg etal.,1995). In those cases with neurologi-
adrenal gland.(c) Ulirasonograph of the cranial abdomen
cal signs,MRI or CT examination of the brain is
ofa 10-year-old LabradcrRetricvcrbitchwith an
adrenocortical carcinoma which has invaded the caucal
essential foraccuratelyplanning therapyifpituitary
vena cava(CvC).
irradiation is tobeconsidered.
161
Chapter15 Canine hyperadrenocorticism
ticism orin dogs withknown non-adrenal disease.
Theprotocols for these tests aregiven inFigure
15.23.Therelativemeritsof each testand interpreta-
ET:16
tionare discussed below.Theauthor'spreferenceisto
use the ACTHresponse test as the first screening test
and the low-dose dexamethasone suppression testif
the ACTHresponse test gives a normal result in a dog
with clinical signssuspiciousof hyperadrenocorticism.
ACTH response fest
Collect a blood sample forbasal cortisol concentrationa
2.
Inject 250μgof syntheticACTH(tetracosactide,cosyntropin） iv
3.
Callectasecond sampleforcortisolconcentration30-60minutes
later
Low-dose dexamethasone screening test
Collect a blood sample for cortisol determination
2.
Inject 0.01-0.015 mg/kg of dexamethasone i.v.
Collec aecodsacrtislcnetratonhu
and a third sample 8hours after dexamethasone administration
Urine cortisol:creatinine ratio
Collect aurine sampleinthemorning forcortisoland creatinine
measurements.ltispreferableforthedogtobeathomeforthis
test so that itis minimally stressed
2.
Determine the urine corticoid:creatinineratioby dividing theurine
cortisol concentration(μmol)by theurine creatinine
8kHz
concentration (μmol/l)
Protocols for screening tests for
(b)
15.23
hyperadrenocorticism.aTherecent
15.22
Magneticresonance images of a 10-year-old
Bulldog with pituitary-dependent
prednisolone or prednisone may result in elevated cortisol
hyperadrenocorticism andcentral diabetes insipidus.
concentrations due to cross-reactivity in many cortisol
(a) T2-wei ghted midline sagittal image and (o) T2-
assays.Forthisreason gluccorticoics should bewithheld
weighted transverseimage showing a pituitary
forat least 24 hours before testing.There is no cross-
macrcadenoma.
reactivity with dexameihasone, but like other
glucocorticoids, dexamethasone willsuppress cortisol
Endocrine screening tests
concentrations in palients with an intact hypothalmic-
pituitary adrenal axis.Doses as lowas 5μg/kg
A presumptive diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticismcan
administered intravenously have also been shown to
be made from clinical signs,physical examination,
maximally stimulate cortisol production inhealthydogs
routine labaratorytests anddiagnosticimaging find-
and thosewith hyperacrenocorticismbut care must be
ings,but the diagnosismust be confirmed by hormone
taken to time the post-ACTH sample correctly (Kerl ct al,
assay.A single resting or basal plasma or serum
1999).
cortisoldeterminationisofvery limiteddiagnosticvalue
because of the overlapin cortisol concentrationsob-
ACTH response test
tained fromnormal and abnormal disease states.
TheACTH responsetest isthebest screening test for
Plasma or serum cortisol concentrations are only use-
distinguishing spontaneous from iatrogenic hyper-
fulafterdynamicmanipulationwithACTHor dexa-
adrenocorticism.lnspontaneoushyperadrenocorticism,
methasone.Themostcommonlyused screeningtests
the ACTHresponse testreliably identifies>50%of
are the ACTH response test or the low-dose dexa-
dogswithadrenal-dependenthyperadrenocorticism
methasone suppression test,however, the urinary
and approximately85%of dogswithpituitary-depend-
cortisol:creatinineratiohas alsoproveda usefulscreen-
ent hyperadrenocorticism.
ing test.None of these tests areperfect and allare
It isa simple andquicktest toperform and docu-
capableofgiving false-negative andfalse-positive test
mentsexcessiveproductionof glucocorticoidsby the
results.lfa dog with clinical signs compatible with
adrenal cortex incases of hyperadrenocorticism.The
hyperadrenocorticism produces a negative result with
information gained is alsouseful inprovidingbaseline
onescreeningtest,analternativescreeningtestshould
informationformonitoringtrilostaneormitotanetherapy,
be used.False-positiveresultscanbeobtainedindogs
although differentcriteria areused tointerpretcortisol
suffering from non-adrenal disease (Kaplan et al.,
results during treatment.
1995).Thus,a definitive diagnosis of hyperadrenocor-
The ACTH response test,however, does not reli-
ticism should never be made purely on the basis of
ablydifferentiate adrenal-dependentfrompituitary-
resultsof one ormoreof thesescreening testsepe
dependent hyperadrenocorticism.A diagnosis of
ciallyin dogs without classicsignsof hyperadrenocor-
hyperadrenocorticismshouldnotbyexcludedon the
162
Chapter15 Caninehyperadrenocorticism
basisof a normal ACTH responseif theclinical signs
dependentand adrenal-dependentatypical hyper
are compatible with the disease.Occasionally,an
adrenocorticismcaseshavebeenreported(Norman et
animalunderchronicstressmaydevelopsomedegree
al,1999; Syme et al.2001;Ristic et al.,2002).
of adrenal hyperplasia,whichproduces anabnormal
Inhealthy dogs pre-ACTH17-hydroxyprogesterone
ACTH response.This may be seen for example with
concentrations range from <1-1.9 nmol/l and increase
diabetesmellitusorpyometra,andanormal cortisol
tobetween1.0.and5.5nmol/afterACTHadministra-
responsetoACTHadministrationwillbeobtained after
tion.Aswith cortisol measurements on ACTH re-
treatmentof theunderlying disease in these cases.
sponse testing,abnormal 17-hydroxyprogesterone
It isessential to use absolutevalues forpre-and
responses canbefound incases of non-adrenalillness
post-ACTH cortisol concentrationsrather than aratio
(Chapman et al.,2003).
or percentageincrease inpost-ACTH cortisol concen-
Plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone concentrations
tration over thebasal concentration.In healthy dogs;
can be used to monitor treatment of atypical cases
pre-ACTHcortisol concentrations areusuallybetween
treatedwith mitotane.However,themeasurement of
20and 250 nmol/l withpost-ACTH cortisol concentra-
17-hydroxyprogesterone is not helpful in managing
tionsbetween200 and450nmoll.Regardlessof the
cases treated with trilostane as concentrationsare
pre-ACTH cortisolvalue,a diagnosis of hyperadreno-
massivelyincreasedpresumablybecauseofcross-
corticism canbe confirmedby demonstratingapost-
reactivity in the assay with 17-hydroxypregnenolone,
ACTH cortisolconcentration>600nmol/l in dogs with
which is increased becauseof inhibitionof3-beta
compatible clinical signsandwithoutevidenceof con-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenaseby trilostane.
current non-adrenal disease(Figure 15.24).
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test(Fig-
ure 15.25)ismorereliable than theACTHresponse
1400
test inconfirming hyperadrenocorticism,astheresults
are diagnosticin the majorityof adrenal-dependent
Hyperadrenocorticism
casesand in90-95%ofdogswithpituitary-dependent
1200
hyperadrenocorticism.
The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is
not as accurate as the ACTH response test for the
1000
detection of iatrogenichyperadrenocorticism.Thetest
isalsoaffectedbymorevariablesthantheACTH
E
response test,takes8hoursto complete and doesnot
ccrtisol
provide pre-treatment information that maybe used in
monitoring theeffects of mitotane or trilostane therapy.
600
Plas
250
?PDH/ADH
(Addison's Disease)
Pre
Post
15.24
ACTH response test. Interprctation of plasma
E
Hyperadreno-
cortisolconcentraticnsceterminedbeforeand
corticism
after administration of synthelicACTH.
Concurrentmeasurement of17-hydroxyproges-
terone:Somedogs,withclassicclinicalsignsofhyper-
adrenocorticism and typical haematological and
biochemical findings,have a normal cortisalresponse
to bothACTHadministration and low-dose dexa
PDH
methasone suppression.Thesecaseshavebeentermed
atypical hyperadrenocorticism.lt has been suggested
a derangement of the steroid productionpathway and
Hourspost dexamethasone
that some of the precursors of cortisol,such as 17-
hydroxyprogesterone,maybe abnormally increased
15.25
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test.
Interpretation of plasma cortisol concentrations
(seeFigure15.2).Circulating17-hydroxyprogesterone
concentrations showanexaggerated response toACTH
determined during low-dose cexamethasone screening.
?PDH/ADH represents the typc of resoonse seen in cases
administrationinbothtypicalandatypicalhyperadreno-
of pituitary-dependent or adrenal-dependent
corticismwith concentrationsincreasing to between
hyperadrenoccrticism. PDH represents the rcsponse in
6.5and38nmol1(Ristic et al.,2002).Both pituitary-
pituitary-cependent cases where suppression occurs.
163
Chapter 15 Canine hyperadrenocorticism
The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test does
normal range make a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorti-
not reliably differentiate pituitary-dependent from
 cism unlikely. The urine cortisol:creatinine ratio does
adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
not reliably differentiate pituitary-dependentfrom adre-
Interpretation of the results of a low-dose dexa-
methasone suppression test must be based on the
exceeds 100 x 10-6 when it becomes more likely that the
laboratory's reference range for the dose of dexa-
 dogis suffering from pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
methasone administered. if the dose of dexametha-
corticism (Galac et al., 1997). The test is of little value,
sone fails to adequately suppress circulating cortisol
however, in monitoringthe response to mitotane therapy
in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism (Guptill etal., 1997).
dog with compatible clinical signs, a diagnosis of
hyperadrenocorticism is confirmed. while basal and
Tests to differentiate the cause of
8-hour post-dexamethasone samples are most
hyperadrenocorticism
important for interpretation of the test, one or more
The ability to differentiate between pituitary- and adre-
 samples taken at intermediate times (e.g. 3 or 4 hours
nal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism can have impor-
Aew pouad jsal eul buunp (uoensuwpe bumolol
tant implications in providing the most effective method 
also prove helpful. If a plasma cortisol concentration
of management for the disease. An accurate test is
determined at this intermediate time is suppressed
therefore required to differentiate pituitary from adrenal
causes of hyperadrenocorticism. The high-dose dexa-
mmoll) while the 8-hour sample shows escape from
methasone suppression test used to be the most
cortisol suppression, or there is marked suppression
commonly used test for differentiating the cause of
(>50% of baseline concentrations) throughout the test.,
hyperadrenocorticism, but its accuracy has recently
then a diagnosis of pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
 been brought into question. Canine ACTH assays are
corticism can be made (Peterson, 1984). A failure to
now readily available and the determination of the
suppress plasma cortisol at 3-4 and at 8 hours is not
plasma ACTH concentration has been shown to pro-
helpfu! in determining the cause of the hyperadreno-
vide reliable discrimination between pituitary and adre.
corticism.
nal causes of hyperadrenocorticism(Gould etal., 2001).
Diagnostic imaging techniques, particularly abdominal
Urinary cortisol:creatinine ratio
ultrasonography, have also proved sensitive in distin-
Evaluation of urinary cortisol:creatinine ratio rather
guishing dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
than the more laborious 24-hour urinary corticoid ex-
corticism from dogs with adrenocortical tumours.
cretion has been shown to be a simple and valuable
Recognition of metastatic lesions with radiography
screening test for hyperadrenocorticism (Rijnberk et
and/or ultrasonography, however, is the only method
al., 1988).
that can reliably distinguish dogs with adenomas from
 Cortisol and its metabolites are excreted in urine.
dogs with carcinomas inthe absence of histopathology
By measuring urine cortisol in the morning sample, the
(Reusch and Feldman, 1991).
concentration. will reflect cortisol release over a period
of several hours, thereby adjusting for fluctuations in
Plasma endogenous AcTH concentration
plasma cortisol concentrations. The concentration of
Stringent and meticulous sample handling is crucial
 cortisol in urine increases with increased circulating
because ACTH activity in plasma will reduce rapidly
concentrations. Relating the urine cortisol concentra-
resulting in falsely low values and incorrect interpreta-
tion to urine creatinine concentration provides a cor-
tion (see Chapter 1). The endogenous ACTH assay
rection for any differences in urine concentration.
used must be validated for use in dogs.
Urine is collected in the morning for cortisol and
 Measurement of basal endogenous ACTH concen-
creatinine estimations. It is preferable for the dog to be
 tration is of no value in the diagnosis of hyperadreno-
at home for this test so that it is subjected to as little
corticism because ofthe episodic secretion of ACTH in
stress as possible otherwise abnormal cortisol concen-
healthy dogs and the overlapping values in dogs with
trations will be found in the urine. The urine
hyperadrenocorticism.
cortisol:creatinine ratio is determined by dividing the
 Endogenous ACTH concentrations in healthy dogs
urine cortisol concentration (umol/l) by the urine creati-
nine concentration (μmol/l).
formulae see Chapter 3). Dogs with adrenal tumours
have very low endogenous ACTH concentrations (<1.1
The reference ratio for normal dogs is <10 x106
pmol/l) whereas cases with pituitary-dependent hyper-
(Stolp et al, 1983).
adrenocorticism tend to have high-normal to high con-
The urine cortisol:creatinine ratio is increased
centrations (>6.2 pmol/l). ACTH measurement has
above normal (>10 x 10) in dogs with
been shown to be an accurate method of identifying the
hyperadrenocorticism.
cause of hyperadrenocorticism (Gould et al., 2001). It
has also been recognized that there is a positive
However the ratio is also increased in many dogs
correlation between the plasma ACTH concentration
with non-adrenal illness (Smiley and Peterson, 1993).
and the size of the pituitary mass in pituitary-dependent
Therefore while this simple test appears highly sensi-
hyperadrenocorticism (Theon and Feldman, 1998).
tive in detecting hyperadrenocorticism in dogs, it is not
that specific. The test does provide a good screening
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
test for hyperadrenocorticism in that values in the
This test is no longer considered reliable but may be
164
Chapter15 Caninehyperadrenocorticism
indicated inthose caseswhere the diagnosisof hyper-
Dose
adrenocorticismhasbeen establishedbya screening
The initial doseof trilostaneis 2-12mg/kgbody weight
test,but the differentiationof adrenal-dependent and
administeredorallyoncedailyusing60or120mg
pituitary-dependenthyperadrenocorticismhas natbeen
capsules according the regimen given in Figure 15.27.
determinedby ACTH measurementor diagnostic
imaging.Aprotocolforthe test is giveninFigure 15.26.
capsule but at the present time trilostane is not recom-
The high doseof dexamethasone should inhibit pitui-
mended foruse indogs<5kg.Trilostane should notbe
taryACTH secretion,through negative feedback.in
used in dogs suffering fromprimaryhepatic disease or
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and thus
renal failure.lt is also not recommended for use in
suppress cortisol concentrations.Suppression of cor-
pregnant or lactating animals or in anyanimal intended
forbreeding.
cism.Adrenocortical tumours are autonomous and
thus cortisol is not suppressed.However,it hasbeen
Body weight (kg)
Starting dose (mg)
shown thatapproximately20-30%ofpituitary-depend-
<5kg
Not currentlyrecommended
because the pathalogy involves the pars intermedia,
5-20
60
andthereforealackofsuppressiondoesnotdetermine
20-40
120
the cause of the hyperadrenocorticism.Inaddition,the
high-dose dexamethasone suppression test will not
>40
120-240
differentiateadrenocorticaladenomas from adreno-
cortical carcinomas.
15.27
Initial dosageregimen for trilostane.
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
Monitoringtreatment
Collect ablood sample for cortisol determination
Close monitoring isrequired during treatment with
Inject 0.1 (although some authors recommend 1.0 mg/kg) of
trilostane.Clinicalexaminationand laboratorytesting
dexamethasonei.v.
Collect twopost-dexamethasone samplesneat4hoursand
should beperformed at10days,4weeks,12weeks
3.
a second at 8hours after dexamethasone administration
and thereafterevery 3months.Polyuriaandpolydipsia
mayresolvewithin a fewdaysof treatmentbutalo-
15.26
Protocol for endocrine lests to diferentiate the
pecia and skin changesoften takeseveral monthsto
cause of hyperadrenocorticism.
improve.Blood samplesshould be taken forhaemato-
logyand biochemistry and anACTH responsetest
Diagnosticimaging
should beperformed ateachvisit.
The initial dose shouldbe adjusted on thebasis of
and abdominal and cranial CT/MR imaging can be
ACTH response testresults to achieve the desired
used to differentiate betweenpituitary-dependent
level of control.The ACTH response test should be
performed4-6hours afterdosing with trilostane asthe
adrenocorticism.Diagnosticimaging can alsobeused
effects of the drug are often short lived.A post-ACTH
todistinguishbetweenbenign andmalignant tumours
cortisolconcentrationof >20but<150 nmol/lindicates
of the adrenal cortex.
adequatecontrol4-6hoursaftertrilostane administra-
tion.Thedose of trilostane should beincreased or
decreasedaccordinglytobringthepost-ACTHcortisol
Treatment ofpituitary-dependent
concentration into this targetrange.Some dogs re-
hyperadrenocorticism
quire twicedaily dosingwithtrilostanetoachieve
adequate control of clinical signs over a24-hour pe-
Trilostanetherapy
riod.In these cases,an ACTH response test per-
Trilostane(Vetoryl,ArnoldsVeterinaryProducts)has
formed24hoursafter thelastdoseof trilostanewill
provisional marketing authorizationin theUKforthe
usuallyshowapost-ACTHcortisolconcentrationabove
treatmentof pituitary-dependenthyperadrenocorticism
250 nmol/l.
andshould thereforebeused as thefirstlineof treat-
Clinical signs of polydipsia,polyuria and poly-
ment according to the‘cascade'
phagia areameliorated in about70%of dogstreated
Trilostaneisasyntheticsteroidwithnoinherent
with trilostane,and skinchangesresolve in about60%
hormonal activity.lt acts as a competitive,and there-
of cases.The clinical response to trilostane would
forereversible,inhibitorof the3-beta hydroxysteroid
therefore appeartobeless than withmitotane,where
dehydrogenase enzyme system and therefore blocks
>80%of cases showa good to excellent response.
adrenalsynthesisofglucocorticoids,mineralocorticoids
However,serious adverseeffectsareconsideredless
and sexhormones(seeFigure15.2).lt hasbeenused
frequentwith trilostane thanwithmitotane.Failure to
with limitedsuccesstomodifyadrenal steroidogenesis
resolve theclinical signswithtrilostanemayrequire an
inhumanswith hyperadrenocorticismand primary
alternative therapy tobe tried.
hyperaldosteronism.Preliminaryreportshaveshawnit
While somecasesrequire increasing dosesof
tobe of value in the treatment of pituitary-dependent
trilostanetocontroltheclinical signs,othercases may
hyperadrenocorticism in dogs (Neiger et al.,2002;
showspontaneousremissionrequiring lowerdoses or
Ruckstuhl et al.,2002).
even a cessationof treatment.Anexplanationfor the
165
Chapter 15  Canine hyperadrenocorticism
remission is not clear but may be related to adrenal
Pre-treatment assessment
necrosis (see below).
Mitotane therapy should only be considered once the
diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism has been confrmed.
Adverse effects
Because of its powerful effects mitotane should never
About 10-15% of trilostane-treated dogs develop ad-
be used empirically. Before treatment is instigated, the
verse effects most of which are mild and can be
dog's daily water consumption should be measured
corrected by stopping or adjusting the treatment.
over at least two consecutive 24-hour periods. lf the
Overdosage willresult in hypocortisolaemia with signs
water intake and appetite are not increased then pre-
of lethargy, depression, vomiting and anorexia but,
treatment cortisol concentrations, both before and af-
although many trilostane treated dogs have elevated
ter ACTH stimulation, are required in order that the
serum patassium concentrations and reduced
effects of treatment can be monitored. Monitoring
sodium:potassium ratios, clinical signs of primary
therapeutic efficacy using lymphocyte counts has been
hypoadrenocorticism are rare.
previously recommended but tends to be less useful
 Reported complications in trilostane-treated dogs
than repeated ACTH response tests.
include diarrhoea, acute pancreatitis, sudden death
(usually in the first few days of treatment), neurological
Initial treatment 
signs associated with a rapid enlargement of a pituitary
The author prefers to have his patients hospitalized for
 tumour and adrenal necrosis. Although comparatively
the initial course of treatment, although many clinicians
rare, sudden death is an unprediclable adverse effect
have dogs treated by their owners at home, with the
and it is not clear why these animals die. Acute
owners doing the necessary monitoring.
hypoadrenocorticism or thromboembolism might ex-
 Mitotane is given orally at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day.
plain some of these cases and an assoclation with
It should be administered with food, since it is a fat-
chronic valvular disease and mitral regurgitation has
soluble drug and its absorptian is poor when adminis-
been suggested in others. Perhaps of most concern is
tered orally to fasted animals (Watson et al., 1987).
the finding of adrenal necrosis in two dogs receiving
 Daily mitotane therapy should be continued until any of
trilostane treatment for hyperadrenocorticism
 the following changes are noted:
(Chapman, personal communicafion). As trilostane is
a reversible inhibitor of steroid synthesis, this compli-
The water intake of a polydipsic dog drops to <60
 cation would not be expected and yet awareness is
ml/kg/day
important since prompt treatment is required to correct
The dog takes longer to consume its meal than
this life-threatening situation.
before treatment or stops eating completely
It has also been noted that the adrenal cortices
 The dog develops vomiting or has diarrhoea
 continue to enlarge on trlostane treatment (Ruckstuh!
The dog becomes listless and depressed.
et al., 2002). Ultrasonographic examination shows a
noticeable increase in thickness and echogenicity of
The initial mitotane course is then stopped, an
the adrenal cortex. This increase is due to the effects
ACTH response test carried out and the dog put on
 of increased secretion of ACTH that results from abol-
maintenance therapy (see below). The importance of
ishing the negative feedback normally exerted by cor-
close monitoring of the patient during this period can-
tisol. In some treated dogs the adrenal glands assumed
not be over-emphasised. If such end points are not
observed, an ACTH response test is completed after
resents bilateral nodular hyperplasia. However, the
10 days of therapy and mitotane therapy stopped if the
 progression to neoplasia should also be considered.
appropriate response has occurred. if the dog is not
polydipsic or polyphagic then efficacy of treatment
Survival data
should be assessed by repeated ACTH response tests
Long-term survival data for trilostane-treated dogs with
carried out approximately every 5 days. A successful
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism have not
therapeutic response is indicated by cortisol concen-
been published but preliminary data suggests that
trations of between 20 and 120 nmol/l before and after
 survival is similar to dogs treated with mitotane.
ACTH administration. If serum cortisol concentrations
are undetectable then the introduction of maintenance
Mitotane therapy
therapy should be delayed until the cortisol concentra-
Mitotane (o,p'-DDD) requires a 'Special Treatment 
tions are between 20 and 120 nmol/l after ACTH
Authorization' from the Veterinary Medicines Directo-
administration.
rate for its use in the UK. It should therefore only be
The majority of dogs with pituitary-dependent
used in the treatment of pituitary-dependent hyper-
 adrenocorticism when trilostane has been shown to be
treatment with an average of 10 days before an appro-
ineffective, when adverse effects have meant that
priate response is apparent. A few dogs respond in
 trilostane can not be used, or when pre-existing disor-
2-3 days,but others require more than60 consecutive
ders preclude the use of trilostane.
days of treatment. It is important to emphasize that
During its evaluation as an insecticide, mitotane
each dog must be treated as an individual if the therapy
was discovered to have adrenocorticolytic effects. It
is to be successful.
selectively destroys the zona fasciculata and zona
reticularis while tending to presarve the zona
Adverse effects: Mitotane therapy is comparatively
glomerulosa.
 safe and the adverse effects that occur most frequently
166
Chapter 15 Caninehyperadrenocorticism
Problem
Management
Vomiting or anorexia within the first 3
Discontinuemitotane and reassesspatient.Divide dose and give 2-4 times a day
days of treatment (gastric irrtation)
Profound weakness,depression and
DiscontinuemitotaneandreassesspatientChecksodiumandpotassiumconcentrationsandinstit
anorexia usualyaround day4or5of
treatment
Acute onset of neurological signs
ReassesspatintContittaelessthdgnreximiing odresd
Failure foresume normal waterintake
Recheckurinalysis andrenalfunction.Reassess ACTHresponse test.Increasemitotaneby50%ifpost
ACTHcortisolconcentrationis>200nmolConsidercentral diabetes insipidusin associationwitha
macroadenoma
Failre of hairto regrow
Reassess ACTHresponse testDetermine baseline T4.Increasemitotane by 50%if post-ACTH cortisol
concentration is >200 nmoll.Ifcortisol concentration is <120 nmoll investigate hypathyroidism
Excessive depression orweakness
ReassesspatientChecksodiumandpotassiumconcentrationsRepeatACTHresponse test.lf cortisol
related to weekly maintenance therapy
concentration post-ACTH is<20 nmoll reduce maintenance dose or give every other week
15.28
Possibleproblems that maybe encounteredduring rritotane therapy and their management.
(anorexia,vomiting,diarrhoea)arerarelyseriouspro-
food.Casesthatare wellcontrolledmay sleepforafew
viding they arenoticedearlyso thatmitotane therapy
hours after theweekly dose and for thatreasonit is
can be withheld.Some of the problems that can be
oftenrecommendedthatthetreatmentisgiveninthe
encountered during treatment are summarized in Fig-
evening.More profound depressionorweaknessre-
ure 15.28 together with their suggested management.
quiresre-evaluation using the ACTH response test and
Some authors advocate the administration of
possiblyareductionor splittingof themaintenance
glucocorticoids during the induction treatment topre-
dose.Failure tocontrol thepolydipsiamayrequire an
vent signsofhypocortisolaemia.However,thereisno
increased doseof mitotane(seeFigure 15.28).
effects and will make interpretation of subsequent
Monitoring therapy:Treateddogsshouldbere-ex-
ACTHresponse testresults difficult,due to the cross-
amined6-8weeks afterinstitutionof themaintenance
reactivity ofprednisalone/prednisoneinmost cortisol
dose.Marked improvement should be noted at this
assays(Dunn et al.,1995).Therefore concomitant
time.Themostobviousandrapidresponseis areduc-
glucocorticoid treatment is not advisedroutinely,al-
tioninwaterintake,urineoutputandappetite,andthis
though if the dog is being treated at home,theowner
isusuallyobvious at the endof the initial courseof
should begiven a small supply of prednisolone/pred-
therapy.Muscle strength and exercise tolerance im-
nisone tablets tobe used in an emergency.
prove over the first 3-4weeks.Skin andhair coat
Rarely dogs willdevelop neurological signs during
changes take longer and theprogress is variable.The
theinductioncourseof treatment with mitotane.These
skin and alopecia maydeteriorate markedlybefore
signsarethought tobe associatedwitharapidexpan-
improving,alternatively,there may be gradual and
sion in the sizeof apituitary macroadenoma subse-
noticeable resolution of the clinical signs.Although
quent toa decline innegative feedbackinhibition as
improvementshouldbenoted at8weeks,theskinand
circulating cortisol concentrations decrease.Clinical
haircoatmaynotreturn tonormalfor3-6months
signs caninclude dullness,depression,disorientation,
(Figure 15.29).A few dogs have dramatic changes in
lossof learnedbehaviour,anorexia,aimlesswander-
coatcolourfollowing successful therapy(Figure 15.30).
ing oracing,headpressing,cirling,head tilt,ataxia
Re-evaluationevery3-6monthsisrecommended
blindness,anisocoria and seizures. Most of these
for theremainder of the animal's life.The dosage of
cases willrespond favourably to treatmentwith
mitotane shouldbe adjusted according to theresults of
glucocorticoids.If the glucocorticoid therapy is slowly
ACTH response testing. The goal of therapy is to
withdrawn over several weeks,thebrain can often
achieve anACTH testresult with serum cortisol con-
adapt to the enlargement of the pituitary tumour.If
centrationsbetween 20 and120 nmol/1.Relapses and
episodes of overdosage do occur.Relapses (post-
therapy shouldbe considered.
ACTH cortisol>120nmol/Iwithclinical signsofpoor
Maintenance therapy
therapyoran increase in the maintenance dosage.
Havingproduced sufficientadrenocortical damagewith
Overdosage (post-ACTH corisoi <20 nmol/l) requires
daily mitotane treatment,it is important to continue
areductionin thefrequencyordoseof maintenance
therapy,albeit at a lower dose,otherwise the adrena
therapy.
cortexwill regenerate a hyperplasticzona fasciculata
andzonareticularis and the clinical signswillrecur.
Adverse effects:Primary hypoadrenocorticism with
Mitataneisgiven at adoseof 50mg/kg/weekwith
bathglucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid insufficiency
167
Chapter15Caninehyperadrenocorticism
b）
15.30
（a)A7-year-aldDachshund bitchwith pituitary
dependent hyperadrenocorticism before
treatment.(b) The same dog 4 months later afler
commencirg milolane therapy.Notethcmarked change
this period had a longer mean survival time.Other
studieshave shown similar survival times(Kintzerand
Peterson,1991).
Other treatments
Selegiline hydrochloride
Selegiline hydrochloride (L-deprenyl) is a monoamine
oxidaseinhibitor(MAOl)and assuchit should inhibit
(c)
ACTH secretionbyincreasing dopaminergic tone to
thehypothalamic-pituitaryaxis.Depletionofdopamine
15.29
(a)A 10-year-old crossbreddogwithpiluitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticismbeforc
and a consequent increasein ACTH secretion is con-
treatment.(b) Thc same dog 8 weeks after commencing
treatment with mitotane.(c) The same dog 6 months later.
ent hyperadrenocorticismin the dog.L-deprenyl is not
licensed for use inpituitary-dependenthyperadreno-
occurs in5-17%of treated dogs during maintenance
corticism in the UK,but is licensed for treatment of
therapy.AlthoughAddison'sdisease can develop at
behavioural disorders in dogs.
any time during treatment,most cases ofprimary
Therecommendeddoseof L-deprenyl forcanine
hypoadrenocorticism occur during the firstyear of
hyperadrenocorticism is1mg/kg daily.If thereis an
treatment.Thereis,unfortunately,no way to predict
inadequateresponse after twomonths the dosage is
whichdogswill developcomplete adrenocortical insuf-
increased to2mg/kg/day.lf thisdosagealsoproves
ficiencybutifhypoadrenocorticismdoesdevelopmain-
ineffective,alternativetreatment shouldbeemployed.
tenancemitotane therapy should be stopped and the
L-deprenylisnotrecommendedfortherapyofpituitary-
dog treatedwithmineralocorticoidandglucocorticoid
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs withconcur-
supplementation asforprimaryhypoadrenocorticism.
rentdiabtemllitus,anratitisartfailur
disease or other severe illnesses.The drug should not
Survivaldata
beadministeredwithotherMAOls,opioidsortricyclic
Themeansurvival timeof treateddogswas30months
antidepressants.
inonestudy,witharangeofafewdaystoover7years
Preliminary trials with L-deprenyl have shown that
(Dunn etal.,1995).The highestmortality was seen in
theefficacyisvariablewithapproximately80%ofdogs
thefirst16weeksof treatmentanddogsthatsurvived
failing toshowimprovementof clinical signs.However,
168
Chapter 15 Canine hyperadrenocorticism
an advantage of L-deprenyl is that there are no severe
Feldman, 1998). There is often a dramatic response,
adverse effects with this treatment. Monitoring therapy
although, in some cases improvement takes several
with endocrine testing is difficult since there are only
weeks. The resolution of neurological signs parallels
 minor reductions in serum cortisol concentrations dur-
the reduction in size of the tumour, which can continue
 ing a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test or an
to decrease for a year or more after the completion of
 ACTH response test in dogs on treatment (Reusch ef
the radiotherapy. Reduction in ACTH secretion by the
al, 1999).
tumour is less predictable and if it does occur may not 
L-deprenyl might be considered a justified treat-
be evident for 6-12 months after therapy. Therefore,
ment if the clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism were
very severe and the risk of trilostane or mitotane was
trilostane or mitotane is indicated at least initially.
considered too great, or in cases which have obvious
 signs of hyperadrenocorticism and a positive diagno-
Hypophysectomy
sis, but where the owner does not feel there is a major
Hypophysectomy has been successfully performed in
problem and thus any adverse effect would not be
the dog for the treatment of pituitary-dependent hyper-
tolerated.
adrenocorticism using the trans-sphenoidal approach
(Meij et al., 1998). The operation is technically difficult
Ketoconazole
and should only be carried out by a veterinary surgeon
Ketoconazole is an imidazole antifungal drug that
with considerable skill and experience of the tech-
suppresses steroidogenesis. It has a reversible inhibi-
 nique, otherwise it is associated with high morbidity
tory effect on glucocorticoid synthesis whilst having a
and mortality. Haemorrhage and incomplete visualiza-
negligible effect on mineralocorticoid production.
tion and removal of larger lesions are common compli-
Ketoconazole has been used effectively in the man-
cations. Transient diabetes insipidus may develop,
agement of canine hyperadrenocorticism (Feldman
which requires treatment and all dogs will require
and Nelson, 1996).
 lifelong thyroid and glucocoricoid replacement therapy.
 The initial dose of ketoconazole is 5 mg/kg twice
daily for 7 days to assess drug tolerance. If there are no
Bilateral adrenalectomy
adverse reactions the dose is increased to 10 mg/kg
Bilateral adrenalectomy has been employed success-
twice daily for 14 days. The efficacy of the treatment is
fully but involves the risk of putting an ill animat with a.
determined by an ACTH response test using the same
compromised immune system and poor wound heal-
criteria as for monitoring mitotane therapy. If sufficient 
ing, through a difficult surgical procedure. With other
suppression of cortisol is not achieved (i.e. serum
 more effective treatments available there is litte to
cortisol >120 nmol/l) then the dose should be in-
recommend this technique. Dogs treated by this ap-
creased to 15 mg/kg twice daily. Occasionally doses
proach will require lifelong treatment for hypoadreno-
aul louoo o painbal ae Aep aomi by/bw oz 1o
corticism.
disease.
Adverse effects include anorexia, vomiting, diar-
rhoea, hepatopathy and jaundice. Higher doses are
Treatment of adrenal-dependent
associated with a higher incidence of adverse effects.
hyperadrenocorticism
The treatment is expensive and not always effective.
 About 25% of dogs treated with ketoconazole fail to
Dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
respond adequately.
carry the best prognosis if the tumour can be com-
pletely removed surgically, however, these dogs are
Cyproheptadine
often poor surgical candidates. Mitotane therapy has
Cyproheptadine is a drug with antiserotonin, antihist-
also been recommended for adrenal-dependent
 amine and anticholinergicproperties. Since excess ACTH
hyperadrenocorticism with simiiar results (Kinfzer and 
secretion from the pituitary gland can be the result of
Peterson, 1994).
increased serotonin concentrations, cyproheptadine
 might act to reduce ACTH release in pituitary-depend-
Surgical adrenalectomy
ent hyperadrenocorticism. Although cyproheptadine
Preoperative staging of the adrenal tumour should
has been used for the treatment of pituitary-dependent
include thoracicradiographs and abdominal ultrasound
hyperadrenocarticism the response has been variable
 to assess the presence of vascular invasion and meta-
with only a very low success rate.
static spread. Administration of trilostane or mitotane is
recommanded by some authors in order to attempt to
 Pituitary irradiation
control the hyperadrenocorticism before surgery.
Pituitary irradiation is indicated for dogs with neurologi-
Unilateral adrenalectomy requires considerable
cal signs associated with pituitary tumours.CT or MRI
experience and expertise because of the complex
screening of the brain is required to plan the treatment
anatomy. The technique is well described using the
 protocol. Radiotherapy using megavoltage irradiation
paracostal, flank approach (Johnston 1977, 1983).
from a linear accelerator orcobalt 60 source is required
Glucocorticoid supplementation is required during sur-
to penetrate to the depth of the pituitary gland without
seriously injuring overlying softissues. Mosttreatment
adrenal cortex will be atrophic and unable to respond
protocals involve the administration of 40-50 Gy in
adequately to stress. Although mineraiocartlcoid pro-
3-4 Gy fractions (Goosens et al., 1998; Théon and
duction should not be affected long-term, replacement
169
Chapter 15  (
Canine hyperadrenocorticism
therapy is often recommended during and immediately
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Journal of tre American
Veterinary Medical As5ociation206,651-656
0 Aresseoeu sieedde Hiov asneoeg Aiabins jae
Chapman PS, Mooney CT, Ede J, Evans H, OConmor J, Pfeiffer DU
maintain normal aldosterone output. Adrenalectomy
and Neiger R (2003) Evaluation of the basal and post-
should only be performed by an experienced veteri-
 hydroxyprogesterone for the diagnosis gf hyperadrenocorticism
nary surgeon and even so there is a high morbidity and 
in dogs. Veterinary Record 153, 771-775
 mortality rate. In one study, the perioperative mortality
DouglassJP. Berry CRandJames S (1997) Uitrasonographic adrenal
was 30% (van Sluijs et al., 1995). Inthe same study, the
gland measurements In dogs withoutevidence of adrenal disease.
Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 38, 124-130
median survival time was just <2 years with some dogs
Duesherg CA, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Bertoy EH, Dublin AB and
surviving for >4 years.
 Reid MH (1995) Brain magnetic resonance imaging for the
diagnosis of pituitary macrofumours. Jouma! of the American
Velerinary Medical Associalion 206, 675-662
Mitotane therapy
 Duncan ID, Grifiths IR and Nash AS (i977) Myolania in canine
Mitotane (o,p' -DDD) is effective and relatively safe in
Cushings disease.Veterinary Record100,3031
 Dunn KJ, Herrtage ME and Dunn JK (1995) Use of ACTH stimulation
dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
tests to monltor the treatmenl of canine hyperadrenocorticism.
Dogs with adrenal tumours, however, tend to be more
Veterinary Record 137, 161-165
resistant to mitotane than dogs with pituitary-depend-
01 a dog wilh funclional adrenocortical neoplasia.Joumal of
ent hyperadrenacorticism (Feldman et al., 1992).
Smal Animal Practice 44, 126-131
Generally dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadreno-
Feldman ECand Nelson Rw (1996) Hyperadrenocorticism, In: Canine
corticism require higher daily induction doses (50-75
Feldman and Rw Nelson pp. 187-265. wB Saunders,
mg/kg/day) and a longer period of induction (>14 days)
Philadelphia
Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Feldman MS and Farver TB (1992)
Comparison of mitotane treatment for adrenal tumar versus
cism (Kintzer and Peterson, 1994). However, in this
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. Journal of the
study about 20% of cases responded successfully to
the recommended protocol for pituitary-dependent
Ferguson DC and Peterson ME (1992) Serum free and lotal
jodothyronine concentrations indogs with hyperadrenocorticism,
hyperadrenocorticism. Frequent monitoring of treat-
Amencan Journal of Veterinay Research 53, 1636-1640
ment by ACTH response testing is important to ensure
 Fluckiger MA and Gomez JA (1984) Radiographic findings in dogs
adequate control of the hyperadrenocorticism.
Radiology 25, 124-131
Maintenance doses are also generally higher (75-
Ford SL, Feldman EC and Nelson Rw (1993) Hyperadrenocorticism
100 mg/kg/week) and again frequent monitoring of the
(1983-1988).Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
cortisol response to ACTH administration is required to
Association 202, 789-792
maintain optimal control of the disease. Adverse ef-
GalacS,osrainstjanIgGAMor
fecis of treatment are similar to those described for
G, Mol JA and Mali BP (2003) Hyperadrenocorticism ina dog due
lpectopic ACTH secrelion. Joumalof Veterinary Internal Medicine
17,737
requiring higher dose rates tend to be more prone to
Galac S. Kogistra HS. Teske E and Rijnberk A (1997) Urinary
corticoid/crealinine ratios in the diferentiation batween pituitary-
 adverse effects. The adrenal tumour and metastatic
dependent hyperadrenocorticism and hyperadrenocorticism due
mass will often reduce in size due the cytotoxic effects
toadrenocortical tumourin the dog.Veternary Quarterly19,17-
 of mitotane, but in other cases the tumour will continue
20
Goossens MMC, Feldman, EC, Theon AP and Koblik PD (1998)
ta grow despite increasing doses of mitotane. In one
study of adrenocortical tumours treated using mitotane
hyperadrenocorticism.Journat of AmericanVetennary Medical
therapy, the median survival time was 11 months with
Associafion212,374-376
Gould SM, Baines EA, Mannion PA, Evans H and Herrtage ME (2001)
a range of a few weeks to >5 years (Kintzer and
Use of endogenous AcTH concentration and adrenal
Peterson, 1994).
ultrasonography to distinguish the cause of canine
iyperadrenocorticism.JournatofSmalfAnima/Practice42,113-
Trilostane therapy
21
Goy-Thgllotl, Pechereau D, Keroack S, Dezempte J-C and Bonnet J-
Trilostane has also been used in an attempt to control
the clinical signs in adrenal-dependent hyperadreno-
associated
 wilh  spontaneous, pituitary-dependent
hyperadranocorticism In dogs.Journal ofSmaii Aninai Practice
corticism with some success. As an enzyme inhibitor,
43,489-492
trilostane provides only symptomatic control without
 Greco DS, Peterson ME, Davidson AP, Feldman EC and Komurek K
(1999) Concurrent pituitary and adrenal tumors in dogs with
treating the underlying neoplastic disease process.
hyperadrenocorticism:17 cases (1978-1995).Journaf of the
However, in one case with an adrenal tumour an 80-
AmericanVeterinary Medical Association214,1349-1353
week survival was reported on trilostane using a dose
 Grooters AM, Biller DS and Merryman J (1995) Uitrasonographic
pararmeters of normal canine adrenal glands; comparison to
of up to 17.2 mg/kg once daily (Eastwood et al., 2003).
126-130
Groolers AM, Biller DS, Theisen SK and Miyabayashi T (1996)
References and further reading
ngrmal dogs. Journai of Veterinary Intemal Medicine 10, 110-
Bartez PY, Nyland TG and Feldman EC (1g95) Ultrasonographic
115
evaluation of the adrenal glands in dogs. Jounal of tfre American
Guptil L,ScottMoncrieffJC,Bottoms G, Glickman L, Johnson M,
Veterinary Medical A5sociarion 207, 1180-1183
Glickman N, Nelson R and Bertoy E (1997) Use of urine cortisol:
Bertoy EH, Feldman EC, Nelson Rw, Dublin AB, Reid MH and
crealinine ratio to monitor treatment response in dogs with
FelimanMS(1996)One-year follw-up evaluationof magnetic
pltultary-dapendent hyperadrenocorticism. yoyrna! of the
resonance imaging of the brain of dogs with pituitary-dependent
American Veterinary Medical Associaion 210, 1158-1161
hyperadrenocorlicism, Journal ofthe Armenican Veterinary Medica!
Huntey K, Frazer J, Gibhs C and Gaskell C.J (1982) The radlologlcal
Assoclation 208,1268-1273
features of canine Cushing's syndrome: a review of fory-eight
Bertoy EH, Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Duesberg CA, Kass PH, Heid
cases.Jouma/of SmalAninalPractice23,369-380
MH and Dublin AB (1995) Magnetic resonanca lmaglng of the
Hurley KJ and Vaden SL (1998) Evalualion of urine prptein contentin
brain in dogs with recently diagnosed but untrealed pituilary.
dags with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Joumai of
170
Chapter 15  Canine hyperadrenocorticism
theAmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociation212,369~373
thyroxine in the normal cat, American College of Veterinary
dogs, ypurnat of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Pcterson ME, Krieger DT, Drucker WD and Halmi NS (1982a)
170, 1092-1095
Immunocytochemical study of the hypophysis in 25 dogs with
Johnston DE(1983) Adrenalectomy inthe dog. In: Current Techniques
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Acta Endocrinoiogica
in Smal Animai Surgery, ed. MJ Bojrab, pp.386-388,Lea and
101,15-24
Febiger, Philadelphia
Ramsey IKand Hertage ME (1998)Theeffectofthyrotropin releasing
Kantrowiz CM, Nyland TG and Feldman EC (1966) Adrenal
horrmone on thyroiropin cancentrations in euthyroid, hypothyraid
Ulrasonographyinhedogdetectionfumourandypeasia
and hyperadrenocorticoid dogs. joumai of Veterinary Internal
Medicina12,235
Kaplan AJ, Peterson ME and Kemppainen RJ (1995) Effects of
 Ramsey IK and Herrtage ME (2001) Increased parathyroid hormone
discase on the results of diagnostic tests for use in detecting
concentratigns in dogs wlth hyperadrenocoricism. Journal of
Veterinary Internal Medicine 15. 298
due to adrenocortical neoplasia: prelreatment evaluation in 41
circadian aclivity in plasma concentrations of adrenocorticotropin.
dogs. Joumal of Veterinary internal Medicine 13, 291-301
contisol and thyroxina in dogs. Journa! of Endocrinalogy 1D3.
ReuschCE, Steffen Tand HoeraufA(1999) The efficacy pfL-deprenyl
219-226
 Ker ME, Peterson ME, Wallace MS, Melian C and Kamppainen RJ
of Veterinary Intema! Medicine 5, 3-10
[1999] Evaluation af a low-doge synthetic adrenocorticotropic
 Rijnberk A, Van Wees A and Mol JA (19e8) Asscssment of two tests
hormone stimulation test in clinically normal dogs and dogs with
for the diagnosis of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Veternary
naturally developing lhyperadrenocorticism.journai oF the
Recora 122, 178-180
Ristic JME, Ramsey IK, Heath FM, Evans HJ and Herrtage ME (2002)
The use of 17-hydroxyprogesterone inthe diagnosis of caninc
 200 dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Journal
hyparadrenocorticism.Joumal of Vaterinary Internal Medicine
of Veterinary Intemal Medicine 5, 182-190
16, 433-439
KintzerPP and Peterson ME(1994) Mitotane treaiment of32dogs
withcortisol-secreting adrenocorticalneoplasms.ournalofthe
examinations,laboratory tesls, andutrasanography indogs wi
American Veterinary Medical Association 205, 54-60
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism treated with trilastane.
 LaRue MJ and Murlaugh RJ (19so) Pulmanary thromboembalm In
American Journal of Veterinary Research 63, 506-512
dogs:47 cases (1986-1987). journalof the American Veterinary
 Schwarz T, Stork CK, Mellor D and Sulivan M (2000) Osteopenia and
Medical Assaciarion 197, 1368-1372
 other radiographic signsin canine hyperadrenocorticism. Journa!
LeeRandGrifiths R(1972)Acomparisonof cerebral arteriography
 of Smgl Animal Practice 41. 491-495
and cavernous sinus venography in the dog. Journal of Small
Smiley LE and Peterson ME (1993) Evaluatlon of a urine
Animai Practice 13. 225
cortisol:crealinine...
ratio as a screening test for
Meij BP, VoorhoutG, van den Ingh TSGAM, Hazewinkal HAW, Teske
E and Rijnberk A (1998) Results of lransspenoidal
Medicine7,163-168
hypophysectomy in 52 dogs with pituitary-dependent
Stolp R, Fijnberk A, Maijer JC and Craughs RJM (1983) Urinary
coriccids in the diagnosis of canine hyperadrenocorticism.
ResearchinVeterinarySclence3411144
KS (i996) Basal and glucagon-stimulated plasma C-peptide
Syme HM, Scott-Moncrieif J, Treadwell NG, Thompson MF, Snyder
concentrations in healthy dogs, dogs with diabetes mellitus, and
 PW, White MR and Oliver JW (2001) Hyperatranocarticism
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.lournal of Veterinary internal
assoclated with excessive sex harrione production by an
Medicine 10, 11B-122
adrenocortical tumor in two dogs. yournaf of the Amenican
Neiger R, Ramsey I, O'Connar J, Hurley KJ and Mooney CT (2002)
Veterinary.Medicai Association2i9,1725-1728
Teske E,HathuizenJ, de Brujne Jand Rijnberk A(1989)Carticosteroid.
 Induced alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme In the diagnosis of
Narman EJ, Thomgson H and Mgoney CT (1999) Dynamic adrena)
Theon AP andFeldman EC (1 998) Megavoltage irradiation of pltuitary
with adrenocartical neoplasia. Veterinary Record 144, 551-554
macotumousindogswithneurogicalsignsourraffe
 Oluju MP, Eckersall PD and Douglas TA (1984) Simple quanlitative
AmericanVeterinaryMedicaAssociation213,225-231
van SluijsFJSjollemaBEoorhouGvandenIngTSGAMnd
Recora 115. 17-18
Rinberk A (1995) Results of adrenalectomy in 36 dags wih
canine Cushing's syndrome. Veterinary Chinics of North America
Veterinary Quarterly 17. 113-116
7,583
Voarhoui G, Stolp R, Lubberink AAME and van Waes PFGM (1988)
 Peterson: ME (1984) Hyperadrenocorticism. Veierinary Clinics o!
Computed tomography in the diagnosis of canine
NorthAmerica:Smail Animal Practice14,731-749
hyperadrenocorticism not supprasslble by dexamethasone.
 Peterson ME, Ferguson DC. Kintzer PP and Drucker WD (1984)
Jourmai of the American Veterinary Medicai Association 192.
Efects oi spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism on serum thyroid
641-646
hormoneconcentrationsinthedog.AmericanJournaiofVaterinary
Yoorhout G, Stolp R, Rijnberk A and van Waes PFGM (1990)
Research 45, 2034-2038
 Peterson ME, Gibertson SR and Drucker WD (1982b) Plasma
comgutad tomegraphy for detection of hyperfunclioning
cortisol response 1o exogenous ACTH in 22 dogs with
adrenocorticaltumors indogs.Journalof the American Veterinary
Medical Assoclation 196, 1799-1803
Journai ofthe AmericanVeterinary MedicafAssociation180,
542-544
of o,p'-DDD in narmal dogs, fasted and fed and in dogs with
 Peterson ME, Kemppainen RJ and Graves TK(1988) Episodic but not
171
非
Canine hypoadrenocorticism
David B. Church
Introduction
one synthase, the cytochrome P450 enzyme that con-
verts corticosterone to aldosterone.
Naturally cccurring hypoadrenocorticism, character-
 Aldosterone secretion is stimulated via activation of
ized by clinically significant loss of adrenocortical se-
the renin-angiotensin system and through elevations
cretory capacity, is an uncommon condition in both
in plasma potassium concentratian acting directly on
 dogs and cats. 1n primary hypoadrenocorticism the
the zona glomerulosa.
 process is generally a result of immune-mediated
Renin catalyses the conversion of angiotensinogen
adrenocortical destruction with resultant mineralacor-
to angiotensin I which is subsequently converted to
ticoid and glucocorticoid deficiency. In a small propor-
angiotensin ll. Angiotensin 1l is both a potent vasocon-
tion of patients there is selective loss of glucocorticoid
strictor and aldosterone secrelogogue. Renin release
secreting capacity, so-called 'atypical' cases. Although
is stimulated by the activation of various effectors that
less commonly encountered than primary hypo-
include:
sociated with reduced adrenocorticotropic hormone
Baroreceptors in the walls of the afferent
(ACTH) secretion is also recognized and as in atypical
arterioles of the glomeruli
primary cases, there is selective glucocorticoid defi-
Cardiac and arterial baroreceptors (through
ciency. Feline hypoadrenocorticism is covered sepa-
increased sympathetic neural activity stimulating
rately in Chapter 22.
beta, adrenergic receptors)
Cells of the macula densa in the early distal
tubule which appear to be stimulated by a
Physiology of the adrenal cortex
reduction in chloride delivery.
The major adrenocortical hormones are synthesized in
Angiotensin ll and hyperkalaemia act an the zona
distinct areas of the adrenal cortex. The adrenal cortex
glomerulosa promoting the conversion of cholesterol to
comprises approximately 80% of the adrenal gland
pregnenolone and more importantly of corticosterone to
and is divided into three morphologically distinct
aldosterone via stimulation of aldosterone synthase.
regions:
Aldosterone release is also stimulated by other factors,
including ACTH and hyponatraemia, and it can be
The inner zona reticularis
suppressed by atrial natriuretic peptide (Figure 16.1).
The zona fasciculata
The primary sites of action of aldosterone are the
 The outer zona glomerulosa.
connecting segment and collecting tubules of the distal
nephron, where sodium and chloride resorption as well
Cells ofthe zona reticularis and fasciculata produce
as potassium and hydrogen ion secretion are stimulated.
cortisol, the principal gndogenous glucocorticoid in
Aldosterone acts throughspecific cytosolic receptors
dogs. In addition, androgens and oestrogens are also 
contained within its major target cells of the distal
produced in these zones. The zona glomerulosa has a
nephron. Once aldosterone binds to these receptors,
[ess clearly defined structure and its cells tend to be
the hormone-receptor complex migratestothe nucleus
scattered in the region directly beneath the capsule.
were it modifies nuclear chromatin transcription to
Aldosterone, the principal endogenous mineralocorti-
produce so-called 'aldosterone-induced proteins'
coid, is syhthesized in the zona glomerulosa.
(AIPs). These AIPs modify transcellular ionic transport 
The differences in steroid synthesis are related to
in the aldosterone-sensitive cells of the distal nephran.
variations in the concentrations of specific steroid-
Cortisol has similar affinity for the aldosterone receptor
synthesizing enzymes in each region of the adrenal
 and has approximately 10o0 times the plasma concen-
cortex. Compared with the zona fasciculata, the zona
tration of aldosterone. However, cortisol does not act
glomerulosa has a low concentration of 17-alpha-
as a major mineralocorticoid, as the major target cell
hydroxylase, the enzyme that converts pregnenolone
for aldosterone possess significant amounts of the
and progesterone to substrates for glucocorticoid, an-
enzyme 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase that
drogen and oestrogen production. The zona
converts cortisol (but not aldosterone) to its less active
glomerulosa also has high concentrations of aldoster-
metaboliles.
172
Chapter16Caninehypoadrenocorticism
Primary hypoadrenocorticism
Cholesterol
Aetiology
Stimulated by:
Hyperkalaemia,
Impaired adrenocortical function may develop asa
angiotensin Il
resultofdiseaseofanypart of thehypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis.However in dogs,hypo-
Pregnenolone
adrenocorticism is generally a result of substantial
destruction of adrenocortical tissue.Althoughany
amountofadrenocortical damagemayimpairadreno-
Corticosterone
cortical reserve, in non-stressful situations approxi-
mately90%of theadrenalcortexneeds tobe
Stimulatedby:
non-functional before the impairment becomes clini-
Hyperkalaemia,hyponatraemia
ACTH,angiotensin II
cally significant (Reusch,2000).
Inmost casestheunderlyingreasonforadrenal
Inhibited by:
Atrial natriuretic
ated.Several investigatorshave describedbilateral
peptide(ANP)
adrenocortical atrophy with mononuclear infiltrates
(Schaer et al.,1986;Boujon et al.,1994). In addition,
Aldosterone
whenevaluated,anti-adrenal antibodieshavebeen
hypoadrenocorticism(Schaeretal.,1986,Welleretall.
Bound to cytosol
TC
1996).In humans,immune-mediated adrenocortical
destructionhasbeen associatedwith two heritable
receptor
conditions resulting in immune-mediated polyendo-
crinopathies(see Chapter 25).Interestingly a marked
geneticpredisposition for hypoadrenocorticism has
Aldosterone-induced
been demonstrated in both Standard Poodles and
proteins
Bearded Collies. In the former the heritability appears
to beinfluenced bya singlerecessive locus(Famula et
al.,2003) while the mechanism of inheritance in
Bearded Colliesremainsundetermined(Oberbaueret
al.,2002).
Schematicdagram summarizingaldosterone
Lesswell documented causes of adrenal destruc-
16.1
synthesis and various modifying factors.
tion in dogs include infectious and infiltrative diseases
N,nucleus;TC,ubular cell of the distal nephron.
aswell aspossibleadrenocortical destructionsecond-
ary to haemorrhageinducedby coagulopathies.
Aldosterone stimulatesionictransportin these cells
Overdosage and/oridiosyncraticreactions in dogs
by increasing the number of open sodium andpotas-
withhyperadrenocorticism treatedwithmitotaneand
siumchannelsin the luminal membraneaswellasthe
trilostane have alsoresulted inboth temporary and
activityof the sodium-potassiumATPasepump in the
permanenthypoadrenocorticism(Braddocketal.,2003;
basolateral membrane.The aldosterone-induced el-
Chapman et al.,in press). In at least two cases treated
evationinluminal sodiumpermeabilitypromotesso-
with trilostane,permanent adrenocortical destruction
dium diffusioninto the tubular cell,which isreturned to
resulted fromgeneralized bilateral adrenocortical in-
the systemic circulation by the sodium-potassium
farction thatmay havebeenaconsequence of chronic
ATPase pump. The movement of sodium through its
hyperstimulationbymarkedlyelevatedplasma ACTH
luminal channel creates a negative potential within the
concentrations,ashasbeenreportedinhumans(Rao,
tubule.Electro-neutrality is maintained eitherbypas-
1995).
sive chlorideresorptionorbypotassiumsecretionfrom
the cell into the tubule lumen.Aldosterone further
non-specificallyinhibit adrenocortical steraidproduc-
enhancesintraluminalpotassiumsecretionastheex-
tion.These include etomidate,most of the imidazole
tracellular transport of sodiumvia thesodium-potas-
drug group andvarious agents such as metyrapone,
siumATPasepumpincreases intracellularmovement
aminoglutethimide and mifepristone.Howeveras their
ofpotassium and ensuresa continued intracellular
effectsaregenerallyrelativelyshort-acting,theyrarely
supplyof potassiumfor itsongoing tubularexcretion.
result in clinically significant hypoadrenocorticism.
Aldosterone stimulated hydrogen ion secretion oc-
curs in different collecting tubularcellsand is mediated
Clinical features
througha H+ATPasepumpin theluminal membrane.
Aldosteronealso indirectly stimulates tubularhydro-
Signalment
genionsecretionvia itseffect onsodiumresorption.
The associated generation of a lumen-negative elec-
dogsranging from2monthsto14yearsofage,
tricalpotential through sodiumresorption creates a
although most affected animalspresent inyoung to
favourable electricalgradient forhydrogen ion
middleage.Asstatedabove,ageneticpredilectionhas
accumulation in the tubular lumen.
been confirmed in StandardPoodlesand Bearded
173
Chapter16 Caninehypoadrenocorticism
Collies and issupportedbytheover-representationof
neuromuscular dysfunction such asgeneralized so-
hypoadrenocorticism in certain breeds such as Nova
matic muscle cramping(Burrows,1987;Lifton et al,
Scotia Duck Tolling Retrievers,Leonbergers,Portu-
1996;Saito etal.,2002).
gueseWaterSpaniels,GreatDanes,Rottweilersand
Themost consistent findings onphysical examina-
WheatenandWestHighlandWhiteTerriers(Smallwood
tion in dogs with non-specific signsinclude depression,
and Barsanti,1995;Peterson etal.,1996;Burtonetal.,
lethargyorweaknessandvariabledegreesof dehy-
1997).Females are more commonly affected than
drationorhypovolaemia.Likethosepresentingwith
males with a ratio of approximately2.3:1.
acute illness,these animals may be bradycardic or
have evidence of gastrointestinal haemorhage.
Clinical signs
It is not uncommon for dogs with primary hypo-
Theclinical signsof hypoadrenocorticismvaryfrom
adrenocorticismtohaveperiodsof vague illness,with
acutecollapsewith generalized underperfusiontoa
variablegastrointestinal signsanddepression/weak-
variety of more vague andnon-specific signs.These
ness,interspersed with periods of apparent normality.
latter signs often suggest thatthe animal isunwell
The clinician's index of suspicion for hypoadreno-
but donot indicate anyparticular body system or
corticism is heightened by such a waxing and waning
syndrome.
history,particularlyif accompaniedbythe absenceof
Patients presenting with acute collapse usually
tachycardia or thepresenceof bradycardiain a dog
have evidenceof generalized,markedhypovolaemia
withclinical signsofunderperfusion.
and dehydration,together with vomiting,diarrhoea,
All dogswithprimaryhypoadrenocorticism arepo-
abdominal pain and hypothermia.Some may have
tentiallyunstableastheyarevariablyhypovolaemic
severegastrointestinalhaemorrhagewithmelaena
and prone to marked hypotension.Thishypotensive
andoccasional haematemesis(Medingeretal.,1993).
potentialresultsfromalackofaldosteronesecretion
Frequently,affected animalswill have aninappropri-
but ispossiblyfurtherexacerbatedbyconcurrent de-
atelylowheartrate fortheir degreeofcirculatory
creased vascularresponsiveness to normal pressor
collapse and manywill actually be bradycardic.These
effects,mediated through the overproductionofnitric
oxide (Orbach et al.,2001).Consequently if primary
medical emergency that requires,at least initially,
hypoadrenocorticism is being considered in anypa-
stabilization withrapidparenteral fluid therapy.
tient,they shouldbe treated asapotentiallycritical
In contrast themajorityofpatientswithprimary
caseuntil their adrenocortical function is clarified.
hypoadrenocorticismpresent with vague and non-
specificclinical features,usually attributabletovari-
Diagnosis
able impairment of the gastrointestinal,renal and
neurological systems (Figure 16.2).These may in-
Haematology
In thepresence of appropriate clinical signssuspicion
sion,nappetence,vomitinganddiarrhoea.Thesesigns
forhypoadrenocorticism is dramatically increased by
may vary in severity in individual dogs.Polydipsia and
the presence of lymphocytosis and/or eosinophilia,or
polyuria arerarelyprimarycomplaintsalthough their
simply the absence of a stress leucogram(lympho-
presencemay berevealed during questioning of the
penia andeosinopenia) in a clearly unwell patient
owners.Additionally a small proportion of patientswith
(Figure 16.3).
hypoadrenocorticism presentwith apotentiallyrevers-
ible megaoesophagus where regurgitation is the pri-
mary presenting complaint,or other signs of
Haematology
Presenting complaints
Non-regenerative anaemia
Absence of lymphopenia and eosinopenia inastressedanimal
Inappetencea
Lymphocytosis
Lethargy:
Eosinophilia
Weaknessb
Neutrophili leucocylosis
Vomiting:
Mild neutropenia
Diarrhoea
Serum biochemistry
Weight loss
Shivering and/or muscle stiffness
Hyperkalaemia
Polyuria
Hyponatraemia
Polydipsia
Hypochloraemia
Physical examination findings
Prerenal azotaemia
Hyperphosphataemia
Depressiona
Hypercalcaemia
Weaknessa
Hypoglycaemia
Dehydration
Metaboli acidosis(low total COand HCO)
Inappropriately slow heart rate
Urinalysis
Hypothermia
Clinical signs encountered in dogs with
16.2
hypoadrenocorticism.Present in aimost all
16.3
Clinicopathalogical abnormalitiesindogswith
cases.Common.
hypoadrenocorticism.
174
Chapter 16  Canine hypoadrenocorticism
Hypoadrenocorticism commonly results in a non-
Consequently, although the presence of hyponatrae-
regenerative anaemia of chronic illness, although on
 mia and hyperkalaemia may increase the likelihood of
occasions, gastrointestinal haemorrhage can result in
hypoadrenocorticism in a dog with suspicious clinical
signs, their absence should never decrease the index 
severe, gastrointestinal haemorrhage may result in a
of suspicion for this diagnosis.
regenerative anaemia, although overall marrow sup-
 Although the presence of hyponatraemia, hyperkal-
pression generally resuits in impairment of the regen-
aemia, hypochloraemia and a significantly reduced
erative response. In anaemic patients, the
sodium:potassium ratio support a diagnosis of
magnitude of the reduction in packed cell volume
hypoadrenocorticism, these changes can occur in a
(PCV) underestimates the severity of the true anaemia
variety of other conditions (Roth and Tyler, 1999;
because of the concurrent hypovolaemia and/or
Neiger and Gunderson, 2003). Non-adrenal diseases
dehydration.
associated with moderate to marked hyponatraemia
 and hyperkalaemia include acute and chronic urinary
Serum biochemistry
tract disease, various gastrointestinal disorders (e.g.
The most consistent biochemical abnormalities in-
pancreatitis, secretory enteropathies, diffuse small
 clude azotaemia, hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia, hy-
intestinal disease), chronic end-stage heart or liver
pochloraemia and, less commonly, hypoglycaemia
failure, pleural and peritoneal effusions, neoplasia and
and hypercalcaemia (see Figure 16.3).
on occasions uncomplicated pregnancy (Roth and
Tyler, 1999; Schaer etal., 2001; Neigerand Gunderson,
Electrofyte abnormalities: Hyponatraemia and hy-
 2003). In addition, artefactual hyperkalaemia may be a
perkalaemia, with a sodium:potassium ratio of <23:1,
confusing consequence of post-collection haemolysis,
are considered characteristic features of primary
particularly in Japanese Akitas (Degen, 1987) or of
hypoadrenocorticism. In two recent studies evaluating
marked leucocytosis or thrombocytosis (Reimann et
diseases associated with these electrolyte abnormali-
al., 1989).
ties, hypoadrenocorticism was the most common ex-
Consequently, many non-adrenal illnesses may
planation forthe presence of concurrent hyponatraemia
result in subnormal sodium:potassium ratios. Indeed
and hyperkalaemia (Roth and Tyler, 1999; Neiger and
any disease that results in significant metabolic
Gundersen, 2003).
acidosis or in marked tissue destruction with release
In patients with hypoadrenocorticism, circulating
of intracelular contents, may produce profound
 sodium concentrations are usually <135 mmol/ and
hyperkalaemia.
However, because of the variation in the magnitude of
Azotaemia: As with all hypovolaemic conditions, ani-
these changes, the ratio of sodium to potassium is
mals with primary hypoadrenocorticism develop azo-
frequently recommended as a more reliable indicator
taemia as a consequence of renal underperfusion.
of hypoadrenocorticism. in one study evaluating dogs
However, unlike otherhypovolaemic conditions, where
 with subnormal plasma sodium:potassium ratios, 28%
renal concentrating ability is maintained, dogs with
of dogs with a ratio <25:1 had primary hypoadreno-
primary hypoadrenocorticism are generally unable to
corticism and this proportion increased to 64% of cases
concentrate their urine effectively. Impaired urine con-
when the sodium:potassium ratio was <20:1 (Neiger
centrating ability is due to: mineralocorticoid deficiericy
and Gunderson, 2003).
and resultant chronic renal sodium loss; depletion of
Circulating chloride concentration is also reduced
the normal renal medullary sodium concentration gra-
in patients with hypoadrenocorticism and concentra-
 dient; and impaired water resorption from the rena
tions of <100 mmol/l are frequently encountered.
collecting ducts. As a consequence, azotaemia is
Approximately 10% of dogs with primary
usually accompanied by inappropriately dilute
urine, increasing the potential for affected animals to
lyte concentrations or only mild hyponatraemia without
be mistakenly diagnosed with severe primary renal
hyperkalaemia, at the time of diagnosis. These ani-
disease.
mals presumably have either early or mild primary
hypoadrenocorticism, or selective glucocorticoid
Orher abnormalities: Other biochemical abnormali-
deficient hypoadrenocorticism (atypical primary cases)
ties possibly encountered in dogs and cats with
(Lifton etal., 1996; Sadek and Schaer, 1996; Dunn and
Hertage, 1998). In these patients mineralocorticoid
caemia and varying levels of hypoalbuminaemia or
supplementation may not be required initially. How-
hypoproteinaemia. As with anaemia, the severity of the
ever, overt mineralocorticoid deficiency with conse-
hypoproteinaemia may be masked by hypovolaemia
quent hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia is likely to
 and/or dehydration. Hypoproteinaemia can be a con-
 Occur with time, necessitating appropriate supplemen-
 sequence of gastrointestinal haemorrhage.
tation. The time to progression of mineralocorticoid
deficiency is variable occurring in weeks or months.
Electrocardiography
It is therefore important that a diagnosis of
 Electrocardiography may be helpful as animals with
hypoadrenocorticism is not precluded in animals with 
hyperkalaemia tend to have specific changes in
suspicious clinical signs but normal or mild electrolyte
 electrocardiographic complex morphology. These in-
changes. Electrolyte abnormalities can also be masked
clude peaking of the T wave, shortening of the QT
by priortreatment, particularly intravenous fluid therapy.
 interval, prolongation of the PR interval and reduction
175
Chapter 16  Canine hypoadrenocorticism
 in P wave amplitude. Unfortunately, these changes
cross-react with cortisol and consequently can be used
are non-specific and referable to any condition that
to provide glucocorticaid support to critically ill patients
induces hyperkalaemia. They therefore cannot be
before the ACTH response test has been completed.
 considered particularly suggestive of reduced adreno-
Although dexamethasone directly inhibits endogenous
 cortical function.
cartisol production, this usually takes at least 4-6
hours to take effect. Consequently any artefactual
Diagnostic imaging
[owering of post-ACTH cortisol levels can be avoided
 Other diagnostic aids that may provide supporting
by insuring the ACTH response testis completed within
evidence for hypoadrenocorticism include thoracic
2-3 hours of dexamethasone administration.
radiography and abdominal ultrasonography.
The administration of a supraphysiological dose of
 Thoracic radiography will tend to show a reduction
ACTH should result in a predictable and significant 
 in the size of the cardiac silhouette, the prominence of
increase in plasma cortisol values, particularly in sick
 the pulmonary vasculature and the diameter of the
dogs. An abnormally poor response to this test, defined
 caudal vena cava. Although these signs are invariably
as a post-ACTH cortisol concentration of less than
present in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism the changes
approximately 50 nmoll, confirms a diagnosis of
 are simply a reflection of hypovalaemia (Melian et al.,
hypoadrenocorticism. In the majority of affected dogs,
1999). Additionally, when present, the megaoeso-
both pre- and post-ACTH cortisol values are
undetectable using most commercial cortisol assays.
corticism is likely to be demonstrable on plain thoracic
Although the ACTH response test is the gold stand-
radiography.
ard for confirming a diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism,
It has been suggested that ultrasonography of both
it does not differentiate animals with naturally occurring
 adrenal glands may facilitate the diagnosis of primary
primary adrenocortical disease from those with sec-
hypoadrenocorticism. In one study, objective evalua-
ondary adrenal insufficiency as a result of chronic
 tion of adrenal gland size using abdominal ultrasonog-
pituitary dysfunction or recently discontinued chronic
raphy confirmed a significant reduction in the size of
glucocorticoid administration.
both adrenal glands, with minimal overlap between
normal and affected dogs (Hoerauf and Reusch,
Endogenous plasma ACTH concentration:Esti-
1999). It is possible that in the hands of a skilled
mating the plasma ACTH concentration is the most
ultrasonographer with appropriate equipment this may
reliable means of differentiating primary from second-
provide further support for a diagnosis of hypo-
ary hypoadrenocorticism. Dogs and cats with primary
adrenocorticism.
hypoadrenocorticism have markedly elevated plasma
ACTH concentrations (usually >200 pmol/l) whereas
Adrenal function tests
those patients with secondary hypoadrenocorticism
None of the above potential abnormalities, either alone
have subnormal ar undetectable values (usually <5
or in concert, could be considered sufficient evidence
pmol/l).
 Sample processing needs to be meticulous as the
other conditions potentially produce such a combina-
measurable ACTH can easily be modified by post-
tion of clinical signs and abnormalities in the various
collection proteolysis and/or haemolysis. Consequently
diagnostic aids described. Consequently, document-
the clinician needs to be confident that the sample
 ing impaired adrenal steroid production is necessary to
 confirm a diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism.
the specific ACTH assay has been validated for use in
dogs (see Chapter 1).
ACTH response test: A definitive diagnosis of spon-
 Endogenous ACTH concentrations are rapidly and
taneous hypoadrenocorticism requires the demonstra-
-loooonib snouaboxe Aue Aq pesseiddns Aleoeei
tion of subnormal basal and post-ACTH plasma
ticoid. Consequently, estimation ofendogenous ACTH
 cortisol concentration in an animal that has not recently
should only be performed on samples collected before
received exogenous glucocorticoid therapy.
Although measurement of basal cortisol or urinary
corticoid:creatinine ratio may provide some indication
Plasma aldosterone concentration: Estimation of
af hypoadrenocorticism in a patient with supporting
plasma aldosterone concentrations, before and after
clinical signs, these estimations do not assess adrenal
ACTH administration, Iis theoretically helpful in differ-
 reserve and, consequently, true hypofunction may not
entiating primary from atypical and secondary
be detected.
hypoadrenocorticism. Although assays for plasma al-
In dogs the ACTH response test is best performed
dosterone are not widely available, it is not species-
by sampling before and 30-60 minutes affer the intra-
specific and most assays used for estimation-of human
venous or intramuscular administration of 250 μg (or
aldosterone can be adapted for use in dogs. The
125 μg for dogs <5 kg), or the intravenous administra-
 absolute values will differ between laboratories but
tion of 5 μg/kg of the synthetic ACTH analogue
usually basal values range between 5.5 and 265.9
tetracosactide (cosyntropin).
pmol/l (mean 135.7 pmol/l) with post-ACTH concentra-
As hydrocorisone, prednisolone and prednisone all
tions between 404.4 and 1437.6 pmol/l (mean 847.6
cross-react in cortisol assays it is essential that the
pmol/l) in healthy dogs (Golden and Lothrop, 1988:
ACTH response test is performed before these agents
Feldman and Nelson, 1996).
 are administered. ln contrast, dexamethasone does not
Dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism have re-
176
Chapter 16
Canine hypoadrenocorticism
ducedplasma cortisolandaldosteronecancentrations
before and after ACTH administration.In contrast,
Fluid therapy
thosewithsecondaryhypoadrenocorticismhaverela-
Type:0.9% saline solution
tivelynormalaldosteroneconcentrations.Dogswith
Rate: 20-40m/kg/h iv.initialy forfirst 2-3 hours then reduced tono
primary atypical hypoadrenocorticismwill alsohavea
>5ml/kg/h.Monitor circulating sodium concentration and ensure it
responseindistinguishablefrom thatofpatientswith
does not increase bymore than10-12mmoll in the first 24hours
secondary hypoadrenocorticism.In contrast dogs with
Potassium supplementation: Contraindicated until plasma potassium
normalelectrolyteconcentrations due toprevious
concentration normalizes
therapy. will have a response similar to dogs with
Dextrose:Rarely required unless hypoglycaemic.Use2.5% dextrose
infusion (add50ml of 50%dextirose to each litre ofiv.fluids) and
primaryhypoadrenocorticism and obviousmineralo-
corticoid deficiency.
monitor glycaemic response
Mineralo/glucocorticoid therapy
Treatment
Parenteral therapy should continue until the animal is rehydrated
Becauseofthecombinationofapotentiallycritical
gastrointestinaltractfunctionhasormalizedfoodandwatre
patientand the inability torapidlyconfirm adiagnosis
being consumed normally andoral maintenance therapy can be
by cortisolestimation,there are timeswhen suspected
started. Recommended optons include:
HSS at 1 mg/ml administered as a continuous infusion of 0.5 mg/kg/h
nosis hasbeenreliably confirmed.Initially most af-
HSS as a bolus of 5-20mg/kg i.v.every 6 hours
fectedanimalsrequire concurrent intravenous fluid
Prednisolone sodium succinateat 4-20mg/kg i.,then
andparenteral glucocorticoid/mineralocorticoid
dexamethasone sodium phosphate at 0.05-0.1 mg/kg in i.v.
replacement therapy.Dogs with atypical primary
fluids infused over 12hours
hypoadrenocorticism,at least initially,require only
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate at 0.1-2 mg/kg i.v, then
0.05-0.1 mg/kg ini.v.fluids infused over 12 hours
glucocorticoid supplementation.
16.4
Initial treatment required tomanage dogs
Initialstabilizationoracutetherapy
with acute, critical hypoadrenocorticism.
Fluid therapy should be started as soon as possible in
HSS,hycroccrtisone sodium succinate;Precnisclone/
the acutely unwellpatient.Patients with hypoadreno-
prednisone and dexamethasone lack mineralocorticoid
corticismaresusceptibletofluidoverload and addition-
activity necessitating the concurrent use of a parenteral
mineralocorticoid. Ihe only agent currently available
ally,rapid correctionof thehyponatraemia mayresult
(USA only) is desoxycorticosterone pivaiate(DOCP)
instructural neurological disease and myelinolysis
given as a single intramuscular injecticn at 2.2 mg/kg.
characterized bya varietyof variablyreversible neuro-
logical signs (Brady et al.,1999;MacMillan,2003).
HSS is the succinate ester ofhydrocortisone or
There is therefore a conflict between theneed to
cortisol,theprincipal steroidproduced bythe adrenal
rapidly correcthypovolaemia whilstensuring the
cortex in dogs. It has equipotent glucocorticoid and
serum sodium concentration does not increase too
mineralocorticoid activity.lt hasonly25%of thegluco-
rapidly.Consequently the fluidofchoice is normal
corticoid potencyof prednisolone/prednisone and<1%
saline(0.9%) and an initial rate of 20-40m/kg/h is
of the mineralocorticoid potency offludrocortisone
usuallyrecommendedwithasubsequentreduction to
acetate.However,at therecommended doses it pro-
nomore than twicemaintenancelevels(5ml/kg/h)
vides sufficient glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
after2-3hours.Becauseof thepotential forexces-
activityto treat the clinicalconsequencesofprimary
sivelyrapid correctionofhyponatraemia,theplasma
hypoadrenocorticismandcanbeeffectivelyusedinthe
sodium concentration shauld be monitored closely.
short-term management of these patients (Church et
Experimental and clinical observations suggest that
al.,1999).
thedegreeofcorrectionoverthefirst24hoursismost
HSSisadministeredata dose of0.5mg/kg/hi.v.until
important and problems are unlikely if the plasma
normal gastrointestinal function hasreturned,the dog
sodiumdoesnot increasebymore than10-12mmol/l
is eating and drinking normally,and can be changed to
in the first 24 hours.
oralsteroid supplementation.Ina dogwith clinically
Although fluid therapy alone generally results in a
significant hypoadrenocorticism this dose results in
markedreductionincirculating potassium concentra-
circulatingcortisolconcentrationsof approximately1000
tions,restorationof renalperfusionand correction of
nmollwithin 2-3hours.Sucha cortisalconcentrationis
acidosis,it should be complemented by treatment
likelytoprovideadequateglucocorticoidandmineralo-
withaparenteral agentpossessingboth glucocorti-
corticoidreplacement instressed dogswith impaired
coid and mineralocorticoid activity (Figure 16.4). Cur-
adrenocortical function (Church et al.,1994,1999).
rently,hydrocortisone sodium succinate(HSS) isthe
As thereispotential forHSStoadheretoplasticor
onlycommerciallyavailableparenteralsteroidwith
glassatlowconcentrations,itisbesttoadministeritin
both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid activity.
its own fluidbagmadeuptoa concentrationof 1 mg/
Although soluble dexamethasone or prednisolone/
ml. lIt is incompatiblewith avariety of different solu-
prednisone preparations can be used,their lack of
tions,includingamicilin sodiumanditistherefre
mineralocorticoid activity make them less
best to dilute it in normal saline.
attractive alternatives toHSS.Using HSS,additional
treatment for hyperkalaemia (e.g.intravenous
Maintenance therapy
dextrose,insulin,calcium orbicarbonate) isvirtually
Once the patient is stabilized,glucocorticoid and min-
never required.
eralocorticoidreplacement therapy are almostalways
177
Chapter 16  Canine hypoadrenocorticism
required for the remainder of the animal's life. Tradi-
patients treated with concurrent cortisone acetate and
tionally, a semi-selective mineralocorticoid, fludro-
fludrocortisone acetate. Using such a combination, the
cortisone acetate and a semi-selecfive glucocorticoid
fludrocortisone acetate dose required to maintain nor-
(cortisone acetate or prednisolone/prednisone) are
initially used together. The latter can be discontinued in
suggested dose range.
 approxlmately 50% of patients after 1-2 months. Dogs
This lower dose of fludrocortisone acetate is almost
with atypical disease only require glucocorticoid sup-
certainly partiy due to the inherent mineralocorticoid
 plementation until signs of mineralocorticoid deficiency
activity of cortisone acetate, although, there are other
occur.
possible explanations including accelerated metabo-
 Patients can also be maintained on a combination
lism secandary to chronic daily prednisolone/pred-
of a selective mineralocorticoid, desoxycorticosterone
nisone administration. The usual recommended
pivalate (DOCP) and a semi-selective glucocorticoid
replacement dose of prednisolone/prednisone, admin-
(cortisane acetate or prednisolone/prednisone). How-
istered on a daily basis, potentially results in
ever, currently DOCP is not readily available in the UK
 supraphysiological concentrations in certain individu-
or Europe.
als that could contribute to accelerated metabolism of 
 Affected dogs have a markedly reduced capacity to
other steroids. In addition, some dogs treated with
modify sait and water balance and should never be fed
fludrocortisone acetate alone may also require a
a diet that is restricted in salt. Indeed, adding a small
higher dose over time, emphasizing the need for
 amount of salt to the diet may be helpful in maintaining
regular monitoring.
 the circulating sodium concentration.
Desoxycorticosterone pivalate: Desoxycorticoster-
 Fludrocortisone acetate: Fludrocortisone acetate is
 one has neither 11-beta nor 17-alpha-hydroxylation
& synthetic adrenocortical steroid with a ffuaride ion
and consequently theoretically has little, if any, gluco-
 substituted at the 9-alpha position and an 11-beta-
corticoid activity. When formulated as the pivalate
hydroxyl group, giving it both glucocorticoid and miner-
ester it provides the opportunity to deliver a long-acting
alocorticoid potency.
mineralocorticoid, although currently it can only be
Because of the 9-alpha fluoride substitution,
delivered by depot intramuscular injections.
fludrocortisone acetate has potent mineralocorticoid
The recommended dose of DoCP is 2.2 mg/kg by
 activity while the 11-hydroxylation confers significant
yonoue shep gg Aana uooaui senosnweui daap
glucocorticoid activity. Fludrocortisone acetate has 10
subcutaneous injection has been shown to be an
effective alternative (McCabe et al., 1995). Plasma
mineralocorticoid activity of cortisol.
electrolyte, urea and creatinine concentrations are
The dose of fludrocortisone acetate is 10-30 μg/kg
monitored every 2 weeks to determine the duration of
administered orally once daily. Typically a lower dose
 action and help individualize the dose. Once stabilized
is used initially with subsequent titration based on
it is prudent to check electrolytes every 3-6 months.
clinical response and circulating electrolyte concentra-
Most dogs are well controlled on 1 .1-2.2 mg/kg admin-
tions. Dose adjustments are usually made after weekly
istered every 3-4 weeks, although it has been sug-
electrolyte evaluations. Once the electrolyte concen-
gested that occasional individuals will require more
trations are stable and within the reference range,
frequent dosing. As DOCP has no glucocorticoid activ-
assessments can be every 3-4 months.
ity it is essential that patients receive concurrent gluco-
Although fludrocortisone acetate is primarily used
 corticoid supplementation with either cortisone acetate
 for its mineralocorticoid activity, it has inherent gluco-
or prednisolone/prednisone.
corticoid activity. Based on daily cortisol production in
heaithy experimental dogs, the theoretical level of
Cortisone acetate: Cortisone acetate is a synthetic
glucocorticoid activity required for maintenance is ap-
 steroid with an 1 1-keto substitution. Once absorbed, it
proximately 22 μg/kg/day. Given the inherent glucocor-
is rapidly activated to hydrocortisone by a distinct 11-
ticoid activity of fludrocortisone acetate (10 times that
of cortisol) it is possible for patients with hypoadreno-
reductive mode. As cortisone acetate is rapidly 11.
corticism to be well controlled on this drug alone,
hydroxylated to cortisol, it provides a complete re-
especially if the dose is at the upper end of the recom-
placement for any form of cortisol deficiency. As it has
mended range. However, because of differences in
equipotent glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid activ-
individual requirements, steroid metabolism and
 ity it will also provide more mineralocorticoid activity
bioavailability, not all animals can be stabilized effec-
than other synthetic glucocarticoids such as pred-
tively on fludrocortisone acetate alone. In these indi-
nisolone/prednisone. In addition, its shorter half-life
viduals specific glucocorticoid supplementation is also
 and lower overall activity means cortisone acetate is
required.
less likely to create iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism 
 In patients receiving concurrent long-term
with long-term administration. As a consequence, in
fludrocortisone acetate and prednisolone/prednisone,
the author's opinion, cortisone acetate is a more effec-
it is not uncommon for the dose of fludrocortisone
tive altermative in the treatment of primary hypo-
acetate to gradually increase, as there appears to be a
adrenocorticism.
reduction in its mineralocorticoid efficacy over time
In patients with hypoadrenocorticism, orally admin-
(Kintzer and Peterson, 1997). In the author's opinion,
istered cortisone acetate can be used as an effective
this fludrocortisone acetate creep' is not a feature of
long-term cortisol replacement. The dose of cortisone
178
Chapter 16  Canine hypoadrenocorticism
acetate rmust be individualized aocording to the sever-
corticism can usually be managed by oral replacement
ity of the condition, the response obtained and the
glucocorticoid therapy alone. The dose of gluco-
other glucocorticoids or mineralocorticoids being con-
corticoids that are effective are generally similar to
currently administered. As animals recover from an
acute crisis and start eating and drinking normally, the
0.5 mg/kg sid of prednisolone/prednisone or cortisone
medication can be changed from parenteral to oral and
the patients can be started on a dose of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
administered once or twice daily. However, once sta-
ble, a dose of 0.5 mg/kg administered once or twice
Prognosis
daily generally provides adequate additional glucocor-
ticoid supplementation.
Hypoadrenocorticism is a readily treatable disease
Assessing the efficacy of glucocorticoid supple-
with an excellent prognosis providing treatment is
mentation is more problematic than for mineralocorti-
 maintained for life. Patients on adequate maintenance
coid replacement. The development of overt clinical
therapy should expect to lead normal lives with no
signs of hypercorfisolaemia (i.e. polyuria, polydipsia,
impairment to exercise or usual activities. However, it 
polyphagia) indicate a relative overdose. A differential
is vitally important to stress to owners that affected
leucogram can also be helpful in suggesting if the dose
dogs only remain stable and apparently healthy while
is too high or too low. Patients without other non-
they continue to receive adequate glucocorticoid and
adrenal disorders should have neither a stress
mineralocorticoid supplementation. Additionally, as
leucogram (lymphopenia and/or eosinopenia) nor any
these dogs have no adrenocortical reserve, any non-
evidence of lymphocytosis or eosinophilia.
 adrenal iliness or stressful event needs to be matched
 with an appropriate increase in the amount of glucocor-
Prednisolone: Prednisolone/prednisone isa synthetic
ticoid administered. Dogs with atypical primary
adrenal steroid with moderately potentiated
 hypoadrenocorticism should be carefully monitored for
glucocorticoid activity (approximately five times that of
hydrocortisone) and <10% of hydrocortisone's miner-
alocorticoid activity. lt is often advocated as an oral
giucocorticoid supplement in the long-term manage-
References and further reading
ment of hypoadrenocorticism at a dose of between 0.2
and 0.5 mg/kg administered once daily. As with admin-
 Boujon CE, Bomang-Jaunin V, Scharer V, Rossi GL and Bestetti GE
[1994] Pituitary gland changes in canine hypoadrenocorticism: a
istration of cortisone acetate, assessing the appropri-
functionalandimmunocytochemicalstudy.JournalofComparative
ate dose ofprednisolone or prednisone is best achieved
Pathalagy 111, 287-295
Braddock JA. Church DB, Robertson ID and Watson ADJ (2003)
 by ensuring the dog is clinically well and has no signs
attributable to hypercortisolaemia.
hypoadrenccorticism.AustralianVeterinaryJourna/81,600-607
BradyCA, ViteCHand Drobatz KJ(1999) Severe neurologicsequelae
In a dog after treatment af hypaadrenal crisis. Jourmal of tha
American Veterinary Medical Association 215, 222-225
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism
hyppadrenocorticism. Journai of Smalt Aninal Praclice 28, 1073-
Although, in dogs adrenocortical insufficiency second-
1078
Burton S, Del.ay J, Holmes A, Somerville C, Eye J, Shaw D, Wack O
occur as a resultof aspecificdestructive lesion (Feldman
Scotia duck tolling retrilevers. Canadian Veterinary Journai 38,
231-234
and Nelson, 1996; Platt et al, 1999), it is most com-
 Chapman PS, Kelly DF, Archer J, Brackman DJ and Neiger R (in
monly secondary to excessive, exogenous glucocorti-
press) Adrenal necrosis in a dog receiving trilostane for the
treatment of hyperadrenocorlicism. Jouma! of Smail Animal
coid supplementation. Depending on the dose,
Practice
preparation and duration of therapy, suppression of the 
Church DB, Lamb WA and Emslie DR (1999) Pla6ma cortisol
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis can persist for
concentrations in ngrmal dogs given hydrocortisone sodiurm
succinate. Australian Veterinary Journal 77, 316-317
weeks or months after cessation of exogenous therapy.
Church DB, Nicholson AL, likiw JE and Emslie DR (1994) Effect of
As aldosterone secretion is principally controlled by
non-adrenal illness, anaesihesia and surgery on plasma cortisol
concentratlons in dogs. Research in Veterinary Science 56, 129-
plasma concentrations of renin and potassium rather
131
than ACTH, secondary hypoadrenocorticism is not
Degen M (1987) Pseudahyperkalemia in Akitas. Journal of the
characterized by signs referable to mineralocorticoid
American Veterinary Medical Associalion 190 541-543
 Dunn KJ and Herrtage ME (1998) Hypocortisolaemia in a Labrador
deficiency. Consequently, although these patients may
relriever.Joumalof Smal AnimalPractice39 90-93
be clinically indistinguishable from animais with pri-
tests to monitor the treatment of canins hyperadrenacorticisml.
 mary hypoadrenocorticism, they wil not have the clas-
The Veterinary Record 137 161-165
sical electrolyte disturbances of hyponatraemia and
Famula TR, Belanger JM and Oberbauer AM (2003) Hertabilty and
hyperkalaemia.
complex segregalion analysis of hypoadrenocorticism in the
Suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adre-
standard poadle. Journal of Smafl Animal Practice 44, 8-12
nal axis is best elucidated with an ACTH response test.
and Falina Endocrinology and Reproduction,2d edn,ed.EC
In patients who have been receiving glucocorticoid
Feidman_ and Rw Naison pp. 266-306. WB Saunders,
supplementation recently, basal plasma ACTH con-
Philadelphia
centration is the first parameter to normalize followed
by basal cortisol and finally post-ACTH plasma cortisol.
memalMeoicine2.121-125
 Hoerauf A and Reusch C (1999) UItrasonographic evaluation of the
If treatment is required, secondary hypoadreno-
adrenal glands In six dogs with hypcadrenocorticism. journat of
179
Chapter 16 Canine hypoadrenocorticism
the American Animai Hospital Association 35, 214-218
Associatian 208, 85-91
Kintzer PP and Peterson ME (i 997) Treatment and long-term follow-
Platt SR, Chrisman CL, Graham J and Clemmons RM (1999)
up of 205 dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. journafof Veterinary
Interna/Medicine11,43-49
trauma in a dog. Journai of the American Animat Hospia!
Lifton SJ, King LG and Zerbe CA (1996) Glucocorticoid deficient
Associatian 35,117-122
 Hao RH (1995) Bilateral massive adrenal haemorrhage. Medica!
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 209, 2076-
Glinics of North America 79 107-129
2081
Reimann KA,Knowlen GG and Tvedten HW (1989) Factitious
 MacMillan KL (2003) Ncurologic complications following lrealment of
canlne hypoadrenocorllclsm. Canadlan Veterinary /ourmai 44,
internal Medicine 3, 47-52
490-492
Reusch CE (20oo) Hypoadrenocoricism. In: Textbook of Veterinary
McCabe MD, Faldman EC, Lynn HC and Kass PH (1995)
Internat Medicina 5h adn, ed. SJ Etinger and EC Feloman, pp.
Subcutaneous administralion of desoxycorlicosterone pivalate
1488-1499. WB Saunders, Pniladelphia
for the treatment af canine hypaadrenocorticism. Journal of the
AmenicanArima/ Hospite!Association31,151-155
ratios in dogs. Joumal of Veterinary Diagnostic investigations11,
Medinger TL, Wiliams DA and Bruyeite DS (1993) Severe
60-64
gastrointestinal tract haemorrhage in three dogs with
hypaadrenocorticism. Journalafthe American Veterinary Medical
a retrospective survey of 14 cases. yournal of the American
Association 202,1869-1872
Animal Hospital Association 32, 159-163
Melian C. Stefanacci J, Peterson ME and Kintzer PP (1999)
 Radiographic findings in dogs with nalurally-occurring prlmary
two standard poodlas with hypoadrenacortlclsm. Journal of the
hypoadrenocorticism. Journaf of the Anerican Animat Hospital
American Animat Hospital Associalion38. 437-443
Associatlon 35,208-212
 Schaer M, Halling KB, Collins KE and Grant DC (2001) Combined
Neiger R and Gunderson HC (2003) Decreased sodium potassium-
hyponatremia and
hyperkalemia mimicking  acute
ratig in dogs: 50 cases. Scientiic Proceedings of Brlish Small
hypoadrenocorticism in three pregnant dogs. joural of the
Animat Veterinary Association p.52B
AmericanVeterinaryMedica!Association218,897-899
Hr pie 'da leubem 'Wr lebuejeg sy uueueueg wy jeneqego
 and CampbellGA(1986) Auloimmunily and Addison's disease in
bearded colles. Amarican Journa! of Veterinary Research 63,
the dog. Journal olthe Amarican Animal Hospital Association22,
643-647
789-794
 Orbach P, Waod CE and Keller-Waod M (2001) Nitric oxide reduces
 Smallwood LJ and Barsanti JA (1995) Hypoadrenocorticism in a
family of Leonbergers. Journat of the American Animal Hospital
Association31,301-305
459-462
Weller RE, Buschbom RL, Dagle GE, ParkJF, Ragan HAand Watson
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP and Kass PH {1996) Pretreaiment clinical
 CR (1996) Hypoadrenocorticism in beagles exposed to aerosols
and laboratory findings in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism: 225
 of plutonlum-238 dioxlde by Inhalatlon. Radlation Research 146, 
688--893
180
Pituitary dwarfism
Hans S. Kooistra
Introduction
The development of the adenohypophysis isregu-
latedbythecoordinated actionsof transcriptionfactors
Dwarfism orgrowthretardationmaybe caused by
anddifferentiationfactors(Watkins-Chowand Camper,
several endocrine and non-endocrine causes.This
1998).Thesefactors are notonly involved inthe forma
chapterwill concentrateonpituitarydwarfism and
tionof theadenohypophysisbutalsoregulate endo-
growthhormonedeficiency.
crine-cell specification.Following proliferation of the
stemcellsthatwillform the adenohypophysis,different
endocrinecellphenotypesariseinadistinct temporal
Pituitary development
fashionand undergohighly selective differentiation
(Watkins-Chow andCamper,1998).The firstcelltypeto
During embryogenesis theadenohypophysis deve-
develop is the corticotropiccell,followed by gonado
lopsframRathke'spouch,whicharisesfromtheroofof
tropic,thyrotropic and somatolactotropiccells.Thema
the primitivemouthcontiguouswiththe baseof the
turepituitaryanteriorlobeispopulatedbyat leastfive
developing brain.Rathke's pouch subsequently sepa
highly distinct types of endocrine cells (Figure 17.2):
rates from theoral cavityby constriction.
Somatotropiccells-secrete growth hormone(GH)
Thecellsof the anteriorwall of Rathke's
Lactotropiccells-secrete prolactin(PRL)
pouchproliferateactivelytoformtheglandular
Thyrotropic cells-secrete thyrotropin（thyroid
anteriorlobe.
stimulating hormone (TSH))
The posterior wall of Rathke'spouch is
Gonadotropic cells-secrete luteinizing hormone
closelyapposed to the neural tissue of
(LH) and follicle stimulating hormone(FSH)
theneurohypophysisandforms thepars
Corticotropic cells-synthesize the precursor
intermedia.
molecule pro-opiomelanocortin(POMC),which
The pars intermedia remains separated from the
gives rise to adrenocorticotropic hormone
anterior lobe by the hypophyseal cleft (formerly
(ACTH) and related peptides.
the lumen of Rathke'spouch).
Theposteriorlobeof thepituitarybody
Indogs andcats,thesomatotropiccellsaccountfor
(neurohypophysis) is derived from the neural
50%or more of the anterior lobe endocrinecells.The
ectoderm at the base of the developing
other cell typeseachrepresent about5-15%of the
diencephalon (Figure 17.1).
endocrine cells (Rijinberk,1996).
17.1
Schematic
illustration of
Diencephalon
IlIVentricle
caninepiluiltary gland
development.
Neurohypophysis
Pars
Anterior
intermedia
lobe
Rathke'spouch
Neurohypophysis
Rathke'scleft
181
Chapter 17 Pituitary dwarfism
ENVIRONMENT/STRESS
HYPOTHALAMUS
AL
PRL
-MSHACTHP
Hypophysis
cortisol
estosteron
oestradlol
IGF-1
thyroxine
17.2
(Courtesy of DrBPMeij.)ACTH,adrenocorticotropic hormene;AL,anterior lobe;AVP,arginine-vasopressin
CRH,corticoropinreleasing hcrmonc;DA,dopamine;FSH,follicle stimulating hormone:GHgrowth hormone;GHRH,
growth hormone-releasing hormone;GnRH,gonadotropinreleasinghormone;IGF-1,insulin-like growth factor-1;LH,
luteinizinghormcne;MSHmelanocyte stimulatinghormone;Pl,parsintrmcdiaPIFprolactin-inhibitory factor;PRH,
prolactin-releasing hormone;PRL,prolactin;SRIF,somatotropin-release inhibitory actor(somatostatin）:THH,thyrotropin
releasing normone;ISH, thyrcid stirrulating hermone(Inyrotropin);+,stimulation;-,inhibition.
Growth hormone
be elicited by synthetic GH secretagogues.These GH
secretagoguesexerttheireffectonGHreleaseby
GH isarather large single-chainpolypeptidewith a
acting throughreceptors differentfrom thoseforGHRH.
molecular weight of approximately 22kD.The amino
The endogenous ligand for these receptors hasbeen
acid sequence of GHvaries considerablybetween
characterized and called ghrelin (Kojima et al.,1999).
species.
The main source ofcirculating ghrelin appears to be
the stomach.Ghrelin also stimulates GH secretion in
Secretion
dogs (Bhatti et al.,2002).
Likeother hormonesof thepituitary anterior lobe,GH
is secreted inapulsatilefashion.PituitaryGHsecretion
Effects
isregulatedpredominantlybythe opposingactionsof
Theeffectsof GH canbe divided into twomaincatego-
the stimulatoryhypothalamicpeptide GH-releasing
ries:rapid catabolic actions and slow(long-lasting)
hormone(GHRH)andthe inhibitoryhypothalamicpep-
hypertrophic actions.
tide somatostatin(Figure 17.3)
Thepulsatiledeliveryof GHRHcauses thepulse
The acute catabolicactions are mainly due to
releaseof GH,whereas GH secretionbetweenpulses
insulin antagonism and result in enhanced
isprimarilyundersomatostatincontrol.Thereleaseof
lipolysis,gluconeogenesis,andrestricted glucose
GHRH and somatostatin is controlled by complex
transportacross thecell membrane.Thenet
neural regulatory mechanisms.GH release can also
effect of these catabolic actions is promotion of
hyperglycaemia.
Theslow anaboliceffects aremainlymediated
Hypothalamus
via insulin-likegrowthfactors(IGFs).
GHRH
Somatostatin
Insulin-like growthfactors
一
IGFs are produced in many different tissues,and in
Pituitary gland
Ghrelin
mosttheyhave alocal(paracrineorautocrine) growth-
(Anterior lobe)
promoting effect.
Themain source of circulating IGF-1 is the liver.
GH
Thechemical structureofanIGFis about50%identical
to insulin,but,incontrast to insulin,IGFs arebound to
Liver
IGF-1
carrierproteins(insulin-like growthfactorbindingpro-
teins,IGFBPs).Asa result of thisbinding theyhave a
Schematioillustration of theregulationof
17.3
prolonged half-life consistent with their long-term
pituitarygrowthhormone secretion.GH,growh
hormone;GHRH,growth hormone-releasing hormone:
grawth-promoting actions.
IGF-1; insulin-like grcwth factor-1;+, stmulation;
IGFs areimportant in theregulationof body size as
,inhibition,
theycontrol thestimulationofproteinsynthesis,
182
Chapter 17 Pituitary dwarfism
chondrogenesis and growth. There is increasing
isunlikelytoberesponsibleforpressureatrophy
evidence that GHexertsitsgrowth-promoting effect
(Kooistra etal.,2000).In addition,the fact that ACTH
notonlyvia IGFs butalsobya directeffecton thecells
secretion ispreserved in GermanShepherd dwarfs
(Rijnberk,1996).
arguesagainst cyst formation as theprimarycauseof
IGF-1exertsaninhibitory effectonGHreleaseby
pituitary dwarfism in this breed(Kooistra etal.,2000).
stimulatingthereleaseofsomatostatinandbyadirect
It ismore likelythat pituitary dwarfism iscaused by
inhibitoryinfluenceat thepituitarylevel.Inaddition,GH
aprimary failureof thestemcells todifferentiateinto
itselfhasanegativefeedbackeffectatthe hypothalamic
normal tropic-hormone-secreting cells.The cyst for-
level(see Figure 17.3).
mationinRathke'spouchisprobablyaconsequenceof
theunderlying geneticdefectrather than thecauseof
dwarfism inGermanShepherd dogs.
Pathophysiology
Any defect in theorganogenesis of the pituitary gland
Clinical features
mayresult ina formof isolatedorcombinedpituitary
Pituitarydwarfsareusuallypresented totheveterinary
tary dwarfism is themost striking example of pituitary
surgeon at 2-5 months of age because of proportion-
hormone deficiency.Congenital GH deficiency has
ategrowthretardation andanabnormallysoff and
beenreportedin different dog breeds,including Toy
woollyhaircoat.Thelatterisduetoretentionof lanugo
Pinschers,WeimaranersandCarelianBeardogs,and
orsecondaryhairs and lack of primaryorguard hairs.
occasionallycats(Feldman and Nelson,1996).
The lanugohairs are easily epilatedand there is
gradual developmentof truncal alopecia,beginningat
Genetic factors
the points ofwear and sparing the head and the
Congenital GH deficiency is most often encountered
extremities(Figure 17.4).The skinbecomesprogres-
asasimpleautosomalrecessiveinheritedabnormal
ityin the German Shepherd dog (Andresen and
infections of the skin are quite common.
Willeberg,1976).The genetic defect causing con-
genital GH deficiency in theGermanShepherd dogis
probablyalso thecause ofdwarfism in the Carelian
Beardog.Thedisease inthelatterbreedwasonly
recognized after German Shepherd dogshad been
used in their breeding.
Inherited pituitary dwarfism inGermanShepherd
dogs is caused by a combined pituitary hormone defi-
ciency.GermanShepherd dwarfshave a concurrent
deficiency of GH,TSH and prolactin together with
impaired releaseof gonadotropins,butACTH secre
tion is preserved (Kooistra et al., 2000).
Knowledge of the pattern ofcombinedpituitary
hormonedeficiencyprovidestheinformationrequired
for a candidate gene approach to identify the under-
lying defect.The hormonedeficiencyin GermanShep-
herd dwarfs ismost likelycausedbyamutation in a
genethatencodesforadevelopmental transcription
entiationofpituitarystemcellsafterthedifferentiation
of the corticotropic cells
17.4
A6-month-oldGermanShepherdbitchwith
Identificationof themutation causing pituitarydwarf-
growthretardation,retentionof secondary
hairs (puppy coat) and lack of primary hairs due to
ismwill allowthedevelopmentofageneticscreening
piluitary dwarfism.
test,which may behelpful in the eradicationof this
inherited disorder.For more detailed information on
the genesinvolvedinpituitaryorganogenesisthereader
Theredoesnotappeartobe agenderpredilectionfor
isreferredtoSheng etal.(1997)and toWatkins-Chow
pituitary dwarfism.Inmale dwarfsunilateral orbilateral
and Camper (1998).
cryptorchidismisacommonfinding.Infemaledwarfs
persistent oestrusisoftenobserved.Persistentoestrus
Pituitary cysts
inaffected dwarfsischaracterizedbyswellingof the
Originally,pituitary dwarfism in the GermanShepherd
vulva,attractiveness tomales,and bloodyvaginal dis
charge of >4 weeks duration. Circulating progesterone
pituitaryanterior lobebycyst formation in Rathke's
concentrationremainslow,often3nmol/l,indicating
pouch (Muller-Peddinghaus et al.,1980).Indeed,in
thatovulationdoesnotoccur.
most German Shepherd dwarfspituitary cysts are
Physicalexaminationmayalsorevealacontinuous
present. However, at a young age these dogs some-
heartmurmurduetoapatentductusarteriosus(Kooistra
times have no oronly a very smallpituitary cyst,which
etal.,2000).
183
Chapter17Pituitary dwarfism
Initially.pituitary dwarfs are bright andalert.With
be8.12±1.3nmol/l,considerablylowerthanthemean
time the animals develop signs of systemic illness,
plasma IGF-1concentrations inhealthy adult (36.7±
including inappetence and decreased activity. This
3.0nmoll)and immature(45.2±6.6nmol/l) German
situationusuallyoccurs at 2-3yearsof age and has
Shepherd dogs (Kooistra et al.,2000).Nevertheless,
beenascribed tosecondary hypothyroidism and im-
IGF-1measurements donotprovide sucha definitive
paired renal function (Rijnberk,1996).
diagnosisasthemeasurementsof GHbefore andafter
stimulation
Differential diagnosis
Pituitaryfunction tests
CirculatingGHconcentrations arelowinpituitarydwarfs
Although theclinical signsof pituitary dwarfismmaybe
butcan alsobe lowin healthy animals.Therefore,the
veryobvious,otherendocrineandnon-endocrinecauses
definitive diagnosisof GH deficiencyisbasedon the
ofgrowthretardation have tobe excluded.Juvenile-
results of a stimulation test. For this purpose GH
onset(congenital)hypothyroidism may be the most
important differential diagnosis,but endocrinecauses
adrenergic drugs,clonidine(10μg/kgi.v.) orxylazine
such as juvenile diabetes mellitus,iatrogenichyper-
(100μg/kg i.v.) can be used.GH concentrations are
adrenocorticism due toglucocorticoid administration,
measured atleastimmediatelybefore and20-30min-
and even hypoadrenocorticismshouldbe considered.
utesafterintravenousadministration of the stimulant.
Withregard tonon-endocrinecauses,malnutrition,
In healthy dogs,circulating GH concentrations
gastrointestinal disorders,liver disease （e.g
should increase atleast2-4-fold.In dogswith pituitary
portosystemic shunting),renal disease,heart failure
dwarfism there is no significantrise incirculating
GH concentrations (Figure 17.5).Administration of
retardation.Inaddition,the apparently dwarfed animal
xylazine orclonidine maygiverisetosedation,brady-
maysimplybeasmall individualwithinthenormal
cardia,hypotension andvomiting.
biological variation,ortheresultof anunexpected and
unwanted mating.
Due to thevariation in GHamino acidsequence of
different species,the concentration shouldbe deter-
mined by a species-specific homologous radio
Diagnosis
validated homologous assays for measuring canine
Laboratory testing
andfelineGH arenotwidelyavailable.Ahomologous
RIA for canine GH,which is also suitable for GH
Renalfunction
measurement in cats,isused at Utrecht University.
Routine laboratoryexamination usually doesnotre
Special sample handling is required (see Chapter 1).
vealanyabnormalities,apart from anelevatedplasma
creatinine concentration.GH deficiencyisassociated
with abnormalglomerulardevelopmentandrenalfunc-
20
tionmayalsobe impairedbecauseofa functionally
decreasedglomerularfiltrationrate asaresult of the
deficienciesofbothGH and thyroidhormones.
川
Thyroid hormones
Theremaybeevidenceofsecondaryhypothyroidism
entration
15
because pituitary dwarfism is often the result of com-
bined hormone deficiency.Circulating thyroxine(T4)
concentrations are commonlybelow thereference
range in pituitary dwarfs.However,instead of an ele-
CO
10
vated circulating TSH concentration,expected with
primaryhypothyroidism,inpituitary dwarfsTSH con-
hormone
centrations areoftencloseto thelower limitof theTSH
assaybecause of decreasedpituitary secretion.
IGF-1
5
rowth
GHdeficiency alsoresultsinlowlevelsofcirculating
IGF-1.IGF-1has along half-life and its secretion is not
episodic. The amino acid sequence of IGF-1 is less
G
species-specificthan thatof GHand thereforeIGF-1
can be determined in a heterologous(human) assay
-15
15
30
45
(Rijnberk,1996).As aresult,measurement of IGF-1
concentration isoftenrecommended to assess the GH
Time(min)
status of an animal indirectly.
Plasma IGF-1concentrationsare low inpituitary
17.5
Resullscfagrowthhormone-releasinghormone
stimulation test ineight German Shepherd dogs
dwarfs,even whenage andbody size are taken into
with pituitary dwarfisrn (red line) and in eight healthy adult
account.The mean(±SEM)plasma IGF-1 concentra-
Bcaglcs(blue line)(mean±SEM(shaded area). SEM,
tion inGermanShepherd dwarfs hasbeenreported to
standard error.
184
Chapter 17 Pituitary dwarfism
Supra-pituitary stimulation withcorticotropinreleas-
4-6weeks.This treatment mayresult in GH excess
ing hormone (CRH), thyrotropin releasing hormone
and consequentlyside-effectssuchasdiabetesmellitus
(TRH)and gonadotropin releasing hormone(GnRH)
may develop.Weekly monitoring of GH. IGF-1 and
mayreveal thepresenceofotherpituitary hormone
glucose concentrations is vital.
deficiencies(fordetailedinformationonthesestimula-
Subsequent treatment with heterologous GH after
tion teststhereaderisreferred toKooistraetal.,2000)
thisinductionperiodalsodependsonthemeasure-
ments of these concentrations.There isno significant
Pituitary imaging
increaseinbodysizeinmostdogs,becausethegrowth
Diagnostic imaging of the pituitary area(CT or MRI)
plateshave usuallyalreadyclosed orareabouttoclose
oftenrevealsthepresenceofpituitarycystsindogs
at the time GH treatment is initiated.The coat that
with congenital GH deficiency (Figure 17.6). In the
growsbackiscomposedmainlyofprimarylanugo hair
majorityofyoung dogswith dwarfism,thepituitaryis
as growth of guard hairs is variable.
quite small despite thepresence of cysts compatible
Progestogens are capable of inducing expression
with pituitary hypoplasia (Kooistra et al., 2000). As
of the GH gene in thecanine mammarygland and
pituitary dwarfs age,the cystsbecome larger(Kooistra
subsequent secretion of this GH into the systemic
et al.,1998).When large cysts arepresent,pituitary
circulation (Selman et al.,1994). This has raised
size also increases.
thepossibility of progestogen treatment for congeni-
tal GH deficiency.Treatment of young German
Shepherd dwarfswithmedroxyprogesteroneacetate
at 2.5-5.0 mg/kg s.c., initially at 3-week intervals
and subsequently at 6-week intervals,has resulted
insomeincreasesinbodysizeand thedevelopment
ofacompleteadulthaircoat.Parallelwith thephysical
improvements,circulating IGF-1 concentrations rose
sharply,whereas GH concentrations,although in-
ence range (Kooistra et al.,1998).Similarly,
proligestone treatment of pituitarydwarfs has
beenreportedtoresult in thedevelopmentofan adult
hair coat.increased body weight and elevated
circulating IGF-1 concentration (Knottenbelt and
Herrtage, 2002).
Treatment of dogswith congenital GH deficiency
effects, such as recurrent periods of pruritic pyo-
derma,abnormal skeletal development,mammary
17.6
Contrast-enhanced CT image of the pituitary
tumours,acromegaly,diabetes melitus and cystic
arca of a Gcrman Shepherd dwarf at the age of
endometrial hyperplasia.As with the treatment using
6 months (pituitary height 3.6 mn, pituitary width 4.3 mm).
Aradiolucent area with a diamcter of 1.5mm is visible in
heterologous GH,manitoring circulating concentra-
the pituitary, sucgestive of a cyst (arrcwed).
tions of GH,IGF-1 and especiallyglucose are impor-
tant.In bitches,ovariohysterectomy should be
performed before the start of theprogestogen treat-
It is important to note that pituitary cysts are not
ment. Despite the possible side-effects,long-term
unusual in healthydogs,particularlyinbrachycephalic
treatment with progestogens can be used as an
breeds.Consequently,thepresence ofapituitarycyst
alternativeforheterologousGH in the treatmentof
isnot synonymouswithpituitarydwarfism.
dogswith congenital GH deficiency.
Thyroid hormonereplacement shouldbestarted as
soonasthereisevidenceofsecondary hypothyroidism.
Treatment
Unfortunatelyadequatetherapyofpituitarydwarfs
Prognosis
isnot possible.Canine GH is not yet available for
therapeutic use and only porcine or human GH
The long-termprognosisforGerman Shepherddwarfs
hasbeen tried.However,becauseof the differences
is poor if treatment is not attempted.By3-5years of
between canine and humanGH,antibodyformation
age.affected animals are usually bald, thin and dull
maypreclude the use ofbiosynthetic human GH
These changes may be due to:
(Van Herpen et al.,1994).The amino acid sequence
ofporcineGHisidenticalto thatof canineGH(Ascacio-
Progressiveloss ofpituitary functions
Martinez and Barrera Saldana,1994) but it is not
Continuing expansion of pituitary cysts
availableinEurope.Moreover,treatmentwithporcine
Progressiverenal failure.
GH is expensive.
The recommended subcutaneous dose for hetero-
Owners usuallyrequest euthanasia fortheir dog,if
logousGH is 0.1-0.3IU/kg three timesperweek for
they have notdone solong beforethis(Rijnberk,1996).
185
Chapter 17  Pituitary dwarlism
References and further reading
induced growth hormone (GH) production in the treatment of
dogs with congenital GH deliciency. Domestic Anima!
Endocrinology 15, 93-102
 Andresen E and willeberg P (1976) Pilultary dwarflsm In German
Kooislra HS, Voorhout G, Mol JA and Rijnberk A (2000) Combined
pituitary hormone deficiency in German Shepherd dogs with
Tecessivinhertance.NordiskVeterinaryMedicine28,481486
dwarlism.DomesticAnima/ Endocrinoiogy 19,177-190
Ascacio-Martinez JA and Barrera Saldana HA (1994) A dog growth
Muller-Peddinghaus R, El Eltebry MF, Siefert J and Ranke M (1980)
....
hormone cDNA codes lora malure protein identical to pig growth
Hypophysarer Zwergwuchs beim Deutschen Schaferhund.
hormone.Gene143,277-2B0
Veterinary Pathology 17, 406-421
Bhatti SFM, De Vliegher SP, Van Ham L and Kooistra HS (2002)
Rijnberk A (19s6) Hypothalamus-pituitary system. In: Clinical
Effects of growth hormgne-releasing peptides in healthy dogs
Endocrinology of Dogs and Cals, ed. A Rijnberk, pp. 1l-34.
Kluwer, Dordrech, The Netherlands
MolecuiarandCellularEndocrinoiogy197,97-103
Selman PJ, Mol JA, Rutteman GA, Van Garderen E and Rijnberk A
Feldman EC andNelson RW(1996) Disorders of growth harmone. n:
[1994] Progestin-induced growth hormone excess in Ehe dog
Canine and Feline Endocringiogy and Reproduction, 2 edn, ed.
ariginates in the mammary gland. Endocrinoiogy 134, 287-292
EC Feldman and RW Nclson,Pp.38-66. W8 Saunders,
Philadelphia
 Knottenbelt CM and Hertage ME (2002) Use of proligeslone in the
Science 278, 1809-1812
Van Herpen H,RiinberkAand MolJA (1994) Praductionof antibodies
dwarlism. Journai of Smal Animal Practice 43, 164-170
to biosynihetic human growth harmone in the dog.Veterinary
emefuey pue H onshew 'W oiezeyen 'A elea 'h eposoh W ewoy
Record 134, 171
K (1999) Ghrelin is agrowth-hormone-releasing acylated peplide
Watkins-Chow DE and Camper SA (1998) How many homeobox
from stornach. Nature 402, 656-660
KocistraHS,VoorhoutG,SelmanPJand RnberkA(199a)Progestin-
186
Acromegal
Mark E. Peterson
Introduction
Old intact bitches may develop acromegaly sponta-
neously because of the high endogenous progester-
 Excess productionof growth hormone (GH), also called
one concentrations characteristic of dioestrus
somatotropin, causes overgrowth of bone, connective
(Eigenmann and Venker-van Haagen, 1981; Eigen-
tissue and viscera, leading to the clinical syndromes of
mann etal, 1983). Alternatively, acromegaly inbitches
giantism and acromegaly.
may resuit from attempts to suppress oestrus by
administration of long-acting progestogens (e.g.
 Giantism develops in young patients with GH
medroxyprogesterone acetate).
hypersecretion before closure of the epiphyses.
leboseboid snoueboxa lo snouabopue laue yl!m
Acromegaly develops in adult patients with GH
excess, the resuitant GH excess originates from within
hypersecretion after epiphyseal closure.
the mammary gland (Selman et ai., 1994a), where
progestogens induce the expression of the gene en-
In patients with acromegaly, the increase in bone
coding for GH (Mol et al., 1996). As the mammary GH
length is limited to the membranous bones (e.g. nose,
 gene is identical to the pituitary-expressed gene, GH
mandible and portions of the vertebrae) because the
secreted by the mammary gland is biochemically iden-
long bones cannot grow longitudinally once the epiphy-
tical to pituitary GH.
 ses have fused. In dogs and cats, giantism has not
 been documented, but acromegaly has been reported 
Cats
in both species.
In cats, as in humans, acromegaly is most often
GH is normally synthesized by the somatotropic
caused by a GH-secreting tumour of the pituitary
cells of the pars distalis of the pituitary gland. The
gland (Middleton et al., 1985; Lichtensteiger et al.,
om a peuoo pue oposida s! Ho jo uoaos
1986; Peterson et al., 1990; Norman and Mooney.
hypothalamichormones:GH-releasing hormone, which
2000). As in dogs, administration of progestogens to
stimulates production and secretion of GH; and
cats can induce expression of the gene encoding for
 somatostatin, which inhibits secretion of GH.
GH and stimulate the local production of GH in the
GH exerts its effects both directly and indirectly.
mammary gland (Mol etal., 1996). However, this local
The indirect actions of GH, mediated by insulin-like
 production of GH does not lead to high circulating
growth factor 1 (IGF-1) produced in the liver, are
concentrations and the clinical state of acromegaly in
anabolic and include increased protein synthesis and
cats (Peterson, 1987).
soft-tissue and skeletal growth. By contrast, the direct
effects of GH are predominantly catabolic (e.g. lipo-
lysis and restricted cellular glucose transport).
Clinical features
 Assay of plasma or serum GH concentrations, as
well as IGF-1 concentrations, confirm the diagnosis of
Many of the clinicai and laboratory findings in dogs and
 acromegaly in both dogs and cats. The physiology of 
cats with acromegaly are similar but there are some
GH secretion and its measurement are described in
important differences.
 more detail in Chapter 17.
Signalment
 In humans, dogs and cats, naturally occurring acro-
Pathogenesis
 megaly is a disease of middle to old age. However, in
 The pathogenesis of GH excess is completely different 
contrast to humans, where acromegaly has no sex
in dogs and cats.
predilection, most acromegalic cats (> g0%) are male
(Peterson et al., 1990; Norman and Mooney, 2000)
Dogs
In bitches, acromegaly is caused by endogenous or
female (Eigenmann and Venker-van Haagen, 1981;
exogenous progestogen excess that induces overpro-
Eigenmann etal., 1983). The female predisposition for
duction and high circulating concentrations of GH
acromegaly in dogs is understandable based on the
(Concannon et al, 1980; Eigenmann and Venker-van
ability of progesterone to stimulate excess GH produc-
Haagen, 1981; Eigenmann et al., 1983).
tion from the mammary gland in this species.
187
Chapter 18 Acromegaly
Generalappearance
Hypertrophy of all organs in the body(e.g.heart,
In humans, the earliest recognizable signs of acro-
liver, kidneys and tongue) is also a characteristic sign
megaly aresoft tissueswelling andhypertrophyof the
face and extremities.Facial alterations in humans
include: large nose; thick lips; prominent skin folds;
macroglossia;prognathism;andwidened interdental
Finding
Dogs
Cats
spaces in the mandible.Many of these changes occur
Clinical signs
inacromegalicdogsandcatsbut,asinhumans,they
developinsidiouslyandarefrequentlyoverlooked.
Polyuria and polydipsia
55%
100%
Bothdogs andcatswith acromegalyhavebeen
Inspiratory stridor
85%
Rare
reportedtoshowmandibularenlargementresulting in:
Renal failure
prognathism;widened interdental spaces;thickening of
Rare
50%
the bony ridges of the skull large pawsand soft-tissue
Cardiacfailure
Rare
40%
swelling of the head and neck(Peterson et al.,1990;
Arthropathy
Rare
40%
Norman and Mooney,200o)(Figures 18.1 and 18.2).
GH-inducedproliferationofconnectivetissuemay
Central nervous signs
Rare
15%
cause the body to increase insize,mostfrequently
Laboratory findings
manifest asmarkedweight gain andenlargement of
the abdomenandface.The increase inbodyweight
Hyperglycaemia/glycosuria
30%
100%
may occur despite thepresence of the catabolic state
Azotaemia
Rare
50%
ofunregulated diabetesmellitus.The skin may be-
Hyperphosphataemia
Rare
come thickened and developexcessive folds,particu
45%
larly around thehead andneck.
Hyperchalesterolaemia
Rare
45%
High alanine aminotransferase activity (ALT)
Rare
30%
High alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP)
70%
10%
Erythrocytosis
Rare
35%
Proteinuria
Rare
65%
18.3
Manifestations of acromegaly in dogs and cats:
similarities and contrasts.
Respiratory system
Indogswithacromegaly,thesoft-tsueproliferationin
the aropharyngealregionmaybesoprofound thatthey
exhibitpanting,exercise intolerance,andinspiratory
stridar due tocompression oftheupper airway
(Concannon et al.,1980;Eigenmann and Venker-van
Haagen,1981;Eigenmann et al.,1983).Inspiratory
A 10-year-old intact bitchwith dabetesmellitus
18.1
and acromegaly.Note the brcad head,the
ported incats(Norman andMooney,200o),butisrare.
increaseininterdentalspaces,and theinspiratory stridor
However, dyspnoea may develop in cats with long-
(manifested by panting).
standing untreatedacromegalyasaresultofpulmo-
naryoedema orpleural effusion fromGH-induced
cardiac failure (Peterson et al.1990;Norman and
Mooney,2000).
Diabetesmellitus
The most commonly recognized clinical manifestation
ofacromegaly in cats is insulin-resistant diabetes
mellitus （Peterson et al.,1990;Norman and Mooney：
2000).Diabetesmellitus is also common in dogs with
acromegaly buteven in the absenceof diabetes,
acromegalic dogs may demonstrate carbohydrate
intolerance(EigenmannandVenker-vanHaagen,1981).
GH in carnivores(particularlycats and dogs),dis-
playspowerful diabetogenic activity and appears to
A 12-year-old male castratedcatwith scvere
18.2
provake hyperglycaemia,mainlyby inducing periph-
insulin-resistant diabetes melitus and
acromegaly.The owners had noticed a gradual increase
eral insulin resistance.Excess GH hasbeen shown to
in the size of thc cat‘s head and feet, as well as an
increase inbody weight.Note the broad face,prominent
affinity as wellas a post-receptor insulin defect similar
jowls and increase in softissuc over the eyes.
to that observed inpatientswith cortisol-induced
188
Chapter 18 Acromegaly
insulin antagonism.This post-receptordefectin insulin
and septal hypertrophy;however, ECG findings are
action may lead to hyperinsulinaemia and subsequent
normal.Similar cardiacchangeshave notbeen ob-
down-regulation of insulin receptors.
served indogswith acromegaly.
These abnormalities in insulin binding andaction
The cause of cardiac disease in cats with acro-
result inhyperglycaemia and glucosuria and the ac-
megaly s unclear,but it may be related to the general
companying clinical signs of polyuria,polydipsia and
grawth-promoting effect of excess GH on tissue.
polyphagia.Largedoses ofinsulinare frequentlyneeded
Hypertension,common inhumanswith acromegaly,
to control thesustainedhyperglycaemia.
may also contribute to cardiachypertrophy in cats.
Bloodpressureshould bedetermined inall catswith
Skeletal system
acromegalyandany associated hypertension treated.
In some cats with acromegaly,articular changes(as
Nervous system
sociated with degenerative arthritis)are severe and
crippling(Peterson etal.,1990).The articularchanges
In cats,central nervous system (CNS) signs can de-
initiallyresult fromfibrous thickeningof thejointcap-
velop asa result of expansionof thepituitary tumour
suleandrelated ligaments,aswellasbonyovergrowth
beyond thesellaturcica,butovertneurologicalsignsare
and articular cartilage proliferation.Featuresmore
rareevenwhenalargepituitarytumouriscompressing
typical of degenerativejoint disease developlateras a
and invading the hypothalamus (Peterson et al, 1990).
result of the distorted joint architecture(Figure 18.4).
Neurological signs may include stupor,somnolence
Radiographicevidence of acromegalicarthropathy
andpoorappetite.Dogswith acromegalydonot have
includes:an increase in joint space secondary to
pituitary tumours. so CNS signs do not occur.
thickening of the articular cartilage;corticalthickening;
Renal system
osteophyteproliferation;periarticularperiostealreac-
Polyuria andpolydipsia are common signs of acro-
tion;and collapse of the joint. Similar arthropathy has
megaly in cats and dogs and appear to develop prima-
not been observed in dogs with acromegaly.
rilybecause of the associated diabetic state.
Bonychangesthat mayoccurincatsanddogswith
acromegalyinclude the aforementionedenlargement
Dogs
ofthemandibleleading toprognathismandanoverbite
Acromegalicbitchesoccasionally develop a formof
by the lower incisors.The spacingbetween the teeth
transient diabetesinsipidusthatoccursduring dioestrus
mayincrease,a common change in acromegalic dogs.
and resolves after ovariohysterectomy (Schwedes,
Finally,thebonyridges of the calvariummaybethick-
1999).In addition to polyuria and polydipsia,acro-
ened,andmarkedspondylosis deformansof thespine
megaly alsocausesseveralalterations inrenal function.
maybe evident in some patients.
The kidneysbecome hypertrophied,leading to an in
creasedglomerularfiltrationrate andrenalbloodflow.
Cats
Incatswithlong-standing acromegaly,azotaemiapro-
teinuria and clinical signsofrenal failure may develop
(Peterson et al.,1990;Norman and Mooney,2000).
Histologically,the kidneys of these cats are charac-
terized by mesangial thickeningof the glomeruli
changessimilar to those described in humanpatients
with diabetic nephropathy.Themechanism of impair-
mentofrenal functionin catswith acromegaly isnot
clear,but it mayresult from the glomerulosclerosis
associated withunregulated diabetesmellitusor GH-
mediated glomerular hyperfiltration.Renal failure has
Dorsopalmar radiograpn af the distal forelimbs
not been observed in dogswith acromegaly.
18.4
of a cat wit acromegaly.Notice themild,
Reproductive system
diffusesoft tissueswelingperiarticularperioslealreaction
and collapse of he carpal joint spaces,consistent with
degencrative joint disease.
comitantmammarygland nodules,cysticendometrial
hyperplasia,orpyometramaydevelop(Concannon et
Cardiovascular system
al,1980).The pathogenesis of the mammary gland
Anotherprominent manifestationofacromegalyincats
nodulesinvolves progestogen-induced GH production
is cardiomyopathy(Peterson etal.,1990).Cardiovas-
by the mammary gland tissue; GH then acts locally in
cularabnormalitiesthatmaybedetectedonphysical
an autocrineorparacrine manner topromote mam-
examination include:thepresenceofa systolicmur-
mary tumorigenesisbystimulating proliferation of sus-
mur;galloprhythm;and,especiallylateinthecourseof
ceptiblemammary epithelialcells.
disease,signs of congestive heart failure (e.g.dys-
Incontrast,thepathogenesisoftheuterine changes
pnoea,muffled heart sounds and ascites).
of cystic endometrial hyperplasia probably involves a
directeffectof theprogestogenexcessratherthanGH,
cardiomegaly,pleuraleffusionandpulmonaryoedema.
since local(uterine)production of GH does not occurin
Echocardiography frequentlyrevealsleftventricular
dogs (Kooistra et al.,1997).
189
Chapter 18 Acromegaly
latrogenic hypoadrenocorticism
Growthhormone determination
Dogs with acromegalycaused by the chronic adminis-
Confirmationof thediagnosisrequiresdemonstration
tration ofprogestogens may develop iatrogenic
of a high circulating GH concentration.Unfortunately
hypoadrenocorticism,characterized by low serum
theavailabilityofveterinarylaboratoriesperforming
cortisol concentrations (both basal and adreno-
radioimmunoassay of GH in dogs and cats is limited
corticotropic hormone(ACTH) stimulated cortisol)and
(see Chapters 2 and 17).
atrophy of the adrenal cortex.Theintrinsic glucocorti-
Determinationof IGF-1alsocontributestothediag-
coid-like activity of these progestogens suppresses
nosis of acromegalyby indirectly evaluating the GH
ACTHsecretion,causing thesecondaryhypoadreno-
concentration.The IGF-1concentration reflects the
corticism(Selman et al.,1994b).
magnitude of GH secretion overtheprevious 24hours
Administration of high doses ofprogestogens to
andhasbeenreported tobe highinbothdogs andcats
cats also suppresses the pituitary-adrenal axis and
with acromegaly(Middleton et al.,1985;Abrams-Ogg
leads to iatrogenic,secondary hypoadrenocorticism
et al.,1993;Norman and Mooney,2000).An abnor-
(Peterson,1987).However,cats that develop iatro-
mally high serum IGF-1 concentration strongly
genichypoadrenocorticismsecondarytoprogestogens
suggests acromegaly,but the disease should not be
donot develop acromegaly.
excluded if values are withinthe high-normalrange(i.e.
Again,in contrast to dogs,where progestogen
false-negative results).In addition,high serum IGF-1
treatment orhigh circulating progesterone concen-
concentrations haverecentlybeenreportedindiabetic
trations associated with dioestrus can stimulate
catswithoutacromegaly,sofalse-positive testresuits
mammary gland GH overproduction (without the
can also occur(Lewitt et al.,2000).
development of a pituitary tumour),progestogens
If the serum orplasma GHorIGF-1concentration
donotlead tohighcirculating GHconcentrationsor
cannot be measured,most dogs with acromegalyare
thedevelopmentofanacromegalicstateincats
tentatively diagnosed on thebasis of:characteristic
(Peterson,1987).
clinical and laboratory findings;history ofrecent di-
oestrus or exposure toa progesterone source;
Diagnosis
gesterone;and no evidenceof spontaneoushyper-
adrenocorticism on adrenal testing.
Acromegaly should be suspected inbitches
Similarly, if the serum or plasma GH or IGF-1
receivingprogestogens andintact bitches that
concentration cannot be measured in cats,the pre-
develop diabetesmellitus or laryngeal stridor
sumptivediagnosis of acromegaly can bemade on the
during metoestrus (Eigenmann and Venker-van
basisof:characteristic clinicaland laboratory features;
Haagen,1981;Eigenmann et al,1983).
normal results of thyroid and adrenal testing:and
documentationof a pituitarymassby computerized
tomographyormagneticresonanceimaging(Peterson
has severe insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus (i.e.
et al,1990;Abrams-Ogg et al.,1993;Elliott et al.,
persistent hyperglycaemia despite daily insulin
2000) (Figure t8.5).
doses>20IU/day)orpoorlycontrolleddiabetes
mellitus,especiallyifothercharacteristicsignsof
acromegaly(e.g.arthropathy and
cardiomyopathy)are also present(Peterson et
al,1990;Norman and Mooney,2000).
Laboratory testing
Routine laboratory investigation oftenreveals hyper-
glycaemia and glycosuria,especially in cats(seeFig-
ure 18.3).Less frequently seen are increases in
18.5
CT scans of the head of a cat with acromegaly,
cholesterol,alanine aminotransferase (ALT)and se-
before and afterexternal-beam radiotherapy.
rumalkaline phosphatase(ALP),whichmayberelated
(Left) Before radictherapy;note tne large mass in the
to the diabetic state.
region of ihe pituitary and hypothalarrus following the
However,inmanyacromegalicdogswithout diabe-
intravenousadministrationofapositivecontrastagent
tes,ALP activity is high.Possible causes for this
(Right) Twc months after radiotherapy:the size of the
includeproductionof the steroid-inducedor bone
isoenzyme stimulatedbyprogesterone and hepatic
lipidosisassociatedwithGH-stimulatedmobilizationot
fat from adipose tissue.
Treatment
Other uncommon findings in acromegalic cats
Dogs
mayinclude:mild erythrocytosis;hyperphosphataemia
In dogs,treatmentforprogesterone-induced acromegaly
proteinaemia;andproteinuria(Peterson etal.,1990).
isvia ovariohysterectomyordiscontinuation of proges-
Renal failureisacommonsequel of untreated acro-
togendrugs(EigenmannandVenker-vanHaagen,1981;
megaly in cats and,if present, is associated with
Eigenmann etal.,1983).The circulating GH concentra-
azotaemia and isosthenuria.
tionswillnormalize（rapidlyafterovariohysterectomy
190
Chapter 18 Acromegaly
andmore slowly afterwithdrawal of progestogendrugs).
symptoms and signs of acromegaly in the majority
This will be accompanied by resolution of the soft tissue
of human patients, with normalization of the serum
proliferation and signs of respiratory stridor; however,
IGF-1 concentration and tumour shrinkage in half of
the skeletal changes may persist.
the patients.
The insulin requirement for GH-induced diabetes
Dopamine agonists (e.g. bromocriptine and
mellitus will also decline, but the reversibility of the
selegiline) are effective in some human patients but are
diabetes depends on the insulin reserve of the pancre-
less eficacious and have more side-efects than
atic islet beta cells.
octreotide. Pegvisomant, a recently introduced GH
receptor antagonist (Stewart, 2003), is the most effec-
Cats
tive drug treatment for acromegaly; however, itis likely
 In cats, treatment should be directed if possible at the
only to have an adjuvant rale as its mechanism of
pituitary tumour. Three potential treatment modalities
action is not directed at the tumour itself {i.e. the
are available: radiation therapy, hypophysectomy and
pituitary tumour would continue to grow).
medical therapy. Of these, radiotherapy is considered
to bethe mosteffective ( Peterson etal., 1990; Goossens 
et al., 1998; Kaser-Hotz et al., 2002).
owners, neither somatostatin analogues nor dopaming
agonists have been successful in lowering serum GH
Radiattlon therapy
concentrations or improvinginsulin sensitivity (Peterson
wo sahuei Adeaun ueipe peqo oi esuadse aul.
et al., 1990; Abraham et al, 2002). Pegvisomant has
poor to excellent. In cats that show a good to excellent
 not yet been evaluated in cats with acromegaly, butthis
response to external radiation therapy, the response is
drug would be expected to be effective only if there is
characterized by: shrinkage in tumour size; norrmaliza-
sufficient homology between the feline and human GH
tion of high circulating concentrations of GH and IGF-1;
receptors.
resolution of insulin resistance; improvement in diabetic
control; and, rarely, remission of the diabetic state (see 
 Figure 18.5). Disadvantages of this treatment include:
Prognosis
 Limited availability
Dogs
Extended time in hospital
In dogs with progestogen-induced GH excess, the
Frequent anaesthesia
 prognosis is good after elimination of the progestogen
High expense
source. Diabetes mellitus resulting from the GH excess
Unpredictable outcome.
is sometimes reversible after removal of its source.
Even in dogs where the dlabetic state persists after
In addition, complete clinical improvement follow-
elimination of progestogen excess, the insulin resist-
ing radiotherapy may take weeks to months to achieve,
ance that commonly accompanies the acromegaly will
 and relapse may develop 6-18 months aftertreatment.
resolve, and the diabetes will be much easierto control.
Hypophysectomy
Cats
Surgical hypophysectomy is the therapeutic modality of
In cats, the short-term prognosis is relatively good,
choice for human patients with a GH-secreting micro-
even without definitive treatment for acromegaly. As-
adenoma or well circumscribed small macroadenoma
soclated insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus can gener-
because it provides the best cure rate. However, human
ally be managed satisfactorily with large, divided daily
patients with a large invasive macroadenoma com-
doses of insulin.
monly have residual disease following surgery and
 Renal disease, hypertension or cardiac failure can
require additional therapeutic intervention.
be managed with appropriate drug therapy in affected
Hypophysectomy as treatment for cats with acro-
cats. Without definitive treatment, hawever, complica-
megaly has not yet been described but, inasmuch as
tions such as congestive heart fallure, renal failure, or
most cats have a pituitary macroadenoma at time of
an expanding pituitary tumour usually result in death or
diagnosis, a low rate of cure might also be predicted.
euthanasia within 1-2 years (Peterson et al., 1990;
Although surgical removal of the pituitary has not been
Norman and Mooney, 2000). Lowering circulating GH
perfarmed in cats, there is one report of the use of
trans-sphenoidal cryotherapy of a pituitary tumour in a
size with definitive treatment(e.g. pituitary radiotherapy
cat with acromegaly with relatively good success
or hypophysectomy) impraves the long-term progno-
(Abrams-Ogg et al., 1993). In that single case report,
 sis in these cats.
cryotherapy was successful in destroying allneoplastic
tissue, with normalization of the serum iGF-1 concen-
tration and resolution of the diabetic state.
References and further reading
Medical therapy
Abraham LA, Helmond SE, Mitten RW, Charles JA and Holloway SA
Medical therapy also plays an important role in the
agonist-deprenyl.AusfralianVeterinaryourna80,47-483
 management of acromegaly in human patients (Burt 
and Ho, 2003). Of the medical treatments available,
Acromegaly in a cal: diagnosis by magnetic resonance imaging
and treatment by cryohypophysactomy. Canadian Veterinary
somatostatin analogues (e.g. octreotide) improve
Journal 34, 682-685
191
Chapter 18 Acromegaly
Endocrinoiogy 166, 21-27
Lichtensteiger CA, WortmanJA and Eigenmann JE (1986) Functional
Endocrine20, 299-306
 Concannon P, Aliszuler N, Hampshire -J, Butler WA and Hansel W
acromegallc faatures, Varerinary Pathofogy 23, 518-521
(1980) Growth hgrmone, prolactin, andcortisolin dogs developing
 Bunp aouereadde ayll-Aebauiarot ue pue sanpou Aewwu
traatment with_medroxyprogesterone acetate.Endocrinology
somatomedin C concentration and diabetes melitus in a cat.
106, 1173-1177
Canadian Veterinary Joumal 26, 159-171
Mol JA, yan Garderen E, Ruteman GR and Rijnberk A (1996) New
insights in the molecuar mechanism of progestin-induced
grewth hormone overproducllon: clinlcalpicture and pathogenesis.
Journalof theAmericanAnimalHospitalAssocialion17,813-822
biosynthesis of growth hormone (GH) in the mammary glands of
 Eigenmann JE, Eigenmann RY, Rijnberk A, van der Gaag I, Zapf J
dogs, cals and humans. Journal of Sterold Biochamistry and
 and Froesch ER (1983) Progesterone-controlled growth hormone
Molecular Bioiogy 57,67-71
overproduction and naturally occurring canlne diabetes and
jo juewafeuew pue sisouela (ooz) 1o Aauoo pue rg uewnon
acromegaly. Acta Endocrinologica 104, 167-176
diabetes melius in five cats with somatotraphic abnormalities.
Elliott DA, Feldman EC, Koblik PO, Samfl VF and Naison RW (2000)
Joumafof Feline Medicine and Surgery 2, 183-190
 Prevalence of pituttary tumors among diabetic cats with insulin
PetersonME (1987) Effecls of megestrolacetate onglucose tolerance
resistance.Journalofthe American Vetarinary MedicalAssociation
216, 1765-1768
Science 42, 354-357
Goossens MM, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Theon AP, Koblik PD,
Pelersan ME, Taylar RS.
. Greco DS, Nalson Rw, Randolph_ JF.
 Elliott DA and Rulteman GR [1998) Cabalt 60 irradiation of
Faodman MS,Moraff SD,Morison SA and Lothrop CD(1990)
pituitarygland tumorsinthreecatswih acromegaly.Joumaof
Acromegaly in 14 cails. Journal of Veterinary internal Medicine4.
the American Veterinary Medicai Association 213, 374-376
192-201
Kaser-Hot B.Rohrer CR,StankeovaS,WerginMFide Jand
Schwedes Cs (1999) Transient diabetes insipidus in a dog with
Reusch C (2002) Radiotherapy of pituitary tumours in five cats.
acromegaly.Journal ofSmaifAnimal Practice40,392-396
Journal ofSmail AnimalPractice43.303-307
 Selman PJ, Mol JA, Rutteman GR, Van GE and Rinberk A (1994a)
Kooistra HS, Okkens AC, MolJA, van Garderen E, Kirpenstelin J and
 Progestin-induced growth hormone excess in 1he dog origlnales
RijnberkA(1997) Lack of associationofprogostin-induced cystic
inthemammarygland.Endocrinology134,287-292
endometrial hyperplasla with GH gene expression in the canine
Selman PJ, Mol JA, Ruteman GR and Rijnberk A (1994b) Progestin
ylerus, Journal of Reproduction and Ferilfy (Supplement) 51,
355-361
Lewitt MS, Hazel SJ, Church DB, Watson AD, Powell SE ard Tan K
422-430
(2000) Regulatian of insulin-like growth lactor-binding proteln-3
 Stewart PM (2003) Pegvisomant: an advance in clintcal efficacy in
lernary complex in feline diabetes melitus. Jourmaf of
acromegaly.EuropearJourna/ofEndocrinoiogy148,S027-S032
192
Unusual thyroid disorders
Carmel T. Mooney and Boyd R. Jones
Introduction
In addition,hypothyroidism,in theory，can be a
result of pituitary neoplasia.However, such cases
Hypothyroidismandhyperthyroidismarerelatively
havenotyetbeenreported.
common endocrine disorders of dogs and cats,re-
spectively(seeChapters10and 11).Incontrast,feline
Clinical features
Theclinical featuresofcongenital hypothyroidism are
encountered in small animal practice.
summarized inFigure 19.1.They can be severe ormild
dependingonthenatureofthemetabolicdefect,which,
as in humans,can bepartial or complete.
Feline hypothyroidism
Naturally occurringhypothyroidismisusuallyencoun-
Dwarfism
teredasa congenital problem.ltcan occur as aresult
Stunted growth
of thyroid gland agenesis or dysgenesis or from
Short,broadhead
dyshormonogenesis (Arnold et al.,1984;Peterson,
Enlarged cranium
1989;Peterson et al,1994;Stephan and Schutt-
Shortened limbs
Mast,1995).
Delayed closure of growth plates
A defectin thyroidperoxidase activityresulting in
Retained deciduous teeth
impairedorganification of iodide hasbeenreported in
Short,rounded body
domestic shorthair and Abyssinian cats (Sjollema et
Small ears
al.,1991;Jones et al.,1992).In only one cat has this
Apathy
defectbeenfurthercharacterized.Thyroidperoxidase
Mental dullness
activitywasmeasurablein anextract of thyroid tissue
Inappetence
but was notmembrane-bound,suggestive of loose
Lethargy
anchorage (Sjollema et al.,1991).
Constipation
Hypothyroidism arisingbecause of aninability of
Thickened skin
the thyroid gland to respond to thyrotropin (thyroid
Sot, flofy oa 
stimulating hormone (TSH)) has been described in a
Seborrhoea
family of Japanese cats(Tanase et al.,1991).Where
known,the defectscausingcongenital hypothyroidism
Possible alopecia
Possible goitre
are inherited asautosomal recessive traits.
Spontaneous acquired primary hypothyroidism
Clinical signsexpectedwithfeline congenital
due to lymphocytic thyroiditis hasbeenwell docu-
19.1
hypothyroidism(cretinism).
mented in one adult cat(Rand et al.,1993)but there
are anecdotal reports of othercases.albeit rare.The
most commoncause ofhypothyroidism in the
Kittens
adult cat isthedestruction orremovalof thethyroid
Manyaffectedkittensdiebefore hypothyroidismis
gland after radiciodine or surgical treatment of hyper-
suspected or diagnosed;most appear normal at birth,
thyroidism,although this in itself is unusual (see
Chapter 11).
sizebecomespronounced compared with their eu-
Abreedinglineof domesticcatshasrecentlybeen
thyroid littermates.
established in oneinstitution that spontaneouslyde-
Affected kittens show signs of disproportionate
dwarfism,withanenlarged broad head,short limbs
of age.This disease is characterized by elevated
and shortroundedbodies.Theyarelethargic,mentally
circulating concentrations of antibodies against micro-
dulland less active than their healthy littermates(Fig-
somal structures and thyroglobulin,together with
ure 19.2).
lymphocyticinfiltration of the thyroid gland(Schumm-
Other signs include: bradycardia; hypothermia;
Draeger et al,1996). Such cases have not yet been
constipation;and weight loss. Teeth are frequently
reported elsewhere.
underdeveloped,and replacementof deciduousteeth
193
Chapter19Unusual thyroid disorders
An18-
features associated with myxoedema,obesity and
19.2
month-old
profound apathyinone spontaneouslyaffected adult
DSH cal presented
with lethargy.
cat.This cat alsoexhibited seborrhoea sicca and hair
that was easily epilated from the trunk had poor
cullness,matting of
the hair coat anc
regrowth after clipping.
seporrhoeasicca.
Diagnosis
Routine haematological and biochemicalfeatures
Consistentroutine clinicopathological abnormalities
have not beenreported for congenital feline hypo-
thyroidism.Mild anaemia and hypercholesterolaemia
are occasionally detected (Jones et al.,1992). How-
ever,Petersonet al.(1994) reported that these abnor-
malities are more consistent findings in iatrogenic
hypothyroidism.
Basal serumthyroidhormoneconcentrations
Catswithhypothyroidism invariablyhavelow to
undetectablecirculating total thyroxine(T4)concentra-
isoftendelayeduntil18monthsof ageorolder(Figure
tion.However,thereare twomajorfactorstoconsider
19.3).Evidence of delayed closure of ossification cen-
priorto interpreting total T4valuesin individual cats:
tresof longbonesispresent.Alopecia isnot a feature
of congenital hypothyroidism, the hair coat being pre-
Theeffectsofage
dominantly undercoat with a fewguard hairs.
Non-thyroidal illness.
Survival of untreated hypothyroidkittensdepends
on theunderlyingdefect.KittenswithTSHresistance
Various drug therapiesmay also have an effect on
deterioraterapidlyandmostdiebefore16weeksofage.
thyroidfunctionbutthese arenotwellcharacterizedfor
However,kittenswithdefectiveperoxidase activity usu-
the cat.
ally survive,andasadults their abnormal appearance
and activityisoftenlessnoticeable.Goitre develops in
Kittens:Forkittens,assessment of total T4values in
cats with defective thyroid peroxidase activity. It is
comparisontothe adultreferencerangeisinappropriate
presumed that the development of goitre makes it
as circulating concentrations vary with age.The total T4
possibleto compensatefor deficientproduction and
concentration innewbornkittensis approximatelyhalf
normalize circulating thyroid hormone concentrations.
theserumconcentration of theirmother.By2weeksof
age thetotal T4doubles andby4weeksofage it is
typically within therange52-72nmolI (Jones,unpub-
lished data).Basal circulating total T4concentrations
arebeloworat thelowendof thisrange inkittenswith
congenital hypothyroidism(Jones et al.,1992).
Adult cats:Many factors affect and diminish basal
total T4 concentration,particularly illnesses such as
diabetesmellitus,renalandhepaticdisease,andsys
temicneoplasia.Themoreseveretheilliness,thelower
thetotalT4concentration(Petersonand Gamble,1988;
Mooney et al.,1996).Most cats with non-thyroidal
illness have free T4 concentrations (assessed by
equilibriumdialysis)within,oroccasionallyabove,the
reference range,even when total T4values are low
(Mooney et al,1996;Peterson et al.,2001).When
Hypcthyroid9-month-old DSH cat showing
facedwithalowcirculatingtotalT4value,non-thyroidal
19.3
delayederuplion ofpermanent dentition.
illnessmustbeconsideredandeliminatedor thyroid
function furtherevaluated with other tests (e.g.freeT4
Adultcats
analysis,dynamicthyroid functiontests)before a diag-
In adult cats with iatrogenic hypothyroidism, skin
nosis of primary hypothyroidism can be confirmed.
changes(seborrhoeasicca,matting)arethepredomi-
After treatmentforhyperthyroidism withradioiodine
nant feature,along withlethargy,depression,weight
orbilateralthyroidectomy,hypothyroidismisexpected.
gain,hypothermia and bradycardia.
However,circulating thyroid hormone concentrations
Hair maybe epilated easily,and regrowth ispro-
longed where the coat hasbeen clipped.Alopecia is
weekstomonths,presumablyduetothereactivationof
nota commonfeature,butsomecatsdolose hairfrom
normal or ectopic thyroid tissue. Thyroid hormone
the pinnae.Rand et al.（1993)reported puffy facial
supplementationisrarelyrequiredin the intervening
194
Chapter 19 Unusual thyroid disorders
 period and may inhibit a return to normal functian. If
there is suspicion of hypothyroidism on historical and
specilic validated feline TSH assay is not yet available.
clinical grounds, then measurement of a low basal total 
TSH concentrations were elevated in Japanese
T4 concentration supports the diagnosis, and supple-
cats with suspected TSH resistance {Tanase et
mentation can begin.
a., 1991), but the use of a human TSH assay in this
Cats treated with carbimazole or methimazole fre-
study was controversial as limited validation studies
quently have low circulating total T4 concentrations in
were performed.
the absence of detectable clinical signs of hypo-
 Preliminary reports suggestthat the canine specific
thyroidism. These signs are not evident presumably
immunoradiometric assay (IRMA) may be useful in the
 because corresponding triodothyranine (T3) cancen-
diagnosis of spontaneous hypothyroidism in cats
 trations are maintained within the reference range
(Graham et al., 2000).
(Peterson et al., 1994).
 Establishing the nature of the underlying defect in
thyrold hormone metabolism requires additional inves-
Dynamic thyroid functlon tests
tigation. For example, in thyroid agenesis, there may
 In cases where a definitive diagnosis of hypothyroidism
is required and non-thyroidal illness cannot be elimi-
there is an increased uptake and discharge of a1l after
 nated, dynamic thyroid function testing may be required.
the intravenous administration of sodium perchlorate.
131| (0.125--1 MBq) is administered intravenously and
Thyrotropin releasing hormone response test: The
thyroid uptake measured by a gamma camera.
thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) response test
Unorganified iail is discharged two hours after admini-
has been suggested as a suitable and reliable provoca-
 stration by injecting sodium perchlorate, indicating
tive test for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
impaired organification.
 Additional investigations for selected cases include
A blood sample is collected for the measurement
 thyroid gland biopsy for histopathological examination
of total T4 before and 4 hours after the slow
and biochemical investigations to measure the tissue
 jntravenous injection of 0.1 mg/kg of TRH.
iodine content, peroxidase activity and the presence or
Some cats may transiently vomit, salivate,
absence of thyroglobulin. Such studies are best com-
defecate or exhibit tachypnoea after
 pleted at referral centres or at research institutions that
administration of TRH.
 In healthy cats and those with non-thyroidal
thyroid diseases.
disease, a 60-1 00% increase in circulating total
T4 concentratian is expected.
Treatment
Hypothyroid cats have a low basal value of
The recommended dose of levothyroxine for treating
circulating total T4 that does not increase after
a hypothyroid cat is 10-20 μg/kg orally sid. This
TRH administration.
dose should be increased or decreased depending
 on the response.
Carg must be taken in interpreting the results of this
In acquiredhypothyroidism an excellent response
test as subnormal responses have been reported in cats
 is expected. However, with congenital disease the
with severe non-thyroidal illness (Tamsa. et al, 2001).
 response is more varied and complete resolution of
 signs may not occur. Some kittens remain apathetic
Thyroid stimulating hormone response test: The
and lethargic, and their small stature may persist
saui oi pasn ag ose ueo isat asuodsu hi
despite treatment. Even when euthyroidism is
thyroid function in cats (Peterson et ai., 1994).
many are euthanased because of recurrent and
 A blood sample is collected for serum T4
unresponsive constipation.
 measurenment before and 6 hours after the
intravenous administration of 0.5 IU/kg cf
bovine TSH.
 Cats with hypothyrcidism show little or no rise in
 Canine hyperthyroidism
total T4 above the basal value.
Healthy cats will consistently exhibit a doubling or
Hyperthyroidism in dogs is extremely rare and usually
tripling of basal total T4 concentration.
occurs as a result of thyroid carcinoma. As a conse-
quence, hyperthyroidism cannot be discussed in isola-
Bovine TSH is currently difficult to obtain and poten-
tion but is considered in the context ofthyroid neoplasia,
tially antigenic, and thus no longer recommended for
 since it is the existence of the latter that dictates the
use. A parenteral recombinant human TSH prepara-
diagnostic work-up, treatment and prognosis.
tion has become available recently and appears to be
 The development of thyroid dysfunction plays a
 a useful, albeit expensive, alternative to the bovine
minor role in the dog, althoughspecifictherapy may be
preparation (Stegeman et al., 2003).
required inindividual cases. Overal, thyroid fumours in
the dog are non-functional, invasive, carcinomatous
 Additional diagnostic tests
-ouny Aleiauet ee Aeui eo eun ul sealeum sasseu
In the dog, measurement of circulating TSH concentra-
tional non-invasive relatively small adenomatous
tion is routinely used in the investigation of thyroid
masses, In dogs, therefore, the prognosis is guarded.
195
Chapter 19  Unusual thyroid disorders
Tumour types
is rare in dogs; the majority of canine carcinomas are
Thyroid tumours account for 1.2-3.75% of all tumours
mixed, follicular or, less commonly, compact. The
 and approximately 10-15% of all head and neck neo-
correlatlon between this histopathological classifica-
 plasms in the dog.
tion and ultimate prognosis is unclear.
Undifferentiated (anaplastic) thyroid tumours ap-
Adenomas
pear to be highly malignant but are rare. Medullary
In pathological studies, benign adenomas account for
(parafollicular, C-cell) carcinama is also considered
 approximately 30-50% of all thyroid tumours (Brodey
rare but may be difficult to distinguish from other thyroid
and Kelly, 1968; Leav et al., 1976). However, benign
 carcinomas by light microscopy aione. When specific
thyroid tumours are usually smal focal lesions that are
immunocytochemical stains are used, the incidence of
not commonly detected during life. Occasionally, these
medullary thyroid carcinoma is much higher (Carver et
tumours, particularlyif cystic, may be obvious by palpa-
al., 1995). These tumours may have a more favourable
tion as mobile ovoid masses within the cervical area.
On rare occasions, clinical signs referable to compres-
They also appear to be well encapsulated and easily
sion of organs surrounding the thyroid may be appar-
resgctable at the time of surgical thyroidectomy but
ent. In most cases only one thyroid lobe is affected,
 further studies are required in this area.
 although bilateral involvement is possible.
 Despite the lack of clear correlation between prog-
nosis and histopathological classification, the probabil-
Carcinomas
ity of metastases increases in proportion to the size of
Carcinomas, while responsible for approximately 50-
the tumour. Dogs with small thyroid tumours (<20 cm²)
70% of all thyroid tumours diagnosed post-mortem,
 accountfor up to 90% of those tumours detected during
have a less than 20% incidence of metastatic disease,
life, and therefore all thyroid masses are usualy pre-
have metastases.
sumed malignant until proven otherwise.
Carcinomas are usually larger than adenomas,
Thyroid function
coarsely multinodular, non-mobile, and often have
 In general, canine thyroid tumours are non-functional,
necrotic or haemorrhagic centres. Occasionally they
 and euthyroidism is maintained thraughout the course
have focal areas of mineralization or bone formation.
of the disease. lt has been suggested that up to 30% of
 Unilateral involvement is more than twice as com-
dogs with detectable thyroid tumours are hypothyroid
 mon as bilateral involvement, and when the latter occurs
(Feldman and Nelson, 1996).
the neoplastic process is usually extensive. In these
cases it isdifficult todetermine ifthe tumour arose in both.
 Hypothyroidism may arise because of destruction
thyroid lobes or if metastasis occurred from one lobe to
of all normal thyroid tissue by aggressive bilateral
the other. Occasionally ectopic thyroid tissue, arising
carcinomas.
from thyroglossal duct remnants - located anywhere
 Alternatively. large tumours could potentially
from the base of the tongue to the base of the hear -
 produce excessive concentrations of inactive
becomes neoplastic and thyroid tumours must therefore
thyroid hormones capable of pituitary TSH
be included in a range of differential diagnoses for oral,
 suppression and eventual atrophy of normal
cervical and thoracic masses.
thyroid tissue, although this has not yet been
Thyroid carcinomas are poorly encapsulated and
substantiated.
commonly extend into or around the trachea, cervical
 muscles, oesophagus, larynx, nerves and blood ves-
 A diagnosis of hypothyroidism must be approached
sels, although invasion into the oesophageal or tra-
with caution because of the suppressive effect of non-
cheal lumen is unusual. The majar lymphatic drainage
 specific illness on circulating thyroid hormone concen-
of the thyraid gland is in the cranial direction and
trations. In the authors' experience, hypothyroidism is
 metastatic spread to the retropharyngeal and cervical
rare and may be coincidental. Hyperthyroidism occurs
lymph nodes is common. However, early invasion into
in approximately 10-20% of thyroid carcinomas. Al-
the cranial and caudal thyroid veins with the formation 
though not clearly defined because of small numbers.
of tumour cell thrombi leads to multiple pulmonary
funcfional tumours tend to be unilateral, small to me-
 metastases, often before involvementof regional lymph
dium size, and mobile with less compressive effects on
nodes. Other reported, but rare, sites of metastatic
adjacent structures. This may be related to the exist-
lesions include: kidney; adrenal gland; liver; spleen;
 ence of metabolic signs prompting earlier veterinary
 spina! cord and bone.
intervention.
Histopathologically, thyroid carcinomas are usually
 There are only sporadic reports of hyperthyrcidism 
 well differentiated and classified as:
 associated with thyroid adenoma in the dog (Lawrence
gt al., 1991).
Follicular
Aetiology
Compact (solid)
Mixed
In humans ionizing radiation, iodine intake, chronic
Papillary.
TSH stimulation, gene mutations and oncogene ex-
 pression have all been implicated in the pathogenesis
In humans, papillary carcinoma is the most com-
of thyroid carcinoma. lonizing radiation and somatic
mon type. lt has a low grade of malignancy and
therefore a favourable prognosis. This type of tumour
humans, have also been implicated in dogs.
196
Chapter19Unusual thyroid disorders
Inhumans,thyroid tumours also form part of the
multipleendocrine neoplasia(MEN)syndromeswhere
Clinical feature
Perceniage of cases
neoplasia or hyperplasia develops inseveral different
Visiblemass inneck
endocrine organs simultaneously.
Coughing
37
31
MEN syndromes are classified as type1or type
Dysphagia
28
2,the latter further divided into types 2A and2B.
Dysphonia
18
TheMENsyndromestend toinvolveoneormore
specific polypeptide- and biogenic amine-
Weight loss
15
Vomitingyregurgiation
13
producing cell types,exhibit a histological
Polydipsia/polyuria
10
progressionfromhyperplasiato adenoma and,in
Depression
some cases,to carcinoma.Each has an
8
Anorexia
6
autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
MEN type 1 syndrome involvesparathyroid,
Hyperactivity
pancreatic islet and pituitary hyperplasia or
Diarrhoea
4
neoplasia.
Increased appetite
MEN type 2A syndrome is associated with the
Facial oedema
developmentofbilateral phaeochromocytomas,
19.4
Common presenting signs in a series of 146
medullary thyroid carcinomasand,less
dogs wih thyroic tumcurs.(Adaptec from
commonly,parathyroid hyperplasia or adenoma.
Feldman and Nelson,1996.)
The associationof medullary thyroidcarcinoma
andphaeochromocytomawithmuitiplemucosal
19.5
Large mid-
neuromas is termedMEN type2B.
cervical
mass in ahyperthyroid
Patients do existwith unusualmanifestations of
dog.
thesesyndromesbut these arelesswellcharacterized.
Althoughrare,it hasbeen suggested that MEN syn-
dromes exist in dogs(Feldman and Nelson,1996).
However,thispremiseisbasedonnumerousandoften
isolated casereportsoranecdotalreferencetothyroid
tumours occurring inassociation with adrenocortical
carcinoma/adenoma,pituitary adenoma,parathyroid
hyperplasia and phaeochromocytoma.In dogs the
thyroid tumour is morecommonly definedasanad-
enoma,ormixedorfollicularcarcinoma,ratherthana
medullary carcinoma as is reported in humans.
Detailed genetic studies are lacking in the dog,
presumablybecauserelativesarerarelyknown.Thus,
whileMENsyndromesmayexistindogs,theymanifest
differentlyfrom those inhumans and arepoorlyde-
Thedurationof thesesignsvaryfromweeksto
fined.The existence of neoplastic or hyperplastic
months.The mass is usually felt in the region of the
changes in multiple endocrine organs may be coinci-
thyraidgland,belowthelarynx,butoccasionally larger
dental in individual dogs.
tumours may descend towards the thoracic inlet.Clini-
cal signs referable to regional (enlarged lymph nodes
Clinical features
distant(dyspnoea frompulmonarymetastases)meta-
Signalment
staticspreadmaybe apparent.Afewdogsmaypresent
Thyroid tumoursoccur inmiddle-aged andolderdogs
with the additional clinical signs of hypothyroidism(see
all dogs are >4 years old at the time of diagnosis.There
thyraidism exhibit clinical signs similar to those in cats
isnosexpredilection,unlike thesituation inhumans
(i.e.weight loss,polyphagia,polyuria/polydipsia,rest-
where females aremorethan twiceas likely to
lessness,tachycardia,etc.)bu:tend to be less symp-
develop thyroidcancer asmalesat most ages.Beagles
tomatic (see Chapter 11).
andGoldenRetrievers appearpredisposed to the
developmentofthyroid carcinomasandBoxersto
Differential diagnosis
the development of both adenomas and carcinomas.
Thedifferential diagnosisforlargecervical swellings
includes:
Clinical signs
Thyroid tumours areoccasionallyfound as freelymo
Abscess
bile masses when grooming. petting or during a gen-
Granuloma
eral health check.However,most dogs are presented
Thyroid tumour
because ofavisible mass in the neck and/or its
Other tumours
Salivarymucocoele.
197
Chapter19
Unusual thyroiddisorders
Fine needle(21-23-gauge) aspiration ishelpful in
distinguishing the type of swelling present.Unfortu-
may be useful in cases where hepaticmetastasis
nately,becauseofthevascularnatureofthyroidtissue
is suspected.
samplesarefrequentlyheavilycontaminatedwithblood,
As in cats,thyroid scintigraphyusing radioactive
and exfoliation ofneoplastic cells can be poor
iodineor technetiummaybeuseful asmost thyroid
(Thompson et al., 1980).
tumours and theirmetastasesretainthe abilitytotrap
Cytological examination,or total T4estimation of
iodine.Such scansdonotprovideanyinformation
anyfluidremoved,helpsconfirmtheoriginof thesample
withregard to thyroid function butare helpful in
buta definitive diagnosisofmalignancy isnot often
locating the tumour and any regional metastases
possible.Evaluationofwide-boreneedlebiopsies,while
(Marks et al.,1994)
ofgreater diagnosticyield,significantlyincreases the
Some thyroid tumoursfail to concentrateradioiso-
riskofhaemorrhageandshouldonlybecarriedout
topes adequatelyand it hasbeen suggested that such
underultrasound guidance.Evenwith such biopsies.
tumoursarelesslikelytorespondtoradioactiveiodine
theremay stillbe difficultyin distinguishing benign from
malignant tumours andthe latteris often only confirmed
by demonstration ofvascular or capsular invasion in
radiography to depict pulmonary metastases.
biopsiestaken at thetimeof surgical thyroidectomy.
Treatment
Diagnosis
There areseveral possibletreatmentoptionsforthy-
Results of post-mortem studies showthat up to80%of
roid carcinoma.The selection of anyone option is
dogs exhibit distant metastatic spread,although this
complicated by:
decreasestojustover60%inclinical cases(Milesetal.,
1990).Thus,itisimperative thatonce amass is identi-
Poorly defined prognostic indicators
fiedasthyroidasystematicsearchformetastaticpread
Inconsistenciesincase selection andreporting
isinstigated.Routinehaematological andbiochemical
criteria amongst the different studies
examinationsmaybehelpful inidentifyingsecondary
Thevarietyandnumberof treatments attempted
organinvolvementor concurrentproblems thatmay
in individual patients.
ultimatelyaffecttheprognosis.Locallymphnodesshould
be carefullyexamined and biopsiestakenas necessary.
However,it is clear:thatprognosis is excellent for
mobile,non-fixed tumours;that local control may halt
TSH andT4
metastatic spread and that metastaticspreadmaynot
Measurement of serum total T4 concentration is nec-
ultimately affectoutcomewith certain treatmentop-
essaryin dogs with appropriate clinical signs of thyro-
tions. In addition,functional state appears irrelevant
toxicosis.Elevations in T4are generally moderate,
and clinical signsofhyperthyroidism can easilybe
comparedwiththe marked increaseoftenseen in
controlled usingcarbimazoleormethimazoleat5mg
hyperthyroid cats.
Measurement of the circulating endogenous TSH
orally tid initially and subsequently adjusted foreffect.
concentrationisnotuseful due to thepoorsensitivity of
Surgery
Surgical thyroidectomy in dogs is approached in the
nationwithcTSHmeasurementswillprovide themost
same wayas it is for cats(see Chapter 11).However,
useful information to support hypothyroidism.
mostcaninetumours areunilateral and,therefore,it is
Diagnosticimaging
not necessary topreserveparathyroid glands on the
Radiography of the cervical areamay help to assess
affected side
the sizeof themass and the extent of local invasion
Surgical thyroidectomy allowsgrossexamination
(Figure 19.6).Thoracic radiography should always
for local invasion and submission of tissue for histo-
beevaluatedforevidenceofpulmonaryspread even
in the absence of clinical signs. Given that most
ingadenomafromcarcinoma.Adenomasandrelatively
pulmonary metastasesinvolve theinterstitialratherthan
small,mobile carcinomas are easy to remove using
the alveolar or bronchial portions of the lung,clinical
this surgical technique (Figure 19.7).
signs arelesslikelyevenwithadvanced disease.
In dogs with no evidence of metastatic spread and
operable thyroid tumours,resection aloneresults in
quent developmentof metastases(Kleinetal.,1995).
However,in many casesextensive local tumourinva-
sion precludes completeremoval and aggressive sur-
gicalattempts significantlyincreasetheriskofextensive
haemorrhage anddamage tothelaryngeal nerves and
parathyroid glands.In such cases,surgery alone is
associatedwitha survivalrateatoneyearofonly25%
(Carver et al.,1995).Surgical debulking followed by
Cervical radiograph of a dog showing dorsal
chemotherapywith cisplatinordoxorubicin hasbeen
19.6
displacement of trachea by large calcified soft
recommended for such cases(Jeglum et al.,1983;
tissue swelling (arrowed).
Fineman et al.,1998).
198
Chapter19Unusual thyroiddisorders
GrahamPA,Refsal KR,Nachreiner RF and Provencher-Bolliger AL
(2000)Themeasurement of feline thyrotropin（TSH)using 
commercial canine immunoradiometric assay.Journal of
VeterinaryInternalMedicine14,342
JeglumKA and Whereat A (1983) Chemotherapy of canine thyroid
carcinoma. Compendium on Continuing Education for the
PracticingVeterinarian5698
Jones BR,Gruffydd-Jones TJ,Sparkes AH and Lucke VM（1992)
AbyssiniancatsVeterinaryRecora131145-148
KleinMKwrsEWiwSJCurtisRtrawCgiivi
Dickinson KL, Cooper MF and Baier M (1995) Treatment of
(1981-1989）.Journalof the American Veterinary Medical
Association206,1007-1009
LawrenceD,ThompsonJ,LaytonAW,Calderwood-MaysM,Elisn
G andMannella C(19g1) Hyperthyroidism associated witha
thyroidadenoma inadog.Journalof theAmericanVeterinary
MedicalAssociation199,81-83
LeavI,chilerAL,RijnberkA,ggMAandderKinderenPJ(1976)
Adenomas and carcinomas of thecanine and feline thyroid.
Smallmobile thyroid tumoursarerelativelyeasy
AmericanJournalofPathology83,61-93
19.7
Marks SL,KoblikPD,Hornof WJ and Feldman EC(1994）mTc
to remove surgically.
pertechnetate imaging of thyroid tumors in dogs:29 cases
(1980-1992）.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Radioactive iodine
Association204,756-760
Administrationofradioactive iodinemaybehelpful if
Miles KG, Latimer JC, Jergens AE and Krause GF (1990) A
iodineuptake ismaintained but generally high and
multiples dosesmustbeused,limiting its clinical value
Radiology31,79-82
(Adams et al.,1995;Feldman and Nelson,1996).
Mooney CT,LittleCJLandMacrae AW(1996)Effect of illnessnot
associatedwiththethyroidglandonserumtotalandfreethyroxine
Radiotherapy
concentrationsincats.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association208,2004-2008
Tworecent studiessuggest that definitive orpalliative
PetersonME（1989)Felinehypothyroidism.In:CurrentVeterinary
radiotherapymaybe associatedwiththebestsurvival
Therapy,10edn,ed.RWKirk,pp.1000-1001.WBSaunders,
Philadelphia
(Brearley et al.,1999;Theon et al.,2000).In these
PetersonMEandGambleDA(1988)Effectof non-thyroidalilnesson
studies,prior existence ofmetastatic spread did not
serum thyroxine concentrationincats:494cases.Journaiofthe
appear to alter survival and therewasadecreased
PetersonME,MelianCandNicholsR(2001）Measurement of serum
riskof metastaticspreadwith local control of tumour
concentrations of free thyroxine, total thyroxine, and total
progression.
triiodothyronineincatswithhyperthyroidismandcatswith
nonthyroidaldisease.JournalaftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Associafion218,529-536
Thyroxine therapy
PetersonME,RandolphJFandMooneyCT(1994)Endocrinediseases
Standard doseT4supplementation isnecessary fol-
In:TheCat:Diseases andClinicaManagement,2edn,d.G
lowing bilateral thyroidectomy.In addition,T4 therapy
RandJS,evineJ,estSJand ParkerW(1993)Spontaneousadult
isusuallyrecommended afterunilateral thyroidec
onsethypothyroidisminacat.JournalofVeterinaryInternal
tomy. Receptor affinity and concentration, and func-
Medicine7,272-276
Schumm-DraerPM,LangeF,CaparGipgatherKHrman
tional response to TSH,are similar in healthy and
G,FortmeyerHP,UsadelKHandHubnerK(1996)Spontaneous
carcinomatous thyroids(Verschueren et al.,1992).
Hashimoto-like thyroiditisincats.VerhandlungenderDeutsch
Gesellschaft fur Pathologie 80,297-301
SjollemaBEnHartgMTeVijlderJManDjJEandRjinbk
stimulating properties in thyroid neoplasia
invivo,
thyroxine therapy seems a wiseprecaution.
organification:datasuggestinglooselyanchoredthyroperoxidase.
Acta Endocrinologica125,435-441
Stegeman JR,Graham PA and Hauptmann JG (2003) Use of
recombinanthuman thyroid-stimulating hormone for thyrotropin-
References and further reading
stimulation testing of euthyroid cats.American Journal of
VeterinaryResearch64,149-152
AdamsWHWakeMAanilGBPtrsenMGandLndM
Stephan Iand Schutt-Mast i(1995) Kongenitale Hypothyreose mit
40,701-706
TanaseHKudoKHorikoshiHMizushimaH,kazakiTandOgata
Goitrous hypothyraidism and dwarfism inakitten.Journa/of the
(1991)Inheritedprimaryhypothyroidismwiththyratrophinresistance
AmericanAnimal Hospital Association20.753-758
inJapanesecats.Joumal ofEndocrinoiogy129.245-251
Brearley MJ,Hayes AM and Murphy S (1999) Hypofractionated
Theon AP,Marks SL,Feldman ES and Griffey S (2000) Prognostic
factors andpatterns of treatmentfailureindogs withunresectable
retrospectiveanalysisofsuvival.JoumalofSmallAnimalPractice
diferentiated thyroidcarcinomas treatedwithmegavoltage
40,206-210
irradiation.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
Brodey RS and Kelly DF(1968)Thyroid neoplasms in the dog.A
216,1775-1779
clinicapathologic studyofifty-sevencases.Cancer22,406-416
needle aspirationcytalogy in the diagnosisaf canine thyroid
medullarythyroid carcinoma and thyraid adenocarcinomaindogs:
carcinoma.CanadianVeterinaryJourna/21,186-188
aretrospectivestudyf38cases.eerinarySurger2415319
Tomsa K,Glaus TM,Kacl GM,Pospischil A,Reusch CE(2001)
Thyrotropin-releasinghormonestimulationtesttoassessthyroid
hyperthyrcidism.In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and
function in severely sick cats.JournalofVeterinary Intermal
Reproduction2ednp.66185.WBSaundersPhiladelphia
Medicine15,89-93
Fineman LS.Hamilton TA.de Gortari A and Bonney P (1998)
VerschurenCP,Rutteman GR,VosJH,VanDijkJEand deBruin
Cisplatinchemotherapyfortreatmentof thyroidcarcinoma in
TWA(1992) Thyrotrophin receptors innormal and neoplastic
dogs:13 cases.Journal of the American Anima!Hospital
(primary and metastatic)canine thyroid tissue.Journal of
Association34,109-112
Endocrinology132,461-468
199
Diagnosis and treatment
of insulinoma
Peter P. Kintzer
Introduction
before diagnosis is variable(usually 1-6months),and
most patients exhibit multiple signs that increase in
Insulinomas are tumoursthatarisefrom thebeta
severityand frequencyasthediseaseprogresses.The
cells of the pancreatic islets and that secrete
severityof a hypoglycaemic crisisisdependent on
excessive amounts of insulin,resulting in clinical
threefactors:
signs of hypoglycaemia.As the secretion of insulin is
usually episodic,so are the resulting clinical signs.
The glucose nadir
Insulinomasin dogs are typically malignantand
Therate of decrease in the blood glucose level
The duration of the hypoglycaemia.
benign on histopathological evaluationusuallybe-
have in an aggressive manner (Leifer,1986).Meta-
stasis to the liver,local lymph nodes andomentum
Seizures
Weakness
is common and is found in approximately 50% of
Paresis
Collapse
dogs at thetime of diagnosis.
Tremors
Lethargy
Dueto the small numberof reportedcasesincats,
Dullness
Ataxia
the expected behaviourof insulinoma in thisspecies
Behavicurchanges
Nervousness
isunclear.
Musclefasciculation
Exercise intolerance
Polyphagia
Tachycardia
Tachypnoea
Pupillary dilation
Clinical features
Polyneuropathy
Decerebrate posture
Coma
Signalment
Insulinomas arerareindogs.Theyaretypicallyseenin
20.1
Clinical signs of hypoglycaemia.
middle-aged to older dogs but have been reported in
dogs ranging from 3.5-15 years of age. There is no
apparent sex predilection.German Shepherd dogs,
Boxers,Standard Poodles,lrish Setters,collies and
Differential diagnosis of
Fox terriers have beenreported to be at increased risk
hypoglycaemia
of developing an insulinoma (Caywood et al.,1988;
Nelson and Salisbury,2000).
Causes of hypoglycaemia are listed inFigure20.2.
Insulinomas appear to be extremely rare in cats,
Evaluation of the signalment,history,physical exami
with only four cases ranging in age from 12-17 years
nationand routinelaboratory testingwillallow
havingbeenreported.Threeofthesecatswere Siamese
the clinician to excludemany of these disorders in a
(Hawks et al.,1992).
given patient.
Clinical signs
The primary differential diagnosis is a
Most animalswith insulinoma presentwithclinical
paraneoplastichypoglycaemia,secondary to
signs relatedto hyperinsulinism and resulting episodes
extrapancreaticneoplasia.
of hypoglycaemia. Clinical signs result from
Hepatocellularcarcinoma,hepatoma,
neuroglycopenia or the increased adrenergic tone in-
leiomyosarcoma,leiomyoma,
duced by hypoglycaemia.
haemangiosarcoma, melanoma and leukaemia
Seizures are the most common presenting com
havebeenimplicated inextrapancreatic
plaint.Thebrain is dependent on a steady supply of
hypoglycaemia in dogs (Leifer, 1986).
glucose asit haslimited energyreservesandlimited
Mechanismsofextrapancreatictumour
abilitytoutilize otherfuels.Otherreported clinical signs
hypoglycaemia include:
of hypoglycaemia are listed in Figure 20.1.
Secretion of an insulin-like substance
Excess glucose utilization by thetumour
related to fasting,exercise or,counterintuitively，
Inhibition of hepatic glycogenolysis and
feeding in some cases.The duration of clinical signs
gluconeogenesis.
200
Chapter2oDiagnosis and treatment of insulinoma
Anelevatedinsulinconcentrationina
Insulinoma
hypoglycaemicpatient is consistent with
Extrapancreatic neoplasia
insulinoma.
Sepsis
If the insulin concentrationiswithin the mid to
Neonatal hypoglycaemia
high end of thereference range,insulinoma is
Toy-breed hypoglycaemia
still possible asinsulincancentrationshouldbe
Hunting dog hypoglycaemia
low toundetectableonceblood glucose
Starvation
concentrationsfallbelow 2mmol/l.
Hepaticdiseaseportosystmicshunthpatecrosishpati
Serum insulin concentrations in thelowend of
fibrosis; glycogen storage diseases
the referencerange are equivocal and
Hypoadrenocorticism (primary and secondary)
considered non-diagnostic.
Hypopituitarism
Aninsulinconcentrationbelow thereference
Uraemia
range inahypoglycaemicanimal isthenormal
Cardiac disease
physiological response and is therefore not
Severe polycythaemia
consistent with the diagnosis of insulinoma.
Salicylate ingestion
Propranolol ingestion
Incases where equivocal results are found (i.e.
Oral hypoglycamic dug ingestion
hypoglycaemia with serum insulin concentrations in the
Excgenous insulin excess
lowend of thereferencerange),additional simultaneous
insulin and glucose determinationsmay be necessary.
Demonstration of a lowcirculatingfructosamine con-
20.2
Causes cf hypog ycaemia.
centration isuseful indiagnosing chronichypoglycae-
miawhenbloodglucoseconcentrationsarewithin the
reference range (Mellanby and Herrtage,2002).Com-
Such extrapancreatic tumours are usually large
plete blood counts,serum biochemistry,urinalysis and
malignant lesions readily demonstrable on diagnostic
surveyradiographs aretypicallyunremarkable.
imaging studies.
Ultrasonographymaybeabletodetectapancreatic
massorevidenceof metastasis,thoughinmanycases
the lesion is too small to image.The sensitivity of this
Diagnosis
modality ishighly dependenton theresolution of the
equipmentand theexperienceofthe ultrasonographer.
The diagnosis of insulinoma ismade when a patient
Other imaging modalities such as computed tomo-
with hypoglycaemia (glucose <3.5 nmoll) has a high
serum insulin concentration.
maybehelpful but are notcommonlyutilized.
Simultaneous serum glucose and insulin
concentrationsareevaluatedinanimals
Treatment
suspected of having an insulinoma.
Use of the insulin:glucose and amended
Emergency treatment of symptomatic
insulin:glucoseratios asdiagnostic tests for
hypoglycaemia
insulinoma iscontroversial.Theyprobably
providenomoreinformationthanevaluationof
Symptomatichypoglycaemia istreatedwith theintra-
insulin and glucosemeasured simultaneously
venous injectionaf dextroseas abolus(1 ml/kg50%
and are nolongerrecommended.
dextrose injection slowlyover5-10minutes)and sub-
sequently glucose(2.5%or5%dextrose solution) as
If hypoglycaemia is not present on initial presenta-
tion,the animal is fasted under observation(should
patient'scondition.The goalistoameliorate theclinical
signs of hypoglycaemia occur),and blood glucose
signsof hypoglycaemia,butnotnecessarilytoreturn
levelsdetermined every 1-2hoursuntil hypoglycae
the blood glucose concentration tonormal.
mia is documented.Point-of-care-glucose analysers
Overzealous administrationofintravenous dex-
Bruyette,1996;Nelson and Salisbury.2000).Such
lationofinsulinreleasefromthetumourandworsening
analysersshould be calibrated against standard labo-
of the hypoglycaemia.Suchrebound hypoglycaemia
ratoryresults,assomemachines tend to givefalsely
mayresult inaviciouscyclethatisdifficult tobreakand
low values, particularly in the hypoglycaemic range.
potentially fatal.
Although12 hoursof fasting isusually sufficient to
Frequent feeding of small meals should be insti-
demonstrate hypoglycaemiasomepatientsrequire
tuted as soon asthe animal is stable.
prolonged fasting (>24 hours).Once hypoglycaemia is
Persistence ofseizuresfollowingresolutionof hypo-
documented,ablood sample for determination of si-
glycaemia maybe an indication of an underlying neu-
multaneous insulin and glucose concentrations is sub-
rological problem such as cerebral oedema.Mannitol
mitted to the diagnosticlaboratory.Serumsamplesfor
and/orarapid-actingglucocorticoidpreparationmay
determination of insulin levelsmust be handled appro-
beindicated and diazepamorotheranticonvulsants
priately (see Chapter 1).
may be necessary to control the seizures.Although
OE
201
Chapter 20  Diagnosis and treatment of insulinoma
uncommon, cerebral lesions (laminar and pseudo-
Tumours in the body of the pancreas or proximal
laminar necrosis) can cause continued intermittent
right lobe should be removed by local excision, along
acquired seizure activity as a result of prolonged or
with 1-2 cm of surrounding normal pancreas by the
recurrent episodes of hypoglycaemia. Such cases may
following technique:
jao jo jeigouaud ym ideiau wet-uol paau
anticonvulsant medications.
1.
 Separate the pancreatic tissue by blunt
dissection.
Surgery for insulinoma
Take care to avoid trauma to the
The initiai treatment of choice for dogs and cats with
pancreaticoduodenal vessels, the main and
insulinoma is surgery. Symptomatic hypoglycaemia
accessory pancreatic ducts and the common
must be adequately controlled priorto anaesthesia and
bile duct.
surgery. This may involve: frequent feedings; dex-
3.
Attend to haemostasis as needed.
trose-containing intravenous fluids; prednisolone/pred-
4.
 Thoroughly lavage, and close the abdomen 
routinely.
later) as dictated by the patient's response.
Laparotomy provides histalogicai confirmation of
 Special considerations
the diagnosis and allows resection of the neoplastic
Cytoreduction of any visible metastatic lesions should
tissue and staging of the disease. A ventral midline
-jodky jabuol u lnsei Aew syi se paduae eg
approach is used. A balanced intravenous electrolyte
caemia-free survival periods or make subsequent
solution containing dextrose is administered
 medical management easier. Even if gross metastatic
dodde pue la aui ja Asdoig jupielou s aseas
 maintain blood glucose concentrations around 2.5
ate lymph nodes must be done, as occult metastatic
mmol/l. Appropriate preoperative and intraoperative
disease is common.
fluid therapy is important to maintain systemic blood
Close intraoperative monitoring of the serum glu-
pressure and splanchnic perfusion and to decrease the
 cose concentration is imperative as manipulation of
incidence of postoperative pancreatitis.
the pancreas during surgery can stimulate insulin
The pancreas should be carefully inspected both
release from the tumour and resultin hypoglycaemia
visually and by palpation. Insulinomas are typically
- signs of which may not be evident in an anaesthe-
firmer than the normal parenchyma and may be small
 tized patient. The intravenous administration of dex-
and obscured by the normal pancreatic tissue, thus
trose is adjusted as needed based on serial blood
difficult to visualize. Insulinomas occur with about equal
 glucose determinatians.
frequency in the right and leff lobes of the pancreas. In 
In the immediate postoperative period, blood glu-
addition, multiple nodules are seen in about 15% of
 cose concentrations are monitored every hour for the
dogs. Diffuse infiltration by neoplastic beta cells without 
first 4-6 hours and then every 24 hours, with the
identifiable nodules has also been reported.
administration of dextrose boluses or dextrose con-
Intraoperative ultrasonography may be useful in identi-
taining solutions being adjusted accordingly. Some
fying nodules that cannot be seen or palpated.
dogs may be normoglycaemic or hyperglycaemic after
If no tumour can be identified definitively, some 
surgery and do not require dextrose-containing fluids.
authorities recommend removing 50% or more of the
pancreas inthe hope of excising thetumour (Matthiesen
Compllcatlons
and Mullen, 1990). Any identifiable pancreatic nodules
 Potential complications include hyperglycaemia, per-
sistent hypoglycaemia and pancreatitis.
ble, as this has been reported to result in longer survival
In some dogs, transient hyperglycaemia develops
times than simple excision of the tumour.
after surgical removal of the islet cell tumour. In most
cases the diabetic state resolves in a few days, al-
Technique
though on rare occasions, persistent hyperglycaemia
 Surgical technique is similar in both the dog and cat.
can result in dogs requiring exogenous insulin therapy.
The pancreas must be handled gently during paipa-
 Such cases must be closely monitored by in-home
tion and surgery to minimize the incidence of post-
urine glucose determinations and periodic serial blood
operative pancreatitis. Tumours in the left lobe or
glucose curves, since in almost all cases the diabetic
distal right lobe should be removed by partial pan-
state will resolve eventually and the patient will need to
createctomy as follows:
be evaluated for recurrence of the insulinoma. Tran-
sient hyperglycaemia does occur in cats, but there
1. Resect the portion of the lobe containing the
have been few reported cases.
tumour 1-2 cm proximal to the insulinoma.
Persistence of hypoglycaemia postoperatively or
 2. Divide the mesentery around the lobe. Ligate and 
transect the vessels.
should prompt consideration of symptomatic medical
 3. After incising through the surface, bluntly dissect
management or the use of chemotherapy. In patients 
the pancreafic tissue from both sides to isolate
who have had a significant hypoglycaemia-free period
the pancreatic duct. Ligate the duct with non-
absorbable suture and transect.
months of normoglycaemia unless gross metastatic
4.
 Thoroughly lavage, and close the abdomen 
disease is present. In these cases medical manage-
routinely.
 ment, as discussed below, is indicated.
202
Chapter 20
Diagnosis and treatment of insulinoma
Pancreatitisisapotential complication inanimals
Theresponsiveness of insulinomas to octreotideis
undergoingsurgeryforinsulinoma,andcanbesevere
dependenton thepresence ofsomatostatinreceptors
or even life-threatening.Appropriate preoperative,
on thecellmembranesof thetumourcells,hencenotall
intraoperativeandpostoperative intravenousfluid
patients will respond to this therapy.In addition, some
administration is important in decreasing the riskof
patientsbecomerefractorytothemedication.Octreotide
this complication.
isexpensivebut appears tobe well tolerated.
Postoperative care
Miscellaneous medications
Followingsurgery,food andwatershould bewitheld
Othermedications,such aspropranolol and diphenyl-
for 48 hours.orlonger if signs of pancreatitis are
hydantoin,have been used in human patients with
evident.Thereafter,water and then a bland diet is
insulinoma anddiscussedasadjunctivetherapyfor
offered.If there arenoproblems,normal diet can be
betacell tumoursindogs.These agentshave notbeen
resumedwithin a few days.
sufficientlyevaluatedindogswithinsulinomaforthera-
peuticrecommendations tobegiven.
Long-term medical management of
Chemotherapyofinsulinoma
hypoglycaemia
Streptozotocin
Frequent feedings
Streptozotocin isa nitrosourea alkylating agent that is
In some cases ofinsulinoma,frequent feedingsmay
control clinical hypoglycaemia. Diets high in protein,
cytotoxictopancreaticbetacellsandhasbeenusedto
treathumanswithnon-resectableor metastatic
fats and complex carbohydratesarerecommended.
insulinomas.Ininitialreportsintwo dogs,bolusinjec
These are the type of dietstypicallyrecommended as
tionofstreptozotocincausedacutefatalrenalfailure
adjunctive management of diabetesmellitus.In ani-
(Nelson,1995).However,arecent study (Moore etal.,
mals with insulinoma,they are useful in decreasing
2002)hasshown thatmultipledosesof streptozotocin
postprandial hyperglycaemia,potentiallyresultingna
marked insulin surge.
aggressive saline diuresis protocol is used priorto and
following theinfusionof the chemotherapeutic agent
Prednisolone/prednisone
(Figure 20.3).
Prednisolone or prednisone (0.2-0.5 mg/kg orally bid)
can be given if dietary management alone is not
effective.Higherdosescanbeadministered if neces-
Pretreatment diuresis
sary,but the development of iatrogenichyperadreno-
Administer0.9%salineatarateof 18.3mkghiv.fr3hours
corticism is ultimately dose limiting.
Streptozotocin infusion
Diazoxide
Administerstreptozotocin500mg/m²)dilted inthe appropriatevolume
The nandiureticbenzothiadiazide antihypertensive
of 0.9% salineatarateof18.3mlkg/hi.v.over thenext2hours
agent diazoxide is often successfulin controlling hypo-
Antiemetic treatment
glycaemiainpatientsnotresponding to diet and
judiciousglucocorticoid administration.Diazoxide in-
Give butorphancl at a dose of 0.4mg/kg i.m. during or after the
hibitspancreaticbetacellinsulinsecretion,enhances
streptozotocin infusion
hepatic glycogenolysis andgluconeogenesis,and in
Post-treatment diuresis
hibits glucose uptake by peripheral tissues(Meleo and
Administer 0.9% saline at a rate of 18.3ml/kg/h i.v.for 2 hours
Caplan,2000) The initial dosage is 10 mg/kg/day
orally,which canbe increased as needed to control
Prctocol for use of streptozotocin as
hypoglycaemia.Therecommendedmaximum dose is
20.3
chemctherapeutic treatmenit ofinsulinomaindogs.
60 mg/kg/day.
Common adverse effects arevomiting and ano-
Thecurrent recommended doseis500mg/m²per
rexia.Other potential adverse effects include:bone
treatment.Five treatmentsaregivenat 3-week inter-
marrow suppression;sodium retention;diarrhoea;
vals,unless side-effects dictate otherwise,progres-
tachycardia;aplastic anaemia;hyperglycaemia;and
sive disease is detected orhyperglycaemia occurs.lf
cataracts.Theothermajordrawbacksof diazoxideare
metastaticdiseaseispresent,imaging studiesshould
itslimited availability andconsiderableexpense.
also be used to monitor treatment.Butorphanol is
administeredduring thestreptozotocin infusionforits
Somatostatin analogues
antiemetic effects(see Figure 20.3).
The long-acting somatostatinanalogue octreotide has
The incidence ofnephrotoxicity in this study
been successfully used aspalliative therapytocontrol
waslowandacuterenal failure was notreported
(Moore et al.,2002).Other reported adverse effects
tory to usual symptomatic medical therapy.
included bone marrow suppression (which was
Somatostatin inhibits therelease of insulin from pan-
generally mild),vomiting (which was occasionally
creaticbeta cells.Theinitial dosageis 10-20μg/kg s.c.
severe),anorexia,diarrhoea,elevated alanine amino-
every 8-12 hours (Nelson, 1995). The dosage is in-
transferase concentrations,transient hypoglycaemia
creased as needed tocontrol hypoglycaemia.
andinsulin-dependentdiabetesmelitus.Streptozotocin
203
Chapter 2oDiagnosis and treatment of insulinoma
is efficacious in some dogs with insulinoma and its
References and further reading
use should be considered in dogs with non-resectable
Caywood DD, Klausner JS, O'Leary TP and Withrow SJ (1988)
Pancreaticinsulin secretingneoplasms:Clinicaldiagnosticand
 glycaemic), dogs remaining hypoglycaemic after sur-
prognostic teatures in73 dogs, Journal af the American Animal
 gery (indicating residual disease) and dogs in which
HospitalAssociation24,577-586
Hawks D. Peterson ME, Hawkins KL and Rosabury WS (1992)
hypoglycaemia recurs.
Insulin-secreting pancrealic(islet cell carcinomaina cat. Journal
ofVeterinaryInternalMedicine6,193-199
Leifer CE (19B6)Hypoglycemia. In: Curreni Veterinary Therapy iX,
Doxorubicin
ed. RW Kirk, pp. 982-987. W8 Saunders, Philadelghia
The use of doxorubicin (commonly used in veterinary
 Matthiesan DT and Mullen HS (1990) Problems and complications
uwnu mei e ui paodau uaag seu (rboaouo
associated with endocrinc surgery in the dog and cat. Problams
patients with insulinoma, but its efficacy in veterinary
in Veterinary Medicine, 2, 627-667
patients with insulinoma is not known. Use of doxo-
cat, and ferret. In: Kirk's Currant Vaterinary Therapy Xlf, ed. JD
 rubicin could be contemplated in certain cases and its
Bonagura,pp.357-361.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
 activity against canine and feline insulinoma needs
further investigation.
Practice 43, 506-508
MooreAS,lsnRW.HenryCJ,assickKM,KristaO,OgilvieGK
Other potential chemotheraples
cell tumours In dogs:17cases (1989-1999). Journa/ of the
American Veterinary Medica/ Ass0ciation 221, 881-81B
 Other reported chemotherapeutic protocols used for 
NelsonRW(195)Insulin-secreting isletcellneoplasia.In:Textbook
 non-resectable and metastatic insulinomas in humans
OfVeterinaryntaedicieondElngrand
Feldman, pp.1501-1509.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
include L-asparaginase and combinations
of
streptozotocin withdoxorubicin and streptozotocin with
In:Saunders Manual of Smail Animal Practice,2edn,ed.SJ
fluorouracil (fluorouracilcannotbeused in cats). Use of
Birghard and RG Sherding. pp. 288-294. WB Saunders,
 these agents in veterinary patients with insulinoma
Philadelphia
Steiner JM and Bruyetle DS (1996)Canine insulinoma.Compendium
warrants further evaluation.
OnContinuingEducationforthaPracticingVeterinarian8,1325
204
Feline hyperadrenocorticism
Mark E. Peterson
Introduction
female predilection has been suggested (Duesberg
and Peterson,1997),most case series of cats with
In cats,as in other species such as the dog,hyper-
hyperadrenocorticism haveshownnosexpredilection
adrenocorticism(Cushing's syndrome) is the constel-
lation of clinical signs resulting from chronic
Findings
Percentage
glucocorticoidexcess (Peterson etal.,1994;Duesberg
of cases
andPeterson,1997).Naturallyoccurring hyperadreno-
corticism is caused by primary hyperfunction of either
Clinical signs
the pituitary or adrenal gland,whereas iatrogenic
Polyuria and polydipsia
90
hyperadrenocorticism iscausedbyadministration of
Pot bellied appearance
85
syntheticglucocorticoids.Of the two causes of the
75
naturally occurring disease,pituitary-dependent
Increased appetite
hyperadrenocorticism results from excessive secre-
Unkempt, seborrhoeic hair coat
70
tion of adrenocorticotropic hormone(ACTH)-from an
Muscle wasting
adenoma arising in thepars distalisorpars intermedia
65
of thepituitary gland-which inducesbilateral adreno-
Biaterallysymmetricalhairthining rlpcia
60
cortical hyperplasia (Peterson et al.,1994;Duesberg
and Peterson,1997;Meij et al.,2001).Unilateral ad
Fragile,taring sin
55
enomaorcarcinomaof theadrenalcortexsecretes
Lethargy
50
excessivecortisolautonomously,resultinginsuppres-
Insulin resistance (high dailyinsulin dose)
50
sionofpituitaryACTHsecretion and atrophyofthe
contralateral adrenal cortex.
Obesityweight gain
45
Whilenaturallyoccurringhyperadrenocorticism is
Infection or sepsis
40
rareincats(with fewer than75reported cases),both
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and corti-
Hepatomegaly
35
sol-secreting adrenal tumours arewell recognized
Calcinosis cutis
0
feline disorders(Peterson et al.,1994;Duesberg and
Peterson,1997;Meij et al.,2001).Approximately
Complete blood count
75-80%ofcatswithhyperadrenocorticismhave the
Lymphopenia
65
pituitary-dependentform of thedisorder;theremaining
Eosinopenia
55
20-25%haveunilateral adrenal tumours.Of thecats
withfunctionaladrenocortical tumours,approximately
Matureleucocytosis
45
two-thirds haveunilateral adenoma:theremainder
Monocytosis
25
have adrenal carcinoma.Finally,althoughcatstend to
bemoreresistanttotheeffectsofexogenousglucocor-
Serum biochemical analysis
ticoid excess than dogs,iatrogenic hyperadrenocorti-
Hyperglycaemia
90
cism is a wellrecognized disorder incats.
Hypercholesterolaemia
50
Progesterone-secretingadrenal tumourshavealso
been recognized in cats,albeit rarely (Boord and
High alanine aminotransferase activity
45
Griffin,1999;Rossmeisletal.,2000).Clinicalsigns are
High alkaline phosphatase activity
20
similar to those incatswith cortisol-secreting tumours
but,asin the dog,measurement of cortisol precursors
Urinalysis
is necessary for diagnosis(see Chapter 15).
Glycosuria
85
Urine specific gravity<1.015
10
Clinical features
Ketonuria
10
Hyperadrenocorticism is a disease of middle-aged to
Clinical signs and abnormal laboratory findings
oldercats,withamedianageof10years.Whileaslight
21.1
incatswithhyperadrenocorlicism.
205
Chapter21 Felinehyperadrenocorticism
(Duesberg etal.,1995;Goossens etal,1995;Watson
skintendstotearwithroutine handling orwhilst playing
and Hertage,1998).Thereis noreported breed pred-
with other cats,leaving large denuded areas(Figure
lection incatsthat develophyperadrenocorticism.
21.2).Although many of the other cutaneousfeatures
Themostcommon clinical signs(Figure21.1)asso-
ofhyperadrenocorticism incats are similarto those
ciatedwith hyperadrenocorticisminclude:
reported in dogs (e.g.unkempt hair coat,bilaterally
symmetrical hairloss,atrophicthin skinandbruisingof
Polyuria
the skin) skin fragility appears to be a unique but
Polydipsia
seriousmanifestationofthediseaseincats(see Figure
Polyphagia
21.1).
A pendulous abdomen.
Catswith advanced or long-termuntreated hyper-
adrenocorticism alsoshowother signstypical of the
disease in dogs, such as bilaterally symmetrical hair
loss,weight gain andmuscle atrophy (Peterson etal,
1994;Goossens et al.,1995;Duesberg and Peterson,
1997;Watson and Herrtage,1998).
Differences in clinicalpresentation
betweencats and dogs
Despite the apparent similarity between cats and dogs
with hyperadrenocorticism,therearemajordifferences
in clinical presentation.
21.2
Cat with hyperadrenocorticism caused by a
unilateral adrenal adenoma.Note the unkcmpt
Polyuria andpolydipsia
hair coat,chronic eye infection and opennon-healing
Polyuria andpolydipsiaare usually the earliest signsof
wcundontheventral abdomen.The non-healing wcund is
hyperadrenocorticismin dogsanddevelopinover80%
secondary to severe thinning of the skin.
of cases.Indogs,itappearsthat glucocorticoidsinhibit
the secretion or action ofvasopressin(antidiuretic
hormone(ADH))resulting inpolyuria with secondary
Diagnosis
polydipsia.Although hyperglycaemic osmoticdiuresis
might also contribute to these signs,most dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism have a normal or only mildly
Routine laboratory tests
increasedbloodglucose concentrationandare not
Theresultsofroutine laboratorytestsarevariable and
overtly diabetic.
may not be specific for the disease(Peterson et al.,
In contrast todogswith hyperadrenocorticism the
1994;Duesberg and Peterson,1997;Watson and
onsetofpolyuria andpolydipsiaboth incatstreated
Herrtage,1998;Hoenig,2002).The classic haem-
with large doses of glucocorticoids,and in cats that
atological changes of mature leucocytosis,eosino-
develop naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism is
penia,lymphopeniaandmonocytosis(seeFigure21.1)
often delayed; polyuria usually coincides with the de-
may bereported,but thesefindings areinconsistent.
velopmentofmoderatetoseverehyperglycaemia and
Byfarthemoststrikingserumbiochemicalabnormality
glucosuria withsubsequent osmoticdiuresis(Peterson
reportedisseverehyperglycaemiaandglycosuria(see
etal.,1994;Duesberg andPeterson,1997;Meijetal.,
Figure 21.1).Hypercholesterolaemia developsin about
2001;Hoenig,2002).Therefore,these signs are not
half of affectedcats and isprobablycaused,at least in
present in most cats during the less advanced stages
part,bya poorlycontrolled diabeticstate.High activity
afhyperadrenocorticism whenglucosetoleranceis still
of serum alanine aminotransferase(ALT)also deve-
normal (i.e.before development of diabetes mellitus).
lops in about half of affected cats,probably related to
Althoughrare in catswith hyperadrenocorticism,it is
the hepatic lipidosis associatedwith diabetes.Indogs
important torealize that polyuria andpolydipsia can
withhyperadrenocorticism,steroidinductionofape
alsodevelopeitherwithoutconcurrent,orprior to the
cific hepatic isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
progression of,overt diabetes mellitus(Watson and
causes increases in the serum activity of this enzyme
Herrtage,1998).
in 85-90%of cases;whereas only20%of catswith
hyperadrenocorticism havehigh ALPactivity(see Fig-
Skin fragility
ure 21.1). The mild increase in serum ALP activity
Oneof the major cutaneousmanifestations of hyper-
found insomecatsprobablyresults from thepoorly
adrenocorticism in cats,extreme fragility of the skin,
regulateddiabeticstateratherthanfromadirecteffect
developsonlyrarely,ifatallindogwiththedisorder
ofglucocorticoid excess,since itmay normalize with
(Daley et al.,1993;Peterson et al.,1994;Duesberg
insulin treatment alone,despite progression of the
and Peterson,1997;Watson and Herrtage,1998;Meij
hyperadrenocorticism.
etal.,2001).Fragilityoftheskin,somewhatresembling
Inspiteofclinicalpolyuria and polydipsia,catswith
that seen in cats with cutaneous asthenia (Ehlers-
hyperadrenocorticism usuallymaintainurine specific
Danlos syndrome),develops in approximatelyhalf of
gravity of >1.020. These cats rarely exhibit the dilute
allcats with hyperadrenocorticism.Inaffected catsthe
urine concentrations commonlyseen in dogs with
206
Chapter21 Feline hyperadrenocorticism
hyperadrenocorticism.Again,thisdifference inurine
concentrationprobablyreflectsthefact that polyuria in
(Petersonetal.,1994).Incats,intravenous administra-
most catsis theresult of hyperglycaemia and glycos-
tion of ACTH induces greater and more prolonged
uria,rather thanbeing a directinhibitory effect on
adrenocorticalstimulationthantheintramuscularroute
secretion or actionof ADH asin dogs.
and is thereforepreferred(Peterson and Kemppainen,
1992).Lower doses of syntheticACTH(1.25and 12.5
Pituitary-adrenal functiontests
μgper cat)produce comparable cortisol stimulation
Endocrinological evaluation of cats suspected of
(Peterson and Kemppainen,1993).However,more
prolongedstimulationis attained after administration of
confirm the diagnosis and differentiating tests to
higher doses and inobese cats doses as high as 250
μghavebeenrecommended,particularlyifsampling is
tumours.
delayed for anyreason(Schoeman et al.,2000).
Regardless of the basal cortisol value obtained,
Screening testsforhyperadrenocorticism
diagnosis of naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism
dependsondemonstration of a post-ACTH cortisol
ACTH response test:Although use of the ACTH
concentration that ishigher than thereferencerange.
responsetestcanbeavaluablescreening testincats
In contrast,catswith iatrogenichyperadrenocorticism
40-50%of cats with naturally occurring hyperadreno-
wouldbeexpected tohavea subnormalresponse to
corticismhave testresultswithin thereferencerange.
exogenous ACTH administration.
Therefore,the ACTHresponse testisnotassensitive
Studieshavereported thatavarietyofchronic
fordetectingnaturallyoccurringhyperadrenocorticism
illnesses(notassociatedwithhyperadrenocorticism)
in cats asit is in dogs,where the test sensitivity is
canalso influenceACTH-stimulated cortisol secretion
approximately 85%. However, if iatrogenic hyper-
in cats (Zerbe et al.,1987).It is likely that the‘stress
adrenocorticismissuspected,the ACTHresponsetest
associated with chronic illnessresults insome degree
remains the screening testofchoice todocument
of bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia in sick cats,
secondary adrenocortical suppression (Peterson et
which could account for an exaggeratedcortisol re-
al.,1994;Duesbergand Peterson,1997;Hoenig,2002).
sponse toACTH.Therefore,the diagnosis of hyper-
adrenocorticismshould bebased on the cat'shistory,
ure 21.3)is tocollectbloodfor determination of serum
clinical signs,androutinelaboratory findings andnot
(orplasma)cortisol concentration before,and at 60to
solelyon theresultsofbasalorACTH-stimulated
90 minutes after, administration of 125 μg synthetic
serum cortisol concentrations.
Test
Test protocol
Screening tests
ACTH response test
Callectbaseline blood sampleforserum cortisolmeasurement
Administer syntheticACTH(tetracosactideat125μg intravenousy)
Urine cortisal:creatinine ratio
Owner cllects urine specimen from cat at home
Owner drops offurine sample toveterinary clinic
Submit urine to laboratory
Low-dose dexamethasone
Collect baseline blood sample for serum cortisolmeasurement
suppression test
Administer dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg, intravenously)
Collectpost-dexamethasone sampleforcortisoldetermination34and8hourslater
Combined dexamethasone
 Collect baselinbod samle for serum corisol detemination
 suppresson'ACTH response test
Administer dexamethasone at the dosage of 0.1 mgkg, intravenously
Collect blood forpost-dexamethasonecortisol concentration4hours later
Immediatelyafercollecting the4hoursampleadministersyntheticACTH(ttracosactideat0.125mg
intravenously)
Collect post-ACTH sample for cortisol determination at 5 hours（1 hour afterACTH administration）
Discrimination tests
High-dose dexamethasone
Collectbaselinebloodsampleforserumcortisolmeasurement
suppression test
Collect post-dexamethasonesample forcorisol determination3-4 and8hours later
Plasma endogenous ACTH
Collectplasmainchilled tubewithproteaseinhibitoraddedifavallable
concentration
Abdominal ultrasonography
Need equipment and skilledoperator to perform procedure
21.3
Diagnostic tests used in cats with suspected hyperadrenocorticism.
207
Chapter 21  Feline hyperadrenocorticism
Urine cortisol:creatinine ratio: The urine cortisol:
at a dose of 125 μg i.v. and a post-ACTH sample for
creatinine ratio appears to be a sensitive screening test
cortisol determination collected at 5 hours (1 hour after
that can be used to help diagnose hyperadrenocorti-
ACTH administration).
cism in cats (Goosens et al., 1995). However, as with
 Almost all cats with hyperadrenocorticism fail to
the ACTH response test, the finding of a high (false-
show serum cortisol suppression after dexametha-
positive) urine cortisol:creatinine ratio is common in
 sone administration, and about half have a clearly
cats with moderate to severe non-adrenal illness
exaggerated response to ACTH administration. By
(Henry et al., 1996). Therefore, ifthe results of the urine
contrast, healthy cats and almost all diabetic cats
cortisol:creatinine ratio are suggestive of hyperadreno-
without hyperadrenocorticism exhibit marked serum
corticism, the diagnosis should be confirmed with an-
cortisol suppression after dexamethasone and have a
other screening test.
 normal cortisol response after ACTH administration
To avoid the stress of travel or hospitalization
(Peterson et al., 1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997;
(which could falsely increasethe urine cortisol:creatinine
Hoenig, 2002).
ratio), it is best to have the owner collect the urine
specimen from the cat at home and bring the sample to
Tests to determine cause of hyperadrenocorticism
the veterinary clinic for submission to the laboratory
(see Figure 21.3). However, it can be difficuit for many
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test: In
owners to collect a urine sample from their cat; in one
cats with confirmed hyperadrenocorticism, a high-dose
study, urine collection was aided by replacing the cat
dexamethasone suppression test can be performed to
litter with non-absorbent aquarium gravel (Goossens
help differentiate pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
et al., 1995).
corticism from cortisol-secreting adrenocortical tumour.
To perform this test in cats, blood is collected for serum
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test: The
(or plasma) cortisol determination before, and 3-4 and
low-dose (screening) dexamethasone suppression test
8 hours after, the administration of dexamethasone at
is performed differently in cats and dogs. For cats, a
1.0 mg/kg i.v. (see Figure 21.3).
ten-fold higher dose of dexamethasone is required
Following administration of high-dose dexa-
(Peterson et al., 1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997:
-jeuen s! uoissaiddns josoo erenbape euoseyiew
Hoenig, 2002). The protocol for the test in cats is to
ally defined as a serum cortisol cancentration of belaw
collect blood samples for serum (or plasma) cortisol
 approximately 40 nmoll; or a cortisol concentration
determination before, and 3-4 and 8 hours affer,
<50% of the baseline value at 3-4 or 8 hours. In cats
administration of dexamethasone at 0.1 mg/kg i.v. (see
 with functional adrenocortical neoplasia, high-dose
Figure 21.3).
dexamethasone neveradequately suppresses cortisol
The low-dose (screening) dexamethasone will con-
concentration, whereas it suppresses serum cortisol
concentration in approximately 50% of cats with
below approximately 40 nmol/l at 3-4 and 8 hours in
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (Peterson
6t al., 1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997). This is
 Inadequate serum cortisol suppression at either 3-4
unlike the situation in dogs with pituitary-dependent 
or 8 hours - diagnostic for hyperadrenocorticism :
hyperadrenocorticism, where 85% will show adequate
is found in all cats with cortisol-secreting adrenal
cortisol suppression after administration of this high
dose of dexamethasone. Therefore, the finding of
adrenocorticism will also fail to suppress serum cortisol
inadequate cortisol suppression in a cat confirms
concentration at 3-4 hours, and only a few will show
 hyperadrenocorticism, but cannot reliably determine
cortisol suppression at 8 hours (Peterson et al., 1994;
the cause ofthe disorder. In these cases, either plasma
Duesberg and Peterson, 1997; Hoenig, 2002). Again,
ACTH should be measured or abdominal ultrasono-
this lack of normal serum cortisol suppression is diag-
 graphy performed to determine the cause of the hyper-
nostic for hyperadrenocorticism.
 adrenocorticism.
Combined ACTH response/dexamethasone sup-
Endogenous ACTH determinaffons: The basal
pression test: The ACTH response test and the low-
endogenous ACTH concentration appears to be a
dose (screening) dexamethasone suppression test
valuable test for differentiating the origin of hyper-
(0.1 mg/kg) are both useful screening tests for hyper-
adrenocorticism in cats with clinical signs and
 adrenocorticism in cats (Peterson etal., 1994; Duesherg 
screening test results diagnostic for the disease
and Peterson, 1997). It is possible to combine the two
(Peterson et al., 1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997).
screening tests and perform them in a single day as
The endogenous ACTH concentration is high to high-
only three blood samples need to be collected over a
5-hour period (see Figure 21.3).
 corticism, whereas the concentration in cats with
To perform the combined test. a baseline blood
functional adrenocortical tumours is low to
sample for serum cartisol determination is collected
undetectable.
and dexamethasone administered at a dose of 0.1
It is important to remember that blood samples for
 mg/kg i.v., with collection of a further blood sample for
determination of endogenous ACTH concentration need
 cortisol measurement 4 hours later. Immediately after
to be handled carefully, since ACTH can degrade
the 4-hour blood sample has been taken, synthetic
rapidly in plasma after collection, Special handing
ACTH (tetracosactide or cosyntropin) is administered
 requirements (see Figure 21.3) include the addition of
208
Chapter 21Feline hyperadrenocorticism
a protease inhibitor (e.g. aprotinin) when blood is
Medical therapy
coliected, rapid separation of plasma and proper stor-
age temperatures until the assay is performed. Mis-
Mitotane
handling of samples may result in a falsely low value
 Mitotane is an adrenocorticai cytolytic agent that has
that could emoneously suggest an adrenal tumour
been used extensively for the treatment of hyper-
(see Chapter 1).
 adrenocorticism in dogs. A number of different protocols
for mitotane treatment of cats with hyperadrenocarti-
Diagnostic fmaging: Abdominal radiography and
cism have been used with imited short-term success;
abdominal ultrasonography are commonly used to
however, long-term results have been generally dis-
 help cifferentiate pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
couraging (Peterson et al, 1994; Duesberg and
 corticism and cortisol-secreting adrenal tumours. Com-
Peterson, 1997; Schwedes, 1997). In most cats treated
puted tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
with the standard daily dosages of mitotane (25-50
imaging (MRl) have also proved useful in the detection
mg/kg/day orally) used for dogs with pituitary-depend-
of pituitary and unilateral adrenal tumours, but both
ent hyperadrenocorticism, the drug neither effectively
require specialized equipment, are expensive to per-
suppresses adrenocortical function nor alleviates clini-
form and are not widely available.
cal signs of the disease, even after prolonged daily
Although a large adrenocortical tumour can some-
treatment periods (Peterson et al., 1994; Duesberg
times be seen on abdominal radiographs, radiography
and Peterson, 1997). Adverse effects such as ano-
is of no value in confirming bilateral adrenocortical
rexia, vomiting and lethargy are relatively common,
hyperplasia in cats with pituitary-dependent hyper-
even in cats where the drug has not lowered serum
adrenocorticism. Bilateral calcification of the adrenal
cortisol concentrations (see Figure 21 .4).
gland can occasionally be detected in clinically normal
cats but this should not be interpreted as evidence of an
Ketoconazole
adrenal tumour as it is in dogs (Peterson et al., 1994).
Ketoconazole, a drug used principally for treatment of
Ultrasonographic evaluation of adrenal size and
mycotic disease, inhibits the first step in cortisol bio-
morphology is extremely useful in determining the
synthesis (cholesterol side-chain cleavage to preg-
cause of the hyperadrenocorticism in cats. Adrenal
nenolone) and, to a lesser extent, the conversion·of
 glands are relatively easy to identify in cats. In contrast
11-deoxycortisol to cortisol. Although ketoconazole
to the dog, where the left and right adrenal glands differ
has been used successfully in both humans and dogs
in shape, in cats both the adrenal glands are oblong
 with hyperadrenocorticism, the drug does not reliably
and oval to bean-shaped (Zimmer et al., 2000). In cats
 suppress adrenocortical function in normal cats, or in
with hyperadrenocorticism, if both adrenal glands are
large or of equal size, the diagnosis is pituitary-depend-
ous side-effects such as thrombocytopenia (Peterson
ent hyperadrenocorticism. If, on the other hand, one
etal.: 1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997). Therefore,
 adrenal gland is large or misshapen and the contralat-
ketoconazole cannot be recommended for.treatment
eral adrenal is small or cannot be visualized on
of cats with hyperadrenocarticism (see Figure 21.4).
ultrasonographic evaluation, cortisol-secreting adre-
nal tumour is diagnosed (Peterson et al., 1994;
Metyrapone
Duesberg and Peterson, 1997).
Metyrapone - a drug that inhibits the action of 11 -beta-
hydroxylase (the enzyme that converts 11-deoxy-
cortisol to cortisol) - has been used with mixed results
Treatment
 in cats with hyperadrenocorticism. Total dosages rang-
ing from 250 to 500 mg/day have been used (Daley et
In cats, hyperadrenocorticism is difficult to treat suc-
al., 1993; Peterson etal., 1994; Duesberg and Peterson,
cessfully (Figure 21.4). Potential options for medical
1997; Moore et al., 2000). Most cats appear to tolerate
treatment include the use of the adrenocorticolytic
the drug reasonably well, but drug-induced vomiting
agent mitotane (o,p'-DDD) or drugs that block one or
and anorexia necessitated the discontinuation of the
 more ofthe enzymes involved in cortisol synthesis (e.g.
drug in some cats (see Figure 21.4). If treatment is
ketoconazole, metyrapone or trilostane). Surgical treat-
effective, metyrapone reduces both basal and ACTH-
ment for cats with pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
stimulated cortisol concentrations and ameliorates the
corticism includes bilateral adrenalectomy or
clinical signs of disease. Overall, the effectiveness of
hypophysectomy, whereas unilateral adrenalectomy
metyrapone in cats with hyperadrenocorticism is vari-
is indicated in cats with an adrenocortical tumour.
able and may be transient, so the drug is best used
 Finally, external radiation therapy can also be used for
short-term to prepare forsurgical adrenalectomy. How-
 pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, especially
ever, metyrapone is frequently difficult to obtain so
when the cat has a large pituitary adenoma.
precluding its widespread use.
In general, adrenalectomy has proven the most
successful mode of treatment for most cats, whereas
Trilostane
Trilostane reversibly inhibits the 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
have yielded mixed results (Daley etal, 1993; Peterson 
dehydrogenase enzyme system in the adrenal cortex,
et al, 1994; Duesberg 9t al., 1995;: Duesberg and
which decreases the synthesis of both glucocorticoids
Peterson, 1997; Schwedes, 1997; Watson and Hertage,
 and mineralocorticoids. Trilostane is an effective medi-
1998; Moore et al., 2000: Witt and Neiger, 2003).
cal treatment for dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, and
209
Chapter 21
Felinehyperadrenocorticism
Treatment
Indication
Comments
Medical therapy
Mitotane (o.p'-DDD)
PDH or adrenal tumour
Iniial dose25-50mg/kg/day
Drug failsto adequately suppress adrenocorical functioninmost cats
Adverse effects common
 Not stronglyrecommended
Ketoconazole
PDH or adrenal tumour
Ineffectivein suppresing adrenocorticalfunctioninmostcats
Adverse effects common
Not recommended
Metyrapone
PDH or adrenal tumour
Initial dose250-500mg/day
Potential adverse effects include vomiting and anorexia
Beneficialeffectsonsuppreingadrenocorticafunctionmaybetransient
Unavailability of drug is a frequent problem
Trilostane
PDH or adrenal tumour
Initial dose30-60mg/day
Adverse effects uncommon
Effective in suppressing adrenocortical function
Druglicensed forseonlyindogsintheUKnoticensedforuseinUSA)
Radiation therapy
Pituitary cobaltradiation
PDH
Offersa potential cure forpituitary-dependenthyperadrenocorticism
treatment
Maybe theonly reatment forcats withalargeorinvasivepituitarytumour
Treatment response typically delayedsouseof concurrentmedical therapy orbilateral
adrenalectomy recommended
Limited availability and expense disadvantages
Surgery
Unilateral adrenalectomy
Adrenal tumour
Presurgicalmedical stabilization(e.gmetyraponeortrlostane）helpful
Postoperativecomplicationsmayincludepancreatisandwounddehiscence
Clinical signsresclveby 2-4months postoperatively
Withcompleteremoval ofadrenal tumourcureof disease accomplished
Bilateral adrenalectomy
PDH
Postoperative complications common
Clinical signs resolveby 2-4months postoperatively
Lifelong relacemntof bothminralocorticoidand gluccrioid hmneeqid
Pituitary det gpititad man aladeeppi
macroadenoma
Hypophysectomy
PDH
Offers potential cure for hyperadrenocorticism
Requireshighlyskilledsurgeonandadvanced imaging facilities
Postoperative complications (diabetes insipidus) common
Recurrence of disease possible
21.4
Treatment options forcats with hyperadrenocorticism.PDH,pituitary-deoendenthyperacrenocorlicism.
preliminaryresultsindicate that it mayalsobeavalu-
inhibitoryeffectwasnotedoverthefollowing 2months
ablemedical treatment forcatswith hyperadrenocorti-
of daily treatment(Skelly et al.,2003）.No details
cism (see Figure 21.4).
concerning follow-up ACTH stimulation test results
Thusfar,trilostane treatment hasbeenreported in
wereprovided for the other fivecats.Nospecific
six catswithhyperadrenocorticism(five with pituitary
adverseeffectsrelatedtothedrugwerenotedinanyof
dependent disease and one with anadrenal tumour),
thesixcats,but two of the catsdied ofrenal failure,
using a daily dose of 4.2-13.6 mg/kg (Skelly et al.,
whichhasbeenpurported to occurwith trilostane
2003;Witt and Neiger,2003).Clinical signs of hyper-
therapy in dogs.
adrenocorticismresolved tovarying degrees after
Althoughfurtherinvestigationneeds tobe done,
trilostane administration in all cats.In one cat with
trilostaneappearstobeavaluableoptionfortreatment
pituitary-dependenthyperadrenocorticism,theACTH-
of cats with hyperadrenocorticism and provides a use-
stimulated cortisolconcentration was low when
ful medical alternative to metyrapone.Trilostane should
rechecked after1week,and noescapefrom thedrug's
210
Chapter 21  Feline hyperadrenocorticism
cats with hyperadrenocorticism, prior to unilateral or
many cats have decreased requirements for exogen-
bilateral adrenalectomy, but the drug may also be
ous insulin therapy.
usefui as sole agent in the long-term management of
 Unfortunately, cats debilitated by chronic hyper-
some cats.
secretion of glucocorticoids have an increased risk of
infection and delayed wound healing postoperatively.
 Radiation therapy
Presurgical medical stabilization (e.g. metyrapone or
trilostane) of cats with severe clinical signs may im-
Pituitary radlotherapy
 prove the postoperative outcome. Iin cats with pituitary-
Radiation therapy has been used with partial success
dependent hyperadrenocorticism that undergo
to treat a smallnumber of cats with pituitary-dependent
successful bilateral adrenalectomy, one must always
hyperadrenocorticism (Peterson etal., 1994; Duesberg
remember that the pituitary defect (e.g. pituitary ad-
and Peterson, 1997). Pituitary radiotherapy may help
enoma) remains; these cats may later develop neuro-
decrease tumour size and prolong survival in cats with
logical signs associated with a compressive pituitary
a large or invasive pituitary tumour, and also offers a
tumour.
potential cure for cats with pituitary-dependent hyper-
adrenocorticism. However, because the decrease in
Hypophysectomy
both tumour size and ACTH-secretion are often de-
Recently, use of microsurgical trans-sphenoidal hypo-
layed, many cats die of complications attributable to
physectomy was found to be an effective method of
. hyperadrenocorticism before radiotherapy can ade-
treatment for cats with pituitary-dependent hyper-
quately control the disease. Use of either medical
adrenocorticism (Meij et al., 2001). However, because
therapy (e.g. metyrapone or trilostane) or surgical
adrenalectomy is therefore recommended prior to per-
skilled veterinary surgeon and advanced CT imaging
forming radiotherapy in cats with pituitary-dependent 
 facilities, this procedure remains a specialized form of
hyperadrenocorticism.
 treatment. Although it appears highly effective, at least
Other disadvantages of radiotherapy for treatment
 in cats with a small pituitary tumour, hypophysectomy
of cats with hyperadrenocorticism include its limited
 is associated with significant morbidity and the proce-
availability and high expense, as well as the frequent
dure is not likely to be effective in cats with a large
 anaesthesia and extended hospitalization periods re-
quired to perform the treatment. All of these limiting
ment is that hypopituitarism develops during the imme-
factors willikely preclude this modality from becoming
diate postoperative perind, resuiting in hypqcortisolism,
a common treaiment option for cats (see Figure 21.4).
hypothyroidism and transientdiabetes insipidus; there-
Surgery
and desmopressin are required for at least 2—4 weeks
 or lifelong after hypophysectomy.
Unilateral and bllateral adrenalectomy
Adrenalectomy appears to be the most successful
method of treating cats with hyperadrenocorticism
Prognosis
(Peterson etal., 1994; Duesberg etal., 1995; Duesberg
Hyperadrenocorticism is a serious disease with. a
and Peterson, 1997; Watson and Herrtage, 1998;
 guarded to grave prognosis. Without treatment, most
Moore et al., 2000; Hoenig, 2002).
cats will succumb to complications of the disease
within a few weeks to months of diagnosis (Peterson et
 Unilateral adrenalectomy should be performed in
al., 1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997). One com-
cats with a unilateral, cortisol-secreting 
 mon reason for death of untreated cats is the deleteri-
adrenocortical tumour.
ous effects of glucocorticoid excess on skin fragility,
Bilateral adrenalectomy must be performed in
which leads to tearing of skin, open wounds and
cats with pituitary-dependent bilateral
dalayed wound healing. The immunosuppressive ef-
adrenocortical hyperplasia.
fects of glucocorticoid excess also predispose cats to
 infection. Finally, chronic hypercortisolism may ad-
Cats undergoing unilateral adrenalectomy gener-
versely affect the cardiovascular system leading to
ally require glucocorticoid supplementation for ap-
 hypertension, pulmonary thromboembolism or con-
 gestive heart failure. Thus, the deleterious conse-
until the glucocorticoid secretory function of the atro-
quences of chronic corisol excess on metabolic,
phiad contralateral gland recovers. In contrast, cats
immune and cardiovascular function are frequently
undergoing bilateral adrenalectomy require constant,
responsible for the death of untreated cats with hyper-
lifelong replacement of both mineralocorticoid and
adrenocorticism.
glucocorticoid hormones.
 Cats with hyperadrenocorticism that are success-
fully treated by adrenalectomy typically have resolution
References and further reading
 of clinical signs (polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia and 
lethargy) and physical abnormalities (pot belly, muscle
 Boord M and Griffin C (1999) Progeslerone-secreting adrenal mass
wasting, alopecia, thin skin, hepatomegaly and infec-
ina catwithclinical signsof hyperadrenocoricism.Journalofthe
AmericanVeterin&ry MedicineAssociation214,666-669
tion) within 2--4 months postoperatively (Duesberg et
Daley CA, Zerbe CA, Schick RO and Powers RD (1993) Use of
al., 1995; Watson and Herrtage, 1998). In addition,
211
Chapter 21   Feline hyperadrenocorticism
a cat wlth large cutanaous wounds. jourma! of the American
stimulation lesling in cats. American Journar of Veterinary
Veferinary Medical Association 202, 956-960
Research 54, 300-304
 Duasberg CA, Nelsan RW, Feldman EC, Vaden SL and Scolt-
Peterson ME, Randolgh JF and Mooney CT (1994) Endocrine
Moncriefi JCR, (1995) Adrenalectomy for treatment of
diseases. In: The Cat: Diagnasis and Chinical Management, 2W
hyperadrenacorticism incats:10 cases(1988-1992). Journa/ of
the Amernican Veterinary Medica! Association 207, 1066-1070
Rossmeis JHJrScotMoncrieffJC,Siems J,Snyder PW,WellsA.
Duesberg C and Peterson ME (1997) Adrenal disorders In cats.
Anothayanantha L, and Oliver JW (2000) Hyperadrenocorticism
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 27,
321-347
Associafion 36, 512-517
excretion  of glucocorticoids  in  the diagnosis
of
Schoeman JP, Evans HJ, Childs D and Herrtage ME (2ooo) Cortisol
hyperadrengcorticism in cats. Domestic Animat Endocrinoiogy
responses to two different doses of inlravenous syntheticACTH
12, 355-362
(tetracosactrinj in overweight cats.Journal of Smal Animal
Henry Cj, Clark TP, Young DW and Spano JS (1996) Urine
Practice 41,552-557
cortisol:creatinine ratio in healthy and sick cats. Joumal of
ym jeo e ul juawean (aoa-d'o) aueow (266t) so sepamyos 
Vaterinary lntarnal Medicina 10, 123-126
hyperadrenocorticism. Journa! of Smal/Animai Practice38, 520--
Hoenig M(2002) Feline hyperadrenocorticism-where are we now?
524
Journat of Feline Medicina and Surgery 4, 171-174
 Skelly BJ, Petrus D and Nicholls PK (2003) Use of trilostane for the
Meij BP, Voorhout G, Van Den 1ngh TS and Rijnberk A (2001)
treatment of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a cat.
Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy for treatment of pltultary-
JournalofSmailAnimalPractice4,269-272
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in 7 cats. Velerinary Surgery
Watson PJ and Herrtage ME (1 9g8) Hyperadrenocorticism in six cats.
30,72-86
Journai of Smafl Anima! Praclice 39, 175-184
Moore LE, Biller DS and Olsen DE (2000) Hyperadrenocarticism
Witt A and Neiger R (2003) Triloslane therapy in live cals with
hyperadrenocorticism.' Scientific Proceedings: Vaterinary
cat. Journal of the American Veterinary Medicine Association
Prograrme,BSAVA Congress 2003,p.527 [abstrac]
217, 691-694
 Zerbe CA, Refsal KR, Peterson ME, Armstrang PJ, Nachreiner RF
Peterson ME and Kemppainen RJ(1992) Comparison of intravenous
and Schall WD (i987) Eflect of nonadrenal illness on adrenal
and intramuscular routes of administering cosyntropin for
function in the cat. American Journai of Vaterinary Research 48,
corticotropin stirnulation testing in cats. American Journat of
451-454
VcterinaryRcsearch53,1392-1395
Zimmer C. Horauf A and Reu5ch C (2000) Ultrasonographic
 Peterson ME and Kemppainen RJ (1993) Dose-response relation
examination gf the adrenal gland and evalyation gf the
between plasma concentrationsof corticotropin and cortisolafter
hypophyseal-adrenal axis in 20 cats. Jourmalof Smal Animal
 administration afincremental doses of cosyntropin far corticotropin
Practice 41, 156-160
212
Feline hypoadrenocorticism
Mark E. Peterson
Introduction
complication of surgical treatment for pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease)
In cats, as in other species, deficient adrenocortical
by bilateral adrenalectomy (Duesberg et al., 1995).
 secretion of glucocorticoids, either alone or concurrent
In all cats with primary hypoadrenocorticism, the
with reduced secretion of mineralocorticoids, leads to
deficiencyof both glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids
hypoadrenocorticism. This syndrome can either de-
 causes the clinical signs observed. As the primary insult
velop as a naturally occurring disease or, can be
 is to the adrenal glands, pituitary production of ACTH 
iatrogenic in nature. Hypoadrenocorticism, especially 
 continues unhindered. in fact, reduced cortisol produc-
the naturally occurring disorder, is extremely rare in
tion results in decreased negative feedback at the
cats. Since the first cat with primary hypo-
pituitary gland with increased release of ACTH. There-
adrenocorticism was described 21 years ago
fore, circulating concentrations of ACTH are usuaily
(Johnessee et al., 1983), fewer than 20 cases of
greatly increased in cats with primary hypoadreno-
naturally occurring adrenal insufficiency in cats have
corticism (Peterson etal., 1989; Bergerand Reed, 1993;
been reported.
Stonehewer and Tasker, 2001).
Secondary adrenocortical failure
Aetiology and pathophysiology
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism can develop because
 of deficient ACTH production assoclated with an un-
Hypoadrenocorticism may result from primary adrenal
derlying hypothalamic-pituitary disorder (e.g- pituitary
failure, in which destruction of more than 85-90% of
 or hypothalamic tumour) or from administration of
both adrenal cortices leads to deficient secretion of
drugs that suppress pituitary ACTH production
 glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids. This is known
(Peterson et al., 1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997).
as primary hypoadrenocorticism.
In cats, secondary hypoadrenocorticism has not yet
Alternatively, the disorder imay result from deficient 
been recognized as a naturally occurring disorder but
pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) secre-
tion, which leads to atrophy of the adrenal cortex and
tumours.
impaired glucocorticoid secretion. This is known as
latrogenic hypoadrenocorticism due to chronic ad-
secondary hypoadrenocorticism. However, because
ministration of either glucocorticoids or progestogenic
the zona glomerulosa is spared in cats with secondary
agents is the most common type of secondary adreno-
hypoadrenocorticism, adequate mineralocorticoid se-
cortical failure in cats (Middleton etal., 1987; Peterson,
cretion is maintained.
1987, 1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997). Although
Primary adrenocortical failure
for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocarticism in cats,
n
cats
with
 naturally occurring primary
iatrogenic secondary hypoadrenocorticism is a well
hypoadrenocorticism, the cause of the complete de-
recognized complication of this procedure (Meij et al.,
struction or atrophy of both adrenal cortices is usually
2001).
unknown (idiopathic atrophy). As in humans and dogs
The deficient ACTH secretion results in atrophy of
with the disease, itis likely that many ofthese cats have
the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis and a sub-
immune-mediated destruction of the adrenal cortices
 sequent decrease in glucocorticoid production. As
(Johnessee at al., 1983; Peterson et al., 1989). Less
ACTH has little stimulatory effect on mineralocorticoid
commonly, cats with primary hypoadrenocorticism have
production, the adrenal zona glomerulosa is preserved.
a history of abdominal trauma, and adrenal haemor-
The deficiency in glucocorticoid production results in
rhage is thought to be responsible for their disease
clinical signs similar to those observed in cats with
(Berger and Reed, 1993; Brain, 1997). Primary
primary hypoadrenocorticism, except that the
hypoadrenocorticism secondary to bilateral adrena!
derangements associated with mineralocorticoid deff-
gland infiltration by multicentric lymphoma has also
 ciency (and subsequent electralyte disturbances) are
been described in cats (Parnell et al., 1999).
 absent. Therefore, the clinical signs observed are
Although iatrogenic primary hypoadrenocorticism
usually less severe than those that develop in cats with
is rare in cats, this disorder is a well recognized
primary hypoadrenocorticism.
213
Chapter22 Feline hypoadrenocorticism
Clinicalfeatures
ings are depression,dehydration,weakness,hypo-
thermia,slow capillary refill time and weak pulse.
Naturallyoccurring primaryhypoadrenocorticism has
Collapse,bradycardia and a painful abdomen are
beenwell documented in 17cats(Johnessee et al.
observed less frequently (Figure 22.1).
1983;Peterson et al, 1989;Berger and Reed,1993;
Ballmer-Rusca,1995;Brain,1997;Parnellet al.,1999;
Diagnosis
Taskeretal,1999;StonehewerandTasker,2001).Of
these17cats,13had idiopathic atrophyof theadrenal
Routinelaboratory tests
and 2had adrenal lymphoma.The catswith idiopathic
Haematology
hypoadrenocorticismwere of mixed breeding,ranging
Haematological abnormalities thatmaydevelopincats
inagefrom1to14years（medianage5years),and
withprimaryhypoadrenocorticismincludelympho-
showednoobvioussexpredilection(7male and6
cytosis and eosinophilia,as well as mild normocytic,
female).
normochromic,non-regenerative anaemia （Figure
The clinical signs andphysical examination find
22.2). The finding of normal or high eosinophil and
ingsin the17reportedcatswithprimaryhypo-
lymphocyte counts in a sickcat with signs suggestive
adrenocorticism are similartothoseobserved indogs
ofhypoadrenocorticism is clinically significant,be-
withthe disease.Themostcommonownercomplaints
cause theexpectedresponse to stress shouldresultin
include lethargy, anorexia and weight loss (Figure
eosinopenia and lymphopenia.
22.1). Vomiting, polyuria and polydipsia are less com-
monlyreported.In some cats,the clinical manifesta-
Serumbiochemistry
Mostcatswithprimaryhypoadrenocorticismdevelop
usually occursafterparenteral fluid and corticosteroid
the classicalelectrolytechangesassociatedwithmin-
administration.
eralocorticoid deficiency,including hyponatraemia,
On physical examination,themost common find-
hypochloraemia and hyperkalaemia(seeFigure 22.2).
Findings
No.of
Percentage
Findings
No.of
Percentage
cats
of cases
cats
of cases
History
Complete blood count
Lethargy or depression
17
100
Anaemia
29
Anorexia
16
94
Lymphocytosis
18
Weight loss
13
76
Eosinophiia
Vomiting
9
53
Serum biochemical analysis
Waxing-waning course
7
41
Sodium-to-potassiumratio<27:1
17
100
Previcusresponse to therapy
6
35
Hyponatraemia
17
100
Polyuria and polydipsia
5
29
Hyperkalaemia
16
94
Azotaemia
14
Dysphagia
6
82
Physical examination findings
Hyperphosphataemia
13
76
Depression
17
100
Hypochloraemia
12
71
Dehydration
15
88
Low total CO (metabolic acidosis)
4
24
Weakness
14
82
Hypercalcaemia
12
Hypothermia
12
71
Urinalysis
Slow capilaryrefiltime
8
47
Specific gravity <1.030
10/14
71
Weak pulse
7
41
Specific gravity >1.030
4/14
29
Collapse/inability to rise
5
29
Pituitary-adrenalfunction tests
Bradycardia
2
12
Lowbasal serum cortisol
16
94
Painful abdomen
6
Subnormal ACTH-stimulated cortisol
16/16
100
Constipation
g
High endogenous ACTH concentration
10/10
100
22.1
Clinical findings in 17 catswith primary
22.2
Labcratory findings in17catswith primary
hypcadrenocorlicism.(Dala compiled from
hypoadrenocorticism.(Data comoiled from
Johnessee ctal,1993Pcterscn et al.,1989;Berger and
Johncssce et al.1993;Peterson et al,1989;Berger and
Reed,1993;Ballmer-Rusca,1995;Brain,1997;Parnell e
Reed,1993;Balmer-Rusca,1995;Brain,1997;Parnell ef
al.1999:Taskerelal,1999:StonehewerandTasker,2001.)
al.,1999;Taskeretal.,1999;Stonehewer andTasker,2001.)
214
Chapter 22  Feline hypoadrenocorticism
The extracellular fluid volume contraction (and sub-
enous cortisol concentrations.
sequent decreased renal perfusion) associated with
A subnormal serum cortisol response to ACTH
primary adrenocortical insufficiency often results in
administration accompanied by serum electrolyte find-
prerenal azotaemia and hyperphosphataemia (see
ings of hyperkalaemia and hyponatraemia is consist-
Figure 22.2).
ent with primary hypoadrenocorticism. lf serum
 electrolytes changes are notfound, one of thefollowing
Urinalysis
may be present:
As in dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism, pre-
treatment urine specific gravity varies but urine may be
 Early primary hypoadrenocorticism with at least
more dilute than would be expected in a cat with
 some residual mineralocorticoid secretion
0l lou weyel eg tsnw enno pue eweoze jeuajaid
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism resulting from
 misdiagnose primary renal failure in these cases (see
pituitary or hypothalamic disease
Figure 22.2). The cause of this apparent loss of renal
 Most commonly, secondary hypoadrenocorticism
concentrating ability is poorly understood, but may be
resulting from the administration of drugs such as
secondary to renal sodium loss with resultant medul-
glucocorticoids or progestogens (Middleton et al..
[ary washout.
1987; Peterson, 1987; Peterson et al., 1994;
Duesberg and Peterson, 1997).
Radiography and electrocardiography
 Radiography demonstrated hypoperfusion of the lungs
Plasma ACTH concentration
and microcardia in approximately half of the cats with
Once steroid or progestogen usage (or any other
primary hypoadrenocorticism (Peterson et al., 1989;
jatrogenic cause of hypoadrenocorticism) is excluded.
Ballmer-Rusca,1995; Tasker et al., 1999; Stonehewer
plasma ACTH concentration should be determined to
and Tasker, 2001). Electrocardiography revealed
help distinguish between primary and secondary
sinus bradycardia in 2 of 17 cats, and atrial premature
hypoadrenocorticism. Plasma ACTH concentrations
contractions in 1 (Peterson et al., 1989). None of the
are
extremely high in cats with primary
cats with primary hypoadrenocorticism showed other
hypoadrenocorticism (Peterson et al., 1989; Berger
ECG changes commonly associated with hyperkal-
and Reed, 1993; Stonehewer and Tasker, 2001),
aemia in dogs and humans, such as peaking of the T
whereas cats with secondary hypoadrenocorticism
wave, reduced or absent P wave, or atrial standstill.
have inappropriately low plasma ACTH concentrations
 when compared with circulating cortisol concentra-
Pituitary-adrenal function tests
tions (Peterson et al., 1994; Duesberg and Peterson,
1997).
ACTH response test
 Samples for plasma ACTH determination must be 
The most accurate screening test for hypoadreno-
 collected prior to treatment with glucocorticoids, inas-
corticism in cats is the ACTH response test. The finding 
much as these drugs will suppress pituitary ACTH
of a low basal serum cortisol concentration with a
eseld mollo jeou asle, ullnsai kew pue uoaoas
subnormal or negligible response to ACTH is diagnos-
ACTH concentrations in cats with primary
hypoadrenocorticism. It is also important to rermember
entiate between primary and secondary causes of
 that blood samples for determination of endogenous
hypoadrenocorticism. When interpreting the test re-
ACTH concentration need to be handled carefully,
sults, it is imperative to compare them to reference
since ACTH can degrade rapidly in plasma after collec-
range values obtained in normal cats, because cats
tion. Special sample handling is required and outlined
tend to respond to ACTH with a lesser rise in peak
in Chapter 1. Mishandling of samples potentially
serum cortisol concentrations than do dogs (Peterson
results in falsely decreased values, which could erro-
et al., 1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997).
Aewjd ueut jeuiel Aiepuooas isebens Aisnoeu
 One common protocol for ACTH response testing 
hypoadrenocorticism.
 in cats is to collect blood for determination of serum (or
 plasma) cortisol concentration before and at 60-90
minutes after administration of 0.125 mg synthetic
Treatment
ACTH (tetracosactide or cosyntropin) intravenously
(Peterson etal.,1994). Use ofthe intravenousroute for
Initial treatment
ACTH administration is very important in cats with
suspected hypoadrenocorticism, especially if the catis
Fluid therapy
dehydrated.
 In cats with acute or life-threatening primary adrenal
It is important to realise that many glucocorticoid
failure, initial therapy should be aimed at restoring the
preparations, including hydrocortisone and pred-
circulating blood volume, providing an immediate source
nisolone/prednisone, cross-react in most cortisol as-
 of glucocorticoid, and correcting serum electrolyte dis-
oo     a  s
turbances (i.e. hyperkalaemia, hyponatraemia). An in-
determination, and therefore should not be adminis-
dwelling intravenous catheter should be placed,
tered until the ACTH response test is completed.
preferably in the jugular vein, to allow forthe administra-
Dexamethasone, on the other hand, can be adminis-
tion of large volumes of isotonic fluids. The intravenous
tered before the ACTH response test because it has
fluid of choice is 0.9% saline, administered at 40 ml/kg
little or no influence on the measurement of endog-
 per hour during the first 1-2hours. Once fluid deficits are
215
Chapter 22  Feline hypoadrenocorticism
restored, the rate of fliuid administration should be de-
creased to 2.5 ml/kg/h (60 ml/kg/day), given by continu-
chronicmineralocorticoid therapy (Peterson etal., 1989,
ous infusion. Fluid administration is tapered when
1994; Berger and Reed, 1993; Duesberg and Peterson,
azotaemia resolves, serum electrolyte abnormalities
1997; Tasker et al., 1999; Stonehewer and Tasker,
 are corrected, and the cat is eating and drinking on its
 2001). The dosage of mineralocorticoid supplementa-
own.
tion is adjusted as needed, based on serial serum
electrolyte concentrations, determined every 1-2 weeks
Glucocorticoid therapy
during the initial maintenance period. The goal of
Rapid intravenous administration of a glucocorticoid is
 mineralocorticoid treatment is normalization of the
also extremely important in the initial management of
 serum sodium and potassium concentrations.
severe adrenocortical insufficiency. In most cases,
Glucocorticoid replacement, as needed, is usually
dexamethasone, administered at a dose of 0.5-1.0
accomplished with oral administration of prednisolone/
mg/kg i.v., is adequate and will not interfere with
prednisone, at a total dosage of 1-1.25 mg/day. If
concurrent ACTH response testing. Alternatively,
owners find it difficult to give oral medication to their cat,
hydrocortisane can be administered at a dose of 5-10
glucocorticoid supplementation can be given
 mg/kg i.v. every 6 hours or as a continuous infusion
intramuscularly as reposital methylprednisolone ace-
(0.5-0.625 mg/kg/h) for the first 24 hours. However,
tate, af a total dosage of 10 mg/month. At these low
these doses are based on studies in dogs and no feline
replacement glucocorticoid doses, adverse effects
specific dosages have been evaluated (see Chapter
 associated with iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism (i.e.
16). If hydrocortisone is used as initial glucocorticoid
 polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, pendulous abdomen,
therapy, it should not be administered until the ACTH
Or hair loss) rarely, if ever, develop in cats.
response test has been completed. Once the test has
been completed and the cat is stable, glucocorticoid
 replacement should then be continued as prednisolone/
References and further reading
prednisone at 0.2 mg/kg/day i.m. Oral administration of
the daily glucocorticoid dosage can be instituted once
 Ballmer-Rusca E (1995) What is your diagnosis? Hypoadrenocorticism
in a domesliccat. SchweizerArchiv fur Tierheikunde137,65-67
the cat can swallow without vomiting.
Berger SL and Read JR (1993) Traumatically induced
Mineralocorticaid therapy
Brain PH (1997) Trauma-induced hypoadrenpcorticism in a cat.
Once the cat is stabilized and can swallow without
Australian Veternary Practitioner 27, 178-181
Duesberg CA, Nelson Rw, Feldman EC, Vaden SL and Scott-
vomiting, mineralocorticoid replacement therapy should
also be started with fludrocortisone acetate, adminis-
hyperadrenocorticismincats:10cases(1988-1992).Journai of
tered orally at 0.1 mg/day per cat (Peterson et al., 1989,
the Amarican Veterinary Medical Association. 207, 1066-1070
 Duesberg C and Peterson ME (1997) Adrenal disorders in cats.
1994; Duesberg and Peterson, 1997; Tasker ef a.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Smafl Animai Practice 27.
1999). Aithough not available in most countries other
321-347
than the USA, the mineralocorticoid desoxycortico-
 Johnessee JS, Peterson ME and Gilbertson SR (t9g3) Primary
hypoadrenocarticism jna cat. Journal of the American Veterinary
sterone pivalate (DocP) works well in most cats when
Medical Association 183, 881-882.
administered intramuscularly at theinitial dosage of 12.5
Meij BP, Voorhout G, Van Den Ingh TS and Rljnberk A (2001)
mg'month percat (Peterson atal., 1989, 1994; Duesberg 
and Peterson, 1997). The mineralocorticoid effects of
30, 72-86
either fludrocortisone acetate or DOCP enhance renal
Mlddleton DJ, Watson AD, Howe CJ and Caterson ID (1987)
potassium excretion and sodium resorption, thereby
Suppression of cortisol responses to exogenous
adrenocorticotrophic hormone, and the occurrenceol side effects
 normalizing serum electrolyte abnormalities.
in contrast to dogs, in which the major clinical signs
megestrol acetate and prednisolane. Canadian Journai of
VeterinaryAesearch51,60-65
 of primary hypoadrenocorticism usually resolve within
Parnell NK, Powell LL,Hohenhaus AE,Patnaik AK and Petersn ME
a day or two of treatment, signs of weakness, lethargy
(1999). Hypoadrenocorticism as the primary maniflestation of
ymphoma in two cats. Journal of fhe American Veterinary
ym sleo ui shep g-g loj isisied Aeu eixenoue pue
Medical Assaciation 214, 1208-1211
acute adrenocortical insufficiency, despite proper man-
agement (Peterson et al., 1989; Tasker et al, 1999).
and growth hormone secretion in lhe cat. Aesearch in Veterinary
Sclence 42. 354-357
Peterson ME, Greco DS and Orth DN (1989) Primary
 Long-term treatment and prognosis
hypgadrenocorticism in ten cats. Journat or Veterinary internat
Once stabilized, maintenance therapy for cats with
Medicine3.55-58
Peterson ME, Randolph JF and Mooney CT (1994) Endocrine
primary adrenocorticalinsufficiency consists of lifelong
diseases.In: The Cat: Diagnosis and Clinical Management 2nd
 mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid supplementation.
With proper corticosteroid replacement therapy, the
Wew York
Stonehewer J and Tasker S (2001) Hypoadrenocorticism in a cal.
long-term prognosis of cats with primary (especially
Jourmal of Small Animal Practice 42, 186-190
TaskerSMacKayADandSparkesAH{1999)Acaseoffelineprimary
idiopathic) hypoadrenocorticism is excellent.
hypoadrenacorlcism.JoumalofFeine Medicine and Surgery 1,
Either oral fludrocortisone acetate orintramuscular
257-260
216
Phaeochromocytoma
Susan E. Lana and David Twedt
Introduction
1982). A smal number of dogs with pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism may also have phaeochromo-
 With the advent of more sensitive imaging technigues
cytomas (von Dehn et al., 1995).
(ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT)),
adrenal masses are now being diagnosed with in-
 creasing frequency. Unexpected adrenal masses are
Biological behaviour
identified in approximately 1 % of abdominalultrasound
evaluations (Page, 2001). Primary adrenal tumours
Phaeochromocytomas are rare in dogs and even more
are reported in 0.17-0.76% of dogs and 0.03% of cats.
uncommon in cats. They tend to occur in older dogs
Metastasis from non-adrenal primary tumours can also
with an average age at presentation of 10.5 years
 invade the adrenat gland. Predicting biological behav-
although, reported ages range from 1 to 15 years of
aq ueo edki anown pue (jueubjew jo ubjuaq) ino!
age. No sex or breed predisposition is apparent in
difficult prior to histological evaluation, although size of
dogs. Phaeochromocytomas can be locally invasive
mass, degree of invasion, and hormonal activity present
(40-50% of tumours) and have a reported metastatic
can support, and in some cases confirm, a diagnosis.
rate of 15-30% (Page, 2001).Distant sites of meta-
Adrenal cortex neoplasms are the most commonly
stasis include liver, lung, lymph nodes, spleen, bone
diagnosed tumours of the adrenal gland and are con-
and central nervous system. Local invasion is most
sidered in Chapters 6, 15 and 21. This chapter will 
commonly seen as thrombi in the adjacent vena cava
focus on tumours of the adrenal medulla, specifically
 and mural and extraluminal compression of associated
phaeochromocytoma.
renal, adrenal, hepatic and aortic vessels. One report
Phaeochromocytomas are catecholamine-
also describes local extension of large adrenal
secreting tumours comprising cells characterized by
masses into the vertebral canal in two dogs (Platt et al.,
amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation (APUD)
1998).
(Feldman and Nelson, 1987; Norton and Lee, 2001).
The diagnosis of phaeochromocytoma is challeng-
The term APUD describes the common biochemical
ing and requires a basic knowiedge of its biological
feature of the cells, which invalves the synthesis and
bahaviour and associated clinical syndromes. A large
secretion of biologically active amines (Morrison, 1984;
proportion of phaeochromocytomas (38-48%) are
Twedt and Wheeler, 1984;Feldmanand Nelson, 1987).
 diagnosed at post-mortem examination (Bouayad et
Tumours derived from such cells are often called
al., 1987; Gilson etal., 1994b). Ante-mortem diagnosis
APUDomas and include: phaeochromocytomas;
is important because of the possible life-threatening
insulinomas; gastrinomas; and chemodectomas.
consequences caused by phaeochromocytomas.
APUDomas of various types share morphological fea-
tures that suggest a common origin from neuroecto-
derm (Feldman and Nelsan, 1987).
Clinical features
 Phaeochromocytomas are reported in mostdomesti-
cated animals inciuding dogs (Bouayad et al., 1987;
In humans, the catechclamine most frequently
Gilson et al., 1994a) and cats (Patnaik et al., 1990).
secreted by phaeochromacytomas is norepinephrine
These tumours are most commonly unilateral, but are
(noradrenaline) although epinephrine (adrenaline) or
occasionally present in both adrenal glands. Multiple
combinations of the two have been reported. Secretion
endocrine neoplasia syndromes (MEN), defined as the
of other biologically active amines or peptide hor-
excessive secretion by more than one endocrine gland,
 mones may als0 occur (Norton and Lee, 2001). It is not
are well documented in humans and may involve
known whether the same is true for dogs or cats.
phaeochramocytoma (MEN type 2). Specifically, MEN
Catecholamines stimulate receptors of different
type 2 is defined by the presence of phaeochromo-
 adrenergic classes, resulting in various biological ef
cytoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma and parathyroid
fects. The different effects of epinephrine and nor-
hyperplasia oradenoma. MEN type 2bis defined by the
presence of phaeochromocytoma, medullary thyroid
for various adrenergicreceptors. Adrenergic receptors
carcinoma, and mucosal neuromas. Dogs with a MEN
 are widely distributed in tissues and their stimulation
type syndrome have been reported (Peterson et al.,
has wide-ranging effects including:
217
Chapter23 Phaeochromocytoma
Generalizedvasoconstriction
be hyperaemicasaresultof flushing from intermittent
。
Decreased gastrointestinal motility
catecholaminerelease.
Mydriasis
Conversely,themembranesmay bepale dueto
Positive inotropic and chronotropiceffects on the
eithervasoconstrictionoranaemiafromhaemorrhage.
heart.
Thrombosisof the caudal vena cava andother
vessels may account for some of the clinical findings.
Most of theclinical features associatedwithsecre-
Abdominal distensionasaresultof ascitesdue to
toryphaeochromocytomasare understandablebased
vascular obstruction can occur,butmay alsoresult
on these physiological effects. Certain clinical signs
from haemorrhage.Distensionof the caudal superficial
mayalsobe associatedwith theinvasive/metastatic
epigastricveins maybe evident,albeit rarely.A few
characteristics of the tumour that mayresult in throm-
dogshavepalpable abdominal masses.
basisof thecaudal vena cavaor acutehaemorrhage
Ophthalmicexaminationmayrevealretinalhaemor-
into the abdomen.
rhages as a result of hypertension. Neurological find-
The clinical consequences of phaeochromocytoma
ings are often non-specific,but may indicate focal
are diverse,ranging fromnoapparent clinical signs to
central nervoussystem lesions secondary tohaemor-
cardiovascular collapse.Signs may develop acutely,
rhage or metastasis. Hindlimb paraparesis may occur
may be episodic ormaybe chronic and progressive.
secondary tovascular compromise,local tumour ex-
Inconsistency inpresentation isprobablyrelated to:
tensionorotherprimaryneurologicalabnormalities.
intermittentorcontinuoussecretionofcatecholamines;
whetherthetumourinvadeslocal tissues,orthrombo-
Diagnosis
sesthecaudal venacava（TwedtandWheeler,1984;
Feldman and Nelson,1987;Maher,1994).
Thediagnosisofphaeochromocytomaisdifficult,dueto
The clinical features reported for phaeochromo-
thelackofspecificclinical findingsoftenaccompanied
cytomas are listed in Figure 23.1; many are non-
byalowindexof suspicion.Resultsof routinelaboratory
specific.General signs of weight loss,anorexia and
work,includingcompletebloodcount,biochemicalpro-
file andurinalysis,arenon-specificandunhelpful(Gilson
including dyspnoea,panting or cough are common
etal.,1994b;Maher,1994).Thrombocytosismayoccur
(Bouayad etal.,1987;Gilson etal,1994b).Tachycar-
withtumoursthatare chronicallybleeding.Liverenzyme
dia and arrhythmiasare often evident on physical
elevationsmaybepresentbutdonotappeartocorrelate
examination.Thoracic auscultationmayrevealabnor-
with thepresence of hepatic metastases.Proteinuria is
mal lung sounds.Most of these signs relate to hyper-
often found,presumablyresulting from hypertensive
tensionandarrhythmiasresulting from thesecretionof
glomerulopathy.In theraredogwherephaeochrom-
catecholamines.Similarly,mucous membranes may
ocytomaco-existswithpituitary-dependenthyperadreno-
corticism, the diagnostic work-up may lead to the
impression that anadrenal mass isof adrenal cortical
Non-specific
originbecausemost of the changes relate to
Weight loss
hypercortisolaemia (vonDehn et al.,1995).
Anorexia
Indirect blood pressure measurements are helpful
Depression
in identifying dogs with phaeochromocytomas.In one
Weakness
report,sixoutofsevendogshadhypertensionat the
Collapse
time ofmeasurement(systolic>160mmHg,diastolic
Restlessness
>100 mmHg)(Gilson etal.,1994a).Most humanshave
Cardiopulmonary
hypertension in association with this syndrome but in
many this is only episodic (Norton and Lee,2001).
Dyspnoea
Panting
Repeated blood pressure evaluations may be neces-
sary to document hypertension inpatientssuspected
Cough
Exercise intolerance
of havingphaeochromocytoma.
Cyanosis
Fineneedleaspirationandassociatedcytological
Epistaxis
assessment of suspectedphaeochromocytomasis of
variablevalue.Theability todifferentiatebetween
Neurological
benign and malignant neuroendocrine lesions is
Seizures
limited with cytology, and concern exists in human
Paraparesis
patients over possible worsening of hypertensive
Ataxia
episodes associated with needle trauma(Norton and
Dilted pupils
Lee,2001).Complications associatedwithfineneedle
Miscellaneous
aspirateprocedures havenotbeenreported in veteri-
nary medicine. Cytology can be useful for identifying
Polyuria/polydipsia
other tumaurtypes,includingmetastaticlesions tothe
Abdominal distension
adrenal gland fromotherprimary tumours.
Diarrhoea
Diagnostic imaging
Clinica signs associated witn
23.1
phaeochromocytoma.
Abdominal radiography reveals a mass in the perirenal
218
Chapter23 Phaeochromocytoma
areain30-56%ofcases(Bouayad etal.,1984;Gilson
nists suchasphenoxybenzaminehydrochloride isrec-
et al,1994b).Abdominal detail is occasionally de
ommended.In veterinary patients,complications re
creaseddue to thepresenceoffluid.Thoracicradio-
sultingfrom theuse ofcontrastmedia havenotbeen
graphymayrevealchangessecondarytochronic
reported(Rosenstein,2000).
hypertension,including cardiac enlargement and pul-
monarycongestion oroedema.Radiography has dem-
Catecholaminemeasurements
onstrated metastases in the lungs of approximately
Otherspecificdiagnostictechniquesforphaeochromo-
11%of dogs (Gilson et al.,1994b).
cytoma are aimed atidentifying elevatedcirculating
Ultrasonography can be helpful in identifying an
catecholamines or urinary metabolites ofcate-
adrenal mass in cases of suspected phaeochromo-
cholamines.These techniques have been employed
cytoma,but islimited in determining the extent of
infrequentlyindogsbecauseoflimitedavailability,
disease (Gilson et al.,1994a,b).Echocardiography
poorlyestablishedreferenceranges,and theproblems
mayreveal left ventricular hypertrophy consistentwith
of 24-hour urine collection.They may be useful in
systemichypertension
patientsinwhichaphaeochromocytoma isstrongly
Nuclear imaging with 1231- or 1311-metaiodobenzyl-
suspected based on clinical signsor thepresenceof
guanidine (MIBG) has been used extensively in
hypertension,but a tumour isnot identifiedwiththe
humans to image and stage tumoursof neuroendo-
imagingtechniques mentioned.lItisimperative that the
crine origin,including phaeochromocytomas.MIBG is
clinician obtain specific sample handling instructions
similar in structure to epinephrine andis taken up
from the laboratory performing these assays.
by APUD type cells.12-MiGB imaging has been
successfullyperformed fordiagnosisof phaeochromo-
Measurement of urine catecholamines and
cytoma in one dog（Berry et al.,1993).However, in
metabolites
human patients,not allphaeochromocytomas exhibit
Unchanged catecholamines and metabolites
uptake on MIBG scanning:possibly due tofailure of
(metanephrine,vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), and
certain storage or uptake mechanisms.Recently use
normetanephrine)are excreted primarilyin the urine.
ofotherradiolabellednucleotidesincombinationwith
Therefore,increases incirculatingcatecholamines that
advanced imaging techniques such as positron emis-
mayoccurwithphaeochromocytomaresult ineleva-
sion tomography(PET)havebeen described(Berryet
tions of urine catecholamines and metabolites.To
al.,2002).p-iF-fluorobenzylguanidine(#F-FPBG) is
measureurinaryexcretionofcatecholamines,24-hour
onesuch nucleotide which hasbeen used in dogs and
urinecollectionisperformedwith thepatient atrest.
shown to be taken up byphaeochromocytomas.The
Urinemustbe acidifiedimmediatelywith hydrochloric
advantageoverMiBGscansisa morerapidlocaliza-
acid(pH<3)and refrigerated (Keiser,1995).Random
tion andclearance of thebloodpool.
urinesamplesmayalsobeused if thecatecholamine
Othermaging studiesincludingTscanscaudal
values areexpressed in mg/ml creatinine.
venography andmagneticresonance imaging(MRI)
No reference ranges exist for dogs. Test results
may be helpful in determining the extent of disease
may be influenced by exercise,excitement,foods
(Gilson et al.,1994a;Norton and Lee,2001）. CT is
containing vanilla, radiographic contrast agents and
useful inassessing the size and symmetryofboth
various medications(Keiser,1995).Improper sample
glandsaswellasdetermining invasion and involve
handlingand intermittentsecretionofcatechalamines
ment of adjacent structures.Contrast-enhanced stud-
by the tumour may result in false-negative results.
iesarehpfulnidentifyingvena cava,aorta,kidny
Additionally,thespecificcatecholaminesecretedbya
and associated vessel involvement(Figure 23.2).The
tumour and themetabolitesproduced inanindividual
useof intravenous contrast media in humanpatients
patientmayvary.Therefore,sensitivityofthesetestsis
with suspectedphaeochromocytomasiscontroversial
increasedwhenmultiplecatecholaminesormetabolites
because of theincreasedrisk of a hypertensive crisis.
are measured. Finally, impaired renal function may
Pretreatmentwith alpha-adrenergicreceptor antago-
decrease catecholamine excretion,resulting inlower
than expectedvalues.
Measurementofserumcatecholamines
Assaysofrestingcatecholaminesarenotrecommended
fordiagnosticpurposesdue to thewidevariabilityof
serum concentrationsof catecholamines.Normal con-
centrationsofcatecholaminesdonotruleoutthe
LAMS
RK
diagnosis ofphaeochromocytoma,and currently no
reference ranges exist for dogs.
LK
R
Provocative tests
Several tests areperformedinhumanpatients to help
support a diagnosisofphaeochromocytoma(Keiser,
1995) The clonidine suppression test employs phar-
23.2
Abdominal CTscanofadog witha large left
macological manipulationof catecholamine secretion
adrenal mass.LAM,left adrenal mass:LK,left
by thisalpha-agonist.Phaeochromocytomas secrete
kidney;RK,right kidney.
catecholamines independentofneurologicalinput and,
219
Chapter23 Phaeochromocytoma
therefore,concentrations ofcatecholamines in the
bloodstreamarenotdecreasedfollowingclonidine
administration.Fluctuation in catecholamine concen-
trationswithintermittentsecretionbythe tumourmay
influence results.
Thephentolamine suppression testhelpsrule out
phaeochromocytomaasacauseofhypertension.False-
positiveresults and theriskofa severehypotensive
crisis preclude the routine use of this test.Other sub-
stances,such as histamine,tyramine,glucagon and
metoclopramide,increasesecretionofcatecholamines
by thephaeochromocytoma.Provocative testsusing
these agents are not recommended due to the
possibility of inducing a life-threatening hypertensive
crisis.
(a)
Treatment
Surgery is the treatment of choiceforphaeochromo-
cytomas in dogs as in humans.Resection of these
tumourstends tobeproblematicbecause manyof
these animalscarryahigh anaestheticriskasaresult
ofhypertension and arrhythmias,which mayworsen
AM
with surgical manipulation (Gilson et al., 1994b,
Robertson,2003).
Inaddition,tumoursmayinvadesurroundingstruc
turesorextendvia thrombiinto thevena cava(Figure
23.3).Resection of the adjacent kidney and portions of
the caudalvena cava is frequentlyrequired.Clearly,
intensive anaestheticmonitoring and anexperienced
veterinary surgeon are necessary.At the time of sur-
gicalresectiona thorough exploratorylaparotomy is
indicatedtodeterminewhethermetastases arepresent
and torule out thepresence of other tumours.
(b)
Preoperatively,normalization of blood pressure,
23.3
(a)An intraoperativeviewof anadrenal mass
restoringbloodvolume,andtreatingcardiacarrythmias
and surrounding structures.(Courrcsy of Dr
mayberequired toincrease the likelihoodofsuccess-
Julius Liptak.)AM,adrenal mass;K,kidney.Note the
ful outcome.
phrenicoabdomina vein overlying it.(b)A necropsy
Treatmentwith alpha-antagonist drugs is often
specimen with the caudal vena cavaopen toreveal a
indicated.Phenoxybenzamine(0.2-1.5mg/kg orally
large thrombus.(Courtesyof Drs Geraldine Hunt and
bid)maybethedrug ofchoice duetoits long duration
JuliusLiptak.)AM,adrenal mass;ICT,intracaval
thrombus.
of action(Maher,1994;Norton et al.,2001).Prazosin
(0.5-2.0 mg/kg orallybid or tid) is an alternative
choice.
Prognosis
Beta-blocking agents may be used to control
arrhythmias,but shouldneverbe used without alpha-
The prognosis is difficult to define precisely,as
adrenergicantagonists.Cardiacoutput may decrease
phaeochromocytoma israre and alimitednumber of
toomuchif betablockadeisinstitutedwithunopposed
caseshavebeen treated.Asinhumans,malignantand
alpha-mediated vasoconstriction(Feldman and Nel-
benign tumours cannot be distinguished solely by
son,1987;Maher,1994).
histopathology.Clinicalevidenceof invasionandmeta-
Intraoperatively,intravenouspentolamine maybe
stasis defines malignancy(Bouayad etal.,1987;Gilson
required to stabilize blood pressure and intravenous
etal.,1994a;Norton et al.,2001).Approximately50%
beta blockademaybenecessary to control cardiac
ofphaeochromocytomasreported indogswerecon-
arrhythmias(Robertson,2003)
sidered malignantbased on invasion and metastatic
Whensurgical resectionisincompleteoranimals
characteristics.Many dogswith non-invasive tumours
havemetastaticdisease,continuedmanagement with
that undergo surgical resectionmay live normal life
adrenergicantagonistdrugsmaybe necessary.Chemo-
spans.Extended survivalsof 18months to2years
therapyhasbeenused inhumans but has notbeen
have been reported in dogs with successful surgical
described in the dog.1311-MIBG has also been used
resection (Twedt and Wheeler,1984;Gilson et al.,
therapeuticallyinhumanswith disseminatedor non-
1994b). Surgery has been effective in dogs with inva-
resectable tumours (Norton and Lee,2001).The value
sivetumoursand hasallowed forextendedsurvival in
of this therapy inveterinary speciesisunknown.
dogswith metastases.
220
Chapter 23  Phaeochromocytoma
References and further reading
Intemal Medicine gd edn, ed. Rw Nelson and CG Cauto, pp.
778-815. Masby, St Lguis, MO
Norton IA and Lee HN (2001) Cancer of the endocrine system: the
Berry CR,DeGrado TR,NulterF Garg PK,BreischwerotEB,Spauding
adrenal gland. In: Cancer: Principies and Practice of Oncology,
K, Concannon KD, Zalunsky MR and Coleman RE (2002) Imaging
6 edn. ed. VT, Deyia et al., pp. 1770-1787 Lippincot, williams
ot pheochromgcytomain2aogs usingp-[sFjluorgbenzylguanidine.
ang Wilkins, Philadelphia
Page RL (2001) Tumors of the endocrinc system. In: Smal Animal
Berry CR,Wright KN, Brestschwerdt EB and Feldman JM (1993) Use
Clinicat Oncoiogy, 3" aan, ed. SJ Withraw and EG MacEwen, pp.
of l-123 Metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy for the diagnosis
418-444. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
        o
Patnaik AK,Erlandson RA, Liebeman PH, Welches CD and Maretla
Ultrasound34,5255
SM {1990) Extra-adrenal pheochiromocytoma (paraganglioma)
Bouayad H, Feeney DA, Caywood DD, Hayden DW (19B7)
in a cat. Journal of the American Veterinary Madical Assaciation
Pheochromocytoma in dogs: 13 cases (1980-1985). Journaf or
197.104-106
Fo
the American Varerinary Medical Association 191, 1610-1615
 Peterson ME, Randolph JF, Zaki FA and Heaih H 3rd (1982) Multiple
endocrine neoplasia in a dog. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association 180, 1476-1479
Reproduction, ed. EC Felgman and Rw Nelson, pp. 387-395.
Platt SR, Sheppard BJ, Graham J, Uhl EW, Meeks J and Clemmons
WB Saunders,Philadelphia
RM(19g8) Pheochromocytoma inthe vertebralcanalin two dogs
 Gilson SD, Withrow SJ and Orton EC (1994a) Surgical treatrment of
Journai of tha American Anima! Hospital Association 34, 365-
phacochromocytoma:technique,complications and results in six
dogs. Veterinary Surgery 23, 195-200
371
Robertson SA (2003) Anesthesia: endocrine system. In: Textbook of
Gilsan SD. Withrow SJ, Wheeler SL and Twedt DC (1994b)
Smal Anial Surgery 3edn,ed.D Slatter,pp2586-2594.WB
 Phaochromocytoma In 50 dogs. Journat of Vaterinary Intarna?
Saunders, Philadelphia
Medicine8,228-232
Rosenstein  DS (20oo) Diagnostic imaging  in canine
Keiser HR (1995) Pheochromacyloma and relaled tumors. ln:
pheochromocytoma.Vetennary Radiology andUitrasound 41,
499-506
Saunders, Philladelphta
 Maher ER (1994) Pheochromocytoma in the dog and cat: ciagnosis
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Smalf Animal Praclice 14,
andmanagement.SeminarsinVeterinaryMedicineandSurgery
(SmallAnimal 9, 158-166
von Dehn BJ, Nelson RW, Feldman EC and Griffey SM (1995)
767-782
Morison WB (1984) The clinical relevance of APUD cell. Campendium
 Pheochromocytoma andhypcradrenocorticismin dogs:six cases
on Continuing Fgucation for the Practicing Veterinarian6, 884-889
(1982-1991). Journal of tha Amarican Veterinary Medical
Nelson RW (200s) Disorders of the adrenal gland. In: Smal Anima!
Associalion 207, 322-324
221
Unusual gastrointestinal
endocrine disorders
Jorg M. Steiner
Introduction
functions of the more important ones are listed in
Figure 24.2.For further information thereader is re-
Thegastrointestinal (Gl) tract isrecognized as the
ferredtoseveralexcellentreviews on the physiologyof
largest endocrine organ of the body.However,little is
Gl regulatory peptides (e.g. Holst et al., 1996; Zerbe
known about it,presumablybecause of its complexity.
and Washabau,2000).
For example,the Gl tract utilizes more regulatory
Endocrine disorders arelargelyassociatedwith
compoundsthanmostotherendocrineorgansyetinno
eitheralack,or an excess,of hormone secretion.To
otherisdivisionbetween communicationpathways as
date,apart from insulin deficiency associated with
blurred.Traditionally, mechanisms of cell-to-cell com-
diabetesmellitus, a lack of Gl regulatory peptideshas
municationhavebeendividedintoautocrine,paracrine,
notbeen identified ascausing specific syndromes in
neurocrine and endocrine mechanisms,but this divi-
dogs,catsorhumans.However,there isnoreason to
sion is not entirely clear in the Gl tract.Almost all
believe thatseriouslackofGlregulatorypeptides
regulatorysubstancessynthesized inthe Gl tractare
wouldnotleadtoclinical disease.Therefore,itappears
peptides,butseveralof themfunctionasendocrine,as
likelytobeonlyamatteroftimebeforesuchsyndromes
wellas neurocrine,paracrine and even autocrine
are discovered.Manychronic GI diseasesare idio-
peptides.
pathic,and itispossible thatsome maybecaused by
In1902,secretin-thefirstendocrine hormone and
Gl regulatorypeptide deficiency.
the first gut hormone -was discovered (Holst et al.,
Disordersrelated tooverproductionof Glregulatory
1996).ince then,aplethoraofGlregulatory peptides
peptides are wellrecognized and are caused by neuro-
hasbeen identified（Figure 24.1)(Holst et al.,1996;
s
Zerbe and Washabau,2000).Many of these are con-
inhumansislow,withabout3-4casespermillionof the
sidered truehormonesalthoughcurrentlyonlysixmeet
population. Of all these NETs, approximately 55% are
allphysiological criteria fora hormone:insulin,gluca-
carcinoids,25% insulinomas,10%gastrinomas,2%
gon, gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin (Cck) and
vasoactive intestinal polypeptidomas (ViPomas),2%
motilin.Itisbeyondthe scopeof thischapterto discuss
glucagonomas,<1% somatostatinomas,and there-
all of these regulatory peptides in detail but the main
maining5-6%non-functioning tumoursorpancreatic
Regulatory peptide family
Members of regulatory peptide family
Gastrin-cholecystokinin
Cholecystokinin (CCK); gastrin
Secretin/glucagon/vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
peptide 2;glicentin; growthhormone-releasing factor(GHRF);oxyntomodulin;secretin;
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)
Pancreatic polypeptide
Neuropi(N)pacreatilptid(P)iY)
Tachykinin/bombesin
Gastrin-relasing pepide GRP);GRPdecaepideneurmedin;nermedinK;
substance K; substance P
Opioid peptide
Adrenocoricotropichormone (ACTH);beta endrphin;betanecendorphin:dynorphin:leu
encephalin;leumorphin;melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH);Met encephalin
Insulin
Insulin; insulin-like growth factor1
Epidermalgrowthfactor
Somatostatin
Somatostatin
Calcitonin
Calcitonin calcitoningene-relatd peptide
Miscellaneous
Endothlinglaninotlinertesinthyrpneingmo）
24.1
Overviewoffamilies cfgastroinleslinal regulalorypeptides
222
Chapter24Unusualgastrointestinalendocrinedisorders
Regulatory peptide
Location of secretion
Celltype
Stimulation or inhibition by
Most important functions
Gastrin
Stomach;duodenum
G
Stimulation by: stomach distension;
Stimulationof gastric acid secretion;
digested proteins and amino acids;
tropic effect on acid-secreting gastric
bombesin;GRP;Ca²+
mucosa; stimulation of pepsinogen
Inhibitionby:luminal acidification;
secretion
somatostatin
Cholecystokinin
Duodenum;jejunum
Stimulation by: fat; fatty acids; proteins
Stimulationofpancreatic enzyme
and amino acids;Hbombesin;GRP
secretion;gallbladdercontraction;
Inhibition by: somatostatin
regulation of pancreatic growth
Secretin
Duodenum:;jejunum
S
Stimulationby:duodenalacidification
Stimulation of pancreaticbicarbonate
secretion
Glucagon
Pancreas
A
Stimulationby:hypoglycaemia: high
Stimulation of glycogenolysis;
concentration of amino acids or low
stimulation of gluconeogenesis from
concentration of free fatty acids in
lactate,amino acidsandglycerol
plasma
Inhibition by:hyperglycaemia
Gastric inhibitory
Duodenum; jejunum
GIP
Stimulation by: all major classes of
Inhibition of gastricacid secretion;
polypeptide (GIP)
nutrients in the gut;bombesin
stimulationof intestinal fluid secretion
stimulation of insulin release
Oxyntomodulin
lleum;colon
Stimulation by:intraluminal glucose
Inhibition of gastric acid secretion;
and lipids
stimulationof intestinalmucosalgrowth
Vasoactive intestinal
Entire Gl tract
Stimulation by:vagus nerve
Relaxation of smoothmuscle;
polypeptide (VIP)
vasodilation;stimulationofpancreatic
and intestinal secretion
PeptideYY
Illeum, colon
Stimulationby:intraluminallipids;
lnhibition of pancreatic secretion;
bombesin
inhibitionof gastricacid secretion;
inhibition of gastric emptying
Pancreatic
Pancreas
F
Stimulation by:intraluminal proteins;
Inhibition of pancreatic enzyme and
polypeptide (PP)
vagusnerve
flid secretion
Tachykinins
Entire Gl tract
NK
Stimulation by:luminal distension
Regulation of Gl motlity; transmission of
pain impulses
Opioids
Entire Gl tract
NK
Inhibition of intestinal water and
electrolyte secretion;modulationof GI
motility
Insulin
Pancreas
B
Stimulation by:hypergycaemia:
Stimulation of peripheral glucose uptake;
glucagon
stimulation of glycogen synthesis;
Inhibition by: hypoglycaemia
stimulation of lipogenesis;stimulation of
DNA,NAandprotinti
Somatostatin
Entire Gl tract
D
Stimulation by:intraluminalipid; protein;
Inhibition of gastric and pancreatic
bile
secretions;inhibition of intestinal amino
acid andglucose absorption,inhibitionof
intestinal motility
Motilin
Duodenum; jejunum
M
Stimulation by:cyclic release during the
Initiatesphasell of themigratory
fasting state:intraluminallipids
motility complex
Neurotensin
lleum;colon
N
Stimulation by:intraluminal lipids;
Inhibitionofgastricacidsecretion
bombesin
24.2
peptice; NK,not known.
polypeptidomas.Similarepidemiological data are not
Gastrinoma
available fordogs and cats andmany of thepossible Gl
NETshave notyetbeen described inveterinary pa-
A syndrome characterized by acid hypersecretion,
tients.Todate,GINETsdescribedindogs andcats are
fulminantpeptic ulceration,andapancreaticnon-beta
limited to insulinomas,gastrinomas,glucagonomas
isletcelltumourwasfirstdescribed inahumanpatient
carcinoids and pancreaticpolypeptidomas.Insulinoma,
by Zollinger and Ellison in 1955.The syndromewas
the most frequent GI NET inboth dogs and cats,is
initiallynamedZollinger-Ellisonsyndromebutlaterthe
discussed in Chapter 20.
ulcerogenicfactorwasidentified asgastrin,andthe
223
Chapter 24  Unusual gastrointestinai endocrine disorders
 anorexia, or diarrhoea when an alternative diagnosis
gastrinoma (Pisegna, 2002).
has not been made using the usual recommended
 Gastrinoma is a rare tumour and has been reported
tests and procedures. However, gastrinoma should be
in only 25 dogs and 4 cats, compared with approxi-
considered immediately in patients with severe peptic 
mately 250 dogs and 4 cats with insulinoma (Liptak et
ulcer disease without predisposing risk factors.
al., 2002; Simpson and Dykes, 1997).
A definitive diagnosis of gastrinoma, short of
Gastrinomas are most commonly smali single nod-
histopathological confirmation, is difficult. A species-
ules. In humans, gastrinomas are uitimatety malignant,
specific assay for gastrin is not available but several
but most grow slowly, and a history spanning several
test kits developed for use in humans have been
years is not unusual. When first described in humans,
validated for dogs and cats (Gabbert et al., 1984). Few
 most gastrinomas were localized in the pancreas, but
veterinary laboratories offer gastrin measurements
Currently over50% are found inthe duodenum (Pisegna,
(canine reference range, 10-40 ng/l) and special sam-
2002). This is probably due to improved localization
ple handling is required (see Chapter 1). According to
techniques. In sharp contrast, gastrinomas have not
the diagnostic recommendations for humans, a pre-
been localized in the duodenum in either dogs or cats,
 sumptive diagnosis of gastrinoma is made when the
 although tumours could not be accurately localized in
24-hour fasting serum gastrin concentration is 10 times
many cases.
the upper limit of the reference range. This recommen-
Gastrinomas synthesize and release supraphysio-
dation is rather conservative and reflects the high
logical quantities of gastrin into the vascular space,
prevalence of chronic atrophic gastritis in humans that
leading to gastric acid hypersecretion, hypertrophy of
 can also cause severely elevated serum gastrin con-
the gastric mucosa and eventual ulceration (Lurye and
centrations (Bieligk and Jaffe, 1995).
Behrend, 2001; Pisegna, 2002). Persistent hyperchlor-
In the dog, differential causes of high serum gastrin
hydria also leads to a decreased pH in the duodenum,
concentrations are chronic renal failure, gastric outlet
which in turn leads to direct mucosal injury and to
obstruction, smal intestinal resection, immuno-
inactivation of digestive enzymes and subsequent
proliferative enteropathy of Basenji dogs, gastric dila-
maldigestion.
tation-volvulus complex, and proton pump inhibitor
administration and are all easy to rule out (English et
Cllnical features
al., 1988; Zerbe and Washabau, 2000). Thus, if these
disorders are excluded, a less than 10-fold elevation of 
Signaiment
serum gastrin concentration may be highly suggestive
Gastrinomas usually develop in middle-aged to older
 of gastrinoma.
dogs (age range in 21 reported dogs, 3.5-12 years)
and oider cats (age range in 4 reported cats 10-12
Provocative testing
years). Females are supposedly more commonly af-
In cases where circulating gastrin concentration is less
fected than males (69% versus 31%), but this may
 markedly elevated, provocative testing may be useful.
simply reflect the small number of cases.
Secretin is injected intravenously at a dose of 2 IU/kg
after withholding food for 24 hours. Blood samples are
 Clinical signs
collected at 0, 2, 5, 10, 15 and 20 minufes. An increase
The most common clinical signs observed in 25 of the
to >200 ng/l or a 2-fold increase of the serum gastrin
reported cases inciuded vomiting (92%), weight loss
concentration at any time point is considered diagnostic
2 e (9) A11 (2) 9x (88)
for gastrinoma (Simpson and Dykes, 1997). Alterna-
(60%). In addition, polydipsia, melaena and abdaminal
tively, calcium is administered intravenously at a dose of
pain were noted in approximately 25%, and haema-
 5 mg/kg/h, followed by serial measurements of serum
temesis, haematochezia, pyrexia and ravenous appe-
gastrin concentrations at 0, 15, 30, 60, 90 and 120
tite in approximately 10% of cases. A paipabie abdominal
minutes. A 2-fold increase at any time point is diagnostic
mass, tachycardia, and obstipation were reported in a
for gastrinoma. In humans, the calcium challenge test is 
single case each (Simpson and Dykes, 1997).
less sensitive than the secretin challenge test and is
Routine screening laboratory tests do not reveal any
somewhat uncomfortable for the patient.
specific changes but up to 50% of affected dogs and cats
 have a regenerative anaemia, indicating current blood
imaging
loss. Many of these animals have a leucocytosis with an
 Survey abdominal radiographs are unremarkable in
increased number of band neutrophils, possibly reflect-
most cases. Upper G1 tract contrast radiography may
ing gastric and/or intestinal inflammation. Hypoprotein-
reveal plaque-like defects in the stomach or duodenum 
aemia with hypoalbuminaemia, hypokalaemia, increased
 indicating ulceration but is rarely performed today. Of
serum hepatic enzyme activities, hypochloraemia and
the small number of dogs examined, abdominal ultra-
sonography has failed to locate the primary lesion but
may occur if complications, such as pyloric obstruction
it may be useful for identifying metastatic disease
due to mucosal hypertrophy, or ulcer perforation with
(Lamb et al., 1995). Upper Gl endoscopy permits direct
 peritonitis occur.
visualization of oesophageal, gastric, and duodenal
lesions but does not diagnose the underlying cause
Diagnosis
definitively. In human patients with gastrinoma, the
Although rare, gastrinomas should be ruled cut in
sensitivities and specificities of different localization
patlents with a history of chronic vomiting, weight loss,
techniques have been compared. Abdominal ultra-
224
Chapter 24  Unusual gastrointestinal endocrine disorders
sonography, computed tomography (CT), magnetic
Confirmation of the diagnosis and localization of
resonance imaging (MRl) and selective angiography
the primary tumour
are all rather unsuccessful in identifying the primary
Careful evaluation for metastatic lesions
lesion (Pisegna, 2002).
Removal of the primary tumour
 However, abdominal ultrasound, CT scanning and
 Removal of single metastatic lesions.
MRI are all useful in identiftying rmetastatic lesions.
Much more promising for localization of the primary
Even if the primary tumour can be identified easily.
lesion are endoscopic uitrasonography and
the rest of the pancreas and abdominal cavity should
somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS), which iden-
be carefully inspected for additional primary or meta-
tify the primary lesion in almost all cases. Currently.
 static lesions. This should include careful palpation of
the duodenum. lf a primary lesion cannot be identified.
in veterinary practice. The use of 1\'indium-pentetreotide
for SRS has recently been reported in one dog, but is
 duodenal wall with an endoscope may be useful. in
not routinely performed in this species to date (Altschul
cases where a primary lesion can still not be identified,
et al., 1997). Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy is the
biopsy samples of pancreas, lymph nodes and liver
most sensitive technique for localization of both the
should be collected.
primary tumour and metastatic lesions in human
gastrinoma patients (Pisegna, 2002).
Surgery: Some authors have recommended partial
pancreatectomy of the right lobe of the pancreas if a
Treatment
primary lesion can not be identified, as 60% of all
gastrinomas in smail animals have historically been
 Symptomatic therapy
identified in the right lobe and only 7% in the left lobe
Symptomatic therapy is started in most cases before a
(Zerbe and Washabau, 2000). However, this is based
definitive diagnosis has been made and should be
on 15 dogs and may not reflect the true distribution of
continued for several weeks after definitive therapy.
tumours.
The mainstay of symptomatic treatment of human
 If the primary iesion is identified it is removed by
 gastrinoma patients are proton-pump inhibitors. The
 partial pancreatectomy while minimizing pancreatic
proton- pump inhibitcr omeprazole, administered at 0.7
 trauma. The tumour should be submitted forhistopatho-
mg/kg orally sid, has also been successfully used in the
 logical examinatian and immunohistochemical stain-
management of canine patients with gastrinoma (Brooks
ing for regulatory peptides most commonly found in Gi
and Watson, 1997; Simpson and Dykes, 1997). Ini-
 NETs. Metastatic lesions, which are present in most 
 tially, sucralfate, a mucosal protectant that adheres to
cases, should be removed cnly if this is possible
exposed proteins of necrotic tissues, should be added
without radical excision. Postoperatively, the patient
leo lad 6 g'0-92'0 pn 4re1o bop led b1) looad eyi 0
should not be given anything crally for 24-48 hours,
orally tid). Histamine-2 antagonists, such as cimetidine,
 followed by the gradual introduction of water and an
ranitidine or famotidine at double the standard dose
easily digestibie low-fat diet.
are used if omeprazole is prohibitively expensive or
inefective. Octreotide, a long-acting somatostatin
Other: lf ithe primary tumour cannot be localized and
analogue, acts by inhibiting gastrin release and by
removed during surgery or if extensive metastatic
decreasing gastric acid secretion directly but may also
disease is presenf, an alternative therapeutic
inhibit tumour growth and thus afford more than just
approach shouid be considered. The use of chemo-
symptomatic relief. It has been used successfully
therapy has not been reported in dogs or cats with
in two dogs at doses of 2-20 μg/kg s.c. tid (Lothrop,
gastrinoma and has a low success rate in human
1989; Simpson and Dykes, 1997). These two dogs
patients. Radiation therapy using "ln DTPA-D-
survived for 10 and 14 months, respectively, compared 
Phe-octreotide (Octreo-scan) has been successfully
with a reported mean survival time of 5.5 months for
used in humans with a response rate of up to 50%
other dogs with gastrinoma (Simpson and Dykes,
(Pisegna. 2002), Medical therapy as described above
1997). However, octreotide therapy may be cost-
may prove useful. Use of human recombinant inter-
 prohibitive.
feron has shown promise in the treatment of humans
with gastrinoma but has not yet been reported in dogs
Definitive therapy
or cats (Pisegna, 2002).
 Clinicaf staging:Before initiating definitive treatment,
Prognosis
the patient should be staged, invoiving localization of
The long-term prognosis for dogs and cats with
 the primary lesion and search for metastatic disease
gastrinoma is grave. However, with appropriate medi-
(see above). Metastatic lesions serve as a long-term
 cal management the short-term prognosis and quality
prognostic indicator, and approximately 85% of all
 of life in dogs and cats with gastrinoma can be good.
dogs and cats with gastrinoma have metastatic
 Several canine gastrinoma patients have been suc-
disease at the time of diagnosis. After localization of
 cesstully managed for more than a year after diagno-
the primary tumour, and if widespread metastatic dis-
sis. With increasing awareness leading to earlier
ease has been excluded, an exploratory laparotomy
diagnosis, improved localization and staging tech-
shauld be undertaken. Goals of the exploratory
 niques and advanced treatment options, survival times
laparotomy are:
are likely to increase further.
225
Chapter 24
 Unusual gastrointestinal endocrine disorders
Glucagonoma
Treatment
 The same guidelines for localization and surgical ex-
In 1974 the first nine human patients with glucagon-
ploration discussed for gastrinomas also apply for
producing pancreatic tumours were reported but it
glucagonomas. As for gastrinomas, metastatic dis-
remains a rare disease today (Jensen and Norton,
ease at the time of diagnosis is common in dogs with
 2002). To date, only five cases of canine glucagonoma
 glucagonoma. Since most patients with a glucagonoma
have been conclusively diagnosed, and this syndrame
have hypoaminoacidaemia preoperatively, total or
has not yet been reported in the cat (Zerbe and
partial parenteral nutrition may improve the overall
Washabau, 2000).
condition of the patient, including improved healing
after surgery.
Clinical features
 Medical managementshould beconsidered in cases
Glucagonoma in human patients is associated with
of metastatic glucagonoma, if abdominal exploration 
typical skin lesions characterized by marked erythema,
is refused, and in recurrent cases. Medical therapy
destruction of the superficial epidermis, and a tend-
can include insulin, intravenous infusion of essential
ency to heal and progress to other areas of the body.
amino acids and fatty acids, zinc supplementation
known as necrolytic migratory erythema {Jensen and
and octreotide therapy (Taboada and Merchant, 1997:
 Norton, 2002). Similar skin lesions have been reported
Zerbe and Washabau, 2000). However, more clinical
in several dogs and have been termed supericial
 information is needed before more specific treatment
necrolytic dermatitis (Walton et al., 1986; Turnwald et
recommendations can be given.
al., 1989: Gross et al., 1990). However, approximately
90% of canine patients with superficial necrolytic der-
matitis are diagnosed with hepatic disease, diabetes
Pancreatic polypeptidoma
mellitus or, less commonly, other conditions rather
than with glucagonoma.
Gl NETs secreting pancreatic polypeptide have been
Human patients with glucagonoma present with
described in humans (Bieligk and Jaffe, 1995; Jensen
skin lesions, weight loss, diabetes mellitus, glossitis,
and Norton, 2002). Although not yet associated with a
stomatitis, cheilitis and tendencies forthromboembolic
distinct clinical syndrome, watery diarrhoea, diabetes
disease. Often the development of skin lesions and/or
mellitus, weight loss, decreased gastric acid secretion,
diabetes mellitus precedes the diagnosis of
peptic disease, flushing, rashes and acute psychosis
 glucagonoma by many years.
have been described (Jensen and Norton, 2002).
The small numbers of dogs diagnosed with
Because similar clinical signs have been observed
 glucagonoma have had crusting and scaling skin le-
in patients with non-functional Gl NETs without
 sions most commonly on footpads, hocks, abdomen,
 elevated serum pancreatic polypeptide concentration,
elbows, perineum, nose and mucocutaneous junc-
it is now generally accepted that there is no cause-
tions. These dogs also exhibited depression, periph-
effect relationship between the increased serum
eral lymphadenopathy and anorexia. Hyperglycaemia
pancreatic polypeptide concentration and these
was reported in almost all cases, but in some dogs
clinical signs.
diabetes mellitus was diagnosed after the glucagon-
Only one dog with a presumptive diagnosis of
 oma. It is therefore appropriate to suspect gluca-
 pancreatic polypeptidoma has been reported in the
veterinary literature (Zerbe et al., 1989). This dog
dermatitis that do not show evidence of hepatic dis-
presented with chronic vomiting, anorexia, weight loss
ease, whether they concurrently present with diabetes
and lethargy. An insulinoma was diagnosed on the
mellitus or not.
basis of hypoglycaemia in the face of a high serum
insulin concentration. Baseline serum gastrin concen-
Diagnosis
tration was 7 times the upper limit of the reference
Assessment of circulating glucagon concentration may
range, but did not rise after secretin or calcium
be helpful in confirming a diagnosis. Unfortunately, at
challenge.
the current time no veterinary endocrine laboratory
 Serum pancreatic polypeptide concentration was
offers such assays. However, samples may some-
 3500 times the upper limit of the reference range.
times be submitted to a human laboratory for assay.
Multiple
pancreatic
tumours
removed
at
 In this case the laboratory must be contacted for
exploratory laparotomy showed a strongly positive
 submission instructions as special sample handling
immunoreactivity for pancreatic polypeptide, and a
is required (see Chapter 1). Caution is advised
 positive reaction for insulin, but no reaction for gastrin
when interpreting high values as they occur in humans
 or other Gl regulatory peptides. However, it remains
with, amongst others, chronic renal failure, diabetic
uncertain whether there was a true cause-effect
ketoacidosis, starvation, acute pancreatitis, hyper-
relationship between the extremely high serum
 adrenocorticism and sepsis (Jensen and Norton,
 pancreatic polypeptide concentration and the clinical
2002).
 signs observed in this patient.
 If glucagon assay is not available, the diagnosis
It should be noted that approximately 75% of NETs
of superficial nacrolytic dermatitis is confirmed by
 of the Gl tract stain positive for pancreatic polypeptide
(Zerbe et al., 1989). However, the clinical syndrome in
out. An exploratory laparotomy should then be
these patients is caused by other neuroendocrine
considered.
substances.
226
Chapter 24 Unusual gastrointestinal endocrine disorders
Carcinoids
Also, the use of radioactively labelled somatostatin to
localize Gl NETs, especially gastrinomas, has been
Gastrointestinal carcinoids are a heterogenous group
mentioned (Altschul et al., 1997).
of tumours arising from the diffuse neuroendocrine
Other diagnostic uses of Gl regulatory peptides
system of the Gl tract. In human patients, these have
have been described in humans. Pentagastrin, a syn-
been reported to secrete a variety of regulatory sub-
thetic gastrin analogue, can be used to assess gastric
stances such as histamine, serotonin, gastrin,
acid secretory capacity in patients with suspected
somatostatin, tachykinins, peptide YY, pancreatic
hypochlorhydria or achlorhydria. Also, secretin can be
 polypeptide, calcitonin, CCK, motilin and bombesin.
utlized to evaluate bicarbonate secretory capacity of
Human gastric carcinoids often secrete large
the exocrine pancreas, or to increase exocrine pancre-
amcunts of histamine and lead to a syndrome charac-
 atic blood flow in order to enhance pancreatic angio-
terized by flushing, hypotension, lacrimation, cutane-
 graphy. Finally. glucagon has been used as a Gl
ous oedema and bronchoconstriction. By contrast,
relaxing agent to faclitate diagnostic procedures such
smal intestinal carcinoids often secrete serotonin and
as colonoscopy, gastroduodenoscopy or retrograde
lead to flushing, diarrhoea and bronchoconstriction.
cholangiopancreatography.
Gastrointestinal carcinoids have been reported in
dogs and cats (Sykes and Cooper, 1982). Recently,
 gastric carcinoids have been described in a dog and a
Therapeutic uses of gastrointestinal
cat. Both patients were old and presented with chronic
regulatory peptides
vomiting. The dog also showed weakness, ataxia, and
coughing, later deteriorated and was euthanased. The
With the exception of insulin treatment for dogs and
cat was surgically treated and remained free of clinical
cats with diabetes mellitus, the range of therapeutic
signs for 21 weeks, re-presenting with clinical signs of
uses of Gl regulatory peptides in veterinary patients is
chronic renal failure.
limited.
 Signs oflushing, hypotension or bronchoconstriction 
 The use of octreotide has shown initial promise in
have not been reported in dogs or cats. This may reflect
the medical management of canine gastrinoma pa-
a lack of synthesis of regulatory substances by canine
tients, and may also prove beneficial in the medical
 and feline Gl carcinoids, secretion of different regulatory
substances compared with human carcinoids, or a
al., 1997). Erythromycin, a macrolide antibiotic, can
relative resistance of dogs and cats to high plasma
cause motilin release and has been used in dogs at an
histamine and serotonin concentrations. Careful evalu-
antimicrobially ineffective dose (1.0 mg/kg orally tid) as
ation of future cases, including the measurement of
a prokineticagent in the Gl tract (Zerbe and Washabau,
urinary histamine and seratonin metabolite excretion,
2000). Other, more exotic, applications such as the
immunohistochemical behaviour, and ultrastructure of
treatment of achlorhydria with gastrin analogues, or
 the tumour cells. is required for a better understanding
the treatment of male impotence with ViPs are con-
of this disease in dogs and cats.
stantly being investigated in humans and will hopefully
lead to future applications in veterinary patients.
Other neuroendocrine tumours of
the gastrointestinal tract
References and further reading
Several other Gl NETs have been reported in humans 
Altschul M, Slmpson KW, Dykes NL, Mauldin EA, Reubi JC and
but have not yet been identified in dogs or cats.
Cumrmings JF (1997) Evaluation of somatostatin analogues for
VIPoma is a neuroendocrine tumour secreting
Smal Animal Practice38,286-291
large amounts of VIP (Bieligk and Jaffe, 1995; Jensen 
 and Norton, 2002). The clinical syndrome includes
Surgicat Clinics of North America 75, 1025-1040
 Brooks D and Watson GL (1997) Omeprazole ina dog with gastrinoma.
watery diarrhoea, hypokalaamia, hypochlorhydria and
Journal of Veterinary internal Medicine 11, 379-381
acidosis. Diagnosis is established by a severely high
EnglishRV,BreitschwerdtEB,Grindem CS, ThrallDE and Gainsburg
 plasma ViP concentration.
LA (1988) Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and myelofibrosis in adog.
Somatostatinoma is a rare NET causing diabetes
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 192,
1430-1434
 mellitus, gallstones and steatorrhoea (Bieligk and Jaffe,
Gabbert NH, Nachreiner RF, Holmes-Word P and Kivela JH (1984)
1995; Jensen and Norton, 2002). Diagnosis is based on
Senum immunoreactive gastrin concentrations in the dog. Basal
 an extremely high plasma somatostatin concentration.
AmericanJourna! of Veterinary Research45, 2351-2353
A GHRFoma is a tumour that often originates from
Gross TL, O'Brien TD, Davies AP and Long RE (199Q) Glucagon-
the pancreas and secretes large amounts of growth
necrolytic dermattls. Journat of the Amenican Veterinary Medical
hormone releasing factor (Jensen and Norton, 2002).
Association197,1619-1622
The syndrome is characterized by acromegaly.
Holst.JJ, FahrenkrugJ, Stadil F and Rehfeld JF (1296) Gastroinlestinal
Endocrinology. Scandinavian Journa! of Gastroenteroiogy 216,
27-38
 Jensen AL and Noron JA (2002) Pancreatic endocrine tumors, In:
Diagnostic uses of gastrointestinal
GastrointestinafanoLvcrLscase,/edned.MFeldmanefaf.,
regulatory peptides
pp. 988-1016. WB Saunders, Phlladelphia
Lamb CR, Simpson KW, Boswood A and Matlhewman LA (1995)
Utrasonography of pancrealic neoplasiainthe dog:arstrospective
As discussed previously, secretin can be used in a
review of 16 cases. Veterinary Record 137,65-68
challenge test for the diagnosis of canine gastrinoma.
LiplaMntGB,arrsRstF,isdallL,Brin
227
Chapter 24  Unusual gastrointestinal endocrine disorders
Malik R (2002) Gastroduodenal ulceratlon In cats: elght cases
Taboada J and Merchant S (1997) Superfilcial necrolytic dermatitis
and a review of the literature. Journal of Feline Medicine and
and the liver. Proceedings of the 15n ACViM Forum pp. 534-537
Surgery 4, 27-42
 Turnwald GH, Foil CS, Walfsheimer KJ, williams MD and Rougeou BL
Lothrap CD (1ea9) Medical treatmenl ot neuroendocrine tumors of
(1989) Failure to document hyperglucaganemia in a dog with
the gastroenteropancreatic system with somatostatin. In Current
diabetic denmalopathy resembling necrolyic migratory erythema.
Veteri7ary Therapy, 10m edn, ed. Rw Kirk, pp. 1020-1024. WB
Journal of the American Anirat Hospital Association25, 363-369
Saunders, Philtadelphia.
Walton DK, Center SA, Scott DW and Collins K (1986) Utcerative
Lurye JC and Bahrend EN (2001) Endocrine tumors. Veterinary
 dermatitis associated with diabetes melitus in the dog: a report
Chinics of North America: Small Animal Practice 31, 1083-1101
offourcases.Journalof the AmericanAnimaf Hospitai Association
Zerbe CA, Boosinger TR, Grabau JH, Plelcher JM and O'Dorisio TM
22,79-88
hypersecrelory stales.ln:Gastrointesinaland LiverDisease
edn, ea. M Feldman at al., pp. 782-796. WB Saundars,
Philadelphia
 Simpson kW and Dykes NL (1997) Diagnosis and treatment of
gastrinoma. Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Smal!
 Zerbe CA and Washabau RJ (2oo0) Gastrointeslinal endocrine
Animal) 12, 274-281
 disease. In: Textbookof Veterinary internat Medicine, 5h edn, ed.
 Sykes GP and Cooper BJ (1982) Canine intestinal carcinoids.
SJ Etinger and EC Feldman, pp. 1500-1508. WB Saunders,
Veterinary Pathoiogy 19. 120-131
Philadelphia
228
Autoimmune polyglandular
disease
Peter A.Graham
Introduction
immuneresponsethatviewsnormal tissuesaspoten-
tial targets.
Of the common endocrinopathies ofdogs andcats,
manyresult fromthe immune-mediated destruction of
endocrine tissue.An immune-mediated process is
Types
believed to cause themajorityof casesof hypothy-
roidism,hypoadrenocorticism,hypoparathyroidism,and
Inhumans there are two typesofpolyglandular
a substantialproportion of insulin-dependent diabetes
autoimmune(PGA)syndromeswithdifferingfeatures
mellitus,at least ndogs.Incertainindividuals,more
(Figure 25.1)(Eisenbarth and Verge,1998).
thanone endocrine gland is targeted by the inflamma
toryprocess and these animals areconsideredtohave
TypeI PGA
apolyglandularimmune-mediated disease.Onsome
occasions othernon-endocrinetissuescanbeinvolved
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hypoparathyroidism
(e.g.haemolytic anaemia,myasthenia gravis).Im-
mune-mediated polyglandular syndromes are rela-
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
Hypogonadism
tivelyuncommoningeneralveterinarypractice butit is
Hypothyroidism
worth maintainingvigilance foradditianal immune-
Type 1 diabetes melitus
mediateddiseasesinanimalsthathave alreadybeen
Intestinal malabsorption
diagnosed with one of the above conditions.The com-
Alopecia
Viligo
oftenasecond,oreventhird,diseasebecomesappar
Permicious anaemia
ent months toyears after the first hasbeen success-
Chronic active hepatitis
fullymanaged.
Type ll PGA
The otherforms ofpolyendocrinopathy thatcan
exist in small animals include: partial or pan-hypopitui-
Hypoadrenocorticism
tarism,where pituitary failure results in secondary
Autoimmune thyroiditis
Type 1 diabetes melitus
hypofunction of endocrine organs;and multiple endo-
Hypogonadism
crine neoplasia, in which animals are predisposed to
Coeliac disease
the development of functional neoplasia in multiple
Myasthenia gravis
endocrine sites.Both of these syndromes are very
Vitligo
differentfrom themultipleendocrinefailuresyndrome
Alopecia
ofpolyglandularautoimmune disease.
Pernicious anaemia
25.1
Component disorders cf polyglandular
Pathology
autoimmune syndromes ir humans.
Theinflammatorypathologyof theimmune-mediated
PGA-I
endocrinopathies is similar,irrespective of the gland
TypeI (PGA-l) disease is associated with:
involved and generallyincludes both cell-mediated (T-
cell) and humoral(B-cell) components.Many theories
Hypoadrenocorticism
have been proposed concerning thepossible initiators
Hypoparathyroidism
and predispositions.Studies in humans and experi-
Mucocutaneouscandidiasis
mental animalsincludinginvestigationsof heritability,
Hypogonadism
haveled toafocusonthemajor histocompatability
Hypothyroidism
complex(MHC)as the possible source ofpredisposi-
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
tionin affected individuals and families.The inappro-
Malabsorption.
priate presentation of endogenous or exogenous
antigens or dysfunction of the normal suppressive
It isinherited inanautosomalrecessivemanner
immuneregulationsystemissuspectedtoinitiatean
independent of MHC alleles.Recently，defects in a
229
Chapter 25
 Autoimmune polyglandular disease
newly identified autoimmune regulator gene (AlRE)
years, between the first identitication of thyroid anti-
have been shown to be responsible for human PGA-l
bodies (thyroglobulin autoantibodies (TgAA)) and de-
(Anderson, 2002; Ikegami, 2002). The defective or
tection of thyroid dysfunction (low circulating thyroxine
absent AlRE causes failure to delete autoreactive
(T4) and high thyrotropin (thyroid stimulating hormane,
T-cell clones in the thymus (Liston etal., 2003). Whether
TSH) concentrations) (Graham et al, 2001).
defects in the equivalent canine and feline genes exist 
Identification of specific antibodies to more than
has yet to be explored.
 one organ in patients alffected with immune-mediated
endocrine disease confirms a diagnosis of polyglandu-
PGA-I
lar disease and allows for early institution of therapy as
Type Il PGA (PGA-Il) syndrome is associated with:
 required. Such an approach is more helpful than a
functional investigation (e.g. adrenocorticotropic hor-
Hypoadrenocorticism
 mone (ACTH) response test) in identifying impending
Thyroiditis
gland failure at a time when functional reserve in a
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
 partially destroyed gland permits normal function.
+
Hypogonadism
Serum antibody tests for endocrine gland-specific
Coeliac disease
immune-mediated disease are still limited in the dog.
Myasthenia gravis.
TgAA and anti-insulin antibody tests are readily avail-
able. Anti-islet (glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65)
 PGA-ll predisposition is polygenetic but strong
associations exist with certain human leucocyte anti-
 in a research setting (L Davison, personal communica-
gen (HLA) alleles within the MHC. Work has begun on 
tion) and serum markers of subclinical hypo-
dog leucocyte antigen (DLA) associations with canine
adrenocorticism are under development. Diagnostic
diabetes melitus, and predisposing haplotypes are
tests for other potentially concurrent immune-
being identified (LJ Kennedy, personal communication).
mediated diseases such as myasthenia gravis (acetyl-
Appropriate genetic study of canine PGA cases may
yet identify similar MHC-associated predispositions for
 mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) (Coombs' test)
this variant of immune-mediated endocrine disease in
are also available.
small animals.
There are certain common or cross-reacting anti-
Hypothyroidism
gens among the affected organs in PGA syndromes,
The diagnosis of hypothyroidism in animals with a pre-
existing endocrine disease deserves particular cau-
pathy, and between thyroiditis and myasthenia gravis
tion. A common physiological response to significant
(Mappouras ef al., 1995). However, in most cases,
non-thyrcidal illness (such as diabetes mellitus or
circulating antibodies are organ-specific and no single
hypoadrenocorticism) is a decrease in circulating total
common autoantigen has yet been discovered. Both
T4, often to concentrations below the reference range.
forms of human polyglandular disease are modified by
Consequently, the confident diagnosis of hypothy-
environmental circumstances as shown by significant
roidism in an animal with anather endocrine disease
discordance of expression and onset of disease in
 requires the additional measurement of circulating
identical twins despite, in some cases, much greater
TSH, TgAA and perhaps free T4 by equilibrium dialysis
concordance in the presence of autoantibodies.
(see Chapter 10).
Clinical features
Treatment
The clinical presentation of an animal with immune-
The treatment of the polyglandular autoimmune syn-
mediated polyglandular disease will depend on the
dromes depends on the component diseases. In gen-
combination of endocrine disorders present.
eral, the treatment of either component is similar for
each alone but in some cases with minar adjustments
 in approach or expectations (see below).
Diagnosis
Immunosuppression is not considered useful
therapy for these conditions in humans. However,
The diagnosis of multiple endocrine diseases in an
 some work in experimental animals and humans sug-
affected individual follows the same protocols as for the
gests that the early treatment of conditions - when
individual endocrinopathies concerned.
there is evidence of pathology (e.g. serum antibodies)
but not yet any overt hormone deficiency - with the
Antibody detection
 appropriate hormone (e.g. thyroid hormone for thy-
When the inflammatory process employs a significant
roiditis, insulin for insulitis) can alter the course or
humoral component, antibodies may be released into
resolve the immune-mediated process (Eisenbarth
the circulation. Detection of organ-specific antibodies
and Verge, 1998; Lee et al., 1998). Such therapy may
buoj aogoued aul jo aouasaid au sieaaau wnas ui
 act by feedback inhibition of the affected gland or by the
before organ destruction is sufficient to result in clinical
induction of immune tolerance to the hormonal prod-
signs. In immune-mediated thyroiditis in the dog, it
uct. In veterinary medicine, few have been convinced
appears that there may be many months, or even
of the concept of using thyroid hormone supplementa-
230
Chapter 25  Autoimmune polyglandular disease
tion in subclinical thyroiditis to prevent a future need for
of hypothyroid dogs (Milne and Hayes, 1981).
 thyroid hormone treatment; most prefer to wait until a
Hypothyroidism should be suspected in dogs with
clinical need for treatment becomes apparent.
hypoadrenocorticism particularly when there is a poor
response to mineralocorticoids, persistent hyponat-
raemia or bradycardia, inappropriate hypercholesterol-
Reported combinations
aemia, dermatological signs, obesity or heat-seeking
behaviour (Melendez et al., 1996).
The following combinations have been reported in the
Thyroid hormone replacement therapy potentially
:6op
causes increased requirements for steroid supple-
 mentation because of the expected increase in
 Diabetes melitus and hypothyrcidism (Ling et al.,
metabolic rate. However, this is unclear and dose
1977; Milne and Hayes, 1981; Ford et al., 1993; 
adjustments should be made based on an individual
Panciera, 1994; Graham, 1995)
animal's response.
Hypoadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, diabetes
 mellitus and hypoparathyroidism (Peterson et al.,
 Hypoadrenocorticism and diabetes
1996)
mellitus
 Hypothyroidism and hypoadrenocorticism (Mine 
 The combination of hypoadrenocorticism and diabetes
and Hayes, 1981; Bowen et al., 1986; Kooistra et
mellitus is relatively rare compared with other combi-
al., 1995; Smallwood and Barsanti, 1995;
nations (see above). Diabetes mellitus has been iden-
Melendez et al., 1996: Peterson et al., 1996)
tified in <0.5% of dogs with hypoadrenocorticism
Hypoadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus
(Peterson etal., 1996) butlarge case series of diabetes
(Peterson et al., 1996)
mellitus fail to identify or mention any cases of
Diabetes melitus and IMHA (Elie and Hoenig, 1995)
hypoadrenocorticism.
 Myasthenia gravis and hypothyroidism (Dewey er
Animals with this combination of diseases would be
al., 1995)
expected to have lower than normal insulin require-
 Myasthenia gravis and hypoadrenocorticism
(Whitley,1995; Shelton, 1998).
if diabetes melitus preceded the hypoadrenocorticism.
The therapeutic use of glucocorticoids may result in
 The combination of endocrine and gastrointestinal
increased insulin requirements.
or malabsorptive disease has not yet been reported,
although it has been suggested that the hypo-
 albuminaemia of hypoadrenocorticism may reflect, at
References and further reading
least in part, a protein-losing or malabsorptive entero-
pathy (Langlais-Burgess et al., 1995).
Anderson MS (2002) Autoimmune endocrine diseaase. Current
Opinions in Immunology 14, 760-764
There are no published reports of polyglandular
Bowen D, Schaer M and Riley W (1986) Autoimmune polyglandular
autoimmune disease in cats.
syndrome in a dog. Joumal or the American Animaf Hospital
Association 22, 649-654
Dewey CW, Shelton GD, Bailey CS, Wllard MD, Podell M and Collins
RL(1995) Neuromusculardyslunctionin ive dogs with acquired
Relative frequencies and
myasthenia gravis and presumplive hypothyroidism. Prograss in
Veterinary Neurology 6, 117-123
consequences
Eisenbarth GS and Verge CF (1998). 1mmunoendocrinopaihy
syndromes. In: Wiliam's Textbook of Endocrinology, 9"n edn, ed.
Hypothyroidism and diabetes mellitus
JDWilntal,612aundersPhilahi
Elia M and Hoanig M (1995) Canlne immune-mediated diabetes
Hypothyraidism is not uncomman in diabetic dogs;
melitus: a case report. Journat of the American Animal Hospital
estimates of the prevalence range from 4 to 9% (Ling
Associafion 31,295-299
'et al., 1977; Graham, 1995). However, in reported case
Ford SL, Nelson Rw, Feldman EG and Niwa D (1993) Insulin
resistanceinthreedogswithhypothyroidismand dlabelesmelitus.
series of canine hypothyroidism, only 1.2-1.5% of
Journal of the Amenican Veterinary Medical Association 202.
hypothyroid dogs had diabetes mellitus (Milne and
1478-1480
Hayes, 1981; Panciera, 1994).
 diabetes melitus. PhD Thesis, University of Glasgow, Glasgow
A proportion of dogs with concurrent hypothyroidism
Graham PA.Lundguist RB, Refsal KR, Nachreiner RF and Provencher
 and diabetes mellitus have insulin resistance and high
AL (2001) 12-month prospective_study of 234 thyroglobulin
insulin requirements. The institution of thyroid supple-
antibody positlve dogs which had na laboratory evidence of
thyroiddysfunction (Abstr).Jourmalof Veterinary internal Medicine
mentation therapy is therefore expected to cause a
862
decrease in insulin requirement. However, this de-
[kegami H (2002) Animal models of autoimmune polyglandular
syndrome. Endocrinotogyand Metabotism Clinics of North Amenica
creased requirement tends to occur more slowly and
31, 431-439, vill.
less dramatically than that following the treatment of
 Kooistra HS, Rijnberk A and van den Ingh TS (1995) Polyglandular
hyperadrenocorticism in diabetics. Thus, intensive
glucocorticoid deficiency.Veterinary Quartery17.59-63
 dose monitoring and adjustment is not normally
required.
hypoadrenocorticism and hypoalbuminemia in dogs: a
Tetrospective study.journalof the American Animal Hospitai
Association 31,307-311
Hypothyroidism and hypoadrenocorticism
Lee S, Scherberg N and DeGroot LJ (1998) Inductionof oraltolerance
Hypothyroidism occurs in approximately 4% of dogs
Ling GV, Lowenstine LJ, Pulley LT and Kaneko JJ (1977) Diabeles
with hypoadrenocorticism (Peterson et al., 1996) but
mellitus in dogs: a review of initiat evaluation, Immedlate and
hypoadrenocorticism occurs in only approximately 1%
long-term management and outcome. Journaf of the American
231
Chapter 25 Autoimmune polyglandular disease
Veterinary Medicat Association 170, 521-530
 Panciera DL (1994) Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases, Jaurnal of the
Liston A, Lesage S, Wilson J, Peltonen L and Goodnow CC (2003)
American Veterinary Medical Association 204, 761-767
AIRE regulates negative selection of organ-specific T cells.
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP and Kass PH (i996) Pretreatment clinical
Nature lmmunology 4. 350-354
Mappouras DG, Philippou G, Haralambous S, Tzartos SJ, Balafas A,
cases (1979-1993) Journatof thc Amcrican Veterinary Medical
Sauvatzoglou A and Lymberi P (1995) Antibodies to
Assoc/ation 208, 85-91
acetylcholinesterase_cross-reaoting_with thyrogobulin in
Shelton GD (1998) Myasthenia gravis; lessons from the past 10
years. Journat of Smal Animai Practice 39, 368-372
Immunology100,336-343
Melendez LD, Greca DS, Turner JL, Hay DA and VanLiaw CH (1996) 
family of leonbergers. Journal of the American Animat Hospital
Cancurrent hypoadrenocoricism and hypolhyraidism in 10 dogs
Associalion 31, 301-305
(Abstr). Journai of Veterinary internal Medicine 10, 182
Whitley NT (1995) Megaoesophagus and glucocorticoid-deficient
 Milne KL and Hayes HM (1981) Epidemiologic features of canine
hypoadrengcorticism in a dog. Journai of Smalf Animal Practice
36, 132-185
232
Acarbose,119,133-4
clinical features, 61-2
Acid-base disorders, 45
diagnosis, 58-61
diabetic ketoacidosis, 144, 148
hair growth cycle, 57-8
Acid-base therapy, 148
hyperadrenocorticism, 157
Acromegaly, 71, 187-92
hypothyroidism, 79
in cats, 187,189, 191
laboratory investigation, 62-3
clinical features, 187-90
non-scarring, 58
cardiovascular system,
.189
 pathophysiology, 5
diabetes melitus, 188-9 
scarring, 58
general appearance, 188
seasonal flank, 60
nervous system, 189
skin biopsy, 62-3
renal system, 189
traumatic. 58
reproductive system, 189
treatment， 63-4
respiratary system.
188
Alopecia X, 60, 63
signalment, 187
Freatment, 64
skelelal system, 189 
 Alpha-glucosidase inhibitars, 119-20, 133-4
diagnosis, 190
Amylin, 131
in dogs, 187,189, 190-1
Anaemia
pathogenesis, 187
 autoimmune polyglandular disease, 229, 230
prognosis, 191
diabetic ketoacidosis, 145, 148
treatment, 190-1
hyperthyroidism, 99, 105
ACTH
hypoadrenocorticism, 175,214
availability and uses, 12
hypothyroidism, 63, 83
conversion factors, 11
Angiotensin 1l, 44, 45, 172, 173
plasma concentrations, 164, 176, 215
Anoestrus, 157
reference range,
.12
Anti-insulin antibodies, 67
sample handling. 1
 Antidiuretic hormone see Vasopressin
storage temperature, 4
 Arginine vasopressin see Vasopressin
ACTH response test, 14, 162-3. 176, 207, 215
Atenolol, 103, 106
Acute renal failure, potassium loss in, 46
Atherosclerosis, 54
 Addison's disease see Hypoadrenocorticism
Atrophic alopecias, 58
 ADH see Vasopressin
 Australian Shepherd dogs, diabetes mellitus, 113
Adrenal cortex, 150-2
Australian Terriers, diabetes melitus, 113 
physiology, 172-3
 Autoimmune polyglandular disease, 229-32
Adrenal function tests, 176-7
clinical features, 230
ACTH response test, 176
diagnosis, 230
endogenous plasma ACTH concentration, 176
pathology, 229
plasma aldosterone concentration, 176-7
relative frequencies and consequences, 231
Adrenal gland enlargement, 160 
reported combinations, 231
Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, 154
treatment, 230-1
Adrenalectomy, _169-70, 211
types,229-30
Adrenaline see Epinephrine
Azotaemia, 175
Adrenocorticotropic hormone see ACTH
Airedale Terriers, alopecia in, 60
Aldosterone, 43--4
Bearded Collles, hypoadrenocorticism, 173
 conversion factors, 11
Bichon Frise, diabetes mellitus, 113
plasma concentrations. 176-7
Biguanides, 134
sample handling. 1
Bile acids, 158
storage temperature, 4
Blood gases,
148
Alkaline phosphatase,
158
Blood pressure, 148
Alopecia in dogs, 57-65
Bombesin, 222
 acquired pattern, 60
Boxers
atrophic, 58
alopecia,60
breed predisposition, 60
insulinoma, 200
233
xapul
Burmese cats
storage temperature, 4
diabetes mellitus, 130
Cortisone acetate, 178-9
periodic hypokalaemia in, 45, 48
Creatinine
hyperadrenocorticism, 158
hyperthyroidism, 99
C-peptide, 159
 Curly Coated Retrievers, alopecia, 60
Cairn Terriers, diabetes melitus, 113
 Cushing's syndrome see Hyperadrenocorticism
Calcinosis cutis, 156, 160
Cyproheptadine, 169 
Calcitonin, 32, 222
disorders of production, 40
Calcitriol disorders, 40
Dachshunds, hyperadrenocorticism, 154 
Calcium
Daidzein, 96
in hyperthyroidism, 99
Darglitazone, 134
ionized, 28
Desmopressin
measurement of, 28
formulations, 24
samples, 4
long-term treatment regimens, 24-5
tatal, 28
therapeutic trial, 24
 Calcium homeostasis, 26-7
 Desoxycorticosterone pivalate, 178
 circulating calcium and phosphate, 26
 Diabetes insipidus, 21—4
disorders of, 27
central，23
hypercalcaemia see Hypercalcaemia
circulating ADH concentrations, 23-4
hypocalcaemia see Hypocalcaemia.
nephrogenic, 23
see also Parathormone; Parathyroid glands
treatment, 24-5
Calcium ipodate, 103
water deprivation test, 22-3
Calcium oxalate, 30
 see also Polyuria and polydypsia
Cancer cachexia, 53
 Diabetes mellitus
Carbimazale, 104
and acromegaly,
.188-9
Carcinoids, 227
in cats, 129-41
Carelian Bear Dogs, pituitary dwarfism, 183 
 anaesthesia, 139
Carnivore Connection Theory, 131
blood glucose concentration, 132
Cataracts,125,139
chronic complications, 139-40 
Catecholamines, measurement of, 219-20
 clinical features, 132
Cholecystographic agents,
106
complicated, 132
Cholecystokinin, 223
diagnosis, 132
Cholestatic disease, 52
fructosamine concentration, 132
Cholesterol, 49-51
glucocorticoids, 138-9
diabetes melltus, 114
pathogenesis, 129-32
hyperadrenocorticism, 158
prognosis, 140
hypoadrenocorticism, 173
treatment, 132-9
hypothyroidism, 83
type 2, 129-32
see also Hyperlipidaemia
uncomplicated,
132
Chromium, 120, 134
urinaiysis, 132
Chronic renal failure, potassium loss in, 45, 48 
in dogs, 112-28
Chylomicrons, 50
chronic complications, 125-7
Circulating glycated proteins, 138
clinical features, 112-13 
Clodronate, 32
diagnosis, 113-15
Cocker Spaniels, diabetes mellitus, 113
laboralory testing. 113-15
Cold intolerance, 80
pathophysiology, 112
Collies
prognosis, 127
 diabetes mellitus, 113
treatment, 115-20
insulinoma, 200
and hyperlipidaemla, 52
 Combined high-dose dexamethasone suppression and
monitoring, 69
 ACTH response test, 15 
potassium translocation, 45
Comedones, 156
remission/relapse, 72
Computed tomography. 74
 Somogyi phenomenon, 68-9
acromegaly. 190
transient, 138
gastrinoma, 225
 See aiso Diabetic control; Insulin
hyperadrenocorticism, 161-2, 209 
Diabetic control, 66-75, 136-8
insulinoma, 201
blood glucose measurement, 120, 132, 136-7
phaeochromocytoma, 217
case management, 68-9 
Congenital hypothyroidism, 77
in cats, 136-8
Conn's syndrome, 45-6
circulating fructosamine concentratian, 120-1
 Containars for transportation, 5
circulating glycaled proteins, 138 
Corneal lipidosis, 81
in dogs, 120-5
Cortisol
endogenous causes of poor control, 66, 69-72
 availability and uses, 12
and hepatic insufficiency, 71-2
conversion factors, 11
and hyperadrenocorticism, 70-1
reference range,
12
investigation of poor control, 72-4
 sample handing:
1
serial blood glucose curve, 121-4, 137
234
Index
urine manitoring. 124-5, 138
Gastric inhibitory peptide, 223
 Diabetic ketoacidosis, 142-9
Gastrin, 223
clinical features, 143
 sample handling, 1
concurrent disease, 145
Gastrin-cholecystokinin, 222
diagnosis, 143-5
Gastrinoma, 223-5
electrolyte concentrations, 144
clinical features, 224
haematology, 145
diagnosis, 224-5
history, 143
prognosis,225
laboratory findings, 143-4
treatment. 225
liver enzymes, 144
Gastrointestinal endocrine disorders, 222-8
metabolic acidosis, 144
carcinoids, 227
pathophysiology, 142
gastrinoma,224-5
prognosis, 149
gastrointestinal regulatory peptides
treatment, 145-8
GHRFoma, 227
electrolyte and acid-base therapy, 147-8
glucagonoma, 226
fluid therapy. 147
pancreatic polypeptidoma, 226
insulin therapy. 147-8
somatostatinama, 227
response to, 148
VIPoma, 227
urinalysis.145
Genistein, 96
Diabetic nephropathy, 126-7, 140
German Shepherd dogs
Diabetic neuropathy, 126, 139-40
diabetes mellitus,
113
Diabetogenic drugs, 72
insulinoma,200
Diagnostic imaging see individual techniques
pituitary dwarfism, 183
Diazoxide, 203
Giantism, 187
Diet
Glipizide, 133
high fibre, 118
Glucagon, 223
 and polydypsia/polyuria, 19
conversion factors, 11
treatment for diabetes mellitus, 117-18, 135-6
Glucagonoma, 226
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D
Glucocorticoids
 conversion factors, 11
anti-inflammatory effects. 152
 sample handling. 2
and diabetes mellitus. 138-9 
Dilated cardiomyopathy, 81
effects
Diuretics
 carbohydrate metabolism, 152
hypercalcaemia. 31
fat metabolism, 152
hypakalaemia, 46,48
 protein metabolism,
152
Dobermann Pinschers
hypercalcaemia, 31-2
alopecia, 60
hypoadrenocorticism, 216
diabetes mellitus, 113
regulation of release, 150-2
hypothyroidisn, 78
Glucose
Doxorubicin, 204 
 blood concentration
Drug-induced hyperlipidaemia, 53
diabetes mellitus, 120, 132, 136-7, 148
Drug-induced hypoadrenocorticism, 190
hyperadrenocorticism, 158
Drug-induced insulin resistance, 130
 serial blood glucose curve, 121-4, 137
urine monitoring, 124-5, 138
Electracardiography. 148, 175-6
see also Diabetic control
Glucose toxicity, 131, 131-2
Electrolyte monitaring. 148
Electrolyte therapy, 148
Glycosuria
diabetes mellitus, 124-5, 138
Electrolytes
diabetlc ketoacidosis, 144
hyperadrenocorticism, 159 
hyperadrenocorticism, 158
Goitre, 98-9
Golden Retrievers
hypoadrenocorticism, 175
diabetes mellitus, 113
Enzyme immunoassay (EIA), 7-8
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 7-8
hypothyroidism, 78
Granulomatous disease, 40
Epidermal growth factor, 222
Epinephrine (adrenaline) conversion factors, 11
Great Danes, hypoadrenocorticism, 174
Ground glass appearance, 145
Exercise
 in diabetes mellitus, 118
Growth hormone, 182-3
 availability and uses, 13
intolerance. 80
conversion factors, 11
determination of, 190
'Fading puppy syndrome, 77
effects.182-3
Fludrocortisone acetate,
178
hyperadrenocorticism, 159.
Fluid therapy, 31, 147
reference range,
12
Follicular dysplasias, 58, 64
sample handling.
1
Fox Terriers
secretion, 182
diabetes mellitus, 113
insulinoma, 200
Fructosamine, circulating concentration, 120-1, 132
Haemolysis,3
Furosemide, 31,32.46, 48
Hair growth cycle, 57-8
235
Index
Hepatic insufficiency and diabetic control, 71-2
lipid metabolism, 49-51
Hepatomegaly. 159-60
management, 55
High density lipoproteins (HDLs),. 51
physiological, 52
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 164-5,
secondary, 52-3
208
Hyperoestrogenism, alopecia in, 60, 63
Hormone assays, 6-10
Hyperparathyroidism, 27
biological activity. 10
primary.35-7
enzyme immunoassay. 7-8
clinical features,
35
enzyme-linked irmmunosorbent assay, 7-8
diagnosis, 35-6
free hormones, 8-9
pathophysiolagy.
35
immunoradiometric assay, 7
treatment, 36-7
precision, 9
secondary
radioimmunoassay, 6-7
nutritional, 38
sensitivity. 9
renal, 38-9
specificity, 9
Hyperpigmentation, 62
veterinary use,10
Hypertension
Horner's syndrome, 51
in diabetes mellitus, 127
Humoral hypercalcaemia. of malignancy, 27
in hyperadrenocorticism, 157
Hydration status, 148
Hyperthyroidism
Hydroxyapatite, 26
in cats, 95-111
17-Hydroxyprogesterane
aetiology, 95-6
 availability and uses,
13
clinical features, 96-9
 conversion factors,
11
diagnosis, 99-102
reference range, 12
electrocardiography. 100
25-Hydroxyvitamin D
radiography and cardiac ultrasonography, 100
conversion factors,
11
serum biochemisiry, 99-100
sample handling, 2
thyrcid function tests, 100-2
storage temperature, 4
treatment, 102-9
Hyperadrenocorticism
urinalysis, 100
alopecia in, 60, 63
 and diabetic control, 70-1
in cats, 205-12
in dogs, 195-9
 clinical features, 205-6
adenomas, 196
diagnosis, 206-9
aetiology, 196-7
prognosis, 211
carcinomas, 196
treatment, 209-11
clinical features, 
197
and diabetic control, 70-1
diagnosis, 198
diagnosis, 157-65
differential diagnosis, 197-8
in dogs, 150-71
thyroid function, 196
adrenal cortex physiology, 150-2
treatment, 198-9
adrenal-dependent, 154, 169-70
hypokalaemia in, 46-7
breed disposition, 154 
 Hypertriglyceridaemia
clinical features, 154-7
in cats, 53, 131
diagnostic imaging, 159-62, 165
in dogs, 53-4
endocrine screening tests, 162-4
Hypervitaminosis D, 40
high-dose dexamethasone suppression test,
 biochemical and harmone findings, 27
164-5
 Hypoadrenocorticism 
laboratory findings, 157-9
in cats, 213-16
 pituitary-dependent, 153-4, 165-9
aetiology and pathophysiology, 213
plasma endogenous ACTH concentration, 164
clinical features, 214
treatment, 165-70
diagnosis, 214-15
Hyperaldosteronism, 45-6, 48 
treatment, 215-16
Hypercalcaemia, 30-2
 and diabetes mellitus, 231
clinical signs, 30
in dogs, 172-80
diagnosis, 31
adrenal cortex physiology, 172-3
differential diagnosis, 31
 adrenal function tests, 176-7
idiopathic, in cats, 41
aetiology, 172
of malignancy, 27, 39-40
clinical features, 173-4
treatment, 31-2
diagnosis, 174-7
diuretics, 31
diagnostic imaging. 176
fluid therapy. 31
electrocardiography, 175-6
 glucocorticoids, 31-2
haematalogy. 174-5
Hypercholesterolaemia, 51
primary, 172-9
Hyperkalaemia, 175
prognosis, 179
Hyperkeratosis, 78-9
secondary.
179
Hyperlipidaemia, 49-56, 114
treatment, 177-9
classification of, 52-3
jatrogenic, 190
clinical manifestations, 53-4
Hypocalcaemia, 32-5
diagnosis, 54
clinical signs, 32-3
inherited and idiopathic, 53
diagnosis, 33-4
236
Index
differential diagnosis, 33
insulin lispro, 116
post-thyroidectomy. 108
use as initial therapy, 117, 118-19
treatment, 34-5
 Insulin resistance, 130-1
Hypochloraemia,175
Insulin-like growth factor-1, 184-5
Hypoglycaemia, 125-6
availability and uses, 13
causes of, 201
conversion factors, 11
Hypokalaemia in cats, 43-8
hyperadrenocorticism, 159
causes of, 44-7
reference range, 12
clinical features, 47
sample handling. 1
differential diagnosis, 44
storage temperature, 4
treatment, 47-8
Insulinoma, 200-4
Hyponatraemia, 175
 clinical features, 200
Hypoparathyroidism
diagnosis, 201
biochemical and hormone findings, 27
differential diagnosis, 200-1
primary, 37-8
treatment, 201-4
Hypophysectomy, 169, 191, 211
chemotherapy, 203-4
Hypothyroidism, 230
emergency treaiment, 201-2
alopecia in, 60, 63
long-term medical management, 203
in cats, 193-5
surgery, 202-3
clinical features, 193-4 
lodine
diagnosis, 194-5
radioactive, 108-9
dynamic thyroid function tests, 195
stable,103,106
thyroid hormone concentrations, 194-5 
Irish Setters, insulinoma, 200
treatment, 195
Irish Water Spaniels, alopecia, 60
 and diabetes mellitus, 231
and diabetic control, 70-1
in dogs, 76-94
Jack Russell Terriers, hyperadrenocorticism, 154
aetiology, 76-7
central, 77
clinical features, 78-81
Keeshond, polyuria and polydypsia, 18
congenital, 77
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 81
idiopathic thyroidal atrophy, 77
Ketoconazole, 169, 209
lymphocytic thyroiditis, 76-7
Kidney see Renal
prevalence, 77
 and hypoadrenocorticism, 231
post-thyroidectomy, 108
Laboratory tests
Hypovitaminosis D, 40
effects of lipaemia, 51
see aiso individual conditions
Labrador Retrievers, diabetes melitus, 113
Idiopathlc hypercalcaemia, 41
Laryngeal paralysis, 81
Idiopathic hyperlipidaemia.
53
Leonbergers, hypoadrenocorticism, 174
ldiopathic thyroidal atrophy. 77
Lethargy. 80
Immunoradiometric assay, 7
Lipaemia,3-4,51-2,114
Inherited hyperlipidaemia,53
Lipaemia retinalis, 53
Insulin, 67-8, 115-17, 134-5,222, 223
Lipase, 115
absorption，67
Lipid toxicity. 131-2
administration, 67-8
Lipids, 49
 anti-insulin antibodies, 67
laboratory measurements, 51-2
 availability and uses, 13 
metabolism, 49-51
concentration, 135
transport of samples, 50--1
 conversion factors, 11
Lipoproteins, 49-50
diabetic ketoacidosis. 147-8
 characterization of, 52
dose, 135
classes of, 49-50
duration of activity, 67
function, 50
handling, 67, 117
structure, 49
hyperadrenocorticism, 159
Liver enzymes in diabetic ketoacidosis, 144
owner education, therapy, 135
Low density lipoproteins (LDLs), 51
pharmacokinetics, 134
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 15, 163-4,
preparations, 134-5
208
reference range, 12
Lower motor neuron disease, 80
resistance to therapy. 130--↑1
Lymphocytic thyroiditis, 76-7
sample handling.
1
secretion, impaired, 130-2
species of origin, 116-17. 134
Magnesium in diabetic ketoacidosis, 144
storage temperature, 4
Magnetic resonance imaging
types
acromegaly, 190
insulin aspart, 116
gastrinoma, 225
insulin glargine, 116,1345
hyperadrenocorticism, 161-2, 209
insulin fente, 115-16 
insulinoma, 201
237
Irdex
phaeochromocytoma, 219
measurement of, 28-9
pituitary dwarfism, 185 
reference range,
.12
Malassezia, 79
sample handling. 2
Matrix cell abnormalities, 58, 64
storage temperature. 4
Megaoesophagus, 81
Parathormone-related protein
Melanocyte abnormalities, 58, 64
measurement of, 29 
Metabolic acidosis. 144
sample handling. 2
Metformin, 134
Parathyrcid glands, 26-7
Methimazole, 103, 104
examinatian of, 29
Metoestrus, and diabetic control, 69-70
pathology, 39-40
Metyrapone, 209
Peplide YY, 223
Miglitol, 119
Phaeochromocytoma, 217-21
Mineralocorticoids, anli-inflammatory effects, 152
biclogical behaviour, 217
Miniature Poodles
catecholamine measurements, 219-20
diabetes mellitus, 113
clinical features, 217-18
 polyuria and polydypsia, 18
diagnosis, 218-19
Miniature Schnauzers
prognosis, 220
diabetes mellitus, 113
treatment, 220
hypertriglyceridaemia, 53, 54
Phosphate
Mitotane, 166-8, 170,209
 in diabetic ketoacidosis, 144
adverse effects, 166-7, 167-8
in hyperthyroidism, 99
initial therapy. 166
Pioglitazone, 134
maintenance therapy. 167
Pituitary cysts, 183
pre-treatment assessment, 166
 Pituitary dwarfism, 181-6
survival data, 168
clinical features, 183-4
Motilin, 223
diagnosis, 184-5
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes, 197
differential diagnosis, 184
Muscle wasting, 155-6
growth hormone, 182-3
Myxoedema, 79
pathophysiology. 183
Myxoedema coma, 81
prognosis, 185
treatment, 185
Pituitary gland
Neurotensin, 223
development 181-2
Norepinephrine (noradrenaline) conversion factors, 11
function tests,
184-5
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retrievers,
imaging. 185
hypoadrenocortlcism, 174
radiotherapy, 211
 Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, 38
Pituitary macroadenoma, 151
Pituitary-adrenal function tests, 207-9, 215
ACTH response test, 14, 162-3, 176, 207, 215
Obesity
high-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 164-5,
208
 and diabetes mellitus, 130
Iow-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 15,
and diabetic control, 69
163-4,208
and hypothyroidism, 80
urine cartisol:creatinine ratio, 208
and insulin resistance, 130
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, 153-4
Oestrogen conversion factors, 11
Polyphagia
Oestrogen-responsive dermatosis, 60
in diabetes mellitus, 132
Opioids, 223
 in hyperadrenocorticism,
Oral hypoglycaemic agents, 133-4
155
Polyurla and polydypsia, 16-25, 132
alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, 133-4
causes of, 17-18
biguanides, 134
diagnosis. 18-21
sulphonylurea drugs, 133
diet, 19
thiazolidinediones, 134 
differential diagnosis, 17
transition metals, 134
Osteopenia, 160
environmental factors,
19
hyperadrenocorticism, 155, 206
Oxyntomodulin, 223
hyperthyroidism, 97
hypothyroidism, 81
physical examination, 19-20
Pamidronate, 32
potassium loss in, 46
Pancreatic polypeptide, 222,223
signalment and history. 18
Pancreatic polypeptidoma, 226
thirst mechanism, 
17
Pancreatitis, 52
treaimenl, 24-5
and diabetic control, 71, 131
urinalysis, 20
Parathormone
urine specific gravity, 21
actions of, 27
water consumption, 20
availability and uses, 13
 Poodles, hyperadrenocorticism, 154 
calcium homeostasis, 27
Portuguese Water Spaniels
conversion factors, 11
alopecia, 60,61
hyperadrenocorticism, 159
hypcadrenocorticism, 174
238
Index
Potassium 
Serum separator tubes, 3
in diabetic ketoacidosis, 144
Shetland Sheepdogs, diabetes mellitus, 113
homeostasis, 43-4
Siberian Huskies, alopecia, 60
reduced intake, 44-5
Skin fragility, 206
renal loss, 45-7
Sodium bicarbonate, 32
role of, 43
Sodium in diabetic ketoacidosis, 144
translocation of, 45
Soft tlssue mineralization, 160
 Prednisolone/prednisone. 32, 179, 203
Somatostatin, 222, 223
Primary polydypsia, 18, 23
Somatostatin analogues, 203
treatment, 25
Somogyi phenomenon, 68-9
 see aiso Polyuria and polydipsia
Spironolactone, 48
 Primary polyuria, 18
 Spitz, diabetes mellitus.
113
Progesterone
Stable iodine, 103, 106
 conversion factors, 11
Staffordshire Bull Terriers, hyperadrenocorticism, 154
 sample handling. 2
 Standard Poodles
Propranolol, 106 
hypoadrenacorticism, 173
Propylthiouracil, 104
insulinama, 200
Proteinuria, 115
 Standard Schnauzers, diabetes mellitus, 113
hyperadrenocorticism, 159
Streptozotocin, 203-4
Proteolysis, 3
Sulphonylurea drugs, 133
Pruritus, 61
T3 see Triiodothyronine
Radiation therapy, 211
T4 see Thyroxine
Radioactive iodine, 108-9
Radiography
Tachykinins, 222, 223
Telogen efluvium, 60, 61
diabetic ketoacidosis, 145
Testicular atrophy,
feline hyperthyroidism, 100
157
Testicular tumour, alopecia in, 60
feline hypokalaemia, 46
Testosterone
gastrinoma,224
conversion factors, 11
hyperadrenocorticism, 159-60,165,209
 sample handling, 2
hyperthyroidism,198
Tesiosterone-responsive dermatosis,B0
hypoadrenocorticism, 176, 215
Thiazolidinediones, 134
phaeochromocytoma,218-19
polyuria and polydypsia, 19
Thirst, 17
Thrifty Gene Theory, 131
1.
Radioimmunoassay, 6-7
Thyroglobulin autoantibodies, 2, 12
Rathke's pouch, 181
Thyroid function tests, 100-2, 195
Renal disease, and hyperlipidaemia, 52-3
basal free thyroxine concentration, 101-2
Renal failure
acute, potassium lass, 46
basal total thyroid hormone concentrations, 101
hyperadrenocorticism, 159
chronic, potassium loss, 45 
T3 suppression test, 102
Renal function tests, 184
thyroidal radioisotope uptake, 100
Renal tubular acidosis, 46
TRH response test, 102
Renin, 44
TSH response test, 102
 sample handling. 1
Retinopathy. 139
Thyroid gland
carcinoma in cats, 109-10
Rosiglitazone, 134
Rottweilers, hypoadrenocorticism, 174
radioisotope uptake, 100
Thyroid stimulating hormone see Thyrotropin
Thyrotoxicosis see Hyperthyroidism
Salcatonin, 32
Thyrotropin
Samoyeds, polyuria and polydypsia, 18
 availability and uses, 12
Sample collection, 1-4
conversion factors, 11
Scaling, 78-9
dynamic function tests, 13-14
Scaming alopecia, 58
hyperthyroidism,
198
Schnauzers, alopecia, 60
reference range,
12
Scurfing, 78-9
 sample handling,
，2
Seasonal flank alopecia, 60, 61
 storage temperature, 4
treatment, 64
Thyrotropin releasing hormone, 14
 Seborrhoea sicca, 194
Thyrotropin releasing hormone response test, 102,
Secondary renal hyperparathyroidism, 38-9
195
Secretin, 223
Thyrotropin response test, 102, 195
Selegeline hydrochloride, 168-9
Thyroxine
Selenium, 96
basal concentration, 10.1-2
 Serial blood glucose curve, 121-4
free
adjustment of insulin therapy. 122
 availability and uses, 12
 dosage adjustments. 124
conversion factors, 11
gquipment, 122
reference range,
12
interpretation of, 123-4
 sample handling, 2
 problems in perfarming, 122-3
storage temperature, 4
239
EI6L
EGA
Livraria
Bstuu
Index
Preco...
101,52
Proposta
undo Ceno
total
Urea
availability and uses,11-12
inhyperadrenocorticism,158
conversion factors,11
in hyperthyroidism,99
reference range,
12
Urinalysis,20
sample handling,2
diabetesmellitus,114-15,132
storage temperature,4
diabetic ketoacidosis,
145
Tracheal and bronchial wall mineralization,160
hyperadrenocorticism,158-9
Transient diabetes mellitus,
138
hyperthyroidism,100
Transportation of samples,4-5
hypoadrenocorticism,215
TRH seeThyrotropinreleasing hormone
Urinary tract infection,158
Triglycerides,hyperadrenocorticism,158
Urine
Triodothyronine
cortisol:creatinine ratio,
164,208
free
glucose see Glycosuria
conversion factors,
11
protein see Proteinuria
sample handling,2
specific gravity,21
storage temperature,4
hyperadrenocorticism,158
total
hyperthyroidism,100
availability and uses,12
conversion factors, 11
reference range,12
Vanadium,134
storage temperature,4
Triodothyronine suppression test,14
Vasoactive intestinal peptide(VIP),223
Trilostane,165-6,170,209-11
Vasopressin.16-17
adverse effects,166
circulating concentrations,23-4
dose,165
sample handling.2
monitoring therapy,165-6
storage temperature,4
survival data,166
Very lowdensitylipoproteins(VLDLs),50-1
Troglitazone,134
VitaminD
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity,115
deficiency,40
TSH see Thyrotropin
measurement,29
Ultrasonography
Water consumption,20
cardiac,100
Water deprivation test,22-3
diabetic ketoacidosis,145
Weight
feline hypokalaemia, 46
gain,80
gastrinoma,224,225
loss, 96
hyperadrenocorticism,160-1,164,165,207,208
reduction,117
209
West HighlandWhiteTerriers.hypoadrenocorticism,
hypoadrenocorticism,176
174
insulinoma,201
Wheaten Terriers,hypoadrenocorticism,174
pancreatitis,71
parathyroid glands,29,36
phaeochromocytoma,219
polyuria and polydypsia,19
YorkshireTerriers,hyperadrenocorticism,154
240
BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline Endocrinology
Thirdedition
Edited by Carmel T. Mooney and Mark E.Peterson
Building on the successof previous editions,the BSAvA Manual of Canine and Feline
Endocrinology3Editionprovides apractical,clinicallyoriented approach tocanineand feline
endocrinology with themost up-to-date informationforveterinary surgeons,nurses,
technicians and those interested in the field.
The book is divided into four sections.The first
section discusseshormone measurements and
special sample handingrequirements,before
providing a quick-reference section on test
protocols and assayresults.
The second section isupdated from the
previous edition and investigates the clinical
problemsand laboratory abnormalities
associatedwithendocrine disorders.
Complete and detailed chapters on themost common endocrine disorders encountered in
dogs and cats follow in the third section and it is here that the greatest differences from the
last edition are evident.The revolutionary advances in endocrinology,including the use of
trilostane for the management of hyperadrenocorticism andnew information on the aetiology
of feline diabetes mellitus,are discussed in depth.
The final section of the Manual focuses on the
uncommon and emerging endocrine disorders
that affect dogs and cats.The majority of the
informationisreviewed andupdated from the
last manual,but new to this edition are
chapters on unusual thyroid disorders
(covering both feline hypothyroidism and
canine hyperthyroidism),insulinoma and feline
hypoadrenocorticism.
Comments on the second edition
..highly recommended to veterinary students and clinicians who desire a concise source of
information on smallanimal endocrinology.'
Journal of theAmerican Veterinary Medical Association
"..an excellent book...easy to read...and contains a mass of valuable information. It deserves
a place on yourbookshelf.
The Veterinary Journal
CONTENTS
BIBLIOTECAGERAL
Sample handling;Hormone assays;Hormone reference ranges
and protocols;Investigation of polyuria and polydipsia;Investigation
1084105
of hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia;Investigation of feline
hypokalaemia;Investigation of hyperlipidaemia;Investigation of
ISBN 0-905214-72-2
symmetrical alopecia in dogs;The uncontrollable diabetic; Canine
hypothyroidism;Feline hyperthyroidism;Canine diabetes mellitus;
Feline diabetesmellitus;Diabetic ketoacidosis;Canine
hyperadrenocorticism;Canine hypoadrenocorticism;Pituitary
dwarfism;Acromegaly;Unusual thyroid disorders;Insulinoma;
Feline hyperadrenocorticism:Feline hypoadrenocorticism;
Phaeochromocytoma;Unusual gastrointestinal endocrine disorders;
Autoimmune polyglandular disease; Index.
1780905214726