abuon
LA
Anaesthesia
OfExotic Pets
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.com
SAUNDERS
FLSEVIER
ELSEVIER SAUNDERS
@ 2008, Elsevier Limited. All nights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, without either the prior permission of the publishers or a
licence permmitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the
Copynight Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London WlT 4LP
Permmissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights
Department in Philadelphia, USA: phone: (+1) 215 238 7869, fax: (+1) 215 238
2239, e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request
on-line via the Elsevier homepage (http://www.elsevier.com), by selecting
'Customer Support' and then *Obtaining Permmissions'.
First published 2008
ISBN: 978-0-7020-2888-5
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Catatoging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research
and experience broaden our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and drug
therapy may become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the
most current information provided (ij) on procedures featured or (i) by the
manufacturer of each product to be administered, to venify the recommended dose
or fommula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications.
It is the responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own experience and
knowledge of the patient, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best
treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any
liability for any injury and/or damage.
The Publisher
Printed in China
The
Publisher's
policy is to use
peper manufectured
from sustalna ble forests
Introduction to anaesthesia in
exotic species
INTRODUCTION
pre-anaesthetic evaluation will involve taking a thorough
history of the animal's current and previous diet and envi-
Exotic animals are popular pets, and often present to the vet-
ronmental conditions. A cormplete history and understand-
erinary practice for evaluation and treatment. These species
ing of species' requirements are vital in these pets as
are varied anatomically and physiologically from the rmore
clinical examination before anaesthesia may be difficult
(for example in very small rodents) or limited (for exam-
commonly presented species. These differences will affect
how the patient responds to handling, illness and anaesthesia
ple due to the chelonian shellj. Later chapters will discuss
husbandry conditions in various species that may predis-
pose to or cause diseases, for example those affecting the
WHYISANAESTHESIANEEDEDIN
immune and respiratory systems.
EXOTICPETS?
 A clinical examination should be performed, if possible,
with minimal stress to the patient. At this stage, a weight
Anaesthesia of anirmals may be necessary for two main rea-
should be obtained, to enable accurate dosing of drugs
-ad ro uouxa moe on uesqu asneo o sus
and subsequent monitoring of body condition. Many
forrmance of minor procedures (for example phlebotomy),
species become stressed when restrained, and high circu-
or to perform surgical procedures humanely by causing loss
lating catecholamines may predispose to cardiac arrhyth-
of consciousness whilst providing analgesia, muscle relax-
mias.
Pre-anaesthetic history taking and clinical
ation and armnesia. The presence of each of these factors is
examination will allow the clinician to form a picture of
dependent on the anaesthetic used, with local anaesthesia
the patient's health status, in order to identify any
not causing unconsciousness and some general anaesthetic
increased risks pertinent to the individual pet. Even if
agents producing relatively little muscle relaxation. The
none are found, the benefits and risks of anaesthesia
requirements for these facets vary between cases and the
should be explained to the animal's owner. Written con-
clinician must consider what is necessary for the animal in
sent should be obtained for the procedure, as most drugs
question before selecting an anaesthetic regime.
are not licensed for use in exotic anirmals [this will vary
 Anaesthesia is required for many varied procedures in
between countries). The veterinary surgeon should also
exotic pets. Certain species cannot be manually restrained
advise the owner that the duration of many drugs (includ-
without injury to handlers or stress to thermselves, and
ing analgesics) has not been verified experimentally in
sedation or anaesthesia is required even to perform a clin-
many species, but is based on clinically perceived dura-
ical examination. In other more amenable species, anaes-
tions of action.
thesia may be required for investigative procedures or
If possible, a small blood sample should be obtained
surgery. If surgery is to be performed, analgesia should be
before anaesthesia to assess the patient's packed cell volume
 provided. Analgesics will be briefly discussed, principally
(PCV), total protein, blood urea nitrogen (uric acid in rep-
in the context of an aid to anaesthesia
tiles) and blood glucose (Heard, 1993). These parameters
will allow assessment of the animal's hydration and nutri-
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
tional status. Dehydration and malnutrition are common in
exotic pets presented to the veterinary surgeon, and it is
AND SUPPORTIVE CARE
often prudent to postpone anaesthesia while fluid and nutri-
tional support are provided to stabilise the patient's condi-
Inadequate or inappropriate husbandry often predisposes
tion. Although this text is primarily concerned with
exotic pets to disease and an important part of the
 ss a j r s id a  iss
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
anaesthesia in these animals relates to provision of sufficient
for anaesthetic gases, as a tube with or without a bag
care in the perioperative period. Information is, therefore,
attached (the Jackson-Rees rmodification), enables the gas
provided on nursing and supportive care, including basic
flow rates to be reduced to twice the minute volume. The
hospitalisation techniques, fluid and nutritional support.
addition of a reservoir bag enables positive pressure ventila-
tion to be performed. Dead space can be minirmised by using
ANAESTHETICEQUIPMENT
low dead space connectors, and minimising space between
the animal's muzzle and the mask (Flecknell, 1996)
Equipment for use in anaesthesia varies greatly, the primary
The Bain is a coaxial version of the T-piece circuit, with
requirements being delivery of anaesthetic agent and oxygen
the inspiratory part running within the reservoir limb (Fig.
1.2). This has the advantage of reduced ^drag', as a single
to the patient, and scavenging of waste gases. Waste gases
tube runs between the anaesthetic machine and the patient,
contain carbon dioxide produced by the patient, and anaes-
and the reservoir bag and scavenge are located away from
thetic agents that would cause environmental contarmination 
the patient (Flecknell, 1996). For animals weighing less than 
and potential risks to staff.
10 kg, modifications with a valve and reservoir bag cause
too much resistance; however, an open-ended reservoir
Anaesthetic machines
bag may be attached. This latter modification allows pos-
itive pressure ventilation to be performed on the patient.
In order to deliver oxygen and anaesthetic gases to a patient,
The gas flow rate for a Bain circuit is 200-300 ml/kg/min
an anaesthetic machine is required. Machines for dog and
(Ungerer, 1978), or 2-2.5 times minute volume.
cat anaesthetics are suitable for use with exotic pets. Oxygen
Mechanical ventilators can be connected to either
and nitrous oxide can be provided from cylinders stored
T-piece or Bain circuits.
on the anaesthetic rmachine, or via pipes from a bank of cylin-
Magill circuits (Fig. 1.3) can be used in animals weighing
ders in the hospital situation. Flowmeters are usually not
more than 10kg. Circuit resistance is quite high and the
capable of accurate delivery of low gas flow rates. Small
dead space within the circuit is typically &-10ml (Flecknell
rodent anaesthetic machines have been suggested (Norris,
1996).
1981; Sebesteny, 1971) to overcome this problerm, but the
The above three anaesthetic circuits are non-rebreathing
flowmeters on most machines can still be used providing
systems. Closed breathing systems, such as the circle (Fig.
a minirmum flow rate of 1 L/min is maintained. Calibrated
1.4) and to-and-fro, utilise a soda lime canister to absorb
vaporisers are necessary for addition of volatile anaesthetic
expired carbon dioxide, enabling rebreathing and recycling
agents to carrier gases (usually oxygen)], and are specific for
of anaesthetic gases. They are often run semi-open, with
different agents (Flecknell, 1996).
fresh gas flows of 0.5-l L/min. These systems are useful
for larger animals, as lower gas flow rates are required and
Anaesthetic circuits
Waste gas
The most commonly used circuit for small animal anaesthe-
sia is the T-piece (Fig. 1.1) (Ayre, 1956). This circuit has low
Fresh
scavenge
gas
Patient
resistance and little dead space. The presence of a reservoir
Fresh
gas
Patient
Reservoir
Quter reservoir
bag
tube
Fgure I.2 · Schematic of modified Bain (coaxial) anaesthetic circuit.
Valve
Waste gas
Waste gas
scavenge
Valve
Fresh
scavenge
gas
Reservoir
bag
Reservoir
Figure I.l · Schematic of T-piece anaesthetic circuit. The addi-
bag
tion of a reservoir bag and valve allows intermittent positive
pressure ventilation to be performed easily.
Figure I.3 · Schematic of Magill anaesthetic circuit.
Introduction to anaesthesia in exotic species
costs can be reduced as less anaesthetic agent and oxygen
srmall patients that normally have low tidal volumes (i.e. the
are used. However, the valves and soda lime within these
volume of gas inspired with one breath)
systems increase circuit resistance, and they can only be
 Scavenging is an important part of an anaesthetic sys-
used in smaller animals (less than 5 kg) if mechanical venti-
tem, removing anaesthetic agents safely to reduce expo-
lation is used. Nitrous oxide is not used routinely with
sure to personnel in the practice. This may be performed
 closed systems, as it may build up and reduce the oxygen 
by connection of waste gases to an active scavenging sys-
concentration significantly (Flecknell, 1996),
tem, or to activated charcoal for adsorption. Activated
Gas flow rates are calculated for each circuit type, and
charcoal systems are ineffective at removing nitrous oxide
depend on the amount of gas used by the patient. The
(Flecknell, 1996).
minute volume is the total volurme of gas inspired by the
animal in l min, and is calculated by multiplying the tidal
Connections to the patient
volume by the respiratory rate. As animals do not inspire
continuously, the gas flow rate is usually higher than the
The use of induction chambers to induce small animals has
minute volume. For example, the flow rate needed may be
both advantages and disadvantages. Minimal restraint is
three tirmes the rminute volume for an anaesthetic delivered
required before anaesthesia, reducing stress to the animal
via a facemask attached to an open circuit when the patient
and potential danger to the clinician. However, rmost volatile
inspires for one-third of the minute (spending the rest of
agents are irritant to the airways to some degree, and certain
the time exhaling, and pausing between inspiration and
species may breath hold. It is, therefore, advisable to pre-
exhalation). Non-rebreathing circuits require oxygen flow
cxygenate the patient before the anaesthetic gas is added to
rates of two to three times the minute ventilation, which
the charmber. It is more difficult to assess depth of sedation
is approximately 150 to 200 ml/kg per minute (Muir and
Or anaesthesia when the patient is within a charmber; this is
Hubbell, 2000).
improved by using clear containers (for exarmple, Perspex?,
For many small patients, this flow rate will be miniscule,
clear Tupperware@ or plastic bottles [Fig. 1.5]].
and the fresh gas flow rate on the anaesthetic machine may
 Ideally, the induction chamber should have an inlet pipe
not be titratable to this level. For exarmple, a rabbit weighing
for gases as well as a scavenge outlet. Gases should be scav-
2 kg may have a tidal volurme of 10 ml and a respiratory rate
enged from the top of the charmber to rermove that contain-
of 40, and, therefore, a minute volume of &0ml (10 ml ×
ing a lower concentration of the anaesthetic agent, which
40), which requires a gas flow rate of 240 ml/min if using
sinks below air as it is denser. Where plastic bottles are
a T-piece circuit. The flowmeter on many anaesthetic
used to make chambers (Fig. 1.5), the anaesthetic circuit
machines is not accurate below l L/min, so this should,
is usually attached to one end; fresh gas administration and
therefore, be used as a minimum setting.
The end of the respiration part of the circuit contains
gases within the chamber. In most systems, there will be
expired gas. Gases within this ^dead space' are re-inhaled
environmental contarmination when the patient is rermoved
by the patient, including high levels of carbon dioxide pro-
from the charmber, as volatile anaesthetic agents are
duced by the patient. If the dead space is large and high
released. To reduce the risk to staff, there should be good
concentrations of carbon dioxide are inspired, this will be
ventilation (but not open windows through which patients
detrimental to the patient (Flecknell, 1996).
could escape!) within the room to allow escape of these
Resistance to the flow of gases, for example caused
agents. Double chamber systems are available and enable
by valves, within the circuit may also increase the effort
removal of anaesthetic gases before the chamber is
required by the animal to move gases during respiration
opened (Flecknell, 1996).
(Flecknell, 1996). This will be particularly significant in
One-way valve
Fresh
gas
+
Patient
Soda
lime
1
Pop-off
valve
Reservoir
bag
Figure I.5 · Plastic bottles can be adapted for use as induction
Figure I.4 · Schematic of circle anaesthetic circuit.
chambers with small animals.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
A
Figure I.6 · Selection of endotracheal tubes that may be used
with small exotic pets.
B
Many animals, particularly mammrmals, will urinate and/or
defecate during induction in chambers. Wetting of fur will
increase the risk of hypothermia. The use of paper towels or
incontinence pads to soak up fluids in the chamber will
reduce fur contamination. The chamber should also be
cleaned and disinfected between patients.
Facemasks should be close-fitting to reduce environ-
mental contamination and resultant health risks to staff.
Veterinary facemasks are usually cone-shaped to accom-
modate carnivore maxillae, but for species with shorter
skulls, such as guinea pigs, human paediatric masks or
those designed for cats may be more suitable. The masks
should also be low volume, as a small increase in dead space
 may easily be the same as a small animal's tidal volurme.
Figure I.7 · (A) Various sizes of facemask are available. Clear
For extremely small patients, such as rats, a syringe-case
masks allow better monitoring of patients during induction and
may be attached to the anaesthetic circuit to form a mask,
anaesthesia; (B) a facemask can be adapted using a latex glove to
or the end of the circuit used directly on the patient (see
create a smaller aperture for the patient's head.
Fig. 4.8). Some anaesthetic circuits already have built-in
masks (for example, rodent non-rebreathing circuit with
nosecone, VetEquip@, Pleasanton, CA [see Fig. 4.5]],
Endotracheal tubes for use in dogs and cats may be used in
some may incorporate active gas-scavenging (for exarmple,
larger animals, but most exotic species require small
Fluovac@, International Market Supplies, Congleton, UK
uncuffed tubes. Many species have complete tracheal
[Fig. 2.2]) (Hunter et al., 1984]. Clear facemasks (Fig. 1.7)
rings, laryngeal spasm may be a risk and narrow airways
permit sorme visual assessment of the patient's head and
may easily be damaged by cuff over-inflation. For srmaller
are preferable to opaque masks.
patients, endotracheal tubes can be improvised from tubing
As masks are usually plastic or rubber, they cannot be
available in the practice, for exarmple, cut-off urinary catheters
sterilised in an autoclave. They can be cleaned with most
or intravenous catheters [with the stylet removed). If a large
disinfectants or ethylene oxide sterilisation used if con-
number of exotic pets are seen by the veterinary practice, it
tamination with a particularly resistant infectious agent is
is worth investing in appropriate sized endotracheal tubes,
suspected.
frorm 1 to 5mm diameter. A wide variety of types and sizes
Some animals, for example birds, can be readily induced
of endotracheal tubes are available (Fig. l.6), some of which
via facemask. For most species, however, induction is not
require the use of a stylet for placement.
as rapid and the restraint required can be stressful for the
Most new endotracheal tubes are excessively long,
animal. Facemasks are most useful for maintaining anaes-
causing an increase in dead space, and should be short-
thesia in animals that cannot be intubated. The biggest
ened prior to use. To do this, the connector is removed
disadvantage with a mask is a lack of airway control, and
from the tube and the tube cut to length before reattaching.
positive pressure ventilation (PpV) is not normally possi-
(Do not cut the tip of the endotracheal tube, as this will
ble. (PPV may be performed in an emergency via a closely
leave a sharp end that rmay darmage the patient's tracheal
fitting facemask, but oesophageal inflation and gastric
mucosa.) The aim is to place the tip of the tube within the
tympany may be produced.)
animal's trachea above the bifurcation, with the connector
Introduction to anaesthesia in exotic species
EIOTICSWA
Figure I.8 · Anaesthetic kit for exotic pets, including emergency
Figure I.9 · Digital scales accurate to I g are vital for weighing
drugs.
small patients prior to calculating drug doses.
for the circuit at the lips to minimise dead space within
Other equipment required
the circuit. It is useful to have a selection of endotracheal
tube sizes and lengths on hand, particularly for emergen-
Scalesused for cats are appropriate for mediu-sized exotic
cies (Fig. 1.8). Always check that appropriate tubes are on
pets, such as rabbits, but small kitchen-type digital scales
hand before inducing anaesthesia.
Inspect endotracheal tubes before anaesthesia, particu-
(Fig. 1.9) that measure to the nearest gram are required for
larly checking for lurmen patency. It is easy for small tubes
smaller animals. Most scales have a tare function, allowing
to become blocked with a small armount of respiratory
the display to be tared after an empty container is placed
secretion or other material. Tubes cannot be heat sterilised
on to the scales before the anirmal is weighed.
Supplermental heating is required for most exotic patients
and are cleaned and sterilised as facemasks.
to maintain body temperature in patients both during and
Many animals will breath-hold, or have reduced respi-
after anaesthesia. Equipment need not be as expensive as
ratory rate or tidal volume during anaesthesia. A mechan-
heated water or air blankets (Bair Hugger@, A
Arizant
ical ventilator is thus enormously useful in exotic-animal
Healthcare, Eden Prairie, MN). Electric heat pads are
practice.
useful, as are microwaveable heat pads and “hot hands'
Prepare all equipment, including that required for
anaesthesia and for the procedure to be performed, before
[latex or nitrile gloves filled with warm water); most of
these should be covered with a towel to prevent burning
inducing anaesthesia in the patient. This will minimise the
of the patient. It is important to warm fluids prior to
anaesthetic time and thereby the risk to the animal
administration to small patients that are more susceptible
to hypothermia. Boluses of fluids in syringes may be
Monitoring equipment
warmed in a jug of warm water, while giving sets can be
wrapped around *hot hands' near the patient receiving a
The most useful piece of anaesthetic monitoring equip-
continuous rate infusion of fluids.
ment is a trained assistant. Assessment of physiological
Alight source is useful for intubation. For many species,
parameters is the cornerstone of patient monitoring. Other
an overhead directable theatre light or pen torch may be
equipment may also be useful in different species, includ-
suitable. For other species with more caudal tracheal
ing bell or oesophageal stethoscopes, Doppler flow moni-
openings, a laryngoscope is advisable, for example with a
tor, electrocardiogram (ECG) machine, capnograph and
Wisconsin size O or 1 blade.In some situations, an otoscope
blood gas analysis.
or srmall endoscope may be used. If the light source has been
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
in contact with an animal, it should be washed between
Many pet mammals are obese. This may compromise
patients to reduce the risk of cross-contarmination.
cardiopulmonary function during anaesthesia by reducing
 Most other equiprment is standard for veterinary practices,
cardiac reserve (Carroll et al., 1999), causing hypoventila-
but smaller versions are required for smaller patients. For
tion (Ahmed et al., 1997].
example, drug volumes are more likely to necessitate the
 Exotic pets are often dehydrated or otherwise debili-
use of 1ml syringes and 25 gauge needles, and insulin
tated when presented to the veterinary clinician. In many
syringes are especially useful when drug dilutions are to be
cases it is advisable to postpone anaesthesia while correcting
 performed for very small anirmals. Small over-the-needle
fluid deficits and/or administering nutritional support. For
catheters are useful for many procedures, including intra-
 some patients, provision of appropriate diet and environ-
venous fluid or drug administration and as endotracheal
 mental conditions may be sufficient for the patient to ingest
tubes in tiny patients. Giving sets used in larger animals
food and water. Unfortunately, many are beyond this stage
 may not be readily calibrated to provide small volumes of
fluids. The use of infusion pumps, burette giving sets or
hand-feeding or assist-feeding. The oral route is useful for
syringe-driver infusion pumps is extremely useful where
administration of maintenance fluids or in those animals
continuous rate infusions are required. In many patients,
with mild dehydration. Subcutaneous fluids are useful in
fluids are administered as boluses. Although proprietary
many species, but absorption may be slow, particularly in
small-gauge intraosseous needles are available, hypodermic
hypothermic animals. Intraperitoneal fluids are rapidly
needles can be used as intraosseous catheters in small
absorbed, but administration carries the risk of visceral
patients (see Fig. 4.3).
puncture. Intravenous or intraosseous fluids are excellent
methods of accessing the circulatory system for replace-
EOUIPMENT PREPARATION
ment of moderate to severe fluid deficits, but are obviously
more technically demanding to place than other techniques.
Before using an anaesthetic system on a patient some rou-
The choice of anaesthetic protocol will be based on findings
tine checks should be perforrmed. These include checking
at this stage. An appreciation of the patient's current health
that all connections are secure and that sufficient gases
status, along with the purpose of the anaesthesia, will allow
[for example, oxygen} and volatile agents are available.
the clinician to select the most appropriate drugs. A debili-
The anaesthetic circuit should be leak-tested, by closing
tated anirmal will likely be unable to rmetabolise drugs well
and a prolonged recovery may reduce chances of survival. If
the expiratory end (most have valves that can be closed),
surgery is indicated, analgesia should be included in the anaes-
placing a thumb over the end that connects to the patient
and filling the circuit with oxygen. Endotracheal tubes
thetic protocol, perhaps synergistically with other agents.
should be checked for patency and cuffs (if present)
inflated to check for leaks. Anaesthetic time can be greatly
ANAESTHETICDRUGS
minimised by collecting all equipment required for anaes-
thesia and the procedure to be performed, before the
patient is induced.
Most anaesthetic agents are not licensed for use in exotic
At the end of anaesthesia, endotracheal tubes, facemasks
pets. Some drugs, for example narcotic analgesics, may be
controlled under national legislation. These may require
and anaesthetic circuits should be cleaned between patients.
specific storage facilities and/or records of their purchase
Sterilisation is also necessary in sorme instances, particularly
with endotracheal tubes. The anaesthetic machine oxygen
and use. It is good practice to keep any drugs with the
should be switched off and the vaporiser re-filled with
potential for human abuse in a locked cupboard.
volatile agent.
The doses for most agents have not been experimentally
elucidated for exotic species. Differences in physiology and
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
 metabolism between species will alter the effects of drugs,
including safety margins. Doses relevant for larger anirmals,
AND STABILISATION
such as dogs, will rarely be transferable to small species, such
as rodents, with high metabolic rates. Other species, such
All animals should be assessed before anaesthesia, including
 as reptiles, have extrermely slow rmetabolic rates.
a detailed history and clinical examination (including an
There are several classes of drugs that produce anaes-
accurate body weight). Further investigations may be indi-
thesia and effects seen may differ between species [and
cated depending on the animal's condition. This assessment
 often also between individuals within a species). Although
will allow the clinician to gauge the anaesthetic risks and to
there is a temptation to use a single agent in order to sim-
select an appropriate protocol.
plify the anaesthetic protocol, the use of multiple agents
Weigh animals accurately, particularly before administra-
from different classes allows the clinician to obtain a rmore
tion of injectable drugs. Digital scales with 1g increments
balanced anaesthesia, for example including analgesia if
are necessary for small species (Fig. 1.9).
required. If multiple drugs are used, doses of individual
drugs can be lowered, reducing their side effects (except
m ssaul jo suais Aapi Ae saussasse e
where two agents have the same side effects, in which
require attention before anaesthesia is performed, or
case they may be additive).
 Besides a lack of licensed drugs that have been rigorously
factors that will adversely affect anaesthesia
tested, other difficulties encountered in using anaesthetic
Introduction to anaesthesia in exotic species
drugs in exotic pets include technical problems associated
will cause both motor and sensory nerve blockade. Other
with drug administration, and difficulties with anaesthetic
agents, such as opioids, ketamine or xylazine, are commonly
monitoring of anirmals that are often much smaller or have
used with local anaesthetics in epidurals for analgesia or
different anatomy and physiology than more common pet
anaesthesia (Nolan, 2000). If opioids are administered with-
species. In preparing an anaesthetic protocol, consideration
out local anaesthetics, sensory block only will be produced.
should be given to the patient's health and the procedure to
Lipid solubility affects the duration of action, with bupi-
be performed during anaesthesia. For exanple, phle-
vacaine being more lipid and, therefore, having a longer
botomy may require sedation or a brief anaesthesia only,
duration than lidocaine (lignocaine). The duration of action
whilst surgery will necessitate a deeper plane of anaesthesia
of lidocaine (lignocaine) is 60-90 min, and is increased by
for a more prolonged period, as wellas appropriate analge-
adding adrenaline (epinephrine). Bupivacaine has a high
sia. Many anaesthetic problems are associated with the
rate of protein binding, which prevents absorption, and the
postoperative period and peri-anaesthetic managerment is
duration is 2-6h (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003).
vital for a successful outcome.
Bupivacaine has been shown to be myotoxic in rabbit
 The ensuing chapters aim to discuss species differences
extraocular muscles (Park and Oh, 2004). Ropivacaine is
affecting anaesthesia, but the following section discusses
similar to bupivacaine, but is less cardiotoxic. All three
anaesthetic agents in general.
drugs undergo hepatic metabolism by cytochrome P-450.
A major cause of anaesthetic mortality is human error
Mechanisms of action
leading to anaesthetic overdosage and to hypoxia (Jones,
2001). Overdoses of local anaesthetics result in systemic
General anaesthetics affect the central nervous system;
toxicity, which causes hypotension, ventricular arrhythrmia,
predorminantly the higher functions. Respiratory control
myocardial depression and convulsions. The maximum safe
is often impaired during general anaesthesia, as is temper-
doses for most species are 4 mg/kg for lidocaine [lignocaine)
ature homeostasis.
and 1-2 mg/kg for bupivacaine (Dobromylskyj et al., 2000).
Many anaesthetic agents inhibit nicotinic acetylcholine
MS-222 (tricaine methane sulfonate) is a soluble local
receptors, in particular the volatile agents and ketarmine
anaesthetic. It is commonly used to anaesthetise fish and
(Tassonyi et al., 2002). Modulation of these receptors is not
amphibian species (Bowser, 2001).
directly involved in the hypnotic component of anaesthesia,
but may contribute to analgesia with some agents.
Pre-anaesthetic medication
Local anaesthetics
Drugs may be administered before anaesthetic induction
for several reasons. These include sedation to: reduce the
These drugs are weak bases and block sodium ion chan-
stress of anaesthetic induction (to handlers or patients),
nels, and thence stop both motor and sensory nerve trans-
reduce the dose of other agents required, reduce the risk
of side effects that may occur with anaesthetic agents
mission (Skarda, 1996). Local anaesthetics may be used
used or surgery performed, or smooth anaesthetic induc-
to provide analgesia locally, and to reduce the doses of
tion and recovery. For most exotic pet species, long-acting
sedatives and general anaesthetics required (Hedenqvist
and Hellebrekers, 2003). The use of regional anaesthesia
pre-medications are not used, as rapid recovery after
[as opposed to general anaesthesia) has been shown to
anaesthesia is desirable. It is, therefore, also preferable to
allow earlier rehabilitation and shorten hospital stays in
use inhalation rather than injectable anaesthetic agents
patients (Capdevila et al., 1999).
where possible to provide a speedier recovery.
 Local anaesthetics can be adrministered by several routes
including topical sprays, liquids or creams, or by local infil-
tration, intrapleurally and epidurally. The most cormmonly
BOX I.l Groups of sedative and
used topical agent is EMLA cream (AstraZeneca,
Sodertalje, Sweden], which contains lidocaine [lignocaine)
anaesthetic agents
and prilocaine; it produces full-skin-thickness anaesthesia
within 60 min of application (Nolan, 2000). Topical appli-
 Alkyl phenol, e.g. propofol
cation of liquid local anaesthetics, such as prcxymetacaine,
Apha-2-agonists, e.g medetomidine
will result in cormeal and conjunctival anaesthesia. Lido-
Benzodiazepines, e.g. midazolam
caine [lignocaine) is commonly sprayed on to the larynx of
anirmals prone to laryngeal spasm prior to intubation. Local
Butyrophenones, e.g, fluanisone
anaesthetics can be infiltrated into skin and underlying tis-
Dissociative agents, e.g. ketamine
sues to assist minor procedures, but a sedative or light plane
of anaesthesia is often required to immobilise the patient
Local anaesthetics, e.g. lidocaine
concurrently. In larger animals, certain anatomical sites
Opioids (narcotic analgesics), e.g. fentanyl
have a well-defined nerve supply and individual nerves can
Phenothiazine derivatives, e.g. acepromazine
be anaesthetised [for example the paravertebral nerve
Steroid agents, e.g. alfaxalone
block).
Local anaesthetics administered into the epidural space
Volatile agents, e.g. isoflurane
between the dura rmater and the wall of the vertebral canal
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
A simple form of pre-anaesthetic medication is to use
Phenothiazine derivatives, such as acepromazine, are
local anaesthetic ointment to anaesthetise the skin before
tranquillisers, which produce sedation by
yblocking
intravenous access is used to induce anaesthesia (Flecknell
 dopamine centrally. Peripheral alpha-adrenergic antagonis-
et al., 1990). Where pre-anaesthetic medication is given to
tic effects are also seen (Brunson, 1997). No analgesia is
produce sedation, the animal is left in a quiet area for
produced. These agents reduce the dose of other agents
10-30 min after administration to allow the drug to take
required to produce surgical anaesthesia, including anaes-
effect (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003).
thetics, hypnotics and narcotic analgesics. Disadvantages
Anticholinergic drugs reduce bronchial and salivary
include a long duration of action, variable response, rmoder-
secretions. This is desirable because these secretions may
ate hypotension due to peripheral vasodilation, depressed
be problematic in srmall anirmals, causing airway occlusion.
thermoregulation and a lowered CNS seizure threshold
In some species, salivary secretions may become more vis-
(Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003; Short, 1987). These
cous after anticholinergics (Flecknell, 1996). Atropine
 agents should be avoided in dehydrated patients (Flecknell,
can be used to protect the heart from vagal inhibition, or
1996)
to treat bradycardia caused by opioids. Care should be
The butyrophenones include droperidol, fluanisone and
taken in species with normally high heart rates, such as
azaperone. These act similarly to the phenothiazines
birds. An overdose of anticholinergic agents may cause
[Brunson, 1997), but produce less severe hypotension. They
seizures (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003). If admin-
are often used in neuroleptanalgesic combinations, for
istered prior to alpha-2-agonists, anticholinergics may
example droperidol with fentanyl (Innovar-Vet@, Janssen
initially prevent bradycardia. However, the initial hyper-
Pharmaceuticals, Ontario, Canada) or fluanisone with fen-
tension associated with the alpha-2-agonist may be
tanyl
[Hypnorm@,
, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Beerse,
potentiated.
Belgium) (Flecknell, 1996). Hypnorm@ is commonly used
 Afropine is used in preference for cardiac ermergencies as
in cormbination with midazolam to produce surgical anes-
it is faster in onset and shorter in duration than glycopy-
thesia, for example in rabbits or rodents (Hedenqvist and
rrolate. The latter drug has a rmore selective anti-secretory
Hellebrekers, 2003). Azaperone is used in pigs, causing
action, and does not cross the blood-brain barrier or pla-
immobilisation with minimal side effects (Swindle, 1998).
centa, therefore, causing minimal central nervous system
Anticholinergic agents are used to avoid some of the adverse
(CNS} and fetal effects (Flecknell et al., 1990; Heard,
effects seen, which may include bradycardia, hypotension,
i993). Glycopyrrolate is used in preference in rabbits and
respiratory depression, hypoxia, hypercapnia and acidosis.
rats, which destroy atropine with hepatic atropinesterase
The butyrophenones have a long duration of activity, and
[Harkness and Wagner, 1989; Olson et al., 1993).
may produce paradoxic excitement and aggression in some
Diazepam, midazolam and zolazepam are benzodi-
animals (Heard, 1993)
azepines. These drugs are weak bases, and act by potentia-
The alpha-2-adrenergic agonists medetomidine and
tion of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). They produce
xylazine are potent sedatives, also causing rmuscle relax-
sedation and good skeletal muscle relaxation and are anti-
ation, anxiolysis, and variable analgesia. Action at the alpha-
convulsant (Brunson, 1997). These agents cause minimal
 2-adrenoceptors inhibits presynaptic calcium influx and
cardio-respiratory depression (Short, 1987), but also do not
neurotransmitter release (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers,
provide analgesia (Hedenqvist and Hellbrekers, 2003).
 2003). These agents potentiate most anaesthetic drugs.
Hyperalgesia may occur, and analgesia should be provided if
Cardio-respiratory depression with these agents varies
surgery has been performed (Flecknell, 1996).Flumazenil is
between dose, species and other agents (Short, 1987).
a specific antagonist to the benzodiazepines (Amrein and
 Respiratory depression is observed in most species and car-
Hetzel, 1990; Pieri et al., 1981). Some reports have shown
diac effects, such as bradycardia, bradyarrhythrmias and
diazeparm to have toxic effects on liver cells (Strormbeck and
hypotension, vary between species and dose. Initially hyper-
Guildford, 199lj. Diazepam usually comes as a propylene
tension is seen, followed by slight hypotension, bradycardia
glycol formulation that must be administered intravenously,
and reduced cardiac output (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers,
and cannot be mixed with other agents. Although midazo-
2003). These agents depress insulin release and thence
lam is shorter acting, it is more potent and is water-soluble.
cause hyperglycaemia (Feldberg and Symonds, 1980;
It can be mixed with other agents, such as atropine, fen-
Lukasik, 1999). Diuresis is due to a decrease in antidiuretic
tanyl, Hypnorm@ (Janssen Pharmaceuticals,
Beerse,
hormone and a direct renal tubular effect (Greene and
 Belgium) and ketamine. Zolazepam is potent and long act-
Thurmon, 1988).
ing (Heard, 1993)
Xylazine is a mixed alpha-2/alpha-l-agonist (Lukasik,
Opioids are often administered with benzodiazepines,
1999), and may cause cardiac arrhythmias in some species
to increase the sedation produced. The benzodiazepines
(Flecknell, 1996). As xylazine increases uterine tone in
are also frequently used to potentiate dissociative anaes-
some species, it should be avoided in pregnant animals
thetics and to improve muscle relaxation (Heard, 1993).
Diazepam or midazolarm is often combined with keta-
very effective as a sole agent in most exotic species, but
mine. Zolazepam is prepared in combination with the dis-
 may be used in combinations [Heard, 1993). Medetomidine
sociative agent tiletamine (as Zoletil@, Virbac, Peakhurst,
is more selective for alpha-2 adrenoceptors (Brunson,
NSW; Telazol@, Fort Dodge, IA). This drug may cause
1997], is more potent and reportedly has fewer side
nephrotoxicity in rabbits (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers,
effects than xylazine (Virtanen, 1989). The effects of
2003)
these drugs vary between species; for example, the analgesic
Introduction to anaesthesiainexoticspecies
 properties of medetomidine are weak in rabbits, guinea
ae siasa pue ameaduan on e spinb aenn
 pigs and hamsters.
used to add them to inspired gases, usually mixed with
 These agents are most commonly used in combination
oxygen. After inspiration, the agent diffuses down con-
with ketarmine, which will offset the bradycardia and result
centration gradients, passing frorm airways to the blood
in hypertension (Lukasik, 1999). Combinations with opi-
and thence to tissues including the brain.
oids or benzodiazepines will enhance sedation and analgesia
The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) is a meas-
(Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003).
ure used to define the potency of a volatile anaesthetic
A major advantage with alpha-2-adrenergic antagonists is
agent. It is the concentration of gaseous anaesthetic agent
that they can be reversed, but administration of the antago-
required to prevent movement in 50% of patients in
nist should be delayed for 45-60 min if ketarmine has been
response to a noxious stirmulus (Eger et al., 1965), and is
given, as ketamine alone causes tremors and muscular rigid-
similar for animals of the same species, but may differ
ity (Frey et al., 1996). Atipamezole is rmore short acting than
slightly between species. MAC values are end-tidal con-
medetomidine and is usually not administered for 30-40
centrations of anaesthetic, rather than vaporiser settings.
min after medetomidine to avoid resedation (Harcourt-
Values will vary slightly between studies if different ‘nox-
Brown, 2002). If resedation occurs, the atipamezole may be
ious stimuli' are used. MAC values are lower after certain
repeated.
 pre-medication drugs have been administered (Turner et
Atipamezole is a specific antagonist for medetomidine,
al., 2006). The values also decrease with age, and higher
but will also partially reverse xylazine (Flecknell, 1996).
concentrations of agent are required to anaesthetise
Yohimbine is a more specific antagonist for xylazine
neonates [Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003]
(Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003). Intravenous admin-
The MAC value is inversely related to potency; hence
istration of these antagonists is not recommended.
agents with low MAC values will be more potent and
Many narcotic analgesics are used to cause moderate
require low inspired concentrations to produce a particu-
sedation where analgesia is also required. They also reduce
- ud si ai e rm sr ia i
the doses of anaesthetic drugs necessary to produce anaes-
cient (^) will have a low MAC; the converse is also true.
thesia. They are often combined with neuroleptics (tran-
For example, halothane's blood-gas 入 is 2.5 and MAC (in 
quillisers or sedatives). Drugs include morphine, pethidine,
the dog) is 0.87, isoflurane's 入 is 1.4 and MAC (dog) is
buprenorphine, butorphanol and fentanyl. Respiratory
1.28, and 入 for nitrous oxide is 0.5 while MAC (dog) is
depression is the most common side effect; some will also
222 (Steffey 1994). MAC is fairly constant between
affect gastrointestinal motility (Flecknell, 1996).
species (Table 1.1), varying by less than 20% between
species (Ludders, 1999). For example, MAC for
Inhalation anaesthesia
halothane is 0.87% in dogs and 0.95% in rats; MAC for
isoflurane is 1.28% in dogs and 1.38% in rats (Flecknell,
Gaseous anaesthetic agents used in exotic pets are predom
1996; Steffey 1994).
inantly halogenated hydrocarbons, halothane or halogenated
 Another important factor for volatile agents is the equi-
ethers, such as isoflurane and sevoflurane. These agents
libration time, the time taken for the drug to act. Blood
interact with receptors in the CNS, enhancing the inhibitory
solubility affects the time until the anaesthetic agent
neurotransmitters GABA and glycine (Hedenqvist and
reaches the brain and spinal cord, and the effects of anaes-
Hellebrekers, 2003; Mihic et al., 1997). In most exotic pet
thesia are seen. Isoflurane produces more rapid induction,
species, various gaseous anaesthetic agents can be used to
as it is less soluble in blood than halothane (Hedenqvist
induce and/or maintain anaesthesia. These agents are ideal
and Hellebrekers, 2003). Agents that are relatively insol-
for lengthy procedures, as the recovery period is not pro-
uble in blood (with a low blood-air 入) will diffuse rapidly
longed with longer administration of agents (unlike many
from the circulation into the airways and be expired,
injectable agents). It is vital to check equipment prior to
causing a rapid recovery from anaesthesia. Halothane has
anaesthesia, ensuring that it is functional and that sufficient
a relatively high blood-air 入, and is lost slowly into the air-
 gases and anaesthetic agents are available close at hand.
ways; ventilation rate, thus, limits the expiration of and
Isoflurane is the most commonly used agent,
but
recovery from this agent. An agent's lipid solubility also
sevoflurane can be used for rmost species. These agents are
affects potency, with highly lipid-soluble agents being
Table I.1: Minimum alveolar concentrations (MAC , %) for volatile anaesthetic agents in selected species
ANAESTHETIC
DOG
MOUSE
PIG
PRIMATE
RABBIT
RAT
Halothane
0.87
0.95
1.25
1.15
68'1
0.95
Isoflurane
1.28
1.41
1.45
1.28
2.05
1.38
Nitrousoxide
222
275
277
200
150
(Drummond, 1 985; Flecknell, 1996; Mazze et al., I985; Steffey, 1994; Valverde et al., 2003)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
 more potent. Similarly, these agents will accumulate in
arrest. This allows the anaesthetist to counter the adverse
adipose tissue and recovery from anaesthesia may be slow.
effects and provide respiratory support, and to avoid cardiac
 Most gaseous anaesthetic agents induce anaesthesia rap-
problems.
idly, do not require metabolism to any great degree, and
Isoflurane gas is non-irritant (Flecknell, 1996). The
allow rapid recovery when the agent is no longer adrminis-
MAC for isoflurane is similar to halothane, but the blood-
tered to the patient. They are thus considered relatively
air 入 is less, producing rmore rapid induction and recovery
'safe' anaesthetics. Cardio-respiratory and renal blood
than halothane. Moderate analgesia and rmuscle relaxation
flow depressions are dose-dependent (Steffey 1996].
are produced.
Disadvantages include the smell and airway irritation,
Although respiratory depression is similar to that seen
which may lead to breath holding in some species, such as
with halothane, cardiac effects are much less pronounced.
rabbits and reptiles, and poor analgesia. A pre-medicant
Vasodilatory effects are seen, for example in the coronary
may be used to sedate the animal and reduce the former
vessels (Brunson, 1997). Heart rate and arterial blood pres-
disadvantage prior to gaseous induction. An altermative is
sure are not significantly affected, and the myocardium
to induce the animal with injectable agents and maintain
does not become sensitised to catecholamines (Hedenqvist
anaesthesia using a volatile agent.
and Hellebrekers, 2003). Studies in rabbits have shown
Inhalation agents do necessitate the purchase of anaes-
that isoflurane produces reactive oxygen species that con-
thetic machines and circuits. While this is not absolutely
tribute to protection against myocardial infarction (Chiari
necessary for anaesthesia with injectable agents, it is
et al., 2005; Tanaka et al., 2002; Tessier-Vetzel et al., 2005),
advisable to use an anaesthetic machine during all anaes-
Very little absorbed isoflurane is metabolised (Eger, 1981),
thetic procedures, as oxygen supplermentation should
with rmost being expired. Only 0.2% is metabolised in the
always be administered. This is particularly important
liver; this makes it a safer anaesthetic in animals with
when using injectable agents [see below] that may com-
reduced hepatic metabolism. Induction and recovery are
promise cardio-respiratory function.
rapid with isoflurane, and it is routinely used in veterinary
10
Waste gases may contaminate the environment and be
 practices for anaesthesia of all exotic pet species.
hazardous to humans, particularly with halothane that is
Sevoflurane and desflurane are similar to isoflurane.
metabolised more than isoflurane. Excess gas should, there-
Sevofurane has negligible airway irritant effects (Patel and
fore, be scavenged effectively (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers,
Goa, 1996], and, therefore, is less stressful for animals
 2003). It is good practice to monitor environmental con-
induced in a charmber or via facermask. This agent has a very
centrations of inhalational agents, to assess scavenging
low solubility in blood and, therefore, induction and recov-
 techniques and possible health risks for staff.
ery are more rapid than with isoflurane (Hedenqvist and
Hellebrekers, 2003). Sevoflurane is also protective against
Halothane
myocardial infarction (Chiari et al., 2004). This agent is
metabolised in a similar manner to isoflurane. However, it is 
This agent is derived from chloroform, is unstable in light and
unstable in soda lime, forming haloalkenes that may be
very soluble in rubber. Halothane has a high lipid solubility
nephrotoxic in certain species. Antioxidant supplementa-
and low MAC; these result in a potent anaesthetic with rapid
tion with vitarmin E and selenium has been shown to protect
induction. However, muscle relaxation is limited and analge-
against damage to DNA caused by repeated sevoflurane
sia minimal. Recovery may be delayed after prolonged, deep
anaesthesia (Kaymak et al., 2004).
anaesthesia (Flecknell, 1996)
Desfurane undergoes the least metabolism of the
Several  cardio-respiratory
changes are seen with
volatile agents (Koblin, 1992), and induction and recovery
halothane use. Moderate respiratory depression occurs
are the most rapid (Eger, 1992). Toxicity is very low with
due to a dose-dependent decrease in medullary carbon
this agent (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003]
dioxide sensitivity. Myocardial contractility is reduced,
sympathetic ganglion blockade leads to bradycardia and
Nitrous oxide
relaxation of vascular smooth muscle reduces diastolic
blood pressure. The myocardium is also sensitised to cate-
Although this agent has a place in anaesthesia, its extremely
cholarmines, with the risk of arrhythmias (Brunson, 1997).
low potency (with high MAC) in animals minimises its use-
Twenty per cent of absorbed halothane gas undergoes
fulness. Solubility in blood, oil and fat is poor, and, there-
hepatic metabolism. Hepatic enzymes are, therefore,
fore, uptake and equilibration are rapid (Hedenqvist and
induced during halothane anaesthesia. If hypoxia is pres-
Hellebrekers, 2003). Cardio-respiratory effects are mini-
mal and excellent analgesia is produced. The second gas
lead to hepatotoxicity (Ludders, 1999). Risks to veteri-
effect means that nitrous oxide may be useful in conjunc-
nary staff include hepatotoxicity, and it may be terato-
tion with another volatile agent to increase the rate of
genic in women. Good scavenging is required to reduce
induction. At least 33% oxygen should always be adminis-
environmental contamination.
tered with nitrous oxide, in order to avoid hypoxia in the
patient (Ludders, 1999). It is more usual to have a 50:50 or
Halogenated ethers
60: 40 mix of nitrous oxide to oxygen.
 During recovery, nitrous oxide diffuses into the airways
These include isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane. If
from the blood, reducing the volume of inspired air and
overdosed, these agents tend to cause apnoea before cardiac
 associated oxygen intake; higher flow rates and/or oxygen
Introduction to anaesthesia in exotic species
are, therefore, necessary during recovery to prevent diffu-
administrations will only cause sedation. Induction of
sion hypoxia. Nitrous oxide is not absorbed by either soda
anaesthesia is usually rapid (Edling, 2006). Propofol is
lime or activated charcoal. This gas should not be used,
 redistributed rapidly, tissue accumulation is minimal and
therefore, in a closed anaesthetic circuit and there should
propofol is rapidly metabolised in the liver, resulting in
be active scavenging to the building's ventilation outlet.
rapid recovery (Stoelting, 1987). Propofol has been
Nitrous oxide may diffuse into gas-filled intestines and is,
shown to have anti-oxidant effects [Mathy-Hartert et al.,
therefore, not recommended in herbivorous species
1998; Murphy et al., 1993) and attenuated endotoxin-
(Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003). Chronic exposure
induced acute lung injury in rabbits (Kwak et al., 2004).
to nitrous oxide may increase rates of abortion and terato-
Propofol reduces both carotid body chemosensitivity
genicity in veterinary staff.
[Jonsson et al., 2005) and baroreceptor responsiveness
[Memtsoudis et al., 2005]. Side effects include a moder-
Injectable anaesthetic agents
ate fallin systolic blood pressure, a small reduction in car-
diac output (Sebel and Lowdon, 1989], and significant
 Routes of administration for these agents are intravenous,
respiratory depression (Glen, 1980). The respiratory
intrarmuscular, subcutaneous and intraperitoneal. Many
depression may result in a reduced respiratory rate of
drugs may be irritant; care should be taken to calculate and
reduced tidal volume (Watkins et al., 1988), and oxygen
measure doses accurately, ensure volumes administered are
should be supplemented. The cardio-respiratory depres-
not excessive for the size of patient (particularly for intra-
sion is dose-dependent (Machine and Caulkert, 1996).
muscular injections, and administer drugs using an appropri-
Slow administration will avoid apnoea (Hedenqvist and
ate technique. Another problem that occurs when using
Hellebrekers, 2003), which is cormrmon in rabbits. Cerebral
injectable agents is inter- and intra-species variation in
blood flow and oxygen consumption are reduced, and
response to the drugs. It is not always possible to obtain a
intracranial pressure lowered by propofol. In pigs, myocar-
reported drug dose, and extrapolations may need to be
dial contractility is reduced. Hepatic, renal, platelet and
drawn from similar species. Individual animal variation
coagulation functions are not affected by propofol (Sear
is often dependent on current disease processes, and pre-
et al., 1985). Analgesic properties are minimal and doses
anaesthetic assessments are vital in identification of any fac-
required for analgesia are associated with hypotension,
tors that rmay adversely affect the patient dur ing anaesthesia.
and reduced heart rate and arterial blood pressure. Pre-
Intravenous induction of anaesthesia is usually the most
medication with a number of agents will reduce the dose
rapid and many agents are titratable. However, intravenous
of propofol required for anaesthesia (Hellebrekers et al.,
access is technically difficult in many exotic pet species or
1997).
may only be possible in sedated anirmals. The approach to
Barbiturates are infrequently used to produce anaes-
anaesthesia may, therefore, be different to other species.
thesia in exotic pets as their therapeutic index is low and
The possibility of ‘topping up' anaesthetic agents may
effects irreversible. Most are highly alkaline and irritant to
arise during the use of injectable agents. It is advisable to
tissues, excepting pentobarbital that has a relatively neu-
adrminister further doses by the intravenous route, so that
tral pH. Cardio-respiratory depression is produced, which
the dose may be easily titrated to effect. To obtain accu-
is dose-dependent. Analgesia is poor with these agents,
racy of dose delivery, infusion pumps or syringe drivers
and hyperalgesia may be produced (Heard, 1993).
should be used. Problems may arise if redistribution of
the drug occurs, such as with barbiturates, and recovery
Steroid anaestheticagents
may be prolonged. With some agents, such as alfax-
alone/alphadolone, recovery is rapid (Cookson and Mills,
Alfaxalone and alphadolone are both steroids, with a wide
1983), and repeat doses or a continuous rate infusion may
safety margin (Child et al., 197l; Child et al., 1972b;
be used for prolonged anaesthesia. Similarly, propofol has
Child et al., 1972c). The usual route of administration is
little cumulative effects and may be used as the sole
intravenous. Intramuscular or intraperitoneal injection is
anaesthetic agent (Aeschbacher and Webb, 1993; Blake
non-irritant, and will also produce effects, but these are
et al., 1988; Brammer et al., 1993). Opioids may also be
variable (Green et al., 1978). Intravenous injection causes
added to a mix of agents for total intravenous anaesthesia
smooth induction of anaesthesia with rapid recovery.
(TIVA). If benzodiazepines are used concomitantly with
Moderate hypotension may be seen (Child et al., 1972a;
an opioid, relative overdose of the benzodiazepine may
Dyson et al., 1987). Continuous rate infusions or boluses
occur due to its longer duration of action and it is prefer-
have been used in various species to maintain more pro-
able merely to top up the opioid component. Ketamine is
longed anaesthesia (Flecknell, 1996)
sometimes used to prolong anaesthesia, but incremental
doses prolong recovery and severe respiratory depression
Dissociative anaesthetic agents
may occur (Flecknell, 1996).
Propofol is an alkyl phenol (Glen, 1980; Glen and
Ketamine and tiletamine are lipophilic cyclohexamines,
Hunter, 1984] with poor water solubility. It is adminis-
with antagonistic effects at N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
tered intravenously and produces anaesthesia in many
receptors. The resulting depression of cortical associative
species by enhancing GABA-receptor function Hedenqvist
areas produces a‘dissociative state' (Hedenqvist and
and Hellebrekers, 2003). Perivascular administration is
Hellebrekers, 2003). Moderate respiratory depression
not irritant (Morgan and Legge, 1989), but intrammuscular
occurs, but bronchodilation is also present. The gag reflex
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
is retained, but may not prevent aspiration if regurgitation
Janssen, Pharmaceuticals, Ontario, Canada). The former
or vomition occurs (Heard, 1993). The corneal reflex is
combination produces good surgical anaesthesia when a
lost in many species and ocular lubricants should be applied
benzodiazepine, such as midazolam or diazepam, is also
to prevent damage to the cormeas or spectacles. An increase
administered. The latter neuroleptanalgesic combination
in skeletal muscle tone is produced and purposeful mus-
produces less predictable anaesthesia (Flecknell, 1996;
cle movements may occur during anaesthesia. Although
Marini et al., 1993)
myocardial depression occurs, an increase in blood pressure
Opioids, such as fentanyl or alfentanil, may also be used
is seen due to sympathetic nervous system stimulation.
in combination with benzodiazepines. The opioids pro-
Analgesia with these agents is dose-dependent. The drugs
vide potent analgesia and are often included in anaesthetic
are metabolised in the liver.
commbinations for this reason. High doses of opioid will
Ketamine can be administered intramuscularly, intra-
cause respiratory depression, but this can be managed
venously or intraperitoneally to produce sedation with appar-
using intermittent positive pressure ventilation in intubated
ent lack of awareness (White et al., 1982). The high doses
anaesthetised patients (Flecknell, 1996)
required in rodents to produce surgical anaesthesia can be
associated with severe respiratory depression (Green,
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
1981). Laryngeal and pharyngeal reflexes are usually retained,
but an increase in salivary secretions may cause airway
CARE, INCLUDING ANALGESIA
obstruction. Anticholinergics may be used to reduce these
bronchial and salivary secretions (Flecknell, 1996).
Supplemental heating will be necessary in almost all
Ketamine is extrermely useful in primates. In many
exotic pets. Larger species, such as minipigs, may not
species, combining ketamine with alpha-2 antagonists,
require warming if anaesthetised in a veterinary practice,
benzodiazepines or phenothiazines produces anaesthesia.
but are likely to if anaesthetised outdoors or in an
Ketamine administered chronically will induce hepatic
unheated house. Insulation of the animal, for example
12
enzymes, and subsequent doses may be less effective
using bubble-wrap, to prevent heat loss may be sufficient
(Marietta et al., 1975). Recovery may also be prolonged
to maintain body temperature. In most small patients,
after ketarmine, and hallucinations and mood alterations
however, additional heating should be provided, such as
may occur (Wright, 1982).
 overhead heat lamps, warm-air blankets (for example Bair
It has a low pH, and may cause discomfort on injection
Hugger@, Arizant Healthcare, Eden Prairie, MN), elec-
(Heard, 1993). There are several reports of acute muscle
tric heat mats or hot water bottles. Care should be taken
irritation and chronic myositis following injection with
not to overheat patients, and mats and bottles are usually
ketamine and xylazine (Beyers et al., 199l; Gaertner
covered with a layer of towelling to prevent contact
et al., 1987; Latt and Echobichon, 1984; Smiler et al.,
burns. Thermostatically controlled heating blankets are
1990). Discomfort may cause the animal to self-traurmatise
available (for example Hormeothermic Blanket System@,
the body part after recovery.
International Market Supply Ltd, Cheshire, UK)
Tiletamine is two to three times as potent as ketamine,
During anaesthesia, the patient's position should be
and has a longer duration (Short, 1987). Nephrotoxicity
 monitored. The exact positioning will depend on the pro-
to high-dose tiletamine/zolazepam has been reported in
cedure to be performed, but the head and neck should be
New Zealand white rabbits (Brarmmer et al., 1991)
extended to prevent the tongue or soft palate from
obstructing the larynx. In general, the head and thorax
Neuroleptanalgesic combinations
should be maintained slightly higher than the abdomen to
 avoid abdominal viscera compressing the lungs. Respiratory
These combinations are useful where analgesia is required
movements should not be impeded; in avian species, for
along with anaesthesia. These combinations include an opi-
example, positioning should allw keel movement. If the
oid that is a narcotic analgesic, and a tranquilliser or seda-
patient is intubated, the endotracheal tube should be
tive (the neuroleptic) that suppresses some of the opioid's
attached to the animal using either bandage material or
side effects. Disadvantages of these combinations include a
adhesive tape (for example, Micropore?, 3M, St Paul,
MN). It is also usually helpful to attach the anaesthetic
relaxation, along with hypotension and bradycardia in some
circuit to the surface on which the animalis positioned, as
cases (Flecknell, 1996). Assisted ventilation is not always
the weight of the circuit may pull on the endotracheal
required, but is beneficial in reducing hypercapnia and aci-
tube and/or the patient. If a change in patient position is
dosis during prolonged anaesthetics. The biggest advantage
required, for example during radiography, it is often sim-
of these combinations is the reversibility of the opioid by
opioid-antagonists, suchas naloxone, mixed agonist/antago-
cuit while moving the animal (Flecknell, 1996).
nists, such as nalbuphine, or partial agonists, such as
Ocular lubricants should be used in most animals to
buprenorphine or butorphanol (Flecknell et al., 1989)
 prevent desiccation and trauma to the corneas [or specta-
Used alone, muscle relaxation is poor with opioids;
cles in snakes and lizards) during anaesthesia and recovery.
this can be improved by adding a butyrophenone.
 It may be possible to tape the eyelids closed (for example,
Common combinations are fentanyl and fluanisone
using Micropore@ tape, 3M, St Paul, MN).
(Hypnorm@, Janssen, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Beerse,
Oxygen therapy is most easily, and least stressfully, pro-
Belgium], and fentanyl and droperidol (Innovar-Vet@,
vided in a chamber before and after anaesthesia. If an oxygen
Introduction to anaesthesia in exotic species
chamber is not available, use of an anaesthetic circuit car-
is just as important as the anaesthetic time. Patients are
rying l00% oxygen into a small kennel or carry box will
still susceptible to many of the risks associated with anaes-
increase the inspired concentration of oxygen for the animal.
thesia and a large nurmber of mortalities occur during this
This can be useful both before anaesthesia and during
time. As many exotic pets are prey species, the recovery
recovery, particularly for mammalian and avian species.
enviromment should be quiet and away from predator
(Provision of high concentrations of inspired oxygen is
species that may stress the recovering patient.
often contraindicated in reptiles, as it will depress their
The environmental temperature will vary depending on
respiratory drive.) If high flow rates are being used, ensure
species requirerments, but supplemental heating is usually
the gas flow does not lower the animal's environrmental
necessary until homeostatic mechanisms return. This is
termperature.
particularly important in neonates. Incubators are ideal
Fluids may be required to stabilise the debilitated
for this period and also allow the provision of oxygen
patient before anaesthesia. They also assist when anaes-
(Flecknell, 1996). Thermometers are useful to monitor
thetic agents depress cardiovascular function during
both environmental and patient temperatures, ensuring
anaesthesia, or in maintaining circulation and metabolism
maintenance of an appropriate temperature.
of anaesthetic drugs. In cases of fluid loss intra-opera-
As with the pre-anaesthetic period, hospital facilities
tively, such as haermorrhage, administration of parenteral
should provide a secure area for patients. Until the animal
fluids may well be life saving. Fluids can be administered
has recovered enough, soft bedding, such as towels of
up to rates equivalent to l0% of circulating volume per
Vetbed? (Profleece, Derbyshire, UK), should be pro-
hour (Flecknell, 1996).
vided, which will not irritate eyes or airways. Water recep-
 In most patients, fluid can be administered at 10ml/kg/h
tacles should be removed until the patient has recovered,
using Hartmann's solution or O.9% saline (Flecknell,
to prevent accidental drowning.
1996). Most animals can cope with the loss of up to 10%
Supplemental fluids and nutrition are often necessary
of their circulating volume acutely, but clinical signs of
for a period of time after anaesthesia in exotic pets. This
hypovolaemia and shock will be seen if >15-20% is lost.
may be directly related to the procedure performed
13
Whole blood transfusions are likely to be required if
under anaesthesia, but often reflects a state of debility on
>20-25% of the circulating blood volume is lost. Blood
presentation. Appetite, water intake, urination and defe-
im sainads Aueu ul panad uaaq aaey suoisnysuen
cation should be recorded if possible in the days following
preference given to a donor anirmal of the sarme species as
anaesthesia. As it is difficult to assess whether many
the recipient. If whole blood is not available, colloids can
patients have eaten, body weight is recorded daily with all
be given to expand circulatory volume; if neither blood nor
patients (Fig. 1.9).
colloids are available, Hartmann's solution or 0.9% saline
s uaed au ro pajad ampaord au uo luuadaa
 may be administered, although crystalloids will redistrib-
condition, analgesia may be necessary in the period after
ute rapidly throughout the body. If intravenous access is
anaesthesia. Pain and analgesia are poorly understood in
not possible, fluids may be administered intraperitoneally
[or intracoelomically] or intraosseously.
and ethics advise that we treat this pain. As with other
Many exotic pets are anaesthetised for surgery or treat-
 domestic species, pre-emptive analgesia is preferable. It is
ment of painful conditions. The judicious use of analgesics
often difficult to assess exotic pets for clinical signs asso-
will speed recovery from  anaesthesia
and illness.
ciated with pain and clinicians are advised to err on the
Multimodal analgesia is used as the synergistic increase in
side of caution, administering analgesics if pain or discom-
 analgesic potency allows lower doses of drugs to be used,
fort may be present. Many species will not show signs of
with concormitant lowering of side effects. For example,
pain as more domesticated species do and signs shown are
opioid analgesics are often administered with non-
likely to be subtle. Few exotic pets will vocalise. Animals
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Opioids are
 may be less active than normal, have a reduced appetite
of particular use when anaesthetising animals, as rmost also
and thirst, have an altered appearance, show behavioural
have sedative or tranquillising effects, which will be
changes, or have cardio-respiratory changes (Flecknell,
anaesthetic-sparing.
1996).
Classes of analgesics available for animals include local
anaesthetics, NSAIDs and opioids. Most routes, including
RECOVERY
orally, subcutaneously, intramuscularly, intravenously and
epidurally, may be used to provide analgesia. An example
If possible, anaesthetic agents should be reversed. This will
of an opioid used in many species is butorphanol, a mixed
reduce the risk of hypothermia, and also risks associated
opioid agonist-antagonist, with primary agonistic activity
with cardio-respiratory depression (Erhardt et al., 2000;
at the 入-opiate receptor (Vivian et al., 1999). Analgesic
Henke et al., 1995; Henke et al., 1998; Henke et al., 1999;
effects will vary between species, depending on the pres-
Henke et al., 2000; Roberts et al., 1993). If part of the
ence of the receptor. Meloxicam is a cyclo-oxygenase-2
anaesthetic protocol that is reversed provided analgesia,
(COX-2} selective NSAID (Kay-Mugford et al., 2000),
for example where opioids are used, consideration should
available as an injectable formulation or an oral suspension
be given to alternative analgesics in the recovery phase.
that is easily administered to many anirmals
The postoperative recovery period is often neglected
 Analgesic drug pharmacokinetics have not been fully
when animals are anaesthetised. In exotic pets, this period
evaluated in most exotic pet species and doses often have
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
not been tested for efficacy. Where analgesic agents have
Patient monitoring
been used in exotic pets to provide pain relief and/or aid
anaesthesia, they are discussed in later chapters.
The stages of anaesthesia described can be difficult to
 If the patient does not recover in the expected period
apply across a broad range of species, as responses will
of time for the anaesthetic used and procedure per-
vary between anirmals. Different drugs will also produce
formed, the clinical exarmination should be repeated.
anaesthesia in different ways, particularly with regard to
Investigations carried out so far should be reviewed, to
identify some aspect of ill health that has been missed.
reffexes or onset time of anaesthesia. Gaseous or intra-
venous agents produce much more rapid onset compared
Pending a diagnosis, supportive care should continue with
to intrarmuscularly administered agents. The depth of
oxygenation, fluids and supplemental heat as required.
anaesthesia required will depend on the procedure to be
(The respiratory drive in reptiles is reduced in high con-
performed and the patient. Surgical procedures require a
centrations of oxygen, so oxygen supplementation should
deeper plane of anaesthesia than those requiring immobil-
be provided intermittently in these species.) Monitoring
isation purely for restraint, for example radiography.
should also be performed continuously until the patient is
The pedal withdrawal reflex is a simple way of assessing
deemed stable, and then periodically until the animal is
depth of anaesthesia. The interdigital web of skin is
sufficiently recovered to be left unattended. The head
pinched with the limb extended; the tail or ear may be
and neck should be extended to reduce airway obstruc-
similarly pinched in some anirmals. At a light plane of
tion. Laterally recumbent anirmals should be turned from
anaesthesia, the limb is withdrawn, muscles twitch or the
time to time to reduce passive congestion in the lungs,
animal vocalises. Eye reflexes and positioning are useful in
species such as the pig and primates, where the palpebral
(Flecknell, 1996).
refex is usually lost during light surgical anaesthesia with
many drugs. However, this reflex is lost at lighter planes
14
with ketamine, and neuroleptanalgesics have unpre-
BOX I.2 Care during the recovery period
dictable effects on it. The palpebral reflex is less useful in
rodents, and may not be lost until very deep planes of rab-
Supplemental heating
bit anaesthesia (Flecknell, 1996)
 Supplemental oxygen (some cases)
Most anaesthetics produce cardio-respiratory depres-
Comfortable substrate
sion. This may include changes in respiratory rate or
depth, heart rate and hypotension. Patient monitoring
Analgesia
should, therefore, include basic physiological functions,
Fluids and nutrition
such as respiratory rate and pattern, heart rate and pulse
quality. Normal values may not be known for the patient
species and anaesthetic combination, but the recording of
the above values allows rapid identification of trends that
may denote an alteration in the patient's well-being
ANAESTHESIAMONITORING
(Flecknell, 1996).
Respiratory system observations will include respira-
Guedel described five stages of anaesthesia [Guedel,
tory rate, pattern and depth. The patient's chest wall may
1936); more recent reviews consider four stages (Smith
be observed, as may the reservoir bag if the animal is intu-
and Swindle, 1994). Induction is comprised of stage one
bated or a tightly fitting facemask is used. A bell or
[voluntary exciterment) and stage two [involuntary excite-
oesophageal stethoscope can be used to auscultate lung
ment). Stage three is surgical anaesthesia, and various
 sounds. Respiratory monitors may be used to monitor res-
reflexes are usually lost at this stage, for exarmple skeletal
piratory rate. Some monitors can be used with animals as
muscle tone. Stage four is characterised by medullary
small as 300g. A Wright's respirometer can be used to
paralysis, shortly before death. These stages or ^depth' of
measure tidal and minute volumes, with paediatric ver-
anaesthesia are assessed using various techniques, mainly
sions suitable for animals over l kg. Ensure the particular
physiological parameters and assessment of reflexes.
piece of equipment used does not add to dead space or
More recent advances have included attempts to monitor
circuit resistance (Flecknell, 1996).
'awareness' during anaesthesia, particularly in human
Peripheral puses are extremely useful in monitoring
patients (Drummond, 2000).
the cardiovascular system, providing an estirmation of sys-
The depth of anaesthesia is monitored to ensure that
temic arterial pressure. These are more easily evaluated in
the patient is at a sufficient plane for the procedure being
larger mammals, such as rabbits, but difficult in smaller
performed, and that a fatal overdose does not occur.
mammals and thick-skinned reptiles. The capillary refill
Other common causes of anaesthetic rmortality are equip-
time of mucous membranes will be rapid with adequate
ment problems, hypothermia and cardiovascular collapse
tissue perfusion. Bell or oesophageal stethoscopes can be
(Jones, 2001). Monitoring both patient and equipment
used to monitor heart rate in most species. Doppier blood
throughout anaesthesia and into the recovery period
flow monitors are useful in very small patients and rep-
should identify problems early enough to allow appropri-
tiles, as they are able to detect pulses in relatively small
ate action to avoid fatalities.
arteries [see Fig. 3.8). A decrease in heart rate is usually
Introduction to anaesthesia in exotic species
associated with a deepening of anaesthesia. Elevations in
Blood gas analysis is the most accurate method of
heart rate often suggest the depth of anaesthesia has
assessing the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon diox-
lightened, or could be due to pain caused by surgery at an
ide, blood pH, blood bicarbonate concentration and the
inadequate depth of anaesthesia (Flecknell, 1996).
base excess. Some analysers can make measurerments
Techniques for recording ECGs have been reported in
frorm 0.l ml. Changes in body temperature will affect
several species (Schoemaker and Zandvliet, 2005). The
results, and the machine requires calibration for this vari-
basic principles are the same as for other species, but some
able. The main difficulty with this technique is arterial
allowances are made for difficulties with contact through
blood sampling. Blood gases are similar for most species.
thick fur or scales. To increase contact, needle electrodes
A blood gas carbon dioxide measurerment at the start of a
can be used or alligator clips can be attached to subcuta-
procedure can be used to calibrate capnography results
neous needles (see Fig. 12.1l). ECG gel is used to enhance
(Flecknell, 1996).
electrical conduction. By standardising positioning, ECGs
ECGs are useful for monitoring the electrical activity
can be interpreted as in other animals. The red (white in
within the patient's heart (see Figs 4.9 and 9.8). Electrical
the US) cable attaches to the right front leg, the yellw
 activity may continue after the heart stops beating, so ECG
(black in the US) to the left front leg, the green (red in the
output does not always correlate with cardiac output.
US) to the left hind leg and the black (green in the US)
Machines with an electronic display usually display heart
earth cable to the right hind leg. ECG measurements are
rate also (Flecknell, 1996). Problems may be encountered
reported in various exotic species, some conscious and some
with the use of ECGs in small patients, where electrode
anaesthetised (Anderson et al., 1999; Girling and Hynes,
contact may be difficult to maintain.
2002; Martinez-Silvestre et al., 2003; Reusch and Boswood,
Assessment of blood pressure is an excellent indicator of
2003; Whitaker and Wright, 2001). Care should be taken
cardiovascular function. Indirect measurement of sys-
in ECG interpretation as different anaesthetics will affect
temic arterial blood pressure is possible in many species
the results differently.
using a sphygmomanometer, inflatable cuff and Doppler
Assessment of mucous membrane colour is a rough meas-
probe, for example using the carpal artery in rabbits (see
15
ure of blood cxygenation; pulse oximetry is a more sensitive
Fig. 3.8], the ulnar artery in birds (see Fig. 10.3], and the
technique. Pulse oximeters measure the oxygen saturation
caudal artery in rats. Disadvantages with this non-invasive
in arterial blood; the machines also measure pulse and cal-
monitoring are the production of intermittent values, and
culate heart rate. Haemoglobins vary between species, but
a failure to detect weak signals when pressure falls. Direct
most hurman pulse oxirmeters can be used in mamrmal
measurements produce a continuous recording, but
species [Allen, 1992; Decker et al., 1989; Erhardt et al.,
require arterial cannulation that may not be possible in all
1990; Vegfors et al., 1991). The probes may be attached to
species. The femoral artery may be used in rabbits, pigs
the ear, tongue, foot or tail of patients. Normal oxygen satu-
and larger prirmates, and the central auricular artery in
ration is 95-98% in animals breathing room airf, but will
rabbits. Central venous pressure can be measured via a
increase to 100% when breathing oxygen. Low cxygen satu-
catheter threaded into a jugular vein and advanced to the
ration correlates with hypoxia and could be due to respira-
anterior vena cava (Flecknell, 1996).
tory depression, airway obstruction, poor contact between
It is important to monitor the body temperature of
the anirmal and the pulse oximeter, or failure of anaesthetic
exotic pets during anaesthesia. Temperature homeostasis is
equipment. If the blood flow falls sufficiently, for example
reduced during anaesthesia, and inadequate supplemental
during shock, a signal will not be detected. Small patient size
 l o samaduan poq moe ide saa
may also reduce the accuracy of values produced, and in
exotic pets are small animals that succumb readily
to
these cases trends are more irmportant than absolute values.
hypothermia due to their high surface area to body weight
Machines may also have a high heart rate alarm below the
ratio, or are ectotherms and rely on environmental temper-
normal rate for a particular species (Flecknell, 1996)
ature to maintain their metabolic functions. Hypothermia
A capnograph can be used to measure expired carbon
will adversely affect the patient's metabolism, hence pro-
dioxide levels. These machines either sample directly
longing recovery time, and increase the potency of gaseous
from the anaesthetic circuit (mainstream system) or from
anaesthetic agents (Regan and Eger, 1967).
a tube close to the endotracheal tube (side-stream sys-
 Rectal temperature is usually assessed in mammalian
tem] (O'Flaherty, 1994). The former are more sensitive
species, and is easily rmonitored using a thermometer (see
and give rapid results, but increase dead space in the cir-
Fig. 4.7). Care should be taken in species with thin-walled
cuit. For animals with small minute volumes, the expired
gastrointestinal tracts, such as birds, where cloacal dam-
gas sample may be contaminated with gas from the cir-
age may readily occur. Probes for oesophageal placement,
cuit, giving an underestimation of the end-tidal carbon
skin surface temperature probes, or thermometers for
dioxide; trends are still useful. The maximum value
measuring temperature at the tympanic membrane are
reflects alveolar gas carbon dioxide concentration. The
alternatives. These may not be accurate in all species and
 normal range in spontaneously breathing animals is 4-8%.
should be validated using a conventional thermometer. It
If respiratory failure or rebreathing of exhaled gas occurs,
is assumed that a reptile's body temperature will equili-
the concentration will increase. Capnographs appear to be
brate with the environmental temperature, and for these
less accurate at higher ranges of PerCOz (Edling et al.,
species an environmental thermometer alongside the
2001; Teixeria Neto et al., 2002).
patient suffices (Flecknell, 1996)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
is, therefore, good practice to assist ventilation during
BOX I.3 Anaesthetic monitoring
anaesthesia. This is facilitated by endotracheal intubation
and, therefore, may be lirmited in smaller patients that
Reflexes (variations between species and
cannot be intubated.
anaesthetics)
 Intermittent ‘sighing' or PPV of anaesthetised animals
Respiratory system:
helps prevent microatelectasis in the lungs, by inflating the
lungs to their normal capacity. PPV also allows the clinician
Rate, rhythm, depth
to control oxygen provision to the patient's airways and con-
· ETCO2 (capnograph)
centrations of inspired anaesthetic agents. Increasing or
·SpO2 (pulse oximeter)
decreasing the rate and/or pressure of PpV is one method of
·Blood gas analysis
lightening or deepening depth of anaesthesia. PPV can
either be performed by the assistant, using hand-control of
Cardiovascular system:
the anaesthetic bag and valve, or mechanically.
Heart rate, rhythm (palpation, bell or
Most anaesthetic circuits allow intermittent positive
oesophageal stethoscope, Doppler flow monitor)
pressure ventilation to be performed by the anaesthetist,
Peripheral pulses (palpation)
but the use of a mechanical ventilator will free the anaes-
thetist to perform other procedures including patient
Mucous membrane colour
monitoring. At lighter planes of anaesthesia, spontaneous
Capillary refill time
respiratory movements may interfere with ventilation;
Eectrocardiogram
neuromuscular blockers will block these movements, but
 are rarely used in exotic pets (Flecknell, 1996).
Blood pressure (usually indirect method)
 Mechanical ventilators apply intermittent positive pres-
Body temperature
sure to the airway and thereby produce controlled ventila-
16
tion. Mechanical ventilators may be prograrmmed to provide
a set nurmber of breaths per minute; they are 'time-cycled' to
switch from inspiration to expiration. Pressure-limited
Anaesthetic equipment monitoring
machines will deliver gases to a maximum pressure, which is
 adjustable. This takes account of variability in patient lung
All equipment for the procedure and anaesthetic should be
compliance, which will change resistance to gas flow.
assermbled and checked before the animal is induced. The
Volme-linmited machines are adjusted to provide a set vol-
anaesthetic equipment should also be monitored continu-
tme of gas with each inspiration, and this tidal volume will
ously throughout the procedure. Care should be taken to
not be affected by pressure variations. The switch back to
ensure the patient remains connected to the anaesthetic
inspiration is similarly dependent either on a fixed time
machine, especially if the patient is moved during the pro-
interval or a set drop in airway pressure (Flecknell, 1996).
cedure. A change in position may also cause the circuit or
If ventilation is pressure-limited, hypoventilation may
endotracheal tube to kink, obstructing the patient's respira-
occur if the airway becomes occluded or if respiratory
tion. The anaesthetist should be aware of the position of
compliance reduces. Using a volume-limited machine, an
valves in the circuit, ensuring that they are never causing
occlusion will cause an increase in pressure that triggers
obstruction or excess resistance to the patient's breathing.
 an alarm to warn the operator. Hypoventilation may occur
The pressure regulator dial(s) should be observed to ensure
with volume limitation if the anaesthetic system leaks
the oxygen supply does not run out, and a spare cylinder
(Edling, 2006)
should be ready to attach to the circuit if required. Some
 Providing that an appropriate pressure is selected, the
anaesthetic machines will have an alarm to indicate low
pressure-limited machines are most useful in small exotic
oxygen. The vaporiser should similarly be monitored to
pets, as an excessive increase in pressure may lead to dam-
ensure sufficient volatile agent is present.
age or even rupture of part of the respiratory tract. A useful
Other equipment requiring continuous function assess-
safety feature is a pressure relief valve in the circuit between
ment includes the patient-monitoring equipment and
the fresh gas inflow and ventilator, to prevent over-inflation
peripheral devices, such as infusion pumps, if fluids or
of the respiratory tract (Flecknell, “1996). Examples of
 other drugs are being administered.
mechanical ventilators which may be used in small patients
include the SAV03@ Small Animal Ventilator ([Fig. 1.10]
Vetronic Services, Devon, UK), which can be used in ani-
RELEVANT TECHNIOUES
mals from 10g to 10kg, or the Nuffield 200@ (Penlon Ltd,
Abingdon, UK)
The use of a mechanical ventilator allows the anaes-
Ventilation
thetist to control ventilation reliably, autormatically provid-
ing intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV). It is
Most anaesthetics cause respiratory depression, which may
extremely useful to be able to set the maximum airway
result in hypoxia, hypercapnia and acidosis (Flecknell,
pressure, particularly in small anirmals where it is easy to
1996). Microatelectasis may occur in the lungs due to
over-inflate airways when manual IPpV is performed.
reduced tidal volurme and perfusion during anaesthesia. It
Suggested values are presented in later chapters, but are a
Introduction to anaesthesia in exotic species
The main disadvantage of using a mechanical ventilator
is the requirement for the patient to be intubated, to
allow the ventilator to inflate the airways to a specified
pressure. Similarly, if the endotracheal tube is too small or
there is a leak in the anaesthetic circuit, gas will leak from
the system and a normal inspiratory-expiratory pattern
will not be producible.
 Respiration during ventilation differs from spontaneous
09
ventilation. During spontaneous ventilation, gases are usu-
ally inspired during negative pressure in the thorax. When
using a ventilator, positive pressure during inspiration will
compress the heart and large veins; this may reduce car-
diac performance and reduce blood pressure. To reduce
this problem, the period of positive pressure should be
minimised by increasing gas flow rates, but this should not
be allowed to compromise airways using high pressures.
Routes of administration
These are described in more detail in species chapters.
The main routes of administration for medications are the
same in all species: oral, subcutaneous, intramuscular,
intravenous, intraperitoneal (or intracoelormic in avian and
17
reptile species) and intraosseous.
Intramuscular injections are administered in the quadri-
ceps muscles of most animals, although the forelimbs or
u pasn Auouunn aro are aimeinnsmu leqaiaeied
Figure 1.10 · Mechanical ventilator for use in animals weighing
reptiles. Intrarmuscular injections in small animals, particu-
up to I0 kg (SAv03@ Small Animal Ventilator, Vetronic Services,
Devon, UK).
larly rodents, may cause muscle damage and pain, and so
should be avoided if possible (Wixson and Smiler, 1997].
Avoid injections into the caudal thigh, as the sciatic nerve
guide only, as individual animals may require different pres-
may be damaged (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003).
sures to compensate for disease for example an increased
Intraperitoneal access is most commonly used for
airway resistance due to respiratory pathology). The respi-
administration of fluids. Absorption is rapid, but fluids
ratory rate can also be adjusted appropriate to the species,
 must be warmed to body temperature beforehand to avoid
usually slightly less than the conscious respiratory rate.
causing hypothermia. Anaesthetic doses necessary are
As pressures required will vary greatly between species,
higher when administered intraperitoneally compared to
these are often adjusted in individual cases until the chest
intramuscular or subcutaneous. Doses required to produce
[(or limbs in chelonia) excursions approximate those nor-
the same effect for the latter two routes are 50-75% of
mally seen in the conscious animal. Suggested pressures
that for the former route (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers,
are listed in species chapters; these will vary depending on
2003). Drugs administered via the intraperitoneal route
the weight of the animal, degree of obesity and functional
 are subject to hepatic first-pass metabolism.
resistance in the airway circuit. Higher pressures are
Intravenous access can be technically difficult in exotic
required in large or obese individuals.
pets, and in many species sedation or anaesthesia is required.
Mechanical ventilators can only be used with intubated
In marmmals, the cephalic, saphenous, jugular, auricular and
patients; if used with a loose-fitting rmask, the pressure cut-
coccygeal veins can be used.
off will never be reached and gas will continuously be
Intraosseous injections are ideal for administration of
infused. The pressure and frequency settings necessary will
fluids and emergency drugs, and are used when venous
depend on the species and individual animal. Some species 
access is not possible (Garvey, 1989). The site for catheter
 such as rabbits have a very small tidal volume and rapid res-
placement varies between species. Aseptic technique is
piratory rate, while others such as reptiles have a large vol-
vital for intraosseous catheter placement, with the skin
urme and slow rate. Reptile and avian airways are particularly
clip and preparation as for surgery. A small needle can be
delicate, and easily ruptured. Animals with airway disease
used for an intraosseous catheter, using a piece of sterile
may have an increased lung resistance that necessitates
surgical wire as a stylet in larger species. The proximal
higher ventilator pressures. Observation of thoracic wall
femur or tibia is a commonly used site for intraosseous
movements should allow the clinician to mimic normal
catheters; the ulna is often used in birds. The limb is
inspiratory volumes. End-tidal carbon dioxide levels should
grasped in the non-dominant hand, palpating the direction
be monitored during artificial ventilation, and tightly main-
of the bone and the proximal end. The needle is then
tained between 4% and 5% (Flecknell, 1996),
inserted into the proximal end of the bone. Gentle turning
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
of the needle with constant pressure will allow the needle
depression as well as analgesia. Different drugs act on dif-
to enter through the cortex, with no resistance felt once
ferent receptor classes and will produce different effects.
the medullary cavity is reached.
Eicosanoids such as prostaglandins and thromboxane
Confirmation of placement is by injection of a small
are released when tissues are injured, resulting in inflam-
amount of sterile saline, which should not encounter
mation and nerve ending sensitisation (Paul-Murphy,
resistance. Movement of the hub of the needle should
2006). NSAIDs inhibit COX enzymes, thus interfering
move the impregnated bone, and the needle tip should not
with eicosanoid synthesis. By reducing these products,
be palpable in the muscle around the bone. Radiographs
NSAIDs decrease inflammation and modulate CNS
can also be used to check the needle site. If intraosseous
effects. The expression of COX-l and COX-2 enzymes
access is required for a period of time, sterile tubing may
varies between species. NSAIDs can be utilised to treat
be attached for continuous infusion or a heparinised bung
many types of pain, including musculoskeletal and vis-
may be used as a port. The hub of the needle can be
ceral, as well as acute or chronic pain.
secured using tape and sutures [see Fig. 4.3]
Side effects may be seen with NSAIDs, as they may
affect renal, hepatic or gastrointestinal systems. These drugs
PAIN AND ANALGESICS
are, therefore, used with caution in anirmals with pre-exist-
ing disorders of these systems or in hypovolaermic animals
where renal blood flow may be reduced. It is not known if
Peripheral nerves detecting a noxious stirmulus transrmit
similar side effects will be seen in all animals, but renal
information to the spinal cord and, thence, to the brain.
lesions have been reported with NSAID use in both mam-
The onset of pain causes physiological changes in the
mals and birds (Ambrus and Sridhar, 1997; Klein et al.,
nerves and pain transmission system, leading to increased
1994; Lulich et al., 1996; Orth and Ritz, 1998; Radford et
sensitisation to further noxious stimuli. Inflammrmation will
al., 1996). Little research has been done on the use of these
cause an increased response to a normally painful stirmu-
drugs in exotic pets. Drug doses are often extrapolated and
18
lus; this is peripheral sensitisation. Central sensitisation
therapeutic serurm levels are not known for most species.
may also occur, producing a greater and more prolonged
response to stimuli (Paul-Murphy, 2006; Woolf and
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
Chong, 1993). This sensitisation may persist for some
time after the initial noxious stirmulus is removed.
Provision of analgesia is usually twofold. Pre-ermptive
The choice of anaesthetic for pregmant animals should con-
analgesia administered before pain occurs will reduce the
sider the consequences of the drugs on the fetus(es) as well
'windup' described above as peripheral and central sensiti-
as the dam. In general, gaseous agents, such as isoflurane, are
sation (Woolf, 1994; Woolf and Chong, 1993). Secondly,
used where possible, as recovery does not rely on drug
the use of different classes of analgesics or multi-modal
metabolism. Positioning should ensure uterine contents do
analgesia will affect the pain transmission and perception
not put excess pressure on the thoracic region, which may
at several points in the physiological pain pathway. A syn-
impede respiration. Oxygen, heat and fluids should be sup-
ergistic effect may be seen when two or more analgesics
plemented; this will avoid hypoxia, hypothermia and
that act via different mechanisms are used in combination.
hypotension respectively. The dam should not be fasted,
This is important when ill animals may succumb to side
blood glucose should be monitored and hypoglycaemia
effects more easily, and enables lower doses of individual
treated. If injectable agents have been administered as part
drugs to be used to produce the same analgesic effect.
 of the anaesthetic, give reversal agents to neonates delivered
Tranquillisers in some anaesthetic protocols may reduce
via Caesarean as well as to the dam. Doxapram is also useful
anxiety and potentiate the analgesic effect.
in stimulating respiration in these neonates (Flecknell,
1996).
Analgesics
 Neonates are more susceptible to many of the problems
associated with anaesthesia, such as hypothermia and
hypoglycaemia. Cardio-respiratory function and drug
Preoperative administration of local anaesthetic agents,
metabolisrm are also likely to be reduced compared to
such as lidocaine (lignocaine} and bupivacaine, will prevent
adult animals. Inhalational agents are frequently used if
or attenuate ‘windup'. These agents are often prepared
neonatal anaesthesia is to be performed. Higher concen-
with adrenaline (epinephrine) to reduce absorption sys-
trations of agents are often required to anaesthetise
temically. Local anaesthetics are most cormmonly adminis-
neonates (Flecknell, 1996).
tered via a splash block, a local line block or regional
infiltration. A line block involves subcutaneous injection
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES AND
into tissue along the site of an incision.
Opioid receptors occur in the central and peripheral nerv-
DRUGS
ous systems. The three classes of receptor involved in anal-
gesia are mu (μ), delta (6), and kappa (k). Species variation
 In most instances, monitoring procedures will detect
exists in the locality, number and function of these recep-
early signs of problerms during anaesthesia. If the patient
tors. Opioid drugs have morphine-like effects, likely medi-
is stable, there will be minimal changes in parameters
ated via an increase in serotonin synthesis (Paul-Murphy,
being rmeasured. However, there may be times when
2006). Most opioids produce sedation and respiratory
more aggressive responses and intervention are required.
Introduction to anaesthesiainexoticspecies
Respiratory problems
Anaesthesia norrmally results in respiratory depression,
but a significant reduction in respiratory rate is likely to
be associated with problems. Onset of respiratory failure
example in rabbits and rodents to less than 40% of the
unanaesthetised rate, or a fall in tidal volume (Flecknell,
1996)
 If ventilation is not assisted, the respiratory depression
during anaesthesia will result in an increase in partial pres-
sures of carbon dioxide. Dead space willallow rebreathing
of expired carbon dioxide and further increased levels. If
this persists for prolonged periods, hypercapnia and aci-
dosis willresult. IPPV, or sighing' the patient periodically,
will reduce this build up of carbon dioxide (Flecknell
1996)
An increase in respiratory rate is likely to correspond to a
lightening of anaesthesia, but may also occur in hypercarbia.
 Hypercarbia will result in a gradual rise in end-tidal carbon
dioxide concentration, as exhaled gas is rebreathed. This
 may be due to a lack of fresh gas, soda lime exhaustion or
anaesthetic circuit problerms. A decrease in end-tidal carbon
19
dioxide may be due to increased ventilation, hypotension or
reduced cardiac output. The carbon dioxide waveform can
be interpreted further, with sudden reductions indicating
airway obstruction, disconnection of breathing circuit from
the anirmals or cardiac arrest (Flecknell, 1996).
Figure I.lI · Humidifers can be used to reduce drying of respira-
Hypoxia will result in cyanosis of mucous membranes,
but only with very low oxygen saturations (less than 50%
in most species). Pulse oxirmetry is a more accurate tech-
nique for monitoring blood oxygen saturations, with a
Doxapram is a respiratory stimulant, available in both
injectable
and topical forms (Dopram-V?, Willow
drop of 5% or more requiring action. Hypoxia below 50%
is life-threatening (Flecknell, 1996).
Francis). It rmay be used to treat anaesthetic-associated res-
piratory arrest or to counteract the respiratory depressive
Inadequate gas exchange results in a decrease in blood
oxygen and/or an increase in carbon dioxide concentra-
effects of fentanyl. Doxaprarm rmay also reverse fentanyl's
tion (Flecknell, 1996). Blood gas analysis is not routinely
analgesic properties (Flecknell et al., 1989). Doxapram's
perforrmed in small patients, and the reader is referred to
duration of activity is 15 min (Cooper, 1989) and repeated
other texts for more detailed blood gas analysis interpre-
administration may be necessary.
tation (Martin, 1992).
If respiratory failure is identified, the patient and
Cardiovascular problems
equipment should be checked. Ensure that oxygen is
being supplied (i.e. that oxygen remains in the cylinder or
These often result from anaesthetic overdose, but may
circuit, and that the circuit is still attached to the patient
also be secondary to respiratory failure causing hypoxia
 and is unimpeded). Switch off volatile anaesthetic agents
and hypercapnia, following severe blood loss, or hypother-
and/or administer reversal drugs for injectable agents.
mia. Circulatory failure may result in delayed capillary
One hundred per cent oxygen should be administered,
refill time, with blanched mucous membranes if associ-
performing positive pressure ventilation if possible. In
small unintubated anirmals, breaths can be forced by tho-
compared to rectal temperature, hypotension and
racic compression. (In reptiles, administration of 100%
variable [increased or decreased) heart rate (Flecknell,
oxygen will depress ventilation.)
1996).
Where bronchial secretions build up during anaesthe-
 If possible, the patient should be intubated to allow pos-
sia, they may obstruct small airways. Anticholinergics,
itive pressure ventilation with 100% oxygen. If intubation is
such as atropine and glycopyrrolate, can be used to reduce
not possible, a facemask should be used to provide oxygen
 secretions. Humidification of inspired gases using nebulis-
while chest compressions are used to ventilate the lungs.
ers can reduce drying of the secretions, allowing them to
Extermal cardiac cormpressions should also be performed if
flow more freely and reducing the risk of obstruction.
cardiac arrest has occurred. Pre-placement of an intra-
This is less important for short procedures, but more so
venous catheter at induction provides venous access in such
for longer anaesthetics or for dyspnoeic animals in oxygen
an emergency, allowing administration of reversal agents or
chambers (Fig. 1.11)
other drugs if necessary. Atropine has parasympatholytic
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
effects; by stimulating supraventricular pacemakers, it may
correct supraventricular bradycardias or a slow ventricular
rhythm (Edling, 2006). Adrenaline [epinephrine} is a posi-
tive inotrope; it initiates heart contractility, increases heart
rate and cardiac output. Atropine should be adrministered if
 complete heart block or bradycardia is present, lidocaine if
fibrillation or arrhythmia has occurred, and adrenaline (epi-
nephrine) if asystole is present. Fluid therapy is important
if hypovolaemia is present (Flecknell, 1996).
Other problems
Hypothermia is unlikely to be an acute problem and
should be prevented by close monitoring of body temper.
ature and provision of supplemental heating. If it occurs
the patient should be slowly warmed using heat sources as
Figure I.12 · Resuscitators are available for use with small patients.
described above. Warrmed fluids should be administered.
The recovery time will be prolonged and ventilatory sup-
 port is likely to be required for a longer period.
Vomiting and regurgitation are possible in some species.
patient along the body length so that the abdominal viscera
(Significantly, they are not possible in rabbits
and
move towards [inducing expiration} and away from (induc-
rodents.) If they occur, irmmediate action should be taken
ing inspiration} the lungs. This is obviously more difficult in
20
to reduce the risk of inhalation of gastric contents that
a patient undergoing surgery, for example a coeliotomy,
may cause an imrmediately fatal respiratory obstruction or
where large body moverments may not be possible.
lead to aspiration pneumonia. The presence of an endo-
tracheal tube will help protect the airways from these
problems. The animal's head should be lowered and
BOX I.5 What to keep in your crash box
material swabbed or aspirated from the oral and pharyn-
geal cavities (Flecknell, 1996).
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
Atropine
BOX I.4 Emergency procedures
Doxapram (drops and injectable)
Diazepam
Intravenous access (better to have it before you
need it!):
Endotracheal tubes (uncuffed), I-6 mm diameter
Glycopyrrolate
Fluids for shock, hypovolaemia
Intravenous catheters (20-26 gauge)
Blood transfusion for severe blood loss
Airway/breathing:
Laryngoscope, with size O-I Wisconsin blade
Local anaesthetic spray
 Oxygen via endotracheal or transtracheal
intubation, nasal catheter, or facemask
Local anaesthetic ointment (for example lidocaine
 )  
with prilocaine, EMLA?)
External cardiac massage
( s-1) sasus pue (a8ne3 tz-81) sapaa
Drug administration:
 Ocular lubricant
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
·Penlight
Adhesive tape
 Atropine, glycopyrrolate
Doxapram
Diazepam
CHAPTER OUTLINES
If an unintubated anaesthetised animal suffers from
The remainder of the text is divided according to taxo-
apnoea, two methods can be used to induce inspiration and
nomic groups, with chapters on mammals, reptiles, birds,
expiration artificially. IPPV can be instigated with a tight-
amphibians, fish and invertebrates. An introductory section
fitting facemask. There is a possibility of inflating the
will describe group anatomy and physiology that is relevant
oesophagus and stomach using this technique, causing iatro-
to anaesthesia, along with an overview of techniques appro-
genic bloat. The other technique is most effective in mam-
priate for those species. Although some basic husbandry
mals (which possess a diaphragm], and involves rocking the
information and veterinary rmedicine is provided where
Introduction to anaesthesia in exotic species
Table I.2: Doses of emergency drugs (doses vary between species and may require to be repeated) (see Fig. I.8)
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lkg)
ROUTE
 INDICATION/COMMENT
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
0.02-0.20
IM, IV, IT, SC
Cardiac arrest (fibrillating or
asystole) Dilute before use in
 small patients
Atropine
0.01-0.04(mammals)
IM, IV, SC
Cardiac arrest (heart block,
0.2(birds,reptiles)
bradycardia). Ineffective in
0.1 (amphibians,fish)
animals with atropinesterase
(e.g.rabbits)
Dexamethasone
1-2
IM, IV, SC, PO
Ferrets <8 mg/kg, birds
<6mg/kg
Diazepam
0.5-5.0
IM, IV, IP IO
Seizures
Doxapram
5
IM, Iv, IP/ ICe, SC
Short durationofeffect,may
require repeated dosing
(typically every 15 min)
Frusemide
1-10
IV, IM
Diuretic for oedema,
 pulmonary congestion, ascites
Glycopyrrolate
0.01-0.02
SC, IM, IV
Bradycardia
2
Alternative to atropine for
animals with atropinesterase
Lidocaine (lignocaine)
1-2
IV, IT
Cardiac arrest (fibrillating)
Key. ICe = intracoelomic, IM = intramuscular, IO = intraosseous, IP = intraperitoneal, IT = intratracheal, IV = intravenous,
SC= subcutaneous
(Carpenter,2005;Flecknell,1996)
relevant for anaesthesia and the peri-anaesthetic period, it
Flecknell, P. I996. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia, Znd edn.
Academic Press, New York.
is not possible to cover these areas in detail; the reader is
Hall, L.W. and K.W. Clarke. 2000. Veterinary Anaesthesia, IOth edn.
referred to other texts for further information on these
Saunders, London.
topics. Pathologies are briefly mentioned, to outline com-
Harrison, G.L. and T.L. Lightfoot. 2006. Clinical Avian Medicine.
mon problerms that may affect anaesthesia. Within each of
Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm Beach, Florida.
the three larger sections (mammals, birds, reptiles), sub-
Hau, J. and G.L. Van Hoosier. 2003. Handbook of Laboratory
sections will discuss different families, for example lizards,
Animal Science, Znd edn. Vol I: Essential Principles and
snakes, chelonia and crocodilia. Each subsection will pro-
Practices. CRC Press, Boca Raton,FL
vide further detail on these families and describe anaesthe-
Mader, D.R. 2006. Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
sia with drug doses and technical procedures specific to
Saunders, Elsevier, St Louis, MO.
those animals, for example intubation techniques.
Quesenberry, K., and J.W. Carpenter. 2004. Ferrets, Rabbits, and
The aim of the chapters is to make the clinician aware of
Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd ern. Saunders,
St Louis, Missouri.
asaeue-ad ame o saiads yea ot uon saqod
 preparations. Where pathologies may affect the choice of
REFERENCES
 anaesthetic, protocols are suggested for certain cases.
Many procedures have not been formally reported in
exotic pets, but medicine from more common species can
Aeschbacher, G., and A. I. Webb. 1993. Propofol in rabbits. 2. Long
often be applied. Where possible, known drug doses are
term anaesthesia. Lab Anim Sci 43: 328-335.
Ahmed, Q., M. Chung-Park, and J. F. Tomashefski. 1997.
given, but most drugs are not licensed for use in exotic
Cardiopulmonary pathology in patients with sleep
animals. Pet owners should be inforrmed and, ideally, writ-
apnea/obesity hyp oventilation syndrome. Hum Pathol 28:
ten consent obtained to use drugs off-label.
264-269.
Allen, J. I992. Pulse oxim etry: everyday uses in zoological practice.
Vet Rec 131: 354-355.
FURTHER READING
Ambrus, J. L., and N. R. Sridhar. I997. Immunologic aspects of renal
disease. JAMA 278: 1938-1945.
Amrein, R., and W. Hetzel. 1990. Pharmacology of Dormicum
Carpenter, J.W. 2005. Exotic Animal Forrmulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier,
[midazolam] and Anexate [flumazenil]. Acta Anaesthesiol
St Louis, Missouri.
Scand 34[suppl. 92]: 6-15.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Anderson, N. L., R. F. Wack, L. Calloway et al. 1999. Cardio-
Dobromylskyi, P, P. A. Flecknell, B. D. Lascelles et al. 2000.
pulmonary effects and efficacy of propofol as an anesthetic
Management of postoperative and other acute pain. In:
agent in brown tree snakes [Boiga irregularis). Bull Assoc Rep
P. A. Flecknell and A. Waterman-Pearson [eds.) Pain
Amph Vet 9: 9-15.
Management in Animals. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Ayre, P. 1956. The T-piece technique. Br J Anaesth 28: 520-523.
Drummond, J. C. 1985. MAC for halothane, enflurane, and
Beyers, T., J. A. Richardson, and M. D. Prince. I991. Axonal
isoflurane in the New Zealand white rabbit: and a test for the
degeneration and self-mutilation as a complication of the
validity of MAC detertminations. Anesthesiology 62: 336-338.
intrarmuscular use of ketamine and xylazine in rabbits. Lab
Drummond, J. C. 2000. Monitoring depth of anesthesia: with
Anim Sci 41: 519-520.
ermphasis on the application of the Bispectral Index and the
Blake, D. W., B. Jover, and B. P. McGrath. 1988. Haemodynamic and
middlle latency auditory evoked response to the prevention of
heart rate reflex responses to propofol in the rabbit.
recall. Anesthesiology 93: 876-882.
Comparison with althesin. Br J Anaesth 6l: 194-199.
Dyson, D. H., D. G. Allen, W. Ingwersen et al. I987. Effects of
Bowser, P R. 2001. Anesthetic options for fish. In: R. D. Gleed and
 Saffan on cardiopulmonary function in healthy cats. Can J Vet
J. W. Ludders [eds.) Recent Advances in Veterinary Anesthesia
Res 51: 236239.
md Analgesia: Companion Animals. Intemational Veterinary
Edling, T. M. 2006. Updates in anesthesia and monitoring. In:
Information Service, www.ivis.org.
G. J. Harrison and T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Merdicine 
Brammer, A., C. D. West, and S. L. Allen. I993. A comparison of
No. II. pp 747-760. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm Beach, Florida.
propofol with other injectable anaesthetics in a rat model for
Edling, T. M., L. A. Degemes, K. Flammer et al. 2001. Capnographic
measuring cardiovascular parameters. Lab Anim 27: 250-257.
monitoring of anesthetized African grey parrots receiving
Brammer, D. W, B. J. Doeming, C. E. Chrisp et al. I991. Anesthetic
intertmittent positive pressure ventilation. J Am Vet Med Assoc
and nephrotoxic effects of telazol in New Zealand white
219: 1714-1718.
rabbits. Lab Anim Sci 41: 432-435.
Eger, E. 1. 1981. Isoflurane: a review. Anesthesiology 55: 559-576.
Brunson, D. B. I997. Pharmacology of inhalation anesthetics. In:
Eger, E. 1. I992. Desflurane animal and human pharmacology:
D. F. Kohn, S. K. Wixson, W. J. White and G. J. Benson [eds.)
aspects of kinetics, safety, and MAC. Anesth Analg 75: S3-S9.
Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory Animals. pp 29-41.
Eger, E. 1., L. J. Saidman, and B. Brandstater. I965. Minimum
22
ACLAM and Academic Press, New York.
alveolar anaesthetic concentration: a standard of anaesthetic
Capdevila, X., Y. Barthelet, P. Biboulet et al. I999. Effects of
potency. Anesthesiology 26: 756-763.
perioperative analgesic technique on the surgical outcome and
Erhardt, W., C. Lendl, R. Hipp et al. 1990. The use of pulse
duration of rehabilitation after major knee surgery.
oximetry in clinical veterinary anaesthesia. J Assoc Vet Anaesth
Anesthesiology 91: 8- 15.
17.
Carpenter, J. W. 2005. Exotic Animal Formulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier,
Erhardt, W., A. Weiske, R. Korbel et al. 2000. A completely
St Louis, Missouri.
antagonisable injection anaesthesia in pigeons [Columbia Litia
Carroll, J. F., R. L. Summers, D. J. Dzielak et al. I999. Diastolic
Gmel. var. dom.). In: Proceedings 7th WCVA, Beme. p I02.
compliance is reduced in obese rabbits. Hypertension 33:
Feldberg, W., and H. W. Symonds. I980. Hyperglycaemic effect of
811815.
xylazine. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 3: 197-202.
Chiari, P C., M. W. Bienengraeber, P S. Pagel et al. 2005. Isoflurane
Fecknell, P I996. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia. Znd edn.
protects against myocardial infarction during early reperfusion
Academic Press, New York.
Flecknell, P. A., J. H. Liles, and H. A. Williamson. I990. The use of
transduction: evidence for anesthetic-induce postconditioning
lgnocaine-prilocaine local anaesthetic cream for pain-free
in rabbits. Anesthesiology I02: 102-109.
venepuncture in laboratory animals. Lab Anim 24: 142-146.
Chiari, P C., P. S. Page., K. Tanak et al. 2004. Intravenous emulsifed
Flecknell, P. A., J. H. Liles, and R. Wootton. I989. Reversal of
halogenated anesthetics produce acute and delayed
fentanyl/fluanisone neuroleptanalgesia in the rabbit using
preconditioning against myocardial infarction in rabbits.
mixed agonist/antagonist opioids. Lab Anim 23: 147-155.
Anesthesiology 101: 1160-1166.
Frey, H.-H., R. Schulz, and E. Wermer. I996. Pharmakologie des
Child, K. J., J. P. Cumrie, B. Davis et al. 1971. The pharmacological
Zentralen Nervensystems. In: H.-H. Frey and W. Loscher
properties in animals of CT 134l - a new steroid anaesthetic
[eds.] Lehrbuch der Pharmakologie und der Toxikologie fir die
gent. Br J Anaesth 43: 2-13.
Veterinarmedizin. pp I62-163. Enke Verlag, Stuttgart.
Child, K. J., B. Davis, M. G. Dodds et al. 1972a. Anaesthetic,
Gaertner, D., K. R. Boschert, and T. R. Schoeb. 1987. Muscle
cardiovascular and respiratory effects of a new steroidal agent
necrosis in Syrian hamsters resulting from intrarmuscular
CT I34l: a comparison with other intravenous anaesthetic
injections of ketamine and xylazine. Lab Anim Sci 37: 65-79.
dhugs in the unrestrained cat. Br J Pharm 46: 189-200.
Garvey, M. S. I989. Fluid and electrolyte balance in critical patients.
Child, K. J., A. F. English, H. G. Gilbert et al. I972b. An
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 19: 102l-1057.
emndocrinological evaluation of Althesin [CA I34l] with
Girling, S. J., and B. Hynes. 2002. Cardiovascular and haemopoietic
special reference to reproduction. Postgrad Med J {Jume
systems. In: S. J. Girling and P. Raiti [eds.) Manual of Reptiles.
suppl.): 5155.
Znd edn. pp 243-260. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Child, K. J., W. Gibson, G. Harmby et al. 1972c. Metabolism and
Glen, J. B. I980. Animal studies of the anaesthetic activity of ICI 35
excretion of Althesin [CT 134l] in the rat. Postgrad Med J
868. Br J Anaesth 52: 731.
Jume suppl.): 37-42.
Glen, J. B., and S. C. Hunter. I984. Pharmacology of an emulsion
Cookson, J. H., and F. J. Mills. I983. Continuous infusion
formulation of ICI 35 868. Br J Anaesth 56: 617-626.
aaesthesia in baboons with alfaxalone-alphadolone. Lab
Green, C. I98l. Anaesthetic gases and health risks to laboratory
Anim 17: 196-197.
personnel: a review. Lab Anim 15: 397-403.
Cooper, J. E. I989. Anaesthesia of exotic species. In:
Green, C. J., M. J. Halsey, S. Precious et al. I978. Alfaxalone-
A D. R. Hilbery [ed.) Manual of Anaesthesia for Small Animal
alphadolone anaesthesia in laboratory animals. Lab Anim I2:
Practice. p I44. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
85-89.
Decker, M. J., K. P. Conrad, and K. P. Strohl. I989. Noninvasive
Greene, S. A., and J. C. Thurmon. I988. Xylazine - a review of its
oximetry in the rat. Biomed Instrum Technol May-June:
pharmacology and use in veterinary medicine. J Vet Pharmacol
222228.
Ther 11: 295-313.
Introduction to anaesthesia in exotic species
Guedel, A. E. 1936. Anesthesia: a teaching outline: stages of
Lulich, J. P, C. A. Osbome, and D. J. Polzin. I996. Diagnosis and
amnesthesia. Anesth Analg I5: I-4.
long-tertm management of protein-losing
Harcourt-Brown, F. 2002. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: F Harcourt-
glomerulonephropathy; a 5-year case-based approach. Vet Clin
Brown [ed.) Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. pp I2l-139.
North Am Small Anim Pract 26: 1401-1416.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Machine, and N. A. Caulkert. I996. The cardiopulmonary effects of
Harkness, J. E., and J. E. Wagner. I989. The Biology and
propofol in mallard ducks. Proc Am Assoc Zoo Vets: I49-154.
Medicine of Rabbits and Rodents. Znd edn. Lea & Febiger,
Marietta, M. P, P. F. White, C. R. Pudwill et al. I975. Biodisposition
Philadelphia.
of ketarmine in the rat: self-induction of metabolism. J
Heard, D. J. I993. Principles and techniques of anesthesia and
Pharmacol Exp Ther 196: 536-544.
analgesia for exotic practice. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
Marini, R. P, R. J. Hurley, D. L. Avison et al. I993. An evaluation of
Pract 23: 13011327.
three neuroleptanalgesic combinations in rabbits. Lab Anim Sci
Hedengvist, P., and L. J. Hellebrekers. 2003. Laboratory Animal 
43: 338-345.
Analgesia, Anesthesia, and Euthanasia. In: J. Hau and G. L. Van
Martin, L. I992. All You Really Need to Know to Interpret Arterial
Hoosier [eds.) Handbook of Laboratory Animal Science. Znd
Blood Gases. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.
edn. No. I. pp 413-455. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Martinez-Silvestre, A., J. A. Mateo, and J. Pether. 2003.
Hellebrekers, L. J., E. J. de Boer, M. A. van Zuylen et al. 1997.
 Electrocardiographic parameters in the Gomeran giant lizard,
A comparison between medetomidine-ketamine and
Gallotia bravoana. J Herp Med Surg 13: 22-25.
medetormidine-propofol anaesthesia in rabbits. Lab Anim 31:
Mathy-Hartert, M., G. Deby-Dupont, P. Hans et al. I998. Protective
58-69.
activity of propofol, Diprivan, and intralipid against active
Henke, J., C. Lendl, R. Mantel et al. I998. Reversal of anaesthesia in
oxygen species. Mediators Inflamm 7: 327-333.
rats: effects on various paratmeters. In: Proceedings, AVA
Mazze, R. I., S.A. Rice, and J. M. Baden. I985. Halothane,
Spring Meeting, Edinburgh. p 70.
isoflurane, and enflurane MAC in pregnant and nonpregnant
Henke, J., U. Roberts, and K. Otto et al. 1995. Klinische
female and male mice and rats. Anaesthesiology 62: 339-341.
 Untersuchungen zur i.m. Kombinationsanasthesie mit
Memtsoudis, S. G., A. H. S. The, and P. M. Heerdt. 2005.
Fent anyl/Climazolam/Xylazin und post-operativer i.v.
Autonomic mechanisms in the age-related hypotensive effect
Antagonisierung mit Naloxon/Sarmazenil/Yohimbin beim
of propofol. Anesth Analg 100: I1l-115.
23
Meerschweinchen. Tieraerztl Prax 24: 85-87.
Mihic, S. J., Q. Ye, M. J. Wick et al. 1997. Sites of alcohol and
Henke, J., E. Schneider, and W. Erhardt. 2000. Medetomidine
volatile anaesthetic action on GABA[A] and glycine receptors.
Combination anaesthesia with and without antagonisation -
Nature 389: 385-389.
influence on vital parameters in mongolian gerbils
Morgan, D. W. T., and K. Legge. I989. Clinical evaluation of
[Mesocricetus ungiculatus]. In: Proceedings 7th WCVA,
propofol as an intravenous anaesthetic agent in cats and dogs.
Beme. pp 99-100.
Vet Rec 124: 31-33.
Henke, J., U. Sening, and W. Erhardt. 1999. Complete reversal of
Muir, W. W., and L. A. Hubbell. 2000. Anesthetic machines and
anaesthesia in hamsters. In: Proceedings AVA Spring Meeting;
breathing systems. In: W. W. Muir and L. A. Hubbell [eds.)
Newcastle upon Tyne. p. 45.
Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. Mosby, St Louis, MO.
Hunter, S. C., J. B. Glen, and C. J. Butcher. I984. A modified
Murphy, P G., J. R. Bennett, D. S. Myers et al. I993. The effect
anaesthetic vapour extraction system. Lab Anitm 18: 42-44.
of propofol anaesthesia on free radical-induced lipid
Jones, R. S. 2001. Comparative mortality in anaesthesia. Br J
peroxidation in rat liver microsomes. Eur J Anaesthesiol I0:
Anaesth 87: 813-815.
261-266.
Jonsson, M. M., S. G. E. Lindahl, and L. I. Eriksson. 2005. Effect of
 Nolan, A. M. 2000. Phartmacology of analgesic drugs. In: P Flecknell
propofol on carotid body chemosensitivity and cholinergic
and A. Waterman-Pearson [eds.] Pain Management in Animals.
chemotransduction. Anesthesiology I02: 110-116.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Kay-Mugford, P, S. J. Benn, J. LaMarre et al. 2000. In vitro effects
Norris, M. 198l. Portable anaesthetic apparatus designed to induce
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on cyclooxygenase
and maintain surgical anaesthesia by methoxyflurane inhalation
activity in dogs. Am J Vet Res 6l: 802-810.
in the Mongolian gerbil (Meriones uiguiculatus). Lab Anim I5:
Kaymak, C., E. Kadioglu, H. Basar et al. 2004. Genoprotective role
153-155.
of vitamin E and selenium in rabbits anaesthetized with
O'Flaherty, D. I994. Capnography - Principles and Practice Series.
sevoflurane. Hum Exp Toxicol 23: 413-419.
BMJ Publishing Group, London, UK.
Kleim, P N., K. Charmatz, and J. Langenberg. I994. The effect of
Olson, M. E., D. Vizzutti, D. W. Morck et al. 1993. The
flunixin meglumine [Banamine] on the renal function in
parasympatholytic effects of atropine sulphate and
northem bobwhite quail [Colimus virginianus]: an avian model.
glycopyrrolate in rats and rabbits. Can J Vet Res 57: 254-258.
 Proc Annu Conf Assoc Rept Amphib Vet Am Assoc Zoo Vet:
Orth, S. R., and E. Ritz. I998. The nephrotic syndrome. N Engl
128131.
J Med 338: 1202-1211.
Koblin, D. D. I992. Characteristics and implications of desflurane
Park, C., and S. Y. Oh. 2004. Acute effect of bupivacaine and ricin
metabolism and toxicity. Anesth Analg 75: S10-S 16.
mAb 35 on extraocular muscle layers in the rabbit. Curr Eye
Kwak, S. H., J. 1. Choi, and J. T. Park. 2004. Effects of propofol on
Res 29: 293-301.
endotoxin-induced acute lung injury in rabbit. J Korean Med
Patel, S. S., and K. L. Goa. I996. Sevoflurane: a review of its
Sci 19: 55-61.
phartmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties and its
Latt, R. H., and D. J. Echobichon. I984. Self-mutilation in guinea
clinical use in general anaesthesia. Drugs 5l: 658-700.
pigs following the intramuscular injectionof ketarmine-
Paul-Murphy, J. 2006. Pain management. In: G. J. Harrison and
acepromazine. Lab Anim Sci 34: 516.
T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medicine No. I.
Ludders, J. W. I999. Inhalant anaesthetics. In: C. Seymour and
pp. 233-239. Spix Publishing, Palm Beach, Florida.
R. Gleed [eds.) Manual of Small Animal Anaesthesia and
Pieri, L., R. Schaffner, R. Scherschlicht et al. I98l. Pharmacology of
Analgesia. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
midazolam. Arzneim-Forsch/Drug Res 31: 2180-2201.
Lukasik, V. M. I999. Premedication and sedation. In: C. Seymour
Radford, M. G., K. E. Holley, J. P Grande et al. 1996. Reversible
 amd R. Gleed [eds.) Manual of Small Animal Anaesthesia and
membranous nephropathy associated with the use of
Analgesia. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. JAMA 276: 466-469.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Regan, M. J., and E. I. Eger. I967. The effect of hypothermia in dogs
Teixeria Neto, F. J., A. B. Carregaro, R. Mannarino et al. 2002.
on anaesthetizing and apnoeic doses of inhalation agents.
Comparison of a side-stream capnograph and a mainstream
Anesthesiology 28: 689-700.
Capnograph in mechanically ventilated dogs. J Am Vet Med
Reusch, B., and A. Boswood. 2003. Electrocardiography of the
Assoc 221: 1582-1585.
normal domestic pet rabbit. J Small Anim Pract 44: 514.
Tessier-Vetzel, D., R. Tissier, X. Waintraub et al. 2005. Isoflurane
Roberts, U., J. Henke, R. Brill et al. I993. Fully antagonizable
inhaled at the onset of reperfusion potentiates the
anaesthesia of the guinea pig. Part I: experimental
cardioprotective effect of ischemic postconditioning through
investigations. In: G. Schmidt-Oechtering and M. Alef [eds.)
a NO-dependent mechanism. J Cardiovasc Phartm 47:
Neue Aspekte der Veterinaranasthesie umd Intensivtherapie.
487492.
pp. 295-296. Verlag Paul Parey, Berlin.
Tumer, P V, C. L. Kerr, A. J. Healy et al. 2006. Effect of meloxicam
Schoemaker, N. J., and M. M. J. M. Zandvliet. 2005. Electrocardiograms
and butorp hanol on minimum alveolar concentration of
in selecterd species. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 14: 26-33.
isoflurane in rabbits. Am J Vet Res 67: 770-774.
Sear, J W, J. Uppington, and N. H. Kay I985. Haematological and
Ungerer, M. 1978. A comparison between the Bain and Magill
biochemical changes during anaesthesia with propofol (Diprivan').
anaesthetic systems during spontaneous breathing. Can
Postgrad Med J 61 [suppl. 3): 165-168.
Anaesth Soc J 25: 122-125.
Sebel, P S., and J. D. Lowdon. I989. Propofol: a new intravenous
Valverde, A., T. E. Morey, J. Hermandez et al. 2003. Validation of
amaesthetic. Anesthesiology 7l: 260-277.
several types of noxious stimuli for use in deternining the
Sebesteny, A. I97l. Fire-risk-free anaesthesia of rodents with
minimum alveolar concentration for inhalation anesthetics in
halothane. Lab Anim 5: 225-231.
dogs and rabbits. Am J Vet Res 64: 957-962.
Short, C. E. I987. Principes and Practice of Veterinary Anesthesia.
Vegfors, M., F. Sjoberg, L.-G. Lindberg et al. I99l. Basic studies of
Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore.
 pulse oximetry in a rabbit model. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
Skarda, R. T. 1996. Local and regional anesthetic and analgesic
35: 596-599.
techniques: dogs. In: J. C. Thurtmon, W. J. Tranquilli and
Virtanen, R. 1989. Phartmacological profiles of medetomidine
G. J. Benson [eds.] Lumb & Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia.
and its antagonist, atiparmezole. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
3rd edn. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
4: 29-37.
24
Smiler, K. L., S. Stein, K. L. Hrapkiewicz et al. 1990. Tissue
Vivian, J. A., M. B. DeYoung, T. L. Sumpter et al. 1999. X-opioid
response to intrarmuscular and intraperitoneal injections of
receptor effects of butorphanol in rhesus monkeys. J Pharmacol
ketamine and xylazine in rats. Lab Anim Sci 40: 60-64.
Exp Ther 290: 259-265.
Smith, A. C., and M. M. Swindle. I994. Research Animal
Watkins, A., L. W. Hall, and K. W. Clarke. 1988. Propofol as an
Anesthesia, Analgesia and Surgery. Scientist Center for Animal
intravenous anaesthetic agent in dogs. Vet Rec I20:
Welfare, Greenbelt, MD.
326-329.
Steffey, E. P. I994. Inhalation anaesthesia. In: L. W. Hall and
Whitaker, B. R., and K. M. Wright. 2001. Clinical techniques. In:
P M. Taylor [eds.) Anaesthesia of the Cat. pp. I57-193.
K. M. Wright and B. R. Whitaker [eds.] Amphibian Medicine
Bailliere Tindall, London.
and Captive Husbandry pp. 89-110. Kreiger Publishing
Steffey, E. P. I996. Inhalation anesthetics. In: J. C. Thurtmon,
Company, Malabar, FL.
W J. Tranquilli and G. J. Benson [eds.) Lumb & Jones' Veterinary
White, P. F., W. L. Way, and A. J. Trevor. I982. Ketamine - its
Anesthesia. 3rd edn. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
pharmacology and therapeutic uses. Anesthesiology 56:
Stoelting, R. K. I987. Phartmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic
119136.
Practice. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia.
Wixson, S. K., and K. L. Smiler. I997. Anesthesia and analgesia in
Strombeck, D. R., and W. G. Guildford. 1991. Hepatic necrosis and
rodents. In: D. F. Kohn, S. K. Wixson, W. J. White and
acute hepatic failure. Small Animal Gastroenterology pp.
G. J. Benson [eds.) Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory
574-592. Wolfe Publishing, London.
Animals. ACLAM and Academic Press, New York.
Swindle, M. 1998. Surgery. Anesthesia & Experimental Techniques
Woolf, C. J. I994. A new strategy for the treatment of inflammatory
im Swine. Iowa State University Press, Iowa.
pain: prevention or elimination of central sensitization. Drugs
Tanaka, K., D. Weibrauch, F. Kehl et al. 2002. Mechanism of
47[suppl. 5]: 1-9, dliscussion: 46-47.
preconditioning by isoflurane in rabbits: a direct role for
Woolf, C. J., and M. S. Chong. 1993. Preemptive analgesia: treating
reactive oxygen species. Anesthesiology 97: 1485-1490.
postoperative pain by preventing the establishment of central
Tassonyi, E., E. Charpantier, D. Muller et al. 2002. The role of
sensitization. Anesth Analg 77: 362-379.
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the mechanisms of
Wight, M. 1982. Pharmacologic effects of ketarmine and its use in
amesthesia. Brain Res Bull 57: 133-150.
veterinary medicine. J Am Vet Med Assoc I80: 1462-1471.
2
Mammal anaesthesia
a
a
1
INTRODUCTION
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
1
A wide variety of mammals are kept in captivity as pets
Many factors will affect how patients respond to anaes-
and presented to the veterinary surgeon for different rea-
thetics. Sorme anatomical and physiological factors will
sons. This chapter will cover those mammal species of
affect how anaesthesia is approached and maintained in
exotic pet commonly presented to veterinary practices.
different animals. General factors are discussed in this
Sedation or anaesthesia may be required for examination
section, with species-specific sections in later chapters.
(for example, African pygmy hedgehogs - Atelerix albi-
ventris), phlebotomy (for exarmple, guinea pigs - Cavia
Stress
porcellus and some ferrets - Mustela putorius furo], imag-
ing (ultrasonography, radiography, CT, MRI) or surgical
 procedures (for example dentistry, wound repair, neoplas-
The primary factor affecting hospitalised small mammals
tectomy or neutering)
is stress, particularly for prey species, such as rabbits and
Veterinary practitioners are often wary of anaesthetising
guinea pigs. Loud noises to which the patient is not accus-
small mammals due to the risks, real and perceived, of
tomed and the presence of predator species in close prox-
associated morbidity and mortality. A sound knowledge
imity (within sight, hearing or smell of the prey animal)
of species-specific anatomy and physiology, and applica-
will cause stress.Prey species should, therefore, be hospi
tion of basic principles can greatly reduce these risks.
talised in a separate kennel area to predators [ferrets will
However, much individual variation exists in response to
anaesthetics in these animals. Patient health status and the
hear or smell predator species. The environment should
procedure to be performed under anaesthesia have been
be quiet, with subdued lighting for nervous individuals,
shown to be significant factors in anaesthetic-related
deaths (Brodbelt et al., 2005). Veterinary assessment of
(Table 2.1).
the patient's condition should be considered before
Stress will cause adrenergic stimulation. Changes
embarking on a ‘routine' anaesthetic regime, particularly
may occur in the animal's cardiovascular (hypertension)
where injectable agents are used, when it may not be pos-
renal [reduced renal perfusion) and gastrointestinal sys-
sible readily to alter effects of the anaesthetic should prob-
tems. These may impact on the patient's response to
lems arise.
anaesthesia.
 Small mammal species seen in veterinary practice com-
 prise several families, most of which are herbivorous, but
Respiratory system
others are omnivorous, insectivorous or carnivorous.
Species differences will be discussed along with general-
isations that will aid anaesthesia across the groups. This
Respiratory tract anatomy differs somewhat in these
chapter will discuss anatomy and physiology pertinent to
small marmmals. In rodents and lagomorphs, the larynx is
anaesthesia in small marmmals. Later subsections cover
situated dorsally within the oropharynx, closely associ-
the veterinary clinician's approach to individual cases, dis-
ated with the nasopharynx (Fig. 2.1), making the animals
cussing how to minimise risks associated with anaesthesia.
obligate nasal breathers (Vaughan, 1986). This and the
A choice of anaesthetic protocols will be described, to
small diameter of the upper airway mean that intubation
allow clinicians to make an informed choice for their
is readily possible in only a few small mammal species,
patient.
including the rabbit, ferret and non-human primates
Aniaesthesia of ExoticPets
Table 2. I: Physiological information for some common species (conscious values)
SPECIES
ADULT
 RECTAL TEMP
USUAL
HEART RATE
RESPIRATORY
BODYWEIGHT
(C)
ENVIRONMENTAL
(BPM)
RATE (BPM)
TEMPERATURE(°C)
Africanpygmy
250-600 g (males
36.0-37.4
23-32 (optimum 24-29)
180-280
25-50
hedgehog?
double female size)
Chinchilla
400-600g
37-38
18.3-26.7 (optimum
100-150
(female larger)
10-20)
Chipmunk8
72-120g
38 (or a few
75
degrees above
environmental 
temperature when
hibernating)
L
Common
350-400g
39-40
200-350
50-70
marmoset12
28
Ferret?
 Average 600 g
37.8-40
200-400
(female) -1200g
(male)
Gerbillo
70-120g
37.0-38.5
300-400
90-140
Guinea pig2
750-1200g
37.2-39.5
18-26
008-061
90-150
(male larger)
Mouselo
25-63g(female
37.5
24-25
500-600
100-250
larger)
Pig
40-200 kg (breed-
38.4-40
10-32
0810
20-30
dependent)
Prairie dog
0.5-2.2kg (male
35.3-39.0
20-22
larger)
Rabbit?
1.0-10kg
38.5-40.0
15-21
180-300
30-60
(depending on 
breed)
Ratsl0
225-500 g(male
38
18-26
260-450
70-150
larger)
Sugar glierll
80-160 g (males
32 (cloacal
200-300
16-40
larger)
temperature);36.3
(rectal temperature)
Syrianhamsters
85-150g (female
20-24
280-412
33-127
larger)
I(Braun and Casteel, 1993; Straw and Merten, 1992; Taylor, 1995); 2 (Flecknell 2002); 3 (Fox, 1998; Lewington, 2000; Schoemaker,
2002);  (Funk, 2004; Long, 1998; Tell, 1995);  (Goodman, 2002); °(Hoefer and Crossley, 2002); / (Ivey, 2004); °(Meredith, 2002);
(Meredith and Crossley, 2002); 10 (Orr, 2002); 1 (Fleming, 1 980; Johnson-Delaney, 2002); 12 (Thornton, 2002)
Mammal anaesthesia
caused by stress will reduce gastrointestinal motility and
Ethmoturbinates
Brain
Nasal-
predispose ileus (Harcourt-Brown, 2002b).
conchae
 Poor positioning in species such as rabbits during anaes-
thesia may allow the large gastrointestinal tract to put
pressure on the diaphragm, resulting in respiratory dys-
Nares
function. Rodents and lagomorphs cannot vomit (due to
curvature of their stomach) and so fasting is not required.
-PeH
Ferrets can vomit and so should be fasted for at least 4h
Oesophagus
before anaesthesia. Most other small species are not fasted,
palate
for example sugar gliders, due to the risk of hypoglycaemia.
anbuo
rachea
paisey Aiaunnr aie shidiu se yns saiads iaaiet
Soft
palate
Epiglottis
Body size
 Upper respiratory tract 
The mammals to be considered here are, in general,
2
feeeg iesu ieida e ui noe Aoedsn eddn . I't an
(rat). (After O'Malley, 2005)
smaller than most species being anaesthetised by veterinary
surgeons in practice. An exception would be the larger
1
species of rabbits, such as giant breeds that weigh over
These adaptations to increased airflow make small mam-
 5 kg. Small mammals will have a greater surface area to
mals particularly susceptible to respiratory tract disease.
body weight ratio, with an associated high metabolic rate
1
Many pet animals are also exposed to husbandry conditions
and energy intake (Hurst, 1999). This increases their sus-
stress associated with overcrowding or poor nutrition lead-
ceptibility to hypothermia, dehydration, hypoglycaemia
and hypoxia (O'Malley, 2005).
ing to immune compromise, inappropriate temperatures
29
and ventilation, or respiratory irritants, such as ammonia
build-up from urine in unclean bedding, or the volatile oil
with injectable medications in small patients. This risk
thujone in cedar or pine shavings (Brown and Rosenthal,
can be reduced by accurately weighing the patient on
1997; Orr, 2002). In some cases, respiratory disease is sub-
electronic scales (see Fig. 1.9), accurate to 0.lkg for
larger species such as rabbits and to l g for small rodents,
clinical. Common causes of pneumonia include Pasteurella
before administration of anaesthetic drugs. Obviously
multocida in rabbits and Mycoplasma pumonis in rats,
which result in a reduction in respiratory capacity. While
 some drug volumes will be minute; in this case, the use of
insulin syringes or dilution of drugs before administration
these changes rmay not cause clinical signs in the conscious
will reduce the risk of overdose. If syringes with separable
patient, the depressant effects of anaesthesia may further
compromise the respiratory system and lead to a potentially
needles are used, the drug volume in the needle hub may
life-threatening situation. The clinician should, therefore,
be relatively substantial and should be considered when
mixing drugs.
use the history and clinical examination to try to identify
husbandry conditions that may predispose or aggravate
 Small body size is associated with a higher oxygen
demand, for which an increased oxygen intake isrequired.
respiratory disease, as well as previous problerms in the his-
tory that may have resulted in consolidation of lung tissue
Rabbits and rodents have comparatively small lungs, but
increase airflow through their respiratory tract using their
and reduced function, and current clinical disease.
high chest wall compliance and vital capacity, along with
low residual lung capacity. Higher oxygen intake is also
Urinary system
improved with short airways and high respiratory rates.
 Oxygen exchange is facilitated by many alveoli with thin-
 Urine output should be monitored in animals undergoing
ner diameter [for example, 35-75 μm in the Syrian ham-
anaesthesia. Although catheterisation is usually not pos-
ster compared to 200 μm in the cat) (Donnelly, 1990).
sible, a rough estimate of urine production can be per-
formed by weighing bedding material. This is particularly
Systemic disease
useful if renal disease is suspected. Incontinence pads are
weighed before use (checking that the patient does not
Certain conditions visible locally on external surfaces may
ingest them] and reweighed after use; l ml of urine will
weigh approximately l g.
have concurrent systemic disease [for example, lung
metastases from uterine adenocarcinomas in rabbits
[Greene and Saxton, 1938] or mammary carcinomas or
Digestive system
adenocarcinomas in mice). Systemic disease (for exam-
ple, renal or hepatic impairment, and septicaemia] may
Similarly, close attention should be paid to appetite and
be difficult to detect in small animals. Larger species,
faecal output. A major concern primarily in herbivorous
uii r paduesq aq Aaear Au se se yons
species, such as the rabbit, guinea pig and chinchilla, is
modalities used to assess before anaesthesia, while small
that of gastrointestinal hypomotility (ileus) during hospi-
anirmals, such as hamsters, are likely to require anaesthe-
talisation and post-anaesthesia. Adrenergic stirmulation
sia to perform these investigative procedures. For this
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
reason, history and clinical exarmination form a much greater
may be necessary for sorme investigative procedures, such
 part of pre-anaesthetic assessment and decision-making in
as radiography, and the benefits to be gained from
smaller than in larger species.
 information should be balanced against the risks of sed-
ation or anaesthesia in the animal. For some patients,
anaesthesia should be postponed until the patient can be
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
stabilised with medical treatment of illness or fluid and
AND STABILISATION
nutritional support for dehydration and debilitation. Use
of anaesthetic agents that may have cardiovascular effects
History and clinical examination
in a dehydrated patient may lead to circulatory failure
(Flecknell, 2006)
 Unless they are presented for prophylactic procedures
Pre-anaesthetic assessrment of the patient is vital, as it
[for example, ovariohysterectomy), most pets are unwell
processes that may affect anaesthesia. A complete history
and often debilitated. The patient's history and clinical
examination should allow the clinician to triage the ani-
of the animal should include husbandry details, which
mal and decide whether it is fit for an anaesthetic. The
may have altered through the pet's lifetime, and any pre-
animal's condition should be stabilised if necessary before
vious illnesses or clinical signs noted by the owner. The
animal should be observed in its carrying container or a
anaesthesia, for example by adrministration of fluids,
kennel for signs of dyspnoea or other illness that the
nutritional support and warmth. Nutritional and fluid
owner may have missed. Small rodents (including rats,
supports are discussed in more detail in later sections, but
mice and gerbils) may have oculo-nasal porphyrin staining
should aim to provide a diet similar to that normally given
in a readily digestible form. Many proprietary brands of
in response to stress or illness. Handling many of the
mammal species discussed in this chapter will change
supplemental nutrition are available. Other medications,
such as analgesics or antibiotics, may be required in cer-
30
basic physiological data; for instance, heart and respira-
tain circumstances.
tory rates are likely to be elevated. The clinician should be
An accurate weight is essential for small patients, par-
familiar with manual restraint of species, in order to
reduce stress during clinical examination and preparation
ticularly if injectable agents are to be used. Most agents
can be ^topped-up' if the level of sedation or anaesthesia
for anaesthesia. Readers are referred to other texts for
is insufficient for the required purpose, but many cannot
handling techniques. Anirmals with cardio-respiratory
compromise should be handled with great care and as lit-
readily be reduced or reversed. Exceptions to this are
inhalational agents where the vaporiser setting can be
tle as possible, to avoid comprormising the patient further.
A full clinical examination should be performed for
changed and inspired percentage of anaesthetic agent
reduced; medetomidine that can be reversed with ati-
 every patient, and most small mammal pets are amenable
pamezole, opioids (for example fentanyl) that can be
to conscious veterinary examination. An exception may
be the non-human primate that is not routinely handled,
reversed with partial agonists/antagonists (such as butor-
phanol and buprenorphine), and diazepam or midazolam
but even in these a pre-anaesthetic examination should be
with flumazenil.
per formed to assess cardio-respiratory function. Abdominal
palpation may identify problems, such as space-occupying
masses, for example neoplasia (or associated pulmonary
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
metastases affecting lung function), which may not be
causing clinical signs in the conscious animal, but may
A trained assistant is vital for assisting with anaesthesia
reduce respiratory function by reducing diaphragmatic
movement when anaesthetised. Historical or clinical find-
induction and monitoring anaesthetic maintenance while
ings may identify disease processes and further investiga-
the clinician performs the procedures required. It is
preferable to have an anaesthetist who can stay with the
tion, such as blood tests or ultrasonography, may
be
animal throughout the procedure. This is a good reason
warranted before anaesthesia is induced.
for preparing all equipment necessary prior to induction
Blood analysis may be required to further evaluate dis-
of anaesthesia.
ease processes and metabolic function. In general terms,
Appropriate sized and shaped facemasks should be
approximately 10% of the blood volume may be removed
used, for example small cat masks with pliable soft vinyl
in a healthy individual without adverse effects, allowing 3
(Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA], rodent masks with a
or 4 weeks to recover before repeated venepuncture.
Total blood volumes vary for different species. Obviously
clear cone for full visualisation and flexible, replaceable
rubber diaphragm (VetEquip, Pleasanton, CA), or circuits
this volume may be altered if the animal is ill or already
with flared nose end to create a facemask (VetEquip,
hypovolaermic.
Pleasanton, CA). Clear facemasks are excellent for visual-
isation of mucous membrane coloration during anaesthe-
Supportive care and choice of anaesthetic
sia [Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
The mask should not be too large for the animal, as this
Findings from investigative techniques should be taken
will create dead space within the mask. Dead space could
into consideration, and the anaesthetic protocol selected
be 40 ml or more with facemasks routinely used in species
and adjusted as necessary. Sedation or gaseous anaesthesia
such as rabbits (Baterman et al., 2005). Facemasks should
Mammal anaesthesia
Table 2.2: Suggested ventilation rates for mammals 
SPECIES
BREATHS PER MINUTE
Guineapig
50-80
Pig
15-25 (<20kg), 10-15 (>20kg)
Primate
40-50 (<5 kg), 10-30 (>5 kg)
FLUOVAC
HARNED
Rabbit
25-50
口
Rat
60-100
2
Other rodents
80-100
1
Figure 2.2 · Fluovac? active scavenging system (Harvard
(Adapted from Flecknell, 1996)
Apparatus, Kent, UK)
1
also be tightly fitting, to reduce escape of anaesthetic
[for exarmple the BASi Vetronics@ small anirmal ventilator
gases into the workplace environment. Active scavenging
[see Fig. 1.10] may be used in animals weighing as little as
will reduce environmental contarmination, for example
10g and as much as 10 kg).
31
the Fluovac@ (Harvard Apparatus, International Market
Supply, Congleton, UK) supplies anaesthetic gases and
TECHNIQUES
simultaneously scavenges (Fig. 2.2)
A selection of uncuffed endotracheal tubes should be
maintained for intubation, with sizes from 1.5 to 5.0 mm
Routes of administration
for rabbits, ferrets, and small non-human primates.
Intravenous over-the-needle catheters can be used to intub-
It is beneficial to consider the smallsize of many mammal
ate rodents (60mm size 14 for guinea pigs, 55 mm size 16
patients when administering medications, particularly via
for hamsters, and sizes 14-20 for rats), but the technique
the intramuscular or intravenous routes. Excessively large
is difficult and not routinely performed. It is vital with
volurmes rmay lead to muscle necrosis or volume overload,
these small diameters of tubes to ensure they are free of
respectively. Anaesthesia with injectable agents often con-
obstructions, and should be cleaned thoroughly and disin-
sists of relatively large volumes and should be divided
fected between patients. Before use, the patency of the
between multiple intramuscular sites.
tube should be checked, for example by blowing or passing
gas from an anaesthetic machine through it. Any build-up
of secretions or other material may readily obstruct small
Ventilation
tubes and lead to a fatal airway blockage in the anaes-
thetised patient, or at the very least substantially reduce
Mechanical ventilators can only be used with intubated
air flow and pulrmonary ventilation leading to hypoxia
patients. The pressure settings on mechanical ventilators
A laryngoscope, otoscope or small endoscope is useful
will vary between species. The most valuable guide is
for intubation of rabbits, ferrets and non-human primates.
visualisation of the patient as gases are forced into the
A small laryngoscope blade of size O or I will allow access
lungs; thoracic wall movement should be similar to that
to most oral cavities. Gags and cheek dilators may also aid
seen in a normal patient. Similarly, respiratory rates
visualisation, for example to allow exarmination or clean-
should be the same as the animal's normal respiratory
ing of the oral cavity after induction.
aseaiou ot iapio u paseaiau aq on paau Aeu siu aiee
 Since many of these species are obligate nasal breathers,
anaesthetic depth
soft nasogastric catheters are useful for administration of
 It has been shown that prolonged mechanical ventilation
Oxygen where tracheal intubation is not feasible.
 may cause lung parenchymal inflarmmation. This effect is
As discussed above, many of these species have a small
worse at high-inflation flows (D'Angelo et al., 2004}
lung capacity and low tidal volume. It is thus imperative
to use anaesthetic circuits with low dead space. A T-piece
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
(see Fig. 1.l} or mini-Bain (for example, the rodent non-
rebreathing circuits with nosecone; VetEquip, Pleasanton,
CA) circuit will suffice for most animals.
The anaesthetist should continuously observe many facets
Mechanical ventilators are of great use in intubated ani-
of the anaesthetic. This includes the anaesthetic machine
 mals. Many can be calibrated for use in very small animals
and circuit, the patient, and the clinician. If a painful
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
procedure is being performed, a deeper plane of anaes-
it is unlikely that the reservoir bag will move with each of
thesia will be required than when a non-manipulative pro-
the animal's breaths.
cedure is being undertaken.
Central nervous system
Observations on the patient
Trends in heart rate, and respiratory rate and depth are
useful to assess anaesthetic depth, along with monitoring
Positioning
of reflexes. Species variations will exist, but reflexes are
This is of great importance during anaesthesia. As already
similar to dogs and cats. The toe pinch is more reliable in
the hindlimb of most species. Other reflexes that may be
mentioned, airways in many of these animals are narrow
used are the palpebral, corneal, level of muscle relaxation
and easily occluded. Many of these species are obligate
including jaw tone and response to surgical stimuli.
nasal breathers and the nares should be kept clear. The
neck should be extended to align the nasal or oral cavity
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
with the trachea. This is necessary even if the animal is
intubated, as the small endotracheal tubes used may kink
if the neck is flexed. The assistant should also monitor the
Pulse oximetry
proximal end of the endotracheal tube to ensure it does
not kink and become occluded between the patient and
This can be useful, but may be unreliable in some animals.
the anaesthetic circuit. The anaesthetic circuit should be
 For larger species, such as rabbits, the sensor may be sited
attached to the endotracheal tube firmly and monitored
on the tongue or the ear (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). The
for disruption. This may happen, for example, during
base of the tail may be useful, but if thickly furred
repositioning for a new procedure after induction. Many
requires clipping. The probe can be attached to the feet in
herbivorous species have small lungs and large abdominal
small animals, but is not useful for anirmals with haired
viscera; the animal should be tilted so the thorax is slightly
feet [including rabbits and Russian hamsters, Phodopus
higher, to reduce pressure on the diaphragm, which may
sungorus). The pulse oximeter is useful to detect trends in
impede respiration. Care should also be taken not to com-
oxygen saturation, but poor contact may reduce accuracy.
press the thorax with equipment (Redrobe, 2002)
Anaesthetic agents that reduce the peripheral circulation,
for exarmple medetomidine or ketarmine, may affect the
quality of the signal (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
Cardiovascular system
The cardiovascular system should be monitored. Heart
Electrocardiography
rate and rhythm should be continuously assessed. In larger
Electrocardiogram (ECG) pads can be placed on the
animals, an oesophageal stethoscope is most useful, but in
patient's feet if hairless; otherwise [for example, in rab-
smaller species a bell stethoscope may be used against the
bits use filed-down crocodile clips on skin for short-term
thoracic wall. In some cases, a Doppler flow detecton
recording (Reusch and Boswood, 2003), or clip small area
device may be used to auscultate the heart. The fermoral
lateral hocks and elbows for application of ECG pads and
artery is palpable in most patients. Peripheral pulses can
also be palpated in larger species, such as the rabbit, for
longer recording. Remermber that this will only record
example the central auricular and metatarsal arteries
electrical activity in the heart and not mechanical function.
(Reusch, 2005).
Assess the colour of the anaesthetised animal's mucous
Respiratory monitors
membranes. The most readily accessible membranes are
These may be used in larger species, but increase the
those of the oral cavity or the tongue. If pulse oximetry or
resistance to breathing significantly in smaller animals.
capnography is not being used, a change in membrane
colour to blue or grey may be the first sign of airway
obstruction or other cause of reduced oxygen supply in
Capnography
the patient's circulation
This can be used in many species, but care should be taken
with small patients that the capnograph does not add to
Respiratory system
dead space within the circuit or increase circuit resistance.
Observe the animal's respiratory rate, depth and rhythm.
Thermometers
It may be possible to observe movements of the patient's
thoracic or abdominal walls, but these may be obscured if
Core body temperature can be assessed using thermo-
the animal is draped for surgery. The use of clear plastic
 meter probes. Most practices have rectal thermometers,
drapes is to be recommended, allowing better observa-
with digital thermometers being rmore accurate. Some
tions of the patient. If the animal is intubated, it should
digital thermometers will have a remote sensor, which is
be possible to observe movements of the reservoir bag
 of great use when surgical drapes may cover the perineal
with respiration. These may also be visible if a close-fitting
 area. Oesophageal probes may also be used in larger
facemask is used. If there are leaks in the anaesthetic systerm,
species (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
Mammal anaesthesia
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTVE
Analgesia
CARE
Analgesia is important for two reasons. Certain analgesic
Minimise anaesthetic time
agents will reduce anaesthetic drug requirements, reduc-
ing side effects associated. Appropriate and adequate pro-
vision of analgesia will also assist during recovery from
Despite accurate anaesthetic dosing and careful monitor-
painful conditions, including surgery. The mu (u) and
ing of the anaesthetised patient, any anaesthetic will
kappa (k) opioid receptors are primarily associated with
depress normal metabolic functions. This includes ther-
pain relief in mammals (Paul-Murphy, 2006).
moregulation and, often, cardio-respiratory function. The
 Non-steroidalanti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit
anaesthetic time can be minimised by preparing all drugs
cyclo-oxygenase-1 (COX-1) and COX-2 enzymes. In mam-
and equipment before inducing anaesthesia, in order to
mals COX-2 enzymes are involved in inflarmmation, and
reduce the risk to the patient.
both COX-1 and COX-2 are involved in spinal pain trans-
mission (Paul-Murphy, 2006)
2
Hospitalisation facilities
FORMULARY
st:
Supplemental heat is usually required for anaesthetised
As with other exotic pet species, most anaesthetic agents
 patients and during the recovery period.
D
Always supplement oxygen, even when using injectable
are not licensed for use in most small mammal pets.
However, there are tried and tested protocols for rmany
1
anaesthetic agents [many may cause depression of the
cardio-respiratory system). This may be via an endotra-
species, particularly with laboratory animals. Care should
cheal tube, a laryngeal airway mask (see rabbit and pig
be taken with direct extrapolation from laboratory proto-
cols, as these anirmals will have a higher health specification
33
sections), a facemask, a nasal or naso-tracheal tube, or a
tube placed in the oral cavity to the pharynx. Care should
than pet animals. Some drugs used in marmmal anaesthesia,
be taken with positive pressure ventilations (PPVs) via
including the narcotic analgesics (for example, fentanyl],
any of these methods other than tracheal intubation
may be subject to controls under national legislation. Other
(placed via the oral or nasal cavity), as gases may be forced
agents are discussed in this chapter and later chapters in
into the oesophagus and thence the stormach, leading to
this section.
gastric tympany (Smith et al., 2004).
 For animals with suspected or possible respiratory com-
Anticholinergics
promise, pre-oxygenate for a few minutes before indu-
ction of anaesthesia. The only time this is contraindicated
Anticholinergic drugs are used to protect the heart from
is with induction using inhalational anaesthetic agents
vagal inhibition [Harcourt-Brown, 2002a), and are admin-
administered via a facemask where the patient is stressed
istered to patients with bradycardia. They also reduce
by restraint; in this instance, attempts to preoxygenate
bronchial and salivary secretions. However, they may also
will likely be counterproductive. Most animals to be
make secretions more viscous [Bateman et al., 2005) and,
induced in a chamber will benefit from oxygen adminis-
therefore, in some cases obstruct narrow airways.
tration prior to the anaesthetic.
Anticholinergics may reduce gastrointestinal motility.
 Aftropine is the most commonly used anticholinergic in
veterinary practice. Forty per cent of rabbits produce
atropinesterase, breaking down atropine. Glycopyrrolate is,
therefore, used in preference in rabbits. It can also be used
BOX 2.I General hospital
in other species, such as rats, guinea pigs and chinchillas.
requirements for small mammals
Medetomidine
Good-quality food (detailed in species subsections);
can ask owners to provide some of usual diet
The main advantages of this alpha-2-adrenergic agonist in
Quiet kennel space
mammals are the good muscle relaxation, the option of
Prey species separated from sight and smell of
subcutaneous or intrarmuscular adrministration, the lack of
predator species to reduce stress
respiratory depression and the option of reversal. This
drug causes peripheral vasoconstriction, so mucous mem-
Darkened environment for nocturnal species, such
branes have a blue/purple hue [which may appear similar
as rats and hamsters
to cyanosis) (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a]. Oxygen should
Species such as rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs
always be supplermented when medetormidine is used, as
that eat hay and use it for bedding will be more settled
it causes hypoxia (Flecknell, 2000). Medetomidine is
if good-quality hay is provided, as a food source with a
often used in combinations to produce more balanced
familiar odour (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a)
anaesthesia, for example with ketarmine. The sedation or
anaesthesia resulting varies between species (Nevalainen
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Fox, J. G. 1998. Normal clinical and biologic parameters. In:
Table 2.3: Gastrointestinal prokinetics in rabbits and rodents
J. G. Fox [ed.) Biology and Diseases of the Ferret. Znd edn.
pp. 183-210. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins.
DRUG
DOSE
ROUTE
FREQUENCY
COMMENT
Funk, R. S. 2004. Medical Management of Prairie Dogs. In:
(mg/kg)
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Cisapride
0.5
PO
BID-TID
Not commer-
pp. 266-273. Saunders, St Louis, MO.
cially available
Goodman, G. 2002. Hamsters. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
[eds.) Manual of Exotics Pets. 4th edn. pp. 26-33. BSAVA,
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Metoclo-
0.5
PO, SC
BID-TID
Greene, H. S. N., and J. A. J. Saxton. I938. Uterine adenomata in
pramide
the rabbit: I. Clinical history, pathology and preliminary
transplantation experiments. J Exp Med 67: 691-708.
Rabbit
Harcourt-Brown, F. 200Za. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: F.
Ranitidine
2-5
PO, SC
BID
Harcourt-Brown [ed.) Textbook of Rabbit Medicine.
pp. 121-139. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Key: BID = twice daily, PO = orally, SC = subcutaneously,
Harcourt-Brown, F. 2002b. Digestive disorders. In: F Harcourt-
TID = three times daily
Brown [ed.) Textbook of Rabbit Medicine.
(Harcourt-Brown, 2002c; Kounenis et al, I 992; Wiseman and
pp. 249-291. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
Faulds, 1994)
Harcourt-Brown, F. 2002c. Therapeutics. In: F. Harcourt-Brown
[ed.] Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. pp. 94-120. Butterworth-
et al., 1989). Atipamezole can be used to reverse medeto-
Heinemann, Oxford.
Hoefer, H. L., and D. A. Crossley. 2002. Chinchillas. In:
midine and speed recovery.
A Meredith and S. Redrobe [eds.) BSAVA Manual of Exotic Pets.
4 edn. pp. 65-75. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
4
Gastrointestinal prokinetics
Hurst, J. L. I999. Comparative physiology of thermoregulation,
Rodents. In: G. C. Whittow [ed.) Mammals No. 2. pp. 2-130.
Acardemic Press, New York.
Many herbivore species are susceptible to ileus after
Ivey, E. 2004. African Hedgehogs. In: K. E. Quesenberry and
anaesthesia, and prokinetics (Table 2.3) are usually admin-
J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical
istered prophylactically.
Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 339-353. Saunders,
St Louis, MO.
REFERENCES
Johnson-Delaney, C. A. 2002. Other small mammals. In:
A. Meredith and S. Redrobe [eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th
edn. pp. I02-115. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Bateman, L., J. W. Ludders, R. D. Gleed et al. 2005. Comparison
Kounenis, G., M. Koutsoviti-Papadopoulou, A. Elezoglou et al. 1992.
between facermask and laryngeal mask airway in rabbit. Vet
Comparative study of the H2-receptor antagonists cimetidine,
Anaesth Analg 32: 280-288.
ranitidine, famotidine and nazatidine on the rabbit fundus and
Braun, W. F. J., and S. T. Casteel. I993. Potbellied pigs. Vet Clin
sigmoid colon. J Pharmacokin 15: 561-565.
North Am 23 (6): 1149-1177.
Lewington, J. H. 2000. External features and anatomy profile. Ferret
Brodbelt, D. C., L. Young, D. Pfeiffer et al. 2005. Risk factors for
Husbandry, Medicine & Surgery pp. I0-25. Butterworth-
anaesthetic-related deaths in rabbits. In: BSAVA Congress
Heinemann, Oxford.
Proceedimgs. p. 29.
Long, M. E. 1998. The vanishing prairie dog. Natl Geog 193:
Brown, S. A., and K. L. Rosenthal. 1997. Self-Assessment Colour
116-131.
Review of Small Mammals. Manson Publishing Ltd, London.
Meredith, A. 2002. Chipmunks. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
D'Angelo, E., M. Pecchiari, M. Saetta et al. 2004. Dependence of
[eds.) BSAVA Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. 47-51.
hmg injury on inflation rate during low-volume ventilation in
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
nortmal open-chested rabbits. J Appl Physiol 97: 260-268.
Meredith, A., and D. A. Crossley. 2002. Rabbits. In: A. Meredith and
Donnelly, T I990. Rabbits and rodents. In: Laboratory Animal
S. Redrobe [eds.) BSAVA Manual of Exotirc Pets. 4th edn.
Science, University of Sydney Proceedings I42: Anatomy and
pp. 76-92. BSAVA, Quergeley, Gloucester.
 Physiology pp. 369-381.
Nevalainen, T., L. Phyhala, H. M. Voipio et al. 1989. Evaluation of
Fecknell, P. 1996. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia. Znd edn.
anaesthetic potency of medetomidine-ketamine combination in
Academic Press, New York.
rats, guinea-pigs and rabbits. Acta Vet Scand Suppl 85:
Fecknell, P. A. 2000. Anaesthesia. In: P. A. Flecknell [ed.) Manual of
139-143.
Rabbit Medicine and Surgery. Ist edn. pp. 103-1l16. BSAVA,
O'Malley, B. 2005. Introduction to small mammals. In: B. O'Malley
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
[ed.) Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species:
Fecknell, P. A. 2002. Guinea pigs. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
Structure and function of mammals, birds, reptiles and
[eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. 52-64. BSAVA,
amphibians.pp.165-171.Elsevier, Saunders,London.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Orr, H. E. 2002. Rats and mice. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
Flecknell, P. A. 2006. Anaesthesia and perioperative care. In:
[eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. I3-25. BSAVA,
A Meredith and P. A. Flecknell [eds.) Manual of Rabbit
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Medicine and Surgery, Znd edn. pp. I54-165. BSAVA,
Paul-Murphy, J. 2006. Pain management. In: G. J. Harrison and
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medicine No. I.
Flerming, M. R. I980. Thertmoregulation and torpor in the sugar
pp. 233-239. Spix Publishing, Palm Beach, Florida.
glider Petaurus breticeps [Marsupilia: Petauridae). Aust J Zool
Redrobe, S. 2002. Soft tissue surgery of rabbits and rodents. Semin
28: 521.
Avian Exotic Pet Med Il: 231-245.
Mammal anaesthesia
Reusch, B. 2005. Investigation and managerment of cardiovascular
Taylor, D. J. 1995. Pig Diseases, 6th edn. St Edmundsbury Press,
disease in rabbits. In Pract 27: 418-425.
Bury St Edmund's, Suffock, England.
Reusch, B., and A. Boswood. 2003. Electrocardiography of the
Tell, L. A. I995. Medical management of prairie dogs. Proc North
normal domestic pet rabbit. J Small Animal Pract 44: 514.
Am Vet Conf 9: 721-724.
Schoemaker, N. J. 2002. Ferrets. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
Thomton, S. M. 2002. Primates. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
[eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. 93-101. BSAVA,
[eds.) BSAVA manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. I27-137.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Smith, J. C., L. D. Robertson, A. Auhll et al. 2004. Endotracheal
Vaughan, T. A. 1986. Order Rodentia. In: T. A. Vaughan [ed.)
tubes versus laryngeal mask airways in rabbit inhalation
Mammology. 3rd edn. pp. 244-277. Saunders College 
mesthesia: ease of use and waste gas emissions. Contemp
Publishing, Philadelphia.
Topics Lab Anim Sci 43: 22-25.
Wiseman, L. R., and D. Faulds. I994. Cisapride - an updated review
Straw, B. E., and D. J. Merten. I992. Physical examination. In:
of its pharmacology and therapeutic efficacy as a prokinetic
A D. Lemen [ed.) Diseases of Swine. 7th ern. pp. 793-807.
agent in gastrointestinal motility disorders. Drugs 47[1]:
Iowa State University Press, Ames.
116-152.
an
Lesth
Lesi
35
3
Rabbit anaesthesia
INTRODUCTION
and digestion. Stress-induced gastric acidity may lead to
gastric ulceration. Anorexia associated with the altered
carbohydrate metabolism can predispose hepatic disease,
The lagomorph most often encountered in practice is the
6
initially lipidosis and later liver failure and death. Stress
domestic rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculi. A wide range of
breeds are kept as pets, ranging from Netherland Dwarfs
reduces renal blood flow, leading to reduced renal plasma
flow and filtration, and decreased urine flow (Kaplan and
weighing around 1 kg up to giant breeds, which can weigh
Smith, 1935). Corticosteroids will also suppress the
10 kg. The most comrmon breeds presented to veterinary
surgeries, such as the Dwarf Lop and Lionhead, weigh
immune system, predisposing the animal to infectious
1.8-2.5 kg.
processes (Harcourt-Brown, 2002d).
into anaesthetic-related death in rabbits
Avoidance of the aetiologies of stress in rabbits will
A study i
showed them to be at increased risk (1.83%) compared to
reduce cormplications, not just during anaesthesia but also
during hospitalisation. The sections below discuss some
other species (Brodbelt et al., 2005). Animals anaes-
thetised in poor health or undergoing prolonged proce-
important factors to consider when anaesthetising rabbits.
dures were more at risk. Most cases (60%) of mortality
It is, therefore, useful to consider sedating or anaesthetis-
ing the patient for any stressful procedures. Provision of
occurred post anaesthesia. With this species, more than
any other, supportive care will reduce anaesthetic mor-
familiar smells or objects, such as hay or a companion, will
bidity and mortality (Flecknell, 2006).
provide some security (Harcourt-Brown, 2002d).
Many factors contribute to stress in rabbits, which may
lead to problems during and after anaesthesia. Reducing
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
stress is paramount to successful recovery from anaesthe-
sia in this species.
Stress
Temperature
Rabbits are a prey species and many different factors
cause therm stress. The effects are varied but ultirmately all
Rabbits are very sensitive to heat, and an environmental
detrimental to the veterinary patient that in many cases
temperature range of 15-2l°C willallow the conscious ani-
r 'sassd asas od an s 
 mal to maintain normal body temperature of 38.5-39.5°℃
example dental pathology or pain, will cause stress
(Batchelor, 1999; Brewer and Cruise, 1994). They should
(Harcourt-Brown and Baker, 200l). Various aspects of
be protected from environmental temperatures below 4°C,
husbandry will affect rabbits. These include: inappropriate
and show signs of heat stress above 28°C. Sweating is not
diet, temperature or companionship; or an inability to
effective at heat loss as sweat glands are present only on the
behave naturally (Harcourt-Brown, 2002d). In a fright-
lips, and panting does not occur in dehydrated animals
ened rabbit, body temperature, heart rate and respiratory
rate will be elevated (Donnelly, 2004).
reduced in the anaesthetised animal, supplermental heating
Stress in rabbits leads to release of catecholammines or
will be required during this time and for recovery, but care
corticosteroids. Overcrowding has induced cardiormyopa-
should also be taken not to overheat patients.
thy in laboratory rabbits (Weber and Van der Walt, 1975],
As the only extremity not densely covered in fur, and
and catecholammine release can cause heart failure and
with a countercurrent arteriovenous shunt, the rabbit's
death. Sympathetic nervous system stimulation will
pinnae are important in thermoregulation (Donnelly,
inhibit gastrointestinal tract activity, reducing motility
2004). To reduce heat loss during anaesthesia, the ears
Rabbit anaesthesia
can be covered with insulating material such as bubble
and apnoea is common. Bradycardia, hypercapnia and even
wrap; conversely, the animal's core temperature can be
death can result in sorme cases (Flecknell et al., 1996). For
reduced by cooling the ears, for exarmple with damp tow-
this reason, pre-rmedication is given before inhalational
els [Brewer and Cruise, 1994; Cheeke, 1987a}.
agents in rabbits or, more commonly, anaesthesia is induced
using injectable agents.
Cardiovascular system
Pasteurella muultocida may be found in rabbit nasal cavi-
ties without causing disease, but is commonly a secondary
Normal heart rate can vary from 180 to 250 beats per
invader to prirmary disease. Predisposing factors, such as
poor husbandry leading to irmmune compromise, will allow
minute, and is usually higher in srmaller rabbits (Brewer
replication of the bacteria and resultant systemic pasteurel-
and Cruise, 1994; Donnelly, 2004). Blood volume is
 55-70 ml/kg (Benson and Paul-Murphy, 1999; Donnelly,
losis (Harcourt-Brown, 2002c). Many pet rabbits have
pneumonia associated with P multocida infection, some-
1997).
Cardiac disease is rare, but may include congenital con-
tirmes with systermic spread to other organs. The possibility
of clinical or subclinical respiratory disease should be borne
ditions, such as ventricular septal defect or cardiomyopa-
in mind when electing a rabbit anaesthetic protocol.
thy (particularly in giant breeds) (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a;
Orcutt, 2000). Mitral and tricuspid valvular insufficiencies
and valvular endocarditis (Snyder et al., 1976) have been
1
reported. Arteriosclerosis of the aorta and other arteries is
reported (Shell and Saunders, 1989). High altitude has
Nasal
Ethmoturbinates
also caused pulmonary hypertension (Heath et al., 1990).
Brain
1
conchae
Heart disease has been associated with various anaesthet-
ics, for example repeated ketarmine/xylazine anaesthesia
Nares
(Marini et al., 1999). An anticholinergic drug, such as gly-
37
copyrrolate, may be used to counteract these effects.
-Soft
 Obese rabbits are particularly poor anaesthetic patients,
palate
with hypertension and cardiac hypertrophy cormmonly
-Epiglottis
occurring (Carroll et al., 1996). These patients may also
Cesophagus
have hyperinsulinaemia, hyperglycaemia and elevated
sisopidi oedau on auid are pue saaai a
Tongue
Trachea
[Harcourt-Brown, 2002a].
(fleshy base)
Upper respiratory tract 
Respiratory system
Figure 3.l · Schematic upper respiratory tract in the rabbit
Anatomy of the rabbit's upper respiratory tract makes visu-
(sagittal section through head). In the normal flexed position of
alisation of the larynx and thence intubation a difficult tech-
the neck, air from the nares passes to the larynx and trachea. In
order to intubate via the oral cavity, the neck must be hyperex-
nique. The mouth opening is small, and the oral cavity long
tended to align the oropharynx with the larynx.
and narrow. The tongue is long with a raised fleshy base, the
lingual torus. The glottis is small and prone to laryngospasm
(Brewer and Cruise, 1994; Cruise and Nathan, 1994).
Overweight patients rmay have a rmore fleshy oropharynx
than other animals, which is more likely to cause upper air-
way obstruction (Bateman et al., 2005). Rabbits are obligate
        
nasopharynx connects with the larynx (Fig. 3.1).
The thoracic cavity is very small in rabbits in compari-
son to the abdomen, with correspondingly small lung
fields for auscultation (Fig. 3.2). The tidal volume of rab-
bits is 4-6ml/kg (Gillett, 1994), with diaphragmatic
 movements providing most of the impetus for respiratory
movement (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
Lungfield
Liver
Respiratory disease is cormmon in rabbits and any nasal
Kidneys Rest of
Bladder
discharge or upper airway inflammation that may occlude
Heart
Stomach
gastrointestinal
breathing is of particular concern when considering anaes-
tract
thesia. Concomitant lower respiratory tract disease may
Respiratory system
further compromise respiratory function. The pre-anaes-
Cardiovascular system
thetic assessment should identify respiratory abnormali-
 ties that may cause problems during anaesthesia
Figure 3.2 · Schematic lateral body view, showing major organs
Rabbits respond particularly aversely to the smell of
of the rabbit. Note the small size of the lungfield compared to the
volatile anaesthetic agents such as isoflurane and halothane,
space occupied by abdominal viscera.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Other infectious agents that may cause respiratory disease
Urinary system
in rabbits are Bordetella bronchiseptica, Staphylococcus sp.,
ods usd ids uo ds so
 Rabbits drink between 50 and 100 ml of water per kilogram
viruses (Deeb, 2004)
body weight daily, with a total average daily water intake of
Non-infectious aetiologies of respiratory pathology in
120ml/kg (Cheeke, 1994; Harkness and Wagner, 1995).
rabbits include inflammation due to respiratory irritants or
This volume depends on environmental temperature and
allergens, neoplasia (primary or secondary), cardiovascular
disease or trauma (Deeb, 2004). A thorough history to
Inappetent rabbits may drink excessively, leading to sodium
identify predisposing factors, a full clinical examination
depletion (Brewer and Cruise, 1994; Lebas et al., 1997).
and investigation, such as imaging techniques, may be
Domestic rabbits will drink from water bowls or bottles,
required to diagnose the exact aetiology. For the purposes
and rmay well have a personal preference. Maintenance flu-
of anaesthesia, it is important to identify that there is a
ids are usually administered at 100-150ml/kg/day, and can
problem and, if possible, to localise it to a particular part of
either be administered by continuous rate infusion or in
the respiratory tract. The patient should be stabilised with
three boluses over the day (Table 3.1) (Mader, 2004).
 pre-oxygenation prior to choosing an anaesthetic that will
Rabbit urine is normally alkaline (pH 7.6-8.8) with a spe-
cause the least side effects in a compromised animal.
cific gravity of 1.003-1.036 (Harcourt-Brown, 2002b), and
As discused in the general section, the rabbit thoracic
20-350ml of urine is produced per kilogram body weight
cavity contains smallungs. By comparison, the abdominal
[average 130ml/kg) daily (Brewer and Cruise, 1994).
viscera are large (Harkness and Wagner, 1995). Problems
may arise if positioning allws the large abdominal organs to
Assessment of urine pararmeters in hospitalised rabbits may
identify problerms that require peri-anaesthetic treatment,
press against the diaphragm and thence the lungs. Care
such as acid-base imbalances or renal dysfunction.
should be taken to ensure that the rabbit is level or, partic-
Many disease processes may affect the rabbit urinary
ularly in dorsal recurmbency, at a slight tilt with the thorax
tract. A high-protein diet will increase ammonia levels in
raised above the abdormen. Similarly, dorsal recumbency
rabbit urine {Jenkins, 2004a). Urolithiasis is common in rab-
 may be associated with more severe and frequent dyspnoea
bits, and may lead to obstruction and post-renal azotaermia.
in rabbits (Bateman et al., 2005).
Urine analysis is useful to assess renal function (Paré and
Table 3.l: Fluid and nutritional support in rabbits
FLUID
ROUTE
DOSE
FREQUENCY
COMMENT
Isotonic crystalloids,lactated
IP IO, IV, SC!
Maintenance
CRI, or divide
Use lactated Ringer's for fluid and
Ringer's, dextrose (4%)/
100-150 ml/kg/day
and administer
electrolyte deficits, dextrose/saline
normal saline (0.18%)
bolus q6-12 h
for primary water deficit to
supportintravascularfluid volume
Glucose 5%
IV, SC'
10ml/kg
Anorexia
Colloids, e.g. hetastarch
IV, IO2
5ml/kg
 Repeat if still
Hypovolaemic shock.
hypotensive
Administer over 5-10 min
and assess blood pressure
Liquidised diet:
PO
50 ml/kg/day in total
Divide and
Anorexic animals
proprietary
give bolus q8h
Warm food first
nutritional support diets (e.g.
Use organic, lactose-
Critical Care for Herbivores,
free baby foods
Oxbow@, Murdock, USA),
vegetable baby food, liquidised
pellets or vegetables
Blood
IV3
10-20 ml/kg,
Can repeat,
Anaemia. Monitor for
maximum rate
advise
transfusion reactions.
22 ml/kg/h
cross-match
Maximum volume I % of
donor's body weight
Key: CRI = continuous rate infusion, IM = intramuscularly, IO = intraosseously, IV = intravenously, PO = orally, SC = subcutaneously,
q8h = every 8 hours
 (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a); 2 (Lichtenberger, 2004a); 3 (Lichtenberger, 2004b)
Rabbit anaesthesia
Paul-Murphy, 2004). Dipstick analysis can be used to assess
vital that hospitalised rabbits receive adequate fibre in their
for the presence of protein, glucose, ketones or blood
diet to reduce post-anaesthetic ileus. The autonomic nery-
Haematuria may be due to urinary or reproductive tract
ous system plays a role in regulation of colonic motility and
-ads am amseau on pasn si ranaoear y onoid
caecotrophy in the rabbit. Stress (for example, caused by
cific gravity and, thus, the concentrating ability of the kid-
anaesthesia, surgery, illness or diet change) increases adren-
neys. Urine microscopy may also be useful in identifying
aline (epinephrine), which may inhibit gastrointestinal
bacteria, abnormal crystals (calciurm carbonate and amrmo-
motility and instigate caecal stasis and abnormal cae-
nium magnesium phosphate crystals are found in normal
cotrophs (Cheeke, 1987c; Lebas et al., 1997). For these rea-
rabbit urine) or cellular composition. Pre-anaesthetic blood
sons, identification and avoidance of possible stressors
biochemistry, radiography or ultrasonography is also useful
[including the provision of analgesia where deemed neces-
in cases of suspected renal dysfunction. Encephalitozoon
sary] will reduce systemic effects. It is necessary to syringe
cumiculi infection (Flatt and Jackson, 1970) orlead toxicity
feed high-fibre food to rabbits if they are not self-feeding
(Hood et al., 1997) may cause renal pathology and serology
shortly after anaesthesia (Table 3.1).
orlead assay [respectively} may be useful If renal disease is
Rabbits' body weights will vary throughout the day as
identified pre-anaesthetically fluid therapy should be
the gastrointestinal tract contents vary. Rabbits cannot
2
administered. Anaesthetic agents such as medetomidine
vomit, so do not generally require fasting before anaesthe-
 may reduce renal circulation and should be avoided in these
sia. However, some anaesthetists prefer to fast rabbits for
cases. Safer agents include fentanyl/fluanisone, which does
l-2h. This will reduce the presence of food in the oral
1
 not cause much depression of the circulatory system.
cavity that may be inhaled after induction of anaesthesia,
and also reduce gastrointestinal contents that may put
 pressure on the diaphragm or make abdomminal surgery
1
Digestive system
more difficult (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
Restoration of the patient's appetite post anaesthesia is
Wild rabbits eat grass and weeds. In captivity they should
important in order to stirmulate gastrointestinal motility
39
be given a high-fibre diet of good-quality meadow grass hay,
 and to avoid hepatic lipidosis. Nutritional support may be
with a concentrate supplement and fresh green vegetables
required in the form of syringe feeds, and analgesia may
[which are fertiliser- and pesticide-free, and have been
be necessary if pain is present (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a}.
washed). A cereal mix allows selective feeding, so concen-
trates should preferably be extruded pellets. The pellets
Reproductive system
are usually 15-16% fibre and 16-18% protein. Diets high in
protein and low in fibre increase morbidity and mortality,
obesity and diarrhoea. Alfalfa hays are high in calcium and
Uterine adenocarcinomas are common in entire does
(Baba and von Hamm, 1972; Ingalls et al., 1964;
 protein content, and are useful for growing animals or does
Weisbroth, 1994), with ovariohysterectomy being the
that are reproducing or lactating. Correct storage of feed is
treatment of choice. Haematogenous metastatic spread
important to prevent rancidity (particularly if the diet has a
high fat content to increase palatability), and to prevent
occurs mostly to the lungs and liver, not only affecting the
rodent infestation. Water may be offered in a bowl or sip-
animal's response to anaesthesia but also its prognosis.
per bottle, depending on what the individual animal is
Thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound may be
accustomed to. Sipper bottles are preferable in does, which
used to detect these metastases. Various tumours includ-
ing uterine adenocarcinomas, fibrosarcoma and lym-
are prone to developing dewlap dermatitis (Brooks, 2004).
phosarcoma may metastasise to the skin, where tumours
Food consumption increases at lower temperatures
may be more readily detected on clinical exarmination.
(Cheeke, 1987b). High temperatures will lead to dehydra-
If intrauterine haemorrhage has occurred in does with
tion through inhibition of drinking and panting, worsened in
 Luterine pathology, as evidenced by haematuria or (if haem-
a low hurmidity environment (O'Malley, 2005). Intestinal
hypomotility will result in decreased colonic absorption of
orrhage is internal) pale mucous membranes, packed cell
water and electrolytes, leading to dehydration. Therefore,
volurme should be assessed before anaesthesia. Fluid ther-
fluid administration is important in cases of hypomotility or
apy and/or a blood transfusion may be required (Table 3.1).
Dystocia is rare in rabbits, but if there is no response to
ileus in rabbits (Cheeke, 1987c, 1994). Gastrointestinal
dysfunction post anaesthesia may result from slow recovery
oxytocin, a Caesarean section is indicated (Paré and Paul-
Murphy, 2004). Supportive care (warming and fluid
and inappetence (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a)
Any veterinary practice hospitalising rabbits should
administration] should be performed in conjunction with
 ensure they provide appropriate food and water in a man-
the use of a rapidly reversible anaesthetic protocol. Pre-
ner suitable for the individual rabbit. Inappropriate or stale
medication with a low-dose benzodiazepine should allow
food in a stressful environment will discourage rabbits
mask induction with a gaseous agent or intravenous
 propofol, before maintenance with a volatile agent.
from eating in the post-anaesthetic period. An unbalanced
diet, a sudden change in diet, infections, toxins or admin-
istration of certain antibiotics will alter the gastrointestinal
Nervoussystem
microflora, resulting in maldigestion and ileus.
High-fibre diets are necessary to stimulate gut motility
The initial clinical examination may discover neurological
and caecotroph production (Cheeke, 1994). It is, therefore,
abnormalities, some of which may affect the choice of
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
anaesthetic protocol. Encephalitozoonosis is a common
Fluid and nutritional support
cause of head tilt in rabbits and may cause sirmultaneous
renal pathology that requires supportive therapy peri-
Dehydration and electrolyte anomalies may result from a
anaesthetically. Sirmilarly, pasteurellosis may result in a
period of anorexia, reduced thirst or specific disease such
head tilt associated with otitis interna or seizures with
as diarrhoea or oral discomfort causing hypersalivation
encephalitis, with the potential for concormitant systemic
(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). Fluid and electrolyte problems
disease including respiratory infection. Seizures may also
should be identified in the pre-anaesthetic assessment,
be seen with hepatic pathology, including hepatic lipidosis
and attermpts made to correct them before administration
following anorexia. Animals with lead toxicosis will be
of drugs (particularly injectable agents) that are likely to
anaemic and suffer from oxygen deprivation (Deeb and
have an adverse effect on the circulatory system.
Carpenter, 2004). Metabolic and nutritional imbalances
 may also lead to neurological abnormalities.
For these higher-risk patients, care should be taken dur-
BOX 3.l Blood loss in rabbits (Jenkins,
ing anaesthesia. An anaesthetic protocol with minimal
effects on renal, hepatic or respiratory function should be
2004b)
used, for example pre-medication with midazolam fol-
Blood volume approximately 57 ml/kg
lowed by induction and maintenance with isoflurane.
Loss of I5-20% total blood volume → massive
Generalised disease
cholinergic release, tachycardia and intense arterial
constriction →→ redistributes blood away from
gastrointestinal tract and skin
Some disease processes in rabbits affect more than one
body system. Two examples of this are pasteurellosis and
Acute loss of 20-30% total blood volume is critical
40
lymphoma. Multicentric lymphoma is common in rabbits,
with pathology found in many systems, including the
upper respiratory tract, abdominal viscera and bone mar-
BOX 3.2 Checklist for rabbit
row (Huston and Quesenberry, 2004). Clinical signs will
vary depending on the location of lesions and are often
anaesthesia
vague. Thymomas or thymic lymphormas have also been
Accurate weight, doses calculated for anaesthetic
reported (Clippinger et al., 1998; Kostolich and Panciera,
1992; Vernau et al., 1995). Anaesthetic considerations
agent(s)/reversals/emergency drugs
will vary depending on the lesion location and clinical
Supplemental heating, e.g. heat pad
signs associated. The clinician should be aware that more
 Intravenous catheter and fluids
than one organ function might be disrupted
Equipment for intubation - local anaesthetic, laryn-
goscope,endotracheal tubes
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
 Anaesthetic machine and circuit
AND STABILISATION
Monitoring equipment
History and clinical examination
EOUIPMENT REOUIRED
As it is one of the larger species covered in the mammals
section, with most individuals being used to handing, a full
For rabbits weighing up to 10kg, an Ayre's T-piece or
clinical examination should be possible in all rabbit patients.
unmodified Bain's circuit is suitable. Paediatric versions
If cardio-respiratory disease is suspected, the rabbit
are available for small anirmals (less than lkg body
should be handled gently and for minirmal periods to
weight). Use of paediatric circuits and associated low-vol-
reduce stress. Clinical signs seen in rabbits with cardio-
ume endotracheal tube connectors will reduce equipment
vascular disease are primarily tachypnoea or dyspnoea,
dead space, reducing rebreathing. A mechanical ventilator
but more vague signs of lethargy and inappetence may be
is useful for performing positive pressure ventilation
the only signs noted by the owner. Investigation, including
(PPV) in rabbits (Flecknell, 2006).
any sedation or anaesthesia required, should be postponed
Rabbits have a comparatively small laryngeal opening.
while the animal is stabilised. Sedatives may affect meas-
Endotracheal tubes of 2.0-2.5 mm diameter will be suit-
urements taken by echocardiography
[Hustonand
able for 2.0-2.5kg animals. Smaller specialist tubes of
Quesenberry, 2004).
1.0-1.5 mm diameter (Cook Veterinary Products (part of
It is useful to palpate, auscultate and percuss the
Global Veterinary Products Inc.), New Buffalo, MI.) are
abdomen before anaesthesia, as individual variation exists,
available for smaller rabbits, and tubes of 5.0-6.0rmm
particularly with regard to noises auscultated from gas-
 may be required for larger animals. The tubes should be
trointestinal motility. This will enable collection of base-
uncuffed. For direct visualisation of the rima glottis dur-
line data for the animal, allowing post-anaesthetic
ing intubation a laryngoscope (with Wisconsin blade of
variations to be assessed.
size O, 1 or 2), otoscope or endoscope is required. A stylet
Rabbit anaesthesia
or introducer formed frorm a narrow urinary catheter may
without excess drag on the end of the ear. After advance-
be useful (Flecknell, 2006)
ment of the catheter and rermoval of the stylet, the catheter
can be secured in place with adhesive tape. If the catheter
TECHNIQUES
is required for post-anaesthetic use, a light dressing should
be used to cover it and prevent the animal removing the
catheter. The weight of a catheter with dressing on the ear
Routes of administration
is uncomfortable for many conscious rabbits, particularly if
a fluid line is continuously attached, and may interfere with
Oral
feeding. The routine use of buster collars to prevent self-
removal is contraindicated, as self-feeding is not possible
This route is extremely useful for rehydration and nutri-
with these collars.
tional support in rabbits. Dietary fibre is important for
 Possible complications with catheterisation of the mar-
gastrointestinal function, and the ability to syringe feed
ginal auricular vein include sloughing of the tips of the
patients with high-fibre supplerments is invaluable (for
pinnae due to chemical phlebitis from infused solutions,
example, Critical Care for Herbivores, Oxbow@,
mechanical irritation frorm the catheter or bandage rmate-
Murdock, USA). Many medications can be administered
rials (Mader, 2004). In certain breeds with small ears and
orally to rabbits. The syringe is inserted to one side of
veins (for example, dwarf breeds), venepuncture is more
midline, in the gap between incisors and prermolars, and a
difficult and may occasionally lead to vasculitis, vascular
small volume administered at a time to allow swallowing.
necrosis and sloughing of the skin or parts of the pinnae
If the patient is too debilitated to swallow, this technique
 should be abandoned as aspiration may occur.
1
be catheterised, as complications similarly include dam-
age to the auricular blood supply and subsequent slough-
Injections
ing of part of the pinna [Harcourt-Brown, 2002d).
Catheters in the lateral saphenous vein (Fig. 3.5) are
Subcutaneous injections are administered into the dorsal
better tolerated long-term by rabbits than those in the
skin over the scapulae or the flank. Large volurmes may be
marginal ear vein. An assistant restrains the rabbit, with
given and fluids should be warmed beforehand.
the hindlimb held to expose the lateral hock. Skin proxi-
The lurmbar or quadriceps muscles are used for intra-
mal to the hock is clipped and surgically prepared. The
muscular injections. Larger volurmes are split between two
assistant raises the vein by grasping the hindlirmb caudal to
or more sites to reduce the risk of muscle necrosis.
the stifle. Again, the vein is relatively superficial, but
There are several sites for intravenous access in rabbits.
more mobile than the marginal ear vein.
The marginal ear veins (Fig. 3.3) are readily accessible in
The cephalic vein is small and only a short area is accessi-
most breeds for venepuncture, both for sampling and
ble in rabbits. It is infrequently used for catheterisation, but
catheterisation for administration of fluids and drugs.
can be useful in some cases. Catheterisation will be more
Alternative sites for venepuncture are the jugular vein
difficult in smaller species with a shorter antebrachium
[(mainly used for phlebotomy, and accessed as in cats with
[Mader, 2004). Catheter placement is as for other species.
the neck hyperextended), the lateral saphenous vein, the
The jugular vein can be catheterised, but anaesthesia is
cephalic vein and the marmmary vessels.
 necessary for placement of an indwelling catheter.
In the conscious rabbit, it is often useful to apply local
 In very small animals or patients with poor peripheral
anaesthetic cream [for example lidocaine [lignocaine)/prilo-
circulation, imtraosseous catheterisation into the proximal
caine, EMLA@, AstraZeneca, Sodertalje, Sweden} to the
femur, tibia or hurmerus can be used to access the circula-
skin, in order to reduce the patient's response to needle
aanea-cz-8I uy (900z prem) spmy apioid on pue uon
penetration of the skin. Covering the cream with an occlu-
 25-38 mm long hypodermic or intraosseous needle may be
sive dressing for 15-30min will allow local anaesthesia to
used. If required, a stylet of sterile surgical wire can be used
occur prior to catheterisation (Flecknell, 2006); 45-60min
within the former needle during insertion to prevent clog
are required for full-skin-thickness anaesthesia Harcourt-
ging with bone. The animal should be anaesthetised, unless
Brown, 2002a). Over-the-needle 23-26-gauge catheters are
collapsed, and the skin clipped and aseptically prepared.
used to catheterise veins in rabbits.
Sterile surgical gloves should be worn. Local anaesthetic is
The lateral or medial edge of the dorsal pinna is clipped
injected near the periosteum. The greater trochanter or tib-
and surgically prepared before catheter placement in the
ial crest is palpated and the needle inserted in the same line
marginal auricular vein. An assistant raises the vein by
as the bone, anterograde into the medullary cavity (Fig.
applying pressure at the base of the ear (Fig. 3.4). The cli-
3.6). No resistance should be encountered when a small
nician holds the tip of the pinna with thurmb and third fin-
armount of sterile saline is flushed into the cavity (Mader,
ger, and supports the ear margin ventrally with the second
2004). Radiography can be used to check positioning.
finger. The vein is quite superficial, so the catheter should
Intraperitoneal injections are administered as in other
be inserted at an acute angle. Anaesthetics such as medeto-
species, usually into the caudal right abdominal quadrant.
midine will cause peripheral vasoconstriction, rmaking intra-
Fluid absorption is rapid via this route, but there is a risk
venous catheterisation more difficult (see Fig. 3.3A). The
of viscera perforation.
catheter is usually inserted halfway along the length of the
Intracardiac injections may be required in an emer-
pinna, to allow placement of a bung or connecting device
gency situation to administer drugs. The heart is located
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
A
B
Figure 3.3 · Marginal auricular vein. (A) After medetomidine/ketamine/butorphanol administration. (B) After fentanyl/fluanisone
administration.
Figure 3.4 · Intravenous catheter placement in the marginalauric-
Figure 3.5 · Catheter in the lateral saphenous vein: the hindlimb
ular vein: an assistant raises vein by applying pressure at the base
is grasped around the caudal stifle toraise thevein for catheteri-
of the ear. The clinician hols the ear at the tip, supporting the
sation. This vein is particularly useful in short-eared breeds such
cartilage with a finger underneath. The catheter is inserted at a
as this Netherland Dwarf where the auricular veins are difficult
shallow angle into the superficial vein. A light dressing is applied
to access.
Over the catheter.
between the third to sixth rib spaces near the elbow
be adjusted if necessary, premeasuring the tube alongside
[Reusch, 2005). Risks include myocardial damage, cardiac
the rabbit so that the connector for the anaesthetic circuit
tamponade or death.
will be at the lips and the tip of the tube within the tra-
chea. It is easier to intubate with a longer endotracheal
Intubation
tube as there is more tube to grasp and manipulate, but
the connector should not extend beyond the lips as this
increases dead space in the system. A small amount of
After induction of anaesthesia, when sufficient jaw tone
sterile water-soluble lubricant (for example K-Y Jelly@,
relaxation is attained, rabbits should be intubated. The
Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ) may be applied
laryngeal opening is small cormpared to the size of rabbit,
around the tip of the endotracheal tube, ensuring that it
allowing passage of a small uncuffed endotracheal tube,
does not obstruct the lumen. Care should be taken to
usually a 2.5-3.0 mm for a 2.5 kg rabbit (see Fig. 1.6)
avoid traumatising oral and respiratory structures during
(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). Arange of sizes should be pre-
intubation (Conlon et al., 1990)
pared for selection depending on the rabbit's size, from
Two techniques are commonly used in rabbits, blind
1.5 mm for a 1 kg Netherland dwarf to 5 mm for an &kg
intubation and intubation with visualisation of the larynx.
giant breed. The length of the endotracheal tube should
In both techniques the neck is hyperextended to align the
Rabbit anaesthesia
Table 3.2: Injection techniques in rabbits
ROUTE
TECHNIQUE
SUGGESTED NEEDLE SIZE
COMMENT
AND mAXIMUm volUmE
IN ONE SITE (4 KG ANIMAL)
Intramuscular
Lumbar muscles; quadriceps (cranial
 25-ga, I ml
Avoid caudal thigh as risk of damage
thigh)
to sciatic nerve
Intraosseous
Greater trochanter of femur
18-23 gauge needle,
1
25-38mm
a
Intraperitoneal Caudal right quadrant of abdomen,
23-ga, 100 ml
Large volumes of fluids can be
direct needle at 30° angle to skin,
administered, rapid absorption,
an
withdraw on syringe before inject to
warm beforehand; avoid medications
ensure viscus has not been pierced
which may be irritant
D
Intravenous
 Marginal ear
22-24 gauge (catheter);
Marginal ear vein difficult in breeds
vein,cphalic vein,latral
8ml (bolus), 10ml/kg
with shortears,and canbeirritating
1
saphenous vein
(slow infusion)
for rabbit to have pinna bandaged
Lateral saphenous mobile
43
Oral
Syringe: via diastema
Syringe: some formulations require
Suspension or fluids
Gavage: may be aided by use of oral
the use ofa catheter-tip syringe;
 Premeasure gavage tubes to last rib
speculum with central hole for
Gavage: 13 or 8 Fr tube, 15 ml
on left-hand side
passage of lubricated soft
Care with gavage dosing and
feeding tube
nasogastric tube placement, as
Nasogastric tube: apply local
rabbits may not cough if the tube
anaesthetic to nares and coat tip of
inadvertently enters trachea
tube with local anaesthetic gel,
Elizabethan collar usually necessary
direct tube caudo-dorsally, radiograph
for nasogastric tubes
to check placement, secure with
butterfly tape sutured to skin on
dorsal skull
Cesophagostomy tube:
 anaesthesia necessary
Subcutaneous
Scruff or flank
 23-ga, 30-50 ml
Large volumes of fluids can be
administered, warm beforehand,
relatively slow absorption
Key: ga = gauge; Fr = French
(Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003; Mader, 2004; Meredith and Crossley, 2002)
larynx in a straight line from the oropharynx (Fig. 3.7).
caused by the fleshy base of the tongue, and local anaes-
(In the hyperflexed position, the oropharynx aligns with
thetic sprayed on to the larynx with or without visualisa
the oesophagus.) The anaesthetised rabbit is positioned in
tion; see below). The nose is elevated to allow the local
sternal recumbency with the body in a straight line. An
anaesthetic to flow on to the rima glottis, the laryngeal
assistant holds the back of the anaesthetised rabbit's head,
opening.
extending the neck so that the nose-neck-shoulder line is
straight and vertical. It may help to lift the rabbit by the
Blind intubation
head slightly up from the surface.
As the larynx is prone to spasm (Wixson, 1994), local
In the first technique, the endotracheal tube should be
anaesthetic (for example, lidocaine lignocaine) hydrochlo-
pre-measured, against the side of the rabbit's head, to the
ride, Intubeze@, Arnolds) should be applied to it 1-2 min
level of the larynx. The endotracheal tube is advanced via
before intubation is attempted. The tongue is grasped and
the oral cavity to the oropharynx. The operator then lis-
pulled gently out of the mouth, to reduce the obstruction
tens at the connector end of the tube for breath sounds
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Direction of insertion
into greater trochanter
of femur
44
Figure 3.7 · Hyperextension of the rabbit's neck aligns the
oropharynxwith the larynxforintubation.
Visualisation of larynx
In the second technique, the larynx is visualised for intu-
Figure 3.6 · Site for intraosseous catheter placement in the
bation using a laryngoscope (with a size zero or one
proximal femur of therabbit.
straight Wisconsin blade), otoscope or rigid endoscope.
The glottis lies deep and caudal in the oro-pharynx
(Mader, 2004]. The soft palate may initially lie over the
and advances the tube into the larynx when noise indi-
rima glottis and can be moved using the tip of the endo-
cates that the larynx is open during inspiration. It can be
tracheal tube (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). In small rabbits,
helpful to observe breathing movements simultaneously
[o aun oi adosuie aun  oi a aq Aeu i
-Buidxa pue uoeuidsui uaum Aes ot yueisise au ian ot 1o
cavity without damaging the teeth or soft tissues. If an
tion occur. If the sounds diminish, the tube has been
otoscope with a closed cone is used, a stylet [for exarmple,
advanced into the oesophagus and usually some resistance
tubing frorm a 3-5 French urinary catheter) is first placed
is felt. In this case, the endotracheal tube will be palpable
into the larynx before removing the otoscope and thread-
in the neck alongside the trachea. The sounds will be
ing the endotracheal tube over the stylet. If a l.9 mm
loudest when the tip of the tube is at the level of the rima
semi-rigid
1endoscope
[Needlescope, Karl Storz,
glottis. As the tube is advanced through the larynx into
Germany) is available, the endotracheal tube may be
the trachea, the rabbit may cough (but not in all cases).
guided over this whilst using it to visualise the larynx.
Breath sounds will still be heard, airflow can be checked
If an initial attempt at intubation is unsuccessful, a
by showing movement of a small amount of fur or con-
smaller endotracheal tube should be used. If either tech-
densation seen inside clear blue endotracheal tubes or on
nique is unsuccessful after two or three tries the proce-
a glass slide held at the end of the tube, and PpV will
 dure should be abandoned as the risk of laryngeal trauma
cause thoracic movement (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a)
and spasm is increased (Wixson, 1994).
Other options for airway maintenance
 Rabbits do not always cough when a tube or substance
enters the trachea
Larymgeal masks have been used in rabbits with sorme suc-
cess. Placement is rmuch easier than intubation and a good
Rabbit anaesthesia
aul oru padde si sase sauisaue pue uaaixo jo Addns
rate of 25-50 breaths per minute is appropriate for most
trachea, resulting in reduced environmental contamination
patients.
compared to facemasks (Smith et al., 2004). However, it is
 Rabbits have high basal sympathetic tone, and rmay be
not possible to ensure that the airway is completely pro-
sensitive to vagal overstirmulation; this may result in arterio-
tected from material such as fluids in the oral or oesophageal
lar vasodilation after PPV (Shekerdemian and Bohn, 1999).
regions, and PPV may lead to gastric dilation. If saliva and
gastric contents are aspirated, laryngeal necrosis and pneu-
monia are likely to occur (Bateman et al., 2005).
Nasal catheters are particularly useful if endotracheal
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
intubation is not possible or if oropharyngeal access is
otherwise required for procedures, for example dental
Drugs that cause sedation in rabbits have several uses. In
treatments. A soft nasogastric tube [size 3-4 French] or
the first instance, the sedation produced may be sufficient
small endotracheal tube [1.0-1.5 mm] can be inserted
for the procedure to be performed, allowing a rapid return
into the nasal cavity to provide oxygen with or without
to full consciousness with fewer side effects than a pro-
anaesthetic gases [Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). These can be
longed recovery from general anaesthesia using injectable
2
useful even in conscious rabbits requiring supplemental
agents. In the second instance, pre-medication with a
oxygen, although application of local anaesthetic (for
sedative will calm the patient, enabling a less stressful
example, lidocaine [lignocaine] gel) to the nares and outer
anaesthetic induction with other agents, and fewer post-
1
surface of the tube will ease their placement and mainte-
anaesthetic complications. In the third scenario, the pre-
nance. In rabbits with incisor tooth disease, the incisor
medicant drug may potentiate the other drugs, reducing
 roots may penetrate the nasal airways and preclude place-
the doses necessary, and thereby reducing the side effects
1
ment of a nasal tube.
associated. The fourth use is due to the fact that many pre-
If endotracheal intubation is not possible via the oral
cavity, an altermative is to pass a tube via the nasal cavity
important if surgery or another painful procedure is to be
45
into the trachea (Mason, 1997). The muscular nasal fold
performed. The final reason for sedating rabbits is that this
should be elevated, and the tube directed ventromedially
enables less stressful preoxygenation of the patient during
in order to enter the ventral nasal meatus (Flecknell,
induction, which would not be possible if the rabbit was
2006). The neck should be hyperextended as for the intu-
fully conscious.
bation techniques above. This should align the upper air-
 Acepromazine may be used on its own as a premedicant
ways with the trachea. (If the neck is flexed, a tube passed
or mixed with butorphanol to produce sedation, for exam-
via the nasal passages will usually pass into the oesopha-
ple prior to induction using inhalational anaesthetics via a
gus.) Remember that rabbits do not always cough when a
facermask. Acepromazine is vasodilatory, and thence
tube is passed into the trachea. The nasal cavity contains
hypotensive. It can be used to produce sedation in rabbits,
potential pathogens, for example Pasteurella multocida,
administered at O.1 mg/kg subcutaneously or intramuscu-
which may be inadvertently introduced into the trachea
larly (Heard, 1993). The addition of butorphanol will pro-
with this technique (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
vide some analgesia (which the acepromazine lacks) along
 All anaesthetised rabbits should receive oxygen supple-
with a mild sedative effect (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
 mentation. Where none of the above options are possible
The benzodiazepines diazepam and midazolam are both
Or appropriate, a closely fitting facemask can be used if
routinely used to provide sedation in rabbits, and also
oral access is not required. If a procedure is being per-
cause muscle relaxation. Midazolam is shorter-acting
formed on the oral cavity, the end of the anaesthetic cir-
[Flecknell, 1984].
Midazolam can be administered
cuit or a very small facemask can be held over the nares.
intranasally as it is absorbed across mucous membranes
Masks are unlikely to provide as good a seal as the other
(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). Midazolam affects angiokine-
techniques, and so should be used with caution when
sis, reducing the maximum contraction and increasing the
inhalational anaesthetics are being used, as environmental
speed of relaxation of arteries (Borges and Gomes, 2004).
contamination is likely.
The benzodiazepines are often used in combination
Transtracheal intubation can be performed in an emer-
with other agents, injectable or inhalational, for rabbit
 gency or if upper airway obstruction is present.
anaesthesia. Commonly, either of these benzodiazepines
can be used to induce anaesthesia after pre-medication
with fentanyl/fluanisone (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
Ventilation
Medetomidine can be used as premedicant or sedative
in rabbits. The resultant peripheral vasoconstriction gives
It is advantageous to perform IPPV on anaesthetised rab-
the mucous membranes a blue/purple hue and can make
bits, as respiratory depression caused by anaesthesia often
intravenous catheterisation and pulse oximetry more dif-
reduces tidal volume as well as respiratory rate. The tidal
ficult. Medetomidine will also cause hypoxia, and oxygen
volume of an anaesthetised rabbit is a mere 4-6 ml/kg,
should always be supplermented when this agent is used
although this can be increased to 7-10ml/kg with PPV.
(Flecknell, 2000). Mean arterial pressure, heart rate and
The simplest way of perforrming PPV is via a rmechanical
respiratory rate are usually decreased (Kim et al., 2004);
ventilator, but an assistant can perform a similar function
other side effects include hypothermia and diuresis.
using a circuit with valves (Flecknell, 2006). Arespiratory
Advantages of medetomidine include good laryngeal
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 3.3: Sedation in the rabbit
DRUG
DOSE (MG/KG)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Acepromazine
0.25-1.03.4.5
IM, SC, IV
Mild-to-moderate sedation; duration 4 h
Peripheral vasodilation
Care in hypovolaemic animals
Acepromazine +
0.5 + 0.52
IM, SC
Moderate sedation
butorphanol
Peripheral vasodilation, some analgesia
Care in hypovolaemic animals.
Diazepam
1-22
IM, IP SC, IV
Moderate-to-deep sedation; duration 30-180 min
Oily preparation can cause tissue damage extravascularly; emulsion
preparation safer
Fentanyl/fluanisone
0.2-0.3 ml/kg²
IM
Mild-to-moderate sedation,moderate to marked analgesia
(Hypnorm@, Janssen)
 Dose-dependent respiratory depression
Reverse fentanyl with buprenorphine or butorphanol
Fentanyl/droperidol
0.15-0.44 ml/kg5
IM, IV
 As for Hypnorm@
46
(lnnovar vet@, Janssen)
Ketamine
25-502
IM, IV
Moderate-to-heavy sedation, some analgesia; duration I h (IM),
15-20 min (IV)
Medetomidine
0.1-0.52
IM, SC
Mild-to-profound sedation
Peripheral vasoconstriction
Respiratory and cardiovascular depression
Can reverse with atipamezole
Midazolam
0.5-22
IV, IM, IP
Moderate-to-deep sedation; duration <2 h
Sufficient to allow minor procedures or induction with volatile agent
Xylazine
1-5'
IM, IV
Mild-to-profound sedation; duration 30-60 min
Peripheral vasoconstriction
Respiratory and cardiovascular depression
Can reverse with yohimbine or atipamezole
Key: IM = intramuscular, IP = intraperitoneal, IV = intravenous, SC = subcutaneous
(Eisele, 1997); ²(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a); 3(Heard, 2004); 4 (Jenkins, 1995); 5 (Wixson,1994)
relaxation [Harcourt-Brown, 2002a] and ease of reversal,
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
of both sedation and side effects, with atipamezole.
OF ANAESTHESIA
 In some species, anticholinergics are routinely adminis-
tered as pre-medications. They reduce salivary and bronchial
secretions, and reduce bradycardia due to vagal reflexes.
Induction
In most rabbits this is not required. However, anticholin-
ergic agents should be available for administration in case
Injectable agents
of bradycardia. Many rabbits possess atropinesterase and
glycopyrrolate is the anticholinergic of choice in rabbits.
Studies have shown there to be differences in response to
Glycopyrrolate may increase the viscosity of airway secre
various anaesthetic agents between both different rabbit
tions and contribute to airway obstruction (Bateman
strains (Avsaroglu et al., 2003) and individual rabbits
et al., 2005).
(Aeschbacher, 200l). Certain laboratory rabbit strains
Rabbit anaesthesia
were shown to be resistant to ketamine, medetomidine
for medetomidine and ketamine in laboratory animals are
and propofol; gender differences were also seen. This can
usually higher than those required to produce anaesthesia
make dose selection for an individual difficult. Knowledge
in pet rabbits. Intramuscular administration produces
of various anaesthetic combinations and application of
more rapid induction and recovery compared to subcuta-
principles will allow the clinician to vary the protocol if
neous injections. Due to the hypoxaermia associated with
the desired response does not occur.
this combination (Hedenqvist et al., 200ib), supplemen-
Many injectable anaesthetic combinations in rabbits
tal oxygen should be administered. The use of ketamine
will lower blood oxygen saturation levels (Henke et al.
with medetomidine reduces the change seen in heart rate
2005). Oxygen should, therefore, always be supple-
and respiratory rate when medetomidine is used alone
mented either using a facemask or, in preference, an
(Kim et al., 2004). Although the heart rate is lowered, no
endotracheal tube.
cardiac arrhythmias are produced and only minimal
 Several anaesthetic agents may affect plasma concentra-
effects are seen on arterial blood pressure with this com-
tions of various serurm enzymes and biochemical parame-
bination. Blood pressures are higher in rabbits anaes-
ters. Combinations of ketamine with xylazine or diazepam
thetised with a combination of medetomidine, ketamine
may cause increases in alanine arminotransferase, aspartate
and buprenorphine compared to those where xylazine is
aminotransferase, blood urea nitrogen, calcium, chloride,
used in place of medetomidine (Difilippo et al., 2004).
cholesterol, creatinine, lactate dehydrogenase, phospho-
 The anaesthetic period is more prolonged where medeto-
rus, potassium, sodium or triglycerides (Gil et al., 2003;
midine is used in place of xylazine (Difilippo et al., 2004).
1
Gil et al., 2004). Values appear to return to control levels
The period of surgical anaesthesia is also dose-dependent.
within 24 h. Anaesthesia with fentanyl and droperidol did
For example, in one study 15mg/kg ketamine with
0.25 mg/kg medetomidine produced a mean of 27 min
1
not affect serum values assessed in the study.
When used alone, ketamine will cause sedation or can
surgical anaesthesia and sleep time of 86 min, compared
induce anaesthesia. As the eyelids remain open during ket-
to 25 mg/kg ketamine with 0.25 mg/kg medetomidine,
amine anaesthesia, the cornea should be well lubricated
which produced a mean of 57 min surgical anaesthesia
47
(for example, with proprietary liquid paraffin prepara-
and 103 min sleep time (without atipamezole reversal)
tions) to prevent damage and ulceration. Moderate respi-
(Hedenqvist et al., 2001b).
ratory depression is produced. Ketarmine causes poor
 Medetomidine is regularly reversed with atipamezole.
muscle relaxation, and is usually used in combination with
Reported doses for atiparmezole vary; one study (Kim
other agents for anaesthesia (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
et al., 2004) recommends atipamezole at equal or double
Ketarmine reduces the cerebral vasodilation induced by
the dose of medetomidine (for example, 0.35 mg/kg
isoflurane, but not that produced by sevoflurane (Nagase
medetomidine reversed with 0.35-0.7mg/kg atipame-
et al., 2003).
zole). Five times the dose is given routinely in practice, as
 A commonly used anaesthetic protocol for surgery in
this is the same volume of atipamezole (5 mg/ml formula-
rabbits is the combination of an alpha-2-adrenergic agonist
tion] to that of medetomidine (l mg/ml formulation]
with ketamine. Xylazine used on its own will produce mod-
(Morrisey and Carpenter, 2004).
erate sedation, but cardio-respiratory depression is seen
A combination of ketamine 
with diazepam will
and minimal analgesia provided. The xylazine-ketamine
decrease respiratory rates, but not heart rates (Gil et al.,
combination has significant side effects, including cardio-
2003). Some researchers maintain anaesthesia in rabbits
vascular and respiratory depression. Higher doses result in
using a continuous rate infusion of either ketamine and
cardiac arrhythmias, and a high mortality rate (Flecknell
fentanyl or propofol, along with isoflurane (Sakarmoto
et al., 1983). Administration of the alpha-2-antagonist ati-
et al., 2003). Early work with vitamin C suggests it may
 pamezole willreverse the effects of xylazine.
also potentiate ketarmine anaesthesia in rabbits (Elsa and
Replacing the xylazine with medetomidine in the keta-
Ubandawaki, 2005)
mine combination is associated with a lower incidence of
 Many anaesthetic protocols for rabbits include analge-
side effects. This combination will also produce surgical
sia, particularly the opioid analgesics, which also have
anaesthesia (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a; Henke et al., 2005;
sedative properties. However, respiratory depression is a
Nevalainen et al., 1989; Orr et al., 2005). Doses reported
common side effect; mental depression, hypothermia and
bradycardia may also occur. S
Some opioids, including
pethidine, will reduce gastrointestinal motility in rabbits.
Most side effects are dose-related, and so can be min-
imised by using synergistic combinations with other
BOX 3.3 Commonly used anaesthetics
drugs. The addition of butorphanol to ketamine and
in rabbits
medetomidine reduces the doses needed of the latter two
agents, prolongs anaesthesia and provides analgesia.
Fentanyl/fluanisone followed by a benzodiazepine
Fentanyl is an opioid agonist that acts primarily on μ
such as midazolam
receptors. The effects of fentanyl are potentiated by flu-
Ketamine combinations, for example medetomidine
anisone (for example, the fentanyl/fluanisone combination
Isoflurane (after sedation or induction with other
in
Hypnorm@, VetaPharma, Leeds, UK or Janssen
agents)
Pharmaceuticals, Ontario, Canada], a butyrophenone seda
tive. This combination will provide analgesia for 180 min
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
(Flecknell et al., 1989). Fluanisone also usefully partially
high doses can cause respiratory and cardiac arrest
antagonises fentanyl's respiratory depressive effects.
(Flecknell, 2000; Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
Fentanyl/fluanisone is vasodilatory (see Fig. 3.3B), hence
Barbiturates, such as thiopental and pentobarbitone, may
intravenous catheterisation is facilitated after its adminis-
be used to induce anaesthesia in rabbits, but have a narrow
tration. As mentioned earlier, anaesthesia may be induced
safety margin (Green, 1975). Hypoxia, hypercapnia and aci-
using intravenous midazolam or diazepam after sedation
dosis may occur (Flecknell etal., 1983), as may respiratory
with intrarmuscular administration of fentanyl/fluanisone.
depression or arrest, and the dose for euthanasia is margin-
Thefentanylmay
be1
reversed with an opioid
ally greater than that for anaesthesia (Wixson, 1994}.
agonist/antagonist, such as buprenorphine or butorphanol
These drugs will reverse fentanyl's respiratory depression
Volatile agents
effects and also continue analgesia for the patient, making
them ideal where a painful procedure has been performed.
Inhalational agents (including halothane, isoflurane,
If analgesia is not required post anaesthesia, the pure opi-
sevoflurane and desflurane) will induce breath holding
oid antagonist naloxone may be used to reverse all of fen-
and hypoxia in conscious rabbits (Flecknell et al., 1996;
tanyl's actions. This combination is very safe, but has a
Flecknell et al., 1999; Hedenqvist et al., 200la), and in
prolonged sleep time post anaesthesia, as the sedative
many under a light plane of anaesthesia (Harcourt-Brown,
effects of fluanisone and the benzodiazepine are still pres-
2002a). Slow induction with desflurane appears to be
ent (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). This sleep time is more pro-
best tolerated, but it may take 5 min. Apnoea is usually
longed when higher doses of benzodiazepine are used.
 associated with bradycardia, hypercapnia and hypoxia.
 Fentanyl is also produced in a preparation with droperi-
Therefore, in all but the extrermely debilitated patient,
dol (Innovar-Vet@, Jannsen Pharmaceuticals, Ontario,
 pre-medication is required before use of inhalation anaes-
Canada). Bradycardia is comrmonly seen with this combi-
thetic agents. Once the rabbit has been sedated, inhala-
nation (Steffey, 1995).
tion agents can be administered via induction chambers or
48
Medetomidine combined with fentanyl produces
facemasks. Pre-medication will also reduce the volatile
anaesthesia. A study on anaesthesia with medetormidine,
agent requirements. For example, in one study (Turner
fentanyl and midazolarm showed a high incidence of tran-
 et al., 2006) pre-medication butorphanol reduced MACiso
sient apnoea (Henke et al., 2005). Endotracheal intuba-
from 2.49 to 2.30; this anaesthetic-sparing effect was not
tion is, therefore, important if this combination is used.
seen with the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
This combination has the advantage of the possibility to
(NSAID) meloxicam.
reverse all components, using atipamezole, butorphanol
If sedation is not used prior to attempted mask or
or buprenorphine, and flumazenil (respectively).
chamber induction, the ensuing breath holding may be
Propofol is a useful induction agent in rabbits. Most
 p  paisse si eae s 
patients are pre-medicated, for example with fentanyl/flu-
(Flecknell et al., 1999). Useful sedation agents include
anisone (Hypnorm, Jannsen Pharmaceuticals, Ontario,
acepromazine, fentanyl/fluanisone, and medetomidine
Canada), before propofol is administered. An intravenous 
(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). It is also helpful to preoxy-
bolus of propofol will rapidly produce sufficient relaxation
genate the rabbit, either via facermask or chamber, before
for intubation. Endotracheal intubation is necessary, as
inhalational anaesthetic agents are switched on. This
asopiaao ue pue anip siu Busn uaum uouuon si eaoude
reduces the risk of hypoxia in cases of breath holding
may cause respiratory arrest (Glen, 1980). Intravenous
(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
administration of propofol results in systemic hypotension
Isoflurane produces a dose-dependent reduction in res-
(Wang et al., 2003). It is not recommended to repeat
piratory rate and mean arterial pressure in rabbits, but
boluses or to use continuous rate infusions of propofol as
heart rate is not affected (Hayashida et al., 2003).
the sole anaesthetic agent in rabbits as light anaesthesia
only is produced, and hypotension and hypoxaemia are
common (Aeschbacher and Webb, 1993b)
Anaesthetic maintenance
Without pre-medication, the EDgs for tracheal intuba-
tion in rabbits is 6.4mg/kg (Aeschbacher and Webb,
After induction of anaesthesia is accomplished, either by
1993a). If pre-medication is not used, both induction and
using injectable agents or by using sedation and inhalation
recovery will be very rapid; however, the higher dose of
agents, rabbits should, ideally, be intubated. Placement of
propofol required to induce anaesthesia will increase the
 an endotracheal tube has three benefits: oxygen can be pro-
risk of apnoea. Slow administration of the drug, over 30 s,
vided, inhalational anaesthetics can be easily and efficiently
will reduce the risk of apnoea. After intubation, anaesthe-
administered if required for deepening or maintenance of
sia can be maintained via gaseous agents. Propofol is rap-
anaesthesia, and PPV can readily be performed (Harcourt-
idly metabolised, and recovery is smooth and rapid
 Brown, 2002a). Many rabbits benefit from PPV, particularly
(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a)
when anaesthetised in dorsalrecumbency wherelungs may
Alfaxalone-alphadolone is not recommended in rabbits.
become compressed. If it isnot possible to intubate the rab-
The anaphylactic reaction seen in dogs has not been
bit, for example in very small patients or those undergoing
reported in rabbits (Wixson, 1994). This drug will pro-
dental treatrment where the endotracheal tube will obstruct
duce a light plane of anaesthesia with muscle relaxation,
other procedures, anaesthesia can be maintained using a
but no analgesia. Increments can be administered, but
facemask or intranasal catheter.
Table 3.4: Anaesthetics in the rabbit
DRUG
DOSE (MG/KG)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Atipamezole
0.53
SC,IM
Atropine
0.056
IM
Anticholinergic
0.1-0.2
SC, IM
Many rabbits possess atropinesterase
If so, repeat atropine dose or administer glycopyrrolate
Fentanyl/fluanisone
0.2-0.3 ml/kg +
IM + IV
Hypnorm@ causes sedation; benzodiazepine then induces
(Hypnorm@, Janssen) +
0.5-2mg/kg
(10 min after)
anaesthesia
midazolam or diazepam
Respiratory depression is dose-dependent
Reverse fentany with buprenorphine or butorphanol
Recovery tirme often correlates with dose of benzodiazepine
al
Glycopyrrolate
0.01-0.021.,9
SC, IV, IM
Anticholinergicf - control bradycardia, salivation, or
an
respiratory secretions
esth
Halothane
To effect
Inhal
Pre-medicate before mask or chamber induction
lesi
Isoflurane
3-5%
Inhal 
Pre-medicate before mask or chamber induction
1.5-1.75%5
Induction
Maintenance
49
Ketamine
25-506
IM
Painful injection
Lack of muscle relaxation means inappropriate for surgical
anaesthesia on own
Ketamine + diazepam
10 + 24
IV
Ketamine + midazolam
25 + 10
IM
Excellent relaxation; anaesthesia for minor procedures
Ketamine + xylazine
35 + 56
IM
Can give ketamine when sedated, I0-20 min after xylazine
10 + 31
IV
50 + 513
IM
Medetomidine +
0.2 + 0.02 + 1.0
IM
Surgical anaesthesia 30 min
fentanyl + midazolam 
Transient apnoea common
Medetomidine +
0.25-0.5 + 2511.8
IM
Anaesthesia (loss of ear pinch reflex)
ketamine
0.25-0.5 + 1512
(Lower dose of ketamine from study in pet rabbits.)
Medetomidine +
0.1 + 5 + 0.5
SC, IM
Surgical anaesthesia for 30-40 min
ketamine + butorphanol
(commonly used by author)
Medetomidine +
0.5 + 35 + 0.032
IM
Induction of anaesthesia
ketamine 十
buprenorphine
0.01-0.16
IM, IV, IP
Opioid antagonist
Propofol
3-67
IV
Induce anaesthesia after pre-medication, e.g. I0 min after
Hypnorm IM
Sevoflurane
To effect
Inhal
Pre-medicate before mask or chamber induction
Xylazine + ketamine +
5 + 35 + 0.032
IM
Induction of anaesthesia
buprenorphine
Key: Inhal = inhalation, IM = intramuscular, IP = intraperitoneal, IV = intravenous, SC = subcutaneous
(Bateman et al.,2005); 2 (Diflippo et al.,2004); 3 (Flecknell,2000); 4 (Gil et al, 2004); 5 (Gillett,1994); ^ (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a);
7 (Heard, 2004); α (Hedengvist et al, 200Ib); ′ (Jenkins, 2004b); I (Mader, 2004);I (Nevalainen et al., 1989); 12 (Orr et al., 2005);
13 (Ypsilantiset al, 2005)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
The main advantage of volatile anaesthetic drugs is that
radiography or for minor procedures such as wound clean-
they are metabolised much more rapidly than injectable
ing or dressing changes.
agents, and produce a shorter and smoother recovery from
 The combination results in vasodilation, allowing ease
anaesthesia. Halothane may be used in rabbits, but can sen-
of phlebotomy or intravenous catheterisation (Fig. 3.3).
 sitise the myocardium to catecholamines released during
Analgesia and sedation are provided for 3 h. The dose rate
stressful procedures, including anaesthesia. Isoflurane
is 0.2-0.3 ml/kg intrarmuscularly of the Janssen prepara-
(Lynch, 1986) and sevoflurane (Holzman et al., 1996)
tion, Hypnorm@, which contains 0.315 mg/ml fentanyl
depress myocardial contractility less than halothane.
citrate (equivalent to 0.20 mg/ml fentanyl] and 10 mg/ml
Isoflurane is also mainly excreted via therespiratory systerm,
fluanisone. Subcutaneous administration may produce
with only 0.2% undergoing hepatic metabolism (Marano et
less sedation, but will be absorbed more slowly.
al., 1997). Isoflurane is, therefore, safe for anirmals with
General anaesthesia can readily be induced after fen-
renal or hepatic dysfunction. Induction with isoflurane is
 tanyl/fluanisone using either an intravenous benzodiazepine
rapid, as are adjustments in depth of anaesthesia (Harcourt-
or an inhalational anaesthetic agent. Midazolarm (more usu-
Brown, 2002a]. Isoflurane [Roth et al., 1996} and halothane
ally] or diazepam is administered to effect, usually via an
(Houghton et al., 1973) provide little or no analgesia.
intravenous catheter (particularly with the oily preparation
A light plane of anaesthesia may be suspected if one of
of diazepam, which is irritant to tissues when administered
several factors is observed. Apnoea or breath holding may
extravascularly). The usualdoserequired is0.5-2 mg/kg, of
occur if the rabbit smells anaesthetic gases. Movement
either benzodiazepine. Surgical anaesthesia will last for
may be seen, particularly if painful procedures are causing
 30-45 min with these regimes, with a sleep time of 4-6 h
stimulation. Vocalisation, often high-pitched, is an alarm
[Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). The length ofsleeptime appears
response to unpleasant stimuli. This may occur in con-
to be related to the dose of benzodiazepine adrministered,
junction with apnoea, and hypoxia or cyanosis may be seen
with more rapid recovery seen after lower doses.
(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
50
Alternatively, the rabbit should be sufficiently sedated
The easiest method of deepening the level of anaesthesia
after fentanyl/fluanisone to allow mask induction. The
is to increase exposure to inhalational agents. Ideally, this is
rabbit is preoxygenated for a few minutes, before anaes-
performed via an endotracheal tube, where a short period of
thesia is induced using a gradual increase [over 5 min} in
positive pressure ventilation without alteration of the con-
volatile agent such as isoflurane or sevoflurane. Nitrous
centration ofinspired anaesthetic agent maybe sufficient. It
oxide can be added (50:50 with inspired oxygen) during
may be necessary to increase the concentration of inspired
induction (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
agent, especially if the patient has been induced with
The administration of a mixed opioid agonist/antago-
injectable agents [which have been metabolised] and previ-
nist such as buprenorphine or butorphanol will reverse the
ously been receiving 100% oxygen. If the rabbit is not intu-
effects of fentanyl, whilst providing further analgesia.
bated, the concentration of inspired agent applied via a
Buprenorphine at 0.0l-0.05 mg/kg or butorphanol at
facemask should be increased gradually, particularly if the
0.1-0.5 mg/kg can be administered subcutaneously, intra-
animal is under light anaesthesia, in order to reduce the risk
muscularly or intravenously. Butorphanol will reverse the
ofapnoea in response tothe inhalational agent'sodour. In sit-
fentanyl rmore effectively, but buprenorphine has longer-
uations where gaseous anaesthesia is not possible, injectable
-rouaidnq iog u/ Aaieuixoidde] suone oisaaieue Bunst
agents may be used to 'top up'the anaesthetic. It is useful to
phine (Flecknell et al., 1989) compared to 2-4h for
have pre-placed intravenous access for this. Great care
butorphanol) (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). Ater reversal,
should be taken in this scenario not to overdose with one par-
the rabbit may have a sleep time of 1-4 h.
ticular drug, anditshould beremembered thatrecovery tirme
will be greatly prolonged with top-ups of injectable agents.
Medetomidine/ketamine combinations
Each of these drugs will produce sorme degree of sedation,
Recovery
but higher doses of the alpha-2-adrenoceptor agonist
medetomidine and dissociative agent ketamine produce
Anaesthetic gases are switched off and injectable agents
side effects. Medetomidine causes bradycardia and respi-
ratory depression. Use of a combination of the drugs
reversed if possible. If an endotracheal tube has been
placed, it is rermoved when the swallowing reflex returns
enables anaesthesia to be reached using lower doses of
(Orr et al., 2005)
each, minimising unwanted effects. The addition of
butorphanol provides analgesia.
This combination can be administered in one syringe by
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
subcutaneous or intramuscular routes. As relatively large
volumes are involved, it is preferable to split the injection
Fentanyl/fluanisone combinations
into two sites if given intramuscularly. Good restraint is
necessary, as the injection may sting, most likely because
The opioid agonist fentanyl is potentiated by the buty-
of the ketamine. Some clinicians prefer to administer the
rophenone fluanisone. In combination, these drugs produce
medetomidine subcutaneously, awaiting the sedation
profound analgesia and deep sedation within 10-20 min
5 min later before administration of ketamine (subcuta-
of intrarmuscular injection. These effects are excellent for
neously or intramuscularly) (Flecknell, 2006)
Rabbit anaesthesia
Consciousness is lost 5-10 min after administration of
is administered to effect, usually 5-6mg/kg. Apnoea is
the drugs subcutaneously, or 2-5 min after intrarmuscular
comnmon with propofol, and intubation should be per-
administration (Orr et al., 2005).
formed to facilitate oxygen supply and PPV Anaesthesia is
As medetomidine leads to hypoxia, supplemental oxy-
maintained using volatile agents. Buprenorphine or butor-
gen [(via intubation, face mask, or nasal catheter) should
phanol are used to reverse the fentanyl and provide further
always be provided (Hedenqvist et al., 2001b). The depth
analgesia. This combination is quite safe for rmost animals,
of anaesthesia may vary between individual animals and
with rapid metabolism of agents.
supplemental inhalation anaesthetic agents are often
required for surgical procedures. However, the doses
Induction with inhalational anaesthetics for
(Table 3.4) should provide sufficient depth of anaesthesia
neonates or critical patients
to allow intubation. If inhalational agents are required, the
inspired concentration should be gradually increased after
Fluid imbalances should be addressed before anaesthesia is
a few minutes of preoxygenation, to avoid problems with
induced, or at least an intravenous or intraosseous catheter
breath holding (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
placed and fluid therapy instigated. Neonates or severely
 Nitrous oxide may be used for short periods in rabbits;
debilitated rabbits are less likely to breath hold during
used as a 50:50 mixture with oxygen it smoothes induc-
induction with gaseous agents and these may be used to
tion with other inhalation agents. There is a risk of nitrous
induce and maintain anaesthesia, producing a more rapid
oxide diffusing into gas-filled spaces such as the caecum
recovery than injectable combinations. However, many
when used for prolonged periods. Denitrogenation is
benefit from pre-medication with analgesia, such as fen-
required after the use of nitrous oxide, with oxygen being
tanyl in the fentanyl/fluanisone preparation or buprenor-
used as the sole carrier gas to the patient for l0min
1
phine. All animals should have a period of preoxygenation
[Harcourt-Brown, 2002a)
prior to induction with gases. Nitrous oxide (50:50 in coxy-
 The longevity of surgical anaesthesia varies between
gen] may also be administered during induction (Harcourt-
animals, but is usually 30-40 min with the medetomi-
Brown, 2002a).
5
dine/ketamine/butorphanol combination. Without butor-
phanol, surgical anaesthesia is shortened slightly to 20-30
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
min. The sleep time is usually 90 min, but can be as long
as 4 h in some patients (Flecknell, 2006).
The effects of medetomidine, including its analgesic
Observations on the patient
properties, can be reversed using the alpha-2-adrenoceptor
antagonist atipamezole. As atipamezole is not as long-acting
Cardiovascular system
as medetomidine, it should not be administered until a
period of 30-40min has lapsed from medetomidine injec-
The heart rate can be rmonitored using a bell or in larger
tion. If atipamezole is administered too soon after medeto-
animals an oesophageal stethoscope, or very simply by
midine, resedation may occur (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a)
placing a finger on either side of the thoracic cavity near
If ketamine has been given with medetomidine, it is advis-
the point of the elbow at the level of the third to sixth rib
able to wait 40min until administering atipamezole, as
spaces (Reusch, 2005). The central auricular artery is
ketamine alone causes muscle tremors and rigidity (Frey
ideal for monitoring pulse rate and quality. The femoral
et al., 1996]. For a 0.2mg/kg dose of medetomidine,
 pulse should also be easily palpable.
1.0mg/kg of atipamezole is typically administered. The
Mucous membrane colour is a useful indication of
subcutaneous or intrammuscular routes rmay be used to
 peripheral circulation, but may be altered by anaesthetics 
administer atipamezole. Intravenous administration may
such as medetomidine. The normal colour of the nose,
be used to reverse medetomidine in an emergency, but car-
lips and tongue is pink. With medetomidine, it will be
diovascular changes may be rapid and profound.
blue or purple. Any change in colour should alert the
This anaesthetic cormbination does not have any long-
anaesthetist to potential problerms, such as hypoxia asso-
lasting analgesia effects, with the medetomidine usually
ciated with airway obstruction or apnoea. Airway secre-
being reversed with atiparmezole, and butorphanol lasting
tions will readily obstruct the airway (IPPV will reduce
 2-4 h. Further opioids and/or NSAIDs are routinely used
build-up of respiratory secretions). Neck flexion, even in
to continue analgesia after surgical procedures performed
intubated patients where the endotracheal tube rmay kink,
with this combination.
will also obstruct the airway.
Propofol
Respiratory system
This must be administered intravenously. Most patients
Monitoring respiratory rate, depth and pattern is para-
will require pre-medication prior to this, unless an intra-
mount to anaesthetic assessment. A respiratory rate of
venous catheter has been previously placed. Alow dose of
less than 4 breaths per minute is deermed to be severe res-
fentanyl/fluanisone (for example 0.15 ml (Kounenis et al.,
piratory depression (Flecknell et al., 1983), and appropri-
1992; Wiseman and Faulds, 1994) for a 2kg rabbit) may
ate action should be taken post-haste. Signs of airway
be used, causing sedation after approximately 10min, and
obstruction could include a cessation of moverment in the
vasodilation that assists with catheter placerment. Propofol
reservoir bag, a reduction in oxygen saturation, mucous
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
membrane becoming cyanotic (blue), a change in respira-
tory rate or effort, and in severe cases heart rate changes.
If signs of airway obstruction are seen, the position of the
patient's head and neck should be checked, the orophar-
ynx cleared of fluid or secretions if present, and the
tongue pulled forward if the fleshy base may be obstruct-
ing the oropharynx (Bateman et al., 2005).
Central nervous system
Depth of anaesthesia is monitored using assessment of
various reflexes, which differ from those used in dogs and
cats. The rmost reliable reflex is the toe pinch, leg with-
drawal reflex. Rabbits under a surgical plane of anaesthe-
sia will not respond to this stimulus, while those under a
light plane may have some tone in their limb muscles and
a slow withdrawal. This reflex is more reliable when
Figure 3.8 · Indirect blood pressure measurement from the
tested in the hindlimbs than in the forelimbs. Loss of the
carpal artery in an anaesthetised rabbit.
ear pinch reflex and loss of jaw tone are also useful indi-
L
cators of surgical anaesthesia (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a).
With most anaesthetics [not ketamine), the nictitans
Arterial blood pressure can be measured in anaesthetised
membrane will move over the cormea (Donnelly, 2004). The
rabbits, either directly via the central auricular artery or indi-
palpebral reflex is an unreliable assessment of anaesthesia in
52
rabbits. The corneal reflex should not be lost during rabbit
rectly using oscillometric lirmb-cuffs (Ypsilantis et al., 2005).
If the central ear artery is used to measure systemic arterial
anaesthesia, as this occurs only at dangerous depths of
pressure, the blood pressure is lower than in the common
anaesthesia. Medetomidine combinations are an exception,
where it is routinely lost (Hellebrekers et al., 1997).
2004). The direct method is reliable and accurate, but is
more technically difficult, and there is a risk of arterial dam-
The palpebral reflex is unreliable for monitoring
 age and ensuing pinnal necrosis. The indirect method is sim-
anaesthesia in rabbits.
pler, but is sufficient to monitor blood pressure routinely in
The corneal reflex should be maintained throughout
anaesthetised patients. The cuff width is approximately
anaesthesia.
one-third of the circumference of the limb. The cuff is
placed around the forelimb just distal to the elbow, with the
artery arrow on the cuff dorso-medially over the brachial
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
artery (Fig. 3.8). Alternatively, the cuff is placed over the
femoral artery (dorso-medial), proximal to the knee.
The heart rate of conscious rabbits is typically between 240
End-tidal carbon dioxide can be measured in rabbits.
and 280 beats per minute (bpm). These high rates may
Side-stream samples (Kontron Colormon Plus; Charter
Kontron, Milton Keynes, Bucks., UK) add less resistance
cause problems with some rmonitoring equiprment. The rate
to the anaesthetic circuit than in-line sampling.
may drop to 120-160bpm after medetomidine administr-
Core body temperature is easiest monitoring using a
ation (Flecknell, 2000j. Electrocardiography (ECG) has
been used in rabbits (Reuschand Boswood, 2003), but, due
rectal thermometer (Harcourt-Brown, 2002a), but small
oesophageal probes can also be used (Sheldrick etal., 1999).
to the presence of fur on the ventral surfaces of feet, leads
are attached just lateral to the elbows and laterally between
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
stifle and hock. For short procedures, crocodile clips can be
CARE
applied to skin soaked with spirit to irmprove contact. The
clips can be filed smooth to reduce discomfort (Huston and
Quesenberry, 2004; Reusch, 2005). For longer procedures,
Many of the points covered in the mammal introduction
it is more comfortable for the patient to clip a small area of
section are applicable to rabbits. Particular care should be
fur at each ofthe contact points and to use pads to connect
taken against hypothernia with small or very young
to the ECG monitor.
patients. It is also very irmportant to guard against over-
The central ear artery is useful for placement of pulse
heating rabbits, as hyperthermia may easily be caused.
oximeters to measure oxygen saturation (Herrold et al.,
Signs of hyperthermia include panting (if the animal is
1995). As discussed above, pulse oximetry can be used in
sufficiently conscious), seizures and death. It is useful to
rabbits, but reliability of signal production and accuracy of
continue monitoring rectal temperatures during the 'sleep
readings are variable. The pulse oximeter can be attached
time' post-anaesthesia, ensuring supplemental heating is
to the rabbit's ear, tongue or digit (Orr et al., 2005).
provided while the animals are recovering, but also to
Long-term application of the probe to a rabbit's tongue
avoid excess heat once the patient is normotherrmic (see
may cause temporary damage to the lingual muscles.
Table 2.l). Electrical heat pads should be removed when
Rabbit anaesthesia
Table 3.5: Commonly used analgesic drugs for rabbits
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
DURATION (H)
COMMENT
sploidos
Analgesic
Butorphanol
0.1-0.51
SC, IM
2-4
Both of these agents may cause mild sedation in some
IV
rabbits at higher doses, resulting in a slow recovery to
normal activity and self-feeding
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.05'
SC, IM,
6-12
They are also used to reverse fentanyl after Hypnorm
IV
sedation
Fentanyl
0.00742
IV
2-4
Dose-related respiratory depression
1
Morphine
253.4.5
SC, IM
2-3
Affects gastrointestinal motility
Pethidine
5-10'
SC, IM
a
(meperidine)
Analgesic + anti-inflammatory
NSAIDs
D
Carprofen
4
SC
24
 Care in hypotensive animals
1.56
PO
12
Flunixin
1.1'
SC
D
Ketoprofen
1-36
SC
12
1
Meloxicam
0.2-0.61
PO, SC
24
Palatable oral suspension (Metacam@, Boehringer
Ingelheim) well accepted by rabbits
53
Key:IM = intramuscular,IP = intraperitoneal, IV = intravenous, PO = oral, SC = subcutaneous
(Flecknell, 2000); 2 (Lipman et al., 1997); 3 (Flecknell, 1991); 4 (Heard, 2004); 5 (Jenkins, 1993); ^(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a)
no longer needed, as rabbits will chew the cables
Analgesia
(Harcourt-Brown, 2002a). A digital thermometer meas-
uring room temperature is also a useful monitor.
Pain assessrment in rabbits is extremely difficult, even
Administration of fuids is useful peri-operatively. They
more so in the hospital situation where behaviours are
support the circulation, aid metabolism of injectable anaes-
affected by other stressors. Individual rabbits will also
thetic agents, and can be warmed or cooled to assist mainte-
behave differently when in pain. If the rabbit is showing
nance of the rabbit's body temperature. If large boluses of
any signs of discomfort (for example, sitting very still,
fluids are administered, usually subcutaneously or intraperi-
unresponsive, tooth grinding, inappetent or adopting a
toneally, they should be pre-warmed to body temperature
crouched position], has a condition likely to be painful in
(see Table 2.1). If an intravenous catheter has been placed,
it is usually left in situ with a light dressing until the animal
other species, or has been subjected to a painful proce-
dure, analgesia should be administered and continue to be
has recovered from anaesthesia, to facilitate administration
administered until deemed no longer necessary (Table
of emergency medication or fluids if necessary.
3.5). Multinodal analgesia is usually employed with
As discussed in the general section, provision of a com-
 administration of both opioid and NSAID drugs.
fortable environment post-anaesthesia is irmportant. While
good-quality hay provides bedding and food, the rabbit
Local anaesthesia
should be placed on a towel or similar surface during
recovery, as corneal abrasions may occur in the semi-con-
Topical local anaesthetics, such as proxymetacaine and
scious patient. As soon as the rabbit is sufficiently alert,
proparacaine, are commonly used to provide ocular anaes-
foodstuffs and water should be provided to encourage a
thesia (Mader, 2004). This may be useful, for example, to
return to normal eating and drinking.
aid lacrimal cannulation; sedation may be required con-
Use of prokinetics may not be necessary in all cases.
commitantly in some rabbits for this procedure. Local
However, prevention of gastrointestinal stasis is much
 anaesthesia may be provided at surgical incision sites using
easier than treatrment. It is routine to administer at least
1% lidocaine (lignocaine) (Hayashida et al., 2003).
one dose of a gastrointestinal motility stimulant at the
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
time of anaesthesia, and to continue medication if the
rabbit is not producing faeces normally (see Table 2.3).
 NSAIDs are more effective against somatic or integumen-
Administration of peri-anaesthetic fluids also reduces the
tary pain than visceral pain (Jenkins, 1987).
incidence of gastrointestinal disease. If the rabbit is not
eating, supplemental feeding should be instigated, usually
Opioids
in the form of syringe feeding (Table 3.1). Placement of a
nasogastric or an oesophagostomy tube may be required if
Opioids are more beneficial in the alleviation of visceral
anorexia is persistent.
pain (for example, abdominal surgery) (Harcourt-Brown,
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 3.6: Emergency drugs in rabbits
DRUG
DOSE (MG/KG) ROUTE
INDICATION/COMMENT
Adrenaline
0.26
IV, IT
Cardiac arrest (fibrillating or asystole)
Dexamethasone
23
IM, IV
Shock
May be ineffective, and may cause severe immune
suppression and gastrointestinal ulceration
T
Diazepam
12
IM, IV, IP
Seizures
Doxapram
2-55
IV, SC
Respiratory stimulant
Short duration of effect, may require repeated dosing
Frusemide 
0.3-5.01.4
SC, IM, IV, PO
Diuretic
Glycopyrrolate
0.01-0.025
SC
Bradycardia
Lidocaine (lignocaine)
27
IV, IT
Cardiac arrhythmia
54
Key: ICe = intracoelomic, IM = intramuscular, IO = intraosseous, IP = intraperitoneal, IT = intratracheal,
IV=intravenous,SC = subcutaneous
I (Allen et al., 193);2 (Carpenter, 2005); 3(Carpenter et al, 1995); 4 (Harrenstien, 1994); (Huerkamp, 1995);
2002a). The ultra-short-acting opioid remifentanil has
shown to have both clinical and histopathological toxicities
been administered as a continuous rate infusion to pro-
(Malinovsky etal., 2002). Tetracaine produces similar neu-
vide analgesia in rabbits, producing a dose-dependent
rotoxic changes as lidocaine (lignocaine], with bupivacaine
decrease in both respiratory rate and heart rate (Hayashida
less toxic and ropivacaine least toxic [Yarmashita et al.,
et al., 2003). This agent provides good analgesia and can
2003). Ropivacaine has been shown to induce dose-
be reversed with naloxone, but is not routinely used in
dependent spinal anaesthesia without neurotoxicologic
veterinary practice.
lesions. Administering greater volurmes of anaesthetic and
inappropriate patient positioning, allowing the agent to
Epidural anaesthesia
,s  ae  a  
distribution' and associated side effects [Rigler et al., 1991].
The spinal cord in rabbits continues until the sacral verte-
Epidural anaesthesia is contraindicated in certain condi-
brae, the exact endpoint depending on the individual rab-
tions; these include endotoxaemia, meningitis and coagu-
bit (Greenaway et al., 2001). As with other species,
lation abnormalities. Epidural analgesia may protect gut
epidural anaesthesia is useful to provide both intra-operative
mucosa from injury (Kosugi et al., 2005).
and postoperative analgesia. If prolonged analgesia is
 Research into local anaesthetic formulations is ongoing,
required, a catheter can be inserted for continuous or
including mechanisms of bioavailability and clearance
repeat bolus administration. The location and duration of
(Clément et al., 2004]. Various agents can be used to
analgesia produced will depend on the agent and volume
enhance local anaesthetic effects epidurally, for exarmple
used (Dollo et al., 2005). If opioid agonists are used
deoxyaconitine is thought to enhance epidural lidocaine
alone, sensory loss occurs. When local anaesthetic agents
(lignocaine) anaesthesia via K-opioid receptors (Komodo
are used, either alone or concomitantly with opioids,
et al., 2003), or prolong anaesthetic effects (Dollo et al.,
motor and sensory losses are produced; this often results
2004; Dollo et al., 2005).
in hindlimb paralysis. If opioids are used only sensory
innervation will be lost, and hindlimb function is retained.
Local anaesthetics have been adrministered epidurally in
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
rabbits to provide analgesia via blockage of sensory and
motor nerve fibres (Hughes et al., 1993). Several agents
If a rabbit does not recover in the expected period of time
have been adrministered epidurally in rabbits. High con-
(which will vary depending on the anaesthetic regirme used,
centrations (5%) of lidocaine (lignocaine) have been
the patient's condition pre-anaesthesia and the procedure(s)
Rabbit anaesthesia
performed), the patient should be reassessed. A repeated
Cheeke, P R.1987c. Nutrition-disease interrelationships. In:
full clinical examination is warranted, along with a review
T. J. Cumha [ed.) Rabbit Feeding and Nutrition. pp.176-197.
of investigations carried out so far, and consideration of
Academic Press, Orlando.
 performing others. There is likely some aspect of ill health
Cheeke, P R. I994. Nutrition and nutritional diseases. In:
P. J. Manning, D. H. Ringler and C. E. Newcomer [eds.) The
that has been missed or not treated sufficiently. Certain
Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit. 2nd edn. pp.32l-331.
problems require drug administration (Table 3.6).
Academic Press, London.
Pending a diagnosis, supportive care should continue with
Clément, R., J.-M. Malinovsky, P. Hildgen et al. 2004. Spinal
 oxygenation, fluids and supplemental heat as required.
 Disposition and Meningeal Permeability of Local Anesthetics.
Pharmacol Res 21: 706-716.
REFERENCES
Clippinger, T. L., R.A. Bennett, A. R. Alleman et al. 1998. Removal
of a thymoma via median sternotomy in a rabbit with recurrent
appendicular neurofibrosarcoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:
Aeschbacher, G. 2001. Rabbit anaesthesia. Exotic Anim Med 17:
1131, 1140-1143.
1003-1010.
Conlon, K. C., M. T. Corbally, J. R. Bading et al. I990. Atraumatic
Aeschbacher, G., and A. I. Webb. I993a. Propofol im rabbits. I.
endotracheal intubation in small rabbits. Lab Anim Sci 40:
Determination of an induction dose. Lab Anim Sci 43: 324-327.
221-222.
an
Aeschbacher, G., and A. I. Webb. 1993b. Propofol in rabbits. 2. Long
Cruise, L. J., and R. B. Nathan. 1994. Anatomy. In: P J. Manning,
term anaesthesia. Lab Anim Sci 43: 328-335.
D. H. Ringler and C. E. Newcomer [eds.) The Biology of the 
Allen, D. G., J. K. Pringle, and D. A. Smith. 1993. Handbook of
Laboratory Rabbit. 2nd edn. pp.47-6l. Academic Press, London.
Veterinary Drugs. JB Lippencott, Philadelphia.
Deeb, B. J. 2004. Rabbits: respiratory disease and pasteurellosis. In:
Avsaroglu, H., A. Versluis, L. J. Hellebrekers et al. 2003. Strain
K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
differences in response to propofol, ketamine and
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
medetomidine in rabbit. Vet Rec 152: 300.
pp.172-182. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
Baba, N., and E. von Hamm. I972. Animal model for human disease:
Deeb, B. J., and J. W. Carpenter. 2004. Rabbits: neurologic and
spontaneous adenocarcinoma in aged rabbits. Am J Pathol 68:
musculoskeletal diseases. In: K. E. Quesenberry and
55
653-656.
J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical
Batchelor, G. R. I999. The laboratory rabbit. In: T. Poole [ed.)
Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.203-210. Saunders,
 UFAW Handbook on the Care and Management of Laboratory
St Louis, Missouri.
Animals, vol.1. 7th edn. p 395-409. Blackwell Science,
Diflippo, S. M., P J. Norberg, U. D. Suson et al.2004.
Oxford.
 A comparison of xylazine and medetomidine in an anaesthetic
Bateman, L., J. W. Ludders, R. D. Gleed et al. 2005. Comparison
combination in New Zealand white rabbit. Contemp Topics
between facermask and laryngeal mask airway in rabbit. Vet
Lab Anim Sci 43: 32-34.
Anaesth Analg 32: 280-288.
Dollo, G., P. Le Corre, F. Chevanne et al. 2004. Bupivacaine
Benson, K. G., and J. Paul-Murphy. I999. Clinical pathology of the
containing dry emulsion can prolong epidural anesthetic effects
domestic rabbit: Acquisition and interpretation of samples. In:
in rabbits. Eur J Pharm Sci 22: 63-70.
D. R. Reavill (ed.) Clinical Pathology and Sample Collection,
Dollo, G., J. M. Malinovsky, A. Péron et al. 2005. Prolongation of
The Veterinary Clinics of North America, Exotic Animal
epidural bupivacaine effects with hyaluronic acid in rabbits. Int
Practice No. 2. pp.539-553. WB Saumders, Philadelphia.
J Pharm 272: 109-119.
Borges, A. A. F R., and O. M. Gomes. 2004. Effects of midazolam
Donnelly, T. M. 1997. Basic anatomy, physiology and husbandry. In:
 on the contraction and relaxaton of segments of thoracic aorta
E. V. Hillyer and K. E. Quesenberry [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits and
stripped of endothelium and stimulated by adrenaline -
Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. p.147-159. WB
experimental study in rabbits. Mol Cell Biochem 246: 13-17.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Brewer, N. R., and L. J. Cruise. I994. Physiology. In: P. J. Manning,
Donnelly, T. M. 2004. Rabbits: basic anatomy, physiology, and
D. H. Ringler and C. E. Newcomer [eds.) The Biology of the 
husbandry In: K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.]
Laboratory Rabbit. Znd edn. pp.63-70. Academic Press,
Ferrets, Rabbits, and Roents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery.
London.
Znd edn. pp.136-146. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
Brodbelt, D. C., L. Young, D. Pfeiffer et al. 2005. Risk factors for
Eisele, P. H. I997. Anesthesia for the Rabbit. Proceeding of the
anaesthetic-related deaths in rabbits. In: BSAVA Congress
North American Veterinary Conference: 792-794.
Proceedings. p. 29.
Elsa, A., and S. Ubandawaki. 2005. Ketamine anaesthesia following
Brooks, D. L. 2004. Nutrition and gastrointestinal physiology. In: K.
premedication of rabbits with vitamin C. J Vet Sci 6:
E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
239241.
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Flatt, R. E., and S. J. Jackson. 1970. Renal nosematosis in young
pp.155-160. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
rabbits. Pathol Vet 7: 492-497.
Carpenter, J. W. 2005. Exotic Animal Formulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier,
Flecknell, P. A. I984. The relief of pain in laboratory animals. Lab
St Louis, Missouri.
Anim 18: 147-160.
Carpenter, J. W., T. Y. Mashima, E. J. Gentz et al. I995. Caring for
Fecknell, P. A. I991. Post-operative analgesia in rabbits and rodents.
rabbits: an overview and formulary. Vet Med: 340-364.
Lab Anim 20: 34-37.
Carroll, J. F., T. M. Dwyer, A. W. Grady et al. 1996. Hypertension,
Fecknell, P. A. 2000. Anaesthesia. In: P. A. Flecknell [ed.) Manual of
cardiac hypertrophy and neurohumoral activity in a new animal
Rabbit Medicine and Surgery. Ist edn. pp.103-116. BSAVA,
model of obesity. Am J Phys 271: H373-H378.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Cheeke, P. R. I987a. Energy metabolistm and requirements. In:
Flecknell, P. A. 2006. Anaesthesia and perioperative care. In:
T. J. Cunha [ed.) Rabbit Feeding and Nutrition. pp.63-75.
A. Meredith and P. A. Flecknell [eds.) Manual of Rabbit
Academic Press, Orlando.
Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. p.154-165. BSAVA,
Cheeke, P R. 1987b. Feeding behaviour and regulation of feed
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
intake. In: T. J. Cunha [ed.) Rabbit Feeding and Nutrition.
Flecknell, P. A., I. J. Cruz, J. H. Liles et al. 1996. Induction of
pp.160-173. Acadermic Press, Orlando.
anaesthesia with halothane and isoflurane in the rabbit: a
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
comparison of the use of a face-mask or an anaesthetic
Hedengvist, P, and L. J. Hellebrekers. 2003. Laboratory animal
chamber. Lab Anim 30: 67-74.
analgesia, anesthesia, and euthanasia. In: J. Hau and G. L. Van
Fecknell, P. A., M. John, and M. Mitchell. I983. Neuroleptanalgesia
Hoosier [eds.] Handbook of Laboratory Animal Science. Znd
in the rabbit. Lab Anim 17: 104-109.
edn. No. I. pp.413-455. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Flecknell, P. A., J. H. Liles, and R. Wootton. I989. Reversal of
Hedenqvist, P., J. V. Roughan, L. Antunes et al. 200la. Induction of
fentanyl/fluanisone neuroleptanalgesia in the rabbit using
anaesthesia with desflurane and isoflurane in the rabbit. Lab
mixed agonist/antagonist opioids. Lab Anim 23: 147-155.
Anitm 35: 172-179.
Flecknell, P. A., J. V. Roughan, and P. Hedengvist. 1999. Induction of
Hedenqvist, P., J. V. Roughan, H. E. Orr et al. 2001b. Assessment of
amaesthesia with sevoflurane and isoflurane in the rabbit. Lab
ketamine/medetomidine anaesthesia in the New Zealand
Anitm 33: 41-46.
White rabbit. Vet Anaesth Anal 28: 18-25.
Frey, H.-H., R. Schulz, and E. Wemer. I996. Pharmakologie des
Hellebrekers, L. J., E. J. de Boer, M. A. van Zuylen et al. 1997.
Zentralen Nervensystems. In: H.-H. Frey and W. Loscher
A comparison between medetomidine-ketarmine and
[eds.] Lehrbuch der Pharmakologie und der Toxikologie fir die
le wuy qet sggei ui eisayisrue logodod-aupiuoapam
Veterinartmedizin. pp.162-163. Enke Verlag, Stuttgart.
58-69.
Gil, A. G., J. C. Illera, G. Silvan et al. 2003. Effects of the
Henke, J., S. Astner, R. Brill et al. 2005. Comparative study of three
aesthetic/tranquillizer treatments on selected plasma
intrarmuscular anaesthetic combinations [medetomidline/
biochemical parameters in NZW rabbits. Lab Anim 37: 155-161.
ketamine, medetomidine/fentanyl/midazolam and xylazine/
Gil, A. G., G. Silvan, M. Illra et al. 2004. The effects of anesthesia
ketarmine) in rabbits. Vet Anaesth Analg 32: 261-270.
m the clinical chemistry of New Zealand white rabbit.
Herrold, E. M., R. S. Goldweit, J. N. Carter et al. I995. Noninvasive
Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 43: 25-29.
laser-based blood pressure measurement in rabbits. Am J
Gillett, C. S. I994. Selected drug doses and clinical reference data.
Hypertens 5: 197-202.
In: P J. Manning, D. H. Ringler and C. E. Newcomer [eds.)
Holzman, R. S., M. E. van der Velde, S. J. Kaus et al. 1996.
The Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit. Znd edn. pp.468-472.
Sevoflurane depresses myocardial contractility less than
Academic Press, London.
halothane during induction of anesthesia in children.
Glen, J. B. I980. Animal studies of the anaesthetic activity of ICI 35
Anesthesiology 85: 1260-1267.
56
868. Br J Anaesth 52: 731.
Hood, S., J. Kelly, S. McBurmey et al. 1997. Lead toxicosis in 2 dwarf
Green, C. J. 1975. Neuroleptanalgesic drug combinations in the
rabbits. Can Vet J 38: 721-722.
anaesthetic management of small laboratory animals. Lab Anim
Houghton, I. T., M. Cronin, P. A. Redferm et al. I973. The analgesic
9: 161178.
effect of halothane. Br J Anaesth 45: Il05-ll10.
Greenaway, J. B., G. D. Partlow, N. L. Gonsholt et al. 2001.
Huerkamp, M. J. 1995. Anesthesia and postoperative management of
Anatomy of the spinal cord in rabbits. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
rabbits and pocket pets. In: J. D. Bonagura [ed.) Kirk's Current
37: 27-34.
Veterinary Therapy Xll: Small Animal Practice. pp.1322-1327.
Harcourt-Brown, F. 200Za. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In:
WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
F. Harcourt-Brown [ed.) Textbook of Rabbit Medicine.
Hughes, P J., M. M. Doherty, and W. N. Charman. 1993. A rabbit
Pp.121-139. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
model for the evaluation of epidurally administered local
Harcourt-Brown, F. 2002b. Clinical pathology. In: F. Harcourt-Brown
anaesthetic agents. Anaesth Intens Care 2l: 298-303.
[ed.) Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. pp.140-164. Butterworth-
Huston, S. M., and K. E. Quesenberry. 2004. Rabbits:
Heinemann, Oxford.
cardiovascular and lymphoproliferative diseases. In:
Harcourt-Brown, F. 2002c. Infectious diseases of domestic rabbits.
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
In: F. Harcourt-Brown [ed.) Textbook of Rabbit Medicine.
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
pp.361-385. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
pp.21I220. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
Harcourt-Brown, F. 2002d. The rabbit consultation and clinical
Ingalls, T. H., W. M. Adams, M. B. Lurie et al. 1964. Natural history
techniques. In: F. Harcourt-Brown [ed.) Textbook of Rabbit
of adenocarcinoma of the uterus in the Phips rabbit colony.
Medicine. pp.52-93. Butter worth Heinemann, Oxford.
J Natl Cancer Inst 33: 799-806.
Harcourt-Brown, F., and S. J. Baker. 2001. Parathyroid horrmone,
Jenkins, J. R. I993. Rabbits. In: J. R. Jenkins and S. A. Brown [eds.]
haematological and biochemical parameters in relation to
A Practitioner's Guide to Rabbits and Ferrets. pp.I-42.
dental disease and husbandry in pet rabbits. J Small Anim Pract
American Animal Hospital Association, Lakewood.
42: 130-136.
Jenkins, J. R. 1995. Rabbit drug doses. In: L. Bauck, T. H. Boyer, S. A.
Harkness, J. E., and J. E. Wagner. I995. Biology and husbandry - the
Brown [eds.) Exotic Animal Formulary pp.13-17. American
rabbit. The Biology and Medicine of Rabbits and Rodents. 4th
Animal Hospital Association, Lakewood.
edn. pp.13-30. William & Wilkins, Baltimore.
Jenkins, J. R. 2004a. Rabbits: Gastrointestinal diseases. In:
Harrenstien, L. I994. Critical care of ferrets, rabbits, and rodents.
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits,
Sem Avian Exotic Pet Med 3: 217-228.
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Hayashida, M., A. Fukunaga, and K. Hanaoka. 2003. An animal
pp.161-171. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
model for surgical anesthesia and analgesia: characterization
Jenkins, J. R. 2004b. Rabbits: Soft tissue surgery. In: K. E.
with isoflurane anesthesia and remifentanil analgesia. Anesth
Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits, and
Analg 97: 1340-1346.
Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.221-230.
Heard, D. J. 1993. Prmnciples and techniques of anesthesia and
Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
amalgesia for exotic practice. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
Jenkins, W. L. 1987. Pharmacologic aspects of analgesic drugs in
Pract 23: 1301-1327.
animals: an overview. J Am Vet Med Assoc 19l: 1231-1240.
Heard, J. D. 2004. Anesthesia, analgesia and sedation of small
Kaplan, B. L., and H. W. Smith. I935. Excretion of inulin, creatinine,
mammals. In: K. E. Quensenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.]
xylose and urea in the normal rabbit. Am J Phys I13:
Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery.
354360.
pp.356-369. Saumders, St Louis.
Kim, M. S., S. M. Jeong, J. H. Park et al. 2004. Reversal of
Heath, D., D. Williams, J. Rios-Dalenz et al. I990. Pulmonary vascular
medetormidine-ketarmine combination anesthesia in rabbits by
disease in a rabbit at high altitude. Int J Biometeorol 34: 20-23.
atipamezole. Exp Anim 53: 423-428.
Rabbit anaesthesia
Komodo, Y., S. Nosaka, and M. Takenoshita. 2003. Enhancement of
Paré, J. A., and J. Paul-Murphy. 2004. Rabbits: Disorders of the
lidocaine-induced epidural anesthesia by deoxyaconitine in the
reproductive and urinary systems. In: K. E. Quesenberry and
rabbit. J Anaes 17: 241-245.
J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical
Kostolich, M., and R. J. Panciera. I992. Thymoma in a domestic
Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.183-193. Saunders, St
rabbit. Comell Vet 82: 125-129
Louis, Missouri.
Kosugi, S., H. Morisaki, R. Satoh et al. 2005. Epidural analgesia
Ramer, J. C., J. Paul-Murphy, and K. G. Benson. I999a. Evaluating and
prevents endotoxin-induced gut mucosal injury in rabbits.
stabilizing critically ill rabbits - part I. Compendium 2l: 36-40.
Anesth Analg 101: 265-272.
Rarmer,J. C., J. Paul-Murphy, and K. G. Benson. 1999b. Evaluating
Kounenis, G., M. Koutsoviti-Papadopoulou, A. Elezoglou et al. 1992.
:12 wnpuadmo lI aed - shgqe, m Aeono suzyqs pue
Comparative study of the H2-receptor antagonists cimetidine,
36-40.
ranitidine, famotidine and nazatidine on the rabbit fundus and
Reusch, B. 2005. Investigation and management of cardiovascular
sigmoid colon. J Pharmacokinet 15: 561-565.
disease in rabbits. In Pract 27: 418-425.
Lebas, F., P. Coudert, H. de Rochambeau et al. 1997. Nutrition and
 Reusch, B., and A. Boswood. 2003. Electrocardliography of the
feeding. The Rabbit: Husbandry, Health and Production No. 2.
normal domestic pet rabbit. J Small Anim Pract 44: 514.
pp.19-36. FAO United Nations, Rome.
Rigler, M. L., K. Drasner, T. C. Krejcie et al. I991. Cauda equina
a
Lichtenberger, M. 2004a. Prmciples of shock and fluid therapy in
syndrome after continuous spinal anesthesia. Anesth Analg 72:
special species. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 13: 142-153.
275-281.
an
Lichtenberger, M. 2004b. Transfusion medicine in exotic pets. Clin
Roth, D., S. Petersen-Felix, P. Bak et al. I996. Analgesic effect in
Techn Small Anim Pract I9: 88-95.
humans of subanaesthetic isoflurane concentrations evaluated
sth
Lipman, N. S., R. P Marini, and P. A. Flecknell. 1997. Anaesthesia
by evoked potentials. Br J Anaes 76: 38-42.
and analgesia in rabbits. In: D. F. Kohn, S. K. Wixson,
Sakamoto, T, M. Kawaguchi, M. Kakimoto et al. 2003. The effect of
W J. White [eds.] Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory
hypothermia on myogenic motor-evoked potentials to electrical
Animals. pp.205-232. Academic Press, New York.
stimulation with a single pulse and a train of pulses under
Lynch, C. R. I986. Differential depression of myocardial contractility
propofol/ketarmine/fentanyl anesthesia in rabbits. Anesth Analg
by halothane and isofhurane in vitro. Anesthesiology 64: 620-631.
96: 1692-1697.
Mader, D. 2004. Rabbits: Basic approach to veterinary care. In:
Shekerdemian, L., and D. Bohn. I999. Cardiovascular effects of
57
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
mechanical ventilation. Arch Dis Child 80: 475-480.
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Sheldrick, A., K. M. Gray, G. M. Drew et al. 1999. The effect of
pp.147-154. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
body temperature on myocardial protection conferred by
Malinovsky, J. M., F. Charles, M. Baudrimont et al. 2002. Intrathecal
ischaemic preconditioning or the selective adenosine Al
ropivacaine in rabbits: pharmacodynamic and neurotoxicologic
receptor agonist GR79236, in an anaesthetized rabbit model of
study. Anesthesiology 97[2): 429-435.
myocardial ischaermia and reperfusion. Br J Pharmacol 128:
Marano, G., R. Formigari, M. Grigioni et al. 1997. Effects of
isoflurane versus halothane on myocardial contractility in
Shell, L. G., and G. Saunders. I989. Arteriosclerosis in a rabbit.
rabbits: assessment with transthoracic two-dimensional
 J Am Vet Med Assoc 194: 679-680.
echocardiography. Lab Anim 31: 144-150.
Stmith, J. C., L. D. Robertson, A. Aubll et al. 2004. Endotracheal
Marini, R. P, L. Xiantung, N. K. Harpster et al. I999. Cardiovascular
tubes versus laryngeal mask airways in rabbit. Contemp Top
pathology possibly associated with ketamine/xylazine
Lab Anitm Sci 43: 22-25.
aesthesia in Dutch Belted rabbits. Lab Anim Sci 49: 153-160.
Snyder, S. B., J. G. Fox, L. H. Campbell et al. 1976. Disseminated
Mason, D. E. 1997. Anesthesia, analgesia, and sedation for small
staphylococcal disease in laboratory rabbits [Oryctolagus
mammals. In: E. V. Hillyer and K. E. Quesenberry [eds.)
curticulus). Lab Anim Sci 26: 86-88.
Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents, Clinical Medicine and Surgery.
Steffey, E. P I995. Introduction to drugs acting on the central
pp.378-391. W.B.Saunders.
nervous system and principles of anesthesiology. In:
Meredith, A., and D. A. Crossley. 2002. Rabbits. In: A. Meredith and
H. R. Adams [ed.) Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics.
S. Redrobe [eds.) BSAVA Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn.
pp.149-167. Iowa State University Press, Ames.
pp.76-92. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Tumer, P. V., C. L. Kerr, A. J. Healy et al. 2006. Effect of meloxicam
Morrisey, J. K., and J. W. Carpenter. 2004. Formulary. In:
and butorphanol on minirmum alveolar concentration of
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
isoflurane in rabbits. Am J Vet Res 67: 770-774.
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Vemau, K. M., B. H. Grahn, H. A. Clarke-Scott et al. 1995.
pp.436-444. W B Saunders, St Louis.
Thymoma in a geriatric rabbit with hypercalcemia and periodic
Nagase, K., H. Iida, and S. Dohi. 2003. Effects of ketamine on
exophthalmos. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206: 820-822.
isoflurane- and sevoflurane-induced cerebral vasodilation in
Wang, M., S. Joshi, and R. G. Emerson. 2003. Comparison of
rabbits. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 15: 98-103.
intracarotid and intravenous prop ofol for electrocerebral silence
Nevalainen, T, L. Phyhala, H. M. Voipio et al. 1989. Evaluation of
in rabbits. Anesthesiology 99: 904-910.
maesthetic potency of medetomidine-ketamine combination in
Ward, M. 2006. Physical examination and clinical techniques. In:
rats, guinea-pigs and rabbits. Acta Vet Scand Suppl 85: 139-143.
A. Meredith and P. A. Flecknell [eds.) Manual of Rabbit 
O'Malley, B. 2005. Rabbits. In: B. O'Malley (ed.) Clinical Anatomy
Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. pp.18-36. BSAVA, Quedgeley,
ad Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and function of
Gloucester.
mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians. pp.173-195. Elsevier
Weber, H. W., and J. J. Van der Walt. 1975. Carrdiomyopathy in
Saunders, London.
crowded rabbits. Rec Adv Stud Cardiac Struct Metab 6:
Orcutt, C. J. 2000. Cardiac and respiratory disease in rabbits. In:
471-477.
Proceedings of British Veterinary Zoological Society. Autumn
Weisbroth, S. H. 1994. Neoplastic diseases. In: P. J. Manming,
meeting. pp.68-73.
D. H. Ringler and C. E. Newcomer [eds.) The Biology of the
Orr, H. E., J. V. Roughan, and P. A. Flecknell. 2005. Assessment of
Laboratory Rabbit. pp.259-292. Academic Press, New York.
ketamine and medetomidine anaesthesia in the domestic
Wiseman, L. R., and D. Faulds. I994. Cisapride - an updated review
rabbit. Vet Anaesth Analg 32: 271-279.
of its pharmacology and therapeutic efficacy as a prokinetic
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
gent in gastrointestinal motility disorders. Drugs 47 (1):
lidocaine, bupivacaine, and ropivacaine administered
116-152.
intr athecally in rabbits. Anesth Analg 97: 512-519.
Wixson, S. K. I994. Anesthesia and analgesia. In: P J. Manning,
Ypsilantis, P, V N. Dirdilis, M. Politou et al. 2005. A comparative
D. H. Ringler and C. E. Newcomer [eds.) The Biology of the
study of invasive and oscillometric methods of arterial blood
Laboratory Rabbit. 2nd edn. pp.87-109. Academic Press, San
pressure measurement in the anesthetized rabbit. Res Vet Sci
Diego.
78: 269275.
Yamashita, A., M. Mishiya, M. Satoshi et al. 2003. A comparison of
the neurotoxic effects on the spinal cord of tetracaine,
58
Rodent anaesthesia
a
all
an
esth
色
SI
INTRODUCTION
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
1
AND STABILISATION
The order Rodentia is subdivided into two suborders
59
(Table 4.1) (Singleton et al., 2004). These divisions are
History and clinical examination
based on various morphological differences. The larger of
the suborders is Sciurognathi, which includes five families
of squirrel-like rodents [including the squirrel family,
 Inappropriate husbandry may predispose to disease, for
Ars ly y 'suapor iad un uouon si Aisaqo aiduexa
Sciuridae} and five families of mouse-like rodents. The
largest mouse-like rodent family is the Muridae, which
should be obtained, including any known medical condi-
tions. The extent of the clinical examination may be min-
includes the pet species of rats, mice, gerbils and ham-
sters. The Hystricognathi suborder has 16 families, with
imal for smaller species, but larger animals, such as guinea
pigs and chinchillas, can be fully assessed. All animals
families seen as pets including the Cavidae (cavies),
should be accurately weighed to ensure correct dosing
Chinchillidae (which includes the chinchilla),
and
Octodontidae (octodonts, such as the degu).
with drugs and fluids.
Principles of anaesthesia in rodents are discussed at the
Hospitalisation facilities
beginning of this chapter, along with dose rates for anaes-
thetic agents. Later sections discuss some species differ-
ences in anatomy, physiology and pathology that may be
As for other prey species, a quiet environment away
relevant when anaesthetising the particular species.
from predator species is conducive to a less stressful
Table 4.l: Taxonomic classification of rodents seen as pets
SUBORDER
FAMILY SEEN
SUBFAMILY
EXAMPLE
AS PETS
SPECIES
Sciurognathi
Squirrel-like rodents
Sciuridae
Chipmunk
(5 families)
Mouse-like rodents
Muridae
Murinae
Rat, mouse
(5 families)
Cricetinae
Hamster
Gerbillinae
Gerbil
Hystricognathi
Cavy-like rodents
Cavidae
Cavy, guinea pig
(18 families)
Chinchillidae
Chinchilla
Octodontidae
Degu
(Singleton et al., 2004)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
hospitalisation. Food should be provided that is appropri-
Most fluids adrministered to rodents will be as a bolus.
ate for the species in question, along with water in a
 Large volumes of cool fluids will rapidly lead to hypother-
source recognised by the patient [a sipper bottle or bowl
mia; all parenteral fluids must, therefore, be warmed to
for most rodents). If the practice does not regularly hos-
body temperature before administration. A constant-tem-
pitalise rodents, clients can be asked to bring in some of
perature water bath or incubator may be used to warm
their pet's usual food.
bags or bottles of fluids before use. The easiest method of
checking fluid temperature is to spray a small volume on
to your medial wrist (as you would check the water tem-
Fluid and nutritional support
perature in a baby's bath).
Due to the small total blood volume of rodents, small
Administration of fluids often assists in stabilisation of
volumes of blood loss can be significant. Up to l0% of the
debilitated patients before anaesthesia. It is possible to
blood volume can be lost in a healthy animal without
administer fluids intravenously, usually accessing the lat-
any significant effects. However, many pet animals will
eral tail vein in rats and mice. As catheterisation and
not be healthy and smaller amounts of blood loss may
maintenance are difficult, fluids are usually administered
prove fatal. Blood transfusions from conspecifics may be
as boluses (Table 4.2). Subcutaneous and intraperitoneal
possible, using intravenous or intraosseous routes for
administrations are easier, but less rapidly absorbed.
administration.
Table 4.2: Fluid and nutritional support for rodents
60
FLUID
SPECIES
ROUTE
DOSE
FREQUENCY
COMMENT
(ml/animal)
Isotonic
Chinchilla
IV, SC
30-60 /day
Divide doses, give
Use lactated Ringer's for
crystalloids,
Chipmunk
SC
2-5
q6-12h
fluid and electrolyte deficits,
Lactated
IP
3-5
and dextrose/saline forprimary
Ringer's, dextrose
IV
5-7
water deficit to support
(4%)/normal
I0
5-7
 intravascular fluid volume.
saline (0.18%)
Chipmunk IV/lO doses are for
Gerbil
IP
3-4
shocktherapy
SC
2-3
Mouse
IP
E-1
SC
1-2
Rat
IP
10-15
SC
5-10
Colloids
Chipmunk
IV, IO
5-7
Chipmunk IV/IO are shock
doses
Gerbil
IV, IO
0.1 (bolus)
Liquidised diet:
Chinchilla,
PO
50ml/kg/day
Divide, feed q8h
Anorexic animals. Add vitamin
proprietary nutritional
chipmunk,
C to guinea pig food
supportdiets
guinea pig.
(y)/o-01)
(Oxbow@ Critical
hamster,
food first.
Carefor Herbivores)
mouse, rat
Use organic, lactose-free baby
Liquidised
foods; vegetarian types for
vegetables or
herbivores
ground pellets
Baby food
Glucose, 5% and
All species
SC
10 ml/kg of 4%
Pre-anaesthesia
Use routinely in small rodents,
20-50%
 and for pregnancy toxaemia
in guinea pigs
ug  b no =s  =  so  nosso  i s =l
(Orr, 2002;Redrobe,2002, Schoemaker, 2002)
Rodent anaesthesia
TECHNIQUES
the tracheal diarmeter. The patient is restrained and the
dosing tube (metal or rubber) passed into the oropharynx
Routes of administration
and thence the distal oesophagus. A mouth gag should be
used if the tube is not metal and may be bitten through by
the patient. An inexperienced technician may cause iatro-
Oral
genic oral, oesophageal or gastric injuries to the animal
using the gavage technique (Bihun and Bauck, 2004).
Peri-anaesthetic medication may be given orally to con-
scious patients. For small volumes of palatable medica-
Injections
tion, the syringe tip is inserted into the patient's mouth
 just lateral to the incisors. For larger volumes, the gavage
Anatomic sites for administration of fluids and drugs may
technique may be used. To avoid endotracheal adminis-
vary between species (Table 4.3). Due to the srmall size of
 tration, the gavage tube diameter should be greater than
many mammals, there are also maximum recommended
1
Table 4.3: Routes of drug administration in rodents 
ROUTE
SPECIES (maximum
COMMENTS
1
volume per site (ml)
Hamster, mouse, rat
1
Intracardiac
manubrium
25-gauge needle
General anaesthesia required
 Used for emergency administration of drugs
Intramuscular
Chinchilla (0.3)
Gerbil (0.05-0.1)
Small muscle mass
Hamster (0.1)
 Injections painful, can cause muscle damage
Mouse (0.05)
Rat (0.3)
Guinea pig
Intraperitoneal
Gerbil (3-4)
Right caudal quadrant of ventral abdomen, animal in dorsal recumbency with
injection quadrant tilted up
Hamster (3-4)
More rapid absorption than subcutaneous route, but some discomfort caused
Mouse (1-3)
Risk of peritonitis and abdominal adhesions
Rat (10-15)
Possible in all species, but most often performed under sedation or anaesthesia
Intraosseous
Chinchilla, guinea pig.
Proximal femur, tibia or humerus
mouse, rat (as for IV)
 26-23-gauge needle in rodents 
Gerbil (0.I bolus)
Access to vascular system for fluid support and emergency drug therapy
Useful in severely debilitated animals, also in animals where intravenous access
not possible
 Aseptic technique required
Anaesthesia may be necessary
Can be maintained for several days
Intravenous
Chinchilla
Technically difficult
Gerbil (0.2)
n  sndes eeel do (id esu o  in eee
 needle; dilate tail vein by warming tail
Guinea pig
Administer boluses throughout day, or connect to infusion pump or
Hamster
syringe-driver (e.g. Springfusor@, Go Medical, Australia) to avoid overhydration
(Continued)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 4.3: (Continued).
ROUTE
SPECIES (maximum
COMMENTS
volume per site (ml)
Mouse (0.2)
Cephalic vein possible in larger species, running dorsally and then laterally over
Rat (0.5)
tarsal joint; apply tourniquet on proximal antebrachium and use 25- or 27-gauge
needle with a heparinised syringe or capillary tube to collect blood
Chincilla, chipmunk,
Jugular vein (general anaesthesia necessary)
Sid eauing
Guinea pig
Anterior vena cava (anaesthesia required)
Oral
All species
Direct administration via syringe or gastric gavage
For oral administration, insert syringe just lateral to incisors
Small volumes of palatable medication can be mixed with a favourite food
For gavage, use soft flexible rubber tubing or a bulb-ended feeding tube
Medication in drinking water or food variably accepted and exact dose
consumed often not known
Conscious animals only
Less stressful than SC in some guinea pigs
Subcutaneous
Chinchilla
Scrufforflank
62
Degu
25-23-gauge needle
Gerbil (2-3)
Easiest route; slow absorption
Guinea pig (25-30)
 Do not use flank in gerbils. Guinea pig skin can be thick, especially in males;
Hamster (3-5)
can be stressful due to discomfort in conscious guinea pigs
Mouse (2-3)
Rat (5-10)
Key: IV = intravenous, SC = subcutaneous
(Goodman, 2002; Hem et al., 1998; Johnson-Delaney, 2002; Keeble, 2002; Meredith, 2002; Oglesbee, 1995; Orr, 2002;
Quesenberry and Carpenter, 2004)
absorption of drugs from the subcutaneous space is slower
than other routes.
Large volumes can similarly be administered intraperi-
toneally. Due to the large blood supply to viscera, absorp-
tion is rapid via this route. Intraperitoneal injections are
more technically difficult than subcutaneous injections
and some substances [including some anaesthetic agents)
are irritant when given intraperitoneally.
The animal is restrained in dorsal recumbency with the
body tilted so the right caudal abdomen is uppermost
(Fig. 4.2). This will allow abdominal viscera to fall away
from the injection site and reduce risk of accidental
penetration. After cleaning the skin, a small (23-25-gauge)
needle is inserted in the right caudal quadrant. For most
species, injection into the caudal right quadrant of the
abdomen should avoid viscera (Bihun and Bauck, 2004),
Figure 4.I · Subcutaneous injection in a guinea pig, Covia porcellus.
If aspiration produces any fluid, such as urine or intestinal
contents, the needle is withdrawn and the procedure
volurmes for adrministration to reduce the risk of inadvertent
restarted with a fresh needle, syringe and fluids. Placement
tissue damage.
of the needle through the skin and abdominal muscula-
Subcutaneous injections are generally the easiest to
ture causes some discomfort, and is easiest perforrmed in
administer, usually in the loose skin of the scruff (Fig. 4.1),
sedated or anaesthetised animals. This also reduces the risk
and large volurmes can be given in this site. However,
of moverment causing inadvertent penetration of viscera.
Rodent anaesthesia
Figure 4.3 · Collapsed degu, Octodon degus, with intraosseous
1
catheter in proximal femur for administration of fluids.
The quadriceps group of muscles on the anterior sur-
1
face of the thigh is most commonly used for intramuscu-
lar injections. Alternatively, the gluteal muscles of the hip
may be used, avoiding the sciatic nerve in the posterior
63
thigh muscles. If irritant substances are injected near the
sciatic nerve, self-trauma to the limb may result in severe
damage (Bihun and Bauck, 2004). In larger species, such
as the chinchilla, the lumbar muscles may be used for
Figure 4.2 · Intraperitoneal injection in a guinea pig, Cavid porcelus.
injection of small volumes, but most species have rela-
tively small lumbar musculature.
The intravenous route is often used in other species for
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
rapid induction of anaesthesia or administration of fluids.
This route is difficult to access in most small mammals,
Pre-medication with a sedative (Table 4.4) may ease
especially when conscious. The lateral tail vein is useful,
induction with volatile anaesthetic agents. Certain drugs
particularly in rats. A hairdryer, incubator (35°C) or warm
will also have an anaesthetic-sparing effect, for example
water (30-35°C) can be used to warm the tail (taking care
morphine will reduce the MACiso in rats but meloxicam
to avoid heat loss by convection after rermoval of the tail
will not (Santos et al., 2004). Care should be taken when
from the water) to cause peripheral vasodilation. The site
calculating and measuring doses, and should always be
should be aseptically prepared. Insulin syringes with 25-
based on an accurate body weight.
gauge needles are selected for ease of injection, although
catheterisation is possible using a 24- or 25-gauge bore.
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
Intraosseous access is an alternative to the intravenous
OF ANAESTHESIA
route, although this is only posible in extrermely debili-
tated animals or umder general anaesthesia. Analgesia should
be administered. In conscious animals, local anaesthetic
Induction
should be used in the skin and underlying muscle. The
proximal femur is commonly used for intraosseous
Volatile agents
catheter placement (Fig. 4.3) (Bihun and Bauck, 2004).
Substances may be administered intraosseously as for
The first choice for rodent anaesthesia is complete inhala-
intravenous access.
tional anaesthesia (Table 4.5), for example using isoflu-
Whilst the intravenous route is often inaccessible for
rane. The main advantages of gaseous anaesthesia are ease
injection of anaesthetic agents, particularly in conscious
of induction and maintenance, including the ability to alter
small animals, the imtramuscuar route is available for
anaesthetic depth rapidly, simultaneous administration of
rapid drug absorption. The small size of rodent species
Oxygen, wide safety margins with agents currently used,
means that muscle damage is more likely with volumes of
 and more rapid recovery compared to injectable agents.
agents used. This problem is confounded by the fact that
Intubation is not easily possible in these species. If pro-
many small mammals have a high metabolic rate and
cedures are to be performed on the head or neck, it may
require high doses, and, therefore, larger volumes of drugs
not be possible to maintain anaesthesia with gaseous
compared with other species.
agents without unacceptable leakage into the atmosphere.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 4.4: Sedatives and pre-medicants for use in rodents
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE (mg/lkg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Acepromazine
Chinchil, guinea pig, hamste,
0.51.03.10
IM
 May induce seizures in gerbils
mouse, prairie dog, rat
Atropine
All
0.05-0.13
SC
 Some rats possess serum
atropinesterase
Doses <0.4 mg/kg
reported2.7
Diazepam
Gerbil, hamster, mouse, rat
3-51
IM
Light sedation, anxiolytic
Guinea pig
0.5-3.01
Fentanyl/droperidol
Guinea pig
0.22-0.88 ml/kg
IM
Sedation
(Innovar-Vet@,
Dilute I:10 to reduce injection site
Janssen)'
Mouse
0.2-0.3 ml/kg
irritation
Rat
0.13-0.16ml/kg
Fentanyl/fluanisone
Gerbil
0.5-1.0ml/kg
64
IM, IP
Moderate sedation
(Hypnorm@, Jannsen)
Commonly used for minor
procedures
Reverse fentanyl with
buprenorphine or
butorphanol
Glycopyrrolate
AII
0.01-0.026
SC
Reduce excess oral or respiratory
secretions
Ketamine
AlI
20401.10
IM
Light sedation at lower dose; heavy
sedation at higher dose
Marked individual variation
Good immobilisation, but poor
muscle relaxation
Little analgesia (not used 
(Auowwoy
Ketamine + volatile
Chinchilla
10 + 0.5 + 0.055
IM
Pre-anaesthetic sedation prior to
acepromazine +
 agent induction
atropine
Ketamine +
Chinchilla
5-15 + 0.5 +
IM
 Pre-anaesthetic prior to volatile agent
midazolam+ atropine
0.055.10
induction
Medetomidine
Gerbil, guinea pig, hamster,
0.18
SC
Light-to-moderate sedation;
mouse,rat
variable effects
in guinea pigs
Prairie dog
0.510
IM
Hypothermia, cyanosis,
hypotension
LOWEOU
 Medetomidine produces
glycosuria
eniod pue
Reverse with atipamezole
Rodent anaesthesia
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Midazolam
AIl
1-24
IM
Light-to-moderate sedation,
anxioloytic
Xylazine
Chinchilla 
2-105
IM
Light sedation
IM, IP
29
IP
medetomidine (not commonly used)
Mouse,rat
l0"I
Key: IM = intramuscular, IP = intraperitoneal, IV = intravenous, SC = subcutaneous
I(Anderson, 1994); 2(Bennett, 1998); 3(Drummond, 1985); 4(Harkness and Wagner, 1995c); 5 (Hoefer and Crossey, 2002); é(Huerkamp,
1995); ′(Ivey and Morrisey, 2000); *(Johnson-Delaney, I 999); (Keeble, 2002); I(Morrisey and Carpenter, 2004); (Orr, 2002)
Waste gas
 Constant fresh
scavenge
gas supply sends
expired gases
to scavenge
Fresh
1
gas
Fresh
gasto
65
patient
Flared end functions
as a small face mask
Fgure 4.5 · Anaesthetic circuit with a flared nose end for use
with small rodents (VetEquip Inc, Pleasanton, CA).
Figure 4.4 · Intramuscular injection in the quadriceps muscle in a
guinea pig, Cavia porcellus.The clinician holds the muscle mass
pre-medication. Proprietary induction charmbers are avail-
while inserting the needle.
able, or they can be constructed from any number of dif-
ferent plastic boxes or bottles (see Fig. 1.5). Transparent
boxes are ideal, as they allow observation and assessment
Table 4.5: Suggested concentrations of volatile agents for
of the animal during induction.
rodent anaesthesia
 Preoxygenation of the patient will improve circulatory
and tissue oxygen saturation, and is particularly useful in
AGENT
INDUCTION (%)
MAINTENANCE (%)
patients with pre-existing cardiac or respiratory disease.
The addition of anaesthetic agents to the chamber usually
Halothanel.2 2-5
0.25-3.0
causes some irritation to the eyes and upper airways of the
animal, causing the animal to rub its eyes and nose. The
Isofluranel.2
2-5
0.25-4.0
use of sedation before induction will reduce the stress this
causes to the animal. The anaesthetic agent can either be
Sevoflurane?
To effect (usually
To effect
gradually introduced, starting with a low concentration,
higher concentrations
or a higher level of agent abruptly introduced. In the first
required compared to
instance, the animal is exposed initially to low concentra-
other agents)
tions of the agent and anaesthesia is reached more slowly.
The second technique causes more initial iritation to the
(Anderson, 1994); 2(Huerkamp, 1995);
 patient, but results in more rapid onset of anaesthesia.
Induction concentrations of 3-4.5% are required with
3 (Morrisey and Carpenter, 2004)
isoflurane and halothane anaesthesia, and 5-6% with
sevoflurane [Keeble, 2002; Orr, 2002]. Onset of anaes-
Most inhalational anaesthetics (the exception being nitrous
thesia is noted when the righting reflex is lost.
oxide) do not provide any analgesia and so additional
 After induction the animal is switched to a close-fitting
agents should be administered if a painful procedure is to
facemask for administration of anaesthetic, which allows
be perforrmed or a painful condition exists.
access to the body for procedures to be perforrmed. Several
Rodents may be pre-medicated with one of the proto-
options exist for facemasks in small species, including
cols above (Table 4.4), but are often induced without
rodent masks with a clear cone and rubber diaphragrm or
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
circuits with a flared nose end (Fig. 4.5) (both VetEquip Inc,
and a lack of requirement for expensive equipment
Pleasanton, CA). Impromptu masks can be made from
[although it is advisable to provide supplemental oxygen
syringe cases attached to the end of the anaesthetic cir-
toa
all anaesthetised animals). The disadvantages with
cuit. A significant problem when using rmasks on rodents is
injectable anaesthetics are difficulty of administration, pain
the risk of anaesthetic gas escape from loose-fitting masks
on injection or ensuing tissue damage, individual variation in
into the environrent, with attendant risks to staff. Active
response to anaesthetic drug doses, and an inability to alter
scavenge is available with some circuits (see Fig. 2.2,
anaesthetic depth rapidly. Inter-species differences in
Fluovac@, International Market Supply Ltd., Harvard
response to injection agents exist and genetic variation intra-
Bioscience Inc.,(
Congleton, UK). Concentrations for
species has also been shown (Simpson and Johnson, 1996).
maintenance of anaesthesia are lower than those required
for induction, typically 1.5-3% for isoflurane and 1-3%
Weigh animals accurately before administration of
for halothane (Orr, 2002). Gerbils appear to require a
injectable drugs. Digital scales with lg increrments are
higher inspired concentration of volatile agents compared
necessary for small species.
to other rodents (Keeble, 2002).
Injectable agents
It is vitally irmportant to have an accurate body weight for
the patient before injectable anaesthetics are administered,
The second option for anaesthetising rodents is using
as it is easy to overdose with these drugs, many of which
injectable anaesthesia. A protocol using only injectable
have narrow safety rmargins (Table 4.6). It rmay be necessary
agents can be used, or anaesthesia can be ‘topped up' or
to dilute drugs before injection. Most water-soluble com-
  iae sae s  
 pounds will be soluble in sterile physiologic saline (0.9%
injectables. The advantages of injectable anaesthesia are
sodiurm chloride} or sterile water for injection. A notable
accessibility to the head and neck during anaesthesia, avoid-
exception is the oily preparation of diazepam, which is
6b
ance of environmental contamination with volatile agents,
immiscible in water. Care should be taken when measuring
Table 4.6: Injectable anaesthetics in rodents
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE
ROUTE
COMMENT
(mg/lcg)
Atipamezole
Guinea pig,
1.020
SC
Reversal of medetomidine
mouse,rat
Can give IP
in mice2
Alfaxalone/
Gerbil
80-12014
IP
Immobilisation/anaesthesia
alphadolone
Guinea pig
405
IP
Hamster
1504
IP
Mouse
10-154
IV
Rat
10-124
IV
Fentanyl/droperidol
Mouse,rat
0.3-0.5 ml/kg
IM
Anaesthesia
(Innovar-Vet@,
Janssen)
Fentanyl/fluanisone
Guinea pig
0.5-1.0ml/kg
IM
Anaesthesia
(Hypnorm@,Janssen)19
Mouse, rat
0.2-0.6ml/kg
IM, IP
Higher dose required for IP
administration
Fentanyl/fluanisone +
Guinea pig
1ml/kg + 2.5 mg/kg
IM
Anaesthesia, 45-60 min
diazepam19
Mouse
0.4ml/kg + 5 mg/kg
IP
120-240 min sleep time
Rat
0.4 ml/kg + 2.5 mg/kg
Fentanyl/fluanisone/
Guinea pig
8ml/kg
IM, IP
As for fentanyl/fluanisone + diazepam
midazolam*20
Mouse
10 ml/kg
Rat
2.7ml/kg
Rodent anaesthesia
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE
ROUTE
COMMENT
(8)/3u)
Fluamezil +
Chinchilla
0.1 + 0.5 + 0.059
SC
Reversal for midazolam +
atipamezole +
medetomidine + fentanyl combination
naloxone
Ketamine 十
Chinchilla 
40 + 0.5-0.7515
IM
5 min to induction, 45-60 min surgical
acepromazine
anaesthesia, 2-5h recovery
Guinea pig
100 + 55
IP
Light anaesthesia
Ketamine + diazepam
Chinchilla
20-40 + 1-210
IM
Anaesthesia
al
Guinea pig
20-30 + 1-218
 Diazepam may cause muscle irritation
an
(midazolam preferable)
Ketamine +
Chinchilla 
0.06 + 521
IM, IP
 Anaesthesia; may require volatile agent
medetomidine
Guinea pig
40 + 0.517
for surgery
Lesi
Mouse
5075 + 1.02
20-30 min anaesthesia (guinea pig,
Rat
75 + 0.517
mouse, rat); 60-120 min (mouse) or
120-240 min (rat) sleep time
Reverse medetomidine with atipamezole
6
Ketamine + midazolam
Chinchilla, guinea
5-15 + 0.5-1.011.16
IM
Light anaesthesia
 pig, prairie dog
Can also combine ketamine with diazepam
for similar effects
Ketamine + xylazine
Chinchilla
40 + 21
IM
2 h surgical anaesthesia (chinchilla)
Gerbil
50 + 2
IP
May require volatile agent for surgery
Guinea pig
20-40 + 27
IM
in some species
Hamster
80 + 57
IM, IP
As for ketamine + medetomidine in
mouse/rat, but sleep time (mouse) up to
Mouse
50 + 57
IP
120 min
Rat
75-95 + 57
IM, IP
 Xylazine produces glycosuria and
ioe
Reverse xylazine with yohimbine
Midazolam +
Chinchilla 
1.0 + 0.05 + 0.029
IM
Surgical anaesthesia,complete reversal
medetomidine +
possible (flumazenil, atipamezole,
fentanyl
Nalorphine
AI
2-51
IV
Narcotic reversal
Naloxone
AI
0.01-0.112
SC, IP
Narcotic reversal
Pentobarbitone
 Species variability
8106-05
IP
Narrow safety margin in all species;
marginal analgesia
 Not recommended
Propofol
Mouse
12-266
IV
 5 min surgical anaesthesia, 10 min sleep
Prairie dog
3-516
time
Rat
7.5-10.06
Tiletamine/zolazepam
Chinchilla, rat
20-4010
IM
Recovery can be prolonged
Telazol@,Fort Dodge)
(Continued)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 4.6: (Continued).
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE
ROUTE
COMMENT
(mg/lcg)
Tiletamine/
Gerbil
20 + 1012
IP
Anaesthesia
zolazepam + xylazine
Hamster
30 + 107
IM, IP
Yohimbine
AlI
0.5-1.07
IV
Reversal of xylazine
Key: IM = intramuscular, IP = intraperitoneal, IV = intravenous
* One part fentanyl/fluanisone (Hypnorm@, Jannson), two parts sterile water for injection, and one part midazolam (of 5 mg/ml
concentration)
8 (Harkness and Wagner, 1995c); * (Henke et al., 2004); 10 (Hoefer, I 994); I (Hoefer and Crossley, 2002); 12 (Huerkamp, 1995);
(6861 *1e 1e ueuleleN)  (t00. 4euedie pue Kesuowi) 9, (1861 "1e ne ueg1ow) s (7007. e1gea>) , (7661 'suyue) g1
18(Quesenberry, 1994); 1 (Redrobe, 2001); 20 (Redrobe, 2002); 2(Roltgen, 2002)
drugs into syringes, as a small error in volume may be a
more prolonged compared to anaesthesia with volatile
significant error in dose for a small animal. Remember
agents alone.
68
that a one in ten dilution will require one part of anaes-
 In the recovery period, continue to provide heat until
thetic agent mixed with nine parts diluent. It should also
the patient is moving around. For rats and mice, the initial
be noted that the hub in most needles has a relatively
environmental temperature should be 32°C, reducing to
large volume, and the use of insulin syringes with the nee-
26-28°C (Orr, 2002). Until the animal is resting in stermal
dle directly attached may be more applicable in tiny ani-
recumbency, it should be turned once or twice hourly to
mals to aid dosing accuracy.
minimise hypostatic pulmonary congestion (Bennett and
After induction of anaesthesia with injectable agents,
Mullen, 2004). The patient should be closely monitored
oxygen is usually provided via a facemask. If the depth of
until it is able to remain in sternal recumbency. Although
anaesthesia is insufficient for the procedure to be per-
a companion may speed an animal's recovery from illness,
formed, volatile agents can be added to inspired gases.
they should be separated during the immediate post-
This is in preference to administration of further
anaesthesia period as the conscious cormpanion may injure
injectable anaesthetics, as recovery will be prolonged and
the recovering animal.
the risk of overdose is increased.
The cardiovascular system may be depressed by anaes-
Ketamine and medetomidine have been used exten-
thetics, as may respiratory movements. To aid oxygen sat-
sively to produce anaesthesia in laboratory rats, with
uration, the recovery cage should be oxygen-enriched, if
the righting reflex lost within 2-3 min. Both the alpha-
possible, particularly if the patient has respiratory path-
adrenergic agents xylazine and medetomidine are reported
ology. As discussed above (Pre-anaesthetic assessment
to produce increased diuresis in rats (Waynforth and
and stabilisation section], the cage should also be in a
 Flecknell, 1992). The effects appear to be gender-related,
quiet area to minimise stress during recovery.
with female rats succumbing to deeper anaesthesia com-
Appropriate food and a water source should be pro-
pared with similar doses administered to males (Nevalainen
vided for the animal. In the recovery period, it can be
et al., 1989). In mice, the effects are reversed, with females
helpful additionally to supply palatable foods, such as
requiring higher doses of drugs to produce similar effects
warmed baby food, or soak pellets to increase water con-
(Cruz et al., 1998). As with other anaesthetic agents in
sumption (Orr, 2002). Fluids and nutritional support (see
mice, this combination produces marked hypothermia
Table 4.2) may be required post anaesthesia, particularly
(by 4-4.6°C) (Cruz et al., 1998). The effects of ketamine
if the animal is not observed to be eating and drinking nor-
and medetomidine in guinea pigs are variable, with many
mally within a few hours.
animals requiring anaesthesia to be topped up with inhala-
 It can be difficult to assess if small animals are eating.
tional agents (Nevalainen et al., 1989). Without supple-
Weighing food offered to the animal and the remainder
mental oxygen, medetomidine/ketamine combination
the following day is one technique, but does not readily
may produce oxygen saturations as low as 80%.
account for food spilt in the kennel. The easiest method
of assessing small patients is to reweigh them on a daily
basis. Minor fluctuations can be due to urination or defe-
Recovery
cation, but rermermber that a few grarms weight difference
in a 30g mouse could be a significant 10% weight loss.
Where volatile agents have been used, recovery is usually
 If any doubt exists over whether an animal is ingesting
rapid when the agent is no longer administered. Some
normal amounts of food and water, supplementation
injectable agents may be reversed, but recovery is still
 should be given by assist feeding (see Table 4.2).
Rodent anaesthesia
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
Observations on the patient
The respiratory and heart rates are often too high to phys-
ically count in small rodents, and most veterinary surgery
ECG machines will not register the high heart rate.
It is still useful to observe respiratory rhythrm and depth.
The use of clear drapes allows better observation of the
 patient's respiratory rmovements during anaesthesia.
1
Rodents have similar reflexes to other mammrmals. The
pedal withdrawal reflex is the most useful and is lost at a
surgical plane of anaesthesia.
2
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
Figure 4.6 · Syrian or golden hamster, Mesocricetus duratus, with
An infant-size bell stethoscope can be used to auscultate
closely fitting facemask to maintain anaesthesia with volatile
agents.
the heart and lungs. Alternatively a Doppler probe may be
placed over the heart and used to produce a rmore easily
1
audible heart rate. ECG machines may be of use in larger
Supplemental heating
species, with pads attached to the rodent's feet, but many
machines do not register the small electrical deflections in
Hypothermia is common in anaesthetised rodents, and
69
these species. Pulse oxirmeters may be used on the ears or
care should be taken to reduce heat loss and maintain core
tongue of guinea pigs and chinchillas, or the feet of most
body termperature. Supplemental heat should be provided
rodent species; however, again they may not register a
during anaesthesia, ensuring heating devices that may
pulse with smaller animals.
cause burns are not in direct contact with the anirmal.
A rectal thermometer can be used to monitor core body
Electric heat pads, heated operating tables, forced warm
temperature. Digital thermometers are most reliable, and
air blankets (Bair Hugger@, Arizant HealthCare, Eden
those with external probes are easily used during surgery
Prairie, MN), heat lamps, or hot water bottles can be
when drapes cover the animal and surrounding area. The
used. Towels and bubble wrap can be used to insulate the
thermometer should be periodically checked to ensure
animal, including extremities such as feet and tails, and
correct positioning.
are helpful in minimising heat loss. If skin preparation is
required, minimise any fur clipped, use warmed disinfect-
ants, and avoid alcohol-based preparations that may cause
PERI-ANAESTHETICSUPPORTIVE
heat loss by convection. Hypothermia is not just an imme.
CARE
diate problerm with reduced metabolic rate, but will lead
to slower recoveries as drug metabolism and excretion
may be reduced (Robinson et al., 1983].
Fasting
As with other animals, care should also be taken not to
overheat the patient as hyperthermia may occur. Monitor
As rodents cannot vomit, pre-anaesthetic fasting is not
rectal temperatures during anaesthesia and the recovery
required. In fact, prolonged fasting is contraindicated in
period. Chinchillas and guinea pigs are particularly sus-
these small animals, which have low hepatic glycogen
ceptible to heat stress, which can be fatal.
stores and high metabolic rates. The adrministration of fluids
containing dextrose peri-operatively will reduce the risk
Analgesia
of hypoglycaemia and dehydration. After induction, the
oral cavity (including cheek pouches where present)
should be checked for the presence of food material
Analgesics may be used as sedatives in conjunction with
anaesthetic agents. In their own right, they aid recovery
which may be inhaled during anaesthesia, and cleaned if
from painful conditions and speed the return to normal
necessary with cotton-tipped swabs.
function in patients. Pre-emptive analgesia is preferred,
and multimodal therapy is often indicated.
Oxygen
Oxygen should be provided to all anaesthetised patients,
Pain is a major cause of anorexia in small animals.
usually via a small facermask (Fig. 4.6). Some rodents can be
Analgesia should be administered if a painful condi-
intubated (see later), but the technique is difficult. Avoid
tion is suspected or a painful procedure has been
cormprormising respiratory function by thoracic cormpression
performed.
from equipment or abdominal viscera (Redrobe, 2002]
Aniaesthesia of ExoticPets
Table 4.7: Analgesics for rodents
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE
ROUTE
DURATION
COMMENT
(mg/lcg)
(hours)
Aspirin
Chinchilla, gerbil, hamster,
1004.6
PO
4-8
Great species variability
(acetylsalicylic
mouse, rat
Doses <240 mg/kg q24h
acid)
reported in gerbil,hamste
BuprenorphineAll
0.05-0.110
SC
6-12
Opioid agonist-antagonist
Hamster, rat
Can be mixed with gelatine
Mouse
<2.53
for oral administration
Butorphanol
Chinchilla, guinea pig, rat
0.2-2.06.7
SC, IM, IP
2-4
Opioid agonist-antagonist
Gerbil, hamster,mouse
1-54.7
SC
4
Prairie dog
0.1-0.42
SC, IM 
8
L
Carprofen
Chinchilla, guinea pig
41.9
SC
24
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
#
Gerbil, hamster, mouse, rat
SC
24
Care in hypovolaemic or
Prairie dog
17
PO
12-24
hypotensive animals
70
Flunixin
Chinchilla
1-35
SC
12-24
Non-steroidalanti-inflammatory
Guinea pig, gerbil, hamster, 
2.54
Care in hypovolaemic or
mouse,rat
hypotensive animals
Ketoprofen
 Chinchilla, guinea pig
17
SC, IM
12-24
Care in hypovolaemic or
Gerbil, hamster, rat
58
SC
hypotensive animals
Prairie dog
1-37
SC, IM
Meloxicam
Mouse,rat
1-2'
SC, PO
12-24
Oral suspension palatable
0.2-0.3 mg/kg q12-24 h used
 anecdotally in many species
Morphine
Gerbil, guinea pig, hamster,
2-54
SC, IM
2-4
Opioid (narcotic)
mouse,rat
Not suitable in hamster, as
resistant to analgesic effects
Nalbuphine
Gerbil, hamster, mouse, rat
4-84
IM
3
 Opioid agonist-antagonist 
Guinea pig
1-24
Used to reverse fentanyl
Oxymorphone
Chinchilla, gerbil, guinea
0.2-0.51
SC, IM 
6-12
Opioid
pig, hamster, mouse, rat
Pethidine
Chinchilla, gerbil, guinea
203.7
SC, IM
2-4
plodo
(meperidine)
pig, hamster, mouse, rat
Dose q 6h in chinchilla
Key: IM = intramuscular, IP = intraperitoneal, IV = intravenous, PO = oral, SC = subcutaneous, q6h = every 6 hours
(Flecknell, 2001); 2 (Funk, 2004); 3 (Harkness and Wagner, 1995c); 4 (Heard, 1993); 5 (Hoefer, 1999);  (Johnson-Delaney, 1999);
Rodent anaesthesia
EMERGENCY DRUGS
Table 4.8: Emergency drugs for use in rodents
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE (mg/lcg)
ROUTE
INDICATION
Adrenaline
Guinea pig
0.0036
IV
Cardiac arrest
1
Atropine
IV
0.05-0.13
SC
Bradycardia; excess oral/
1
respiratory secretions
Dexamethasone
AlI
4-5'
SC, IM, IP IV
Shock
a
an
Diazepam
AlI
1-5'
IM, Iv, IP, IO
Seizures
st:
Doxapram
Chinchilla, gerbil,
2-102
IV, IP
Bradypnoea or respiratory arrest
guinea pig, hamster,
mouse, rat
1
Furosemide
All
1-104
SC, IM
 Pulmonary congestion, oedema
Glycopyrrolate
All
0.01-0.025
SC
Bradycardia
SUBORDER SCIUROGNATHI
Coprophagy allows the animals to absorb nutrients including
B vitamins. Captive rats, mice, gerbils and hamsters are fed
Family Muridae (mouse-like rodents)
formulated diets (as used in laboratories). These are rmore
balanced than a seed mix and prevent selective feeding [for
exarmple, a preference for sunflower seeds frorm a grain mix)
Introduction
Fatty treats should be avoided as obesity is common in pet
animals (Bihun and Bauck, 2004; Orr, 2002). Obesity may
Muridae rodents seen as pets will include those from
compromise cardiopulmonary function during anaesthesia.
three subfamilies: Murinae, Cricetinae and Gerbillinae.
The Murinae subfamily includes rats (Rattus norvegicus)
Subfamily Murinae (rats and mice)
and mice (Mus muscuus). Cricetinae are hamsters (com-
monly the Syrian hamster - Mesocricetus auratus,but
Temperature
also Russian dwarf hansters - Phodopus sumgorus and
Chinese hamsters - Cricetulus griseus). Gerbillanae are
The optimal environmental temperature range for con-
the gerbils (also known as jirds, the most common pet
scious rats is 18-26°C (O'Malley, 2006b; Orr, 2002). Rats
being the Mongolian jird - Meriones uwnguiculatus)
have a poor tolerance to heat, having few sweat glands and
being unable to pant (Bivin et al., 1979). They reduce
 Anatomy and physiology
their body temperature by radiant heat loss and peripheral
vasodilation. The tail is important for thermoregulation
Temperature
and placing it on a warm surface or wrapping it in insulat-
ing material will reduce heat loss via convection.
 Rodents do not have many sweat glands and cannot pant.
Conversely, conscious adult rats are tolerant to cold
Excess heat is lost via the ears and tails, although mice
(Greene, 1962).
may also salivate to lose heat. All species are susceptible
to heat stress (Bihun and Bauck, 2004).
Cardiovascular system
Gastrointestinal system
The heart contacts the left thoracic wallas the left lung is
small and cardiac injections [for emergency access) are
These species are monogastric, usually herbivorous or
possible between the third and fifth ribs (Bivin et al.,
omnivorous, and are coprophagic to varying degrees.
1979).
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
The rat's blood volume is 60 ml/kg. The commonest site
Urinary system
for venepuncture in rats and mice is the lateral tail vein,
Rats concentrate urine well, and normal urine output is
although the srmaller lateral saphenous vein and the ventral
tail artery are also available (Fallon, 1996). Intravenous
15-30ml daily. Proteinuria may be normal (Bivin et al.,
access to the lateral tail vein is easier if the tail has
1979). Polydipsia and marked proteinuria (10mg/l) may
been warmed, as peripheral circulation is increased by
suggest chronic progressive nephropathy, which is common
vasodilation.
 in aged rats (Orr, 2002). Assessment of blood urea nitrogen
 may be required to investigate suspected renal disease.
Respiratory system
Special senses
The oval-shaped rat trachea is 3 × 2mrm wide, and bifur-
cates after 33 mm (Hebel and Stromberg, 1986). It is pos-
Rats communicate at frequencies outwith the range of
sible to intubate rats and mice using an inclined support
human hearing and can hear ultrasonic frequencies up to
stand for restraint of the anaesthetised animal, holding the
pitched and ultrasound noises from equipment such as
mouth open to increase visualisation of the glottis. An oto-
scope (used as a laryngoscope), local anaesthetic spray, a
computers (Gamble, 1976), but studies show that the
B r  'i sa [aa s ue na
cardiovascular system is not affected by ultrasound noise
(20-40kHz) as it is by audible noise (Burwell and
mouse, 14-gauge 5cm catheter for a rat) are then utilised
as for intubating larger species [Kastl et al., 2004).
Baldwin, 2006). A quiet environment is thus important to
Transillumination of the trachea may aid visualisation of
reduce autonormic changes in hospitalised animals.
the larynx (Remie et al., 1990). This procedure is only rou-
The olfactory system in rats is particularly well
developed (Sharp and LaRegina, 1998). Care should be
tinely performed in laboratories and not usually in veteri-
nary practice. Small endotracheal tubes may readily block
taken to avoid inappropriate smells (for example, from other
72
animals, including bedding from unfamiliar conspecifics)
with airway secretions, although this risk may be reduced
that may stress the patient in the hospital environrment.
using positive pressure ventilation (PPV) (preferably via a
mechanical ventilator).
 Respiratory disease is prevalent in pet rat and mouse
Subfamily Gerbillinae (gerbils)
populations (Donnelly, 2004b). Clinical signs are usually
obvious on examination, including dyspnoea, respiratory
Temperature
noise, sneezing, nasal discharge and stress-related chro-
Gerbils have adapted to great variations in environmental
modacryorrhoea (red oculonasal discharge of porphyrins
temperature, from -40°C in winter to over 50°C in
from the Harderian glands). Upper respiratory tract
summer in their wild desert habitat [Keeble, 2002).
fritation to ammonia or dusty bedding may cause mild
Relative hurmidity higher than 50% will cause them stress
signs or predispose to infections. Pneumonia is common
(Donnelly, 2004b).
in rats. Infectious aetiologies usually cause more severe
signs, with Mycoplasma pulmonis being the most com-
Cardiovascular system
mon agent in chronic respiratory disease in rats. Often
other agents are involved concomitantly, such
as
The total blood volume of a gerbil is approximately
Streptococcus pneumoniae,Corynebacterium kutscheri,
70 ml/kg (Keeble, 2002). Venepuncture sites include the
Sendai virus and cilia-associated respiratory (CAR) bacillus
lateral tail vein and saphenous vein (Herm et al., 1998).
(Orr, 2002)
Sialodacryoadenitis virus is a coronavirus. Initially,
Digestive system
infection causes a rhinitis, before disease progresses to
involve the salivary and lacrimal glands. The upper respira-
Wild gerbils eat coarse grasses, roots, seeds and occasional
tory tract lumen is narrowed due to inflarmmation, com-
invertebrates (Agren et al., 1989). In captivity they are
promising the patient's breathing, and anaesthetic deaths
mainly fed rodent mix, and fresh fruit and vegetables.
are common (Donnelly, 2004b).
Sorme will eat hay. Occasional treats may be given. Water
is provided in a bottle (Keeble, 2002).
Digestive system
Tyzzer's disease, caused by Clostriditum piliforme, can
cause fatal diarrhoea along with hepatic lesions (Motzel
As with other rodents, access to the airways is made rmore
and Gibson, 1990). Many gerbils become obese when fed
difficult by a long narrow oral cavity and the caudal base
on captive rat or mouse mixed diets, with some develop-
of the tongue is raised into the lingual torus (Bivin et al.,
ing diabetes (Donnelly, 2004b).
1979). The stomach has an acute angle at the lesser
curvature that precludes vomition, and so fasting is not
Respiratory system
required before anaesthesia.
Cedar bedding affects microsomal oxidative
liver
Gerbils can be intubated, but the technique requires spe-
enzymes in rats and mice. Clinical signs have not been
cialist equipment and is not routinely performed in prac-
associated with these changes, but they may affect drug
tice. Tracheotomy may be performed, or specialised
metabolism (Weichbrod et al., 1988).
laryngoscopes and endotracheal tubes used (Huerkamp,
Rodent anaesthesia
1995). Intravenous catheters (without the stylet) can be
(Bihun and Bauck, 2004), and temperatures and relative
used, but are easily occluded by respiratory secretions as
humidity should be monitored during hospitalisation
in other small mammals (Antinoff, 1999]
using a digital thermometer and hygrometer. During
recovery from anaesthesia, the environmental tempera-
Urinary system
ture for a hamster should be 35-37°C (Goodman, 2002).
As desert species, gerbils are highly adapted to conserving
Cardiovascular system
water. They produce small volumes of concentrated urine
and only require low volumes of water intake. Urine is
The midline heart in hamsters contacts the thoracic wall
normally alkaline, and may contain protein, glucose and
between the third and fifth ribs. The normal heart rate is
acetone in low levels (Keeble, 2002). Polydipsia/polyuria
 250-500 beats per minute. Blood volume in Syrian ham-
and weight loss may be found with chronic interstitial
sters [Mesocricetus auratus} is 78ml/kg (Bivin et al.,
nephritis, which is common in ageing gerbils (Donnelly,
1987). Atrial thrombosis (Hubbard and Schmidt, 1987)
2004b).
and congestive heart failure caused by cardiomyopathy
have been reported in hamsters (Donnelly, 2004b)
Endocrine system
Venepuncture is difficult in hamsters and sedation is
required. Sites for injection are restricted to the lateral
Diabetes mellitus may occur in obese gerbils (Laber-
saphenous, jugular or cephalic veins, although the anterior
Laird, 1996). These animals will have problems with glu-
vena cava or cardiac puncture are options for emergency
cose metabolism and are susceptible to hepatic lipidosis if
administration of medication (Goodman, 2002; Whittaker,
1
diet is rapidly altered (Keeble, 2002).
1999). Hamsters have a large ammount of loose dorsal skin
interscapularly, enabling easy injection of large volumes of
Nervous system
fluids (O'Malley 2006a). However, fluids are slowly
absorbed from this large potential space.
73
Certain genetic lines of gerbils cormmonly have spontan-
eous epileptiform seizures (Laming et al., i989). Achange
Respiratory system
in environrment or handling rmay stimulate a seizure (Keeble,
2002). With these individuals, minimising stimulation
Normal respiratory rate is 30-32 breaths per minute
[including handling and loud noises] can reduce seizures.
(Bivin et al., 1987). Pneumonia is common in pet ham-
Although the zoonotic virus lymphocytic choriomeningitis
sters (Donnelly, 2004b). Streptococcus spp. causing bacter-
is often asymptomatic in rodents, it may cause seizures in
ial pneumonia may originate from their human carers.
gerbils (Harkness and Wagner, 1995d).
A poorer prognosis should be given for animals with pneu-
A head tilt may be due to otitis media or interna related
monia with concomitant purulent rhinitis and ocular
to bacterial respiratory infections (Keeble, 2002)
discharge (Kuntze, 1992).
Fat-tailed gerbil or fat-tailed jird (Duprasi)
Digestive system
These rodents are similar to the Mongolian gerbil, but
Hamsters are mainly herbivorous, normally eating seeds,
belong to a different group in the Gerbillinae subfamily.
shoots and root vegetables, but also consuming leaves
However, the fat-tailed gerbil, Pachyuromys duprasi, is
and flowers (Feaver and Shibin, 2004). This species feeds
more insectivorous, eating some fruit (Johnson-Delaney,
in short (5 min) bursts with 2-h fasts between (Bivin
2002; Kingdon, 1997]. Captive diets are similar to that of
et al., 1987). Food intake is 5-7g daily (Newcomer et al.,
African pygmy hedgehogs, except feed can be ad libitum
1987).
unless obesity occurs. Captive animals often suffer from
The base of the tongue is muscular (Bivin et al., 1987).
obesity, particularly if fed on grain-based diets.
Vomiting is impossible, as the lesser curvature of the
stomach is very short, with the cardia near the pylorus
Subfamily Cricetinae (hamsters)
(Hoover et al., 1969; Lipman and Foltz, 1996]. Fasting is
not required before anaesthesia, but the large cheek
The most common pet hamster is the Syrian or golden
pouches should be emptied on induction to reduce the
hamster (Mesocricetus auratus). Dwarf hamsters, such as
risk of aspiration of stored food material.
the Roborovski (Phodopus roborovskii) and Djungarian
(Phodopus sumgorus), may also be seen.
Urinary system
Temperature
 Normal hamster urine may vary widely in pH, from 5.1 to
 The optimum environmental temperature range for ham-
(Goodman, 2002; Newcomer et al., 1987). Urine produc-
sters is 20-24°C (Bivin et al., 1987). Below 10°C, ham-
tion is usually 7 ml per day (Syrian hamster), but this may
sters will hibernate (Goodman, 2002). They have a high
increase l0-fold in diabetic individuals [Harkness and
 metabolic rate, and are prone to heat and fluid loss. They
Wagner, 1995b). As is the case with rats, proteinuria may be
are particularly stressed in hot and humid environments
normal (O'Malley, 2006a),
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Special senses
reported to cause nephrotoxicity in rats (Patel and Goa,
1996). There are instances where injectable agents are
These nocturnal animals have a well-developed sense of
required, often in conjunction with volatile agents.
smell and acute hearing; including an ability to hear at
 Doses appropriate for hamsters are used in fat-tailed
ultrasonic levels (Feaver and Shibin, 2004). Efforts should
gerbils.
be made to reduce stress on hospitalised individuals by
minimising strong odours and loud noises.
Family Sciuridae (squirrels)
 Pre-anaesthetic assessment and stabilisation
This family includes the chipmunk (Tamias sibericus} and
History and clinical examination
prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicianus).
Most mouse-like rodents are nocturnal, although to vary-
ing degrees. For example, rats are more nocturnal than
Chipmunks
mice. They should be woken gently to avoid evoking a
bite response. The small size of many patients limits clin-
Chipmunks are omnivorous, with their wild diet mainly
ical examination and history taking may be more impor-
comprising seeds, buds, leaves and flowers. The diet in
captivity is commercial dry mixes, along with fresh and
tant in identifying potential causes or predisposing factors
for disease.
dried fruit, vegetables and nuts. Some dog biscuits and
Observation of the patient before handling may iden-
animal protein (mealworms, cooked meat, hard-boiled
tify cardio-respiratory disease, for example lethargy, noisy
egs and day-old chicks) may be offered (Meredith,
respiration or dyspnoea. It is useful to observe respiratory
 2002). Water is usually provided in a sipper bottle.
This species is less commonly seen as pets than other
 movements and measure respiratory rate (not possible in
smaller species as often too rapid to count) at rest, as the
rodents. Chipmunks are very susceptible to stress, includ-
14
stress of handling may significantly alter the breathing
ing noise, overcrowding and being caged in a confined
pattern. If dyspnoea is noted, handling should be min-
space. Prolonged exposure to the electromagnetic and
imised to avoid stress and possible rmortality.
ultrasonic radiation from televisions can result in death.
After transportation or other stressful event, a chipmunk
Pre-existing disease may well compromise cardiopul-
monary function during anaesthesia. The identification of
rmay be subdued for 24h (Meredith, 2002).
As many pet chipmunks are not used to handling and
disease in these anirmals may in itself not be straightforward
although careful history taking and clinical exarmination may
become stressed when caught, general anaesthesia is often
reveal abnormalities. In an ideal situation, urine analysis,
required for clinical examination. Gaseous anaesthesia is
blood biochemistry and haematology should be performed
usually easiest, as minimal handling is required prior to
placing the animal in an induction chamber.
prior to anaesthesia. Dipstick analysis and specific gravity
Few drug doses are published for this species, but many
can be performed on quite small urine sarmples collected on
clinicians extrapolate from rat doses. Chipmunks require
to a clean non-absorbent kennel liner [for example, an
75-100 ml/kg of fluid daily for maintenance [Meredith,
upturned incontinence pad). However, in most patients
even venepuncture will require anaesthesia. Familiarity with
2002).
the species in question, including knowledge of good hus-
bandry practices, normal body condition and behaviour, aids
Prairie dogs
in clinical assessment of the patient pre-anaesthesia
An accurate weight (to the nearest gram in species as
The black-tailed prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicianus) is
uncommonly seen in the UK, but some pet animals are
small as mice) is essential before the administration of
 medications, as accidental overdosage is easy.
present in the USA. These animals like to burrow, so deep
substrate, such as shredded paper, should be provided
Induction and maintenance of anaesthesia
during hospitalisation. Prairie dogs may transmit a variety
of zoonotic infections, including Yersinia pestis and
The small size of Muridae species precludes some anaes-
Salmonella (Funk, 2004)
thetic techniques routinely used in larger species and rmakes
others technically difficult.
Temperature
Intubation is not routinely performed in pet rodents and
intravenous access may not be possible. Injectable agents
The optimurm environmental temperature for prairie dogs
can be administered via the subcutaneous, intramuscular or
is 20-22°C, with relative humidity between 30 and 70%
intraperitoneal routes. The injectable anaesthetic drugs can-
(Johnson-Delaney, 1996; Lightfoot, 1999). Dormancy is
not, therefore, be given gradually to effect, and much indi-
induced at temperatures below 16°℃.
vidual animal variation in response to anaesthetics exists. In
most cases, volatile anaesthetics are used for induction and
Cardiovascular system
then also maintenance of anaesthesia in rodents (Johnson-
Delaney, 2002). A chamber is used to induce anaesthesia,
Animals over 3 years of age frequently develop dilated
transferring to a small facemask or nose cone
for
cardiomyopathy (Lightfoot, 1999, 2000).
maintenance. Sevoflurane may be used, but haloalkenes
Venepuncture may be possible in conscious prairie dogs
produced by contact with carbon dioxide absorbents are
using the lateral or medial saphenous vein, cephalic vein
Rodent anaesthesia
or jugular vein. The cranial vena cava may be accessed in
rodents. These species are monogastric herbivores. Most
anaesthetised animals.
animals are sufficiently calm to allow a conscious physical
examination, although individual animals in a debilitated
Respiratory system
condition may become too stressed to complete the
 examination at one time
Various environmental conditions predispose to respira-
tory problems in prairie dogs, including poor ventilation,
high humidity and excess dust. Obese animals are often
Family Cavidae
dyspnoeic (Funk, 2004). Sinusitis, rhinitis, cardiomyopa-
thy and dental disease (such as infection or neoplasia)
Guinea pigs are sociable and housing a companion with
may cause upper respiratory tract problems. Many wild-
the patient may encourage normal behaviour. The use of
caught animals will have pulmonary mites (Pneumocoptes
bedding such as shredded newspaper or cardboard hide
penrosei), which may lead to dyspnoea by occluding the
boxes will also reduce stress. Dietary provisions should
nasal passages. Pneumonia may be caused by bacterial (for
include good-quality hay, a selection of vegetables includ-
example, Pasteurella multocida), fungal (for example,
ing leafy greens, proprietary guinea pig concentrate pellets
Aspergillus sp.) and mycoplasma (Johnson-Delaney,
or mix, water in a bowl or bottle (depending on what the
 2002) infections. Pre-anaesthetic stabilisation of dysp-
individual is accustomed to), with vitamin C supplementa-
noeic animals may require oxygen therapy, nebulisation,
tion [at 2g/L of drinking water (Quesenberry, 1994} or
appropriate antimicrobials and bronchodilation.
10-30mg/kg/day orally (Adammcak and Otten, 2000)).
Digestive and urinary systems
Temperature
1
Prairie dogs in the wild graze on grasses, and also on
This species conserves heat well, but is prone to heat
leaves, herbs and flowering plants. They will occasionally
stress. Ideally, the environmental temperature should be
75
take some invertebrates and, rarely, carrion (Funk, 2004].
18-26°C (Harkness and Wagner, 1995c). However, as
As hindgut fermenters, prairie dogs require adequate
with other small mammals, supplermental heat should be
roughage in their diet, so captive animals should receive
provided to guinea pigs during anaesthesia. Careful moni-
unlirmited grass hay. Juveniles can also receive pelleted
toring of core temperature with a rectal probe (Fig. 4.7)
chows and alfalfa ad libitum. Pellets should be limited if
should be performed during anaesthesia and during the
the animal becomes obese or when they reach adulthood.
recovery period. Guinea pigs are prone to heat stress and
Treats include small amounts of fresh greens. Obesity is
care should be taken to avoid overheating animals during
common in captivity (Johnson-Delaney, 2002).
hospitalisation.
 Both hepatic and renal neoplasias have been reported in
prairie dogs (Griner, 1983; Tell, 1995; Woolf et al., 1982).
Cardiovascular system
Anaesthesia of Sciuridae
Guinea pigs have 70-75 ml of blood per kilogram body
weight. The short neck of the guinea pig comprises a thick
Induction and maintenance of anaesthesia are usually per-
layer of muscle ventrally, making jugular venepuncture dif-
formed with isoflurane. A chamber or facemask is used for
ficult. A cut-down technique should be used if a catheter
induction. Usually volatile anaesthetics are administered
is to be placed in the jugular vein (Quesenberry et al.,
via a facemask to maintain anaesthesia. Endotracheal intub-
2004j. For administration of fluids, intravenous sites
ation is possible and is performed similarly to rabbits using
either a blind technique or visualised with a laryngoscope.
Endotracheal tubes of 2.0-2.5 mm can be used (Johnson-
Delaney, 2002).
Injectable anaesthetics have been used in prairie dogs.
However, care should be taken, particularly in obese ani-
 mals that may have variable responses to injectable agents.
Supportive care
Supplemental heating is necessary during anaesthesia to
prevent hypothermia in chipmunks and prairie dogs. The
patient's rectal temperature should also be monitored
Similarly to other small species, fluids and nutritional sup
 port are often required during hospitalised sciuromorphs.
SUBORDER HYSTRICOGNATHI
Guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus), chinchillas (Chinchilla
Figure 4.7 · Measurement of rectal temperature in a guinea pig.
laniger) and degus (Octodon degus) are hystricomorph
Covia porcellus, using a digital thermometer.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
available in this species are the lateral saphenous vein or
refuse to eat and drink while hospitalised, so assist feed-
cephalic vein, although these small veins are difficult to
ing (Table 4.2) is often necessary. Proprietary herbivore
catheterise. A 22-25-gauge needle or 24-gauge or smaller
formulas (for example, Oxbow@ Critical Care for
catheter should be used. The ear veins are visible, but very
Herbivores, Petlife International Ltd, Bury St Edmunds,
small, and hence difficult to access in guinea pigs. An
Suffolk), softened guinea pig concentrate pellets, or vege-
alternative site for phlebotomy or administration of drugs
table baby food (dairy-free) can be administered orally
is the anterior vena cava, for which sedation or general
(Quesenberry et al., 2004). Vitamin C should be given
anaesthesia is required. If long-term intravenous access
daily to hospitalised animals, either in the drinking water
is required, venous access ports can be used. Routinely,
or directly administered by syringe if the patient is not
fluids are adninistered subcutaneously (avoiding the
drinking. Housing a companion simultaneously may
interscapular region where the skin is closely apposed to
reduce stress and encourage normal behaviour in these
underlying tissues, including the subcutaneous fat pad) or
social animals, but can make assessment of appetite and
intraperitoneally (Brown and Rosenthal, 1997).
urine and faecal production difficult.
The large guinea pig heart lies midline at the level of the
The gastric emptying time in guinea pigs is normally 2 h
second to fourth intercostals space, with a narrow space
and total gastrointestinal transit time 20h on average,
bilaterally for lungs (Breazile and Brown, 1976). In irmma-
longer if coprophagy is included (Jilge, 1980). As this
ture animals the cranial mediastinum contains the cervical
species has a very small lesser stomach curvature, they
thymus, being replaced by fat in the adult (Harkness and
cannot vormit, and fasting is not required before anaesthe-
Wagner, 1995a). These anatomical relationships mean
sia.(
Guinea pigs feed primarily at dawn and dusk, but
that the lungs are very smallin guinea pigs and, hence, any
often retain food in their oral cavity. For this reason, the
lung pathology may readily cause clinical signs or increase
oral cavity should be checked for the presence of food
the risk of anaesthesia in this species.
material and cleaned with cotton-tipped swabs on induc-
tion of anaesthesia if necessary.
76
Respiratory systerm
The opening into the oral cavity is narrow and, as with all
Check the oral cavity after induction and remove
rodents, the oral cavity is long. Passage from the orophar-
retained food if present to avoid aspiration.
ynx to the pharynx and thence into the respiratory tract is
via the palatal ostium (or interpharyngeal ostiurm], which
is the central opening between the caudal tongue and the
Gastrointestinal hypomotility is cormmon after anaes-
soft palate (Timm et al., 1987). Endotracheal intubation
thesia or surgery in guinea pigs, or associated with other
is possible in the guinea pig, but difficult, as the palatal
disease processes or stress. Prokinetics (see Table 2.3) are
ostium is a small opening, visualisation is poor and lateral
usually administered prophylactically when guinea pigs
deviation when introducing the tube will damage the vas-
are anaesthetised to reduce the risk of ileus.
cular velopharyngeal folds in the soft palate (Quesenberry
 Diarrhoea in guinea pigs may be caused by a number of
et al., 2004). An otoscope can be used to visualise the
aetiologies, including bacterial overgrowth secondary to
glottis and insert a guide wire, and the otoscope removed
oral administration of certain antibiotics, primary bacterial
before threading an endotracheal tube (16-12-gauge
enteritis and endoparasites (O'Rourke, 2004). The guinea
catheter) over the wire (Flecknell, 1996b)
pig should be stabilised before anaesthesia is induced, by
 Pneumonia is cormmon in pet guinea pigs, with damp of
correcting fluid deficits caused by diarrhoea and the com-
humid environments predisposing to bacterial infections,
mon concomitant anorexia.
such as Bordetella bronchiseptica and Streptococcus pneu-
If hepatic disease is suspected, blood biochemistry may
 moniae. Viral pneumonia has also been reported. Primary
be performed. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is not
pulmonary neoplasia, bronchogenic pulmonary adenoma,
sensitive or specific for hepatocellular damage in guinea
is common in guinea pigs. Lymphosarcoma, caused by a
pigs [White and Lang, 1989). Hepatic lipidosis is common
type C retrovirus, may affect the mediastinal lymph
after a period of anorexia, and may result in ketosis and
nodes and cause dyspnoea (Collins, 1988). Supportive
hypercholesterolaemia (Quesenberry et al., 2004).
care should be administered before anaesthesia is induced
in dypnoeic animals, including oxygen therapy, fluid
Urinary system
administration and oral vitamin C (O'Rourke, 2004).
Daily water update is approximately 100 ml/kg in guinea
Digestive system
pigs (Manning et al., 1984). The normal urine pH is 9.0 in
these herbivores (Navia and Hunt, 1976). If an anirmal has
Guinea pigs should be fed hay and fresh vegetables, sup-
been anorexic for a few days or more, dipstick analysis of
plemented with a concentrate mix (preferably complete
urine can be used to assess for the presence of ketones.
pelleted diet rather than a cereal mix). They have a daily
Ketonuria is produced in ketoacidotic animals, which will
requirement for vitamin C of approximately 10 mg/kg,
require stabilisation of metabolic derangements prior to
rising to 30 mg/kg/day during pregnancy. Good-quality
anaesthesia.
food should always be available to hospitalised guinea
Many guinea pigs older than 3 years of age have chronic
pigs. Unfortunately, many will become depressed and
interstitial nephritis, which may be associated with other
Rodent anaesthesia
conditions, such as diabetes mellitus, or occur secondary
Anaesthesia is usually induced in guinea pigs with a
to renal amyloidosis. Guinea pigs commonly develop
volatile anaesthetic in an induction chamber. A period of
urinary tract calculi. Post-renal azotaemia may result from
preoxygenation precedes addition of the anaesthetic
partial or cormplete obstruction. Volatile agents, such as
agent. Once the righting reflex is lost, the guinea pig is
isoflurane or sevoflurane, are the anaesthetic of choice
removed from the chamber and oxygenation (for short
for investigation and surgical treatment of such cases
procedures) or anaesthesia (for longer procedures) rmain-
(O'Rourke, 2004).
tained via a facemask. It is irmportant to use a small mask
to minimise dead space, and for the mask to be close-
Endocrine system
fitting to reduce contamination of the environment with
waste gases
Diabetes mellitus has been reported in some guinea
Volatile anaesthetic agents are primarily used for short
pigs, some responding to insulin while others are non-
investigative procedures in guinea pigs. However, there
insulin-dependent (Bowden, 1959; Hartmann, 1993;
are two scenarios where injectable agents are preferable.
MacKay et al., 1949; Marlow, 1995). As is the case with
It may be difficult to maintain sufficient depth of anaes-
other species, diabetes should be stabilised (with an
thesia for surgery using inhalation agents alone, or the
s 'eisasue on iod (unsu iopue a adoide
procedure to be performed may require access to the
guinea pigs are not fasted prior to anaesthesia, hypogly-
head that is restricted by a facemask.
caemia is less likely during the procedure, but blood glu-
aonaq Auanban said eauna eisauisaue au
1
cose levels should be monitored throughout
the
apnoeic. This can make maintenance of anaesthesia diffi-
anaesthetic and in the recovery period, and dextrose
cult via volatile agents solely (Flecknell, 2002). In this
1
administered as required.
scenario, injectable sedatives (see Table 4.4] may be used
to relax the patient so a normal respiratory pattern resumes,
Reproductive system
or injectable anaesthetics (see Table 4.6) administered to
replace the requirerment for inhalational agents. If injectable
77
Dystocia is common in guinea pigs, and Caesarean sec-
agents are used alone to provide anaesthesia, oxygen should
tions are often warranted. The anaesthetic of choice for
always be supplemented via a facemask.
this procedure is a volatile agent, either isoflurane or
Two common reasons for anaesthetising guinea pigs are
sevoflurane. Pre-medication with buprenorphine may be
for dental treatment, necessitating access to the oral cav-
helpful in causing mild sedation before mask induction,
ity, or the treatment of cervical lymphadenitis. In the for-
 and will also provide post-operative analgesia.
mer case, it may be possible to intubate the patient, but
Another common reason for anaesthesia of guinea pigs
the endotracheal tube and attached anaesthetic circuit
is surgical excision of mammary neoplasia. A small number
will make the dental procedure difficult. Similarly, when
of these are malignant, for example adenocarcinomas.
operating on the cervical region, a facemask may intrude
Metastasis is rare, but the thoracic cavity should be auscul-
on the sterile surgical field. It is easier to use injectable
tated and radiographed to assess for pulmonary involve-
anaesthetic agents and to provide supplemental oxygen
 ment and function. The abdomen should also be assessed
via a small mask over the nose (Fig. 4.8). If necessary,
for visceral involvement by palpation and ultrasound.
anaesthetic gases can be administered via the nares, but a
It is unwise to anaesthetise a guinea pig suffering from
 good seal between mask and patient may not be achievable,
pregnancy toxaemia. The animal wil be hypoglycaemic,
allowing environmmental contamination.
ketonuric, proteinuric and aciduric (pH 5-6). Hepatic
lipidosis also usually occurs. Despite intensive supportive
care, many animals die (O'Rourke, 2004). Treatment is
stressful, and restraint and anaesthesia will add to the
stress and thereby speed mortality.
Guinea pigs with pregnancy toxaemia are very poor
candidates for anaesthesia.
Induction and maintenance of anaesthesia
Halothane may cause hypotension and hepatic damage.
Isoflurane is safer; however, irritation of mucous mem-
branes during induction may cause lacrimation and saliva-
tion in guinea pigs (Flecknell, 2002). Sevoflurane causes
less irritation to the airways. Doses for injectable sedatives
or anaesthetic protocols are shown in the tables (see
Tables 4.4 and 4.6), but there is much individual variation
Figure 4.8·Anaesthetised chinchilla, Chinchilla laniger, main-
in response to these drugs.
tained with isoflurane via a closely fitting facemask.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Epidural anaesthesia has been reported in the guinea
Supportive care
pig (Thomasson et al., 1974).
 Since intravenous access is limited in the guinea pig, fluids 
Anaesthetic monitoring
to support the circulation are usually administered as a
bolus subcutaneously (see Fig. 4.l) or intraperitoneally
The heart rate can be palpated or auscultated using a bell
[see Fig. 4.2) during anaesthesia. Subcutaneous fluids are
stethoscope over the thoracic wall, but rates up to 300
more slowly absorbed.
beats per minute are extremely difficult to count. In
During recovery, a facemask can be used initially, mov-
larger patients, an oesophageal stethoscope may be used
ing to a chamber supplemented with oxygen if necessary
similarly. Echocardiogram (ECG) pads can be attached to
when the animal becomes rmore reactive. In the recovery
the feet (Fig. 4.9) or needle probes placed subcutaneously
 period, supplemental heat should be continued until the
to inhance electrical conduction (Schoemaker and
patient is able to therrmoregulate. If volatile agents have
Zandvliet, 2005), but many machines cannot detect the
been used, recovery is usually rapid. Injectable agents pro-
low signal strengths and high frequencies in these animals
duce a more prolonged recovery, as will painful proced-
(Flecknell, 2002)
ures. If recovery is unexpectedly slow, body temperature
 Respiration is usually rmonitored by observing the patient.
should be checked using a rectal thermometer and anal-
If a close-fitting facemask is used, breathing movements
gesia requirements reassessed.
may be seen in the reservoir bag. Respiratory monitors can
It is important that these herbivorous animals begin
be used, but care should be taken in the choice of equipment
eating soon after anaesthesia, to reduce the risk of ileus.
so as not to increase dead space within the anaesthetic cir-
Analgesia (Table 4.7) may be required if a painful condi-
cuit (see Chapter l). Pulse oximeters may be attached to
tion exists or surgery has been performed. Opioids, non-
the paw, but the high heart rate in guinea pigs may again
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and local
be greater than the limit on some models (Flecknell, 2002).
anaesthesia can all be used in guinea pigs (Flecknell, 2002).
Oxygen saturation is improved by administering oxygen
Prokinetics may be necessary to stimulate gastrointestinal
via a facemask throughout anaesthesia.
motility, but often syringe feeding is more beneficial in
As guinea pigs are not routinely intubated during anaes-
maintaining hydration and movement of ingesta through
thesia, PPV is not usually possible. It can be attempted
the digestive tract.
using a tightly fitting facemask by compressing the reser-
voir bag with the expiratory valve temporarily closed;
Family Chinchillidae
in gastric tympany. Alternative methods of respiratory
assistance are thoracic compression and the use of respira-
Chinchillas usually occur in large groups in the wild. The
tory stimulants, such as doxapram (Flecknell, 2002).
e  as e   u s  a
Monitoring and maintenance of body termperature are
pair, or a polygamous group of a single male with two to
essential in guinea pig anaesthesia. Supplemental heat can
six females (Quesenberry et al., 2004). As shy animals,
be provided as for other species, and a rectal therrmormeter
provision of a cardboard box (as for guinea pigs) or plastic
(see Fig. 4.7) used to monitor temperature. These
pipe hide will reduce the stress of hospitalisation. Pets
processes should be continued during the post-anaesthetic
should have climbing and jumping space at home, but a
period, until the guinea pig has recovered sufficiently to
single-level kennel is satisfactory for hospitalisation pur-
be able to thermoregulate.
poses. A dust bath (using commercial chinchilla sand or
volcanic ash] should be provided for a short time daily
during hospitalisation.
Chinchillas are adept at hiding signs of disease and sub-
clinical pathology is often present. It is, therefore, import-
ant to question the owner closely regarding husbandry
conditions, to identify any factors that may predispose to
illness. A full clinical examination is possible on most pet
chinchillas, and disease processes that the owner has not
noticed may be detected in this manner.
Temperature
Chinchillas are adapted to living in the cold temperatures
of the Andes mountains and have thick fur. The environ-
mental temperature range should ideally be 10-20C,
 although chinchillas are adapted to ambient temperatures
of between 18.3°C and 26.7°C, with relative humidity
Figure 4.9 · Echocardiograph pads on an anaesthetised guinea
below 50% (Donnelly, 2004a; Webb, 1991). Chinchillas do
not tolerate darmp or wet environrments (Quesenberry et al.,
adhesive tape.
2004). Although hypothermia is the main concern during
Rodent anaesthesia
anaesthesia, they may easily succumb to hyperthermia
Diarrhoea may be caused by an inappropriate diet,
when environrmental temperatures are above 28?C (Hoefer
overfeeding, sudden dietary change, bacterial or parasitic
and Crossley, 2002). Environmental and rectal tempera-
enteritis (Donnelly, 2004a). Hepatic disease caused by
ture must be monitored closely during anaesthesia and
metronidazole toxicity and neoplasia (Nobel and Neumann, 
the recovery period.
1963) have been reported.
As with other herbivores, ileus can cause significant
-sue isod (sausui aos u Aie pue) Aiiqro
Cardiovascular system
thesia. Prokinetics are frequently used in chinchillas peri-
anaesthetically (see Table 2.3). Syringe feeding is also a
As with guinea pigs, intravenous access can be difficult
useful procedure if the patient is not self-feeding soon
and sedation or anaesthesia is required in most anirmals.
after anaesthesia.
25-gauge needles or insulin syringes [28-gauge] can be
used to access peripheral veins, such as the lateral saphe-
nous or cephalic. Catheters should be 24-gauge or smaller.
Urinary system
A cut-down technique is required for jugular access. If
long-term intravenous access is required, venous access
Normal chinchilla urine has a pH of &.5, and it is usually
ports can be used (Quesenberry et al., 2004)
concentrated with a specific gravity greater than 1.045
Cardiomyopathy and valvular disease have been reported
(Merry, 1990). As is the case with guinea pigs, dipsticks
in chinchillas (Hoefer and Crossley, 2002). If clinical signs
can be used to check for ketonuria
are present, they are usually of dyspnoea associated with
Calcium oxalate crystals may precipitate in the renal
tubules, causing renal dysfunction (Goudas and Lusis,
cardiac failure. Cardiac murmurs heard on auscultation
1
may or may not be significant (Hoefer and Crossley, 2002).
1970). Lower urinary tract disorders, such as calculi, may
Echocardiography and electrocardiography are indicated
lead to post-renal azotaemia. In animals with suspected
 un paai sm iu aue aisaa on
urinary tract disease, renal function should be assessed
79
examination before the animal is anaesthetised (Donnelly,
before anaesthesia by analysing urine and blood param-
2004a).
eters. If renal dysfunction is found, fluids should be admin-
istered before, during, and after anaesthesia to ensure
renal circulation is not compromised. Drugs that may be
Gastrointestinal system
metabolised or excreted via the kidneys should be
avoided. Volatile agents, such as isoflurane and sevoflu-
Chinchillas are hindgut fermenting herbivores. In the wild
rane, may be used, as their excretion is almost completely
they consume a variety of grasses, cactus fruit, leaves and
via the respiratory tract.
bark of small shrubs and bushes. The vegetation is tough
and fibrous, with low energy content. The captive chin-
Endocrine system
grass hay (for example, Timothy grass hay), with a small
amount of proprietary chinchilla pellets, and ad libitum
Diabetes mellitus has been reported in a chinchilla
water. Occasional treats may include fruit and small
[Marlow, 1995). Glucosuria and ketonuria were present
amounts of greens (Hoefer and Crossley 2002). Chinchillas
in the case, along with hyperglycaemia. Blood glucose
eat mainly at night, so food should be available constantly.
levels should be monitored in diabetic animals peri-
anaesthetically, encouraging them to feed normally as soon
A daily weight check will be a more accurate method of
assessing appetite than observations during daylight
 as possible when recovered.
hours. The mean gastrointestinal transit time is 12-15 h
(Quesenberry et al., 2004].
Nervous system
Dental disease is the rmost common reason for presen-
tation of pet chinchillas at veterinary practices. Often
Pre-anaesthetic clinical examination of chinchillas should
animals have had a reduced or altered appetite for some
include assessment of their demeanour and neurological
time, and many animals are in poor body condition.
function. Differential diagnoses for animals with clinical
 In these cases, the chinchilla must be assessed and a deci-
signs consistent with central nervous system disease
sion made as to whether the anaesthetic required for
include infection with viruses (for example, herpesvirus
 dental treatment should be postponed while nutritional
(Goudas and Giltoy, 1970; Wohlsein et al., 2002)), bacte-
support is given, or whether the animal is stable enough
ria [for example, Listeria monocytogenes (MacKay et al.
to be anaesthetised and receive dental attention, which
1949)), protozoa (for example, Frenkelia microti (Dubey
will relieve oral discomfort and allow the animal to
et al., 2000)), or nematodes (for example, Baylisascaris
self-feed. In some cases, a staged procedure is used,
procyonis in Canada (Sanford, 1991). Head trauma
whereby the use of volatile agents or a short-acting com-
 could also cause central nervous dysfunction.
bination allows an initial assessment and perhaps minor
Anaesthesia rmay adversely affect animals with a com-
 dental treatment. After a few days of nutritional support,
promised central nervous system, primarily by reducing
when the chinchilla is in better body condition, a more
blood oxygen saturation and its supply to the brain. Care
prolonged procedure can be performed under a longer
should be taken with these cases to provide sufficient
anaesthetic.
oxygen, and to maintain the circulation and blood pressure
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
by administering fluids. Volatile anaesthetic agents are
used in these cases, as they have the least depressive
effects on metabolism and depth of anaesthesia can rap-
idly be altered if necessary. Midazolam or diazepam can be
administered as a pre-medicant to reduce the risk of
seizures.
Sedation and anaesthesia
Chinchilla sedation may be necessary for phlebotomy or
non-painful procedures, such as radiography or ultrasonog-
raphy Midazolam can be used to produce mild sedation,
or ketamine added to produce deeper sedation. The mida-
 zolamm and ketamine mix can be used for pre-medication
or light anaesthesia prior to induction/maintenance using
gaseous anaesthetic agents (see Tables 4.4 and 4.6).
 Induction of anaesthesia in chinchillas is commonly per-
Figure 4.10 · Rat, Rottus norvegicus, with end of T-piece circuit
formed in a chamber using inhalational agents, often without
used as a facemask to allow access to the submandibular region
pre-medication. After preoxygenation for a few minutes,
for surgery.
2-5% isoflurane or halothane is added to induce anaesthe-
sia. Loss of the righting reflex denotes anaesthesia. Usually
 2-4% isoflurane or 2-3% halothane is required for mainte-
nance of anaesthesia (Hoefer and Crossley, 2002)
reliable tool for monitoring depth of anaesthesia. The eyes
80
 In some cases, injectable anaesthesia is preferable to
should be coated with ocular lubricant (for example, liquid
gaseous agents, for example when dental disease necessi-
paraffin) to protect them from trauma, particularly when
tates access to the oral cavity. General anaesthesia can be
ketarmine combinations are used, which result in open
induced using a mix of acepromazine and ketamine. This
eyelids. During recovery, a soft surface, such as a towel,
rapidly results in surgical anaesthesia that lasts for up to
should cover food or bedding material that rmay be irritant
lh. Ketamine has a wide safety margin. Acepromazine
to the eyes.
should be avoided in hypovolaemic animals, and the doses
 Supplemental heat should be provided during anaes-
listed for both drugs may be reduced for debilitated ani-
thesia and in the recovery period until the patient is able
mals. The combination is not reversible, and sleep time
to thermoregulate. It is useful to monitor body tempera-
can be up to 5 h (Morgan et al., 198l). Ketamine can also
 ture using a well-lubricated rectal thermoreter until the
be used in combination with xylazine or diazepam. The
patient is mobile enough to move away from a heat
ketamine combinations can be topped up with volatile
source.
agents, such as isoflurane, if necessary.
 Unless a very brief gaseous anaesthesia has been per-
A study comparing three injectable anaesthetic combin-
formed, fluids are administered at the time of anaesthesia
ations [Henke et al., 2004) showed the combination of
to support the circulation. Warmed fluids are usually
midazolam with medetomidine and fentanyl to produce
administered subcutaneously; the intraperitoneal route
safer anaesthesia. Recovery after xylazine with ketamine
can also be used.
anaesthesia was more prolonged. Cardio-respiratory depres-
 If the chinchilla may be in discomfort, analgesia should
sion was less cormpared to animals given ketammine with
be administered. Pain is likely to cause anorexia and result
xylazine or medetomidine, and the triple combination
 in ileus. Nutritional support is provided with prokinetics
protocol allowed complete and rapid reversal using antag-
ao ioy se (z't aqe aas) spaay aaus pue (e'z aeaas)
onists. Bradycardia associated with alpha-2-agonists
small marmmals. As soon as the chinchilla has recovered
appears to be less marked in chinchillas than that seen in
 sufficiently, good-quality hay is provided to encourage a
other species [Henke et al., 2004). This shorter recovery
return to normal appetite.
phase enables animals to return to normal physiological
activity sooner, and reduces the risks of hypothermia and
Family Octodontidae
hypoglycaemia post anaesthesia.
Oxygen should be provided during all anaesthetics,
Most techniques used in guinea pigs and chinchillas are
 a t h aas] s s e  
appropriate for degus (see Fig. 4.3), such as venepunc-
access is required, the end of the anaesthetic circuit may
ture, as are doses for drugs and other treatrments
be held adjacent to the nares (Fig. 4.10) or a small nasal
(Johnson-Delaney, 2002)
 catheter used to administer oxygen.
Respiratory system
Monitoring and supportive care
Pneumonia is commonly seen in pet degus (Donnelly,
Chinchilla anaesthesia is monitored as for other small
2004b). Primary respiratory tract neoplasia has also been
mammal species. The toe pinch withdrawal is the most
reported (Anderson et al., i990}.
Rodent anaesthesia
 Digestive system
Bennett, A. F, and H. S. Mullen. 2004. Soft tissue surgery. In:
K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
The degu is a herbivorous hind-gut fermentor. In the wild,
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
they eat grass, leaves, bark, herbs, seeds, fruits, fresh cat-
pp. 316-328. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
tle or horse droppings, and crops. Captive animals eat
Bennett, R. A. I998. Rabbit and rodent orthopedics. Proc North Am
rodent chow, grass hay and occasional fresh greens.
Vet Conf: 775-774.
Inappropriate diets may lead to obesity (Donnelly,
Bibun, C., and L. Bauck. 2004. Small Rodents: Basic Anatomy,
2004b) or predispose to dental disease. Hepatocellular
 Physiology, Husbandry, and Clinical Techniques. In:
K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits,
carninomas have been reported (Montali, 1980; Murphy
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Znd edn.
et al., 1980).
pp. 286-298. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
K
Bivin, W. S., M. P. Crawford, and N. R. Brewer. I979.
Urinary system
Morphophysiology. In: H. J. Baker, J. R. Lindsey and
S. H. Weisbroth [eds.) The Laboratory Rat. Vol.1, Biology &
Degus do not require much water, but should have water
Diseases. pp. 74-100. Academic Press, New York.
al
available ad libitum (Donnelly, 2004b).
Bivin, W. S., G. A. Olsen, and K. A. Murray. I987.
Morphophysiology In: G. L. Van Hoosier and
an
C. A. W. McPherson [eds.] Laboratory Hamsters.
Endocrine system
pp. 9-42. Academic Press, Orlando, FL.
Bowden, R. S. T. 1959. Disease of chinchillas. Vet Rec 7l:
Amyloidosis of Langerhans islets rmay lead to diabetes
601-01
 mellitus in degus. This may be associated with certain
Breazile, J. E., and E. M. Brown. 1976. Anatomy. In: J. E. Wagner
viral infections or hyperglycaemia due to an inappropriate
and P J. Manning [eds.) The Biology of the Guinea Pig.
diet (Fox and Murphy, 1979; Najecki and Tate, 1999;
pp. 53-62. Academic Press, New York.
Spear et al., 1984). Blood glucose levels should be closely
Brown, S. A., and K. L. Rosenthal. I997. Self-Assessment Colour
monitored in these animals before and during anaesthesia,
Review of Small Mammals. Manson Publishing Ltd, London.
8
and in the recovery period. Intravenous dextrose can be
Burwell, A. K., and A. L. Baldwin. 2006. Do audible and ultrasonic
sounds of intensities common in animal facilities affect the
administered if required.
autonomic nervous system of rodents? J Appl Anim Welfare
Sci 9: 179-200.
Anaesthesia
Carpenter, J. W. 2005. Exotic Animal Formulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier,
St Louis, Missouri.
The easiest option for anaesthesia of degus is complete
Collins, B. 1988. Common diseases and medical management of
inhalational anaesthesia (see Table 4.5). This is relatively
rodents and lagomorphs. In: E. R. Jacobson and G. V. Kollias
safe and good for short, minor procedures, such as oral
[eds.] Exotic Animals. pp. 261-316. Churchill Livingstone,
New York.
exarmination, phlebotony and radiography. It is less useful
Cruz, I. J., J. M. Loste, and O. H. Burzaco. I998. Observations on
for dental treatment or surgery on the head (which may
the use of medtomidine/ketamine and its reversal with
interfere with facemask positioning)
atipamezole for chemical restraint in the mouse. Lab Anim
For these latter procedures, injectable agents should be
32: 1822.
used as in the other hystricomorphs [see Tables 4.4 and
Donnelly, T. M. 2004a. Disease problems of chinchillas. In:
4.6]. Options include sedation with midazolam, and
K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits,
anaesthesia with ketamine combinations (acepromazine,
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. p.
diazepam, or medetomidine). The degu should be accur-
255-265. Saumders, St Louis, Missouri.
Donmelly, T. M. 2004b. Small Rodents: Disease Problems of Small
ately weighed on digital scales [see Fig. 1.9) to reduce the
Rodents. In: K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.)]
risk of overdose.
Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery.
Znd edn. pp. 299-315. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
REFERENCES
Drummond, J. C. 1985. MAC for halothane, enflurane, and
isoflurane in the New Zealand white rabbit: and a test for
the validity of MAC determinations. Anesthesiology 62:
Adamcak, A., and B. Otten. 2000. Rodent therapeutics. Vet Clin
8-9
North Am Exot Anim Pract 3: 221-237.
Dubey, J. P, T. R. Clark, and D. Yantis. 2000. Fremkelia microti
Agren, G., Q. Zhou, and W. Zhong. I989. Ecology and social
infection in a chinchilla [Chinchilla lamiger] in the United
behaviour of Mongolian gerbils, Meriones unguiculatus,
States. J Parasitol 86: I149-1150.
at Xilinhot, Inner Mongolia, China. Anim Behav
Eisele, P H. I007. Anesthesia for small mammals. Proc North Am
37: 1127.
Vet Conf: 785-791.
Anderson, N. L. I994. Basic husbandry and medicine of pocket pets.
Fallon, M. T. I996. Rats and mice. In: K. Laber-Laird, M. M. Swindle
 In: S. J. Birchard and R. G. Sherding [eds.) Saunders Manual
and P. A. Flecknell [eds.) Handbook of Rodent and Rabbit
of Small Animal Practice. pp. 1363-1389. WB Saunders,
Medicine. pp. I-39. Pergamon, Oxford.
Philadelphia.
Feaver, J., and Z. Shibin. 2004. Hamsters. In: D. MacDonald and
Anderson, W. I., H. Steinberg, and J. M. King. I990.
S. Norris [eds.) The New Encylopedia of Mammals.
Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma with renal and hepatic metastases
pp. 650-651. Oxford Universty Press, Oxford.
in a degu [Octodon degus). J Wildlife Dis 26: 129-131.
Flecknell, P. I996a. Anaesthesia and analgesia for rodents and rabbits.
Antinoff, N. I999. Critical care. In: A. E. Rupley [ed.) Veterinary
 In: K. Laber-Laird, M. M. Swindle and P. Flecknell [eds.)
Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice. Vol. 2.
Handbook of Rodent and Rabbit Medicine. pp. 219-237.
No.2. pp. 153-175. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Pergamon, Kidlington, Oxford.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Flecknell, P. I996b. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia. Znd edn.
Hoefer, H. L., and D. A. Crossey. 2002. Chinchillas. In:
Academic Press, London.
A. Meredith and S. Redrobe [eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets.
Flecknell, P. A. 200l. Analgesia of small mammals. Vet Clin North
4th edn. pp. 65-75. BSAVA, Quedgeley, UK.
Am: Exotic Anim Practice 4: 47-56.
Hoover, W. H., C. L. Mannings,and H. W. Sheerin. I1969.
Fecknell P A. 2002. Guinea pigs. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe 
Observations on digestion in the golden hamster. J Anim
[eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. 52-64. BSAVA,
Sci 28: 349-352.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Hubbard, G. B., and R. E. Schmidt. I987. Noninfectious diseases.
Fox, J. G., and J. C. Murphy. I979. Cytomegalic virus-associated
 In: G. L. Van Hoosier and C. W. McPherson [eds.)
insulitis in diabetic Octodon degus. Vet Pathol 16: 625-628.
Laboratory Hamsters. pp. I69-178. Academic Press,
Funk, R. S. 2004. Medical Management of Prairie Dogs. In:
Orlando.
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
Huerkamp, M. J. 1995. Anesthesia and postoperative management of
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
rabbits and pocket pets. In: J. D. Bonagura [ed.) Kirk's Current
pp. 266-273. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
Veterinary Therapy Xll: Small Animal Practice.
Gamble, M. R. 1976. Fire alarms and oestrous in rats. Lab Anim
pp. 1322-1327. WB Saumders, Philadelphia.
10: 161-163.
Ivey, E. S., and J. K. Morrisey. 2000. Therapeutics for rabbits. Vet
Glen, J. B. 1980. Animal studies of the anesthetic activity of ICI 35
Clin North Am Exotic Anim Pract 3: 183-220.
865. Br J Anaesth 56: 617-627.
Jenkins, J. R. 1992. Husbandry and common diseases of the chimchilla
Goodman, G. 2002. Hamsters. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
(Chinchilla Laiger). J Small Exotic Anim Med 2: I5-17.
[eds.) Manual of Exotics Pets. 4th edn. pp. 26-33. BSAVA,
Jilge, B. I980. The gastrointestinal transit time in the guinea-pig.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Z Versuchstierk 22: 204-210.
Goudas, P, and J. S. Giltoy. I970. Spontaneous herpes-like viral
Johnson-Delaney, C. 1999. Postoperative management of small
imfection in a chinchilla [Chinchilla lamiger). Wildl Dis 6:
mammals. Exotic DVM I(5): 19-21.
175-179.
Johnson-Delaney, C. A. I996. Exotic Companion Medicine
Goudas, P, and P Lusis. I970. Oxalate nephrosis in a chinchilla
Handbook for Veterinarians. Wingers Publishing, Lake Worth.
[Chinchilla laiger). Can Vet J II: 256-257.
Johnson-Delaney, C. A. 2002. Other small mammals. In:
82
Greene, E. C. I962. Gross anatomy. In: E. J. Farris and J. Q. Griffith
A. Meredith and S. Redrobe [eds.)] Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th
[eds.) The Rat in Laboratory Investigation. Znd edn. pp. 24-50.
edn. pp. I02-115. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Hafner, New York.
Kastl, S., U. Kotschenreuther, B. Hille et al. 2004. Simplification of
Griner, L. A. I983. Pathology of Zoo Animals. Zoological Society of
rat intubation on inclined metal plate. Adv Physiol Educ 28:
San Diego, San Diego.
29-32.
Harkness, J. E. I993. A Practitioner's Guide to Domestic Rodents.
Keeble, E. 2002. Gerbils. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe [eds.]
American Animal Hospital Association, Lakewood, CO.
Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. 34-46. BSAVA, Quedgeley,
Harkness, J. E., and J. E. Wagner. I995a. Biology and husbandry -
Gloucester.
the guinea pig. The Biology and Medicine of Rabbits and
Kingdon, J. I997. The Kingdon Field Guide to African Mammals.
Rodents. 4th edn. pp. 30-40. William & Wilkins, Baltimore.
Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Harkness, J. E., and J. E. Wagner. I995b. Biology and husbandry -
Koolhaas, J. M. 1999. The laboratory rat. In: T. Poole [ed.) The
the hamster. The Biology and Medicine of Rabbits and Rodents.
UFAW Handbook on the Care and Management of Laboratory
4th ern. pp. 40-49. William & Wilkins, Baltimore.
Animals. 7th edn. No. I pp. 313-331, Blackwell science,
Harkness, J. E., and J. E. Wagner. 1995c. The Biology and Medicine
Oxford.
of Rabbits and Rodents. 4th edn. Williams and Wilkins,
Kuntze, A. I992. Diseases of guinea-pigs and golden hamsters
Philadelphia
important in practice. Monatshefte Veterinarmed 47: 143-147.
Harkness, J. E., and J. E. Wagner. I995d. The Biology and Medicine
Laber-Laird, K. 1996. Gerbils. In: K. Laber-Laird, M. M. Swindle,
of Rabbits and Rodents. p. 103-284. Lea & Febiger,
P. Flecknell (eds.) Handbook of Rodent and Rabbit Medicine.
Baltimore.
pp. 39-58. Pergamon, Oxford.
Harrestien, L. I994. Critical care of ferrets, rabbits, and rodents.
Laird, K. L., M. M. Swindle, and P. A. Flecknell. 1996. Handbook of
Sem Avian Exotic Pet Med 3: 217-228.
Rodent and Rabbit Medicine. Pergamon, Oxford.
Hartmann, K. I993. [Hubandry-related diseases in the chinchilla.]
Laming, P R., S. L. Cosby, and J. K. O'Neill. 1989. Seizures in the 
[G erman). Tieraerztl Prax 21: 574-580.
Mongolian gerbil are related to a deficiency in cerebral
Heard, D. J. 1993. Prmciples and techniques of anesthesia and
glutarmine synthetase. Comp Biochem Physiol C 94: 399-404.
amalgesia for exotic practice. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
Lightfoot, T. L. 1999. Clinical examination of chinchillas, hedgehogs,
Pract 23: 1301-1327.
prairie dogs and sugar gliders. Vet Clin North Am Exotic Anitm
Hebel, R., and M. W. Stromberg. I986. Respiratory System.
Pract 2: 447-469.
Anatomy and Ermbryology of the Laboratory Rat. pp. 58-64.
Lightfoot, T. L. 2000. Therapeutics of African pygmy hedgehogs and
Biomed Verlag, Worthsee, G ermany.
prairie dogs. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 3: I55-172.
Hem, A., A. J. Smith, and P. Solberg. I998. Saphenous vein puncture
Lipman, N. S., and C. Foltz. 1996. Hamsters. In: K. Laber-Laird,
for blood sampling of the mouse, rat, hamster, gerbil, guinea
M. Swindle and P. Flecknell (eds.) Handbook of Rodent and
pig, ferret, and mink. Lab Anim 32: 364-368.
Rabbit Medicine. p. 59-9l. Pergamon, Oxford.
Henke, J., C. Baumgartner, I. Roltgen et al. 2004. Anaesthesia
MacKay, K. A., A. H. Kennedy, D. L. T. Smith et al. I949. Listeria
with midazolam/medetomidine/fentanyl in chinchillas
motocytogetes infection in chinchillas. Annual Report Ontario
[Chinchilla laigera] compared to anaesthesia with
Veterinary College, Guelph: I37-145.
xylazine/ketamine and medetomidine/ketamine. J Vet Med
Manming, P J., J. E. Wagner, and J. E. Harkness. I984. Biology and
51: 259-264.
diseases of guinea pigs. In: J. G. Fox, B. J. Cohen and
Hoefer, H. I999. Diagnosis and management of chinchilla diseases.
F M. Loew [eds.) Laboratory Animal Medicine. p. 149-177.
 Proc North Am Vet Conf: 833-835.
Academic Press, Orlando.
Hoefer, H. L. I994. Chinchillas. Vet Clin North Am Exotic Anim
Marlow, C. 1995. Diabetes in a chinchilla [letter]. Vete Rec 136:
Pract 24: 103-111.
595-596.
Rodent anaesthesia
Meredith, A. 2002. Chipmunks. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
Quesenberry, K., and J. W. Carpenter. 2004. Ferrets, Rabbits, and
[eds.) BSAVA Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th erdn. pp. 47-51.
Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. Saunders,
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
St Louis, Missouri.
Merry, C. J. 1990. An introduction to chinchillas. Vet Tech II:
Quesenberry, K. E. I994. Guinea pigs. Vet Clin North Am Sum Anitn
315-322.
Pract 24: 67-87.
Montali, R. J. I980. An overview of tumors in zoo animals. In:
Quesenberry, K. E., T. M. Donnelly, and E. V. Hillyer. 2004. Biology,
R. J. Montali and G. Migaki [eds.) The Comparative Pathology
husbandry, and clinical techniques of guinea pigs and
of Zoo Animals. pp. 531-542. Smithsonian Institution Press,
chinchillas. In: K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.)
Washington, DC.
Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery.
Morgan, R. J., L. B. Eddy, T. N. Solie et al. 1981. Ketamine-
Znd edn. pp. 232-244. Saunmders.
acepromazine as an anaesthetic agent for chinchillas [Chinchilla
Redrobe, S. 2001. Imaging techniques in small mammals. Semin
K
Lmiger). Lab Anim 15[3]: 281-283.
Avian Exotic Pet Med 10: 187-197.
Morrisey, J. K., and J. W. Carpenter. 2004. Formulary. In:
Redrobe, S. 2002.Soft tissue surgery of rabbits and rodents. Semin
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
Avian Exotic Pet Med 1l: 231-245.
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Remie, R., A. P M. G. Bertens, J. W. Van Dongen et al. 1990.
a
pp. 436-444. W B Saunders, St Louis.
Anaesthesia of the laboratory rat. In: J. W. Van Dongen,
Motzel, S. L., and S. V. Gibson. I990. Tyzzer disease in hamsters and
J. W. Rensema and G. H. J. Van Wummik [eds.) Manual of
an
gerbils from a pet store supplier. J Am Vet Med Assoc I97:
Microsurgery on the Laboratory Rat. pp. 6l-80. Elsevier,
1176-1178.
Amsterdam.
Murphy, J. C., T. P. Crowell, K. M. Hewes et al. I980. Spontaneous
Richardson, V. C. G. I997. Diseases of Small Domestic Rodents.
lesions in the degu [Rodemtia,Hysticomorpha: Octodo degus]
Blackwell Scientific, Oxford.
In: R. J. Montali and G. Migaki [erds.) The Comparative
Robinson, W. R., R. H. Peters, and J. Zimmerman. I983. The effects
Pathology of Zoo Animals. pp. 437-444. Smithsonian
of body size and termperature on metabolic rate of organistms.
Institution Press, Washington, DC.
Can J Zool 61: 281-288.
Najecki, D., and B. Tate. 1999. Husbandry and management of the
Roltgen, I. 2002. Zur Anasthesie beim Chinchilla [Chinchilla
degu. Lab Anim 28: 54-62.
lamigera] mit Midazolam, Medetomidin und Fentanyl und ihrer
83
Navia, J. M., and C. E. Hunt. I976. Nutrition, nutritional diseases,
vollstandigen Antagonisierung mit Flumazenil, Atipamezol und
and mutrition research applications. In: J. E. Wagner and
 Naloxon im Vergleich zur Anasthesie mit Xylazin/Ketamin und
P J. Manning [eds.) The Biology of the Guinea Pig.
Medtomidin/Ketamin. Vet. Med. Theses, LMU, Muinchen.
pp. 235-261. Academic Press, New York.
Sanford, S. E. 1991. Cerbrospinal nermtodliasis caused by
Nevalainen, T., L. Phyhala, H. M. Voipio et al. 1989. Evaluation of
Baylisascaris procyomis in chinchillas [Chinchilla lamiger]. J Vet
anaesthetic potency of medetormidine-ketamine combination in
Diagn Invest 3: 77-79.
rats, guinea-pigs and rabbits. Acta Vet Scand Suppl 85:
Santos, M., V. Kunkar, P. Garcia-Iturralde et al. 2004. Meloxicam, a
139-143.
specific COX-2 inhibitor, does not enhance the isofurane
Newcomer, C. E., D. A. Fitts, B. D. Goldman et al. 1987.
minimum alveolar concentration reruction produced by
Experimental biology: Other research uses of Syrian hamsters.
morphine in the rat. Anesth Analg 98: 359-363.
In: G. L. Van Hoosier and C. A. W. McPherson [eds.]
Schoemaker, N. J. [2002). Ferrets. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
Laboratory Hamsters. pp. 263-300. Academic Press,
[eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. pp. 93-I01. BSAVA, Quedgeley,
Orlando, FL.
Gloucester.
Nobel, T. A., and F. Neumann. I963. Carcinoma of the liver in a
Schoemaker, N. J., and M. M. J. M.Zandvliet. 2005.
nutria [Myocaster coypus] and a chinchilla [Chinchilla Lamiger].
 Electrocardiograms in selerted species. Semin Avian Exotic Pet
Refuah Veterinarith 20: 16l-162.
Med 14: 26-33.
O'Malley, B. 2005a. Hamsters. In: B. O'Malley [ed.) Clinical
Sharp, P E., and M. C. LaRegina. I998. Important biological
Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and
features. In: M. A. Suckrow [ed.) The Laboratory Rat.
Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians.
pp. I-19. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
pp. 227-236. Elsevier Saunders, London.
Simpson, V. J., and R. E. Johnson. I996. Genetic models in the
O'Malley, B. 2005b. Rats. In: B. O'Malley [ed.) Clinical Anatomy
study of anaesthetic drug action. Int Rev Neurobiol 39:
ad Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of
223-241.
Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. pp. 209-225.
Singleton, G., C. R. Dickman, and D. M. Stoddart. 2004. Rodents.
Elsevier Saunders, London.
 In: D. Macdonald and S. Noris [eds.) The New Encylopedia of
O'Rourke, D. P 2004. Disease problems of guinea pigs. In:
Mammals. pp. 578-587. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
K E. Quesenberry [ed.) Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
Smith, D. A., and P. M. Burgmann. I997. Fortmulary. In: E. V. Hillyer
Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 245-254.
and K. Quesenberry [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
Saunders.
Chnical Medicine and Surgery. pp. 392-404. WB Saunders,
Oglesbee, B. L. I995. Emergency medicine for pocket pets. In:
Philadelphia.
J. D. Bonagura [ed.) Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII:
Spear, G. S., M. V. Caple, and L. R. Sutherland. 1984. The pancreas
Small Animal Practice. pp. I330. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
in the degu. Exp Mol Pathol 40: 295-310.
Orr, H. E. 2002. Rats and mice. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
Tell, L. A. I995. Medical management of prairie dogs. Proc North
[eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. I3-25. BSAVA,
Am Vet Conf 9: 721-724.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Thomasson, B., O. Ruuskanen, and J. Merikanto. I974. Spinal
Patel, S. S., and K. L. Goa. I996. Sevoflurane: A review of its
anaesthesia in the guinea pig. Lab Anim 8: 241-244.
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties and its
Timm, K. I., S. E. Jahn, and C. J. Sedgwick. I987. The palatal
clinical use in general anaesthesia. Drugs 51: 658-700.
ostium of the guinea pig. Lab Anim Sci 37: 801-802.
Pollock, C. 2002. Postoperative management of the exotic
Waynforth, H. B., and P. A. Flecknell. 1992. Experimental and
animal patient. Vet Clin North Am Exotic Anim Practice
Surgical Technique in the Rat. Znd edn. Academic Press,
5: 183212.
London.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Webb, R. 1991. Chinchillas. In: P. H. Beynon and J. E. Cooper [eds.)
Whittaker, D. I999. Hamsters. In: T. Poole [ed.) The UFAW
Manual of Exotic Pets pp. I5-22. Iowa State University Press,
Handbook on the Care and Managerment of Laboratory
Ames.
Animals, Vol.I. pp. 356-366, Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Weichbrod, R. H., C. F. Cisar, J. G. Miller et al. I988. Effects of
Wohlsein, P, A. Thiele, M. Fehr et al. 2002. Spontaneous human
cage beddings on microsomal oxidative enzymes in rat liver.
herpes-virus type I infectionin a chinchilla [Chinchila laniger
Lab Anim Sci 38: 296-298.
f. dom.). Acta Neuropathol 104: 674-678.
White, E. J., and C. M. Lang. I989. The guinea pig. In: W. F. Loeb
Woolf, A., J. M. King, and B. Tennant. I982. Primary hepatocellular
mnd F. W. Quimby [eds.) The Clinical Chemistry of Laboratory
carcinoma in a black-tailed prairie dog, Cymomys Iudovicianus.
Animals. pp. 27-30. Pergarmon Press, New York.
J Wildlife Dis 18: 517.
84
5
Ferret anaesthesia
a
a
1
INTRODUCTION
blood pressure indirectly or urine output may be used to
1
assess cardiac output (Lucas, 2000),
The ferret, Mustela putorius furo, is commonly kept as a
Cardiac disease is prevalent in ferrets, who are suscep-
tible to both dilated and hypertropic cardiomyopathy, and
pet or working anirmal. Sedation or anaesthesia may be
5
Dirofilaria immitis (Lewington, 2005). If possible, ani-
required to perform investigative procedures or surgery.
mals with cardiac disease should be given medications to
improve cardiac function prior to anaesthesia, for example
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
using furosemide, digoxin, and/or enalapril as appropriate
(Schoemaker, 2002)
Total blood volume is usually 5-7% of body weight, and
Temperature
is approximately 40 ml in a jill and 60 ml in a hob (Fox,
 a aag an ui s a t 
The normal ferret body temperature is 37.8-40°C (Fox,
cephalic, lateral saphenous and jugular veins. The jugular
1998). Ferrets do not have sweat glands, and they are vul-
vein lies quite laterally on the neck (O'Malley, 2005). The
nerable to heat stress above 32?C, particularly if humidity
ventral coccygeal artery can also be accessed (Curl and
is also high (Brown, 2004; Lewington, 2005). The envir-
Curl, 1985), as can the cranial vena cava in the anaes-
onmental termperature should not exceed 2l.2°C for nest-
thetised animal (Schoemaker, 2002)
ing jills (Bell, 2004).
 Ferrets have a relatively high haematocrit compared to
other species, at 46-61% (Petrie and Morrisey, 2004).
Anaemia may be caused by blood loss, or a number of
Cardiovascular system
chronic diseases may lead to anaemia, and the risk of
anaesthesia to the patient will depend on the aetiology.
The heart lies obliquely between the sixth and eighth ribs,
Animals with a packed cell volume (PCV) of less than
with the apex beat to the left. This caudal positioning of
25% are likely to benefit from a blood transfusion.
the heart makes cranial vena cava puncture a safer tech-
nique in ferrets cormpared to other species [An and Evans,
Respiratory system
1998). In the healthy animal, the heart should not nor-
 mally rest on the sternum (Brown and Rosenthal, 1997).
As the ferret's tongue is mobile as in cats, it is easily pulled
The normal resting heart rate is 180-250 beats per minute
rostrally to allow visualisation of the glottis for intubation.
(Petrie and Morrisey, 2004).
The ventral space in the nasal conchae is very narrow
 Mean systolic arterial blood pressure is 133 mmHg in
allowing passage of a catheter with a maxirmum diameter
the conscious jill or l6l mmHg in the hob. In the anaes-
of 3.0 or 3.5 French if necessary for oxygen supplementa-
thetised ferret, the mean diastolic arterial blood pressure
tion (Lewington, 2005).
is 110-125 mmHg (Fox, 1998). A sinus arrhythmia may
Compared to other mammals, the ferret's thoracic cav-
be found in normal ferrets (Quesenberry and Orcutt,
ity is large. The long lungs have a correspondingly large
2004), as may second-degree atrioventricular (AV) block
total lung capacity (Lewington, 2005). Diaphragmatic
(Petrie and Morrisey, 2004). Capillary refill time should
movement is more important in ventilation of the anaes-
be less than 2 s, and mucous membranes should be pink.
thetised ferret than costal moverment.
Peripheral pulses are not easily palpable in ferrets, but an
Ferrets may sneeze during clinical evaluation. This is
ultrasonic Doppler flow detector may be used to assess
often in response to dust or debris inhalation, and should not
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
be of concern unless it becomes frequent or other clinical
Gastrointestinal system
signs are noted (Brown, 2004). Primary respiratory tract dis-
ease is relatively rare and includes viral (canine distemper
Ferrets are carnivorous. Their diet is low in carbohydrate and
virus, hurman influenza virus), rarely bacterial (for exarmple,
fibre, containing 928% fat. In the wild they consume whole
Streptococcus zooepidemicus, S. pneumoniae),parasitic
 carcases. Most captive animals are fed formulated diets con-
(Pneumocystis carini) and rarely mycotic (for example,
taining 30-35% animal protein, in addition to chicks, mice,
Blastomyces dermatitidis, Coccidioides immitis} infections.
rats and raw egg (Brown, 2004). Water is provided in a bot-
Aleutian disease virus may cause an interstitial pneumonia in
tle or weighted bowl. Ferrets eat 140-190g of food daily
young anirmals. Differential aetiologies for a dyspnoeic ferret
(Fox, 1998), and have a rapid gastrointestinal transit time of
include cardiac disease (see above), thoracic traurma, neo-
3-4h in the adult animal (Bell, 1999). Unlike most of the
plasia (usually metastases), gastrointestinal disease, such as
other species discussed in this section, ferrets are able to
megaoesophagus (with laboured breathing due to aspiration
vormit and are, therefore, fasted prior to anaesthesia.
pneumonia} or gastric bloat (Hoefer and Bell, 2004)
Diarrhoea in ferrets may be due to various causes, from
 Pleural effusion may be present in animals with cardiomy-
dietary indiscretion and infectious agents to inflarmmatory
opathy or lymphorma, further compromising the patient dur-
bowel disease and severe metabolic disorders [Hoefer and
ing anaesthesia (Schoemaker, 2002). In these cases sedation
Bell, 2004)
or anaesthesia may be required to investigate the disease
 Hepatic disease is common in ferrets, which may affect
process.
anaesthetic drug metabolism. Neoplasia is the predomi-
L
nating aetiology, in particular lymphoma. Chronic anorexia
may lead to hepatic lipidosis, as may chronic gastrointes-
BOX 5.l Cardiovascular and
tinal disease. Elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT} is
respiratory systems
usually found on biochemistry in ferrets with hepatic disease,
86
sometimes with elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
Relatively large thoracic cavity
(Hoefer and Bell, 2004).
Heart quite caudal in thorax
Normal heart rate |80-250 beats per minute
Endocrine system
Normal blood volume 5-7% body weight
Many disease processes can affect the ferret endocrine sys-
 Cardiac disease common; primary respiratory tract
diseaserare
tem, which may affect the patient's physiological responses
to anaesthesia.
Adrenal gland pathology usually causes secretion of sex-
ual hormones from the cortical region, leading to lethargy
and muscle atrophy armong other clinical signs (Lewington,
URINARY SYSTEM
 2005). Periurethral cysts may occur in male ferrets with
adrenal gland disease. These cysts may obstruct urinary
Normal water intake is 75-100 ml (Moody et al., 1985)
outflow, leading to metabolic abnormalities requiring sta-
producing 26-28 ml of urine daily (Fox, 1998). Normal
bilisation prior to adrenal gland surgery. Catheterisation of
urine pH is 6.0-7.5 (Quesenberry 1996; Thornton et al.,
the bladder may be difficult without drainage of the cysts.
1979). In some patients, blood biochemistry parameters
Anaemia and pancytopenia may also occur (similar to oestro-
may be assessed prior to anaesthesia. Blood urea nitrogen
gen toxicosis). Many animals with adrenocortical disease
(BUN) levels are affected by renal and non-renal factors,
have concomitant insulinomas and splenormegaly. As these
and do not elevate sirmultaneously with serum creatinine
are usually older animals, remember to check for cardiac
in renal failure (Hillyer, 1997). Neither BUN nor serum
disease or lymphoma in these cases. Cardiac disease is a
creatinine levels increase until the kidney is 75% dam-
cormrmon cause of peri-operative rmortality in adrenalectomy
aged, and so are relatively insensitive assessrments of renal
surgeries (Lawrence et al., 1993; Rosenthal et al., 1993;
function, but small elevations are often significant (Esteves
Weiss and Scott, 1997; Weiss et al., 1999).
et al., 1994)
Adrenal medulla disease may occur in the form of
Renal disease may not cause clinical signs in ferrets.
phaeochromocytomas. These produce excess catechol-
However, significant nurmbers of anirmals will have some
amines, and affect the cardiovascular system. Clinical
degree of renal dysfunction, for example chronic intersti-
signs include tachycardia, dyspnoea, and cardiovascular
tial nephritis in older animals (Kawasaki, 1994). Urolithiasis
collapse (Quesenberry and Rosenthal, 2004].
may lead to post-renal azotaemia. Where they are pres-
Oestrogen toxicosis may occur in females either with
ent, clinical signs of urinary tract disease are similar to
 persistent oestrous [Sherrill and Gorham, 1985} or adrenal
those seen in other species (Pollock, 2004).
disease (de Wit et al., 2001). Haematopoietic tissue is
Azotaemic animals are usually anaesthetised with isoflu-
affected, with a predominant finding of non-regenerative
rane. An alternative is to use ketarmine with xylazine, revers-
anaemia and leukopenia (Purcell and Brown, 1999;
ing the xylazine with yohimbine or atiparmezole. For this
Rosenthal, 1994).
protocol it is advisable to administer fluids intravenously or
Insulinomas are relatively common in pet ferrets, and
subcutaneously before anaesthesia (Bell, 2004)
resulting hypoglycaemic crises should be stabilised before
Ferret anaesthesia
anaesthesia is instigated. Other disease processes that may
2004). This can be provided with soft bedding, such as
cause hypoglycaemia in ferrets are starvation, sepsis and
towels and shredded paper. Care should be taken to ensure
hypoadrenocorticism (Ludwig and Aiken, 2004). Clinical
that cage bars are sufficiently close to prevent escapes
signs include hindlimb paresis and central nervous systerm
(Quesenberry and Orcutt, 2004).
signs that may result frorn associated brain dysfunction.
Proprietary ferret foods are available, but cat foods are
Hypoglycaemia may produce sinus bradycardia
similar and can be fed to ferrets for short periods during
isu shaiaj u paodan uaaq seu smi saaqi
hospitalisation.
comrmonly after pancreatic surgery for removal of insuli-
nomas (Quesenberry and Rosenthal, 2004].
Fluid and nutritional support
Hydration should be maintained during hospitalisation,
BOX 5.2 Common endocrine diseases
including replacement of existing deficits and ongoing
in ferrets that may cause metabolic or
losses. Fluid therapy is usually administered subcutaneously
haematological changes affecting
or intraperitoneally (Table 5.1). Intravenous or intraosseous
access is preferable for ill animals (Quesenberry and
anaesthesia
Orcutt, 2004). For intravenous catheterisation, the lateral
 Adrenal gland disease
saphenous and cephalic vein are most cormmonly used
(Schoemaker, 2002)
 Insulinoma
Persistent oestrus
Fasting
1
Diabetes mellitus
Ferrets should be fasted for 4 h prior to planned proced-
87
ures to reduce the risk of vomition or regurgitation and
aspiration (Schoemaker, 2002)
Nervous system
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
If central nervous system abnormalities are found in the
clinical examination, anaesthesia should preferably be
Endotracheal tubes ranging in size from 2mm to 4 mm may
postponed until the aetiology has been identified. Many
be used in ferrets, depending on the size of the animal. A
pathologies will affect the patient's response to and risk
frorm anaesthesia. If possible, stabilise the patient prior to
laryngoscope is useful for intubation.
anaesthesia. Causes of paresis or seizures in ferrets include
hypoglycaemia associated with insulinomas, cardiac dis-
TECHNIQUES
ease, metabolic derangements, toxins (for example ibu-
profen), gastrointestinal disease, primary neurologic disease
[for example neoplasia, intervertebral disc disease],
Routes of administration
Aleutian disease, rabies or late-stage canine distemper virus
infection. Central nervous system disease includes trauma,
lan on As siaa on uai aie sip pue sp
infection, inflammation or neoplasia (Antinoff, 2004]
small marmmals. Table 5.2 lists injection sites for ferrets.
PRE-ANAESTHETICASSESSMENT
Intubation
AND STABILISATION
Endotracheal intubation in ferrets is similar to the proced-
History and clinical examination
ure in cats. Local anaesthetic is sprayed on to the glottis
and time allowed for anaesthesia to occur, before passage
of an uncuffed endotracheal tube [diameter 2-4 mm for
A history should be taken and a full clinical exarmination
adult ferrets).
of the conscious animal undertaken to identify the extent
of any disease processes before sedation or anaesthesia.
Findings will help ascertain whether the animal is likely to
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
survive anaesthesia and allow appropriate selection of
anaesthetic agents.
Medetomidine can be used to cause light sedation, either
for minor procedures or prior to induction with another
Hospitalisation facilities
agent. Atipamezole can be administered to reverse the
medetomidine and speed recovery (Schoemaker, 2002).
As their ancestors' natural behaviour was to live in under
Acepromazine can be used to produce sedation in fer-
ground burrows, ferrets prefer to sleep in an enclosed area
rets, administered at 0.l mg/kg subcutaneously or intra-
and have digging opportunities when hospitalised (Brown,
muscularly (Heard, 1993)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 5.l: Fluid and nutritional support for ferrets
FLUID
ROUTE
DOSE
FREQUENCY
INDICATION/COMmENT
Crystalloids, for example
IV, SC
60-70 ml/kg/day3
CRI (IV) or divide
Maintenance requirements (increase if
lactated Ringer's solution
into 2-3 boluses
fluid losses present)
(slow IV, SC)
Support intravascular volume
Colloids, for example
IV
5 ml/kg
Bolus over 15 min,
Shocktherapy
can repeat with
(hetastarch)3
total dose
<20ml/kg/day
10-20ml/kg/day
As CRI
Improves intravascular fluid volume and
oncotic pressure
Can coadminister with
crystalloids, reducing crystalloid volume
at 33-50%
Blood transfusion'
IV, IO
6-12 ml/animal
Treatment of anaemia with variety of
(collected from
aetiologies Indicated if PCV <25% and
recipient at ratio
dinical signs orrequires surgery, rif
of 6 ml blood into
thrombocytopenic with clinical signs
88
I ml anticoagulant, 
No need to cross-match donor blood
such as acid-
with recipient's
citrate-dextrose)
Haemoglobin solutions,
IV
6-15 ml/kg2
Infusion over a
 Anaemic animals
for example Oxyglobin@,
4-h period,
Biopure Corp.,
once or twice
Cambridge, MA)
in a 24-h period
Liquidised diet:
PO
5-10 ml/animal
q8h
Anorexic animals
proprietarynutritional
Warm food first
support diets (canine
Use organic, lactose-free baby foods
a/d for carnivares,
Hill's@), baby food
Key: CRI = continuous rate infusion, IO = intraosseous, IV = intravenous, PCV = packed cell volume, PO = orally, qBh = every 8 hours
I(Hoefer, 1992); 2 (Orcutt,2001); 3 (Quesenberry and Orcutt, 2004)
Table 5.2: Routes of drug administration in ferrets
SITE
TECHNIQUE
COMMENTS
Intramuscular
Quadriceps muscles, lumbar muscles
Very small muscle mass, so SC injections
preferable
Intraosseous
Proximal femur, proximal tibia
Useful access to circulation in collapsed animals
Intraperitoneal
Caudal right abdominal quadrant
Collapsed or anaesthetised animals only
Useful for fluid therapy
Ferret anaesthesia
SITE
TECHNIQUE
COMMENTS
Intravenous:
CRl or divide into 2-3 boluses over day,
maintenance = 60-70 ml/kg/day
Lateral saphenous vein
Thick skin, so use cut-down technique
First three are good sites for catheter
Cephalic vein
Short 22-26 gauge over-the-needle
placement; place when anaethetised; can be
Jugular vein
catheter
dlifficult to place and maintain catheter
Light dressing to reduce risk of self-removal
Cranial venacava
25 gauge 25 mm needle
Anaesthesia usually required
Dorsal recumbency, needle at 30-45° angle
1
into thoracic inlet between manubrium and 
first rib, direct needle to opposite hindleg 
Ventral coccygeal artery
 21-20-gauge needle
Topical anaesthesia (lidocaine [lignocaine]/
D
Insert needle at 30-45° angle towards body,
prilocaine)
into ventral tail groove midline, to depth of
D
2-3mm
1
Vascular access ports
Indwelling intravenous catheter with SC
Surgical implantation required
 injection port 
89
Subcutaneous
Scruff
Key: CRI = continuous rate infusion, SC = subcutaneous (Quesenberry and Orcutt, 2004; Schoemaker, 2002)
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
radiographs or in azotaemic patients, isoflurane anaesthe
OF ANAESTHESIA
 sia produces fewer side effects than other agents.
Anaesthetic maintenance
Induction
Most ferrets can be intubated. This allows oxygen supple-
Injectable agents
mentation to patients that have received injectable anaes-
After medetomidine sedation, intravenous propofol can be
thetic agents. It also allows controlled provision of volatile
agents, including positive pressure ventilation (PpV) if
used to induce anaesthesia, prior to maintenance with
gaseous agents. An alternative protocol is intrarmuscular
required. If an animal cannot be intubated or a very short
medetomidine and ketamine (Table 5.3).
procedure is planned, a close-fitting facemask ay be used
to provide oxygen and/or volatile agents (see Fig. 5.1]
Volatile agents
Recovery
Isoflurane is cormmonly used to induce anaesthesia for
short procedures or in debilitated animals. Anaesthesia
Some injectable agents may be reversed, for example
is induced using a facemask or an induction chamber
with 4% isoflurane and maintained with 2% isoflurane
medetomidine with atipamezole.
 Extubation should
be performed when the patient is showing signs of recov-
(Schoemaker, 2002). Isoflurane decreases haematological
-saue uaaq s aiaj au ji imms aldexa io ia
parameters (maximally 15 min after induction) (Marini
thetised for more than a brief period, supplemental
et al., 1994). For prolonged procedures, the ferret should
heating should be provided until normal homeostatic
be intubated. Local anaesthetic is applied to the larynx
thermoregulation returns.
to reduce the risk of laryngospasm, before insertion of a
2-4 mm uncuffed endotracheal tube.
Isoflurane anaesthesia results in splenic sequestration of
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
red blood cells. This may significantly reduce the haematocrit
and plasma protein levels (Marini et al., 1997), but these
For brief procedures, such as venepuncture or radio-
return to baseline values less than lh after anaesthesia
graphy, mask or chamber induction with isoflurane or
(Ludwig and Aiken, 2004). If required to investigate res-
sevoflurane will provide rapid induction and recovery
piratory or gastrointestinal disease, for example to obtain
from anaesthesia
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 5.3 Sedative and anaesthetic agents in ferrets 
DRUG
DOSE (mg/kg)
ROUTE
COMMENT/INDICATION
Acepromazine
0. 10.58.15
SC, IM
Pre-medication, light sedation
Atipamezole
17
IM, SC, IV
Reversal of medetomidine
Atropine
0.04-0.059
SC, IM, IV
Pre-anaesthetic; bradycardia, hypersalivation.
Reduces xylazine's cardiovascular depressant
effects'
Fentanyl/droperidol
0.15 ml/kge
IM
Deep sedation or light anaesthesia
(Innovar-Vet@,Schering
Plough)
Fentanyl/fluanisone
0.3 ml/kgs
IM
Anaesthesia
(Hypnorm@, Janssen)
Glycopyrrolate
0.019
IM
Pre-anaesthetic;bradycardia,
hypersalivation
90
Halothane
3-3.5%
Inhal
Induction
0.5-2.5%
Maintenance
Isoflurane2
Inhal 
Preferred volatile agent.
5%
Induction
2-3%
Maintenance
Ketamine8
IM
Higher doses may produce apnoea
10-20
Tranquillisation 
30-60
Anaesthesia
Ketamine +
20-35 +
SC, IM 
Anaesthesia
acepromazine
0.20~0.3 510.15
Ketamine + diazepam
10-20 + 1-210
IM
 Anaesthesia (poor analgesia) I2
Ketamine +
5.00 + 0.085
IM
Induction
medetomidine
8.0 + 0.17
 Anaesthesia; hypotension and
respiratory depression may occur
Ketamine +
5.00 + 0.08 +
IM
Induction
medetomidine + 
0.105
butorphanol
Ketamine + midazolam
5-10 + 0.25-0.5013
IV
Induction
Ketamine + xylazine
10-25 + 1210.12
IM
May result in cardiac arrhythmias
Reverse xylazine with yohimbine or atipamezole
Start IV/SC fluids beforehand;
 avoid in ill animals
Medetomidine
0.08-0.203
SC, IM
Light sedation; pre-medicant (0.I mg/kg
usually used)
 Ferret anaesthesia
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lkg)
ROUTE
CoMmEnT/InDICATION
Medetomidine +
0.08 + 0.101
IM
Anaesthesia
butorphanol
Monitor for respiratory and
 cardiovascular depression
Midazolam
0.3-1.04
SC, IM
 Mild sedation, pre-medication 
0.01-0.033
IM, IV
Opioid reversal
1
Propofol
1316 
IV
Induction of anaesthesia, after sedation with
medetomidine (<8 mg/kg unpre-medicated²)
al
Light anaesthesia; prolonged recovery at higher
an
Tiletamine/zolazepam
12-2214
IM
(Telazol@, Fort Dodge)
doses, so rarely used
1
Xylazine
18
SC, IM
Tranquillisation; cardio-pulmonary side effects
common so rarely used
1
Yohimbine
0.53.17
IV, IM
Reversal of xylazine
Key. IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, SC = subcutaneous
 (Bell, 2004); 2 (Brown, 1993);: 3 (Cantwell, 2001); 1 (Carpenter, 2005); 5 (Evans and Springsteen, 1998);: @ (Flecknell, 1987);
 (Flecknell, 1997);  (Fox, 1988);  (Heard, 1993); 1 (Hillyer and Brown, 2000); II (Marini and Fox, 1998); 12 (Moreland and
Glaser, 1 985): 13 (Morrisey and Carpenter, 2004); 14 (Payton and Pick, 1989); 15 (Ryland et al, 1983): I6 (Schoemaker, 2002);
17 (Syivina et al., 1990)
Special anaesthetic cases
Dehydration can be severe with gastrointestinal disease.
This should be corrected prior to anaesthesia if possible,
preferably using intravenous or intraosseous fluid admin-
istration. If anaesthesia is required to investigate the dis-
ease, for example to obtain radiographs, isoflurane
anaesthesia causes the least side effects.
Adremocortical disease is often treated with surgical exci-
sion of the enlarged gland(s). Intravenous access is necessary
to provide circulatory fluid support peri-operatively, along
with dextrose if necessary for hypoglycaemic animals.
Animals should be encouraged to self-feed as soon as pos-
sible on recovery. Electrolytes are monitored during recov-
ery, particularly if bilateral adrenalectomies have been
Cardiovascular function is usually monitored via urine out-
Figure 5.l · After induction with injectable agents, supplemental
put post-operatively, with urea and creatinine levels used
oxygen may be provided to ferrets via a facemask or endotra-
to evaluate renal function if a reduction in urine output or
cheal tube.
hyperkalaemia is detected (Ludwig and Aiken, 2004].
Surgical excision is the treatment of choice with
phaeochromocytomas in the adrenal glands. Due to the
The addition of injectable agents may smooth the
high levels of circulating catecholamines, the cardiovascu-
anaesthetic process for more prolonged or painful proce-
lar system should be supported during anaesthesia, by
dures. For example, the addition of analgesics, such as
administering intravenous fluids during anaesthesia and
buprenorphine or butorphanol, will also produce mild
the recovery phase.
 sedation, reducing stress associated with induction using
 Surgery (ovariohysterectomy) is usually necessary to treat
volatile agents.
oestrogen toxicosis associated with persistent oestrus.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Aggressive supportive care should be given to stabilise the
with other exotic pets, needle probes placed subcuta-
patient prior to anaesthesia, possibly including blood
neously may be used to enhance electrical conduction.
transfusion(s) to treat anaemia (see Table 5.1) (Pollock,
Measurements from ECGs in conscious ferrets have been
2004; Purcell and Brown, 1999).
reported (Schoemaker and Zandvliet, 2005).
Insulimomas often require surgical excision and careful
Blood pressure measurement may be useful, for example
preparation for anaesthesia is necessary. Pre-anaesthetic
in hypovolaemic patients. The indirect method is com-
preparation for pancreatic surgery will involve controlling
monly employed, using a pneumatic cuff and ultrasonic
clinical signs by achieving and maintaining normoglycaemia.
 Doppler flow detector. The cuff is placed proxirmal to the
Prednisolone and/or diazoxide may be used to manage clin-
carpus or tarsus, or at the tail base. After a srmall area of
ical signs medically, along with frequent feeding. If a hypo-
overlying hair is shaved and ultrasound gel applied
to
glycaermic episode is causing collapse or seizures, the ferret
improve contact, the Doppler probe is used to detect blood
may require intravenous dextrose (0.25-2.0ml bolus of
flow in the artery (for example, using the digital branch of
50% dextrose slowly to effect, followed by a continuous
the radial artery on the forelib) (Lichtenberger, 2004)
infusion of 5% dextrose if required) or, rarely, diazeparm.
A rectal or ear thermometer can be used to monitor body
Fasting should be for a maximum of 6h prior to anaes-
termperature during anaesthesia and the recovery period.
thesia, and blood glucose monitored before, during and
after anaesthesia. Placement of an intravenous catheter
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
allows dextrose to be administered with maintenance fluids
CARE
for 1-2h prior to anaesthesia (Quesenberry and Rosenthal,
2004). Maintenance of systermic blood pressure throughout
the procedure will ensure pancreatic perfusion, reducing
Hypothermia is common in ferrets, so supplemental heat-
the risk of pancreatitis (Nelson and Salisbury, 1994)
ing is necessary during both anaesthesia and the recovery
As fasting for 12-24h post surgery is advisable, continue
phase (Schoemaker, 2002). If surgery is being performed
92
intravenous fluids [with 2.5-5% dextrose if necessary] and
the use of waterproof drapes reduces the risk of excessive
monitor blood glucose levels until the patient is eating nor-
wetting of the patient with fluids used intra-operatively,
which may result in evaporative cooling of the patient.
mally (Quesenberry and Rosenthal, 2004). Post-operative
hypoglycaemia can usually be managed with feeding, pred-
The patient should be encouraged to feed normally as
nisolone and diazoxide (Ludwig and Aiken, 2004).
soon after anaesthesia as possible. This is of particular
If anaesthesia is required in diabetic animals, the pre-
importance in cases of insulinoma, when blood glucose
anaesthesia fasting period should be minirmised. Blood
 should be closely monitored and intravenous glucose sup-
glucose is closely monitored during and after anaesthesia,
plemented if hypoglycaemia is detected. If prolonged
anaesthesia or recovery is predicted, or if jill with preg-
intravenous access is maintained until self-feeding, and
food intake is encouraged as soon as possible on recovery.
nancy toxaemia is anaesthetised for Caesarean section,
dextrose should be administered (Bell, 2004).
 Syringe feeding is often helpful if the ferret is not self-
ANAESTHESIAMONITORING
feeding soon after anaesthesia, particularly nursing jills. Itis
helpful to offer a variety of foods to encourage self-feeding.
Observations on the patient
 Oesophagostomy tubes can be placed if longer-term sup-
port is necessary (Fisher, 2001). Motility stimulants, such
Cardio-respiratory system
as cisapride (0.5mg/kg PO q&h] and metoclopramide
(0.2-1.0mg/kg PO/SC q6-8h), may also assist with
The heart rate and rhythm may be assessed using a bell on
gastrointestinal function (Schoemaker, 2002).
oesophageal stethoscope. Observing the patient and anaes-
thetic reservoir bag, and auscultating the lungfields using a
Analgesia
bell stethoscope, will allow monitoring of the respiratory
rate, depth and rhythm.
Analgesia should be administered as appropriate to aid
recovery (Table 5.4). Ferrets are sensitive to paracetamol
Central nervous system
[acetaminophen] toxicity (Court, 200l). Non-steroidal
anti-inflarmmatory drugs may alter renal circulation and
Anaesthetic depth is assessed similarly to other small car-
should be used with caution. Those with preferential
nivores, including corneal and palpebral reflexes, jaw tone
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibition may cause fewer
and withdrawal reflexes.
side effects (Quesenberry and Orcutt, 2004].
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES AND
DRUGS
Electrocardiograms (ECGs) can also be used to monitor
heart rate, rhythm and electrical conduction. ECG clips
If apnoea occurs, holding the legs and tilting the ferret in
are placed as in the dog or cat, to the skin overlying the
a cranio-caudal rocking motion will stimulate diaphrag-
elbows and stifles or to pads attached on the footpads. As
matic breathing (Lewington, 2005).
Ferret anaesthesia
Table 5.4: Analgesics in ferrets
DRUG
DOSE (mg/kg)
ROUTE
DURATION (hours)
COMMENT
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.032
SC, IM
8-12
Reduces doses of medetomine
and ketamine necessary for anaesthesia
Butorphanol
0.1-0.51
IM
4
Analgesia and sedation
Carprofen
1-53
PO, SC
12-24
Flunixin
0.5-2.02
SC, IV
12-24
Provide fluid support
al
 anaesthesi
Meloxicam
0.1-0.23
PO
Not known
Key: IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, PO = orally, SC = subcutaneous
Table 5.5: Emergency drugs in ferrets
93
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
INDICATION/COMMENT
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
0.027
IV, IM, SC, IT
Cardiac arrest
Atropine
0.02-0.043
SC,IM
Bradycardia
Dexamethasone
4-83
IM, IV
Shock
Diazepam6
IM, IV
Seizures
0.5-1.0mg/kg/h
CRI (IV)
 Can repeat boluses
Doxapram
1-1 12.4
IV
 Respiratory stimulant
Furosemide
1-4'
SC, IM, Iv, PO
Diuretic (duration 8-12 h)
Glycopyrrolate
0.015
IM
Bradycardia, hypersalivation
Key: CRl = continuous rate infusion, IM = intramuscular, IT = intratracheal, IV = intravenous, PO = orally,
SC=subcutaneous
 (Bartlett, 2002); 2 (Besh-Williford; 1987); 3 (Browm, 1999);: 4 (Flecknell, 1987); 5 (Heard, 1993);
REFERENCES
Bell,J. A. I999. Ferret nutrition. Vet Clin North Am Exotic Anim
Pract 2: 169-192.
Bell, J. A. 2004. Periparturient and Neonatal Diseases. In: K. E.
An, N. Q., and H. E. Evans. I998. Anatomy of the ferret. In:
Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits, and
J. G. Fox [ed.) Biology and Diseases of the Ferret. Znd edn. p.
Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 50-57.
19-69. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins.
Saunders, St Louis
Antinoff, N. 2004. Musculoskeletal and neurologic diseases. In:
Besh-Williford, C. L. I987. Biology and medicine of the ferret. Vet
K Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits and
Clin North Am: Sm Anim Pract 17: I155-I183.
Rodents: Medicine and Surgery pp. I15-I20. Saunders, St Louis 
Brown, S. A. I993. Ferrets. In: J. R. Jenkins and S. A. Brown [erds.]
Bartlett, L. W. 2002. Ferret soft tissue surgery. Semin Avian Exotic
A Practitioner's Guide to Rabbits and Ferrets. pp. 43-I11.
Pet Med 11: 221-230.
American Animal Hospital Association, Lakewood, CO.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Brown, S. A. 1999. Ferret drug doses. In: N. Antinoff, L. Bauck,
Lucas, A. 2000. Ferret emergency technigues. In: J. Lewington [ed.]
T. H. Boy er et al. [eds.) Exotic Formulary. Znd edn. pp. 42-61.
Ferret Husbandry, Medicine and Surgery. p. 261-271.
American Animal Hospital Association, Lakewood, CO
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Brown, S. A. 2004. Basic Anatomy, Physiology, and Husbandry. In:
Ludwig, L., and S. Aiken. 2004. Soft tissue surgery. In:
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits,
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
2-12. Saunders, St Louis
121-I34. Saunders, St Louis.
Brown, S. A., and K. L. Rosenthal. I997. Self-Assessment Colour 
Marini, R. P, R. J. Callahan, L. R. Jackson et al. I997. Distribution of
 Review of Small Marmmals. Manson Publishing Ltd., London.
technetium 99 m-labeled red blood cells during isoflurane
Cantwell, S. L. 2001. Ferret, Rabbit and Rodent Anesthesia. Vet Clin
anesthesia in ferrets. Am J Vet Res 58: 781-785.
North Am: Exotic Anim Practice 4: 169-191.
Marini, R. P, and J. G. Fox. I998. Anesthesia, surgery, and
Carpenter, J. W. 2005. Exotic Animal Formulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier,
biomethodology. In: J. G. Fox [ed.) Biology and Diseases of the
St Louis, Missouri.
Ferret. pp. 449-484. Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Court, M. H. 2001. Acetaminophen UDP-glucuronosyltransferase in
Marini, R. P, L. R. Jackson, M. I. Esteves et al. 1994. Effect of
ferrets: species and gender differences, and sequence analysis
isoflurane on hematologic variables in ferrets. Am J Vet Res 55:
of ferret UGTIA6. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 24: 415-422.
1479-1483.
Curl, J. L., and J. S. Curl. 1985. Restraint device for serial blood
Moody, K. D., T. A. Bowman, and C. M. Lang. 1985. Laboratory
sampling of ferrets. Lab Anim Sci 35: 296-297.
management of the ferret for biomedical research. Lab Anim
de Wit, M., N. J. Schoemaker, M. H. van der Hage et al. 2001. Signs
Sci 35: 272-279.
of estrus in an ovariectomized ferret. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd
Moreland, A. F., and C. Glaser. I985. Evaluation of ketamine,
126: 526-528.
ketamine-xylazine and ketamine-diazepam anesthesia in the
Esteves, M. I., R. P. Marini, E. B. Ryden et al. 1994. Estimation of
ferret. Lab Anim Sci 35: 287-290.
glomerular filtration rate and evaluation of renal function in
Morrisey, J. K., and J. W. Carpenter. 2004. Formulary. In:
ferrets. Am J Vet Res 55: 166-172.
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits,
Evans, A. T., and K. Springsteen. I998. Anesthesia of ferrets. Semin
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
94
Avian Exotic Pet Merd 7: 48-52.
436-444. Saumders, St Louis
Fisher, P. G. 2001. Esophagotomy feeding tube placement in the
Nelson, R. W., and S. K. Salisbury. I994. Pancreatic beta cell
ferret. Exotic DVM 2: 23-25.
neoplasia. In: S. J. Birchard and R. G. Sherding [eds.) Saunders
Flecknell, P. I997. Medetomidine and atipamezole: potential uses in
Manual of Small Animal Practice. pp. 257-262. Saunders,
laboratory animals. Lab Anim 26: 21-25.
Philadelphia.
Flecknell, P. A. I987. Laboratory Animal Anesthesia. Academic
O'Malley, B. 2005. Ferrets. In: B. O'Malley [ed.) Clinical Anatomy
Press, San Diego.
and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of
Fox,J. G.1988. Anesthesia and surgery. In: J. G. Fox [ed.) Biology
Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. pp. 237-261.
mnd Diseases of the Ferret. pp. 289-302. Lea and Febiger,
Elsevier Saunders, London.
Philadelphia.
Orcutt, C. J. 2001. Update on oxyglobin use in ferrets. Exotic DVM
Fox, J. G. 1998. Normal clinical and biologic parameters. In:
3[4]: 29-30.
J. G. Fox [ed.) Biology and Diseases of the Ferret. Znd edn. pp.
Payton, A. J., and J. R. Pick. 1989. Evaluation of a combination of
183-210. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.
tiletarmine and zolazepam as an anesthestic for ferrets. Lab
Heard, D. J. 1993. Principles and techniques of anesthesia and
Anim Sci 39: 243-246.
amalgesia for exotic practice. Vet Clin North Am: Exot Anim
Petrie, J. -P., and J. K. Morrisey. 2004. Ferrets: cardiovascular and
Pract 23: 1301-1327.
other diseases. In: K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter
Hillyer, E. V. I997. Urinogenital diseases. In: E. V. Hillyer and
[eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and
K E. Quesenberry [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical
Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 58-7l. Saumders, St Louis.
Medicine and Surgery pp. 44-52. WB Saumders, St Louis.
Pollock, C. G. 2004. Urogenital diseases. In: K. E. Quesenberry and
Hillyer, E. V., and S. A. Brown. 2000. Ferrets. In: S. J. Birchard and
J. W. Carpenter [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical
R. G. Sherding [eds.) Saunders Manual of Small Animal
Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 4l-49. Saunders, St Louis.
Practice. pp. 1463-1492. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Purcell, K., and S. A. Brown. I999. Essentials of Ferrets: A Guide for 
Hoefer, H. L. I992. Transfusions in exotic species. In: A. E.
Practitioners. American Animal Hospital Association Press,
Hohenhaus [ed.) Transfusion medicine. pp. 625-635. JB
Philadelphia.
Lippincott, Philadelphia.
Quesenberry, K. E. I996. Gastrointestinal disorders of ferrets. Proc
Hoefer, H. L., and J. A. Bell. 2004. Gastrointestinal Diseases. In:
North Am Vet Conf: 870-871.
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits,
Quesenberry, K. E., and C. Orcutt. 2004. Basic approach to
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
veterinary care. In: K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter
25-40. Saunders, St Louis.
[eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and
Kawasaki, T. A. 1994. Normal parameters and laboratory
Surgery. Znd edn. pp. I3-24. Saumders, St Louis.
interpretation of disease states in the domestic ferret. Semin
Quesenberry, K. E., and K. L. Rosenthal. 2004. Endocrine diseases.
Avian Exotic Pet Med 3: 40-47.
In: K. E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.)] Ferrets,
Lawrence, H. J., W. J. Gould, J. A. Flanders et al. I993. Unilateral
Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
adrenalectomy as a treatment for adrenocortical tumors in
pp. 79-90. Saunders, St Louis.
ferrets: five cases [1990-1992]. J Am Anitm Hosp Assoc 203:
Rosenthal, K. L. 1994. Ferrets. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
267270.
24: 122.
Lewington, J. 2005. Ferrets. In: B. O'Malley [ed.) Clinical Anatomy
Rosenthal, K. L., M. E. Peterson, K. E. Quesenberry et al. I993.
ad Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and function of
Hyperadrenocorticism associated with adrenocortical tumor or
mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians. pp. 237-261.
nodular hyperplasia of the adrenal gland in ferrets: 50 cases
Elsevier Saunders, London.
(1987-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 203: 271-275.
Lichtenberger, M. 2004. Principles of shock and fuid therapy in
Ryland, L. M., S. L. Bemard, and J. R. Gorham. I983. A clinical
special species. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 13[3): 142-153.
guide to the pet ferret. Compend Cont Ed Pract Vet 5: 25-31.
Ferretanaesthesia
Schoemaker, N. J. 2002. Ferrets. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
Thormton, P. C., P. A. Wright, P. J. Sacra et al. I979. The ferret,
[eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. 93-I01. BSAVA,
Mustela putorius furo, as a new species in toxicology. Lab Anitm
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
13: 119-124.
Schoemaker, N. J., and M. M. J. M. Zandvliet. 2005.
Weiss, C. A., and M. V. Scott. I997. Clinical aspects and surgical
Electrocardiograms in selected species. Semin Avian Exotic Pet
treatment of hyperadrenocortism in the domestic ferret: 94
Med 14: 26-33.
cases [1994-1996]. J Am Anim Hosp Assorc 33: 487-493.
Sherrill, A., and J. Gorham. I985. Bone marrow hypoplasia
Weiss, C. A., B. H. Williams, J. B. Scott et al. I999. Surgical
associated with estrus in ferrets. Lab Anim Sci 35: 280-286.
treatment and long-term outcome of ferrets with bilateral
Syvina, T. J., N. G. Berman, and J. G. Fox. I990. Effects of yohimbine
adrenal tumors or adrenal hyperplasia: 56 cases [1994-1997].
cm bradycardlia and duration of recutmbency in ketarmine/xylazine
J Am Vet Med Assoc 215: 820823.
aesthetized ferrets. Lab Anim Sci 40: 178-182.
an
esth
es
95
6
Anaesthesia of other small
mammals
Respiratory system
AfRICAN PYGMY HEDGEHOG
Respiration should be silent, but a stressed individual may
INTRODUCTION
hiss' in defence or aggression (Ivey and Carpenter, 2004).
Inappropriate husbandry, in particular sub-optimal
A species increasing in popularity as a pet is the African
pygmy hedgehog or four-toed hedgehog (Atelerix albiven-
to disease of the respiratory tract. Toxins and irritants,
tris]. This insectivorous species is nocturnal, hiding in bur.
such as wet cedar bedding or srmoke, may irritate the res-
rows during the day and emerging at night to search for
piratory system. Various infectious aetiologies have been
invertebrates (Reeve, 1994). The hedgehog's spines make
reported to cause pneumonia, including Bordetella bron-
chiseptica, Pasteurella mutocida, and Mycoplasma spp.
procedures difficult in conscious animals. Their response
(Smith, 2000). Parasites and neoplasia (often metastatic
to handling is to curl into a ball and general anaesthesia is
usually required to perform a clinical examination on
spread to the lungs) may also cause respiratory disease
these animals.
(Hoefer, 1999; Raymond and Garner, 2001).
Urinary system
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Temperature
Renal diseases may affect a hedgehog's ability to metabolise
and excrete anaesthetic drugs. Those seen in hedgehogs
include tubular necrosis, infarcts, glomerulosclerosis, nephri-
The optimal environmental temperature for this species is
tis and glomerulonephropathies (Done, 1999; Raymond and
24-29°C, with a range between 23°℃ and 32°℃ (Ivey and 
White, 1999). A differential diagnosis for polydipsia and
Carpenter, 2004; Johnson-Delaney, 2002). Supplemental
 polyuria in a hedgehog would be Cushing's disease, although
heating is, therefore, usually required even in conscious
other clinical signs would be seen with this disease as in
anirmals, but is particularly irmportant for debilitated indi-
other species (Johnson-Delaney, 2002)
viduals. Excessively low or high temperatures induce tor-
por (Larsen and Carpenter, 1999). Chronic hypothermia
will result in immune suppression and metabolic derange-
Digestive system
ments. Humidity should be low, less than 40%, in the
environment.
In the wild African pygmy hedgehogs are mainly insecti-
vores and ormnivores, with a high protein and low fat con-
tent, but they also consume some plants. In captivity, they
Cardiovascular system
diets also exist), mixed vegetables with calcium supple-
Cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure have been
ment and insects. Obesity is not infrequently seen in cap-
reported in hedgehogs (Johnson-Delaney, 2002; Raymond
tive anirmals.
and Garner, 2000). Both will compromise cardio-pulmonary
function during anaesthesia.
tious aetiologies including zoonotic Salmonella spp. (Craig
Anaesthesia of other small mammals
et al., 1997). If nutritional support is required, a protein-
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
rich high-calorie canine or feline diet may be syringe-fed
(Smith, 2000).
Preoxygenation is advisable, particularly if respiratory dis-
Hepatic lipidosis appears to be common in hedgehogs,
ease is suspected from initial clinical evaluation of the
particularly obese anirmals, with a variety of aetiologies
patient. Atropine pre-medication may reduce hypersaliva-
(Raymond and White, 1999). Other disease processes that
tion in response to isoflurane (Lightfoot, 1999). Agents such
may affect hepatic function, and thereby drug metabo-
as diazepam 0.5-2.0mg/kg intramuscularly (Smith, 1992)
lism, include neoplasia and human herpes simplex virus 1
(Allison et al., 2002; Lightfoot, 1999).
may be used to produce mild sedation or to treat seizures.
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
Nervous system, special senses
1
OFANAESTHESIA
Several disease processes may affect the central nervous
Induction
1
system, including torpor causing ataxia and systemic
2
infections spreading to the nervous system [Ivey and
Carpenter, 2004). Hedgehogs have acute senses of smell
Volatile agents
and hearing, including an ability to hear at ultrasonic fre-
1
quencies.
Volatile agents, such as isofurane, are ideal for induction of
anaesthesia, particularly for short procedures, such as clinical
examination. Induction is easiest performed in a chamber, as
PRE-ANAESTHETICASSESSMENT
1
the head is often not visible in the protective curled position.
AND STABILISATION
Injectable agents
9
History and clinical examination
 Injectable anaesthetics have been reported in hedgehogs,
but recovery is often prolonged (Pye, 2001; Smith, 2000).
Many diseases result in non-specific clinical signs, which
makes localisation and identification of pathological
processes in hedgehogs challenging. Clinical examination
is often unrewarding in the conscious patient. The history
Table 6.1: Routes of drug administration in African pygmy
may alert the clinician to abnormalities, but anaesthesia is
hedgehogs
often required for clinical examination and further inves-
tigation.
ROUTE
COMMENTS
Hospitalisation facilities
Intramuscular
Orbicularis muscle of mantle, or
quadriceps muscles
A quiet kennel area with subdued light will reduce stress
in the hedgehog and aid recovery. Shredded paper should
Intraosseous
Proximal femur
be provided to allow burrowing behaviour.
Difficult
Fluid and nutritional support
Intraperitoneal
Caudal right abdominal quadrant
Useful for fluid administration;
Maintenance fluids are 50-100ml/kg daily (Johnson-
anaesthetised or collapsed
Delaney, 2002); these are usually warmed and injected
animals only
subcutaneously.
Intravenous:
 All under general anaesthesia
TECHNIQUES
Femoral vein
Lateral saphenous vein
(Cephalic vein)
Routes of administration
(Jugular vein)
Easier in thin animals
The administration of fluids and medication is difficult
(Cranial vena cava)
Risk of cardiac puncture
due to the distinctive integument of the African pygmy
hedgehog. The oral route is not possible in most animals
Subcutaneous
Flank at junction of furred skin
due to the curl response, unless medication is taken in
and mantle (true' subcutaneous
food. Subcutaneous injections in the flank or intramuscu-
with 9 cm spinal needle to enter
lar injections are possible in conscious patients, but
past the spines)
sedation or anaesthesia is usually required for other routes
(Table 6.1)
(Johnson-Delaney, 2002, Ivey and Carpenter, 2004)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Ketamine has been used in combination with diazepam,
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
medetomidine or xylazine to induce anaesthesia (Table
6.2). Tiletamine and zolazepam have also been used, but
During induction, the hedgehog will uncurl. Thereafter,
rough recoveries are reported.
monitoring of cardio-respiratory pararmeters and reflexes
is similar to other small mammals.
Anaesthetic maintenance
Provision of oxygen and maintenance with volatile agents
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTVE
during anaesthesia are via a tightly fitting facermask or
CARE
endotracheal tube. Endotracheal tubes of 1.0-l.5 mm
diameter, intravenous catheters (with the stylet removed)
or feeding tubes may be used for intubation [Ivey and
Analgesia
Carpenter, 2004). It is important to protect the airway in
this way, particularly during procedures involving the oral
Analgesics should be used where discomfort is suspected
cavity, such as dentals.
(Table 6.3).
Table 6.2: Sedative and anaesthetic drugs for hedgehogs
DRUG
DOSE (mg/kg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
98
Atipamezole
0.3-0.58
IM
Medetomidine reversal
Atropine
0.01-0.045
IM, SC
Pre-medicant
Diazepam
0.5-2.06
IM
Mild sedation; seizure treatment
Ketamine + diazepam
5-20 + 0.5-2.03
IM
Anaesthesia
Ketamine + medetomidine
5 + 0.18
IM
Anaesthesia
Ketamine+medetomidine
2 + 0.2 + 0.1'
SC
Anaesthesia; good muscle relaxation
+ fentanyl
Halothane
To effect
Inhal
Less preferable than isoflurane
Isoflurane
3-5%7
Inhal 
Induction of anaesthesia
0.5-3.0%7
Maintenance of anaesthesia
Medetomidine
0.22
IM
Heavy sedation
Naloxone
0.16!
IM
Fentanyl reversal
Sevoflurane
To effects
Inhal
Induction/maintenance of anaesthesia
Tiletamine/zolazepam
1-57
IM
Anaesthesia;recovery may be rough
Xylazine
0.5-1.06
IM
Anaesthesia, can give with ketamine
Yohimbine
0.5-1.05
IM
Xylazine reversal
Key: IM= intramuscular, Inhal=inhalation, SC=subcutaneous
(Smith, 1992); ’ (Smith, 2000); (Stocker, 1992)
Anaesthesia of other small mammals
Table 6.3: Analgesic doses for hedgehogs
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lkg)
ROUTE
DURATION (hours)
COMMENT
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.50
SC, IM
6-12
plodo
Butorphanol
0.05-0.402
SC, IM
6-12
PIOdo
Hunixin
0.03'
IM
NSAID
0.31
SC
24
1
Key: IM = intramuscular, NSAID = non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, SC = subcutaneous
a
D
st:
Urinary system
MARSUPIALS
1
 In marsupials, the cloaca is the combined opening to the
INTRODUCTION
urogenital and digestive tracts (Holz, 2003).
99
Many reports exist of renal disease in sugar gliders,
including urinary tract obstruction, pyelonephritis/nephri-
The sugar glider (Petaurus breviceps) is occasionally seen
tis and renal failure [Johnson-Delaney, 2002) Nephritis,
as a pet. The gray (Brazilian) short-tailed opossum
pyelonephritis, and nephrosis have been reported in grey
(Monodelphis domestica} may rarely be presented at vet-
short-tailedopossums.
erinary practices.
Signs such as polyuria, polydipsia, haermaturia and pyuria
may indicate renal disease. Clinical assessment before
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
anaesthesia may identify these diseases, but care should be
taken not to induce or exacerbate renal problerms.
Temperature
Digestive system
The metabolism of marsupials is approximately 30%
lower than in placental mamrmals. Basal metabolic rate
The diet of sugar gliders varies seasonally. In the winter,
and body temperature are also lower. Mean body temper-
wild animals eat the sugary sap or gum of eucalypts and
atures are between 33°C and 36°C (Holz, 2003)
acacias, nectar from flowers (eucalypts, banksias, acacias
The optimum environmental temperature for sugar
 and several types of native apple), becoming more insec-
gliders is 24-27°C, but they can tolerate a wide range,
tivorous (eating insects, arachnids and small vertebrates)
from 18°C to 32°C (Nagy and Suckling, 1985). During
during the rest of the year. Captive animals should be
periods of extreme cold, the sugar glider will go into a
given a diet that is 50% insectivore diet and 50% fruit sug-
state of torpor to conserve energy (Fleming, 1980). Heat
ars, in the form of a sap or nectar. As they are nocturnal,
 stressis seen at high temperatures (Ness and Booth, 2004].
fresh food should be given in the evening [Henry and
Suckling, 1984].
Cardio-respiratory disease
 Improper diet often predisposes gastrointestinal disease
in this species. Animals rmay be suffering from malnutri-
Sugar gliders may suffer tachypnoea or dyspnoea due to
tion, presenting with hypoproteinaemia, hypocalcaemia,
various aetiologies. Bacterial pneumonia,
including
anaemia, and even hepatic and renal abnormalities due to
Pasteurella multocida, and cardiac f
failure have been
abar Aeu Aa [tooz 'yoog pue ssn] aep uebo
reported (Ness and Booth, 2004; Pye and Carpenter, 1999).
nutritional and fluid support before anaesthesia is per-
Cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure have been
formed. Other animals may be obese, with cardiac, hepatic
reported in the grey short-tailed opossum. Older animals
or pancreatic disease (Nagy and Suckling, 1985).
and males appear more susceptible to congestive heart
The captive grey short-tailed opossum is fed pelleted
failure (Johnson-Delaney, 2002). The problem should be
carnivore diet, insectivore diet, or insects, pinky mice
identified during clinical examination, although confirma-
and a small amount fruit. Malnutrition and obesity
tory investigations may require sedation or general anaes-
may both be seen in pet grey short-tailed opossurms. Neo-
thesia. Hyperlipidaermia and hypercholesterolaemia may
plasia is frequently found in the liver Johnson-Delaney,
lead to atherosclerosis in this species.
2002)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
Table 6.4: Routes of drug administration in sugar gliders
AND STABILISATION
and grey short-tailed opossums
Hospitalisation facilities
ROUTE
COMMENTS
Intramuscular
 Epaxial muscles of neck and upper
These animals are nocturnal and require quiet surround-
ings during hospitalisation.
thorax; biceps femoris
(anterior thigh)
Fluid and nutritional support
Intraosseous
Proximal femur
It is obviously important to ensure that an appropriate
Intraperitoneal
Caudal right abdominal quadrant
diet is provided during hospitalisation. Both species are
 Collapsed or anaesthetised animals
nocturnal feeders, so fresh foodstuffs should be offered in
 only; useful for fluid therapy
the evening (Johnson-Delaney, 2002). Puréed food can be
syringefed in small quantities to anorexic patients.
Intravenous:
Difficult; sedation or anaesthesia
Fluids should be administered during anaesthesia to
required
maintain the renal circulation, particularly in patients
Use a 0.5 ml insulin syringe with
where renal disease is suspected. Subcutaneous fluids can
27-gauge needle
be given dorsally in the interscapular region, but they may
pool in the patagium (gliding membrane) of sugar gliders.
Cephalicvein
Fluids administered into the patagium will be absorbed
Lateral saphenous vein
100
very slowly; the intraperitoneal route is more efficacious.
Femoral vein
If more rapid fluid absorption is required, an intraosseous
Medial tibial artery
catheter can be placed (Ness and Booth, 2004).
Ventral coccygeal or
Warm tail to dilate tail vessels; tail
lateral tail vein
veins are choice for grey short-
Fasting
tailed opossum
Jugular vein
Ventral neck, halfway between
shoulder and ramus of mandible,
Sugar gliders and opossums require pre-anaesthetic fast-
lateral to trachea and oesophagus
ing for at least 4h (Pye and Carpenter, 1999)
(usually general anaesthesia)
Cranial vena cava
 Needle inserted at 30° angle just 
lateral to manubrium, aiming
TECHNIQUES
towards contralateral hindlimb
(general anaesthesia required)
Routes of administration
Cardiac puncture
Emergency use only- may cause
fatal haemorrhage
Intravenous access is difficult in these small animals, and
only srmall volumes of drugs may be administered intra-
Subcutaneous
Scruf; maximum 10 ml/kg
muscularly (Table 6.4). The subcutaneous route is suitable
Fluids injected into the sugar glider's
for most medications and fluids; large volumes should be
 patagium will pool and absorption
pre-warmed.
will be slow
(Johnson-Delaney, 2002; Redrobe, 2002)
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
Pre-medication may be adrministered to provide analgesia,
sedation, and/or reduce respiratory and salivary secre-
tions before anaesthesia is induced (Table 6.5).
Induction
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
Volatile agents
OFANAESTHESIA
The simplest method of inducing anaesthesia in these
Drug doses for sugar gliders are commonly extrapolated
small marsupiais is chamber induction with a volatile
from other species. If metabolic scaling is used, the small
agent, such as isoflurane or sevoflurane (Fig. 6.1). This is
body size of these animals is offset by their low metabolic
relatively safe even in debilitated anirmals. Anaesthesia is
rate (Table 6.6) (Ness and Booth, 2004).
induced in a chamber with 5% isoflurane.
Anaesthesia of other small mammals
Table 6.5: Pre-anaesthetic medications in sugar gliders and grey short-tailed opossums 
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Atropine
0.01-0.021
SC,IM
Anticholinergic (reduce respiratory and
oral secretions)
Diazepam
0.5-1.01
IM
Sedative
Glycopyrrolate
0.01-0.023
SC, IM,IV 
Anticholinergic (reduce respiratory and
oral secretions)
all
Ketamine
202
IM
Sedation before induction/maintenance
ana
with isoflurane (sugar glider)
esth
Key: IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, SC = subcutaneous
lesi
Table 6.6: Anaesthetic and analgesic drugs in sugar gliders
DRUG
DOSE
 ROUTE COMMENT
101
(mg/kg)
Acepromazine
1.7 + 1.72
PO
Postoperative sedation
+butorphanol
and analgesia to
prevent self-trauma at
ncision site 
Acepromazine1 +102
SC
Postoperative sedation
十 ketamine
 and analgesia to
prevent self-trauma at
incision site
Figure 6.1 · Chamber induction of anaesthesia using isoflurane in 
a sugar glider, Petaurus breviceps.
Butorphanol
0.56
IM
Analgesia; can repeat
q8h
Injectable agents
Flunixin
0.1-1.03.4
Analgesia; repeat q12-
Tiletamine/zolazeparm has been used to anaesthetise sugar
24h,use for up to
gliders, at 8.4-12.8 mg/kg (Bush et al., 1990). However,
skepE
some animals suffered neurological signs and death
(Holtz, 1992).
Isoflurane
Inhal 
Anaesthetic of choice
5%1
Induction 
Anaesthetic maintenance
1-3%7
Maintenance
Anaesthesia is usually maintained using 2-3% isoflurane
Sevoflurane
To effect's
Inhal
Anaesthesia
via a closely fitting facemask. It may be possible to intubate
the sugar glider using a stylet and fine-bladed laryngoscope
(Booth, 2000). The head is extended and the tongue gen-
Key: IM =intramuscular, Inhal = inhalation, PO =oral,
q8h =every 8 hours, SC=subcutaneous
tly grasped in order to pass a l mm endotracheal tube into
the larynx (Cook, Global Veterinary Products, New
4 (MacPherson,1997);5 (Morrisey and Carpenter, 2004);
Buffalo, MI) (Ness and Booth, 2004).
6 (Ness, 2000); ′ (Pye, 2001)
Recovery
A warm quiet area should be provided for recovery.
Supplemental oxygen should be provided until the patient
is making coordinated moverments.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
Henry, S. R., and G. C. Suckling. I984. A review of the ecology of
the sugar glider. In: P. A. Smith and I. D. Hume [eds.) Possums
and Gliders. Australian Mammal Society, Sydney.
 Cardio-respiratory parameters and reflexes are similar to
Hoefer, H. L. I999. Clinical approach to the African hedgehog. Proc
 other small mammals.
North Am Vet Conf: 836-838.
The cloacal temperature is lower than body tempera-
Holtz, P. 1992. Immobilisation of marsupials with tiletamine and
ture; rectal temperature is more closely allied to core
zolazepam. J Zoo Wildl Med 23: 426-428.
body temperature. To reach the rectum, the thermometer
Holz, P 2003. Marsupialia [marsupials). In: M. E. Fowler and
should be directed dorsally from the cloaca (Flerming,
E. A. Millr [(eds.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. pp.
1980). Core temperature can also be measured at the
288-303. Saunders, St Louis, Missouri.
Hough, I., R. E. Reuter, R. S. Rahaley et al. I992. Cutaneous
tympanic membrane (Ness and Booth, 2004).
lymphosarcoma in a sugar glider. Aust J Zool 69: 93-94.
Ivey, E., and J. W. Carpenter. 2004. African hedgehogs. In:
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits,
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
CARE
339-353. Saunders, St Louis.
Johnson-Delaney, C. A. 2000. Therapeutics of companion exotic
Supportive heating is necessary to prevent hypothermia
marsupials. Vet Clin North Am: Exotic Anitm Practice 3:
during anaesthesia. Heat pads and forced warm-air blankets
173-181.
Johnson-Delaney, C. A. 2002. Other small mammals. In:
are useful during anaesthesia, with recovery in an incubator
A. Meredith and S. Redrobe [eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th
(Ness and Booth, 2004).
edn. pp. I02-115. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Johnson, S. D. 1997. Orchiectomy of the mature sugar glider
Analgesia
[Fetaurus breviceps]. Exotic Pet Pract 2: 71.
Larsen, R. S., and J. W. Carpenter. I999. Husbandry and
102
medical management of African hedgehogs. Vet Med 94:
For painful conditions or surgery, analgesia should be
877-890.
administered routinely (Table 6.6). Sugar gliders are par-
Lightfoot, T. L. 1999. Clinical exarmination of chinchillas, hedgehogs,
ticularly adept at self-traumatising wounds, and further
prairie dogs and sugar gliders. Vet Clin North Am Exotic Anim
analgesia may be required post anaesthesia (sometirmes in
Pract 2: 447-469.
combination with a sedative, for example 1.7mg/kg
MacPherson, C. I997. Sugar Gliders [A Complete Pet Owner's
Manual). Barron's Educational Series, Hong Kong.
butorphanol with 1.7 mg/kg acepromazine diluted with
Morrisey, J. K., and J. W. Carpenter. 2004. Formulary. In:
normal saline and administered orally (Johnson, 1997])
K E. Quesenberry and J. W. Carpenter [eds.] Ferrets, Rabbits,
and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
REFERENCES
436-444. Saumders, St Louis.
Nagy, K. A., and G. C. Suckling. I985. Field energetics and water 
balance of suger gliders, Petaurus breticeps [Marsupiala:
Allson, N., T. C. Chang, S. K.E. et al. 2002. Fatal herpes simplex
Petauridae). Aust J Zool 33: 683.
infection in a pygmy African hedgehog [Atelerix albiventris).
Ness, R. D. 2000. Sugar glider [Petaurus bretviceps): general
J Comp Pathol 126: 76-78.
husbandry and medicine. Proc Exotic Small Mammal Med Mgt
Arnemo, J. M., and N. E. Soli. 1995. Chemical immobilisation of
[Anmu Conf & Expo Assoc Avian Vet): 99-107.
free-ranging European hedgehogs [Erinaceus europaeus]. J Zoo
Ness, R. D., and R. Booth. 2004. Sugar gliders. In: K. Quesenberry and
Wildl Med 26: 246-251.
J. W. Carpenter [eds.) Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Climical
Barbiers, R. 2003. Insectivora [hedgehogs, tenrecs, shrews, moles]
Medicine and Surgery Znd erdn. pp. 330-338. Saumders, St Louis.
and Dermoptera [flying lemurs). In: M. E. Fowler and
Pye, G. W. 2001. Marsupial, insectivore and chiropteran anesthesia.
R E. Miller [eds.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. 5th edn.
Vet Clin North Am Exotic Anim Pract 4: 2lI-237.
pp. 304-315. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Pye, G. W., and J. W. Carpenter. 1999. A guide to medicine and
Barmes, M. 2002. Sugar gliders. In: L. J. Gage [ed.) Hand-Rearing Wild
sugar in sugar gliders. Vet Med 94: 891-905.
amd Domestic Mammals. pp. 55-62. Iowa State Press, Ames.
 Raymond, J. T., and M. M. Garmer. 2000. Cardiomyopathy in captive
Bennett, R. A. 2000. Husbandry and medicine of hedghogs. Proc
African hedgehogs. J Vet Diagn Invest I2: 468-472.
Exotirc Small Mammal Med Mgt [Annu Conf & Expo Assoc
Raymond, J. T., and M. M. Garmer. 200l. Spontaneous tumours in
Avian Vet): 104-114.
captive African hedgehogs [Atelerix albiventris]: a retrospective
Booth, R. J. 2000. General husbandry and medical care of sugar
study. J Comp Pathol 124: 128-133.
gliders. In: J. D. Bonagura [ed.) Kirk's Current Veterinary
Raymond, J. T, and M. R. White. I999. Nerropsy and histopathological
Therapy XI11. pp. I157-ll163. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
findings in I4 African hedgehogs [Atelerix albivenitris]: a
Bush, M. J., A. M. Graves, S. J. O'Brien et al. I990. Dissociative
retrospective study. J Zoo Wildl Med 30: 273-277.
aesthesia in free-ranging male koalas and selected marsupials
Redrobe, S. 2002. Soft tissue surgery of rabbits and rodents. Semin
in captivity. Aust Vet J 67: 449-451.
Avian Exotic Pet Med I1: 231-245.
Carpenter, J. W. 2005. Exotic Animal Formulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier 
Reeve, N. 1994. Hedgehogs. T & AD Poyser Ltd, London.
Saunders, St Louis, MO.
 Smith, A. J. 1992. Husbandry and medicine of African hedgehogs
Craig, C., S. Styliadis, and D. Woodward. 1997. African pygmy
[Atelerix albivenitris). J Small Exotic Anim Med 2: 21-28.
hegehog associated Salmonella tilene im Canada. Can Commun
Smith, A. J. 2000. General husbandry and medical care of
Dis Rep 23: 129-131.
hedgehogs. In: A. J. Stmith [ed.) Kirk's Current Veterinary
Done, L. B. I999. What you don't know about hedgehog diseases.
Therapy XIll: Small Animal Practice. pp. I128-l133.
 Proc North Am Vet Conf: 824-825.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Fleming, M. R. I980. Thermoregulation and torpor in the sugar glider
Stocker, L. I992. Medication for use in the treatment of hedgehogs.
Petaurus breviceps [Marsupilia: Petauridae]. Aust J Zool 28: 521.
Marshcliff, Aylesbury.
Non-human primate
7
anaesthesia
a
a
an
1
st:
D
INTRODUCTION
gondi can cause pulmonary oedema (Thornton, 2002).
1
Sedation or anaesthesia may be required for investigation
of respiratory disease and identification of aetiological
The most popular pet primate is the common marmoset,
Callithrix jacchus. Other callitrichids (marmosets and
agentsbut extra care shouldbe taken with these patients
103
tamarins), capuchins and squirrel monkeys may also be
who will be at greater risk during sedation or anaesthesia.
seen. Legal requirements may necessitate a licence or
Digestive system
other form of monitoring these animals in captivity. It
should be borne in mind that non-hurman primates may
transfer zoonotic infections to human handlers, but con-
Non-human primates are omnivorous. Their diets vary
versely they will be susceptible to many hurman-borne dis-
between species, ranging from fruits, gums and saps, to
eases. Latex or nitrile gloves should be worn to protect
invertebrates and small vertebrates. Captive animals may
both staff and pet, along with respiratory protection (for
be fed pellets, and/or gum substitutes. The diet of the
example, disposable facermask) if either has a respiratory
common marmoset is mainly fruit.
disease. Herpes simplex virus causes cold sores in
Primates have a daily requirement for vitamin C. New
humans, but may cause a fatal infection in callitrichids
World primates require vitamin D3, particularly cal-
[marmosets and tamarins) (Thornton, 2002)
litrichids (marmosets and tamarins), and require an ultravi-
olet light (UV-B) for calcium and phosphorus metabolism.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Invertebrates can be gut-loaded with calcium supplement.
Dietary protein requirements are high in primates.
Mice should not be fed to callitrichids, as they are sus-
Temperature
ceptible to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (which is
carried by mice and causes fatal callitrichid hepatitis).
Primates are fairly adaptable to a wide range of tempera-
tures. Ambient enclosure temperature should be above
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
15°C, and up to 29°C in a basking area (Thornton, 2002).
AND STABILISATION
Cardiovascular system
History and clinical examination
Pet primates on inappropriate diets can be obese. This
 Assessment before anaesthesia is important in all species.
may be associated with cardio-respiratory disease, as seen
in humans.
However, these animals are potentially dangerous and
many will bite when restrained. The risk to staff handling
animals that are not tarmed can be significant, not only frorm
Respiratory system
bite and scratch injuries, but also frorm disease transmission.
 Smaller species, such as cormmon marmosets, can usually
Measles is a differential diagnosis for animals with a
be caught with a towel or leather gloves for assessrment
mucoid nasal discharge, and this virus may also cause inter-
and anaesthetic induction (Fig. 7.1). Larger species may
stitial and bronchopneumonia. Other aetiological agents
require the administration of injectable anaesthetic drugs
of pneumonia in primates are Bordetella bronchiseptica,
to induce anaesthesia while restrained in a squeeze cage
Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pasteurella spp.Toxoplasma
before a ^hands-on' examination can be perforrmed.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
104
Figure 7.l * Mask induction with isoflurane of a common mar-
Figure 7.2 · Intravenous catheter in the cephalic vein of a brown
moset (Callithrix jacchus).
capuchin (Cebus apella).
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
A 2-2.5 mm diameter endotracheal tube can be used in
primates weighing approximately 500g (for example,
Due to the risks of disease transmission between non-
common marmosets). Positioning can be assessed by aus-
cultating the lungs to check for bilateral ventilation.
hurman prirmates and staff, it is advisable to wear personal
protective equipment, such as examination gloves and
facemasks. It is preferable not to have ill personnel, for
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
example those with respiratory disease, dealing with non-
human primates.
 Acepromazine is used as a pre-medication rarely, its main
advantage being the possibility of oral administration.
TECHNIOUES
Similarly, oral diazepam or chlorpromazine will cause
sedation.
Routes of administration
Atropine may be administered to reduce oral and respi-
ratory secretions (at 0.02-0.05 mg/kg subcutaneously,
intramuscularly or intravenously) (Holmes, 1984).
Intravenous access (Fig. 7.2} is more difficult in smaller
Glycopyrrolate has also been used in larger non-human
species, but most routes are accessible for drug and fluid
primate species (<0.01 mg/kg) (Popilskis and Kohn, 1997).
administration (Table 7.1).
Intubation
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
OFANAESTHESIA
It is advisable to intubate primates when anaesthetised, to
protect their airway and to provide oxygen. A laryngo-
Induction
scope is useful to aid visualisation of the larynx, particu-
larly in larger species (Fig. 7.3). Local anaesthetic should
Volatile agents
be sprayed on the larynx to reduce the risk of laryn-
gospasm. Short endotracheal tubes are used, to avoid
 Small primates such as marmosets are easiest induced using
obstructing one bronchus whilst intubating the other at
volatile agents in a chamber or restrained for facemask induc-
the proximal tracheal bifurcation (Thornton, 2002).
tion. The use of agents such as isoflurane carries a low risk
Non-humanprimate anaesthesia
Table 7.l: Routes of administration in non-human primates
ROUTE
TECHNIQUE
COMMENTS
Intramuscular
Quadriceps muscles,
Small volumes only
lumbar muscles
Intraosseous
Proximal femur,
Useful in collapsed
proximal tibia
or small animals 
when intravenous
1
access not possible.
Provide analgesia
1
Intraperitoneal  Caudal right abdominal 
In collapsed or
2
quadrant
anaesthetised
animals only
(Cebus apella) with intramuscular medetomidine and ketamine.
Intravenous:
Sedation or
The animal is being intubated after local anaesthetic has been 
anaesthesia usually
applied to the larynx to reduce laryngospasm, and will be main-
1
required
tained on isoflurane.
Femoral vein
Medial to femoral
Apply pressure for
artery, which can be
a few minutes after
105
palpated
venepuncture to
'second gas effect', reducing the concentrations of other
25 or 27 gauge needle,
 avoid haematoma
1-2 ml syringe
volatile agents required.
formation
Lateral saphenous
Lateral saphenous,
Jugular vein
jugular and cephalic
Injectable agents
Cephalic vein
very difficult to
access in small
These are particularly useful for animals that cannot
species
be safely removed from cages, such as larger species that
are not routinely handled. Unfortunately, there is
Subcutaneous
Scruff, lateral body
 Maximum volume
 great variation in response to anaesthetic agents between
wall
15-20 ml in
species.
Most anaesthetic combinations for non-human pri-
common
mates contain ketamine, which has a wide safety margin
marmoset,
125-190ml in
when used in non-human primates. Ketamine on its
capuchin
own will cause sufficient immobilisation for handling and
clinical examination, but muscle relaxation is poor.
(Thornton 2002; Joslin 2003)
Lemurs may have a seizure if ketarmine is used as the sole
agent, but can be anaesthetised with combinations of the
drug. The use of combinations allows lower doses of
of morbidity and mortality, and is, therefore, preferable for
ketamine to be utilised, reducing the side effects and
patients with respiratory disease or other debilitation.
recovery time. Combinations commonly used include
Isoflurane is also commonly used after induction with
ketamine with medetomidine or diazepam; both will
injectable agents, either to deepen or prolong anaesthesia.
cause anaesthesia.
Halothane, with a minimum alveolar concentration
 Side effects seen with medetomidine include bradycar-
[MAC) of 0.98-1.15%, produces dose-dependent cardio-
dia, hypotension, loss of thermoregulation, and decreased
vascular depression (Steffey et al., 1974). Isoflurane pro-
mean arterial pressure (Capuano et al., 1999). On induc-
duced respiratory depression when administered with
tion with medetomidine, a transient increase in respira-
morphine, but no cardiovascular depression (Steffey et
tory rate is seen, followed by a more prolonged decrease.
al.,
1994). The MAC for isoflurane is 1.28-1.46%.
Xylazine can be used with ketamine, but often leads to
 Sevoflurane has an MAC of 2%. One study reported no
vomiting on induction. Medetomidine and xylazine can be
significant cardiopulmonary effects during anaesthesia
reversed with atipamezole. Diazepam or midazolamm
with this agent (Soma et al., 1988). Changes were, how-
causes less cardio-respiratory depression, but reversal of
ever, noted in body temperature (lowered), and haema-
the benzodiazepines with flumazenil is expensive.
tology and clinical chermistries (lower white cell count,
 Similar agents are found in the tiletamine [another dis-
calcium, and total protein}.
sociative anaesthetic) and zolazepam (a benzodiazepine)
 Nitrous oxide has an MAC of 200% in non-human pri-
combination. Different species require a wide range of
mates (Popilskis and Kohn, 1997). It is used to provide a
doses. Side effects may include severe hypothermia
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 7.2: Sedative and anaesthetics for primates
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lcg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Acepromazine
0.5-1.010
PO, SC, IM 
Pre-anaesthetic, tranquillisation
Alfaxalone/ alphadalone
IM, IV
Higher doses required IM
Rapid induction and recovery
586.16
Light sedation
12-1816
Deep sedation, light anaesthesia
182512.16
Surgical anaesthesia
L
10mg/kg/h6
Continuous rate infusion
Atipamezole
 4 × medetomidine dose2
SC, IM, IV
Specific alpha-2-antagonist, used for
medetomidine (or xylazine) reversal
L
Chlorpromazine
1-610
PO, IM
Pre-anaesthetic
Diazepam
Sedation after 30-60 min, variable
0.5-1.07
PO
degree of effects
106
0.25-0.509
IM, IV
Prolonged recovery
Fentanyl
10-25 μg/kg/h 13
IV
Continuous infusion
Isoflurane-sparing
Fentanyl/droperidol
0.05-0.10ml/kgl0
IM, IV
Pre-anaesthetic; respiratory
(lnnovar-Vet@, Janssen)
0.1-0.3 ml/kgl3
SC, IM
depression at high doses
Minor procedures
Fentanyl/fluanisone
0.3 ml/kgl13
SC, IM
Minor procedures
(Hypnorm@, Janssen)
Flumazenil
0.0258
IV
Benzodiazepine reversal
Halothane
0.5-1.0 %15
Inhal 
Can supplement with nitrous (2:1
with oxygen) during maintenance
Isoflurane
Inhal
Preferable to pre-medicate with
injectable agent
4%16
Induction
0-3%16
Maintenance
Ketamine
5-203.7
IM
Immobilisation for handling or
examination; induce with volatile
agent
Use lower dose with larger animals
(e.g. 20 mg/kg for callitrichids, such
as marmosets and tamarins, 5 mg/kg
for great apes)
Causes seizures in lemurs
Ketamine + diazepam
15 + 14.16
IM
Surgical anaesthesia with good
muscle relaxation
Non-human primate anaesthesia
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lcg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Ketamine + medetomidine
10.0-15.0 + 0.116
IM
Light anaesthesia
Top up with isoflurane or half dose 
ofketamine
Lower dose in large primates
Ketamine + midazolam
15 + 0.05-0.0913
IM +IV
Animal < I kg body weight
15 + 0.05-0.1513
Animal >1 kg weight
1
Ketamine+xylazine
10.0 + 0.54
IM
Often vomit on induction
Surgical anaesthesia
a
an
Medetomidine
0.01-0.1.11
PO, IV
Sedation/induction
esth
Many side effects (see text)
Midazolam
0.1-0.57.13
Sedation
p
IM, IV
SI
Often used in combination
with fentanyl (1-2 μg/kg IV)
Nitrousoxide
107
<30%15.17
Inhal
Reduces concentration of other
volatile agents required
Propofol
5-1016
IV
Apnoea common. Can give
continuous infusion
Sevoflurane
8%14
Inhal 
Induction
2.5 % 14
Maintenance
Thiopentone
15205
IV
Surgical anaesthesia
Halve dose if
ketamine pre-medicant 
Tiletamine +zolazepam
1107.16
IM
Wide species variation in dose
required
Key: Inhal = inhalation, IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, PO = orally, SC = subcutaneous
(Capuano et al., 1999); 2 (Carpenter, 2005); 3 (Eberhard, 1982); 4 (Flecknell, 1987); 5 (Flecknell, 1996); ^ (Foster et al., 1996);
7(Heard, 1993); (Horne et al,1998); (Ialeggio, 1989); 1 ohnsn et al., 1981); 1 (Kearns et al., 1998); 12 Philips and Grist,
1975); 13 (Popilskis and Kohn, 1997); 14 (Soma et al., 1988); 15 (Steffeyet al., 1974); 16 (Thornton, 2002); 17 (Tinker et al., 1977)
[macaques) or ataxia during recovery (great apes) (Horne,
infusion with isoflurane anaesthesia. Fentanyl may also be
2001; Lopez et al., 2002).
given in combination with midazolam.
Propofot can be used in primates, but the need for intra-
 Other drugs and combinations have been used to cause
venous administration limits its usefulness. Side effects
sedation or induce anaesthesia in non-human primates
include a reduction in mean arterial pressure, heart rate
(Table 7.2). The use of neuromuscular blocking agents,
and myocardial contractility (Fanton et al., 2000),
such as succinylcholine, atracurium, pancuronium,
Alfaxalone/alphadotone will cause dose-dependent seda-
tubocurarine and vecuronium, is reported in non-human
tion or anaesthesia, but large volumes are required via
primates. Assisted ventilation is required if they have
intramuscular injection.
been administered. Succinylcholine has a rapid onset and
Fentanyl has been shown to have a sparing effect on
short duration of action. The other four listed are non-
isoflurane. It may be administered by bolus or continuous
depolarising neurormuscular blockers and are reversed
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
BOX 7.l Anaesthesia induction in
non-human primates
Ketamine is well tolerated, and is often used in
combinations for anaesthesia of non-human primates
Volatile agents, such as isoflurane, cause rapid
induction and recovery from anaesthesia. This is the
agent of choice in debilitated animals
using neostigmine, usually in combination with an anti-
cholinergic agent to reduce the bradycardia that neostig-
mine induces. The use of neuromuscular blocking agents
 in pet species is seldom indicated.
Figure 7.4 · This common squirrel monkey, Saimiri sciureus, has
been induced with medetomidine and ketamine before intuba-
Anaesthetic maintenance
tion and maintenance with isoflurane. Echocardiogram pads are
attached to the feet to monitor electrical activity of the heart,
Volatile agents are commonly used to top up or maintain
and a pulse oximeter on the ear is used to assess arterial oxygen
anaesthesia. If possible, the patient is intubated (Fig. 7.3).
saturation. A warm air blanket is being used to provide supple-
If this is not feasible, a close-fitting facemask is used to
mental heating during anaesthesia.
108
administer oxygen and anaesthetic gases.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) leads can be attached to the
feet using pads (Fig. 7.4) or clips used as in larger species.
Recovery
Pulse oximeters can be attached to the tongue or ear.
Oxygen should be supplermented via facemask until the
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
patient is showing signs of voluntary movement. To avoid
CARE
staff injuries [for example bites), the primate is gently but
firmly restrained once volatile agents have been switched
off and/or reversal agents injected. Supplemental heating
Supplemental heat is important during anaesthesia and
should be continued until the patient is moving around in
recovery, particularly for small individuals. Analgesia
a coordinated manner.
should be given if a painful procedure is to be or has been
performed or the animal is perceived to be in discormfort.
The recovery cage should be on one level, to avoid animals
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
climbing and injuring themselves if they fall. A soft sub-
strate should be provided, for example towelling or straw.
Most small primates kept as pets can be induced in a
Animals that are part of a social group should be returned
chamber. This reduces the stress of restraint to the animal
to the group as soon as possible after recovery; otherwise
and reduces the risk of staff injury. Habituated animals
there may be problems with re-acceptance into the group.
may be held during mask induction (Fig. 7.l). After
induction, it is preferable to intubate the patient and
maintain on volatile agents.
In larger animals, ketamine and medetomidine are
BOX 7.2 Group-housed non-human
commonly used to induce anaesthesia, which may be
primates
topped up as required with volatile agents using a face-
Animals should be fully conscious before returning to
mask or via an endotracheal tube if they have been
intubated (Fig. 7.3). Recovery is more prolonged with
their group to avoid being traumatised by companions.
injectable agents. Medetomidine can be reversed with
The total time apart from the group (including the 
atipamezole and benzodiazepines (diazepam and midazo-
lam] with flumazenil.
minimised to avoid re-acceptance problems.
ANAESTHESIAMONITORING
Analgesia
Cardio-respiratory monitoring is as for other small mam-
mals. Heart and respiratory rates should be assessed
The administration of anti-inflammatories and analgesia
throughout the procedure using a bell or oesophageal
to non-human primates is particularly important after
stethoscope. A rectal thermometer can be used to monitor
surgery, as these species are adept at removing sutures or
body termperature.
traumatising lesions (Table 7.3).
Non-human primate anaesthesia
Table 7.3: Analgesics in primates
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
DURATION
COMMENT
(sunoy)
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid)
 5-10I
PO
4-6
Bupivacaine
18
Local 
0.25 %; e.g intercostals nerve
block
1.23
Epidural
Bupivacaine hydrochloride, 0.5%
Buprenorphine
0.01
IM, IV
12
al
ana
Butorphanol
0.1-0.24
IM
12-48
μ receptor agonist in primates
 May cause profound 
Lesth
respiratory depression
lesi
Carprofen 
2-49.11
PO,SC
12-24
Differs with species so
calculate frequency to effect
Fentanyl
4-8 μg/kg/h1
 Transdermal patch
Monitor for respiratory
109
depression
Hunixin
0.3-1.04
SC, IV
12-24
Care in dehydrated patients
Ibuprofen
207
PO
24
Ketoprofen
59
IM
6-8
Morphine
1-210
PO, SC, IM, IV
4
Dose-dependent respiratory
depression. May cause facial
prurituss
0.018
 Intrathecal
Preservative-free morphine
0.18
Epidural
Preservative-free morphine
Nalbuphine
0.54
IM, IV
3-6
Agonist-antagonist opioid
Oxymorphone
0.03-0.24
SC, IM, IV
4-12
Use low dose in New World
primates, higher dose in Old
World primates
Paracetamol
5-101I
PO
6
一
Pethidine
2-42
IM
3-4
Key: IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, PO = orally, SC = subcutaneous
(Carpenter, 2005); 2 (Flecknell, 1987): 3 (Golub and Germann, 1998): 4 (Heard, 1993): 5 (Horne, 2001); (lsaza et al, 1992); 
7 (Patton et al, 1997); α (Popilskis and Kohn, 1997); 9 (Ramer et al., 1998); 10 (Rosenburg, 1991); I (Thornton, 2002)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
EMERGENCY DRUGS
Table 7.4: Emergency drugs in non-human primates 
DRUG
DOSE (mg/kg)
ROUTE
INDICATION/COMmENT
Adrenaline
0.2-0.4 (diluted in 5 ml sterile water)2
IT
Cardiac arrest
(epinephrine)
0.5-1.0 (of I:10 000 dilution)2
IV
Atropine
0.02-0.055
IM
Anticholinergic - bradycardia
Diazepam
0.25-0.503
IM, IV
Seizures
Doxapram
2'
IV
Respiratory stimulant
Frusemide
1-22
IV
Duresis; heart failure; pulmonary oedema
Glycopyrrolate
0.005-0.0105
IM
Anticholinergic
Lidocaine
1-22
IV
Ventricular arrhythmias; premature
110
(lignocaine)
ventricular contractions
Prednisolone sodium
1-154
IV
succinate
0.01-0.05'
IM, IV
Opioid reversal
Key: IM = intramuscular, IT = intratracheal, IV = intravenous 
I (Flecknell, 1987); 2 (Fortman et al., 2002); 3 (laleggio, 1989); 4 (Melby and Altman, 1976); 5 (Popilskis and Kohn, 1997)
REFERENCES
Heard, D. J. 1993. Principles and techniques of anesthesia and
analgesia for exotic practice. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anitm
Pract 23: 1301-1327.
Capuano, S. V, N. W. Lerche, and C. R. Valverde. 1999. Cardiovascular,
Holmes, D. D. 1984. Clinical Laboratory Animal Medicine. Iowa
respiratory, thermoregulatory, sedative, and analgesic effects of
State University, Ames, IA.
intravenous administration of medetomidine in rhesus macaques
Horne, W. A. 200l. Primate anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am: Exotic
[Macaca mulatta]. Lab Anim Sci 49: 537544.
Anitm Practice 4: 239-266.
Carpenter, J. W. 2005. Exotic Animal Formulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier,
Horne, W. A., B. A. Wolfe, T. M. Norton et al. I998. Comparison of
St Louis, Missouri.
the cardiopulmonary effects of medetomidine-ketamine and
Eberhard, M. L. 1982. Chemotherapy of filariasis in squirrel
medetomidine-telazol induction on maintenance isoflurane
monkeys [Saimiri sciureus). Lab Anim Sci 32: 397-400.
anesthesia in the chimpanzee. Proc Am Assoc Zoo Vets: 22-25.
Fanton, J. W, S. R. Zar, D. L. Ewert et al. 2000. Cardiovascular
Ialeggio, D. M. I989. Practical medicine of primate pets. Compend
responses to propofol and etomidate in long-term
Cont Ed Pract Vet I1: 1252-1258.
instrumented rhesus macaques [Macaca mulatta]. Comp Med
Isaza, R., B. Baker, and F. Dunker. I992. Medical management of
inflarmmatory bowel disease in a spider monkey. J Am Vet Med
Fecknell, P. 1996. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia. Znd edn.
Assoc 200: 1543.
Academic Press, London.
Johnson-Delaney, C. A. 2002. Other small mammals. In: A.
Flecknell, P. A. I987. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia. Acadermic
Meredith and S. Redrobe [eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th
Press, London.
edn. p. I02-115. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Fortman, J. D., T. A. Hewett, and B. Taylor Bennett. 2002. The
Johnson, D. K., R. J. Russell, and J. A. Stunkard. I981. A Guide
Laboratory Nonhuman Primate. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
to Diagnosis, Treatment and Husbandry of Nonhutman
Foster, A., W. Zeller, and H. Pfannkuch. I996. Effect of thiopental,
Primates. Veterinary Medicine Publishing, Edwardsville, KS.
saffan, and propofol anesthesia on cardiovascular parameters
Joslin, J. O. [2003). Other primates excluding great apes. In:
and bronchial smooth muscle in the rhesus monkey. Lab Anim
M. E. Fowler and E. A. Miller. [eds.) Zoo amd Wild Animal
Sci 46: 327334.
Medlicine. St Louis, Missouri, Saunders: 346-381.
Golub, M. S., and S. L. Germann. 1998. Perinatal bupivacaine and
Kearms, K. S., J. Afema, and A. Duncan. I998. Dosage trials using
infant behavior in rhesus monkeys. Neurotoxicol Terat 20:
medetormidine as an oral preanesthetic agent in chimpanzees.
29-41.
Proc Am Assoc Zoo Vets: 5l1.
Non-human primate anaesthesia
Lopez, K. R., P. H. Gibbs, and D. S. Reed. 2002. A comparison of
Soma, L. R., W. J. Tiemey, and N. Satoh. 1988. Sevoflurane
body temperature changes due to the administration of
amnaesthesia in the monkey: the effects of multiples of MAC.
ketarmine-aceprom azne and tiletamine-zolazepam anesthetics in
Hiroshima J Anesth 24: 3-14.
0/ :1t s wuy qe do dwauo sanbee snowous
Steffey, E. P, J. D. Baggot, P H. Eisele et al. I994. Morphine-
Melby, E. C., and N. H. Altman. 1976. CRC Handbook of
isoflurane interaction in dogs, swine and rhesus monkeys. J Vet 
Laboratory Animal Science, Vol. 3. CRC Press, Cleveland, OH.
Pharmacol Ther 17: 202-210.
Patton, D. L., Y. C. Sweney, N. J. Bohannon et al. I997. Effects of
Steffey, E. P, J. R. Gillespie, J. D. Berry et al. 1974. Cardiovascular
doxycycline and anti-inflammatory agents on experimentally
effects of the addition of NzO to halothane in sturmp-tailed
induced chlamydial upper genital tract infection in female
Tmacaques during spontaneous and controlled ventilation. J Am
macaques. J Infect Dis 175: 648-654.
Vet Med Assoc 165: 834-837.
Phillips, I. R., and S. M. Grist. 1975. Clinical use of CT.1341
Thormton, S. M. 2002. Primates. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
anaesthetic ("Saffan") in marmosets. Lab Anim 9: 57-60.
[eds.) BSAVA Manual of Exotic Pets. 4 edn. pp. I27-137.
Popilskis, S. J., and D. F. Kohn. I997. Anesthesia and analgesia in
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
nonhuman primates. In: D. F. Kohn, S. K. Wixson, W. J. White
Tinker, J. H., F. W. Sharbrough, and J. D. Michenfelder. 1977.
and G. J. Benson [eds.] Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory
Anterior shift of the dominant EEG rhythm during anesthesia
Animals. pp. 233-255. Academic Press, New York.
im the Java monkey (Macaca fascicularis): Correlation with
Ramer, J. C., C. Emerson, and J. Paul-Murphy. I998. Analgesia in
anesthetic potency. Anesthesiology 46: 252-259.
an
nonhuman primates. Proc Am Assoc Zoo Vets: 480-483.
Rosenburg, D. P I991. Nonhuman primate analgesia. Lab Anim Oct:
S
22-32.
P
8
Fancy pigs anaesthesia
INTRODUCTION
112
The ancestor of domesticated pigs is the wild pig (Sus
scrofa). Many breeds have now been developed, with the
most common being the large production species. Pet pigs
are infrequently presented to the veterinary practitioner.
This chapter will cover the basics of pig anaesthesia as it
pertains to those breeds kept as pets or on ^hobby' farms.
Although the Vietnamese Potbellied pig is a well-known
and popular pet breed, veterinary clinicians in general
practice may also be presented with rare breeds, such as
the Tamworth (Fig. &.1), Berkshire (Fig. 8.2) or Kune
Kune (Fig. 8.3). Most animals are kept outdoors in a
pen with a shelter, but sorme are house-trained. Many
will be kept singly, but some owners will have a srmall
group.
The adult Potbellied pig usually weighs 50-70 kg, but is
prone to obesity and may weigh more. They are descen-
dents of the Banded pig in South-East Asia. Another
popular breed is the Gottingen Minipig, which weighs
35-45 kg. These were developed in the 1960s by crossing
Minnesota Minipigs with Vietnamese Potbellied pigs.
This breed is commonly used in laboratories for experi-
mental purposes (Sambraus, 1992). The Kune Kune ori-
ginates from New Zealand.
As pet pigs are susceptible to infectious diseases seen in
production breeds, they may be subject to similar restric-
tions. Legislation may place movement or housing restric-
tions to minimise the spread of disease, for example foot
and mouth disease and swine fever.
Manual restraint is difficult in all ages of pig, and sed-
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
ation or anaesthesia may be required for a wide range
of procedures, from phlebotomy to surgery. Many
of
Skull shape varies between pig breeds, with those such as
the risks associated with anaesthetising the previously
the Middle White (Fig. &.4) having quite convex facial fea-
discussed small mammals do not apply to pigs, mainly due
tures. The snout is quite short in Potbellied pigs. The short
to their larger size, and considerations are more akin to
neck is not distinct and subcutaneous fat blends the out-
those in dogs. However, the pig's unique anatomy will
line of the head into that of the body (Dyce et al., 1987).
present the veterinary practitioner with some specific
Curved canines project frorm the mouth. In boars these
problems.
tusks grow throughout life, but stop growth after 2 years in
Fancy pigs anaesthesia
a
alnaesth
Figure 8.2 ·Berkshire (rare breed often kept as a pet)
113
Figure 8.4 · The Middle White has a convex dorsal skull shape.
Many sites exist for venepuncture in pigs, but difficul-
ties exist with all. Unless sedated or anaesthetised, most
pigs will object both physically and vociferously to
venepuncture. The most accessible and superficial vein is
the auricular vein. The use of local anaesthetic ointment
Figure 8.3 · Kune Kune (rare breed often kept as a pet).
(for example, EMLA@, AstraZeneca, London, UK} and
restraint may allow venepuncture in smaller anirmals, but
 chemical immobilisation to some degree will be necessary
sows (Dyce et al., 1987). Care should be taken in conscious
for most patients.
or sedated anirmals to avoid injury to staff or owners.
Conscious anirmals may bite, particularly when stressed dur-
The jugular vein is not visible in pigs, but lies in the
region of the jugular furrow which may be covered by
ing restraint. Most animals are vociferous when restrained
subcutaneous fat in larger specimens). In anaesthetised
and people in the vicinity should wear ear defenders to
avoid hearing damage.
animals, a cutdown procedure is often required to access
the jugular vein for catheterisation. Sirmilarly, the femoral
vein is accessible in anaesthetised animals. A more com-
Temperature
mon site for phlebotomy is the anterior vena cava. If pos-
sible, the animal is restrained in a bleeding crate (Taylor,
 Temperature requirements vary greatly, depending mostly
1995). In an emergency situation, with collapsed or
on the size of anirmal. Heavy animals are able to live in
anaesthetised animals, intracardiac injection is possible.
cooler environmental temperatures, but young and small
Good injection technique is important, as porcine blood
animals require a higher ambient temperature (Taylor,
vessels are very fragile and will tear easily or spasrm when
1995).
injected. Most areas of skin are relatively hairless so do
not require clipping, but the area should be prepared
Cardiovascular system
aseptically before needle insertion
The heart is relatively small in the pig, extending from the
Respiratory system
second to fifth ribs in the ventral thorax. Heart rate is
usually 70-80 beats per minute, but can be up to 280
The resting respiratory rate varies greatly depending on
beats per minute in newborn piglets (Taylor, 1995)
the animal's age (Table 8.1). The average in adults is 20-30
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 8.l: Basic physiological data of pigs
Nasopharynx
Bodytemperoture °C)
Nasal
passages
-Pharyngeal
Higher temperature in newborns,
39 (38.440)
diverticulum
lower in adults
-Oesophagus
Respirotory rote ot rest (per minute)
Laryngeal
ventricle
Young
<50
Adult
20-30
Trachea
TongueEpiglottisLarynx
Old sows
13-15
Figure 8.5 · Schematic of upper respiratory tract (sagittal section
Heart rate ot rest (per minute)
through skull.
Newborn
200-280
Adult
70-80
Minimum environmentai temperature requirements (°C)
Cranial
14
25-30
Caudal
Piglets with sow (<5 kg)
Piglets 3-6 weeks old (alone)
27-32
Weaned 6-12 weeks old
21-24
Growing 12-16 weeks old
15-21
Lungs
Heart
Extent of ribcage
Abdominal viscera
Pigs 16-26 weeks old
13-18
Figure 8.6 · The areas occupied by the lungs and the heart are
Adult in house/yard
15-20
relatively small in pigs.
Adult at farrowing
15-18
Maximum environmentai temperature (°C)
a laryngeal recess in the midline between the base of the
epiglottis and thyroid cartilage on the ventral larynx
(Hodgkinson, 2007). The trachea follows from the larynx
Adult in house/yard
28
dorsally at an acute angle (Fig. 8.5) (Dyce et al., 1987).
The lungs do not project far caudally in pigs, covering only
(Straw and Merten, 1992; Taylor, 2002)
the cranial third to half of the thorax (Fig. 8.6) (Braun and
Casteel, 1993). Auscultation and percussion of lungfields
are made more difficult by subcutaneous fat and variable
breaths per minute, but is up to 50 breaths per minute in
patient demeanour.
Although infectious aetiologies commonly cause pneu-
newborn piglets, and as low as 13-15 in old animals
(Taylor, 1995)
monia in pigs, disease is often predisposed by poor hus-
The nasal cavities are narrow. The middle and ventral
bandry (see Pre-anaesthetic section).
meatuses carry air from the nares via the choana to the
nasopharynx (Fig. 8.5). In animals suffering from rhinitis,
Digestive system
the nasal passages will be even narrower and may become
deformed (Dyce et al., 1987). This will affect the provi-
Commercial pig diets or Potbellied pig special diets [for
 sion of oxygen to anaesthetised patients via nasal catheters.
example, Mazuri Porcine Mini-Pig Diets@, Purina Mills)
Although the lips are long, the mouth does not open
are available. Table scraps and treats should be avoided, as
very wide. Visualisation of the caudal oral cavity and lar-
obesity is very common in Potbellied pigs and contact with
ynx for intubation is, therefore, difficult. The soft palate
 meat may allow transrmission of various diseases Braun and
is long and the tongue relatively fatty. The porcine laryn-
Casteel, 1993; Taylor, 2002). Homemade diets may cause
geal anatomy produces various obstacles to intubation.
malnutrition and hypothermia may be predisposed by a
The pronounced arytenoids and ventrally sloping thyroid
low-energy diet.
cartilage make entry of the larynx difficult. The long thy-
 Diarrhoeas are often infectious and may include zoonotic
rocricoid ligamment on the ventral larynx presents a blind-
diseases, such as Salmonella. Besides supportive care and
ending pouch that must also be avoided during intubation.
fluids for dehydrated animals, isolation and hygiene are
There is also a pharyngeal recess dorsal to the larynx and
 paramount for patient care.
Fancy pigs anaesthesia
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
A balanced electrolyte solution such as Hartmann's is
AND STABILISATION
commonly administered intravenously at 10ml/kg/h
(Hodgkinson, 2007). Alternatively, a bolus of 500 ml
Hetastarch 10% (for an average 40 kg pig) can be followed
History
by a continuous rate infusion of Ringer's lactate solution
at 3-5 ml/kg/h (Goldman et al., 2005)
Details of the animal's history and husbandry may eluci-
date factors that predispose to disease. For example, poor
Fasting
ventilation and unclean bedding may allow ammonia levels
to build up that will be irritant to respiratory surfaces, pre-
Pigs rarely vomit on induction of anaesthesia, but should
disposing to infection. Dampness, draughts and overcrowd-
be fasted for 6-12h prior to anaesthesia to reduce the
ing will also contribute to disease development (Braun and 
possibility of vomition and aspiration (Flecknell, 1996;
Casteel, 1993). The demeanour of pigs is variable - a full
clinical examination may be possible in habitualised ani-
frorm the stomach on the diaphragm that can reduce
mals, whilst only a cursory examination is possible in others
respiratory efficiency. If abdominal surgery is to be per-
Pig-boards and the judicious use of a snare on the maxilla
may be required to restrain the patient for examination
formed, the pig should be fasted for 12-24h. Neonates
and paediatric patients should not be fasted due to the
and administration of drugs. The owner should be warned
1
that restraint will usually result in vocalisations.
risk of hypoglycaemia. Water should be removed 4h
before induction (Braun and Casteel, 1993).
1
Clinical assessment
EOUIPMENT REOUIRED
Initial observations should include assessment of the ani-
115
mal's demeanour, locomotion, and respiratory rate and
Pigs are usually vociferous when restrained, with the noise
pattern. Nasal discharges may be seen with respiratory
produced sufficient to cause damage to the human audi-
tract disease. Thoracic auscultation should be attempted,
tory system. It is, therefore, advisable to warn the owner
but may be unreliable in detection of lung pathology due
that the animal will squeal and to wear ear protectors.
to the difficulties associated with the procedure (see
Owing to the relatively narrow tracheal diameter and
Anatomy section). The heart can be auscultated in
acute angle between oropharnyx and larynx, relatively
armenable anirmals. The skin is easily visible due to the rela-
small emdotracheal tubes are required for porcine intub-
tive hairlessness in most breeds, and skin colour changes
ation (from 3.5 mm for a 5 kg animal to 16rmm for a large
due to disease or haemorrhages will be seen on pale-
adult). A long straight laryngoscope blade is necessary to
coloured animals. Abdominal palpation is unrewarding in
aid visualisation of the larynx. Laryngeal mask airways are
larger pigs, but a superficial exarmination is possible. A rectal
an alternative to endotracheal intubation, or soft tubing
temperature may be taken. Rectal examination is difficult
can be used as nasal catheters (Goldman et al., 2005).
in conscious animals. The external genitalia and mammary
Anaesthetic circuits will depend on the size of patient
glands can be visualised and palpated for abnormalities.
Non-rebreathing circuits used in small animal veterinary
The limbs can be palpated for abnormalities and potential
practice are suitable for most minipigs, using a T-piece or
sites for intravenous access identified
Bain for young pigs. For larger patients, a rebreathing sys-
An accurate weight should be obtained if possible and is
tem will be more efficient, for example a small anirmal cir-
particularly inportant if injectable anaesthetic agents are to
cle for those weighing over 15 kg. A large animal circle
be used. In piglets, small animal digital scales or a spring bal-
will be necessary for patients weighing more than 135 kg
ance with a sack or bucket may be used. In larger anirmals,
(Hodgkinson, 2007)
scales for farm animals will be more appropriate.
Monitoring equipment should include an oesophageal
stethoscope, digital rectal thermometer (or thermistor
Fluids and nutritional support
probe} and pulse oximeter
Owing to the difficulties associated with conscious
RELEVANT TECHNIOUES
restraint in pigs, supportive care may be limited in this
species. Oral supplements can be offered to animals that
are still self-feeding and drinking. Colostrum or sow milk
Routes of administration
substitutes are available for piglets and can be adminis-
tered via gavage tube.
Drug administration in pigs can be difficult. All animals will
 Fluids should be administered during anaesthesia, particu-
vocalise when restrained or injected. Adults usually have a
larly if a prolonged procedure is anticipated. Intravenous
deep layer of subcutaneous fat, with an associated poor
administration is optimal, but in small patients warmed fluids
blood supply and poor absorption.
 can be administered intraperitoneally as in other species. To
Oral medications can be given with fod. Direct oral
reduce the risk of hypothermia, fluids should be warmed to
administration can be dangerous in all but the smallest of
38°C for neonatal or srmall patients (Hodgkinson, 2007).
patients due to the presence of large sharp canines.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Subcutaneous injections can be administered just caudal
injected into or catheterised frorm the caudal surface of
to the base of the ear, avoiding the parotid gland that lies
the pinna. In conscious animals, local anaesthetic cream
ventral to the ear (Dyce et al., 1987).
(lidocaine/prilocaine, EMLA@, AstraZeneca, London,
Intramuscular injections are administered just caudal
UK) should be applied 30min before venous access is
to the base of ear, into the muscle mass attaching to the
required, to reduce the discomfort of venepuncture and
caudal skull surface. The neck muscle here is the pre-
resultant movements by the patient. If the animal is con-
ferred site, as it has relatively little subcutaneous fat and
scious, a snare on the snout may be used for restraint. The
is well tolerated by most pigs (Hodgkinson, 2007]. A nee-
skin of the pinna is relatively hairless in most patients and
dle up to 25 mm long for smaller pigs or 38 mm for adult
clipping is not usually required, although the skin should
pigs should be used to ensure the injection is deeper than
be cleaned with antiseptic before the vein is entered.
the subcutaneous fat layer (Braun and Casteel, 1993].
Manual pressure or a tourniquet at the base of the ear will
Intrawenous access can be difficult in pigs, as many ani-
raise the vein. A butterfly catheter [22-25-gauge} with
 mals are not routinely handled and resist restraint.
extension tubing is useful in case of patient moverment;
The anterior vena cava is often used for phlebotomy as a
alternatively an intravenous catheter can be placed.
large sample can be obtained. This may be easier with the
The cephalic vein is accessible in most anaesthetised ani-
pig in dorsal recumbency. The animal is restrained with the
mals, but cut down may be required through the thick skin
neck in extension and the forelimbs pulled straight in
and it is difficult to access in animals with short fat legs. This
extension away from the head (as for cat jugular venepunc-
is a good site for catheterisation and fluid administration
ture). A needle (>32mm long for a large adult) is inserted
during anaesthesia. Access is also difficult in larger, older
into the thoracic inlet (between the manubrium sterni and
animals with thickened skin over the antebrachiurm. A cut-
shoulder joint) in a caudal direction, 45° to vertical, to a
 down technique may be required and it is usually only pos-
depth of 2-3crm. The right side is preferred, as the left
sible in anaesthetised or collapsed animals. The lateral
phrenic nerve and unpaired thoracic duct [which lies more
sapherous vein rmay be used similarly in anaesthetised ani-
116
to the left) may be damaged. Positioning is checked by aspir-
 mals, but is difficult in Potbellied pigs due to their skin folds.
ating blood. This vessel cannot be catheterised.
The subcutaneous abdominal vein is usually easy to
Other sites, such as the right brachiocephalic and right
visualise and access [including catheterisation} in porcine
external jugular vein, may be accessed in anaesthetised
species, even in conscious animals (Snook, 2001].
patients. To access the jugular vein, the neck is held in
Intracardiac injection may be used in an emergency
extension with the forelimbs straight as for anterior vena
[see Fig. &.6]. The heart is located between the second
cava puncture. Pressure is applied at the thoracic inlet to
and fifth ribs. It is entered 2-3 cm cranial and 2 cm dorsal
raise the vein. The needle is inserted at the level of the
to the apex beat on the left-hand side, via the left fifth or
shoulder joint in the region of the jugular furrow (which
right fourth intercostal space. Access is easier from the
may not be visible in fatter animals). The vein lies rela-
left-hand side as there is more contact between the heart
tively deep in the tissues of the neck (beneath the skin,
and body wall than on the right. Pulling the forelimb for-
fat and muscles) and jugular venepuncture is possible only
ward will enhance access.
in smaller animals without excess subcutaneous neck fat.
The orbital sinus can be accessed for small blood sam-
Jugular catheterisation requires a surgical cut-down tech-
ples in anaesthetised pigs. There is a risk of ocular damage
nique under anaesthesia.
with this technique. A 20-gauge 25 mm needle is inserted
The auricular vein (Fig. 8.7) is the easiest superficial
 deep to the medial canthus ofthe eye towards the medial
vein to access, but catheterisation will be difficult unless
bony orbit (Braun and Casteel, 1993). The femoral vein
the animal is sedated or debilitated. This vein can be
may be accessed for phlebotomy in anaesthetised animals
and is located by palpating a pulse in the neighbouring
fermoral artery.
Intraperitoneal injections are administered similarly to
other species. This route is advisable only in anaesthetised
or severely debilitated patients due to the risk of visceral
puncture if the pig moves unexpectedly. Fluids should be
warmed before intraperitoneal administration due to the
risks of iatrogenic hypothermia with injection of cool fluids.
Intraosseous access is possible in neonates. The tech-
nique is sirmilar to other mammals.
Intubation
 Intermediate auricular vein
The peculiar anatomy of the porcine upper airways (see
[central ear vein)
Fig. &.5) makes intubation technically challenging. A rela-
tively small endotracheal tube should be selected - a
Figure 8.7 · Diagram of the caudal surface of a pig's ear, demon-
6mm tube for a 25 kg animal, 9 mm for a 50kg animal, up
strating the auricular vein for catheterisation.
to a 14-16rmm size for large boars or sows. Although a
Fancy pigs anaesthesia
larger tube would allow more gas flow to the patient,
As in rabbits, a laryngeal mask airway device (LMA-
tracheal damage from a large tube may cause haemorrhage
ProSeal@, Vitaid Ltd., Toronto, Canada] has been developed
 Or inflamnmation that willrestrict ventilation during anaes-
for use in pigs. This is simpler to place than an endotracheal
thesia and the recovery period. The short porcine neck
tube, provides some protection for the pig's airway during
necessitates a short endotracheal tube, to avoid blockage
anaesthesia and allows more reliable delivery of oxygen than
of the epiarterial bronchial root and poor ventilation to
 a facemask or nasal catheter. However, unlike rabbits, pigs
the right apical lung lobe (Hodgkinson, 2007),
can vomit and the presence of some residual food, water or
After induction of anaesthesia, the mouth is opened by
bedding material in the stomach means they cannot be con-
pulling the upper and lower jaws apart with bandage mater-
sidered starved. There is also a risk of gas leakage into the
ial (Fig. &.8). The head is held with the neck extended. The
stomach with the laryngeal mask airway device, which is not
tongue is pulled forward, taking care not to cause iatrogenic
found with endotracheal intubation. This may result in gas-
damage on the sharp teeth. It can be difficult to visualise the
tric distension and regurgitation. Regurgitation may lead to
larynx in pigs and it may help to have the anirmal in dorsal
pulmonary aspiration, which is often fatal. The use of an
recumbency as pharyngeal tissue may fall away from the lar-
oesophageal drainage tube to empty the stomach after induc-
ynx under gravity (Hodgkinson, 2007). Some clinicians pre-
tion and placerment of the laryngeal mask airway device will
fer the patient to be in sternal or lateral recumbency.
reduce these risks (Goldman et al., 2005),
A laryngoscope with size 1-4 straight Wisconsin blade is used
 In unintubated anirmals, either a single or forked catheter,
to visualise the larynx. The soft palate often lies dorsal to the
 or pipe, can be inserted into the nasal cavity(ies) to provide
epiglottis and should be moved with the laryngoscope blade
cxygen and/or volatile anaesthetic agents. If endotracheal
or a stylet before local anaesthetic (for exarmple, 2% lido-
tubes are used, the cuffs can be inflated in the nasal passages.
The mouth is taped closed to reduce oral breathing.
11
caine [lignocaine]] is sprayed on to the larynx to avoid laryn-
geal spasm during intubation. Laryngospasm is common if
anaesthetic depth is insufficient (Goldman et al., 2005).
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
117
A stylet or introducer (Portex Ltd, Hythe, Kent, UK;
M&IE Dentsply, Exeter, UK) is used to stiffen the endotra-
Sedatives are often administered prior to induction of
cheal tube and aid insertion into the trachea. In some cases
anaesthesia to ease handling and reduce stress to the pig
it may be easier to insert the introducer into the trachea
(Table &.2). This greatly facilitates handling of the animals
and use it as a guidewire to thread the endotracheal tube
and enables intravenous induction techniques to be used.
into the trachea. The endotracheal tube is advanced to the
Pre-anaesthetic agents are usually administered intramus-
glottis with the tip angled towards the glottal opening. Due
cularly, as intravenous injections are not possible in the fully
to the acute angle between oropharynx and trachea, it rmay
 conscious animal. If large volumes are involved, it may be
be easier to pass the stylet into the larynx before passing
useful to attach the syringe to a needle via an extension
the endotracheal tube over it into the trachea. With either
tube - this will reduce the restraint period to that required
approach, it is often necessary to rotate the endotracheal
for initial insertion of the needle [Flecknell, 1996)
tube 1&0° as it passes into the larynx and resistance is
Anticholinergics, such as atropine and glycopyrrolate,
encountered. After a further I to 2cm advancerment, rotate
are usually given to reduce salivary and bronchial secre-
the tube back again to pass it down the trachea. The endo-
tions, abolish the vaso-vagal reflex during intubation and
tracheal tube should not be forced against resistance as
prevent bradycardia (Swindle, 1998).
haermorrhage, inflarmrmation or laryngeal spasm may occur,
Azaperone (Stresnil@, Janssen, High Wycombe, UK) is
sometirmes fatally (Flecknell, 1996). If resistance is felt,
 a butyrophenone derivative. It has minimal cardiovascular
withdraw the tube slightly and re-advance. The cuff is
 effects and is used specifically in pigs to cause sedation and
inflated once the tube is in position within the trachea.
ataxia. No analgesia is produced (Flecknell, 1996). The
dose range is between l and &mg/kg, depending on the
effect required; 1-2 mg/kg is usually adrministered intra-
muscularly to produce sedation for minor procedures.
Azaperone pre-medication is administered 20-30min
before anaesthesia is induced by intravenous administra-
tion of another agent into the lateral auricular vein (Taylor,
2002). Azaperone at 5 mg/kg can be combined with meto-
-as daap anoid on Aenoseu yu ie ae
ation and analgesia for minor procedures.
During the onset period, the pig is left in a quiet area.
 Initial effects are observed in 5-10 min, peaking at around
20min and lasting up to 1h (Short, 1986; Swindle,
1998). Penile prolapse has been seen in boars given doses
higher than 1 mg/kg (Hodgkinson, 2007]. Azaperone
causes peripheral vasodilation, which is useful for ensuing
Figure 8.8 · Pig in sternal recumbency for intubation. Bandage
anaesthetic induction with intravenous agents, but will
material is used to open the jaws and extend the head to aid visu-
also increase heat loss. Insulation and supplemental heat-
alisation of the glottis.
ing should, therefore, be provided as appropriate.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 8.2: Sedatives and pre-medicants in pigs
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Alfaxalone/alphadalone
64
IM
Sedation (use in small pigs)
Acepromazine
0.2-1.12
IM
Tranquillisation
Atropine
0.043
IM (or SC, IV)
Anticholinergic; 20-30 min prior to anaesthesia to
reduce hypersalivation
Azaperone
0.25-0.502
IM
Relaxation and mild sedation without ataxia
2.02
Sedation and a degree of ataxia in 5-10 min, lasts I h
>2.08
Recumbency, possible adverse responses
 Doses <8 mg/kg reported for immobilisation3.5
Azaperone + metomidate
5 + 24
IM
Deep sedation with analgesia for minor procedures
Diazepam
0.58.59
IM, IV
Sedation; tranquillisation for minor procedure
118
Fentanyl/droperidol
1 ml/9-25 kg2.10
IM
Sedation; maximum effect in 20 min
(Innovar-Vet@, Janssen)
Glycopyrrolate
0.005-0.0103
SC, IM, IV
Anticholinergic
Ketamine + xylazine
1-2+0.5-2.06
IV
Tranquillisation/sedation. (Sufficient for Caesarean
section when used with local anaesthetic at incision)
Midazolam
0.12.04.11
IM
Sedation
Tiletamine/zolazepam
4-63.5
IM
Sedation; immobilisation
 Doses <20 mg/kg reported
Tiletamine/zolazepam/
0.006-0.13 ml/kg?
IM
Tranquillisation/sedation
ketamine/xylazine*
Xylazine
0.5-3.0
IM
Sedation; tranquillisation
Key: IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, SC = subcutaneous
* Reconstitute 500 mg tiletamine/zolazepam powder (Telazol@, Fort Dodge Laboratories Inc, Fort Dodge, IA) with 2.5 ml of
100 mg/ml ketamine and 2.5 ml of I00 mg/ml xylazine 
(Braun, 1995); 2 (Braun and Casteel, 1993); 3 (Call and Morris, 1999);: 4 (Flecknell, 1996); 5 (Heard, 1993); * (Johnson, 1993);
7 (Ko et al., 1993);  (Short, 1986); (Tymes, 1998); 1 (Wertz and Wagner, 1995); I (Swindle, 1993)
Ketamine at 1Omg/kg intrarmuscularly will produce immo-
venous thrombosis (Hodgkinson, 2007). The sedative
bilisation, but spontaneous movements occur and it is more
effects of acepromazine persist for 8-24 h (Hedenqvist and
frequently used in combination with other agents. Higher
Hellebrekers, 2003). Sedative effects are unpredictable
doses are required in young animals (20mg/kg) (Flecknell,
 and side effects are sirmilar with azaperone. Acepromazine
1996). Ketamine may be adrministered intrarmuscularly with
 may also be used in combination with ketamine.
azaperone, with or without butorphanol, to produce deeper
Benzodiazepines, such as diazepam or midazolarm, can
sedation than azaperone alone (Hodgkinson, 2007).
be administered intramuscularly or  intravenously, but
The phenothiazine acepromazine is usually administered
 intramuscular bioavailability of diazepam is poor. These
intrarmuscularly, as intravenous injection may lead
to
drugs produce good muscle relaxation. Sedation is unreliable
Fancy pigs anaesthesia
when used alone, but is irmproved when adrministered with
Anaesthesia can be induced with intravenous ketamine
ketamine (Hodgkinson, 2007],
at 2-5 mg/kg after pre-medication with azaperone
 Midazolam or ketarmine is often used to produce sed-
(Taylor, 2002). After a loading dose of ketarmine or other
ation, allowing intravenous catheter placerment for induc-
agents, ketamine is also commonly used to top up seda-
tion with another injectable agent [Hedenqvist and
tive or anaesthetic regimes, given at 5 mg/kg boluses or a
Hellebrekers, 2003). Diazepam or midazolam (1-2 mg/kg
continuous infusion (Hodgkinson, 2007).
intrarmuscularly)] will produce rapid sedation and can be
Tiletammine and zolazepam will produce anaesthesia for
minor surgery lasting 20 min (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers,
(10-15 mg/kg intramuscularly) (Flecknell, 1996). Tileta-
2003). Used alone, this preparation causes poor muscle
mine and zolazepam (Zoletil@, Virbac, Carros, France;
relaxation and recoveries may be rough. The zolazepam in
Telazol@, Fort Dodge Animal Health, IA, USA) is more
the mix may prolong recovery. The addition of other agents
useful in larger animals due to the srmall volume required.
produces a more balanced anaesthesia, with smoother
High doses (20mg/kg) produce heavy sedation and
induction and recovery (Table &.3). To increase the pro-
immobilisation.
portion of dissociative agent, ketamine and xylazine
The alpha-2-agonist xylazine may be used as a sole
rather than sterile water rmay be added to the powder for
2
agent to produce sedation and some analgesia. Both
reconstitution (Thurmon and Benson, 1993).
medetomidine and xylazine produce variable sedation and
Propofol is administered intravenously at 2.5-8 mg/kg to
are more useful in potentiation of other agents (Flecknell,
1
1996). They may be used in combination with ketamine,
1996; Hodgkinson, 2007). Slow administration to effect
ketamine and butorphanol, or tiletamine/zolazepan
should avoid the common dose-related adverse reaction of
apnoea. This agent produces no analgesia, has a narrow
1
(Braun and Casteel, 1993). Alpha-2-agonists may induce
vomiting.
Alphaxalone/alphadalone produces sedation in small
produces severe hypotension in pigs (Hedenqvist and
Hellebrekers, 2003). Anaesthesia is commonly maintained
119
pigs at 6 mg/kg intramuscularly (Flecknell, 1996). (It is
not useful in larger animals due to the large volume of
via intubation and the use of volatile agents, but incremen-
injection, for example 10 ml for a 20 kg pig.)
tal injections or continuous rate infusion of propofol may
be used. Recovery is smooth and rapid.
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
A lower dose of propofol may be administered
OFANAESTHESIA
with alfentanil. This provides analgesia, but respiratory
depression will necessitate assisted ventilation. The alfen-
tanil can be reversed with the opioid agonist-antagonist
Induction
nalbuphine, administered intravenously at 0.5 mg/kg
(Flecknell, 1996).
Injectable anaesthetics
Barbiturates may be used to prolong anaesthesia after
ketamine induction (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003)
If anaesthesia is to be induced with injectable agents, it is
They will inhibit respiration and ventilatory support may
common to pre-medicate the pig as described in the sec-
be required if barbiturates are used for anaesthesia.
tion above. This will allow intravenous injection to pro-
Thiopental can be adrministered intravenously after sed-
duce anaesthesia, usually into the auricular vein. Where a
ation. The dose varies between anirmals and level of sedation,
 pre-medication has been given, the dose of anaesthesia for
and is given to effect (Hodgkinson, 2007). This agent causes
induction is reduced by 30-50% (Flecknell, 1996)
the least cardiovascular depression of the barbiturates
Ketamine [manufactured as a sole agent) and tileta-
(Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003). Surgical anaesthesia
mine [manufactured in combination with zolazepam] are
lasts 5-10min (Flecknell, 1996). Unless a sedative or tran-
dissociative anaesthetic agents commonly used in pig
quilliser has been used, recovery may involve exciterment in
anaesthesia. Neither results in much muscle relaxation
some patients.
and if used alone will lead to rough recoveries from anaes-
Pentobarbital has been used in emergencies, but over-
thesia. For this reason, they are commonly used in con-
doses will result in severe cardio-respiratory depression.
junction with other agents.
The safety margin appears to be higher in small pigs.
The advantages of ketarmine are good analgesia, a wide
Anaesthesia has been induced with intravenous pentobar-
safety margin and the ability to administer the drug via the
bital after pre-medication with azaperone (Hodgkinson,
intrarmuscular or intravenous routes. Disadvantages include
2007; Taylor, 2002). Administration should be slow, as
mild cardiovascular depression and muscle rigidity. When
this agent crosses the blood-brain barrier more slowly
used alone, excessive salivation may also occur and recover-
than thiopental. Surgical anaesthesia is provided for
ies are rough. Ketarmine alone is insufficient for surgical
10-30min and top-up doses can be given, but prolong
anaesthesia (Boschert et al., 1994), but can be used in com-
recovery. Full recovery may take up to 3 or 4 h (Flecknell,
bination with agents such as benzodiazepines, azaperone or
1996).
alpha-2-agonists to improve the anaesthesia produced. The
Alphadolone/alphoxolone are steroid anaesthetics that
addition of a benzodiazepine will produce muscle relax-
can be adrministered intrarmuscularly or intravenously
ation and good visceral analgesia, but hypothermia is pro-
[1-2mg/kg), usually after azaperone pre-medication.
found (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003).
This produces anaesthesia lasting approximately 15 min,
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 8.3: Anaesthetic agents in pigs
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Detomidine + butorphanol +
0.125 + 0.3 + 0.3 +
IM
Anaesthesia. (Can reverse detomidine with yohimbine
midazolam + atropine
0.062
or atipamezole, butorphanol with naloxone, and
midazolam with flumazenil)
Diazepam + ketamine
1-2 + 12-201
IM
As for xylazine + ketamine dose below; longer anaes-
thesia,but diazepam not analgesic
Fentanyl + isoflurane
0.03-0.1mg/kg/h
 IV, Inhal
Anaesthesia using combination of opioid CRl and
infusion and 
volatile agent
0.050 mg/kg bolus +
0.5 %
Guaifenesin +ketamine 十
0.5-1.0 ml/kg
IV
Administer to effect for induction
xylazine*
2.2 ml/kg/h6
Maintenance
Halothane
Inhal
May cause malignant hyperthermia in some animals
(genetic predisposition)
120
4-5%
Mask induction
1.52.5%7
Maintenance
Isoflurane
4-5%1
Inhal 
Mask induction 
2-3 %7
Anaesthesia maintenance
Ketamine
s"(ud) t-1 
IV
 Used to prolong anaesthesia after induction with
ketamine combinations (see below)
Ketamine + acepromazine 
10-20 + 0.05-0.502
IM
Anaesthesia
Ketamine + diazepam
10-20 + 121.11
IM
 of sedation are seen
Anaesthesia is short-term
Smoother recovery than ketamine alone
Ketamine + xylazine
1220 + 2.21
IM
Administer xylazine first
Xylazine enhances muscle relaxation and analgesia
Short-term anaesthesia
Ketamine + xylazine +
11 + 2 + 0.222
IM
Anaesthesia
butorphanol
Butorphanol enhances analgesia
Neostigmine
40-60 μg/kga
IV
Reversal of non-depolarising neuromuscular blocking
agents.(Dog/cat dose)
Nitrous oxide
 50% inspired gases
Inhal 
Calms patient for mask induction
(with oxygen)id
Also reduces concentration of other volatile agent
required
Pancuronium
0.063
IV
Neuromuscular blocking agent
Reverse with neostigmine
 Fancy pigs anaesthesia
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lcg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Pentobarbital
5-155
IV
Anaesthesia induction after pre-medication
Slow administration
Top-ups prolong recovery
Propofol
2.583.5
IV
Anaesthesia induction, usually after pre-medicant
sedation (e.g.ketamine I0 mg/kg IM). Apnoea common,
intubation advised
8-1 2mg/kg/h3.4
Maintenance by CRI
Propofol + alfentanil3
2.0-2.5mg/kg +
IV
Induction (after ketamine I0 mg/kg pre-medication)
al
20-230 μg/kg
an
0.1-0.2 mg/kg/min +
Maintenance
25 μg/kg/min
esth
Sevoflurane
Prn9
Inhal
Mask induction/maintenance
Lesi
Sufentanil + isoflurane
0.015-0.030mg/kg/h
IV + inhal
Anaesthesia using combination of opioid CRl and
 infusion and
volatile agent
0.007 mg/kg bolus +
121
0.5%9
Thiopental
 5-155
IV
Anaesthesia induction after pre-medication
Irritant extravascularly
Tiletamine/zolazepam/
0.020-0.026ml/kg?
IM
Dissociative anaesthetic
ketamine/xylazine**
Short induction time, allows intubation
0.022-0.044ml/kgl
Maintenance
Tiletamine/zolazepam +
Rapid induction, poor muscle relaxation, may have
xylazine
rough recovery
2 + 2'
IV
Anaesthesia 30-40 min
2-6 + 2.21.2.6
IM
Can administer xylazine first,followed by tiletamine/
zolazepam when signs of sedation seen
Vecuronium
0.153
IV
Neuromuscular blocking agent
Reverse with neostigmine
Yohimbine 
0.1250.31.2
IV
Reversal of xylazine and detomidine
Key: CRl = continuous rate infusion, Inhal = inhalation, IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, prn = dose to effect 
*5% guaifenesin with I-2 mg/ml ketamine and I mg/ml xylazine
Jo w s't 4am ( spoa mot 'ui seoneiogel a8poa hos @lozeel) epmod wedezeloz/eueen 8w os ansuoy  
I 00 mg/ml ketamine and 2.5 ml of I00 mg/ml xylazine
(Braun and Casteel, 1993);² (Calle and Morris, 1999);3(Flecknell 1996); 4(Goldman et al,2005);$(Hodgkinson, 2007); ^(Johnson,
1993); 7 (Ko et al., 1993); *(Lukasik, 1995);  (Swindle, 1998); 1 (Tynes, 1998); I (Werfz and Wagner, 1995)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
although a continuous infusion can be used to prolong
flow rate of l-3L/min and can be maintained on
anaesthesia. Cardiovascular depression may be seen, but
1.5-2.5% halothane or 2-3% isoflurane.
respiratory depression is rminimal and muscle relaxation is
good (Hodgkinson, 2007).
Opioids, such as fentanyl or sufentanil, can be adminis-
Anaesthetic maintenance
tered via continuous rate infusion in combination with
inhalant agents to maintain anaesthesia. Opioid infusions
Volatile agents are usually used for maintenance of anaes-
do not decrease myocardial contractility or coronary
thesia, via an endotracheal tube or close-fiting facemask.
blood flow (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003).
Alternatively, injectable agents may be used, for example
Although not routinely used, the neuromuscular block-
a continuous rate infusion of propofol (8-12mg/kg/h)
ers pancuronium and vecuronium can be administered to
and hourly boluses of ketamine [l-4 mg/kg) (Braun and
produce muscular paralysis in pigs for certain procedures.
Casteel, 1993; Flecknell, 1996; Goldman et al., 2005).
Inadequate anaesthesia is assessed by changes in heart
rate and blood pressure (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers,
Recovery
2003).
As pigs are prone to laryngospasm, they should be closely
Volatile anaesthetics
monitored during recovery until able to sit in sternal
recumbency.
Inhalant anaesthetic agents are considered safer than
-ueduon uoy aneiedas iday aq Pinous sieuue dnor
injectable anaesthetics in pigs. Volatile agents appear to be
ions during the recovery phase to avoid trauma from con-
specifics (Hodgkinson, 2007). If this is not possible, the
tions are required than in other species (Flecknell, 1996).
whole group should receive azaperone to prevent fighting
122
Isoflurane and halothane have wide safety rmargins, short
(Taylor, 2002)
induction and recovery times, and the depth of anaesthe-
sia can be rapidly adjusted. Desflurane has also been used
in pigs (Swindle, 1998). Halothane is associated with
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
malignant hyperthermia in certain genetically predisposed
commercial pig breeds (Claxton-Gill et al., 1993). Isoflu-
In general, injectable agents are used to induce or assist in
rane has the least myocardial depressant effects of the
induction of anaesthesia before maintenance with volatile
volatile anaesthetic agents (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers,
anaesthetic agents. If endotracheal intubation or venous
2003)
catheterisation cannot be attained, anaesthesia is main-
 Small pigs may be induced using a facemask and volatile
tained via further intramuscular agents or volatile agents
agents, but larger animals require pre-medication before
via a facemask [Hodgkinson, 2007].
they can be restrained for application of a mask. As in
Pre-medication with atropine (0.04 mg/kg), azaperone
other species, volatile agents may be administered via a
[4mg/kg), midazolam (0.2mg/kg) and ketamine (2mg/kg)
closely fitting facemask or endotracheal tube. It can be dif-
is administered intrarmuscularly. At the same time, local
ficult to create a tight seal and environrmental contarmination
anaesthetic cream is applied to the ear to allow placerment
with anaesthetic gases is likely to occur. After induction it
of an intravenous catheter in the auricular vein 20-30 min
is, therefore, preferable to intubate the patient in order to
later. Anaesthesia is induced with intravenous propofol at
ensure airway patency and allow positive pressure ventila-
2-3 mg/kg (ketamine combinations are a common alter-
tion (PpV) to be performed (Swindle, 1998). This is par-
native), using a butterfly catheter with extension tubing
ticularly useful if laryngospasm or respiratory obstruction
in the auricular vein (Taylor, 2002). Since apnoea is com-
occurs. However, intubation can be technically difficult and
 mon after propofol, the patient should be intubated and
facemasks are suitable for short procedures. Equiprment
PPV performed if necessary. Anaesthesia is maintained
[(local anaesthetic, laryngoscope and endotracheal tubes)
with isoflurane. If volatile anaesthesia is not available, a
should always be ready in case it becomes necessary to
continuous rate infusion of propofol (0.2 mg/kg/min} and
intubate the patient.
hourly boluses of ketamine (l-2 mg/kg) can also be used 
Nitrous oxide may be added to the inhaled gases, up to
to maintain anaesthesia (Goldman et al., 2005).
50%, to reduce the concentration of other agents required
Ideally, the pig should be intubated after induction. If
(Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003). Administration of
intubation is not possible, oxygen and volatile anaesthetic
nitrous oxide with oxygen (50:50) may be beneficial in
agents can be provided to the pig via a facermask over the
calming the patient during mask induction before the add-
snout, or via a single or double nasal catheter. Nitrous
ition of other volatile agents (Tynes, 1998). Halothane can
oxide (2:1 ratio of oxygen to nitrous oxide} can be used
be used to induce and maintain anaesthesia in pigs.
during maintenance of anaesthesia to reduce the inspired
Isoflurane results in more rapid induction and recovery of
concentration of volatile anaesthetic agent required.
anaesthesia, but has a more pungent odour than halothane
 Denitrogenation should be performed by supplementing
and may be resented if used for induction by facermask
oxygen without nitrous oxide for 10min at the end of
(Hodgkinson, 2007). Adult pigs usually require an oxygen
anaesthesia.
 Fancy pigs anaesthesia
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
CARE, INCLUDING ANALGESIA
Observations on the patient
Although pigs have a layer of subcutaneous fat, hypother.
Positioning
mia may be a problem during anaesthesia, even in large ani-
mals, due to their relative hairlessness. Performing the
As pig hearts are relatively small, with an associated small
anaesthetic in a space without draughts, along with the use
cardiovascular capacity, pigs should not be rmaintained in
of blankets and bubble-wrap, should reduce heat loss. If the
dorsal recumbency for long periods (Braun and Casteel,
environmental temperature is cold, use methods of supple-
1993)
mental heating such as electric heat pads, warm air blan-
kets and overhead heaters to increase the temperature.
Cardio-respiratory systems
Young and small patients in particular should be closely
monitored and extrermities, such as limbs and ears, insu-
The heart rate and pulse rate should be monitored and
lated (for example, with bubble-wrap) to prevent heat loss.
recorded throughout anaesthesia. Pulses may be difficult
Maligmant hyperthermia is a genetic-associated condition
to palpate in larger thick-skinned animals, but can usually
that has been reported in certain domestic pig breeds,
be detected at several arteries, including the auricular,
including Landrace and Large White pigs, usually in
carotid, femoral, saphenous or [(in anaesthetised animals)
response to halothane anaesthesia (Hodgkinson, 2007). The
sublingual arteries. The carotid and fermoral arteries are
gene governing susceptibility can be tested for in a blood
deep in muscle and only palpable in small pigs (Braun and
sample (Taylor, 2002). Other species are less likely to suffer
1
Casteel, 1993).
from this condition, but core body temperature should be
Capillary refill time can be rmonitored to assess the
monitored during anaesthesia to ensure hyperthermia does
peripheral circulation. Mucous membrane colour will give
not occur. If anaesthesia is performed outdoors, shade
123
the anaesthetist some appreciation of cxygen saturation.
should be provided to protect the patient from sunburn. If
A pulse oximeter can be applied to the ear, tongue or tail to
hyperthermia is noted, cool fluids should be administered
assess oxygen saturation of haemoglobin during anaesthesia.
intravenously; colonic lavage can be helpful, as can ice packs,
The respiratory rate should be rmonitored by observa-
or wet towels can be applied to the skin.
tion of thoracic excursions or movement of the reservoir
bag if the patient is intubated.
Analgesia
Pigs are prone to laryngospasm and should be closely
monitored when unintubated (during anaesthesia or
recovery). Steroids should be administered and intub-
Analgesia should be provided to animals with painful con-
ditions or after surgery (Table &.4). A combination of agents
ation or tracheostomy performed if spasm occurs.
can be used (multimodal analgesia). For example, the use
Nervous system
of local anaesthesia along an incision line with parenteral
opioid analgesics and anaesthesia results in a reduction in
Muscle tone, including jaw tone, is a good indicator of
the effects of noxious stimuli as well as speeding recovery
anaesthetic depth. As with other mammalian species,
times from painful procedures (Swindle, 1998).
ocular reflexes, such as corneal and palpebral, can be
assessed. When under a light plane of anaesthesia, there
Local anaesthetics
will be a strong ear flick response to gentle stroking of
These drugs are useful for several techniques in pigs. As
hairs inside the pinna.
described above, topical application of lidocaine (lignocaine)
is used to reduce the risk of laryngospasm during endotra-
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
cheal intubation. Local anaesthetics, such as 5% procaine,
can be infiltrated locally for minor procedures or used in
 Body temperature should be monitored with a digital rectal
combination with sedatives for a more involved procedure.
thermometer. Skin temperature should be assessed if malig-
For anaesthesia of the testicles prior to castration of pigs up
nant hyperthermia is considered possible, as this will result
to 6 months old, 2-15 ml of 5% procaine can be injected
in hot, pink blotchy skin (Hodgkinson, 2007). In some
subcutaneously and intratesticularly. The patient should
cases, particularly small patients, supplemental heating will
be left for at least 5 min to allow the anaesthetic effects to
be required to prevent hypothermia. In others, body heat
occur before surgery is initiated (Hodgkinson, 2007).
can be maintained by wrapping the body in bubble-wrap.
Intravenous regional anaesthesia can be performed as in
An electrocardiogram (ECG) can be used as in other
other animals. A tourniquet is applied around the prox-
species to record electrical activity frorn the heart. An
imal limb to slow systemic spread and local anaesthesia
arterial catheter in the superficial femoral artery will allow
injected into a superficial vein. This can be useful for dis-
continuous invasive blood pressure monitoring and meas-
tal limb surgery. Manual restraint with or without sed-
urement of arterial blood gases [Goldman et al., 2005}
ation will also be required (Hodgkinson, 2007].
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 8.4: Analgesics in pigs
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
DURATION (hours)/COmMENT
Local anaesthetics
Lidocaine (lignocaine) 2%
Topical
Spray on to larynx 2 min before intubation to
avoid laryngospasm
Lidocaine/prilocaine
Topical
Apply to auricu lar skin at time of pre-medication,
(EMLA@ cream,
to ease intravenous access for induction
AstraZeneca)
Allow 20-30 min to take effect
Prilocaine 5%
 2-15 m13
SC or into
tissue
Non-steroidai
Anti-inflammatory,anaigesic,antipyretic
anti-inflammatory drugs
Many side effects (see text)
Carprofen
2-41
IV, SC
24
Flunixin
0.5-1.02
SC, IV
12-24
Ketoprofen
E
IM
一
124
Meloxicam
0.43
IM 
Phenybutazone
4-8a
PO
12;
Opioids
Buprenorphine
0.005-0.0104
IM, IV
8-12
Butorphanol
0.1-0.31
IM, IV, SC
8-12
Fentanyl
0.02-0.055
IM, IV
Morphine
0.22
IM, SC
4
Pentazocine
2-55
IM
4
Pethidine (meperidine)
2-102
IM
4
Key: IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, PO = oral, SC = subcutaneous
(9861 'swep pue a1pums) s (661 1pum) , :(007 osu8p) g (e661 pH) (9661 lu) 
Lumbosacral extradural anaesthesia can be performed in
Carprofen has been used to control pain post-operatively
pigs similarly to ovines, and is useful for obstetrical and per-
in pigs for up to 3 days without side effects (Dobromylskyj
ineal procedures. The bony landrmarks of wings of the ileurm
et al., 2000). Aspirin has been used orally in pigs (Hedenqvist
are more difficult to palpate in larger anirmals and sedation is
and Hellebrekers, 2003).
advisable. A 19-gauge, 13 mm needle is necessary in an adult
pig; 2% lidocaine (lignocaine) is administered into the
Opioids
extradural space, at l ml per 7.5kg up to 50kg, then l ml
per 10kg body weight above this. This dose will result in
The analgesic effects of buprenorphine have been dermon-
recumbency for up to 2h (Hodgkinson, 2007).
strated in pigs (Dobromylskyj et al., 2000). Both buprenor-
phine and butorphanol can be used in pigs with few side
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
effects (Hedenqvist and Hellebrekers, 2003)
Pigs are susceptible to the side effects of non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and repeated admin-
DRUG DOSES, ROUTES OF
istration may not be advisable. NSAIDs are contraindi-
ADMINISTRATION, DURATION OF
cated in patients with renal, hepatic or cardiac disease.
Gastrointestinal ulceration may also be seen. Therefore, it
ACTION
is advisable to administer a gastrointestinal protectant
simultaneously, for example ranitidine (150 mg per animal
Drugs licensed for pigs will vary between countries.
orally every 12h) (Baldrick, 1993), particularly if more
Legislation is usually less stringent for pet anirmals than
than one dose of NSAID is to be given.
those that will enter the food chain. There may be breed
 Fancy pigs anaesthesia
REFERENCES
Table 8.5: Emergency drugs in pigs
DRUG
DOSE
ROUTE
INDICATION/
Baldrick, L. I993. Veterinary Care of Pot-Bellied Pet Pigs. All
(mg/kcg)
COMMENT
Publishing, Orange, CA.
Boschert, K., P. A. Flecknell, R. T. Fosse et al. I994. Ketamine and its
use in the pig. Recommendations of the Consensus Meeting on
Atropine
0.041
SC, IM, IV Bradycardia;
Ketamine Anaesthesia in Pigs, Bergen. Ketamine Consensus
hypersalivation
Working Group. Lab Anim 30: 209.
Braum, W. F.J. 1995. Potbelled pigs: general medical care. In:
Dantrolene
2-52
PO, IV
Malignant sodium 
 J. D. Bonagura [ed.) Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII -
N
sodium
hyperthermia
Small Animal Practice. pp. I388-1392. WB Saunders,
Repeat q8h until
Philadelphia.
Braun, W. F. J., and S. T. Casteel. I993. Potbellied pigs - miniature
11
normothermic
porcine pets. Vet Clin North Am: Stm Anirm Pract 23[6):
al
1149-1177.
Dexamethasone 0.13
IM, IV
Shock; laryngeal
Calle, P. P, and P J. Moris. I999. Anesthesia for nondomestic suids.
an
oedema
In: M. E. Fowler and R. E. Miller [eds.) Zoo and Wild Animal
Medicine: Current Therapy 4. pp. 639-646. WB Saunders,
Philadelphia.
sth
Glycopyrrolate
0.005-0.010l SC, IM, IV Bradycardia;
Claxton-Gill, M. S., J. L. Comick-Seahom, J. C. Gamboa et al.
hypersalivation
1993. Suspected malignant hyperthemia syndrome in a
miniature pot-bellied pig anesthestized with isoflurane. J Am
Naloxone
4 mg total
IV
Opioid reversal
Vet Med Assoc 203[10): 1434-1436.
dose'
Dobromylskyi, P, P A. Flecknell, B. D. Lascelles et al. 2000.
Management of postoperative and other acute pain. In:
125
 P. A. Flecknell and A. Watertman-Pearson [ers.) Pain
Key: IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, PO = oral,
Management in Animals. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
q8h = every 8 hours, SC = subcutaneous
Dyce, K. M., W. O. Sack, and C. J. Wensing. I987. The head and
(Calle and Morris, 1999);: 2 (Claxton-Gill et al., 1993);
neck of the pig. In: K. M. Dyce, W. O. Sack and C. J. Wensing
3(Murison, 2001)
[eds.] Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy pp. 729-740.
W B Saunders,Philadelphia,PA.
Fecknell, P. I996. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia. Znd edn.
Academic Press, London.
Goldman, K., M. Kalinowski, and S. Kraft. 2005. Airway management
and individual animal differences between drug doses.
 Agents that can be administered to effect, such as agents
under general anaesthesia in pigs using the LMA-ProSeal[TM):
a pilot study. Vet Anaesth Anal 32: 308-313.
administered by inhalation or intravenous injection, are
Heard, D. J. 1993. Principles and techniques of anesthesia and
thus often used. This is particularly inmportant when
analgesia for exotic practice. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
 anaesthetising a patient with unknown health status.
Pract 23: 1301-1327.
Hedengvist, P, and L. J. Hellebrekers. 2003. Laboratory animal
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES/
analgesia, anesthesia, and euthanasia. In: J. Hau and
G. L. J. Van Hoosier [eds.] Handbook of Laboratory Animal
DRUGS
Science. pp. 413-455. CRC Press, London.
Hodgkinson, O. 2007. Practical sedation and anaesthesia in pigs. In
Respiratory problems
Pract 29: 3439.
Johnson, L. 1993.Physical and chemical restraint of miniature pet pigs.
In: D. E. Reeves [ed.) Care and Management of Miniature Pet
Brachycephalic breeds, such as Vietnamese Potbellied
Pigs. pp. 59-66. Veterinary Practice Publishing, Santa Barbara, CA.
pigs, are prone to respiratory obstruction (Hodgkinson,
Ko, J. C. H., J. C. Thurman, G. J. Tranquilli et al. 1993. Problems
2007). This can occur during sedation or in unintubated
encountered when anesthetizing potbellied pigs. Vet Med 88:
435-440.
patients. Appropriate sizes of endotracheal tube and a
Lukasik, V. M. 1995. Neuromuscular blocking drugs and the critical
long-bladed laryngoscope should, therefore, be ready to
achieve airway patency if required. If anaesthesia is being
care patient. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 5[2): 99-113.
Murison, P. J. 2001. Delayed dyspnoea in pigs possibly associated
performed in the veterinary practice, oxygen can be
with endotracheal intubation. Vet Anaesth Anal 28[4): 226.
administered from an anaesthetic machine. If the anaes-
Sambraus, H. H. I992. A Colour Atlas of Livestock Breeds. Wolfe
thetic is outwith the practice premises, self-inflating bag-
Publishing Ltd., London.
valve-masks (Ambu-bag) or resuscitators can be used to
Short, C. E. I986. Preanaesthetic medication in ruminants
 provide PPV with environmental air in such cases. Placing
and swine. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 2: 553-566.
the pig in dorsal recumbency may assist with alleviating
Snook, C. S. 200l. Use of the subcutaneous abdominal vein for
the obstruction (as with intubation).
blood sampling and intravenous catheterization in potbellied
Laryngospasm may also occur during recovery. If dyps-
pigs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219: 809-810.
Straw, B. E., and D. J. Merten. I992. Physical examination. In:
 noea or restlessnessis noted, intubate the animal or perform
A. D. Lemen [ed.) Diseases of Swine. 7th edn. pp. 793-807.
a tracheotomy. These procedures may require re-anaestheti-
Iowa State University Press, Ames.
sation (Hodgkinson, 2007). Steroids should be adminis-
 Swindle, M. I998. Surgery. Anesthesia and Experimental Techniques
tered at anti-inflammatory doses (Murison, 2001]
in Swine. Iowa State University Press.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Swindle, M. M. I993. Minipigs as pets. Proc North Am Vet Conf:
Thurmon, J. C., and G. J. Benson. I993. Anesthesia in ruminants
648-649.
and swine. In: J. L. Howard [ed.) Current Veterinary
Swmdle, M. M., and R. J. Adams. I988. Experimental Surgery and
Therapy 3. Food Animal Practice. pp. 58-76. WB Saunders,
 Physiology: Induced Animal Models of Human Disease.
Philadelphia.
Williams & Wilkins, Baltim ore.
Tynes, V. V. I998. Emergency care for potbellied pigs. J Am Vet Med
Taylor, D. J. 1995. Pig Diseases, 6th edn. St Edmundsbury Press,
Assoc I: 177-189.
Bury St Edmund's, Suffolk, England.
Wertz, E. M., and A. E. Wagner. 1995. Anesthesia in potbellied pigs.
Taylor, D. J. 2002. Fancy pigs. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe [eds.]
Compendium 17: 369-383.
Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. I16-126. BSAVA,
Quedgeley, UK.
126
9
Avian anaesthesia
V
sth
INTRODUCTION
patient more than during a short procedure. During longer
anaesthetics, closer attention to stabilising the patient and
maintaining physiological parameters is necessary to avoid
129
There are over 9800 species of bird within 28 orders
(Perrins, 2004), and many species are kept as pets. This
peri-anaesthetic mortalities. As with other exotic pet
chapter will discuss the avian anatomy and physiology
species, pre-anaesthetic assessment and peri-anaesthetic
 pertinent to anaesthesia of these species, along with anaes-
care are of paramount importance in reducing morbidity
and mortality. It is often necessary to stabilise birds for up
thetic drugs and techniques in birds. Subsections will pro-
to 48 h before anaesthesia is induced. Supportive care and
yide more details on groups comrmonly kept as pets, with
birds of prey (Falconiformes and Strigiforrmes) discussed
protocols for anaesthesia in various bird species presented
 to veterinary practices will be described.
separately from other orders (Passeriformes, Psittaciformes
 The aim of this chapter is to provide the veterinary sur-
and Columbiformes). There is much anatomical and
physiological variation even within one order, with, for
geon with knowledge of avian anatomy physiology and
common conditions that may affect risks associated with
example, nearly 6000 species of Passeriformes [King and
McLelland, 1984}
anaesthesia of the patient. It will also describe anaesthetic-
related techniques and drugs for birds. Later chapters
 Manual restraint often causes stress that may be fatal to
identify differences between avian species.
the avian patient and anaesthesia is frequently used as a less
stressful alternative in many procedures for birds. Non-
 painful procedures, such as venepuncture, radiography and
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
ophthalmoscopy, require a more simplistic approach than
painful procedures, such as surgery. The anaesthetic require-
As the basic anatomy and physiology of birds are very dif-
ments vary depending on the procedure to be performed
ferent from marmmals, this section will describe the main
and the species involved. Many anaesthetic and analgesic
differences. There are many variations between bird
studies have been performed in various bird species, but the
species.
existence of species differences in response to drugs may
reduce the application of this work to other species and
Temperature
broad anaesthetic principles can be applied across many
maq iuis Area a sasp ap 'saiads u
Birds are endothermic, but their core body temperature is
species. The reader is referred to other texts for add-
much higher than that of mammals, between 39°C and
itional references regarding individual species.
42°C (Dawson and Whittow, 2000). Allied to this high
Certain aspects of avian anatomy and physiology, par-
temperature is a high metabolic rate, which provides suf-
ticularly the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, are
ficient energy to permit flight (Dorrestein, 1997). Birds
markedly different to marmmal systerms and are associated
with insufficient energy resources to maintain the high
with increased anaesthetic risks in birds. Although volatile
metabolic rate will have difficulty in maintaining their
anaesthetic agents and improved monitoring techniques
body termperature. Therefore, ill birds should be hospi-
have significantly reduced the risks associated with anaes-
talised in a warm environment or incubator to reduce
thetising birds, the procedure is never risk-free.
their energy requirements.
If a prolonged anaesthesia is anticipated or becomes
 Avian species also have a low tolerance for high tem-
 necessary, the side effects of anaesthesia will affect the
Table 9.l: Common pet avian species
SPECIES
ORDER
AVERAGE WEIGHT
African grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus)
Psittaciformes
310-460g
Barn owl (Fyto alba)
Strigiformes
262-600 g
Blue and gold macaw (Ard drdrdund)
Psittaciformes
850-2000g
Blue-fronted Amazon (Amazond destivd)
Psittaciformes
275-510g
Budgerigar(Melopsittacus undulates)
Psittaciformes
35-85 g
$
Canary (Serinus canaria)
Passeriformes
12-29 g
Cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus)
Psittaciformes
70-108g
Eagle owl (Bubo bubo)
Strigiformes
1.6-2.5 kg
5
Fisher's lovebird (Agapornis fischeri)
Psittaciformes
40-50g
Goshawk (Accipiter gentiles gentiles)
Falconiformes
634-880 g (male); 980-1200g (female)
130
Great Indian hill mynah (Gracula religiosa intermedia)
Passeriformes
180-260g
Greater sulphur-crested cockatoo (Cacatua galerita galerita)
Psittaciformes
500-1250g
Hahn's macaw (Ard nobilis)
Psittaciformes
150-180 g
Harris hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus)
Falconiformes
574-1000g
Kestrel (Falco tinnunculus)
Falconiformes
145-167 g (male); 193-282g (female)
Lanner falcon (Falco biarmicus)
Falconiformes
500-600g (male); 700-900 g (female)
Lesser sulphur-crested cockatoo (Cacatud sulphurea)
Psittaciformes
228-315g
Rainbow lorikeet (Trichoglossus hdemotodus)
Psittaciformes
120-130g
Merlin (Falco columbarius)
Falconiformes
() 805-07z () 80 1-091
Racing pigeon (Columba livia)
Columbiformes
230-540 g
Saker falcon (Falco cherrug)
Falconiformes
680-990 g (male); 970-1300 g (female)
Scarlet macaw (Ard macao)
Psittaciformes
1-1.5 kg
Senegal parrot (Poicephalus senegalus)
Psittaciformes
125-150 g
Sparrow hawk (Accipiter nisus)
Falconiformes
() 800-061 :(e) 8017-051
Yellow rosella parakeet (Patycercus flaveolus)
Psittaciformes
100-120 g
Zebra finch (Pbephila guttata)
Passeriformes
10-16g
(Coles, 1997; O'Malley, 2005)
Avian anaesthesia
Nares {into
nasal cavity)
Infraorbital
-Liver
sinus
Pneumatised
Hepatic-
-Caudal vena cava
-Glottis
humerus
 portal
Kidney
Air sacs
vein
Trachea
-Commoniliac
-Clavicular
Cranial thoracic
Cranial
-Extemaliliac
Caudal thoracic
mesenteric
Choana
-Abdominal
Caudal renal
Caudal-
 portal
mesenteric
-Caudal renal
5
1
Heart
Keel-
Intemal-
Lung-
iliac
Figure 9.1 · Respiratory system in a parrot (after Harcourt-
Figure 9.2 · Major caudal veins in the bird, including the renal
Browm,2005)
portal system.
several techniques to lose heat: thermal panting and gular
pressure and improving blood flow. A consequence of this
high pressure is an increased risk of fatality due to aortic
13
fluttering, via the large surface area of the air sacs, via con-
vection from thinly feathered skin on the ventral wings,
pasans ul aeuoau pue aineg iu 'amdnn
patients (Rosenthal et al., 1997; Welty, 1982).
through the skin, or via blood shunts (Dawson and Whittow,
 The heart is innervated by sympathetic and parasympa-
2000; Welty, 1982)
thetic nerves. The main sympathetic neurotransmitters
As birds use their
r plumage in thermoregulation, any
problems with their feathers, for example oiling or loss
adrenaline (epinephrine} and noradrenaline [norepineph-
due to feather plucking, will result in a reduced capacity
rine} (Sturkie, 1986} are increased with excitement. This
to regulate their body temperature. Birds such as this
may be significant, for example, with volatile anaesthetic
require extra care during hospitalisation to ensure they do
agents that may sensitise the myocardiurm. Cardiovascular
function is depressed by hypoxia, hypercapnia and anaes-
not succumb to hypothermia.
thetics (Edling, 2006).
 Birds have a renal portal system similar to reptiles (Fig.
Cardiovascular system
9.2) (O'Malley, 2005). Venous blood drains from the legs,
caudal body and gastrointestinal tract into the caudal vena
The four-chambered heart lies slightly to the right in the
cava via this system (Smith and Smith, 1997). Valves and
midline, cranially within the thoracoabdominal cavity
the presence of smooth muscles in the blood vessels allow
close to the sternum [Fig. 9.1) (Akester, 1984). In some
blood to pass through the kidneys when the valves close
species the ascending aorta curves to the right or the vena
and to bypass the kidneys at times of stress when adrena-
cavae enter the right atrium via a sinus venosus (King and
line [epinephrine) release opens the valves [Akester, 1971;
McLelland, 1984; Rosenthal et al., 1997). There are also
West et al., 1981). The large coccygeal mesenteric vein
minor differences in the valves and cardiac electrical con-
also drains the hindgut mesentery, frorm the hepatic portal
duction system in birds compared to other animals. Type 2
vein to the renal portal vein; blood flow in this vein can be
Purkinje fibres completely penetrate the ventricular
bi-directional, allowing blood to flow between the kid-
myocardiurm, assisting synchronous beating at high rates
neys and liver. Opening of the portal valves allows blood
(Edling, 2006).
to follow the latter route to the liver or directly into the
Avian hearts are considerably larger than similar-sized
caudal vena cava to the heart.
mammals, due to their high oxygen demands (Maina,
The total blood volume varies between 5% and 13% of
1996). The pericardium normally contains a small amount
body mass in birds (O'Malley, 2005). Although birds rap-
of fluid and attaches to the sternum dorsally (Pees et al.,
idly regenerate erythrocytes, blood samples should not be
2006). The lungs are dorsal to the heart (Smith and
greater than 8% of the total circulation in healthy birds
Smith, 1997]. As birds have no diaphragm, the liver lobes 
[less in ill animals]. As conscious restraint is very stressful
surround the apex of the heart.
for most birds and veins are fragile, venepuncture is most
The higher cardiac output in birds is produced by a
commonly performed under anaesthesia. The spleen is
cormbination of factors, including a high stroke volurme, fast
not used to store blood in birds, and splenic contraction
heart rate (typically 150-350 beats per minute at rest), and
does not occur after blood loss (Coles, 1997}.
slightly lower peripheral resistance (Sturkie, 1986). Arteries
The right jugular vein (see Fig. 9.4) is usually larger than
are stiffer than in mammals, maintaining high blood
the left, as an anastomosis at the angle of the jaw slopes
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
caudally to the right (Akester, 1971; West et al., 1981).
Table 9.2: Average respiratory and heart rates for different
This vein is commonly used for phlebotomy or adminis-
sizes of bird 
tration of fluid boluses in small to medium-sized birds.
Most birds have a featherless tract, or aptera, over this
WEIGHT
RESPIRATORY
HEART RATE (beats
vein; Columbiformes and Anseriformes (mainly water-
RATE (breaths
per minute)
fowl) lack these apteria (Echols, 1999).
per minute)
Cardiovascular disease has been reported in rmany avian
species, but is mostly of case reports rather than large
401100g
55-75
600-750
studies. These include congenital defects, pericardial dis-
eases, myocardial or endocardial disease, arteriosclerosis
in psittacines (Fricke et al., 2003; Hasholt, 1969} and cir-
100-200 g
30-40
450-600
culatory collapse. Nutritional irmbalances may be associ-
ated with cardiomyopathy in captive birds (Harrison and
250-400 g
15-35
300-500
McDonald, 2006).
 Clinical signs of cardiovascular disease may include dys-
0.5-1kg
8-25
180-400
4"
pnoea, lethargy, weakness, exercise intolerance, syncope,
abdominal distension or sudden death (Raftery, 2005).
5-10kg
2-20
60-70
Cardiovascular assessment may be performed in birds,
5
but normal reference values are lirmited. It is irmportant to
minimise handling and examination in these patients, as
(Adapted from Forbes and Altman, I 998)
birds presenting with clinical signs usually have cardiac
decompensation and stress may be fatal (Pees et al., 2006).
132
Respiratory, renal and hepatic function may also be com-
Avian tracheal rings are cormplete and the tracheal lurmen
promised secondary to a circulatory disorder. Radiography
wide (1.3 times the tracheal width in a similar-sized mam-
is used as a baseline to assess the cardiac silhouette, the
mal) (Coles, 1997). The trachea is relatively long, with an
large vessels and changes in other organs. Echocardiography
associated increased dead space volume compared to
is useful and may be possible in conscious patients
mammals (Hinds and Calder, 1971). To compensate for
(Krautwald-Junghanns et al., 1995; Straub et al., 2002).
this, birds have an increased tidal volume [four tirmes) and
Electrocardiograms (ECGs) can also be used to assess
slower respiratory rate [one-third] compared to similarly
electrical activity in the heart, but anaesthesia may be
sized mammals. For example, a l00g bird will have a
required. The reader is referred to other texts for thera-
respiratory rate of approximately 30 breaths per minute,
 peutic options of birds with cardiovascular disease.
 one-third the rate of a 100 g mammal (Welty, 1982). The
syrinx is the sound-producing organ in birds and is sited at
the tracheobronchial junction. Narrowing of the airway
Respiratory system
here predisposes this site for foreign body obstructions.
After the syrinx, the trachea bifurcates into the left and
Breathing in birds is nasal or oral (Powell, 2000). The nares 
right primary bronchi, which run to the lungs and then
are lateral at the base of the beak, although the position
intrapulmonic to the caudal air sacs. In most avian species,
and size vary between species, and some species have an
four sets of secondary bronchi arise from each bronchus
operculum in each to prevent foreign body inhalation.
within the lungs: these are the medioventral, mediodorsal,
(Some bird species, for example gannets [Morus sp.] do
lateroventral and laterodorsal groups (McLelland, 1989).
not have external nares, rather breathing through a nar-
These secondary bronchi terminate in tertiary bronchi
row gap between the beaks (O'Malley, 2005).) Air enters
(parabronchi) (O'Malley, 2005). Smooth muscle, lining all
the nasal cavity and thence via the choana to the orophar-
bronchi, permits dilation and contraction (Lasiewski, 1972).
ynx and the glottis (King and McLelland, 1984). The rete
The major difference between the mammalian and
mirabile is a network of blood vessels within the nasal
avian respiratory system is the small lung size, with non-
conchae, which assists with water and thermal hormeo-
respiratory air sacs attached to aid airflow. Avian lungs are
stasis; nebulisation of avian patients can thus be used to
relatively rigid and quite dense, adhering to the dorsal rib
aid rehydration. Sinusitis is cormmon in pet birds and rmay
cage. The lungs usually extend from the rib on the last
be evidenced by swelling ventromedial to the orbit where
vertebrae to the cranial edge of the ilium.
the infraorbital sinus is superficial. This sinus communi-
The avian lung is connected to the air sacs via the sec-
cates with the nasal conchae and the cervicocephalic air
ondary bronchi at the ostium, which is usually ventrolateral
sac, which may allow dissemination of pathology.
(O'Malley, 2005). The air sacs are thin-walled and relatively
The opening to the larynx is the glottis, which is attached
auxa see jo %s ueun sal ui ayeiied Aaun reos
midline to the base of the tongue. The exact positioning
(Fedde, 1993; Magnusson et al., 1976). Most species have
varies between species, but the glottis is usually easily vis-
nine air sacs. These comprise paired cervical, a single cla-
ible on opening the oral cavity and intubation accomplished
vicular (paired in some species), paired cranial thoracic,
relatively easily. The lack of epiglottis in birds increases
paired caudal thoracic and paired abdominal air sacs.
the risk of inhalation of foreign material if the trachea is
The air sacs act as bellows, and produce unidirectional
not protected by intubation during anaesthesia.
airflow through the lungs. The air sacs may be cannulated
Avian anaesthesia
(see Techniques section] and oxygen and/or anaesthetic
than one-third that in marmmals (King and McLelland,
gases administered into the respiratory system. The air sacs
1984). There is a thin blood-gas barrier across the air cap-
extend into the medullary cavity of some bones, including
illaries in the lungs, and the rigid lungs allow 20% more
the humerus, sternum, coracoid, vertebrae and pelvis. In
gas exchange area compared to mammals [King and
certain species, further pneurmatisation may include the
Molony, 1971; Scheid and Piper, 1972). A cross-current
femur, scapula and furcula (Koch, 1973; Maina, 1996).
Birds do not have a diaphragm. However, a peritoneal
angles to the unidirectional airflow, which allows continu-
sheet, the horizontal septum, lines the ventrurm of the pleu-
ous gas exchange to occur.
ral cavities (Duncker, 1979). This septum does not assist
The normal avian Pacoz is lower than that in mammals
with respiratory moverments, but passively displaces the
due to the lung efficiency discussed in the last paragraph.
viscera. Respiratory movements are due to the extermal and
Birds are very sensitive to hypercapnia. Gas flow rates dur-
intermal intercostals and abdominal muscles, and both
ing anaesthesia should, therefore, behigher for birds, at least
inspiration and expiration require active muscle move-
three times the normal minute volume (Coles, 1997].
ments (Ludders and Mathews, 1996; O'Malley, 2005).
Normal minute volurmes for birds vary between species, but
Contraction of the inspiratory muscles produces
an
are approximately 800ml/min/kg (Klide, 1973). As dis-
1
increase in volume within the coelomic cavity; this causes
cussed in the introductory chapter, the flowmeter on most
pressure in the air sac to becorme negative relative to atmos-
anaesthetic rmachines is inaccurate at low flow rates, so a
pheric pressure, and air flows into the respiratory system.
minirmum of lL/min should be used with small birds
Expiratory rmuscle contraction is the reverse, with air flow-
[suaed rarel u Aatedodde ausearou)]
ing back across the lungs and out of the bird's body. The
Dorsal recumbency will allow compression of the cau-
system stops midpoint between inspiration and expiration
dal air sacs by viscera, reducing minute volume by up to
during the resting phase (Edling, 2006). Due to the pres-
60%. This effect is less with birds in lateral recumbency
ence of air sacs, air will take two breaths to cycle through
(King and Payne, 1964). Positive pressure ventilation is
recommended in anaesthetised birds, as they may not
133
the respiratory tract (McLelland and Malony, 1983).
In one breath, 50% of inspired gases pass directly to the
breathe regularly (Fedde, 1993).
posterior air sacs, only passing through the lungs for gas
Another important physiological difference is the srmall
exchange during the next breath (Fig. 9.3). The other
functional residual capacity (FRC) in birds compared to
 50% of inspired gases pass through the lungs and undergo
mammals. Although birds have a large respiratory gas vol-
exchange of gases during the first breath, but also accom-
ume for their body weight, only 10% of the total specific
pany the gas from the posterior air sacs through the lungs
volume resides within the location of gas exchange (the
for further gas exchange on the second breath. This mech-
parabronchi and air capillaries) at one time. With a small
anism increases the speed and efficiency of gas absorption
FRC, gas exchange will not occur without airflow. Periods
into the blood. Volatile anaesthetic agents are thus absorbed
of apnoea will rapidly upset the acid-base balance and
rapidly in birds, with accompanying rapid changes in blood
become life-threatening (Edling, 2006).
concentrations (Coles, 1997].
 Respiratory disease in birds is common. It may be due
The central nervous system provides a rhythmic stimu-
to a nurmber of aetiologies, including bacterial, viral, fungal
lus for respiration, modulated by various reflexes. Central
or yeast infection, hypothyroidism, airway obstruction by
and arterial chermoreceptors are sensitive to arterial car-
a foreign body or granuloma, or toxins. Malnutrition often
bon dioxide and pH changes; arterial chemoreceptors also
predisposes respiratory disease by depressing the immune
respond to changes in arterial oxygen. Intrapulmonary
system and altering the function of epithelial surfaces, for
chemoreceptors in birds are extrermely sensitive to carbon
example by causing loss of cilia and a decrease in rmucus
dioxide and insensitive to hypoxia (Edling, 2006)
production (Harrison and McDonald, 2006). The airways
Gas exchange occurs in the avian parabronchi. 
They
 may become obstructed by liths and secondary infections
have invaginations (atria), leading to microscopic air capil-
are cormmon.
laries (Powell and Scheid, 1989). Blood capillaries inter-
Clinical signs seen with respiratory disease may vary
lace the anastomosing network of air capillaries to enable
from a slightly quiet or ^fluffed-up' bird to tail-bobbing and
gas exchange. Air flow may be either uni- or bidirectional
open-mouth breathing. Signs associated with upper airway
depending, respectively, on whether the anatomy of the
obstruction and requiring air sac cannulation include gasp-
specific airway is ordered and parallel (in the paleopul-
ing for air and 'squeaks' produced with each breath. Birds
 monic region} or irregularly branched (the neopulmonic)
with air sacculitis may have whole-body movement during
(Brackenbury, 1987; Powell, 2000; Scheid and Piper,
respiration and crackles may be heard on lung auscultation
1971). The ratios of paleopulmonic and neopulmonic sec-
(Harrison et al., 2006). Organomegaly within the coelomic
tions vary between species. For example, the neopul-
cavity will reduce the air sac volume and lead to clinical
 monic portion comprises 10-12% in pigeons, and 20-25%
 signs of dyspnoea.
in passerines and psittacines [Edling, 2006; Ludders and
Mathews, 1996).
Urinary system
 Oxygen absorption in avian lungs is ten times more effi-
cient compared to mammalian lungs, due to several avian
adaptations. The avian air capillaries are much smaller
Avian kidneys lie retroperitoneally in the renal fossa of the
than marmmalian alveoli, with the diameter in avians less
 synsacrurmn, dorsal to the abdorminal air sacs, extending from
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
A
 Inspiration
 Paleopulmonic 
parabronchi
Clavicular
Neopulmonic
air sac
parabronchi
th
Abdominal
air sac
Primary
bronchus
Cranial thoracic
Caudal thoracic
air sac
air sac
134
B
Expiration
 Paleopulmonic
parabronchi
Neopulmonic
parabronchi
Clavicular
Abdominal
 air sac
air sac
Primary
bronchus
Cranial thoracic
Caudalthoracic
air sac
 air sac
the caudal edge of the lungs to the caudal synsacrum (Canny,
renal portal vein (Johnson, 1979; King and McLelland,
1998). Renal disease or enlargement will put pressure on
1984]. The latter renal portal system is irmportant in elirm-
the lumbar and sacral plexus nerves, and clinical signs
ination of urates (Siller, 1971). As mentioned above, a
often include lameness (O'Malley, 2005). Birds have two
smooth-muscle valve in the common iliac vein controls
types of nephron, medullary nephrons (10-30%) that have
the amount of venous blood entering the kidneys. When
loops of Henle and are able to concentrate the urine and
stressed, sympathetic activity stimulates adrenaline (epi-
cortical nephrons (70-90%) with no loop of Henle [Casotti
nephrine) release, opening the valve; this diverts blood
et al., 2000).
from the kidney to the caudal vena cava and thence vital
There is a dual afferent blood supply to the kidneys
organs such as the heart and brain (Siller, 1971). When
  5     (a ))
the valve is closed, venous flow from the legs entersthe kid-
cranial, middle and caudal renal arteries, and the caudal
neys before any other organs (Larochelle et al., 1992). Blood
Avian anaesthesia
within the renal portal ring rmay also bypass the kidneys
high-cholesterol diets may induce renal disease; and excess
by shunting to the caudal mesenteric vein or internal ver-
dietary lipids will affect the progression of chronic renal
tebral sinus (Echols, 2006).
disease (Harrison and McDonald, 2006; Klumpp and
Arterial blood terminates in the glomerular capillary
Wagner, 1986). Hypercalcinosis or hypervitaminosis D
beds, but renal portal blood is directed to the renal tubules
may also cause renal disease (Chandra et al., 1985; Phalen
(Wideman, 1988). It is, therefore, possible for blood from
et al., 1990). Hypovitaminosis A may also affect uric acid
the legs to enter the renal parenchyma directly, which may
elimination and result in gout (Koutsos and Klasing, 2002;
increase the possibility of nephrotoxicity with some drugs
Siller, 1981). Dehydration or fasting is more likely to
administered into the leg (Echols, 2006). Drugs that are
produce renal, articular or visceral gout than renal disease
eliminated by tubular secretion may also enter this system
per se.
and be elirminated (Steinhort, 1999). Although the valvular
Various infectious agents, such as bacteria, parasites (for
system means this is not always the case, parenteral drugs
example, coccidian, Encephalitozoon spp.] or fungi may
should not be adrministered in the caudal half of the body.
result in renal disease (Echols, 2006). Chronic inflamma-
5
Like reptiles, avian kidneys produce both urine and
 tory disease may result in amyloidosis, which may involve
urates; 60% of avian nitrogenous waste is excreted as
the kidneys (Rigdon, 1974). Toxins such as ochratoxin A,
urates, with urea only formed as a by-product of detoxifi-
from Aspergilus and Penicillium, or lead may cause renal
cation in the kidney and in the liver (O'Malley, 2005).
damage (Manming and Wyatt, 1984; Mateo et al., 1997).
 Uric acid is synthesised in the liver and excreted mainly by
As with other species, renal neoplasia has been reported
st
tubular secretion in the kidneys (Goldstein and Skadhauge.
(Freeman et al., 1999; Latimer et al., 1996). Urolithiasis
D
2000; Phalen, 2000j. Urate production is independent of
or ureteral obstruction may occur (Siller, 1981).
5
urine production and urates will continue to be produced
1
even in dehydrated birds. As with azotaemia in mammals,
elevated blood uric acid levels are only seen with severe
Digestive system
135
(70%] renal damage. High serum levels of uric acid or
renal damage will lead to gout, with precipitation of uric
The choana is a slit-like opening in the roof of the orophar-
acid crystal in joints or viscera. Swellings at joints may be
ynx, linking it with the nasal cavity. The anatormy of the
visible or palpable (Lawrie, 2005).
avian tongue varies between species (King and McLelland,
Unlike reptiles, birds can concentrate urine, though not
1984). The oesophagus lies to the right of the neck
as well as mammalian species. It is normal for hens to
(O'Malley, 2005), and most species have a crop, which is
become polyuric before egg-laying, as diuresis occurs as
a dilation in the oesophagus at the base of the neck.
they excrete excess phosphate released from bone during
The digestive system is short and low-volurme; hence avian
egg production (O'Malley, 2005).
saaaaua au ns o uana paay sua
Birds do not have urinary bladders, and the ureters pass
necessary for their high metabolic rate. Fasting tirmes before
directly from the kidneys to the urodeum of the cloaca.
anaesthesia should, therefore, be minimised and feeding
Urine and urates mix with faeces in the rectum and colon,
resumed as soon as possible on recovery. Small birds, such as
where further reabsorption of water may also occur (Sykes,
budgerigars (Melopsittacus umdulates), should not be fasted.
1971)
Larger birds are normally fasted long enough for the crop to
Osmoregulation mechanisms vary between avian species.
empty,reducing the risk of regurgitation and aspiration dur-
Most obtain water from food or by drinking (O'Malley
ing anaesthe sia.
2005). Desert species have a lower water intake than trop-
 The gastrointestinal systerm terminates at the cloaca. This
ical species, for exarmple a cockatoo may drink less than
is the joint ending from the proctodeum of the urogenital
50 ml/kg/day while a lovebird can drink 180 ml/kg/day
[urodeum] and digestive [coprodeum] tracts [King and
(Wolf and Kamphues, 1992). Nasal or salt glands above
McLelland, 1984). The cloaca exits the body at the vent.
the avian eyes are involved in water homeostasis, particu-
 Dietary requirerments vary between species (Table 9.3)
larly in birds from arid climates (Evans, 1996; Maina, 1996).
Most psittacines eat a mix of fruit, vegetables and pulses.
Desert species also produce more concentrated excre-
Species such as lorikeets are nectarivorous, feeding on
ment than those with more water access and cool warm
pollens, plants, insects and their exudates. Raptors are
air in the nares to conserve water (Orosz et al., 1997).
carnivorous, feeding on whole prey. Several species con-
Water homeostasis is performed by renal regulation of
sume insects as part of their diet; in captivity this may
electrolyte balance (Wideman, 1988). The regulation of
include rmealworms, earthworms and crickets (McDonald,
fluid volume results in blood pressure regulation (Echols,
2006).
2006). Although avian species can autoregulate the glomeru-
Improper diets fed to captive birds may predispose
lar filtration rate across a wide range of arterial blood pres-
many systemic abnormalities. All-seed diets are usually
deficient in vitamin A. Hypovitaminosis A is commonly
flow (Forman and Wideman, 1999). Birds appear to be
seen in passerines and psittacines, and may result in
able to maintain blood pressure and thereby renal blood
depression of the immune system (Koutsos et al., 2003).
flow, in quite severe hypovolaemia (Bottje et al., 1989).
Severe hypovitaminosis A may result in gout (Austic and
Renal disease is common in avian species and is often
Cole, 1972]. An inappropriate high-fat diet often predis-
due to malnutrition. Excessive dietary protein may lead to
s aaeo Aeas u iadsa isaqo or saso
accurmulation of waste products, uric acidaemia and uraermia;
This may lead to hepatic lipidosis and congestive heart
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
 and supplemental heating should be provided during
Table 9.3: Dietary requirements in birds
 anaesthesia and the recovery period.
Although malnutrition is the most common aetiology for
ORDER
PREDOMINANT DIET
hepatic disease, infectious or toxic agents rmay also affect
liver function. Clinical signs of hepatic disease are often
Columbiformes
Vegetable matter (fresh green leaves, fruit
vague - lethargy, inappetence, polydipsia, polyuria and diar-
or seeds); young fed on crop milk
rhoea may be seen. Hepatic dysfunction rmay be more
specifically evidenced by the presence of loose green faeces
Falconiformes
Carnivorous
and green-stained urates [due to the bile pigment
Variety of whole carcases in captivity, e.g.
biliverdin], ascites, melaena, abnormal beak and nails, or mal-
day-old chick (yolk often removed), quail
coloured feathers. If hepatic fibrosis occurs, it will increase
$
rabbit,rat
resistance to blood flow (Hochleithner et al., 2006). The
caudal mesenteric vein drains the lower gastrointestinal sys-
F
Passeriformes
Fruit, arthropods, seeds; species variations
tem and may transport disease, such as infection, to the kid-
(some will eat nectar or small vertebrates)
neys (Echols, 2006).
Clinical problems in hepatic disorders include coagu-
Extruded diets are available for pets
lopathy and hypoalbuminaemia (Harrison et al., 2006;
Hochleithner et al., 2006). Serum bile acids may be ele-
Psittaciformes
Vegetable matter (fruit, seeds, buds, nectar,
vated (O'Malley, 2005). Aspartate amino transarminase
pollen), occasionally insects
[AST) elevation without creatinine phosphokinase (CPK)
Extruded diets are available for pets
increase is suggestive of hepatic damage. Radiography may
demonstrate hepatormegaly or microhepatica.
Strigiformes
Carnivorous (as for Falconiformes)
 The liver is the site for metabolism of many drugs, includ-
136
ing sorme anaesthetic agents. Hepatic dysfunction will, there-
fore, adversely affect the patient during anaesthesia and
recovery. If hepatic disease is suspected, the patient should
be stabilised before anaesthesia; fluids, nutritional support
failure. Epithelial tissues may be affected, increasing sus-
and metabolic aids such as s-adenosylmethionine (SAMe)
ceptibility to respiratory and renal disease. Diabetes
are advised. If anaesthesia cannot be postponed, an anaes-
mellitus may ensue or be exacerbated by renal dysfunc-
thetic which undergoes minimal hepatic metabolism, such
tion (McDonald, 2006].
as isoflurane, should be used.
Integumentary system
 Birds on all-seed diets are often immuno-incompetent.
Assume that such birds will have systemic abnormali
The skin is very thin in birds and susceptible to injury
ties and are likely to have infections.
(Spearman, 1971). Thin membranous regions of skin called
patagia are found at various locations in birds, for example
the propatagium between the shoulder and carpus, and
also where the neck and legs join the body (O'Malley,
Gastrointestinal transit times may be affected by dis-
2005). These regions are useful sites for subcutaneous
ease, for example motility disorders or impactions. There
injections (Fig. 9.4), including fluid administration.
are many aetiologies for gastrointestinal motility prob-
Feathers assist thermoregulation, by providing insula-
lems in birds, including bacterial enteritis, proventricular
tion for birds. Moulting is triggered by several factors that
dilatation disease in psittacines and lead toxicity. These
will be species-dependent. At this time, the bird has
may delay crop emptying, which will increase the risk of
increased dermands for protein, calcium and iron to form
regurgitation during anaesthesia. Birds with diarrhoea will
new feathers. As most species moult and replace their
rapidly become dehydrated, particularly if they are also
feathers only once a year (twice in some species), it is
inappetent (Coles, 1997)
important to avoid damaging feathers during hospitalisa-
Clinical signs associated with gastrointestinal disease
tion that may affect the bird’s performance or flight (see
will vary depending on the cause and site within the tract.
Fig. 11.2) (Bauck et al., 1997).
Signs may include regurgitation, vomiting, diarrhoea or
non-specific signs of illness, such as lethargy and reduced
appetite. These patients will be malnourished and likely
Reproductive system
dehydrated; if possible, supportive care should be given to
stabilise the bird before anaesthesia is induced. Some con-
As the gonads are located near the kidneys, gonadal enlarge-
ditions will require irmmediate anaesthesia to allow treat-
ments (for exarmple, seasonal reproductive activity or repro-
ment, for example cloacal prolapse. In these individuals,
ductive disease) may affect the lurmbar and sacral plexus
the risks associated with anaesthesia are increased; fluids
nerves similarly to renomegaly. Egg production may also
Avian anaesthesia
Intravenous (jugular vein)-
Subcutaneous
Intraosseous
(dorsal neck or interscapular)
(distal ulna)
htramuscular
Subcutaneous
(propatagial fold)
vi
Subcutaneous
Intravenous
(axilla)
(superficial ulnar vein)
Intraosseous
(proximal tibiotarsus)
Subcutaneous
1
(precrural fold)
Intravenous-
(superficial plantar
 metatarsal vein)
137
Figure 9.4 · Injection sites in birds.
cause signs of dyspnoea as the abdominal air sacs are com-
metabolism than insulin. Diabetes may occur in some
pressed by the egg.
birds, for example in cockatiels.
 Birds with egg binding presented to the veterinary sur-
geon may require anaesthesia for resolution of the prob-
Nervous system
lem. Malnutrition is often a factor in the aetiology of this 
problem, or it may result from infection, environmental
stressors or dystocia. These patients, therefore, often pres-
Central nervous system disease in birds may be due to
ent severely debilitated and benefit from supplermental
several aetiologies. These include infection, toxins, trauma,
fluids, nutrition and heat to stabilise their condition
neoplasia and dietary deficiencies [vitarmins B or E, calciurm]
 before anaesthesia is induced. Analgesia may be necessary.
(Coles, 1997]. After initial assessment and stabilisation,
Cloacal prolapses commonly occur secondary to strain-
patients that have suffered head trauma should be placed
ing due to egg laying, masturbation or
space-occupying
in a quiet, darkened enclosure with minimal stimulation
intra-abdominal lesions (Bowles, 2006]
0. These prolapses
(Harrison et al., 2006),
may contain sections of reproductive, digestive or urinary
tracts. Anaesthesia is usually required to treat prolapses.
Special senses
As the underlying aetiology of the prolapse is likely to be
due to or have caused some degree of systermic comprom-
Vision and hearing are the most important senses in birds
ise, supportive care is paramount for the successful anaes-
thesia of these patients.
and avian species should be hospitalised in a quiet dark-
 ened area of the veterinary practice to reduce stress.
Endocrine system
Systemic disease
Corticosterone has both glucocorticoid and mineralocor-
Cormmonly, birds presented to the veterinary surgeon and
ticoid activity in birds and is, therefore, important in
requiring anaesthesia will be debilitated due to poor diet
electrolyte balance (O'Malley, 2005). In birds, glucagon
and/or environment. Immune depression may result in
from the pancreas is more irmportant in carbohydrate
generalised infection in the avian patient
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
PRE-ANAESTHETIC
Cardio-respiratory function can be further assessed by
ASSESSMENT/STABILISATION
auscultation of the heart, lungs and air sacs. Any injuries
present should be related to avian anatormy, for exarmple
bone fractures in the cervical or humeral region may
 History and clinical examination
affect the respiratory system by puncturing the cervical or
clavicular air sac. Subcutaneous emphysema may also be
Triage should be performed during the initial assessment
seen if pneurmatised bones are fractured. External abnor-
of the patient. At any point during this phase the veter-
malities often relate to internal disease that may increase
inary clinician should be prepared to pause and postpone
the risks of anaesthesia, for example malnutrition or
investigative techniques, in order to perform immediate
hepatic disease may lead to poor feather quality.
treatment to critical patients or euthanasia as deemed
Palpation of the pectoral muscles and the keel prom-
necessary. As most pet birds are presented with some
inence will allow the clinician to assess the bird's condi-
degree of illness, there is always the possibility that the
tion. Excess fat may be laid down subcutaneously over the
patient may die when stressed during investigation or
pectoral muscles and can be visualised if the feathers are
treatment. The bird's owner should be kept informed at
dampened with an alcohol-soaked swab. An accurate body
4"
all tirmes, particularly on the likely outcome of each pro-
weight should also be obtained, to help assess body condi-
cedure. Initial assessment of the patient should identify
tion and to permit accurate dosing of drugs. The patient
signs of illness and experience will allow the veterinary
 may be weighed in a plastic box on digital scales (see Fig.
surgeon to make a clinical judgement as to the appropri-
1.9) or in a cloth bag using a spring balance. Some trained
ate action.
birds will sit on a perch placed on top of scales. It is not
As with other exotic species, a full history should be
advisable to guess the weight of a bird prior to drug
taken before examining the bird. This will include previ-
adrministration, as a small volume increase may be a fatal
overdose. Scales also enable the clinician to assess a patient's
138
contact with other birds or toxin exposure, and any prior
progress, with daily weighing part of the clinical examina-
or current medical problerms. This part of the investiga-
tion of hospitalised anirmals and intermittent weight assess-
Joj soioey ysi Aue Ayuapi on sueiodu Aiaaxa si uo
ment important for bird check-ups.
disease; birds will mask signs of illness until disease is
The cardiovascular system can be assessed during the
severe and clinical signs are usually subtle, often making
pre-anaesthetic clinical examination as well as monitored
the clinical examination inconclusive. Owners that have
during anaesthesia. Capillary refill can be assessed on non-
strongly bonded birds are more likely to notice signs early
 pigmented skin over the feet and should be less than l s.
on in disease.
Refill time after digital pressure on the basilic or ulnar veins
 Observation of the bird from a distance after it has settled
 at the medial elbow should also be less than l s if perfusion
in the consulting room will allow the clinician to assess for
is normal. Cardiac auscultation is performed over the pec-
clinical signs of illness, including assessment of demeanour,
toral muscles. Heart rates are extremely variable between
paresis or neurological abnormalities, respiratory function
species, usually between ll0 and 300 beats per minute.
and identification of dyspnoea if present. A bird showing
Smaller birds generally have a higher rate, although stress
clinical signs islikely to be severely ill. The bird may be able
and exciterment will increase heart rate significantly in all
to hide signs for a short period when initially brought into
a t inso a spuns ieau aueau u Anta sp
the surgery and it is beneficial to postpone direct assess-
patient is stressed, or if pericardial fluid or soft tissues
ment of the bird by discussing husbandry and history details
surround and insulate the heart. Murmurs and arrhythmias
with the owner first. If the veterinary surgeon suspects the
 are more easily appreciated in quiet individuals or under
presence of disease based on the history, or if signs of illness
 general anaesthesia. Sinus arrhythmia is normal in avian
are observed, the owner should be advised of the risks asso-
species (Raftery, 2005).
ciated with restraint and clinical examination of their bird.
Although auscultation of the respiratory system is not
A full clinical examination is possible with most birds,
always productive, any wheezes, crackles, clicks or squeaks
although should be brief in those with a history of respira-
heard are likely to indicate disease. An infant or paediatric
tory problems or exercise intolerance. Most species are
stethoscope should be used to listen bilaterally both dor-
restrained using a towel, controlling the wings and legs to
 sally and laterally over the rib cage, and ventrally over the
prevent injury, but allowing keel movements during respir-
coelomic cavity. The stress of the physical examination
ation. This may lead to hyperthermia if restraint is pro-
may cause the bird to show more clinical signs of disease
longed, particularly in obese birds, and the patient should
than when relaxed and cormpensating. This is particularly
be closely monitored. For birds of normal body weight
the case with cardio-respiratory disease. Birds with dis-
panting will commence after wrapping in a towel for 5 min,
ease often hide signs of illness, so the owner may not have
but the time will be less for overweight individuals and
noticed any clinical signs, but the stress of handling may
the examination should be briefer for these cases. Birds that
destabilise the patient and produce clinical signs, such as
are not used to handling may be fatally stressed by restraint;
open-mouth breathing. The time taken to return to nor-
the owner should be forewarned of this possibility.
mal can be a useful indicator of the severity of disease. If
The pre-anaesthetic assessrment should include exami-
concerned about a dyspnoeic patient, the patient should
nation of the nares, oral cavity, choanal slit and glottis,
be returned to its cage or into a chamber where oxygen
along with gentle palpation of the coelomic cavity.
can be supplemented. If more than 3 min is required for
Avian anaesthesia
the bird’s respiratory rate to normalise, respiratory cap-
clinician must wait for an outside laboratory to return
acity is reduced (Raftery, 2005). Dyspnoeic birds should
results on other blood analyses. An elevated PCV (>55%)
be placed in an oxygen chamber for stabilisation before a
 and hyperproteinaemia may suggest dehydration and fluid
cormplete physical exarmination can be performed. However,
therapy should be initiated. If the bird is anaemic, with a
if an upper airway obstruction is suspected, anaesthesia
PCV <20%, a blood transfusion should be administered.
and air sac cannulation are indicated
If the bird is obviously unwell and anaesthesia can be post-
 Renal function and disease can be assessed using blood
poned pending results, a larger blood sample should be
and urine analysis, and imaging techniques. However, renal
analysed for other haematology and clinical chemistries. If
biopsy is required to diagnose renal disease definitively.
this delay is necessary, it allows the clinician to stabilise the
The initial history and investigation may alert the clinician
patient to improve the bird's condition before anaesthesia.
to a possible renal problem, but anaesthesia will be required
for a biopsy to be performed. The choice of anaesthetic
protocol should consider problems with renal dysfunction,
Hospitalisation facilities
such as a reduced glomerular filtration rate, likely uricaemia,
and possible systemic disease. Fluids should be adminis-
Birds are susceptible to stress and care should be taken dur-
tered before, during and after anaesthesia to correct and
ing hospitalisation to reduce any stressors on the patient.
 maintain hydration, and to maintain systemic blood pres-
This wil include attention to the patient's environment,
sure and renal blood flow. Drugs that may be metabolised or
including positioning the bird's cage in a quiet area of the
t
excreted by the kidneys should be avoided in such patients.
veterinary practice, out of sight of larger predator species,
 It can be difficult to diagnose the exact cause of an avian
such as dogs and cats. Similarly, predator bird species
patient's illness, but triage should help decide whether it is
should not be within sight of other birds; hence passerines
necessary to perform further investigation. In some cases
and psittacines should be kept separate frorn birds of
it may be more appropriate to postpone these and initiate
prey. Dimming the lights or partially covering the cage to
139
supportive care to improve the bird’s condition before itis
reduce the light intensity will also be less stressful than
stressed any more. If the patient is very thin, it should not
the glare of artificial lights in veterinary practices. If pos-
be stressed by excess restraint; pre-existing hypoglycaemia
sible, the bird should be allowed a period of time to accli-
in ermaciated patients may result in sudden death when the
matise to the hospital environment before anaesthesia is
metabolic demand is increased. If hypoglycaemia is sus-
induced. Certain birds will become very stressed in a new
pected, gavage-feeding or intravenous administration of
environment and in some cases may benefit from a min-
dextrose solutions or glucose should be performed.
irnum period in the veterinary practice before anaesthesia
Examination of fresh droppings may allude to specific
is induced
gastrointestinal problems or more generalised disease. For
 If a contagious disease is suspected the bird should be
example, the presence of green biliverdin-stained urates
maintained in a separate airspace or, ideally have a separate
suggests hepatic dysfunction, which may increase the risk
air ventilation system. Handling should be minirmised, par-
associated with anaesthesia. It is important to have know-
ticularly if the individual is not habituated. Species and indi-
ledge of the normal appearance of droppings for various
vidual differences will affect how easily the bird adapts to
species, as different dietary constituents will affect the
hospitalisation. Companion birds often benefit from hurman
droppings. A faecal Gram stain assessing microflora may
activity and voices in the ward or a radio rmay be left on to
demonstrate gastrointestinal abnormalities.
 mimic normal home noise. Most birds are more stressed if
Brief ultrasonography may be possible consciously in
kept at a low height and so should not be kept at floor level.
some birds. Further investigations in patients often require
Most birds will not accept new diets readily. It is, there-
sedation or general anaesthesia, as restraint for prolonged
fore, important either to stock a variety of foods or to
procedures is stressful and potentially fatal, particularly in
request that the owner provides some of the patient's usual
smaller birds. The owner should be advised of the risk
diet. If the practice does not stock or is unable to purchase
associated with general anaesthesia in avian species, along
the bird's usual food, most owners will be happy to bring
with any specific risks for the pet.
some in for the patient's hospital stay. Birds have high
Phlebotomy may be performed in conscious birds, but
metabolic requirements, particularly passerines (Lasiewski
restraint is usually stressful during the procedure, as well
and Dawson, 1967). It may be easy to see if a Harris hawk 
as after to apply haermostatic pressure. A small blood sam-
(Parabuteo umicinctus) has eaten a chick, but less easy to
ple will allow the clinician to perform several cage-side
assess whether a budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulates) has
tests. A microhaematocrit capillary tube will allow assess-
eaten or merely de-husked seeds. Other birds may refuse
ment of the haematocrit (packed cell volume [PCV],
to eat even their normal diet within the new and stressful
which is normally between 35% and 55% in most avian
environment of a veterinary practice. In order to monitor
species, and an estimate of total solids using a refractom-
food consumption and assess weight gain or loss, hospi-
eter (Coles, 1997]. Ablood smear can be used to estimate
talised birds should be weighed at the same time once
total white cell count and white cell differential, as well as
daily. Keel prorminence should also be checked at this time,
show an anaemia or thrombocytopenia. Glucometers can
as pectoral muscle mass is a useful indicator of body con-
be used to check for hypoglycaemia or, more rarely, hyper-
dition. If poor condition or weight loss is noted, supplemen-
glycaemia. These parameters can be an invaluable part of
tal nutrition should be administered, usually in the form
the patient's assessrment and are especially useful when the
of gavage feeding (Table 9.4).
Table 9.4: Fluid and nutritional support for birds
FLUID
ROUTE
DOSE
FREQUENCY
COMMENT
Blood2
IV
10-20% of bird’s total
Dependent on severity
Homologous donor
blood volume
of anaemia, aetiology of
 preferred; heterogeneous
disease, type of
species donor acceptable
transfusion
for single transfusion
Colloids, e.g. gelatin
10-15 ml/kgs.7
q8h, up to 4 treatments 
Volume expansion
artificial colloidal 
 5 m/kg + 15 m/kg lactated
Treatment of hypovolaemia,
substitudes with
Ringer's4
hypoproteinaemia (total
electrolytes, hetastarch
(/0> sP!os
Can be used in anaemic
patients
Caution in patients with
4"
congestive heart failure or
renal failure
Haemoglobin glutamer-
IV
30
Once
Divided doses, over 24 h
200 (bovine) (Oxyglobin@,
Biopure Netherlands BU)4
140
Crystalloids:
<10 ml/kg/h
CRI
Routine administration
during anaesthesia
50 ml/kg/day6
Bolus
Maintenance fluids
Hartmann's solution
IV, SC, IO
5% Glucose + 0.9%
IV, IO
saline
25%dextrose
IV
1-2ml/kg3
Slowly, to effect
Treatment of hypoglycaemia
Electrolyte solutions, 
PO
 50 ml/kg/day
Divide into 2-4 doses
Oral rehydration and
e.g. Lectade@ (Pfizer
electrolyte replacement
Ltd, Kent, UK)
Nutritional support
SC
10ml/kg'
q6-8h
with amino-acids
PO
5 ml scoop with
Divide into 2-3 doses daily
and essential vitamins:
10 ml water/100 g/day
Duphalyte@ (Fort
Dodge Animal Health,
Southampton, UK)
Critical Care Formula@
(Vetark, Winchester, UK)
10%Glucoseor
PO
10
q6h
Will provide supplemental
glucose saline'
nutrition, but not cover
maintenance requirements
Harrison's@ Recovery
PO
 5 ml/100 g bird
Repeat I-4 times daily.
Nutritional or support
Formula (Harrison's
formula for sick or injured
Bird Foods, http://www.
birds
harrisonsbirdfoods.com/)
Canine/feline a/d@
PO
<5ml/100g
Can dilute with water
(Hill's, Herts., UK)
Carnivore convalescent diet
Key: CRl, continuous rate infusion, IO = intraosseous, IV = intravenous, PO = oral, SC = subcutaneous, q6h = every 6 hours
I(Coles, 1997);: 2 (Degernes et al., 1999a; Degernes et al., 1999b); 3 (Harrison et al.,2006); 4 (Lichtenberger, 2004; Orcutt, 2000);
Avian anaesthesia
The basal metabolic rate will also increase during disease,
as the inflammatory response increases energy demands
(Coles, 1997). Energy demands will be reduced if the envir-
onmental temperature is raised to 26-29°C. This can be
done most simply by keeping the ill bird in an incubator
(Fig. 9.5) or brooder (Fig. 9.6), which will have a thermo-
statically controlled temperature. Most incubators also
allow oxygen supplementation, which may be useful in dys-
pnoeic patients or during recovery from anaesthesia. It is
also useful to provide humidity of around 70%, either with
a humidity source in the incubator or by placing a small
dish of water or a damp towel in the enclosure (Harrison
et al., 2006). With larger birds, infrared heat lamps or hot
1
water bottles wrapped in towels can be used to increase
the patient's local termperature. The cage should be pro-
tected from draughts. A digital thermometer should be
used to monitor the termperature and ensure overheating
Figure 9.5 · Incubator for use with small exotic pet patients
does not occur.
(AlCU@ [Animal Intensive Care Unit], Animal Care Products,
All birds appreciate somewhere to perch; this also pro-
various suppliers).
tects their tail feathers by keeping therm above the substrate.
The type of perch required will depend on the species and
varies from wooden dowelling to more solid block perches.
Whichever type of perch is used in the veterinary practice,
it should be easy to disinfect between patients. Temporary
141
 perches can be made frorm a variety of materials, such as
upturned plant pots or non-toxic branches. It may be
Brinsea
helpful to provide a couple of different types of perch, so
the patient can select one or move around. The perch
veCo
should be placed low in the cage for weak or uncoordin-
ated birds, or those recovering from anaesthesia.
BOX 9.l Basic equipment required to
hospitalise birds
Digital weighing scales
Quiet environment
Escape-proof cage
Perches
Bowls for food and water
Gavage feeding tubes
Diets appropriate for various species, e.g. fresh fruit
and vegetables, seed mix, parrot formulated diet and
day-old chicks (can be stored frozen)
 Nutritional support diets
Handling:towels,falconer's glove
Figure 9.6 · Brooders are useful during recovery from anaesthe-
Incubator/brooder: for heat, humidity, and oxygen
sia or for hospitalisation of critical patients (Brinsea TLC-4M
provision
Intensive Care Unit@, North Somerset, UK).
adversely affect the patient during anaesthesia. The excep-
Stabilisation
tion would be the patient that has undergone acute trauma,
but even in these cases pain or blood loss may lead to shock
Most birds presented at the veterinary practice will be
that should be treated before anaesthesia is induced. Most
unwell, with fluid and/or nutritional imbalances that may
birds, therefore, benefit frorm a period of stabilisation before
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
being anaesthetised. This period may vary from l h to 2
birds. Severely debilitated or dehydrated patients will not
days, depending on the clinician's initial findings. Each case
absorb subcutaneous fluids [Harrison et al., 2006). Some
will be different, but the veterinary surgeon should decide
texts recommend the addition of hyaluronidase (150 IU/L
whether to perform a multitude of tests and procedures
of fluids) to increase the rate of absorption from subcuta-
at one time, reducing the handling frequency, or to lirmit
neous fluids (Griffin and Snelling, 1998). Fluids should
treatments to one procedure before the bird is returned to
be warmed before administration to reduce the risk of
 a cage to recover from handling before another procedure is
hypotherrmia.
performed.
For birds with hypovolaemia and others with severe
dehydration, intravenous or intraosseous fluids are used to
Oxygen supplementation
result in rapid rehydration. However, these routes do pro-
duce some stress to the patient for their delivery and
$
anaesthesia may be required for placement of catheters.
Patients presenting with signs of dyspnoea or suspected
Intraosseous access is ideal for very small or collapsed
cardiovascular disease benefit from supplemental oxygen;
patients where venous access is not possible. It is more
the least stressful method of adrministration is an oxygen
painful to insert a needle intraosseously, but can be life-
chamber with 40-50% oxygen (Quesenberry and Hillyer,
4"
saving in shocked patients. The intraosseous route is analo-
1999). If a chamber is not available, a clear plastic bag can
gous to intravenous, entering the circulation, and fluids or
be used to cover the bird's cage or carrier to contain oxy-
 drugs that may be adrministered intravenously can also be
5
gen supplied from an anaesthetic circuit. The use of a face-
given intraosseously. Placement of a venous or intraosseous
mask may cause stress as restraint of the bird is usually
catheter is discussed later [see Techniques section).
necessary. Prolonged high concentrations of oxygen should
Crystalloids are useful first-line fluids to treat dehydra-
be avoided as they may result in oxygen toxicity (Harrison
tion in avian patients. Glucose-saline is useful as the glucose
et al., 2006). Humidifying the oxygen (to at least 60% rela-
provides a source of carbohydrate and the saline replaces
142
tive humidity) will also reduce dehydration due to loss
extracellular and intracellular fluid to expand the circu-
from respiratory passages (Pees et al., 2006). If the bird's
lating fluid volume temporarily. Lactated Ringer's solu-
condition deteriorates or the dyspnoea does not reduce
tion provides electrolytes and fluid. The lactate undergoes
within 30rmin, cases with upper airway obstruction should
hepatic metabolism to produce bicarbonate that helps cor-
have their air sac cannulated (Raftery, 2005)
rect acidosis (Raftery, 2005).
Colloids may be synthetic or natural and are used to
Fluid therapy
expand plasma volume in hypovolaemic shock. When used
in combination with crystalloids, the volume required is
reduced by 40-60% (Raftery, 2005). If severe anaemia is
Most birds obtain water from metabolised food and body
present, a colloid with oxygen-carrying ability (for example
fat stores. Therefore, dehydration will occur rapidly when
Oxyglobin@, Biopure Netherlands BU) should be
birds are ill and anorexic. Although birds will retain water
chosen. In other instances, synthetic colloids (for example
at these times by excreting less urine, they will benefit
Haemaccel@, Intervet UK) can be used; these are cheaper
from rehydration. All fluids should be warmed to body
and more readily available.
temperature, approximately 39°C, to reduce the risk of
Patients with hypovolaermic shock will generally have
hypothermia following administration (Coles, 1997]
pale mucous mermbranes, slow venous refill time, elevated
The daily water intake for most birds is 40-60 ml/kg
heart rate and falling haermatocrit (Lichtenberger, 2004).
(Curro, 1998; Steinhort, 1999), so maintenance fluids are
A slow bolus of lactated Ringer's solution (10 ml/kg) com-
provided at 50 ml/kg/day. In dehydrated patients, the
bined with haemoglobin-based oxygen carrier or het-
deficit should be estimated and replaced over a period of
astarch (5 ml/kg) should be administered over 5min
approximately 24 h (Raftery, 2005).
(Raftery, 2005).
 In many cases where fluids are required, the bird is
bright enough to entangle itself or attack a fluid giving set
Hydration should be corrected in ill birds before
and it is easier to place a bung in the catheter to adminis-
gavage feeding is commenced.
ter boluses. In debilitated patients, a continuous rate infu-
sion may be more appropriate. Bolus fluids may result in
hypervolaemia and polyuria, while a continuous infusion
The easiest route for rehydration is administration of
will allow retention of more fluid. Syringe pumps can be
fluids orally, usually by crop or gavage feeding. Nutrition
used to administer very small volumes, for example I ml
can be provided concomitantly when required. This route
over 1h. Hypoproteinaemia (total solids <20 g/l) can be
is ideal for patients with normal gastrointestinal function
and consciousness, as the major risk associated is aspiration
(Harrison et al., 2006),
after regurgitation. Up to 20ml/kg can be administered
The administration of boluses allows the clinician to
orally and is usually repeated every 6-8h. If required,
provide fluids intravenously or intraosseously at periods
other routes can be used additionally to provide fluids.
throughout the day. Maximum recomrmended volumes of
Subcutaneous fluids are relatively easy to administer,
intravenous fluid boluses are l.0ml for a budgerigar
but absorption is slow and suitable sites restricted in
(Melopsittacus udulates], 2.0ml for a cockatiel (Nymphicus
Avian anaesthesia
hollandicus], 8.0 ml for an Amazon parrot [Amazona sp.]
Nutritional support
and 12ml for a large macaw (Ara sp.) or large cockatoo
(Cacatua sp.) (Coles, 1997). As with other medications,
Birds on a marginal nutritional plane, including hunting
the veterinary surgeon must balance the stress caused to
birds of prey, may require supplemental nutrition in the
peri-anaesthetic period. Dehydration may affect nutrient
benefits gained from administration of fluids.
absorption and rehydration therapy is usually adminis-
Fluids may be administered rectally if no other routes
tered initially before commencing nutritional support. If a
are available. Absorption is good via this route, but it is
imperative to warm fluids to avoid hypothermia. Care
bird is obviously thin, the addition of glucose to the fluids
gr the use of a diluted nutritional support formula may
should be taken during administration not to damage the
be advisable. Proprietary brands of support formula
delicate recto-cloacal tissue.
exist, although human baby foods may be appropriate in
Birds in renal failure should be given l0% of their body
an emergency - attempting to provide an equivalent to
weight in fluids daily (Lumeij, 2000). Warmed fluids
the usual food, for exarmple fruit-based for an Amazon
are administered orally, intravenously or intraosseously;
parrot (Amazona sp.]. The food administered should also
50-100 ml/kg is administered twice daily to diurese the
be easily absorbed with minirmal digestion, for example a
patient (Echols, 2006). Balanced electrolyte solutions are
carnivore convalescent diet can be fed to birds of prey.
appropriate. Allopurinol may be used to reduce uric acid
Hand-rearing formulas can be used to treat debilitated
production, butrenal toxicity has been reported in at least
adult birds. If they are strong enough and willing to take
one species [Czarnecki et al., 1987; Lee and Fisher,
the food, sick birds can be hand-fed the formula from a
1972). A balanced diet should be fed to the patient.
spoon. They willrequire 30-60ml/kg per day, divided into
Although non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
three or four doses through the day. Convalescent diets
may be beneficial in reducing inflammation in renal dis-
have been formulated to provide easily digestible sources
ease, most are eliminated via renal clearance and have
of nutrition. The volume that can be gavage-fed at one
been associated with renal lesions in birds (Klein et al.,
143
1994; Radford et al., 1996). Low-dose aspirin has been
time will depend on the size of the bird, with adult bird
used in some birds with renal disease (Echols, 2006).
for example 3ml in a 100 g bird. Sick birds may be prone
Anaemia from acute blood loss is particularly concerning
to regurgitation and aspiration, and smaller volumes are
 in a malnourished individual, as coagulopathy may be asso-
usually administered. At this point in time, total par-
ciated with hepatic dysfunction. Anaemic patients should
enteral nutrition is not a feasible option for avian species,
be stressed as little as possible, as the increased oxygen
due to technical and financial constraints (Harrison et al.,
demand may be too great for their small oxygen reserves.
2006). The reader is referred to other texts for further
Oxygen supplementation will increase the efficiency of the
information on different nutritional supplements.
remaining erythrocytes (Harison et al., 2006). Severely
anaemic birds (PCV <20%) may require a blood transfu-
sion. Birds with chronic anaermia will adapt, but interven-
 Supplemental heating
tion is required when PCV drops below 12% in these cases
(Raftery, 2005)
 Blood donors are ideally homologous, that is, from the
Anorexic birds are extremely susceptible to hypotherrmia.
same genus and species (Degernes et al., 1999a; Degermes
Incubation of the patient in an environment warmed to
25-30°C will reduce metabolic demands for thermoregu-
et al., 1999b). Reports suggest that a single transfusion
lation. The bird will then be better able to utilise nutrition
from a heterogeneous species is acceptable, but erythrocytes
for other metabolic processes.
will be short-lived (Harrison, 1984). The donor should be
examnined for signs ofillness and the blood examined for
haemoparasites. Subsequent heterogeneous transfusions will
Preparation for anaesthesia
produce reactions (Coles, 1997). The transfusion should be
10-20% of the bird's blood volume (Harrison et al., 2006),
equivalent to approximately 1% of the bird's body weight.
Once the patient has been stabilised, preparations can
Blood is collected into acid citrate dextrose, with 0.15 ml
begin for anaesthesia. All equipment for the procedures
anticoagulant per ml of blood. Agglutination and haermoly-
to be performed should be prepared, to limit the anaes-
sis should be assessed before repeat transfusions are admin-
thetic period. Emergency equipment and drugs should
istered, by mixing donor and recipient red blood cells and
also be readied.
 serum on a microscope slide (Raftery, 2005).
If blood is unavailable, an alternative is haemoglobin
glutamer-200 (bovine) (Oxyglobin@, Biopure, Cambridge,
EQUIPMENTREQUIRED
MA); where available, this is expensive. Gelatin artificial
colloidal substitutes with electrolytes can also be used in
anaemic patients to expand the blood volume (Lichtenberger
Anaesthetic equipment
et al., 2001). Erythropoietin has been used in avian patients
to stirmulate red cell production, at l00IU/kg subcuta-
Anaesthetic circuits used will vary depending on the size
neously three times weekly (Degernes, 1995).
of the bird. Systems should ideally have a low dead space,
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
low resistance and be non-rebreathing. For most avian
a large dead space it should not be used for prolonged pro-
species seen in veterinary practice, a circuit such as a
cedures due to the risk of hypercapnia. The seal created
modified Rees, Ayre's T-piece, or Bain may be used. Open
 around the bird's neck should be tight enough to permit
or semi-open circuits are necessary, as the tidal volume of
PPV, but not occlude superficial blood vessels (Edling,
birds is insufficient to move gases through closed systems.
-oauuoo ot yoee oi paidepe aq ue sase-aauis (soo
Relatively high gas flow rates are required to expel carbon
 ors and used as masks for small birds.
dioxide and ensure rebreathing does not occur (Coles,
Passive scavenge of waste gases may allow a substantial
1997). Oxygen flow rates should be two to three times
portion of escape into the environment if the facemask is
the minute ventilation with non-rebreathing circuits of
loosely fitted. It is preferable to use active scavenge if a
150-200 ml/kg/minute (Edling, 2005)
facemask is used throughout anaesthesia.
 Non-rebreathing circuits have the advantage of provid-
Air sac cannulae can be purchased or adapted from
$
ing almost instantaneous changes in gas provided to the
existing endotracheal tubes (Fig. 9.7). The basic design is
patient after vaporiser adjustment, which is extremely
a short tube with an adapter for connection to an anaes-
useful in avian patients that have a rapid physiological
thetic circuit, with side-openings in the tube to reduce
response to anaesthetic gases. The addition of a reservoir
the risk of blockage from intracoelomic material or vis-
4"
bag in the Rees' modification of the Ayre's T-piece (see
cera. It is helpful to have a rubber disc or other attach-
Fig. l.l) permits intermittent positive pressure ventila-
ment near the connector for suturing the tube to the
tion (IPPV) to be performed in intubated patients. A bag
patient. In an emergency placement of any piece of tub-
can also be attached to the Bain. The coaxial mini-Bain
ing would allow access for room air ventilation.
(see Fig. 1.2) has the added benefit of warming inhaled
Suction may be required to remove regurgitated fluids
gases. It is advisable to humidify inspired gases if possible
or excess secretions that may block the airways during
to reduce water loss from the avian air sacs [Coles, 1997].
anaesthesia or recovery. Syringes or other suction device
As discussed in the Techniques' section, uncuffed endo-
should be available.
144
tracheal tubes (see Fig. 1.6) are required for avian species.
Various sizes should be purchased for use in birds, with
small sizes available (for example, from 1 .5 mm diameter).
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
Shouldered tubes are useful to close the glottis, reducing
waste gas contamination of the environment and enabling
Equipment is similar to other species, with a competent
mechanical ventilation to be performed. For very small
and attentive anaesthetist essential to monitor the patient's
birds, intravenous catheters [with the stylet rermoved] can
status throughout the procedure. Bell or, in larger patients,
be attached to a small connector. Rubber feeding tubes or
oesophageal stethoscopes can be used to rmonitor heart rate.
 urinary catheters can also be shortened and used.
ECGs can be attached to birds using adhesive pads (Fig. 9.8).
 Most new endotracheal tubes require shortening before
Indirect blood pressure monitors can be used. Capnographs
use in srmall avian species. Ideally the tube should be pos-
are useful in avian species, pulse oximeters less so.
itioned within the trachea with the connector at the beak.
As birds already have a large dead space volume within
Hospitalisation requirements
their trachea, it is irmportant to reduce dead space within
the anaesthetic circuit. If endotracheal tubes are overly
Digital scales or a spring balance are vital for avian medi-
long, they should be shortened proximally, retaining the
 cine, to obtain accurate body weights for patients.
rounded bevel tip. Similarly, if other tubing is shortened,
the end should be cut obliquely and smoothed in a flame
to reduce tracheal damage during insertion.
RELEVANT TECHNIOUES
Facemasks are used for anaesthetic induction of many
species and also for maintenance of anaesthesia in species
Routes of administration
that cannot be intubated. The mask should ideally be com-
fortable for the patient, allow visualisation of the head to
assess anaesthetic depth, contain minimal dead space
This may pose some problems in small birds, as calculated
around the patient's head that may increase rebreathing of
 doses may be very small volurmes. For some medications,
waste gases and create a seal to prevent contamination of
it may be necessary to dilute the agent, for exarmple with
the environment with anaesthetic gases. A variety of sizes
sterile water for injection, before administration to avoid
are required for various species (see Fig. 1.7). Masks with
overdosage. The use of insulin syringes also improves
clear plastic are ideal, as they allow sorme assessment of the
accuracy.
 bird, such as eye movement and position.
Many rmanufactured masks have a rubber diaphragm
Oral
that fits around the patient's neck, but this may not cre-
ate a good seal for srmall birds. For these patients, a larger
The oral route is the easiest method of adrministering fluid
mask can be adapted to reduce escape of waste gases into
or medications to avian patients and is often a procedure
the environment by tying an examination glove over the
that clients may perforrm cormfortably at home. Medication
end and piercing it to create a srmall hole for the patient's
administered via food or drinking water is variably
head (see Fig. 1.7B). However, if this creates a mask with
accepted, particularly in ill patients, and is not advisable if
Avian anaesthesia
st5
145
Figure 9.7 · Air sac cannulation. (A) Patient in lateral recumbency, legs held caudally and wings dorsally; skin surgically prepared.
(B) Small skin incision caudal to last rib. (C) Forceps in incision to puncture musculature. (D) Tube placed into the caudal thoracic air
sac. (E) Anaesthetic circuit can be attached to the cannula.
an exact dose is required. Small volurmes can be syringed
metal or plastic (Dosing catheter@,Harvard Apparatus
directly into the oral cavity, but gavage feeding may be
Ltd, IMS, Kent, UK) tubes.Red rubber tubing or lengths
required for larger volurmes.
of fluid giving sets with smoothed ends can also be used.
Gavage feeding is an easy procedure in most birds.
Care should be taken with the softer tubes not to allow
Proprietary crop tubes are available (Fig. 9.9), including
the bird to bite it, as a broken piece of tubing is easily
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Cropfeeding tube
4"
Figure 9.8 · Electrocardiogram pads can be attached to the skin
of birds in similar positions to other species (for example, the
right and left wing on the propatagium and left pre-crural fold as
seen in this Socorra dove [Zenaida graysoni].
Palpate tip of
tube incrop
146
Fgure 9.10 · Crop tubing the avian patient. The head and body
are restrained while the crop tube is inserted into the mouth.
Agag may be useful in some birds. The tube passes dorsal to the
tongue, lateral to the glottis.
should be palpated in the crop or oesophagus at the base
of the neck before administration of medication.
Fluids and food should be warmed before administra-
tion to reduce the risk of hypothermia. Care should be
taken not to overheat fluids as internal burns may occur.
Up to 20 ml of fluids per kg body weight can be adrminis-
tered with one dose, but less is given to debilitated
patients that are more likely to regurgitate; this bolus can
be repeated once the crop empties (Chitty, 2005). The
bolus should be administered slowly to reduce the risk of
Figure 9.9 · Avian crop tubes may be metal or plastic, and come
regurgitation and the oral cavity observed for this during
in a range of sizes.
the procedure. If regurgitation is noted, the tube should
be rermoved to allow the bird either to swallow the medi-
cation or release it from its mouth. If the patient is quite
debilitated it is often helpful to hold the bird in a head-
swallowed by the patient and may require anaesthesia for
down position to allow excess fluid to drain and reduce
retrieval. An assistant should hold the beak open using
the risk of aspiration. If in doubt, use suction and/or cot-
the fingers or bandage material in small patients, or a
ton buds to remove fluid from the oral cavity to protect
metal speculum in larger birds, to protect soft tubes. A
the airway.
relatively large tube is selected, to reduce the risk of glot-
tal entry and accidental airway dosing. Most proprietary
tubes have a dilated or ball tip to reduce the risk of glot-
Injections
tal insertion or oesophageal trauma.
Small-gauge needles are used for injections or catheterisa-
 The conscious bird is restrained using a towel, with the
tion in birds, as there is a high risk of leakage from blood
head controlled. The head and neck should be extended
vessels or skin if larger needles are employed. In most
to minimise the risk of trauma during tube insertion. The
cases 25-gauge needles are sufficient, but 27-gauge may
lubricated tube is passed lateral and dorsal to the glottis as
far as the base of the neck (into the crop in most species
patients.
or mid-oesophagus in those birds that do not have a crop]
Intramuscuar injections are usually administered in
(Fig. 9.10). If resistance is felt, the tube should be with-
the pectoral muscles (see Fig. 9.4). The injection should
drawn and the procedure re-started. The tip of the tube
be into the mid to caudal portion of the muscles, as the
Avian anaesthesia
veins within the muscles are larger cranially (Coles)
aptera present in most species, and the skin prepared.
1997). A needle of 23-gauge or smaller is usually used,
Supporting the neck on the left-hand side helps stabilise
depending on the viscosity of the medication and the size
the vein and tenses the skin overlying the vein. The vein is
of patient (Chitty, 2005). The syringe plunger should be
raised with gentle pressure at the base of the neck and the
withdrawn as with other injections to ensure a blood ves-
needle inserted at a shallow angle into the superficial vein
sel has not been inadvertently entered. The iliotibialis lat-
[see Fig. 9.4]. A 23-27-gauge needle is used, depending
eralis or biceps femoris muscles may be used in larger
on patient size to reduce venous damage, with the bevel
birds, avoiding the sciatic nerve posteriorly; the renal por-
maintained uppermost during the procedure. Digital pres-
tal system may drain the drug directly to the kidneys from
sure should be maintained on the site, without occlusion
this site. If large volumes (greater than l ml per 500g
 of the trachea, for a few minutes after venepuncture to
body weight) are to be administered, the injection should
reduce the risk of haemorrhage or haematoma formation.
be divided between two or more sites to reduce the risk
Excess suction may collapse the vein and an appropriate
of muscular damage or inflarmmation (Cooper, 1983).
size syringe should be used, for example a 0.5-l.0 ml
Subcutaneous injection can be difficult in birds, due to
syringe for passerines and 2.0-5.0 ml for psittacines.
the thin skin that is quite inelastic, allowing fluids to leak
The ulnar and brachial veins are subcutaneous at the
through the puncture site (Coles, 1997). Several sites are
elbow, on the ventral aspect of the wing (see Fig. 9.4).
available for subcutaneous injections in birds (see Fig.
Access is easier in the anaesthetised patient, as the site
9.4). The precrural fold or inguinal region is the site of
can be more readily stabilised. Preparation of the skin
st
choice for injection of larger volumes, for example fluid
with antiseptic in spirit is usually sufficient to allow visu-
administration. Skin on the dorsal neck or interscapularly
alisation of the vein. A 27- or 25-gauge needle or catheter
 may also be used, particularly in larger birds. Other sites
can be used in most species to enter this vein. Intravenous
for small volurmes are the flank, over the pectoral muscles,
catheters with wings for suture attachrment are ideal, as
in the axilla, or in the propatagial skin fold of the wing
the catheter can be secured to the skin or feathers; if the
[Harrison et al., 2006). Warm fluids will treat or prevent
catheter does not have wings, adhesive tape can be used
147
hypothermia and be less painful during administration
to manufacture a butterfly for attachment [see Fig. 1l.3).
than cold fluids. The addition of hyaluronidase at 150
The superficial plantar metatarsal vein (see Figs 9.4 and
units/L can be used to increase the absorption rate of sub-
10.2) is useful for phlebotomy and catheterisation, particu-
cutaneous medications (Chitty, 2005).
larly in birds with longer legs. The vein is raised by applied
Venous access is useful for a nurmber of reasons; phle-
pressure over the medial distal tibiotarsus. Haematomas
botomy may be performed, or fluids and drugs may be
are less likely to form at this site after venepuncture due
administered. The circulating blood volume in birds is
to the presence of scaly skin, but haermorrhage often neces-
between 6ml and 12 ml per 100g bodyweight (approxi-
sitates temporary pressure, a dressing or tissue glue. This
mately 10%), and approximately 10% of this may be
vein is more stable than the ulnar or brachial and may be
removed in a healthy bird without causing shock (Coles,
 catheterised in quite small birds.
1997). For a l00g cockatiel, the total blood volume would
 Small blood samples may be obtained from toe-nail
be approximately 10ml, so I ml would be a maximum sam-
clipping, but urate contarmination may affect chemistry
ple size; in practice, a smaller sample is taken, as most
results (O'Malley, 2005). Cardiac puncture is difficult in
birds requiring phlebotomy are unwell. Birds appear to be
birds due to the protection of the keel, but can be per-
more able to cope after blood loss than marmmals (Kovach
formed in an emergency (Campbell, 1988).
and Szasz, 1968; Kovach et al., 1969)
Intraosseous injections enter the medullary cavity and
Avian veins are fragile and easily traumatised, and
thence access the vascular system, and are equivalent to
haematomas rapidly form after venepuncture. Most veins
intravenous administration. This route is extremely useful
are more easily accessed in anaesthetised birds, as manual
in small or collapsed birds where intravenous access is not
restraint is stressful for the patient and allows movement
possible. It is not advisable to use the intraosseous route
that makes the procedure more technically difficult. If
in osteoporotic birds, as iatrogenic fractures may occur
the patient is conscious during venepuncture, stress usually
(Chitty, 2005)
 produces a higher blood pressure and there is an increased
 In larger birds, a 20-22-gauge spinal needle may be
risk of haermatoma following venous access; this often
used. Small intraosseous needles are available with inser-
means that more prolonged restraint is necessary to apply
tion handles for ease of insertion. In smaller patients, a
haemostatic pressure following the procedure. The risks
cheaper alternative is to use a hypodermic needle, although
of anaesthesia, therefore, should be weighed against the
the lack of stylet may allow blockage with cortical bone
benefits of venous access - be that to obtain a blood sam-
during insertion. The distal ulna or proximal tibiotarsal
ple for investigative testing, to administer medication or
bone is commonly used for intraosseous catheter place-
fluids, or to place an intravenous catheter allowing more
ment (Figs 9.4, 9.1l and 9.12). The hurmerus cannot be
chronic venous access. Since birds may traumatise catheters,
used as it is pneumatised.
the catheter should be secured using sutures and/or tape
Usually the patient is anaesthetised, as insertion of a
and a light dressing.
needle into bone is painful. The selected site is surgically
The right jugular is the most easily accessible vein, and
prepared to reduce the risk of iatrogenic infection and
is useful for phlebotomy or emergency administration of
resultant osteomyelitis. In patients with poor bone forrma-
drugs. The feathers are parted to expose the featherless
tion, iatrogenic fractures are also possible. The bone is
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
To access the tibiotarsus, the stifle is flexed. The needle
is inserted into the tibiotarsus from cranio-medially (Chitty,
2005). It is directed distally into the cranial cnemial crest,
which lies distal to the stifle (see Fig. 9.11].
When the intraosseous needle is rotated, the bone sur-
-Patella
rounding the medulla can be felt with the needle tip.
Injecting a small volume of sterile saline also assesses cor-
rect positioning; there should be no resistance to injection.
Movement of the needle should result in similar move-
Distal femur
ment of the bone; radiography will also show the needle
position. The needle is secured using bandage material.
Fluids are injected intraosseously under pressure, either
$
as bolus injections by hand or using a syringe pump. With
Needle in
regular flushing to maintain patency and appropriate steril-
medulla of
tbiotarsus
ity, intraosseous catheters can be used for up to 3 days
(Chitty, 2005).
The intraperitoneal route is not commonly used in
u
birds. True intraperitoneal injections should be adminis-
tered in a paramedian location, with the skin and muscle
Tibiotarsus
raised using forceps. The needle is inserted at a very shal-
low angle to reduce the risk of perforating viscera. This
route should not be used in conscious patients unless they
are collapsed and unlikely to move during the injection
148
(Coles, i997). In general, fluids are not administered
intraperitoneally in birds, due to the risk of drowning if an 
air sac is penetrated.
Other routes
Intratracheal administration of drugs may be appropriate,
for exarmple adrenaline [epinephrine) to treat cardiac arrest
Or saline for a tracheal wash. A small catheter, for example
an intravenous catheter with the stylet rermoved, is used
to introduce fluids into the trachea via the glottis. The
Figure9.Il·Intraosseousneedleplacementin the tibiotarsus.
maximum volume that should be administered via this
route is 2 ml/kg body weight (Coles, 1997)
Topical medications are rarely used in avian species, as
ointments and creams often contarminate the plumage and
Needle in
damage the feathers.
medulla of ulna
Many agents can be administered by inhalation. This
includes volatile anaesthetics, but also therapeutic agents
Radius
directed at the respiratory tract. Anaesthetics are usually
 adrministered via masks or endotracheal tubes; other drugs
Ulna
are often administered via nebulisation in a chamber.
Droplet size must be below 5 μm in order to reach the air
sacs (Coles, 1997)
 It is less stressful in dyspnoeic patients to provide oxy-
gen in a charmber rather than via a rmask. For these patients,
a (heated) humidifier should be incorporated (see Fig. 1.11)
Figure 9.1 2 · Intraosseous needle placement in the distal ulna.
-e au woy ssot ianem anan o iddns se au u
ways and prevent drying of the respiratory tract (Benedikt
et al., 1998). It is important to provide supplemental heat-
stabilised using the non-dominant hand and the needle
ing if a bird is in a chamber with gases flowing, as the
gently inserted with a rotating moverment into the bone.
patient may cool excessively.
To place a needle into the ulna, the carpus is flexed and
the dorsal condyle proximal to the carpus is identified
(see Fig. 9.12). The needle is inserted into the medullary
Intubation
cavity of the distal ulna in a proximal direction (Chitty,
2005). A fluid bolus injected into the ulna may be seen in
Placement of endotracheal tubes in birds is relatively
the basilic vein.
easy. The glottis lies at the base of the tongue. The exact
Avian anaesthesia
location, therefore, varies depending on the anatormy of
Air sac cannulation
the tongue, with some species having a long thin tongue
[see Fig. 1l.4) and others having a short fleshy tongue (see
 The air sac cannula bypasses the upper respiratory tract
Fig. 10.1). As described in the anatomy section, the lurmen
[see Fig. 9.7]); for example, if an upper airway obstruction
in avian tracheas is relatively large; for exarmple,
a
is present or if conventional endotracheal intubation would
3-3.5mm endotracheal tube may be used in a parrot
weighing 300g. As the tracheal cartilage rings are complete,
anaesthesia is required for insertion of a cannula into an
uncuffed endotracheal tubes are usually used. The tube
should be of an appropriate length such that when placed
air sac (except in collapsed patients, when analgesia
should still be administered), after insertion the cannula
the connector lies either within or just outside the beak;
can then be used to provide oxygen or to maintain anaes-
this will minimise dead space within the circuit. It is often
thesia using volatile agents.
 necessary to shorten the endotracheal tube before use in
This is an invaluable technique for the avian clinician
S
avian species.
presented with a bird suffering from tracheal or syringeal
obstruction. Anaesthesia via air sac perfusion has also
been shown to be useful for ophthalmoscopic examin-
ation (Korbel et al., 1994). Most patients will not trauma-
The avian trachea has complete cartilaginous rings.
tise the cannula, particularly if the upper respiratory tract
 Uncuffed endotracheal tubes are used in birds to reduce
is obstructed (Edling, 2005). Air sac cannulation should
the risk of causing pressure necrosis.
-uo i ses iie ym spiq u paad aq iou
respiratory disease, such as ascites. This procedure is also
not indicated in dyspnoeic birds with obstructions below
the syrinx or lung disorders, such as polytetrafluoroethyl-
Anaesthesia is induced using volatile or injectable
ene (PTFE) toxicity (Harrison et al., 2006). Care should
149
agents. If a volatile agent has been adrministered via face-
be taken not to damage organs iatrogenically if organomegaly
mask, the mask is removed and the gases switched off
 Or gastrointestinal dilation is present.
during intubation. An assistant holds the upper and lower
Proprietary avian air sac surgical cannulae can be pur-
beaks open while the anaesthetist pulls the patient's
chased (for example, 20 Fr non-cuffed tube with reten-
tongue forward. The tongue may be grasped with your
tion disc, Cook Veterinary Products, Bloomington, IN,
fingers, or atraumatic forceps, or dragged using a cotton
USA), or shortened endotracheal tubes used for larger
bud or tongue depressor. Alight source is used to visualise
birds. In smaller species other tubing,such as urinary or
the glottis at the base of the tongue; a laryngoscope may
intravenous catheters, can be shortened and used. Holes
be used in larger birds, or a pen torch or overhead light. It
should be made in the side of the tube, to allow ease of
s a as o a assd Aie o da 
ventilation and reduce the risk of obstruction. Ideally, the
frorm the base of the oral cavity. The endotracheal tube
tubing should be sterile, but in an emergency cannulation
should be lubricated, for example with water-based KY
with any piece of tubing will allow ventilation. The tube
Jelly@ (Johnson & Johnson, New Jersey, US) or petro-
should be approximately the same diameter as the patient's
leum jelly, taking care not to block the lumen of the tube.
The tube should be inserted when the glottis opens dur-
trachea. The tube should be fairly short, to reduce the risk
 of iatrogenic damage to viscera during placement (Harrison
ing a normal breath.
Endotracheal tube placerment should be performed
et al., 2006]
The cannula is placed in the same site as that used for
gently, to avoid injuring the delicate trachea. The endotra-
left lateral laparoscopy. The anaesthetised bird is placed in
cheal tube diameter should almost completely fill the
right lateral recumbency with the left leg pulled caudally
lumen of the glottis and trachea, to reduce waste gases
and a small area caudal to the last (eighth) rib just ventral to
leaking into the environment. The tube size should enable
the vertebrae is surgically prepared (see Fig. 9.7A). In
a good seal with the glottis, but not be so tight as to cause
large birds, the cannula may be inserted between the last
damage. If the tube is loose in the trachea, a cuff may be
two ribs. The cannula is placed into the more superficial
inflated only with extreme care, as pressure necrosis is
caudal thoracic air sac, rather than the deeper caudal
likely to cause stricture formation (Edling, 2006).
abdominal air sac.
 Until the endotracheal tube is secured to the patient, it
 After preparation of the area, a small skin incision is
should be held in place and the anaesthetic circuit recon-
made using scissors or an upturned scalpel blade [see Fig.
nected to continue adrministration of anaesthetic gases.
9.7B). Mosquito forceps are then used to dissect bluntly a
The tube is usually secured using adhesive tape, for example
 small hole in the abdominal musculature into the abdom-
Micropore? (3M, Bracknell, UK). The tape is wrapped
inal cavity (see Fig. 9.7C). A 'pop' may be heard as the air
around the endotracheal tube within the oral cavity, then
sac membrane is penetrated underlying the muscular
each end wrapped around the lower and/or upper beak
layer. By opening the forceps, the hole is enlarged suffi-
(see Fig. 9.15). Alternatively, woven bandage can be used,
ciently to allow insertion of the tube or cannula (see Fig.
attaching to the wings on the connector and then passing
9.7D). The tube is sutured to the skin to rmaintain its pos-
behind the bird's head to secure. This is preferable if the
ition. Proprietary avian air sac surgical cannulae have a
tube or patient is likely to become wet, which may affect
retention disc that may be easily sutured to the patient's
the adhesive properties of tape.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
skin. Correct positioning is ascertained by holding cotton
gas flow in order to maintain sufficient anaesthetic gas
wool or a down feather to the opening of the tube and
within the respiratory tract.
checking for airflow with breaths (Coles, 1997; Harrison
et al., 2006}
 If anaesthesia is maintained via the air sac cannula, the
Blood pressure measurement
normal airflow pattern may be altered on the left-hand
side and the concentration of volatile anaesthetic agents
often needs to be increased. If the interclavicular air sac is
The ulnar or distal ulnar (distal humerus) (see Fig. 10.3)
or metatarsal (distal femur} arteries can be accessed to
intubated, these airflow changes are not seen; however, it
is more difficult to insert and maintain a cannula in this
measure blood pressure indirectly in birds. The humeral
site is more reliable in birds weighing less than 300g.
air sac. Total gas flow rates should be increased for air
Small blood pressure cuffs are utilised, as the width
sac intubation, to ensure gases reach the lungs (Coles,
1997).
should be approximately 40% of the circumference of
the limb used. A Doppler probe is used to monitor blood
flow audibly distal to the cuff. Birds with systolic
Assisted ventilation
blood pressures below 90 mmHg are treated for hypoten-
4"
sion (with crystalloids and colloids) (Lichtenberger,
2005).
Manual IPPV is used during most avian anaesthetics in
order to maintain pulmonary perfusion and thence pro-
vide oxygen and volatile anaesthetic agents to the patient.
If a mechanical ventilator is not available, compressing
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
the reservoir bag within the anaesthetic circuit with the
expiratory valve temporarily closed can be used to per-
 Pre-medications are rarely administered to birds, but some
150
form manual ventilation. Mechanical ventilators enable
agents may assist srmooth induction and recovery from
provision of anaesthetic gases at consistent pressures and
anaesthesia, have volatile agent-sparing effects, and/or pro-
frequency of respiration. Mechanical ventilation also frees
vide analgesia
the anaesthetist to monitor the patient more closely and
Opioid administration will reduce the concentration of
provide other supportive care during the procedure.
volatile agent required to induce and maintain anaesthe-
Avian airway pressures should be less than 15-20mmHg,
sia. Individual species variation in opioid receptors will
Or volutrauma of the air sacs will be produced (Edling,
affect the response seen with opioid agents; for example,
-euu euou aeuxoudde on pambar amssaid aul (oo0z
most opioid receptors in pigeons are of the k type and
tion will vary between individual animals. In most birds,
 butorphanol may be a better analgesic in this species than
412cm HzO should be appropriate for tracheal or
μ opioid agonists such as morphine (Mansour et al.,
air-sac ventilation. Ideally, the ventilation rate should be
1988). Analgesics, such as butorphanol, will also produce
adjusted to maintain PeTCOz within normal lirmits, depend-
some sedative effects.
ing on minute-by-minute capnograph measurements. As a
 Studies in dogs undergoing surgery have shown that
guide, adequate ventilation is usually present if the PerCOz
is maintained between 30 and 45 mmHg (Edling et al.,
increase in PaCOz postoperatively, and that administra-
2001).
tion of hydromorphone or butorphanol may result in tran-
 In a study where chickens were anaesthetised with
sient reduction in PaO2 (Campbell et al., 2003). While
sevoflurane (Naganobu et al., 2003), controlled ventila-
 these changes appear to be mild in mammalian species,
tion was found to prevent increases in PaCOz and heart
similar physiological changes associated with opioid use
rate that occurred during spontaneous ventilation. Another
within avian species may be significant (Edling, 2006)
study in pigeons (Columbia livia) did not find clinically
The benzodiazepines midazolam or diazepam may be
important cardiopulmonary changes when mechanical
used before anaesthetic induction with other agents. These
ventilation was used during routine anaesthesia, but respira-
tranquillisers produce excellent muscle relaxation, but do
tory alkalosis and cardiovascular depression occurred
 not provide analgesia. Midazolam may be administered
when air sac integrity was disrupted by coeliotomy (Touzot-
intrarmuscularly to tranquillise a bird and reduce the stress
Jourde et al., 2005)
of induction with a volatile agent. This will decrease the
Surgery on the coelomic cavity may involve penetration
levels of circulating catecholamines, reducing the risk of
of air sacs. This will allow leakage of gases ventilated and
catecholamine-induced cardiac dysrrhythmias (Edling,
will require adjustments on both pressure-limited and
2005). Unlike midazolam that is absorbed rapidly and
volume-limited mechanical ventilators. The respiratory
alrmost completely from the muscles, uptake of diazepam
system pressure will obviously be lowered if air sacs are
from the intramuscular site is slow and unpredictable.
open to the atmosphere. Volume-limited systems will not
 Diazepam may be administered intravenously to produce
function well with a large leak such as this in the respira-
the same effect (Ludders and Mathews, 1996). Midazolarm
tory system, and will under-ventilate the patient. If mechan-
is more potent and longer-lasting than diazepam and does
ical ventilators are used during these procedures, the
not have adverse effects on mean arterial blood pressure
pressure or volume settings should be adjusted to increase
and blood gases (Edling, 2006)
Avian anaesthesia
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
body makes weight estimation very difficult in birds, and
OFANAESTHESIA
overdosage is exceptionally easy in small birds. Small vol-
umes of drug are difficult to measure; dilution of the agent
with sterile water for injection or saline and the use
 General approach to avian anaesthesia
of insulin syringes will improve the accuracy of drug
measurerment.
Larger birds should be fasted (see Peri-anaesthetic sec-
 Other problerms associated with the use of injectable
tion] before anaesthesia to reduce the risk of regurgita-
anaesthetic agents in birds include delay in onset of anaes-
tion. If emergency anaesthesia is required in an unfasted
thesia, species and individual variability in response to
bird, the trachea should be intubated, particularly if the
agents, cardio-respiratory depression, slow induction
crop is full or the bird has recently been fed. Small birds
and prolonged and/or traumatic recoveries [Ludders and
are not normally fasted, due to the risks of hypoglycaemia.
Mathews, 1996). Injectable agents are thus rarely used in
On induction, the oropharynx should be checked for the
veterinary practices, as inhalational agents are much more
presence of food or other foreign material that could be
reliable and safer to use.
inhaled and the crop palpated to check for ingesta.
Injectables may be used in conjunction with volatile
Oxygen should be supplied to all anaesthetised patients.
anaesthetics, or where sedation or anaesthesia is required
For brief procedures lasting less than 10 min, a facemask
outwith the practice premises where equipment is sta-
is sufficient, although an appropriately sized endotracheal
tioned. Injectable drugs may be cheaper than volatile agents.
tube should be on hand in case it is required. The face-
Patients should ideally still be intubated after induction
mask should be closely fitting around the bird's neck to
with injectable anaesthetics and oxygen provided if pos-
allow PPV and to reduce environrmental contarmination of
 sible. Monitoring is performed similarly for injectable and
waste gases. Patients should be intubated for most proce-
inhalation anaesthesia. Some agents are used in combin-
dures to maintain a patent airway, for administration of
ation protocols to reduce the concentrations of volatile
oxygen and volatile agents, and to permit PPV. If non-
agent required, for example analgesic agents that also
151
elective anaesthesia is indicated in a bird with a full crop,
produce sedation.
the crop contents should be aspirated before induction if
Although opioids are predominantly used to provide
possible and intubation performed to protect the airway
[nuid yim io Araans auoiapun siuaed iog eisasle
from aspiration of regurgitated ingesta.
conditions, they may be used to augment the anaesthetic
In patients with air sac cannulation, the anaesthetic cir-
protocol.
cuit, for example an Ayre's T-piece (see Fig. 9.7E), can be
Alfaxalone/alphadolone can be administered by several
attached directly to the cannula as it would be for an
routes, including intravenously, intramuscularly and
endotracheal tube. The gas flow rates are reduced to
intraperitoneally This drug has been used in many species.
one-third that used during anaesthesia via tracheal intuba-
Intravenous administration produces the most predictable
tion. PPV can be used, including mechanical ventilators.
anaesthesia, with good muscle relaxation (Coles, 1997;
However, normal respiratory movements usually stop and
Cribb and Haigh, 1977). However, cardiac abnormalities
anaesthetic monitoring is more difficult in these patients
have been recorded - some were fatal (Cooper and Redig,
(Edling, 2005)
1975)
 Propofol has been used in many species (Fitzgerald and
Induction
Cooper, 1990y. It is non-irritant to tissues and is very rapidly
metabolised, but has a narrow safety margin (Coles, 1997).
Respiratory depression and apnoea may result from an
Most birds are induced with volatile anaesthetic agents,
overdose, and supplemental oxygenation and PPV are
using a facemask or induction chamber. The choice of
advisable (Machin and Caulkett, 2000). Propofol may be
volatile agent may depend on those available in the vete-
used in larger birds, with or without pre-medication, to
rinary practice, but isoflurane or sevoflurane is commonly
induce anaesthesia and allow intubation prior to mainte-
used. It may be appropriate to pre-medicate the bird
nance on volatile anaesthetic agents. Administration is by
beforehand, particularly if a prolonged procedure is
slow intravenous injection, producing rapid onset of
planned. Injectable agents are discussed as they may be
anaesthesia. Up to 10 mg/kg is required to induce anaes-
useful adjuncts to volatile agents in certain cases, but are
thesia and incremental doses of up to 3 mg/kg may be
rarely used as sole agents for avian anaesthesia.
used to prolong anaesthesia (Edling, 2005). The lack of
residual and cumulative effects provides rapid recovery
Injectable agents
and allows supplemental doses to be administered to pro-
long anaesthesia. As in other species, dose-dependent
Injectable anaesthetic agents are uncommonly used to
cardio-respiratory depression may be seen.
induce and maintain anaesthesia in birds. There are sev-
Ketamine is a useful agent in birds. It can be adminis-
eral problems associated with injectable anaesthetics, not
tered via any parenteral route, and is often used in combin-
least of which is the risk of overdosage. An accurate weight
ation with other drugs. This agent will produce chemical
should be obtained prior to the use of any injectable agents
restraint and moderate analgesia, but is unsuitable for
in birds. The presence of plurmage variably covering the
major surgical procedures when used alone (Ludders et al.,
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
1989b). Ketamine induces anaesthesia of 10-30min
is recommended to use the intramuscular route (Haigh,
duration 3-5 min after intramuscular administration.
1980; Redig, 1983). Coles reports using a dose of 20mg/kg
Recovery is variable, from 30 min to 5h. The dose varies
of ketamine and 4 mg/kg of xylazine, administered intra-
greatly between species, with higher doses required in
muscularly, in several species (Coles, 1997). This pro-
smaller birds. Increasing the dose of ketamine adrminis-
duces sedation within a few minutes, induction in 5-7 min,
tered does not increase the depth of anaesthesia, but pro-
anaesthesia for 10-20 min and recovery to perching in 1-2h.
longs the effects (Edling, 2005)
Larger species appear to require a lower dose of ketamine.
Ketamine is usually administered intrarmuscularly, with
There may be incoordination and excitement during
anaesthesia occurring within 3-5 min and persisting for
recovery, and it is advisable to wrap the bird loosely at this
approximately 35 min. Initially inco-ordination, opisthotony
stage. This combination is, therefore, unsafe in certain
and relaxation are seen (Coles, 1997). Ketarmine may also
 species, such as long-legged species that may damage
be administered intravenously to induce anaesthesia in
thermselves during this period.
larger birds, usually in combination with other agents.
 Ketamine may be given intramuscularly with medeto-
Administration should be slow and incremental, as a rapid
midine to induce anaesthesia in several species (Jalanka,
overdose may result in apnoea and/or cardiac arrest. When
1991; Reither, 1993; Scrollavezza et al., 1995). As with
4"
used in combination with other agents, such as xylazine,
xylazine, medetomidine causes sedation, muscle relax-
repeating the ketamine dose will extend the period of
 ation and analgesia. Side effects include bradycardia and
n
anaesthesia. Once more, this will prolong the recovery
 peripheral vasoconstriction. Medetomidine is more potent
period (Edling, 2005).
than xylazine and has a wide safety margin. Induction of
The main disadvantage associated with ketamine is
anaesthesia occurs in 2-3 min and anaesthesia can be
cardio-respiratory depression, which increases with higher
maintained with low doses of volatile anaesthetic agents
doses (Coles, 1997; Edling, 2005). There are significant
[Coles, 1997). Surgical anaesthesia induced in pigeons
152
variations in the response to ketarmine between avian
with ketamine, medetomidine and butorphanol produced
species (Ludders et al., 1989b). Thermoregulation may be
arrhythrmias in some birds, which ceased after atiparme-
affected (Altman, 1980). Hepatic metabolism and renal
zole administration (Atalan et al., 2002)
excretion of this drug mean that it should be avoided in
Atipamezole and yohimbine are alpha-adrenergic antag-
birds with hepatic or renal dysfunction, or where dehy-
 onists and are used to reverse medetomidine and xylazine,
dration is suspected.
reducing the recovery time significantly or for use in an
Ketamine has been used in birds with acepromazine,
emergency to treat an overdose. If a combination contain-
but both drugs induce bradycardia (Coles, 1997].
ing ketamine has been administered, the alpha-2-antagonist
The benzodiazepines, midazolam or diazepam, may be
should not be administered until 30-40 min has passed.
used as lone agents or in conjunction with ketamine. The
Administration of the reversal too early may result in vio-
benzodiazepine-ketamine combination is administered
lent wing flapping due to the residual effects of ketamine
intramuscularly and produces deep sedation or anaesthe-
and re-sedation may occur, as atipamezole is more rapidly
sia with good muscle relaxation. The addition of a benzo-
metabolised than medetomidine. It is usual to administer
diazepine to the ketamine also smoothes induction and
the same dose of atiparmezole as medetomidine, but higher
recovery (Edling, 2005). Respiratory depression is seen
doses may reduce the risk of re-sedation (Coles, 1997}
with these agents (Coles, 1997).
 Neuromuscular blockers are not routinely used in avian
Alpha-2-adrenergic agents, such as xylazine and medeto-
patients, but vecuronium at 0.2mg/kg has been shown
midine, are not usually used as sole agents, although they
to optirmise mydriasis for ophthalmoscopic exarmination
have sedative and analgesic properties. Side effects are
(Korbel et al., 1997). Used concurrently with isoflurane
species-dependent. Xylazine use may be associated with
anaesthesia, the vecuronium enabled the isoflurane con-
respiratory depression, hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, excite-
centration to be reduced by 25% (Korbel, 2000).
ment or convulsions (Ludders and Mathews, 1996; Ludders
et al., 1989b). Cardio-respiratory effects with the alpha-
Volatile agents
2-agonists may be severe, including second-degree heart
block, bradyarrhythrmias and sensitisation to catecholamine-
Volatile agents are the most common form of anaesthetic
induced cardiac arrhythmias (Coles, 1997; Edling, 2006).
used in avian species. Their many benefits include rapid
Ketamine enhances the sedative and analgesic effects of
induction and recovery with few adverse side effects at
xylazine, producing anaesthesia in many species, along
doses producing a surgical plane of anaesthesia (Edling,
with reasonable muscle relaxation and only slight respira-
2005). Anaesthesia can be controlled easily using modern
tory depression. The addition of ketamine enhances the
vaporiser units and anaesthetic circuits. Most species are
sedative and analgesic effects of xylazine (Edling, 2006).
readily intubated to facilitate provision of anaesthetic
With this combination, the palpebral reflex may be absent
u a paad aq on Add sad osie si sass 
or slow. Increasing the ketamine dose will increase the
side effects seen with volatile anaesthetic agents are dose-
depth and duration of anaesthesia, but also prolong the
dependent depression of the central nervous, cardiovas-
recovery time (Coles, 1997). The drugs may be given
cular and respiratory systems.
intramuscularly or intravenously, or variations of both.
As birds do not have an alveolar lung, the term ‘min-
Some studies found cardiac and respiratory disturb-
imum alveolar concentration' (MAC) is not appropriate.
ances when these were adrministered intravenously, and it
MAC in birds is, therefore, defined as the minirmum
Avian anaesthesia
Table 9.5: Injectable anaesthetic agents in birds 
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Aphaxolone/alphadolone
Raptors
101
IV
Cardiac rregularities reported
Atipamezole
All
<5 X alpha-2-
IM
Reversal of alpha-2-agonists
agonist dose
(medetomidine or xylazine)
Atropine
Most species
0.02-0.086
IM
Parasympatholytic agent
0.01-0.026
IV
via
Butorphanol
AlI
0.51.0l
IM
 Sedative pre-medication at lower dose
May cause respiratory depression
all
Butorphanol + ketamine +
Psittacines
1 + 3 + 0.0413
IM
Pre-medication,reduces volatile agent
medetomidine
requirements and improves ventilation
Diazepam
Most species 
0.2-0.51
IM, IV
Aqueous solution IM or IV; propylene
glycol solution IV only
Tranquillistion, pre-medication 
153
Glycopyrrolate
 Most species
0.01-0.026
IM, IV 
Parasympatholytic agent
Ketamine
AlIl
50-10010
IM
Used on 3 consecutive days without
Budgerigar
503
side effects
Induction of anaesthesia
Raptor
2.5-1703
Poor muscle relaxation and violent
recoveries, so rarely used alone
Ketamine + diazepam
Most species
5-30 + 0.5-2.02
IM + Im, Iv
Anaesthetic induction
Ketamine + medetomidine 3
Diurnal raptors
5 + 0.1
IM
 Deep sedation/anaesthesia
Owls
10 + 0.1-0.15
Psittacines
5 + 0.075
Ketamine + midazolam
Most species
10-40 + 0.2-2.010
SC, IM
Anaesthesia
Ketamine+xylazine
Most species
2.5-5.0 + 0.25-0.57 IM
Cardiac depression,rough recovery.
Much species variation.Higher doses of
ketamine for smaller birds
Midazolam'
Most species
0.1-0.5
IM
Tranquilisation
0.05-0.15
IV
Propofol
All (variable dose
<145
IV
Induction,dose to effect.Respiratory
required across
depression, so intubate and PPV
species)
Incremental bolus to prolong
 anaesthesia
Tiletamine/zolazepam
Most species
10-308
IM
Restraint, anaesthesia
Prolonged, rough recoveries
(Continued)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 9.5: (Continued)
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE (MG/KG)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Xylazine
Raptors, psittacines 
1.02.211
IM, IV
Heavy sedation
Rarely used due to common
side effects
Yohimbine
Most species
1.0/2
IV
Reversal of alpha-2-agonists
(medetomidine or xylazine)
Excitement and mortality at
higher doses
Key: IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, PPV = positive pressure ventiltion, SC = subcutaneous
4"
(Abou-Madi, 2001); 2 (Bishop, 2001); 3 (Coles, 1997); 4 (Cooper, 1978): $ (Fitzgerald and Cooper, 1990; Huckabee, 2000);
 (Edling, 2005); 7 (Haigh, 1980); α (Hartup and Miller, 1992); *(alanka, 1991); 1 (Mandelker, 1972, 1973);
I(Mandelker,1988;Marx andRoston,1996);12(Samour,2000);13(Teare,1987)
anaesthetic concentration required to keep a bird from
environmental contamination with waste gases may be con-
purposeful movement to a painful stimulus (Ludders
siderable. Cotton wool or swabs may be used to try to
et al., 1989a). MAC values will vary slightly between bird
reduce environmental contamination, but most patients are
154
species, for example the MAC for isoflurane is 1.44% in
intubated for maintenance after induction using a facermask.
cockatoos and 1.32% in ducks (Ludders and Mathews,
 For small birds, an anaesthetic chamber may be used for
1996; Ludders et al., 1990). Values from studies in vari-
induction. This is often less stressful than restraining the
 ous species are listed below as a guide.
patient for mask induction. The charmber may be purpose-
An alternative cormparison of anaesthetic agents is the
built, or more usefully an adapted plastic container. Plastic
Anaesthesia Index (Al), which compares agents' abilities
drinks bottles are easily adapted (see Fig. 1.5) and various
to produce respiratory depression and apnoea. For this
 sizes can be made to accormmodate a range of patient sizes.
index, a lower value corresponds to a higher risk of apnoea
The use of a smaller chamber allows the gas concentration
(Edling, 2006). Comparison of this index in various
to be varied more readily, small birds will be less able to trau-
species has shown birds to be much more sensitive to the
 matise themselves during induction than in a large chamber
respiratory depressive effects of isoflurane than mam-
and there will be less waste gas released into the environ-
malian species, with an AI of 1.0 in ducks (Ludders et al.,
ment when the bird is rermoved from the chamber. The
siL (8/61 Kaais) saop u1 I5'z 0n pareduos (0661
main disadvantage with chamber induction is the difficulty
emphasises the need to monitor anaesthesia closely in
in monitoring the depth of anaesthesia during induction, as
birds. Respiratory depression occurs with all agents with
the anaesthetist cannot easily check muscle relaxation of
the concentrations required to produce a surgical plane of
auscultate the cardio-respiratory system. As the patient is
anaesthesia (Ludders et al., 1989a)
not restrained, it may injure itself during the exciterment
Gaseous agents are routinely used to produce anaesthesia
phase of induction (Edling, 2005). A clear chamber is essen-
 in avian species. They allow rapid alterations of anaesthetic
tial, so the patient can be observed to monitor when the
depth in response to varying stirmuli or patient response,
righting reflex is lost, checked by gently rolling the charmber.
allow rapid induction and recovery, and have few side
 It is normal initially to preoxygenate the patient prior
effects [Muir and Hubbell, 2000a). Isoflurane and sevoflu-
to induction using either of the above techniques. After a
rane are the most commonly used volatile anaesthetic
few breaths in 100% oxygen, the anaesthetic agent is
agents in birds. Isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane all
switched to a high concentration (Table 9.6). This usually
produce dose-dependent effects on the central nervous,
results in rapid induction of anaesthesia with minimal
respiratory and cardiovascular systems (Edling, 2006).
stress for the patient (Edling, 2006). If a gradual increase
With larger birds, it is usual to restrain the patient in a
in concentration of anaesthetic agent is used, induction is
towel and induce by administering a volatile anaesthetic
 slower and the patient may become stressed due to the pro-
agent via a facemask. The efficient avian respiratory systerm
longed restraint, with concomitant catecholamine increases
means that anaesthetic induction by this technique is
(Edling, 2005). Once anaesthesia is attained, the concen-
rapid. This enables the clinician to assess continuously the
tration of volatile agent is reduced to a level at or just below
patient's respiratory moverments, heart rate and reflexes.
its MAC for maintenance
When applying the mask, avoid darmaging the patient's eyes
Volatile anaesthetic agents may depress the PaCO2
and beak. The mask should surround the bird's head, with
chemoreceptors, reducing the respiratory rate in the
the rubber ring on proprietary masks snug (but not exces-
anaesthetised patient (Coles, 1997). Ventilation is, there-
sively tight) around the neck.Unfortunately, many facemasks
fore, usually assisted either manually or using a mechan-
do not create a tight seal with the avian head, and the risk of
ical ventilator.
Avian anaesthesia
Table 9.6: Inhalation anaesthetics in birds
DRUG
INDUCTION
MAINTENANCE
COMMENT
CONCENTRATION*
CONCENTRATION (%)
Desflurane
6-82
4-6
Odour precludes ability to induce via facemask
Halothane
0.5-3.0 (incremental)
2-3
Induction in 2-5 min 
Isoflurane
4-51.2.3
2.5-3.0
Induction in 2-3 min 
Nitrousoxide
50:50 in oxygen'
 Maximum 50:50 in oxygen
Discontinue 5-I0 min before end of anaesthesia
Sevoflurane
7-82.3
41
Smooth induction as no respiratory tract irritation
* Lower concentrations should be used in compromised patients
st
Halothane has been used historically in many species
155
are also much less than those seen with halothane, as
without problems (Graham-Jones, 1966; Jones, 1966;
isoflurane does not sensitise the myocardium to cate-
Marley and Payne, i964). However, there are reports of
cholamine-induced arrhythmias (Muir and Hubbell,
overdosage with this agent (Jones, 1977). Side effects
include direct myocardial depression, causing sensitisation
liver; therefore, it is much safer for patients with hepatic
tocatecholamine-induced cardiac arrhythmias.
These
dysfunction and for veterinary staff who may be exposed
arrhythmias may be fatal, particularly in stressed individuals
to leaked gases (Coles, 1997).
with high levels of circulating catecholamines (Edling,
A number of side effects may be seen with isoflurane.
2006). One study in ducks anaesthetised with halothane
Some respiratory tract irritation occurs, which may result
suggested that the arrhythrmogenic effects seen were related
in stress during induction (Edling, 2006). A decrease in
to hypercapnia (Naganobu et al., 2001). The drop in body
 peripheral vascular resistance results in a lowered blood
 temperature in birds anaesthetised with halothane appears 
pressure (Coles, 1997). Doppler-derived blood flow meas-
 to be more significant than patients where other agents are
urements in cormrmon buzzards (Buteo buteo) have shown
used. A major problem with halothane is that cardiac and
isoflurane anaesthesia to reduce blood flow velocity as well
respiratory arrest are simultaneous with this agent (Coles,
as heart rate (Straub etal., 2003a); these changes are likely
1997).
also to be caused by other anaesthetic agents. Patient age
 If halothane is utilised, it is safer to increase the con-
and gender rmay affect arterial pressures in certain species
 centration of halothane gradually during induction, up to
(Ruiz-Feria et al., 2004). Isoflurane has been reported to
 3%. If 3-4% is used initially, apnoea may occur with a high
cause arrhythmias, for example second- and third-degree
concentration of anaesthetic agent in the posterior air sacs
 atrioventricular block, sinus arrest, T-wave depression and
(Coles, 1997]), with an associated risk of overdose. Halo-
atrial premature contraction (Aguilar et al., 1995)
thane undergoes partial (20%) hepatic metabolism, and is
Respiratory depression may still be seen with isoflu-
not recormended in patients with suspected hepatic dys-
rane, in part due to the muscle relaxation caused by this
function
agent (Straub et al., 2003a). PaCO2 increases with increas-
Isofturane is considered a safe anaesthetic in avian species
ing isoflurane concentrations, producing a respiratory acid-
and is currently the most commonly used agent in veteri-
osis (Ludders et al., 1989a). As with other agents, PPV is,
 nary practices. The MAC value for isoflurane in cockatoos
therefore, advisable to prevent hypercapnia (Forbes, 1999).
is 1.4 (Ludders and Mathews, 1996). The blood gas parti-
Induction with isoflurane occurs in l-2min when a
tion coefficient is 1.4l (Edling, 2006), and blood-brain
concentration of 3-5% is administered via a close-fitting
tissue coefficient l.7 (Franchetti and Kilde, 1978)
facemask. Recovery is similarly rapid, although it appears
 Induction and recovery are rapid due to this relative insol-
to be related to the period of anaesthesia, being slower in
ubility in plasma; alterations in the anaesthetic depth are
patients that have been anaesthetised for a long period of
also rapid (Abou-Madi, 2001).
time (Edling, 2005).
Isoflurane has several advantages over halothane. A sig-
 Sevoflurane has a lower blood gas partition coefficient
nificant benefit is that cardiac arrest does not occur for
(0.69) than isoflurane, resulting in lower blood solubility
several minutes after respiratory arrest with isoflurane,
(Edling, 2006). Sevoflurane is less potent than isoflurane,
allowing the anaesthetist to intervene. Myocardial effects
with an MAC for sevoflurane in chickens of 2-3%
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
(Naganobu et al., 2000). The blood-brain tissue coeffi-
avian anatormy allows the clinician to provide anaesthetic
      I  
gases either via the trachea or from the air sacs. Cannulation
result in shorter recovery time compared to isoflurane
of the air sacs will affect the normal respiratory physiol-
(Greenacre and Quandt, 1997). If a critical patient requires
ogy, and a minor increase in anaesthetic gas concentration
anaesthesia or a prolonged anaesthetic is envisaged, sevo-
may be required to maintain anaesthesia. However, the
flurane is considered a better option than other agents, as
direction of airflow does not adversely affect gas exchange
the recovery will be faster. The time to perching is
(Ludders et al., 1989a). Similarly, if endoscopy is being
quicker and the birds are less ataxic after sevoflurane
performed via a caudal air sac while the patient is anaes-
anaesthesia compared with isoflurane
thetised using an endotracheal tube, the anaesthetic gas
 Sevoflurane does not cause respiratory tract irritation
flow rate and concentration should be increased slightly
and mask induction is, therefore, less stressful than isoflu-
to account for gas leakage via the endoscopic access site.
4
rane and desflurane (Edling, 2006). A disadvantage is the
During anaesthesia, administration of volatile agents
higher current cost of sevoflurane over other agents.
will rapidly deepen the level of anaesthesia. If the plane of
Sevoflurane also depresses plasma ionised calcium levels
anaesthesia is too deep, lower the concentration of
[Edling, 2005; Stanford, 2003). A decrease in arterial blood
volatile agent and consider reversal of injectable agents.
4"
pressure was observed during one study using sevoflurane
anaesthesia in chickens, which was more significant dur-
ing controlled than spontaneous ventilation, probably due
Recovery
to hypercapnia occurring during spontaneous ventilation
(Naganobu et al., 2000; Naganobu et al., 2003).
Volatile anaesthetic agents are switched off and the patient
Desfurane has very low blood solubility, with a blood
is disconnected from the anaesthetic circuit while it is
gas partition coefficient of 0.42, but it is less potent than
flushed with fresh oxygen. The circuit is then recon-
the other agents, with a MAC of 6-8% (Edling, 2006).
nected to the bird to provide 100% oxygen during recov-
156
Tissue solubility is also low in desflurane, with a blood-brain
ery (Edling, 2006). The tape or bandage holding the
tissue coefficient of 1.3 (Franchetti and Kilde, 1978).
endotracheal tube in place is loosened to allow for rapid
These values produce an agent with a faster recovery time
 removal of the tube; the anaesthetist should hold the tube
than the other volatile agents, particularly after prolonged
 in place at this point.
anaesthesia (Edling, 2006). The main problem with des-
If volatile agents have been used alone for anaesthesia,
flurane is the pungent odour that precludes mask induc-
recovery should be rapid. If injectable anaesthetic agents
tion and this may limit its usefulness in avian anaesthesia.
have been administered, reversal agents should be given.
A specialised temperature-controlled pressurised vapor-
As the plane of anaesthesia lightens, the bird will have
iser is also required to use this agent. As with isoflurane,
muscle fasciculations; this may reduce the audibility of
some respiratory tract irritation occurs with desflurane,
heart sounds (Edling et al., 200l). Muscle tension then
which may result in some stress during induction. Due to
returns with spontaneous wing and leg movements. As
these issues, desflurane is not used for mask induction
jaw tone returns along with coughing and swallowing, the
(Eger, 1993)
endotracheal tube should be removed to prevent the bird
Nitrous oxide may be used to reduce the concentrations
from biting through it.
of other volatile agents required for anaesthesia, using a
 If possible, the bird should be restrained in a normal
maximum of 50% nitrous oxide (Korbel et al., 1994;
position during the recovery phase, using a towel to sup-
Korbel et al., 1997). It is not sufficiently potent to produce
port and restrain the bird gently in an upright position.
anaesthesia when used as the sole anaesthetic agent
Excess restraint will prohibit breathing movement and
(Edling, 2005). This agent depresses ventilation at surgical
may also lead to hyperthermia. Oxygen should be provided
anaesthetic levels (Ludders et al., 1989a), increasing PaCO2
via an open mask with the rubber diaphragm rermoved
and producing respiratory acidosis (Scheid and Piper,
held to the head after extubation until the bird can hold
1989). Nitrous oxide should be ceased 5-10min before the
itself upright. If anaesthesia has been brief, the patient
end of anaesthesia. Oxygen should be the sole carrier gas in
may be able to return directly to its original cage or car-
patients with respiratory disease (Coles, 1997).
rier, but a towel should be placed on the floor and high
perches removed until the patient has recovered suffi-
ciently to perch steadily.
Anaesthetic maintenance
During recovery, the bird's environment should be kept
quiet and slightly darkened to reduce stressful stimuli
After induction, most avian species can be intubated.
The bird should be fully recovered from anaesthesia within
Intubation allows the clinician to have more control over
a few minutes to 2 h, depending on the length of anaes-
the bird's respiratory system, with airway patency assured
thetic (Edling, 2006). This will depend on the patient's
and allowing PPV to be peformed. There is also less risk
condition, thelength of anaesthetic, the anaesthetic agents
of waste gas escape into the environment compared to
used and the procedure performed. If recovery is not
when using facemasks.
rapid, review the patient's status and provide supportive
 Intubation may not be performed if a short (less than
treatment as required.
10min) non-invasive procedure is planned; for other
Supplemental heating should be provided until the
 procedures it is a valuable technique. As discussed above,
patient is moving around normally. A pre-warmed
Avian anaesthesia
incubator or brooder with oxygen supplementation (see
respiration that is depresed during anaesthesia. As respi-
Fig. 9.5) and a padded floor are ideal for recovery after a
ratory depression is commmon when using injectable agents,
long procedure, as recovery may be more prolonged.
oxygen should always be supplemented when using these
drugs.
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
Anaesthesia in neonatal or paediatric
The anaesthetic protocol selected will depend on the rea-
patients
sons for anaesthesia. If a painful procedure is to be per-
formed, analgesia should be provided. Hypnotic agents
These patients require extra care when anaesthetised.
are useful to sedate patients, but are not good muscle
Although induction and recovery are usually rapid, careful
relaxants and, therefore, not so useful during surgery. As
monitoring is required to detect and correct problems
swiftly.
5
with other groups of animals, there is much interspecies
The glottis and trachea are soft and easily damaged, and
variation in response to anaesthetic agents. Individual
variation will also affect how the patient responds to var-
intubation and extubation should be performed carefully.
ious agents, likely due to variations in hepatic and plasma
Oxygen requirements are higher in these birds. Gas flow
enzymes affecting detoxication and excretion (Coles, 1997].
rates should, therefore, be two to three tirmes higher than
Pre-existing hepatic and renal disease will also affect drug
rates provided for adults to prevent hypoxia and avoid
carbon dioxide build-up.
metabolism.
Anaesthesia for short procedures in birds is usually
Cardiovascular effects during anaesthesia are rmore ser-
ious in younger birds than adults and careful monitoring is
1
achieved using volatile anaesthetic agents. The most com-
mon drug used is isofurane as induction and recovery are
essential to detect problems early. Haemorrhage may
rapid, and most of the agent is excreted unmetabolised via
result in tachycardia and hypotension.
the respiratory tract. In most species, a facemask can be
There is a high risk of hypoglycaemia in young patients.
157
used to deliver the anaesthetic gas, but a chamber is used
These birds should not be fasted, but the crop should be
to induce anaesthesia in very srmall birds that may be
emptied by aspiration just before induction. If anaesthesia
stressed by the restraint necessary for mask induction. It
is prolonged or the patient is not self-feeding soon after the
is useful to pre-oxygenate patients with 100% oxygen for
procedure, crop feeding should be performed to prevent
a few breaths, to counteract the transient apnoea that
hypoglycaermia. A maximum of 2h should pass between
may occur during induction. If isoflurane is used, the con-
feeds. Featherless chicks are prone to hypothermia and
centration of inspired anaesthetic agent is then turned on
require supplemental heating (Forbes and Altman, 1998).
at 3-5%. Most patients will be induced within 2min at
3% isoflurane, but a few require higher concentrations.
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
Lower concentrations of volatile anaesthetic should be
used in compromised patients, as they will be more sus-
ceptible to adverse effects. If sevoflurane is used, 4-5%
Due to the rapidity of change in anaesthetic depth with
should be adrministered to ill patients rather than the 8%
changing anaesthetic concentration or response to stimu-
used in *healthy' birds (Helmer, 2004).
lation in birds, it is irmperative to monitor the avian patient
closely throughout the anaesthetic period. The param-
Anaesthesia may be maintained via a facemask at 2-3%.
This is suitable if a very short procedure, for exarmple
eters listed in the sections below will allow the anaesthetist
to monitor the patient's progress under anaesthesia. The
phlebotormy, is to be performed. The bird should be intub-
use of equiprment such as electrocardiography, capnogra-
ated if it has recently eaten or a more prolonged proce-
dure is to be perforrmed, for exarmple radiography. IPPV
phy and Doppler flow monitoring improves patient
should be performed to ensure adequate ventilation.
monitoring. As in other species, deteriorating trends in
It may be appropriate to use injectable agents in con-
parameters indicate a deterioration of physiological state.
junction with volatile anaesthetics if a more prolonged
In birds this deterioration can rapidly be fatal and inter-
anaesthesia is anticipated, for example orthopaedic sur-
ventions must be performed without delay.
gery. This has the advantage of providing a more balanced
anaesthetic, lowering the concentration of volatile agents
Observations on the patient
required, and enabling the clinician to consider the add-
ition of an analgesic to the protocol if required. Injectable
Cardiovascular system
agents may be used as pre-medicants, for example mida-
zolam and butorphanol. Alternatively, injectables may be
The heart rate and rhythm should be monitored, using a
used to induce anaesthesia, for example ketamine with
larel u adoosoais ieaeydosao (suaed iarel u ro a
medetomidine or diazepam (Coles, 1997]. If combina-
patients, a peripheral puise can be palpated or rmonitored
tions are administered, the doses of individual drugs
using a Doppler flow probe. Suitable pulses palpable in
required to produce anaesthesia will be reduced.
most birds are the brachial artery in the axillary region or
After induction with injectable agents, anaesthesia is
the dorsal metatarsal artery over the tarsometatarsal bone.
'topped up' or maintained using volatile agents via mask
As respiratory moverments usually cease during air sac
or endotracheal tube. IPPV is again used to maintain
cannulation, anaesthesia monitoring in these patients is
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
predominantly based on cardiovascular assessment. Heart
web of the foot, the ‘toe pinch' reflex, produces a variable
rate and peripheral blood flow should be assessed (Edling,
response. In one study surgical anaesthesia was ascer-
2005). Capilary refill time should be less than I s. It can
tained by closed eyelids, mydriatic pupils, delayed pupil.
be assessed on non-pigmented skin on the feet, or on the
lary light reflex, slow moverment of the nictitating
basilic or ulnar veins at the medial elbow. Mucous merm-
 mermbrane across the cornea, relaxed muscles and absent
brane colour can be monitored in anaesthetised birds, but
pain reflexes (Korbel, 1993).
cannot be relied upon to assess peripheral oxygenation in
critical patients.
BOX 9.2 Reflex responses at a surgical
Respiratory system
plane of anaesthesia (Korbel, I993)
Ventilation can be assessed by monitoring respiratory rate,
e
th
depth and rhythm. These can be measured by directly
observing the patient or movements of the anaesthetic
Rights were not granted tn include this box in electronic media.
sa
reservoir bag. A bell stethoscope can be used to auscultate
Please refer to the printed publication.
moverments associated with respiration within the coelormic
cavity, or an oesophageal stethoscope can be placed in
larger birds. The respiratory rate is likely to slow during
anaesthesia, but should not be less than half the conscious
resting rate (Coles, 1997). It is not possible to ascertain
adequate ventilation via respiratory rate and tidal volurme,
and equipment (described below) should be used in con-
158
junction with these techniques.
 Respiratory rate and depth are also useful measures of
Temperature
anaesthetic depth (Edling, 2006), but may be difficult to
assess if PPV is being performed. The respiratory pattern
Thermoregulation is reduced in anaesthetised patients and
will be rapid and irregular at light planes of anaesthesia,
core body temperature should be monitored during anaes-
becoming slow andregular during surgical anaesthesia.
thesia. Animals suffering from hypothermia will addition-
The plane of anaesthesia is too deep if respiration
ally be more susceptible to cardiac instability, require less
becomes rapid, shallow or intermittent (Coles, 1997; Forbes
anaesthetic and have a more prolonged recovery (Edling,
and Altman, 1998). Respiratory depression, associated with
2005). It is, thus, vital to minimise heat loss during anaes-
A spioio se yns sip iao io suaee rasae
 thesia and provide supplemental heating to patients.
cause hypercapnia. Hypoxia affects different species to
Small probes attached to a digital thermormeter can be
different degrees; for example, birds that normally fly
used to record cloacal temperature (Coles, 1997). This will
high will be more adapted to hypoxia than lower-ranging
enable monitoring of the bird's core body temperature dur-
species (Dawson, 1975). Respiratory depression by anaes-
ing anaesthesia. The probe is carefully placed in the cloaca,
thetic drugs may be more concerning in small passerines
but readings may vary with body position and cloacal activ-
than larger species.
ity. Oesophageal thermistor probes are more accurate, with
the flexible probe inserted to the level of the heart (Edling.
Nervous system
2006). If the patient is too small or a suitable probe is
Various reflexes can be assessed to ascertain the plane or
unavailable, placing a thermometer between the patient and
heat pad will provide an estimate of the bird's temperature.
depth of anaesthesia. The depth of anaesthesia required
will depend on the procedure being performed. Obviously
A drop in body temperature of more than 5.5°C will
cause circulatory problems and a prolonged recovery time
a light plane will be sufficient for restraint to take a
blood sample, but a deeper plane is necessary to perform
(Forbes and Altman, 1998). Normal body temperature
should return rapidly after the end of anaesthesia, although
surgery. As with all anaesthetics, the anaesthetist should
supplemental heat is usually required.
monitor reflexes closely, as their absence may indicate a
life-threatening situation.
Reflexes are similar to other species, and include eye
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
reflexes, jaw tone, the pedal reflex, cloacal reflex and
muscle relaxation. There will be individual bird variation
An &MHz Doppier probe can be used to assess pulse rate
to stimulation of reflexes (Coles, 1997)
and rhythm in the brachial or dorsal metatarsal arteries.
The first reflex to be lost on anaesthetic induction is the
As the volume output from the Doppler is related to the
righting reflex. At a light-to-mediurm plane of anaesthesia,
strength of the pulse, this will effectively assess periph-
the response to stimulation of the cere and peri-cloacal
eral circulation and thence cardiac function.
skin will just be abolished. The cormeal reflex is a reliable
ECGs can be used, but many machines designed for
indicator of anaesthetic depth in birds and may become
larger animals will not record the high rates [up to 500 bpm)
sluggish, but should never be lost during anaesthesia
seen in avian patients. The Silogic EC-60@ (Silogic Inter-
(Forbes and Altman, 1998). Stimulating the interdigital
national Ltd, Surrey, UK) can be used in birds and will
Avian anaesthesia
Capnograph
Im/
Needle in
endotracheal
tube adapter
0.1 sec
5
Figure 9.13 · Schematic avian ECG (lead Il, I00mm/s,
I 0 mm/mV). (After Schoemaker and Zandvliet, 2005)
also record respiratory rate (Coles, 1997). ECGs are use-
1
ful to assess for arrhythmias, conduction disorders and
Figure 9.14 · Side stream sampling for capnography with min-
metabolic disorders (Rosenthal and Miller, 1997).
imal dead space.
1
 It can be difficult to connect ECG leads to avian skin,
although the use of alcohol or gel is helpful. ECG pads
can be attached to relatively featherless areas of skin, such
those receiving 100% inspired oxygen, which most patients
as the ventral propatagium or inguinal skin (see Fig. 9.8).
do during anaesthesia (Edling et al., 200l; Schmidt et al.,
159
The leads are connected as for other species, using the
1998). Oxygen saturation may be normal even in hyper-
wings and legs (Lumeij and Ritchie, 1994). Alternatively,
capnic animals (Eger, 1993). The partial pressure of arterial
an oesophageal ECG probe (Cardio Companion ECG
cxygen, PaOz, may be significantly affected by problems
Probe and Esophageal Lead, SurgiVet Inc, Waukesha, WI)
such as apnoea, ventilation-perfusion mismatch and
can be used in avian patients with an adaptor connecting
tracheal obstruction (Edling, 2005).
the leads to the oesophageal probe (Edling, 2006).
Blood gas analysis, including assessment of arterial oxy-
The ECG produced is different to other species and
gen and carbon dioxide, is the gold standard for assess-
between avian species (Fig. 9.13) (Casares et al., 2000;
ment of respiratory function during anaesthesia. However,
Lopez Murcia et al., 1995; Lumeij and Ritchie, 1994; Uzun
this is usually impractical owing to technical problems
et al., 2004). A sinus rhythm is normal in birds. Gender
with arterial blood sampling, small patient size prohibiting
differences in the ECG may be found (Lopez Murcia
repeat sampling or financial considerations.
et al., 1995; Rodriguez et al., 2004). Reference ranges
Capnography is commonly used to assess the end-tidal
exist for a few species, but will vary depending on posi-
carbon dioxide (PerCOz) of the anaesthetised patient.
tioning, whether the patient is conscious or anaesthetised,
Capnograph machines are becoming more widely avail-
and between anaesthetic protocols (Casares et al., 1999;
able in veterinary practices and their use is discussed in
Lumeij and Stokhof, 1985; Nap et al., 1992; Schoemaker
the introductory chapter. Capnographs have been trialled
and Zandvliet, 2005).
in various avian species (Desmarchelier et al., 2007; Edling
If the ECG is used purely for anaesthesia monitoring,
et al., 2001). It is important to avoid introducing extra
two leads may be used to the sternum across the cardiac
dead space to the anaesthetic circuit in small animals and
axis; one lead is placed cranially and pararmedially on the
to avoid extra resistance within the circuit. Capnographs
right, with the other caudal and slightly to the left (Pees
that sample from the side of the circuit are, therefore,
et al., 2006).
preferable to those which sarmple within the strearm of gases.
Direct arterial blood pressure measurement is difficult
The capnograph can be attached to the endotracheal tube
in birds due to their small size. However, indirect meas-
adapter via an 18-gauge needle, with the bevel towards
urements can be obtained by using inflatable cuffs, a
the patient (Fig. 9.i4). Avoid obstructing the airway with
Doppler blood pressure monitor and a sphygomomanome-
the needle (Edling, 2006).
ter (Lichtenberger, 2005).
Capnography can be used to assess ventilation in birds
A puise oximeter can be used to monitor arterial oxygen
as an indirect measure of arterial carbon dioxide. PerCO2
correlates reasonably well with PaCO2. However, the
birds (Schmidt et al., 1998). Oximeters can be used
anatomy and physiology of the avian lungs create an
to monitor trends during anaesthesia. The level should
efficient cross-current exchange system, which produces
ideally be more than 90%. Levels below 80% are danger-
a higher concentration of carbon dioxide in expired gases
ous for the patient (Coles, 1997).
[end-tidal partial pressure of carbon dioxide, PeTCO2} than
Arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaOz) and oxygen
in the arteries (arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide,
saturation of haemoglobin do not appear to be sensitive
PaCO) (Brackenbury, 1987; Davies and Dutton, 1975).
indicators of the ventilatory status in birds, at least not in
A study in African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus) showed
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
that PerCOz overestimated PaCOz by approximately
Heating
5 mmHg (Edling et al., 2001)
In order to maintain a normal acid-base balance in
As anaesthetics reduce the patient's thermal homeostatic
anaesthetised birds, the recommendation is to perform
mechanisms, supplemental heating should be provided.
PPV to produce PeTCOz measurements between 35 and
This may be in the form of insulation to prevent heatloss,
45 mm Hg (Desmarchelier et al., 2007; Edling, 2001).
such as towels, blankets or bubble-wrap. It is usually nec-
Respiratory monitors can be used, but care should be
essary also to have a heat source by the patient, for exarmple
taken not to introduce extra resistance or dead space to
warm air blanket [for example, the Bair Hugger@, Arizant
the anaesthetic circuit. For example, the Imp respiratory
Inc, Eden Prairie, MN), hot water bottle, circulating
monitor (IMP Electronics, Oxford Medical Systems, UK)
water blanket, heated surgery table, electric heat pad or
heat lamp. Forced warm air blankets are particularly
$
Australia} may be used in birds (Coles, 1997)
effective at minimising heat loss (Edling, 2006). The
patient's eyes should be protected from drying by warm
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
1
air devices with lubrication, for example liquid paraffin. It
CARE
is important to avoid overheating and contact burns, and a
towel should be placed between the heat source and
Fasting
patient, particularly over featherless areas. Radiant heat
sources appear to be the most effective way of providing
5
heat (Edling, 2005). Background heating of the room is
The risks associated with not fasting a bird relate to regurgi-
useful. It is useful to pre-warm an incubator (see Figs 9.5
tation during anaesthesia, with the possibility of acute respi-
and 9.6) ready for recovery post-anaesthesia.
ratory obstruction and death or of inhalation pneumonia.
Evaporation from mucous membranes is a significant
Due to the high avian metabolisrn, the almost continuous
160
source of heat loss in anaesthetised patients. If posible,
requirement for energy supply, poor hepatic glycogen storage
anaesthetic gases should be warmed and humidified (Korbel.
and the probability of rmalnutrition on presentation, birds
 1993). Fluids should also be warmed before administration.
should notbe fasted forlong peridsbefore anaesthesia The
As discussed above, the patient's body termperature
crop should be palpated before anaesthesia in all patients to
should be monitored closely during the procedure.
check for food or liquid residues. If material is present
Hypothermia is more common, but hyperthermia may
within the crop, it can be aspirated before induction of
also occur if excessive attempts at supplementing heat are
anaesthesia (Edling, 2006). After induction, the head should
employed.
be raised above the level of the crop to prevent regurgitation.
 Birds of prey eat once or twice daily and should be fasted
for 12h to allow the previous meal to be digested and a cast
Fluids
produced before induction of anaesthesia. Alter-natively,
food can be fed without casting material (for example,
Fluids should be administered, preferably intravenously,
meat without fur/feathers and bones) on the previous day.
during anaesthetics longer than 20 min. In most patients,
Most granivorous or omnivorous species eat throughout the
a bolus of fluids of 10-20 ml/kg is sufficient to replace
day and are more likely to become hypoglycaemic if fasted.
fluid lost during anaesthesia and to speed recovery (Forbes
Birds between 300 g and 1 kg can be fasted for up to 6h and
and Altman, 1998). During more prolonged anaesthetics
those between 100g and 300g for 3 or 4h. Birds weighing
or those in critical patients, intravenous access with a con-
less than 100g should never be fasted (Coles, 1997}
tinuous rate infusion is more appropriate.
 It is particularly irmportant to maintain blood pressure
if anaesthetic agents are renally excreted. Routinely,
Do not fast neonates or birds that weigh less than
Hartmann's solution or lactated Ringer's is given. If hypo-
I00 g before anaesthesia.
glycaermia is considered a risk, glucose may be added to
The total period without food includes the planned
the crystalloids; this also assists hepatic detoxification of
drugs (Coles, 1997). The optimum route for fluid admin-
pre-anaesthetic fasting and the post-anaesthetic
period before the patient is eating again. Assist
istration is intravenous or intraosseous. Although absorp-
feeding may be required in birds that do not begin
tion is slower, subcutaneous fluids are easier to administer.
Fluids should be warmed to body temperature prior to
 eating soon after anaesthesia.
 administration, to reduce the risk of hypothermia.
Oxygen
Analgesia
Birds with respiratory compromise or anaemia will bene-
 Analgesia is important for many procedures, and the lack of
fit from supplemental oxygen before and after anaesthe-
provision of appropriate analgesia is likely to affect not only
sia. Anaesthesia will depress the respiratory system and
the avian patient's irmrmediate condition, but also its recov-
all anaesthetised patients should be provided with oxygen
ery. It may be difficult to ascertain whether a bird is affected
via facemask, endotracheal tube or air sac cannula.
by pain, as signs rmay be subtle. Behaviours associated with
Avian anaesthesia
pain in birds depend on the individual bird, and the loca-
Lidocaine [lignocaine} can be used in birds, although
tion and type of pain. The bird may show specific behav-
for smaller patients it is safer to use a less concentrated
iours, such as lameness, guarding a painful area or
solution, for example by diluting a 2% solution to 0.2%
vocalisation; alternatively it may show more general abnor-
solution. The addition of adrenaline (epinephrine) will
malities in behaviour, for example inactivity, lack of groom-
reduce the rate of absorption, but some texts recommend
ing or reduced appetite (Paul-Murphy, 2006). If a bird has
use of preparations that do not contain adrenaline (epi-
a condition that causes pain in other species or will undergo
nephrine) (Paul-Murphy, 2006). The toxic dose of lido-
-oud on Anp [eua ue sey uoagms Areuaan aui Aaams
caine [lignocaine} in birds is around 4 mg/kg (Huckabee,
vide analgesia. Intra-operative analgesia may also reduce
2000; Paul-Murphy and Ludders, 2001).
the doses of anaesthetic agents required, reducing the side
Bupivacaine has been safely used at l mg/kg in birds
effects and risks associated with anaesthesia.
(Paul-Murphy, 2006). Local anaesthetics may also be
As with other species, pre-emptive analgesia appears to
injected into joints to provide local analgesia. One study
5
reduce pain (Woolf, 1994; Woolf and Chong, 1993).
reports the use of intra-articular bupivacaine in birds with
Minimising environmental stressors can also reduce pain
experimentally induced arthritis (Hocking et al., 1997).
in avian patients (Paul-Murphy, 2006). Certain anaes-
Procaine has a narrow safety margin, so should be avoided
thetic agents will have analgesic properties, such as alpha.
in small birds and diluted for larger birds (Coles, 1997).
adrenergic agonists and ketamine. If alpha-adrenergic agents
are reversed, their analgesic properties are also lost. If
st
Opioids
anaesthetics without analgesic effects are used, the anal-
D
gesic agents listed below should be employed. In fact,
 Opioid agents may be used as part of the anaesthetic pro-
multimodal analgesia is preferable; using lower doses of
tocol to reduce the doses of other agents required, and
more than one agent to reduce possible side effects asso-
 ciated with individual agents.
most additionally provide good analgesia. The distribution
and function of opioid receptors vary between species,
161
producing different susceptibilities to different opioids.
Local anaesthetics
For example, pigeons have been shown to have high pro-
Local anaesthetics may be used in birds to provide anal-
portions (76%) of kappa [k) opioid receptors in their fore-
gesia, although rarely as the sole agent for a procedure as
brain [Mansour et al., 1988). Species differences mean that
conscious restraint and handling of the patient are likely
different agents will produce differing effects on receptors.
to cause stress (Edling, 2006). These drugs block the trans-
For example, the K agonist butorphanol had an isoflurane-
mission of noxious impulses, producing regional anaesthe-
sparing effect in cockatoos (Cacatua spp.] and African grey
sia and analgesia (Paul-Murphy, 2006). As with other
parrots (Psittacus erithacus), but not in Amazon parrots
analgesics, administration of local anaesthetics pre-emp-
(Amazona spp.) (Curro, 1993; Curro et al., 1994).
tively produces much more effective analgesia.
Dose rates necessary to provide analgesia may also vary
 These agents have long been associated with toxicities
between avian species (Paul-Murphy et al., 1999). Other
pue shuaned les ul Asea si aeesopiaao se 'sainads ueiae u
issues to address are that plasma levels necessary for anal-
systermic uptake appears to be rapid. Signs of toxicity include
gesia in other species may not coincide with those
tremors, ataxia, recumbency, seizures, stupor and cardio-
required in avians and that plasma halflife of drugs may
vascular effects, including cardiac arrest and death (Paul-
be much shorter in birds. The high doses required to pro-
Murphy, 2006). However, local anaesthetics can be safely
ais aiaaas annpod Au siue asan ui eisaelee an
used if the dose is calculated based on an accurate body
effects, for exarmple fentanyl at analgesic doses produced
weight. It may be useful to dilute the solution. It is also help-
hyperactivity in cockatoos (Paul-Murphy and Ludders,
ful to calculate the maximum safe dose and only draw up
2001). Side effects comrmonly seen with opioid use include
this volume before administration. The duration of action
cardio-respiratory depression, for example reduction in heart
 of local anaesthetics is not known in most avian species.
rate and tidal volume (Paul-Murphy, 2006). Butorphanol
adrministered before anaesthesia with sevoflurane did not
cause significant changes in anaesthetic and cardiopul-
 Overdosage of local anaesthetic is easy and can be fatal.
monary pararmeters in a study in Hispanioloan Amazon
Calculate the dose based on an accurate body weight.
parrots (Amazona ventralis) (Klaphake et al., 2006)
The toxic dose of lidocaine (lignocaine) in birds is
approximately 4mg/kg.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
NSAIDs can be utitilised as anti-inflammatories and anal-
Local anaesthetics are cormrmonly administered topically.
gesics in avians. The roles of prostaglandins in inflamma-
 Benzocaine has been used for minor wound repair (Clubb,
tion and pain physiology are similar in birds to those in
1998). Bupivacaine provided 4h of analgesia in chickens
other species (Nichol et al., 1992). However, the relative
after beak trimming (Glatz et al., 1992). Creams and oint-
expression of cyclocxygenase-1 (COX-1) and COX-2
ments containing local anaesthetics pose two problems,
enzymes requires further elucidation. Pre-emptive admin-
namely those of dose calculation and of plumage damage,
istration of NSAIDs reduces peripheral sensitisation to
and are not recommended in avian species.
noxious stimuli (Edling, 2005)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 9.7: Analgesics for avian species
DRUG
SPECIES
DOSE (mg/lkg)
ROUTE
DOSING
 COMMENT
INTERVAL
(hours)
Local andesthetics:
Bupivacaine
Studies in ducks
212.15
SC, intra-articular,
Not known (4-6h
Dilute I:10 or
and chickens
topical IM, SC
in mammals)6
more before
Lidocaine
AIl
1.03.0 1.10,.18
(90-200 min in 
administrationl6
(lignocaine)
mammals)
$
F
Steroids:
Anti-inflammatory,
shock, trauma
Dexamethasone
Most species
0.2-4.0 2.10.20
IM, IV
12-24
 May affect imm-
une competency
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs:
Carprofen
AlI
2.04.0 5.7,10.14.18
PO, IM, SC, IV
8-12
Doses <10 mg/kg
reported
Flunixin
All
0.5 9
IM
24
Ensure hydrated -
162
potential
nephrotoxicity
Ketoprofen
All
2.0 4.8.12,18
PO, SC, IM
8-247
Meloxicam
Psittacines, raptors
0.10.2 4.18,19
PO, IM
12-24
Piroxicam
Most
0.5 7.18
PO, IM PO
12
Chronic pain, e.g.
osteoarthritis
Opioids:
Buprenorphine
Most species
0.01-0.0511
IM
8
Mixed agonist-
antagonist
Butorphanol
Most species
0.5-0.75 1.17
IM, IV
12
Mixed agonist-
antagonist,
primary kappa
agonist action
Fentanyl
Cockatoos
0.218
SC
May have excite-
ment phase
Morphine
Appears ineffec-
tive as analgesic
in many avian
species
Key: IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, PO = oral, SC = subcutaneous
(s007 )  (100z u), (2007 ed0) (1007 s0), (s007.euede) (6661 neg) (1007 pe-ng)
 (Graham et al., 2001); * (Heard, 1997); 10 (Huckabee, 2000);  (Jenkins, 1993); 12 (Machin and Livingston, 2001); 13 (Malley, 1994);
pue Aydanw-ned) g (6661 “eeAydanw-ned)  :(900z Xyd.inw-ned) 9,:(100z uon pue Ayemw) s, (8661 ld pue a.oow) 
Ludders, 2001); 1 (Stanford, 2002); 20 (Tully, 2000)
A few studies have shown NSAIDs to be effective in
treatment of pain in several avian species (Danbury et al.,
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES/DRUGS
2000; Machin et al., 200l; McGeown et al., 1999). For
example, ketoprofen at 5 mg/kg was shown to reduce the
The section above discusses some problems that may arise
response to noxious stimuli in Mallard ducks (Anas
during anaesthesia in avian species and how to avoid
platyrhynchos]anaesthetised with isoflurane [Machin
them. Careful patient preparation and monitoring during
and Livingston, 2002). However, litle is known about
anaesthesia will greatly reduce the incidence of problerms
with avian anaesthesia. This section will focus on crises
lished doses are empirical.
that may arise and how to manage them.
Avian anaesthesia
Many of the procedures for which avian species require
for a short period prior to anaesthesia to allow the crop to
anaesthesia are non-invasive, for exarmple phlebotomy
empty. The crop should be palpated before induction to
 and radiography. If the patient is not responding well
assess for the presence of ingesta. If fluid is present, it is
under anaesthesia in these situations, the clinician should
advisable to aspirate crop contents as fluid is likely to be
be prepared to postpone the procedures and recover the
regurgitated during anaesthesia.Endotracheal intubation
patient. Unless a flock problem is suspected and the
owner is prepared for the individual bird to be sacrificed
protect the airway should regurgitation occur. The patient
there is no point in making a clinical diagnosis if the
should be positioned so that the neck is elevated, to reduce
patient dies during the investigations.
the risk of regurgitation during anaesthesia, and the beak
is pointing down, to allow drainage should any regurgita-
Preparation before induction
tion occur.
If regurgitation occurs, suction and swabs can be used
As with other species, preparation of drugs and equipment
to clear the oral cavity and airway. If the patient is not
intubated, an endotracheal tube should be placed. If aspi-
before induction will minimise the period for which the
ration is suspected, broad-spectrum antibiotics should
animal rermains under anaesthesia. Preparation is vital as,
the longer the patient is anaesthetised, the more likely
be initiated as pneumonia is likely to ensue. The patient
should be closely monitored for signs of respiratory disease
problems will occur. A ‘crash kit' (see Fig. l.8) should
in the post-operative period, further medication adminis-
always be on hand during anaesthesia, stocked with appro-
priate endotracheal tubes, intravenous catheters and
tered as appropriate if signs develop and a guarded progno-
emergency drugs. It is wise to check before each anaes-
sis given.
1
thetic that the kit contains equipment likely to be used,
for example an appropriately sized endotracheal tube for
Respiratory problems
the patient. This will minimise the time before emergency
163
As discussed above, positioning during anaesthesia is
treatrment can be initiated, irmproving the patient's chances
of recovery.
important. Dorsal recumbency should be avoided if pos-
sible due to the compression of the caudal thoracic and
Time is of the essence when dealing with avian anaes-
abdominal air sacs by the abdorminal viscera, reducing
thetic emergencies, as respiratory arrest is often rapidly
followed by cardiac arrest. The patient will have a greater
their effective volume. Although gas exchange within the
chance of survival if emergency equipment and drugs are
lungs will not be affected, the bellow movements of air
caused by the air sacs will be severely limited. Ventilation
close at hand should the need arise. If a patient is unwell
of birds in ventral recumbency is also abnormal, as sternal
prior to anaesthesia, or a major procedure is to be per-
 movements are restricted.
formed, it is advisable to calculate emergency drug doses
IPPV should thus be perforrmed on patients in dorsal
beforehand. Doses for emergency drugs can even be
and ventral recumbency to rmaintain adequate ventilation
drawn into syringes before anaesthesia, in readiness for
potential problems [and discarded after the procedure if
(Edling, 2005, 2006). Lateral recumbency is preferable to
sternal recumbency. The wings should not be stretched
not required). During long procedures, it is advisable to
excessively, as brachial plexus nerve damage may result
have access to the cardiovascular system, and an intra-
and tight restraint may limit respiratory moverments (Coles,
venous or intraosseous catheter should be placed after
1997).
induction. This will allow provision of fluids during the
 Most anaesthetics will produce some respiratory depres-
procedure and immediate access to the circulation if
sion, but if the respiratory rate or depth is significantly
required.
reduced, action should be taken. This may be due to an
overdose of anaesthetic. Respiratory depression rmay also
Problems encountered in avian
cause hypercapnia; capnography can be used to detect this.
If prolonged respiratory depression occurs, the concentra-
anaesthesia
tion of volatile agent should be reduced or switched
off the oxygen flow rate increased and PPV performed
The most commonly encountered problems in anaesthesia
to wash out anaesthetic and carbon dioxide from the
of avian patients are apnoea, hypoventilation, hypother-
air sacs.
mia and regurgitation (Edling, 2006). Prevention of prob-
Unless PPV is used to counteract respiratory depres-
lems is obviously better than treatment. Careful assessment
sion during anaesthesia, the PaCOz will rise, potentially
and stabilisation of the patient, selection of anaesthetic
fatally (Marley and Payne, 1964). High gas flow rates will
protocol and attentive monitoring of the patient will
help rermove waste gases, but this may not be sufficient if
reduce the likelihood of these problems occurring.
the patient is unable to eliminate carbon dioxide effi-
ciently, for example with a reduced respiratory rate. The
Regurgitation
hypercapnia will produce respiratory acidosis, myocardial
depression and hypotension. Elevated PaCOz also predis-
This may occur at any point during the anaesthetic.
 poses the heart to atrial and ventricular fibrillation, and
However, considerations before and at the onset of anaes-
cardiac failure [Coles, 1997).
thesia should reduce the risk of this happening. As
During anaesthetic induction, periods of apnoea and
discussed above, birds larger than 100g are usually fasted
bradycardia may occur as the physiological ^dive response'.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
This is particularly comrmon with mask induction in water-
Cardiac arrest often follows respiratory arrest. Therefore,
fowl, and the reader is referred to other texts for anaes-
a rapid response is vital if apnoea is detected and cardio-
thetic peculiarities with these species (Beynon et al., 1996)
vascular parameters should be closely monitored during
If the patient becomes apnoeic during mask induction,
apnoea. With most avian anaesthetics, there is a time lag
the mask should be removed and oxygen provided via an
after respiratory arrest before cardiac arrest. However,
open mask (avoiding stimulation of the beak and nares which
this may not be seen with halothane anaesthesia.
elicits the response) until respiration resumes (Edling,
Airway obstruction is common when birds are anaes-
2006)
thetised for prolonged periods, as anaesthetic gases dehy-
There are several reasons why respiratory arrest rmay
drate airway secretions and respiratory depression means
occur during avian anaesthesia, including hypercapnia, air-
that secretions are not mobilised; airway secretions may
way obstruction, primary cardiac arrest and the end-point
then obstruct the respiratory tract or endotracheal tube.
4
of other respiratory problems. However, the most com-
Small birds are especially at risk due to the narrow diam-
mon cause is an anaesthetic overdose (Coles, 1997)
eter of their airways and endotracheal tubes used. As air-
Close patient monitoring should identify early signs of
way occlusion occurs, the expiratory phase of respiration
patient compromise and allow correction of problems
is prolonged (Ludders and Mathews, 1996]. Secretions
4"
before apnoea occurs. However, if the patient becomes
 are less likely to obstruct the airway if PPV is performed,
apnoeic, rapid assessment of the anaesthetic equipment
as this assists in moving secretions so they do not build up
and response is imperative. As with respiratory depression,
(Edling, 2006),
the anaesthetic agent should be switched off in the case of
 Signs seen may include an increase in respiratory move-
volatile agents or reversed in the case of injectables. If the
ments or noises, such as clicking, gurgling or squeaking.
patient is not already intubated this should be performed,
Cyanosis is rare in birds, but if seen carries a poor progno-
if possible, and PPV commenced. If intubation is not pos-
sis (Coles, 1997).
sible, for exarmple if the patient is too small, PPV can still
If the bird is intubated, remove the endotracheal tube
64
 be performed via a close-fitting facemask.
and replace it with an unobstructed one [or clean the
During PPV care should be taken not to overinflate as
 blocked tube before replacement). Placement of an air sac
this may cause damage to the delicate airways. Over-
cannula is another option for administration of gases to the
ventilation may also wash out carbon dioxide, inhibiting
respiratory tract. This is particularly useful where intuba-
the chemoreceptors needed to stirmulate respiration
tion is not possible or if lower airway obstruction is pres-
(Coles, 1997). If an oxygen supply is not available, it is
ent. Check the oropharynx for any other secretions that
still prudent to intubate and provide PPV using room air,
may be inhaled, using suction or cotton buds to remove
for example using an Ambu-bag or resuscitator (see Fig.
them.
1.12). If mechanical ventilation is not possible, movement
 Atropine is not routinely used in avian anaesthesia. Its
of the wings and keel may stimulate respiration.
usefulness for reducing respiratory secretions should be
Equipment should be checked for abnormalities, such
balanced against the increase in viscosity of salivary, trach-
as an obvious obstruction in the circuit. The patient
eal and bronchial secretions that are produced, which will
should be assessed for other responses, such as heart
increase the risk of airway obstruction (Edling, 2006).
rate, reflexes and spontaneous respiratory movements. If
spontaneous respiration does not commence within 2 or
3 min, doxapram can be given to stimulate respiration.
This acts directly on respiratory centres in the medulla,
stimulating ventilation (Edling, 2006). This can be admin-
istered intravenously, intramuscularly, intratracheally or
directly on to mucous membranes in the oral cavity. As
the duration of action is short, the dose may need to be
repeated.
Apnoea, ventilation-perfusion mismatch and tracheal
obstructions will affect the partial pressure of arterial oxy-
gen, even when 100% oxygen is administered to patients.
As arterial blood gas analysis is not usually an option and
pulse oximetry is unreliable in birds, PerCO should be
closely monitored as an indication of ventilation (Schmidt
et al., 1998).
Periods of apnoea can rapidly cause serious metabolic
derangements in avian patients. Their small FRC means
that gas exchange will not occur without sufficient airflow
through the lungs. Normal maintenance of the acid-base
 s oe  se a  a
apnoea (Edling, 2006). IPPV throughout anaesthesia will
Figure 9.15 · Tape wrapped around the endotracheal tube and
reduce this problem by ensuring adequate ventilation of
beak will hold the tube in place, as in this Harris' hawk (Parabuteo
the respiratory tract during the procedure.
unicinctus).
Avian anaesthesia
Atropine may also inhibit PaCOz chemoreceptors, and
using a sterile gloved finger or sterile cotton bud via a
may lead to respiratory depression (Coles, 1997].
coelomic incision, but is rarely successful (Coles, 1997)
Cardiovascular problems
 Always have an ermergency or 'crash' kit on hand
when anaesthetising birds.
Most anaesthetics reduce blood pressure [Coles, 1997). If
 Ensure it is kept well stocked.
a drop in blood pressure is detected, a bolus of fluids
should be administered. Initially crystalloids may be used,
Calculate drug doses for patients beforehand.
but if there is no response or the hypotension is severe,
colloids may be more appropriate. The blood pressure
Hypothermia
should, therefore, be monitored during anaesthesia, usu
ally via an indirect method.
As with other animals, anaesthetised birds lose their ther-
 Hypercapnia is the most likely cause of cardiac failure
moregulatory abilities, particularly small patients with
during avian anaesthesia. Cardiac failure is often multi-
a large surface area to volume ratio. Dry anaesthetic
factorial, and other factors include hypoxia, anaesthetic
gases and surgical skin preparations increase heat loss.
agent, dehydration, hypothermia and poor positioning
Supplermental heating should, therefore, be used to avoid
(Coles, 1997].
hypothermia in anaesthetised birds. Hypothermia will
 In most cases, asystole is preceded by bradycardia. If
bradycardia is noted, the concentration of volatile anaes-
Table 9.8: Approach to avian anaesthetic emergencies
thetic agent should be lowered and the parasympathetic
agent atropine may be administered to correct this
CHECK
TECHNIQUE
(Edling, 2006). Cardiac arrest may rapidly follow respira-
165
tory arrest during avian anaesthetics, particularly if an
Airway
Intubate or cannulate air sac
agent such as halothane is used when respiratory and car-
diac arrest occur simultaneously.
Breathing
Provide intermittent positive pressure
 If asystole occurs, anaesthetic agents should be turned
off and reversal agents administered for injectable anaes-
ventilation (manual or mechanical
ventilator) - preferably via endotra-
thetics. Airway patency should be checked and 100% oxy-
cheal tube or air sac cannula,but
gen administered via IPPV. Adrenaline (epinephrine) can be
 possible via close-fitting facemask
administered intravenously or intratracheally. Intravenous
lidocaine (lignocaine) may also be useful. Drugs adminis-
Circulation
Obtain intravenous or intraosseous access
tered intravenously should be followed by a bolus of flu-
ids to assist their passage to the heart and also to increase
10 ml/kg bolus of Hartmann's
blood pressure. If an intravenous catheter has not been
External cardiac compression not usu-
ally effective; internal cardiac massage
previously placed, venous access is likely to be extremely
difficult if not impossible in the collapsed circulation.
possible (often unsuccessful)
Intracardiac injection can be attempted, but is difficult
due to the protection of the heart within the rib cage and
Drugs
SeeTable9.9
stermurm. External cardiac massage can be attempted, but is
sirmilarly difficult. Intermal cardiac massage can be perforrmed
(Adapted from Edling, 2005)
Table 9.9: Emergency drugs in birds
DRUG
DOSE
ROUTE
COMMENT
Adrenaline
0.5-1.0 ml/kg l.4
Iv (c), Im, Io, It
Treatment of cardiac arrest. (Can dilute
(epinephrine)(1:1000)
with Hartmann's to calculate dose)
Atropine
0.2-0.5 mg/kg 2.4
Iv, Im, Io, IP
Treatment of supraventricular bradycardia; CPR
Diazepam
0.5-1.0mg/kg 3
IM, IV
Seizures. Repeat until response seen
Doxapram
 5-20 mg/kg 1 5 
IV, IM, IO, IT, Top
Respiratory depression or arrest
Key: CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, IC = intracardiac, IM = intramuscular, IO = intraosseous, IT = intratracheal,
IV = intravenous, Top = topically
I(Carpenter, 2005); 2 (Redig, 1998); 3(Rupiper and Ehrenberg, 1994); 4 (Rupley, 1997); 5 (Huckabee, 2000)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
reduce metabolism of anaesthetic agents and other drugs
Bottje, W. G., K. R. Holmes, H. L. Neldon et al. I989. Relationships
administered to the patient, and will depress the
between renal hemodynarmics and plasma levels of arginine
myocardium, resulting in cardiac instability (Edling, 2006).
vasotocin and mesotocin during hemorrhage in the domestic
Hypothermic animals require more energy reserves to
fowl [Gallus domesticus]. Comp Biochem Physiol 92A[3]:
423-427.
generate heat during recovery. At the very least hypother-
Bowles, H. L. 2006. Evaluating and treating the reproductive system.
mia will lead to a prolonged recovery; a drop in core tem-
In: G. J. Harrison and T. L. Lightfoot [eds.)] Clinical Avian 
perature of 5°C may be fatal (Coles, 1997).
Medicine No. I. pp. 519-539. Spix Publishing, Paln Beach,
Florida.
Dehydration
Brackenbury, J. H. 1987. Ventilation of the lung-air sac system. In: T.
J. Sellar (ed.) Bird Respiration No. I. pp. 39-71. CRC Press,
This may result from prolonged anaesthesia, as this may
Boca Raton, FL
allow fluids to be lost from the air sacs. This is particularly
Campbell, T. W. 1988. Avian Haematology and Cytology pp. 3-17.
serious in patients that are already dehydrated. The
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa.
reduction in circulating blood volume will produce a
Campbell, V. I., K. J. Drobatz, and S. Z. Perkowski. 2003.
saop Ayaay ul eiqeaky pue euaxoky aneadonsod
undergoing routine ovariohysterectomy or castration and
perfusion. Anaerobic respiration may result in metabolic
receiving butorphanol or hydromorphone for analgesia. J Am
acidosis (Coles, 1997).
Vet Med Assoc 222: 330-336.
Canny, C. 1998. Gross anatomy and imaging of the avian and
Ocular damage
reptilian urinary system. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 7:
72-80.
The eyes may become dry or be traurmatised unless they
Carpenter, J. W. 2005. Exotic Animal Fortmulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier,
are protected during anaesthesia. Lubricants are applied
St Louis, Missouri.
after induction and care taken not to place the eye
Casares, M., F. Enders, and J. A. Montaya. I999.
166
Electrocardiography in some macaw species [genus
directly on to a hard or abrasive surface.
Atodorhynchus and Ara). Proc Sth European AAV meeting,
Pisa: 154-163.
REFERENCES
Casares, M., F. Enders, and J. A. Montova. 2000. Comparative
electrocardiography in four species of macaws [genera
Anodorhynchus and Ara). J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
Abou-Madi, N. 2001. Avian anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am: Exotic
47(5): 277-281
Anim Pract 4: 147-167.
Casotti, G., K. K. Lindberg, and E. J. Braum. 2000. Functional
Aguilar, R. F., V. E. Smith, P Ogbum et al. 1995. Arrhythmias
morphology of the avian medullary cone. Am J Physiol Reg
associated with isoflurane anaesthesia in bald eagles [Haliaeetus
Integ Comp Physiol 279: R1722-R1730.
letcocephalus). J Zoo Wildl Med 26: 508-516.
Chandra, M., B. Singh, P. P. Gupta et al. 1985. Clinicopathological,
Akester, A. R. I97l. The blood vascular system. In: D. J. Bell and
hematological, and biochemical studies in some outbreaks of
B. M. Freeman [eds.) Physiology and Biochemistry of the
nephritis in poultry. Avian Dis 29: 590-600.
Domestic Fowl. Vol 2. pp. 783-837. Academic Press, London.
Chitty, J. R. 2005. Basic techniques. In: N. Harcourt-Brown and J.
Akester, A. R. I984. The cardliovascular system. In: B. M. Freerman
R.Chitty (eds.) Maual of Psittacine Birds. Znd edn. pp.
[ed.) Physiology and Biochemistry of the Domestic Fowl No. 5.
50-S9. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
pp. 172-257. Academic Press, London.
Clubb, S. L. 1998. Round table discussion: Pain management in
Altman, R. B. I980. Avian Anaesthesia. Compend Contin Vet Educ
clinical practice. J Avian Med Surg 12[4): 276-278.
2: 3842.
Coles, B. H. 1997. Avian Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. Blackwell
Atalan, G., M. Uzum, I. Demirkan et al. 2002. Effect of
Science Ltd., London
medetomidine-butorphanol-ketamine anaesthesia and
Coles, B. H. 2001. Prescribing for exotic birds. In: Y. Bishop [ed.)
atipamezole on heart and respiratory rate and cloacal
The Veterinary Formulary. 5th edn. pp. 99-105.
termperature of domestic pigeons. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol
Pharmaceutical Press, London.
Clin Med 49[6): 281-285.
Cooper, J. E. 1978. Veterinary Aspects of Captive Birds of Prey
Austic, R. E., and R. K. Cole. I972. Impaired renal clearance of uric
Standfast Press, Saul, Gloucestershire.
acid in chickens having hyperuricemia and articular gout. Am J
Cooper, J. E. 1983. In: Sonderdruk aus Verhandlumgs Bericht des 26
Physiol 223: 525-530.
lap uaunyueyg ap aqn smnisadmg uaeunau
Bauck, L. I993. A Practitioner's Guide to Avian Medicine. American
Zootiere. pp. 6l-65. Wien Akadermie Verlag, Berlin.
Animal Hospital Association, Lakewood, CO.
Cooper, J. E. 2002. Appendix IX. Medicine and other agents used in
Bauck, L., S. Orosz, and G. M. Dorrestein. I997. Avian dermatology. In:
treatment, including emergency anaesthesia kit and avian
R B. Altman, S. L. Clubb, G. M. Dorrestein and K Quesenberry
resuscitation protocol. In: J. E. Cooper [ed.) Birds of Prey:
[eds.] Avian Medicine and Surgery pPp. 540-562. WB Saunders,
Health and Disease. 3rd edn. pp. 27l-277. Blackwell
Philadelphia.
Publishing, Iowa State, Ames, IA.
Benedikt, B., R. Korbel, and J. Stiehl. I998. Examinations on
Cooper, J. E., and P T. Redig. I975. Unexpected reactions to the use
perianaesthetical stabilisation of the body temperature in
of C.T.1341 by red-tailed hawks. Vet Rec 97: 352.
domestic pigeons. [Perianaesthetisches Temperaturtmonitoring
Comick, J. L. 2001. Veterinary Anesthesia. Butterworth-Heinemann,
bei Haustauben.] Tagumg. Vogelkrankheiten Il: 218-230.
Wobum, MA.
Beynon, P. H., N. A. Forbes, and N. Harcourt-Brown. I996. Manual
Cribb, P. H., and J. C. Haigh. I977. Anaesthesia for avian species.
of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfowl. BSAVA, Quedgeley,
Vet Rec 100: 472-473.
Gloucestershire.
Curro, T. G. I993. Evaluation of the isoflurane-sparing effects of
Bishop, Y. 2001. The Veterinary Formulary. 5th edn. Pharmaceutical
butorphanol and flunixim in Psittaciformes. Proc Assoc Avian
Press, London.
Vet: 1719.
Avian anaesthesia
Curro, T. G. I998. Anesthesia of pet birds. Semin Avian Exotic Pet
Fitzgerald, G., and J. E. Cooper. I990. Preliminary studies on the use
Med 7[1): 10-21.
of propofol in the domestic pigeon [Columbia litia]. Vet Sci
Curro, T. G., D. Brunson, and J. Paul-Murphy. I994. Determination
8-6
 of the EDso of isoflurane and evaluation of the analgesic
 Forbes, N. A. I999. Birds. In: C. Seymour and R. Gleed [eds.)
properties of butorphanol in cockatoos [Cacatua spp.). Vet
Manual of Small Animal Anaesthesia and Analgesia.
Surg 23: 429433.
pp. 283-293. BSAVA, Shurdington, UK.
Czarmecki, C. M., D. K. Olivero, and A. S. McVey. I987. Plasma uric
Forbes, N. A., and R. B. Altman. I998. Self-Assessment Colour
acid levels in ethanol-fed turkey poults treated with
Review of Avian Medicine. Manson Publishing, London.
allopurinol. Comp Biochem Physiol 86C: 63-65.
Forman, M. F., and R. F. Wideman. I999. Renal responses of normal
Danbury, T. C., A. E. Waterman-Pearson, S. C. Kestin et al. 2000.
and preascitic broilers to systemic hypotension induced by
Self-selection of the analgesic drug carprofen by lame broiler
unilateral pulmonary artery occlusion. Poultry Sci 78:
chickens. Vet Rec 146[11): 307-311.
1773-1785.
Davies, D. G., and R. E. Dutton. I975. Gas-blood PCO gradients
Franchetti, D. R., and A. M. Kilde. I978. Restraint and anesthesia.
during avian gas exchange. J Appl Physiol 39: 405-410.
In: M. E. Fowler [ed.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. pp.
S
Dawson, R. W. 1975. Avian physiology. Annu Rev Physiol 37:
359-364. WB Saunders Co, Philadelphia.
Freerman, K. P, K. A. Hahn, M. P. Jones et al. I999. Right leg muscle
441-465.
Dawson, W. R., and G. C. Whittow. 2000. Regulation of body
atrophy and osteopenia caused by renal adenocarcinoma in a
temperature. In: G. C. Whittow [ed.) Sturkie's Avian Physiology.
cockatiel [Melopsittacus urndulatus]. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Sth edn. pp. 344-379. Academic Press, San Diego, Calif.
40[2): 144-147.
st
Degermes, L. A. I995. A preliminary report on IV TPN in birds. Proc
Fricke, C., G. M. Dorrestein, J. Straub et al. 2003. Macroscopic and
microscopic changes in blood vessels of psittaciformes. Proc
Assoc Avian Vet: 25.
Degermes, L. A., M. L. Crosier, L. D. Harrison et al. I999a.
7th Europ AAV Conf, Puerto de la Cruz: I37-144.
Autologous, homologous, and heterologous red blood cell
Glatz, P. C., L. B. Murphy, and A. P. Preston. I992. Analgesic therapy
transfusions in cockatiels [Nymphicus hollandicus]. J Avian
f beak-trimmed chickens. Aust Vet J 69[1]: 18.
Med Surg 13[1): 2-9.
Goldstein, D. L., and E. Skadhauge. 2000. Renal and extrarenal
Degemes, L. A., L. D. Harrison, and D. W. Smith. I999b.
regulation of body fluid composition. In: G. C. Whittow [ed.]
167
Autologous, homologous and heterologous red blood cell
Sturkie's Avian Physiology. 5th edn. pp. 265-291. Academic
transfusions in conures of the genus Aratiriga. J Avian Med
Press, San Diego, Calif.
Surg 12[1]): 10-14.
Graham-Jones, O. 1966.The clinical approach to tumours in cage
Desmarchelier, M., Y. Rondenay, G. Fitzgerald et al. 2007.
birds IIl: Restraint and anaesthesia of small cage birds. J Simall
Monitoring of the ventilatory status of anesthetized birds of
Anim Pract 7: 231-239.
prey by using end-tidal carbon dioxidle measure with a
Graham, J. E., L. A. Tell, C. Kollias-Baker et al. 2001
microstream capnometer. J Zoo Wildl Med 38: I-6.
 Phartmacokinetics of ketoprofen in adult Japanese quail
Dorrestein, G. M. I997. Metabolism, pharmacology and therapy. In:
[Coturrix japorica]. Proc Annu Conf Assoc Avian Vet: I9-21.
R. B. Altman, S. L. Clubb, G. M. Dorrestein and K. E.
Green, C. J. I979. Animal anaesthesia. Laboratory Animal
Quesenberry [eds.) Avian Medicine and Surgery. pp. 66l-670.
Handbooks 8. pp. I26-128. Laboratory Animals Ltd, London.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Greenacre, C. B., and J. E. Quandt. I997. Comparison of
Duncker, H. R. I979. Coelomic cavities. In: A. S. King and
sevoflurane to isoflurane in Psittacifortmes. Proc Assoc Avian
 J. McLelland [eds.) Form and Function in Birds No. I. pp.
Vet: 123-124.
39-69. Academic Press, London.
Griffin, C., and L. R. Snellng. I998. Use of hyaluronidase in avian
Echols, M. S. 2006. Evaluating and treating the kidneys. In:
subcutaneous fluids. Proc Assoc Avian Vet: 239-240.
G. J. Harrison and T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian
Haigh, J. C. I980. Anaesthesia of raptorial birds. In: J. E. Cooper and
Medicine No. I1. pp. 451-491. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm
A. G. Greenwood [eds.) Recent Adv Stud Raptor Diseases.
Beach,Florida
pp. 61-66. Chiron Publications Ltd, Keighley, Yorks.
Echols, S. I999. Collecting diagnostic samples in avian patients.
Harrison, G. J. I984. New aspects of avian surgery. Vet Clin North
Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2: 62I-649.
Am 14(2): 363380.
Edling, T. M. 200l. Gas anesthesia: How to successfully monitor and
Harrison, G. J., T. L. Lightfoot, and G. B. Flinchum. 2006.
keep them alive. Proc Assoc Avian Vet: 289-301.
Emergency and critical care. In: G. J. Harrison and
Edling, T. M. 2005. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: N. Harcourt-
T. L. Lightfoot [eds.] Clinical Avian Medicine No. I.
Brown and J. R. Chitty [eds.) Manual of Psittacine Birds. Znd
pp. 213-232. Spix Publishing, Palm Beach, FL
edn. pp. 87-96. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Harrison, G. J., and D. McDonald. 2006. Nutritional considerations
Edling, T. M. 2006. Updates in anesthesia and monitoring. In:
section II: nutritional disorders. In: G. J. Harison and T. L.
G. J. Harrison and T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medicine
Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medicine No. I. pp. I08-140.
No. I. pp. 747-760. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
Spix Publishing, Palm Beach, FL.
Eding, T. M., L. A. Degemes, K. Flammer et al. 2001. Capnographic
Hartup, B. K., and E. A. Miller. I992. Willowbrook Wildlife Haen
monitoring of anesthetized African grey parrots receiving
Pharmaceutical Index. Friends of the Furred and Feathered,
intertmittent positive pressure ventilation. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Glen Ellyn, IL
219: 1714-1718.
Hasholt, J. I969. Diseases of the nervous system. In: M. L. Petrak
Eger, E. 1. 1993. New imhalatiomal agents - desflurane and
[ed.) Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds. Lea and Febiger,
sevoflurane. Can J Anaesth 40[5 Pt 2): R3-8.
Philadelphia
Evans, H. E. 1996. Anatomy of the budgie and other birds. In:
Heard, D. I997. Anesthesia and analgesia. In: R. B. Altman,
W Rosskopf and R. Woerpel [eds.) Diseases of Cage and
S. L. Clubb, G. M. Dorrestein et al. [eds.) Avian Medicine and
Aviary Birds. 3rd ern. pp. 79-163. Williams & Wilkins,
Surgery. pp. 807-827. WB Saumders, Philadelphia.
Baltim ore.
Helmer, P. J. 2004. Sevoflurane versus isoflurane in birds. In:
Fedde, M. R. I993. Respiration in birds. In: M. J. Swenson and
Westem Veterinary Conference.
W O. Reece [eds.) Dukes Physiology of Domestic Animals. IIth
Hinds, D. S., and W. A. Calder. 1971. Tracheal dead space in the
edn. pp. 294-303. Comell University Press, Ithaca, N.Y.
respiration of birds. Evolution 25: 429-440.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Hochleithner, M., C. Hochleithner, and L. D. Harrison. 2006.
Koutsos, E. A., L. A. Tell, L. W. Woods et al. 2003. Adult cockatiels
Evaluating and treating the liver. In: G. J. Harrison and T. L.
[Nymphicus hollndicus] at maintenance are more sensitive to
Lightfoot [erds.] Clinical Avian Medicine No. I. pp. 44l-449.
diets containing excess vitamin A than to vitamin A-deficient
Spix Publishing, Palm Beach, FL.
diets. J Nutr 133: 1898-1902.
Hocking, P. M., M. J. Gentle, R. Bemard et al. 1997. Evaluation of a
Kovach, A. G. B., and E. Szasz. I968. Survival of pigeons after
protocol for deterrmining the effectiveness of pretreatment
graded haemorrhage. Acta Physiol 34: 301.
with local analgesics for reducing experimentally induced
Kovach, A. G. B., E. Szasz, and N. Pilmayer. I969. The mortality of
articular pain in domestic fowl. Res Vet Sci 63[3): 263-267.
various avian and mammalian species following blood loss. Acta
Huckabee, J. R. 2000. Raptor therapeutics. Vet Clin North Am:
PN Acad Sci 35-109.
Exotic Anim Pract 3: 91-116.
Krautwald-Jumghanns, M.-E., M. Schulz, D. Hagner et al. 1995.
Jalanka, H. 1991. Medetomidine-ketamine and atipamezine, a
Transcoelomic two-dimensional echocardiography in the avian
reversible method of chemical restratin of birds. Proc Ist Cont
patient. J Avian Med Surg 9: 19-31
European Committe of Assoc Avian Vet, Vienna: I02-104.
Larochelle, D., M. Morin, and G. Bemier. I992. Sudden death in
Jenkims, J. R. I993. Postoperative care of the avian patient. Semin
turkeys with perirenal hemorrhage: pathological observations
Avian Exotic Pet Med 2: 97-102.
and possible pathogenesis of the disease. Avian Dis 36:
 Johnson, O. W. 1979. Urinary organs. In: A. S. King and
114124.
J. McLellnd [eds.) Form and Function in Birds No. I.
Lasiewski, R. C. 1972. Respiratory function of birds. In: D. S. Farmer 
pp. 183-237. Acadermic Press, London.
and J. R. King [eds.) Avian Biology No. 2. pp. 288-335.
1
Jones, D. M. 1977. The sedation and anaesthesia of birds and
Academic Press, New York.
reptiles. Vet Rec 101: 340-342.
Lasiewski, R. C., and L. R. Dawson. I967. A re-examination of the
Jones, R. S. I966. Halothane anaesthesia in turkeys. Br J Anaesth 38:
relation between standard metabolic rate and bodyweight of
656-658.
birds. Condor 69: 13-23.
King, A. S., and J. McLelland. I984. Birds - Their Structure and
Latimer, K. S., B. W. Ritchie, R. P. Campagnoli et al. 1996.
Function. Znd edn. Bailliere Tindall, London.
Metastatic renal carcinoma in an African Grey Parrot [Rittacus
King, A. S., and V. Molony. 1971. The anatomy of respiration. In:
erithactus erithacus]. J Vet Diagn Invest 8: 261-264.
68
D. J. Bell and B. M. Freeman [eds.) Physiology and
Lawrie, A. 2005. Systemic non-infectious disease. In: N.
Biochemistry of the Domestic Fowl No. I. pp. 93-169.
Harcourt-Brown and J. R. Chitty [erds.) Manual of Psittacine
Academic Press, London.
Birds. Znd edn. p. 245-265. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
King, A. S., and D. C. Payne. I964. Normal breathing and the effects
Lee, P C., and J. R. Fisher. I972. Effect of allopurinol on the
of posture in Gallus domesticus. J Physiol 174: 340-347.
accurmulation of xanthine dehydrogenase in liver and pancreas of
Klaphake, E., J. Schumacher, C. Greenacre et al. 2006. Comparative
chicks after hatching. Arch Biocherm Biophysiol 148: 277-281.
amesthetic and cardiopulmonary effects of pre- versus
Lichtenberger, M. 2004. Prmnciples of shock and fluid therapy in
postoperative butorphanol administration in Hispaniolan
special species. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 13[3): 142-153.
Amazon parrots [Amazona ventralis] anesthetized with
Lichtenberger, M. 2005. Determination of indirect blood pressure in the
sevoflurane. J Avian Med Surg 20[1]: 2-7.
Companion bird. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 14(2): 149-152.
Klein, P. N., K. Charmatz, and J. Langenberg. I994. The effect of
Lichtenberger, M., K. Rosenthal, R. Brue et al. 2001. Administration
 flunixin meglumine [Banamine) on the renal function in
of oxglobin and 6% hetastarch after acute blood loss in
nort hem bobwhite quail [Colinus tvirginianus]: an avian model.
psittacine birds. Proc Assoc Avian Vet: 15.
 Proc Annu Conf Assoc Rept Amphib Vet Am Assoc Zoo Vet:
Lopez Murcia, M. M., L. J. Bemal, A. M. Montes et al. I995. The
128-131.
normal electrocardiogram of the unanaesthetized competition
Klide, A. M. I973. Avian anaesthesia. Vet Clin North Am 3[2]:
"Spanish Pouler” pigeon [Columba Litia gutturosa]. J Vet Med
175-186.
A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 52[7]: 347-349.
Klumpp, S. A., and W. D. Wagner. I986. Survey of the pathologic
Ludders, J. W., and N. Mathews. 1996. Birds. In: J. C. Thurmon,
fndings in a large production colony of pigeons, with special
W. J. Tranquilli and J. G. Benson [eds.) Lumb and Jones 
reference to pseudomem branous stomatitis and nephritis.
Veterinary Anesthesia. 3rd edn. pp. 645-669. Williams &
Avian Dis 30: 740750.
Wilkins, Baltimore, MD
Koch, T. 1973. Locomotion system. In: B. H. Skold and L. Devries
Ludders, J. W., G. S. Mitchell, and J. Rode. I990. Minimal
[eds.) Anatomy of the Chicken and Domestic Birds. pp. 6-65.
anesthetic concentration and cardliopulmonary dose response of
Iowa State University Press, Ames.
isoflurane in ducks. Vet Surg 19: 304-307.
Korbel, R. I993. Aerosacular perfusion with isoflurane: An anesthetic
Ludders, J. W., J. Rode, and G. S. Mitchell. I989a. Isoflurane
 procedure for head surgery in birds. Proc Assoc Avian Vet: 9-37.
anesthesia in sandhill cranes [Grus caradensis]: Minimal
Korbel, R., A. Milovanovic, W. Erhardt et al. I994. The aerosaccular
anesthetic concentration and cardiopulmonary dose-response
perfusion with isoflurane in birds - an anaesthetical measure
during spontaneous and controlled breathing. Anesth Analg 68:
for surgery in the head region. Proc Znd Conf European
245-249.
Committee Assoc Avian Vet, Utrecht/Netherlands: 9-42.
Ludders, J. W., J. A. Rode, and G. S. Mitchell I989b. Effects of
Korbel, R., B. Spemann, W. Erhardt et al. 1997. Systemic
ketamine, xylazine and a combination of ketamine and xylazine
administration of the muscle relaxant vecuronium during air sac
imn Pekin ducks. Am J Vet Res 50[2): 245-249.
perfusion anaesthesia [APA] to facilitate ocular surgical
Lumeij, J. T. 2000. Pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatrment of renal
problems. Proc Sth Conf European Committee Assoc Avian
disorders in birds of prey. In: J. T. Lumeij, J. D. Remple,
Vet, London: 8-13.
P T. Redig, M. Lierz and J. E. Cooper [eds.) Raptor Biomedicine
Korbel, R. T. 2000. Disorders of the posterior eye segment in raptors -
III. pp. I69-178. Zoological Education Network, Lake Worth, FL.
examination procedures and findings. In: J. T. Lumeij, J. D.
Lumeij, J. T., and B. W. Ritchie. I994. Cardliovascular system. In:
Remple, P. T. Redig, M. Lierz and J. E. Cooper [eds.) Raptor
B. W. Ritchie, G. J. Harrison and L. R. Harrison [eds.) Avian
 Biomedicine Il including Bibliography of Diseases of Birds of
Medicine, Principles and Application. pp. 694-722. HBD
Prey. pp. 179-193. Zoological Education Network Inc, Lake
Intermational Inc., Brentwood, TN.
Worth, FL.
Lumeij, J. T., and A. A. Stokhof. 1985. Electrocardiogram of the
Koutsos, E. A., and K. C. Klasing. 2002. Vitamin A nutrition of
racing pigeon [Columbia livia forma domestica].Res Vet Sci
cockatiels. Joint Nutrition Symposium, Antwerp, Belgium.
38: 275278.
Avian anaesthesia
Machin, K. L., and N. A. Caulkett. 2000. Evaluation of isoflurane
Muir, W. W., and L. A. Hubbell. 2000b. Pharmacology of inhalation
and propofol anesthesia for intraabdominal transmitter
anesthetic drugs. In: W. W. Muir and L. A. Hubbell (eds.)
placement in nesting female canvasback ducks. J Wildl Dis
Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. pp. 210-231. Mosby,
36[2): 324334.
St Louis, MO.
Machin, K. L., and A. Livingston. 2001. Plasma bupivacaine levels in
Mulcahy, D. M., and P. L. Tuomi, R.S. 2001. Mortality of male
mallard ducks [Anas platyrhynchos] following a single
spectacled eiders [Somateria fisheri] and king eiders
subcutaneous dose. Proc Anmu Conf Am Assoc Zoo Vet, Am
[Somateria spectabilis] given propofol, bupivacaine, and
Assoc Wildl Vet, Assoc Rept Amph Vet, Nat Assoc Zoo Wildl
ketoprofen. Proc Annu Conf Am Assoc Zoo Vet, Am Assoc
Vet: 159-163
Wildl Vet, Assoc Rept Amph Vet, Nat Assoc Zoo Wildl Vet:
Machin, K. L., and A. Livingston. 2002. Assessment of the analgesic
164.
effects of ketoprofen in ducks anesthetized with isoflurane. Am
Naganobu, K., Y. Fujisawa, H. Ohde et al. 2000. Determination of
J Vet Res 63[6): 821-826.
the minimum anesthetic concentration and cardiovascular dose
Machin, K. L., L. A. Tellier, S. Lair et al. 2001. Pharmacodynamics of
response for sevoflurane in chickens during controlled
fluinixin and ketoprofen in mallard ducks [Anas
ventilation. Vet Surg 29[1): 102-105.
S
patyrhynchos] . J Zoo Wildl Med 32[2): 222-229.
Naganobu, K., M. Hagio, T. Sonoda et al. 2001. Arrhythmogenic
Magnusson, H., H. Willmer, and P. Scheid. I976. Gas exchange in air
effect of hypercapnia in ducks anesthetized with halothane.
sacs: Contribution to the respiratory gas exchange in ducks.
Am J Vet Res 62 [1): 127-129.
Respir Physiol 26: 129-146.
Naganobu, K., K. Ise, T. Miyamoto et al. 2003. Sevoflurane
Maina, J. N. I996. Perspective on the structure and function of birds.
anaesthesiain chickens during spontaneus and controlled
In: W. Rosskopf and R. Worel eds.) Diseases of cage and aviary
ventilation. Vet Rec 152: 45-48.
st
birds. 3rd edn. pp. I63-217. William & Wilkins, Baltimore.
Nap, A. M. P, J. T. Lumeij, and A. A. Stokhof. 1992.
Malley, A. D. I994. Practical therapeutics for cage and aviary birds.
Electrocardiogram of the African Grey [Psittacus erithacus)
In: M. E. Raw and T J. Parkinson [eds.) The Veterinary Annual.
and Amazon [Amazona sp.] parrot. Avian Pathol 2l: 45-53.
pp. 235-246. Black well Scientific, London.
Nichol, G. D., D. K. Klingberg, and M. R. Vasko. 1992.
Mandelker, L. 1972. Ketamine hydrochloride as an anaesthetic for
 Prostaglandin Ez mncreases calciurm conductance and stimulates
parakeets. Vet Med/Stmall Anim Clin 67: 55-56.
release of substance P in avian sensory neurons. J Neurosci 12:
169
Mandelker, L. I973. A toxicity study of ketamine HCl in Parakeets.
1917-1927.
Vet Med/Small Anim Clin 68: 487-489.
O'Malley, B. 2005. Avian anatomy and physiology. In: B. O'Malley
Mandelker, L. I988. Avian anesthesia, part I: injectable agents.
[ed.] Clinical anatomy and physiology of exotic species:
Compan Anirm Pract 2: 21.
Structure and function of mammals, birds, reptiles and
Manning, R. O., and R. D. Wyatt. I984. Toxicity of Aspergius
amphibians. pp. 97-161. Elsevier Saunders, London.
ochraceus contaminated wheat and different chemical forms of
Orcutt, C. 2000. Oxyglobin ardministration for the treatment of
ochratoxin A in broiler chicks. Poultry Sci 63: 458-465.
anemia in ferrets. Exotic DVM 2[3): 44-46.
Mansour, A., H. Khachaturian, M. E. Lewis et al. I988. Anatomy of
Orosz, S., G. M. Dorrestein, and B. L. Speer. I997. Urogenital
CNS opioid receptors. Trends Neurosci II[7]: 308-314.
disorders. In: R. B. Altman, S. L. Clubb, G. M. Dorrestein and
Marley, E., and J. P. Payne. I964. Halothane anaesthesia in the fowl.
K. Quesenberry [eds.) Avian Medicine and Surgery.
Small Animal Anaesthesia Proceedings of a BSAVA/UFAW
pp. 614-644. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Symposium, ern. O. Graham-Jones. pp. I27. Pergamon, Oxford.
Paul-Murphy, J. 2006. Pain management. In: G. J. Harrison and
Marx, K. L., and M. A. Roston. 1996. The Exotic Animal Drug
T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medicine No. 1. pp.
Compendiutm: An International Formulary. Veterinary Learming
233-239. Spix Publishing, Palm Beach, FL
Systerms, Trenton, NJ.
Paul-Murphy, J., and J. W. Ludders. 2001. Avian analgesia. Vet Clin
Mateo, R., J. C. Dolz, J. M. Aguilar Serrano et al. I997. An epizootic
 North Am Exot Anim Pract 4: 35-45.
of lead poisoning in greater flamingos [Phoerticopterus ruber
Paul-Murphy, J. R., D. B. Brunson, and V. Miletic. I999. A technique
roseus) in Spain. J Wildl Dis 33[1): 131-134.
for evaluating analgesia in conscious perching birds. Am J Vet
McDonald, D. 2006. Nutritional Considerations Section I: Nutrition
Res 60{10): 1213-1217.
and Dietary Supplementation. In: G. J. Harrison and
Pees, M., M.-E. Krautwald-Junghanns, and J. Straud. 2006.
T L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medlicine No. I. p.
Evaluating and treating the cardliovascular system. In:
86-107. Spix Publishimgs, Palm Beach, FL.
G. J. Harrison and T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medicine
McGeown, D., T. C. Danbury, A. E. Waterman-Pearson et al. 1999.
No. I. p. 379-394. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
Effect of carprofen on lameness in broiler chickens. Vet Rec
Perrins, C. M. 2004. What is a bird? In: C. Perrins [ed.) The New
144[24]: 668-671.
 Encyclopedia of Birds. pp. I8-31. Oxford University Press,
McLelland, J. 1989. Anatomy of the lungs and air sacs. In: A. S. King
Oxford.
ad J. McLelland [eds.) Form and Function in Birds, Vol. 4.
 Phalen, D. N. 2000. Avian renal disorders. In: A. M. Fudge [ed.]
Academic Press, London.
Laboratory Mericine - Avian and Exotic Pets. pp. 6l-68. WB
McLelland, J., and V. Malony. I983. Respiration. In: B. M. Freeman
Saunders, Philadelphia.
[ed.] Physiology and Biochermistry of the Domestic Fowl No. 4.
 Phalen, D. N., J. L. Ambrus, and D. L. Graham. I990. The avian
pp. 63-85. Acadermic Press, London.
urinary system: form, fumction, diseases. Proc Annu Conf Assoc
Moore, D. M., and R. L. Rice. I998. Exotic animal formulary. In:
Avian Vet: 4457
K. M. Holt, D. M. Boothe, J. Gaumnitz, et al. [eds.) Veterinary
Powell, F L. 2000. Respiration. In: G. C. Whittow [ed.) Sturkie's
Values. 5th ern. pp. 159-245. Veterinary Medicine Publishing
Avian Physiology pp. 233-259. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Group, Lenexa, KS.
Powell, F. L., and P. Scheid. I989. Physiology of gas exchange in the
Morrisey, J. K. I997. Avian emergency medicine and critical care. In:
avian respiratory system. In: A. S. King and J. McLelland [eds.)]
H. L. Hoefer [ed.) Practical Avian Medicine: The Compendium
Form and Function in Birds No. 4. pp. 393-437. Academic
Collection. pp. 53-57. Veterinary Leaming Systems Co,
Press, London.
Trenton, NJ.
Quesenberry, K. E., and E. V. Hillyer. I999. Supportive care and
Muir, W. W., and L. A. Hubbell. 200Oa. Inhalation anesthesia. In:
emergency therapy. In: B. W. Ritchie, G. J. Harrison and
W W. Muir and L. A. Hubbell [eds.) Handbook of Veterinary
L. R. Harrison [eds.] Avian Medicine: Principles and
Anesthesia. pp. 154-163. Mosby, St Louis, MO.
Application. pp. 393-396. HBD Int'l Inc, Brent wood, RN.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Radford, M. G., K. E. Holley, J. P. Grande et al. I996. Reversible 
Avian Medicine and Surgery. p. 170-200. WB Saumders,
membranous nephropathy associated with the use of
Philadelphia.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. JAMA 276: 466-469.
Spearman, R. 1. I971. Integumentary system. In: D. J. Belland
Raftery, A. 2005. The initial presentation: triage and critical care. In:
B. M. Freeman [eds.) Physiology and Biochermistry of the
N. Harcourt-Brown and J. R. Chitty [eds.) Manual of Psittacine
Domestic Fowl, Vol. 2. pp. 603-619. Academic Press, London.
Birds. pp. 35-49. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Stanford, M. 2002. Cage and aviary birds. In: A. Meredith and S.
Redig, P. T. I983. Anaesthesia for raptors. Raptor Res Rehabil Prog
Redrobe [eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. I57-167.
 Newslett 4: 9-10.
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester
Redig, P. T 1998. Recommendations for anesthesia in raptors with
 Stanford, M. 2003. Clinical assessment of sevoflurane use in African
comments on trumpeter swans. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 7:
Grey parrots. Exotic DVM 4[6]): 9.
22-29.
Steffey, E. P 1978. Isoflurane potency in the dog and cat. Am J Vet
Reither, N. D. I993. Medetomidine and atipamezole in avian
Res 39: 573-577.
practice. Proc Euro Conf Avian Med and Surg, Utrecht: 43-48.
Steinhort, L. A. I999. Avian fluid therapy. J Avian Med Surg 13:
Rigdon, R. H. 1974. Occurrence and association of amyloid with
16-8
diseases in birds and mammals including man: a review. Tex
Stone, E. G. I994. Preliminary evaluation or hetastarch for the
Rep Biol Med 32: 665-682.
management of hypoproteinemia and hypovolemia. Proc Annu
Rodriguez, R., F. Preito-Montana, A. M. Montes et al. 2004. The
Conf Assoc Avian Vet: 197-199.
nortmal electrocardiogram of the unanesthetized pergrine falcon
Straub, J., N. A. Forbes, J. Thielebein et al. 2003. The effects of
[Falco peregrius brookei]. Avian Dis 48[2]: 405-409.
isoflurane anaesthesia on some Doppler-derived cardiac
Rosenthal, K., and M. Miller. I997. Cardiac disease. In:
parameters in the common buzzard [Buteo buteo). Vet J
R. B. Altman, S. L. Clubb, G. M. Dorrestein and K.
166[3): 273-276.
Quesenberry [eds.) Avian Medicine and Surgery. pp. 491-500.
Straub, J., M. Pees, and M.-E. Krautwald-Junghanns. 2002.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Measurement of the cardiac silhouette in psittacine. J Am Vet
Rosenthal, K. L., M. Miller, S. Orosz et al. I997. The cardiovascular
Med Assoc 221: 76-79.
system. In: R. B. Altman, S. L. Clubb, G. M. Dorrestein and
Sturkie, P. D. 1986. Heart and circulation: Anatomy, hemodynamics,
17.0
K E. Quesenberry [eds.) Avian Medicine and Surgery. pp.
blood pressure, blood flow. In: P. D. Sturkie [ed.) Avian
489-500. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Physiology. 4th edn. pp. 130-166. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Ruiz-Feria, C. A., D. Zhang, and H. Nishimura. 2004. Age- and sex-
 Sykes, A. H. 197l. Formation and composition of urine. In:
dependent changes in pulse pressure in fowl aorta. Comp
D. J. Bell and B. M. Freeman [eds.) Physiology and
Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 137(2): 311-320.
biochemistry of the domestic fowl No. I. pp. 233-276.
Rupiper, D. J., and M. Ehrenberg. I994. Introduction to pigeon
Academic Press, London.
practice. Proc Annu Conf Assoc Avian Vet: 203-211.
Teare, J. A. 1987. Antagonistm of xylazine hydrochloride-ketarmine
Rupley, A. E. 1997. Respiratory bacterial, fungal and parasitic
hydrochloride immobilization in guineafowl (Numidia
diseases. Pror Avian Specialty Advanced Prog/Small Mam Rept
melaeagris) by yohimbine hydrochloride. J Wildl Dis 23:
Prog [Annu Conf Assoc Avian Vet]: 23-44.
301-305.
Samour, J. H. 2000. Pharmaceutics commonly used in avian
Touzot-Jourde, G., S. J. Hemandez-Divers, and C. M. Trim. 2005.
medicine. In: J. Samour [ed.) Avian Medicine. pp. 388-418.
Cardiopulmonary effects of controlled versus spontaneous
Mosby, Philadelphia.
ventilation in pigeons anesthetized for coelioscopy. J Am Vet
Scheid, P, and J. Piper. 1971. Direct measurement of the pathway
Med Assoc 227[9): 1424-1428.
of respired gas in duck lungs. Respira Physiol Il: 308-314.
Tully, T. N. 2000. Psittacine therapeutics. Vet Clin North Am: Exotic
Scheid, P, and J. Piper. I972. Cross current gas exchange in avian
Anitm Pract 3: 59-90.
hmgs: Effect of reversed parabronchial air flow in ducks.
Uzun, M., S. Yildiz, and F. Onder. 2004. Electrocardiography of rock
Physiology 16: 304-312.
partridges [Alectoris graeca] and chukar partridges [Alectoris
Scheid, P, and J. Piper. I989. Respiratory mechanics and air flows in
chukar). J Zoo Wildl Med 35[4].
birds. Form and Function in Birds No. 4. pp. 369-391.
Welty, J. C. 1982. Blood, air and heat. The life of birds. 3rd edn.
Academic Press, San Diego.
pp. 130-156. Saumders College Publishmg, Philadelphia.
Schmidt, P. M., T. Gobel, and E. Trautvetter. I998. Evaluation of
West, N. H., B. Lowell Lanille, and D. R. Jones. I981.
pulse oximetry as a monitoring method in avian anesthesia.
Cardiovascular system. In: A. S. King and J. McLelland [eds.)]
J Avian Med Surg 12[2): 91-99.
Form and Function in Birds. Vol 2. pp. 235-34l. Academic
Schoemaker, N. J., and M. M. J. M. Zandvliet. 2005.
Press, London.
Electrocardiograms in selected species. Semin Avian Exotic Pet
Wideman, R. F. 1988. Avian kidney anatomy and physiology. CRC
Med 14: 26-33
Crit Rev Poult Biol I: 133-176.
Scrollavezza, P, S. Zanichelli, L. Palestra et al. I995. Medetomidine-
Wolf, P., and J. Kamphues. I992. Die Futter- und Wasseraufnahme
ketamine association and atipamezole in the anaesthesia of
bei Kanarien - EinfluBfaktoren and Abhangigkeiten.
birds of prey. Proc 3rd Cont European Committee of Assoc
Kleintierpraxis 4l: 545-552.
Avian Vet, Jerusalem: 211.
Woolf, C. J. I994. A new strategy for the treatment of inflammatory
Siller, W. G. I971. Structure of the kidney. In: D. J. Bell and B. M.
pain: prevention or elimination of central sensitization. Drugs
 Freeman [eds.) Physiology and Biochermistry of the Domestic
47[Suppl. 5): I-9, Discussion : 46-47.
Fowl No. I. pp. 197-229. Academic Press, London.
Woolf, C. J., and M. S. Chong. I993. Preemptive analgesia: Treating
Siller, W. G. I98l. Renal pathology of the fowl - a review. Avian
postoperative pain by preventing the establishment of central
Pathol 10: 187-262.
sensitization. Anesth Analg 77: 362-379.
Smith, B. J., and S. A. Smith. I997. Radiology. In: R. B. Altman,
Zantop, D. W. 1999. Medetomidine in birds. Exotic DVM I: 34.
S. L. Clubb, G. M. Dorrestein and K. E. Quesenberry [eds.]
Passerine, psittacine and
10
columbiforme anaesthesia
via
sth
INTRODUCTION
Several aspects of pet psittacine husbandry may affect
the bird's response to anaesthesia. Atherosclerosis results
This chapter discusses anaesthesia in pet birds belonging
from cholesterol deposition in arteries and is associated
with inflammation and fibrosis, and it is common in captive
171
to three orders - Passeriformes, Psittaciformes and Columb-
iformes. Although there are many differences between
psittacines (Johnson et al., 1992). Many pet parrots are fed
unbalanced diets, high in fats that predispose to obesity and
species, the approach to their anaesthesia is similar. The
these atheromatous arteries (Coles, 1997). This is exacer-
preceding chapter covers rmost aspects of this approach.
bated by a sedentary lifestyle, with many captive birds hav-
The aim of this chapter is to highlight anatomical, physio-
logical and pathological differences within these three
ing little opportunity for free flight to maintain fitness.
groups to allow the clinician to refine anaesthetic tech-
Respiratory system
niques. Where studies have been performed on one
species, this will be highlighted, as will any other differences
affecting anaesthesia.
In psittaciformes, the right and left nasal sinuses communi-
The order Passeriformes includes over 5000 species.
cate (Evans, 1996; King and McLelland, 1984). Access for
Passerines cormmonly seen in veterinary practice include
intubation is more difficult in psittacines due to their fleshy
species such as canaries and zebra finches. Pet Psittaci-
tongue obscuring the glottis (Fig. 10.1) (O'Malley, 2005).
formes include the Cacatuidae [cockatoo} and Psittacidae
Most (88-90%] of the lungs in pigeons are paleopul-
(parrot) families. Psittacidae include budgerigars and
monic and ordered in parallel; thus the majority of air
cockatiels as well as the larger parrots. Pigeons and doves
flow through them will be unidirectional (Edling, 2006;
belong to the Columbidae family in the Columbiformes
Ludders and Mathews, 1996).
order.
 Passeriformes have a total of seven air sacs, as the cranial
thoracics are fused with the clavicular (Evans, 1996; King
and McLelland, 1984). Pneumonisation of the medullary
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
cavity of bones is minimal in some small birds. Due to the
large internal surface area of the air sacs and the high body
Metabolism
termperature of small birds, they lose a substantial armount
of water via the respiratory tract [Coles, 1997].
Passerines have the highest metabolic rate of all verte-
Urinary system
brates (Dorrestein, 1997; Maina, 1996).
The nasal glands are absent or vestigial in passerines
Cardiovascular system
(Shoemaker, 1972). Species such as the zebra finch,
Taeniopygia guttata, can produce metabolic water and con-
The left jugular vein is usually much smaller than the right
centrated urine (Goldstein and Skadhauge, 2000).
(Akester, 1971; West et al., 1981], and may be absent in
some small cage bird species (Evans, 1996; King and
Digestive system
McLelland, 1984). Pigeons have an extensive vascular
plexus in the neck that makes the jugular an unsuitable
Gastrointestinal transit times vary from 16min to 2h in
vein for phlebotomy in these species (Coles, 1997]
passerines (O'Malley, 2005). They also have high metabolic
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Endocrine system
Pituitary gland neoplasia is common in budgerigars
(Melopsittacus undulates).Resulting changes to prolactin
and vasotocin production may cause hyperglycaemia and
polydipsia or polyuria; pressure from the lesion may cause
blindness, exophthalmos and seizures (Rae, 2000).
Goitre due to iodine deficiency is also common in bud-
 gerigars (Oglesbee et al., 1997). Thyroid disease may affect
metabolism, growth, reproduction and thermoregulation
(Hodges, 1981; King and McLelland, 1984; Rae, 2000).
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
AND STABILISATION
4"
History and clinical examination
E
It is vital to obtain husbandry details for pet birds, as poor
ditions [discussed below) that will increase anaesthetic
risks. Many pets, particularly psittacines, are prevented
172
from flying either by wing clips or small enclosures, and
are in a state of cardio-respiratory unfitness when pre-
sented to the clinician. Pigeons are often kept in captivity
for racing and are more likely to be cardiovascularly fit.
Very small birds are gently restrained for exarmination
Figure I0.I · Oral cavity of a sulphur-crested cockatoo (Cacatud
with the clinician's hand around their body, avoiding com-
galerita) showing the typical fleshy tongue seen in Psittaciformes.
pression of the keel that would preclude respiratory move-
ments, with the head between two fingers or thurmb and
forefinger. A tissue or thin cloth may be lightly wrapped
dermands, and hypoglycaemia is common in birds that
around the patient. Restraint of psittacines is similar to
have been malnourished or anorexic even for a short
passserines, but a towel is usually necessary to wrap the
wings in these larger species [and has the added benefit of
period of time [Harrison et al., 2006). Fasting is not usually
 providing the bird with something to chew other than the
recommended before anaesthesia in these small birds.
clinician's fingers). With larger species, such as macaws,
The rapid gastrointestinal transit tirme rmeans the crop will 
an experienced assistant should restrain the patient to
ermpty quickly.
 Diets vary between species. Passerines feed mainly on
enable the veterinary surgeon to conduct the clinical
examination. Most captive pigeons are accustomed to
seeds and/or insects in the wild, and rmost pet birds will take
handling and, therefore, are less stressed during restraint
srmall quantities of fruit and vegetables. Formulated diets are
available for many species (for example, Harrison's High
than the other species.
The examination should concentrate on identification
Potency Formulas@, http://www.harrisonsbirdfoods.com/, or
of factors that may affect anaesthesia, such as increased or
Kaytee@ exact@, Kaytee Products Inc., Chilton, WI).
altered noise on air sac auscultation. Due to the delicate
As discussed in the general section, all-seed diets will
avian respiratory system and susceptibility to infectious
cause immune depression, and associated respiratory
or toxic agents, all birds presented for anaesthesia should
and/or renal disease is possible (McDonald, 2006).
be assessed for respiratory disease. It is useful to take a
Obesity may also lead to cardiac disease and hepatic lipi-
small blood sample for packed cell volume (PCV) assess-
dosis [McDonald, 2006). All these factors increase the
 ment before anaesthesia when a prolonged procedure is
risk associated with anaesthetising these birds. Most
anticipated.
psittacines presented to veterinary surgeons are house- or
cage-bound pets. In general, they will be unfit, particu-
larly those that have their wings clipped or do not fly for
BOX 10.1 Factors predisposing to
some other reason. In combination with this, many are
on an unbalanced diet, with excess fats and vitamin defi-
anaesthetic problems in small birds
ciencies
 Chronic malnutrition leading to immunosuppression,
Although a bird's current diet may be unsuitable, it is
hepatic disease and cardiovascular disease
unwise to attermpt to change the diet during hospitalisa-
tion of a sick bird. The bird is more likely to eat if it is
Lack of exercise producing cardiovascular 'unfitness
offered food that it recognises.
Passerine, psittacine and columbiforme anaesthesia
Hospitalisation facilities
 most species if crop feeding is required. Some birds, par-
ticularlyhand-reared individualsmayvoluntarily takegg
 Small kennels can be adapted to house birds, taking care
food or hand-rearing formula from a spoon. Several
to ensure escape is not possible. However, various sized
enteral nutritional support formulas are available for ill
cages are more appropriate for passerines and psittacines.
birds, such as Harrison's@ Recovery Forrmula (http://
www.harrisonsbirdfoods.com/) or Critical Care Formula@
Birds should always be hospitalised in a quiet area of the
 practice, as loud unfamiliar noises will cause stress.
[VetArk, Winchester, UK). These may be offered in a
small bowl, but in general they are crop-fed to the patient
Small birds may benefit from a hide box or nest com-
partment, for example a small cardboard box, during hos-
throughout the day to ensure adequate intake of nutri-
pitalisation to reduce the stress of being in the unfamiliar
ents. In birds with strong beaks, such as the psittacines, a
metal tube should be used for crop feeding or a metal
environment. Nursing staff should still be able to observe
speculum used to open the mouth to allow safe passage of
the patient. If a pet bird is usually caged with or alongside
S
a companion, it may be less stressful to hospitalise that
a plastic tube
bird with the patient.
The jugular vein is large and the most common site
 Perches suitable for birds include wooden dowelling or
for phlebotomy or emergency acces, but the superficial
plantar metatarsal vein may be catheterised in quite small
non-toxic wood, such as apple tree twigs or branches. The
size depends on the size of bird and provision of a variety
birds. A catheter can be readily stabilised in this latter
of diameters will allow the bird to exercise its feet.
vein for peri-anaesthetic fluid administration. Small gauge
needles and catheters, usually 25-27 gauge, are used for
 Perches at different heights should be provided to allow
the bird to move around within its temporary enclosure.
venous access in these small patients to reduce the risk of
venous damage.
Wooden dowelling is appropriate for most birds; non-
toxic branches have the added advantage of providing
Although intraosseous injections may be administered in
environmental enrichrment as the bird can chew them.
very srmall birds, the risk of iatrogenic fracture precludes
173
Parrots are less stressed if their hospital cage is in a high
routine use in patients weighing less than 100g. In birds
position, rather than placing the cage on the floor.
weighing over 200g. a 23-gauge, 25-mm hypodermic
However, they should not be allowed to perch above
needle can be used for intraosseous access [Chitty, 2005].
human shoulder height as this gives them a psychologically
Air sac cannulation is possible in small birds. For
patients weighing 50-100 g, a dog or cat urinary catheter
dominant position over staff.
The basal metabolic rate is higher in passerines than in
may be shortened, or a large-bore venous catheter used
non-passerines (Lasiewski and Dawson, 1967). Associated
(Edling, 2005)
with this are rapid heat loss and utilisation of body energy
reserves. Birds will, therefore, lose weight when not feed-
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
ing, for exarmple overmight, or if armbient temperatures are
low (Perrins, 1979). To encourage birds to feed longer and
reduce energy required for thermoregulation, hospitalised
Specialist equipment is not required for anaesthesia in
passerines should be provided with an extended day length
these species. However, it is useful to have small endotra-
[even 24 hours per day in some cases) and the environ-
cheal tubes for intubation during anaesthesia and various
mental termperature raised (Coles, 1997].
sizes of crop tube if nutritional support is required.
Supplemental oxygen and heating
BOX 10.2 Basic equipment for small
-jdsoy guimp Bueay ieiuaualddns uoy iyauaq spuq i
bird anaesthesia
talisation. Those with respiratory problems should also
receive additional oxygen in an incubator or brooder (see
Digital scales for accurate weighing
Figs 9.5 and 9.6]
 Small gauge needles and small syringes (e.g. insulin
syringes)
Fluid and nutritional support
Towel for restraint during induction and recovery
Supplemental heat source, e.g. heat pad or hot
Hypoglycaemia is common in malnourished or starved
water bottle covered with towel
passerines, those with increased dermands due to sepsis, or
those with hepatic dysfunction. Paresis, depression and
Appropriate sized endotracheal tubes (or catheters
seizures may be seen. Treatment should be perforrmed as
with circuit attachments)
soon as possible, causing as little stress to the patient as
T-piece circuit
possible. Glucose solutions may be administered via crop-
Monitoring equipment: stethoscope,
tube or given intravenously. If the patient is dehydrated,
this should be addressed before dextrose is administered
echocardiogram
(Clippinger and Platt, 2000).
Trained assistant to monitor patient while clinician
Pureed fruit and vegetables, or organic dairy-free fruit
performs procedures
 or vegetable baby food are suitable food substitutes for
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
fleshy with the glottis located caudally at the base, and
BOX 10.3 More specialist equipment
the strong beak rmeans that the patient must be at a deep
for small bird anaesthesia
plane of anaesthesia to allow opening of the oral cavity
without risking darmage to either the clinician's fingers or
Mechanical ventilator
the endotracheal tube (see Fig. 10.1). If volatile anaes-
 Monitoring equipment: capnography, pulse oximeter,
thetic agents are used for induction via facemask, recov-
oesophageal echocardiogram
ery will be rapid and there is little time to place the tube
e ay on suiidi si i paaoan si ys au uam
 Manufactured small endotracheal tubes
equipment ready to hand, including a length of tape for
securing the tube once placed.
TECHNIQUES
 It is safer in larger species to use atraumatic forceps to
$
grasp the tongue during intubation rather than placing
your fingers into the mouth of lightly anaesthetised par-
Routes of administration
rots, in order to avoid the patient biting on to your fingers
if it recovers during the procedure.
4"
Injections
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
The jugular vein is commonly used for phlebotomy, and is
large and accessible for emergency venous access. More
Pre-medication is rarely used in these species. However,
commonly, an intravenous catheter is placed in the super-
butorphanol has been shown to be anaesthetic-sparing
ficial ulnar vein (see Fig. ll.3) or superficial plantar
when used in combination with isoflurane in cockatoos
metatarsal vein during anaesthesia. The superficial plantar
(Curro et al., 1994), and would be appropriate if analgesia
metatarsal vein can be accessed even in psittacines with
174
is required.
short legs (Fig. 10.2), but it can be difficult to insert a nee-
dle or thread a catheter proximally before the vein devi-
ates; small gauge needles/catheters should be used to
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
facilitate this. Needles and catheters are usually 23-25
OF ANAESTHESIA
gauge; catheters should be short. If an indwelling catheter
is placed, care should be taken to position and secure the
Induction
catheter to allow the bird to perch or move its wings com-
fortably. The catheter should, therefore, not extend below
On anaesthetic induction, the oropharynx should be
the foot and the bandage should not be curmbersome.
Intraosseous catheters can be placed in parrots with rel-
checked for the presence of ingesta, the crop assessed for
ative ease. In birds weighing between 200g and 700g, a
the presence of food and the trachea intubated. If intu-
2l-gauge, 25-mm hypodermic needle can be used (Chitty,
bation is not possible, the neck should be raised above the
2005).
level of the crop to reduce the risk of regurgitation and
the beak lowered to allow drainage should any occur.
Intubation
Injectable agents
Endotracheal tube placerment may be more difficult in
The combination of ketamine with xylazine is not recom-
psittacines than in other avian species. The tongue is usually
mended in touracos (members of the order Cuculiformes,
related to Passeriformes). Only low doses of ketamine and
medetomidine are used in psittacines due to the question-
able health status of most pet birds (Coles, 1997}.
As a species widely available for research, many anaes-
thetic studies have been performed in pigeons. When
induced with ketamine, medetomidine and butorphanol,
arrhythmias were seen in some pigeons; as these ceased
after atiparmezole adrministration, the irregularities are
likely due to medetomidine (Atalan et al., 2002}
Volatile agents
The minimum alveolar concentration [MAC) for isoflu-
rane in cockatoos is 1.44% (Curro et al., 1994].
Anaesthetic maintenance
Most birds can be intubated, using either an endotracheal
tube or a modified catheter. Anaesthesia is usually maintained
metatarsal vein of a male Eclectus parrot (Eclectus roratus).
with volatile agents via a rmask or endotracheal tube.
Passerine, psittacine and columbiforme anaesthesia
Recovery
If volatile agents have been the sole anaesthetic, recovery
is typically rapid. Most small birds are gently restrained in
a towel during recovery. After prolonged procedures or
with debilitated birds, it is useful to pre-warm an incuba-
tor or brooder for the post-anaesthetic period.
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
Small birds may be induced in a chamber to reduce the
vla
stress of handling, but it can be difficult to assess the
depth of anaesthesia. When the righting reflex is lost,
anaesthesia is rmaintained using either a facermask or intuba-
tion. Endotracheal intubation is possible in birds as small
lesthe
as 30g, but for these patients the tube may need to be
fashioned from an intravenous catheter (with the stylet
removed) or soft rubber catheter. It is important to per-
5
form intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV), as
these small tubes are more prone to obstruction with air-
way secretions.
Anaesthesia is usually induced by administration of
175
volatile agents via a facemask in larger birds (l00 g and
ims e 'peau s nouied e on yseu e Buaidde uaum (ranaeay
motion should be used to pass the mask over the beak, as
these species will tend to bite and damage the rubber or
 plastic ofthe mask. As the rim of the mask passes over the
Figure I0.3 · Indirect blood pressure measurement from the
bird's head, take care not to darmage the eyes.
ulnar artery in a sulphur-crested cockatoo (Cacotud galerita).
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
PERI-ANAESTHETICSUPPORTIVE
Observations on the patient
CARE
All birds should be closely observed throughout the anaes-
Fasting
 'sa Arsan  pad a
rate and reflexes.
Veterinary texts vary in their recomrmendations for fasting
before anaesthesia. Malnourished or debilitated animals
will benefit from provision of food as long as possible, but
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
the crop should be allowed to empty before induction of
anaesthesia
Capnography has been used to monitor isoflurane anaes-
Birds weighing less than 100g should not be fasted
thesia in African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus timmus)
before anaesthesia (Coles, 1997), as they are likely to
receiving IPPV via a mechanical ventilator (Edling et al.,
become hypoglycaemic. The gastrointestinal transit time
2001). PeTCOz correlated well with PaCOz, but overesti-
is fast in these small birds. If the patient is not eating, a
mated it by approximately 5 mmHg in the birds.
crop-feed lh before anaesthesia will usually allow time
Electrocardiogram (ECG) measurements have been
for the crop to ermpty, and reduces the risk of hypogly-
performed in several species, including one study involv-
caemia. The crop should be checked on induction of
ing four species of macaws, genera Anodorhynchus and
anaesthesia and any ingesta present aspirated to reduce
Ara, under isoflurane anaesthesia [Casares et al., 2000}. A
the risk of regurgitation and aspiration.
paper speed of 50mm/s and calibration of 10mm =
Larger birds may be fasted for a short period; usually
I mV was used. Significant differences were found between
Crop emptying will occur in 2-3 h (Edling, 2006; Forbes
species for heart rate and ECG measurements.
and Altman, 1998). Birds in good condition larger than
Blood pressure can be measured indirectly using an
100g appear to cope with overnight fasting and water
inflatable cuff and Doppler probe (Fig. 10.3). In patients
deprivation for 2-3 h without adverse effects (Franchetti
weighing less than 300 g, the distal humerus is a more reli-
and Kilde, 1978). In general, birds between 300 g and 1 kg
able site than the femur for cuff placerment (Lichtenberger,
are fasted for 6h and those between 100g and 300g for
2005).
3-4h (Coles, 1997)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Analgesia
Forbes, N. A., and R. B. Altman. I998. Self-Assessment Colour
 Review of Avian Medicine. Manson Publishing, London.
Franchetti, D. R., and A. M. Kilde. I978. Restraint and anesthesia.
Pain recognition can be particularly problermatic in parrot
In: M. E. Fowler [ed.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine.
pp. 359-364. WB Saumders Co, Philadelphia.
iour, whilst concealing a true discomfort. Familiarity of
Goldstein, D. L., and E. Skadhauge. 2000. Renal and extrarenal
the particular bird may allow the owner to detect subtle
regulation of body fluid composition. In: G. C. Whittow [ed.)
behavioural changes. Often the veterinary surgeon must
Sturkie's Avian Physiology. 5th edn. pp. 265-291. Academic
rely on more obvious signs of pain, such as restlessness,
Press, San Diego, CA.
inactivity or biting at a lesion to detect a problem.
Harrison, G. J., T. L. Lightfoot, and G. B. Flinchum. 2006.
Pigeons have been shown to have high proportions
Emergency and Critical Care. In: G. J. Harrison and
(76%) of kappa (k) opioid receptors in their forebrain.
T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medicine No. 1.
pp. 213-232. Spix Publishing, Paln Beach, FL.
 Butorphanol may, therefore, be a better analgesic in pigeons
than μ opioid agonists, such as morphine Mansour et al.
Hodges, R. D. I981. Endocrine glands. In: A. S. King and
 J. McLelland [eds.) Fortm and Function in Birds. Vol 2.
1988)
pp. 149-235. Acarlemic Press, London.
Johnson, J., D. N. Phalen, V. H. Kondik et al. 1992. Atherosclerosis in
REFERENCES
psittacine birds. Proc 13th Ann Conf Assoc Avian Vet: 8793.
King, A. S., and J. McLelland. I984. Birds - Their Structure and
Function. Znd edn. Bailliere Tindall, London.
Akester, A. R. I971. The blood vascular system. In: D. J. Bell and
Lasiewski, R. C., and L. R. Dawson. I967. A re-examination of the
 B. M. Freeman [eds.) Physiology and Biochemistry of the
relation between standard metabolic rate and bodyweight of
Domestic Fowl. Vol 2. pp. 783-837. Academic Press, London.
birds. Condor 69: 13-23.
Atalan, G., M. Uzun, I. Demirkan et al. 2002. Effect of medetomidine-
Lichtenberger, M. 2005. Determination of indirect blood pressure in
butorphanol-ketamime anaesthesia and atipamezole on heart and
the companion bird. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 14[2]:
176
respiratory rate and cloacal temperature of domestic pigeons.
149-152.
JVet Med A Physiol Pathol Chin Med 49[6): 281-285.
Ludders, J. W., and N. Mathews. I996. Birds. In: J. C. Thurmon,
Casares, M., F. Enders, and J. A. Montova. 2000. Comparative
W. J. Tranquilli and J. G. Benson [eds.) Lumb and Jones 
electrocardiography in four species of macaws [genera
Veterinary Anesthesia. 3rd edn. pp. 645-669. Williams &
Anodorhynchus and Ara). J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
47(5): 277281.
Maina, J. N. 1996. Perspective on the structure and function of
Chitty, J. R. 2005. Basic techniques. In: N. Harcourt-Brown and
birds. In: W. Rosskopf and R. Woerpel [eds.) Diseases of Cage
J. R. Chitty [eds.) Manual of Psittacine Birds. Znd ed. pp.
and Aviary Birds. 3rd edn. pp. 163-217. William & Wilkins,
50-59. BSAVA, Gloucester.
Baltimore.
Clippinger, T. L., and S. R. Platt. 2000. Seizures. In: G. H. Olsen and
Mansour, A., H. Khachaturian, M. E. Lewis et al. 1988. Anatomy of
S. E. Orosz [eds.) Manual of Avian Medicine. p. 173. Mosby,
CNS opioid receptors. Trends Neurosci I1[(7): 308-314.
St Louis.
 McDonald, D. 2006. Nutritional considerations section I: nutrition 
Coles, B. H. 1997. Avian Medicine and Surgery. Znd erdn. Blackwell
and dietary supplementation. In: G. J. Harison and
Science Ltd, London.
T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medlicine No. I. pp.
Curro, T. G., D. Brunson, and J. Paul-Murphy. I994. Determination of
86-107. Spix Pubhshings, Palm Beach, FL.
the EDso of isofhurane and evaluation of the analgesic properties of
O'Malley, B. 2005. Avian anatomy and physiology. In: B. O'Malley
butorphanol in cockatoos [Cacatua spp.]. Vet Surg 23: 429-433.
[ed.] Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species:
Dorrestein, G. M. 1997. Metabolism, pharmacology and
Structure and function of mammals, birds, reptiles and
therapy. In: R. B. Altman, S. L. Clubb, G. M. Dorrestein and
amphibians. pp. 97-161. Elsevier Saumders, London.
K E. Quesenberry [eds.)] Avian Medicine and Surgery.
Oglesbee, B. L., S. Orosz, and G. M. Dorrestein. 1997.
pp. 661-670. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
The endocrine system. In: R. B. Altman, S. L. Clubb,
Edling, T. M. 2005. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: N. Harcourt-
G. M. Dorrestein and K. Quesenberry [eds.] Avian Medicine
Brown and J. R. Chitty [eds.) Manual of Psittacine Birds. Znd
and Surgery. pp. 475-488. WB Saumders, Philadelphia.
edn. pp. 87-96. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Perrins, C. 1979. British Tits. Collins, London.
Edling, T M. 2006. Updates in anesthesia and monitoring. In:
Rae, M. 2000. Avian endocrine disorders. In: A. M. Fudge [ed.)]
G. J. Harrison and T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical Avian Medicine
Laboratory Medicine: Avian and Exotic Pets. pp. 76-89. WB
No. II. pp. 747-760. Spix Publishing, Inc., Palm Beach, FL.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Edling, T. M., L. A. Degemes, K. Flammer et al. 200l. Capnographic
Shoemaker, V. H. I972. Osmoregulation and excretion in birds.
monitoring of anesthetized African grey parrots receiving
In: D. S. Fammer and J. R. King [erds.) Avian Biology. Vol 2.
intertmittent positive pressure ventilation. J Am Vet Med Assoc
pp. 527-551. Academic Press, New York.
219: 1714-1718.
West, N. H., B. Lowell Lanille, and D. R. Jones. I981.
Evans, H. E. 1996. Anatomy of the budgie and other birds. In:
Cardiovascular system. In: A. S. King and J. McLelland [eds.)]
W Rosskopf and R. Woerpel [eds.) Diseases of Cage and Aviary
Form and Function in Birds. Vol 2. pp. 235-34l. Academic
Birds. 3rd edn. pp. 79-163. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.
Press, London.
Birds of prey anaesthesia
via
sthe
INTRODUCTION
Accipitridae (hawks, eagles and Old World vultures)
{Perrins, 2004]. Anatomical and physiological variations
pertinent to anaesthesia of birds of prey will be described.
This chapter will discuss species from the orders
Various anaesthetic protocols will be considered.
177
Strigiforrmes (owls) and Falconiforrmes [vultures, hawks,
The owners of these species usually fly the birds regu-
eagles and falcons). Strigiformes contain two families, the
Strigidae (most owl species [Fig. ll.1]] and Tytonidae
larly, either for pleasure or working (to collect vermin
species), particularly Falconiform species. They are,
[which includes the barn owl]. Falconiforrmes are divided
into five families, including the Falconidae (falcons} and
therefore, often presented in good cardiovascular fitness,
-and saueisd pue saassed iad isou on isenuon u!
sented to the veterinary clinician.
ANATOMY ANDPHYSIOLOGY
Respiratory system
The most common cause of respiratory pathology in birds of
prey is Aspergillus spp. (Redig, 1993). Infection presents
most ften as Aspergiltus fumigatus. This fungus isan oppor-
tunistic organism and usually infects immunosuppressed
birds (Dahlhausen, 2006). Predisposing factors include
stress, confinement, poor husbandry, malnutrition, other
disease, prolonged antibiotics or steroids (McMillian and
Petrak, 1989; Redig, 2000). The spores are usually found
in dusty, warm, humid environments with poor ventila-
tion. Certain species are reported to be more susceptible
to aspergillosis, including gyrfalcons (Falco rusticolus),
goshawks (Accipiter gentilis), golden eagles (Aquila
chrysaetos} and snowy owls (Nyctea scandiaca) (Forbes
1991; Fransen and VanCulsem, 1988; Redig, 2000, 1993).
Urinary system
The nasal glands are functional in falcons, assisting with
water homeostasis (O'Malley, 2005).
In cases of uricaermia, allopurinol may be used to
decrease uric acid production, but renal toxicity has been
Figure Il1.1 · This female snowy owl (Nycted scandiaca) belongs
reported in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamicensis) receiving
to theStrigidae owl family.
this drug (Lumeij et al., 1998). Carnivorous birds such as
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
birds of prey should be fasted before blood sampling, as
Behaviour
false-positive elevations in blood uric acid levels will be
seen in birds that have not been fasted (O'Malley, 2005)
Different species and individual birds react to hospitalisa-
tion and restraint in dissimilar ways. Some species are eas-
Gastrointestinal system
ier to handle, for example buzzards (Buteo buteo), while
others are more aggressive and nervous, such as goshawks
Most species have a crop. Owls do not have an obvious
[Accipiter gentiles) or sparrow hawks [Accipiter nisus)
crop, but rather a spindle-shaped distension of the cer-
(Coles, 1997].
vical oesophagus (Taylor, 2000).
The diet for free-ranging birds of prey is predominantly
PRE-ANAESTHETICASSESSMENT
small mammals and birds, although some species are
AND STABILISATION
adapted to hunt fish or other aquatic species. Nutritional
imbalance is less commonly seen in captive carnivorous
History and clinical examination
birds than frugivorous or granivorous species, as captive
feeding of whole prey is similar to diets in the wild.
L
Problerms may be seen if one food item only is fed, rather
Local variations and individual falconer preferences may
than the variety that free-ranging birds would consume.
affect the specific husbandry of birds presented to the
For exarmple, day-old chicks have a high fat content if the
veterinary surgeon. Details of enclosure design and com-
yolk-sac is not removed.
ponents of the diet should be ascertained. The amount of
Birds of prey perform intestinal reflux or casting
food given is likely to vary seasonally, depending_on
approximately i2h after feeding, in order to void the
whether the bird is flying, moulting or breeding. The
indigestible parts of their diet, such as bone (in owls), fun
source of food may be important, for example trichomon-
178
and feathers (all species) (McLelland, 1979).
iasis infection from a diet of infected pigeons.
Although athletically fit, birds in flying condition are
Most owned birds of prey will have restraint equipment
often rmaintained lean to encourage them to work well.
and be trained to the fist, but should be cast with a towel
If these birds become ill, hepatic glycogen reserves will
to control the wings and legs in order to allow detailed
deplete rapidly and hypoglycaemia may be present (Coles,
clinical examination. Most species do not bite, but the
1997). In contrast, most falconers supplement their birds
talons of even small species can apply pressure and cause
during the rmoult when they are not flying and these birds
injury to the handler if not properly restrained.
are less likely to be on the edge of nutritional imbalance.
Hospitalisation facilities
Integumentary system
 In contrast to other avian species, many raptors are accus-
As many birds of prey have long tail feathers, they must
tomed to being tethered close to the ground. However,
be protected during hospitalisation to prevent damage
care should be taken to approach the bird at the same level,
that would hinder the bird's flight capabilities.
as an approach from above may be perceived as aggression.
A tail-guard (Fig. ll.2) made of paper, card or radio-
 Birds should be provided with a perch that is high enough
graphic film should be placed around the tail to protect it,
to prevent the wing and tail feathers from trailing on the
particularly if the bird is unable to perch.
floor, where they may becorme damaged. Most trained birds
of prey are kept tethered on a bow perch, with falcons rmore
usually on a block perch. Perches are often covered with arti-
ficial turf (AstroTurf@, Southwest Recreational Industries,
Texas), which spreads the load-bearing surface across the
feet to reduce the risk of pododermatitis, and is easy to
clean and disinfect. Alternatively, rmost birds will perch on
a sturdy wooden branch during short-term hospitalisation.
If the raptor is unable to perch high enough to protect
its plumage, it is vital to protect the tail with a guard (see
Fig. 1l.2). The owner will not appreciate it if the bird's tail
feathers become damaged during hospitalisation so the
bird cannot fly until after a subsequent moult.
 Most captive birds will eat frorm a selection of day-old
chicks, mice, rats, rabbits and quail. It is important to
ascertain what the bird's usual diet is, including quantities
fed, before admittance to the veterinary practice. Although
 some birds will initially require easily digestible support-
ive nutrition, the aim will be to progress to the normal
Figure I1.2 · Tail-guard made from radiographic film on a Saker
diet as soon as possible. The practice may store frozen
falcon (Falco cherrug).
food, such as day-old chicks, to defrost before feeding to
Birds of prey anaesthesia
the patient. If the practice cannot source the food, the
Intubation
client can be asked to provide food for the bird during
hospitalisation. Most raptors are fed once or twice daily.
The tracheal opening is easily visible in most birds of prey.
Birds of prey should be fasted before elective procedures
to allow for crop ermptying. Feeding material that will not
The tongue is typically long and thin, with the glottis at the
base (Fig. 1l.4). Birds of prey have relatively large tracheas,
produce casting (i.e. meat without feathers and bones)
for example a 3-3.5 mm tube will be appropriate for a
will allow for feeding closer to the tirme of anaesthesia.
750 g hawk, or a 45 mm tube for a 3 kg eagle.
Fluid and nutritional support
Suitable nutritional support products for raptors include
Hill's a/d@ (Hills, Herts., UK), a convalescent food formu-
vla
lated for dogs and cats. In patients who have been anorexic
for a period of time or where dehydration is suspected,
fluids are provided first. Dehydrated patients may have
gastrointestinal motility or absorption problems. In mild
cases of dehydration, water or electrolyte solutions, such
sth
as Lectade@ (Pfizer Limited, Sandwich, Kent, UK),
should be administered orally before food is administered
If more severe dehydration is present, subcutaneous,
intravenous or intraosseous fluids should be used to rehy-
drate the patient (in increasing order of effectiveness).
179
EOUIPMENT REOUIRED
Figure II.3 · One electrocardiogram pad attaches to the skin on
Falconer's gloves and towels are necessary for restraint dur-
ing induction. A variety of sizes of endotracheal tube should
superficial ulnar vein (taped in place at elbow) of this Saker falcon
be available. Most birds of prey are sufficiently large to allow
(Falco cherrug) hybrid.
the anaesthetist to use multiple pieces of equipment to
assist with monitoring of the patient, such as oesophageal
 stethoscope, electrocardiogram (ECG) and capnograph.
TECHNIQUES
Routes of administration
Injections
There are several sites for intravenous access in birds of
 prey. The jugular vein is ideal for phlebotomy and ermer-
gency administration of fluids or medication. The superfi-
cial ulnar orbasilic vein is most commonly used for catheter
placerment peri-anaesthetically in patients over 300g
body weight (Fig. 11.3), although the superficial plantar
 metatarsal vein is another option. Needles and catheters used
are 23-25 gauge, depending on the patient size. Indwelling
catheters are secured using sutures to the skin or feathers
and/or bandage materials. In most cases, the catheter is
bunged and intermittent boluses of fluid or medication
administered, but in some instances a continuous rate infu-
sion will be administered. Raptors appear to traumatise
catheters and drip lines less than other companion birds.
The circulation can also be accessed via the intraosseous
route. In raptors weighing between 200 g and 700 g body
weight, a needle similar to that used in parrots rmay be used
for intraosseous access, i.e. a 2l-gauge, 25-mm hypodermic
Figure Il.4 · Oral cavity of a common buzzard (Buteo buteo)
needle. In birds weighing more than 700 g, an 18-gauge,
38-mm needle is more appropriate (Chitty, 2005]
the glottis at the base.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
Volatile agents
Anaesthesia is most commonly induced in raptors via a close-
A benzodiazepine, such as midazolam, may be adminis-
fitting facemask with a volatile anaesthetic agent, most com-
tered intrarmuscularly to produce tranquillisation prior to
monly isoflurane. Initial high gas concentrations, for example
mask induction with a volatile agent. The benzodiazepine
45% isoflurane, are used to induce anaesthesia. After induc-
will reduce the stress of induction, and the improved
tion, the bird is intubated and maintained on a lower concen-
muscle relaxation is useful if surgery is to be performed.
tration of anaesthetic, usually I-3% isoflurane.
The effects of midazolam will persist for several hours
(Valverde et al., 1990).
Anaesthetic maintenance
$
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
Birds are intubated and maintained on volatile agents.
th
OF ANAESTHESIA
 Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) should
be per formed.
Induction
Recovery
Injectable agents
Patients should be appropriately restrained during recov-
Although ketamine and a benzodiazepine will produce deep
ery, usually by casting in a towel. This is to reduce the risk
of self-trauma during recovery and to avoid injury to staff.
sedation or anaesthesia with good muscle relaxation, recov-
ery may be prolonged in raptors (Forbes, 1984). Ketamine
Most birds of prey do not fit in incubators and a large ken-
is reported to produce poor-quality restraint and anaesthe-
nel in a warm room is used for recovery. A heat pad and
180
sia in raptor species (Ludders et al., 1989). However, keta-
towels or blankets can be used to warm and pad the ken-
mine has a wide safety margin and can be adrministered via
nel. The perch should be removed until the bird has
any parenteral route, including orally. The addition of a
recovered sufficiently to perch soundly.
benzodiazepine will reduce the risk of convulsions due to
ketarmine (Baronetzky-Mercier and Seidel, 1995)
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
If anaesthesia is induced with ketamine and xylazine,
nocturnal raptors appear to metabolise the drugs more
As with other birds, isoflurane is generally used to induce
rapidly than diurnal species [Haigh, 1980). Buteo species
appear to be sensitive to this combination, with deep
anaesthesia via facemask for short procedures. Intubation
will protect the airway and allow IPpV.
anaesthesia and prolonged recovery times [Coles, 1984].
 For more prolonged or painful procedures, injectable
In contrast, the goshawk (Accipiter gentiles) and Coopers
agents are administered before induction with isoflurane
hawk (Accipiter cooperi) required higher doses, but had
via a facermask to produce a more balanced anaesthesia.
associated prolonged recovery times [Redig, 1983). The
Midazolam is a useful pre-medicant in nervous or stressed
combination of ketamine with xylazine is not recom-
birds, and opioids such as butorphanol will also provide
mended in large owls (Coles, 1997].
some sedation as well as analgesia. Addition of these
Another combination of a dissociative agent and benzo-
agents produces a smoother induction and recovery than
diazepine is the proprietary preparation of tiletamine and
volatile agents alone.
zolazepam (Zoletil@, Virbac Laboratories, Carros, France
or Telazol@, Fort Dodge Laboratories Inc, Fort Dodge,
IA). This preparation has been used to immobilise
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
Eurasian buzzards (Buteo buteo) via parenteral injection
(Trah, 1990) and up to 80mg/kg orally (Zenker et al.,
Observations on the patient
2000j. Oral administration does not usually result in sur-
gical anaesthesia, and the effects seen vary between pow.
In general, patient rmonitoring is similar to other anaes-
dered and liquid formulations. It has also been used
thetised birds. However, the toe pinch is unreliable as a
successfully in several other species, at various doses that
method of assessing anaesthetic depth in birds of prey, as
differ between species (Blyde, 1992; Gray, 1974; Hayes,
the response is variable depending on the patient (Coles,
1996; Schobert, 1987).
1997). Respiratory rate, depth and pattern should be
Propofol has been used to induce and maintain anaes-
closely assessed, as should heart rate and rhythm.
thesia via a continuous rate infusion in red-tailed hawks
(Buteo jamaicensis} and great horned owls (Bubo virgini-
anus) (Hawkins et al., 2003). Intravenous administration of
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
propofol at l mg/kg/min induced anaesthesia. Parameters
assessed during anaesthesia showed that the propofol had
A bell or oesophageal stethoscope can be used to monitor
minimal effect on blood pressure, but effective ventila-
heart rate and rhythm (Fig. 11.5).
tion was reduced. Recovery periods were prolonged, and
ECGs (see Figs 9.8 and 9.13) have been recorded in vari-
central nervous systerm excitatory signs were observed.
ous raptors, for example peregrine falcons (Falco peregrinus
Birds of prey araesthesia
few hours before anaesthesia. This should allow tirme for
the fluid to pass through the crop to the proventriculus
Antifungals
Owing to the high susceptibility of birds of prey to
aspergillosis, prophylactic anti-fungal agents, such as itra-
conazole, are routinely administered if the patient has any
of the predisposing factors listed above. These will
include stress associated with hospitalisation or other con-
current disease.
REFERENCES
Baronetzky-Mercier, A., and B. Seidel. I995. Greifvoegel und Eulen.
Figure Il.5 · Intubated Bonelli's eagle (Aquila fasciata). In larger
In: R. Goeltenboth and H.-G. Kloes [eds.) Krankheiten der
Zoo- umd Wildtiere pp. 443-465. Black well-
st
birds such as this, an oesophageal stethoscope can be used. The
Wissenschaftsverlag, Berlin.
lead across the head is from the electrocardiogram machine.
Blyde, D. 1992. Zoletil for Anaesthesia in Birds. Control and Therapy
Series, No.3294. University of Sydney Postgraduate
1
Committee in Veterinary Science.
brookei) (Rodriguez et al., 2004). However, values will
Chitty, J. R. 2005. Basic techniques. In: N. Harcourt-Brown and
J. R. Chitty [eds.) Manual of Psittacine Birds. Znd edn. pp.
vary in anaesthetised patients. One study has produced
181
50-59. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
reference values for buzzards (Buteo buteo} anaesthetised
Coles, B. H. 1984. Avian anaesthesia. Vet Rec I15[12): 307.
with isoflurane (Espino et al., 2001). Generally ECG leads
Coles, B. H. 1997. Avian Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. Blackwell
are attached as with other species, but adaptors can be
Science Ltd, London.
obtained to obtain ECG measurements via an oesophageal
Dahlhausen, R. D. 2006. Implications of mycoses in clinical
probe (Cardio Companion ECG Probe and Esophageal
disorders. In: G. J. Harrison and T. L. Lightfoot [eds.) Clinical
Lead, SurgiVet Inc, Waukesha, WI])
Avian Medicine No. I1. pp. 691-704. Spix Publishing Inc., Palm
 Capnography has been used in several species of birds
Beach, Florida
of prey (Desmarchelier et al., 2007). Arterial blood gas
Desmarchelier, M., Y. Rondenay, G. Fitzgerald et al. 2007.
Monitoring of the ventilatory status of anesthetized birds
analysis was performed on samples from the superficial
of prey by using end-tidal carbon dioxide measure with a
ulnar artery. This study reported a good correlation between
microstream capnometer. J Zoo Wildl Med 38: I-6.
arterial blood partial pressures of carbon dioxide and end-
Edling, T. M., L. A. Degemes, K. Flammer et al. 200l. Capnographic
tidal measurements over a normo-carbic range. However,
monitoring of anesthetized African grey parrots receiving
at low values of PerCOz, the associated PaCOz was over-
intermittent positive pressure ventilation. J Am Vet Med Assoc
estimated, possibly due to hyperventilation during the
219: 1714-1718.
study. The PaCOz was underestimated at higher PeTCO2,
Espino, L, M. L. Suarex, A. L6pez-Beceiro et al. 2001.
 possibly due to hypoventilation and dilution of the sampled
Electrocardiogram reference values for the buzzard in Spain.
gas with fresh gas from the anaesthetic circuit, along with
J Wildl Dis 37[4): 680-685.
Forbes, N. A. 1984. Avian anaesthesia. Vet Rec I15[6]: 134.
a decrease in capnography accuracy at higher values of
Forbes, N. A. 1991. Aspergillus in raptors. Vet Rec I28: 263.
PerCOz (Edling et al., 200l; Teixeria Neto et al., 2002).
Forbes, N. A., and R. B. Altman. I998. Self-Assessment Colour
Review of Avian Medicine. Manson Publishing.
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
Fransen, J., and J. VanCulsem. I988. Fungal infections in birds in
CARE
captivity [synopsis]. Assoc Avian Vet Today 2: 15.
Gray, C. W. 1974. Clinical experiences in CI-744 in chemical
restraint and anaesthesia of exotic specimens. J Zoo Anim
Fasting
Med 5[4): 12-21
Haigh, J. C. I980. Anaesthesia of raptorial birds. In: J. E. Cooper
and A. G. Greenwood [eds.] Recent Adv Stud Raptor Diseases.
Carnivorous species, such as birds of prey, tend to eat
pp. 61-66. Chiron Publications Ltd, Keighley, Yorks.
once or twice daily. In species with a crop, it will empty in
Hawkins, M. G., B. D. Wright, P J. Pascoe et al. 2003.
6-8h (Forbes and Altman, 1998). These birds should be
 Pharmacokinetics and anesthetic and cardiopulmonary effects
fasted for 12h, to allow the previous meal to be digested
of propofol in red-tailed hawks [Buteo jamaicersis] and great
and a cast produced. If the anaesthetic procedure is
homed owls [Bubo tirginiarmus]. Am J Vet Res 64[6): 677-683.
planned, it can be helpful to provide a feed without cast-
Hayes, L. M. I996. Restraint and Anaesthesia of Wild and Domestic
ing material (that is, meat without fur, feathers and
Birds. Annual Conference Proceedings Australian Committee
bones) on the previous day. If a bird of prey is in poor
of the Association of Avian Veterinarians: 295-315.
Ludders, J. W., J. A. Rode, and G. S. Mitchell. 1989. Effects of
body condition or dehydrated, it may be gavage-fed with
ketamine, xylazine and a combination of ketamine and xylazine
a liquid food supplerment or electrolyte solution up to a
in Pekin ducks. Am J Vet Res 50[2): 245-249
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Lumeij, J. T, E. P M. Sprang, and P. T. Redig. I998. Further studies
Schobert, E. 1987. Telazol use in wild and exotic animals. Vet Med
on allopurinol-induced hyperuricemia and visceral gout in red-
82: 1080-1088.
tailed hawks [Buteo jamiceisis). Avian Pathol 27: 390-393.
Taylor, M. 2000. Anatomy and physiology of the gastrointestinal tract
McLelland, J. 1979. Digestive system. In: A. S. King and
for the avian practitioner. Birds. Post Grad Found in Vet Sci,
J. MeLelland [eds.) Form and Fumction in Birds. Vol I.
Uni of Sydney, Aus. Proc 334: 107-113.
Pp. 69-181. Academic Press, London.
Teixeria Neto, F. J.,A. B. Carregaro, R. Mannarino et al. 2002.
McMillian, M., and M. Petrak. 1989. Retrospective study of
Comparison of a side-stream capnograph and a mainstream
aspergillosis in pet birds. J Avian Med Surg 3: 2lI-215.
Capnograph in mechanically ventilated dogs. J Am Vet Med
O'Malley, B. 2005. Avian anatomy and physiology. In: B. O'Malley
Assoc 221: 1582-1585.
[ed.) Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species:
Trah, M. I990. Ein neues Narkotikum auch fuer die Vogel-praxis?
Structure and function of mammals, birds, reptiles and
Kleintierpraxis 35[8): 413-416.
amphibians. pp. 97-161. Elsevier Saunders.
Valverde, A., V. L. Honeyman, D. H. Dyson et al. 1990.
4
Perrins, C. M. 2004. What is a bird? In: C. Perrins [ed.) The New
Determination of a seda tive dose and influence of midazolam
Encyclopedia of Birds. pp. I8-3l. Oxford University Press.
on cardiopulmonary function in Canada geese. Am J Vet Res
Redig, P. T. 1983. Anaesthesia for raptors. Raptor Res Rehabil Prog
51[7): 1071-1074.
Newslett 4: 9-10.
Zenker, W., M. Janovsky, J. Kurzweil et al. 2000. Immobilisation of
Redig, P. T I993. Mycotic infections of birds of prey. In:
the Eurasian buzzard [Buteo buteo] with oral
M. E. Fowler [ed.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine: Current 
tiletamine/zolazepam. In: J. T. Lumeij, J. D. Remple,
Therapy 3. p. 178-181. WB Saumders Co, Philadelphia.
P T. Redig, M. Lierz and J. E. Cooper [eds.) Raptor Biomedicine 
Redig, P. T. 2000. Aspergillosis. In: J. Samour [ed.) Avian Medicine.
Il ncluding Bibliography of Diseases of Birds of Prey pp.
L
pp. 275-287. Mosby, Philadelphia.
295-300. Zoological Education Network, Lake Worth, Florida.
Rodriguez, R., F. Preito-Montana, A. M. Montes et al. 2004. The
normal electrocardiogram of the unanesthetized pergrine falcon
[Falco peregrius brooket]. Avian Dis 48[2]: 405-409.
182
12
Reptile anaesthesia
2
btil
e
1
INTRODUCTION
anaesthetising these animals, many of these drugs are
11
effective at providing immobilisation in a humane way.
Almost &000 reptile species are divided into four orders:
Testudines (Chelonia) (tortoises, turtles and terrapins),
185
Chilling is not an ethically acceptable method for
Crocodylia (alligators, crocodiles, gharial], Rhynchocephalia
restraint of reptiles.
[tuatara} and Squarmata [includes the suborders of snakes
and lizards) (Halliday and Adler, 2004; Holz, 2006). Many
species are endangered in the wild, and regional and global
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
legislation may restrict their capture and moverment. This
chapter will cover those pets most cormmonly seen in vet-
Although basic anatomy is similar between species, signifi-
erinary practices, namely chelonia, snakes and lizards.
cant variations are present, even within groups. This section
Tuatara are unlikely to be seen as pets, but techniques are
will discuss general reptilian anatomy as it pertains to anaes-
similar to those used in lizards. Crocodilians will be covered
thesia and peri-anaesthetic care, and aspects of husbandry
briefly, as smaller species owned by herpetologists may be
that may predispose to disease with potential efects on
presented to the veterinary practice.
anaesthesia. Later sections will provide more detail on dif-
Reptiles are considered an unusual pet, but are kept by
ferent reptilian groups, although other texts should be con-
a broad spectrum of people. Different species have differ-
Konoishud pue Auoeue suadis-sainads ueqo on pams
ent characteristics, with some being relatively easy to
 maintain in captivity and others only suitable for experi-
will aid with pre-anaesthetic assessment of the patient's
enced herpetologists. Reptiles present to the veterinary
health and thereby suitability for anaesthesia. It will also
clinician for a variety of reasons and case care may be for
provide the clinician with the knowledge to select appro-
the single pet or for a group.
priate anaesthetic agents, which may have undesirable
Anaesthesia may be required for a range of procedures
side effects on the patient, and enable rmonitoring of the
in these species. Demeanour varies greatly across the
patient during anaesthesia and recovery.
orders, with some requiring little chemical restraint for
procedures such as radiography, for example tortoises,
while others require sedation for many procedures, such
Stress
as snakes. Anaesthesia [with appropriate analgesia} is
required for surgery in all species.
Reptiles are particularly susceptible to captive husbandry
Contrary to older texts, rmore recent work suggests that
inadequacies, frequently succumbing to disease when
reptiles do experience pain (Kanui and Hole, 1990,
stressed (Cowan, 1980). Environmental conditions, espe-
1992). Techniques previously advocated for restraint of
 cially temperature, are important for all body processes.
reptiles included chilling. This has been shown to slow the
As their metabolism tends to be slower than that of mam-
ectothermic animal's metabolism and responses, allowing
mals or birds, and clinical signs are often difficult to iden-
easier manipulation, but not to provide analgesia.
tify, pathological processes are often not observed in
Hypotherrmia is painful and brain necrosis may also result
reptiles until an advanced state. For this reason, it is
(Schumacher and Yelen, 2006). Chilling is inhumane and
important for veterinary practices to be able to provide
not an ethically acceptable technique for restraint of rep-
appropriate hospitalisation facilities, and the clinician should
tiles. Many anaesthetic and analgesic agents have been
endeavour to identify and correct problems that may
used in reptiles. Although there are some challenges to
affect post-anaesthetic survival.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
As certain reptile species are dangerous, causing bites
daytime background temperature range from 27°C to
or scratches, or being venomous, staff safety is irmportant
35°C with a hotter basking area is appropriate; for noctur-
when hospitalising these animals. All enclosures should be
 nal or montane species 21-27°C is advisable. Nighttime
secured, to prevent animal escape leading to self-trauma
temperatures are lower, usually 21°C (Rossi, 2006). Most
 or human casualties. Signs should be used to indicate ven-
heat sources, for exarmple bulbs and mats, can be con-
omous species and, if possible, enclosures should be
nected to a thermostat. However, thermostats are not
locked. Latex or nitrile gloves should be worn when hand-
100% reliable and it is wise to-monitor the temperature
ling reptiles, to avoid transference of pathogens between
range, ideally using maximum-minimum digital therm-
patients or of zoonotic infections to handlers. Further per-
ometers (Fig. 12.1}.
sonal protective equipment (PPE) may be required with
Most reptiles, including chelonia and diurnal lizards,
some animals, for example the use of towels to restrain
derive heat by basking in the sun (heliothermy). Free-
green iguanas or snake hooks with venomous snakes.
ranging nocturnal species may warm from contact with
hot surfaces (thigmothermy). In captivity, it is usual to
provide a basking heat source, for example a hanging heat
Temperature
bulb (Fig. 12.2) or a heat mat at the side of the vivariurm.
It is advisable to ensure animals cannot contact electrical
Reptiles are unable to generate their own body heat,
heat sources, as thermostats are often unreliable and ani-
but rather they are ectothermic. (The two exceptions to
mals frequently obtain contact burns.
this rule are the fat-laden, giant, leatherback sea turtle
 The cardiovascular system is involved in thermoregulation.
(Dermochelys coriacea) and the incubating female Indian
The heart rate in reptiles increases in warmer tempera-
python (Python molorus), which produce a small amount
tures, hastening body warming. In species with three-
of heat (Bennett and Dawson, 1976; Seymour, 1982).) By
chambered hearts (see Cardiovascular section], the right
depending on external environmental temperature for
to left cardiac shunt will also reduce cooling by avoiding
186
body heat, reptiles lower their metabolic requirements
evaporation from the lungs. Peripheral blood vessels are
(Bennett and Nagy, 1977). However, low environmental
dilated during warming and then constricted to reduce
temperatures limit locomotion and enzymatic activity in
cooling (Pough et al., 1998b). Lymphatic vessels are large
reptiles. Smaller animals are more susceptible to changes
in reptiles and attempted venous access commonly
in the external temperature. Most reptiles are poorly
accesses lymph.
insulated and readily lose heat (O'Malley, 2005a}.
The reptile imrmune system is dependent on the mainte-
Other husbandry factors
nance of body termperature (Mitchell, 2006). At cooler tem-
peratures immune responses are lower, with less antibody
production and fewer circulating peripheral white blood
Poor husbandry will affect the patient's health in reptiles
cells (Mitchell, 2006; Rossi, 2006). Studies have shown that
more than in any other exotic pet. Many species are main-
some reptiles self-regulate temperature when cormbating a
tained in countries with a climate far removed from their
pathogen; by selecting a higher environmental temperature,
native land and, as ectotherms, rely very rmuch more on
they will effect a fever response'to stimulate the immune
their owner for provision of an appropriate external envir-
system (Vaughn, 1963, 1974]. Reptiles with advanced dis-
[9 'aui) asuodsar sun mous ou Ae asa
seq ym uaas Aun saads as sis Ii a
 Each reptile species has a preferred optimum tempera-
husbandry requirerments that should be adhered to when
ture range (POTR), also called the preferred optimum
patients are hospitalised.
temperature zone (POTZ). This is the natural tempera-
 Several problerns may be seen in animals maintained in
inappropriate environments. Outwith the species' POTR,
Table 12.1 lists ranges for common pet species. Different
the body's enzymes will function sub-normally. An inap-
metabolic functions will be optimal at different termpera-
 propriate environmental temperature will adversely affect
tures within this range [i.e. each has a preferred body
all metabolic processes in the body Immunosuppression may
juerodui si a (zooz 'le a yanod (ad] aimeiaduat
to maintain reptiles within their POTR during hospitalisa-
Inappropriate temperature and relative humidity often lead
tion, otherwise metabolic processes, such as digestion,
to dysecdysis (which may require surgery, for example
drug metabolism and healing, may function sub-optimally.
retained spectacles in snakes and some geckos). As with
This includes the anaesthetic period, when it will be neces-
marmrmals, insufficient (or excess) ventilation will predispose
sary to work in a warm environment and provide supple-
the animal to respiratory tract infections. Inappropriate
mental heating for the patient. Heat larmps, electric heat
diets in reptiles often contain insufficient or unbalanced
pads, water bottles, forced air blankets and heated circu-
quantities of certain minerals. Ultraviolet (UV) lighting is
lating water blankets can all be used to maintain the
moe  (saoqaq eed) saiads ue oj paa
patient's body temperature during anaesthesia and the
calciurm metabolism. Diets rmay also contain excess fats (for
recovery period.
 example, insectivores fed primarily on grubs).
 It is necessary to create a termperature gradient within
 UV light is necessary for many reptiles, with rmost che-
a vivariurm, so that the patient is able to select whether
lonia and lizards having an absolute requirement. UV-A
to warm up or cool down. For most diurnal species, a
[320-400nm) affects behaviour and appetite, while UV-B
Reptile anaesthesia
Table I2. I: Husbandry and physiological information for common pet species (conscious values)
SPECIES
PREDOMINANT
POTR (*C)
RELATIVE
COMMENT
DIET
HUMIDITY (%)
African spurred tortoise
Herbivorous
25-35
40-75
Don't hibernate. Diet
(Geochelone sulcata)²
mainly grasses/hay
Asian water dragon
Herbivorous
24-30
80-90
Arboreal, semi-aquatic
(Physignathus concincinus)4
Bell's hingeback tortoise
Omnivorous
24-28
50-80
May hibernate in the
(Kinixys belliana)2
wild, but usually
over wintered
an
in captivity
lesth
Boa constrictor
Carnivorous
28-30
50-80
(Bod constrictor)4
es
Boxtortoise
Carnivorous-omnivorous
21-27(night
95
Hibernate
(Terrapene
(depending
>15, basking
on species)
27-32)
187
Burmese python
Carnivorous
25-30
50-80
(Pythonmolurus）
Corn snake
Carnivorous
25-30
30-70
(Elaphe guttata)4
Desert tortoise
Herbivorous
20-32
<30
Hibernate 
(Gopherus ogassizi)2.3
Garter snake
Carnivorous
21-28
50-80
 Diet mainly fish
(Thamnophis spp.)4
Green iguana
Herbivorous
25-35
75-100
Arboreal
(guana guana)4
Inlandbearded dragon
Omnivorous
25-35, basking
30-40
Appreciate climbing
(Pogona vitticeps)4
area 38-42
facilities
Kingsnake spp.
Carnivorous
25-30
30-70
(Lampropeltis spp.)4
Leopard gecko
Insectivorous
25-30
30-40
(Eublepharis macularius)4
Leopard tortoise
Herbivorous
25-35
40-75
May hibernate in the
(Geochelone pardalis)2
wild, but often over-
wintered in
captivity
Map turtle
Omnivorous
21-28 (water)
Somespecieshibernate
(Graptemys sp.)2
(Continued)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 12.1: (Continued)
SPECIES
PREDOMINANT
POTR (*C)
RELATIVE
COMMENT
DIET
HUMIDITY (%)
Marginated tortoise
Herbivorous
20-28
30-50
Hibernate
(Testudo marginata),
North African tortoise
(T. graeca), Hermann's
tortoise（T.hermanni)²
Red-eared slider
Omnivorous
20-24
60-90
Semi-aquatic. Young
Trachemys scripta
quite carnivorous,
elegans)2
become more
herbivorous as mature.
Hibernate
Red-footed tortoise
Herbivorous
21-27
50-60
Diet mainly fallen fruits,
(Geochelone carbonaria)2
leaves and flowers
occasional carrion. Do not
hibernate
Royal python
Carnivorous
25-30
50-80
(Python reguis)4
188
Savannah monitor
Insectivorous
26-38
20-50
(Varanus exanthematicus)4
Spiny-tailed lizard
Herbivorous
20-25
50-90
(Uromastyx spp.)4
Veiled (Yemen) chameleon
Insectivorous
21-38
75-80
Arboreal.
(Chamaeleo calyptratus）4
Require water via drip
system or misting 
Yellow-footed tortoise
Herbivorous
25-27
75-80
Does not hibernate
(Geochelone denticulata)2
(008),(0e ) (9661 )  (900g pueog)
[290-320 nm] is necessary for vitamin D manufacture and
where escape may be possible through large vents. In non-
calcium absorption (Rossi, 2006). As UV light cannot pass 
climbing species, including most chelonia, a portion of the
through glass, any reptiles not kept outdoors in natural sun-
top of the enclosure can be open or covered with mesh to
light require UV supplementation. This is usually provided
allow airflow. In smaller or more agile species, the use of
 in the form of a UV strip light or bulb.
wire netting is required over openings in the vivarium.
Relative hurmidity requirements vary with species, with
Increasing ventilation should not allow the environmental
some requiring high humidity and others comparatively
temperature to drop below the POTR, and should not
dry environments. In the latter, a small area with high
allow draughts to pass through the enclosure. Animals with
humidity is required, for example a box with damp sub-
respiratory disease that may be airborne should be main-
strate, particularly during ecdysis. Each species has spe-
tained in a separate airspace to other patients. Feeding,
cific water requirerments [see Urinary section]. Attention
cleaning and treatment utensils should also be disinfected
to conditions in the wild and provision of microclimates
between anirmals to prevent transfer of pathogens.
within a captive enclosure are important for many species.
Where vivaria are not available, dog or cat cages can be
As with other captive animals, ventilation of the enclos-
modified. With small animals, a small Perspex box can be
ure should be considered. This can be difficult for anirmals
placed within the cage to retain the patient. Supplemental
requiring high environrmental temperatures, or srmall species
heating and lighting can be provided just outside or within
 Reptile anaesthesia
240399
号
otile
 anaesth
lesla
189
Figure I2.1 · Digital maximum-minimum thermometers can be
Figure I2.2 · Ceramic bulbs used to provide heat in vivaria should
used to monitor temperature in vivaria.
be covered with wire mesh to prevent patient contact resulting in
burns.
the enclosure. Environmental parameters, for example
of vivariur cleaning. Water should be provided for all rep-
temperature, should continue to be recorded. Due to the
tiles to drink. A deeper bowl may be required for soaking,
increased ventilation with these enclosures, more heating
but a shallow bowl should be provided for weak animals
may be required than for a vivarium.
that may drown. Supervised soaking in deeper water may
Most animals benefit from a hide in their enclosure.
be appropriate during the day to encourage water intake
This may be a simple cardboard box or a log hide, or a
[see Fluid therapy section below]. Aquatic or semi-aquatic
plastic box with moist substrate [damp kitchen roll or
species obviously also require water in which to subrerse.
sphagnum rmoss) for animals undergoing ecdysis. Arboreal
species should be provided with branches for climbing. If
BOX 12.I Record-keeping
the front of an enclosure is glass, most species benefit
from an opaque strip at the bottom to prevent self-trauma
during escape attempts.
Record previous and current captive husbandry in
An animal's response to various husbandry factors, such
case notes
as inappropriate environmental temperatures or the pres-
 Monitor and record husbandry during hospitalisation:
ence of an aggressive companion, may result in a stress
vivarium temperature range, faecal/urine/urate
response. This response results in physiological changes
production, appetite, medications received (including
that attempt to allow the individual to adapt to its environ-
route), and treatments performed
ment. If stressors are severe or persistent, for example if
enclosure temperatures are excessively high or low, the
Metabolism
 animal's physiology may not be able to adapt. In these situ-
ations, one outcome may be inhibition of the immune sys-
tem, leading to an increased susceptibility to infections.
Reptiles are ectothermic, relying on their environment for
Certain disease processes, such as chronic endopara-
heat. As noted above, rates of metabolic processes within
sitism, may reduce the reptile's ability to respond to other
reptiles will thus be affected by external temperature.
disease and concurrent pathologies will be more likely.
 In general, the metabolic rate is much slower in reptiles
Although most species will have specific substrate
compared to sirmilar sized mammrmals (Bennett and Dawson,
requirements for long-term care, most can be maintained
1976). Each species will have a specific metabolic rate
on newspaper during hospitalisation. This allows for ease
(Bennett, 1972; Espinoza and Tracy, 1997]), with an optimum
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
temperature for this metabolism within their POTR.
Major vessels:
Lungs
   e i s  s i
Right precaval vein
metabolic rates to cope with a high metabolic demand.
Left precaval vein
Postcavalvein
Left and 
Larger species may increase their metabolic rate after
Left hepatic vein
right
feeding to facilitate digestion (Secor and Diamond, 1995;
pulmonary
Secor and Nagy, 1994j.
veins
When bursts of activity are required, reptiles can convert
General
Sinus
Heart
to anaerobic metabolism for short periods (Bennett and
dirculationj
enosus
Licht, 1972). Lactate build-up causes an acidaemia, with an
Pulmonary
Body
Right
Left"
associated reduction in haemoglobin oxygen affinity, delay-
atrium
atrium
circulation
ing oxygen transport (Pough et al., 1998a). Right to left car-
Left
diac shunting occurs during this proces (Machin, 2001).
and
Cavum,
Cavum
Few studies have investigated drug efficacy in reptiles.
right aortic
venosum arteriosum
 Likewise, little is known of drug absorption, distribution,
arches
Cavum
 metabolism and excretion in these species. Most reports of
 pulmonale 
drug use are sporadic and in small numbers of animals. Due
Venlricke
there are likely to be differences in drug effects that preclude
direct extrapolation between species, even those within the
Key:
- Interventricular canal (ie. cavum venosum and cavum arteriosum
same taxonormic order. Illnesses, such as renal or hepatic dys-
are a continuous chamber)
function, or hypoproteinaemia associated with parasitism or
· Muscular ridge (ie. separates cavum venosum and cavum
nutritional deficiencies, are also likely to affect drug metabo-
arteriosum fromi cavum pulmonale to some extent)
lism. Dehydration and hypothermia have profound effects
190
Oxygenatedblood
on drug rmetabolism, and many reptiles require correction of
Deoxygenated blood
these pararmeters before adrministration of other medications
(Mitchell, 2006). Clients should be advised before their pet
Figure I2.3 · Schematic showing circulation in non-crocodilian
is admitted that data are limited and that most drugs are not
reptiles.
specifically licensed for use in reptiles.
BOX 12.2 Circulation in reptiles
Cardiovascular system
(non-crocodilian)
Reptile hearts are located within the cranial part of the
Heart = right atrium (with sinus venosus), left
coelomic cavity. In chelonia, the heart lies midline, cranial
atrium and ventricle (comprising cavum venosum,
to the liver and just dorsal to the plastron. In most lizard
cavum arteriosum and cavum pulmonale)
species, the heart is at the level of the pectoral girdle,
Cavum venosum and cavum arteriosum form a
although in larger species, such as monitors (Varanus sp.),
chamber, with the interventricular canal in between
it lies more caudally. The serpentine heart lies within the
cranial body third (Funk, 2006).
Left and right single-cusped atrio-ventricular valves
The heart in snakes, lizards and chelonia is three-
arise from the interventricular canal and prevent
chambered, with two atria and one ventricle (Fig. 12.3).
regurgitation from the ventricle to the atria
A pressure differential exists between the charmbers, ensur-
A muscular ridge within the ventricle separates the
ing that oxygenated and preoxygenated blood do not mix
cavum venosum and cavum arteriosum from the
(White, 1976). Changes in pulmonary resistance will allow
cavum pulmonale
shunting of blood either towards (during respiratory activity)
Or away from (during oxygen starvation, for example diving
Timing of muscular contractions and pressure
or apnoea) the lungs. Use of the right to left shunt allows the
variations in the heart creates a functionally dual
lungs to be bypassed, reducing oxygen loss from the circula-
   (d  s
tion and also reducing evaporative heat loss. A pathological
normal respiration. For example, in normal
respiration in a red-eared slider (Trachemys scripta 
increase in pulrmonary resistance, for instance pneumonia,
 elegans), 60% of the cardiac output is directed to the
would similarly shunt blood away frorm the lungs. This shunt
becomes important when using volatile agents, as uptake of
pulmonary circulation with 40% to the systemic
the anaesthetic into the systemic circulation will be reduced.
circulation; the pulmonary circulation is bypassed
during diving (Williams, 1992)
Crocodilians have a heart sirmilar to mammrmals, with two
atria and two ventricular chambers.
When pulmonary resistance is increased, for
Ventilation and apnoea will ffect blood flow through the
example during diving or in animals with lung
pulmonary and systemic circulation in reptiles [Kik and
pathology, a right to left shunt occurs. Blood is,
Mitchell, 2005). Research with sliders (Trachemys scripta
therefore, recycled around the systemic circulation
spp.] has shown that the shunt between pulmonary and sys-
and bypasses the pulmonary circulation
termic circulations is mediated by adrenergic mechanisrms,
Reptile anaesthesia
but blood flow is primarily determined by the ratios of resist-
base of the fleshy tongue (see Fig. 15.1], while the crocodil-
ance within the two circulations (Overgaard et al., 2002)
in glottis is behind the epiglottal flap. Crocodilians have
 The normal blood volume in reptiles is approximately
 several features that allow underwater hunting and breath-
5-8% of body weight (O'Malley, 2005a). A 100 g snake
ing at the water's surface with their mouth open underwa-
would, therefore, have 5-& ml of blood. Reptile haemo-
ter, including the presence of this epiglottal flap (also known
globin is different to that in mammals and there are also
as the basihyoid plate or valve) at the base of the tongue [see
species differences. In reptiles, haermoglobin tends to have
Fig. 16.1) (Diaz-Figueroa and Mitchell, 2006).
a lower oxygen affinity, allowing release of oxygen to tis-
 Snakes and lizards have incomplete tracheal rings, but che-
sues at very low blood oxygen levels. During hypoxic con-
lonia and crocodilia have complete tracheal rings (Davies)
ditions such as diving, particularly during exercise where
1981). The trachea bifurcates at the level of the thoracic
production of lactic acid leads to metabolic acidosis, the
inlet in chelonia, at the level of the heart in snakes, and at
Bohr effect again increases the release of oxygen from
the base of the heart in lizards
blood to tissues (Murray, 2006a). The oxygen-carrying
The mucociliary apparatus is primitive in reptiles, predis-
capacity of a reptile's blood is greatest within the species'
posing them to inhaled infections and reducing their capabil.
D
POTR (Davies, 1981)
ities of clearing exudates from the airways (Murray, 1996].
Heart rate in reptiles increases with temperature, as does
Although reptilian lung volumes are large, they have a much
1
peripheral vasodilation, leading to increased peripheral per-
smaller surface area (approximately 1%) than similar-sized
fusion and thus increasing heat intake. The opposite occurs
mammals (Wood and Lenfant, 1976). The lungs of reptiles
1
with reduced environmental temperatures, conserving heat.
are essentially sac-like, with the surface area increased by
In order to maintain cardiac output at lower temperatures,
various invaginations, which form faveoli (equivalent to
11
stroke volurme is increased (White, 1976). Heart rate is
mamrmalian alveolij lined with respiratory epithelium.
increased during periods of activity, often threefold (Murray,
Serpentine bronchi are short, leading into elongated,
2006a). Smaller anirmals tend to have a higher heart rate
sac-like lungs. Boids have a vestigial, but functional, left
than larger individuals. Other factors that will elevate heart
lung, while other species have a right lung only. Lizard lungs
191
rate include increases in metabolic rate, respiratory rate
are single-chambered (unicameral} in most species, but
and sensory stimulation (Davies, 1981).
multi-chambered in iguanids. Iguana and chameleon lungs
The renal portal system (see Urinary section] allows
are paucicameral, having a few chambers, but no intrapul-
blood to drain frorm the pelvic limbs into the kidney (O'Malley.
monary bronchus. Snake and some lizard lungs extend
2005b). This may have some bearing on administration of
into air sacs (see Fig. 13.5] with non-respiratory epithe-
medications into the caudal portion of the reptilian body,
lium. Chelonia have left and right intra-pulmonary bronchi,
but it is thought that valvular control may allow this to be
leading to paired lungs that are multi-chambered (multi-
bypassed at certain times (O'Malley, 2005a).
cameral] and relatively rigid. Monitor lizards also have
multicameral lungs. Crocodilian bronchi branch into mul-
tiple internal lobes, with complex multi-chambered lungs
BOX 12.3 Reptile cardiovascular system
(Perry, 1989; Perry and Duncker, 1978). Reptilian lungs
are delicate, being easy to inflate due to high compliance
Snake, lizard, and chelonian hearts are 3-chambered
(Schumacher and Yelen, 2006). Over-inflation and rup-
Crocodilian hearts are 4-chambered
ture during positive pressure ventilation (PPV) are also easy.
Reptiles are capable of anaerobic metabolism
The respiratory epitheliurm varies between reptile species.
In all species, gas exchange occurs across the falveolar epithe-
Environmental temperature will affect heart rate and
liurm of the lungs, but less so in the caudal lungs of snakes. No
perfusion
faces include the skin in some soft shellaquatic species, buc-
copharyngeal mucosa in many lizards and cloacal mucosa in
Respiratory system
terrapins (Seymour, 1982; Wood and Lenfant, 1976).
Softshelled turtles (Apalone spp.)] are able to obtain up to
Reptiles generally breathe through their nostrils. The nasal
70% of their oxygen requirements through their shell when
 passages are conmected via the internal nares to the oral cav-
underwater (Marcus, 198l). Cutaneous sites of respiration
ity and thence the glottis. The anatormy of the airway will
are also important for carbon dioxide elimination in aquatic
vary with species, but the glottis is generally quite rostral.
species (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006).
Snakes protrude the glottis and trachea out of the mouth to
 Reptiles do not possess a diaphragm as found in mammals.
allow simultaneous breathing and feeding (O'Malley, 2005a),
Crocodilians are the exception, with a muscular septum sirm-
 There are two arytenoid cartilages and one cricoid carti-
ilar to the mammalian diaphragm caudal to the lungs. In
lage surrounding the glottis. The glottal opening is closed at
order to breathe, intrapulmonary pressures are changed by
rest, opening during inspiration and expiration. It is found
musculature moverments, including the intercostals, pectoral
on the base of the oral cavity, but the position varies in dif-
and abdorminal muscles. Chelonians have a non-muscular
ferent species. In snakes, the glottis is quite rostral on the
pseudo-diaphragm (the septum horizontale), which sepa-
tongue [see Fig. 14.9). Glottal position in lizards depends on
rates the lungs frorm the rest of the coelormic cavity. Limb
the species, being rostral in most species, but more caudal in
moverments stretch this septurm, pulling it ventrally and cre-
herbivores (see Fig. 13.3). The chelonian glottis is at the
ating negative pressure, and, thus, inspiration (Davies, 1981).
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Respiratory control varies between species. In snakes
Several factors will predispose to disease in the reptil-
it is primarily centrally controlled. There are species
ian respiratory system. These include stressors discussed
differences in the presence or absence of intrapulmonary
earlier, such as malnutrition, ecto- or endoparasitism,
chemoreceptors and stretch receptors; many snakes have
excessively high or low relative hurmidity, poor hygiene or
both while many chelonian species have stretch receptors
suboptimal environmental temperature (Murray, 2006b).
only (Redrobe, 2004).
Bacterial pneumonia is common in reptiles, either as pri-
The respiratory rate of reptiles varies with environrmen-
mary or opportunistic pathogens. Most infections are
tal temperature and body size, but is usually 10-20 breaths
associated with aerobic Gram-negative isolates, such as
per minute (O'Malley, 2005a). In a normal breathing cycle,
Aeromonas，
Klebsiella,Proteus,
Pseudomonasand
a reptile will expire, inspire and relax. This last phase can
Satmonella (Hilf et al., 19990). Viral, parasitic, and fungal
be particularly long in aquatic animals (Wood and Lenfant,
infections are also reported. High environmental humid-
1976). Reptiles tolerate hypoxia well, converting to anaer-
ity, low temperature and dusty substrates may increase
obic metabolism during periods of apnoea (Murray, 1996).
fungal spores in the environment.
Their myocardium tolerates this change in metabolism bet-
Rhabdias nematodes are found in snake and lizard lungs,
ter than marmmalian myocardium, with species variability
and pentastormids may be throughout the respiratory tract
in this tolerance (White, 1976). Heart rate reduces during
in all species (Murray, 2006b). Various trematodes may
apnoea and the right-to-left cardiac shunt predominates,
infect the respiratory tract (Murray, 2006b) and other
bypassing the pulmonary circulation (Murray, 2006a).
nermatodes may have a pulmonary larval migrans (Stoakes,
Respiration is related to oxygen and carbon dioxide
1992). Occasionally foreign bodies may be inhaled. Other
concentrations, and environmental temperature. The main
disease processes, such as space-occupying lesions, may also
stirmulus to breathe is low levels of oxygen in blood, caus-
compromise respiratory function.
Owing to the respiratory depressive effects of anaesthetic
dioxide will lead to an increase in tidal volurme. An elevated
agents, it is prudent to stabilise the patient with respiratory
192
temperature, or a prolonged dive in aquatic species, will
disease prior to anaesthesia. In most species many investiga-
lead to elevated oxygen dermand that is met by an increase
tions can be performed without anaesthesia, including radio-
in tidal volume [not an increase in respiratory rate). High
graphy and tracheal swabs for cytology and/or culture. If
levels of environmental oxygen lead to reduced ventila-
oxygen supplementation is deemed necessary, care should
tion, due to a decrease in respiratory rate and tidal volume
be taken not to depress respiratory drive further in reptiles
(Wood and Lenfant, 1976].
by elevating inspired oxygen levels.
Reptiles are able to function well with anaerobic
 metabolism. Circulatory buffering systems enable the ani-
Urinary system
mals to tolerate acid-base imbalances produced by lactic
acid and hydrogen ion build-up during anaerobic periods.
Consequently, reptiles are able to cope during hypoxia
In comrmon with other vertebrates, water constitutes
produced by respiratory illness, masking clinical signs
approximately 75% of a reptile's body weight (66% in che-
until pathology is severe and the individual is unable to
lonia) (Fig. 12.4) (Minnich, 1979; Smits and Kozubowski,
compensate further (Murray, 1996). A poor ability to
1968). Cellular and endothelial membranes between water
move inflammatory exudates from the lungs will further
compartments are selectively permeable. Intracellular ion
compromise the reptile with respiratory pathology, as the
concentrations produce osmotic forces to maintain water,
increase in pulmonary resistance will tend to direct car-
diac blood flow towards the systermic circulation.
Solids
25%
BOX 12.4 Reptile respiratory system
Chelonia and crocodiles have complete cartilaginous
tracheal rings
Intracellular
fluid
 Most snakes only possess a right lung (boids have a
volume
vestigial left lung also)
50%
Low partial pressure of oxygen is the main stimulus
Mater
75%
Interstitial
to breathe
Extracellular
spaCce
(66% in
Respiratory pathology results in:
dhelonia)
fluid
volume
-an increase in pulmonary resistance,leading to
Intravascular
50%
space
right-to-left shunting of blood in the heart and
30%
reduced supply to the pulmonary circulation
Body mass
Today body
Extracellular
-an increase in anaerobic metabolism to compensate
water
fuid volume
for hypoxia
Figure I2.4 · Water distribution in reptiles.
Reptile anaesthesia
Starling's forces act at vascular membranes to maintain
waste products as insoluble uric acid, which forms the white
water and plasma proteins act as impermeable solutes to
or yellow urates seen in reptile excreta. Aquatic reptiles
 produce colloid osmotic pressure within the compartrments
excrete armmonia, urea and small armounts of uric acid.
(Mader and Rudloff, 2006),
 Reptiles will also regulate water loss by selecting a cer-
Water homeostasis in reptiles differs significantly from
tain environmental hurmidity, and attention should be paid
that in mammals. The slow reptilian metabolism results in
to species' humidity requirements during hospitalisation.
slower synthesis of water. Reptiles are unable to produce
Water is reabsorbed frorm the urinary bladder (found in
more water than their evaporative water loss and so are
chelonia and sorme lizard species) or [in species without a
more likely to become dehydrated when not drinking or
bladder) refluxed from the urodeum into the rectum
 absorbing water via other methods (see Fluid therapy sec-
where protein, electrolytes and water can be reabsorbed.
tion) (Minnich, 1979). Reptilian kidneys are much less well
Water can also be absorbed from the cloaca (Braun, 1998;
developed than those of mammals and birds, with fewer
Dantzler, 1976; Schmidt-Nielsen and Skadhauge, 1967].
and shorter nephrons, fewer capillaries to the glormeruli, and
This mechanism can be utilised for rehydrating reptile
no loop of Henle (Dantzler, 1976; Holz, 2006). Kidneys are
patients, as they may absorb water if soaked in a shallow
D
responsible for synthesis of vitamin C (Gillespie, 1980)
warrm water bath.
and active vitamin D (llrey and Bernard, 1999).
 Lipids on the skin reduce water loss in reptiles. Skin per-
The paired kidneys are connected to the urinary blad-
meability also increases when in contact with water, allow-
吊
der or cloaca via ureters. Not all reptiles have a bladder,
ing transdermal rehydration (Lillywhite and Maderson,
1
for example agamidae lizards have only rudimentary blad-
1982). Under-hydrated reptiles may become anuric and
ders. Snakes, crocodilians and sorme varanidae lizards have
urates may form solid concretions. Alternatively, uric acid
may build up in the body and lead to gout. Many reptiles
1
no bladder (Fox, 1977). Owing to their lack of renal reab-
sorption of water, homeostasis in reptiles relies on their
excrete potassium and sodium via an extra-renal salt gland
drinking water, reabsorbing it from the cloaca and blad-
to conserve water (O'Malley, 2005a).
193
der, and salt loss via the nasal salt glands (Fitzsimmons
and Kaufman, 1977)
Reducing the glomerular filtration rate also conserves
BOX 12.5 Reptilian urinary tract is
water. If a reptile becomes dehydrated, blood may cease
adapted for water conservation
to flow through the glomerulus. There is a dual blood sup-
ply to the reptilian kidney, from the renal arteries and
Few nephrons
renal portal vein (similar to avian species, see Fig. 9.2).
Low glomerular filtration rate
The renal portal vein bypasses the renal glomerulus,
Renal portal system
entering the tubules directly. This mechanism ensures
renal perfusion continues even when glomerular blood
Uric acid production (terrestrial species)
flow is reduced to conserve water [Murray, 2006a), pre-
venting ischaemic necrosis of the renal tubules. A valve
for regulating the amount of blood entering the kidneys
via the renal portal system has been described in Red-
eared sliders (Trachemys scripta elegans) (Holz et al.,
1997b), which may be affected by adrenaline (epineph-
rine} and acetylcholine as in poultry (Rennick and Gandia,
1954). Shunts also bypass the kidneys by carrying blood
from the renal portal system to the postcava (Porter,
Water in
intravenous
1972). Historically, texts have advised against adrministra-
fuid bag
tion of drugs in the caudal half of the reptilian body, but
more recent work suggests that the site of administration
does not lead to nephrotoxicity or subtherapeutic levels
(Holz et al., 1997a; Holz et al., 2002)
 Most species will drink water and so should be provided
with a shallow bowl of water when hospitalised. A deeper
Fenestrations in giving set
bowl or aquarium is necessary for semi-aquatic or aquatic
species. Chameleons require dripping water (Fig. 12.5).
After anaesthesia, waterbowls should be removed until the
patient has recovered sufficiently to ensure drowning does
not occur. Aquatic animals should be intermittently sprayed
Water dripping on to foliage
with water during recovery to avoid integurment desiccation.
 provides source of water
As mentioned above, the reptile urinary system differs
for patient
significantly from that of rmarmrmals. Most mammals excrete
waste products from protein and amino acid metabolism as
Figure 12.5 · Simple set-up for administration of water in a
urea in water. As reptiles cannot concentrate urine, water
chameleon enclosure. (A plastic bottle with pinholes in the base
 must be conserved. Terrestrial species excrete nitrogenous
could also be used to provide water.)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Renal diseases have been reported in many species of
Table I2.3: Fluids commonly used in reptiles, with their
reptile. Pathologies include inflarmmatory or degenerative
 distribution characteristics
changes, infection or neoplasia. Metabolic derangements
may lead to amyloidosis or gout (Frye, 1992, 1994a). Diets
Crystalloids
 containing high levels of protein predispose to renal disease
in herbivorous reptiles (Barnard, 1996; Jacobson, 2003).
Chronic dehydration will also affect renal circulation
Replacement fluids (avoid lactated solutions if hepatic disease
and thereby function (Hermandez-Divers and Innis, 2006).
present):
Clinical signs associated with renal disease are often non-
Lactated Ringer's solution - ECF (interstitial and intravascular)
0.9% saline - ECF (interstitial and intravascular)
specific and further investigation (blood and urine analysis,
7% saline-ECF(intravascular)
radiography, ultrasound and renal biopsy) is necessary to
5% dextrose in water -ICF
assess fully for renal pathology and obtain a prognosis.
Maintenance fluids:
2.5% Dextrose in half-strength lactated Ringer's solution -
Digestive system
ECF (interstitial and intravascular)
Jarchow's solution (two parts 2.5% dextrose in 0.45% saline,
one part lactated Ringer's solution) - ECF(interstitial and
Reptiles fall into three broad categories according to their
diet: herbivores, carnivores and omnivores (Table 12.1).
intravascular)
Each species will have specific requirements and it is
advisable to maintain a captive diet as close to that in free-
Colloids
ranging conspecifics as possible. The reader is advised to
Hydroxyethyl starches, for example Hetastarch - ECF
consult other texts for specific dietary information.
(intravascular), synthetic
The clinician should ascertain the patient's nutritional
Whole blood - ECF (intravascular),natural
194
status. Inappropriate diets or insufficient calorific intake
will cause the reptile to become dehydrated, have muscle
wasting and necrosis, and compromised hepatic (usually
associated with lipidosis) and renal function (Mitchell,
fuid compartment
2006). Malnourished animals in a state of negative energy
(Mader and Rudloff, 2006)
balance may be hypokalaemic and hypophosphataemic,
and susceptible to refeeding syndrome with associated
cardiac dysfunction (Donoghue and Langenberg, 1996).
During hospitalisation, many anirmals, therefore, require
supportive care, particularly to stabilise debilitated ani-
mals before anaesthesia (Tables 12.2, 12.3 and 12.4). The
Table I 2.4: Suggested foods for supportive feeding via gavage.
reptilian oesophagus is quite fragile (Diaz-Figueroa and
Blended normal diet or commercial enteral diets
Mitchell, 2006) and gavage feeding should be performed
are often more balanced than baby foods
with care using sufficient lubrication.
The digestive tract in reptiles varies depending on the
DIETARY
FREE-RANGING/
SUPPORTIVE
species diet (see Table 12.1), with herbivorous species
GROUP
CAPTIVE
FEEDING IN 
having quite complicated tracts compared to carnivores
DEBILITATED
(O'Malley, 2005a). The positioning of organs within the
ANIMALS
body cavity also varies with species, with major differ-
ences found in the elongated body of snakes. All reptiles
Herbivore
Leaves, fruits,
Herbivore support
have a single combined excretory-reproductive organ, the
flowers and
diet (e.g. Oxbow@
cloaca (Diaz-Figueroa and Mitchell, 2006).
vegetables
Critical Care for
The oral mucosa should be moist, but colours can vary
Herbivores), puréed
from pale pink to grey (Diaz-Figueroa and Mitchell, 2006),
fruits or vegetables,
with some species being highly pigrmented. Chelonians do
organic and dairy-
not have teeth. Those in other species vary, for exarmple
free vegetarian baby
being long and caudal-pointing in snakes. Acrodont teeth,
poo,
Carnivore
Small mammals
 Dog/cat support diet
Table 12.2: Fluid rates for reptile rehydration (Mitchell, 2006)
(rodents),frogs,
(e.g. Hills@ a/d),
insects
blended killed prey
Maintenance requirements = I-3% of total body weight; i.e.
10-30ml/kg/day
Omnivare
Molluscs, small 
Combination of the
In addition, replace fluid deficits over 72-96 h
mammals, fruits,
above, puréed killed
vegetables
prey (e.g.insects),
Oral fluids: volume administered <2-3% body weight per
organic and dairy-free
baby food
Reptile anaesthesia
for example in bearded dragons (Pogona vitticeps) are not
dehydration. Debilitated animals often succumb to bacterial
replaced (Diaz-Figueroa and Mitchell, 2006). The clinician
 and fungal infections. The airm of the pre-anaesthetic period
should be aware of species' peculiarities during restraint,
is to identify any problems and treat them if possible, or
 particularly during oral manipulations of venomous species.
manage them to reduce the risks associated with anaesthe-
As with other rmetabolisrm in reptiles, the rate of diges-
 sia. As discussed above, inappropriate environments or diets
tion is related to body termperature and thence to envir-
often cause or predispose to disease in captive reptiles; for
onmmental temperature. Hospitalised animals should be
this reason, a thorough review of current and previous hus-
maintained at their POTR to allow normal digestion,
bandry should be ascertained to identify adverse factors.
particularly if recently fed. Dietary composition and
If husbandry factors suggest sub-clinical disease rmay be
species-specific gastrointestinal anatomy will also affect
present or clinical signs of disease are seen, further inves-
gastrointestinal transit time (King, 1996). These factors
tigation should be undertaken to identify the extent of
irmpact on anaesthesia as reptiles may regurgitate ingesta,
pathology and its aetiology. Many reptiles are not pre-
particularly if recently fed or maintained at too low an
sented to the veterinary clinician until disease processes
environmental temperature.
are advanced. These patients are often debilitated and,
D
Gastrointestinal transit time is usually 2-4 days in small
thus, are very poor candidates for anaesthesia. It is advis-
2
carnivorous lizards and snakes. Passage in large snakes,
able to provide supportive care prior to anaesthesia in
herbivorous chelonians and lizards may take up to 3-5
these animals, possibly providing fluid and nutritional
weeks (Diaz-Figueroa and Mitchell, 2006). Fasting is advis-
support for several days if procedures requiring anaesthe-
able before anaesthesia of carnivorous species to reduce
sia can be postponed while the patient is stabilised. If
the risk of regurigitation, either during anaesthesia or as a
anaesthesia cannot be postponed, a more guarded progno-
sis should be given and peri-anaesthetic supportive care,
11
response to restraint.
for example fluid therapy, should be more aggressive.
Nervous system
195
It is irmportant to provide an appropriate environment
The spinal cord extends to the tip of the tail in reptiles
for hospitalised reptiles before and after anaesthesia.
(Bennett, 1996a). There is no true subarachnoid space,
Maintenance of the patient within the species' POTR
and the subdural space lies between the leptomeninges
is vital and the environmental termperature should be
and dura mater (O'Malley, 2005a),
monitored using a digital thermometer.
Many veterinary clinicians do not provide analgesia for
reptiles. However, all vertebrate species experience pain.
History
These pain pathways have not been fully elucidated in rep-
tiles. Reptiles have been shown to possess an endogenous
This will include current and previous husbandry details for
opioid system and primary Ao-nociceptive neurons are
the patient. It is particularly irmportant with these ectother-
described in snakes [Liang and Terashima, 1993; Ng
mic species to note the temperature range in which they
et al., 1986]
have been maintained. Any deviation from the species-
As with many other exotic species, it can be difficult to
specific POTR is likely to affect metabolic processes,
assess reptiles for the presence of pain. Reptiles do not
including the immune system, and predispose to pathology
vocalise as some other species do and behavioural changes
that may affect anaesthesia. Any previous illnesses may also
are likely to be subtle. An appreciation of the species' and,
be pertinent to the enquiry. An appreciation of the animal's 
preferably, individual animal's normal behaviour may allow
the clinician to identify changes resulting from pain. This 
current appetite will enable assessment post anaesthesia
A risk factor for infectious diseases includes contact,
is more difficult if the species presented is unfamiliar to
either directly or indirectly, with other reptiles. The owner
the clinician or if a chronic illness has resulted in insidious
should be questioned regarding other pets as well as indi-
onset of clinical signs that the owner has not noticed.
 Often the animal will be less active and spend more time
rect contact with other reptile collections
hiding, but some may be more aggressive. An elevated res-
Clinical examination
piratory or heart rate may accompany pain. The reptile
may guard' the painful anatomical body part, for example
Observation of the patient before handling gives the clini-
non-weight-bearing larmeness with limb pain or an arched
back with coelomic discomfort.
-ue ar nu  ssasse on ado ue u
mal's resting stance. Weak animals are often inactive and
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
quadrupedal anirmals may not be able to raise thermselves
above the ground in normal posture. Body condition can
AND STABILISATION
sometirmes be assessed visually by observing muscle rmass
over bony prominences, such as vertebral spinous processes
Many reptiles presented for anaesthesia will have either sub-
or pelvic bones, or fat reserves in the tails of species, such
clinical or overt disease, which may be chronic in nature,
as leopard geckos (Eublepharis macularius). Respiratory
but have an acute onset of clinical signs. Often animals have
rate and pattern are also best observed before restraining
been anorexic for long periods, resulting in poor body con-
the patient. The skin of many species, particularly lizards,
dition. Inappropriate diet or husbandry may result in severe
changes colour when unwell, often becorming darker. Ocular,
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
nasal or oral discharges may be seen. Species such as leop-
Investigation
ard geckos store fat in their tails and loss of a normal plump
tail-base is suggestive of chronic malnutrition or illness.
Further tests may be required to characterise any prob-
A full clinical examination should be performed,
to
lems found on history and clinical examination. It is impor-
identify any current illness. (This may be restricted in
tant to maintain the patient at a sufficiently warm
dangerous or venomous species.) Respiratory assessment
temperature during these investigations. As with animals
will include measurement of rate, depth and character of
undergoing anaesthesia, supplemental heating can be pro-
breathing. Normal reptilian respiration should be inaudi-
vided from a number of sources (see Chapter 1).
ble, but respiratory abnormalities can often be heard by
 Faecal analysis should be routinely performed in rep-
placing your ear close to the animal in a quiet room.
tiles, particularly wild-caught animals that often have high
Although auscultation is possible using a stethoscope in
endoparasite burdens. Parasitism may lead to debilitation
snakes, lizards and crocodilians, it is often insensitive in
and predispose to further disease in the individual. Sarmples
detecting respiratory lesions (Chitty, 2004). A damp
of faeces or discharges may be necessary for culture, and
towel placed between the stethoscope and scales or cara-
should be taken prior to instigation of anti-microbial therapy.
pace may aid auscultation. Mucous membranes should be
Clinical examination and blood analysis will allow
assessed and any nasal or oral lesions noted that might
determination of the level of dehydration (Schumacher,
pertain to respiratory disease. Doppler blood flow moni-
2000) Blood analysis will provide data on metabolism. As
tors are useful for cardiac assessment, placing the probe
a minimum database, haematocrit packed cell volume
directly over the heart to obtain a heart rate, rhythrm and
(PCV), total protein and glucose should be recorded. The
character (Fig. 12.6)
total blood volume in reptiles is 5-8% of body weight, and
The external body surface should be examined for
up to 10% of this can be safely taken from a healthy ani-
swellings, lesions or ectoparasites. The abdominal region
mal. Thus, a 500 g animal would have a blood volume of
can be palpated in lizards, but this is a less sensitive tech-
196
25-40ml, and 2.5-4.0ml could be sampled. However,
nique for detecting abnormalities in snakes. Palpation and
many reptiles are not healthy and a srmaller volume is usu-
ballottement in the prefemoral fossae of chelonia may
ally taken. A blood sample may not be possible pre-anaes-
identify fluid or masses such as eggs.
thesia in many small patients; in these cases more reliance
Dehydration can be difficult to detect in reptiles; signs
is based on clinical assessment. As ethylene diamine
 may include sunken eyes [particularly in chelonia, which sug-
tetraacetic acid (EDTA) may lyse reptilian red blood cells,
gests dehydration more than &-10%), viscous oral mucus,
a fresh blood smear is used to estimate total and differen-
reduced urine output, dry faeces, dysecdysis, presence of dry
tial white cell counts. Lithium heparin samples can be
loose skin folds, lethargy and anorexia (Donoghue, 2006).
used for biochemical tests.
A basic neurological examination can be performed. The
eyes and ears should also be examined.
The body should be palpated to assess body condition,
Blood sample volume
and an accurate body weight should be obtained. A com-
parison between weight and body length (snout to cloaca
The maximum blood sample size that should be taken
in snakes and lizards, or sub-carapacial length in chelonia]
from a healthy reptile is 0.8% of body weight, i.e.
is also useful to assess body condition. These assessments
0.8 ml from a 100 g animal.
enable calculation of drug doses, fluid and nutritional
requirements.
Imaging may be useful to assess for intermal pathology.
 Radiography and ultrasonography may be indicated, and can
usually be performed in conscious reptiles. Where masses
 are present, cytology and microbiology may be performed
 om aspirates or biopsies. Anaesthesia will be required for
certain procedures, such as lung washes and endoscopic
investigations. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) techniques also require anaesthesia
to immobilise the patient for prolonged periods.
Stabilisation
This stage of reptile anaesthesia is often the most critical.
Many patients are presented with chronic debilitating dis-
ease and failure to stabilise prior to administration of anaes-
thetic agents may have fatal consequences. Initial triage
should allow a decision to be made as to how long anaes-
thesia may be delayed, including any procedures for
Figure I2.6 · Doppler monitor used to monitor heart rate in a
which the anaesthesia is required, and balanced against
sedated African spurred tortoise (Geochelone sulcata).
the benefits of stabilisation and supportive care.
Reptile anaesthesia
Provision of an appropriate environmental temperature
Intravenous or intraosseous fluid administration is
is vital in reptile medicine. Studies have shown that
advisable for replacerment of intravascular deficits. Sites
maintaining the reptile's body temperature at or just
for venous access are discussed in the species subsections,
above the species POTR will be beneficial. The imrmune
with most requiring surgical cut-down to access. Continuous
response is stimulated, with improved leukocyte function
rate infusion of intraosseous fluids is easiest or small
and reduced healing time. Fluids and medications will also
boluses can be repeated.
be better absorbed and metabolised in the warm patient
(Mader and Rudloff, 2006).
Warm fluids before administration to avoid inducing
 Most reptiles will be dehydrated and fluid therapy is
hypothermia.
vitally irmportant. The simplest method of administering
fluids is by immersion in a warm water bath or electrolyte
solution, at the species' PBT. Weak animals should be con-
Interstitial dehydration occurs when dehydration is
tinuously monitored to prevent accidental drowning.
more than &% and may be clinically evident as tacky mucous
H
In some patients, particularly those that have been
membranes and sunken eyes. Intracellular hydration can
D
anorexic, it may be necessary to provide nutritional sup-
be estirmated after restoration of perfusion and interstitial
port. Rehydration therapy should initially be administered
hydration (Mader and Rudloff,
2006).
Free water
1
to avoid 're-feeding syndrome' in hypophosphataemic and
deficits should be replaced over 12-24 h (see Table 12.2).
hypokalaemic animals (Bounos, 1972; DaSilva and Migliorini,
Dehydration present for more than 48h should be
1
1990). Calorific requirements should also be gradually intro-
replaced more gradually, over 24-48 h.
duced, with 50% on the first day, 75% on the second and
The choice of fluids for rehydration will depend on
11
100% on the third day (Calvert, 2004).
where water is required within the body. Isotonic crystal-
loids are often used to restore tissue perfusion, but the
Fluid therapy
addition of colloids will reduce the volume required.
197
Isotonic crystalloids used for fluid replacement (see Table
12.3) should have sodium levels similar to norrmal plasma
Dehydration is common in reptile patients, due to several
to produce less of an osmotic gradient, while those for
factors Inappropriate husbandry and diet or illness may lead
maintenance usually have lower levels. Fluids should be
to reduced water intake; excess losses may occur due to
warmed to 30-35°C before administration (Mader and
haermorrhage, reflux, vomiting or diarrhoea. History, clinical
Rudloff, 2006)
examination and blood results will allow an estimation of
The crystalloid 5% dextrose in water is hypotonic and
the patient's dehydration and fluid requirements. These
will thus increase intracellular fluid deficits, distributing
parameters are reassessed following fluid administration.
evenly across the total body water compartments.
Heart rate will increase in the hypovolaemic reptile, pro-
Hypertonic saline (7%) will increase the intravascular
viding it is within its POTR. Normal PCV is 20-40% in
osmotic pressure, drawing fluid from the interstitial and
most reptiles and total solids [measured on a refractometer)
intracellular compartments. This crystalloid should not be
40-80mg/L. Increases in both of these suggest dehydration
used in reptiles that cannot tolerate rapid increases in
due to reduced water intake or increased loss; decreases sug-
intravascular volume, for exarmple those with dehydra-
 tion, hypernatraemia, hyperchloraemia or hyperosmolality.
sodium and chloride levels will also be increased in dehydra-
Isotonic crystalloids, for example half-strength lactated
Ringer's solution and 2.5% dextrose, will distribute across
Oral fluid therapy can be used in patients for mainte-
the extracellular fluid volurme, with 70% entering the
nance requirements or to replace water deficits if less
interstitial space and 30% remaining intravascularly.
than 5% dehydrated, provided the gastrointestinal tract is
Intravascular volume depletion is treated with isotonic
functional. This is usually via oesophageal or stomach
crystalloids, usually lactated Ringer's solution or Jarchow's
tube, although small volurmes may be administered via a
solution (see Table 12.3). Buffered fluids may correct aci-
syringe directly into the oral cavity (Mitchell, 2006).
daemia if present, but some studies suggest the buffer
When more than 5% dehydration is present, parenteral
may exacerbate hyperlactataermia (Prezant and Jarchow,
fluids should also be administered.
1997). Reptiles can tolerate high levels of lactate, as pro-
The subcutaneous route is not used regularly in rep-
duced during anaerobic metabolism (White, 1976). End-
tiles. The poor blood supply means absorption is slow, and
au mone Keur uoisnjadoday raai io aimy iaall aeis
the small subcutaneous space limits the volume that may
lactate salts in lactated Ringer's solution to affect plasrma
be administered. This route should again only be used for
levels (Lowery et al., 1971). In cases of hyperkalaemia,
reptiles less than 5-6% dehydrated (Mitchell, 2006).
hypercalcaemia or hypochloraemic metabolic alkalosis,
Patients with moderate-to-severe dehydration can be
0.9% sodium chloride solution can be used for fluid ther-
given intracoelomic fluids. As with all fluids, these should
apy (Mader and Rudloff, 2006).
be warmed prior to adrministration. There is a risk of
 Excess isotonic crystalloids rmay reduce intravascular col-
organ puncture with this technique, but large volurmes can
loid osmotic pressure or further increase hydrostatic pres-
be administered and absorption is rapid via the coelomic
sure, leading to movement of fluid into the interstitial
membrane and serosal surfaces. Fluid volume should be
compartment. This may cormpress lymphatic vessels and
 limited as reptiles lack a diaphragm.
reduce drainage. Oxygen perfusion may be reduced if
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
anaermia is present, particularly if cardio-respiratory disease
EOUIPMENT REOUIRED
is also present. Colloids should be given in these cases
[Mader and Rudloff, 2006].
Anaesthetic equipment
Collid fluids are isotonic, but contain large molecules
that will remain in the intravascular fluid space and thus
increase osmotic pressure. They must be administered
Various sizes of facemasks and induction chambers may be
intravenously or intraosseously. Colloids will, therefore,
of use in reptile anaesthesia. Endotracheal tubes come in a
only increase intravascular fluid volume, but will do so for
variety of sizes, with adaptations from intravenous and
longer periods than the use of crystalloids alone.
uinary catheters necessary for many small reptile species
Concomitant administration of crystalloids and colloids
(see Fig. 1.6).
will prevent interstitial dehydration, which may result if
Since most reptile pets are less than 10 kg in weight, a
colloids are used alone. Commonly used synthetic col-
non-rebreathing anaesthetic circuit should be used. For
loids include hydroxyethyl starches and dextrans.
small patients (<10kg), a T-piece is appropriate. The
Whole blood transfusions are a form of colloid. The
minirmum gas flow rate is l L/min, as the vaporiser is inac-
donor animal should be of the sarme species and healthy,
curate at lower flow rates. Larger patients may require
and blood volume collected should be no more than 0.8%
other circuits (see Chapter 1).
of body weight. Little is known about blood transfusions
in reptiles, but in animals that have received transfusions
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
previously a slide agglutination test can be performed
(Mader and Rudloff, 2006).
An & MHz Doppler probe is useful for assessing heart rate.
Oesophageal stethoscopes may be used in larger animals.
Electrocardiography (ECG) can be used in reptiles. Pulse
198
BOX 12.6 Pre-anaesthetic stabilisation
cximetry is of limited use in reptiles and blood pressure
monitors are rarely used.
Failure to stabilise a patient prior to anaesthesia may
have fatal consequences
Hospitalisation requirements
Fluid therapy should be administered to all patients
before anaesthesia
Additional heat sources are required during anaesthesia
and the peri-anaesthetic period. These may include heat
lamps, electric heat pads, water bottles, forced air blan-
kets and heated circulating water blankets. The environ-
Nutritional support
mental temperature can be increased using central
heating in treatment rooms, and heat mats and bulbs in
Reptiles that have a reduced appetite may respond to
vivaria. Anaesthetic recovery time will be prolonged in an
force-feeding, for example animals with reduced vision
environment outside the individual species' POTR, as meta-
bolic processes including drug metabolism will be slowed.
may eat if food is placed near or into the mouth. However,
many reptiles presented to the veterinary clinician are
Equipment for fluid administration in reptiles may
completely anorexic and require intensive supportive care.
include a sink or cat litter tray to use as a bath, oesophageal
Fluid deficits should be addressed before nutritional
tubes (dosing catheters, urinary catheters), oesophagos-
support, as the gastrointestinal tract will function sub-
tomy tubes (Fig. 12.7), intraosseous needles or catheters
optimally in dehydrated patients.
Assist-feeding may be carried out using gavage feeding
or, for patients likely to require longer-term support, via
indwelling feeding tubes. Initial foods may be more liquid
to assist with fluid losses, progressing to higher calorie
foods for debilitated anirmals and eventually foods close to
the normal diet for maintenance.
Feeding tubes come in a variety of types and sizes.
Commercial tubes can be used for most patients and
intravenous catheters [without the stylet) used for small
patients. Gags or speculums are often required, as soft
tubes should be protected from the patient's bite and the
patient's jaws should be protected from damage by metal
tubes. The volume of food administered and the feeding
frequency depend on the size and health status of the
reptile. Smaller animals will benefit from more
frequent feeds to mirmic their natural behaviour, but this
must be balanced against a need to minimise stress to the
Figure 12.7 · Oesophagostomy feeding tube in a Hermann's
patient.
tortoise (Testudo hermanni).
Reptile anaesthesia
Pre-measure the length of tubing to reach the distal
BOX 12.7 Basic equipment required to
oesophagus or stomach. This will be approximately half-way
hospitalise and anaesthetise reptiles
down the length of the body in most reptiles. Prime the
tube with fluids, to avoid introduction of relatively large vol-
Secure enclosure - vivarium or kennel
umes of air. Lubricate along the tube, for exarmple with a
 Easy to clean substrate, e.g newspaper for
small amount of petroleum jelly or sterile lubricating jelly,
terrestrial animal
particularly in dehydrated patients where the delicate
Heat source for enclosure and for anaesthesia, e.g.
oesophageal mucosa may easily be traurmatised. With the
mouth opened, the glottis should be visualised. The tube for
ceramic heater, heat bulb, heat mat or combination
gavage feeding is passed dorso-laterally to avoid entering the
Digital thermometer to measure body and
glottis, which is closed at rest in reptiles. In chronically debil-
environmental temperatures
itated animals, a prolonged recovery may be anticipated and
Ultraviolet lighting (not required for all species)
til
Water provision - varies from shallow bowl for some 
e
species to drink (Fig. I 2.8), to aquatic tank for others
BOX 12.8 Drug/fluid administration
an
to swim
Hygrometer to monitor relative humidity
st:
reptiles, to reduce the risk of introducing infection
Hide, e.g. cardboard box, upended broken plant pot 
In some species scales are present to provide
D
Qlimbing facilities for arboreal species - e.g. wooden
5
branch for bearded dragon
protection, and the needle should be inserted
1
between scales in these animals to avoid damaging
Food - varies between species and whether self-
the integument
feeding or assist-feeding. Ask owner to provide
Pre-warm any fluids or food to be administered, to
199
normal diet if practice does not normally stock
help maintain the patient's body temperature. Also
Restraint devices -towels, gloves, snake hooks
ensure that fluids are not over-heated as this could
Ventilator or Ambu bag (selfinflating bag-valve-mask)
cause intermal damage
Endotracheal tubes - I-4 mm, uncuffed
Oral gags - metal, wooden, plastic, tape; can be
improvised (e.g. wooden tongue depressor)
Small syringes and needles (insulin syringes) for small
patients
 Infusion pumps or syringe-drivers for accurate fluid
administration
to use in place, syringe-drivers or infusion pumps. Various
fluids should also be on hand for use as required.
TECHNIQUES
Routes of administration
Most animals will absorb oral fluids well; these are usually
adrministered in boluses via a rubber or metal oesophageal
tube. A variety of tubes are available for this purpose. If a
metal dosing catheter with ball-tip is used, a gag should be
placed in the mouth to prevent traurma to the reptile's jaw,
particularly in lizards and snakes where teeth may be dam-
aged. If a rubber or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) dosing catheter
is used, the gag is necessary to prevent the patient biting
through the tube. A wooden tongue depressor covered with
adhesive bandage is useful as a mouth gag in lizards. A
smooth round plastic or wooden bar, for exarmple a cotton-
bud, can be used in snakes. For small or mediurm-sized ter-
Figure I2.8 · Cat litter trays can be used to bathe reptiles to
restrial chelonia the clinician's finger can be placed in the
encourage drinking and voiding of waste products (such as this
cormer of the mouth, while a wooden or metal gag may be
Hermann's tortoise [Testudo hermanni]], or as the water source
more useful in larger or more aggressive chelonian species.
for aquatic species within the hospital vivarium.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
an oesophagostomy feeding tube deemed appropriate; the
ischaemic necrosis. The endotracheal tube should be as
reader is referred to other texts for description of this tech-
large as possible, to reduce escape of anaesthetic gases
nique (McArthur et al., 2004a; Mitchell, 2006)
into the working environrment, and to allow sufficient air-
Where more severe dehydration is present, or sus-
way ventilation. If a cuffed tube is used, for example dur-
pected, more aggressive fluid therapy should be insti-
ing oral procedures in larger animals, care should be taken
gated. Subcutaneous or intracoelormic fluids are not well
not to over-inflate. Alternatives to cuffed endotracheal
absorbed in cold patients. The needle is inserted between
tubes are those with a step or 'shoulder' to place at the
scales at a shallow angle for subcutaneous injections. For
glottis, producing a wider base and narrow tip (see Fig. 1.6).
intracoelomic injections, the animal is turned into lateral
For very small animals, intravenous catheters or feeding
recumbency, to allow organs to fall away frorm the injec-
tubes can be attached to connectors for anaesthetic cir-
tion site in an attempt to avoid accidental organ puncture.
cuits. The clinician should attempt to minimise functional
The caudal third of the coelomic cavity is entered, to
dead space within the circuit by ensuring the extent of
avoid the lungs or air sac (see Fig. 15.4D].
endotracheal tube between the patient's oral cavity and
Constant rate infusions administered intravenously or
anaesthetic circuit is minimised (see Fig. 13.2). PPV is
intraosseously are more beneficial in debilitated animals,
important in these patients to reduce the risk of respira-
where intravascular fluid deficits are likely to be present.
tory secretions obstructing the endotracheal tube.
The intravenous or intraosseous routes are more difficult
to access in reptiles, but in debilitated patients are the
Assisted ventilation
methods of choice for fluid adrministration
A cut-down technique is necessary for placement of intra-
Bradypnoea or apnoea occurs during anaesthesia in rep-
venous catheters in reptiles. In all but the most severely
tiles and they thus require assisted ventilation. This can
debilitated patient, anaesthesia or analgesia is required. Local
be performed either by an assistant or by using a mechan-
anaesthesia is preferred to general anaesthesia for this proce-
200
ical ventilator. Manual ventilation is labour-intensive and
dure, as fluids are usually required to stabilise the patient to
excess pressure can easily result in damage to the delicate
reduce the risks of general anaesthesia. Peripheral venocon-
airways. Mechanical ventilation is preferred, both because
striction is common in dehydrated and hypothermic animals,
and warming the animal before catheterisation will assist
management is easier and also because the pressure or
with peripheral venodilation (Mader and Rudloff, 2006).
volume and respiratory frequency can be electronically
Imtraosseous accessis used for patients that are either too
maintained (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006).
 The principles of intermittent positive pressure ventila-
small or with a circulation too collapsed to allow venous
access. Intraosseous injections should be performed using
tion (IPPV) are described in the introductory chapter. The
tidal volume in reptiles is much larger than that in mam-
appropriate analgesia, usually under general anaesthesia.
[The intraosseous route is not possible in snakes.) The tib-
mals, but with a lower respiratory rate. Peak airway pressure
should be less than 10-i5 cm HzO. A point particularly
ial crest is accessible in most species. The stifle is flexed,
local anaesthetic injected and a needle with stylet inserted
worth noting for manual ventilation is that inspiration
should proceed over a maximum of 1 or 2 s. IPPV is usually
into the tibial plateau. This should avoid the joint capsule.
The distal femur can also be used, entering the anterior sur-
performed at four to eight breaths per minute (Schurmacher
face. Correct positioning can be checked using radiography.
and Yelen, 2006). The reptile's body should be observed
during forced inspirations and movements should mimic
Tape or sutures are used to secure the needle.
those seen during conscious inspirations in healthy animals.
Intubation
There is a tendency to over-inflate the lungs during forced
ventilation. A low pressure should be used in reptiles as
Intubation is particularly important in anaesthetised
their have very fragile lungs and air sacs.
 During mechanical ventilation, the pressure required to
reptiles as the relaxed position of the glottis is closed.
 approximate normal inhalation will vary between individual
Endotracheal intubation, therefore, maintains the trachea
animals. As a guide, this will be 5-10cm HzO in lizard
in an open position during anaesthesia, permitting passage
of gases. Connecting the tube to an anaesthetic circuit
species. In snakes, 6-10cm HO is usually sufficient, but a
also protects the airway from fluids, for example haemor-
higher pressure setting rmay be required to achieve full venti-
lation in the long trachea. In chelonia, &-10 cm HzO should
rhage during oral procedures, and enables positive pres-
increase intra-coelomic pressure and produce small outward
sure ventilation (PPV) to be performed.
 moverments of the limbs as seen in normal respiration.
Adequate sedation or anaesthesia is required to pro-
duce jaw relaxation for intubation. (The exception is snakes,
where conscious intubation is sometimes performed.)
Staff safety with venomous species
A good light source is necessary for the procedure. In
species such as chelonia or herbivorous lizards, where the
Many snake species and two lizard species (the helo-
glottis is located caudally in the mouth, a laryngoscope is
derms) are venomous. Staff safety is paramount if these
useful to aid visualisation.
species are to be treated at a veterinary practice. If staff
Endotracheal tubes come in a wide variety of shapes
are not sufficiently trained or confident, it may be advis-
and sizes. Uncuffed tubes are usually used, to avoid dam-
able to refer these animals to a better equipped practice
age to the delicate tracheal lining that may result in
rather than risk a potentially fatal incident. In general,
Reptile anaesthesia
access to the oral cavity should be restricted to anaes-
As in other species, the use of high doses of single agents
thetised animals and great care should be taken not to
results in pronounced cardio-respiratory depression and pro-
self-envenormate when exarmining the oral cavity or intu-
longed recovery tirmes. The use of combinations of agents
bating the animal. Emergency protocols should be in place
allows the clinician to reduce individual drug doses and
for instances where a member of staff is bitten or the ani-
thereby reduce side effects. This also allows the clinician to
mal escapes.
address analgesia and muscle relaxation of the patient.
Injectable agents
BOX 12.9 Assisted ventilation
Ketamine hydrochloride is commonly used as part of the
Reptiles require assisted ventilation during
reptile anaesthetic protocol. Its advantages include the
anaesthesia
possibility to administer intramuscularly or intravenously,
and a wide safety margin. However, muscle relaxation is
ti
 This can be performed either manually or mechanically
poor and analgesia minimal. Recovery can be prolonged,
e
Peak airway pressure < |0-15 cm H2O
particularly when used at high doses. Combinations of
Ventilationrate 4-8breaths/minute
ketarmine with benzodiazepines and opioids result in smooth
induction and recovery, and provide muscle relaxation
and analgesia (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006). Another
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
dissociative anaesthetic, tiletamine, has been used in reptiles
OF ANAESTHESIA
as the preparation containing zolazepam. Higher doses may
1
have extended recovery times of up to 72 h.
Medetomidine is usually combined with ketamine and
Induction
an opioid agent, for example butorphanol. This combination
201
can be used to allow examination and minor procedures
Volatile agents
on larger species. Medetomidine and ketamine can be
adrministered intramuscularly or intravenously. Atipamezole
Gaseous anaesthetic agents are ideal for maintenance of
can be used to reverse the alpha-2-agonist.
anaesthesia in reptiles. These agents have a wide safety
Propofol is the anaesthetic agent of choice in reptiles. The
margin and recovery is rapid. In animals that do not
safety margin is wide, induction is srmooth, and recovery is
breath hold, these agents can also be used for rapid induc-
smooth and rapid. The major disadvantage is the require-
tion of anaesthesia. In other species, including chelonia,
ment for intravenous or intraosseous access for administra-
injectable agents (see below) must be used to induce
tionof
this agent. Some animals may require
 anaesthesia before inhalational agents can be instigated.
pre-medication with a low dose of the agents discussed
Isoflurane causes minimal cardio-respiratory depres-
above before intravenous access is possible. Doses required
sion, and also limited hepatic and renal toxicity. In
vary between species, and in general snakes require a
unpre-medicated animals, anaesthesia can be induced in a
slightly lower dose and chelonia a higher dose compared to
chamber or via a mask with 5% isoflurane. Once the
lizards (Divers, 1996). A continuous rate infusion or inter-
patient is sufficiently anaesthetised, as noted by loss of
mittent administration of boluses can be used to maintain
jaw and muscle tone, the animal is intubated (if possible)
anaesthesia (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006). As in other
and maintained on 2-3% isoflurane (Schumacher and
Yelen, 2006). Anirmals that are debilitated or have received
fol. A rapid bolus injection may lead to apnoea (Bennett et
pre-medication with other anaesthetic agents will require
al., 1998). The dose is, therefore, titrated to effect, and
lower concentrations of inspired anaesthetic agent.
 most animals are intubated after induction to provide oxy-
 Sevoflurane has been used in reptiles with varying success.
gen and gaseous anaesthetic agents for maintenance.
Concentrations of 7-8% were required for induction, with
Alfaxalone/aiphadotone preparations have been used to
3.5-4.5% to maintain surgical anaesthesia. Anaesthesia was
anaesthetise several species of reptiles, and were rmost
not achieved in sorme species (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006),
reliable in lizards and chelonia [Lawrence and Jackson
1983). The author has also used alfaxalone (Alfaxan@,
Other routes of administration
Vétoquinol, Buckingham, UK) as the sole agent to induce
 anaesthesia in lizards and chelonia.
Oral administration of sedative or anaesthetic agents in
 Neuromuscular blocking agents provide immobilisation,
reptiles leads to unreliable results. Similarly, prolonged and
but no analgesia, and IPPV will be required if they are
unreliable induction times result from subcutaneous drug
used (Redrobe, 2004).
admministration (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006). Therefore,
anaesthetic agents are usually administered imtramuscu-
larly, intravenously or intraosseously. Drug pharmacokinet-
Anaesthetic maintenance
ics do not appear to be significantly altered if anaesthetic
agents are administered caudally, despite historical con-
After induction, even very small reptiles can be intubated.
cerms regarding the renal portal system (Benson and
 Maintenance is usually achieved with volatile agents. PPV
Forrest, 1999; Holz et al., 1997a).
is often required as respiratory depression is comrmon.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Recovery
If gaseous anaesthetics are used, these are switched off.
Some injectable anaesthetics are reversible, for example
 medetomidine with atipammezole. The reptile patient is kept
intubated until making spontaneous respiratory moverments.
The high levels of oxygen supplied during anaesthesia
will suppress the reptile's respiratory drive and continued
oxygen provision during recovery will increase the time
until:
spontaneous respiration (Diethelm, 2001). Two
methods are used to reduce this, the first being to use car-
bon dioxide along with oxygen as carrier gases during
anaesthesia. The second is to provide PPV with room air
during recovery, for exarmple using a respiratory or Ambu
bag (see Chapter 1], rather than using 100% oxygen as is
common practice in mammals.
Supplemental oxygen should be administered if the
reptile patient has respiratory disease and hypoxaemia is
suspected. Once the animal has been extubated, a face-
mask [with oxygen flow rate of 2-5L/min] or nasal
catheter [with oxygen at 0.5-3 L/min} can be used to pro-
vide oxygen if necessary. In cases with obstructive upper
202
airway disease, a transcutaneous tracheal catheter can be
placed to provide oxygen into the trachea. Oxygen should
be humidified (see Fig. 1.1l) to prevent drying of the res-
 piratory passages (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006).
As the normal glottal position is closed in reptiles, the
endotracheal tube is leftin place until the animal is taking
regular deep breaths, and oral and pharyngeal reflexes are
used to warm reptile patients, such as this Veiled chameleon
present. In chelonia the forelimbs can be pulled out and
(Chamaeleo catyptratus). Care should be taken not to exceed the
pushed into the shell to cause respiratory movements. In
species' preferred optimum temperature range (POTR).
all species, the use of small resuscitators (see Fig. l.12) or
Ambu(@-bags (Ambu, Glen Burnie, MD) will enable ven-
tilation with room air if required.
Recovery from anaesthesia is often prolonged in reptiles,
due to their slow metabolism of drugs. If possible, reptile
anaesthetics should be performed early in the working day,
Under no circumstances should the clinician blow
in order to ensure sufficient staff are available to monitor
directly into an endotracheal tube in a patient, as
the patient during recovery. If the sole use of injectable
reptiles harbour many potentially zoonotic pathogens.
agents such as ketamine is envisaged, the client should be
forewarned that the pet is likely to require overnight hos-
pitalisation post anaesthesia. This provides further oppor-
Heart rate and respiratory rate and pattern should con-
tunity for supportive care, such as fluids and analgesia, to
tinue to be monitored during recovery. Reflexes assessed
be administered to the animal as necessary.
during anaesthesia can also be monitored, including palpe-
 Provision of analgesia is vital for recovery. In the short
bral, comeal, foot and tail withdrawal. These parameters will
term animals suffering discomfort or pain will be less
allow the clinician to assess the progress of recovery from
likely to eat and, in the longer term, chronic pain will
anaesthesia. If metabolic derangements or dehydration were
increase stress and, thus, affect other metabolic processes
identified pre-anaesthesia, it may be useful to repeat blood
 and the immune system.
analysis to monitor these also during the recovery period.
To prevent drowning, aquatic species should not be
The reptile should be kept within its POTR during recov-
allowed access to water until sufficiently recovered from
ery. If PpV is being performed outwith the vivarium, the use
anaesthesia (see Fig. 15.3). Similarly, group animals
of heat pads and a hair-dryer (Fig. 12.9) will help maintain
should not be returned to their companions until fully
sufficient environmental temperature. Although in general
recovered, as attacks rmay occur.
warming reptiles increases their metabolism, there is no ben-
efit to be gained from over-warming the patient, as the meta-
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
bolic rate will increase along with oxygen requirements.
During recovery the patient's depressed respiratory function
In small anirmals or those that are severely debilitated,
may not be able to meet these requirements, resulting in
induction with an inhalational agent in a chamber (see Fig.
hypoxaermia. If recovery is rmore prolonged than expected,
13.11) may be possible without pre-medication. Respiratory
doxaprarm can be adrministered as a respiratory stimulant.
rate and patterm should be closely monitored to assess for
Reptile anaesthesia
breath holding. If this technique is not possible, doses for
injectable agents should be carefully calculated based on an
accurate weight.
 In larger animals injectable agents can be used either to
cause sedation allowing mask induction or to induce
anaesthesia, prior to maintenance with inhalational agents.
The use of cormbinations of anaesthetic agents reduces the
doses of other agents required, thereby reducing side
effects. Propofol is the agent of choice to induce anaes-
thesia if intravenous access, for example a coccygeal or
jugular vein, or intraosseous access is possible. Ifthis is not
D
an option, ketamine may be used alone or in combination
with other agents intrarmuscularly to provide sedation.
Butorphanol or buprenorphine is commonly used to
e
sedate reptiles before induction with inhalational agents via
a closely fitting facemask (Schurmacher and Yelen, 2006].
Doses of anaesthetic agents in reptiles are often reported
Figure I2.10 · Use tape or marker pen to mark the position of
in large ranges. There are two reasons for this, the first
1
the snake's heart for ease of monitoring (shown here in a black
being the wide difference in response to these drugs
rat snake [Elaphe obsoreta obsoleta]).
between species and individuals. The second reason is the
 great variation in condition of individual animals presented
1
to the clinician for anaesthesia. It is for this latter reason
produced by PPV. Anaesthetic records should differenti-
that pre-anaesthetic assessment and stabilisation are so
ate between forced (PPV) and spontaneous ventilation.
The heart rate and rhythm may be rmonitored visually or
203
important in these animals. If in any doubt as to an animal's
health status, use a combination of drugs at low doses or
palpated in some patients but in most instances the use of an
use drugs where doses can be altered or given to effect, for
8MHz Doppler flow device (see Figs 12.6 and 13.12)
example inhalational agents or intravenous propofol
assists greatly, particularly if surgical drapes cover the
patient. The heart position varies between species. It is
located in the cranial third of the body in snakes, but is quite
 There is great variation in inter- and intra-species
mobile and it is helpful to mark the location with tape for
repeated monitoring (Fig. 12.10y. The chelonian heart is
response to anaesthetic agents administered to
reptiles.
near the thoracic inlet (see Fig. 12.6), but a pencil probe is
required to fit between the carapace and plastron in srmall
 The clinician should ascertain the individual animal's
species. In lizards, the heart is again usually near the thoracic
health status and adjust anaesthetic doses
inlet (see Fig. 13.2), but may be more caudally situated
accordingly.
within the thoracic region in monitors. The carotid artery
may be monitored in chelonia and lizards (see Fig. 13.12), or
Intramuscular injectable agents, such as ketamine, will
the coccygeal artery in lizards and snakes (Schurmacher and
be required in some species, including some chelonia or
Yelen, 2006). Small probes can be attached using adhesive
venomous snakes, to facilitate handling and enable induc-
tape to the skin for continuous monitoring, or probes with a
tion of anaesthesia using other agents.
larger footprint applied intermittently. Oesophageal stetho-
scopes rmay be of use in larger anirmals.
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
Nervous system
Observations on the patient
As with other species, various reflexes can be monitored
to assess anaesthetic depth. Deepening of anaesthesia will
reduce muscular tone. During induction, loss of the right-
Cardio-respiratory systems
ing reflex is used to indicate anaesthesia. The palpebral
reflex is also lost at this stage. The corneal reflex should
As evidenced by the difficulties in initial clinical assessment
be maintained during surgical anaesthesia; this reflex is
of reptiles, monitoring the patient during anaesthesia is also
lost at a deep plane of anaesthesia. The corneal and palpe-
problematic. A minimum of respiratory rate and pattern,
bral reflexes cannot be assessed in species with spectacles,
and heart rate should be recorded during anaesthesia.
including snakes and some lizards. Tail, toe and cloacal
There are great variations in species, and baseline data col-
reflexes should also be monitored during anaesthesia
lected during the pre-anaesthetic period allow comparisons
(Schumacher and Yelen, 2006).
to be made for individual animals.
 Snakes appear to lose muscular tone gradually, starting
Anaesthetic agents produce cardio-respiratory depres-
with the head and moving caudally. During recovery from
sion, and often the respiratory drive is obliterated by a corm-
anaesthesia, the reverse occurs, with tail tone returning
bination of drugs and oxygen administered during
first. Assessment of tail tone is, therefore, a useful meas-
anaesthesia. Respiratory rate may, therefore, equal that
ure of depth of anaesthesia in snakes.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
Direct arterial blood pressure can be measured, but
is technically difficult and not routinely performed. A
An 8 MHz Doppler flow probe is ideal for monitoring heart
cut-down technique is used to access fermoral, carotid
rate in reptiles. In smaller animals, it is well lubricated and
or coccygeal arteries in lizards, chelonia and crocodilia
 pressed against the body wall in the position of the heart.
(Schumacher and Yelen, 2006; Wellehan et al., 2004).
For larger lizards or chelonia, a signal can be obtained from
As discussed in the physiology section, reptile haemo-
the carotid artery. Oesophageal stethoscopes are of use only
globin differs from that in marmmals. For this reason, pulse
 in larger patients.
oximeters designed to measure relative arterial oxygen
Electrocardiogram (ECG) can be used in reptiles, with
saturation (SpOz) will be calibrated for mammals, and
leads positioned as in other species (Fig. 12.1l). In snakes,
absolute values will not relate to the reptile's SpOz.
Having said that,trends in oxygen saturation can be followed
S
electrodes are placed two heart lengths cranial and caudal
a
to the heart (Girling and Hynes, 2002). To increase elec-
using these devices. In most reptiles, an oesophageal
probe level with the carotid artery or a rectal probe can be
trical conduction, needle probes can be placed subcuta-
used (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006).
neously. Altermatively, alligator clips are attached to skin and
ana
Although arterial blood gas analysis is possible in rep-
ECG gel applied (Schoemaker and Zandvliet, 2005). ECGs
will only record electrical activity, and not mechanical activ-
tiles, peripheral artery catheterisation is technically diffi-
e
ity; nonetheless, they can be useful in patients with cardiac
cult and not routinely performed. Other blood parameters
disease (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006). Unfortunately,
assessed prior to anaesthesia can be monitored during
reference values do not exist for most species.
anaesthesia and in the recovery period. The maximum
blood volume that can be withdrawn from a reptile
patient is 0.5-0.8% of body weight (i.e. 0.5-0.8 ml per
100 g) (Heard et al., 2004), and this total volume should
BOX 12.l0 Stages of anaesthesia in
not be exceeded in any 2-week period.
204
reptiles (Brogard, 1987)
End-tidal carbon dioxide concentration measurements
are extremely useful for monitoring mammalian respira-
tory performance, but they are less useful in reptiles. The
 small size of most reptile patients necessitates the use of
Rights were not granted to inclde this boxin electronic media.
capnograph machines that sample 50ml per minute.
 Please refer to the printed publication.
Reptile cardiac shunts will affect the rmeasurerment, and
one study reports a lack of correlation between end-tidal
and arterial carbon dioxide values [Hernandez-Divers
et al., 2004). Nevertheless, trends in measured end-tidal
carbon dioxide rmeasurerments may be useful during anaes-
thesia. A decrease may suggest airway leaks or obstruction,
disconnection of patient from breathing circuit, or venti-
lator malfunction (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006).
PERI-ANAESTHETIC
SUPPORTIVE CARE
Most pet species are used to being handled, but the clini-
cian should be aware of handling techniques that will be
safe for both the aninal and handler(s). These techniques
will vary between species, and special care should be
taken when restraining ill or injured animals. (Other texts
should be consulted for information on animal handling.)
Fasting
Pre-anaesthetic fasting is not necessary for most reptilian
pets. The main exceptions are carnivores that may regurgi-
tate food, or the recently fed snake that may have cardio-
respiratory compromise due to the space-occupying mass
within the gastrointestinal tract. Although many patients
are receiving supplemental care, the clinician should avoid
administering oral fluids shortly before anaesthesia, as
Figure I2.ll · Electrocardiogram probes can be attached to
aspiration may occur if they are regurgitated.
needles inserted into limb muscles to improve contact, showm in
 Fasting may alter gastrointestinal flora, and herbivorous
this bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps).
species are not usually fasted before anaesthesia.
Reptile anaesthesia
Non-herbivorous animals may be fasted from 1& to 96h
Opioid agents, such as butorphanol and buprenorphine,
depending on the species (Redrobe, 2004]
also have the advantage of providing rmild-to-moderate
sedation, and may reduce the doses of other anaesthetic
Heating
agents required.
Analgesia requirements should be
assessed throughout anaesthesia; voluntary rmovement, or
During anaesthesia, the reptile patient should be main-
elevations in heart or respiratory rate during a procedure
tained within its species-specific POTR. This is likely to
may indicate pain (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006). As with
involve heating of the room along with more localised
other species, pre-emptive analgesia should be provided
where possible.
heating of the animal. Heat pads, for example electric
pads or those that can be warmed in microwave ovens, are
Multi-modal therapy is advisable for many procedures,
useful. Circulating hot water blankets and forced air blan-
to reduce possible side effects from one group of drugs.
kets are ideal, but gloves containing warm water are a
Commonly, a non-steroidal anti-inflarmmatory drug (NSAID)
cheaper alternative. Heat sources should usually be covered
is used in conjunction with an opioid. Local anaesthetics
with a towel to prevent contact burns. Overhead larmps
 may also be used topically or by local infiltration for certain
can also be used, but may prove uncomfortable for the cli-
cases, for example during orthopaedic or soft tissue surgery
nician performing a procedure underneath.
[see Fig. 13.5].
1
Conversely, the patient should not be overheated.
Cold narcosis is not recommended as a means of restraint
for reptiles, as no analgesia is provided (Bennett, 1998).
1
Temperatures over 42°C are fatal (Malley, 1997].
Fluids
Opioids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory dnugs
11
Fluids should be given to all anaesthetised patients. In
Often, pre-medication of an animal before surgery may
dehydratedor severelydebilitatedanirmals where
involve the use of opioids such as butorphanol. Opioids
205
hypotension is likely, 1
the intravenous or intraosseous
are often used to manage acute pain in reptiles. NSAIDs
route should be used. Infusion pumps can be used for
are usually used in cases with chronic pain, for example
continuous administration of fluids, with syringe drivers
gout. As in other species NSAIDs may exacerbate renal or
being useful in smaller patients. Where this equipment is
gastrointestinal disease (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006).
not available, an assistant can administer small boluses
Gastrointestinal ulceration after NSAID administration
throughout the procedure. An extension set attached to
has been reported anecdotally in chelonia.
an intravenous or intraosseous catheter allows intermit-
tent fluid boluses to be administered easily during anaes-
thesia and the recovery period. Due to the small marrow
Local anaesthetics
space in reptiles, fluid boluses can only be of small vol-
Local anaesthetics provide additional analgesia and also
ume. Placerment of intraosseous catheters may cause darm-
reduce anaesthetic agent requirements. Intercostal nerve
age to the patient, for example osteomyelitis if aseptic
blocks and interpleural anaesthesia have been reported in
technique is not used for placement, or fractures in ani-
reptile coeliotomies. Local anaesthesia techniques in
mals with bone pathology. Intraosseous catheters are dis-
other species are applicable to reptiles. Lidocaine Qligno-
cussed later in species subsections.
caine} and bupivacaine have been used in reptiles, often as
Maintenance fluid requirements are usually adminis-
a splash block, but they are not usually used as the sole
tered to reptiles at 5-10ml/kg/h using a balanced elec-
agent for procedures. Lidocaine [lignocaine} has a more
trolyte solution [Schumacher and Yelen, 2006]
rapid onset, but bupivacaine is longer-acting (Schumacher
and Yelen, 2006). As local anaesthetics may be toxic at
Analgesia
higher doses,
;potentially
ycausingarrhythmias_and
seizures, a maximum dose should be calculated (Table
Any animal that is suspected of having a painful condition
12.5) to ensure that it is not accidently exceeded, partic-
or about to undergo surgery should be given analgesia.
ularly in small patients.
Table I2.5: Analgesic agents used in reptiles. Species variations exist in analgesic effect and duration of action (species-specific
doses, where available, are listed in individual chapters)
DRUG
DOSE
ROUTE
DURATION
COMMENT
(mg/lcg)
(hours)
Bupivacaine
1-24
Local
4-12
Beware toxicity; maximum total
dose 4mg/kg
Buprenorphine
0.02-0.203.4
SC, IM
12-24
Analgesia and sedation
(Gontinued)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 12.5: (Continued)
DRUG
DOSE
ROUTE
DURATION
COMMENT
(mg/lcg)
(hours)
Butorphanol
0.4-2.04
SC, IM, IV
12-24
(pre-anaesthetic)
Carprofen
1-42.3
PO, SC, IM, IV
24
Use half dose if repeat
Flunixin meglumine 
0.5-2.02.4
IM
12-24
Ketoprofen
22
SC, IM
24
Lidocaine (lignocaine)
2-54
Topical, local
一
 Beware toxicity; maximum total
dose 10mg/kg
Meloxicam
0.1-0.22.4
PO, IM, SC
24
Therapeutic levels may not be
d
achieved with oral administration
Morphine
0.4-2.01
SC, IM
12
Great species variability
206
Oxymorphone
0.1-0.21
SC, IM
12-24
Great species variability, no effect 
in snakes'.
Avoid if hepatic or renal dysfunction
 =  iso =  es = l ons = s 
Table I 2.6: Sedative and anaesthetic agents used in reptiles. Species variations exist in anaesthetic effect (species-specific doses,
where available, are listed in individual chapters)
DRUG
DOSE (MG/KG)
ROUTE
SPECIES
COMMENT
Alkylphenol:
Dose to effect
·Propofol
5101.23
IV, IC
Snakes
Lower dose required if
106.12
IV, IO
Lizards
premedication administered
12-1 510.26
IV
Chelonia
10-1519
IV
Crocodilia
Alpha-Z-agonists:
Poor immobilisation if used alone.
· Medetomidine
0.10.155
IM
Most
Reversible (with atipamezole,
·Xylazine
0.10-1.2514
yohimbine)
Alphd-antagonist:
IM, (IV)
Reversal of alpha-2-agonists
 5 × medetomidine dosel3.25
一
·Atipamezole
Benzodiazepines:
 Pre-anaesthetic. Minimal sedation 
· Midazolam
22.4
IM
Most
if used alone.
Sedative in
Red-eared slider, Trachemys
scripta elegans, allowing minor
manipulations
Dissociative agents:
Depth of sedation or
Ketamine
5~909
SC, IM, IV
Most
anaesthesia, and duration of
 Reptile anaesthesia
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lkg)
ROUTE
SPECIES
COMMENT
Lower doses (10-20 mg/kg)
used in most species as
pre-medication
55-883.4
Surgical anaesthesia (induction
10-30 min, recovery 24-96 h)
· Tiletamine
See combination below
Inhalational ogents:
 Inhal 
Most
Induction/maintenance
·Halothane
3-4%/1.5-2.0%7.14
Isoflurane preferred
p
Isoflurane
3-5%/1-3%8.16
Advise intubate and IPPV
otill
Sevoflurane
Prn 15.22
D
an
Phenothiazine:
Most
Pre-anaesthetic, can be used
Acepromazine
0.05-0.5017.21
withketamine
IM
lesth
Steroids:
Good muscle relaxation
lesi
·Alfaxalone/
26
IV
Snakes
Can repeat dose to extend
anaesthesia
·Alphadolone 
9-1 518.20
IM, IV
Lizards,
 chelonia
Variableresults in snakes
207
Combinations:
·Butorphanol +
0.4 + 25
IM
Pre-anaesthetic
midazolam
·Butorphanol +
0.5-1.5 + 10-3024
Chelonia
Anaesthesia, e.g. minor
ketamine
procedure
· Medetomidine +
=01 + ε0-10
Most
Anaesthesia
ketamine
· Tiletamine 十
4-104.5
Most
Sedation; non-invasive
zolazepam
procedures
Key: IC = intracardiac, IM = intramuscular, Inhal = inhalation, IO = intraosseous, IPPV = intermittent positive pressure
ventilation, IV = intravenous, prn = dose to effect, SC = subcutaneous
7 (Boyer, 1992); α(Boyer, 1998);:  (Carpenter, 2005); 10(Divers, 1996); I (Divers, 1999a); 12 (Divers, 199b); 13 (Fleming, 1996);
12(9961dy) o(6661) (661m(1661 su(1661su (8661pH)661)
(Page, 1993); 2 (Rooney et al., 1999); 23 (Schaeffer, 1997); 24 (Schumacher, 1996); 25 (Smith et al, 1998); 26 (Stahl and Donoghue, 1997)
Table 12.7: Emergency drugs in reptiles 
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lcg)
ROUTE
 INDICATION/COMmENt
Anticholinergics:
Atropine
0.01-0.042.3.6
SC, IM, IV ICe
Bradycardia. Not effective at these doses
Glycopyrrolate
0.011.2
SC, IM, IV
 in green iguana, guana iguand.
Diazepam
2.55
IM, IV
Seizures
Doxapram
51
IM, IV
Respiratory stimulant; repeat every I0 min
if required
Key: ICe = intracoelomic, IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, SC = subcutaneous
(9661 eyewnys) , (9661 1ssoy) s (700zepew pue a2ed) , (9t661 ak)  (661ekog) , (9661 neuueg)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES AND
Boyer, T. H. I998. Essentials of Reptiles: A Guide for Practitioners.
DRUGS
AAHA Press, Lakewood, CO.
Boyer, T. H., and D. M. Boyer. 2006. Turtles, tortoises, and terrapins.
In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
The most common post-anaesthetic problerm with reptiles
pp. 78-99. Saumders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
is apnoea. If respiratory arrest occurs, reptiles can survive
Braun, E. J. I998. Comparative renal function in reptiles, birds, and
long periods of hypoxia by converting to anaerobic metab-
mammals. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 7: 62-71.
olism. Maintenance with oxygen (or room air) ventilation
Brogard, J. I987. Anesthesie et chirurgie. Les Malardies des Reptiles.
pp. 289-298. Editions du Point Veterinaire, Maisons Alfort.
once per minute may be sufficient to revive the patient
after a prolonged period. As respiration is stimulated by
Calvert, I. 2004. Nutritional problems. In: S. J. Girling and P. Raiti
[eds.) Manual of Reptiles. Znd edn. pp. 289-308. BSAVA,
low levels of oxygen, overventilation should be avoided,
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
as this would depress respiration. Maintaining patients
Carpenter, J. W. 2005. Exotic Animal Formulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier,
within their POTR is also important (O'Malley, 2005a).
St Louis, Missouri.
A tracheostomy can be performed in an emergency, for
Chitty, J. R. 2004. Respiratory system. In: S. J. Girling and P Raiti
example to bypass an upper airway obstruction (Schumacher
[eds.) Manual of Reptiles. 2nd edn. pp. 230-242. BSAVA,
and Yelen, 2006). Doxapram can be administered to stim-
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
ulate respiratory rmovements in apnoeic animals.
Cowan, D. I980. Adaptation, maladaptation and disease. In:
The circulation should be supported with appropriate
 J. B. Murphy and J. T. Collins [eds.) SSAR Contributions to
fluid administration, preferably intravenously in a critical
 Herpetology, number I, Reproductive Biology and Diseases of
Captive Reptiles. Society for the Study of Amphibians and
patient.
Reptiles, Salt Lake City, USA.
Dantzler, W. H. 1976. Renal function [with special emphasis on
nitrogen excretion]. In: C. Gans [ed.) Biology of the Reptilia
REFERENCES
No. 5. Academic Press, New York.
208
DaSilva, R. S., and R. H. Migliorini. I990. Effects of starvation and
refeeding on energy-linked metabolic processes in the turtle.
Anderson, N. L., R. F. Wack, L. Callway et al. I999. Cardio-
Comp Biochem Physiol A 96: 415-419.
pulmonary effects and efficacy of propofol as an anesthetic
Davies, P M. C. I981. Anatomy and physiology. In: J. E. Cooper
agent in brown tree snakes [Boiga irregularis). Bull Assoc Rep
[ed.) Diseases of the Reptilia. Vol.1. pp. 9-73. Academic Press,
Amph Vet 9: 9-15.
New York.
Barnard, S. I996. Reptile Keeper's Handbook. Krieger Publishing,
Diaz-Figueroa, O., and M. Mitchell. 2006. Gastrointestinal anatomy and
Malabar, FL.
physiology. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery.
Bennett, A.F.1972.The effect of activity and oxygen consumption,
Znd ech. pp. 145-162. Saumders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Oxygen debt and heart rate in lizards Varanus gouldii and
Diethelm, G. 200l. The effect of oxygen content of inspiratory air
Sauromalus hispidis. J Comp Physiol 79: 259-280.
[FIOz)] on recovery times in the green iguana [iguana iguana],
Bennett, A. F I996a. Neurology. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile
Doctoral thesis, Universitaet Zuerich, G ermany.
Medicine and Surgery. pp. I41-148. WB Saunders,
Divers, S. J. I996. The use of propofol in reptile anaesthesia. In:
Philadelphia
Proceedings of 3rd Annual Conference of Association of
Bennett, A. F., and W. R. Dawson. I976. Metabolism. In: C. Gans
Amphibian and Reptilian Veterinarians, 24-27 August 1996,
amd W. R. Dawson [eds.) Biology of the Reptilia. Vol.5,
Tampa. pp. 57-59.
Physiology A. pp. I27-2l1. Academic Press, London.
Divers, S. J. I999a. Anaesthetics in reptiles. Exotic DVM I: 7-8.
Bennett, A.F, and P Licht. 1972.Anaerobic metabolism during
Divers, S. J. I999b. Clinical evaluation of reptiles. Vet Clin North
activityin lizards. J Comp Physiol A: Neuroethol Sensory,
Am Exot Anim Pract 2: 291-331.
 Neural Behav Physiol 81.
Donoghue, S. 2006. Nutrition. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile
Benmett, A. F., and K. A. Nagy I977. Energy expenditure in free
Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 251-298. Saunders
ranging lizards. Ecology 58: 698-700.
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Bennett, R. A. I991. A review of anesthesia and chermical restraint in
Donoghue, S., and J. Langenberg. I996. Nutrition. In: D. R. Mader
reptiles. J Zoo Wildll Med 22: 282-303.
[ed.] Reptile Medicine and Surgery. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Bennett, R. A. I994. Current techniques in reptile anesthesia and
Espinoza, R. E., and C. R. Tracy I997. Thermal biology, metabolism
surgery. Proc Assoc Rept Amph Vet/Am Assoc Zoo Vet: 36-44.
and hibermation. In: L. Ackermarmm [ed.) The Biology,
Bennett, R. A. I996b. Anesthesia. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile
Husbandry and Healthcare of Reptiles. Vol.I, The Biology of
Medicine and Surgery. pp. 241-247. WB Saunders,
Reptiles. Pp. I49-I84. TFH Publications, NJ.
Philadelphia.
Fitzsimmons, J. T., and S. Kaufman. I977. Cellular and extracellular
Bennett, R. A. I998. Reptile anesthesia. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med
dehy dration, and angiotensin as stimuli to drinking in the
7: 30-40.
Common iguana Iguana iguara. J Physiol 265: 443-463.
Benmett, R. A., J. Schumacher, K. Hedjazi-Haring et al. 1998.
Fleming, G. J. I996. Capture and chemical immobilisation of the
Cardiopulmonary and anesthetic effects of propofol
Nile crocodile [Crocodylus miloticus] in South Africa. Proc
administered intraosseously to green iguanas. J Am Vet Med
Assoc Reptilian Amphibian Vet: 63-66.
Assoc 212: 93-98.
Fox, H. I977. The urogenital system of reptiles. In: C. Gans and
Benson, K. G., and L. Forrest. I999. Characterization of the renal
T. Parsons [eds.) Biology of the Reptilia. Vol.6, Morphology E.
portal system of the common green iguana [iguna iguana] by
pp. I-122. Acadermic Press, London.
digital subtraction imaging. J Zoo Will Med 30: 235-241.
Frye, F. L. I992. Biomedical and Surgical Aspects of Captive Reptile
Bounos, G. 1972. Enteral hyperalimentation with elemental diet.
Husbandry. Krieger Publishing, Malabar, FL.
Can Med J 107: 607-608.
Frye, F. L. I994a. Diagnosis and surgical treatment of reptilian
Boyer, D. M. I992. Clinical anesthesia of reptiles. Bull Assoc Rep
neoplasms with a compilation of cases 1966-1993. In Vivo 8:
Amph Vet 2: 10-13.
885892.
Reptile anaesthesia
Frye, F. L. I994b. Reptile Clinician's Handbook. Krieger Publishing,
Liang, Y-F, and S.-1. Terashima. I993. Physiological properties and
Malabar, FL.
morphological characteristic of cutaneous and mucosal mechanical
Funk, R. S. 2006. Snakes. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine
nociceptive neurons with A-d peripheral axons in the trigerminal
and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 42-58. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
ganglia of crotaline snakes. J Comp Neurol 328: 88-102.
Missouri.
Lillywhite, H. B., and P. F. Maderson. 1982. Skin structure and
Gillespie, D. S. I980. Overview of species needing dietary vitamin C.
pertmeability. In: C. Gans [ed.) Biology of the Reptilia. Vol.12,
J ZooWildlMed Il:88-91
Physiology C. pp. 397-433. Academic Press, London.
Girling, S. J., and B. Hynes. 2002. Cardiovascular and haemopoietic
Loyd, M. L. I999. Crocodilian anesthesia. In: M. E. Fowler and
systems. In: S. J. Girling and P. Raiti (eds.) Manual of Reptiles.
R. E. Millr [eds.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine: Current
Znd edn. pp. 243-260. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Therapy 4. pp. 205-216. WB Sauners, Philadelphia.
Halliday, T., and K. Ader. 2004. The New Encyclopedia of Reptiles
Lowery, B. P, C. T Clouter, and L. C. Carey. I971. Electrolyte
& Amphibians. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
solutions in resuscitation in human hermorrhagic shock. Surg
Heard, D. J. 1998. Advanced reptile anesthesia and medicine. Proc
G ynecol Obstet 133: 273.
Avian Specialty Advanced Prog/Small Mam Rept Prog: I13-119.
Machin, K. L. 2001. Fish, amphibian, and reptile anaesthesia. Vet
Heard, D. J., K. Harr, and J. Wellehan. 2004. Diagnostic sampling
Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 4: 19-33.
and laboratory tests. In: S. J. Girling and P. Raiti [eds.) Manual
P
Mader, D. R., and E. Rudloff. 2006. Emergency and critical care. In:
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
an
of Reptiles. pp. 7l-86. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Hemandez-Divers, S. J., and C. J. Innis. 2006. Renal disease in
533-548. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
D
reptils: diagnosis and clinical management. In: D. R. Mader
Malley, D. I997. Reptile anaesthesia and the practising veterinarian.
In Pract 19: 351-368.
sth
[ed.] Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 878-892.
Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Marcus, L. C. I98l. Veterinary Biology and Medicine of Captive
卫
Hermandez-Divers, S. M., J. Schumacher, and S. J. Hemandez-
Amphibians and Reptiles. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.
Divers. 2004. Blood gas evaluation in the green iguana [guana
McArthur, S., R. Wilkinson, and J. Meyer. 2004a. Medicine and
iguana). Proc Assoc Reptilian Amphibian Vet: 45-46.
Surgery of Tortoises and Turtles. Black well Publishing, Oxford.
Highfield, A. C. 1996. Practical Encyclopedia of Keeping and
McArthur, S. D., R. J. Wilkinson, and M. G. Barrows. 2004b.
Breeding Tortoises and Freshwater Turtles. Carapace Press,
Tortoises and turtles. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe [eds.)
209
London, England.
Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th ern. pp. 208-222. BSAVA,
Hilf, M., R. A. Wagner, and V. L. Yu. I9990. A prospective study of
Quedgeley, Goucester.
upper airway flora in healthy boid snakes and snakes with
Millichamp, N. J. 1988. Surgical techniques in reptiles. In:
pneumonia. J Zoo Wildl Med 2l: 318.
E. R. Jacobson and G. V. J. Kollias [eds.] Exotic Animals.
Holz, P. 2006. Renal anatomy and physiology. In: D. R. Mader [ed.)
pp. 49-74.Churchill Livingstone, New York.
Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd ern. pp. 135-144. Saunders
Minmich, J. E. 1979. Reptiles. In: G. M. O. Maloiy (ed.)
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Comparative Physiology of Osmoregulation in Animals.
Hob, P, I. K. Barker, J. P Burger et al. I997a. The effect of the renal
Academic Press, London.
portal system on pharmacokinetic parametersin the red-eared
Mitchell, M. A. 2006. Therapeutics. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile
dider [Trachemys scripta elegans]. J Zoo Wildl Med 28: 386-393.
Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. pp. 631-664. Saunders
Holz, P, I. K. Barker, G. J. Crawshaw et al. 1997b. The anatomy and
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
perfusion of the renal portal system in the red-eared slider
Murray, M. J. I996. Pneumonia and normal respiratory function. In:
[Trachemys scripta elegas]. J Zoo Wildl Med 28: 378-385.
D. R. Maler [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. pp. 396-405.
Holz, P., J. P Burger, K. Pasloske et al. 2002. Effect of injection site
WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
on carbenicillin pharmacokinetics in the carpet python, Morelia
Murray, M. J. 2006a. Cardiopulmonary anatomy and physiology. In:
spilota. J Herp Med Surg I2: 12-16.
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
Illrey, D. E., and J. B. Bemard. 1999. Vitarmin D: metabolism,
124-134. Saunders Elsevier.
sources, unique problems in zoo animals, meeting needs. In:
Murray, M. J. 2006b. Pneumonia and lower respiratory tract disease.
M. E. Fowler and R. E. Miller [eds.) Zoo and Wild Animal
In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Medicine, Current Therapy. 4 edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
pp. 865-877. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Jacobson, E. 2003. Biology, Husbandry, and Medicine of the Green
Ng, T. B., W. K. Hon, C. H. Cheng et al. I986. Evidence for the
Iguana. Krieger Publishing, Malabar, FL.
presence of adrenocorticotropic and opiate-like hormones in
Jenkins, J. R. 199la. A formulary for reptile and amphibian
the brains of two sea snakes, Hydrophis cyanocinctus and
medlicine. Proc Fourth Annu Avian/Exotic Anim Med Symp,
Lapemis hardwickii. Gen Comp Endocrinol 63: 31-37.
University of Califormia, Davis, CA: 24-27.
O'Malley, B. 2005a. General anatomy and physiology of reptiles. In:
Jenkins, J. R. I991b. Medical management of reptile patients.
B. O'Malley [ed.) Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic
Compend Cont Ed Pract Vet I3: 980-988.
Species: Structure and Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles
Kanui, T. I., and K. Hole. I990. Nociception in crocodiles: Capsaicin
and Amphibians. pp. 17-39. Elsevier Saunders, London.
mstillation, formalin and hot plate tests. Zool Sci 7: 537-540.
O'Malley, B. 2005b. Tortoises and turtles. In: B. O', [ed.) Clinical
Kanui, T 1., and K. Hole. 1992. Morphine and pethidine antinociception
Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and
im the crocordile. J Vet Pharmacol Ther I5:
Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians.
01-101
pp. 41-56. Elsevier Saumders, London.
Kik, M. J. L., and M. A. Mitchell. 2005. Reptile cardiology: a review
Overgaard, J., J. A. Stecyk, A. P. Farrell et al. 2002. Adrenergic
of anatomy and physiology, diagnostic approaches, and clinical
control of the cardliovascular system in the turtle Trachemys
disease. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 14: 52-60.
scripta. J Exp Biol 205: 3335-3345.
King, G. 1996. Turtles and Tortoises. Reptiles and Herbivory.
Pace, L., and D. Mader. 2002. Atropine and glycopyrrolate, route of
pp. 47-60. Chapm an & Hall, London.
adlministration and response in the green iguana [iguana
Lawrence, K., and O. F. Jackson. I983. Alfaxalone/alphadolone
iguana). Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet: 79-84.
anaesthesia in reptiles. Vet Rec I12: 26-28.
 Page, C. D. I993. Current reptilian anesthesia procedures. In:
Lawton, M. P. C. I999. Pain management after surgery. Proc North
M. E. Fowler [ed.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine: Current
Am Vet Conf: 782.
Therapy 3. pp. 140-143. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Perry, S. F. I989. Structure and function of the reptilian respiratory
Schumacher, J. 2000. Fluid therapy in reptiles. In: J. D. Bonagura
system. In: S. C. Wood [ed.) Compartive Pulmonary
[ed.] Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xll Sumall Animal
Physiology - Current Concepts pp. 193-237. Deker,
Practice. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
New York.
Schumacher, J., and T. Yelen. 2006. Anesthesia and analgesia. In:
Perry, S. F., and H. R. Dumcker. I978. Lumg architecture, volume and
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
static mechanics in five species of lizards. Respir Physiol 34:
pp. 442-452. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
6181.
Secor, S. M., and J. Diamond. 1995. Adaptive responses to feeding
Porter, K. R. I972. Herpetology. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Burtmese pythons: Pay before pumping. J Exp Biol 198:
Pough, F. H., R. M. Andrew, J. E. Cadle et al. I998a. Energetics and
13131325.
Performance Herpetology.pp.173-204. Prentice Hall
Secor, S. M., and K. A. Nagy. 1994. Energetic correlates of foraging
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
mode of snakes Crotalus cerastes and Masticophis flagellum.
Pough, F. H., R. M. Andrew, J. E. Calle et al. 1998b. Temperature
Ecology 75: 1600-1614.
and Water Relations Herpetology pp. I37-172. Prentice Hall,
Seymour, R. S. I982. Physiological araptations to aquatic life. In:
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
C. Gans [ed.) Biology of the Reptilia. Vol. 13, Physiology D.
Pough, F. H., C. M. Janis, and J. B. Heiser. 2002. The lepidosaurs:
pp. I-41. Academic Press, London.
Tuatara, lizards and snakes. Vertebrate life. 6th edn. pp.
Smith, J. A., N. C. McGuire, and M. A. Mitchell. 1998.
294-34l. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Cardiopulmonary physiology and anesthesia in crocodilians.
Prezant, R. M., and J. L. Jarchow. I997. Lactated fluid use in
Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet: 17-21.
reptiles: is there a better solution? Proc Assoc Reptili Amphib
Stmits, A. W., and M. M. Kozubowski. 1968. Partitioning of body
Vet: 8387.
fluids and cardiovascularesponses to circulatory bypovolaemia
Redrobe, S. 2004. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: S. J. Girling and
in the turtle, Pseudemys scripta elegaris; and Thorson, T.B. Body
P Raiti [eds.) Manual of Reptiles. Znd edn. pp. 131-146.
fluid partitioning in reptilian. Copeia: 592-601.
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Stahl, S., and S. Donoghue. I997. Pharyngostomy tube placement,
Rennick, B. R., and H. Gandia. I954. Pharmacology of smooth
Tmanagement and use for mutritional support in the chelonian
muscle valve in renal portal circulation in birds. Proc Soc Exp
patient. Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet: 93-97.
210
Biol Med 85: 234-236.
Stoakes, L. C. I992. Respiratory system. In: P. H. Benyon,
Rooney, M. B., G. Levine, J. Gaynor et al. I999. Sevoflurane
M. P. C. Lawton and J. E. Cooper [eds.) Manual of Reptiles.
mesthesia in desert tortoises [Gopherus agassizit). J Zoo Wildl
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Goucestershire.
Med 46: 64-69
Varga, M. 2004. Captive maintenance and welfare. In: S. J. Girling
Rossi, J. V. 1998. Emergency medicine of reptiles. Proc North Am
and P. Raiti [eds.) Manual of Reptiles. Znd edn. pp. 6-17.
Vet Conf: 799-801.
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Rossi, J. V. 2006. General husbandry and management. In:
Vaughn, E. E. 1963. Comparative immunology: antibody response in
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Dipsosaurus dorsalis at different temperatures. Proc Soc Exp
pp. 25-41. Samders Esevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Biol 112: 531.
Schaeffer, D. O. I997. Anesthesia and analgesia in nontraditional
Vaughn, E. E. I974. Fever in the lizard [Dipsosaurus dorsalis).
laboratory animal species. In: D. F. Kohn, S. K. Wixson, W. J.
Nature 252: 473.
White et al. [eds.) Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory
Wellehan, F. X., M. Lafortume, C. Gumkel et al. 2004. Coccygeal
Animals. pp. 338-378. Academic Press, New York.
vascular catheterization in lizards and crocodilians. J Herpetol
Schmidt-Nielsen, B., and E. Skadhauge. I967. Function of the
Med Surg 14: 26-28.
excretory system of the crocodile [Crocodylas acutus]. Am J
White, F N. 1976. Circulation. In: C. Gans [ed.) Biology of the
Phys 212: 973-980.
Reptilia No. 5. Academic Press, New York.
Schoemaker, N. J., and M. M. J. M. Zandvliet. 2005.
Williams, D. L. 1992. Cardiovascular system. In: P. H. Benyon,
Electrocardiograms in selected species. Semin Avian Exotic Pet
M. P. C. Lawton and J. E. Cooper [eds.) Manual of Reptiles.
Med 14: 26-33
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Schumacher, J. 1996. Reptiles and amphibians. In: J. C. Thurman,
Wood, S. C., and C. J. Lenfant. I976. Respiration: mechanics,
W J. Tranquilli and G. J. Benson [eds.] Lumb and Jones'
Control and gas exchange. In: C. Gans [ed.) Biology of the
Veterinary Anesthesia. 3rd edn. pp. 670-685. Williams &
Reptilia No. 5. Academic Press, San Diego.
Wilkins, Baltimore.
13
Lizard anaesthesia
p
btile
an
lesth
色
INTRODUCTION
Temperature
1
A diverse group of animals are found within the lizard
It is vital to know what species is being dealt with, as
suborder (Table 13.1), with many differences in external
there is great variation in the preferred optimum temper-
211
and internal anatomy, diet, and environmental require-
ature range (POTR) of lizard species. Although free-ranging
ments. These differences will almost certainly affect how
animals may raise their body temperature on warmed
a particular species is hospitalised and its supportive care,
rocks, radiant overhead (or wall heating is preferable in
and may also affect the approach to anaesthesia.
captive animals, due to the risk of burns frorm direct contact
Most lizards tolerate handling well. Larger species
with hot surfaces.
 should be handled with care, particularly adult male igua-
nas during their breeding season from December to
Cardiovascular system
March (Barten, 2006). Smaller species, such as geckos,
often have delicate skin that can easily be torn, and gen-
The three-chambered heart lies at the pectoral girdle in
eral anaesthesia using volatile agents may be required for
most lizards (Figs 13.1 and 13.2). In monitors, it is more
physical examination.
caudal (O'Malley, 2005).
Table I3. I: Families of lizards commonly kept as pets
FAMILY
EXAMPLES
COMMENTS
Iguanidae
Green iguana (guana iguana)
Whip-like tail; autotomy common
Agamidae
Bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps)
Frilled lizard (Chtamydosdaurus kingi)
Water dragon (Physignathus cocincinus)
Chameleonidae
Yemen veiled chameleon(Chamaeleo calyptratus)
Arboreal; drink from water droplets; take care to
avoid damage to tongue when intubating
Gekkonidae/Eublepharidae
Leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius)
eyelids; autotomy common
Varanidae
Bosc monitor (Varanus exanthematicus)
Heart quite caudal in body compared to other
species
Scincidae
Blue-tongued skink (Tiliqud spp.)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
A renal portal system is present in lizards, receiving
blood from the caudal vein and iliac veins. The efferent
renal portal veins fuse to form the postcaval vein. There is
Trachea
a single ventral abdominal vein in lizards (Holz, 2006]. As
the ventral skin is often thin, the large ventral abdominal
vein is accessible in most species. It is possible to inject
Right atrium-
medications into this vein (Table 13.2), but haemostasis
Left atrium
Heart
may be difficult if haemorrhage occurs.
Ventricle
Respiratory system
Lungs
In certain lizard species, for example the green iguana, nasal
salt glands are used to excrete excess sodium and potassiurm
salts. The resulting white powder at the nares is normal and
not indicative of respiratory tract pathology (Barten, 2006).
The glottis is located at the base of the tongue (Fig.
Liver
13.3), but may be more rostral in some species, particu-
larly carnivorous species, such as monitors. The normal
resting position is closed, with the glottis opening only
Gastrointestinal
during inspiration and expiration. The tracheal rings in a
tract
lizard are incomplete. However, uncuffed endotracheal
tubes are usually used, as most species are small and pres-
Kidneys
sure necrosis may easily occur if a cuff was inflated exces-
212
sively. The trachea bifurcates near the heart, into left and
right bronchi (Murray, 2006).
Lizard lungs vary depending on the species (Fig. 13.4),
with some having only a single charmber (unicarmeral), for
example the green lizard (Lacerta viridis). Skinks have
unicarmeral lungs with non-respiratory sacs caudally (sirmilar
to bird air sacs). Infection in these sacs can be difficult to
Figure I 3.1 · Schematic showing lizard anatomy (ventral view).
eliminate, due to accumulation of exudates and poor vas-
 n se s s   
have paucicameral lungs, with more partitioning within the
lungs and caudal dilatations (Fig. 13.5). In some species
of chameleon, for example the Jackson's chameleon
(Chamaeleo jacksoni)], an accessory lung lobe is present in
the ventral cervical region. In multicameral or multicham-
bered lungs, faveoli are similar to marmmalian alveoli
(O'Malley, 2005). Iguanids have an anterior and posterior
chamber in each lung (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006)
In paucicameral species and those with multicameral
lungs, a postpulmonary septum divides the pleural fror
the peritoneal cavity. This rmembrane is not muscular and
does not contain respiratory epithelium (Holz, 2006).
All vertebrae in lizards have ribs attached, except for those
in the tail (Barten, 2006). The extent of these varies with
species, with the charmeleon coelormic cavity almost com-
pletely encased within the ribcage (Fig. 13.6). Contraction
and expansion of the ribs cause respiratory movements. No
the heart near the thoracic inlet in anaesthetised lizards, such as
diaphragm is present and outward movement of the inter-
this green iguana (guand iguana). The heart is located more cau-
costal, trunk and abdominal muscles causes inspiration due
dally in monitors. The endotracheal tube used in this patient is
to negative pressure [and the converse for expiration). Lung
excessively long and will increase the respiratory dead space.
walls also contain smooth muscle, which assists in inspiration
in some species (Wood and Lenfant, 1976].
It is useful to observe a reptile's normal respiratory
Pressure on the ocular globes in larger species causes a
moverments before anaesthesia, in order to assess depth of
vagovagal reflex, with lowering of the heart rate and blood
respiration and to mirmic this movement during anaesthe-
pressure. Non-painful procedures can be performed using
sia. Positive pressure ventilation (PPV) is useful in these
this reflex (Bennett, 1972). The lizard will still respond to
animals, and their delicate lung structure makes over-
stimuli such as loud noise.
 inflation and the possibility of rupture very easy.
Lizard anaesthesia
Table I3.2: Routes of administration in lizards
ROUTE
SITE
NEEDLE/CATHETER SIZE
COMMENTS
Intracoelomic
Caudal right quadrant of coelom
22-25 ga needle
Rapid absorption; large volumes
possible; risk of perforation of organs
(less safe in conscious animals and
reproductively active females)
Intramuscular
 Anterior forelimb or hindlimb
 As small as possible for medication
Renal portal system may be important
musculature
if hindllimb used 
Small volumes only
btil
é
Intraosseous
Distal femur or proximal tibia
Intraosseous needle (with stylet), or
Ideal in collapsed patients where
an
hypodermic needle (with or without
intravenous access not possible
sterile surgical wire as stylet)
Possible to place catheter in distal femur
esth
D
without entering stifle joint in most
species
D
n
 Equivalent to intravenous administration;
can use to administer injectable
anaesthetics or fluids
213
Intravenous
Ventral coccygeal vein
Long needle necessary in animals 
Vein larger near tail base, but avoid
with thick tails
hemipenes in males
Beware autotomy
Jugu lar vein
Can catheterise in larger species
Use local anaesthetic (e.g. 2% lidocaine
with long necks
(lignocaine)) before incise skin
18-22 ga catheter in adult green
Maintain for maximum of 48-96 h
iguana, lguana iguand
Under anaesthesia
Ventral abdominal vein
 Small gauge needle.
Haemostasis difficult if haemorrhage
Can be catheterised
occurs
Intracardiac
Emergency only
Axillary venous plexus
Lymph dilution common
Cephalic vein
Can catheterise in larger species
Oral
Distal oesophagus or stomach
Use rubber or metal tube
Ideal for administration of fluids and
Pre-measure length to reach
supplemental feeding; conscious animals
stomach
only. (If the patient is alert, small volumes
may be placed into the oral cavity to be
swallowed)
Subcutaneous
Dorsally between scapulae, or
Small volumes only, particularly in species
lateral body
with high skin tension (e.g. chameleons)
Avoid in species with fragile skin
(e.g.geckos)
(Mitchell, 2006; Murray, 2000; Redrobe and MacDonald, 1999; Schumacher and Yelen, 2006)
Urinary system
ammonia is produced to excrete nitrogenous waste; ter-
restrial species mainly produce uric acid to aid with water 
Lizard kidneys are located dorso-caudally, lying within the
conservation.
coelomic cavity in most monitor lizards, but intrapelvic in
 Ureters from the kidneys empty into the urodeum por-
most other species (Canny, 1998). In larger animals, clin-
tion of the cloaca. Most lizards have a urinary bladder, but
ical exarmination may include cloacal palpation to assess
in some species urine is stored in the distal colon prior to
the intrapelvic region for renomegaly. Uric acid, urea or
excretion (Davies et al., 1976). In those species with a
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Glottis
Tongue
Oropharynx
Endotracheal tube
(secured to mandible)
Figure I3.5 · Air sacs attached to the caudal lungs are exposed
Anaesthetic circuit
during coeliotomy to perform ovariectomy in this veiled
chameleon (Chamdeleo calyptratus).
Figure I3.3 · Glottis is quite rostral in most lizards, such as this
Chinese water dragon (Physignathus cocincinus), but may be
more caudal in herbivore species.
214
A
Trachea
Lung
Air sac
B
Trachea
Lung
Figure I3.6 * Lateral radliograph ofa veiled chameleon (Chamaeleo
cahyptratus) (with post-ovulatory egg stasis) showing the ribs
enclosing the body. This is the same animal as in Figure I3.5 before
C
surgery.
Trachea
Multi-chambered lung
containing excessive protein or deprived of water are pre-
disposed to formation of cystic calculi (Barten, 2006).
Nasal salt glands in herbivorous lizards aid in excretion of
excess potassium salts, along with potassiurm urate salts in
their urine (Dunson, 1976).
A Unicameral, e.g. Lacerta spp.
Branches from the aorta provide arterial blood to the
B Paucicameral - few simple divisions.
kidneys. A renal portal system also directs blood from the
 Some species have air sacs, e.g. chameleon spp.
tail and hind-limbs via the renal portal veins to the kid-
C Multicameral - with intrapulmonary bronchus.
neys. Pelvic veins connecting to the iliac veins can divert
blood around the kidneys (Holz, 2006, 1999).
Figure I3.4 · Schematic showing lung types in lizards.
Digestive system
urinary bladder, the ureters do not connect with the
bladder; rather the urethra connects the bladder to the
The anatomy of lizard tongues varies between species,
urodeum (Beddard, 1904; Fox, 1977). Water can be reab-
with most being relatively wide and fleshy, but some are
sorbed from the bladder or colon. Animals fed diets
highly specialised. The chameleon has a long sticky tongue,
Lizard anaesthesia
monitors have a long forked tongue, while the gecko's is
mobile enough to clean its corneas. Care should be taken
not to damage the tongue during intubation, as it is a vital
organ for prehension and swallowing of food.
In
many
species,
including
Agamidaeand
Chamaeleonidae, the teeth are acrodont and not replaced
Site for cut-down
(Barten, 2006). Use a padded gag to avoid damaging den-
to access/
tition when opening the mouth for intubation or passage
catheterise vein
of a feeding tube. Protective gauntlets should be worn
when restraining the venomous Helodermatidae, the Gila
monster [Heloderma suspectum) and the Mexican beaded
lizard (Heloderma horridum) and great care taken to
D
avoid envenomation when examining the oral cavity
Environmental temperature is important for digestive
e
capacity, particularly in herbivorous reptiles. Certain
Figure I 3.7 · Location of cephalic vein in lizard species.
species, including the green iguana and spiny-tailed lizard,
require high temperatures for their microbial hindgut fer-
D
st:
mentations (Iverson, 1982). Gastrointestinal transit time
secondary hyperparathyroidism is present and pathologi-
is slow in herbivorous species, taking up to 140 h in lizards
cal fractures likely), and to the operator. A wooden
(O'Malley, 2005)
 Diurnal lizards that do not eat vertebrate prey require
tongue depressor wrapped in bandage material (for exam-
11
ple Vetrap?@, 3M, St Paul, MN) can be used as a gag to
ultraviolet (UV) (290-320nm) light for vitamin D
synthesis. They also benefit behaviourally and psycho-
allow safe gavage feeding. Alternatively a hole may be
drilled in a wooden gag to facilitate passage of the tube.
logically from UVA (320-400 nm) light (Frye, 1991;
215
Visualise the glottis at the base of tongue, and direct the
Gehrmann, 1994). UV light sources can be fluorescent
tube dorso-laterally into the pharynx and oesophagus.
tubes or bulbs, with some bulbs producing both UV light
and heat. Lights producing 5% of their light as UV are
recommended, as even these do not produce as much UV
Subcutaneous
as direct sunlight. Most UV lights will continue to pro-
The skin on the lateral flank is tented and the needle inserted
duce visible light when UV production has ceased, and,
at a shallow angle to avoid penetration into the coelomic
therefore, regular replacerment is advised.
cavity. Absorption is poor frorm this site. Some lizards (for
Herbivorous species are not usually fasted before
examnple geckos) have particularly thin and friable skin,
anaesthesia. Srmaller insectivorous or carnivorous species
and the subcutaneous route should not be used in such
are fasted for 18h before elective anaesthesia, and larger
carnivorous species for 72-96h (Redrobe, 2004).
species.
Integumentary system
Intramuscular
The anterior muscles of the limbs are used (quadriceps and
Autotomy is an escape mechanism practised by some
triceps). Pinch the muscle to stabilise it prior to injection.
species, whereby the lizard breaks off a portion of its tail
mid-vertebra; it continues to move to distract a predator
Intracoelomic
[including the unwary clinician]. Care should be taken when
handling species, including most Iguanidae, which may shed
Tilt the animal so one side is uppermost, allowing organs
their tails in this manner, particularly when restraining the
to drop away from the needle. Insert the needle at a shal-
 s s ue    a se on 
low angle to the skin, pararmedially to avoid the ventral
clinician should grasp the pelvic girdle and hindlimbs along
abdorminal vein. Aspirate before injecting, starting the
with the tail-base. If autotomy occurs the remaining tail
procedure again (including fresh medication, syringe and
should be cleaned, but not sutured, as regrowth (usually
needle) if air from a lung or air sac, or organ contents are
without calcification} will occur (Bellairs and Bryant, 1985).
aspirated.
TECHNIQUES
Intravenous
Intravenous access is possible at several sites in lizards.
Routes of administration (Table I3.2)
Catheterisation requires use of a cut-down technique.
The ventral coccygeal vein is commonly used to admin-
Oral
ister drugs to induce anaesthesia. The needle is inserted
midline a third of the distance down the tail at a steep
The tube is pre-measured to mid-body. Use a mouth gag
angle (close to 90°) with the bevel facing up (see Fig.
when gavage feeding lizards to prevent damage to the
13.10j. When the needle contacts vertebral bone, with-
tube used, to the lizard's jaws (particularly if nutritional
draw slightly and aspirate to check positioning.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
intravenous catheterisation. The most common site for
placement is the proximal tibia, in the tibial crest (Fig.
13.8). As with intravenous catheterisation, a surgical prepa-
ration of the skin is performed. Analgesia should be adrmin-
istered, for example using local anaesthetic (taking care not
to overdose and cause systemic toxicity) at the periosteurm.
Intraosseous catheters are available, but alternatives include
spinal needles or hypodermic needles. The first two have
the advantage of a central stylet, which prevents bone from
Needle
blocking the needle during insertion. The latter is particu-
inserted
into
larly useful in small species when the first two options are
proximal
Lmavailable in small enough sizes, or where financial consid-
tibia
erations preclude the use of the first two options. The nee-
dle should be a maximum of half the length of the bone.
 To access the tibial crest, the stifle is flexed and the nee-
dle inserted in a distal fashion. With correct placerment the
bone will move in the direction of the needle when the
hub is rmoved, there will be no resistance to injection of
small amounts of fluid and there will be no soft tissue
swelling due to injection into surrounding soft tissues.
Radiographs can be used to confirm correct positioning.
Figure I3.8 · Intraosseous catheter placement in the proximal
The marrow space is small in reptiles and continuous rate
tibia of lizard species.
infusions are preferable to bolus injections (Mader and
216
Rudloff, 2006j. Extreme care should be taken in patients
A cut-down technique [and, therefore, anaesthesia} is
where bone pathology is likely, for example nutritional sec-
required to reach the jugudar vein. In the iguana, it lies on
omdary hyperparathyroidism, when pathological fractures
the ventro-lateral neck just caudo-ventral to the tympanic
may be induced during intraosseous catheter placerment.
membrane in a line towards the shoulder. Some blunt dis-
section may be required to visualise the vein.
The ventral abdominal vein is notable for necessitating
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
paramedical incisions for coeliotomy in the lizard. It lies
OFANAESTHESIA
relatively superficially in the midline of the ventral
abdomen, and can be injected into or catheterised in
Induction
larger animals. The axillary venous plexus lies caudal to
the hurmerus near the shoulder joint.
Intracardiac injections may be required in an emer-
Injectable agents
gency. The heart is palpated and the needle inserted cau-
dally into the pectoral inlet. Species such as monitor
The anaesthetic induction agent of choice in lizards is
propofol. Most commonly, the drug is injected into the
lizards have a more caudo-ventrally positioned heart, and
the approach will be caudal to the forelimb.
ventral coccygeal vein. In animals with a thick tail, a long
needle is required. In species that undergo autotomy, the
The cephalic vein lies in a similar position to dogs and cats,
coursing along the medial antebrachium (Fig. 13.7), and is
tail and body should be securely restrained to avoid this
accessible in larger animals. After surgical preparation of the
occurring. In patients with intraosseous access, this route
skin, a small incision is carefully made in the skin overlying
can be used to administer the propofol.
the vessel. A catheter can then be placed and attached to
Low doses of ketarmine may be used to sedate patients
the skin with sutures or tissue glue before a light dressing is
before induction with propofol or volatile agents. Higher
doses will induce anaesthesia, but have associated pro-
applied to protect the catheter fromn dislodgerment (Mader
and Rudloff, 2006). Fluids can be administered in boluses
longed recovery tirmes.
Tiletamine and zolazepam have been used intramuscu-
via a bung, or a continuous rate infusion using infusion
purmps or syringe drivers. The ventral abdominal vein may
larly to induce anaesthesia in green iguanas (Iguana iguama)
also be catheterised, but maintenance is more difficult due
[von Degerfeld, 2004). The author has also used alfaxalone
to the location of the vein on the ventral body wall.
intravenously in lizards.
Avoid grasping lizard tails during restraint or venepunc-
ture. Species that will undergo autotomy (tail loss) include
Volatile agents
Mask or chamber induction with gaseous anaesthetic agents
(Eublepharis macularius)
in lizards often results in breath holding, with a conversion
Intraosseous
to anaerobic respiration. Premedication with butorphanol
(2mg/kg intramuscularly) (Fig. 13.9) or buprenorphine of
Intraosseous catheters are easily placed in most lizards
green iguanas causes sufficient sedation to allow mask
and provide access to the circulatory systerm equivalent to
induction (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006). The minimum
Lizard anaesthesia
ana.estn
Figure I3.9 · Mask induction with isoflurane in a Chinese water
dragon (Physignathus cocincinus) after pre-medication with intra-
muscular butorphanol.
lesla
alveolar concentration (MAC) of isoflurane in green igua-
nas is 2.1% (Mosley et al., 2003)
One study found more rapid induction and recovery
from anaesthesia in green iguanas with sevoflurane corm-
217
pared with isoflurane, after butorphanol pre-medication
in both groups (Hernandez-Divers et al., 2005). In the
sevoflurane animals, muscle relaxation appeared greater
and heart rates did not reduce as they did in the isoflurane
group. Another study showed that butorphanol did not
Figure 13.10 · Induction of anaesthesia in a bearded dragon (Pogond
reduce the concentration of isoflurane required to anaes-
vitticeps) using intravenous propofol in the ventral coccygeal vein.
thetise green iguanas (Iguana iguana) (Mosley et al.
2003). The same author also demonstrated that the car-
diac anaesthetic index of isoflurane was not affected by
butorphanol in this species.
Anaesthetic maintenance
After induction, most lizards are intubated and maintained
on volatile agents using intermittent positive pressure
ventilation (IPPV) (either manually or mechanically).
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
As discussed in the introductory reptile chapter, many anaes-
thetic regimes have been used in lizards. As with other groups,
the choice of protocol depends on species and health status.
In preference, lizards are induced using propofol intra-
Figure I3.1I · Induction of a leopard gecko (Eublepharis macu-
venously (10-12 mg/kg) to allow intubation (Fig. 13.10).
larius) in an induction chamber using isoflurane.
In small patients or others where venous access is not
possible, there are two options. The first is to use intra-
muscular anaesthetic agents to induce anaesthesia, often
After induction, most patients can be intubated and
ketarmine or ketarmine cormbinations, but recoveries may be
anaesthesia maintained using volatile agents, such as
prolonged. A more balanced approach is to pre-medicate,
isoflurane and sevoflurane. IPPV is usually required, as
for example with butorphanol (Hernandez-Divers et al.,
2005) or low-dose ketamine, before induction using
most anaesthetics depress respiration.
volatile agents using a facermask or chamber.
Healthier animals will often breath hold if subjected to
ANAESTHETIC MONITORING
volatile agents without any prermedication, but severely
debilitated animals may be induced using volatile agents
If spontaneous respiration is present, the respiratory rate,
alone (Fig. 13.11).
depth and pattern should be observed. If anaesthesia
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table I3.3: Anaesthetic agents used in lizards (see also Table 12.6)
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lcg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Butorphanol 
148
IM
Premedication, reduces dose of induction agent; analgesia
Ketamine
5-10?
IM
 Premedication, reduces breath holding in chamber induction
20-303
Sedation (lower dose than in other reptiles)
Ketamine +
5-10 +
(K) IM +
(guanas)
medetomidine
0.10-0.155
(M) IM or IV
Isoflurane
4-5%
Inhal
Induction of anaesthesia
13%²
Maintenance of anaesthesia
Propofol
3-54.5
M, 10
Induction of anaesthesia,titrate to effect,apnoea conmon
Higher dose required if not premedicated (< I0 mg/lkg')
0.3-0.5 mg/kg/mina
Continuous rate infusion to maintain anaesthesia
0.51.08
 Intermittent boluses to top up anaesthesia
Sevoflurane
7-8%
Inhal
Induction of anaesthesia
218
prne
Maintenance of anaesthesia
Tiletamine/
4-68
Sedation
zolazepam
10-306
Anaesthesia (induction 8-20 min, recovery 2-10 h)
(Bennett et al., 1998); ²(Boyer, 1998); 3 (Faulkner and Archambault, 1993); 4 (Heard, 1998); 5 (Heard, 1999); (Millichamp, 1988);
7(Schumacher,1996);(Schumacher and Yelen,2006)
 depresses respiration significantly, IPPV will be required.
 Heart rate and rhythm are best assessed using a Doppler
probe over the heart (usually at the thoracic inlet [see
Fig. 13.2], or more caudally in monitor lizards} or carotid
artery (in larger patients [Fig. 13.12].
 Reflexes are monitored as for other species, with jaw tone
and toe pinch withdrawal the most reliable for assessing sur-
gical anaesthesia. The righting reflex is lost at a lighter plane
of anaesthesia. The palpebral reflex can also be monitored
(except in gecko species which have spectacles).
REFERENCES
Barten, S. L. 2006. Lizards. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine
and Surgery. 2nd edn. pp. 59-77. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Missouri.
Beddard, F. E. I904. Contributions to the anatomy of the Lacertilia:
(l) on the venous system in certain lizards. Proc Zoo Soc:
436-450.
Bellairs, A., and S. V. Bryant. I985. Autotomy and regeneration in
reptiles. In: C. Gans and F. Billett [eds.) Biology of the
Reptilia. Vol.15, Development B. pp. 302-350. Wiley
Interscience, New York.
Benmett, A. F. 1972. The effect of activity and oxygen consurmption,
Oxygen debt and heart rate in lizards Waramus gouldii and
Sauromalus hispidis. J Comp Physiol 79: 259-280.
Bennett, R. A., J. Schumacher, K. Hedjazi-Haring et al. 1998.
Cardiopulmonary and anesthetic effects of propofol
Figure 13.12 · Doppler flow monitor on the carotid artery to
adlministered intraosseously to green iguanas. J Am Vet Med
monitor heart rate in a bearded dragon (Pogond vitticeps).
Assoc 212: 93-98.
Lizard anaesthesia
Boyer, T. H. I998. Essentials of Reptiles: A Guide for Practitioners.
Millichamp, N. J. 1988. Surgical techniques in reptiles. In:
AAHA Press, Lakewood, CO.
E.R. Jacobson and G. V.J. Kollias [eds.) Exotic Animals. pp.
Canny, C. 1998. Gross anatomy and imaging of the avian and
49-74. Churchill Livingstone, New York.
reptilian urinary system. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 7:
Mitchell, M. A. 2006. Therapeutics. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile 
72-80.
Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 631-664. Saunders
Davies, L. E., B. Schmidt-Nielsen, and H. Stolte. 1976. Anatomy
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
and ultrastucture of the excretory system of the lizard,
Mosley, C. A., D. Dyson, and D. A. Smith. 2003. Minimum alveolar
Sceloporus cyanogentys. J Morphol 149: 279-326.
concentration of isoflurane in green iguanas and the effect of
Dunson, W. A. 1976. Salt glands in reptiles. In: C. Gans and
butorphanol on minimum alveolar concentration. J Am Vet
W R. Dawson [eds.) Biology of the Reptilia. Vol.5, Physiology
Med Assoc 222: 1559-1564.
A. pp. 413-441. Academic Press, London.
Murray, M. J. 2000. Reptilian blood sampling and artifact
Faulkner, J. E., and A. Archambault. I993. Anesthesia and surgery in
considerations. In: A. Fudge [ed.) Laboratory Medicine - Avian
the green iguana. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 2: I03-108.
and Exotic Pets. pp. I85-191. WB Saumders, Philalelphia.
Fox, H. I977. The urogenital system of reptiles. In: C. Gans and
Murray, M. J. 2006. Cardiopulmonary anatomy and physiology. In:
T. Parsons [eds.) Biology of the Reptilia. Vol.6, Morphology
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
P
E. pp. I-122. Academic Press, London.
124-I34. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Frye, F. L. I991. Biomedical and Surgical Aspects of Captive Reptile
O'Malley, B. 2005. Lizards. In: B. O'Malley [ed.) Clinical Anatomy
an
Husbandry. Znd edn. Krieger Publishing, Malabar, FL.
and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of
D
Gehrmann, W. H. 1994. Spectral characteristics of lamps commonly
Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. pp. 57-75. Elsevier
sth
used in herpetoculture. Vivarium 5: 16.
Saunders, London.
Heard, D. J. 1998. Advanced reptile anesthesia and medicine. Proc
Redrobe, S. 2004. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: S. J. Girling and P.
卫
Avian Specialty Advanced Prog/Small Mam Rept Prog:
Raiti [eds.) Manual of Reptiles. Znd edn. pp. 131-146. BSAVA,
113119.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Heard, D. J. 1999. Advances in reptile anesthesia. Proc North Am
Redrobe, S., and J. MacDonald. I999. Sample collection and clinical
Vet Conf: 770.
pathology of reptiles. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2:
Hermandez-Divers, S. M., J. Schumacher, S. Stahl et al. 2005
709-730, vii.
219
 Comparison of isoflurane and sevoflurane following
 Schumacher, J. 1996. Reptiles and amphibians. In: J. C. Thurman,
premedication with butorphanol in the green iguana [iguana
W. J. Tranquilli and G. J. Benson [eds.) Lumb and Jones'
iguana). J Zoo Wildl Med 36: 169-175.
Veterinary Anesthesia. 3rd edn. pp. 670-685. Williams &
Holz, P. 1999. The reptilian renal portal system: a review. Bull Assoc
Wilkins, Baltim ore.
Rep Amph Vet 9: 4-9.
Schumacher, J., and T. Yelen. 2006. Anesthesia and analgesia. In:
Holz, P. 2006. Renal anatomy and physiology. In: D. R. Mader [ed.)
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 135-144. Saumders
442-452. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
von Degerfeld, M. M. 2004. Personal experiences in the use of
Iverson, J. B. I982. Adaptions to herbivory in iguanine lizards. In:
association tiletamine/zolazepam for anaesthesia of the green
G. M. Burghardt and A. S. Rand [eds.) Iguanas of the World:
iguana [guana iguana]. Vet Res Commun 28: 35l-353.
their Behavior, Ecology, and Conservation. Noyes Publications,
Wood, S. C., and C. J. Lenfant. I976. Respiration: mechanics,
Park Ridge, NJ.
control and gas exchange. In: C. Gans [ed.) Biology of the
Mader, D. R., and E. Rudloff. 2006. Emergency and critical care. In:
Reptilia No. 5. Acadermic Press, San Diego.
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp.
533-548. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
14
Snake anaesthesia
a
til
INTRODUCTION
220
Although snakes evolved from lizards, there are many
differences in their anatomy and physiology. There are 18
eH
families of snakes. A great variety of snake sizes present
Trachea
the clinician with a variety of challenges, from obtaining
Left lung
venous access in the very small specimen to restraining the
larger animal. This section will discuss general serpentine
anatomy before approaching anaesthesia.
Oesophagus
ANATOMYAND PHYSIOLOGY
Respiratory tract
General anatomy
H□
Liver
In order to assess a snake's body condition, the normal
appearance of that species should be known. The cross-
Stomach
sectional shape varies, but the dorsal spinous processes
Gall
should be palpable. In obese animals these may not be pal-
badder
pable and in emaciated animals they will be overly promi-
-Spleen
nent. Another assessment of condition is to test how much
-Pancreas
of the snake's body weight it can support unaided.
Right
Most snake species (except Boidae) have a residual left
testis
lung, with only the right being functional. The trachea and
Large
Right
heartlie in the cranialthird of the snake's internal anatomy,
intestine
kidney
Right
with the lung(s) extending through both the cranial and
adrenal
middle thirds (Fig. 14.1).
gland
Small
The oesophagus passes through the cranial third, with
 intestine 
the stomach found in the mid-section. For gavage feeding.
Left
the tube should be pre-measured to approximately half the
Left
testis
length of the body. The ribs are numerous and continue for
kidney
the length of the snake from head to cloaca. Intracoelormic
injections, therefore, should be given along the ventro-
adrenal
gland
lateral margin (see Fig 14.6).
Temperature
Cloaca
Preferred optimum temperature range (POTR) will vary
depending on species - with most this is between 18°℃
Figure I4.1 · Schematic showing organ location in snakes.
Snake anaesthesia
otile
 anaesth
Figure |4.2 · Heart is stabilised to prevent displacement during
cardiac puncture.
Lesia
and 34°C. Above 35°C heat stress occurs, with death at
38-44°C. Torpor occurs below 10°C, with death below
4°C (O'Malley, 2005).
221
 All heat sources should be protected to prevent contact
with the snake, as they rmay burm an anirmal that rests in con-
tact with the heat for too long. Heat bulbs should, there-
fore, be covered with a grill (see Fig. 12.2). Heat rmats
should never be placed within an enclosure, under sub-
Figure I4.3 · Glottis is quite rostral in snakes, shown in this black
strate, as the animal may dig down to lie directly on the mat.
rat snake (Elaphe obsoleta obsoleted).
Cardiovascular system
exudates in the respiratory tract, as the mucociliary appa-
Snake hearts are similar to other three-chambered hearts
ratus is inefficient (O'Malley, 2005).
in reptiles. Right-to-left and left-to-right shunting is pos-
 In some snakes, i.e. the Acrochordidae, a portion of the
sible, allowing mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated
trachea is open dorsally to a ‘tracheal lung' with a respira-
blood (Hicks, 1998; Pough et al., 2004). The heart lies
tory surface Stoakes, 1992). Most snake species have one
functional lung, with the left being vestigial or absent
craniovental to the tracheal bifurcation. Owing to the
absence of a diaphragm, the heart is fairly mobile and
(Table 14.1); the exception is Boidae that have two func-
requires stabilisation with pressure both cranially and caud-
tional lungs. The right lung extends from the level of the
ally before intracardiac injections (Fig. 14.2),
heart almost to the right kidney (Funk, 2006). The cranial
Oxygen requirements vary greatly in snakes. They
portion of the lung is single-chambered (unicarmeral} with
increase postprandially to allow for increased metabolic
faveoli lined by respiratory epithelium. The caudal third of
requirements during digestion (Anderson et al., 2005].
the lung does not have a respiratory epithelium, and func-
Both renal and hepatic portal circulations are present in
tions as an air sac (Perry, 1989).
snakes, and as for other reptiles it is currently advisable to
The intercostal muscles control respiration. Several
avoid injection of nephrotoxic medications into the caudal
muscles control expiration. Inspiration is initially passive,
part of the body (Holz, 1999). There are no iliac veins in
following from relaxation of the expiratory muscles. The
ribs are then elevated, causing a decrease in intrapul-
snakes, but an abdominal vein is present (Holz, 2006).
monary pressure and active inspiration. When the inspira-
tory muscles relax and the lung(s) recoil(s), passive
Respiratory system
expiration occurs (Wood and Lenfant, 1976). As with
other reptiles, the lung walls are thin and rupture is possi-
The glotis is quite rostral in snakes (Fig. 14.3), allowing
ble with over-zealous positive pressure ventilation (PPV).
breathing to continue while they swallow prey and also
Ophidian pararmyxovirus (OPMV) has been associated
relative ease of intubation even in conscious animals.
with respiratory disease in certain snake species; serology
Cartilaginous tracheal rings are incomplete, with a mem-
may aid in diagnosis (Jacobson et al., 1981). Pneumonia
branous region dorsally. In species such as gophersnakes
may also be seen in Boidae with the retroviral inclusion
(Pituophis spp.) the epiglottal cartilage is enlarged (Funk,
body disease; diagnosis is based on histology of kidney or
2006). Body positioning is important in clearance of
pancreatic biopsies (Schumacher et al., 1994).
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table I4.l: Families of snakes that may be kept as pets (only experienced herpetologists should keep venomous species, and staff
FAMILY
EXAMPLES
COMMENTS
Boidae
Boas, e.g. boa constrictor (Bod constrictor)
Two lungs; two carotid arteries
Pythons, e.g. Burmese python (Python molurus),
royal python (Python regius)
Colubridae
e.g. corn snake (Elaphe guttata), common kingsnake
One functional lung (right); single carotid artery (left)
(Lampropeltis getula), grass snake (Natrix natrix),
Most species harmless, but family includes rear-fanged
milksnake (Lampropeltis triangulum)
venomous species
Elapidae
e.g. black mamba (Dendroaspis polylepis), king cobra
One functional lung (right); single carotid artery (left)
(Ophiophagus hannah), taipan (Oxyuranus scutellatus)
All venomous
Viperidae
e.g.Central American fer-de-lance (Bothrops asper),
One functional lung (right); single carotid artery (left)
European adder (Vipera berus), Gaboon viper
Venomous
(Bitis gabonicus)
222
The heart is located in the cranial third of the snake's
body.
The glottis is rostral in the mouth.
Most snakes have a singe functional lung, with a
caudal air sac.
Urinary system
 Serpentine kidneys are elongated and most are lobulated.
The right kidney is more cranial in the body than the left,
with both in the caudo-dorsal coelomic cavity. Snakes do
not have a urinary bladder, so urine is stored in the distal
colon or distal ureters (Canny, 1998; Holz, 2006)
The renal portal veins can be bypassed via the rmesenteric
vein, and thence to the liver (Holz, 2006)
Digestive system
Avoid trauma to the caudally facing teeth when examin-
ing a snake's oral cavity, for example during intubation or
passing a feeding tube. Extreme caution should be taken
in venomous species, even when anaesthetised, to avoid
accidental self-envenomation.
Figure I4.4 · Rostral viewof a juvenile Western hog-nosed snake 
The tongue in snakes lies in a sheath ventral to the glottis
(Heterodon nasicus) showing the lingual fossa. Feeding tubes can
(Funk, 2006). The presence of a lingual fossa (Fig. 14.4)
be passed through the fossa into the mouth, thus avoiding dam-
enables the snake to sarmple the air and environrment with its
age to the teeth.
tongue while the mouth is closed, and also allows the clin-
ician to pass a feeding tube easily for administration of sup-
portive fluids. When opening the mouth for examination,
the clinician will note the unfused mandibular symphysis in
maintained in an upright position for at least 30 s to reduce
snakes (Lock, 2006).
the risk of regurgitation (O'Malley, 2005). Absorption of
The oesophagus is relatively amuscular, and the cardiac
ingesta is slow, for example up to 5 days for a rat in a large
sphincter is weak. After gavage feeding, the snake should be
snake.
Snake anaesthesia
D
ti
e
an
Figure I4.5 · Subcutaneous injections are given between scales
Figure I4.6 · Intracoelomic injection in a black rat snake (Elaphe
1
(shown in this black rat snake [Elaphe obsoleta obsoletea]). The
obsoleta obsoletea). The needle is inserted at a shallow angle to
skin is cleaned before needle insertion to reduce the risk of iatro-
reduce the risk of visceral puncture.
genic infection.
11
TECHNIQUES
All snakes are carnivorous. However, different species
have different diets.Consuming larger prey requires a
223
longer period of digestion and absorption, and larger
Routes of administration
s   Auaa ssa aay n pua s
should be fasted before elective anaesthesia, to reduce the
Oral
risk of cardio-respiratory compression from prey within
the gastrointestinal tract. The period of starvation
The feeding tube should be pre-measured to the level of
depends on the size of snake and usual frequency of feed-
the stomach, mid-body. Hold the snake with the head and
ing, but 72-96 h is usually advisable (Redrobe, 2004).
neck vertical. Until the technician is experienced, it is
advisable to open the mouth with a smooth plastic gag (for
Integument
example, a small syringe) to visualise glottis. Once experi-
enced, the technician can pass the tube into the closed oral
The ventral scales on snakes, the gastropeges, are larger
cavity via the lingual notch, reducing the risk of dental
trauma. Pass the lubricated tube into the caudo-lateral phar-
and thicker than those dorsally and laterally. Snake scales are
ynx. Hold the snake with its proximal body elevated for 30
thickened regions of epidermis, with thin skin inbetween
s to avoid regurgitation.
(O'Malley, 2005). Needles should be inserted into the thin-
ner skin, to avoid damaging the protective scales (Fig. 14.5)
Use a smooth mouth gag in snakes, for example the 
Special senses
plastic or wooden shaft of a cotton-tip swab or a
wooden tongue depressor.
The eyelids have fused in snakes to form a spectacle. It is
Bandage material will snag and damage the teeth.
not necessary to lubricate the eye during anaesthesia (as
in other species), but care should be taken to avoid dam-
age to the spectacle, as a lesion may lead to dysecdysis.
Subcutaneous
Olfaction is highly developed in snakes. If rodents or
other prey species have recently been handled, wash
Tent the skin before injecting between scales. Before any
hands or (preferably) wear gloves before handling a hun-
injection, the skin is surgically prepared to reduce intro-
gry snake that may taste prey on your hands and attack
duction of pathogens. Needles are inserted between scales
the scent. Sirmilarly, snakes with infrared pits may rely on
(see Fig 14.5).
heat detection to strike at prey (O'Malley, 2005).
Intracoelomic
EQUIPMENT
The caudal coelomic cavity is accessed (Fig. 14.6). The nee-
dle is inserted at a shallow angle at the junction between
Endotracheal tubes should be uncuffed. Those with a
the ventral scutes and lateral body scales. After aspiration
shoulder are useful in snakes to seal the glottis during
to ensure organs have not been entered, fluids or medica-
anaesthesia. Perspex tubes may be used for restraint of
tion can be slowly injected. If large fluid volumes are to be
venomous species during induction
administered, they should be pre-warmed.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Figure 14.8 · A cut-down technique is required for jugular
catheterisation in snakes such as this black rat snake (Elaphe obso-
11
letdobsoletea).
+
The palatine vein lies dorsally in the mouth, medial to
224
M
the palatine teeth, and so is only accessible under general
anaesthesia.
Intravenous catheters can be placed in snakes using a
cut-down technique (Fig. 14.8). This is a useful technique
in collapsed snakes, for administration of supportive fluids.
Aseptic technique should be followed, with skin prepara-
Figure I4.7 · A Doppler flow monitor can be used to assist loca-
tion before incision. The right jugular vein is most com-
tion of the heart, which is located approximately one-third of the
monly used. The jugular vein is accessed approximately
distance along the body length.
ten scales cranial to the heart. The vein traverses from a
lateral position near the head towards the ventral heart.
After surgical preparation of the skin, a small incision is
Intramuscular
made between the ventral scutes and lateral body scales.
Some blunt dissection medial to the ribs is used to locate
The paravertebral muscles are used. Only small volurmes
the vein under muscles. The catheter is inserted in a cau-
can be administered via this route.
dal fashion and secured with skin sutures.
 In an emergency the heart can be catheterised, with the
Venous access
catheter inserted between scales into the ventricle.
Haemorrhage and tamponade are possible, but unlikely
Sites for venepuncture are scant in snakes due to their
due to the low blood pressure, slow heartbeat and thick
anatomical adaptations. Access is difficult in small ani-
ventricle in most snakes (Mader and Rudloff, 2006).
rmals or fermales with shorter tails.
A light dressing covering the catheter and bung prevents
Inserting the needle midline, directed caudally in males
dislodgement during patient movements.
to avoid hemipenes, enters the ventral coccygeal vein. This
Intraosseous catheterisation is not possible in snakes.
vein is accessible in medium or large snakes. Sedation or
anaesthesia may be required and haematoma is common
Intubation
(Murray, 2000).
Locate the heart by visualising the heartbeat or use a
The glottis is rostral and relatively easily intubated in snakes
Doppler probe (Fig. 14.7). The heart is immobilised with
(Fig. 14.9).
gentle pressure cranially and caudally. After needle inser-
tion, the syringe fills slowly with each heart contraction.
There is a risk of haemorrhage associated with cardiac
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
puncture, but the risk is small owing to the low blood
OFANAESTHESIA
pressure and slow heart rate in snakes (Murray, 2000).
Extra care should be taken in anirmals weighing less than
300 g. Ideally, this route should be used for administration
Induction
of drugs in ermergencies only. In collapsed patients where
venous access is not possible, an indwelling cardiac
As with other reptiles, propofol is the anaesthetic agent of
catheter may be placed.
choice in snakes. However, venous access is difficult. The
Snake anaesthesia
Table 14.2: Routes of administration in snakes
ROUTE
SITE
COMMENTS
Intracoelomic
Caudal coelomic cavity
Technique similar to lizards
Intramuscular
Paravertebral muscles
Small volumes only
Intraosseous
N/A
Not possible in snakes
Ventral coccygeal vein
Intravenous
Difficult, particularly in species with short tail length caudal to cloaca
otile
Cardiac puncture
Catheterisation possible for debilitated patients
 Dorsal palatine vein
Under general anaesthesia
Jugular vein (left or right)
Catheter placement possible
lest:
Oral
Mid or distal oesophagus
fuids or medication are likely to induce regurgitation
色
1
Subcutaneous
Lateral body wall
Small volumes only; multiple sites may be required for larger
volumes
225
(Mitchell, 2006; O'Malley, 2005; Redrobe and MacDonald, 1 999)
during forced intubation, to the lungs and air sacs with
over-zealous pressure, or to the subcutaneous tissues
during restraint.
Although induction is possible using inhalational agents
in a chamber, breath holding may occur and induction is
not rapid. It is preferable to prermedicate the snake to ease
restraint and allow intubation. Sedatives used include
butorphanol, low-dose ketamine or teletamine/zolazepam.
Following intubation, anaesthesia is induced and main-
tained using inhalational anaesthetic agents.
If used as the sole anaesthetic agent, ketamine will cause
respiratory depression, hypertension and tachycardia in
snakes (Schumacher et al., 1997). Combinations can be
used (see Table 12.6).
Anaesthetic maintenance
Figure I4.9 · The glottis is quite rostral in snakes (seen in this
Madagascan ground boa [Acrantophis madogascariensis], and easily
In general, snakes are intubated after induction and main-
intubated.
tained using volatile agents. Repeated administration of
injectable agents, such as ketarmine, may excessively pro-
long recovery.
yentral coccygeal vein may be accessible in larger animals,
but is short in females and is often small. If a jugular
catheter has been placed, this can be used for adrministra-
Suggested protocols
tion of propofol. Cardiac puncture is not routinely used to
administer anaesthetic agents, due to the risk of introduc-
In preference, anaesthesia is induced with intravenous
tion of infection. The use of sedatives may facilitate intra-
propofol. If intravenous access is not possible, the snake is
venous access and administration of propofol
pre-medicated with a low dose of ketamine to allow
In some specimens, it may be possible to intubate the
induction with volatile agents. This is done in an anaes-
conscious snake and induce anaesthesia with inhalational
thetic chamber, or by intubating the sedated patient and
agents using PPV. Induction and recovery are rapid;
performing PPV with a volatile agent. Altermatively, a higher
however, this technique is stressful for the animal.
dose of ketarmine may be used to induce anaesthesia, with
Damage rmay be caused to the snake, either to the glottis
or without other agents such as butorphanol.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Venomous snakes should be induced before intubation,
to reduce the risk of self-envenomation. Protective equip-
ment should be worn to reduce the risk to handlers.
Induction can be performed either in a chamber with
gaseous anaesthetic agents, or using injectable agents.
Clear plastic tubes can be used to restrain the snake, with
access for injections via srmall holes along the side.
Very small snakes pose difficulties to the clinician, as
intravenous access and conscious intubation are not
usually possible. Debilitated animals may allow induction
in a charmber with inhalational anaesthetic agents. For more
alert animals, injectable agents are used to sedate prior to
induction with gaseous agents (Fig. 14.10) before intuba-
tion can be achieved. An accurate body weight is essential
before administration of injectable drugs, diluting drugs if
necessary and using insulin-type syringes with needles.
Overdosage is a major concen, particularly as resuscitation
Figure 14.10 · 60g common garter snake (Thamnophis sirtalis)
techniques will also be limited in small animals. Intubation
induced in a chamber with isoflurane after sedation with 10 mg/kg
is performed after sedation, sometimes after administra-
ketamine administered intramuscu larly.
tion of volatile agents in a chamber or via a mask.
226
FORMULARY
Table I4.3: Anaesthetic and analgesic agents used in snakes (see also Table I2.6)
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Butorphanol
1-22
IM
Analgesia; premedicant (improves muscle relaxation, e.g. with ketamine)
Diazepam
0.2-0.88
IM
Muscle relaxation, used in conjunction with ketamine
Isoflurane
3-5%9
Inhal
Induction of anaesthesia
<3%
Maintenance of anaesthesia
Ketamine
5-209
IM
i eiseuiseeue uedeep o suee aelon leuoippe auinben keu uoees
some patients before intubation is possible
20-603.5
Sedation (induction 30 min, recovery 2-48 h)
Propofol
5-101.7
IV
Induction of anaesthesia, titrate to effect, apnoea common
0.3-0.5 mg/kg/min9
Continuous rate infusion to maintain anaesthesia
0.5-1.09
 Intermittent boluses to top up anaesthesia
Sevoflurane
8%9
Inhal
Tiletamine/zolazepam
3
IM
Sedation
 Facilitates handling and intubation of large snakes
Prolongsrecovery
10404.6,10
Supplement with volatile agent for surgical anaesthesia
Key: IM = intramuscular, Inhal = inhalation, IV = intravenous
(Anderson et al., 1999); 2 (Bennett et al.,1999); 3(Boyer, 1992); 1(enkins, 1991);  (Johnson, 1991); 6 (Millichamp, 1988);
(Schaeffer, 1997);  (Schumacher, 1996); (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006); I (Schobert, 1987)
Snake anaesthesia
REFERENCES
Murray, M. J. 2000. Reptilian blood sampling and artifact
considerations. In: A.Fudge [ed] Laboratory medicine - avian
and exotic pets. pp. I85-19l. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Anderson, J. B., B. C. Rourke, V. J. Caiozzo et al. 2005. Postprandial
O'Malley, B. 2005. Snakes. In: B. O'Malley [ed.) Clinical Anatomy
cardiac hypertrophy in pythons. Nature 434: 37-38.
and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of
Anderson, N. L., R. F. Wack, L. Calloway et al. 1999. Cardio-
Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. pp. 77-93. Elsevier
pulmonary effects and efficacy of propofol as an anesthetic
Saunders, London.
ent in brow tree snakes [Boga irregularis).BullAssc Rep
Perry, S. F. 1989. Structure and fumction of the reptilian respiratory
Amph Vet 9: 9-15.
system. In: S. C. Wood [ed.) Comparative Pulmonary
Benmett, R. A., S. J. Divers, and J. Schumacher. I999. Anesthesia.
Physiology - Current Concepts. pp. 193-237. Dekker,
Bull Assoc Rep Amph Vet 9: 20-27.
Boyer, D. M. I992. Clinical anesthesia of reptiles. Bull Assoc Rep
Pough, F. H., R. M. Andrews, J. E. Cadlle et al. 2004. Herpetology.
Amph Vet 2: 10-13.
3rd edn. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Canny, C. 1998. Gross anatomy and imaging of the avian and reptilian
Redrobe, S. 2004. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: S. J. Girling and
urinary systetm. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 7: 72-80.
P. Raiti (eds.) Manual of Reptiles. Znd edn. pp. I31-146.
Funk, R. S. 2006. Snakes. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine 
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
P
and Surgery. Znd ern. pp. 42-58. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Redrobe, S., and J. MacDonald. I999. Sample collection and clinical
Missouri.
pathology of reptiles. In D.R. Reavill (ed.) Clinical Pathology
Hicks, J. 1998. Cardiac shunting in reptiles: mechanisms, regulation,
and Sample Collection. Vol.2. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
and physiological functions. In: C. Gans and A. S. Gaunt [eds.)]
sth
Pract.: 709-730.
Biology of the Reptilia. Vol. 19. Morphology. Society for the
Schaeffer, D. O. 1997. Anesthesia and analgesia in nontraditional
Study of Amphibians and Reptiles, Ithaca, NY.
卫
Iaboratory animal species. In: D. F. Kohn, S. K. Wixson, W. J.
Holz, P. 2006. Renal anatomy and physiology. In: D. R. Mader [ed.)
White et al. [(eds.) Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory
Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.pp. 135-144. Saunmders
Animals. pp. 338-378. Academic Press, New York.
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Schobert, E. 1987. Telazol use in wild and exotic animals. Vet Med
Holz, P. H. I999. The reptilian renal-portal system: influence on
82: 1080-1088
227
therapy. In: M. E. Fowler and R. E. Miller [eds.) Zoo and Wild
Schumacher, J. 1996. Reptiles and amphibians. In: J. C. Thurman,
W. J. Tranquilli and G. J. Benson [eds.) Lumb and Jones'
Jacobson, E. R., J. M. Gaskin, D. Page et al. I981. Illness associated
Veterinary Anesthesia. 3rd edn. pp. 670-685. Williams &
with paramyxo-like virus infection in a zoological collection of
Wilkins, Baltimore.
smakes. J Am Vet Med Assoc 179: 1227.
Schumacher, J., E. R. Jacobson, B. L. Homer, and J. M. Gaskin.
Jenkins, J. R. 1991. A forrmulary for reptile and amphibian medicine.
1994. Inclusion body disease in boid snakes. J Zoo Wildl Med
 Proc Fourth Annu Avian/Exotic Anim Med Symp, University of
25: 511-524.
Califormia, Davis, CA: 24-27.
Schumacher, J., H. B. Lillywhite, W. M. Norman et al. 1997. Effects
Johnson, J. H. I991. Anesthesia, analgesia and euthanasia of reptiles
of ketamine HCl on cardiopulmonary function in snakes.
and amphibians. Proc Am Assoc Zoo Vet: 132-138.
Copeia 2: 395.
Lock, B. A. 2006. Behavioral and morphologic adaptations.In:
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. p.
Schumacher, J., and T. Yelen. 2006. Anesthesia and analgesia.
In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
163-179. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
pp. 442-452. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Mader, D. R., and E. Rudloff. 2006. Emergency and critical care. In:
Stoakes, L. C. 1992. Respiratory system. In: P. H. Benyon,
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
M. P. C. Lawton and J. E. Cooper [eds.) Manual of
pp. 533-548. Saumders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Reptiles. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Goucestershire.
Millichamp, N. J. 1988. Surgical techniques in reptiles. In:
Wood, S. C., and C. J. Lenfant. I976. Respiration: mechanics,
E. R. Jacobson and G. V. J. Kollias [eds.] Exotic Animals.
control and gas exchange. In: C. Gans [ed.) Biology of the
pp. 49-74. Churchill Livingstone, New York.
Reptilia No. 5. Acadermic Press, San Diego.
Mitchell, M. A. 2006. Therapeutics. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile
Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 631-664. Saunders
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Chelonian
(tortoise, terrapin
15
and turtle)
anaesthesia
INTRODUCTION
animals between 25°C and 35°C (Boyer and Boyer, 2006)
Most tortoises bask to absorb heat through their carapace
Chelonia have been kept as pets for many years. Due to
(dorsal shell), and so heating should be provided from
228
above or to one side of their enclosure. Heating appliances
worldwide threats, many species are now protected, for
example under Convention on the International Trade in
include lamps and mats. In order to produce a tempera-
Endangered Species (CITES) legislation. More pets now
ture gradient (or range) across the vivarium, heaters should
be predominantly at one end. This will provide a basking
are captive-bred, but certain species are still traded inter-
nationally, and some aged specimens will have been traded
area, but supplemental background heating may also be
prior to the establishment of CITES laws. Most species
necessary to maintain the lower end of the POTR. Armbient
are difficult to keep in captivity, and unfortunately hus-
temperature for hospital enclosures should be 24-32°C
bandry inadequacies often predispose disease.
for most species. For aquatic species, submersible water
In this text ‘tortoise' refers to terrestrial species, ‘terrapin’
heaters may be required to rmaintain water temperature
With all heaters, ensure that the chelonian cannot contact
to freshwater semi-aquatic species, and ^turtle' to marine
them, either by raising them above the substrate or using a
and aquatic species.
barrier cage. Thermostats are useful to help maintain a con-
stant temperature in the enclosure, but are not loo% reli-
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
able. Digital thermometers should be used to monitor both
air and water termperatures in chelonian enclosures.
Temperature
Cardiovascular system
The table at the start of the reptile introductory chapter lists
preferred optimum temperature ranges (POTR) for some
The chelonian three-chambered heart lies cranio-ventrally
species (see Table 12.1). For most terrestrial species this
in the coelomic cavity, near the pectoral inlet. As discussed
is between 26°C and 38°C, and for aquatic or semi-aquatic
above [see Chapter 12), the three-chambered heart still
Table I 5.l: Families of chelonia that may be kept as pets
SUBORDER
FAMILIES
EXAMPLES
COMMENTS
Cryptodira (hidden-neck)
9
Leopard tortoise (Geochelone pardalis)
Can retract head within shell
Map turtles (Graptemys spp.)
North African tortoise (Testudo graeca)
Pig-nosed turtle (Carettochelys insculpta)
Slider (Trachemys scripta subspp.)
Pleurodira (side-neck)
2
African side-necked turtles (Pelusios spp.)
Unable to retract head, but fold it
Australian snake-necked turtles (Chelodina spp.)
sideways
Chelonian anaesthesia
maintains functionally separate pulmonary and systermic
hind-limbs tenses the septum horizontale, a non-muscular
circulations (O'Malley, 2005)
mermbrane which separates the airspace frorm the coelomic
 The renal portal system is present in chelonians, but as
cavity. The negative pressure induced causes lung inflation.
in other reptiles its irmportance is not known. As with other
Moverment of the limbs within the coelormic cavity relaxes
species, nephrotoxic or renally excreted drugs are usually
this membrane, and also increases positive pressure on
administered in the cranial half of the body (Boyer and
the gastrointestinal tract and thence the lungs, expelling
Boyer, 2006)
air from the lungs (Gans and Hughes, 1967; Wood and
The two chelonian abdominal veins are linked by a trans-
Lenfant, 1976). Head and neck movement in and out of
verse anastomosis (Holz, 1999).
the shell also aids respiration (Boyer and Boyer, 2006).
Some aquatic species can respire across their skin, pha-
Respiratory system
ryngeal mucosa and/or cloacal bursae. Although aquatic
species usually surface to breathe, many species can
Normal chelonian respiration is via the nares. The glottis is
respire across their cloacal membrane sufficiently during
L
at the base of the fleshy tongue (Fig. 15.1). In cryptodiran
periods of low activity, for example during underwater
species the trachea bifurcates relatively proximally, allow-
hibernation (brumation} (Cann, 1998; Davies, 1981)
ing respiration when the head is retracted within the shell.
An inefficient mucociliary clearance of foreign material
Short endotracheal tubes should be used to ensure admin-
in the airways and the caseous nature of inflarmmatory exu-
istered gases enter both bronchi. In pleurodiran species, the
dates in chelonia (Junge and Miller, 1992; Murray, 1996)
trachea is longer due to the extended length of the neck.
mean that these species are susceptible to pneumonia.
As the cartilaginous rings of the chelonian trachea are
A cure is unlikely and pneumonia carries a poor long-term
 complete, non-cuffed endotracheal tubes should be used.
prognosis. However, their ability to respire anaerobically
11
The lungs attach ventrally to the carapacial periosteum,
enables chelonia to survive severe respiratory disease
from the pectoral to the pelvic limb girdles. The paired
(McArthur et al., 2004).
lungs are compartmentalised (multicameral), with a single
The dive reflex in chelonia is used physiologically when
229
primary bronchus each side (Perry, 1989). As in other rep-
a low oxygen environment is encountered. The animals
tiles, the respiratory surface area is small compared to marm-
become apnoeic and convert to anaerobic respiration, as
mals (Wood and Lenfant, 1976). Intermal ridges and septa
well as using cardiac shunting to divert blood from the
increase the surface area in the sac-like lungs, with faveoli
pulmonary vessels (McArthur et al., 2004). Induction
opening into the central air space.
with volatile anaesthetic agents alone is usually not possi-
As the pectoral and pelvic girdle are within a chelon-
ble in these species.
ian's ‘ribs', they cannot breath by moving these bones
Mycoplasma spp. have been associated with upper
[McCutcheon, 1943). Respiratory movements are enabled
respiratory disease and pneumonia in tortoises [Jacobson,
by a combination of techniques. In most species, contrac-
2000; Mader, 1991). A herpesvirus has also been linked to
tion of testocoracoideus and obliquus abdominis muscles
upper and lower respiratory tract disease in chelonia (Junge
enlarges the coelormic cavity leading to inspiration, and con-
and Miller, 1992; Origgi and Jacobson, 1999). Mycoplasma
traction of diaphragmaticus and transversus abdominis
culture and viral isolation are difficult. Enzyme-linked
reduces the coelormic space and causes expiration. In Testudo
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing has been developed
graeca (North African tortoise), pectoral girdle move-
for Mycoplasma agassizi in certain species. Polymerase
ments are the predorminant respiratory muscles [Wood
chain reaction (PCR) assays can be used to diagnose
and Lenfant, 1976). Outward movement of the fore- and
Mycoplasma and herpervirus infections [McArthur, 2004c].
Nares
Hard palate
Soft palate
Oropharynx
Glottis (intubated)
Tongue
Figure I5.I · Open-mouth view showing intubated Testudo sp., with the glottis at the base of the fleshy tongue.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Urinary system
These variations often restrict the clinician's access for
examination and administration of medication. The anatomy
The paired lobulated kidneys lie on the ventro-caudal
of this group of reptiles, therefore, poses some challenges
carapace, caudal to the acetabulum in most species (Frye,
for treatment (Fig. 15.2)
199i). Terrestrial species produce uric acid and urate salts to
Although newspaper will be used as the substrate in
conserve water whilst excreting nitrogenous waste; aquatic
most hospital enclosures, most species of tortoise benefit
species tend to excrete ammonia and urea (Davies, 1981)
from being able to hide or dig. For species from drier
climes shredded newspaper allows some refuge, but for
The chelonian bladder may be a single large sac or rmay
have bilateral accessory bladders (Holz, 2006). The
species requiring higher humidity a box or cat litter tray
ureters enter the bladder neck directly in chelonia (corm-
with damp soil and/or sand will allow more natural behav-
 ar o ia  a sae   
iour. A hide box should always be provided. Aquatic and
the urodeum). A urethra then connects the bladder to the
semi-aquatic species should be provided with a dry area
0n which to haul out and bask (Fig. 15.3) (Boyer and
urodeum (Canny, 1998). The urinary bladder is used to
store water in terrestrial species, with reabsorption of water
Boyer, 2006).
[and excreted drug metabolites) posible from the cloaca,
colon or urinary bladder (Davies, 198l). Cloacal bladders
may also have respiratory epitheliurm in some species, neces-
Postpulmonary
Kidney
sary for periods of underwater hibernation (Fox, 1977).
Lung
septum
(retrocoelomic)
Water should always be provided for hospitalised chelo-
 nia. Bowls should be deep enough to allow the animal to dip
Trachea
its head to drink. Tortoises benefit from a period of daily
soaking in warm water or electrolyte solution to encour-
230
age drinking and defecation (see Fig. 12.8). Debilitated
animals should be monitored to avoid drowning.
Gastrointestinal system
Gastrointestinal tract,
bladder
Chelonia are herbivorous or omnivorous (see Table 12.1).
Terrestrial species are usually herbivorous, while aquatic
species are usually carnivorous or omnivorous (Boyer and
Boyer, 2006; Pritchard, 1979). Their gastrointestinal tran-
sit time varies between species, taking up to 4 weeks, and
Liver
 [left and right
Respiratory tract
is significantly affected by factors such as temperature,
atria, ventricle)
Heart
dietary fibre and water content, and feeding frequency
[King, 1996; Lawrence and Jackson, 1982).
Figure I5.2 · Schematic lateral view of a chelonian showing the
Poor water quality will predispose various disease
location of major organs within the shell
processes. It is preferable to feed aquatic species in a sep-
arate tank to their rmain enclosure to rmaintain water qual-
ity in the main aquarium. Many animals will void urine,
urates and faeces around the time of feeding. Voided
 material should be removed from the water.
Non-herbivorous chelonia are usually fasted for l8h
before elective anaesthesia to reduce the risk of regurgita-
tion and aspiration (Redrobe, 2004).
Integumentary system
The presence of a shell provides protection from predation
for these animals. However, procedures performed rou-
tinely in other species are difficult or not possible, includ-
ing limited clinical examination and restriction of venous
access sites. A great variation in basic anatomy will affect
which procedures may be performed, with due regard paid
to staff safety when dealing with large carnivorous species,
for example the snapping turle (Chelydra serpentine).
The chelonian shell comprises a dorsal carapace and ven-
Figure I5.3 · Aquatic and semi-aquatic species should be pro-
tral plastron, although the exact shape and consistency will
vided with a dry haul-out area during hospitalisation. The patient
vary between species. For example, box turtles (Terrapene
should not be returned to water until sufficiently recovered from
spp.) have hinges in their plastron, while hinged-back
anaesthesia. This pig-nosed turtle (Carettochelys insculpta) is not
tortoises (Kinixys spp.) have a caudal carapacial hinge.
Chelonian anaesthesia
Metabolism
sterile peritonitis may result from follicle or ova penetra-
tion. Large volumes of fluids should be pre-warmed before
As with other reptiles, the metabolic rate in chelonia
intracoelomic injection.
is relatively low. The rate becomes much lower during
periods of hibernation, in part due to the lower environ-
Intravenous
mental temperatures during this time. This effect should
Several venous sites are present in chelonia. The choice
be considered before administration of drugs. Animals
will depend on the species and size of the animal, and the
recovering from illness should not be hibernated, as the
reason for access.
immune function and healing will also be reduced
Most terrestrial tortoises can be restrained with the
TECHNIQUES
head extended to access the jugular vein.
Routes of administration
It may be more difficult to grasp the head in turtles
e
and terrapins; the subcarapacial vein is a useful
alternative for venepuncture in these species.
an
Oral
The subcarapacial vein is also accessible in very small
esth
D
Small volumes of medication can be syringed directly into
helonia.
the oral cavity or mixed with food if the patient is eating
Species such as the African spurred tortoise
色
well. It is more usual to administer medication and fluids
(Geochelone sulcata) and box turtles (Terrapene spp.)
via gavage to ensure dosing success.
often require sedation with intramuscular agents
Pre-measure the rubber or metal tube to the level of
before venous access is possible.
the stomach, which lies mid-plastron. Restrain the patient's
231
head in extension (straightening the oesophagus). Use a
mouth gag - a finger in the mouth commissure is suffi-
The jugular vein is most commonly used for venepunc-
cient in most terrestrial tortoises, but a metal gag may be
ture in chelonia. The vein lies on the lateral neck, extend-
more appropriate in larger or stronger animals. Pass the
ing caudally from the tympanic membrane towards the
tube dorso-laterally in the oro-pharynx to avoid the glot-
thoracic inlet. The vein is quite superficial, with the right
tis (Fig. 15.4A). Observe for regurgitation during dosing.
jugular vein often larger than the left. To access the vein
Large volumes of fluids should be pre-warmed to prevent
the head is extended and the vein is raised by applying
body cooling.
pressure at the base of neck laterally (Fig. 15.4E).
This route should be used in conscious animals only. In
Although injections are often given through the skin
less cooperative patients it is possible to pass the tube with
into the jugular vein, it is easier to use a cut-down tech-
the neck retracted, using a flexible tube and a mouth gag.
nique before catheterisation to expose the vein. Catheters
of 20-26 gauge can be inserted, depending on body size.
Subcutaneous
A cut-down technique may allow for easier catheterisa-
tion. The catheter is inserted approximately one-third the
This route is rarely used in chelonia, as absorption is
length of the neck caudal to the tympanic membrane,
slow. The axillary or inguinal regions may be usually used,
and should be approximately half the length of the neck.
tenting the skin before injection.
The catheter is attached as in lizards using skin sutures
or tissue glue, and a bung used to allow fluid administra-
Intramuscular
tion. If free-flowing giving sets are used, flow may cease
Muscle groups anterior to the humerus or femur are used.
when the chelonian's neck is retracted. Srmall syringe-driv-
The limb is held and the needle inserted perpendicular to
ers can be attached to the carapace in larger specimens to
the skin (Fig. 15.4B). Only small volumes can be adminis-
allow ease of movement [Mader and Rudloff, 2006]
The subcarapacial vein is ventral to the carapace in the
tered via this route.
midline. A needle is inserted at a 45° angle into the skin
Epicoelomic
near the carapace. This vein cannot be catheterised, but is
a useful site for venous access, particularly in small patients
Fluids can be administered into the potential space
or in animals where the head cannot be easily extended
between the plastron and pectoral musculature (Fig. 15.4C)
(including many aquatic species).
(McArthur, 2004b).
The small dorsal coccygeal vein is accessible for phle-
botomy or injection of small volurmes of medication. Due
Intracoelomic
to the location, it is important to clean the skin thor-
oughly before using this route. The tail is extended cau-
Access is via the prefermoral fossa, near the site where skin
dally, and the needle inserted midline at a steep angle until
attaches to the plastron-carapace bridge. Tilt the animal so
bone is reached. The needle is then withdrawn slightly
viscera fall away frorm the needle. Insert the needle into the
and the syringe aspirated to check positioning Inadvertent
uppermost side to enter the coelomic cavity (Fig. 15.4D).
lymph vessel access is common at this site.
There is a risk of organ penetration and particular care
Arcess to the dorsal occipital venous plexus is possible
should be taken in reproductively active females, as a
from a lateral approach, but is rarely used (O'Malley, 2005).
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
A
D
232
C
Figure I5.4 · Routes of administration in chelonian. (A) Premeasure the tube before gavage feeding. (B) Intramuscular injection in the
propofol into the jugular vein of a Hermann's tortoise ( Testudo hermanni).
Intraosseous
the lirmb within the shell. Access to the long lirmb bones is
This is difficult in chelonian species. The distal femur or
proximal tibia can be used in sorme anirmals. Fermur access is
limb, but may be useful in debilitated patients. Additional
difficult due to the sigmoid shape of this bone and intraos-
 problems are the thick cortices and small marrow cavities
seous catheters in lirmbs may be dislodged by withdrawal of
of chelonian bones [Mader and Rudloff, 2006].
Chelonian anaesthesia
Table 15.2: Routes of administration in chelonia (Fig. 15.4)
ROUTE
SITE
COMMENTS
Epicoelomic
Potential space between plastron and
Absorption good
pectoral muscles
Can administer I-2% body weight in fluids,
in divided doses, over 24h 
Intracoelomic
Prefemoral fossa
Rapid absorption
 Pre-warm large volumes of fluids
otile
Intramuscular
 Muscle groups anterior to humerus or fermur
Can be difficult in species that withdraw limbs into
closed shell, for example box turtle (Terrapene spp.)
Intraosseous
Cranial or caudal limits of bone bridge connecting
Provide analgesia
D
st:
 carapace and plastron; distal femur or proximal tibia
D
Intravenous
5
Jugular vein
Jugular vein may be catheterized
11
Subcarapacial vein
Dorsal coccygeal vein
233
Oral
Encourage to drink by bathing
Useful for administration of fluids and nutritional
Use rubber/polyvinyl chloride (PVC)/metal tube to
support
reach stomach (mid-plastron level)
Small volumes directly into mouth
Subcutaneous
Axillary or inguinal region
Slow absorption
(McArthur,2004b; Mitchell,2006)
Another option is to access the bone within the shell,
sedation reduces the ketamine dose required and allows for
usually by inserting a needle into the cranial or caudal
limits of the bony bridge between carapace and plastron.
Chlorpromazine is rarely used, but has anticholinergic as
In larger animals an orthopaedic drill may be required to
well as anxiolytic properties that may be beneficial.
gain access to the medulla in this bone before insertion
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
of a needle. As with other catheters, aseptic technique
should be used for placement of the needle.
OF ANAESTHESIA
PRE-ANAESTHETICS
Induction
Pre-medications may be used solely for the purpose of
Volatile agents
sedation or as part of a balanced anaesthetic protocol in
chelonian species (see Table 15.3].
If anaesthesia is attempted in the conscious animal using
Ketarmine is often used to sedate chelonian species that are
inhalational anaesthetic agents alone, chelonia are very
difficult to exarmine or to obtain venous access, for example
likely to breath hold, particularly aquatic species - under-
in box turtles (Terrapene spp.] or African spurred tortoises 
going the ^dive reflex' and switching to anaerobic respiration.
(Geochelone sulcata]. This drug has a relatively wide safety
Different species will be able to breath hold for varying
margin, but may be dangerous in dehydrated or debilitated
time periods, with aquatic animals capable of maintaining
tortoises. The effects are dose-dependent, with 20mg/kg
producing sedation in most species. Benzodiazepines, such
anaerobic respiration for the longest time. An exception
 may be severely debilitated individuals that may continue
as diazepam and midazolam, are often administered with
to inhale volatile agents, but respiration should be closely
ketamine to produce good muscle relaxation with sedation.
monitored for the occurrence of apnoea.
Another dissociative-benzodiazepine combination is tilet-
armine-zolazepam - lower doses of this produce sedation.
Attermpts at induction of anaesthesia in chelonian
The phenothiazines acepromazine and chlorpromazine
species using volatile agents alone are usually unsuc-
have been used as pre-medicants in chelonia, adrministered
cessful due to breath holding.
intrarmuscularly. The addition of acepromazine to ketarmine
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Injectable agents 
(Holz and Holz, 1994). Recovery times with ketamine are
A number of injectable agents can be used to sedate che-
dose-dependent, with animals receiving anaesthetic doses
lonia, either for minor procedures, such as venepuncture,
taking more than 24h to recover. Use of the tiletamine
or prior to induction with other agents. Butorphanol will
and zolazepam preparation in chelonia leads to prolonged
lead to mild sedation, which may be sufficient to enable
recovery times (Schumacher and Yelen, 2006).
intravenous access to be gained for induction with propo-
Sole use of medetomidine in chelonia is likely to cause
fol. Ketamine has been used to sedate red-eared sliders
 severe cardiopulmonary depression, with reduced heart and
(Trachemys scripta elegans) both alone and in combina-
respiratory rates and hypotension (Sleeman and Gaynor,
tion with xylazine or midazolam, but results were variable
2000). Medetomidine can be used in combination with
Table I5.3: Sedative and anaesthetic agents used in chelonia (see also Table 12.6)
DRUG
DOSE (mg/kg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Alfaxolone
10-15
IV
Smooth induction andrecovery
Light anaesthesia for < 20 min
Alfaxalone/alphadolone
247
IV
Muscle relaxation good, surgical anaesthesia
(red-eared slider [Trachemys scripta
elegans])
234
Atipamezole
5 X medetomidine dose5
IM
Reversal of medetomidine
Severe hypotension if given IV (gopher
tortoise [Gopherus polyphemus]]
Butorphanol
0.2-0.48
IM
Premedication: analgesia and sedation
Flumazenil
I mg per 20 mg of
IM, IV
Reversal of zolazepam
zolazepam17
Ketamine
20-604.9.10
IM
Sedation
Use low dose in debilitated animals
609010.13
Light anaesthesia
Prolonged recovery if high dose used
Ketamine + butorphanol
10-30 + 0.5-1.518
IM
Deep sedation, minor surgery (e.g. shell
repair)
Ketamine + midazolam
20140 + 2 
IM
Sedation (in snapping turtles [Chelydrd
serpentine])
Ketamine + medetomidine 5 + 0.053
IM, IV
Induction of anaesthesia (in loggerhead
seaturtle [Caretta caretta]
5 + 0.15
IV
Short-term immobilisation for minor
procedures (in gopher tortoise [Gopherus
polyphemus])
Hypoxaemia and hypercapnia, moderate
hypertension; advise oxygen
 supplementation and assist ventilation
Ketamine + midazolam
20140 +<2
IM
Sedation
60-80 + < 213.18
Anaesthesia
Medetomidine
0.1520
IM
Sedation (in desert tortoise [Gopherus
ogassizi]) with pronounced cardio-
respiratory depression
Chelonian anaesthesia
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lcg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Midazolam
1.514
IM
Sedation (study in red-eared sliders
[Trachemys scripta elegans]
Neostigmine +
0.04 + 0.01
IM
Reversal of rocuronium (glycopyrrolate
glycopyrrolate
administered 5 min prior to neostigmine,to
antagonise possible parasympathetic effects
of neostigmine)
Propofol
31 56.18,19,21
IV
Induction of anaesthesia, titrate to effect,
apnoea common
1 mg/kg/min18
Continuous rate infusion to maintain
e
anaesthesia
吊
Rocuronium
0.25-511.12
IM
Neuromuscular blockade, allowing
intubation for anaesthesia with inhalational
 agents, require PPV until metabolised or
D
n
reversed; no analgesia
1
Recommend reverse at start of surgery
when other anaesthetic agents employed, to
 allow monitoring of analgesia
235
Succinylcholine
0.25-1.02,15.16
IM
Neuromuscular blocker;induction in
15-30 min
No analgesia
Not recommended in chelonian
Tiletamine/zolazepam
4-813
IM
Sedation, may be sufficient to allow
intubation
Prolonged recovery(<72h) at higher doses
Key: IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, PPV = positive pressure ventilation
 (Bienzle and Boyd, 1992); 2 (Boyer, 1992); 3 (Chittick et al., 2002); 4 (Crane et al., 1980); 5 (Dennis and Heard, 2002);  (Divers,
1996); 7 (Hackenbroich, 1999); α (Heard, 1993); 9 (Holz and Holz, 1994); 1 (Johnson, 1991); I (Kaufman et al., 2001); 12 (Kaufman
"eeyded)  :(0661 oupneW pue a8ed) 9, (e661 e8ed) s (s661 uoow pue wleyueddo) , (8861 'dweypw) s (e00z "1e n
(900z "1e ne uayau/m) 1z (000z doukey pue uewee1s) o (/661 any8ouoa pue lyeas) 6 (9661 deyeunyps) e (e007
ketamine, but oxygen and assisted ventilation should be
Alfaxalone/alphadolone has been used in many chelonian
administered to reduce the side effects, which may include
species to induce and maintain anaesthesia. Induction is
hypoxaemia, hypercapnia and hypotension (Dennis and
smooth and rapid, and recovery is usually 10-20 min after
Heard, 2002). Atipamezole should not be administered
intravenous injection (McArthur, 2
2004a]. It may also be
intravenously in chelonia, as one study reported severe
adrministered intramuscularly, although response after intra-
hypotension following dosing via this route (Dennis and
muscular injection may be variable (Lawrence and Jackson,
Heard, 2002)
1983; McArthur, 1996). Anaesthesia can be extended using
 If venous access is available, the anaesthetic agent of
top-ups without prolonging recovery. The author has also
choice for induction is propofol. Commonly the jugular
successfully used alfaxalone alone (Alfaxan@, Vétoquinol,
vein is used for administration, but other options include
Buckingham, UK) to induce anaesthesia in chelonia.
the dorsal coccygeal vein, the subcarapacial vein or the
intraosseous route. The dose is titrated to effect, as apnoea
Anaesthetic maintenance
may occur with rapid administration of a bolus. Propofol
is short acting and will allow either a short procedure to
be performed, for example oesophagostomy tube place-
After induction of anaesthesia, most patients are intu-
ment, or intubation prior to maintenance with an inhala-
bated for provision of oxygen and inhalational anaesthetic
tional anaesthetic agent for longer procedures.
agents. As the tracheal rings in chelonia are complete,
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
In patients where intravenous access is not possible,
intrarmuscular agents are used. These may include keta-
mine, with or without medetomidine and/or butorphanol.
Low doses will produce sedation to allow intravenous
access for induction with propofol, while higher doses will
induce anaesthesia. However, higher doses of intrarmuscu-
lar agents are often associated with prolonged recoveries.
After induction with the above regimes, the patient
is then intubated and maintained on volatile agents with
oxygen. Intermittent PPV is usually performed, either
manually or with a mechanical ventilator.
REFERENCES
Bienzle, D., and F. J. Boyd. 1992. Sedative effects of ketamine and
midazolam in snapping turtles [Chelydra serpentina]. J Zoo
Figure I5.5 · Anaesthetised map turtle (Graptemys sp.) intubated
Wildl Med 23: 201-204.
with an intravenous cannula.
Boyer, T. H. I992. Common problems of box turtles [Terrapene spp]
in captivity. Bull Assoc Rep Amph Vet 2: 9-14.
Boyer, T. H., and D. M. Boyer. 2006. Turtles, tortoises, and terrapins.
uncuffed endotracheal tubes are used. In cryptodirans,
In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
the tracheal bifurcation is quite proximal, and care should
pp. 78-99. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis Missouri.
Cann,J. 1998. Australian freshwater turtles. Beaumont Publishing,
236
be taken not to intubate one bronchus (Schumacher and
Singapore.
Yelen, 2006)
Canny, C. I998. Gross anatomy and imaging of the avian and reptilian
Owing to the respiratory depression caused by most
urinary system. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 7: 72-80.
anaesthetic agents, intermittent positive pressure ventila-
Chittick, E. J., M. A. Stamper, J. F Beasley et al. 2002. Medetomidine,
tion (IPPV) is maintained throughout anaesthesia. If the
ketamine, and sevoflurane for anesthesia of injured logger-head
patient is breathing voluntarily, this may be intermittent
sea turtles: 13 cases [1996-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:
'sighing' to ensure the lungs are well ventilated. If the
1019-1025.
patient's breathing is significantly depressed, including a
Crane, S. W., M. Curtis, E. R. Jacobson et al. 1980. Neutralization
decrease in tidal volume or a decrease in respiratory rate,
bone-plating repair of a fractured humerus in an aldabra tortoise.
continuous PPV should be performed. As discussed earlier
J Am Vet Med Assoc 177[9): 945-948.
Davies, P. M. C. 1981. Anatomy and physiology. In: J. E. Cooper
(see Chapter 12), this may be carried out by an assistant,
[ed.) Diseases of the Reptilia. Vol.l. pp. 9-73. Acadermic Press,
 or using a mechanical ventilator. In either case, care should
be taken not to over-inflate the delicate lungs, which may
Denmis, P M., and D.J. Heard. 2002. Cardiopulmonary effects of a
rupture. Observation of the normal degree of limb move-
Tmedetormidine-ketarmine combination admimistered intravenously
ment during inspiration is a useful guide to the pressure
in gopher tortoises. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220: 1516-1519.
required. PPV is useful during coeliotomy, when the surgeon
Divers, S. J. I996. The use of propofol in reptile anaesthesia. In:
 may benefit from knowledge of the timing of inspirations
Proceedings of 3rd Annual Conference of Association of
causing intracoelomic organ movement.
Amphibian and Reptilian Veterinarians, 24-27 August 1996,
Tampa. pp. 57-59.
Fox, H. I977. The urogenital system of reptiles. In: C. Gans and
Recovery
T. Parsons [eds.) Biology of the Reptilia. Vol.6, Morphology E.
pp. I-122. Academic Press, London.
Frye, F. L. 1991. Biomedical and Surgical Aspects of Captive Reptile
Chelonian recovery from anaesthesia is similar to other
Husbandry. Znd edn. Krieger Publishing, Malabar, Florida.
reptiles. Special care must be taken with aquatic species
Gans, C., and G. M.Hughes. I967.The mechanism of lung
not to return them to their aquarium until sufficiently
ventilation in the tortoise Testudo graeca Linne.J Exp Biol 47:
recovered (usually 24h after anaesthesia) or drowning
1-20.
may occur (Fig. 15.3). It is useful to use wet towels or
Hackenbroich, C. 1999. Alphaxalon/Alphadolon-Anaesthesie bei der
incontinence pads along with regular spraying with water
Rotwangen-Schmuckschildkroete [Trachemys scripta elegans],
to keep the patient's skin moist during the recovery
Doctoral Thesis, Justus-Liebig-Universitaet Giessen, Germany.
 period, particularly in soft-shelled species.
Heard, D. J. 1993. Principles and techniques of anesthesia and
analgesia for exotic practice. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
Pract 23: 1301-1327.
Suggested protocols
Holz, P I999. The reptilian renal portal system: a review. Bull Assoc
Rep Amph Vet 9: 4-9.
Induction with intravenous propofol provides rapid and
Holz, P. 2006. Renal anatomy and physiology In: D. R. Mader [ed.)
controllable induction. Without premedication, a compar-
Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd ern. pp. 135-144. Saunders
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
atively high dose is required (up to 15 mg/kg). Alfaxolone,
Holz, P., and R. M. Holz. I994. Evaluation of ketamine, ketamine/
with or without alphadolone, may also be used intra-
xylazine and ketarmime/midazolam anesthesia in red-eared sliders
venously to induce anaesthesia.
[Trachemys scripta elegas). J Zoo Wildl Med 25: 531-537.
Chelonian anaesthesia
Jacobson, E. R., D. R. Brown, I. M. Schumacher et al. 2000. An
Murray, M. J. I996. Pneumonia and normal respiratory function. In:
update on mycoplasmal respiratory disease of tortoises. In:
D.R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. pp. 396-405.
Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet I31-132.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Johnson, J. H. I991. Anesthesia, analgesia and euthanasia of reptiles
O'Malley, B. 2005. Tortoises and turtles. In: B. O'Malley [ed.)
and amphibians. In: Proc Am Assoc Zoo Vet. Pp. I32-138.
Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure
Junge, R. E., and R. E. Miller. I992. Reptile respiratory diseases. In:
md Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians.
R. W. Kirk and J. D. Bonagura [eds.) Current Veterinary
Pp. 4l-56. Elsevier Saumders.
Therapy XI. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Oppenheim, Y. C., and P. F. Moon. 1995. Sedative effects of
Kaufman, G. E., R. Seymour, B. Bonner et al. 200l. The use of
midazolam in red-eared slider turtles [Trachemys scripta
rocuronium to facilitate intubation in North American Gulf
elegarts). J Zoo Wildll Med 26: 409-413.
Coast box turtles. Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet I81-184.
Origgi, F. C., and E. R. Jacobson. 1999. Development of an ELISA
Kaufman, G. E., R. E. Seyumour, B. B. Bonner et al. 2003. Use of
and an immunoperoxidase based test for herpesvirus exposure
rocuronium for endotracheal intubation of North American
detection in tortoises. In: Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet. 65-67.
Gulf Coast box turtles. J Am Vet Med Assoc 222: IIlI-II15.
Page, C. D. I993. Current reptilian anesthesia procedures. In:
?
King, G. 1996. Turtles and Tortoises. Reptiles and Herbivory.
M. E. Fowler [ed.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine: Current
P
pp. 47-60. Chapman & Hall, London.
Therapy 3. pp. 140-143. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Lawrence, K., and O. F. Jackson. I982. Passage of ingesta m tortoises.
Page, C. D., and M. Mautino. I990. Clinical management of
Vet Rec I1I: 492
tortoises. Compend Cont Ed Pract Vet I2: 79-85.
Lawrence, K., and O. F. Jackson. I983. Alfaxalone/alphadolone
Perry, S.F.1989.Structure and function of the reptilhan respiratory
D
system. In: S. C. Wood (ed.) Comparative Pulmonary
anaesthesia in reptiles. Vet Rec I12: 26-28.
Mader, D. R. 1991. Turtle and tortoise medicine and surgery. In:
Physiclogy - Current Concepts. pp. 193-237. Dekker, New York.
卫
Proc Calif Vet Med Assoc
Pritchard, P 1979. Encyclopedia of Turtles. TFH Publications,
Mader, D. R., and E. Rudloff. 2006. Emergency and critical care. In:
Neptune City, NJ
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Raphael, B. L. 2003. Chelonians [turtles, tortoises). In: M. E. Fowler
pp. 533-548. Saumders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
md R. E. Miller [eds.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. 5th
McArthur, S. 2004a. Anaesthesia, analgesia and euthanasia. In:
edn. pp. 48-58. WB Saumders, Philadelphia.
237
S. McArthur, R. Wilkinson and J. Meyer [eds.) Medicine and
Redrobe, S. 2004. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: S. J. Girling and
 Surgery of Tortoises and Turtles. pp. 379-401. Blackwell
P Raiti [eds.) Manual of Reptiles. Znd edn. pp. 131-146.
Publishing Ltd, Oxford.
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
McArthur, S. 2004b. Feeding techniques and fluids. In: S. McArthur,
Schumacher, J. 1996. Reptiles and armphibians. In: J. C. Thurman,
R. Wilkinson and J. Meyer [eds.) Medicine and Surgery of
W J. Tranquilli and G. J. Benson [eds.) Lumb and Jones'
Tortoises and Turtles. pp. 257-27l. Blackwell Publishing Ltd,
Veterinary Anesthesia. 3rd edn. pp. 670-685. Williams &
Oxford.
Wilkins, Baltim ore.
McArthur, S. 2004c. Problem solving approach to common diseases
Schumacher, J., and T. Yelen. 2006. Anesthesia and analgesia. In:
of terrestrial and semi-aquatic chelonians. In: S. McArthur,
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
R. Wilkinson and J. Meyer [eds.) Medicine and Surgery of
pp. 442-452. Saumers Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Tortoises and Turtles. pp. 309-377. Blackwell Publishing Ltd,
Sleeman, J. M., and J. Gaynor. 2000. Sedative and cardiopulmonary
Oxford.
effects of medetomidine and reversal with atipamezole in
McArthur, S., J. Meyer, and C. Innes. 2004. Anatomy and
desert tortoises [Gopherus agassizit]. J Zoo Wildl Med 31:
physiology. In: S. McArthur, R. Wilkinson and J. Meyer [eds.]
28-35.
Medicine and Surgery of Tortoises and Turtles. pp. 35-72.
Stahl, S., and S. Donoghue. I997. Pharyngostomy tube placement,
McArthur, S. D. J. I996. Veterinary Management of Tortoises and
management and use for nutritional support in the chelonian
Terrapms. Black well Science, Oxford.
patient. Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet: 93-97.
McCutcheon, F. H. I943. The respiratory mechanistm of turtles.
Wood, S. C., and C. J. Lenfant. I976. Respiration: mechanics,
Physiol Zool 16: 255.
control and gas exchange. In: C. Gans [ed.) Biology of the
Millichamp, N. J. 1988. Surgical techniques in reptiles. In:
Reptilia No. 5. Academic Press, San Diego.
E. R. Jacobson and G. V. J. Kollias [eds.) Exotic Animals.
Wyneken, J., D. R. Mader, E. S. I. Weber et al. 2006. Medical care of
Pp. 49-74. Churchill Livingstone, New York.
seaturtles. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery.
Mitchell, M. A. 2006. Therapeutics. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile
Znd edn. pp. 972-1007. Saunrers Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. pp. 631-664. Saumders
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
16
Crocodilian anaesthesia
a
INTRODUCTION
crocodilians are commonly inactive and use anaerobic
metabolism, allowing them to tolerate prolonged dives
without re-breathing (Lang, 1987).
238
This section covers small crocodilians that may be kept by
the reptile hobbyist. Local or national legislation may have
specific requirerments for the maintenance of these species
Respiratory system
in captivity, for example the Dangerous Wild Animals Act
[1976) in the UK. All crocodilians should be considered
dangerous, and due care taken when handling these species.
The nostrils at the rostro-dorsal tip of the snout can be
The three families within the Crocodilia order are
closed during submergence, and connect to the nasal pas-
sages. The gular fold or basihyoid plate (Fig. 16.1) pre-
Gavialidae (gharials and false gharials), Alligatoridae (alli-
gators and caimans} and Crocodylidae [crocodiles) . Although
vents water entering the respiratory passages when the
the larger representatives are unlikely to be presented to
mouth opens underwater, for example when grabbing
the general veterinary practitioner, smaller species, such
prey. The lungs are well developed, non-lobulated and
as the dwarf caiman (Paleosuchus palpebrosus), may be seen.
highly vascular. The glottal valve retains air in the lungs
for prolonged submergence (Lane, 2006). Crocodilians
have a muscular pseudo-diaphragm.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Temperature
As with other reptiles, environmental temperature is impor-
tant in crocodilians, affecting behaviour and metabolism
Inadequate temperatures, below 25°℃, willreduce appetite,
digestion, and growth, and cause immunosuppression
(Lane, 2006)
Velum palati
Cropharynx
(soft palate fold)
Cardiovascular system
Basihyal valve
(basihyoid plate)
The four-chambered crocodilian heart lies in the ventral
midline, caudal to the forelimbs by approximately eleven
Tongue
scale rows (Hernandez-Divers, 2006). A small foramen,
the forarmen of Panizza, in the ventricular septum allows
mixing of left and right ventricular blood, and the flow of
e a um mn si as sr a  po
is submerged. When the animal re-surfaces, normal breath-
ing causes a reduction in pulmonary pressures (and thence
Figure I6.l · Open-mouth view demonstrating the gular fold or
the right ventricle) that closes the foramen. Submerged
basihyoid valve in crocodilia.
Crocodilian anaesthesia
Digestive system
vein in medium or large animals. The ventral coccygeal
vein is accessed as for lizards. The supravertebral vein is
This group are carnivorous, eating both live prey and car-
accessed in the dorsal midline just caudal to the occiput,
rion in the wild. They will eat at termperatures between
with the needle perpendicular to the skin. Slow advance-
25°℃ and 35°C (Lane, 2006).
ment will avoid spinal trauma (Hernandez-Divers, 2006].
In an emergency, the heart can be injected, but cannot be
Integumentary system
stabilised (Fudge, 2000).
The skin has separate scales joined by connective tissue
Intubation
Crocodilians have dorsal cornifications over bony plates,
which precludes injections in this region (Lane, 2006].
After induction, the jaws are held open and the gular
D
fold (see Fig. 16.1) deflected to visualise the glottis for
otile
intubation.
Low temperatures produce immune suppression.
The crocodilian heart has four chambers (unlike 
other reptiles that have three).
The gular fold allows breathing through the nose
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
while the mouth is open under water.
OF ANAESTHESIA
 Crocodilians have a muscular pseudo-diaphragm.
11
Bony plates dorsally and thickened skin make
Induction
injections difficult.
239
Owing to the demeanour of these species, most anaes-
thetic protocols are based on injectable agents. There is
TECHNIQUES
wide variation in species response to different agents.
Muscle relaxants are cormmonly used to assist irmmobilisa-
Restraint
tion, but do not provide analgesia. Induction with intra-
venous propofol into the ventral coccygeal vein may be
possible in small specimens.
Initial restraint should protect handlers from bites and
Species variations in response to anaesthetic agents
scratches. The snout should be taped shut; gloves can be
worn and towels used during restraint to reduce trauma
exist. For example, alligators respond well to etorphine,
which is not very effective in other species. Gallarmine, on
from sharp claws. Several personnel will be required to
the other hand, appears to be unsafe in alligators at doses
restrain larger specimens.
greater than 1 mg/kg (Page, 1993). Ketamine may be used
to sedate or anaesthetise crocodilians; recovery times are
Routes of administration
dose-dependent and may be prolonged.
The intramuscular or subcutaneous routes are usually
These sites are similar to those used in lizards. The main
used to induce anaesthesia in crocodilian species. Add-
difference is the use of larger and longer needles to pene-
ition of hyaluronidase to the anaesthetic agent accelerates
trate the skin for injections.
absorption (Lloyd, 1999).
Oral
Neuromuscular blockers
Owing to staff safety issues, the oral route is used to
administer medication only in very small or severely
Crocodilians are a species in which neuromuscular
debilitated animals. Medications can be added to feed. In
blockers are commonly used. The agent produces immo-
very small animals, gavage dosing is similar to lizards,
bilisation, enabling safer handling and induction of
except with the mouth taped shut once a gag has been
anaesthesia for painful procedures. These drugs do not
placed. The dosing tube must pass over the basihyal valve
produce analgesia. Intermittent positive pressure ventila-
in the pharynx (Mitchell, 2006]
tion (IPPV) should be performed in animals that have
received these agents.
Subcutaneous
This is rarely used in crocodilians due to their thick
Anaesthetic maintenance
dermal scales.
If possible, the patient is intubated and maintained on
Intravenous
volatile agents. Some injectable regimes will produce
The easiest site for venous access is the ventral coccygeal
 anaesthesia, but oxygen should still be supplemented if
vein in small or medium anirmals and the supravertebral
available.
Table I 6.l: Anaesthetic agents used in crocodilians (see also Table I 2.6)
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lkg)
ROUTE
COMMENT
Alpha-Z-agonists:
Medetomidine
0.159
IM
Sedation (incomplete immobilisation)
Xylazine
Bradycardia and bradypnoea seen
125.7
IM
Preanaesthetic (study in Nile crocodiles)
Benzodiazepine:
Zolazepam
See tiletamine 
combination below
Reversal agent:
Flumazenil
I mg per 20 mg 
IM, IV
Reversal of zolazepam
zolazepam5
Dissociative agent:
Ketamines
SC, IM, ICe
Induction <30-60 min, recovery in hours to days
20-40
Sedation
40-80
Anaesthesia
Dissociative dgent combinations:
240
Ketamine + medetomidine
5-15 + 0.1-0.252
IM
Anaesthesia (in American alligators [Aligator
mississippiensis])
Lower doses required for adults compared
to juveniles
Reverse medetomidine with atipamezole
Tiletamine/zolazepam
5151.8
IM
Immobilisation for restraint and intubation
Recovery may be prolonged
Neuromuscular blockers:9
Can be used alone or with ketamine or
benzodiazepines to provide immobilisation
No analgesia
 Use lower dose in larger animals
Gallamine
0.5-23
IM
Succinylcholine
0.25-1.23
IM
Variable induction and recovery periods with
succinylcholine
Reversal agent:
Neostigmine
0.03-0.063
IM
Antidote to gallamine (side effects include emesis
and lacrimation,so often allowrecovery
without reversal)
Can combine with hyaluronidase(75 mg)to enhance
effects6
:sproido
Etorphine HC
0.30-2.754
IM
Crocodilians require high doses
Poor relaxation
Legal restrictions due to safety issues
Propofo!
10-155
IV
Anaesthesia 30-90 min
Hyaluronidase
25 IU/dose5
SC
Combine with other drugs to accelerate
SC absorption
Key: ICe = intracoelomic, IM = intramuscular, IV = intravenous, SC = subcutaneous
(Cyde et al., 1994); 2 (Heaton-Jones et al., 2002); 3 (Lane, 2006); 4 (Lawton, 1992): 5 (Lloyd, 1999);  (Lloyd et al., 1994); 7(Page, 1993);
Crocodilian anaesthesia
REFERENCES
Lawton, M. P. C. 1992. Anaesthesia. In: P. H. Beynon,
M. P. C. Lawton and J. E. Cooper [eds.) Manual of Reptiles.
pp. I70-183. Iowa State University, Ames, IA.
Clyde, V. C., P Cardeilhac, and E. Jacobson. I994. Chemical
Loyd, M. L. I999. Crocodilian anesthesia. In: M. E. Fowler and
restraint of American alligators [Alligator mississippiensis] with
R. E. Miller [eds.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine: Current
atracurium or tiletamine-zolazepam. J Zoo Wildl Med 25:
Therapy 4. pp. 205-216. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
525-530.
Lloyd, M. L., T. Reichard, and R. A. Odum. I994. Gallamine reversal
Fudge, A. M. 2000. Laboratory Medicine Avian and Exotic Pets. WB
in Cuban crocodiles [Crocodilus rhombifer) using neostigmine
Saunders, Philadelphia.
alone versus neostigmine with hyaluronidase. Proc Assoc Reptil
Heaton-Jones, T. G., J. C. H. Ko, and D. L. Heaton-Jones. 2002.
Amph Vet Am Assoc Zoo Vet: I17-120.
Evaluation of medtomidine-ketarmine anesthesia with
Mitchell, M. A. 2006. Therapeutics. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile
atip amezole reversal in American alligators [Alligator
Medicine and Surgery. Znd ern. pp. 631-664. Saunders
mississippiersis). J Zoo Wildl Med 33: 36-44.
Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Hermandez-Divers, S. J. 2006. Diagnostic techniques. In:
Page, C. D. I993. Current reptilian anesthesia procedures. In:
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd ed.
M. E. Fowler [ed.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine: Current
pp. 490-532. Saumders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
Therapy 3. p. 140-143. WB Saumders, Philadlelphia.
P
Lane, T. 2006. Crocodilians. In: D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine
Schumacher, J., and T. Yelen. 2006. Anesthesia and analgesia. In:
and Surgery. Znd ern. pp. I00-l17. Saunders Elsevier.
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn.
Lang, J. W. 1987. Crocodilian behaviour: implications for
pp. 442-452. Saumders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
sth
management. In: G. J. W. Webb, S. C. Manolis and
Smith, J. A., N. C. McGuire, and M. A. Mitchell. 1998.
P J. Whitehead [eds.) Wildlife Management: Crocodiles and
Cardiopulmonary physiology and anesthesia in crocodilians.
卫
Alligators. Surrey Beaty and Sons Printing in Association with
 Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet: 17-21.
the Conservation Commission of the Northern Territory,
Chipping Norton, Australia.
241
17
hibian anaesthesia
f5h
and
INTRODUCTION
Table 17.l: Amphibians commonly kept as pets
Over 4000 species belong to the class Amphibia, in three
COMMON
LATIN NAME ORDER COMMENT
orders: Anura (Salientia) - frogs and toads; Caudata
NAME
[Urodela)
salamanders, newts and sirens; and
245
Gymnophiona [Apoda] - caecilians (Adler, 2004). Many
African bulfrog
Pyxicephalus
Anura
species of amphibian are endangered in the wild, mostly
ddspersus
due to environmental factors, such as pollutants and loss
of breeding sites, or fatal infections, such as chytridiomy-
African clawed
Xenopus ldevis
Anura
Completely
cosis (Berger et al., 1999; Daszak et al., 1999).
frog
aquatic;
Members of the order Anura are most often seen as
common in
pets, with common species kept in captivity including
laboratories
White's treefrog (Pelodryas caeruea) and poison arrow
frogs (Dendrobates spp.). Caudata are seen less frequently,
Fire-bellied toad
Bombina sp.
for example fire salamander (Salamandra salamandra]
Anura
(Fig. 17.l). Gymnophiona are uncommonly presented at
veterinary practices. In the following discussions, salaman-
Green treefrog
Hyld cinered
Anura
ders and caecilians will be discussed as the predorminant
members of the Caudata and Gymnophiona, respectively.
Leopard frog
Rana pipiens
Anura
Chemical restraint may be necessary for several reasons.
Difficulties may be associated with conscious examination,
Cane (marine)
Bufo marinus
Anura
particularly with smaller species (for example, the spot-
toad
legged poison frog [Epipedobates pictus]may die after a few
Poison dart frog
Dendrobates sp. Anura
Require high
humidity;
arboreal;
parental care of
tadpoles
White's tree frog Litoria caeruleaAnura
Mexican axolotl
Ambystomd
Caudata
Neotenic
mexicanum
Mudpuppy
Necturus
Caudata
Obligate
maculosus
aquatic
Tiger salamander Ambystomd
Caudata
tigrinum
Figure I7.I · Fire salamanders, Salamandra salamandrd.
(Raphael, 1993, Wright,2001e)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
minutes of manual restraint) or more aggressive species [for
example, horned frogs [Ceratophrys spp.] may bite when
provoked) (Buchanan and Jaeger, 1995; Wright, 200lc).
Internal transillumination (a useful technique for visual-
isation of intracoelomic organs) and some sarmpling tech-
niques (for example, blood sampling using venepuncture or
eral anaesthesia. Analgesia and anaesthesia will be required
if surgery is to be performed in these species.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Right
Left
Temperature
atrium
atrium
Amphibians are ectotherms and, consequently, care should
be taken to work in an appropriate environmental tem-
Ventricle
perature throughout the procedure. The preferred body
temperature will vary according to species, age, season and
current metabolic processes (Goin et al., 1978; Whitaker
et al., 1999; Wright, 2001b). Changing temperatures will
affect blood gas composition as well as acid-base status
246
(Boutilier et al., 1987). The optimal temperature for tem-
perate frogs will be 20-25°C compared with 25-30°C for
Systemic
tropical species; 10-16°C is appropriate for temperate
circulation
salamanders and 15-20°C for tropical species (Jaeger,
1991; Raphael, 1993). Lower temperatures (0-20°C) may cause
lng-term problems with imune suppression, while higher
 Oxygenated bloodDeoxygenated blood Mixed blood
temperatures enhance the imrmune response. Many infec-
tions in captive amphibians originate as ubiquitous bacteria
Figure 17.2 · Schematic showing the amphibian circulation.
or fungi, which opportunistically cause infection in immuno-
suppressed individuals.
Water quality
the distribution and pharmacokinetics of substances
absorbed across the skin (Wright, 200la).
Aquatic species and larval forms require water for immer-
The typical armphibian heart is three-chambered, with a
sion. The water should be dechlorinated; this is achieved
right atrium, a left atrium and a single ventricle (Fig. 17.2).
Species differences occur (see below), such as septal fen-
by standing the water at room temperature, adding
estrations that allow mixing of oxygenated and deoxy-
dechlorination tablets, or by charcoal filtration. Optimal
genated blood (Wallace et al., 1991). As with reptiles,
pH will vary between species and developmental stage,
blood flow within the heart may vary during a dive. For
but is usually between 6.5 and 9.5. Water cleanliness is
example, in the African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis) ven-
performed by filtration as in fish vivaria or by regular
tricular blood flow is separated during air breathing, but
replacement of portions of the water (Raphael, 1993)
less divided when the animal dives (Emilio and Shelton,
 In terrestrial species, environmental humidity is import-
ant. Temperature species should be maintained in 60-80%
1974). Central blood pressures between various anuran
species appear to be similar, but are significantly lower in
humidity, and tropical species in 70-90%.
Salamandra species (Shelton and Jones, 1968).
 Renal and hepatic portal vein systems exist in the cau-
Cardiovascular system
dal amphibian. Little pharmacokinetic data are available
for amphibian species and so drugs that may be
This includes the arterial, venous and lymphatic systems.
metabolised or excreted renally or hepatically should not
Lymph contains all the components of blood except for
be administered in the hindlimbs.
erythrocytes. The lymphatic systems contain lymph sacs
The adult anuran heart is dorsal to the pectoral girdle
(also known as lymph hearts or lymph vesicles) that
and stermum (Figs 17.3 and 17.4). The inter-atrial septum
restrict lymph flow to unidirectional. These structures
is cormplete and ventricular trabeculae are present in some
beat in synchrony independent of the cardiac rate, at
species (Kumar, 1975). The presence of a large lingual
approximately 50-60 beats per minute (Conklin, 1930).
venous plexus (Fig. i7.5) is useful for venepuncture,
Well-hydrated terrestrial amphibians may absorb fluid
including administration of drugs during anaesthesia.
from the skin directly into lymph (Boutilier et al., 1992).
Other options for venepuncture include the midline
This fluid is eliminated by the kidneys, which may affect
abdominal vein (which may be visible percutaneously in
Amphibian anaesthesia
Trachea
Heart
Liver
Lungs
Stomach
Spleen
Intestines
and body fat
Kidneys-
Cloaca
247
Figure I7.3 · Schematic to show location of major organs in an
anuran (ventral view).
Figure 17.5 · The lingual venous plexus is located by pulling the
anuran (in this case a cane toad [Bufo marinus]) tongue forward,
and can be utilised for venous access.
(Siren intermedia} and mud-puppy (Necturus maculosus)
(Putnam, 1975; Putnam and Dunn, 1978]. The interatrial
septum in salamanders is fenestrated (exceptions are
sirens [Siren sp.] and the helbender [Cryptobranchus
alleganiensis]). The interatrial septum is modified in
Plethodontidae (lungless salamanders) (Putnam and
Kelly, 1978). Again, the midline abdominal vein is prom-
inent, but the ventral tail vein may be a rmore easily access-
ible site for venepuncture in salamanders.
The atrial septum is fenestrated in adult caecilians, and
the left atrium is usually smaller than the right. Caecilians
have over 200 lymph hearts subcutaneously (Wright,
2001a).
Respiratory system
Figure I7.4 · Cardiocentesis in an anaesthetised anuran (cane
toad, Bufo marinus).
The amphibian respiratory system varies between orders
and individual species, and even intraspecies depending
frogs with pale-coloured ventral skin) (Fig. 17.6), heart
on the individual's life-stage and environment. Most larval
(Fig. 17.4) and femoral vein [in larger species).
 stages are aquatic and rely on branchial respiration, having
Anurans possess few lymph hearts compared to other
external gills.
amphibians. A prominent pair may be present bilaterally
The anuran tongue is attached rostrally and at rest lies
dorsally at the urostyle in terrestrial species, frorm which
pointing caudally within the oral cavity. The glottis is at
lymph may be collected or fluids administered (Fig. 17.7)
the base of the tongue, on the ventral buccopharyngeal
(Carter, 1979).
cavity. In most amphibian species, the trachea is short
Adult salarmander cardiac anatomy varies greatly between
(Fig. 17.3), with cartilaginous rings. The trachea birfur-
species. A ventricular septum is present in the lesser siren
cates into pulmonary bronchi
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Many immature armphibians are totally aquatic and rely
approximately one-quarter of their oxygen via the skin
on branchial respiration. External gills are often lost when
(Emilio and Shelton, 1974)
metamorphosis occurs, for example when tadpoles become
Mechanisms for buccal ventilation differ between anurans
froglets.
(Brett and Shelton, 1979). The left and right anuran lungs
Respiration in adult anurans may be cutaneous, buc-
are approximately the same size and are simple structures
copharyngeal and/or pulmonic. Adaptations include an
without partitioning or infolding (Wright, 2001a).
increase in surface area via skin folds in the aquatic Titicaca
Salamander respiration may be branchial, cutaneous,
water frog (Telmatobius coleus], which relies mostly on
buccopharyngeal or pulmonic. Neotenic species [for
cutaneous respiration, living in a cold well-oxygenated
example, axolotls [Ambystoma mexicanu]] have external
mountain lake. By contrast, the African clawed frog
gills and rely heavily on branchial respiration (Fig. 17.8).
(Xenopus laevis) is primarily a lung breather, as adequate
Some aquatic species (for example, sirens [Siren spp.]]
cutaneous respiration is not possible in the poorly oxy-
have lungs as well as gills. Gill structure varies, depending
genated warm water in which it lives (Wright, 200la).
on the species and environment (especially oxygen con-
African clawed frogs with access to air will consume
tent and speed of water flow). All salamander species per-
form cutaneous respiration to variable degrees, with
 gaseous exchange across the skin promoted by several fea-
ures: a thin epidermis, highly vascular dermis, high sur-
face area to volume ratio and cylindrical shape. A low
metabolic rate in these species and ability to incur an oxy-
o  sn ie oe sioi oa ea n ua
respiration (Wright, 200la)
Lung size and partitioning vary between salamander
species. The left lung is slightly larger than the right. In
248
aquatic salarmanders, the simple lungs are more caudally
located, and consequently the trachea is longer. The lungs
in terrestrial species usually have sacculations and some
Dorsal lymph sac
(bilateral)
Illiac
cest
Figure 17.6 · Venepuncture is possible in the midline ventral
abdominal vein (shown in an anaesthetised cane toad [Bufo
marinus]).
Figure I7.7 · Location of dorsal lymph sacs in anurans.
Table I7.2 Respiration in adult amphibians (species variations exist, and not all species will show all
methods of respiration)
CUTANEOUS
BRANCHIAL
BUCCOPHARYNGEAL
PULMONIC
(GILLS)
Anurans
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Caudata
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Gymnophiona
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Amphibian anaesthesia
alveoli, as do some pond-dwelling species. Some species
ammonia is produced and freely diffused into the envir-
have reduced or absent lungs (Wright, 200la}.
onment across the skin and via renal excretion. Similar to
Adult caecilians have pulmonic, buccopharyngeal and
other aquatic anirmals, they have little concentrating abil-
cutaneous respiration. The prirmary mode will vary between
ity. In these species, the liver plays a small role in nitrogen
species, with the lungs being most important (Bennet and
processing. In terrestrial amphibians, nitrogenous waste is
Wake, 1974). Thelef lung is often smaller than the right or
primarily excreted as urea, with conversion of armrmonia
absent. The lung lobes are elongate, with alveoli present.
to urea (and to uric acid, to conserve water in a small
 Smooth muscle controls the diameter of the external nares
number of species) occurring in the liver. A few terrestrial
and choana. The buccopharyngeal structures are primarily
species in drier conditions convert nitrogen wastes to uric
responsible for inspiratory and expiratory effort (Mendes,
acid to conserve water further (Wright, 200la).
1945). A tracheal lung with respiratory epithelium exists in
 Secondary tubules are found in the mesonephric kidney
some species of ichthyophids (fish caecilians)
and
of most species of adult salamander. In many species the
typhlonectids (aquatic caecilians) (Wright, 200la)
emphasis for nitrogenous waste excretion is on vascular fil-
The drive for respiration in amphibians may be hypoxia
tration. Again, renal relevance is dependant on lifestyle and
and/or hypercapnia; species differences exist (West and
environment. The excretory requirerments of caecilians may
Van Vliet, 1992). Stretch receptors in the lungs and
change frorn larva to adult (increasing for terrestrial species).
chemoreceptors in lungs or blood appear to be involved in
vasodilation of the pulmonary vascular bed during breath-
Digestive system
ing (Emilio and Shelton, 1972). These changes are medi-
ated in the central nervous systerm and result in an increase
in pulmonary blood flow and a decrease in pulmocuta-
Amphibians are carnivorous, with most being insectivor-
neous arterial pressure. This vasodilation response occurs
ous, and require a high protein diet. The exact diet will
depend on the species, but is quite varied in the wild.
 as part of normal diving-emergence behaviour in toads.
Smaller amphibians usually eat invertebrates while larger
249
species may consume vertebrates (Adler, 2004). In cap-
Metabolism
tivity, many are fed live items, such as crickets, meal-
worms, tubifex worms, mice pups and fish. Dry dog, cat
Normal energy production is via aerobic metabolism, but
and fish food may also be used. Secondary nutritional
anaerobic pathways are employed during outbursts of
hyperparathyroidism is common in captive amphibians
activity (Gatten et al., 1992; Pough et al., 1992).
and may predispose to muscle fasciculations, seizures or
pathological fractures. Feeding a variety of foods will help
Urinary system
prevent nutritional deficiencies and vitamin/mineral sup-
plements are usually added to invertebrate diets. Vitamin
C is essential in tadpole diets (Raphael, 1993].
Amphibian kidneys are mesonephric and so cannot con-
 Diet may be affected by life-stage and many tadpoles
centrate urine higher than the concentration of the
are herbivorous, converting to carnivory or insectivory
solutes in plasma. The kidneys filter vascular and
after metarmorphosis. Day/night cycles may affect metab-
coelomic fluid, which may include intracoelomically
olism. The time of day for feeding can, therefore, affect
administered medications (Wright, 200la)
digestion and absorption.
In anurans, the primary nitrogenous waste product
depends on the species' environment. In aquatic amphibians,
Integumentary system
Amphibian skin is important for thermoregulation and
hydrational homeostasis (Heatwole and Barthalamus,
1994). The highly vascular and well-innervated dermis is
covered by the epidermal layer that is several cell layers
thick, but thinner than in other tetrapods. The stratum
in some aquatic salamanders. Most amphibians do not
have dermal scales (the exception being some caecilians)
(Helmer and Whiteside, 2005). Anurans lack tight colla-
gen fibres between the stratrum spongiosum and under-
lying tissues, creating a potential subcutaneous space for
fluid administration (Wright, 200la).Subcutaneous fluid
accurmulation may be normal in these species
The thin epidermis is easily torn and defects will allow
entry of pathogenic organisms. Moistened latex or nitrile
gloves worn by the clinician will help protect this layer
Figure I7.8·Axolotl, Ambystoma mexicanum, showing external
during restraint. To protect the amphibian from noxious
gills in this neotenic species.
substances, any lubricating powders should be rinsed off
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
gloves prior to handling the animal. Water-soluble non-
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
toxic gel may also be applied, for example when handling
AND STABILISATION
delicate skinned aquatic species (some of which do not
 possess keratinisation of the stratum corneumj.
 An amphibian's skin is of paramount importance for
Before embarking on anaesthesia of a patient, a cormplete
water conservation. The skin of leaf frogs (Phyllomedusa
history should be taken and physical examination
spp.] secretes a lipid substance as waterproofing and is
per formed.
et al., 1976; McClanahan et al., 1978). However, for most
History
amphibians, the skin is a negligible barrier to water loss.
As mentioned above, most species rely heavily on cuta-
The history should include signalment (species, age, sex if
neous respiration and their skin must be kept moist for gas
Arpueqsny juauimo pue snoaid yoq yiim Buole (umou
exchange. An area on the ventrum, the ^drinking patch', is
and medical problems (including treatments adminis-
responsible for most water uptake (Parsons, 1994).
Care should be taken when handling amphibian species.
teredj. Analysis should be performed on a water sarmple
Many produce skin secretions: glue-like mucilaginous secre-
from the armphibian's enclosure to ascertain water quality.
tions (for
example,
slimy salamanders 
[Plethodon
glutinosus]] or malodorous secretions (for example, mink
Clinical examination
frog [Rana septentrionalis] (Chen and Chen, 1933; Wright,
200lc). Some of these secretions will cause a variety of
As with many pet species, zoonotic diseases are potentially
effects in hurmans: mild-to-severe inflammrmation of mucous
present and the clinician should exercise good personal
membranes (for example, Bufonidae spp. toads); and saliva-
hygiene during the examination. Immunosuppressed
tion, regurgitation, dyspnoea, convulsions and even death
250
amphibians in particular may suffer from infections, such
[for example, the cane toad [Bufo marinus] or poison arrow
as mycobacteria and Chlamydophila psittaci
frogs [Dendrobates spp.]. Secretions are often increased 
The patient is observed within the enclosure to assess
when the animal is injured or agitated. Species such as the
skin colour, body condition, respiratory rate, demeanour
spotted toad (Bufo guttatus} can expel secretions from their
and activity. A brief clinical examination should be pos-
parotid glands over long distances (up to 2m}. For these ani-
sible in most conscious patients (Wright, 200lc). Clinicians
mals, caution should be exercised and further personal pro-
should wear gloves to protect themselves from toxins in the
tective equipment (for exarmple, goggles) may be necessary.
amphibian's skin, rinsing powder off the gloves beforehand,
Catecholamine release during restraint or other stress can
to reduce damage to the patient's delicate skin. The animal
also influence skin colour change (Raphael, 1993). It is pru-
should be examined quickly to identify gross abnormali-
dent to wear protective gloves when handling armphibians,
ties, including assessment of the oropharynx, nares, eyes
either conscious or anaesthetised.
and skin. The heartbeat can be observed on the ventral
body surface (see Fig. 17.4). As with some reptile species
autotomy is possible in some salamanders and the owner
 should be warned of the risk of tail loss during restraint. If
BOX 17.l Important points: anatomy
more prolonged investigation is required, the patient
should be rermoistened in a container of water to prevent
and physiology
desiccation during the procedure (Raphael, 1993).
Poor husbandry conditions often contribute to ill health
Heart
in amphibian pets. Any anomalies will predispose the
Three-chambered - right atrium, left atrium, single
patient to disease, which may be clinical or sub-clinical.
ventricle
Infections are often opportunistic in immunocomprom-
ised individuals. In these cases, elective procedures may
Respiration
be postponed until husbandry corrections have been
Cutaneous, branchial (gills), buccopharyngeal,
implemented or critical patients stabilised (for example,
pulmonic
with appropriate husbandry and/or fluid administration) for
a few days prior to anaesthesia. Chronic disease processes,
Urinary
such as renal disease associated with dehydration, will
Cannot concentrate urine higher than plasma solute
greatly increase the anaesthetic risk. In certain cases,
concentration
 anaesthesia cannot be postponed and in these cases own-
Main nitrogenous waste depends on species
ers should be made aware of the risks involved. Peri-
anaesthetic care and monitoring can reduce these risks.
Skin
Easily damaged
Hospitalisation
Important for thermoregulation and water
homeostasis.
The basic amphibian hospital enclosure comprises a glass
or Perspex tank. Moistened paper towels can be used as
Amphibian anaesthesia
substrate, an upturned plastic cup for shelter and a shal-
Table 17.3: Electrolyte baths for amphibians
low water dish should be provided. Aquatic species need
to be able to irmmerse thermselves in fresh chlorine-free
Amphibian Ringer's solution (Humason 1967, as cited in
water. Other important environmental conditions include
(Maruska, 1 994))
ultraviolet (UV}-B lighting and temperature in an appro-
priate range (see Anatomy and physiology section], and
Distilledwater
relative humidity at 70-80% (Hadfield and Whitaker,
IL
2005).
NaCI
7.3g
KCI
0.17g
Water quality prior to, during and post anaesthesia is
CaCl
0.17 g
particularly important for aquatic species. For these
NaHCO;
0.22g
species in constant intirmate contact with water and for all
larval forms, dechlorinated water should be used for pro-
· Mix to dissolve all crystals; agitate before use. Keep
cedures. The pH should also be monitored closely, as
changes will affect the sensitive skin.
in closed container to reduce evaporation. Use
10-I 00% solution for ill aquatic amphibian
Fluid therapy
Whitalcer-Wright solution (l00% solution) (Wright and
Whitaker,2001)
Maintenance of water and electrolyte balance is vital for
amphibians. Amphibian patients may present with dehy-
Distilledwater
IL
dration or may become dehydrated during procedures at
NaCI
113.0 g
MgSO4HO
8.6g
(20-40 mOsm for ^fresh' water} than plasma in a healthy
CaCl2
4.2g
1.7 g
251
individual (usually at least 250mOsm) (Boutilier et al.,
KCI
1992). Animals spending time in water may develop
imbalances leading to skin, gill or renal damage. Damaged
·Dissolve crystals thoroughly
  s a     a
Cover container to prevent evaporation. Add
influx may be excessive. Fluid overload may occur if ill
Trizma@ buffering crystals (Sigma, St Louis,
animals are maintained in ^fresh' water. Conversely, dehy-
Missouri) to stabilise between pH 7.0 and 7.3
dration [(including electrolyte loss) may occur in terres-
· Dilutions can be made from this solution. e.g., 5 ml
trial species and should also be prevented or corrected.
of 100% solution with 95 ml distilled water will
 In either of these situations, bathing the patient in a shal-
make 5% solution; at 21.7°C and pH 7.0 this will
low electrolyte bath is a simple method of treatment of
have an osmolality of 206 mmol/kg.
dehydration or as prevention of irmbalance in an ill animal
Use 5% solution if no fluid overload is present, or
(for example, amphibian Ringer's solution or Whitaker-
10% if severe fluid overload is present
Wright solution at various concentrations [Table 17.3]]
Balanced electrolyte solutions may be administered
Saline (Wright and Whitaker, 2001)
intracoelomically. However, many solutions for mamrmals
are hypertonic for armphibians or contain excess lactate
· 0.8-2.5%: Hypertonic saline may be used if solutions
[which may cause lactic acid overload in the amphibian].
above are not available, for a maximum of 4 h
One or two parts balanced electrolyte intravenous solu-
· 0.5-0.8%: Normal saline is suitable as a bath for ill
tion added to one part 5% dextrose is more suitable for
terrestrial amphibians. (Provide a bath of untreated
intracoelomic administration in dehydrated amphibians.
fresh water simultaneously)
In general, topical fluid therapy via baths is more applic-
able to maintenance of amphibian water and electrolyte
balance [Wright and Whitaker, 200l). Intravenous access
may be possible in larger species. A maximum volume of
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
25 ml fluid per kilogram of body weight should be admin-
istered parenterally (Wright, 1996)
Water should be clean and chlorine-free. It is important
that it is also at the correct temperature and pH (particu-
Nutritional support
larly if the anaesthetic agent used requires buffering) and
well oxygenated. Separate buckets of fresh water should
be available for recovery, along with the anaesthetic solu-
Carnivore convalescent diets (for example, Hills@ a/d,
tion for induction and a less concentrated anaesthetic
Herts., UK) can be administered to support adult
solution for maintenance.
amphibians. Initially, 1% of body weight can be adrminis-
 Plastic bags are useful for induction, as the amphibian is
tered once daily diluted in a similar volume of chlorine-
less likely to traumatise itself than in solid containers.
free fresh water. This volume can be gradually doubled
Syringes are used to squirt liquid over the skin to moisten
[Hadfield and Whitaker, 2005). Body condition should be
it during the procedure. A waterproof tank and/or a shal-
assessed with daily weight checks.
low bowl or plate serves as a maintenance platforrm.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Anaesthesia monitoring is usually carried out using a
Large specimens can be intubated using small endotra-
Doppler probe with a small footprint.
cheal tubes or flexible intravenous catheters. The
amphibian trachea is short and the endotracheal tube
should not be inserted too far (Raphael, 1993). The
TECHNIQUES
trachea is also narrow in some aquatic species compared
 to a similar-sized terrestrial amphibian.
Routes of administration
 It can be difficult to maintain anaesthesia in armphibians
via this method due to the alternative respiratory
Injections
 methods that most species possess.
Prior to administration of injections, the skin should be
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
wiped clean of debris and excess skin secretions. Sterile
OFANAESTHESIA
saline may be used. Care should be taken with disinfec-
tion. Isopropyl alcohol is toxic in amphibians (Wright,
Induction
2001d). Amphibians are also susceptible to water-soluble
toxins such as iodine, but safe use of tamed-iodine com-
pounds has been documented (Brown, 1995; Jacobson,
Immersion 
1975). Dilute chlorhexidine (l:40) is appropriate for use
This is the most common method of anaesthetising
  e  s  
For intracoelomic injections, the patient is held in dor-
amphibians. The technique is described in detail in the
sal recumbency with the caudal end slightly elevated, in
 section below, but can be applied to other agents.
an attempt to avoid organ puncture. A small gauge needle
[23-gauge or smaller) is used, inserting in a paramedian or
252
Tricaine methanesulfonate (Ms-222)
paralumbar location in the right posterior quadrant of the
abdomen (Lewbart, 2001).
The agent of choice for amphibian anaesthesia is MS-222
The skin of some species contains ossifications, which
(PHARMAQ Ltd, Hampshire, UK; Finquel@, Argent
may make injections difficult (Wright, 200la).
Chemical Laboratories, Redmond, WA). MS-222 is a
Anurans can also be injected subcutaneously as their
sodium-channel blocking local anaesthetic. It is an isomer
skin adheres loosely to underlying tissues (see Anatomy
of benzocaine and is a water-soluble white salt that forms
section], but not salamanders and caecilians. Fluids or
a clear, colourless, acid solution when mixed with water.
some medications can be administered into lymph sacs,
Anaesthesia is induced by bathing the amphibian in the
for example the dorsal lymph sacs of anurans, which are
solution (Raphael, 1993). The solution has a wide safety
cranio-lateral to the urostyle (see Fig. 17.7}.
margin, with the LCso in frog toxicity studies being 6.2%
In larger amphibians, intramuscular injections can be
[Finquel? data sheet, Argent Chemical Laboratories).
administered, for example into the proximal limbs. The
MS-222 directly affects the respiratory motor output
posterior muscles of the forelimb or hindlimb are used in
frorm the central nervous system, causing both excitation
salarmanders, and the hindlirmb of frogs (Lewbart, 2001).
and inhibition (Hedrick and Winmill, 2003). Prolonged
Intravenous injections are difficult, but possible
in
exposure may affect renal circulation and cause deaths
larger animals. The ventral abdominal vein lies just dorsal
(Finquel@ data sheet, Argent Chemical Laboratories)
to the skin (see Fig. 17.6), and the dorsally recumbent
Care should be taken to avoid human exposure (skin or
patient is approached with the needle bevel uppermost
eye contact, inhalation or ingestion} to either the MS-222
directed at an approximately 45° angle. In order to access
powder or solutions, as they can be irritant or corrosive.
the lingual plexus, which lies bilaterally at the base of the
Solutions should not be disposed of into water supplies or
tongue, the tongue must be pulled rostrally out of the
natural waters.
mouth (see Fig. 17.5). The heart lies midline in the pec-
MS-222 is supplied as an acid salt. In solution (in its
toral region and is located by visualisation, palpation on
un-ionised or free base form), this agent can be used to
Doppler flow. It is accessed by directing a needle almost
produce anaesthesia in amphibians. However, when
perpendicular to the skin just to the right of midline (see
MS-222 is added to water the solution forrmed is acidic
  
and mostly contains ionised MS-222 [which cannot be
vein may be accessible in some larger species. The ventral
absorbed across amphibian skin). Therefore, the solution
tail vein is the most easily accessible vein in salamanders
must be buffered before use. If the MS-222 is not
(Whitaker and Wright, 2001].
buffered, iatrogenic metabolic acidosis may be induced
[Hadfield and Whitaker, 2005].
Sodium phosphate (NazHPO4) is the easiest buffer to
Intubation
use, as excess will not affect the ratio of ionised to
unionised MS-222. Addition of MS-222 to a solution of
Most animals will not require intubation, as cutaneous res-
excess phosphate buffer produces a pH of around
17.
piration is relatively efficient. The anuran tongue is flipped
Alternatively the agent can be free-based by the addition
forward to access either the glottis for intubation or the
of sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3, bicarbonate of soda) to
lingual venous plexus for venepuncture (see Fig. 17.5)
a solution of the MS-222 salt, whilst monitoring the pH
Amphibian anaesthesia
to achieve a point around pH 7-7.4. Excess sodium bicar-
bonate will result in a pH outside the physiological range.
It will also increase the concentration of un-ionised
MS-222. The pH of local water will affect the armount of
buffer required - this will be more critical when using
sodium bicarbonate.
To reduce stress caused to the animal by sudden
changes in water parameters, the patient's enclosure
BOX 17.2 Tricaine methanesulfonate
(MS-222) 0.1% solution, I g MS-222/L
(Crawshaw, 1992)
2 g MS-222 + 34-50 ml of 0.5M NaHPO (buffer) + 2 L
of oxygenated water
Figure I 7.9 · Induction of anaesthesia in a marine toad (Bufo mar-
pH = 7.0-7.4
inus), in a plastic zip-lock bag using MS-222.
Dilute as required with well-oxygenated, toxin-free water
Table 17.4: Planes of anaesthesia 
water is used to prepare the anaesthetic solution if it is of
sufficient quality. Toxin-free water with buffering agent
PLANE
REFLEXES RETAINED REFLEXES LOST
253
can be stored and MS-222 added when anaesthetic solu-
tion is required. It is useful to have water available in
Light
Withdrawal reflex,
Righting reflex and
measured (for example l L} quantities for further dilu-
spontaneous movement,
corneal reflex
tion of the anaesthetic agent or for recovery. All solutions
gular respiration, cardiac
 should be allowed to equilibrate to room temperature, to
impulse
reduce thermal shock caused to the animal due to tem-
 perature changes (Wright, 2001c).
Deep
Cardiac impulse
Withdrawal reflex (last
reflex to be lost),
be effective in anaesthetising amphibians (Crawshaw,
spontaneous movement,
1989; Vanable Jr, 1985). These will vary between species
gular respiration, corneal
and between life stages. Recommended induction concen-
reflex and righting reflex
trations are 0.2-0.5g/L for larvae and newts, 1-2g/L for
adult frogs and salarmanders, and 3 g/L for toads (Crawshaw,
Overdose None
 Cardiac impulse slow or
1993; Downes, 1995; Hadfield and Whitaker, 2005). Large
difficult to detect
species [for example, the Japanese giant salamander
[Andrias japonicus]can weigh over 60kg] may require
(Holmes and Pitham, 2004; Wright, 2006)
higher concentrations for induction, but care should be
taken to buffer the solution appropriately.
It may, therefore, be necessary to titrate the dose for dif-
solution and produced surgical anaesthesia in 6-12min
ferent species and individual animals. In general, the con-
[Letcher and Amsel, 1989). After removal from the
centration of MS-222 necessary and time taken to reach
solution, anaesthesia lasted 18-36 min and recovery was
surgical anaesthesia is longer in toads due to slower absorp-
complete in 39-69 min
tion of fluid and drugs across the skin compared to frogs.
Once the appropriate level of anaesthesia has been
The patient is bathed in the anaesthetic solution in
achieved, the animal should be removed from the induc-
either a plastic zip-lock' bag (Fig. 17.9) or a lidded plastic
tion solution or excessively prolonged anaesthesia may
container. The patient can be protected from self-trauma
result. The patient's skin should be kept moist using well-
in the latter by lining it with a cloth. On initial exposure
cxygenated clean water. Further contact with anaesthetic
to MS-222, erythema is often seen [more obviously on
agents should only be used if the animal shows signs of
the pale-skinned ventrum), followed by agitation and,
recovery before the procedure is completed. Artificial
finally, loss of the righting reflex. Most patients
will
slime (for example Shieldex@, Aquatronic, Oxnard, CA}
require approximately 5min in contact with MS-222
may be used to coat the skin. Water-soluble gels (for
solution before becorming anaesthetised, with the result-
exarmple KY Jelly@) may inhibit cutaneous respiration and
ant anaesthesia lasting 25-45 min - but responses will be
so should not be used to coat the skin (Wright, 200ld)
variable depending on species, solution concentration and
A more dilute concentration of the anaesthetic may be
temperature. One study in bronze frogs (Rana clamitans)
 syringed over the patient to prolong anaesthesia (Pizzi and
and leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) used 1.5mg/ml MS-222
Miller, 2005). Alternatively, isoflurane or halothane or
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
sevoflurane may be diluted [l:3 in water} and trickled
Volatile agents
over the patient; however, this option poses rmore health
and safety issues for staff exposed to evaporating anaes-
soffurane, halothane and methoxyfurane
thetic agents.
Volatile agents can be used to anaesthetise amphibians
Rinsing the patient with clean water will reverse the
(Whitaker et al., 1999). Both isoflurane and sevoflurane
anaesthetic and speed recovery. Recovery usually occurs in
 depress myocardial conduction by affecting calcium chan-
30-90min after rermoval of the anaesthetic [Hadfield and
nel currents (Hirota et al., 1996). There is a risk of dam-
Whitaker, 2005). If necessary, doxapram hydrochloride can
be administered to stimulate breathing (Raphael, 1993).
age to the patient's epidermis during anaesthesia with
MS-222 has also been used intramuscularly or intra-
these agents, and self-trauma may occur with the irrita-
tion. There are also safety issues for staff with this form of
coelomically to induce anaesthesia. Doses required again
anaesthesia unless the gases are provided via an endotra-
vary between species, with 100-200 mg/kg being used in
leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) and up to 400 mg/kg in bull-
cheal tube
 Usually the volatile agent is bubbled through water into
frogs (Rana catesbeiana) (Letcher, 1992). The solution
was 125 mg/ml in sterile water, producing a pH of
which the anirmal is placed. Placing the animal on moist
 paper in an induction chamber will also induce anaesthe-
approximately 1.75. No peritonitis or inflammation was
sia. Care should be taken not to allow the patient to
seen in the study. However, the duration of anaesthesia
desiccate with the dry gases during this technique.
may be prolonged and cannot be ^reversed' by rinsing the
patient as with induction using a solution.
Alternatively some of the anaesthetic liquid can be mixed
with water-soluble gel before topical application to the
 An overdose of buffered MS-222 at 10 g/L in a 30-min
bath appears to be appropriate for humane euthanasia of
amphibian. It is more difficult to titrate the dose with this
amphibian species (Hadfield and Whitaker, 2005)
technique and the gel must be wiped off to prevent fur-
ther absorption once the patient is anaesthetised.
254
Clove oil (eugenol)
Injectable agents
A solution of clove oil has been used to induce anaesthesia
in several species. Anecdotal reports suggest 318-400 mg/L
Propofo!
for anaesthesia lasting 30-100 min in anurans and sala-
This agent may be administered by intracoelomic or intra-
manders [Mitchell, 2003).
 In leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) a bath concentration of
venous injection, or applied topically. Propofol has been
310-318mg/L for 15 min induced surgical anaesthesia
used to induce sedation or light anaesthesia in leopard
(Lafortune et al., 2o0l). The anaesthetic duration was
frogs (Rana pipiens} at 10 mg/kg when injected perivas-
extremely variable, from less than 5 min up to 65 min.
cularly in the area of the sublingual plexus (Lafortune
A common side effect was gastric prolapse.
et al., 2001). Intracoelomic administration of propofol
resulted in sedation [at 9.5 mg/kg) or anaesthesia (at
30 mg/kg) in White's tree frogs (Pelodryas caerulea) (von
Benzocaine
Esse and Wright, 1999).
In order to produce a solution for anaesthesia, benzocaine
must first be dissolved in acetone. A stock solution can be
Ketamine
prepared by adding 40 g benzocaine to a litre of acetone
and protected from the light in a dark glass bottle; 10 ml
Anaesthesia with ketamine is possible in amphibians and
of the stock solution mixed with & L of water will produce
may be administered intramuscularly, intravenously, into
a solution containing 50 ppm benzocaine. This concentra-
the lymphatic system or subcutaneously. However, effect-
tion will cause sedation in many species. Induction of
ive doses vary greatly both intra- and inter-specifically,
anaesthesia may require a higher concentration, up to
 oe a sa n   p
200 ppm.
(Whitaker et al., 1999).
One study performed on cane toads (Bufo marinus)
showed significant cardio-respiratory changes during ben-
Tiletamine/zolazepam
zocaine anaesthesia (Anderson and Wang, 2002]. Apnoea
occurred during anaesthesia after immersion in I g benzo-
The combination of tiletamine with zolazepam produces
caine/L for 15 min. PaOz dropped below 30 mmHg and
anaesthesia in rmany species. When this was trialled in two
respiratory acidosis developed. Acid-base status did not
amphibian species, bulfrog (Rana catesbeiana) and leop-
stabilise until 24 h after anaesthesia.
ard frog (Rana pipiens), results were extremely variable
(Letcher and Durante, 1995). There was profound
Ethano!
intraspecies variation in depth and duration of effect.
Doses that produced anaesthesia in some individuals were
Immersion in 5-l0% ethanol may produce anaesthesia.
fatal in others. There are reports of using this combination
80 proof vodka is 40% ethanol and can be diluted in
at 5-20mg/kg intramuscularly or subcutaneously to
fresh chlorine-free water to produce the appropriate
induce anaesthesia in anurans, but results are variable
concentration
between species (Schumacher, 1996).
Amphibian anaesthesia
Medetomidine
bathing the patient (cutaneous respiration), via an endo-
tracheal tube (pulmonic respiration], or across the skin
 In a study in leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) this agent failed
[cutaneous respiration]. Anaesthesia is reduced by rermov-
to produce sedation or anaesthesia (Lafortune et al., 2001).
ing the animal from contact with the anaesthetic (as gas,
solution, or topically), by changing to a solution containing
Cooling
a lower concentration of anaesthetic, and/orby flushing the
animal with fresh water that does not contain anaesthetic.
Cooling amphibians will slow their metabolism and ease
restraint, but does not provide any analgesia and may cause
Recovery
potential long-term immunosuppression (Green and Cohen,
1977). Cooling is not recormmended as a form of anaesthesia.
Recovery is cormplete when the patient has normal respira-
tory movements and is alert and responsive (Wright, 2001c).
Anaesthetic maintenance
Suggested anaesthetic protocols
If the heart rate or oxygen saturation decreases or meta-
bolic variations are seen, oxygen flow to the patient should
be increased and the anaesthesia reduced. Oxygen is pro-
Tricaine methanesulfonate is the anaesthetic agent of
vided by bubbling gas through the anaesthetic solution
choice in amphibians. It can be used for induction and,
Table 17.5: Amphibian anaesthetic agents
DRUG
DOsE (concentration
ROUTE
COMMENT
for bath or mg/kg)
255
Benzocaine
Bath
Dissolve in ethanol or acetone before water
Use product from chemical suppliers or fish
 anaesthetic preparation; do not use topical
mammal products
50mg/L3
Larvae
200-500 mg/L2.3
Frogs, salamanders
Clove oil (eugenol)
0.3-0.45 mg/L1.5
Bath
e pue shoy piedoel ui eiseuiseue dea
salamanders
 Reversible gastric prolapse in 50% leopard frogs
Ethanol
5-10%
Bath
Halothane
4-5%3
Induction chamber
 Bubbled into water to effect?
Bath
Isoflurane
3-5% (induction);
Chamber
Terrestrial species
1-2% (maintenance)6
0.28 ml/10 ml bath8
Bath
Aquatic species
3.0 ml + 3.5 ml KY jelly +
Topical
Remove excess once anaesthetised
1.5 ml water&
Ketamine
50-150 mg/kg3
SC,IM
Induction and recovery can be prolonged
Variableresponse
Propofol
100-140 mg/kg
Topical
 Sedation to deep anaesthesia; rinse when 
desired plane achieved; recommended only
for animals <50g
10-30 mg/kg
VCe
White's tree frogs; sedation/light anaesthesia
at lower dosage;recoveryin 24h
(Continued)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table 17.5: (Continued)
DRUG
DOsE (concentration
ROUTE
COMMENT
for bath or mg/lcg)
Tricaine methanesulfonate
100-200 mg/L10
Bath to effect
Induction of larvae
(MS-222)
200-500 mg/L3
Induction of tadpoles, newts
1g/L4
Induction of most gill-less adults
0.5-2.0 g/L3
Induction of frogs, salamanders (15-30 min)
2-3g/L1I
Induction of toads (1 5-20 min)
50-200 mg/kg4
May be irritant SC or IM1
Tiletamine/zolazepam
5-20mg/kg6
IM, ICe
Variable results
Key: ICe = intracoelomic,IM =intramuscular,SC= subcutaneous
(Carpenter, 2005); ²(Cooper, 1984); ²(Crawshaw, 1993); 4 (Downes, 1995);  (Lafortune et al., 2000);  (Schumacher, 1996);
 (Stein, 1996); * (Stetter et al., 1996);  (von Esse and Wright, 1999); 1 (Whitaker et al., 1999);  (Wright and Whitaker, 2001)
at a lower concentration, for maintenance of anaesthesia.
Central nervous system
256
 Depth of anaesthesia is easily changed by using differing con-
 centrations of agent for imrmersion or cutaneous application.
Reflexes can be monitored in amphibians similarly as in
The nares should be kept above the level of solution to
other species (Lafortune et al., 2001). Loss of the righting
reflex on induction denotes onset of anaesthesia(see
ensure inhalation does not occur.
Table 17.4). The corneal reflex is also lost at a light plane
of anaesthesia. Surgical anaesthesia is deemed present
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
when the righting reflex, withdrawal reflex and gular res-
piration are lost (Downes, 1995; Wright, 2006).
Observations on the patient
Anaesthetic monitoring equipment
Cardio-respiratory systems
The minimal pararmeters that should be monitored during
Although not designed with amphibians in mind, many
amphibian anaesthesia are heart rate, buccopharyngeal or
pieces of anaesthetic monitoring equipment can be used
pulmonic respiratory rate, and blood oxygen saturation
on these species.
(Wright, 2001c).
With some Doppler flow detectors, heart sounds may
The cardiac impulse is often visible and heart rate can be
be differentiated and characterised (Frye, 1994). Doppler
easily recorded. Doppler flow rmachines are very useful in
ultrasound has been used to measure blood flow in the
situations where the cardiac irmpulse cannot be observed,
common liac artery in bulfrogs (Rana catesbeiana} and
for example when the patient has been draped for surgery.
cane toads (Bufo marinus) (Willens et al., 2006).
A small footprint' (i.e. small patient contact surface) probe
As most amphibian respiration is cutaneous, and pul-
is required, as most amphibian patients are small.
monic respiration often ceases under anaesthesia, it can
Depending on the species, a respiratory rate may be
be difficult to assess oxygen supply to the patient. During
obtained from observing buccopharyngeal or pulmonic
apnoea, oxygen uptake reduces, arterial oxygen falls, arter-
movements. During anaesthesia, respiration should be
ial carbon dioxide levels increase and arterial pH falls
slow and regular, but many anaesthetics will induce
(Jones, 1972). If appropriate sized clips or probes are
apnoea in amphibians. Hyperoxic conditions usually cause
available, haemoglobin oxygen saturation may be meas-
a cessation of respiratory movements, as hypoxia is often
Wed using puse oximetry devices. Small clips may be
the drive for respiration. In order to stimulate respiration,
used on toes or tails, and probes may be placed on the
room air should be used (rather than 100% oxygen) to
ventrum over the heart or oesophageally. Armphibians
stimulate respiratory
movements during
recovery
On 'sleuu ueui uoeumes uaxo iamol aae on pua
(Wright, 200le). Ideally, respiration may be slow during
normal values exist, but Burggren and Just report levels
surgical anaesthesia, but remains regular despite painful
over 95% in the tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum]
stimuli.With some anaesthetics, spontaneous respiration
(Burggren and Just, 1992). As with other species, trends
will be lost; in these patients, intubation should be per-
in values are important, and a decrease of 5% or more
formed if possible to allow intermittent positive pressure
should prompt action to increase the patient's oxygen
ventilation (IPPV) (Crawshaw, 1993; Downes, 1995)
supply (Wright, 2001c).
Amphibian anaesthesia
Table 17.6: Analgesics that may be useful in amphibians
DRUG
DOSE (mg/lcg)
ROUTE
DURATION
COMMENT
Buprenorphine
0.0754
Dorsal lymph sac
>4h
382
SC
EDso in leopard frog (Rana pipiens)
Butorphanol
0.2-0.43
IM
Fentanyl
0.52
SC
>4h
EDso in leopard frog (Rana pipiens)
Lidocaine
Local infiltration'
Local anaesthetic; use with caution
(lignocaine)1-2%
Morphine 
30-1005
IM, SC, topically
60-90min
Little effect on feeding and behaviour
38-422
SC
>4h
Nalorphine
1222
SC
>4h
Key: IM = intramuscular; SC = subcutaneous
(Johnson, 1991); ²(Machin, 1999); 3(Schumacher, 1996); 4 (Stephens and Rothe, 1997); 5 (Stevens et al., 1994)
257
Electrocardiogram (ECG) machines are not routinely
pre-anaesthetic fasting if possible. Insectivorous species
used on armphibians, but may be used to monitor heart
weighing less than 20g should be fasted for no longer than
rate. ECG electrodes are positioned as in other species
4 h, those weighing more than 20g for 48h, and those on a
(Schoemaker and Zandvliet, 2005). Electrical conduction
vertebrate diet for seven days (Wright, 200lc). Obviously
is enhanced by using needle electrodes. Reference values
these guidelines will vary depending on the patient's status,
for anaesthetised animals have been published (Whitaker
the anticipated period of anaesthesia and the procedure to
and Wright, 2001).
be perforrmed.
The environmental temperature will also affect meta-
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
bolic rate and gastrointestinal transit time in these
ectothermic animals. Amphibians maintained at tempera-
CARE
tures below their preferred body temperature will require
an extended fasting period - up to 10 days in larger speci-
 Patient management
mens (Jiang and Claussen, 1993).
An accurate weight (using digital scales) should be obtained
Analgesia
prior to anaesthesia. Weighing should be repeated on a regu-
lar basis after recovery to monitor hydrational and mutri-
tional status.
Amphibians display appropriate behaviour in response to a
 Most armphibians will use predorminantly cutaneous res-
painful stimulus and possess antinociceptive mechanisms
piration. Soak the amphibian in a shallow water bath for
to modulate pain. These physiological findings suggest that
60min before anaesthesia to ensure adequate hydration
pain perception in amphibians is likely similar to other ver-
[Wright, 2001d). The skin of amphibian patients should
tebrates and analgesia should be provided for painful pro-
also be kept moist throughout the procedure, either with
cedures (Stevens et al., 1994; Stoskopf, 1994). As with
maintenance anaesthetic solution or high-quality water, to
many other exotic pets, drug pharmacokinetics and doses
have not been experimentally ascertained, but clinical
prevent desiccation and associated respiratory compro-
investigations have proposed dose rates for various species.
mise. For species relying rmore on branchial respiration, for
example the axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum),the deli-
The opioid ligand and receptor are conserved through-
cate extermal gills should be protected from trauma and
out vertebrate phylogeny, suggesting the potential bene-
desiccation.
fits of opioids in amphibian analgesia (Stevens, 1988).
Alpha-2-agonists, ketamine and ms-222 have also demon-
strated analgesic potential (Brenner et al., 1994; Lee and
Fasting
Frank, 1991; Letcher, 1992).
Morphine, a μ-agonist, has been demonstrated to pro-
As the larynx is usually closed during anaesthesia, aspiration
duce analgesia when administered intramuscularly, subcu-
after regurgitation is very rare in amphibians. Nevertheless,
taneously or topically (Stevens et al., 1994). However,
loss of electrolytes via emesis should be avoided by
variations in response between species are likely to exist.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES/DRUGS
Burggren, W. E., and J. J. Just. 1992. Developmental changes in
physiological systems. In: M. E. Feder and W. W. Burggren
[eds.] Environmental Physiology of Amphibians. pp. 467-530.
Respiratory problems
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Carpenter, J. W. 2005. Exotic Animal Formulary. 3rd edn. Elsevier,
Gas exchange can be supported by increasing ambient
St Louis, Missouri.
a u iam yan uaaxo uq i saa ua
Carter, D. B. I979. Structure and function of the subcutaneous
lymph sacs in the anura [Amphibia]. J Herpetol 13: 321-327.
vivarium (Crawshaw, 1998). If apnoea is prolonged
Chen, K. K., and A. L. Chen. I933. A study of the poisonous
respiration can be stimulated using doxapram intra-
secretions of five North American species of toards. J Pharmacol
muscularly or intravenously at 5 mg/kg (Hadfield and
Exp Therap 49: 526-542.
Whitaker, 2005).
Conklin, A. E. 1930. The formation and circulation of lymph in the
frog: I. The rate of lymph production. Am J Physiol I: 79-110.
Cooper, J. E. 1984. Anesthesia of exotic animals. Anim Technol 35:
13-20.
Cardiovascular problems
Crawshaw, G. J. 1989. Medical care of amphibians. In: Proceedlings
of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians I989. pp.
Bradycardia may be treated with atropine at 0.03 mg/kg
166-172.
Crawshaw, G. J. 1992. Amphibian medicine. In: R. W. Kirk and
intramuscularly (Hadfield and Whitaker, 2005). Adrenaline
J. D. Bonogura [eds.) Current Veterinary Therapy XI: Small
(epinephrine) can be administered intratracheally along
Animal Practice. pp. I219-1231. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
with cardiac compressions if asystole occurs (Hadfield and
Crawshaw, G. J. 1993. Amphibian medicine. In: M. Fowler [ed.)
Whitaker, 2005).
Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine: Current Therapy. 3rd edn. pp.
131-139. Saunders, Philadephia, PA.
Crawshaw, G. J. 1998. Amphibian emergency and critical care. Vet
258
Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract I: 207-232.
REFERENCES
Daszak, P, L. Berger, A.A. Cunningham et al. 1999. Emerging
mfectious diseases and amphibian population declines. Emerg
Infect Dis 5: 735-748.
Adler, K. 2004. Amphibians In: T. Halliday and K. Adler [eds.) The 
Downes, H. 1995. Tricaine anaesthesia in amphibians: a review. Bull 
New Encylopedlia of Reptiles and Amphibians. pp. i0-19.
Assoc Rep Amph Vet 5: 11-16.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Emilio, M. G., and G. Shelton. I972. Factors affecting blood flow to
Anderson, J. B., and T. Wang. 2002. Effects of anaesthesia on blood
the lungs in the amphibian, Xeopus laetis. J Exp Biol 56:
gases, acid-base status and ions in the toad Bufo marinus.
67-77.
Comp Biochem Physiol A 13l: 639-646.
Emilio, M. G., and G. Shelton. 1974. Gas exchange and its effect on
Bennet, A. F., and H. M. Wake. I974. Metabolic correlates of activity
blood gas concentrations in the amphibian, Xemopus laetis.
in the caecilian Geotryptes seraphini. Copeia 1974[4): 764-769.
J Exp Biol 60: 567-579.
Berger, L., R. Speare, and A. Hyatt. I999. Chytrid fungi and
Frye, F. L. I994. Ultrasonic Doppler blood flow detection in small
amphibian declines: Overview, implications and future
exotic animal merdicine. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 3:
directions. In: A. Campbell [ed.) Declines and Disappearances of
'661-61
Australian Frogs. pp. 2l-3l. Environment Australia, Canberra.
Gatten, R. E., K. Miller, and R. J. Full. I992. Energetics at rest and
Blaylock, L. A., R. Ruibal, and K. Platt-Aloia. I976. Skin structure
during locomotion. In: M. E. Feder and W. W. Burggren [eds.)]
ad siping behaviour of phyllomedusine frogs. Copeia I976[1]:
Environmental Physiology of the Amphibians. pp. 314-377.
283295.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Boutiler, R. G., M. L. Glass, and N. Heisler. I987. Blood gases, and
Goin, C. J., O. B. Goin, and G. R. Zug. 1978. Structure of
extracellular/intracellular acid-base status as a function of
Amphibians. Introduction to Herpetology. 3rd edn. pp. 15-38.
temperature in the anuran amphibians Xenopus laetis and Bufo
W H Freerman, San Francisco.
marinxs. J Exp Biol 130: 13-25.
Green, N., and N. Cohen. I977. Effect of temperature on serum
Boutilier, R. G., D. F. Stifler, and D. P Toews. I992. Exchange of
complement levels in the leopard frog Rana pipiens. Dev Comp
respiratory gases, ions, and water in amphibious and aquatic
Pathol I: 59-64.
amphibians. In: M. E. Feder and W. W. Burgren [eds.)
Hadfield, C. A., and B. R. Whitaker. 2005. Amphibian emergency
Environmental Physiology of the Amphibians. p. 81-124.
medicine and care. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 2:
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
79-89.
Brenner, G. M., A. J. Klopp, L. L. Deason et al. I994. Analgesic
Heatwole, H., and G. T. Barthalamus. I994. Amphibian Biology,
potency of alpha adrenergic agents after systermic administration
Vol I. The Integument. Surrey Beatty and Sons Party Limited,
im amphibians. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 270: 540-545.
Chipping Norton, New South Wales, Australia.
Brett, S. S., and G. Shelton. 1979.Ventilatory mechanisms of the
Hedrick, M. S., and R. E. Winmill. 2003. Excitatory and inhibitory
amphibian, Xenopus laevis the role of the buccal force pump.
effects of tricaine [MS-222] on fictive breathimg in isolated 
J Exp Biol 80: 251-269.
bulfrog brain stem. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
Brown, C. S. I995. Rear leg amputation and subsequent adaptive
284: 405-412.
behavior during reintroduction of a green treefrog, Hyla
Helmer, P. J., and D. P Whiteside. 2005. Amphibian anatomy and
cinerea. Bull Assoc Reptil Amphibi Vet 5: 6-7.
physiology. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species.
Buchanan, B. W., and R. G. Jaeger. I995. Amphibians. In:
pp. 3-14. Elsevier Saunders, Edinburgh.
B. E. Rollins [ed.) The Experimental Animal in Biomedical
Hirota, K., J. Fujimura, M. Wakasugi et al. 1996. Isoflurane and
Research. Volume II. Care, husbandry, and well-being. An
sevoflurane modulate inactivation kinetics of Ca+ currents in
Dverview by species. Pp. 32-48. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL
   s  a
Amphibian anaesthesia
Jacobson, E. 1975. The effects of ACTH, glucagons, and
Putnam, J. L. 1975. Septation in the ventricle of the heart of Sire71
norepinephrine on plasma glucose levels in the mud puppy,
intermedia. Copeia 1975[4]: 773-774.
Necturus maculosus. PhD dissertation, University of Missouri.
Putnam, J. L., and J. F. Dunn. I978. Septation in the ventricle 
Jaeger, R. G. I99l. Housing, handling, and nutrition of salamanders.
of the heart of Nectarus maculosus. Herpetologica 34:
In: Proceedings of a Scientists Center for Animal Welfare
292-297.
conference, The Care and Use of Amphibians, Reptiles and
Putnam, J. L., and D. L. Kelly. I978. A new interpretation of
Fish in Research, New Orleans. pp. 25-29.
interatrial septation in the lungless salamander, Plethodor
Jiang, S., and D. L. Claussen. I993. The effects of temperature on 
glutimosus. Copeia 1978[2]: 251-254.
fish
food passage time through the digestive tract in Notophthalmus
Raphael, B. L. I993. Amphibians. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
tiridescens. J Herpetol 27: 414-419.
Pract 23: 1271-1286.
 Johnson, J. H. I991. Anesthesia, analgesia and euthanasia of reptiles
Schoemaker, N. J., and M. M. J. M. Zandvliet. 2005.
and armphibians. In: Proc Am Assoc Zoo Vet. pp. I32-138.
Electrocardiograms in selected species. Semin Avian Exotic Pet
Jones, D. R. I972. Anaerobiosis and the oxygen debt in an anuran
Med 14: 26-33.
atmphibian, Rana esculerita. J Comp Physiol A: Neuroethol
 Schumacher, J. 1996. Reptiles and amphibians. In: J. C. Thurman,
Sensory, Neural Behav Physiol 77: 356-382.
W. J. Tranquilli and G. J. Benson [eds.] Lumb and Jones'
Kumar, S. 1975. The Amphibian Heart. S Chand and Company, New
Veterinary Anesthesia. 3rd edn. pp. 670-685. Williams &
Delhi.
Wilkins, Baltimore.
Lafortune, M., M. A. Mitchell, and J. A. Smith. 2000. Evaluation of
Shelton, G., and D. R. Jones. I968. A comparative study of central
clinical and cardiopulmonary effects of clove oil (eugenol] on
blood pressures in five amphibians. J Exp Biol 49: 631-643.
leopard frogs, Raa pipies. Proc Assoc Reptil Amphib Vet:
Stein, G. I996. Reptile and amphibian formulary. In: D. R. Mader 
5153.
[ed.] Reptile Medicine and Surgery. pp. 465-472.
Lafortune, M., M. A. Mitchell, and J. A. Smith. 200l. Evaluation
WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
of medetomidine, clove oil and propofol for anesthesia of
Stephens, C. W, and K. S. Rothe. I997. Supraspinal administration
Ieopard frogs, Rana pipiers. J Herp Med Surg II: I3-18.
of opioids with selectivity for μ-, d-, k-opioid receptors
Lee, J. H., and G. B. Frank. 1991. Effects of racemic ketamine on
produces analgesia in amphibians. Eur J Pharmacol 331:
excitable membranes of frog. Korean J Pharmacol 27:
15-21.
259
'801-66
Stetter, M. D., B. Raphael, F. Indiviglio et al. I996. Isoflurane
Letcher, J. I992. Intracelomic use of tricaine methanesulfonate for
anesthesia in amphibians: comparison of five application
amesthesia of bulfrogs [Rana catesbeiana) and leopard frogs
methods. Proc Am Assoc Zoo Vets: 255-257.
[Rana pipiens). Zoo Biol Il: 243-251.
Stevens, C. W. 1988. Opioid antinociception in amphibians. Brain
Letcher, J., and S. Amsel. 1989. Practitioners guide to anesthesia in
Res Bull 21: 959-962.
anurans. Companion Anim Pract 19: 21-24.
Stevens, C. W., A. J. Klopp, and J. A. Facello. I994. Analgesic
Letcher, J., and R. Durante. I995. Evaluation of use of
potency of μ- and k-opioids after systemic administration in
tiletamine/zolazepam for anesthesia of bullfrogs and leopard
amphibians. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 269: 1086-1093.
frogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207: 80-82.
 Stoskopf, M. K. 1994. Pain and analgesia in birds, reptiles, fish and
Lewbart, G. 2001. Amphibian medicine. In: Atlantic Coast
amphibians. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 35.
Veterinary Conference.
Vanable Jr, J. W. 1985. Benzocaine: an excellent amphibian
Lewbart, G. A., and M. K. Stoskopf. 2002. Amphibian medicine:
anesthetic. Axolotl Newslett Spring I4: I9-21.
selected topics. Exotic DVM 4.3: 36-39.
von Esse, F. V., and K. M. Wright. I999. Effect of intracoelomic
Machin, K. L. 1999. Amphibian pain and analgesia. J Zoo Wildl Med
propofol im White's tree frogs, Pelodryas caerulea. Assoc Reptil
30: 2-10.
Amphib Vet 9: 7-8.
Maruska, E. I994. Procedures for setting up and maintaining a
Wallace, R. A., G. P. Sanders, and R. J. Ferl. I991. The chordates. In:
salamander colony. In: J. B. Murphy, K. Adler and J. T. Collins
R. A. Wallace, G. P Sanders and R. J. Ferl [eds.) Biology: The
[eds.) Captive Management and Conservation of Amphibians
science of life. 3rd edn. pp. 718-751. HarperCollins, New York.
and Reptiles, Contributions to Herpetology No. Il. pp.
West, N. H., and B. N. Van Vliet. I992. Sensory mechanisms
229-242, SSAR, Ithaca, NY.
regulating the cardliovascular and respiratory systems. In:
McClanahan, L. L., J. N. Stinner, and V. H. Shoemaker. I978. Skin
M. E. Feder and W. W. Burggren [eds.) Environmental Physiology
lpids, water loss, and energy metabolism in a South American
of Amphibians. pp. I51-182. University of Chicago Press,
treefrog [Phyllomedusa sauuagi). Physiol Zool 5l: 179-187.
Chicago.
Mendes, E. G. 1945. Contribucao para a fisiologicca dos sistemas
Whitaker, B. R., and K. M. Wright. 2001. Clinical techniques. In:
respiratorio e circulatorio de Siphonops ammulatus [Amphibia-
K. M. Wright and B. R. Whitaker [eds.) Amphibian Medlicine
Gymnophiona). Bol Fac Filos Cienc Letras Univ Sao Paulo,
and Captive Husbandry. pp. 89-110. Kreiger Publishing
Zool 9: 25-64 as quoted im Duellman and Trueb, 1968, p. 1405.
Company, Malabar, FL.
Mitchell, M. A. 2003. Amphibian Medicine and Surgery. In: Western
Whitaker, B. R., K. M. Wright, and S. L. Bamett. I999. Basic
Veterinary Conference.
husbandry and clinical assessment of the amphibian patient.
Parsons, R. H. I994. Effects of skin circulation on water exchange. In:
Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2: 265-290.
H. Heatwhole and G. T. Barthalmus [eds.) Amphibian Biology
Willens, S., S. H. Dupree, M. K. Stoskopf et al. 2006. Measurerments 
Vol. I, The Integument. pp. I32-146. Surrey Beatty and Sons,
of common iliac arterial blood flow in anurans using Doppler
Chipping Norton, New South Wales, Australia.
ultrasound. J Zoo Wildl Med 37: 97-101.
Pizzi, R., and J. Miller. 2005. Amputation of a Mycobacterium
Wright, K. M. 1996. Amphibian husbandry and medicine. In:
marinum infected himdlimb in an African bullfrog [Fyxicephalus
D. R. Mader [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery pp. 436-459.
αdspersus). Vet Rec 156: 747-748.
Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Pough, F. H., W. Magnusson, M. J. Ryan et al. I1992. Behavioral
Wight, K. M. 200Ia. Anatomy for the clinician. In: K. M. Wright
emergetics. In: M. E. Feder and W. W. Burggren [eds.)
and B. R. Whitaker [eds.] Amphibian Medicme and Captive
Environmental Physiology of the Amphibians. pp. 395-436.
Husbandry pp. I5-30. Krieger Publishing Company,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Malabar, FL.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Wright, K. M. 2001b. Applied physiology. In: K. M. Wright and
and B. R. Whitaker [eds.) pp. 3-14. Krieger Publishing
B. R. Whitaker [eds.) Amphibian Medicine and Captive
Company, Malabar, Florida.
Husbandry. p. 31-34. Krieger Publishing Company,
Wright, K. M. 2006. Overview of amphibian medicine. In:
Malabar, FL.
D. R. Madler [ed.) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Znd edn. p.
Wright, K. M. 200lc. Restraint techniques and euthanasia. In:
941-971. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, Missouri.
D. M. Wright and B. R. Whitaker [eds.] Amphibian Medicine
Wright, K. M., and B. R. Whitaker. 2001. Phartmacotherapeutics. In:
and Captive Husbandry pp. IlI-122. Kreiger Publishing
K. M. Wright and B. R. Whitaker [eds.] Amphibian Medicine
Company, Malabar, FL.
and Captive Husbandry. pp. 309-330. Krieger Publishing
Wright, K. M. 200Id. Surgical techmiques. In: K. M. Wright and
Company, Malabar, FL.
B. R. Whitaker [eds.) Amphibian Medicine and Captive
Husbandry. p. 273-283. Krieger Publishing Company,
Malabar, FL.
Wright, K. M. 200le. Taxonomy of amphibians kept in captivity.
Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. In: K. M. Wright
260
18
Fish anaesthesia
Matthew Fiddes
INTRODUCTION
for veterinary attention and is used to demmonstrate typical
external and internal gross anatomy [Fig. 18.1]
There are at least 24 600 known species of fish (Helfman
261
et al., 1997), with over 2000 species entering the onammen-
tal fish trade (Davenport, 200l). The total population of
ornamental fish in the UK has been estirmated at 135 mil-
Dorsal
lion, with approximately 14% of UK households owning
Lateral 
fin
either an aquarium or pond (Anonymous, 2007). The bulk
line
of this pet fish trade is in freshwater fish, split between
Operculum
coldwater species (such as koi carp [Cyprinus carpio] and
goldfish [Carassius auratus]] and tropical species kept in
aquaria. This is reflected in the fish species most often pre-
sented to veterinary surgeons. With continuing advances in
the field of ornamental fish medicine, together with the
large number of fish kept as pets and in public aquaria, there
is great potential for further veterinary involverment.
Anaesthesia is a useful tool to the fish practitioner and
enables various tasks to be performed. Fish often struggle
Pectoral
Pelvic
vent
Anal
Caudal
in most forms of restraint and handling, which can result
fin
fin
fin
fin
in damage to the fish and, in some cases, to the handler.
Anaesthesia can greatly facilitate examination, transport
and diagnostic sampling as well as reducing stress to the
fish. Surgery will require anaesthesia and, with appropri-
Swim
Kidney
ate techniques, the fish may be maintained out of water
bladder
for extended periods.
Liver
Spine
Brain
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
As discussed, a large number of species are commonly
kept in captivity and it is often this diversity that makes
fish such attractive pets. Unlike many terrestrial environ-
-ea aanu e otioalqns aq uen siuauuoaua senbe 'suau
Jo aauer apim e ul pannsar seu sl pue suoipuon ul uoe
physiological differences. Water conditions can have a great
Gills
Heart
Spleen Gonad
effect on the homeostatic mechanisms in the fish.
 Thankfully many anatomical and physiological features
Gastrointestinal
tact
that are irmportant in anaesthesia are comrmon to rmost fish.
Sorme clinically important variations will be discussed. The
Figure I8.l · The external and internal anatomy of the koi carp
koi carp (Cyprimus carpio} is a species commonly presented
(Cyprinus carpio). (A) External anatomy. (B) Internal anatomy.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
If the practitioner is unfarmiliar with the species or vari-
are a variety of vascular patterns in fish and most have
ant presented it can often be useful to consult texts as to
well developed renal or hepatic portal systems (Wildgoose,
the normal anatomy of these fish. In particular, selective
200la). The renal portal system may have effects on the
breeding of fancy goldfish has led to a wide variety of
pharmacokinetics of drugs administered intramuscularly
often extreme body types that may be mistaken for
or intravenously at various sites.
pathology (Fig. 18.2)
Respiratory system
Temperature regulation
With few exceptions, the major respiratory organs are the
Fish, with the exception of some species, such as those in
gills (Childs and Whitaker, 200l). These are the site of
the suborder Scombroidei [which includes tuna), are
exchange of respiratory gases, but are also vital for nitroge-
ectothermic, so their body temperature varies with that of
nous waste excretion, acid-base balance and osmotic control.
the surrounding environment. This has important implica-
The gills consist of multiple bony/cartilaginous gill arches
tions for the speed of physiological processes. In the con-
(Fig. 18.3) and typically lie either side of the pharynx in the
text of anaesthesia, drug rmetabolism may vary rmarkedly
pathway of water from the mouth to the exterior of the
with different termperatures; dosage intervals and absolute
animal. The cranial aspects of the gill arches are modified
dosages may need to be altered accordingly. Meat with-
into gill rakers that allow separation of food particles from
drawal times for drugs used in farmed species for hurman
the water as it flows over the gills (Stoskopf, 1993a). The
consumption are expressed in degree days to reflect the
varying speed of metabolism at different temperatures.
A
Gill arch 
Cardiovascular system
262
Compared to mammalian species, the circulatory system
is relatively simple in fish. Deoxygenated blood passes
from the heart to the gills, where it is oxygenated by a
counter-current system in the gill lamellae (Stoskopf,
1993a). From the gills, blood travels directly into the sys-
temic circulation (Wildgoose, 200la) and returns to the
Water
fow
heart via the venous system.
The fish heart is often positioned quite cranially
(Stoskopf, 1993a). It is a two-chambered organ with four dis-
tinct regions, and lies within the pericardial sac (Wildgoose,
Gill rakers
Gillfilaments
200la). Venous blood enters the thin-walled sinus veno-
(primary lamellae)
Lateral view
sus and subsequently the atrium. Blood then enters the
thick-walled, muscular ventricle and is pumped into the
bulbus arteriosus. The elastic recoil of the bulbus arteriosus
pushes blood though the ventral aorta to the gills. There
Mouth
Water
flow
 Operculum
Gill arch
 Gil filament 
Pharynx
(primary lamella)
Oesophagus
Dorsal view
Figure I8.3 · Anatomy and water flow over the teleost (bony
fish) gill Water passes from the buccal cavity over the gills and
exits via the opercular clefts. Blood travels against the water flow
at the secondary gillamelle to provide anefcient counter-current
Figure I8.2 · The normal appearance of an Oranda, a variety of
goldfish (Carassius auratus). Selective breeding has resulted in
over the gills.
wide anatomical variation of the same species.
(Continued)
Fish anaesthesia
gill filarments (primary lamellae) project caudally from the
as the respiratory rate. In some species movement of the
gill arches, giving the gills a comb-like appearance. Each gill
mouth, in particular with the presence of pharyngeal
hi o renpuadad u aaue Arepuoas sey nuae
valves, is crucial in allowing water to pass over the gills
axis, which act as the site of diffusional/osmotic exchange.
(Stoskopf, 1993a). This may be of relevance to artificial
A secondary larmella consists of two layers of epithelial
ventilation when movement of the mouth may be
cells surrounding a vascular space. The arrangement of the
required to facilitate water passage over the gills (Harms,
secondary larmellae and the associated blood supply acts as
2003).
an efficient counter-current mechanism of gaseous exchange.
The gills do not function well out of water. Gill lamel-
The gills are often protected frorm the exterior by bony
lar collapse occurs out of water, which decreases the
plates (operculae).
exchange area for absorption of gases across the lamellar
membrane (Brown, 1993). If the fish is removed from the
than the oxygen concentration in air experienced by ter-
water for rmore than a few rminutes, steps rmust be taken
restrial anirmals. The gill arrangerment, with its counter-
to pass water over the gills to allow respiratory/excretory
current mechanism, allows extremely efficient removal of
exchange and to prevent desiccation.
oxygen (Harms, 2003). This efficiency can, however,
 Some fish are capable of utilising atmospheric oxygen
i Aiaa are sla uaxo paossp j! us a aeeep
(Childs and Whitaker, 2001) instead of dissolved oxygen
[supersaturation) (Mayer, 2005). In a clinical context,
in the water and may be referred to as ^air-breathers'. This
care should be employed in attempting to oxygenate the
can make induction with waterborne anaesthetic agents
water. It is preferable to bubble air through the water via
problermatic (for example, snakeheads, family Channidae)
an air-stone or diffuser rather than using 100% oxygen.
(Ross, 2001).
Water must be passed over the gills to maintain their
respiratory and excretory functions. Mostly water is
Osmotic homeostasis and electrolyte
drawn in through the mouth, passes over the gills and
balance
263
exits caudally through the gill openings (opercular clefts)
This is a unidirectional flow of water (Childs and Whitaker,
2001} and directing water in the opposite direction may
The major organs involved in osmotic regulation are the
damage the sensitive gills. This is important to consider in
gills, kidneys and skin. In most species the skin provides a
ventilation/resuscitation where the fish should not be
relatively impermeable barrier, reducing the area of osmotic
dragged backwards through the water (Brown, 1988) and
exchange. The gills and kidneys have varying roles dependent 
water should only be directed by pump or syringe though
on surrounding water conditions.
the mouth and not through the gill openings. Water flow
across the gills is chiefly achieved by the opening and clos-
 species, but some are capable of switching between these
ing of the mouth and opercula, together with movements
environments and some inhabit estuarine/brackish condi-
of the pharyngeal floor. Movement of the opercula is
tions. The degree of salinity has a rmajor role in determin-
often the best guide to ventilatory effort and is referred to
ing the strategy of maintaining electrolyte balance in fish.
 Freshwater fish are effectively imrmersed in a hypotonic
solution and, therefore, are faced with water influx by
C
Efferent
Afferent
osmosis across exposed epithelial surfaces, in particular
artery
artery
the gills. Ion transport across the gills is utilised to main-
tain osmotic regulation (Childs and Whitaker, 200l} and
the kidneys excrete urine that is primarily water, thus
Buccal cavity
Opercular cleft
eliminating excess water (Mayer, 2005). Extensive dis-
ruption of osmoregulation, such as damage to environ-
 mental barriers or to the organs responsible for osmotic
Aferent artery
control, can potentially result in ascites, with or without
(deoxygenated
cutaneous oedema (Wildgoose, 200la). This may be
bood)
observed as the clinical condition referred to as ^dropsy'
Water flow
where there is coelomic (abdorminal) distension and raised
Efferent artery
scales, giving a ^pine cone' appearance. One possible aeti-
[oxygenated
ology is an internal bacterial infection.
 Marine fish are immersed in a hypertonic solution and face
the reverse problerm to freshwater fish (Fig. 18.4). There is
osmotic loss of water mainly from the gills, together with dif-
Gill arch-
Secondary
fusional entry of salt. This is countered by the fish drinking
lamella
seawater to replace the lost water. However, this is inevitably
(gill flament)
Primary lamella
accompanied by a large intake of salt. Specialised chloride
(gill filament)
cells found in high concentrations at the gills (Childs and
Whitaker, 200l) actively transport sodium and chloride ions
Figure I8.3 · (Continued) (C) Water flow and blood flow in the
out of the fish. The major role of the kidney is excretion of
gill lamellae.
excess electrolytes, mainly magnesiurm and sulphate (Mayer,
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
2005). If there are skin wounds or major gill damage in
presence of nociceptors with similar physiological proper-
marine fish, there may be a rapid loss of water,and so clinical
 management may need to involve fluid replacement.
strated in fish (Sneddon, 2003b). As in varying mammalian
species, the expression of pain may well be varied in fish
Integumentary system
and not ammenable to anthropomorphic cormparison. Pain
responses attributed to application of noxious chemicals
to the lips of trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss] included anom-
Most fish possess scales, which are flexible bony plates that
alous behaviours where they rocked on either pectoral fin
develop in scale pockets in the dermis (Wildgoose, 2001b).
from side to side and also rubbed their lips (Sneddon,
Large scales on fish, such as sturgeon, can make injections
2003a). Opercular beat rate (respiratory rate) was also
difficult. Some species are ‘scaleless' and often have thicker
increased. Administration of morphine appeared to reduce
epithelial skin layers to compensate. Such species may be
these pain responses and this was attributed to the anal-
more sensitive to waterborme drugs and toxins. The epider-
gesic properties of morphine.
mis and cuticle (outermost skin layer) form the waterproof
This is likely to be an area of continuing debate and
barrier. As discussed previously, dammage to the skin breaches 
research, but it would seem justifiable to take steps to
this barrier and may disrupt osmotic control.
minimise pain and suffering in fish patients. Also impor-
Epithelial cells secrete mucus to form the cuticle, which
tant to consider in a pet animal context is the owner's
also contains antibodies and lysozymes that have antibac-
perception of the veterinary care provided, which often
terial and antifungal properties (Wildgoose, 2001b). This
skin coating can easily be damaged by rough handling, leav-
factors analgesia as beneficial.
 ing the fish more vulnerable to pathogen invasion.
Health and safety
Pain
264
Sorme species of fish have potential hazards to personnel
involved in handling. Injury may be caused by venomous
The subject of whether fish can feel pain has been a contin-
spines (for example, the lionfish [Pterois volitans]], sharp
uing subject of debate. However, there have been studies to
spines, teeth and electrical charges [for example, the elec-
suggest that fish are capable of experiencing pain (Chandroo
tric eel [Electrophorus electricus]] (Grist, 200l]. Knowledge
et al., 2004; Dunlop et al., 2006; Sneddon, 2003a). The
of the species involved and an appropriate risk assessment
should make anaesthesia of these fish as safe as possible.
Hazardous species should only be handled with more than 
 Marine fish
Osmotic loss of water
across exposed epithelial surfaces
one person present, and all team members aware of specific
(eg. gills, skin wounds)
first aid measures.
Possible zoonoses should also be considered, such as
Mycobacterium spp. that may cause cutaneous infections
in humans (Grist, 2001). In general, good handling prac-
Oral water
tice, in particular the wearing of gloves, should minimise
intake to
replace
the risk.
osses
BOX I8.l Anatomy and physiology
Gills are the major respiratory organ
Gills are also involved in nitrogenous waste
Freshwater fish
Osmotic gain of water
across exposed epithelial surfaces
excretion, acid-base balance and osmotic control
(eg. gills, skin wounds)
There is unidirectional flow of water from the mouth,
over the gills and exiting through the opecular clefts
Opercular (gill cover) movements are referred to as
the respiratory rate
 Freshwater fish are immersed in a hypotonic solution
and marine fish in a hypertonic solution. Homeostatic
 mechanisms are required to maintain osmotic
Kidneyexcretion
balance
of excess water
 Skin is mostly impermeable and provides an osmotic 
barrier as well as a barrier against pathogen invasion
Figure I8.4 · Demonstration of water flow in osmoregulation by
Most fish are ectothermic
freshwater and marine fish. Freshwater fish are effectively
The circulatory system is relatively simple, often with
immersed in a hypotonic solution and are subject to osmotic
water influx. Marine fish face the reverse situation as they are
renal portal system
immersed in a hypertonic solution.
Fish anaesthesia
PRE-ANAESTHETIC ASSESSMENT
Many fish will be transported to veterinary surgeries for
AND STABILISATION
initial presentation. Proper handling and transport at this
stage, and subsequently, will help minimise stress and pre-
vent iatrogenic damage to the fish.
History and clinical examination
 Fish should be handled with latex gloves to minimise dam-
age to the skin or mucus covering. Fine mesh nets large
 The owner should be questioned regarding current and prior
enough to support the fish should be used and sock nets may
husbandry conditions, and any previous medical problems.
be ernployed for larger fish. Covering the head and eyes
This information will allow the clinician to identify any fac-
improves handling. Catching, transport and waiting time
tors that may predispose disease.
should be minimised to reduce stress to the fish. Transport
In contrast to many domesticated species, fish will be
Containers should be large enough to accommodate the fish
 stressed by handling. This means that a hands-on' approach
s u  s a  - 
to pre-anaesthetic checks is unlikely to be rewarding.
boxes are cormmonly used. For short jourmeys the bag may be
However, much information can be observed by rermote
 nearly cormpletely filled with water; however, for longer jour-
assessment. If possible, fish should be observed in their
neys a ratio of % water to % air (or oxygen if available) is
normal surroundings and an assessment made in compari-
preferable to help maintain water oxygen concentrations.
son to the other fish. If all fish are showing a clinical sign
Fish may be starved before transit to prevent fouling of the
then this may indicate possible adverse water quality.
water, with food being withheld for one feeding cycle prior
Assessment of water parameters is often performed as part
to transport or anaesthesia (Brown, 1988). For veterinary
of a fish health investigation and may be useful prior to
surgeons in general practice, appointments for fish clients
anaesthesia. In particular ammonia, nitrite, pH and tem-
should ideally be rmade outside normal consultation times to
perature should be measured (Cecil, 2001). It should be
remembered that the water in which a fish has been trans-
 priate, as soon as possible after initial assessment.
 ported is likely to have been fouled and so will not be rep-
265
Weight measurement can be problermatic and is often
resentative of the conditions in the pond or tank of origin.
best performed following sedation or anaesthetic induction
As will be discussed, fish anaesthesia often involves water-
where the fish can be easily rermoved from the water and
borne anaesthetic agents that rely on uptake and excretion by
placed on a balance. Length-to-weight charts are available
the gills. Therefore, compromised gill function may have an
for some species and can be useful in estimating approxi-
effect on anaesthesia, as wellas compromise of respiratory and
mate weights (Table 18.1).
hormeostatic functions. Signs of gill disease (although often
It is recommended that written informed consent for
non-specific) include increased respiratory rate [increased
 anaesthesia is obtained from the owner.
opercular beating), gaping at the surface and congregation at
waterfall/filter inlets. The gills may be visually inspected for
signs of damage (Fig. 18.5). Diagnostic procedures and handling
BOX 18.2 Pre-anaesthetic assessment
should be minimised until the critically hypoxic patient is
stabilised (Childs and Whitaker, 2001).
Good history, including medical and husbandry
Fish cases are often presented with advanced systemic
conditions, is important 
disease and pathology is frequently present in the absence
Examine fish, usually by remote assessment, as they
of any obvious clinical signs (Wildgoose, 200la). This should
are stressed by handing
be considered in pre-anaesthetic assessment.
Fish are often presented with advanced systemic disease
Water quality assessment is useful, including
temperature, pH, ammonia, nitrite and dissoved oxygen
pue ssa.ns asuu jodsuen pue Bupuey poo
atrogenic damage
Table I8.1: Guide to weight of koi (Cyprinus carpio), from
length of fish. These are only approximate guidelines and
considerable variation will occur. The use of tables such as this
is not a substitute for accurate weighing of fish
SIZE(cm)
30
35
40
50
5560
70
BODY WEIGHT
0.61
1.5
2
3
4
5
(kg)-MALE
BODY WEIGHT
0.81.25
1.92.5-3 4.55.5-6
Figure I8.5 · Normal appearance of healthy gills in a goldfish
(kg)-FEMALE
(Cardssius duratus). The operculum (gill cover) has been lifted.
Note the uniform red colour of the gill filaments.
(Holmes and Pitham, 2004)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Hospitalisation
20 ml/kg/day is a safe starting point (Stoskopf, 1993d).
 Blood urea nitrogen produced by the liver is important in
shark osmoregulation and levels may fall in cases of
Hospital tanks at the veterinary surgery may be used to
house fish before and after anaesthesia, with the advan-
hepatic dysfunction. Elasrmobranch balanced salt solution,
tage of more intensive treatment and observation by
an electrolyte solution with physiological concentrations
trained medical staff (Stoskopf, 1993c). The water qual-
of sodium chloride and urea added, has been used in
ity should be well maintained in such a setup with ade-
transported sharks (Andrews and Jones, 1990], and this
quate filtration and heating as appropriate. Tanks will
solution may be appropriate in situations of hepatic dys-
need to be sterilised between patients, which will
function or where electrolyte replacerment is required.
inevitably kill established biological filters. For this reason
biological filters are, in general, not useful. These prob-
EOUIPMENT REOUIRED
lems, together with the stress of changing the fish's envi-
ronment and water conditions, mean that the patient is
The equipment required will vary with the anaesthetic
often best returned to the tank or pond of origin when
recovery is complete. Often owners will have hospital
modality used, with little specialist equipment required
be maintained, are useful to house recovering fish isolated
Table 18.2: Fluids and supportive care in fish
from the main stock. Provision should be met for fish that
are not content to be solitary.
DRUG
DOSE
COMMENTS
Fluids
Fluid therapy
266
Dextrose (5%)
20-30 ml/kg/day Sharks;
Parenteral fluid therapy is largely contraindicated in fresh-
IV, IP3
dehydration3
water fish as there is already a net osmotic gradient into the
 body from the surrounding water. Adding a small amount
40-60 ml/kg/day Severe
of salt to the water in which the fish is immersed rmay help
IV, IP3
dehydration3
to reduce this osmotic gradient and reduce net water gain
Lactated Ringer's
20-60ml/kg/day Sharks;
n i sa  o  ar i u 
IV, Ip3
dehydration;
homeostatic sites (such as the gills, skin or kidneys)
administer in
(Lewbart, 200lc; Lloyd, 2001). Fluid therapy may, how-
divided doses?
ever, be appropriate in saltwater species where the hyper-
tonic environment can make the animal subject to fluid
Ringer's
18ml/kg prn
Dehydration3
loss, particularly with gill and skin damage (Table 18.2).
IV, IP3
The use of parenteral fluids has been described in dehy-
drated sharks either by intravenous or intraperitoneal/
Dextran
20 ml/kg IV3
Hypovolaemia:
intracoelomic administration using 5% dextrose solution
given to effect?
(Stoskopf, 1993d). Fluid rates should be balanced
to
the degree of dehydration (seen in sharks as elevated
Elasmobranch
2ml/min IPl
Mature sandbar
haematocrits and/or serum urea nitrogen levels), but
balanced salt solution
sharks
(phenol red-free Hank's
(Carcharhinus
balanced salt solution
plumbeus)'
BOX 18.3 Supportive care
(BioFluids,Rockville,
Maryland) with 8 g/L NaCI
Hospital tanks are useful provided stress can be
and 31.02 g/L urea added)'
minimised and water quality maintained
With freshwater species, addition of low doses of
Miscellaneous
salt to the water may help reduce osmotic stress
agents
Salt (sodium
1-3 g/L tank
Supportive
 Parenteral fluid therapy is contraindicated in
chloride)
water2
measure in
freshwater species as there is already an osmotic
freshwater fish
gradient into the fish
Use non-
Fluid therapy may be useful in marine species,
iodinised salt
especially if there is damage to natural osmotic
(not table salt)
barriers
Studies suggest fish are capable of experiencing pain
Key: IM = intramuscular, IP = intraperitoneal (intracoelomic),
Aalod ui anedoidde s asn sisateue os pue
IV = intravenous, prn = 'as the situation arises
painful procedures
ss) (i0o eqm) 0661 su pue su)
(96661
Fish anaesthesia
for basic procedures. However, many waterborne anaes-
delicate piscine cuticle. A foam block with a V-shape cut
thetics are used exclusively for fish and will need to be
out can be used to support the anaesthetised fish out of
obtained specifically for this purpose. Nets for handling
water.
and air pumps may be obtained from pet stores. Appropriate
 For longer procedures, an anaesthetic delivery system
containers for induction or recovery chambers rmay be
may be used to direct water continuously over the gills.
fashioned from any non-toxic watertight containers, with
This may be constructed from an opened intravenous
plastic storage boxes available from DIY stores working
fluid bag with giving set attached, or a submersible aquar-
well for fish such as larger koi.
ium pump with tubing attached.
Transport and handling
Monitoring
Fish within a pond or tank are usually caught using a net.
Water quality may be measured before induction and dur-
The clinician should wear latex or nitrile gloves when han-
ing the procedure. A thermometer with an appropriate
dling fish, to prevent darmage to the sensitive cuticle. Two
range for aquarium use will allow temperature to be
watertight containers, preferably with covers, should be
assessed. Various test kits and rmeters are available to rmeas-
available for use as induction and recovery chambers. The
ure pH, oxygen, ammonia, nitrite and nitrate; these are
client should be asked to bring sufficient water from the
useful, but not essential for individual fish anaesthetics.
fish's pond or aquarium to fill both the induction and
An & MHz Doppler ultrasound probe is the most useful
recovery chambers. An air pump with air stone attached
piece of equipment for monitoring the fish during anaes-
is used to aerate the water in the charmbers.
thesia (Fig. 18.7). An electrocardiogram (ECG) may also
be used.
Induction
267
Resuscitation
Measuring spoons are useful to measure anaesthetic pow-
ders; those designed for culinary purposes work well
A modified rubber enema pump may be used to deliver
Accurate balances are also appropriate for this. Small
syringes are used to measure liquids.
unidirectional water flow across the gills for resuscitation
procedures.
Maintenance
TECHNIQUES
If the fish is to be maintained under anaesthesia out of the
water, large syringes [for example, 60ml catheter-tip
Injection sites
syringes) can be used to direct water over the gills (Fig.
18.6). Non-abrasive surfaces, such as a waterproof drape or
 Skin preparation with agents such as alcohol and chlorhex-
reversed incontinence pad, will prevent damage to the
idine prior to injection may cause irritation and skin dam-
age, particularly in elasmobranchs (sharks and rays), as well
as being ineffective (Stoskopf, 1993d). Irrigation with sterile
Figure I8.6 · A syringe containing anaesthetic solution can be
used to maintain anaesthesia. The solution is applied into the
mouth, so that water passes over the gills and out of the opercu-
lar clefts. This is the normal unidirectional flow of water - rever-
Figure I8.7 · Doppler probe positioned to monitor heart rate in
sal of water direction reduces the efficiency of gas exchange and
a goldfish (Carassius duratus). Here the probe is positioned on the
may damage the gills.
ventral midline between the pectoral fins.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
saline may be performed prior to injection if there is gross
adhesions, which can result in injection into a solid organ or
contarmination. Contarmination of the needle before injec-
 gastrointestinal tract (Wildgoose and Lewbart, 2001)
tion should be avoided.
Subcutaneous injections are generally not recom-
ANAESTHETICS
mended in fish. The inelasticity of the skin reduces the
potential space between the skin and rmuscle layers, and
Waterborme anaesthesia (see Table 18.6) is the most
means the injected drug may be expressed through the
widely used method of fish anaesthesia and is analogous to
injection site.
gaseous anaesthesia in mammals (Ross, 2001). The anaes-
Intramuscular injections are best given into the epaxial
thetic agent in aqueous solution is ventilated by the fish
muscles (Fig. 18.8). A position on the flank dorsal to the lat-
eral line and lateral to the dorsal fin should be chosen. The
and passes into the bloodstream across the gills. The agent
needle should be aimed cranially, angled at 45°, and posi-
is delivered to the central nervous system to produce
tioned between scales to reduce the chance of scale damage
anaesthesia. Most agents are excreted predominantly by
[Wildgoose and Lewbart, 2001). A dorsal midline approach
the gills (Ross, 2001), but the liver, kidneys and skin may
play roles in metabolisrm and excretion. In general, water-
is sometimes used where the needle is positioned cranially or
borne agents are more easily given to effect. The anaes-
caudally to the dorsal fin and injection made between the
thetic depth may be easily changed by using solutions
muscle fillets. Owners, particularly of valuable show koi carp
containing different concentrations of anaesthetic agent.
(Cyprinus carpio), should be advised of posible scale loss
 Injectable agents (see Table 18.6) are most useful in larger
caused by injection at these highly visible sites. Long needles
should be used in large fish to minimise the risk of the drug
fish, where waterborne agent induction may be impracti-
being expressed through the injection hole. Intramuscular
cal as large quantities of drug would be required to reach
effective concentrations in large water systems (Stoskopf,
injection under the pectoral fin from a caudal approach is
1993d). For longer procedures, waterborne agents may be
described in koi (Holmes and Pitham, 2004). This has the
268
advantage of being on the ventral aspect of the fish, making
used to maintain anaesthesia following injectable agent
any scale loss or scarring less visible. However, this is only
induction. Most injectable anaesthetics are associated with
suitable for srnall injection volumes and the proximity to
longer recovery times than waterborne agents. It is often
difficult to gauge fish weights accurately prior to anaesthe-
vital internal structures should be remembered.
 Intravenous access in fish may be problematic and is
sia and, therefore, difficult to dose injectable agents accu-
rately. Use of estimated doses of injectable anaesthetics
largely restricted to adequately restrained patients. The
may lead to over- or under-dosing, which rmay be of criti-
caudal vein lying ventral to the tail vertebrae may be
accessed by a ventral midline or lateral approach. The
cal irmportance in smaller species.
veins on the medial aspect of the operculae of larger koi
If the fish is removed from water for more than a brief
may be used for administration of euthanasia agents
period, the same attention to maintaining water flow over
the gills to enable respiratory gas exchange is required,
(Ross, 200l). The brachial arch may be a useful site for
phlebotomy in teleost fish (Suedmeyer, 2006).
independent of the mode of anaesthesia used.
Intracoeloic injections are administered on the ventral
Waterborne anaesthetic agents
midline between the vent and pelvic fins with the needle
directed in a craniodorsal direction. A short needle
[6-12mm] is especially important in small ornamental
MS-222 (ethyl-m-aminobenzoate, tricaine
species because of the proximity of the spleen to the point of
methanesulfonate)
injection (Brown, 1993). This route may be hazardous in koi
and other carp because of the normal presence of peritoneal
MS-222 is the most widely used fish anaesthetic (Harms,
1999). It is licensed for fish in the UK and is approved for
food fish use in the US (Harms, 2003). MS-222 is a white
IM
crystalline powder that is readily soluble, making anaes-
thetic solutin preparation easier. MS-222 may be made up
into a stock solution of 10g/L, from which the required
volumes can be used. The solution is unstable in light and
so should be kept in a dark, stoppered container (Harms,
2003). In correct conditions this stock solution may be kept
for up to 3 months (Ross and Ross, 1999). Refrigeration of
freezing lengthens shelf life (Harms, 1999). Darkening of
the solution (Ross, 200l) or the presence of oily residues
 indicates degradation.
If an accurate balance is unavailable or the stock solu-
IM = Intramuscular
tion is going to be used infrequently, then it may be more
IV = Intravenous
practical to use a standard pharmaceutical scoop (or, if
IP = Intraperitoneal (intracoelomic)
necessary, a measuring spoon used for culinary purposes)
to measure out the required amount of MS-222. A level
Figure I8.8 · Injection sites in fish (see descriptions in text).
0.5 ml scoop holds approximately 400mg of MS-222, and a
Fish anaesthesia
level quarter-teaspoon measure (equivalent to 0.&ml scoop)
For calculation simplicity, it may be assumed that l ml
will hold approximately 650 mg of MS-222 (Ross, 2001).
clove oil contains approximately l000mg of eugenol
 MS-222 solutions are acidic and so should be buffered
(Lewbart, 2005). Eugenol is poorly soluble in water and
before use with fish (Harms, 2003). Unbuffered solutions
so needs to be dissolved in ethanol before use [Lewbart,
may cause hyperactivity and stress on induction (Ross and
2001b). A stock solution of 100 mg/ml may be achieved
Ross, 1999). Saturation with sodium bicarbonate will
by diluting 1 part clove oil with 9 parts 95% ethanol.
buffer the solution to between pH 6.0 and 7.5 (Harms,
Eugenol may be used in freshwater and marine species.
2003). Practically, a buffered stock solution may be pre-
 Eugenol results in anaesthesia comparable to MS-222,
pared by adding sodium bicarbonate equal in mass to the
but eugenol is characterized by more rapid induction, pro-
amount of MS-222 used (Lewbart, 2001b). Tis-buffer
longed recovery and a narrow margin of safety (Sladky et al.,
may also be used.
2001). The analgesic properties of eugenol are unknown.
Induction is rapid (approximately 1-2 min [Hall and
Fish may exhibit a calmer induction than with other agents,
Clarke, 1991], dependent on the concentration used} and
including MS-222 and benzocaine (Munday and Wilson,
MS-222 is regarded as having a good safety margin (Ross,
1997). The use of high doses of eugenol (>100mg/L) for
200l). Safety margins are reduced in warm, soft water
induction of anaesthesia may be associated with rapid venti-
(Harms, 2003), and also with young fish (Harms, 2003)
latory failure, so care should be exercised. Commmercially
and small fish (Ross and Ross, 1999). Recovery times are
available, Aqui-S (Aqui-S New Zealand Ltd, uww.aqui-
usually rapid, and equilibrium and motor activity can be
s.com) is a compound mixture of eugenol and polysorbate
expected to returm after a few minutes. Prolonged recov-
 80 [added for solubility) (Lewbart, 2005). This product can
ery of up to 6h may be expected after longer procedures.
be added directly to water, usually having been prepared in
Also, as the drug is fat soluble, older or gravid animals may
a 10-fold diluted stock solution.
show slower recovery times. Anaesthesia induced with
 Owing to the wide availability of clove oil, owners may
MS-222 may contribute to hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, res-
use it for euthanasia of fish. A dose of at least 10 drops
per litre is recommended (Ross, 2001). The fish should
269
piratory acidosis and hyperglycaemia (Sladky et al., 2001).
 MS-222 is absorbed across the gill epithelium and is bio-
be left in the solution for 10 min after respiratory (oper-
transformed in the liver and probably the kidney (Harms,
cular) movements have stopped. It is suggested that pro-
1999). It is cleared primarily across the gills as the free and
longed irmmersion in high-dose clove oil solution is a more
acetylated form, with additional metabolites being elimi-
appropriate means of euthanasia by owners than carbon
nated in the urine or bile (Harms, 1999). Tissue levels
dioxide (see below). The owner should be advised of the
decline to almost zero in 24h (Ross and Ross, 1999).
insolubility of clove oil, and it may be mixed thoroughly
However, withdrawal times should be observed if used with
with warm water to improve dispersion.
fish for human consumption.
MS-222 has been administered in sharks as a solution
Carbon dioxide
sprayed on to the gills with the fish in the water (Brown,
1993). However, prior restraint is required and is not
Carbon dioxide (CO) is readily soluble in water and has
appropriate for use in closed systems where the water
been used as a sedative and anaesthetic in fish species.
 Carbon dioxide gas may be bubbled through water or com-
may be heavily contarminated (Stoskopf, 1993d).
pounds releasing COz may be added to the water (sodium
Benzocaine
bicarbonate, Alka-Seltzer, Bayer, Germany) (Harms,
1999). It can be difficult to control the dissolved concen-
Benzocaine is a white crystalline material that is similar to
trations. For controlled anaesthesia, dissolved oxygen has
MS-222 (Ross and Ross, 1999). Unlike MS-222, it is
to be maintained at a high concentration, which has its
almost totally insoluble in water and so must be dissolved in
impracticalities (Ross and Ross, 1999). Carbon dioxide
acetone or ethanol first (Ross, 2001). It is stable in a stock
also has adverse physiological effects compared to other
solution (usually 100 g/L} and can be stored in a sealed dark
anaesthetic agents, such as marked alteration of blood
bottle for up to 1 year (Ross, 2001]
gases, acid-base balance (Iwama et al., 1988) and ECG
In solution benzocaine is neutral (Ross and Ross, 1999)
[Mitsuda et al., 1988]. For these reasons the use of carbon
and so usually does not require buffering. Benzocaine is
dioxide is not to be recomrmended for clinical anaesthesia.
almost identical to buffered MS-222 both chemically and
Baking soda and Alka-Seltzer are common household
in terms of physiological reactions.
products and rmay be useful as a last resort for anaesthesia.
 Like MS-222, benzocaine has a good margin of safety, but 
Again, fish should be left in the solution for 10 min after
this margin appears reduced at higher temperatures (Ross
respiratory movements have stopped.
and Ross, 1999). Its efficacy is unaffected by water hardness
or pH (Ross, 200l). Again benzocaine is fat soluble and
Fluorinated hydrocarbons
recovery tirmes can be prolonged in older or gravid animals.
These compounds include isoflurane and halothane, and
Eugenol (dlove oil)
have the advantage of being readily available in most vet-
erinary practices. They may be used by direct addition of
This product is readily available without prescription
the liquid to water (best achieved by spraying the liquid
[Ross, 2001). Over-the-counter pharmacy preparations
through a hypodermic needle under the surface) or by
contain approximately 90-95% eugenol (Harms, 2003).
bubbling the vaporised cormpound through the water.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Halothane has been shown to provide rapid induction
and forceful heart beat (Ross and Ross 1999).
providing good surgical anaesthesia with excellent mainte-
Vasodilatory properties are most obvious at the gills and
nance and fast recovery (2-5 min) (Ross and Ross, 1999).
aid in adequate oxygenation of the blood. At low doses
Despite these properties, the use of these agents has a
[12mg/kg) respiration and circulation were maintained at
 nummber of disadvantages. Due to their relative insolubility
basal levels in certain species (Tytler and Hawkins, 1981].
anaesthetic levels are difficult to control. If added as liq-
As with the ketarmine combinations, the duration of anaes-
uids to the water they may remain in pockets in the water.
thesia is long (Ross, 200l). Again, intravenous administra-
This gives rise to the possibility of the fish ventilating
tion often limits the use of this drug in clinical situations.
potentially lethal concentrations of the agent (Brown,
1993). It is difficult to scavenge these gases in this appli-
cation and so there is a potential hazard to operators.
Lidocaine (lignocaine)
Again the use ofthese agents should be a lastresort, but
Lidocaine may be used as a waterborne anaesthetic, but
may be potentially useful for restraint prior to the use of
there can be wide variation in dosages required between
injectable euthanasia agents or percussion in situations
species [Carrasco et al., 1984). Its use as a waterborne agent
where no other alternatives are available.
is, therefore, not recormmended, but it may be used as an
injectable local anaesthetic, either alone or with sedative
Injectable anaesthetic agents
agents (Harms, 1999). Care must be taken not to overdose
small fish when used by local injection (Harms, 2003)
Ketamine
Ketamine may be used as a single agent given by intramus-
cular injection. High doses are required in many teleost
BOX 18.4 Anaesthetics
[bony fish] species and even then incomplete anaesthesia
270
may result. This makes ketarmine alone useful for restraint,
Waterborne anaesthetic agents are most widely used -
but not as a replacerment to waterborne anaesthetics for
analogous to inhalational anaesthesia in terrestrial
surgical procedures (Harms, 1999). Ketamine used in
animals
cichlids provided anaesthesia for up to 40 min; recovery
 The most commonly used waterborne anaesthetic is
required up to 4h (Ross and Ross, 1999). The safety mar-
MS-222. It forms an acidic solution and should be
ddns Aroedsa saiaduat iauu ie panpar st u
buffered before use
 may be required with this agent.
Injectable agents are useful in larger fish, but careful
dosing is required and recovery times are often
Ketamine and alpha-2-adrenergic receptor
longer
agonist combinations
Local analgesia may be performed, with care not to
This combination reduces the total dose of ketamine
overdose small fish
required and reduces muscle spasms that can occur with
Euthanasia may be carried out by overdose of
ketarmine alone (Stoskopf, 1993d). The use of medetomi-
waterborne agents, injectable agents or percussive
dine has the advantage of reversibility with atipamezole
means. Clove oil may be used by owners for
(Lewbart 2005). Ketamine combinations can cause mild
euthanasia of fish
bradycardia and apparent respiratory depression (Fleming et
al., 2003). The use of alpha-2-agonists as sole agents is not
recormmended - studies with xylazine used at doses required
for anaesthesia in trout showed ventilatory collapse, convul-
INDUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
sions and gross ECG disturbance (Oswald, 1978).
OFANAESTHESIA
Propofol
Sedation
This is a widely used drug in srmall animal practice, but as
in other species is administered by intravenous injection,
Most procedures in fish requiring restraint are usually car-
which limits its use in fish species. Induction may be
ried out using anaesthetic agents at the appropriate plane
faster than ketarmine combinations, with one study show-
of anaesthesia. Premedicant sedatives are not usually
ing induction to a light plane of anaesthesia in 5 min
ermployed because of the adverse effects of the extra han-
(Fleming et al., 2003). Propofol showed more profound
dling required in giving parenteral drugs.
bradycardic and respiratory depression effects than keta-
Mild hypothermia will tranquillise or immobilise fish
mine combinations (Fleming et al., 2003).
(Bell, 1964). This can be achieved by refrigeration, adding
ice to the water or the use of solidified carbon dioxide [this
should not come into contact with the water) (Ross, 2001).
Alfaxolone-alphadalone
Care should be taken not to lower the temperature too far
This drug has a number of advantageous properties. There
or too quickly, and it should be remembered that some
is a stirmulatory effect on the heart, providing a very regular
tropical species may not tolerate even lirmited termperature
Fish anaesthesia
decreases. Hypothermia almost certainly gives little anal-
care should be taken that the fish does not become
gesia and so should not be used for potentially painful
trapped in a corner as this may impair ventilatory effort.
procedures (Ross and Ross, 1999).
Because of the possible excitement phase during induc-
Sedation may be useful in long distance fish transporta-
tion and the irritant properties of some agents, it is advis-
tion where the resulting reduction in metabolic rate and
able to have a lid on induction and recovery tanks as some
waste excretion can improve water quality and dissolved
fish may jump out of the water.
oxygen levels (Ross, 2001). Eugenol sedation has been
 As many anaesthetic agents tend to cause respiratory
shown to suppress circulating cortisol levels during crowd-
depression, the induction chamber should be aerated.
ing and low oxygen conditions (Small, 2004), and so seda-
This is best achieved using an airstone connected to an air
tion may reduce transport stress. Moderate cooling, reduced
pump designed for aquarium use, available from pet
doses of waterborne anaesthetic agents (such as MS-222
stores. Administration of pure oxygen may be used; how-
and benzocaine) or a combination of both have been used.
ever, prolonged exposure to excessively high oxygen con-
 Some species of elasmobranchs will go into a state of
centrations can damage the gills (Harms, 1999). Oxygen
tonic immobility when turned on their backs (George,
concentration should be maintained between 6 and
2004; Harms, 2003). This technique can be employed for
10 ppm (Harms, 1999), although in most situations it is
minor procedures, such as taking blood samples; however,
not necessary to measure this. Oxygen-supersaturated
a strong stimulus may arouse the animal.
water may in itself cause narcosis (George, 2004).
 Ideally induction should be rapid to reduce stress and
Induction
reduce the duration of any excitement phase. This is best
achieved by using a higher dose of anaesthetic agent that
can then be reduced for maintenance. Some dosages are
As discussed, waterborne anaesthesia is the most widely
given (see Table 18.6), but it should be stressed that these
used anaesthetic modality for fish (Harms, 1999) and usu-
ally the most appropriate for the practice seting. The fish
are guidelines only. When using a novel agent or dealing
271
with an unfarmiliar species it may be rmore prudent to start
to be anaesthetised is placed in an induction tank contain-
at lower concentrations and increase the dose gradually to
ing the anaesthetic solution. To miniise stress to the fish,
effect. If working with a number of fish it may be best to
this solution should ideally be water from the fish's usual
trial the anaesthetic regime on a small nmumber of fish first
environment to which the anaesthetic agent has been
and monitor for delayed adverse effects over the follow-
added. The owner should be advised to bring enough
ing 12-24h before proceeding with anaesthesia of the
water to make up the induction solution, along with a sim-
remainder of the fish (Brown, 1988).
ilar volume into which the fish can be placed to recover.
 This induction tank should be large enough to accom-
modate the fish comfortably, including sufficient water
Maintenance
depth, but should not be too large to allow the fish to
damage itself in any exciterment phase of anaesthesia. A
plastic storage container (made of non-toxic plastic)
For short procedures [under 5 min] the fish may be simply
removed frorm the solution and either returned to the
without any sharp edges, is a good choice for most fish
anaesthetic solution to extend the anaesthesia or placed in
(Fig. 18.9). The plastic transport bag may be used, but
a recovery tank free of anaesthetic solution to recover. Fish
 should not spend extended periods in the induction tank.
 For longer procedures, which necessitate the fish being
out of water, water needs to be directed over the gills
to allow respiratory gas exchange and maintenance of
anaesthesia. This can be achieved by using either a non-
recirculating or a recirculating system.
Non-recirculating systems are the simplest to con-
struct, require less equipment and work well for small
fish. Following removal from the induction chamber, the
fish is placed on a surface that will not damage the cuticle
(a waterproof drape or the reverse plastic coating of an
incontinence pad are good choices). Water is directed
 over the gills and drains away. This can be achieved using
a handheld syringe (see Fig. 18.6) or a turkey baster
directed into the mouth so the water exits the opercular
openings. An intravenous fluid bag connected to a stan-
dard giving set filled with anaesthetic solution can also be
Figure I 8.9 · A goldfish (Carassius duratus) in a suitable induction
used to direct water over the gills (Fig. 18.10). The con-
tank. The tank should be large enough to accommodate the fish
trol valve can be used to regulate the flow. Unrestricted
flow will produce about 250 ml/min, which is enough for
phase. Note the air pump, connected to an airstone, aerating the
a 250 g fish (Ross, 2001). Like the induction chamber, the
water.
fluid bag should be aerated using an airstone.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Intravenous fluid bag
containing anaesthetic
solution
Air pump
Giving set directed
 aerating.
into fish's mouth
 Air pump
anaesthetic
with
solution
air stone
aerating.
anaesthetic
solution
Reservoir containing
 Pump
Separate reservoir
anaesthetic solution
supplying
containing anaesthetic-
water to
 free water (into which
fish's mouth
return pipe and supply
Fish on waterproof, non-abrasive surface
pump can be transferred
Water flow
Waterflow
to alter anaesthetic depth)
Figure I8.10 · A non-recirculating anaesthetic system. The fish is
Figure I8.ll · A recirculating anaesthetic system. An electric
placed on a non-abrasive surface. An intravenous fluid bag is filled
pump is positioned in a reservoir tank containing anaesthetic solution.
with anaesthetic solution and the tubing from the giving set is
Tubing from the pump is directed into the fish's mouth. The
directed into the fish's mouth. The flow of water into the mouth
anaesthetic solution runs off from the fish and drains back into the
(and then over the gills) can be controlled by adjusting the valve
reservoir tank. A separate reservoir with anaesthetic-free water
272
on the giving set.
can be positioned in the system - anaesthetic depth can be varied
Changing anaesthetic depth can be achieved by directing
water containing different anaesthetic concentrations over
the gills, dependent on assessment of the anaesthetic depth
of the patient. It may be sensible to prepare in advance sev-
-sae iauiu auon seq Pm io sauis [ng [ea
thetic concentration water and anaesthetic-free water so
that changes may be effected quickly (Harms, 2003)
 Recirculating systems deliver anaesthetic solution across
the gills that is then collected and returned to the fish
repeatedly. This system is rmore econormical for larger fish.
These systems can be most simply achieved by modify-
ing the non-recirculating systems above. The fish is placed
over a reservoir that collects the water that runs out of the
gills. Instead of using fresh anaesthetic solutions directed
over the gills, the operator returns water collected by
hand to the fish by use of the syringe or by refilling the
fluid bag and giving set arrangement. Aless labour-intensive
Figure I8.12 · A recirculating anaesthetic system in operation.
solution is to use an electric pump to return water to the
Note the electric pump within the reservoir with tubing to the
gills from the reservoir (Fig. 18.1l). This method is
fish's mouth. The airpump on the left is aerating the water.
preferable for longer procedures. Electrical safety for the
operator should be considered and the use of low voltage
 pumps or a residual current device (RCD) employed.
 i       
Tubing from the electric pump is placed in the fish's
lished work, 2005). Again it is important to aerate the
mouth (Fig. 18.12). The flow rate may be controlled by
water reservoir to increase oxygen concentration and also
opening and closing a valve that directs a proportion of
to reduce dissolved carbon dioxide.
the water directly back to the reservoir. Flow rates of
 Changes in anaesthetic depth may be achieved by alter-
1-3 L/min have been successfully used (Harms, 1999). If
ing the water anaesthetic concentration. A second reser-
the rate is too slow then there will be poor gas exchange.
voir containing anaesthetic-free water can be positioned
A flow that is too fast rmay damage the gills or cause gas-
in the system so that if the anaesthetic depth needs to be
tric inflation. Use of soft tubing, ideally silicon rubber
 changed the pump and return pipe from the work surface
[Ross, 2001), will reduce the risk of damage to the buccal
drain can be switched between the reservoirs. This gives
cavity. Care should be taken not to insert the tubing too
the option of interchangeably supplying the fish with anaes-
caudally as this may result in gastric inflation rather than
thetic solution or anaesthetic-free water.
Fish anaesthesia
Fish may be maintained on such a recirculating systerm
handling may precipitate a more stressful recovery.
for several hours. For longer procedures, or when solu-
Respiration, motion and equilibrium should be monitored
tions are reused for large numbers of fish, attention
during this time (Harms, 1999).
should be paid to maintaining water quality. The main fac-
uagx paalossip 'aumeaduat are ouos gurmbar sio
concentration, ammonia levels and build-up of faecal
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
solids (Ross and Ross, 1999). It should also be remem-
bered that the solution will gradually become anaesthetic-
Planes of anaesthesia
depleted.
To maintain water temperature, a submersible aquar-
ium combined heater and thermostat can be placed in the
The stages of fish sedation and anaesthesia are shown
reservoir. When water quality starts to deteriorate chang-
(Table i8.3; Fig. 18.13). These stages are dependent
ing of the solution will be required; timing for this can be
on the dose rate of the anaesthetic agent and length
determined by observation of longer induction times in
of exposure (Ross, 200l). At high concentrations
subsequent fish or by direct measurement of water
of induction agent, the fish may pass rapidly through
parameters (Harms, 1999). Increasing protein concentra-
these individual stages and in practice the stages may be
tion from fish cuticle will cause increased foaming of aer-
indistinct.
ated water and this can be used as a visual indication of
 For short procedures, anaesthetic depth may be deter-
deteriorating water quality.
mined by the response to tactile and surgical stimuli and
Whenever the fish is kept out of the water the skin
the respiratory rate, which is seen as opercular movement
should be kept moist to prevent damage. Surgical drapes
(see Table 18.3; Fig. 18.13) (Harms, 2003). The depth
over the fish may offer some protection from desiccation
of anaesthesia required will depend on the nature of
and overheating due to surgical lights
the procedure perforrmed. For full surgical anaesthesia,
the respiratory rate may be very slow (Brown, 1993) and
273
Recovery
so other means of monitoring should also be employed.
For more involved or prolonged procedures, other tech-
niques should also be utilised to assist rmonitoring of the
On completion of the required procedure, the fish is
anaesthetic.
placed in anaesthetic-free water, which should be well
aerated and match the tank or pond conditions. During
recovery the light levels should be dimmed to reduce
Cardiovascular system
stress. It may also be preferable to release the fish in
the water before full equilibrium has returned as further
Measurement of heart rate is useful in surgical cases and
also during longer procedures. Pulse is not readily palpa-
ble in fish (Harms, 2003), but in some fish the heart can
be observed beating though the skin on the ventral mid-
 BOX 18.5 Induction and maintenance
line caudal to the base of the operculae (Lewbart, 200la).
Use of a Doppler ultrasound probe is usually practicable
of anaesthesia
and in most fish can be positioned over the heart for audi-
 Sedation and general anaesthesia are relative stages
ble cardiac monitoring (see Fig. 18.7).
Heart rate will vary between species and with stress
on a continuum, dependent on dose of anaesthetic
and temperature, but normal rates (in unanaesthetised
agent and length of exposure (Ross, 200 I)
fish] are often between 30 and 70 beats per minute
Injectable premedicants are not usually used before
(Lewbart, 200la). Cardiac ultrasonography and an ECG
anaesthetic induction 
may also be performed (Harms, 2003). ECG electrodes
Induction tanks should be aerated as many
may be clamnped lightly on to the pectoral and anal fins
waterborne agents cause hypoxia
(Ross, 2001) or subcutaneous leads used.
Blood gases can be measured in fish of a sufficient size
For extended periods out of the water, water should
[Harms, 2003). Pulse oximetry has not shown consistent
be directed over the gills (from the mouth) to
results (Ross, 2001) and is not recommended as a means
maintain respiratory gas exchange and, with 
 of anaesthetic monitoring.
waterborne agents, maintain anaesthetic depth.
Syringes, intravenous fluid bags (with giving sets
attached) or pumps may be used for this
Respiratory system
With waterborne agents, changes in anaesthetic
depth are carried out by changing the anaesthetic
Slow and regular opercular movements, with minimal
concentration of the solution directed over the gills.
response to manual stimuli, indicate sufficient depth
Recovery is achieved by placing the fish in anaesthetic-
of anaesthesia for most procedures. When placed
free water or directing this water over the gills
in air, opercular movements may be reduced (Brown,
1993)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
lesthesia
Suitable for external 
sampling,fin biopsies,
Followed in several
minutes by cardiac
 COMMENTS
Amphibian, fish and invertebrate anae
gill biopsies
Suitable for
procedures
arrest
Respiration
Decreased
Increased
Normal
 Normal
Absent
rate
Decreased
Decreased
decreased
Muscle
Normal
Normal
Further
tone
None
None
274
Decreased
jp.masod
changes
Very decreased - weak  No
No
No
Decreased - response 
Very decreased - weak
 BEHAVIOURAL RESPONSE OF FISH 
tactile stimuli present 
response to strong
response to strong
response to strong
Decreased - still
pressure present
 Slight decrease
stimulipresent
Reaction to
tactile
stimuli
Yes
No
No
Voluntary
2
No
No
Zo
Surgical anaesthesia
 Medullary collapse
Table I8.3: Stages of anaesthesia in fish
 CATEGORY
 Light sedation 
 Deep sedation
 Light narcosis 
 Deep narcosis
Normal
(Adapted from Brown, 1993)
 PLANE 
2
STAGE
AI
Fish anaesthesia
275
Figure I8.13 ± Stages of fish anaesthesia induced by gradual increasing water concentrations of MS-222. (A) Stage 0 - normal. Voluntary
swimming, normal equilibrium and responsive. (B) Stage I.2 - deep sedation. Not swimming, normal equilibrium and decreased
response to stimuli. (C) Stage ll.2 - deep narcosis. Very decreased response to tactile stimulus and loss of response to postural changes.
(D) Stage Il.2 - surgical anaesthesia. No response to strong tactile/surgical stimulus.
Central nervous system
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
CARE
 Jaw tone, which may be present in the absence of opercu-
lar rmovement, may be used as an indicator of anaesthetic
Analgesia
depth (Harms, 2003).
As discussed earlier, there is debate as to the perception 
of pain in fish. However, various studies have demon-
BOX 18.6 Monitoring
strated the possibility that fish experience pain
(Chandroo et al., 2004; Dunlop et al., 2006; Sneddon,
For simple procedures anaesthetic depth may be
2003a) and so it would appear justifiable to use analgesics
monitored by response to tactile/surgical stimuli and
in potentially painful situations. Opioids, non-steroidal
respiratory (opercular) rate
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and local anaesthetics
 More involved procedures should involve monitoring
may be used in fish (see Table 18.4) (Harms, 2003;
heart rate, visually or by Doppler probe
Harms et al., 2005). Intraoperative use of butorphanol in
Electrocardiogram (ECG), cardiac ultrasonography,
koi (Cyprinus carpio) was shown to reduce post-surgical
negative behaviours (Harms et al., 2005). Studies suggest
jaw tone and blood gases may also be used
that intraoperative use of ketoprofen had no behavioural
At surgical anaesthetic planes, respiratory rate may
sparing effect, but the anti-inflammatory action may
be very slow
result in less muscle damage following surgery (Harms
et al., 2005)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
FORMULARY
Table 18.6: Anaesthetic drug doses in fish
AGENT
DOSE (concen-
COMMENTS
Table I8.4: Suggested doses of analgesics used in fish
tration in water
DOSE (mg/lg IM)
or injectable
DRUG
COMMENTS
dose rate)
Butorphanol
0.1-0.42
 Analgesic!
Waterborne agents
Ketoprofen
2
Anti-inflammatory
MS-222, tricaine
100-200mg/ml5
Induction
methanesulfonate 
50-100 mg/ml5
 Maintenance
Key: IM = intramuscular
15-50mg/m1s
Sedation
I(Harms et al, 2005); 2 (Lewbart, 2001c)
Ig/L sprayl
Large fish
Es
Spray on to gills
with aerosol
sprayer
Table I8.5: Emergency drugs for use in fish 
Benzocaine
Approx. same
doses as MS-22210
DRUG
DOSE
COMMENTS
25-200mg/m
Doxapram
5mg/kg
Sharks
Eugenol (clove oil) 2
25-50mg/mllI
Anaesthesia
prn IV, ip2
Treatment
More than 10
Euthanasia
276
of respiratory
drops/L9
depression2
Eugenol/
17-25 mg/ml12
Anaesthesia
Polysorbate80
6mg/m112
Sedation
Atropine
0.1mg/kg
(Aqui-s, Aqui-S,
prn IM, IP IVI
New Zealand Ltd)
Quinaldine sulphate 50-100 mg/m15
Induction
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
0.20.5 ml
Cardiac arrest2
15-60mg/ml5s
1:1000
IP IM, IV IC2
Maintenance
Metomidate
0.06-0.2 mg/mls
Transport
Key: IM = intramuscular, IP = intraperitoneal(intracoelomic),
 0.5-1 mg/ml5
Light sedation
IV = intravenous, IC = intracardiac, prn = 'as the situation
 2.5-5 mg/m1s
 Heavy sedation
arises'
5-10mg/ml (up to
Anaesthesia
(George,2004)² (Stoskopf, 1993b)
30 mg/ml for some
species)5
Some authors
Drug metabolism will be temperature-dependent and
recommend
so this should be factored into dosing interval calculation.
much lower
In a study of the pharmacokinetics of morphine there was
sesop
a wide species variation even at the same temperature,
Gouramis very
although the disposition of morphine in fish was approxi-
sensitive5
mately one order of magnitude slower than it is in mam-
mals (Newby et al., 2005).
Isofluorane/
0.5-2 ml/L5
Added directly to
halothane
water,or
EMERGENCYPROCEDURES
vaporise
and dissolve
to effect
Resuscitation
Other agents
preferable
 If opercular movements stop, particularly if the fish is in
Carbon dioxide
Bubble gas through
Euthanasia
water, or there are other signs that the anaesthetic depth is
too great, forced recovery/resuscitation efforts should be
gas
water8
made (Harms, 2003). Reversal agents to any injectable
wnipos
30g/L8
Euthanasia
anaesthetic previously administered should be given, for
bicarbonate
example atipamezole to reverse alpha-2 agonists. In pref-
erence the fish should be placed in the recovery tank and
Alka Seltzer,
2 tablets/0.5-1.0 L3
Euthanasia
Bayer
anaesthetic-free water directed across the gills. This may
Continued
Fish anaesthesia
Table 18.6 (Continued)
AGENT
DOSE (concen-
COMMENTS
In the case of respiratory arrest being unresponsive to
tration in water
the resuscitation procedures outlined above, or in the
 or injectable
case of cardiac arrest, the use of respiratory and cardiac
dose rate)
stimulants may be appropriate (Table 18.5). Intravenous
administration of doxapram to sharks immobilised
Ethanol
> 3% in water4
Euthanasia;other
with ketamine and xylazine produces dramatic arousal
agents
(Stoskopf, 1993d).
preferable?
Injectable agents
Acknowledgements
Ketamine
66-68 mg/kg IM9
Teleosts (bony
fish)
The author would like to thank Strathmore Veterinary
Clinic and Porton Aquatic & Pet Centre for their photo-
12-20 mg/kg IM9
Elasmobranchs
(sharks and rays)
graphic assistance.
Ketamine/medeto-
1-2 mg/kg ketamine
Teleosts;reverse
midine
with 0.05-0.10
with 0.2mg/kg
REFERENCES
mg/kg medeto-
atipamezole IM.$
midine IM5
Andrews, J. C., and R. T. Jones. I990. A method for the transport of
12-20 mg/kg
sharks for captivity. J Aquaricult Aquatic Sci 5: 70-72.
Ketamine/xylazine
Sharks
Bell, G. R. 1964. A guide to the properties, characteristics and uses
ketamine
277
of some general anaesthetics for fish. Bull Fisheries Res Board
with 6 mg/kg
Can No 148.
xylazine IM5
Brown, L. A. 1988. Tropical fish medicine, anaesthesia in fish. Vet
12 mg/kg IV9
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 18: 317-330.
Alfaxolone-
alphadalone
Brown, L. A. I993. Anaesthesia and restraint. In: M. K. Stoskopf
(Saffan)
[ed.) Fish Medicine. pp. 79-90. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Carrasco, S., H. Sumano, and R. Navohro-Fierro. I984. The use of
Propofol
3.5-7.5 mg/kg IV2
lidocaine-sodiurm bicarbonate as an anesthetic in fish.
Aquaculture 4l: 161-163.
Cecil, T. R. 2001. Examining the environment. In: W. H. Wildgoose
Pentobarbital
60 mg/kg Ip&
Euthanasia
[ed.] Manual of Omamental Fish. 2nd edn. pp. 69-74. BSAVA,
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Lidocaine
Do not exceed I-2
Local
Chandroo, K. P., I. J. H. Duncan, and R. D. Moccia. 2004. Can fish
(lignocaine)
mg/kg total doses
 anaesthesia5
suffer? Perspectives on sentience, pain, fear and stress. Appl
Anim Behav Sci 86: 225-250.
Childs, S., and B. R. Whitaker. 2001. Respiratory disease. In:
Key: IM = intramuscular, IP
intraperitoneal (intracoelomic)
W. H. Wildgoose [ed.) Manual of Ormamental Fish. Znd edn.
IV= intravenous
pp. 135-146. BSAVA, Gloucester.
Davenport, K. 200l. Ornamental fish trade. In: W. H. Wildgoose
[ed.) Manual of Omamental Fish. 2nd edn. pp. 9-I2. BSAVA,
1992); 4 (Harms, 1999); 5 (Harms, 2003); (Lewbart, 2001c);
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
pue ssoy) o (100z ssoy) s (000z e8oN) g (s00z 1eqma7) 
Dunlop, R., S. Millsopp, and P Laming. 2006. Avoidance learming in
Ross, 199); " (Sladky et al., 2001); 12 (Treves-Brown, 2000)
goldfish [Carassius auratus] and trout [Oncorhynchus mykiss]
and implications for pain perception. Appl Anim Behav Sci 97:
255-271.
Fleming, G. J., D. J. Heard, R. Francis Floyd et al. 2003. Evaluation
of propofol and medetomidine-ketamine for short-term
be achieved by facing the fish into the flow of the
immobilization of Gulf of Mexico sturgeon [Aciperiser
filter/aerator or by holding the fish and moving it forwards
oxyrinchus de soti). J Zoo Wildl Med 34: 153-158.
slowly though the water, ideally whilst holding the mouth
George, R. H. 2004. Basic shark medicine. Proc North Am Vet
open. Fish should not be dragged backwards through the
Conf Book 2: 1245-1246.
water as the reverse flow of water may damage the gills, as
Gratsek, J. B., E. B. Shotts, and D. L. Dawe. I992. Infectious
well as greatly reducing the efficacy of gas and anaesthetic
diseases and parasites of freshwater ommamental fish. In:
exchange (Brown, 1988). A syringe or rubber enema pump
J. B. Gratzek and F. R. Matthews [eds.] Aquariology: The
may also be used to direct water through the rmouth (Ross,
Science of Fish Health Management. pp. 227-274. Tetra Press,
2001j. Resuscitation attermpts should not be abandoned
Morris Plains.
prematurely as respiratory arrest can precede cardiac arrest
Grist, C. 2001. Health and safety. In: W. H. Wildgoose [ed.) Manual 
of Omamental Fish. Znd edn. pp. 285-290. BSAVA,
by an extended period of time, possibly several minutes.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Once spontaneous ventilation returms, recovery should
Hall, L. W., and K. W. Clarke. I99l. Veterinary Anaesthesia. 9th edn.
proceed as above.
Saunders, London
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Harms, C. A. I999. Anaesthesia in fish. In: M. E. Fowler and
Ross, L. G., and B. Ross. I999. Anaesthetic and Sedative Techniques
R E. Miller [eds.) Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. 4th edn.
for Aquatic Animals. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
pp. 158-163. Saumders,Philadelphia.
Sladky, K. K., C. Swanson, M. K. Stoskopf et al. 2001. Comparative
Harms, C. A. 2003. Fish. In: M. E. Fowler and R. E. Miller [eds.)
efficacy of tricaine methanesulfonate and clove oil for use as
Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. 5th edn. pp. 2-20. Saunders,
anaesthetics in red pacu [Fiaractus brachypomus]. Am J Vet
St Louis, Missouri.
Res 62: 337342
Harms, C. A., G.A. Lewbart, C. R. Swanson et al. 2005. Behavioral
Small, B. C. 2004. Effect of Aqui-S sedation on the stress response
ad clinical pathology changes in koi carp [Cyprirmus carpio)
of channel catfish exposed to three environtmental stressors.
subjected to anesthesia and surgery with and without intra-
Aquaculture, Honolulu, HI: 549.
operative analgesics. Comp Med 55: 221-226.
Sneddon, L. U. 2003a. The evidence for pain in fish: the use of
Helfman, G. S., B. B. Collette, and D. E. Facey. I997. The Diversity
morphine as an analgesic. Appl Anim Behav Sci 83: 153-162.
of Fishes. Blackwell Publishing.
Sneddon, L. U. 2003b. Trigeminal somatosensory innervation of the
Holmes, K., and T. Pitham. 2004. The Interpet Manual of Koi
head of a teleost fish with particular reference to nociception.
Health. Interpet, Dorking.
Brain Res 972: 44-52.
Iwama, G. K., J. C. McGeer, and M. P. Pawluk. I988. The effects of
Stoskopf, M. K. 1993a. Anatomy. In: M. K. Stoskopf [ed.) Fish
Es
five fish anaesthetics on acid-base balance, haematocrit, blood
Medicine. pp. 2-30. Saunders, Philadelphia.
gases, cortisol and adrenaline in rainbow trout. Can J Zool 67:
Stoskopf, M. K. 1993b. Chemotherapeutics In: M. K. Stoskopf [ed.)
2065-2073.
Fish Medicine. pp. 832-839. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Lewbart, G. A. 200la. Clinical examination. In: W. H. Wildgoose 
Stoskopf, M. K. I993c. Hospitalization. In: M. K. Stoskopf [ed.) Fish 
[ed.) Manual of Omamental Fish. Znd edn. pp. 85-89. BSAVA,
Medicine. pp. 98-112. Saumders, Philadelphia.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Stoskopf, M. K. 1993d. Shark pharmacology and toxicology. In:
Lewbart, G. A. 2001b. Current approaches to anesthesia and
M. K. Stoskopf [ed.) Fish Medicine. pp. 809-816. Saunders,
analgesia in fish. Exotic DVM 3.3: 19-20.
Philadelphia.
Lewbart, G. A. 200lc. Surgical techmiques in the koi patient. Exotic
Suedmeyer, W. K. 2006. A new [er] method for fish phlebotomy.
DVM 3.3: 43-47.
Proc Am Assoc Zoo Vets: 7071.
278
Lewbart, G. A. 2005. Fish. In: J. W. Carpenter [ed.) Exotic Animal
Treves-Brown, K. M. 2000. Applied Fish Phartmacology. Kluwer
 Fortmulary. 3rd edn. pp. 5-29. Elsevier, St. Louis, Missouri.
Academic Publishers, Dodrecht, The Netherlands.
Lloyd, J. 2001. The aquatic environment. In: W. H. Wildgoose [ed.)
Tytler, P., and A. D. Hawkins. I98I. Vivisection, anaesthetics and
Manual of Ornamental Fish. Znd edn. pp. I-8. BSAVA,
minor surgery. In: A. D. Hawkins [ed.] Aquarium Systems.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Academic Press, London.
Mitsuda, H., Y. Ishida, H. Yoshikawa et al. 1988. Effects of a high
Wildgoose, W. H. 200Ia. Internal disorders. In: W. H. Wildgoose
concentration of COz on electrocardiograms in the carp,
[ed.) Manual of Omamental Fish. Znd erdn. pp. I23-134.
Cyprirnus carpio. Comp Biochem Physiol Part A Physiol 9l:
BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
749-757.
Wildgoose, W. H. 200Ib. Skin disease. In: W. H. Wildgoose [ed.)
Munday, P. L., and S. K. Wilson. I997. Comparative efficacy of clove
Manual of Omamental Fish. Znd edn. pp. I09-I22. BSAVA,
cil and other chemicals in anaesthetization of Pomaceitrus
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
amboineisis, a coral reef fish. J Fish Biol 5l: 931.
Wildgoose, W. H., and G. A. Lewbart. 2001. Therapeutics. In:
Newby, N. C., P. C. Mendonca, K. Gamperl et al. 2005.
W. H. Wildgoose [ed.) Manual of Ormamental Fish. Znd edn.
 Pharmacokinetics of morphme in fish: Winter flounder
pp. 237-258. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
[Pseudopleurorectes americarius] and seawater-acclimatised
rainbow trout [Orcorhymchus mykiss]. Comp Biochem Physiol
Websites
Part C, Pharmacol Toxicol Endocrinol 143: 275-283.
Noga, E. J. 2000. Fish disease: diagnosis and treatment. Iowa State 
University Press, Ames.
Anonymous. 2007. Omamental Aquatic Trade Association.
Oswald, R. L. 978. Injection anaesthesia for experimental studies in
http://www.ormamertalfish.org, accessed 23 April 2007.
fish. Comp Biochem Physiol Part C, Pharmacol Toxicol
Mayer, J. 2005. Fish Medicine. Online,
Endocrinol 60: 19-26.
http://ocw.tufts.edu/Content/5/Lecturertotes/215706,accessed
Ross, L. G. 2001. Restraint, anaesthesia and euthanasia. In:
17 Jan 2007.
W H. Wildgoose [ed.) Manual of Omamental Fish. Znd edn.
pp. 75-83. BSAVA, Quedgeley, Gloucester.
19
Invertebrate anaesthesia
5
Michelle O'Brien
INTRODUCTION
practice, but will also try to touch on some aspects
of anaesthesia for some more unusual specimens (Figs
The invertebrates are an extremely diverse group of animals
19.1-19.3).
279
[see Table 19.1). Many are highly specialised, with differing
body shapes, methods of feeding and number of legs being
just some of the differences that separate the different
 groups. All invertebrates lack a backbone. This in turn means
 ae   as  a i 
upon as more fragile' than many other species of animals.
The simplest means of discussing anaesthesia in these
species is to separate the procedures used into those for
aquatic and those used for terrestrial invertebrates. In cer-
 tain circumstances the same agents can be used both in
water and in air, for example, gaseous anaesthetic agents can
be bubbled though water in order to anaesthetise aquatic
invertebrates. In most cases injectable agents are not
used in invertebrates due to their small size, the chance of
leading to iatrogenic damage and the difficulty in correct
dosing. In this chapter we will be concentrating on the
invertebrate species most cormrmonly encountered in general
Figure I 9.2 · Blue crayfish (rocambarus alleni).
Figure I 9.I · Atlantic anemones (Condylactis sp.).
Figure I 9.3 · Red starfish (Fromia milleporella).
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Sorme invertebrates, for exarmple arthropods and molluscs
to feel pain, anaesthesia is employed more for control of
have been shown to have both the body wall and internal
motion to facilitate examination, imaging or manipulation
tissues well endowed with nerve endings or similar sensory
than for analgesia. Many procedures are carried out with-
structures (Cooper, 1998) and, although invertebrate pain
out anaesthesia, especially in sessile species (Stoskopf,
is a topic for debate, it is wise to err on the side of caution.
2006).
In countries where animal welfare issues are of high prior-
ity it is becorming clearer that invertebrates, like any other
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
animal, should be given the benefit of the doubt (Cooper,
2006). Analgesia has not been studied in most inverte-
The most important factor in dealing with any inverte-
brates, but the adverse response to noxious stimulin many
brate species is knowledge of exactly which species you
species suggests that anaesthesia should be employed in any
are treating and its environmental requirements and behav-
situation where painful procedures are to be undertaken.
ioural patterns (Table 19.l). An example of this is thera-
Anaesthesia is useful for haermolymph sarnpling, oral swabs
phosid spiders [tarantulas) that will turn over into dorsal
and flushing of the mouthparts for parasite evaluation in
recumbency in specially designed webs during moulting. Any
spiders (Pizzi, 2006), together with any examination of
disturbance or righting of the anirmal may lead to disruption
venomous specimens or delicate procedures requiring corm-
of the moult and can be fatal.
plete immobilisation of the individual.
Many invertebrates have rmultiple, relatively delicate,
 In a number of invertebrate species surgery such as sec-
imbs or wings and, therefore, must be treated with caution
tioning and grafting is carried out without any form of
to prevent accidental injury. The opisthosoma [abdomen)
anaesthetic, for example in sponges and tubellarians.
. In
is very delicate and can easily be damaged by falls, often
coelenterates (a term encompassing both phylum Cnidaria
fatally; therefore, experience and care in handling are
and comb jellyfish), due to questions regarding their ability
essential.
280
Table I9.l: Some of the significant taxonomic classifications of the invertebrates dealt with in this chapter
PHYLA
CLASSES, SUBCLASSES AND ORDERS
COMMON NAME
Porifera
Sponges
Cnidaria
Class Anthozoa (anemones, corals, etc.)
Sea anemones, jellyfishes, corals, hydroids
Class Cubozoa (sea wasps or box jellyfish)
Class Scyphozoa (cup animals and jellyfishes)
Class Asteroidea (sea stars)
Sea urchins, starfish,
Echinodermata
Class Echinoidea (echinoids, sea urchins and sand dollars)
brittle stars, sea
Class Holothuroidea (sea cucumbers)
cucumbers
Class Ophiuroidea (brittle stars and basket stars)
Mollusca
Class Bivalvia (clams, mussels, oysters, scallops)
Molluscs (slugs, snails, squid)
Class Cephalopoda (squids, octopus, nautilus, cuttlefish)
Class Gastropoda (snails, sea slugs)
Annelida
Subclass Hirudinea (leeches)
Segmented worms
Subclass Oligochaeta (angleworms, earthworms
and their relatives, night crawlers, and oligochaetes)
Class Polychaeta (paddle-footed annelids and polychaetes)
Arthropoda
Subphylum Chelicerata, class Arachnida (arachnids)
Arthropods
Subphylum Crustacea (crustaceans), class Malacostraca, order
(insects, crabs, spiders, etc.)
Decapoda (crabs, lobsters, etc.)
Subphylum Hexapoda, order Diplura (diplurans), class
Insecta (insects)
Subphylum Myriapoda, class Chilopoda (centipedes), class
Diplopoda (millipedes)
Inivertebrate anaesthesia
Cardiovascular system
feasible in crustaceans. It is, however, possble to use
injectable anaesthetics, though only at the level of the
In spiders the heart lies in the middorsal opisthosoma
joints where there is a thinning of the exoskeleton termed
the arthrodial membrane (Fig. 19.5) (Oswald, 1977)
(Fig. 19.4). Demarcation of organs is often inexact and
 most are embedded between the multiple midgut diver-
Owing to an open or semi-closed circulatory system in
ticula that occupy most of the opisthosoma (Pizzi, 2006).
many invertebrates, any darmage to the exoskeleton can lead
The circulatory system of spiders involves a well-
to excessive haemorrhage and death by exsanguination.
developed arterial and open venous circulation, with haermo-
Respiratory system
cyanin the copper-based oxygen carrying pigment (Pizzi,
2006). Vessels from the heart direct haemolymph to spe-
cific organs and throughout the spider's body. Venous retun
The folia (leaves) of the book lungs are present in the
follows specific pathways and occurs due to a pressure
cranio-ventral opisthosoma. Spiders' book lungs on the
gradient. The pericardial sinus around the heart, together
ventral abdomen enable anaesthesia using gaseous agents
with ligarments attached to the cuticle, helps generate suc-
by having only the abdomen within the gas chamber. This
tion and pressure. Haemolymph is clear with a blue tinge
leaves the cephalothorax readily accessible for assessrment
due to the haemocyanin. Arachnids need to maintain blood
and procedures (G. A. Lewbart, unpublished work, 2006].
volume and pressure for leg extension; therefore, dehy-
Many spiders also have trachea that open above the spin-
drated individuals often hold their legs flexed beneath therm
nerets. Gases are exchanged with the blood by diffusion.
 and are unable to move. Haemocyanin has a much higher
Book lungs hang in an open space connected to a tube.
 oxygen affinity than haemoglobin and functions more as
The other side of the tube is connected to the open air.
Most spiders possess both book lungs and trachea, though
an oxygen storage mechanism than a transporter. Spiders
 have a very low metabolic rate with an oxygen consumption
some only possess one mechanism. The trachea supplies
of one-hundredth that of warm-blooded vertebrates and
oxygen faster than the book lungs. More ^modern' spiders
[for exarmple, the family Symphyltognathidae) that only
281
one-fifth that of poikilothermic vertebrates (Paul, 1990).
The resting heart rate can range from 30-40 beats per
possesstracheal systems, therefore, have quicker and longer
minute in large theraphosids, to over 100 beats per minute
reactions than more primitive species that only possess
book lungs (Nieuwenhuys, 2006).
in srmaller spiders. The rate can double after short bursts
Crustaceans use gills for respiration and these are also
of activity (Foelix, 1996). One study (Coelho and Amaya,
the main site for absorption of aqueous anaesthetic agents
2000) found the resting heart rate of the Texas tarantula
[Aphonopelma hentzi} to be 5.6 ± 1.5 beats per minute.
(Noga et al., 2006).
 Owing to a hard exoskeleton and an open or mixed circu-
Integumentary system
latory system [Noga et al., 2006), surgery is usually not
Invertebrates are a highly diverse group of animals that vary
greatly in the risks they can pose to humans (Fig. 19.6)
These risks include toxic secretions (for example, venom);
Heart - site of
urticarial hairs on the abdormen of the theraphosid spiders
injectionforfluids
(Fig. 19.7); painful bites, which often also act to transmit
bacteria; stings and defensive spines (Cooper, 2001).
Some species can also shoot venom at a distance, for
Spinarets
example Assassin bugs (family Reduvidae), and goggles
Positionof book
lung on a theraphosid
spider
Ventral view
Apog
B
of crab
Body
Heart
Eye S
Opisthosoma
containing
Arthroidal
Arthrodial
digestive and
membrane
membrane
reproductive
Chelicera
-Spinarets
Legs
Book
Spiracle
lungs
Figure I9.4 · Position ofthe heart and book lungs in a theraphosid
Figure I9.5 · Arthrodial membrane position in the leg of a
spider. (A) Spider. (B) Detail.
decapod.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Figure 19.6 * It is acdvisable to wear thick gloves when handling
Figure I9.7 · Abdomen of a Baboon spider (Pterinochhilus muri-
nus) showing urticarial hairs. (Photo courtesy L Longley)
should be worn when dealing with these species. The pro-
Clinical examination and further assessment
282
duction of risk assessments can be beneficial in a veter-
inary practice dealing with these species.
Depending on the species, a visual inspection or hands-on
examination may be performed to assess the patient's
Nervous system
condition.
It is important to determine secondary problems pres-
ent other than those that anaesthesia is required to cor-
Crustaceans use 5-hydoxytryptamine glutamate and pos-
rect. These can include parasitic, fungal and bacterial
sibly peptide-like substances as well as the more common
infection, or the close proximity of some individuals to
forms of neurotransmitter. They can, therefore, respond
moulting [this process could be disrupted by anaesthesia
differently to certain anaesthetic substances compared to
and if interrupted can lead to fatalities). In theraphosid
other species, possibly because their synaptic receptor sites
spiders the colour of the opisthosorma rmay darken prior to
are not affected (Ross and Ross, 1999). The reflex grasping
moulting. This is especially visible in areas of alopecia. The
action of many decapods can lead to a type of imrmobilisation
spider will also become anorexic prior to moulting (Pizzi,
wherein simple procedures, for example fitting of near-heart
2006).
electrodes, can be accomplished during this distraction.
 In aquatic invertebrates water quality should be main-
Many agents other than magnesium chloride, which is
tained by oxygenation and filtration, with temperature
thought to act on the central nervous systerm, are ineffective
maintained to prevent overheating. Maintenance of a damp
in cephalopods. This may be due to the nature of their nerve
skin or exoskeleton for aquatic invertebrates is a vital
transmitters and receptors [Messenger et al., 1985]
process (Ross and Ross, 1999) and can be important in
some terrestrial invertebrates with delicate cuticles, for
Owing to a difference in neurotransmitters, crustaceans
example myriapods. For this reason, the carrier gas should
can react differently to anaesthetics than other
be humidified (Chitty, 2006).
invertebrates.
During anaesthesia temperature and humidity must
be maintained for terrestrial invertebrates, together
PRE-ANAESTHETIC
with water quality for the aquatic species.
ASSESSMENT/STABILISATION
All pre-anaesthetic assessments should include the ques-
History
tion of whether a general anaesthetic is necessary or appro-
priate for the procedure to be carried out - for exarmple, in
Prior to anaesthesia it is useful to have a full assessment of
spiders autotomy of lirmbs is a voluntary process and, there-
the environment previously inhabited. Invertebrates are
fore, must be carried out without anaesthetic (Pizzi, 2006)
ectothermic and unable to control their body tempera-
ture other than by behavioural modification. Temperature
Autotomy of limbs in spiders is a voluntary process
and hurmidity are, therefore, vitally irmportant, especially
and, therefore, anaesthesia must not be administered.
regarding correction of dehydration prior to anaesthesia.
Invertebrate anaesthesia
Owing to the open haermolymph system, extracardiac
adrministration because of incorrect placement is not detri-
m
mental. However, if the spider or fluid administrator were
to move during the procedure, fatal cardiac laceration could
result (Pizzi, 2006). A suggested fluid administration amount
is up to 20ml fluid/kg body weight. This amount should
be reduced depending on variation in weight due to the
fish
amount of ingesta present (Johnson-Delaney 2000),
and
In scorpions that are too severely dehydrated to
drink when water is offered in a shallow dish, a similar
administration can be performed. An appropriate volume
of sterile half-strength physiological dextrose saline can be
injected dorsolaterally between the platelike tergites of
the mesosoma [preabdomen). A 30 gauge, or smaller, needle
attached to an insulin syringe should be used and the needle
Figure I9.8 · A Huntsman spider (Heteropoda venatoria) pro-
advanced omly deep enough to permit injection but not so
an
vided with a dish containing soaked cotton wool to drink from, as
deep as to risk injury to internal organs (Frye, 2006)
naesthesia
a means to combat dehydration.
Myriapods also require fluid therapy in certain cases;
however, systemic administration has yet to be evaluated.
Fluid administration
Millipedes may be placed in a shallow bowl of lukewarm
water and centipedes may be placed in a very hurmid envir-
Increasing spraying or providing a dish of water from
onment surrounded by moistened tissue paper (Chitty,
2006) in order to treat clinical dehydration.
which the individual can drink (Fig. 19.8) can improve the
283
outcome of the anaesthetic and procedure carried out.
Many arthropods will often take fluid offered directly
from the tip of a syringe. In other species spraying and
It is possible to provide fluids via injection (using a 26
or 27 gauge needle) in certain species, for example thera-
providing soaked cotton wool may be sufficient. In mol-
phosid spiders. 0.9% sodium chloride, lactated Ringer's
luscs and aquatic arthropods rehydration can be accom-
plished by immersion or soaking in an appropriate solution,
solution and Hartmann's solution have all been adminis-
tered to theraphosid spiders without incident (Pizzi, 2006).
depending on the species (Cooper, 1998].
It is also possible to prepare a spider Ringer's lactate to
approximate the composition of tarantula haermolymph
EQUIPMENTREQUIRED
(Schartau and Leidescher, 1983).
The majority of invertebrate anaesthetics do not require
BOX I9.I Recipe for spider Ringer's
 any specialist equipment that is not present in a general
practice that deals with small marmmals. Most of the
lactate (Schartau and Leidescher, I983)
anaesthetics for terrestrial invertebrates involve placing
the animal in an anaesthetic chamber and administering gas
anaesthetic. The most vital piece of equipment is, there-
Rights were nut granted to include this box in electronic media
fore, the anaesthetic chamber that can be created in a num-
Please refer to the printed publication.
ber of different ways - varying from using a small animal
facemask to contain the animal, to using a purpose-built
small mammal anaesthetic chamber.
External sources of heat, for example heat mats or
water-filled gloves - protected with thin towels from any
dammage by external projections from the specimen (such
as spines in jungle nymph stick insects [Heteropteryx sp.]
In a conscious spider fluids can be administered into the
[see Fig. 19.6]] - are important for terrestrial inverte-
ventral aspect of a limb joint, through the arthrodial mem-
brates in order to reduce lowering of body temperature
brane, with the spider restrained in dorsal recumbency using
under general anaesthesia. It is also vital, given the size of
 a plastic ruler. Even if dammage to the limb is sustained it can 
the animal and in certain cases shape (for example, myr-
be removed using autotomy and the stump sealed using
iapods), that the ends of any accessible pipes or other
cyanoacrylate glue (Pizzi, 2006). However, administration is
apertures present in the anaesthetic chamber should be
slow and only a limited armount of fluid can be administered.
covered by fine mesh to prevent the patient gaining access
Johnson-Delaney has been quoted (Chitty, 200l) as
to the anaesthetic circuitry (Chitty, 2006).
recommending a different method of fluid administration.
 Smoke for bees requires specialist equipment and pro-
In an anaesthetised or severely dehydrated spider fluid can
vides only a sedation effect, though it has been used for
be administered into the heart or pericardial sac present
many centuries in order to facilitate the maintenance of
in the dorsal opisthosoma. Administration is rapid and
hives. This is not a rmethod regularly ermployed other than
a relatively large amount of fluid can be given at one time.
in specialist situations.
Anaesthesia of ExoticPets
Figure I9.9 · Anaesthesia should not be performed within a
mixed exhibit such as this marine tank, as many invertebrates may
be affected.
The equipment required for aquatic invertebrates is
usually a simple container holding a known volume of
284
water either taken from the animal's previous container
 Or made up as a fresh solution. It is important to ensure
that temperature and salinity correspond to that of the
animal's normal environment. In certain cases anaesthesia
can be carried out in the tank in which the animal is
normally housed, but this carries greater risks if other
exhibits are housed in the same tank or if filtration will
affect anaesthetic concentrations (Fig. 19.9) (Cooper,
2001).
Figure I9.10 · Use of a plastic scoop to transfer a Chilean rose
spider (Grammostola rosea) to the anaesthetic chamber.
TECHNIQUES
Handling
Handling and transferring of the animal from transport
container to anaesthetic charmber can be facilitated by the
use of nets, padded forceps in scorpions or direct handling
using gloves in cooperative specimens with experienced
handlers. In debilitated fragile specimens it can be easier
to use a flat plastic scoop (Fig. 19.10) in order to reduce
direct handling - this is especially true of specimens dis-
playing dysecdysis. It is possible to use a gauze sling around
the body between the cephalothorax and abdomen of
theraphosid spiders while the forefinger applies gentle
downward pressure on the cephalothorax to maintain
restraint for certain procedures, by lifting them very
slightly above a surface (Johnson-Delaney, 2000)
Figure I9.ll · Use of a clear plastic container, available in prac-
Those individuals capable of producing severe damage
tice, to transfer a Goliath bird-eating spider (Theraphosa blondi) to
in a handler by using their defence mechanisms should be
the anaesthetic chamber.
transferred only within suitable containers (Fig. 19.11)
and anaesthetised with as little risk to the handler as pos-
person alone and antivenom should be available if possible -
sible. For example centipedes, Scolopendra sp. (Fig. 19.12),
for example in black widow spiders (Latrodectus mactans).
possess venom delivered in a bite known to cause excruci-
It is also important to note that this species, and a number
ating pain; large theraphosid spiders can deliver a painful
of others, cannot be kept without licence in certain coun-
bite that may lead to bacterial infection or anaphylaxis.
tries due to legislation, for example the Dangerous Wild
In venomous species, animals must not be handled by one
Animals Act 1976 in the UK.
Inivertebrate anaesthesia
 Holes in inner 
Cuter container
container to allow
vapourthrough
Anaesthetic
gas
fish
and
 Spider
Cotton wool soaked
in anaesthetic agent 
Figure I9.l4 · The use of two containers as an anaesthetic
chamber when a vaporiser is not available.
285
Book lungs on
ventral abdomen
Abdomen-
Latex glove
stretched
of spider
Anaesthetic mask-
across mask
Figure 19.12 · Giant centipede (Scolopendrd sp.), which can
deliver an excruciatingly painful venomous bite. (Courtesy of
L Longley.)
To
anaesthetic
machine
Hole in glove for
abdomen to pass
through
Cephalothorax
Figure 19.15 · A small animal facemask used as an anaesthetic
chamber.
The second method involves placing the spider within a
box with a number of holes in its surface within a second
non-perforated container into which a ball of cotton wool
soaked in gaseous anaesthetic agent is placed, thereby
allowing no direct contact between the spider and the
Figure I9.13 · Anaesthesia of a Chilean rose spider (Grdmmostold
anaesthetic agent (Fig. 19.14). The spider is removed
rosea) via gaseous anaesthetic in an anaesthetic chamber.
from the inner chamber once anaesthesia is sufficient -
induction normally takes 10-15 min. It is possible to allow
a degree of scavenging with the first system, but not with
the second.The first should, therefore, be used if pos-
Induction and maintenance of anaesthesia
sible, due to health and safety concerns for staff regarding
exposure to anaesthetic gases. The second method, how-
There are two main ways to anaesthetise a terrestrial
ever, can be carried out in circumstances in which no
invertebrate, such as a theraphosid spider. The first involves
vaporiser is available (Pizzi, 2006).
placing the spider into a small marmmal anaesthetic cham-
Owing to the anatomy of spiders and the placement of
ber and administering gaseous anaesthetic, such as isoflu-
the book lungs on their abdomens, through which anaes-
rane, with the vaporiser set to maxirmum [4-5%] until
thetic is absorbed, it is possible to create an anaesthetic
anaesthesia is achieved (Fig. 19.13].
chamber using a small animal facermask (Fig. 19.15)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
A latex glove is used to cover the open end of the mask
1999). In crustaceans cooling to this degree can lead to
and the abdomen of the spider is placed through a small
autotomy of appendages, although Kuriama prawns (Pemaeus
hole in the latex, thereby lying inside the mask into which
japonicus) were successfully anaesthetised by cooling to
anaesthetic can be passed. This allows the cephalothorax to
12°C (Patterson, 1993). Cephalopods can be immobilised
remain available for surgery and allows continuous anaesthe-
by decreasing the temperature from 24°C to 3-5°C, but
sia, avoiding the necessity of returning the spider to the
without effective muscle relaxation (Andrews and Tansey
anaesthetic chamber using the previous methods if deep-
1981). In sea anemones cooling to 4-10°C can be used as
ened or prolonged anaesthesia is required (G.A. Lewbart,
part of a protocol to prevent closing prior to anaesthesia
unpublished work,2006)
(Moore, 1989).
In decapods injectable anaesthesia can be carried out by
injection into the haemocoel via the arthrodial membrane
of a posterior leg (Fig. 19.5) or alternative route (Oswald,
Cooling should not be used to immobilise inverte-
1977). A number of anaesthetic agents have been given
brates for painful procedures.
using this method, with varying results (see Table 19.5).
 In an individual anaesthetised using aqueous solutions
Carbon dioxide
of agent, the animal is removed from the bath of solution
after induction. Anaesthesia can be maintained by spray-
Carbon dioxide gas (CO) from a cylinder can be bubbled
ing the water containing the anaesthetic agent over the
through water and in emergency situations a product such
animal while it is lying on a damp surface. In order to lighten
as Alka Seltzer@ can be used to liberate the gas, but there
the anaesthesia oxygenated water without anaesthetic can
is doubt about the armount of analgesia provided with CO2
be sprayed over the invertebrate (Cooper, 2001). In mol-
luscs, anaesthetic agents can be administered using aqueous
 anaesthesia (Cooper, 200l). Carbon dioxide has been used
as a sedative in insects in the past, but it may cause fatali-
solution via immersion of only the foot of the individual.
286
ties in spiders (Pizzi, 2006). Cockroaches appear to be very
 In certain cases cephalopod anaesthetics can require assisted
tolerant of COz levels and have been reversibly anaes-
ventilation, with cooled oxygenated anaesthetic being
thetised with 100% COz, though recovery was prolonged.
passed either manually or using a pump through the man-
COz in aqueous solution using a 50:50 dilution of soda
tle cavity continuously (O'Dor et al., 1990).
water or an Alka Seltzer@ tablet (Bayer, Germany) has
been successfully used in leeches [Williams, 2002} as an
Signs of anaesthesia in invertebrates can be similar to
anaesthetic.
signs of death. Overdosage of anaesthesia will result
in death. This can be used as a method of euthanasia.
Gaseous anaesthetic agents
The agents most commonly used in veterinary practice for
ANAESTHETICS
anaesthesia of terrestrial invertebrates are gaseous agents
administered via chamber. This method allows minimal
A number of anaesthetic agents have been used on inver-
handling of the individual animal and relatively rapid
tebrates through the years - often leading to sedation of
 anaesthesia and recovery in most species. It provides full
the individual rather than full general anaesthesia, for
anaesthesia and analgesia, although analgesic effects do
exarmple smoke has been used as a sedative for bees
not continue after recovery has occurred. Isoflurane, the
(Cooper, 2001).
most commonly used of these agents, is known to have a
high safety margin in other species, even in debilitated
animals. These agents and the method of administration
Hypothermia
produce a degree of risk of exposure to personnel and,
therefore, if posible, scavenging should be carried out.
Hypothermia can facilitate handling, for example 30 min
Halothane gas can be used at up to l0% and isoflurane
at 4°C for most species will produce immobility, but in
gas at 3-5% for induction (Williams, 2002). Itisimportant
Solifuge (camel spiders) it can be fatal (Cooper, 2001]).
to cover the end of pipes with open weave rmesh or gauze
Decreasing temperature can be useful to immobilise insects
to prevent escape, especially in species such as myriapods.
for non-painful procedures, such as photography or radio-
Induction occurs in myriapods within 15-25 min using
graphy, but should not be employed for any procedure that
isoflurane at 5% in 100% oxygen (Chitty, 2006). In
may cause pain or stress [Cooper, 2006] as it provides no
decapods gaseous anaesthetic agents are effective in air, by
analgesia (Williams, 2002). Change in termperature is known
immersion in solution or by injection through the arthroidial
to be a stressor in insects, as are starvation and chemical
membrane (Fig. 19.5), for example 0.5% halothane by vol-
insult. These factors can affect the immune response (Brey,
ume was used to anaesthetise crayfish (Astacus astacus)
1994), leading to an increased weakness to infectious dis-
(Obradovic, 1986} within 15min (Ingle, 1995). Aquatic
ease, but the effect that hypothermia could have during the
gastropods can be reversibly anaesthetised using halothane,
length of an anaesthetic has yet to be assessed.
enflurane and isoflurane gases (Girdlestone et al., 1989).
Molluscs can be cooled to 2°C, or even lower in some
Invertebrates such as brachiopods, for example Daphnia
species, but long periods at low temperatures may cause
magna, can be anaesthetised by these agents bubbled
death, especially in warm water species (Ross and Ross,
through water in 100% cxygen. Methoxyflurane has also
Invertebrate anaesthesia
been used in this manner (McKenzie et al., 1992), though
a posterior leg or between the ventral integumental plates
anaesthesia is temperature-dependent.
[see Fig. 19.5). Some work has shown that many agents,
other than those listed below, including MS-222, were
Magnesium chloride and
ineffective or led to limb autotomy when administered by
magnesium sulphate
this route (Oswald, 1977].
Miscellaneous agents
Magnesium chloride and magnesium sulphate are some of
the oldest agents used with invertebrates (Table 19.2). They
are formulated as a saturated solution in distilled water for
A multitude of other agents have been used less fre-
freshwater animals and are diluted with an equal volurme of
quently in invertebrates. A number of these are sum-
seawater for marine animals. Iso-osmotic 7.5% w/v magne-
marised in Table 19.6.
Benzocaine, which must first be dissolved in a small
sium chloride (MgClz.6HzO) can also be added to the
medium containing the animal until a lack of response to
volurme of acetone, has been suggested for use in aquatic
stimulus is noted.
invertebrates via immersion at l00 mg/L in water (Grist,
 In molluscs, magnesium ions compete with calcium
2001).
Benzocaine, tubocurarine, gallamine, chlorpromazine
ions required for synaptic transrmission thereby leading to
mmmobilisation. These agents do not provide true anaesthe-
(Oswald, 1977), carbon dioxide, 2-phenoxyethanol and
sia in rmany invertebrates and their analgesic properties have
magnesium chloride (Gardner, 1997) have been shown to
be ineffective or detrimental to crustaceans. Xylazine
yet to be determined (Ross and Ross, 1999). Magnesium
chloride works well in cephalopods as the site of action is
administered at 100 mg/kg led to a number of mortalities
thought to be the central nervous system, whereas in
and is therefore not recommended at this dose rate
crustaceans and vertebrates MgCl works at the post-
(Ferrero and Pressacco, 1982). Agents such as urethane -
synaptic membrane of the nerve-muscle junction (Scimeca,
now known to be carcinogenic - have been used to anaes-
287
2006). Many other agents are ineffective in cephalopods,
thetise invertebrates in the past.
possibly due to the nature of their nerve transmitters and
receptors; subtle differences between cephalopod species
In general, terrestrial invertebrates are anaesthetised
have also been shown (Messenger et al., 1985)
using gaseous agents and aquatic invertebrates are
Acohol-based anaesthetics (Table T9.3)
anaesthetised using aqueous agents. A notable excep-
tion is decapods that are often given injectable anaes-
thetics.
In cephalopods the combination of cooling to 5-7°C with
ethanol or magnesium anaesthesia allowed for surgery of
up to 15min, though it required assisted ventilation via
cooled oxygenated anaesthetic being passed through the
ANAESTHESIA MONITORING
mantle cavity continuously. In some cases ethanol anaes-
thesia can lead to initial hyperactivity in cephalopods that
It is hard to judge the depth of anaesthesia in inverte-
may lead to traumatic damage (O'Dor et al., 1977)
brates. Lack of movement and righting reflex indicate full
Tricaine methane sulphonate (MS-222)
anaesthesia, but intermediate stages are harder to judge,
for example movement of appendages and muscle tone
(Table 19.4)
are often unreliable indicators. In spiders, recovery from
anaesthesia is gradual with increasing leg rmovements and
 MS-222 is employed widely in fish anaesthesia, but is less
righting attempts over 3-20 min after anaesthesia. Slow
predictable when used to anaesthetise aquatic invertebrates.
ambulation may occur 30-120 min after anaesthesia, but
MS-222 has produced varied results in anaesthesia of
prey should not be offered for 48h, as live prey may
decapods, though the sand shrimp (Crangon septemspinosa)
injure a spider still recovering from the after-effects of
was anaesthetised by 0.5 g/L MS-222 (Foley et al., 1966).
anaesthesia (Pizzi, 2006]. Arboreal species should not be
MS-222 appears to be ineffective in crayfish (Astacus asta-
allowed access to climbing material until any incoordin-
cus] at lower concentrations (100 mg/L) and has only a mild
ation has ceased due to the risk of fatal injury from falling.
effect at high dose rates (1000mg/L) (Obradovic, 1986).
 In snails, response to pricking of the foot can be an indi-
MS-222 at 500mg/L has been shown to take up to 1 h in
cator of anaesthetic depth (Cooper, 2001). In myriapods,
crustaceans to produce anaesthesia. Although it is approved
indication of sufficient anaesthesia involves loss of volun-
for aquatic animals not intended for food in many countries,
tary movement and loss of righting reflex and withdrawal.
it is not particularly effective in these species (Brown et al.
Full recovery may take a few hours (Chitty, 2006). In
1996; Gardner, 1997; Oswald, 1977).
insects, total immobility, absence of righting reflex and
apparent lack of awareness to stimuli are often reversible
Injectable anaesthetics (Table 19.5)
with removal of the anaesthetic agent; therefore, ascer-
taining whether an insect is dead is often far from easy.
 In decapods injectable anaesthesia can be carried by injec-
Recovery can start with limb twitching and proceed to full
tion into the haemocoel via the arthrodial membrane of
recovery within hours. The best method of ascertaining if
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table I9.2: Dose rates for the use of magnesium chloride and magnesium sulphate in a variety of invertebrates
SPECIES
AGENT
ROUTE/DOSE
COMMENTS
Annelids
Polychaetes
Magnesium chloride in water6.8
Immersion: concentration of
 Some species may display
between 7.5 and 8% for
differing sensitivity
relaxation
Cnidaria
Calliactis parasitica (sea
Magnesium chloridel3
Immersion: 0.3 M until
anemone)
'sufficient'* relaxation
Echinoderms
Asterias forbesi (sea star)
Magnesium chloridel
Immersion: 8% solution in
tap water
Luidid clathratd and AstropectenMagnesium chloride?
Immersion: MgCl.6H2O 7.5%
drticulatus (sea stars)
solution mixed with an equal
288
volume of sea water
Molluscs
Bivalves:
Magnesium chloride3
Immersion 3.5% w/v
Relatively quick induction,
Ostred edulis (flat oyster)
90 min anaesthesia, rapid
recovery, minimal
stress + mortality
Bivalves:
Magnesium chlorides
Immersion 30 g/L
Effective anaesthesia, but
Pecten fumatus
excess mortalities
(commercial scallop)
Cephalopods
7.5% magnesium chloride in
Immersion:
Induction took 13 min and
distilled water mixed with an
I:l mixture for surgical
recovery 8min approximately
equal volume of sea water2.9.11
anaesthesia and invasive dinical
procedures
I:3 or I:4 for handling and
examination, and I:9 dilution
for sedation and shipping
Cephalopod,e.g
Using the above preparation ofImmersion
Surgical anaesthesia
Sepioteuthis sepoided
MgCl with a 1% solution (by
(Caribbean reef squid)
volume) of ethanol added
Cephalopods, e.g. Sepioteuthis
Magnesium chloride4
Immersion: concentration of
Effective anaesthesia
sepoided
1.5 to 2%
Cephalopods, e.g. Sepioteuthis
 Magnesium sulphate4
Immersion: concentration
Effective anaesthesia
sepoided
of 3-4%
Gastropods
Magnesium chloridelo
Injected as a I0% solution
Quick relaxation for 5-15 min
dose to the cerebral ganglia
Gastropod: abalone
 Magnesium sulphate 14
4-22% (wt/vol)
5-8min
Gastropod: sea hare
Magnesium chloridel2
0.4 M MgCl in sea water with
2 mM Hepes (pH 7.7) injected
into haemocoel through
the foot
(Anderson, 1965); 2 (Best and Wells, 1983); 3 (Culloty and Mulcahy, 1992); 4 (Garcia-Franco, 1992); 5 (Heasman et al., 1995);
6 (Lewbart and Riser, 1996): 7 (McCurley and Kier, 1995): & (Muller et al., 2003); 2 (O'Dor et al., 1990); 1 (Runham et al., 1965);
(9661 1e e e4) , (661 *1e 1 11eps) g (9007, Zm01ows)  :(6661 a(s.1o pue e5ews)1
 Table I 9.3: Dose rates for the use of alcohol-based agents in a ariety of invertebrates
SPECIES
AGENT
ROUTE/DOSE
COMMENTS
Annelids
Lumbricus terrestris (common
Ethanol in Rushton's Ringer's Immersion: 5% ethanol
Immobilised
earthworm) and Eisenid
solution'
combined with Ringer's
 fish
foetida (compost worm)
Ethanol
Immersion: 5% solution
Immobilised
at 23°℃
Arthropods
Crustaceans
Ethanoll2
Immersion: 5-10% solution
Crustaceans
Chlorbutanol at varying dose  Immersion 
Can be irritant to humans
dose rates12
Crustaceans
2-phenoxyethanoll2
Immersion (1.5%)
Crustaceans
Isobutyl alcoholl2
Immersion (1.5-7 cm/L)
Crustacean
Isobutanol2
Cardiacinjection
Reliable anaesthesia
stomatopods,e.g.Squilld
100-200 μ/kg, between I1
mantis (mantis shrimp)
and 17°℃
Crustacean: decapods,e.g
Isobutyl alcohol
Immersion at concentrations
This caused brief hyperactivity
289
Homarus americanus
of 0.5-14.4 cm²/L
and recovery took 10 min
(American lobster)
Cnidaria
Coelenterates
Ethanoll3
Immersion
Reduce or eliminate pulsing
of the bell
Probably also effective in
comb jellies
Echinoderms
Holothuria forskali and
Propylene phenoxetop.14
Immersion: 2 ml/L saturated
Stichopus badionotus (sea
solution in sea water
cucumbers)
Molluscs
Cephalopods
I.5-2% ethanol in sea waterImmersion
Initial hyperactivity can be
traumatic and lead to high
mortalities if individuals are
left too long in solution
Cephalopods:octopusesandotherEthanol5
Immersion: 20 ml/L
Cephalopod: Sepid oficinalis
Ethanol alone!l
Immersion: 3% for induction
Surgery
(common Cuttlefish)
and I.5% for recirculating
maintenance
Cephalopod: Sepioteuthis sepoided
Ethanor
Immersion: I-3%
Gastropod:(abalone)
2-phenoxyethanoll5
Immersion: 0.05-0.3 % (vol/vol)
1-2min
Molluscs
2-phenoxyethanol
Immersion up to I% solution 
Effective in clams
Molluscs
Ethanol (95%)10
Immersion: 5-15% solution
2-8 min
I(Cooper, I968); 2 (Ferrero and Pressacco, 1982);3 (Foley et al., 1966); 4 (Garcia-Franco, 1992); 5 (Grist, 2001);  (Hill and
Reinschmidt, 1976); 7(Marks and Cooper, 1977); (O'Dor et al., 1990);  (Owen, 1955); I (Ross and Ross, 1999); II (Scimeca,
2006); 12 (Smaldon and Lee, 1979); 13 (Stoskopf, 2006); 14 (Van den Spiegel and Jangoux, 1987); I5 (White et al., 1996)
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Table I 9.4: Dose rates for the use of Ms-222 in a variety of invertebrates
SPECIES
AGENT
ROUTE/DOSE
COMMENTS
Arthropods
Crustacean: Amphipods,
MS-2221.5
Immersion at 0.5-1.0 g/L
 Slower induction, but greater safety margin at 
e.g. Gammarus pullex,
lower temperatures
Corophium sp.
Crustacean:Crangon
MS-2224
Immersion at 0.5 g/L
Anaesthetised
septemspinosa (sand shrimp)
Echinoderms
Coscinasterias (sea star)
MS-2226
Immersion at I0 g/L in sea water
Gastropods
MS-2222
Immersion 0.3% solution
Reversibly anaesthetised
Mollusc: Pinctadd
MS-2223
Immersion at I mg/L
 Effectively anaesthetised
290
radiata (pearl oyster)
Cnidaria
Coelenterates
MS-2227.8
Immersion (0.5 g/L)
Immobilised; reduce or eliminate pulsing of the bell
This method would probably be effective in
comb jellies also
(Ahmad, 1969); 2 (Beeman, 1969); 3 (Ehteshami, 1993); 4 (Foley et al., 1966); 5 (Gamble, 1969);  (O'Neill, 1994); 7 (Smaldon and
Lee, 1979); (Stoskopf, 2006)
Table I9.5: Dose rates for the use of injectable anaesthetics in a variety of invertebrates
SPECIES
AGENT
ROUTE/DOSE
COMMENTS
Arthropods
Crustacean: Decapods
Alfaxolone-alphadolone
30mg/kg
Anaesthesia
(Saffan@)5*
Crustacean:Large
Isobutanor
0.1 ml/kg into the
 Produces anaesthesia within 2 min
lobsters and crabs
abdomen
Crustacean:Homarus
Isobutanol (100%)3
0.2-0.5 μL/10g into
Mortality at higher doses
sp.-lobsters
abdominal sinus 
Crustacean: Pseudocar-
Ketamine HCI²
0.025-0.1mg/kg
Anaesthesia within 15-45 s, can cause rigidity
cinus sp.- giant crabs
Crustacean:Orconectes
Ketamine HCiI
WI 88 06
Duration I h or less
sp. - crayfish
Crustacean
Lidocaine
30 μg/g IM injected 
 Duration 25 min
Orconectes sp.
(lignocaine) HCI
intrathoracically
Crustacean: Decapods
Pentobarbitone5
250mg/kg
Duration 90 min
Continued
Invertebrate anaesthesia
Table I9.5: Continued
SPECIES
AGENT
ROUTE/DOSE
COMMENTS
Crustacean: Cancer
Procaine HCI5
25 mg/kg
Anaesthesia within 20-30 s, duration 2-3 h,
sp.- crab -and Carcinus
short phase (10 s) of excitement
sp.-green crab
Crustacean:Decapods
Propanidid injection into
100mg/kg
Anaesthesia of 60 min
the haemocoel via the
arthrodial membrane of
a posterior leg or
alternative routes
Crustacean:Cancer sp.
Xylazine HC15
70mg/kg
Anaesthesia within 5-6 min, duration 45 min
and Carcinus sp.
Crustacean: Pseudocar-
Xylazine HCI2
16-22mg/kg
Anaesthesia within 2-3 min
cinus sp.
Key: IM = intramuscular
* Schering Plough Animal Health, Welwyn Garden City, Herts, UK.
291
insects, and most other invertebrates, are truly dead is
2001). The POTR can be achieved using heat mats or
either to await signs of autolysis or rigor mortis, or to
gloves filled with warm water in terrestrial invertebrates,
destroy the anirmal physically so that recovery is impossible.
or by treating aquatic invertebrates in water maintained at
Sick or debilitated insects may succumb to anaesthesia, but
a temperature within their POTR.
generally anaesthesia is relatively safe (Cooper, 2006).
An & MHz Doppler ultrasound probe has been used to
Fluids
monitor heart rate under anaesthesia in some species,
such as giant land snails (Achatina sp.) (Rees Davies et al.,
Dehydration is always a threat when the chitinous
2000) (Fig. 19.16). However, this appears to be ineffective
-ji si ll sapadiu u alduexa ioy 'saioads rauo auos u!
exoskeleton is breached and insects should always receive
fluids before and after surgery, either by mouth via nebu-
ficult to attain good contact on the ventral body (Chitty,
lisation or, with caution, intracoelomically (Cooper, 2006).
2006).
Water or hypotonic saline [0.2-0.5%) can be used. Saline
 Judging anaesthetic depth in aquatic invertebrates
should not be used in phasmids (stick and leaf insects) as
is even more challenging. Five stages of anaesthesia
their body fluids contain potassium ions, not sodium
have been described in leeches, depending on the follow-
ing factors: attachment to surface, speed and extent of
(Stonehouse, 2003). The exoskeleton of aquatic animals
and those with delicate cuticles, such as myriapods
swimming, muscle tone, whether the caudal sucker is
functioning, and response to stimulation (Cooper, 2001).
(Chitty, 2006), should not be allowed to dry out and,
Anaesthesia has been judged to have occurred in the
therefore, carrier gas should be hurmidified.
flat oyster (Ostrea edulis) when the valves open but do
not close when touched (Culloty and Mulcahy, 1992). In
 Oxygen supplementation 
sea anermones depth of anaesthesia is measured by lack of
During some anaesthetics cephalopods may require
response to tactile stimuli (Moore, 1989).
assisted ventilation via cooled oxygenated anaesthetic
being passed through the mantle cavity continuously
PERI-ANAESTHETIC SUPPORTIVE
(O'Dor et al., 1990). Recovery from anaesthesia can be
hastened by pumping oxygen into the anaesthetic cham-
CARE
ber or by bubbling it through the water in aquatic situ-
ations (Cooper, 2001].
Temperature
Recovery
Invertebrates should be maintained within their preferred
optirmum temperature range (POTR) throughout anaes-
Anaesthetised or sedated crustacean individuals should
thesia. Although increased temperature can often acceler-
never be returned to tanks housing unsedated tank mates,
ate anaesthesia and recovery, this can be deleterious in
as these may attack a debilitated individual (Noga et al.
some cases and should only be carried out with care (Cooper,
2006). This situation may also occur in other colonies and
Aniaesthesia of ExoticPets
 Table I 9.6: Dose rates for the use of miscelaneous agents in a variety of invertebrates
SPECIES
AGENT
ROUTE/DOSE
COMMENTS
Annelids
Leeches
Mephenesin (3-o-toloxy-1,
Immersion
Anaesthesia for grafting
2-propanediol)12
research
Arthropods
Crustacean:Pseudocarcinus sp.
 Aqui-S (active ingredient
Immersion: 0.125-1.0 ml/L
Induction time 20-70 min
Iso-eugenol)
Chloroform6
Immersion: 1.25-2.5 ml/L
Duration 60 min
Clove oilf
Immersion: 0.03-1 ml/L
Induction time >85 min
Crustaceans
 Ethane disulphonate!l
Immersion: 2.5 g/L
Crustaceans
 Methyl pentynolll!
Immersion: 5 cm /L
Cnidaria
292
Adamsid carciniopados (cloak
Menthol
Crystals ground to coarse
Lower temperatures slow
sea anemone) plus various
powder and scattered on
rate of induction
other sea anemone species
surface of water containing
organisms
Echinoderms
Amphipholis squamata
Menthol
Immersion: 2.5-5% in sterile
(brittle star)
seawater
Molluscs
Gastropod: limpet
Chloral hydrate
Immersion: dilutesolution for
swimming larvae
Gastropod: pulmonates
Clove oil (eugenol)2
Immersion: 0.6% in water
Gastropods
Nembutal
Immersion: 0.1%
Gastropod: abalone
 Sodium pentobarbitonel.10
Immersion: 60 mg/L of
23°℃
seawater
Gastropods
Succinyl choline dissolved in
Immersion: 0.5 mg per 10g
Good relaxation
sea water at 5 g/L3
liveweight
Injection into space near
 cerebral ganglia
Mollusc: Ostred edulis -
Benzocaine (must first be
Immersion: 0.1% solution
flat oyster
dissolved in small volume of
acetone)5
Mollusc: Pecten fumatus -
Chloral hydrate?
Immersion: 4 g/L
Anaesthesia
commercial scallop
Mollusc: Ostred edulis
Chloral hydrates
Immersion: 2-5%
I(Aqualina and Roberts, 2000); 2 (Araujo et al., 1995); 3 (Beeman, 1969); 4 (Costello and Henley, 1971); 5 (Culloty and Mulcahy,
1992);  (Gardner, 1997); 7 (Heasman et al, 1995); 8(Moore, 1989); 2 (Ross and Ross, 1999);1 (Sharma et al., 2003);  (Smaldon
and Lee, 1979); I2 (Tettamanti et al., 2003)
Invertebrate anaesthesia
Figure I 9.16 · (A) Use of an 8 MHz Doppler ultrasound probe in a giant land snail (Achatind sp.). (B) Use of Doppler on giant land snail:
close-up.
should be assessed before reintroductions. It is also impor-
Andrews, P. L. R., and E. M. Tansey. I98l. The effects of some
293
tant that no live food should be left within a tank into
anaesthetic agents in Octopus vulgaris. Comp Biochem Physiol
which a recently anaesthetised individual is returmed, as the
70C: 241-247.
animal is unlikely to feed soon after anaesthesia and may
Aqualina, B., and R. Roberts. 2000. A method for inducing muscle
relaxation in the abalone, Haliotis iris. Aquaculture I90: 403-408.
itself, be attacked by other invertebrates supplied as food.
Araujo, R., J. M. Remon, D. Moreno et al. 1995. Relaxing techniques
for freshwater molluscs: trials for evaluation of different
Do not place recently anaesthetised individuals into
methods. Malacologia 36: 29-41.
 an environment with other invertebrates as they may
Beeman, R. D. 1969. The use of succinylcholine and other drugs for
be attacked.
anaesthetising or narcotising gastropod molluscs. Publ Zool
Station, Naples 36.
Best, E. M. H., and M. J. Wells. I983. The control of digestion in
octopus I: The anticipatory response and effects of severing
CONCLUSION
the nerves to the gut. Vie Milieu 33: 135-142.
Brey, P. T. I994. The impact of stress on insect immunity. Bull
I'Institut Pasteur 92: I10-I18.
Invertebrate anaesthesia is an increasingly vital part of
Brown, P. H., M. R. White, J. Chaill et al. I996. Evaluation of three
modern veterinary practice and is likely to grow in impor-
anaesthetic agents for crayfish [Orconectes virilis]. J Shelfish
tance as monitoring methods become more sophisticated.
Res 15: 433-435.
An animal's care should never be comprormised simply
Chitty, J. R. 200l. A discharging sinus in a Chile Rose spider. Vet
due to its size, and veterinary clinicians have a duty to
Invertebrate Soc Newlett 2: II-16.
provide anaesthesia and analgesia to the best of our abili-
Chitty, J. R. 2006. Myriapods [centipedes and millipedes). In:
ties to all the many and varied species we treat.
G. Lewbart [ed.) Invertebrate Medicine. pp. I95-203.
Blackwell Publishing, Iowa.
Coelho, F C., and C. C. Amaya. 2000. Measuring the heart rate of
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
the spider Aphomopelma hentzi: A non-invasive technique.
Physiol Entomol 25: 167-171.
I would like to thank Strathmore Veterinary Clinic,
Cooper, E. L. 1968. Transplantation immunity in annelids
Andover, Hampshire and Porton （
Garden
Centre,
Transplantation 6: 322-337. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Salisbury, Wiltshire for their assistance in providing photo-
Cooper, J. E. I998. Emergency care of invertebrates. In:
 graphic specimens.
A E. Rupley (ed.) The Veterinary Clinics of North America,
Critical Care No. I(1)- pp. 251-264. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Cooper, J. E. 2001. Invertebrate Anaesthesia. In: D. J. Heard [ed.)
REFERENCES
The Veterinary Clinics of North America, Analgesia and
Anaesthesia No. 4[1]- pp. 57-67. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Cooper, J. E. 2006. Insects In: G. Lewbart [ed.) Invertebrate
Ahmad, M. F. 1969. Anaesthetic effects of tricaine methane
Medicine. pp. 205-219. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa.
sulphonate [MS222 Sandoz] on Gammarus pulex [L.)
Costello, D. P., and C. Henley. I971. Methods for Obtaining and
[amphipoda). Crustaceana [Leiden] 17: 197-201.
Handing Marine Eggs and Embryos. Znd edn. pp. 247. Marine
Anderson, J. M. I965. Studies on visceral regeneration in sea-stars.
Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA.
III. Regeneration of the cardia stomach in Asterias forbesi
Culloty, S. C., and M. F. Mulcahy I992. An evaluation of anaesthetics
[Desor). Biol Bull 129: 454-470.
for Ostrea edulis [L.). Aquaculture I07: 249-252.
Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets
Ehteshami, F. 1993. Anaesthetising Fnctada radiata with MS222
O'Dor, R. K., R. D. Durward, and N. Balch. I977. Maintenance
Iranian Fisheries Bull 3: I.
and maturation of squid [illex illecerebrosus] in a I5 metre
Ferrero, E.A., and L. Pressacco. I982. Anaesthetic procedures for
circular pool. Biol Bull Woods Hole, Massachusetts I53:
crustacean. An assesstment of isobutanol and xylazine as general
322-335.
anaesthetics for Squilla mantis [Stomatopoda). Memorie Biol
O'Dor, R. K., H. O. Portner, and R. E. Shadwick. I990. Squid as
marina Oceanografia I2: 47-75.
elite athletes: Locomotory, respiratory and circulatory
Foelix, R. F. 1996. Biology of Spiders. Znd edn. pp. 330. Harvard
integration. In: D. L. Gilbert, W. J. Adelman and J. M. Amold
University Press, Cambridge.
[eds.) Squid as Experimental Animals. pp. 516. Plenum Press,
Foley, D. M., J. E. Stewart, and R. A. Holley. I966. Isobutyl alcohol
New York.
and methyl pentynol as general anaesthetics for the lobster,
O'Neill, P. L. 1994. The effect of anaesthesia on spontaneous
Homarus americarius Milne-Edwards. Can J Zool 44: I41-143.
contraction of the body wall musculature in the asteroid
Frye, F. L. 2006. Scorpions In: G. Lewbart [ed.) Invertebrate
Coscinasterias calamaria. Marine Behav Physiol 24:
Medicine. pp. I69-177. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa.
137150.
Gamble, J. C. I969. Anaesthetic for Corophium volutator [Pallas)
Obradovic, J. 1986. Effects of anaesthetics [halothane and MS222)
and Marinogammarus obtustatus [Dahl) Crustacea,
on crayfish Astacus astacus. Aquaculture 52: 213-217.
Amphipoda. Experientia 25: 539-540.
Oswald, R. L. 1977. Immobilisation of decapod crustacean for
Garcia-Franco, M. 1992. Anaesthetics for the squid Sepioteuthis
experimental procedures. J Marine Biol Assoc UK 57:
sepiodea [Mollusca: Cephalopoda). Comp Biochem Physiol
715-721.
103C: 121-123
Owen, G. I955. Use of propylene phenoxytol as a relaxing agent.
Gardner, C. 1997. Options for humanely immobilizing and killing
Nature 175: 434.
crabs. J Shellfish Res 16: 19-224.
Patterson, B.D.I993.Respiration rate of the Kuriama prawn,
Gilgan, M. W., and B. G. Burms. I976 The anaesthesia of the lobster
Permaeus japomicus, is not increased by handling at low
[Homarus americarius] by isobutanol injection. Can J Zool
temperatures [12 degrees C]. Aquaculture I14: 229-235.
54: 1231-1234.
Paul, R. J. 1990. La respiration des arachnids. Recherche 226: 1338.
Girdlestone, D., S. G. H. Cruikshank, and W. Winlow. I989. The
Pizzi, R. 2006. Spiders In: G. Lewbart [ed.) Invertebrate Medicine.
294
actions of three volatile general anaesthetics on withdrawal
pp. 143-168. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa.
responses of the pond snail Lymnea stagnalis (L.) Comp
Rees Davies, R., J. R. Chitty, and R. Saunders. 2000. Cardiovascular
Biochem Physiol 92C: 39-43.
monitoring of an Achatina snail using a Doppler ultrasound
Grist, C. 2001. Aquatic invertebrates. In: W. H. Wildgoose [ed.)
unit. In: Proceedings of the British Veterinary Zoological
Manual of Ormamental Fish. 2nd edn. pp. 267-274. BSAVA,
Society Aututmn Meeting 18-19 November, Royal Veterinary
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
College, London. pp. 101.
Heasman, M. P, W. A. O'Connor, and A. W. J. Frazer. I995.
Ross, L. G., and B. Ross. I999. Anaesthesia of aquatic invertebrates.
Induction of anaesthesia in the commercial scallop Pectem1
In: L. G. Ross and B. Ross [eds.) Anaesthetic and Sedative
fumatus. Aquaculture 131: 231238.
Techniques for Aquatic Animals. Znd ern. p. 46-57. Blackwell
Hill, R. B., and D. Reinschmidt. I976. Relative importance of the
Science, Oxford.
antioxidant and anaesthetic properties of propylene phenoxetol
Runham, N. W., K. Isarankura, and B. J. Smith. I965. Methods for
im its action as a 'preservative' for living holot hurians.
narcotizing and anaesthetising gastropods. Malacologia 2:
J Invertebrate Pathol 28: 131-135.
231-238.
Ingle, R. W. I995. The UFAW Handbook on the Care and
Schartau, W, and T. Leidescher. I983.Composition of the haemolymph
Management of Decapod Crustaceans in Captivity. Universities
of the tarantula Eurypelma califormicum. J Comp Physiol
Federation for Animal Welfare, Potters Bar, England.
152: 73-77.
Johnson-Delaney, C. 2000. Invertebrates. Exotic Companion
Scimeca, J. M. 2006. Cephalopods In: G. Lewbart [ed.) Invertebrate
Medicine Handbook. Zoological Education Network.
Medicine. pp. 79-89. Black well Publishing, Iowa.
http://www.exoticdvm.com.
Scimeca, J. M., and J. W. Forsythe. I999. The use of anaesthetic
Lewbart, G., and N. Riser. I996. Nuchal organs of the polychaete
agents in cephalopods. In: Proceedings of the International
Parapriorosyllis marica (Syllidae). Invertebrate Biol I15: 286-298.
Association of Aquatic Animal Medicine. pp. 94.
Marks, D. H.,and E.L.Cooper.1977.Aeromonas hydrophila m the
 Sharma, P, H. H. Nollens, J. A. Keogh et al. 2003. Sodium
coelomic cavity of the earthworms Lumbricus terrestris and
pentobarbitone-induced relaxation in the abalone Haliotis iris
Eisertia foetida. J Invertebrate Pathol 29: 382-383.
[Gastropoda): Effects of animal size and exposure time.
McCurley, R. S., and W. M. Kier. 1995. The functional morphology
Aquaculture 218: 589599.
of starfish tube feet: The role of a crossed-fiber helical array in
Smaldon, G., and E. W. Lee. 1979. A Synopsis of Methods for the
movement. Biol Bull 188: 197-209.
Narcotisation of Marine Invertebrates. Royal Scottish Museum
McKenzie, J. D., P Calow, and W. S. Nimmo. I992. Effects of
Information Series No. 6, Edinburgh.
general anaesthetics on intact Daphria magna [Cladocera:
Smolowitz, R. 2006. Gastropods In: G. Lewbart [ed.) Invertebrate
Crustacea). Comp Biochem Physiol 10iC: 9-13.
Medicine. pp. 65-78. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa.
Messenger, J. B., M. Nixon, and K. P Ryan. I985. Magnesium
Stonehouse, J. 2003. Hexapod. Antenna 27: 341-342.
chloride as an anaesthetic for cephalopods. Comp Biochem
Stoskopf, M. K. 2006. Coelenterates. In: G. Lewbart [ed.]
Physiol 82C: 203-205.
Invertebrate Medicine. pp. I9-5l. Blackwell Pubhishing, Iowa.
Moore, S. J. I989. Narcotising sea anemones. J Marine Biol Assoc
Tettamanti, G., A. Grimaldi, R. Ferrarese et al. 2003. Leech
UK 69: 803-811.
responses to tissue transplantation. Tissue Cell 35: I99-212.
Muller, M. C. M., A. Berenzen, and W Westheide. 2003. Experiments
Van den Spiegel, D., and M. Jangoux. I987. Cuverian tubules of the
m anterior regeneration in Eurythoe complatata {Polychaeta
holothuroid Holothuria forskali [Echinodermata):
 Amphinomidae): Reconfiguration of the nervous system and its
A morphofunctional study. Marine Biol 96: 263-275.
fumction for regeneration. Zoomorphology I22: 95-103.
Westfall, J. A., K. L. Sayyar, C. F. Elliott et al. I995. Ultrastructural
Noga, E. J., A. L. Hancock, and R. A. Bullis. 2006. Crustaceans In:
localization of anthor wamides i and i at neuromuscular
G. Lewbart [ed.) Invertebrate Medicine. pp. I79-194.
synapses in the gastrodermis and oral sphincter muscle of the
Blackwell Publishing, Iowa.
sea anemone Calliactis parasitica. Biol Bull 189: 280-287.
Invertebrate anaesthesia
White, H. I., T. Hecht, and B. Potgeiter. I996. The effect of four
WEBSITE
anaesthetics on Haliotis midae and their suitability for
application in comm ercial abalone culture. Aquaculture 140:
145151.
 Nieuwenhuys, E. 2006. The spider, blood circulation, the lungs and
Williams, D. L. 2002. Invertebrates. In: A. Meredith and S. Redrobe
moulting. Online. Available: http://www.xs4all/~ednieuw 12
[eds.) Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. pp. 280-287. BSAVA,
April 2007.
Quedgeley, Gloucester.
折sh
295
Appendix
opendix
STANDARD NEEDLE SIZES
297
METRIC
IMPERIAL
13 mm
X"
16mm
%”
wW61
y"
25 mm
32mm
I 4"
38mm
IX"
A
anaesthesia
Alligators, 238, 239
Abdominal palpation, 30, 115
analgesia, 98, 99
Allopuninol, 143, 177
Abdominal veins, chelonia, 229
induction and maintenance, 97-8
Alpha-2 agonists, 8-9, 33, 47, 80,
 Abdominal venepuncture, pigs, 116
monitoning,98
161
299
Abdomminal viscera, 38, 69
techniques, 97
see aiso individual agents
Accipitridae seeBirdsof prey
anatomy and physiology, 28, 96-7
Alpha-2 antagonists, 12
Acepromazine, 8
clinical examination,97
see aiso individual agents
ferret anaesthesia, 87, 90
diet, 73, 96
Alfaxalone-alphadolone, 11
non-human primate anaesthesia,
environmental temperature, 96
avian anaesthesia, 15l, 153
104,106
fluid support, 97
fish anaesthesia, 270, 277
pig anaesthesia, 1l8, 118
history taking, 97
invertebrate anaesthesia, 290
rabbit anaesthesia, 45, 46
hospitalisation, 97
non-human primate anaesthesia,
reptile anaesthesia, 207, 233
husbandry factors, 96
106, 107
rodent anaesthesia, 64, 67,80, 81
nutitional support, 97
pig anaesthesia, 118,119
small mammal anaesthesia, 101, 102
pre-anaesthetics, 97
rabbit anaesthesia, 48
Acepromazine + butorphanol, 46, 101
sedation for examination, 27
reptile anaesthesia, 201, 207, 234,
Acepromazine + ketamine, 80, 101
supplemental heating, 96
235, 236
Acetylcholine, 193
African sidenecked turtle (Pelusios
rodent anaesthesia, 66
Acidaemia, 190
spp),228
Alveolar gas carbon dioxide
Acidosis, 8, 16, 19, 48
African spurred tortoise (Geochelone
concentrations, 15
Acrochordidae,221
sulcata), 187, 196,231, 233
Amazon parrot (Amazona ventralis),
Activated charcoal, 1l
Agamidae,211,215
143, 161
Ad-nociceptive neurons, reptiles, 195
Air sac cannulae, 144, 164
Ambu@ bags, 202
Adrenal disorders, 39, 77, 86, 91
Air sac cannulation, 145, 149-50, 151,
American alligator Alligator
Adrenalectomy, 86
156, 173
mississippiensis),240
Adrenaline (epinephrine), 7, 20, 21
Air sacs
Amino acids, 140
 amphibian anaesthesia, 258
avians, 132-3, 171
Ammonia, 38, 249
avian anaesthesia, 16l, 165
lizards, 212, 214
Amphibia, 245
ferret anaesthesia, 93
Airway initants, 10
anaesthesia
fish anaesthesia, 276
Airway maintenance, rabbits, 44-5
anaesthetic agents, 255
non-human primate anaesthesia,
Airway obstruction, 15
analgesia, 257
110
avians, 164
cardiovascular problems, 258
rabbit anaesthesia, 54
rabbits, 46, 51-2
equipment, 251-2, 256-7
reptile anaesthesia, 193
Airway pressures, avians, 150
fasting,257
rodent anaesthesia, 72
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 47, 86
induction, 252-5
Adrenergic stimmulation, 27, 29
Alcohol-based anaesthetics, 288, 289
intubation,252
Aeromonas,192
Aleutian disease, 86, 87
maintenance, 255
African bullfrog (Pyxicephalus
Alfafa hays, 39
monitoring, 256-7
adsperus),245
Alfaxan@, 201
oxygen supplementation, 255
African
clawed frog (Xenopus laevis),
Alfaxolone, 234
patient management, 257
245, 248
Alfentanil, 12, 119, 121
planes of, 253
African grey parrot (Psittacus
Alka-Seltzer@, 269, 277
recovery, 254, 255
erithacus),130,159-60,161
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 86
respiratory problems, 258
Allergens, 38
routes of admministration, 252
albiventris)
Alligator clips, 15
suggested protocols, 255-6
Index
Amphibia (Contd)
Artenial catheters, 123
ocular damage, 166
anatomy and physiology, 246-50
Arteriosclerosis, 37, 132
oxygen supplemmentation, 142,
blood flow, 246
Arthropods,280, 283,289,290, 292
143, 156, 160
blood pressure, 246
Artificial turf, 178
positioning of patients, 12, 163
body temperature, 246
Aspartate amminotransferase (AST), 47,
positive pressure ventilation, 144,
clinical exammination, 250
136
163, 164
commonly kept as pets, 245
Aspergillus sp.,75, 135, 177
preparation, 143
dehydration, 250
A.fumigatus, 177
recovery, 156-7
environmental temperature, 246, 257
Aspiration, 143
routes of administration, 144-8
fluid support, 251
Aspirin, 70, 109, 143
stabilisation, 141-2
handling, 250
Assassin bugs (Reduviidae), 281
suggested protocols, 139, 157
history taking, 250
Ataxia, 97, 107
supplemental heating, 143,
hospitalisation, 250-1
Atherosclerosis, 171
156-7, 160, 165
husbandry factors, 250
Atipamezole, 9
thage, 138, 139
metabolism, 249
avian anaesthesia, 152, 153, 174
anatomy and physiology, 129-37,
nutitional support, 251
ferret anaesthesia, 86, 90
147, 149
Amyloidosis, 81, 135, 194
mammmal anaesthesia, 30, 87
blood flow, 155
Anaemia, 85, 86, 139, 142, 143
non-human primate anaesthesia,
blood pressure, 135, 165
Anaerobic metabolism, reptiles, 190
105, 106
blood sampling, 139
Anaesthesia
rabbit anaesthesia, 47, 48, 49, 51
blood smears, 139
emergency procedures and drugs,
reptile anaesthesia, 206, 234, 235
blood transfusions,
s,139,140,143
18-21
rodent anaesthesia, 66
blood volume, 131
equipment, 2-6,16
small mammal anaesthesia, 98
body temperature, 129
monitoning, 14-16
Atlantic anemones (Condylactic sp.),
catheters,179
mortality, 7, 14
279
clinical examination,
, 138-9
300
 need for, l
Atracurium, 107
common pets, 130
 pain and analgesics, 18
Atrial thrombosis, 73
dehydration, 135, 139,166
Atropine, 8, 19-20, 21
diet, 135-6, 143
12-13
avian anaesthesia, 153, 164-5, 165
environmental temperature, 129-31,
pre-anaesthetic assessment , 1-2, 6
ferret anaesthesia, 90, 93
141
protocols,6
fish anaesthesia, 276
fluid support, 139, 140, 142-3, 160
recovery, 13-14
mammal anaesthesia, 33
history taking, 138
relevant techniques, 16-18
non-human primate anaesthesia,
hospitalisation, 139-41
special conditions, 18
104, 110
nutritional support, 136, 140,143
stages of, 14
pig anaesthesia, 118, 120, 122, 125,
 peri-anaesthetic supportive care,
see aiso individual species
228
160
Anaesthetic circuits, 2-3, 6, 10, 1l, 12,
rabbit anaesthesia, 49
pre-anaesthetics, 150
13, 15. 16
reptile anaesthesia, 207
reflexes, 158
avians, 143-4, 151
rodent anaesthesia, 64, 72
restraint, 172, 179
mammals, 31, 115
small mammal anaesthesia, 97, 98,
vision, 137
reptiles, 198
101
see aiso Birds of prey; Passerines,
Anaesthetic creams, 7, 41, 1l6, 161
Atropinesterase, 33, 46
psittacines and columbiformes
Anaesthetic drugs, 6-12
Auricular venepuncture, 116
Awareness, during anaesthesia, 14
Anaesthetic Index (AI), 154
Australian snake-necked turtle
Ayre's T-piece, 1 44
Anaesthetic machines, 2, 10
(Chelodina sp.),228
Azaperone, 8, 117, 118, 119, 122
Analgesia/analgesics, 8, 13, 18
Avians, 129
Azaperone + metomidate, 118
Annelids, 287, 289, 292
anaesthesia
Anorexia, 36, 38, 40, 69, 76, 86, 195
air sac cannulation, 145, 149-50,
Antenior vena cava puncture, 76, 113,
151, 156
Baboon spider (Pterinochhilus
116
analgesia, 160-2
murinus),282
Antibiotics, 30, 76
assisted ventilation, 17, 149
Baby foods, 60, 88, 143, 173
Anticholinergics, 8, 12, 19, 33, 46,
blood pressure measurement,
Bactenial entenitis, 76
108, 117
150, 159
Bactenial pneumonia, 99, 192
see aiso individual agents
emergency procedu res/drugs,
Bain circuits, 2, 31, 40, 144
Antifungals, 181
162-6
Barbiturates, 1l, 48, 119
Antioxidant supplementation, 10
equipment,4,143-4
Barn owl (Tyto alba), 130
Anurans, 245, 248, 252
extubation,157
Basc monitor (Varanus
Anxiclysis, 8
facemasks, 4, 144, 151, 154, 157,
exanthematicus),211
Apnoea, 10, 11, 20, 36, 48, 50, 77, 92,
175, 180
Basihyoid valve, crocodilia, 238
151,163, 164, 190, 192, 200,
fasting before, 135, 151, 160
Bayer, 277
258
general approach,
, 151
Baylisascaris procyonis,79
Appetite, 13, 136
induction, 151-6
Bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps), 187,
Aquatic invertebrates, 282, 283, 291
intubation, 148-9, 156, 157, 163
195, 211
Aquatic reptiles, 202, 229, 230
maintenance, 156
Bedding, 13, 71
Aquis-S@, 269,276,292
monitoning, 157-60
Bees, sedation, 283
Artenial blood pressure, 1l, 15, 85,
 neonatal or paediatic patients,
Bell stethoscopes, 5, 14, 32, 69, 78, 92,
156, 159, 181, 204
157
144, 157
Index
Bell's hingeback tortoise (Kinixys
Bonelli's eagle (Aquila fasciata), 181
C
belliana),187
Book lungs, spiders, 281, 285
Caecilians, 245, 247, 249
Benzocaine
Bordetella bronchiseptica,38, 76,96,
Caecotrophy, 39
amphibian anaesthesia, 254, 255
103
Caesarean sections, 77, 92
avian anaesthesia, 161
Box tortoise (Terrapene carolina spp),
Caimans, 238
fish anaesthesia, 269, 270, 276
187
Calcium, 47
invertebrate anaesthesia, 288, 292
Box turtles (Terrapene spp), 230, 231,
Callitrichid hepatitis, 103
Benzodiazepines, 8, 9, 11, 12, 39, 50,
233
Canary (Serinus canaria), 130
119
Brachial venepuncture, 147
Canine distemper, 87
see also individual agents
Brachiocephalic venepuncture, 116
Capillary refill time, 14, 19, 85, 123,
Berkshire pigs, 112, 113
Brachiopods, 286
138, 158
Birds of prey, 177
Bradyarrhythmias, 8
Capnography, 15
anaesthesia
Bradycardia, 8, 10, 12, 20, 37, 46, 48,
avians, 144, 159-60, 163, 175, 181
antifungals, 181
50, 80, 105, 108, 152, 163, 270
mammals, 32
equipment, 179, 180-1
Bradypnoea, 200
reptiles, 204
fasting before, 160, 178,181
Branchial respiration, amphibia, 248
Carbon dioxide (CO), 15, 19, 269,
induction, 180
Bronchial secretions, 19, 46
276, 286
intubation, 179
Bronchodilation, 1l
Cardiac
maintenance, 180
 Bronchogenic pulmonary adenoma, 76
arrest,10, 19, 155,161, 163, 164
monitoning,180-1
Bronchopneumonia, 103
arrhythmias, 10, 20, 47, 155
recovery,
180
Bronze frog (Rana clamitans), 253
auscultation, 138
routes of administration, 179
Brooders, 141
compressions, external, 19
suggested protocols, 180
Budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulates),
disease, 37, 85, 86
anatomy and physiology, 177-8
130, 135, 139, 142, 172
dysfunction, 194
behaviour, 168
Buffered fluids, 197
emergencies, pre-anaesthetic
clinical exammination, 178
Bull frog (Rana catesbeiana), 254
medication, 8
301
diet, 178-9
Bupivacaine, 7, 18
failure, 79, 99, 165
fluid support, 179
avian anaesthesia, 16l, 162
hypertrophy, 37
history taking, 178
 non-human primate anaesthesia, 1 09
output, 8,11,20, 131
hospitalisation, 178-9
reptile anaesthesia, 205
puncture,100,147
nutritional support, 179
Buprenorphine, 9, 12
Cardio-respiratory
pre-anaesthetic support care, 181
amphibian anaesthesia, 257
compromise, 30
pre-anaesthetics,180
avian anaesthesia, 162
depression, 8, 10, 11,13, 14, 33, 47,
Black mamba (Dendroaspis polylepis)
ferret anaesthesia, 9l, 93
80, 104, 151, 152, 161
222
 mammal anaesthesia, 30
disease, 40, 74, 99
Black rat snake (Elaphe obsoieta
non-human primate anaesthesia,
Cardio-respiratory system
obsoietea),223,224
109
amphibia, 256
Black widow spider (Latrodectus
pig anaesthesia,124
ferrets, 92
matrans),284
rabbit anaesthesia, 48, 50, 53
reptiles, 203
Bladder, reptiles, 193, 230
reptile anaesthesia, 203, 205, 216
Cardiocentesis, marine toad, 247
Blastomyces dermatidis,86
rodent anaesthesia, 70, 77
Cardiomyopathy, 36, 37, 73, 75, 79,
Blind intubation, rabbits, 43-4
small mammal anaesthesia, 99
86,96, 99, 132
Bloat, gastrointestinal, 86
Burette giving-sets, 6
Cardiovascular
Blood biochemistry, 39, 74, 76, 86
Bumese python (Python moiurus),
collapse, 14, 86
Blood donors, avians, 143
187, 222
depression, 47, 68, 105, 119, 150
Blood flow, fall in, 15
Butorphanol, 9, 12
problems, 19-20. 38, 132, 165,
Blood gas analysis, 15, 19, 159, 273
amphibian anaesthesia, 257
258
Blood glucose, 18, 77, 79, 81, 92
avian anaesthesia, 150, 153, 161,
Cardiovascular system, 14-15
Blood oxygen, 19
162, 174, 176
amphibia, 246-7
 Blood oxygenation, 15
ferret anaesthesia, 90, 91, 93
avians, 131-2, 138, 157-8
 Blood pressure, measurement, 15
fish anaesthesia, 276
passenines, psittacines and
Blood sampling, 1
mammal anaesthesia, 30
columbifomes, 171
 Blood solubility, equilibration time,
 non-human primate anaesthesia, 109
fish, 262, 273
volatile agents, 9
pig anaesthesia, 120,124
invertebrates, 281
Blood transfusions, 13
rabbit anaesthesia, 45, 46, 47, 48,
mammals, 32
Blood urea nitrogen, 47, 72, 86
50, 53
 Afican pygmy hedgehogs, 96
Blue crayfish, 279
reptile anaesthesia, 203, 205, 207,
chinchillas, 79
Blue and gold macaw (Ara ararauna),
216,218, 225,226,234, 236
ferrets, 85, 91
130
rodent anaesthesia, 70
gerbils,68
Blue-fronted Amazon (Amazona
small mammal anaesthesia, 99, 101
guinea pigs, 75-6
aestiva),130
Butorphanol + ketammine, 207
hamsters, 73
Blue-tongued skink (Tiliqua spp.),
Butorphano] + ketamine +
non-human primates, 103
211
medetomidine, 47, 153
pigs, 113, 123
Boa constrictor (Boa constrictor), 187,
Butorphanol + midazolam, 207
prainie dogs, 74
222
Butyrophenones, 8, 12
rabbits, 37, 51
Body size, mammals, 29
Buzzards [Buteo buteo), 155, 178, 179,
rats and mice, 7l, 72
 Body temperature, 15
180, 181
rodents, 72
Index
Cardiovascular system (Contd)
Chilean rose spider (Grammostola
Congestive heart failure, 73, 96, 99,
reptiles, 186, 190-1
rosea),284,285
135-6
chelonia, 228-9
Chinchillas
Conjunctival anaesthesia, 7
crocodiles, 238
anaesthesia, 77, 80
Connections to patients, 3-5
lizards, 211-12
analgesics, 70
Convulsions, 7, 152
snakes, 221
 injectable agents, 67
Coopers hawk (Accipiter cooperi)], 180
Carprofen
monitoring and supportive care,
Coprophagy, 71
avian anaesthesia, 162
80
Corn snake (Elaphe guttata), 187, 222
ferret anaesthesia, 93
routes of administration, 61, 62
Corneal anaesthesia, 7
non-human primate anaesthesia, 109
sedatives and pre-medicants, 64,
Corneal reflex, 12, 52, 158
pig anaesthesia, 124, 124
65
Corticosteroids, 36
rabbit anaesthesia, 53
clinical examination, 78
Corynebacterium kutscheri,71
reptile anaesthesia, 205
diet, 79
Cranial vena cava puncture, 74, 85, 89,
rodent anaesthesia, 70
emergency drugs, 72
97, 100
Cat litter trays, 198, 199
environmental temperature, 78-9
Crash boxes, 20, 163
Cat masks, 30
fluid and nutritional support, 60
Crayfish (Astacus astacus), 286, 288
Catecholammines, 10, 36, 86, 155
physiological information, 28, 29,
Creatine phosphokinase (CPK), 136
Caudata, 245, 248
78-80
Creatinine, 47
Cedar bedding, 71
Chipmunks (Tamius sibericus), 28, 60,
Cnitical Care Fommula@, 173
Centipedes (Scolopendra sp.), 284, 285
74, 75
Crocodiles, 238
Central Amenican fer-de-lance
Chlamydophila psittaci), 250
anaesthesia
(Bothrops asper), 222
Chloral hydrate, 292
induction, 239
Central nervous system, 8
Chlorbutanol, 289
intubation, 239
amphibia, 256
Chlorhexidine, 252
maintenance, 239
avians, 133, 137, 158
Chlonide, 47
positive pressure ventilation, 239
302
fish, 273
Chlorofom, 292
restraint,239
invertebrates, 282
Chlorpromazine,104, 106, 233, 288
routes of administration, 239
mammals, 32
Cholesterol, 47
anaesthetic agents, 240
African pygmy hedgehogs, 97
Chronic myositis, 12
anatomy and physiology, 191, 238-9
chinchillas, 79-80
Cilia-associated respiratory (CAR)
environmental temperature, 238
ferrets, 87, 92
bacillus, 71
Crop tubes (avian), 145, 146
gerbils, 73
Circle (closed) anaesthetic circuit, 2, 3
Cnustaceans, 282, 289, 290, 291, 292
pigs, 123
Circulatory
Crystalloids, 13, 38, 60, 88, 140, 142,
rabbits, 39-40, 52
failure, 19
165, 194, 197, 198
reptiles, 195, 203
volume expansion, 13
Cushing's disease, 96
Central sensitization, 18
Circulatory system
Cyanosis, 33, 164
Central venous pressure, assessment,
amphibia,246
Cyclooxygenase enzymes (COX-1], 33
15
fish, 262
Cyclooxygenase enzymes (COX-2), 33,
Cephalic venepuncture, 41, 74, 76, 79,
invertebrates, 281
92
85, 89, 105, 116, 213, 216
reptiles, 190
Cephalopods, 286, 287,289, 291
Cisapnide, 34
D
Cerebral blood flow, 1l
CITES (Convention on the
 Dangerous Wild Animals Aet (1976),
Cerebral vasodilation, 47
International Trade in
238
Cervical lymphadenitis, 77
Endangered Species), 228
Dantrolene, 125
Chameleon, 211, 212, 215
Clinical examinations, 1
Dead space, 2, 3, 19, 30
Cheek dilators, 31
Cloaca, 99, 135
Debilitated animals, 6, 30
Chelonia, 228
Cloacal bladders, 230
Decapods, 281, 286, 288
anaesthesia
Cloacal prolapse, 137
Defecation, recording during recovery,
assisted ventilation, 200
Cloacal reflex, 158
13
fasting before, 230
Closed anaesthetic circuits, 2, 3
Degu [Octodon degus], 62, 63, 80-1
induction, 203, 233-5
Clostridium piliforme, 72
Dehydration, 1,6,8
intubation, 200
Clove oil (Eugenol), 254, 255, 269,
Delta(8) receptors, 18
maintenance, 235-6
270, 276, 292
Dental disease, 75, 79, 81
monitoning，203
Cnidaria, 287, 289, 290, 292
Deoxyaconitine, 54
positive pressure ventilation, 236
Coagulation abnommalities, 54
Depression, 173
recovery, 236
Coagulopathy, 136
Desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii),
routes of administration, 231-3
Coccidiosis immitis, 86
187,234
suggested protocols, 236
Cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus),
Desflurane, 10, 48, 122, 154, 155, 156
anatomy and physiology, 191,
130, 142-3
Detomidine + butorphanol +
228-31
Coelenterates, 280, 289, 290
midazolam + atropine, 120
environmental temperature, 228
Coelomic cavity, surgery, 150
Dexamethasone, 21, 54, 72, 93, 125,
heliothermy, 186
Colloids, 13, 38, 60, 88, 140, 142,
162
metabolism, 231
143, 194, 197-8
Dextran, 266
pre-anaesthetics, 233
Colonic motility, 39
Dextrose, 60, 81, 92, 140, 194,197, 266
ultraviolet (UV) light, 186-8
Columbines see Passerines, psittacines
Diabetes, 72
Chest compressions, 19
and columbifomes
Diabetes mellitus, 73, 77, 79, 81, 87,
Chickens, controlled ventilation, 150
Congenital conditions, rabbits, 37
136, 137
Index
Diaphragm, reptiles, 191
Double induction chambers, 3
ferrets, 86-7
Diarrhoea, 72, 76, 79, 86, 114, 136
Doxapram, 18, 19, 21
gerbils, 73
Diastolic blood pressure, 10, 85
amphibian anaesthesia, 258
guinea pigs, 77
Diazepam, 8, 12, 21
avian anaesthesia, 165
Endoparasitism, 76, 192
avian anaesthesia, 150, 152, 153,
ferret anaesthesia, 93
Endoscopes, 5, 31
165
fish anaesthesia, 276, 277
Endotoxaemia, 54
ferret anaesthesia, 90, 92, 93
non-human primate anaesthesia, 1 10
Endotracheal tubes, 4-5, 6, 12
mammal anaesthesia, 30
rabbit anaesthesia, 54
avians, 144, 174
non-human primate anaesthesia,
reptile anaesthesia, 207,208
mammals, 31, 32
104, 105, 106, 110
rodent anaesthesia, 72, 78
pigs, 115, 117,125
pig anaesthesia, 118-19, 118, 120
Dropenidol, 8, 12
rabbits, 40
rabbit anaesthesia, 45, 46, 47, 48,
ferret anaesthesia, 90
reptiles, 198, 200, 202, 223, 229
49, 54
 non-human primate anaesthesia, 106
see aiso Intubation
reptile anaesthesia, 207, 226, 233
pig anaesthesia, 118
Entenitis, 96
rodent anaesthesia, 64, 66, 67, 72,
rabbit anaesthesia, 46, 47, 48
Environment, post-anaesthesia, rabbits,
80, 81
rodent anaesthesia, 64, 66
53
small mammal anaesthesia, 97, 98,
Droperidol + fentanyl, 48
Environmental temperature, 13
101
Dropsy, 263
Epicoelomic injections, chelonia, 231,
 Diazepam + ketamine, 120
Drug volumes, 6
232, 233
Diazoxide, 92
Dwarf hamsters, 73
Epidurals, 7, 54, 78
Digestive system
Dwarf Lop rabbits, 36
Equilibration time, volatile agents, 9
amphibia,249
Dysecdysis, 186
Erythema, 253
avians, 135-6
Dyspnoea, 19, 30, 38, 40, 48, 52, 74,
Erythropoietin, 143
 passerines, psittacines and
75, 76, 79, 86, 99, 125, 132,
Ethane disulphonate, 292
columbifommes, 171-2
137, 138-9, 148
Ethanol, 254, 255, 277,289
mammals, 29
Dystocia, 77, 137
Etorphine, 239, 240
303
 African pygmy hedgehogs, 96-7
Eugenol see Clove oil
degu, 81
E
European adder (Vipera berus), 222
gerbils, 72
Eagle owl (Bubo bubo), 130
Excitement, 152
guinea pigs, 76
Ear themometers, 92
Expiration, artificially induced, 20
hamsters,73
Echinodems, 287, 289, 290, 292
Expiratory muscles
marsupials, 99
Echocardiography, 78, 132, 175, 257,
avians, 133
non-human primates, 103
267
snakes, 221
pigs, 114
EDgs, tracheal intubation, rabbits, 48
Eye reflexes, 14
prairie dogs, 75
Egg binding, avians, 137
Eyelids, snakes, 223
rabbits, 39
Eicosanoids, 18
rats and mice, 71
Elasmobranch balanced salt solution,
F
reptiles, 194
266
Facemasks, 4, 6, 14, 19
crocodiles, 239
Electnic eel (Electrophorus electricus),
mammals, 30-1
lizards, 214-15
264
pigs, 122
snakes, 222-3
Electnic heat pads, 5, 69, 92, 160
rabbits, 45, 50
Digital scales, 66
Electrocardiography, 15
rats, 4
Digital themmometers, 32, 69, 141
avians, 132, 144, 146, 158-9, 180-1
reptiles, 198
Digoxin, 85
mammals, 32
rodents, 65-6, 69, 78
Dipstick analysis, 39, 74, 79
pigs, 123
Falconer's gloves, 179
Dirofilaria immitis, 85
rabbits, 52
Falconidae see Birds of prey
Dissociative anaesthetic agents, 1l-12,
reptiles, 198, 204
Fat-tailed gerbils (Duprasi), 73
119
Electrolyte balance, fish, 263-4
Feeding, after anaesthesia, 92
Distal femur injections, 200, 213
Electrolyte solutions, 140, 143, 179,
Feeding tubes, reptiles, 198
Distal ulna injections, 137, 147, 148
251
Femoral artery, blood pressure
Diuresis, 8, 45, 68, 135
Emergency procedures/drugs, 18-20,
measurement, 15
Dive response, 163-4, 229
21
Femoral venepuncture, 105, 147, 252
Djungarian hamster (Phodopus
EMLA-cream, 7, 41, 124
Fentanyl, 8, 9, 12, 19
sungorus),73
Enalapril, 85
amphibian anaesthesia, 257
DNA damage, prevention, 10
Encephalitozoon sp.,135
avian anaesthesia, 16l, 162
Doppler ultrasound, 14, 15, 288
E. cuniculi, 39, 40
ferret anaesthesia, 90
amphibia, 252, 256
End-tidal carbon dioxide concentration,
non-human primate anaesthesia,
avians,157,158
19
106,107,109
fish, 267, 273
Endocardial disease, 132
pig anaesthesia, 118,120, 122, 124
mammals, 32, 69, 85, 92
Endocrine disorders, ferrets, 87
rabbit anaesthesia, 39, 46, 47, 48,
reptiles, 196, 198, 203-4, 212, 224
Endocrine system
49, 50, 53
Dopram-V@, 19
avians, 137
rodent anaesthesia, 64, 66, 67
 passerines, psittacines and
Fentanyl + dropenidol, 48, 64, 66, 90,
Dorsal lymph sacs, anurans, 248
columbifomes, 172
106,118
Dorsal neck injections, avians, 137, 147
mammals
Fentanyl + fluanisone, 47-8, 49, 50,
 Dorsal occipital venepuncture, 231-2
chinchillas, 79
64, 66,90,106
Doses, anaesthetic drugs, 6
degu, 81
Fentanyl + fluanisone + diazepam, 66
Index
 Fentanyl + fluanisone + midazolamn,
pain, 264
Cauge needlles, 6
population of ornamnental, 261
Gavage feeding, 145-6, 181, 220, 222
66
Fentanyl + isoflurane, 120
temperature regulation, 262
Geckos, 186, 211, 211,215, 218
Fentanyl + midazolam, 107
transport, 265, 266
General anaesthetics, 7
weight measurement, 265
Gerbils (Gerbillinae)
Ferrets (Mustela putorious furo)
anaesthesia
Fisher's lovebird (Agapornis fischeri),
analgesics, 70
analgesia, 92, 93
130
emergency drugs, 72
blood pressure measurement, 85,
Flat oyster (Ostrea edulis), 291
environmental temperature, 72
Fowmeters, 2
fluid and nutritional support, 60
92
emergency drugs, 93
Fluamezil + atipamezole + naloxone,
induction, 66
67
injectable agents, 66, 67, 68
emergency procedures, 92
Fluanisone, 8, 12
intravenous catheters,72
equipment, 31, 87
fasting before, 29, 87, 92
ferret anaesthesia, 90
physiological information, 28, 72-3
induction, 89
non-human primate anaesthesia, 106
pre-anaesthetic assessment, 30
intubation, 87
rabbit anaesthesia, 39, 46, 47-8, 49
routes of admministration, 61, 62
maintenance, 89
rodent anaesthesia, 64, 66
sedatives and pre-medicants, 64, 65
Fluid absorption, amphibia, 246
monitoring,92
Ghanials, 238
Fluid support, 1, 13, 18, 20
Giant land snail (Achatina sp.), 288
recovery, 89
Flumazenil, 8, 30, 48, 105, 234, 240
Gila monster (Heloderma suspectum),
routes of admministration, 87, 88
suggested protocols, 89-92
Funixin, 53, 70,93, 99, 101,109,
215
supplemental oxygen, 91
124, 162, 206
Cill disease, 265
anatomy and physiology, 28, 85-7
Fluorinated hydrocarbons, 269
Cill structure
blood pressure, 85
Fuovac@, 31, 66
amphibia, 248
Foramen of Panizza, 238
blood transfusions, 85, 88, 92
fish, 262-3
Forceps, muscular incisions, avians,
Clomerular filtration rate, 13, 193
blood volume, 85
304
body temperature, 85
145, 148
Clomerulonephropathies, 96
clinical examination, 85-6, 87
Frenkelia microti, 79
Glomenulosclerosis, 96
dehydration, 91
Freshwater fish, 263
Glottis
diet, 86
Frogs see Amphibia
amphibia, 247
environmental temperature, 85
Frusemide, 21, 54,72,85, 93, 110
avians, 132
fluid support, 86, 87, 88
 Functional residual capacity, avians, 133
rabbits, 37, 44
history taking, 87
reptiles, 191,212,214,221,225,229
hospitalisation, 87
G
Glucometers, 139
nutitional support, 87, 88
GABA (gamma-aminobutryic acid), 8,
Glucose, 38, 60, 140, 142, 173
6
Clucosuria, 79
 pen-anaesthetic supportive care, 92
phlebotomy, 27
Gaboon viper (Bitis gabonicus), 222
Glycine, 9
Gag reflex, 11-12
Glycopyrolate, 8, 19, 21
pre-anaesthetics, 87
supplemental heating, 92
Cags, 31, 198
avian anaesthesia, 153
Gallammine, 239, 240, 288
ferret anaesthesia, 90, 93
Fibnillation, 20
Fibrosarcoma, 39
Gannets [Morus sp.), 132
mammal anaesthesia, 33
Garter snake (Thamnophis spp.), 187,
non-human primate anaesthesia, 110
Fire salamander (Salamandra
salamandra),245
226
pig anaesthesia, 118, 125
Fire-bellied toad (Bombina sp.), 245
Cas exchange, avians, 133
rabbit anaesthesia, 37, 46, 49, 54
Gas flow rates, anaesthetic circuits, 3
Fish, 261
reptile anaesthesia, 207, 235
Gastric
anaesthesia, 261
rodent anaesthesia, 64, 72
analgesia, 275, 276
Kueduk
small mammmal anaesthesia, 101, 104
emergency drugs, 276, 277
ulceration, 36
Goitre, 172
Gastrointestinal
Golden eagles (Aquila chrysaetos], 177
equipment,266
induction, 267, 271
disease, 86, 87, 91, 136, 139
Goldfish (Carassius auratus), 26l,
injection sites, 267-8
dysfunction,39
262, 265, 267,271
hypomotility, 76
Goliath bird-eating spider (Theraphosa
maintenance, 267, 271-2
motility, 9, 39, 47, 78, 179
bondi),284
monitoning,267,275
prokinetics,34
Gopher tortoise (Gopherus
oxygen supplementation, 271
ulceration, 124, 205
recovery, 273
polyphemus),234
resuscitation, 267, 276
Gastrointestinal system
Gophersnake (Pituophis sp.), 221
avians, 135, 136, 178
Goshawk (Accipiter gentiles), 130, 177,
sedation,270
stages, 273, 274
chelonia, 230
178, 180
chinchillas, 79
Cottingen Mini-pig, 112
supportive care, 275
anaesthetic agents, 269-70,
ferrets, 86
Cout, 194
276-7
rodents, 71
Grass snake (Natrix natrix), 222
anatommy and physiology, 261-4
Castrointestinal transit time
Gray short-tailed opossum
amphibia, 257
clinical exammination, 265
(Monodelphis domestica)
avians, 136, 171
anaesthesia
euthanasia, 269
fluid support, 266
ferrets, 86
anaesthetic agents, 101
guinea pigs, 76
induction and maintenance,
handling, 264, 265, 266
history taking, 265
reptiles, 195,215, 230
100-1
hospitalisation,266
Gastropods, 287, 289, 290, 292
monitoning,101-2
Index
anatomy and physiology, 99
pig anaesthesia, 120, 122
gastrointestinal hypomotility, 29
 peri-anaesthetic and supportive care,
rabbit anaesthesia, 36, 48, 49, 50
nitrous oxide, 11
102
reptiles, 207
positioning of patients, 32
 pre-anaesthetic assessment and
rodent anaesthesia, 65, 77, 80
susceptibility to ileus, 34
stabilisation, 99-100
small mammal anaesthesia, 98
 pre-anaesthetic medications, 100,
Hamsters (Cricetinae)
Hemann's tortoise (Testudo hermanii),
101
analgesics, 70
188.198.232
Great Indian hill mynah (Gracula
emergency drugs, 72
Herpes virus, 79, 97, 103
religiosa intermedia),130
environmental temperature, 73
Hetastarch, 38, 88, 142
Great-horned owl (Bubo virginanus),
fluid and nutritional support, 60
Hindlimb paresis, 87
180
injectable agents, 66, 67, 68
Hinge-backed tortoises (Kinixys spp.),
Greater sulphur-crested cockatoo
intubation, 31
230
(Cacatua galerita galerita),
physiological information, 73-4
History taking, 1
130, 161, 172, 175
routes of administration, 61, 62
Horizontal septum, avians, 133
Green iguana (Iguana iguana), 187,
sedatives and pre-medicants, 64, 65
Horned frog (Ceratophrys sp.), 246
211,215, 216, 217
Handling, 30
Hot hands, 5
Green lizard (Lacerta viridis), 212
Harris hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus),
Hot water bottles, 160
Green tree frog (Hyla cinerea), 245
130,139,164
Human error, anaesthetic mortality, 7
Guaifenesin + ketammine + xylazine,
Harrison's @ Recovery Formula, 140, 173
Humidifiers, 19
120
Hartmann's solution, 13, 140, 282
Humidity requirements, reptiles, 188
Guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus)
Head tilt, 40
Huntsman spider (Heterapoda
anaesthesia
Head trauma, 79
vwnatori),283
analgesics, 70
Hearing, avians, 137
Husbandry conditions, and disease, 1
body temperature, 78
Heart
Hyaluronidase, 142, 239, 240
jnduction and maintenance, 77-8
amphibia,246
Hydrochlonide, 43
injectable agents, 66, 67, 68
avians, 131
Hydromophone, 150
305
intubation, 31, 76
ferrets, 85
5-hydroxytryptamine, 282
monitoring,78
fish, 262
Hyperactivity, 161
routes of administration, 61, 62,
guinea pigs, 76
Hyperalgesia, 8, 11
63, 65
invertebrates, 281
Hypercalcaemia, 197
sedatives and pre-medicants, 64,
pigs,113, 114
Hypercalcinosis, 135
65
reptiles, 190, 221, 228-9, 238
Hypercapnia, 8, 12, 16, 19, 37, 48,
Suggested ventilation rate, 31
Heart block, 20
144, 152, 155, 158, 163, 164,
supportive care, 78
Heart rate, ll, 14-15
165, 235, 249
anticholinergics, 33
amphibia, 256
Hypercarbia, 19
emergency drugs, 72
avians, 131, 138, 155, 157, 158
Hyperchloraermia, 197
environmental temperature, 75
ferrets, 85
Hypercholesterolaemia, 76
fluid and nutnitional support, 60
fish, 273
Hyperglycaemia, 8, 37, 79, 81, 139, 172
phlebotomy, 27
hamsters, 73
Hyperinsulinaemia, 37
physiological infommation, 28, 29,
invertebrates, 281
Hyperkalaemmia, 9l, 197
75-8
mammals, 32
Hypernatraemia, 197
 rectal temperature, measurement,
pigs,113
Hyperosmolality, 197
75
rabbits, 37
Hyperparathyroidism, 249
Gular fold, crocodiles, 238
reptiles, 186, 191, 192, 195, 197,
Hyperproteinaemia, 139
Gymnophiona, 245,248
202
Hypertension, 8,37, 225
Gyrfalcons (Falco rusticolus), 177
Heat loss, reducing, 12, 36-7
Hyperthermia, 52, 69, 78
Heating blankets, 12, 69, 160
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 85
H
Heating, supplemental, 5, 12, 13, 18
Hypervitaminosis D, 135
Haematocnit, 85
Helbender (Cryptobranchus
Hypnom@, 8, 12, 47-8, 49, 50, 64, 90
Haematology, 74
alleganiensis), 247
Hypnotic agents, 157
Haematomas, 147
Heliothemy, 186
Hypoadrenocorticism, 87, 91
Haematunia, 39, 99
Hepatic
Hypoalbuminaemia, 136
Haemoglobin, 15, 88, 191
comprommise, 132
Hypocalcaemia, 99
Haemoglobin glutamer-200, 14, 143
disease/abnomalities, 76, 79, 86,
Hypoglycaenmia, 29,77, 86-7, 92, 139,
Haemorrhage, 13
99, 136, 157
157, 172, 173
Hahn's Macaw (Ara nobilis), 130
dysfunction, 190
Hypokolaemmia, 194
Hallucinations, 12
fibrosis, 136
Hypophosphataemia, 194
Haloalkenes, 10, 74
 jmpairment, 29
Hypoproteinaemia, 99, 142, 190
Halogenated ethers, 10
lesions, 72
Hypotension, 7,8, 11,12, 18, 19, 105,
Halothane, 9, 9, 10
lipidosis, 36, 37, 40, 73, 76, 77, 86,
235
amphibian anaesthesia, 253, 254, 255
97, 135
Hypothermia, 4, 5, 13, 14, 15, 18, 20,
avian anaesthesia, 155, 155, 165
metabolism, 10, 152, 155
45, 47, 52, 68, 69, 75, 78, 92,
ferret anaesthesia, 90
neoplasia, 75,99
96, 105, 114, 119, 123, 143,
fish anaesthesia, 276
portal system, 221, 246, 262
146, 147, 163, 165-6, 190,
invertebrate anaesthesia, 286
Hepatocellular carcinomas, 81
197, 270, 286
non-human primate anaesthesia,
Hepatotoxicity, 10
Hypoventilation, 16, 163
105,106
Herbivorous species
Hypovitaminosis A, 135
Index
Hypovolaemia, 13, 18, 19, 20, 38, 135,
Insulin release, depressed, 8
avians, 148
142, 197
 Insulin syringes, 6
ferrets, 88
Hypoxaemmia, 47, 152, 202, 235
Insulinomas, 86-7, 92
marsupials, 100
Hypoxia, 7, 8, 10, 15, 16, 18, 19, 33,
Integumentary system
non-human primates, 105
45, 48, 51, 158, 191, 192, 208,
amphibia, 249-50
pigs,116
249
avians, 136, 178
rabbits, 41, 43
Hystricognathi, 59
fish, 264
rodents, 61,62,63
reptiles, 193
Intratracheal administration, 148
I
chelonia, 230
Intrautenine haemorrhage, 39
Iatrogenic fractures, avians, 147-8
crocodiles, 239
Intravenous catheters, 19, 144, 198,
Ibuprofen, 109
lizards, 215
200, 224
Iguanidae, 211
snakes, 223
Intravenous fluids, 6, 197
Ileus, 29, 34, 78, 80
Intercostal muscles, snakes, 221
Intravenous injections, 1l, 17
Iliotibialis lateral injections, 147
Intermittent positive pressure
African pygmy hedgehog
Immune system, reptiles, 186
ventilation (IPPV), 16, 19, 150,
anaesthesia, 97
Immunosuppression, 36, 96, 135, 172
157, 163, 164, 180, 200, 218,
amphibia, 252
Incubators, 13, 141
256
avians, 137, 179, 180
Indian python (Python molorus), 186
Interstitial
ferrets, 88
Induction chambers, 3, 74, 77, 154,
dehydration, 197
fish, 268
198
nephnitis, 73, 76-7, 86
lizards, 215-16
Induction tanks, 271
pneumonia, 86, 103
marsupials, 100
Infections
Intestinal
non-human prinmates, 105
 Afnican pygmy hedgehogs, 96, 97
inmotility, 39
pigs,116
amphibia, 245,250
Intestinal
rabbits, 41, 42, 43
avians, 135, 136, 137
reflux, 178
reptiles, 200, 213, 225, 231-2, 232,
306
ferrets, 87
 Intracardiac injections
233, 239
fish, 264
pigs, 116
rodents, 61, 63
invertebrates, 282
rabbits, 41-2
Introducers, 117
pigs, 114
reptiles, 213, 216
Intubation, 16
rabbits, 37-8
rodents, 61
see aiso Endotracheal tubes
rats and mice, 71
Intracoelomic fluids, 197
Intubeze@, 43
reptiles, 192, 194
 Intracoelomic injections
Invertebrates, 279-80
rodents, 72, 73, 75, 79
amphibia, 252
anaesthesia, 279
sugar gliders,99
fish, 267-8
analgesia, 280
Inflammation, 18, 38, 87
reptiles, 200, 213, 215, 223, 225,
equipment, 283, 284
Inflatable cuff, 15
231, 232, 233
hypothemia, 286
Infusion pumps, 6
Intrammuscular injections, ll, 17
induction, 285-6
Inhalation anaesthesia, 9-ll, 18
 African pygmy hedgehogs, 97
maintenance, 286
see aiso individual agents
amphibia, 252
monitoring, 288-91
 Injectable agents, 10, 1i-12
avians, 146-7
oxygen supplemmentation, 291
African pygmy hedgehog
ferrets, 88
recovery, 288, 291
anaesthesia, 98
fish, 268
anaesthetic agents, 286-8
amphibian anaesthesia, 254-5
lizards, 215
anatomy and physiology, 280-2
avian anaesthesia, 1512, 157, 174
marsupials, 100
clinical examination, 282
ferret anaesthesia, 89
non-human primates, 105
fluid support, 282-3, 291
fish anaesthesia, 268, 269-70
pigs, 116
handling, 284
invertebrate anaesthesia, 288
rabbits, 4l,43,47
history taking, 282
mammal anaesthesia, 30
reptiles, 213, 224, 225, 231, 232,
pain, 280
marsupial anaesthesia, 100
233
taxonomic classifications, 280
non-human primate anaesthesia,
rodents, 61,63, 74
temperature, 291
105-8
Intraosseous catheters, reptiles, 205
Iodine, 252
pig anaesthesia, 119-22
Intraosseous fluids, 6, 142, 197
Isobutanol, invertebrate anaesthesia,
rabbit anaesthesia, 46-8
Intraosseous injections, 17-18
289.290
reptile anaesthesia, 201, 203, 216,
Afican pygmy hedgehogs, 97
Isobutyl alcohol, 289
23 45
avians, 137, 147-8, 173, 174, 179
Isoflurane, 9, 9, 10
rodent anaesthesia, 66-8, 74, 77, 80,
ferrets, 88
amphibian anaesthesia, 253, 254,
81
lizards, 216
255
Injections
marsupials, 100
avian anaesthesia, 154, 155, 155,
avians, 146-8, 174, 179
non-human primates, 105
156,174,181
rabbits, 41-2, 43
pigs, 116
ferret anaesthesia, 86, 89, 90
rodents, 61-3
rabbits, 41, 43, 44
fish anaesthesia, 276
Innovar-Vet@, 8, 64, 66, 90, 118
reptiles, 200, 213, 224, 225, 232-3,
 invertebrate anaesthesia, 286
Inspiration, artificially induced, 20
233
non-human pnimate anaesthesia,
 Inspiratory muscles
rodents, 61, 63
106, 107
avian,133
Intrapenitoneal fluids, 6
non-human primates, 104-5
snakes, 221
 Intraperitoneal injections, 17
pig anaesthesia, 120, 122
Insulation, 12, 36-7, 69
African pygmy hedgehogs, 97
rabbit anaesthesia, 37, 47, 48, 49, 50
Index
reptile anaesthesia, 201, 207, 216,
Ketonunia, 79
reptile anaesthesia, 205, 206
217, 218, 226
Ketoprofen, 53, 70, 109, 124, 162,
Lidocaine (lignocaine) + prilocaine, 124
rodent anaesthesia, 65, 66, 77, 80
206, 275, 276
Light sources, 5-6
small mammal anaesthesia, 98, 101,
Ketosis, 76
Line block, 18
101
Kidneys
Lingual venous plexus, amphibia, 246,
Itraconazole, 18l
amphibia,249
247
avian, 133-5
Lionfish (Pterois volitans), 264
J
fish, 263
Lionhead rabbits, 36
 Jackson-Rees anaesthetic circuits, 2
reptilian, 193, 222,230
Lipid solubility,7,9-10
Jackson's chameleon (Chamaeleo
King cobra(Ophiophagus hannah),222
Liquid local anaesthetics, 7
jacksoni),212
Kingsnake spp (Lampropeltis spp.),
Liquidised diet, 38, 88
Japanese giant salamander (Andrias
187.222
Listeria monocytogenes,79
japonicus),253
Klebsiella, 192
Liver
Jarchow's solution, 194,197
K.pneumoniae,103
failure, 36, 197
Jaw tone, 158
Koi carp (Cyprinus carpio), 26l, 265,
hypoperfusion, 197
Jirds see Gerbils
267, 275
metastases, 39
Jugular vein, avians, 131-2, 17l, 173
Kune Kune pigs, 112, 113
Lizards
Jugular venepuncture, 4l, 74, 75, 85,
Kuriama prawn (Penaeus japonicus),
anaesthesia
89,97, 100, 105, 113, 116,
286
analgesia, 216
147, 174,179, 213,216, 224,
assisted ventilation, 200
231
L
induction, 216-17
Lacrimation,77
intubation,200
K
Lactate dehydrogenase, 47
maintenance,
217
Kappa (k) receptors, 18, 33, 161
Lactated Ringer's solution, 38, 60, 88,
monitoring, 203, 217-18
Kestrel (Falco tinnunculus), 130
142, 194, 197,251, 266,
positive pressure ventilation, 212
Ketamine, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12
282-3
routes of administration, 199,
307
amphibian anaesthesia, 254, 255
Lagomorphs see Rabbits
213, 215-16
avian anaesthesia, 151-2, 153, 161,
Langerhans Islets, amyloidosis, 8l
suggested protocols, 217
174, 180
Lanner falcon (Falco biarmicus), 130
anatomy and physiology, 19l, 192,
ferret anaesthesia, 90
Larnygeal necrosis, 45
195-6, 211-15
fish anaesthesia, 269-70, 277
Laryngeal masks, 44-5, 117
body temperature, 211
invertebrate anaesthesia, 290
Laryngoscopes, 31, 149
commonly kept as pets, 211
mammal anaesthesia, 33
Laryngospasm, 4, 123, 125
enyironmental temperature,211,215
non-human primate anaesthesia,
Larynx
heliothemy, 186
105, 106, 107
pigs, 114
reflexes, 218
pig anaesthesia, 118, 118, 119, 120,
small mammals, 27
ultraviclet light, 186-8
122
visualisation, 44, 71
Local anaesthetics, 7, 18, 123
rabbit anaesthesia, 37, 46, 47, 49
Lateral saphenous venepuncture, 4l,
avians, 161
reptile anaesthesia, 201, 203, 206,
42,71, 72, 74, 76, 79, 85, 89,
rabbits, 53, 54
207,216, 217, 218, 225, 226,
105
reptiles, 205
233, 234, 236, 240
Lateral tail venepuncture, 63, 71, 72,
see aiso individual agents
rodent anaesthesia, 64, 67,68, 80,
100
Lower respiratory tract disease, 37
81
Lead toxicosis, 40
Lumbosacral extradural anaesthesia,
small mammal anaesthesia, 98, 101
Leaf frogs (Phyllomedusa spp.), 250
124
Ketamine + acepromazine, 67, 8l, 90,
Leatherback sea turtle (Dermochelys
Lumen, avians, 149
120, 152
coriacea), 186
Lung metastases, 29, 30, 39, 96
Ketamine + acepromazine + atropine,
Lectade@, 179
Lung parenchymal inflammation, 31
64
Leeches, 288-91, 292
Lungs
Ketamine + butorphanol, 234, 236
Leopard frog (Rana pipiens), 245, 253,
amphibia, 248-9
Ketammine + diazepam, 47, 49, 67, 80,
254.255
avians, 132,171
81, 98,105, 119, 120, 153
Leopard gecko (Eublepharis
ferrets, 85
Ketamine + medetomidine, 67, 8l, 90,
macularius), 187, 195, 211,
pigs, 114
98, 105, 107, 153, 174,218,
216
reptiles, 191, 212, 214, 220, 221,
234, 236, 240, 270, 277
Leopard tortoise (Geochelone pardalis),
229
Ketamine + medetomidine +
187, 228
spiders, 281
butorphanol, 90
Lesser sulphur-crested cockatoo
Lymphatic systems, amphibia, 246
Ketamine + medetomidine + fentany],
(Cacatua sulphurea), 130, 161
Lymphatic vessels, reptiles, 186
86
Lethargy, 86, 132, 136
Lymphoma, 86
Ketammine + midazolam, 49, 67, 90,
Leukopenia, 86
Lymphosarcoma, 39, 76
107, 153, 234
Lidocaine (lignocaine), 7, 18, 20, 21
Ketammine + midazolam + atropine, 64
amnphibian anaesthesia, 257
M
Ketamine + xylazine, 37, 47, 49, 67,
avian anaesthesia, 16l, 162
MAC (minimum alveolar
80, 86, 105, 107, 118, 120,
fish anaesthesia, 270, 277
concentrations)
153,174, 180, 277
invertebrate anaesthesia, 290
in avians, 152-4
Ketamine + xylazine + butorphanol,
non-human primate anaesthesia, 110
volatile anaesthetic agents, 9, 10
120
pig anaesthesia, 116, 123, 124
selected species, 9
Ketamine hydrochlonide, 201
rabbit anaesthesia, 43, 45, 54, 54
Magill circuits, 2
Index
Magnesium chlonide, 282, 286-8
pre-anaesthetics, 100, 101
susceptibility to callitrichid hepatitis,
Magnesium sulfate, 286-8
Measles, 103
103
Malignant hyperthemia, 123
Mechanical ventilators, 5, 16-17
Microatelectasis, 16
Mallard ducks(Anas piatyrhynchos),
avian anaesthesia, 150
Micropore? tape, 12, 148
162
mammal anaesthesia, 31
Microwavable heat pads, 5
Malnutnition, 1, 99, 114, 136, 137, 192
 reptile anaesthesia, 200
Midazolam, 8, 12
Mammals
Medetomidine,8,9
avian anaesthesia, 150, 152, 153,
anaesthesia
avian anaesthesia, 152, 153, 174
180
analgesia, 33
ferret anaesthesia, 87, 89, 90, 91
ferret anaesthesia, 90, 91
equipment, 30-1
fish anaesthesia, 270, 277
mammal anaesthesia, 30
fasting before, 29
mammal anaesthesia, 30, 33-4
non-human primate anaesthesia,
fluid support, 30
non-human primate anaesthesia,
105, 107
fomulary, 33-4
105, 107
pig anaesthesia, 118, 119, 120, 122
intubation, 27
rabbit anaesthesia, 39, 41, 45-6, 47,
rabbit anaesthesia, 45,46,48, 49,
monitoning,31-2
48, 49, 50-1, 52
50, 80, 81
nutnitional support, 30
reptile anaesthesia, 201, 206, 207,
reptile anaesthesia, 206, 207, 233,
oxygen supplementation, 33
218, 234, 236, 240
234,235
positioning of patients, 29, 32
rodent anaesthesia, 64, 67, 68, 81
rodent anaesthesia, 65, 66, 67
positive pressure ventilation, 33
small mammal anaesthesia, 98
Midazclam + ketamine, 80
routes of administration, 31
Medetomidine + butorphanol, 91
Midazolam + medetomidine +
supplemental heating, 33
Medetomidine + fentanyl +
fentanyl, 67,80
trained assistants, 30
midazolam, 48, 49
Middle White pigs, 112, 113
ventilation, 31
Medetomidine + ketamine, 47, 49,
Milksnake(Lampropeltis triangulum),
anatomy and physiology, 27-30
50-1, 89, 207
222
blood analysis, 30
Medetomidine + ketamine +
Millipedes, 283
308
clinical exammination, 30
butorphanol, 49
Mini-Bain circuits, 3l, 144
dehydration, 30
Medication administration see Routes
Minipigs, 12, 29, 112
handling, 30
of administration
Mink frog (Rana septentrionalis),
history taking, 30
Meloxicamn, 48, 53, 70, 93, 124, 162,
250
hospitalisation, 33
206
Minnesota Minipig, 112
husbandry factors, 29
Meningitis, 54
Mitral valvular insufficiency, 37
manual restraint, 30
Mental depression, 47
Mixed agonists/antagonists, 12
 peni-anaesthetic supportive care, 33
Menthol, 292
Molluscs, 280, 286, 287, 288, 289,
see aiso Ferrets; Non-human
Meperidine, 53, 70, 124
290, 292
primates; Pigs; Rabbits;
Mephenesin, 292
Molting, avians, 136
Rodents; Small mammals
Merlin (Falco columbarius), 130
Monitors, 215
Mammary carcinomas, 29
Metabolic
Mood alterations, 12
Mammary neoplasia, 77
acidosis, 191, 197
Morphine, 9, 53, 70, 105, 109, 124,
Map turtle (Graptemys sp.), 187, 228
derangemments, 87, 164, 194
162, 206, 257
Marginal auricular vein, cathetenization,
imbalance, 40
Mosquito forceps, 149
41, 42
Metastases, 86, 96
Motility stimulants, 92
Marginated tortoise (Testudo
Methoxyflurane, 254, 286
Motor nerve blockade, 7
marginata),188
Methyl pentynoi, 292
Mouth gags, 199, 215
Marine (cane) toad (Bufo marinus),
Metoclopramide, 34, 92
Mouth opening, rabbits, 37
245, 247,250, 253, 254
Metomidate, 276
Mu (x) receptors, 18, 33
Mamosets (Callithrix jacchus)
Metronidazole toxicity, 79
Mucociliary apparatus, reptiles, 191
anaesthesia, induction, 104
Mexican axolotl (Ambystoma
Mucous membrane
physiological infomation, 28
mexicanum),245,248,249
assessment, 15, 51, 158
pre-anaesthetic assessment and
 Mexican beaded lizard (Heloderma
cyanosis, 19
stabilisation, 103
horridum),215
penipheral vasoconstriction, 33
 Marsupials
Mice
Mudpuppy (Necturus maculosus), 245,
anaesthesia
anaesthesia
247
 anaesthetic agents, 101
analgesia, 70
Multi-modal analgesia, 13, 18, 205
analgesia, 101,102
environmental temperature, 68
Multicentric lymphoma, 40
induction and maintenance,
induction and maintenance,
74
Muridae see Gerbils; Hamsters; Mice;
100-1
injectable agents, 66, 67, 68
Rats
monitoning,101-2
MAC for volatile anaesthetic
Muscle
supplemental heating, 102
agents, 9
atrophy, 86
techniques, 100
routes of administration, 61, 62
fasciculations, 249
anatomy and physiology, 28, 99
sedatives and pre-medicants, 64,
innitation, 12
body temperature, 99
65
relaxation, 8, 10, 12, 47, 158, 217
66 '129
clinical examination, 74
nigidity, 119
environmental temperature, 99
emergency drugs, 72
tremors, 51
fluid support, 99, 100
fluid and nutritional support, 60
Mycobacterium sp.,38,264
hospitalisation,99
history taking, 74
Mycoplasma sp., 38,75, 96, 229
nutnitional support, 99, 100
physiological information, 28, 71-2
M.agassizii, 229
 peri-anaesthetic supportive care, 102
pre-anaesthetic assessment, 30
M. pulmonis, 29,71
Index
Myocardial
suggested ventilation rate, 31
Over-the-needle catheters, 6, 31, 41
contractility, 10, 11, 50
anatomy and physiology, 103
Overdosage, 7, 11, 29
depression, 7, 12, 155
clinical exammination, 30, 103
Owls see Birds of prey
disease, 132
diet, 103
Oxbow@,38
infarction, 10
emergency drugs, 110
Oxygen
Myniapods, 283, 288, 291
history taking, 103
absorption, avians, 133
 peni-anaesthetic supportive care, 108
consumption, reduced, 11
N
pre-anaesthetics, 104
demand, small body size, 29
Nalbuphine, 12, 70, 109, 119
temperature, 103
deprivation, 40
Nalorphine, 67, 257
Non-recirculating systems, 271,272
exchange, 29
Naloxone, 12, 49, 67, 91, 98, 110, 125
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
intake, short airways, 29
Narcotic analgesics, 6, 9, 12
(NSAIDs), 13, 18, 124, 143,
saturation,15,68,78
Nasal catheters, rabbits, 45
161-2
supplementation, 10, 11,12,18, 19
Nasal glands
ferret anaesthesia, 92
Oxyglobin@, 88, 142, 143
avians, 135, 171, 177
fish anaesthesia, 275
Oxymorphone, 70, 109, 206
reptiles, 212
mammal anaesthesia, 33
Nasogastnic catheters, 31
rabbit anaesthesia, 53
P
Nasopharynx, 27, 29, 37
reptile anaesthesia, 205
Packed cell volume (PCV), 39, 139,
Nebulisers, 19
see aiso individual agents
143
Needle electrodes (ECC), 15
North African tortoise (Testudo
PaCOz, avians, 133, 154, 155, 159,
Needle sizes, 179, 295
graeca),188,228,229
160, 163, 164, 181
Nematodes, 79
Nutnitional
Pain, and analgesia see Analgesia
Nembutal, 292
deficiencies, 190
Palatine venepuncture, 224
Neonates, anaesthetics, 18, 51
imbalances, 40, 132, 178
Palpebral reflex, 14, 52, 218
Neoplasias, 30, 38, 75, 76, 77, 79, 86,
support, 1,6, 13
Pancreatitis, 92
87, 96, 99, 135, 194
Pancuronium, 107, 120, 122
309
Neostigmine, 108, 120, 240
0
Pancytopenia, 86
Neostigmine + glycopyrrolate, 235
Obesity, 6, 37, 71, 72, 73, 75, 81, 99
Paracetamol, 109
Nephnitis, 96, 99
Ochratoxin A, 135
Parasites, 96, 135, 190
Nephrons, avians, 134
Octodontidae, 80-1
Paresis, 173
Nephrosis, 99
Ocular lubricants, 12, 80
 Parots see Passerines, psittacines and
Nephrotoxicity, 8, 12,74
Oesophageal probes, 32, 158, 159
columbiformes
Nerve ending sensitisation, 18
Oesophageal stethoscopes, 5, 14, 32,
 Partial agonists, 12
Netherland Dwarf rabbits, 36, 42
92, 115, 144, 157, 198
Passerines, psittacines and
Neuroleptics, 9
Oesophagostomy tubes, 92, 117
columbifomes, 171
Neuroleptoanalgesic combinations, 8,
Oesophagus, reptiles, 194, 220, 222
anaesthesia
12
Oestrogen toxicosis, 86, 91
air sac cannulation, 173
Neurological disease, 40, 87
Olfactory system
analgesia, 176
Neuromuscular blockers, 16, 107-8,
rats, 72
blood pressure measurement, 175
122, 152, 201, 239
snakes, 223
equipment required, 173-4
see also individual agents
Opercular movements, fish, 263, 264
fasting before, 172, 175
Neurotransmitter inhibition, 8, 9
Ophidian paramnyxovinus (OPMV), 221
induction, 174, 175
Neurotransmmitters, crustaceans, 282
Opicid-antagonists, 12
intubation, 174, 175
Newts see Amphibia
Opioids,7,8,9,11,12,13,18
maintenance, 174
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, 6
avian anaesthesia, 150, 15l, 161
monitoning,175
Nictitans membrane, 52
mammal anaesthesia, 33
recovery, 175
Nitrogenous waste, 135,249
pig anaesthesia,122, 124,124
routes of administration, 174
Nitrous oxide, 3, 9, 10-11
rabbit anaesthesia, 53-4
suggested protocols,175
avian anaesthesia, 155, 156
reptile anaesthesia, 205
anatomy and physiology, 171-2
non-human primate anaesthesia,
see aiso individualagents
clinical examination, 172
105, 107
Opisthosoma, invertebrates, 280, 282
diet, 136, 172
pig anaesthesia, 120, 122
Oral anaesthesia
fluid support, 173
rabbit anaesthesia, 50, 51
avians, 144-5, 180
history taking, 172
Non-breathing circuits, 2-3, 144, 198
pigs, 115-16
hospitalisation, 173
Non-human primates, 103
rabbits, 41, 43
metabolism, 171, 173
anaesthesia
reptiles, 199, 201,213, 215, 223,
nutritional support, 173
analgesia, 108, 109
225, 231, 233, 239
oxygen supplementation, 173
equipment, 31,104
rodents, 61, 62
peri-anaesthetic supportive care, 175
induction, 104-8
Oral mucosa, reptiles, 194
pre-anaesthetics, 174
intubation, 104
Orbital sinus blood sampling, 116
supplermental heating, 173
MAC for volatile anaesthetic
Oropharynx, rabbits, 37
Pasteurella sp., 103
agents,9
Osmoregulation, avians, 135
P. multocida, 29, 37, 40, 45, 75, 96,
maintenance,108
Osmotic homeostasis, fish, 263-4
66
monitoning, 108
Osteomyelitis, 205
Pedal reflex, 14, 69, 158
recovery, 108
Otitis interna, 40
Penicillium sp., 135
routes of administration, 104, 105
Otoscopes, 5, 31
Pentazocine, 124
suggested protocols, 108
Ovaniohysterectomy, 30, 39, 91
Pentobarbital, 119, 121, 277
Index
Pentobarbitone, 48, 67, 290
Piroxicam, 162
rodent anaesthesia, 67
Perches {avian], 14l, 173, 178
Pituitary gland neoplasia, 172
Propofol + alfentanil, 121
Peregrine falcons (Falco peregrinus
Plasma concentrations, 47
Propylene phenoxetol, 289
brookei), 180-1
Pleural effusion, 86
Prostaglandins, 18
Peni-anaesthetic supportive care, 12-13
Pneumatic cuffs, 92
Protein binding, 7
Penicardial diseases, 132
Pneumocoptes penrosei, 75
Proteinunia, 72
Peripheral
Pneumocystis carinii, 86
Proteus, 192
blood vessels, reptiles, 186
Pneumonia, 29, 37, 45, 71, 73, 75, 76,
Protozoa, 79
pulses, 14, 32
103, 190, 221, 229
Proximal femur injections, 63
vasoconstriction, 33,41
Poison dart frog (Dendrobates sp.),
Proximal tibiotarsal injections, 137,
vasodilation, 63, 117
245, 250
147, 148, 148, 213,216
venoconstriction, 200
Polydipsia, 72, 73, 96, 99, 136, 172
Proxymetacaine, 7
Periurethral cysts, 86
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 229
Pseudomonas sp., 38, 192
Persistent cestrus, 86, 91
Polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE) toxicity,
Psittacines see Passerines, psittacines
Personal protective equipment (PPE)
148
 and columbiformes
186
Polyunia, 73, 96, 99, 135, 136, 142,
Pulmonary
Perspex tubes, anaesthesia induction,
172
aspiration, 117
223
Positioning of patients, 12
hypertension, 37
PetCOz, 159, 160, 164, 181
 Positive pressure ventilation (PPV), 4,
mites, 75
Pethidine, 9, 53, 70, 109, 124
16, 19, 20
neoplasia, 76
Phaeochromocytomas, 86, 91
Post-renal azotaemia, 38, 77, 79, 86
oedema, 103
Phasmids, 291
Potassium, 47
resistance, reptiles, 190
2-phenoxyethanol, 288, 289
Prairie dogs (Cynomys ludovicianus)
Pulse oximetry, 15, 19
Phenothiazines, 8, 12
anaesthesia
amphibia, 256
see also individual agents
analgesia, 70
avians, 159
310
Phenylbutazone, 124
induction and maintenance, 75
fish, 273
Phlebotomy, 27, 76, 139, 163
injectable agents, 67, 68
mammals, 32
Phosphonus, 47
MAC for volatile anaesthetic
rabbits, 52
Phyla, 280
agents,9
reptiles, 204
Pig-nosed turtle (Carettochelys
sedatives and pre-medicants, 64,
rodents, 69, 78
insculpta),228,230
65
Pyelonephnitis, 99
 Pigeons see Passerines, psittacines and
supportive care, 75
Pythons, 222
columbifomes
environmental temperature, 74
Pyunia, 99
Pigs, 112
physiological information, 28, 74-5
anaesthesia
Pre-anaesthetic assessment, 1-2, 6
Q
analgesia, 123-4
 Pre-anaesthetic medication, 7-9
Quadniceps, intrammuscular injections,
equipment,115
Pre-emptive analgesia, 13, 18
63, 65
fasting before, 115
Precrural fold injections, 137, 147
Quinaldine sulfate, 276
induction, 119-22
Prednisclone, 92, 110
intubation, 116-17
Prefemoral fossa injections, 231
R
MAC for volatile anaesthetic
Preferred optimum temperature
Rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculi)
agents,9
range/zone (POTR/Z)
anaesthesia
maintenance,122
invertebrates, 291
analgesia, 39, 47, 53-4
monitoring,123
reptiles, 186, 190, 195, 196, 202,
anticholinergics, 33
positioning of patients, 117, 123
211, 220-1, 228
blood pressure, 47
positive pressure ventilation, 122
Pregnancy toxaemia, 77, 92
blood pressure measurement, 52
recovery, 122
Pregnant animals, choice of anaesthesia,
checklist for, 40
routes of administration, 1l5-16,
18
emergency procedures, 54-5
125
Preoxygenation, 65, 77, 97, 154
equipment, 31, 40-1
suggested protocols, 122
Pressure-limited ventilators, 16
fuid support, 38, 39, 40, 53
suggested ventilation rate, 31
 Presynaptic calcium influx, inhibition, 8
induction,46-8
anatomy and physiology, 28, 112-14
Prey species, hospitalised, 27
intubation, 42-5, 48
blood sampling, 116
Pilocaine, 7, 116, 124
MAC for volatile anaesthetic
body temperature, 114
Procaine, 16l, 291
agents,9
clinical exammination, 115
Prokinetics, 34, 53, 78
maintenance, 48-50
diet, 114
Propatagial skin injections, 137, 147
monitoring, 32, 51-2
dhug doses, 125
Propofol, 1l
mortality, 36
emergency procedures/drugs, 125
amphibian anaesthesia, 254, 255
nutnitional support, 38, 39, 40
environmental temperature, l13,
avian anaesthesia, 151, 153, 180
oxygen supplementation, 45, 47,
114
ferret anaesthesia, 91
LS
fluid support, 115
fish anaesthesia, 270, 277
positioning of patients, 38, 43, 54
history taking, 115
non-human primate anaesthesia, 107
positive pressure ventilation, 45,
husbandry factors, 115
pig anaesthesia, 119, 121, 122
48
manual restraint, 112
rabbit anaesthesia, 47, 48, 49, 51
recovery, 50
nutritional support, 115
reptile anaesthesia, 201, 203, 206,
relevant techniques, 41-5
peri-anaesthetic supportive care, 123
217, 218, 224, 226, 235, 235,
routes of administration, 4l, 42,
pre-anaesthetics, 117-19
239,240
43
Index
suggested protocols, 50-1
Red-eared slider (Trachemys scripta
end-tidal carbon dioxide
suggested ventilation rate, 31
elegans), 188, 193
concentration, 204
supplemental heating, 52
Red-footed tortoise (Geochelone
environmental temperature, 186,
vocalisation, 50
carbonaria), 188
189, 192, 195, 198
anatomy and physiology, 27, 28, 29,
Red-tailed hawk(Buteo jamaicensis),
faecal analysis, 196
36-40, 44
177, 180
fluid support, 194, 197-8, 200,
blood loss, 40
Reflexes, 14
205
blood transfusions, 39
Refractometer, 39
glomenular filtration rate, 193
blood volume, 37
Regional infiltration, 18
history taking,195
body weight, 39
Regurgitation, 20, 117, 136, 143, 163
hospitalisation, 186, 194
catheterization, 41, 42,48, 50
Renal
husbandry factors, 186-9, 195
clinical examination, 40
amyloidosis, 77
metabolism, 189-90, 195
dehydration, 39
biopsy, 139, 194
nutritional support, 194, 198
diet, 38, 39
blood flow, 10, 18, 36
oxygen supplemmentation, 202
emergency drugs, 54
compromise, 132
pain, 185, 195
end-tidal carbon dioxide
disease, 29, 86, 96, 99, 134, 135,
penri-anaesthetic supportive care, 204
concentration, 52
139, 143, 157, 172, 194, 250
reflexes, 202
food consumption,39
dysfunction, 39, 79, 86, 136, 139, 190
restraint, 185
gastrointestinal prokinetics, 34
failure, 99, 143
supplemental heating and lighting.
generalised disease, 40
neoplasia, 75, 135
188-9
history taking, 40
perfusion, reduced, 27
tidal volume, 200
husbandry factors, 36
portal system, 131, 134-5, 191, 193,
see also Chelonia; Crocodiles;
nephrotoxicity, 8, 12
212, 221, 222, 229, 246, 262
Lizards; Snakes
 peri-anaesthetic supportive care,
toxicity, 143, 177
Reservoir bags, anaesthetic circuits, 2
52-4
tubular effect, 8
Respiratory
pre-anaesthetics, 10, 45-6
tubular necrosis, 96
acidosis,156
311
reflexes, 52
Reproductive system
alkalosis, 150
temperature, 36-7, 52
avians, 136-7
arrest, 48, 154, 163, 164, 208
tidai volume, 37, 45
guinea pigs, 77
auscultation, 138
Rabies, 87
rabbits, 39
compromise, 33, 132
 Racing pigeon (Columba livia), 130,
Reptiles, 185
control, 7, 192
150, 161
anaesthesia
depression, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 18,
Radiography, 12, 18, 39, 41, 163, 194
 anaesthetic agents and sedatives,
19, 47, 51, 105, 151,152, 155,
Rainbowlonikeet (Trichoglossus
206-7
157, 158, 163, 201, 225, 236,
haematodus), 130
analgesia, 202, 205, 205-6
270
Ranitidine, 34,124
assisted ventilation, 17, 200,201
disease, 19, 37-8, 71, 103, 133,
Raptors, 135, 179
blood pressure measurement, 204
163-5, 172, 177, 192, 258
Rats (Rattus norvegicus)
equipment required, 198, 199,
failure, 19
anaesthesia
203-4
monitors, 14,32, 78, 160
analgesics, 70
fasting before, 204-5
obstruction, 125
environmental temperature, 68
hospitalisation, 198
Respiratory rate, 19
induction and maintenance, 74,
induction, 201
amphibia, 256
80
intubation, 200
avians, 154, 158, 180
injectable agents, 66, 67, 68
maintenance, 201
hamsters, 73
MAC for volatile anaesthetic
monitoning,203-4
pigs, 113-14
agents,9
positive pressure ventilation, 202
reptiles, 192, 195, 202
routes of administration, 61, 62
recovery, 202
Respiratory system, 14
sedatives and pre-medicants, 64,
routes of administration,
amphibia, 247-9
65
199-200, 201
avians, 131,132-3, 134,154, 158
Suggested ventilation rate, 31
stabilisation, 196-7
birds of prey, 177
anticholinergics, 33
staff safety, 200-1
 passerines, psittacines and
blood volume, 71
stages,204
columbifomes, 171
clinical exammination, 74
suggested protocols, 202-3
fish, 262-3, 273
emergency drugs, 72
supplemental heating, 198, 205
invertebrates, 281
fluid and nutritional support, 60
anatomy and physiology, 185-95
mammals, 27-9, 32
history taking, 74
auscultation, 196
 Afican pygmy hedgehogs, 96
nephrotoxicity, 74
blood analysis, 196
degu, 80
physiological infomation, 28, 71-2
blood flow, 196
ferrets, 85-6, 92
pneumonia,29
blood transfusions, 198
gerbils, 72
pre-anaesthetic assessment, 30
blood volume, 191, 196, 198, 204
guinea pigs, 76
Recirculating systems, 271-2
body temperature, 186, 195, 196
hamsters, 73
Recovery, 13-14
clinical exammination, 195-6
monitoring,32
Rectal temperature, 15,79
dehydration, 190, 194, 195, 196,
non-human primates, 103
Rectal themmometers, 32, 69, 92, 115,
197, 200
pigs, 113-14, 123
123
diet, 194, 195
prairnie dogs, 75
Red blood cells, splenic sequestration, 89
emergency drugs, 207, 208
rabbits, 37-8, 51-2
Red starfish (Fromia milleporella), 279
emergency procedures, 208
rats and mice, 71
Index
Respiratory system (Contd)
Saliva secretions, 46
nisk of respiratory tract disease, 29
reptiles, 191-2
Salivation, 77
stress in hospitalised, 27
chelonia, 229
Salmomella sp., 96, 114, 192
see aiso African Pygmy Hedgehogs;
crocodiles, 238
SAMe (s-adenosylmethionine), 136
Marsupials
lizards, 212
Savannah monitor(Varanus
Snails, anaesthetic depth, 288
snakes, 221-2
exanthematicus),188
Snakes, 220
Respiratory tract
SAVO3@, 16
anaesthesia
disease, 29, 86
Scales
assisted ventilation, 200
infection, 186
fish, 264
equipment,223
innitation, 155, 156
snakes, 223
fommulary, 266
 neoplasia, 80
Scales (weighing), 5
induction, 224-5
Resuscitators, 20, 202
Scarlet macaw (Ara macao), 130
intubation, 200, 224, 225
Retention discs, air sac cannulae, 149-50
Scavenging, 3, 10, 11, 31, 144
maintenance, 225
Rhabdius nematodes, 192
Sciuridae,74-5
routes of administration, 223-4,
Rhinitis, 71, 73, 75
Sciurognathi, 59, 71-5
225
Rigidity, 51
Scombroidei, 262
Suggested protocols, 225-6
Rima glottis, rabbits, 44
Scorpions, fluid administration, 283
anatomy and physiology, 191, 192,
Roborovski hamster (Phodopus
Second gas effect, 105
203, 220-3, 225
roborovskii), 73
Sedation/sedatives, 7, 8, 18
commonly kept as pets, 222
Rocuronium, 235
mammals, 30
environmental temperature, 220-1
Rodent anaesthetic machines, 2
pigs, 117,118
husbandry factors, 186
Rodent masks, 30
rodents,64-5,80
Snapping turtle (Chelydra serpentine),
Rodentia, 59
Seizures, 8, 40, 73, 87, 92, 161, 173,
230, 234
Rodents
249
Sneezing, duning clinical examminations,
anaesthesia, 80
Selenium, 10
85-6
312
analgesia, 69, 70, 80
Self-inflating bag valve-masks, 125
Snowy owl (Nyctea scandiaca), 177
environmental temperature, 68
Self-traumatisation, 12
Soda lime, 10, 11
equipment,69
Sendai vinus, 71
Soda lime canister, 2
fasting before, 69, 73
Senegal parrot (Poicephaius senegalus),
Sodium, 47
induction and maintenance, 63-8
130
Sodium bicarbonate, 252-3,276
monitoring,69
Sensory nerve blockade, 7
Sodium chlonide, 197, 266
oxygen supplementation, 68, 69,
Sepsis, 87
Sodium pentobarbitone, 292
76, 78, 80
Septicaemia, 29
Sodium phosphate, 252
positive pressure ventilation, 78
Sevoflurane, 9, 10
Softshelled turtles (Apalne spp.), 191
recovery, 68
amphibian anaesthesia, 254
Space-occupying lesions, 192
routes of admministration, 61-3
avian anaesthesia, 150, 154, 155-6,
Space-occupying masses, 30
techniques, 61-3
155, 161
Sparrow hawk (Accipiter nisus), 130,
blood1oss, 60
non-human primate anaesthesia,
178
blood transfusions, 60
105,107
Special senses
clinical exammination, 59, 74
pig anaesthesia, 121
African pygmy hedgehogs, 97
commonly seen as pets, 59
rabbit anaesthesia, 48, 49, 50
avians, 137
emergency drugs, 72
reptile anaesthesia, 201, 207,217,
hamsters, 73-4
fluid support, 60, 68, 76, 78, 80
218, 226
rats and mice, 72
gastrointestinal prokinetics, 34
rodent anaesthesia, 65,74, 77, 79
snakes, 223
history taking, S9, 74
small mammal anaesthesia, 98, 1 01
Speculums, 198
hospitalisation, 59-60
Shieldex@, 253
Sphygmomanometer, 15
nutnitional support, 60, 68, 80
Shock, 13, 15
Spiders
 peni-anaesthetic supportive care, 69,
Shouldered endotracheal tubes, 144,
anaesthesia induction, 284-6
70
200
fluid administration, 283
physiological infomation, 27, 29
Sialodacryoadenitis vinus, 71
physiology, 281, 282
pre-anaesthetics, 63, 64-5
Sighing, 16, 19
Spinal cord
reflexes, 69
Sinus arrhythmmia, 85
rabbits, 54
Sinusitis, 75, 132
reptiles, 195
see aiso Gerbils; Mice; Rats
Sipper bottles, 39
Spinal pain transmission, 33
Ropivacaine, 7, 54
Sirens see Amphibia
Spiny-tailed lizard (Uromastyx spp.),
Routes of administration, 1l, 17-18
Skeletal muscle tone, increase in, 12
188, 215
Royal python (Python regius), 188, 222
Skin see Integumentary system
Splash block, 18
Russian hamster (Phodopus sungorus),
Skin incisions, avians, 145, 148
Splenic sequestration, red blood cells,
32
Skink, 211, 212
89
Slider (Trachemys scripta), 190, 228
Splenomegaly, 86
S
Slimy salamanders (Plethodon
Sponges (Phylum porifera), 280
Saffan@, 290
glutinosus), 250
Spot-legged poison frog (Epipedobates
Saker falcon (Falco cherrug), 130, 178,
Small mammals
pictus),245-6
179
anaesthesia, 27
Spotted toad (Bufo guttatus), 250
Salamanders, 245, 247, 248, 249, 250
intubation, 27
Stabilisation, 6-12
Saline, 13, 18, 60, 102, 140, 142, 194,
nisks of associated morbidity and
Staff safety, venomous reptiles, 200-1
197, 251
mortality, 27
Staphyiococcus sp., 38
Index
Starvation, 87
Tachypnoea, 40, 99
Doxoplasma gondii, 103
Stenilisation, 6
Tadpole diet, 249
Trachea
Steroids, 11, 119, 125
Tail-guards, 178
amnphibia, 247, 252
see aiso individual agents
Taipan (Oyxuranus scutellatus), 222
avians, 148,179
Stick insect (Heteropteryx sp.), 282, 283
Tamworth pigs, 112
rats, 71
Streptococcus sp., 73
Tarantula (Aphonopeima hentzi, 280, 281
reptiles, 212, 229
S. pmeumoniae,71, 76,86
Teeth, reptiles, 215
spiders, 281
S.zooepidemicus, 86
Telazo1@, 8, 67, 91,119, 180
Tracheal intubation, rabbits, 45, 48
Stress, 27, 36, 185-6
Terrestrial invertebrates, 288
Tracheal obstructions, 164
Strigidae see Birds of prey
Tetracaine, 54
Tracheal rings, 4
Stylets, 117
Themometers, 13, 32
avians, 132
Thermoregulation, 105,
, 131, 136, 152,
reptiles, 191, 212, 221
 Subcutaneous emphysema, 138
158, 172, 186
Tracheostomy, 72, 208
Subcutaneous injections
Thigmothemy, 186
Tranquilisers, 8, 18
African pygmy hedgehogs, 97
Thiopental, 119, 121
Transtracheal intubation, 45
amphibia,252
Thiopentone, 48, 107
Trauma, 38, 87
avians, 137, 147
Thoracic
Trematodes, 192
ferrets, 89
auscultation, 115
Tremors, 161
fish, 267
compression, 69, 78
Ticaine methanesulfonate (MS-222),
marsupials, 100
trauma, 86
252-4, 256, 268-9, 276, 288,
non-human primates, 105
Thoracic cavity
290
pigs, 116
ferrets, 85
Ticuspid valvular insufficiency, 37
rabbits,41, 43
rabbits, 37, 38
Tiglycenides, 37, 47
reptiles, 200, 213, 215, 223, 225,
Thromboxane, 18
Rubellanians, 280
231, 233, 239
Thrombocytopenia, 139
Tubocurarine, 107, 288
rodents, 62, 62
Thymic lymphomas, 40
Tumours, 39
313
Subcutanous fluids, 6, 142
Thymomas, 40
Tytonidae see Birds of prey
Succinylcholine, 107, 235, 240, 292
Thyroid disease, 172
Tyzzer's disease, 72
Suction, of regurgitated fluids, 144
Tibial crest injections, 200, 216
Sudden death, 132
Tiger salamander (Ambystoma
U
Sufentanil, 122
tigrinum),245，256
Unar venepuncture, 137, 147
Sufentanil + isoflurane, 121
Tiletamine, 11
Ultrasonography, 30, 39, 139
Sugar gliders (Petaurus breviceps)
Tiletamine + zolazepam, 8, 12
Ultrasound noise, 72
anaesthesia
amphibian anaesthesia, 254, 256
Ultraviolet (UV) light, 186-8, 215
anaesthetic agents, 101
avian anaesthesia, 153, 180
Uncuffed endotracheal tubes, 4, 31,
analgesia, 101,102
ferret anaesthesia, 91
144
fasting before, 29, 100
non-human primate anaesthesia,
Upper respiratory tract
induction and maintenance,
105,107
disease, 229
100-1
pig anaesthesia, 118, 119, 121
infection, rats and mice, 71
monitoning,101-2
reptile anaesthesia,207,216,218,
nasal breather, 29
techniques, 100
225, 226, 233, 235, 240
pigs,114
 anatomy and physiology, 28, 99
rodent anaesthesia, 67, 68
rabbits,37
environmental temperature,99
small mammal anaesthesia, 98, 100
Uraemia, 135
 peri-anaesthetic and supportive care,
Tiletamine + zolazepam + ketamine +
Ureteral obstruction, 135
102
xylazine, 118,121
Urethane, 288
 pre-anaesthetic assessment and
Tiletammine + zolazepam + xylazine,
Urethra, chelonia, 230
stabilisation, 99-100
68, 121
Unic acid, 135, 143, 177, 193
 pre-anaesthetics, 100, 101
Time-cycled ventilators, 16
Unicaemmia, 139, 177
Superficial plantar metatarsal
Titicaca water frog (Tlmatobius
Urinary system
venepuncture, 137, 147
coleus), 248
amphibia,249
Supportive care, 2
Toads see Amphibia
avians, 133-4
Supraventricular bradycardia, 20
Toe pinch reflex, 80, 158
birds of prey, 177-8
Surgical anaesthesia, 12, 50, 51, 119
Tongue
 passerines, psittacines and
Sympathetic ganglion blockade,10
anphibia, 247, 252
columbifomes, 171
Syncope, 132
birds of prey, 179
mammals, 29
Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus auratus),
ferrets, 85
 African pygmy hedgehogs, 96
28,29, 69, 73
rabbits, 37
chelonia, 230
Syringe feeding, 92
reptiles, 215, 222
chinchillas, 79
Syringes, 6
Tongue depressors, 199, 215
degu, 81
Syninx,132
Topical agents, 7, 148
ferrets, 86
Systemic disease, 29-30, 137
Topping up, injectable agents, 1l
gerbils, 73
Systolic blood pressure, ll, 85
Tortoises
guinea pigs, 76-7
anaesthesia, administration, 231
hamsters,73
T
daily soaking, 230
marsupials, 99
T-piece anaesthetic circuits, 2, 31, 40,
infection,229
prairie dogs, 75
144, 198
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA),
rabbits, 38-9
Tachycardia, 86, 225
11
rats and mice, 72
Index
Urinary system (Contd)
Vertebrae, lizards, 212
recording duning recovery, 13
reptiles, 192-4
VetEquip③, 4
Water quality, 230, 246, 251, 272
lizards, 213-14
Vetrap@,215
Waterborne anaesthetic agents, 268-9,
snakes, 222
Vietnamese Potbellied pigs, 112, 125
276-7
Urinary tract
Viral pneumonia, 76
Waterfowl, 164
calculi, 77, 79
Visualisation
Weakness, 132
disease, 86
ferret anaesthesia, 85
Whitaker-Wnight solutions, 251
Urination, recording during recovery,
mammal anaesthesia, 31
White's tree frog (Litoria caerulea),
13
pig anaesthesia, 114
245, 254
Urine
rabbit anaesthesia, 40-l, 44
Windup, 18
avians, 135
rodent anaesthesia, 7l, 76
Wisconsin blade, 117
chinchillas, 79
Vitamin A, 135
Wrights respirometer, 14
ferrets, 86
Vitammin C, 47, 76, 103, 249
gerbils, 73
Vitammin D3, 103
X
guinea pigs, 76
Vitamin E, 10
Xylazine, 7, 8, 9
rabbits,38
Volatile agents
avian anaesthesia, 152, 153, 154,
Unine analysis, rabbits, 38-9
 African pygmy hedgehog
174, 180
Urine microscopy, 39
anaesthesia,97
ferret anaesthesia, 90,91
Urolithiasis, 38, 86, 135
amphibian anaesthesia, 254
fish anaesthesia, 270, 277
Utenine adenocarcinomas, 39
avian anaesthesia, 133, 152-6, 174,
invertebrate anaesthesia, 288, 291
Uterine tone, increased, 8
180
non-human primate anaesthesia,
ferret anaesthesia, 89
105, 107
V
MAC for selected species, 9
pig anaesthesia, 118, 119, 120
Valvular disease, 37, 79
marsupial anaesthesia, 100
rabbit anaesthesia, 37, 46, 47, 49
Vaporisers, calibrated, 2
 non-human primate anaesthesia,
reptile anaesthesia, 206, 240
314
Varanidae,211
104-5
rodent anaesthesia, 65, 67, 68
Vascular access port injections, 89
pigs, 122
 small mammal anaesthesia, 98
Vasodilation, rabbit anaesthesia, 50
rabbit anaesthesia, 48, 50
Xylazine + ketamine, 49, 152
Vasodilatory effects, halogenated
reptile anaesthesia, 20l, 216, 233
ethers, 10
rodent anaesthesia, 63-6, 68, 77, 79
Y
Vecuronium, 107, 121, 122, 152
see alsoindividual agents
Yellow rosella parakeet (Platycercus
Veiled (Yemen) chameleon (Chamaeleo
Volume-limited ventilators, 16
flaveolus),130
calyptratus),188,211,214
Vomiting, 20, 86, 136
Yellow-footed tortoise (Geochelone
Veins, avian, 147
denticulata),188
Ventilation, 12, 16-17
W
Yohimbine, 68,86, 91,98, 121, 152,
Ventilation perfusion mismatch, 164
Waste gases, 2, 3, 10
154
Ventral abdominal vein, lizards, 212
Water conservation, reptiles, 193
Ventral abdominal venepuncture, 216,
Water distribution, reptiles, 192
252
Water dragon (Physignathus
Zebra finch (Poephila guttata), 130,
Ventral coccygeal injections, 85, 89,
concincinus),187,211,214
171
100, 213, 215, 224, 225
Water homeostasis, reptiles, 193
Zolazepam see Tiletamine + zolazepam
Ventral tail injections,
671, 252
Water intake
Zoletil@,8, 119, 180
Ventricular arrhythmias,
7
ferrets, 86
Zoonotic diseases, 73, 114, 186, 250,
Ventricular septal defect (VSD), 37
rabbits, 38
264