RAPIDIREVIEW
ECG interpretation
in small animal practice
MARK A. OYAMA
MARC S. KRAUS
ANNA R. GELZER
CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
Rapid Review
ECG Interpretation In
Small Animal Practice
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
This page intentionally left blank
Rapid Review
ECGI
Interpretation
Small Animal
IPractice
Mark A. Oyama
DVM
Professor
Department of Clinical Studies
Matthew J. Ryan Veterinary Hospital
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Marc S. Kraus
DVM
Senior Lecturer
College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
 Department of Clinical Sciences
Ithaca, NY, USA
Anna R. Gelzer
Dr. med. vet., PhD
Heart & Rhythm Veterinary Specialists
Ithaca, NY, USA
CRC Press
CRC
Taylor & Francis Group
 Boca Ratlon London New York
CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Hrancis Group, an informa business
CRC Press
Taylor&Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Park way N W, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
@ 2014 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Govern ment works
Version Date: 20131028
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-84076-654-7 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable
data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions that may be
made. The publishers wish to make clear that any views or opinions expressed in this book by individual editors, authors or contributors are personal
to them and do not necessarily reflect the views/opinions of the publishers. The information or guidance contained in this book is intended for use
un huaant umo s euissajod auo n lea a on suaaddns e se As papiaod si pue seissad ae-ayao syais eia aq
knowledge of the patient's medical history, relevant manufacturer's instructions and the appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of the rapid
urged to consultthe drug companies' printedinstructions, and their websites, before administering any of the drugs recommended in this book. This
book does not indicate whether a particular treatment is appropriate or suitable for a particular individual.Ultimately it is the sole responsibility of
the medical professional to make his or her own professional judgements, so as to advise and treat patients appropriately.The authors and publishers
have also attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.s. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any elec-
tronic, mechanical, or other means, now known orhereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http:/www.copyright.com/) or contact
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that pro-
vides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy licen se by the CCC, a separate system of
payment has been arranged.
uoeuedxa pue uoeoyuap! ioj Auo pasn ane pue syieuapenn paaisiea io syieuapenn aq Aeu saueu aneodios no ponpoia aoon yiemape
without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com
CONTENTS
Preface
Abbreviationis
Section 1 Principles of Electrocardiography
Section 2 Evaluation of the Electrocardiogram
Section 3 Approach to Evaluating Arrhythmias
27
ECG Cases
35
Index
93
PREFACE
Clinicians can choose from many different cardiac
 the subject. Following a brief consideration of the
diagnostic tests when assessing dogs and cats 
 theoretical basis of the ECG, a systematic approach
with heart disease. Many of these modalities,
 to interpretation is presented in the introductory
such as thoracic radiography, are widely used and
 chapters. Included are several flow charts that
 modalities such as echocardiography as well as new
 will help users to diagnose arrhythmias with more
cardiac blood and biomarker tests are increasingly
confidence. These sections cover determination of
available. Notwithstanding the availability of these
heart rate, measurement of intervals, derivation
 and other tests, the standard electrocardiogram 
of the mean electrical axis, criteria for atrial
{ECG) is an indispensable part of cardiac medicine.
and
ventricular enlargement or hypertrophy,
It can be obtained easily, rapidly, and inexpensively.
intraventricular conduction disturbances, and both
and with little to no risk to the patient. Results can
normal and abnormal cardiac rhythms. The second
be interpreted in real time and its format lends itself 
 part of the book contains a comprehensive collection
to easy electronic transmission should consultation
asn o Asea ue ui shue1 DoH pue saseo lea1 jo
with a remote specialist be desired. The ECG is the
format. The cases cover the common arrhythmias
gold standard for assessment of cardiac rhythm
encountered in small animal medicine, and will
disturbances, and a sound working knowledge of
help develop the necessary skills to assess the ECG
 ECG principles is needed for proper interpretation.
 quickly and accurately in both the dog and the cat.
Most  veterinarians  have some experience 
in
We hope that you find this book useful and that it
ECG interpretation, but many still feel uncertain
makes interpretation of the ECG an enjoyable and
about their ability in this respect. ECG textbooks
 productive endeavor.
are often lengthy, detailed, and not intended
for immediate clinical application. This book is
Mark A. Oyama
designed with the general practitioner in mind, and
 Marc S. Kraus
 presented as a concise and practical overview of
 Anna R. Gelzer
ABBREVATIONS
AC
 alternating current
LAFB
left anterior fascicular block
AF
 atrial fibrillation
LBBB
left bundle branch block
AFL
 atrial flutter
MEA
 mean electrical axis
AP
 accessory pathway
RBBB
right bundle branch block
ARVC
 arrhythmogenic right ventricular
SA
sinoatrial
cardiomyopathy
SB
sinus bradycardia
ATP
adenosine triphosphate
SSS
sick sinus syndrome
AV
atrioventricular
SVA
 supra ventricular arrhythmia
AVRT
atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia
SVT
 supra ventricular tachycardia
cTnI
cardiac troponin
VF
ventricular fibrillation
ECG
electrocardiography/electrocardiogram
VPC
ventricular premature contraction
FAT
focal atrial tachycardia
VT
ventricular tachycardia
ICU
Intensive Care Unit
Section 1
PRINCIPLES OF
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHV
The electrocardiogram (ECG) is a graphical record
ECG LEAD TERMINOLOGY
of electric potentials generated by the heart muscle 
In order to record an ECG waveform, a differential
during each cardiac cycle. These potentials are
recording is made between two electrodes, placed
detected on the surface of the body using electrodes
on different points on the body. One of the
attached to the limbs and chest wall, and are then
electrodes is labeled positive, and the other negative.
amplified by the electrocardiograph machine and
The positions of the electrodes on the body are
displayed on special graph paper in voltage and
standardized (Fig. 1.1) and defined as RA = right
time. The ECG serves to characterize arrhythmias
arm, LA = left arm, and LL = left leg. The output
and conduction disturbances.
from each electrode pair (differential recording) is
referred to as a lead and numbered with the Roman
INDICATIONS FOR ECG RECORDINGS
numerals I, II, and III. These leads are called limb
· Evaluating arrhythmias and heart rate
leads.
disturbances detected on auscultation.
· History of syncope (fainting) or episodic
weakness.
Cardiac monitoring during anesthesia.
· Cardiac monitoring in critically ill patients.
· Monitoring changes in rate and rhythm due to
 drug administration.
Assessing changes in ECG morphology and
 heart rate due to electrolyte imbalances
 associated with extracardiac disease or drug
toxicities.
· In addition, the ECG may also be helpful to
identify anatomical changes due to myocardial
hypertrophy or dilation, and detect pericardial
disease. However, echocardiography has largely
replaced the ECG for these indications due to its
RA
superior sensitivity.
I= LA-RA
II =LL - RA
III=LL-LA
Fig. 1.1 The standardized positions of the electrodes
on the body are defined as RA = right arm, LA =
left arm, and LL = left leg. The output from each
electrode pair is referred to as a lead and numbered
with the Roman numerals I, Il, and Ill.
9
Principles of Electrocardiography
The limb leads form the points of what is known as
THE LIMB LEADS
Einthoven's triangle (Fig. 1.2). The positive pole for
There are six limb leads which assess the cardiac
lead I is on the left arm, the positive pole for lead
depolarization in the frontal plane. A modified
 Ill peal ro alod ansod aui pue bal yal aui uo 1
version of the frontal plane in the dog is shown in
is on the left leg. An imaginary line connecting the 
Figure 1.3. Leads I, II, and II directly record the
two electrodes is the lead axis. Each lead looks at 
electrical activity between two limb electrodes ( Table
the heart from a different angle within the animal's
1.1) and are thus referred to as bipolar limb leads.
frontal plane. There are 12 standard ECG leads used
The unipolar (augmented) limb leads use the same
in veterinary medicine, which provide information 
electrodes as lead I, II, and IIl, and also measure
regarding the magnitude of the electrical activity
the electrical activity between two terminals, but
of the heart and the direction of a moving
the recording electrode is always positive and the
depolarization wavefront in multiple orientations.
negative terminal is made up of the sum of the
A wavefront traveling towards the positive terminal
electrodes attached to the right arm, left arm, and
of a lead results in a positive deflection of the ECG
left leg (Fig. 1.4). These limb leads are named after
in that lead. When a wavefront travels away from
their positive electrode, located on the Left arm
the positive electrode, a negative deflection occurs.
(aVL), the Right arm (aVR), and the left Foot (aVF),
A lead axis in parallel to the direction a wavefront
where the ‘a’ stands for augmented, and V' stands
is moving results in a large deflection, while a lead
for vector (Fig. 1.5 ). Together with leads I, II, and III,
axis perpendicular to the direction of a moving 
augmented limb leads aVR, aVL, and aVF form the
wavefront results in a small (or no) deflection on
basis of the bexaxial reference system, which is used
the ECG.
to calculate the heart's electrical axis in the frontal
 plane. The positive and negative terminals of the six
limb leads are listed in Table 1.1.
Transverse
RA
A
4
rontal
Fig. 1.3 The limb leads display the cardiac
Fig. 1.2 The limb leads (l. Il, Ill) form the
depolarization in the frontal plane. The chest leads
Einthoven's triangle.
display the depolarization in the transverse plane.
10
Principles of Electrocardiography
Table 1.1 The positive and negative terminals of the six ECG limb leads
Augmented 
Bipolar
unipolar limb
limb leads
leads
R arm {-} to L arm {+}
aVR
R arm ({+} to common terminal {-}
R arm {-} to L foot {+}
aVL
L arm {+} to common terminal {-}
三
L arm {-} to L foot {+}
aVF
L foot (+) to common terminal {-}
Fig. 1.4 The augmented
{unipolar) limb leads
use the same electrodes
RA
as lead I, Il, Ill, but the
recording electrode is
 always positive and 
the negative terminal is
made up of the sum of 
the electrodes attached
to the right arm, left arm.
 and left leg.
2LA-RA -LL
→aVL =
2
RL
Augmented
limb
→aVR：
2RA - LA - LL
leads
2
→aVF = 2LL - LA - RA
2
Fig. 1.5 The augmented
limb leads are named
after their positive
electrode, located on the
Left arm {aVL), the Right
RA
A
arm (aVR), and the left
④：
?
Foot (aVF), where the 'a'
stands for augmented.
and 'v' stands for vector.
11
Principles of Electrocardiography
THE PRECORDIAL OR CHEST LEADS
GENESIS OF THE NORMAL ECG
(V LEADS)
The ECG waveforms are generated by the spread of
The chest leads view the heart's electrical activity
activation of cardiac action potentials through the
in the transverse plane (see Fig. 1.3 p.10). This
specialized electrical conduction system of the heart,
complements the information regarding the electrical
as well as the atrial and ventricular myocytes. The
fields gained from the six limb leads. The chest leads
specialized conduction system consists of the sinus
are termed V (voltage) leads. They are considered
node, internodal tracts, the atrioventricular (AV)
to be unipolar with the positive exploring electrode
node, the bundle of His, which divides into the two
placed on the chest (precordium). The electrodes
main bundle branches, and the Purkinje fibers (Fig.
for the chest leads (V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, and V6)
1.7). Organized electrical activity passing along this
are placed directly on the chest (Fig. 1.6). In dogs,
specialized conduction system results in co-ordinated
V1 is placed in the 5th right intercostal space just
mechanical contraction during each cardiac cycle.
to the right of the sternum, V6 is placed in the left
The sinoatrial (SA) and AV node cells have the
6th intercostal space at the costochondral junction,
intrinsic ability to fre spontaneously (automaticity).
while V2-V5 are spaced equally between V1 and
Normal atrial or ventricular myocytes do not
V6 in the 6th intercostal space on the left side. Left
spontaneously depolarize. The SA node normally
chest leads may be more sensitive than the limb
dictates the heart rate because the SA nodal cells
leads for detection of right ventricular enlargement
have a faster rate of spontaneous depolarization than
or allow better identification of P waves.
the AV nodal or Purkinje fbers. The actual action
Fig. 1.6 The unipolar
chest leads {V =
voltage) leads are
placed directly on the
chest (precordium).
Equidstant
6
RA
V4
V3
√1
V2
A
12
Principles of Electrocardiography
 potential generated by the SA nodal cells (pacemaker 
relatively isoelectric segment following the P wave,
 potentials) are too small be seen on the surface ECG.
contributing to the PR interval. When the electrical
However, as the activation wa vefront encounters the
impulse emerges from the AV node and enters
mass of atrial myocardium, the initiation of electrical
the His-Purkinje network, conduction velocity
activity is observed on the body surface. Thus, the
dramatically increases once again. The bundle of His
frst ECG wave of the cardiac cycle is called the P
divides into the right and left bundle branches that
wave and represents activation of the atria. Atrial
depolarize the right and left ventricles, respectively.
repolarization is rarely appreciated on the ECG, as it
The left branch further divides into the anterior and
occurs simultaneously with ventricular depolarization
posterior fascicule. Once the large muscle mass of
and is thus hidden in the QRS complex.
the ventricles is excited, a large deflection is seen
Conduction of the cardiac impulse proceeds from
on the body surface, called the QRS complex. This
the SA node through the atria via the specialized
large wave can have several components. In lead
conduction system of the internodal tracts to the
II, there may be an initial downward deflection,
AV node. When the activation wave reaches the
called the Q wave, followed by a dominant upward
AV node, conductions slows markedly, due to the
deflection called the R wave. There may also be a
slow depolarization characteristics of the AV nodal
terminal downward deflection, called the S wave.
cells. This provides time between the mechanical
The polarity and actual presence of these three
contraction of the atria and the ventricles. On the
components depend on the lead examined.
surface ECG, this conduction delay produces a short,
Fig. 1.7 The
specialized cardiac
conduction system.
Internodal tracts
Sinoatrial 
(SA) node
Left atrium
Right atrium 
Atrioventricular
[AV} node
Bundle
of His
Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Right bundle.
Left bundle
branch
branch
13
Principles of Electrocardiography
Following the QRS complex is another short,
 or other electrical equipment in the room. The ECG
relatively isoelectric segment, the ST segment.
reference ground is provided through a separate
During this time period, the ventricles are absolutely
electrode, either incorporated into one of the three
refractory, i.e. cannot respond to another electrical
limb leads, or as a separate wire.
activation. After this short segment, the ventricles
To record an ECG, the animal should be placed
return to their electrical resting state, and a wave
 on its right side with the limbs perpendicular to the
of repolarization is seen as a low-frequency signal,
body. The animal must be physically connected to
the T wave. During the T wave, the ventricles are
the amplifier front end of the cables, by attaching
only relatively refractory, and may be stimulated
 alligator clips or patch electrodes to the skin. These
by a premature electrical activation. The duration
electrodes require alcohol ('wetting of the skin') or
of time from the start of the QRS complex to
 a gel with a high ionic concentration, which acts as
the end of the T wave is the QT interval which
the transducer at the tissue-electrode interface. The
represents the entire ventricular depolarization and
size of the ECG waveform deflections depends on the
repolarization.
distance between the heart and the electrode position.
In dogs and cats, the limb leads are attached to the
TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF ECG
elbows and stifles, and color coded to identify their
ACQUISITION
position. Table 1.2 lists the electrode positions.
The standard ECG recording systems record
 Besides the standard 6- or 12-lead ECG, there are
an analog signal and use a heated stylus which
several other uses of ECG recording technology that
 records on light-sensitive graph paper. Older-style
rely on only a few leads. Continuous monitoring
ECG machines recorded one lead at a time while
under anesthesia or in the Intensive Care Unit
more recent digital systems, which record
l the
(ICU) using an integrated physiorecording system
ECG on a computer, allow any combination of
for blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and so on,
simultaneous 6- or 12-lead recordings. The ECG
typically record only one lead. The ambulatory or
machine typically applies a flter to reduce baseline
Holter ECG is an important technology for long-
artifact. A S0 Hz flter may be adequate in dogs.
term monitoring of patients allowing detection and
but in cats it is best to use a 150 Hz flter in order
 quantification of intermittent arrhythmias. Holters 
to include high-frequency components of the R
 record a two or three lead ECG digitally for up to 7
 and S wave. Proper grounding is important to
days. The data can then be stored and analyzed on-
 avoid electrical interference from 60 Hz alternating
line with personal computer-based programs.
 current (AC) originating from the electrical supply
Table 1.2 Electrode position for ECG recording
in dogs and cats
ECG electrode
Position
Black
Left front leg at elbow
White
Right front leg at elbow
Red
Left back leg at stifle
Green
Right back leg at stifle
14
Principles of Electrocardiography
The cardiac conduction system and components of the P-QRS-T complex
Through a complex change of ionic concentrations across the cell membrane, an extracellular potential
field is established which then excites neighboring cells, and a cell-to-cell propagation of electrical events
occurs. Because the body acts as a purely resistive medium, these potential fields extend to the body
surface. The character of the body surface waves as seen on the EcG depends on the amount of tissue
activated at one time and the relative speed and direction of the activation wavefront. The 12 ECG leads
provide information about the magnitude of the electrical activity of the heart and the direction of the
moving depolarization wavefront in multiple orientations. A wavefront traveling towards the positive
away from the positive electrode, a negative deflection occurs. A lead axis in parallel to the direction
a wavefront is moving results in a large deflection, while a lead axis perpendicular to the direction of a
moving wavefront results in a small (or no) deflection on the ECG.
An early pioneer of the ECG, Einthoven chose the letters of the alphabet 'PQRST' to avoid conflict with
other physiological waves being studied at about the same time. The wavefront initiated by the sinus
node, located at junction of the cranial vena cava and the right atrium, depolarizes the atria from right to
left and cranial to caudal. This results in a small, upright P wave in the caudal leads I, Il,Ill, and aVF, while
in lead ll, because the average vector of the atrial depolarization is traveling towards the positive terminal
of lead Il, while the P is almost invisible in leads which are oriented perpendicular to lead Il (aVL). While
the impulse conducts slowly through the AV node and enters the bundle of His and spreads down into
the bundle branches and to the Purkinje fibers, the ECG displays an isoelectric (baseline) line in all leads.
These conduction tissues are 'insulated' so that the action potential travels mostly intracellular and does
Once the impulse reaches the ventricular myocardium, it spreads into the interventricular septum
and then across both ventricles, producing the QRS complex on the surface ECG. The initial vector of
jo alod aalsod aut woiy Aeme s! teun 'tuby aul oi pue Ajejuenn juiod uen wnidas aul ou! uogezjejodap
lead ll, producing the small negative deflection of the Q wave. Not all dogs and cats display Q waves.
depending on the position of the heart in the chest. Because the muscle mass of the left ventricle exceeds
that of the right ventricle, the summation of all vectors of ventricular depolarization point toward the left
side and caudally. i.e. the positive terminal of lead ll, resulting in the large, positive deflection of the R
ae pue 'l 'll 'll speal lpner lle Aewou ina 'apnidwe aam y isael aut smous Alleoii ll pea] 'aaem
will depict a positive R wave. The final phase of ventricular depolarization includes the heart base, such
Not all dogs and cats display Q waves or S waves as the presence of these waves depends somewhat on
the horizontal position of the heart in the chest.
process that starts at the epicardium and the ventricular apex, and ends at the endocardium and heart
amplitude T wave in lead ll. It can be a positive or negative deflection in dogs, or nearly isoelectric in cats.
15
Principles of Electrocardiography
Electrical properties of the heart
Two types of action potentials are observed in the heart: The fast response action potential occurs in the
normal atrial and ventricular myocardium and in the Purkinje fibers (Fig. 1.8A), while the slow response
action potential (Fig. 1.8B) is found in the SA node, the pacemaker region of the heart, and in the AV node.
the specialized tissue that conducts the cardiac impulse from atria to the ventricles (see Fig. 1.7 p. 13).
The various phases of the action potential (Fig. 1.8) are associated with changes in the permeability of the
cell membrane, mainly to positively charged sodium (Na+), potassium (K+), and calcium (Ca2+) ions. This is
accomplished by opening and closing of voltage-dependent ion channels in the cell membrane, selective
across the cell membranes (resting membrane potential) such that the inside is negative with respect to
the outside of the cells. This negative intracellular potential is maintained by Na+ channels, which extrude
Na+ ions from the cell. When an action potential from a neighboring cell arrives, it reduces the resting
potential to a threshold (i.e. makes it less negative) resulting in an abrupt increase in permeability of the
 Na+ channels, allowing Na+ ions to rush into the cell and depolarize it. The rapid depolarization (upstroke of
fast response action potential), that ensues once the cell reaches a voltage threshold corresponds to Phase 
0. The membrane potential is thus reversed or positive. Once a cell is depolarized, it cannot be depolarized
again, until the ionic fluxes that occur during depolarization are reversed, a process called repolarization.
The repolarization of the cardiac cells roughly corresponds to phases 1 through 3 of the action potential.
Phase 1 consists of a brief rapid repolarization, initiated at the end of the action potential upstroke, as the
 Na+ channels inactivate and the K+ channels transiently allow outwards current. Phase 1 is interrupted
when the cell reaches the 'plateau phase' or phase 2, maintained by a slow Ca?+ influx. The transmembrane
 current of Ca2+ initiates the mechanical contraction of the heart. During the plateau, repolarization slowly
progresses, until the Ca?+ channels are turned off and eventually a final rapid repolarization (phase 3)
ensues, via an outward K+ current. Because a second depolarization cannot happen until repolarization 
occurs, the time from the end of phase 0 to late in phase 3 is called the refractory period. Phase 4 is the
resting membrane potential. This is the period that the cell remains in until it is stimulated again by an
extemal electrical stimulus (typically an action potential from an adjacent cell).
Cells from the SA node and the AV node (Fig. 1.8B) have a lower resting membrane potential which
becomes gradually more positive during diastole (phase 4) because of steady influx of calcium through
slow Ca2+ channels, eventually resulting in spontaneous depolarization. The slow influx of Ca2+ produces 
the slow upstroke velocity (s/ow response action potential) in the SA and AV nodal cells.
A
B
+50
-50
Thres hold
0
potential
100L
Resting
potential
Fig. 1.8 Action potentials of the heart and generation of the surface ECG. The fast response action
action potential (graph B) is found in the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes.
16
Section 2
EVALUATION OFTHE
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
Evaluation of the ECG is best performed
 of squares and performing a few easy calculations
using a systematic approach so that important
to convert each value to either seconds or millivolts,
characteristics are not overlooked.  Important
respectively.
features that require analysis include heart rate,
rhythm, mean electrical axis (MEA), waveform
morphology, and criteria for heart enlargement.
This section will provide a step-by-step guide on
how to evaluate each of these features, but first, one
must understand how paper speed and sensitivity
settings affect ECG interpretation.
ECG PAPER, SENSITIVITY, AND SPEED
OF RECORDING
ECG paper has a background pattern of 1 mm
squares and bold division lines every 5 mm in both
horizontal and vertical directions (large squares).
The ECG is typically recorded at one of two different
paper speeds, either 25 mm/s or 50 mm/s. Paper
 speed denotes the speed at which the paper moves
through the ECG machine while the waveforms
Paper speed:
Sensitivity:
are being recorded. At 25 mm/s, each 1 mm square
25 mm/s
10 mm/mV
represents 0.04 seconds and each 5 mm square
50 mm/s
 represents 0.2 seconds, while at 50 mm/s, each 1 mm
square represents 0.02 seconds and each 5 mm square
0.2 s
 represents 0.1 seconds (Fig. 2.1).
0.1 s
ECG sensitivity refers to the amplitude of the
waveforms based on electrical voltage. At standard
0.04 s
sensitivity, an impulse of 1 millivolt (mV) will inscribe
0.02 5
a waveform amplitude that is 10 mm tall (Fig. 2.1).
4++
1 mV
In cases where the ECG voltages are low (i.e. in cats),
sensitivity can be increased (doubled) so that an
impulse of 0.5 mV will create a waveform of 10 mm
0.1 mV
 amplitude, thereby allowing easier inspection of the
individual ECG waveforms. Conversely, in animals 
Amplitude
with severe heart enlargement, sensitivity can be
decreased (halved) so that waveforms do not extend
past the borders of the recording paper. Once the
 paper speed and sensitivity are noted, calculation of
Time-
heart rate and waveform morphology becomes as
simple as determining time and amplitude in number
Fig. 2.1 Paper speed and sensitivity.
17
Evaluation of the Electrocardiogram
HEART RATE
 The regularity of the heart beats: are the RR
 If the heart rhythm is regular, the simplest method
intervals regular or irregular?
to calculate heart rate is to count the number of 1
The relationship of the P wave and QRS
mm squares between two heart beats (RR interval)
complexes:
and divide this number into 3000 if the paper speed
· Is there a P wave in front of every QRS
is 50 mm/s (3000 is the equivalent of i minute
complex?
because 60 seconds x 50 = 3000), or into 1500 if the
· Is there a QRS complex following every P
paper speed is 25 mm/s (Fig. 2.2). This calculation
wave?
will yield the heart rate as beats per minute (bpm).
The origin of the heart beats:
If the heart rhythm is irregular, calculation of the
- Sinus node
 average heart rate over a prescribed period of time
- Ectopic focus (i.e. atrial, junctional, or
is performed. It is useful to realize that 30 larger
ventricular origin).
squares or 150 mm represent 3 seconds at 50 mm/s or
The heart rate.
6 seconds at 25 mm/s. Thus heart rate is determined
by counting the number of QRS complexes over 30
 In some instances, the heart rhythm changes or is
large squares and multiplying this number by 20 if
composed of multiple different rhythms that each
 the paper speed is 50 mm/s, or multiplying by 10 if
requires a separate description.
the paper speed is 25 mm/s (Fig. 2.3). A commonly
used shortcut takes advantage of the fact that many
MEAN ELECTRICAL AXIS
standard ballpoint pens are 150 mm in length.
The mean electrical axis (MEA) describes the net
Thus, the pen can be placed on the ECG paper to
direction of cardiac depolarization across the
denote a 3 or 6 second interval and the number of
 animal's frontal plane (the plane delineated by the
beats that are demarcated by the length of the pen
four extended limbs if the animal is viewed as lying
can be quickly counted. To get *bpm', this number
on its back). The conventional 6-lead ECG system
is multiplied by 20 if the paper speed is 50 mm/s or
divides the frontal plane into 12 segments, similar
by 10 if the paper speed is 25 mm/s.
to the slices of a pie (Fig. 2.4, see Fig. 1.3 p.10).
By doing so, the 6-lead ECG examination records
RHYTHM
the electrical activity of the heart from six different
The heart rhythm describes the pattern of heart
vantage points along the frontal plane in 30 degree
beats and sequence of the P-QRS-T wave
increments (Fig. 2.4). The MEA normally points
forms. The heart rhythm is best evaluated over
towards the caudal half of the animal. In the dog.
a prolonged recording of a 6-lead ECG tracing.
the normal MEA is between +40 and +100 degrees
When determining the heart rhythm, the following
characteristics should be examined:
Heart rate = 3000/15 = 200 bpm
50 mm/s
15 mm
10 mm/mV
1
Fig. 2.z Calculation of heart rate when rhythm is regular.
18
Evaluation of the Electrocardiogram
25 mm/s
Average heart rate = 12 beats/6 s = 12 x 10 = 120 bpm
10 mm/mV
150 mm (30 large squares) = 6 s
Fig. 2.3 Calculation of heart rate when rhythm is irregular.
avF-
-90"
-120°
-60°
aVR+
aVL+
150°
-30°
+/-180*
D°
十
+150°
avL
+30°
aVR-
+120°
+60°
三十
+90°
=十
aVF+
Fig. 2.4 The 6-lead ECG system.
19
Evaluation of the Electrocardiogram
and in the cat, the normal MEA is between O and
left axis deviation includes partial or incomplete
+160 degrees (Fig. 2.5). An easy way to remember
bundle branch block. Note that left ventricular
the direction of the normal MEA is to visualize
hypertrophy does not usually result in the left
a dorsoventral or  ventrodorsal  radiograph 
 and
 axis shiff, as the normal MEA is already pointing
imagine the normal MEA as pointing from the center
 in the direction of the left ventricular apex. Less
of the heart towards the left ventricular apex. The
commonly, mechanical displacement of the heart to
MEA can be within the normal range or to the right
 either side of the thorax by space-occupying lesions
or left of the normal range. Common causes of right
or lung lobe atelectesis can change the MEA.
axis deviation include right ventricular hypertrophy
Examples of animals with a left and right axis shift
or right bundle branch block. A common cause of
 are shown in Figure 2.6.
aVF-
-90°
-120°
-60°
aVR+
aVL+
-150°
30°
+/-180°
aVR
+150°
+30°
aVL-
aVR-
+120°
+60°
aVL
三+
+90°
+
aVF+
aVF
25 rmm/s
5 mm/mV
the polarity of the QRS complexes from each of the six limb leads.
1. Identify the ECG lead in which the QRS complex is isoelectric, that is, the lead in which the net polarity of the
QRS complex is closest to zero (i.e. the positive and negative deflections ofthe QRS waves cancel each other
outy . In some instances this will be the lead in which the QRS waves are the smallest and in other instances the
lead in which the amplitude of the positive QRS deflections is the same as the sum of the negative deflections.
2. Examine the hexaxial lead system and identify the limb lead that is perpendicular to the isoelectric lead. The
MEA will exist in a direction either towards the positive or negative pole of the perpendicular lead.
 3. Inspect the ECG and note the polarity of the QRS complex in the perpendicular lead.
4. If the net polarity is negative, the MEA points to the negative pole of the perpendicular lead, and if the net
polarity is positive, the MEA points to the positive pole of the perpendicular lead.
20
Evaluation of the Electrocardiogram
avF-
.06-
-120°
60°
aVR+
avL-
-150°
-30°
+/-180°
+150°
002+
avL-
aVR-
+120°
.09+
.06+
+三
I+
avF+
aVF-
4
.06-
-120°
-60°
avR+
2
ayL-
-150°
30°
+/-180°
+150°,
02+
avL-
avR-
+120°
+60°
o06+
+
+= 
aVF+
25 mm/s10 mm/mV
50 mm/s20 mm/mV
Fig. 2.6 Right shift (right panel) and left shift (left panel) in mean electrical axis. See Figure 2.5 for numerals.
21
Evaluation of the Electrocardiogram
WAVEFORM MORPHOLOGY AND
The PR interval
INTERVALS
The PR interval represents the time it takes for
The amplitudes, durations, and intervals
ofa
the electrical impulse to conduct from the sinus
representative  normal  P-QRS-T complex are
node through the atria and the AV node and
shown in Figure 2.7.
bundle of His. Physiologically, the delay in impulse
 conduction in the AV node allows the atria to empty
The P wave
 of blood and for ventricular flling to occur, prior
The  P  wave represents  atrial depolarization.
to the onset of ventricular contraction. The PR
Increased P wave amplitude or duration is associated
interval is measured from the start of the P wave to
with either right and/or left atrial enlargement.
the first deflection of the QRS complex. The normal
Normal P wave values for the dog and cat are
PR interval in dogs and cats is shown in Table 2.1.
shown in Table 2.1. Absence of P waves is noted in
Increased duration of the PR interval is described
instances of atrial fibrillation (AF), atrial standstill,
as frst-degree AV block. Varying PR intervals are
and sinus arrest. P waves without corresponding
noted in cases of sinus arrhythmia or certain forms
QRS complexes are noted in cases of second- and
of second-degree AV block. Abnormally short PR
third-degree AV node block. Inverted or retrograde
intervals are rare and encountered in instances of
P waves are commonly seen in conjunction with
 accessory pathway (AP)-mediated arrhythmias.
 junctional or atrial premature and escape beats.
Fig. 2.7 Amplitudes,
durations, and intervals
of the P-QRS-T
complex.
 R amplitude
P amplitude
P duration
ST segment
QRS duration
PR interval
QT interval
22
Evaluation of the Electrocardiogram
The QRS complex
The
 QRS
complex
represents
ventricular
through the ventricle, and the potential presence of
depolarization. Standard nomenclature describes
ventricular hypertrophy. QRS complexes generated
the first negative deflection as the Q wave, the first
by a beat of supraventricular origin (sinus node or
positive deflection as the R wave, and the first negative
supraventricular foci such as the atria or AV nodal
deflection following the first positive deflection as the
junction) are typically narrow and positive in lead II,
S wave. Note that normal QRS complexes do not
while those that originate from ventricular foci are
 necessarily contain all three waveforms, and in dogs,
auieadde aqi ul aieziq, pue uonemp ul iapim
a high degree of individual variability is seen. The
as compared to normal sinus beats.
normal sequence of ventricular depolarization results
Conduction disturbances within the ventricles
in a QRS complex of relatively short duration and
  o  a rae ose s
with a net positive polarity in leads II, II, and aVF.
complexes. Finally, ventricular hypertrophy can
The normal duration and amplitude of the QRS
increase the amplitude of the QRS complex and
complex in the dog and cat is shown in Table 2.1.
the duration (albeit to a lesser degree than a bundle
A key component of ECG analysis is inspection of
branch block) or change the MEA (as in the case of
the QRS morphology in lead II, which can provide
right heart enlargement, Fig. 2.6, p.21).
clues to the complex's origin, its conduction
Table 2.1 Normal ECG amplitude and duration in the dog and cat
Dog
Cat
Heart rate
Puppy: 70-220 bpm
120-240 bpm
Adult: 70-180 bpm
Rhythm
Sinus rhythm
Sinus rhythm
Sinus arrhythmia
P wave
Amplitude
Max: 0.4 mV
Max: 0.2 mV
Duration
Max: 0.04 s
Max: 0.04 s
PR interval
0.06-0.13 5
0.05-0.09 5
QRS
Amplitude
Max: 2.5 mV, small breeds
Max: 0.9 mV
[3.0 mV, large breeds)
Duration
≤0.06 s
≤0.04 s
ST segment
no elevation
none
or depression >0.2 mV
T wave
positive, negative, or
isoelectric or usually positive and
biphasic, not >25% height or R wave
x0.3 mV
Electrical axis
+40° to + 100*
0 to + 160°
Adapted from Tilley LP, Srmith WK (2008). Electrocardiography. In: Tilley LP, Smith WK, Oyaina MA, Sleeper MM (eds).
Manual of Canine and Feline Cardiology, 4th edn. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis.
23
Evaluation of the Electrocardioqram
The ST segment
congenital  heart disease (subaortic  stenosis),
The ST segment (or interval) represents the time
electrolyte imbalances, acute hypoxia (anesthesia),
between the end of ventricular depolarization
 or suspected myocardial infarction (rare).
and the beginning of ventricular repolarization.
In general, the ST segment should not be either
The T wave
elevated or depressed as compared to baseline by
The T wave represents ventricular repolarization.
more than 0.2 mV. In human patients, ST segment
The normal T wave in both dogs and cats
abnormalities occur in instances of myocardial
demonstrates a high degree of variability and can
ischemia/infarction,
 pericardial
disease,
or
be positive, negative, biphasic, or of very low
electrolyte imbalances. In dogs and cats, ST segment
amplitude; however, the T wave should be consistent
abnormalities are occasionally detected in cases
from beat to beat during a normal rhythm. The
of myocardial disease (dilated cardiomyopathy),
 normal characteristics of the T wave in dogs and
cats are shown in Table 2.1. As compared to human
patients, T wave changes in the dog and cat are
relatively nonspecific  and poorly  characterized.
T wave abnormalities can be seen in instances of
tlectrolyte abnormalities, hypoxia, conduction
abnormalities, or drug toxicity {i.e. digoxin). The
 duration of time from the start of the QRS complex
to the end of the T wave is called the QT interval.
CRITERIA FOR HEART ENLARGEMENT
The criteria for heart enlargement in the dog and
cat are shown in Table 2.2. In brief, left atrial
enlargement is manifest as P wave of increased
duration (P mitrale) or increased amplitude, and left
ventricular enlargement as QRS waveforms with
increased R wave amplitude and QRS duration.
Right atrial enlargement is manifest as P waves of
increased amplitude (P pulmonale) or increased
duration, and right ventricular enlargement as a
right MEA shift and prominent S waves. Examples
 of left and right heart enlargement patterns are
shown in Figures 2.8 and 2.9.
Fig. 2.8 Left atrial and ventricular enlargement
in a dog is denoted by the wide and notched P
wave (arrow) and wide QRS complex (red bar).
respectively.
24
Evaluation of the Electrocardiogram
Fig. 2.9 Right venticular enlargement in a dog is denoted by deep S waves in leads I, Il, Ill, and aVF
[arrows).
Table 2.2 ECG criteria for heart enlargement in the dog and cat
Dog
Cat
Left atrial enlargement
P wave
>0.4 mV
>0.04 s
>0.04 s
Notched
Right atrial enlargement
P wave
>0.4 mV
>0.2 mV
Left ventricular enlargement
R wave
>2.5 mV in lead Il, aVF
>0.9 mV in lead Il
[>3.0 mV in large breed dogs)
>1.5 mV in lead I
QRS duration*
>0.06 s
>0.04 s
Right ventricular enlargement
S wave
> 0.05 mV in lead I
S wave in leads I,Il, Ill
>0.35 mV in lead Il
and aVF
Electrical axis
nght shift (> + 100°)
right shift (> + 160°)
Adapted from Tilley LP, Sinith WK (2008). Electrocardiography. In: Tilley LP, Smith WK, Oyama MA, Sleeper MM (eds).
Manual of Canine and Feline Cardiology, 4th edn. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis.
*QRS duration >0.08 s in the dog and >0.06 s in the cat can be associated with left or right bundle branch blocks. See
text for rmore detail.
25
Evaluation of the Electrocardiogram
BUNDLE BRANCH BLOCK
The bundle of His is specialized conduction tissue
markedly prolonged QRS duration (>0.08 s in the
that forms the distal portion of the AV node, and 
dog and >0.06 s in the cat). Examples of RBBB and
divides into two main bundle branches that course
LBBB are shown in Figures 2.10 and 2.11. The
left- and rightward into the ventricular muscle.
wide QRS morphology of a bundle branch block
Right (RBBB) or left (LBBB) bundle branch block
pattern may be confused with a ventricular rhythm.
occurs when the impulse is blocked or slowed
Impulse origin in most cases of bundle branch
within either of the branches and block results in
block is the sinus node, hence there is a P wave
characteristic QRS waveform changes. In order
associated with each QRS complex and the rhythm
to diagnose a bundle branch block, the MEA has
is supraventricular, despite the marked change in
to be determined, which requires a 6-lead ECG
QRS waveform morphology. RBBB is typically a
recording. RBBB is characterized by a right shift of
benign finding in both dogs and cats, whereas LBBB
the MEA and markedly prolonged QRS duration
is usually associated with severe underlying heart
(>0.08 s in the dog and >0.06 s in the cat), while
disease.
LBBB is characterized by a normal MEA and
Figs. 2.10, 2.11 Bundle branch block. Fig. 2.10: Left bundle branch block in a dog. Note the presence of a
in a cat. Note the presence of P wave, deep and wide S waves in leads I, ll, Ill, and aVF, and the right mean
electrical axis deviation.
26
Section 3
APPROACHTO
EVALUATNG
ARRHYTHMIAS
Cardiac arrhythmias are defined as variations
SYSTEMIC APPROACH TO RHYTHM
of the cardiac rhythm from normal sinus rhythm
DIAGNOSIS
(too rapid, too slow, or too irregular). “Ectopic'
Questions to ask:
beats are those that arise from a source other than
 Is the rate fast or slow (tachycardia vs.
the sinus node. Some cardiac arrhythmias are
bradycardia)?
benign and clinically insignificant and require no
 Is the rhythm regular or irregular? If irregular, is
 therapy, whereas other arrhythmias are malignant
the rate slow, fast, or are there premature beats?
and potentially life-threatening (i.e. ventricular
 Are there P waves? Are they normal (upright 
tachycardia [VT] or ventricular fibrillation [VF]]
 in lead II - i.e. is the rhythm sinus or not sinus)
 causing clinical signs such as weakness, lethargy.
(Fig. 3.1)?
syncope, or sudden death.
 Is there a P wave for every QRS; is there a QRS
Although a specific diagnosis may be suggested
for every P wave?
by auscultation (i.e. AF, high-grade AV block) and
Are the QRS complexes normal or abnormal
physical examination, an ECG is required for a
(normal or abnormal conduction)?
definitive diagnosis.
Sinus
Normal conduction
Abnormal conduction
Bundle branch blocks:
 Sick sinus
Normal rate
Abnormal rate
left or right
syndrome
Bradycardia
Tachycardia
AV blocks:
1st degree
2nd degree
3rd degree
(complete)
Regular rhythm
Fig. 3.1 Schematic
Irregular rhythm
diagram of rhythm
 analysis in sinus rhythm
{P waves have to be
 Sinus rhythm
Sinus arrhythmia
present to be considered
sinus rhythm).
27
Approach to Evaluating Arrhythmias
HOW DOES ONE DIFFERENTIATE
SUPRAVENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
FROM VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS?
Supraventricular arrhythmias: general criteria
Ventricular arrhythmias: general criteria (Fig. 3.3):
(Fig. 3.2):
· Wide QRS complex.
?
 Ectopic beats display a narrow QRS complex.
· Morphology of ectopic QRS complexes and
 Morphology of ectopic QRS complexes and
 sinus beat QRS complexes are dissimilar.
sinus beat QRS complexes are similar.
· P waves are not associated with the ectopic QRS
· P waves usually associated with the ectopic QRS
complex.
(unless heart rate is rapid enough so that the P
 If fusion beats are present, this supports a
waves are buried within the preceding T wave
diagnosis of ventricular ectopic complexes.
 or if AF or atrial flutter [AFL] are present).
 P wave morphology of ectopic beats can appear
different from the sinus P wave.
Is ventricular
conduction normal?
 Normal 
Abnormal
ventricular
ventricular
conduction
 condition
Irregularly
SVT with
Regular
irregular
rhythm 
 bundle 
rhythm
branch blocks
 Atrial
 Atrial
flutter
tachycardia
or junctional
No P
tachycardia
waves
 Atrial
Fig. 3.2 Schematic diagram of rhythm
fibrillation
analysis in supraventricular arrhythmias. SVT:
supraventricular tachycardia.
Wide complex
[QRS} rhythm
Ventricular
Supraventricular
rhythm 
rhythm with bundle
branch block
Rate
Rate
>160 bpm
<160 bpm
 Ventricular
Idioventricular
tachycardia
 or accelerated
escape rhythm
Fig. 3.3 Schematic diagram of rhythm analysis
in ventricular tachycardia (wide QRS complex
rhythm].
28
Approach to Evaluating Arrhythmias
Fig. 3.4 Dog. lead Il, 50 mm/s showing atrial fibrillation and f waves (arrow).
Fig. 3.5 Dog. lead Il, 50 mm/s showing atrial flutter and Fl waves (arrows).
SUPRAVENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
Supraventricular arrhythmias (SVAs) originate in
Most cases of AF in small animals are associated
the sinus node, atrial tissue, and AV junction {or
with significant underlying heart disease. In giant
AV node). SVAs include a wide variety of atrial,
breed dogs, AF can occur spontaneously, and in the
AV, and AV nodal tachycardias. SVAs have to
absence of identifiable heart disease, the term *lone*
be differentiated from sinus tachycardia. Sinus
AF is often used.
tachycardia is typically physiological and may be
caused by many conditions including febrile states,
Atrial flutter
anemia, heart failure, adrenergic medications, and
AFL is a form of re-entry tachycardia that usually
anxiety.
arises from the right atrium. It utilizes the anatomy
of the right atrium to sustain a macro-re-entry loop
Specific supraventricular arrhythmias and ECG
of continuous depolarization. It can also be initiated
criteria
and sustained in the left atrium. It is maintained
Atrial fibrillation
due to differences in the refractory periods of atrial
AF is caused by multiple atrial impulses that
tissue. As in AF, the AV node controls the ventricular
depolarize the atria simulatenously and bombard
response rate.
the AV node. During AF the atrial activation rate is
rapid and can exceed 500 depolarizations/minute.
ECG criteria (Fig. 3.5):
The refractory period of the AV node does not
Rapid ventricular rate possible.
allow all these impulses to travel to the ventricle,
Saw tooth undulation of the baseline.
and prevents heart rates exceeding 250-300 bpm.
Atrial (f wave) rate usually >300 bpm.
This protects the ventricles from developing
VF
Rate and regularity of RR intervals can be
as a consequence of AF. The electrophysiological
variable (depends on AV conduction). Often 2:1
mechanisms that initiate and maintain AF include
or 3:1 conduction patterns are observed.
abnormal automaticity and re-entry.
ECG criteria (Fig. 3.4):
· P waves are absent.
●Atrial activity is represented by fibrillatory (f)
waves of varying amplitudes.
Irregular ventricular rhythm.
· At very rapid rates the rhythm can appear more
regular.
29
Approach to Evaluating Arrhythmias
Focal (ectopic) atrial tachycardia
· One-to-one atrial to ventricular association is
 Focal atrial tachycardia (FAT) occurs when localized
usually present during AVRT because the atria
 regions in the atria (other than the sinus or AV node)
and ventricles are both integral parts of the
develop the ability to fre rapidly on their own.
arrhythmia circuit.
 Depending on the site of the focus, the morphology
of the P wave observed on the surface ECG varies. On
BRADYARRHYTHMIAS AND
 occasion, multifocal atrial tachycardia can develop, in
CONDUCTION DISTURBANCES
which case the P wave morphology varies depending
Sinus bradycardia
on the shifting atrial focus. The electrophysiological
Sinus bradycardia (SB) is a type of sinus rhythm
mechanisms that initiate and maintain FAT include
where the sinus node discharge rate is low (<50 bpm
abnormal automaticity, re-entry, and triggered activity.
 in an awake dog). SB of 45-60 bpm during sleep is 
normal. However, if SB persists during excitement
ECG criteria (Fig. 3.6):
 or exercise, it can be a sign of sinus node pathology.
 Normal P waves or abnormal P waves that are
different in morphology from sinus P waves.
ECG criteria (Fig. 3.7):
 There may be a 'warm up' period observed
 Sinus rhythm with positive P waves in the
where the heart rate gradually accelerates after
caudal leads (II, IHl, aVF) and normal QRS
initiation of the tachycardia.
 complexes, unless concurrent conduction disease
 Atrial rate generally >180 bpm.
is present.
 The ventricular rhythm may be irregular when
 Slow sinus node discharge rate.
the atrial rate is so rapid that not every atrial
 Escape beats (junctional or ventricular) may be
beat is conducted to the ventricles (physiological
present.
second-degree AV block).
SICK SINUS SYNDROME
Atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia (AVRT}
Sick sinus syndrome (SSS) is a disease process in
Atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia (AVRT} is a
which the spontaneous sinus node discharge is either
macro-re-entry arrhythmia whose circuit comprises
slower than normal (primary SB) or intermittently
the AV node as well as an accessory pathway (AP)
absent (sinus arrest or sinus block). It is characterized
which can conduct impulses from the atria to the
by an atrial rate that is inappropriate for a patient's
ventricles directly, thus bypassing the AV node
activity. The subsidiary pacemaker tissue (AV node
and His-Purkinje system. During typical AVRT,
 and Purkinje fbers) is often also abnormal, resulting
the depolarization proceeds from the atria to the
in inadequate escape rhythms, such that complete
ventricles through the AV node, and back up to
 asystole (pauses) can occur, often lasting many
the atria from the ventricles in the retrograde
seconds. Clinical signs associated with SsS may
direction via the AP. An AP can behave like a two-
include fainting or intermittent weakness. Some
way street for electric conduction. During normal
patients experience supraventricular tachycardia
sinus rhythm, early activation (pre-excitation) of
(SVT) as well as bradycardia or sinus arrest.
the ventricle via the AP can create a delta wave
(slurring of the upstroke of the QRS complex) on
ECG criteria (Fig. 3.8):
the surface ECG. Some APs can only conduct in the
 The ECG demonstrates a collection of
retrograde direction and therefore do not show a
conditions that indicate sinus node and escape
 pre-excitation pattern.
rhythm dysfunction.
· Periods of bradycardia or sinus arrest followed
ECG criteria:
by paroxysms of SVT.
· Short PR interval (if the impulse is transmitted
+
 AV block may also be present.
forward from atria to ventricle over the AP)
 Due to the intermittent nature of the
?
 Delta wave (if the impulse is transmitted
arrhythmia, 24-hour ambulatory ECG (Holter)
forward from atria to ventricle over the AP).
monitoring is often necessary to diagnose this
 During typical AVRT, QRS complexes are
condition definitively
usually narrow and the retrograde P wave
(negative polarity in leads II and Il) may be seen
embedded into the early portion of the T wave.
30
Approach to Evaluating Arrhythmias
Fig. 3.6 Dog. lead Il, 25 mm/s showing focal atrial tachycardia (blue arrow points to T wave and red arrow
points to P wave).
Fig. 3.7 Dog, lead aVF, 50 mm/s showing sinus bradycardia, with a heart rate of 65 bpm.
Fig. 3.8 Dog. lead Il, 25 mm/s showing sick sinus syndrome, with a period of sinus arrest and junctional
(second beat from the left) and ventricular (last beat on the right) escape beats.
31
Approach to Evaluating Arrhythmias
ATRIAL STANDSTILL
AV CONDUCTION ABNORMALITIES
Atrial standstill is a lack of electrocardiographic
(AV BLOCK)
evidence of atrial depolarization, resulting in the
AV block consists of incomplete, intermittent, or
absence of P waves on the ECG. Causes include
complete failure of conduction between the atria
hyperkalemia, digitalis toxicity, and primary atrial
and ventricles via the AV node. Three types of AV
myocardial disease.
block exist:
● First-degree AV block (Fig. 3.10) is defined as
ECG criteria (Fig. 3.9):
 prolonged conduction through the AV node that
· No P waves are present.
results in an increased PR interval of >0.13 s
· Slow junctional or ventricular escape rhythm is
(dog) and >0.09 s (cat) and normal P wave and
often present.
QRS complexes, in a 1:1 ratio.
· If associated with hyperkalemia, the T waves
Second-degree AV block (Fig. 3.11) is a
 can be tall and the QRS morphology can be
conduction disorder in which some atrial
wide and bizarre.
impulses are not conducted to the ventricles.
There are normal P waves and QRS complexes,
but intermittently the P waves are not followed
by QRS complexes (blocked P). Second-degree
AV block occurs in two types:
Fig. 3.9 Cat, lead aVL, 50 mm/s showing atrial standstill.
Fig. 3.10 Dog, lead Il, 50 mm/s showing first-degree atrioventricular block, with a PR interval of 0.16 s.
32
Approach to Evaluating Arrhythmias
- Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) AV block: PR
VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
interval gradually prolongs until conduction
Ventricular arrhythmias are abnormal spontaneous
across the AV node fails, hence no QRS
depolarizations that originate in any location
complex occurs following the P (dropped
in the ventricle. The occurrence of three or more
beat).
ventricular premature contractions (VPCs) in a
- Mobitz type II AV block: the PR interval is
row is termed VT. Descriptions of ventricular
usually constant before a dropped beat occurs.
arrhythmias often include whether or not the
This is considered a more advanced form of
morphology of all VPCs is similar (monomorphic)
block that occurs lower in the His bundle and
or different (polymorphic), occurs as a single
may thus progress to complete heart block
VPC, two VPCs in a row (couplet), or three or
· In third-degree (complete) AV block (Fig. 3.12),
more VPCs in a row (VT). Furthermore, a period
none of the P waves conduct through the AV
of VT is often described as persisting less than 30
node, thus the atrial and ventricular activities
seconds (nonsustained) or more than 30 seconds
are completely independent (AV dissociation).
(sustained). Breed-specific ventricular arrhythmias
The atrial rate is faster than the ventricular
occur especially in Boxers, Doberman Pinchers, and
rate. The escape rhythm is either junctional or
German Shepherd dogs. An analysis algorithm for
ventricular in origin.
differentiation of wide QRS complex arrhythmias is
shown in Figure 3.3 p. 28.
Fig. 3.11 Dog. lead Il, 50 mm/s showing second-degree atrioventricular block, with a blocked P wave
 seen in the middle of the strip.
Fig. 3.12 Dog. lead Il, 25 mm/s showing third-degree atrioventricular block.
33
Approach to Evaluating Arrhythmias
ECG criteria (Figs. 3.13, 3.14):
VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION
· Abnormally wide and bizarre QRS complexes as
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) is an irregular chaotic
 compared to the normal sinus QRS complex.
rhythm during which there is no organized
No associated P waves.
ventricular contraction. VF is a fatal arrhythmia
Rate of ventricular beats is similar to (AV
because it is never self-terminating and is associated
dissociation) or greater than the P wave rate
with little to no cardiac output. Electric defibrillation 
(VT).
is the only viable treatment option.
● Fusion beats are often present.
ECG criteria (Fig. 3.15):
· Chaotic and irregular deflections of varying
amplitudes.
· No distinguishable P, QRS, or T waves are
present.
Fig. 3.13 Dog. lead Il, 50 mm/s showing ventricular
Fig. 3.14 Dog. lead Il, 50 mm/s showing ventricular
premature beats.
 tachycardia.
Fig. 3.15 Dog. lead Il, 50 mm/s showing ventricular fibrillation.
34
ECG CASES
Question 1
ECG recorded from an 11-year-old Golden Retriever with acute onset of extreme weakness.
1 What are the findings in ECG 1 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
Question 2
Lead II ECG recorded in a 3-year-old Labrador Retriever.
1 What are the findings in ECG 2 (25 mm/s; 20 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
35
Answers 1, 2
ECG Cases
Answer 1
1 ECG 1 shows sinus rhythm with low amplitude QRS complexes and electrical alternans.
2 · The heart rate is ~145 bpm. The P wave amplitude is normal. The QRS amplitude in all leads is
<1.0 mV which is unusual for a large breed dog. The R wave height varies slightly with every other
beat, most easily appreciated in leads I and aVF. Beat to beat variation in QRS complex amplitude or
configuration is called electrical alternans.
· Low amplitude QRS complexes and electrical alternans are most commonly found in association
with pericardial effusion. These findings are not extremely sensitive, but fairly specific for pericardial
effusion. Dampening of the electrical signal by the pericardial effusion decreases the QRS amplitude,
and swinging of the heart in the fluid-filled pericardial sac is considered the origin of the electrical
alternans.
· Large volumes of pericardial effusion impair cardiac flling, resulting in cardiogenic shock
 (pericardial tamponade), and require pericardiocentesis and often intravenous fluid administration.
In this patient, pericardial effusion was confirmed by echocardiography and a mass was visualized
originating at the right atrium. The right atrial mass is most likely a hemangiosarcoma, which is
commonly diagnosed in older, large breed dogs with pericardial effusion.
Answer 2
1 ECG 2 shows either SVT or sinus tachycardia.
2 · The average heart rate is 200 bpm. The rhythm is regular.
● There is a P wave (blue arrow), QRS complex (black arrow), and T wave (green arrow) for every
beat.
· The rapid heart rate causes the P wave to be partially obscured by the preceding T wave.
· The QRS complex morphology is normal indicating a supraventricular origin, which could be ectopic
(SVT) or originating from the sinus node (sinus tachycardia).
· Differentiation between the two rhythms can sometimes be difficult. SVT is characterized by sudden
 (paroxysmal) stopping and starting of the tachycardia, electrical alternans (cyclical variation in 
the amplitude of the QRS complex), changes in P wave morphology, persistence despite sedation
or alleviation of patient stress, and underlying myocardial or valvular disease. In contrast, sinus
tachycardia is usually associated with gradual acceleration and deceleration of the tachycardia.
disappearance when patient stress is alleviated, and normal underlying heart function.
· Labrador Retrievers are particularly prone to SVT and may require additional diagnostic procedures,
such as echocardiography or 24-hour ambulatory (Holter) monitoring, as well as medical therapy to
slow the heart rate (i.e. beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers, digoxin).
36
ECG Cases
Questions 3, 4
Question 3
ECG recorded in a 5-year-old Great Dane dog.
1 What are the findings in ECG 3 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
Question 4
ECG recorded from a 9-year-old male mix breed dog that presents to the emergency service with acute
collapse.
1 What are the findings in ECG 4 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
37
Answers 3, 4
ECG Cases
Answer 3
1 ECG 3 shows sinus tachycardia.
2 · The average heart rate is 200 bpm and the rhythm is regular. There is a normal P, QRS, and
T wave for each beat.
· Sinus tachycardia is mediated by increased sympathetic tone and can be a normal response to stress
or exercise, or secondary to systemic conditions such as sepsis, fever, hypovolemia, shock, or heart
failure.
· Sinus tachycardia can be differentiated from SVT through its gradual acceleration and deceleration in
response to stress and the absence of other clinical signs in instances of excitement or exercise.
Answer 4
1 ECG 4 demonstrates a particular type of polymorphic VT called torsade de pointes.
2 · There is a characteristic illusion of a twisting of the QRS complex around the baseline. The ECG has
 an undulating appearance with varying QRS amplitudes. Torsade de pointes can degenerate into VF,
which is a terminal arrhythmia if not quickly defibrillated.
· Various causes have been implicated in this dangerous arrhythmia, including adverse effects from
certain sodium- or potassium-channel blocking antiarrhythmic drugs, and/or electrolyte or metabolic
disturbances (hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, acidosis) that prolong the QT interval.
VPCs in the presence of long QT intervals predispose the patient to an R-on-T phenomenon,
where the R wave of a subsequent beat occurs during the relative refractory period at the end of
repolarization (T wave) of the preceding beat, and thus may initiate torsades or fbrillation.
· For this arrhythmia, treatment is directed at withdrawal of the offending agent, infusion of
magnesium sulfate, and/or electrical defibrillation.
38
ECG Cases
Questions 5, 6
Question 5
ECG recorded from a 5-year-old Newfoundland dog with an arrhythmia.
1 What are the findings in ECG 5 (25 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
1x11-30Hz
Shock 1 100 J Impedance 55
+
25 rmm/s
Question 6
 ECG recorded in a 12-year-old male castrated Golden Retriever with a heart murmur.
1 What are the findings in ECG 6 (25 mm/s; 5 mm/m V)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
39
Answers 5, 6
ECG Cases
Answer 5
1 ECG 5 shows conversion to sinus rhythm, using electrical cardioversion.
 2 ● The initial four complexes represent AF, with a ventricular rate of approximately 60 bpm. AF is
diagnosed based on the absence of distinct P waves, presence of low amplitude f waves, the irregular
nature of the rhythm, and the QRS complexes having supraventricular morphology (see ECG 12,
p.50 and ECG 29, p.72).
· Because of the absence of significant underlying heart disease and the relatively slow ventricular
rate, a diagnosis of lone' AF was made and conversion back to sinus rhythm was attempted using
electrical cardioversion. A transthoracic electrical shock was delivered with a biphasic defibrillator
(blue and white arrowheads).
● The small blue arrows pointing to the R waves are synchronization markers. Defbrillation shocks
should never be delivered over the T wave, since the repolarization phase is a vulnerable window for
induction of VF. To avoid this complication, the defibrillator detects the R waves and synchronizes
the defbrillation discharge with the onset of the R wave.
● Immediately following cardioversion, there are two ventricular beats (red arrows), followed by
restoration of sinus rhythm with normal P waves (purple arrows) and QRS complexes (green arrow).
Ix 11-30Hz
Shock11u0Jlrnpedance55
25 mn/s
Answer 6
1 ECG 6 shows sinus rhythm.
2 ● The heart rate is ~94 bpm. The rhythm is regular and there is a P for every QRS and QRS for every P.
The amplitude and duration of the P and QRS complexes are normal. The QRS complex amplitude
 is 2.6 mV In order for the QRS complexes from each lead to ft onto the paper without overlapping
each other, note that the ECG sensitivity was set at 5 mm/mV, which is half the normal
[10 mm/mV) setting. The MEA is normal.
● Sinus rhythm represents the normal sequence of cardiac depolarization. In the dog, sinus rhythm
typically ranges between 70 and 180 bpm, although in large breed dogs, the upper rate is often
defined as 140 bpm, and in puppies, 220 bpm.
· The key points are the regularity, and normal rate, sequence, and morphology of the P-QRS-T
waves.
40
ECG Cases
Questions 7, 8
Question 7
ECG recorded in a 9-year-old male domestic shorthair cat with a grade 2/6 systolic murmur.
1 What are the findings in ECG 7 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
Question 8
ECG from a 9-year-old Collie being treated for glomerulonephritis and progressive respiratory distress and
tachycardia
1 What are the findings in ECG 8 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
41
Answers 7. 8
ECG Cases
Answer 7
1 ECG 7 shows sinus rhythm with evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy.
2 ● The average heart rate is 210 bpm. The rhythm is regular.
· The amplitude of the R wave in lead II is 1.9 mV (normal <0.9 mV) suggesting left ventricular
hypertrophy. The caudal limb leads II and aVF, which are similar in orientation to lead II, also
display R wave amplitudes similar to lead I1.
● Left ventricular enlargement if often due to cardiomyopathy or, less commonly, hyperthyroidism
 or systemic hypertension. Based on the ECG findings as well as the presence of a heart murmur,
underlying changes in cardiac structure and function are likely, and further diagnostics, such as
radiographs or echocardiography, are warranted.
Answer 8
1 ECG 8 shows sinus rhythm with ST segment elevation.
2 ● The heart rate is 150 bpm. The ST segment is markedly elevated (arrows) in leads II, II, and
aVF and depressed in lead aVR. The Q waves are notched in leads II,Ill, and aVF.
· ST segment elevation or depression occurs secondary to myocardial hypoxia/ischemia in dogs and
cats. In humans, the discrete location of a recent myocardial infarction can often be inferred based
on ST segment changes. The mechanisms underlying ST segment changes are complex. Hypoxic
conditions in the myocardium leads to diminished intracellular concentrations of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP), and thus decreased activity of ATP-dependent ion transport systems. These
systems play an important role in maintenance of the resting cell membrane as well as action
potential propagation. In cases of myocardial hypoxemia, neighboring regions of myocardium will
have different electrical properties and a small electrical current (current of injury) flows from the
depolarized ischemic regions to more normal regions, resulting in ST segment elevation or depression.
· In this case, pulmonary thromboembolism secondary to glomerulonephritis and loss of antithrombin
 III resulted in severe hypoxemia.
42
ECG Cases
Question 9
Question 9
ECG recorded from an 8-year-old Lhasa Apso presented for yearly vaccinations and an arrhythmia was
ausculted.
1 What are the findings in ECG 9 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
43
Answer 9
ECG Cases
Answer 9
1 ECG 9 shows second-degree AV nodal block
2 ● There are P waves that are not followed by a QRS (arrowheads). This is an example of Mobitz type
I (Wenckebach) AV block, wherein the PR interval gradually prolongs before a P wave is blocked.
The arrows displaying the PR interval are longer at the end of the sequence of sinus beats than at the
beginning.
· Second-degree AV block can be due to high resting vagal tone, degeneration or infltration of the
AV node, or infectious or inflammatory disease. In patients with high vagal tone and slow heart
rates, Wenckebach type second-degree AV block can occasionally be observed as a physiological
phenomenon. In this case, the underlying heart rate is relatively high at 150 bpm, indicating that vagal
tone is not predominant and underlying disease of the AV node is likely. In cases of infrequent AV
block, no clinical signs are observed and no treatment is indicated. In cases of frequent AV block and
resulting bradycardia, syncope or weakness can result.
· Atropine (0.04 mg/kg) can be administered intravenously or subcutaneously in an attempt to resolve
the AV block. Incomplete resolution of the AV block suggests presence of underlying AV nodal injury
or disease.
人人人人人人人人人人人人人人人
44
ECG Cases
Question 10
Question 10
 ECG recorded in a 9-year-old male castrated Cocker Spaniel with a heart murmur.
1 What are the ECG findings in ECG 10 (25 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
 2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
10
45
Answer 10
ECG Cases
Answer 10
1 ECG 10 shows sinus arrhythmia.
2 ● The average heart rate is ~90 bpm. The rhythm is regularly irregular and there is a P for every QRS
and QRS for every P. The amplitude and duration of the P and QRS complexes are normal.
The MEA is normal.
· Sinus arrhythmia is similar to sinus rhythm with respect to average heart rate and the normal
sequence of cardiac depolarization. Sinus arrhythmia differs from sinus rhythm in that the heart rate
demonstrates phasic changes that are often (but not always) related to respiration. Higher rates are
noted during inspiration and slower heart rates during expiration (respiratory sinus arrhythmia).
● Changes in size and shape of the P wave (arrows) is termed wandering pacemaker and can occur during
sinus arrhythmia. The P wave amplitude is greater during faster heart rates and smaller during slower
heart rates.
· Vagolytic stimuli (e.g. exercise, atropine) reduces or eliminates sinus arrhythmia.
· The key points are the phasic irregularity and normal rate, sequence, and morphology of the P-
QRS-T waves.
10
46
ECG Cases
Question 11
Question 11
ECG recorded from a 5-year-old Siberian Husky.
1 What are the ECG findings in ECG 11 (25 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
 2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
11
47
Answer 11
ECG Cases
Answer 11
1 ECG 11 shows atrial premature complexes.
The frst beat is a sinus beat and the second beat is an atrial premature beat. There is a normal
P wave in front of the sinus QRS complex of each pair The atrial premature beat has a normal QRS
configuration and a small negative P wave (arrows).
· The interval between the first and second beat of each pair equates to an atrial premature beat rate
of 190 bpm. The term atrial bigeminy is often used in instances when the sinus and atrial premature
beats alternate in a regular 1:1 fashion.
· Atrial premature beats often occur in cases with underlying heart diseases, especially in those that
produce atrial enlargement (i.e. mitral valve disease, cardiomyopathy), but can also be secondary to a
wide variety of extracardiac conditions.
48
ECG Cases
Questions 12, 13
Question 12
ECG recorded in an 8-year-old male castrated domestic shorthair cat.
1 What are the findings in ECG 12 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
12
Question 13
ECG recorded from a 6-year-old Boxer that presented with a 3-week history of progressive coughing and
onset of severe dyspnea over the last 48 hours.
1 What are the findings in ECG 13 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/m V)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
13
49
Answers 12, 13
ECG Cases
Answer 12
 1 ECG 12 shows atrial fbrillation (AF) and left ventricular enlargement.
 2 ● The heart rate ranges from 130 bpm to 272 bpm, with the average ~220 bpm. The rhythm is
irregularly irregular.
· There are no consistent P waves noted; however, despite the lack of P waves, the QRS complexes are
narrow and appear to be of supraventricular origin.
· The amplitude is 1.3 mV (normal <0.9 mV) indicating left ventricular enlargement. Note that the
caudal limb leads II and aVF, which are similar in orientation with lead II, also display QRS complex
amplitudes that are relatively increased, further supporting left ventricular enlargement.
· The irregularity, lack of P waves, and supraventricular QRS complexes are all findings consistent with
AF.
· In cats, AF is usually due to severe underlying heart disease, and further diagnostics such as
radiographs and echocardiography are indicated.
· Treatment of AF involves slowing the ventricular rate by decreasing conduction through the AV node
with medications such as beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers, and/or digoxin.
Answer 13
1 ECG 13 shows sinus rhythm with a left bundle branch block (LBBB).
 2 ● The heart rate is 100 bpm. The QRS complexes look wide and bizarre, and the duration is prolonged
at 100 ms. The MEA is normal. The rhythm is sinus in origin as evidenced by the fact that there are
P waves preceding each QRS complex, with a regular PR interval of 140 ms. The P wave morphology
changes slightly with heart rate, indicating a wandering pacemaker. The PR interval is slightly
prolonged, consistent with first-degree AV block. The ST segment is depressed and slurred,
which is suggestive of myocardial hypoxia.
· The diagnosis of a LBBB is made based on sinus QRS complexes with a normal MEA and increased
duration of the QRS (>80 ms in a dog, >50 ms in a cat). The wide QRS duration is caused by
complete disruption of the left bundle branch and delayed depolarization of the left ventricle.
· The QRS complex morphology of LBBB mimics that of a VPC. The key feature discriminating
between LBBB and VPCs is the presence of P waves associated with each QRS, signifying the QRS as
supraventricular in origin. If the heart rate is very rapid, the P waves may be hidden in the preceding
T waves, and the rhythm can be difficult to discern from VT.
· LBBB almost never occurs by itself as a benign abnormality. Rather, it occurs secondary to left
system disease. While the LBBB does not require treatment per se, the presence of underlying cardiac
disease results in a relatively poor prognosis. The finding of LBBB should prompt further diagnostics
such as echocardiography to search for an underlying cardiac disease.
50
ECG Cases
Questions 14, 15
Question 14
A 10-year-old cat presented for a dental prophylaxis
1 What are the findings in ECG 14 (50 mm/s, 10 mm/mV}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
14
Question 15
ECG recorded from an 8-year-old Rottweiler that presents for several episodes of collapse.
1 What are the findings in ECG 15 (50 mm/s; 10mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
15
51
Answers 14, 15
ECG Cases
Answer 14
1 ECG 14 shows normal sinus rhythm with baseline artifact.
2 · The heart rate is 200 bpm, likely in response to being handled for ECG acquisition. The P-QRS-T
complexes are normal and the MEA is normal.
· The diastolic intervals after the third and fourth QRS complex, the sixth and eighth, as well as the
 11th and 12th QRS complexes show small, high frequency undulations, most easily discerned in leads
 II and aVF. These undulations are not an arrhythmia, but the consequence of the cat purring, causing 
a repeatable, breathing-associated artifact in this ECG. This type of artifact can often be mistaken as
AF, but the presence of P waves precludes this diagnosis. In dogs, panting or shivering are common
causes of similar artifacts. Other causes of ECG artifact include electrical current 60 or 50 Hz
interference, due to poor grounding of the ECG machine or any other electronic equipment connected
to the patient. The 60-Hz cycle interference can also mimic AF, and all other electronic equipment in
the room may need to be unplugged to avoid this artifact.
Answer 15
1 ECG 15 shows complete or third-degree AV nodal block
 2 · The ventricular heart rate is 35 bpm. There is complete AV dissociation, with the P waves having no
 relationship to the QRS complexes and the atrial and ventricular rates are independent of each other.
In complete AV block, the atrial rate (P-P interval) is always faster than the ventricular rate, and P
waves should have ample opportunity to conduct to the ventricles, but fail to do so. In third-degree 
(complete) AV block, the ventricular escape rhythm is usually slow and regular, and approximately
40-60 bpm in dogs and 80-120 bpm in cats.
· The etiology of most cases of third-degree AV block is unknown, but age-related degeneration of the
 AV node or acute myocarditis are two possible causes.
● Most dogs with third-degree AV block show signs of weakness, lethargy, activity intolerance, or
syncope, and require artificial pacemaker implantation. In cats, the more rapid ventricular escape rate
often permits normal quality of life without the need for any specific therapy.
52
ECG Cases
Questions 16, 17
Question 16
ECG recorded in an 11-year-old mixed breed dog.
1 What are the ECG findings in ECG 16 (25 mm/s; 10 mm/mV}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
16
Question 17
ECG recorded in a domestic shorthair cat.
1 What are the findings in ECG 17 (25 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
17
53
Answers 16, 17
ECG Cases
Answer 16
1 ECG 16 shows atrial flutter (AFL).
2 · The average heart rate is 120 bpm. The rhythm is irregular and there is a *sawtooth' baseline that
represents the AFL waves (F waves). The rate of the F waves is 425 bpm. The QRS complexes
 are narrow and of normal morphology.
· AFL usually occurs in the presence of advanced cardiac disease, such as mitral valve disease or
dilated cardiomyopathy. AFL is often considered a more ^organized’ form of AF. The ventricular rate
is dependent on the conduction of the F waves through the AV node and is further described by the
ratio of F waves to QRS complexes (e.g. four F waves for every one QRS is described as 4:1). In cases
where the ventricular rate is rapid, medication to slow conduction through the AV node (e.g. digoxin,
diltiazem, and/or atenolol) can be used.
· The key points are the 'sawtooth baseline' made up of F waves, the variable conduction of F waves
through the AV node, and the often rapid ventricular rate.
Answer 17
1 ECG 17 shows sinus arrest and junctional escape beats.
2 · There are eight beats of sinus rhythm at the start of the ECG tracing with normal P waves, QRS
complexes, and T waves. The heart rate is ~215 bpm and the rhythm is regular.
· Following the 8th beat, there is a 2.5 second period of sinus arrest that is terminated by a narrow
QRS complex without a P wave, consistent with a junctional escape beat. This is followed by another
sinus beat, a second period of sinus arrest, a second junctional escape beat, and then resumption of
sinus rhythm. Sinus arrest can be secondary to sinus node disease, cardiomyopathy, abnormal vagal
 tone secondary to central nervous system, gastrointestinal, or respiratory disease, or drug toxicity
(i.e. beta-blockers). Extended periods of sinus arrest (typically >3-4 seconds in cats) can cause clinical
signs such as syncope or weakness.
54
ECG Cases
Questions 18, 19
Question 18
ECG recorded from a 15-year-old domestic shorthair cat admitted for a dental examination with a grade
2/6 systolic heart murmur
1 What are the findings in ECG 18 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
18
Question 19
ECG recorded from a 6-year-old male castrated Boxer that presents for collapse during exercise.
1 What are the findings in ECG 19 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
19
MMYMO
55
Answers 18, 19
ECG Cases
Answer 18
1 ECG 18 shows sinus rhythm with a left anterior fascicular block (LAFB) pattern
2 ● The heart rate is 200 bpm. The MEA is shifted to the left to -50° (see Section 2 Evaluation of the
Electrocardiogram). The QRS duration is 20 ms and normal.
· The LAFB pattern is thought to arise from disruption of the anterior fascicule of the left bundle branch
that supplies the cranial and basilar region of the left ventricle with electrical impulses. A region of
block will result in a deviation of the MEA of the ventricular depolarization to the left, but the QRS
duration is not prolonged since only one of the two fascicules of the left bundle branch is blocked.
● This conduction disturbance does not tend to progress to more advanced degrees of bundle branch
block and does not warrant any treatment per se; however, many cats with LAFB patterns are found
to have cardiomyopathy. This ECG finding in conjunction with the presence of a systolic murmur
warrants further diagnostics, such as thoracic radiography or echocardiography prior to general
anesthesia for a dental procedure.
Answer 19
1 ECG 19 shows rapid VT.
2 ● The heart rate is 300 bpm. There are no P waves associated with the ventricular beats and there
is one fusion beat (circled) present, which helps differentiate this rhythm from a supraventricular
arrhythmia. The ventricular complexes are wide and bizarre and *upright' in appearance (positive
QRS deflection in leads II, II, and aVF). The arrow indicates a normal sinus beat (*capture beat')
which briefly captured control of the heart rhythm.
· The most likely underlying cause of the ECG findings is arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy (ARVC). The presence of the *upright VPC morphology in lead II is common in 
Boxer dogs with ARVC. Rapid VT can cause reduced cardiac output and blood pressure, and clinical
signs such as weakness or syncope are common.
· For acute life-threating VT, intravenous lidocaine (2 mg/kg bolus, up to a cumulative dose of
6-8 mg/kg) can be administered in an attempt to convert to sinus rhythm. The first choice for oral
antiarrhythmic therapy for treatment of symptomatic VT in most dogs, including Boxers with ARVC,
is sotalol.
· Ambulatory ECG monitoring (Holter) is useful to determine the effect of therapy on frequency and
severity of ventricular arrhythmias or to detect VPCs in dogs with only intermittent arrhythmias.
19
LAYMYAVAYA
56
ECG Cases
Question 20
Question 20
ECG 20a was recorded in a 9-year-old female spayed Siberian Husky. ECG 20b was recorded from a
geriatric Cocker Spaniel.
1 What are the findings in ECG 20a (50 mm/s; 5 mm/mV) and ECG 20b (25 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of these ECGs?
20a
Rate 75 bprm
20b
57
Answer 20
ECG Cases
Answer 20
1 ECGs 20a and 20b show atrial standstill.
2 · The heart rate in ECG 20a is 48 bpm and heart rate in ECG 20b is 75 bpm. In both ECGs, the
rhythm is regular.
· There is an absence of P waves. The QRS complexes in ECG 20a are wide, indicating they are
likely ventricular in origin. The slow rate and absence of normal sinus beats are consistent with a
ventricular escape rhythm. The QRS complexes in ECG 20b are narrow indicating they are likely
supraventricular in origin.
· The lack of P waves is most consistent with atrial standstill. Atrial standstill can be secondary to a
degenerative atrial myopathy or secondary to severe electrolyte abnormalities, such as hyperkalemia.
· The degenerative atrial myopathy is typified by loss of functional atrial myocytes and atrial fbrosis,
and atrial standstill is usually permanent. This condition was suspected in the case of ECG 20a.
· Hyperkalemia can be secondary to metabolic disease (i.e. diabetic ketoacidosis), endocrine
disease (i.e. hypoadrenocorticism), renal failure, or reperfusion injury that sometimes
accompanies feline aortic thromboembolism. In the case of ECG 20b, the dog had
hypoadrenocorticism and a serum K+ of 10 mmoll (10 mEq/l). Correction of hyperkalemia
(e.g. diuresis, glucose, insulin, and so on) can restore normal sinus rhythm.
58
ECG Cases
Question 21
Question 21
 ECG recorded in a 1-year-old dog under anesthesia for a routine ovariohysterectomy.
1 What are the findings in ECG 21 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
 2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
21
59
Answer 21
ECG Cases
Answer 21
1 ECG 21 shows accelerated idioventricular rhythm.
 This rhythm occurs when the discharge rates of the sinus node and another ectopic pacemaker site
(nodal or ventricular) approximate each other. In this example, when the sinus rate is slightly slower
than the ventricular rate, the ventricular rate ^takes over'. The R-R interval of the sinus complexes (blue
arrow) is 460 ms (heart rate of 130 bpm) and the interval of the ventricular complexes (black arrow) is
shorter at 420 ms (143 bpm). Therefore, the ventricular rate is *accelerated' and becomes the dominant
rhythm until the sinus rate increases and recaptures control of the heart rate later in the strip. This
arrhythmia is commonly seen in patients under anesthesia or animals with significant systemic disease.
· Generally, no therapy is required as the sinus and ectopic pacemaker rate approximate each other.
 Usually, slow ventricular rhythms do not result in hemodynamic consequences and are not a
significant risk for degeneration into ventricular fibrillation; however, if the ventricular rate is very
fast (typically >180 bpm), antiarrhythmic treatment may be necessary.
21
60
ECG Cases
Question 22
Question 22
ECG recorded in an 11-year-old Irish Setter.
1 What are the ECG findings in ECG 22a (25 mm/s; 5 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
22a
61
Answer 22
ECG Cases
Answer 22
1 ECG 22a shows SVT.
 2 ● The heart rate is 250 bpm. The rhythm is regular. The heart rate is fast enough such that the P waves
in front of each QRS complex occur immediately at the end of the preceding beat's T wave. The
amplitude and duration of the P and QRS complexes are normal. The MEA is normal.
· SVT describes a rapid and usually regular rhythm that originates from either the atria or AV nodal
junction. These rhythms can be due to rapid fring of ectopic foci or re-entrant rhythms. SVT can
be differentiated from sinus tachycardia by: 1) its persistence despite the patient being calm or
unstressed; and 2) sudden cessation secondary to vagal maneuvers or pharmacologic intervention.
Many cases of SVT will have underlying cardiac disease.
· Depending on the origin of the rhythm (atria or AV junction), the P wave configuration can be
normal or altered. The QRS configuration is usually normal except in cases of aberrant conduction
such as concurrent bundle branch block
· There is typically one P wave for every QRS complex; however, in cases of SVT and AV nodal block,
the ratio of P waves to QRS complexes may be <1 (ECG 22b).
· The key points are identification of a rapid rhythm with normal QRS configuration.
22b
62
ECG Cases
Question 23
Question 23
ECG recorded in 11-year-old male castrated cat that was scheduled to have a dental cleaning. An arrhythmia
and a 3/6 systolic sternal murmur was ausculted.
1 What are the findings in ECG 23 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
23
63
Answer 23
ECG Cases
Answer 23
1 ECG 23 shows ventricular bigeminy (sinus beat followed by a ventricular beat).
 2 ● The QRS complex of the ventricular beat (circled) is wide and bizarre and has a negative deflection.
There are no P waves associated with these beats. Notice that the sinus beats all have P waves
preceding the QRS complex (arrows).
· The most common cause for ventricular arrhythmias in cats is cardiomyopathy and further
diagnostics, such as echocardiography, are recommended. This patient was diagnosed with
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.
· Other common diseases that can cause or exacerbate myocardial hypertrophy and associated
ventricular arrhythmias include systemic hypertension and hyperthyroidism. Blood pressure and
thyroid levels should both be acquired in cats with ventricular arrhythmias.
23
64
ECG Cases
Questions 24, 25
Question 24
ECG recorded from a 12-year-old Poodle dog that presented for respiratory distress.
1 What are the findings in ECG 24 (50 mm/s, 10 mm/mV}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
24
Question 25
ECG recording from a 15-year-old Pug dog under anesthesia.
1 What are the findings in ECG 25 (25 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
25
65
Answers 24, 25
ECG Cases
Answer 24
1 ECG 24 shows sinus arrhythmia and criteria for atrial enlargement.
2 · The heart rate is ~100 bpm. The P waves are tall and peaked in leads I, II, and aVF. The amplitude of
the P wave in lead II is 0.5 mV (normal: <0.4 mV). A tall P wave is often referred to as *P pulmonale'
despite the fact that tall P waves can be detected in both cases of left or right atrial enlargement.
· At times, tall P waves are seen in patients with pulmonary disease, right ventricular hypertrophy, and
pulmonary hypertension (cor pulmonale).
Answer 25
1 ECG 25 shows ventricular fibrillation (VF) followed by electrical defibrillation, a wide complex
tachycardia, and finally a more narrow complex tachycardia.
● Section A shows VF, recognized by the low voltage undulating baseline and absence of distinct P
waves or QRS complexes. During VF, cardiac output and arterial blood pressure are absent and
immediate intervention is indicated. The arrow shows delivery of a transthoracic defibrillation shock
of 50 Joules with a biphasic defibrillator. The ECG trace disappears during the shock application due
to the high current flow.
● Approximately 1 second following the shock a wide complex tachycardia at 230 bpm appears and
 is likely VT. Despite the abnormal nature of this initial postshock rhythm, it immediately provided a
co-ordinated cardiac contraction and blood pressure, which is vital. The wide complex tachycardia
begins to assume a narrow complex morphology towards the end of the strip and likely represents
 resumption of a supraventricular rhythm.
25
A
External electrical defibrillation is the treatment of choice in cases of VF. In dogs, a dose of 2-3 J/kg for
to depolarize uniformly and simultaneously a critical mass of the excitable myocardium. The objectives
are to interfere with all arrhythmia mechanisms and to allow the normal cardiac pacemakers to assume the
role of primary pacemaker. Failure to defibrillate or immediate recurrence of VF are an indication to repeat
defibrillation depends on two key factors: 1) duration between onset of fibrillation and defibrillation, and
2) the metabolic condition of the myocardium. The goal is to use the minimum amount of energy required
to overcome the threshold of defibrillation. Excessive energy can cause myocardial injury and worse
lo sped aigesodsip jauta buisnl uogonpuoo aienbape pue isayo paaeus pue 'ainssaid poeiuoo wi
electrode gel) all contribute to lower impedance, which allows the use of lower-energy shocks.
During VF, blood flowto andfrom the heartceases, resultinginrapidoxygen depletionofthe myocardium.
preparing the electric defibrillator or between failed defibrillation attempts. Antiarrhythmics as a means to
defibrillate are rarely effective, as perfusion of the myocardium is absent during VF.
66
ECG Cases
Question 26
Question 26
 ECG recorded from a 2-year-old Labrador Retriever that presents to the emergency service for a syncopal
episode. An arrhythmia was ausculted on presentation.
1 What are the findings in ECG 26 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
26
67
Answer 26
ECG Cases
Answer 26
1 ECG 26 shows paroxysmal rapid VT.
 2 ● The maximum instantaneous heart rate of the VT is 380 bpm.
· *R-on-T phenomenon is present. The R-on-T phenomenon′ is the superimposition of an ectopic beat
QRS complex on the T wave of a preceding beat (arrows) due to the rapid rate of the VT. There is
short pause between the first ventricular couplet and the next ventricular triplet. It is believed that
these short-long intervals during VT can predispose to the onset of VF, which is a terminal rhythm
unless successfully defibrillated.
· In addition, the sinus beat QRS complexes are of low amplitude.
26
8
Rapid VT is uncommon in young dogs. Certain dog breeds are predisposed to a juvenile onset of
cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias (such as Boxer, Doberman, Portuguese Water, and German Shepherd
dogs). In this case, myocarditis was suspected due to elevated serum cardiac troponin (cTnl) concentration
(13.5 ng/ml, normal: 0-0.11 ng/ml). cTnl is a highly sensitive and specific biomarker of myocardial injury
and necrosis. In humans with myocardial infarction, sepsis, or traumatic myocardial injury, cTnl is used to
aid in a diagnosis of cardiac injury and to provide prognostic information. cTnl is elevated in dogs and cats
with a variety of diseases including myocarditis, cardiomyopathy. pericardial disease, arrhythmias,
congestive heart failure, gastric dilatation and volvulus, chemotherapy. and heatstroke, and after intensive
exercise.
 In this case, the absence of any of these other conditions suggested a diagnosis of myocarditis. Vector-
borne diseases have been implicated in myocarditis; thus, testing for heartworm, anaplasmosis, Lyme
disease, Ehrlichia toxoplasmosis, Neospira spp., Bartonella spp., and leptospirosis can be considered. The
underlying cause is often not identified. The cTnl half-life is ~-2 hours in the dog. thus serial measurements
 might be helpful in determining the presence of either ongoing or resolving myocardial injury.
Treatment of suspected myocarditis depends on whether an underlying cause has been identified.
Anti-inflammatory therapy is controversial. Many patients receive empiric doxycycline and/or clindamycin
'paajosaid s! (uzib od by/w 1-zh loleios 'adoouas se yons subis jeoiuio sasneo 1 aut f 'tuawea
ldeally. a pre- and post-treatment Holter examination is acquired to assess the efficacy of the
antiarrhythmic therapy.
68
ECG Cases
Question 27
Question 27
ECG recorded from a 7-year-old Shar Pei that presents for exercise intolerance.
1 What are the findings in ECG 27 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
27
69
Answer 27
ECG Cases
Answer 27
1 ECG 27 shows second-degree AV nodal block.
2 ● The ventricular rate is approximately 75 bpm. There are P waves present without a subsequent QRS
complex. There are three P waves (arrows) for every QRS complex, and the AV block can be further
described using a ratio of P waves to QRS complexes, or 3:1. One of the P waves is buried in the T
wave. In AV block with 2:1 conduction ratio or higher, prolongation of the PR interval before the
block is impossible to observe so Mobitz type I or II labeling cannot be performed, and this form of
second-degree AV block is often referred to as *high-grade'.
· The exercise intolerance in this case might be explained by the AV block and resulting bradycardia.
As explained in ECG 9, p.44, an atropine response test can be performed to help differentiate
increased vagal tone versus intrinsic AV nodal disease as a cause of the AV block. In most instances
of high-grade second-degree AV block, AV node disease is present. Patients experiencing even a
partial response to atropine may be candidates for medical management with vagolytic drugs (e.g.
probantheline bromide) and/or a sympathomimetic drug (e.g. albuterol, theophylline).
· Second-degree AV block can progress to third-degree AV block, and further diagnostics include
Holter recording to screen for other periods of AV block. Artificial pacemaker implantation can be
used to treat symptomatic high-grade or third-degree AV block.
27
70
ECG Cases
Questions 28, 29
Question 28
ECG recorded from a 10-year-old Labrador Retriever presented to the veterinary hospital for a routine
dental prophylaxis.
1 What are the findings in ECG 28 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
28
Question 29
 ECG recorded in a 10-year-old mixed breed dog.
1 What are the ECG findings in ECG 29 (25 mm/s; 10 mm/m V)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
29
10
71
Answers 28, 29
ECG Cases
Answer 28
1 ECG 28 shows a normal sinus rhythm and first-degree AV nodal block.
2 · The heart rate is 70 bpm. The P waves and QRS complexes are normal in morphology. The PR
interval is 160 ms (normal: 60-130 ms) and consistent with a diagnosis of first-degree AV block.
· First-degree AV block has no clinical sequelae unless it progresses to a more advanced form (i.e.
second- or third-degree AV block). The exact etiology of AV block is often undetermined but can
be due to high resting vagal tone, degeneration or infltration of the AV node, or infectious or
inflammatory disease. First-degree AV block can also be an incidental finding in a healthy dog. Drugs
that reduce or slow AV nodal conduction such as beta-blockers, digoxin, or calcium-channel blockers
can exacerbate this conduction delay and result in more advanced forms of AV block. Opioids
increase vagal tone and it might be best to avoid these drugs during the anesthesia protocol.
Answer 29
1 ECG 29 shows atrial fbrillation (AF).
'sm d ou ane arau pue renai aenai s uuu au udq oiz si aeu ieay aaae au · 7
The QRS complexes are narrow and of supraventricular morphology. The baseline displays small
 atrial fibrillatory waves (f waves).
· AF usually occurs in the presence of advanced cardiac disease, such as mitral valve disease or dilated
cardiomyopathy. In these instances, the ventricular rate is typically rapid, thus requiring medications
(e.g. digoxin, diltiazem, and/or atenolol) to slow conduction through the AV node and slow the
rate. Spontaneous conversion back to sinus rhythm is rare. In some large breed dogs, AF can occur
without any identifiable underlying cardiac disease (lone AF). In this instance, the ventricular rate is
usually slow and might not require medication. Conversion of lone AF back to sinus rhythm using
electric cardioversion (see ECG 5, p.40) or antiarrhythmic medications (amiodarone) is possible.
· The key points are the irregularity of the ventricular rhythm, lack of P waves, the normal morphology
of the QRS complexes indicating a supraventricular origin, and the rapid ventricular rate.
72
ECG Cases
Questions 30, 31
Question 30
ECG recorded from a 6-year-old male castrated Boston Terrier presented with a 4/6 left-sided systolic
apical murmur.
1 What are the findings in ECG 30 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
30
Question 31
ECG recorded from a 10-year-old West Highland White Terrier with progressive weakness and syncope.
1 What are the findings in ECG 31 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
31
73
Answers 30, 31
ECG Cases
Answer 30
1 ECG 30 shows sinus arrhythmia and criteria for atrial enlargement.
2 ● The heart rate is 90 bpm. There are wide and notched (bifid) P waves in leads II, IIl, and aVF. The
P wave duration in lead II is 60 ms (normal: <40 ms). A wide and notched P wave is also referred
to as *P mitrale' despite the fact that tall P waves can be detected in cases of both left or right atrial
enlargement.
· Atrial enlargement is associated with volume overload and increased atrial size, as for example
occurs with degenerative mitral or tricuspid valve disease or cardiomyopathy. ECG detection of atrial
enlargement is relatively insensitive but usually specific in both cats and dogs. This patient had severe
left atrial enlargement due to advanced degenerative mitral valve disease.
Answer 31
1 ECG 31 shows sinus bradycardia and QT interval prolongation.
2 · The heart rate is ~45 bpm. The PR interval is mildly prolonged at 140 ms, indicating first-degree
 an iq u si  s a ll e u  mo P Pa si am d a o 
interval is markedly prolonged at 360 ms (normal: 150-250 ms, depending on heart rate). The QT
interval is measured from the beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the T wave and represents
the total duration of electrical depolarization and subsequent repolarization of the ventricular
 myocardium. The QT interval is inversely related to the heart rate.
· Long QT syndromes are caused by abnormal ionic current flow during repolarization. Various
drugs are a common cause of a long QT interval, including the class IA antiarrhythmic agents,
including quinidine, procainamide, and disopyramide, and class IHl antiarrhythmic agents, including
sotalol and amiodarone. A number of noncardiac drugs have also been reported to prolong QT
interval, including cisapride, phenothiazines, haloperidol, tricyclic antidepressants, antimicrobial
 agents (erythromycin, chloroquine, and trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole), and antifungal agents 
[ketoconazole and itraconazole).
· Long QT intervals predispose to the development of polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias, (torsade
de pointes; see ECG 4, p.38).
74
ECG Cases
Question 32
Question 32
ECG recorded in a 13-year-old female domestic shorthair cat.
1 What are the findings in ECG 32 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
 2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
32
75
Answer 32
ECG Cases
Answer 32
1 ECG 32 shows an accelerated junctional rhythm and evidence of left heart enlargement.
2 · The average heart rate is 185 bpm. The rhythm is slightly irregular.
· Two different QRS complex morphologies are noted. P waves can be intermittently seen in front of
QRS complexes of normal duration (arrows), and these beats appear to be sinus beats (heart rate
195-214 bpm). Other QRS complexes also with narrow duration but greater amplitude (arrowheads)
do not have a P wave associated with them, and these beats are most likely an accelerated junctional
rhythm (heart rate 195 bpm).
· The junctional (as opposed to ventricular) origin of the accelerated beats is suggested by the narrow
QRS complex.
· The amplitude of the sinus beat QRS complexes is increased at 1.9 mV (normal <0.9 mV) indicating left
ventricular enlargement.
· Accelerated junctional rhythms compete with the sinus node for control of the heart rate. When
the sinus rate speeds up above the rate of the junctional rhythm, the sinus rate captures control of
the rhythm. When the sinus rate slows below that of the accelerated junctional rate, the junctional
rhythm captures control of the rhythm.
· Accelerated junctional rhythms can occur secondary to underlying cardiomyopathy, as well as
 secondary to extracardiac disease such as trauma, hypoxia, electrolyte abnormalities, and drugs.
32
76
ECG Cases
Questions 33, 34
Question 33
ECG recorded from a 3-year-old Welsh Springer Spaniel that presents for exercise intolerance.
1 What are the findings in ECG 33 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
33
Question 34
ECG recorded from a 5-year-old cat with a heart murmur.
1 What are the findings in ECG 34 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
34
77
Answers 33, 34
ECG Cases
Answer 33
1 ECG 33 shows sinus arrhythmia, first-degree AV nodal block, and low amplitude QRS complexes.
2 · The heart rate is ~80 bpm. There is a prolonged PR interval of 140 ms, which is indicative of first-
degree AV block. The amplitude of the R waves is <1.0 mV in leads I, II, II, and aVF, which is 
unusual for a medium or large breed dog.
· Conditions associated with low amplitude QRS complexes include a variety of cardiac and
extracardiac causes. Pericardial effusion is the most common cardiac cause of low amplitude QRS
complexes. Other causes include cardiomyopathy, cardiac neoplasia, constrictive pericarditis, and
myocarditis.
· Extracardiac causes are due to the pathology of organs and tissues surrounding the heart. Causes
 include peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia, pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, pneumonia,
and obesity. This patient had a peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia that was surgically
corrected as it was causing clinical signs of exercise intolerance. The first-degree AV block is an
incidental finding and of no clinical consequence.
Answer 34
1 ECG 34 shows sinus rhythm and right bundle branch block (RBBB)
2 ● The heart rate is 150 bpm. The duration of the QRS is prolonged at 80 ms (normal: <40 ms).
The QRS complexes in leads I, II, II, and aVF are negative and the MEA is shifted to the right at
-120*. This shift in MEA occurs because conduction is blocked down the right bundle, so that the
depolarization travels rapidly down the left bundle branch activating the left ventricle first, followed
by right ventricular depolarization. The right ventricular depolarization is prolonged due to slower
conduction from myocyte to myocyte instead of the rapidly conducting Purkinje system. This results
 in the late and dominant S wave in the aforementioned leads. There is a notch in the QRS complex,
which is commonly seen in cases of RBBB.
· RBBB occurs either as a consequence of conduction system disease in the right bundle branch or
can be an incidental finding in a healthy animal, particularly in dogs. Rarely, RBBB is associated
with severe right ventricular hypertrophy secondary to a pressure overload condition such as
pulmonic stenosis. More commonly, such conditions produce a right axis shift but without excessive
prolongation of conduction time.
· Due to the delayed activation of the right ventricle, RBBB may cause a prolonged right ventricular
ejection time, thus resulting in delayed closure of the pulmonic valve, which may be ausculted as a
split second heart sound.
78
ECG Cases
Questions 35, 36
Question 35
ECG recorded from an 8-year-old Doberman Pinscher with dilated cardiomyopathy.
1 What are the findings in ECG 35 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
35
Question 36
ECG recorded from an 8-year-old Doberman Pinscher with a history of syncope.
1 What are the findings in ECG 36 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
36
79
Answers 35, 36
ECG Cases
Answer 35
1 ECG 35 shows AF and a LBBB morphology.
2 · The heart rate is ~185 bpm. The rhythm is irregularly irregular. The QRS duration is prolonged
(>80 ms) due to a wide Q and R wave.
· The diagnosis of a LBBB is made based on a normal MEA of the QRS complex with increased
duration of the QRS.
· AF is a common sequela to atrial dilation associated with advanced dilated cardiomyopathy. Due to
the absence of P waves, and the LBBB morphology, one may be inclined to make a diagnosis of VT
in this ECG. The key feature to recognize AF with a LBBB is the irregularity of the rhythm; VT is
usually more regular.
· AF in the setting of advanced myocardial failure is typically associated with tachycardia and can lead
to exacerbation of heart failure signs, such as ascites or pulmonary edema.
Answer 36
1 ECG 36 shows polymorphic VT.
2 · Five sinus beats (black arrows) are seen. The other complexes are wide and bizarre compared to the
normal sinus beats, indicating a ventricular origin. A short period of VT consisting of five ventricular 
premature beats (blue arrows) is detected in the middle of the recording, with a heart rate of
200 bpm. The VPCs have two different and distinct morphologies (i.e. polymorphic), suggesting that
they arise from two different areas within the ventricles.
● There is one potential fusion beat (green arrow), indicating simultaneous ventricular depolarization
from a sinus impulse and a ventricular ectopic impulse. The resultant QRS complex morphology is a
combination of a normal sinus QRS and abnormal VPC QRS.
· In this case, dilated cardiomyopathy was diagnosed via echocardiography and the antiarrhythmic
agent sotalol was prescribed, based on the presumption that syncope was being caused by longer runs
of polymorphic VT.
36
80
ECG Cases
Questions 37, 38
Question 37
ECG 37 was recorded in an 18-year-old cat with a history of chronic dyspnea.
1 What are the findings in ECG 37 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
37
Question 38
ECG recorded in a 2-year-old Rottweiler, with a grade 4/6 systolic murmur.
1 What are the findings in ECG 38 (50 mm/s; 5 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
38
81
Answers 37, 38
ECG Cases
Answer 37
 1 ECG 37 shows a sinus rhythm and criteria for right ventricular hypertrophy.
2 · The heart rate is 215 bpm. The QRS duration is within normal limits and each is preceded by a
normal P wave. There is a shift in the MEA to the right at -100°, indicated by a predominantly
negative QRS morphology in leads I, II, II, and aVF.
· Right axis deviations are associated with either right ventricular hypertrophy or RBBB, with the
discriminating feature being the duration of the QRS complex. QRS durations >60 ms in the cat are
· In this cat an echocardiogram revealed marked right ventricular hypertrophy due to pulmonary
hypertension and tricuspid insufficiency.
Answer 38
1 ECG 38 shows sinus arrhythmia with criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy.
2 · The heart rate is ~150 bpm. Note that the ECG was recorded at 5 mm/mV, which results in the
 amplitude of the QRS complex as appearing half its actual height. The P wave amplitude is normal at
0.4 mV. The MEA is +80°, which is in the normal range. The R wave amplitude in lead II is
4.4 mV, in lead aVF is 4.6 mV, and in lead I is 1.5 mV, all of which are indicative of left ventricular
hypertrophy.
· Left ventricular hypertrophy increases the magnitude of the electrical wavefront travelling through
the left ventricle, resulting in an increased R wave in leads parallel with this wavefront, primarily
leads II and aVF. Diseases that cause left heart hypertrophy include cardiomyopathy, valve disease,
and a variety of congenital heart defects. The left heart hypertrophy pattern is not specific to any
one disease or cause, and further diagnostics such as thoracic radiography or echocardiography are
warranted.
· In this case, echocardiography revealed congenital subaortic stenosis and resulting concentric left
ventricular hypertrophy.
82
ECG Cases
Question 39
Question 39
ECG recorded from a 1-year-old cat presented to the emergency service with a history of syncope and
having just received a calcium-channel blocker (diltiazem).
1 What are the findings in ECG 39a (25 mm/s, 20 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
39a
83
Answer 39
ECG Cases
Answer 39
1 ECG 39a shows a SVT converting into sinus rhythm.
2 · The initial section of ECG 39a shows a narrow complex tachycardia at a rate of 300 bpm. The QRS
complexes are tall and narrow and therefore the arrhythmia is presumed to be supraventricular in origin,
despite the fact that P waves cannot be readily identified. The heart rate is rapid enough that any P waves
will be buried in the preceding T wave. Diltiazem, a calcium-channel blocker was administered and the
SVT terminated abruptly followed by a sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 125 bpm.
● This ECG demonstrates the difficulty in discerning VT from SVT when the heart rate is very rapid.
A differential diagnosis for the arrhythmia is VT, as the QRS complexes during the tachycardia do
not look exactly like the QRS complexes during sinus rhythm. The response to diltiazem, however,
strongly suggests that this was a SVT, as calcium-channel blockers are effective at terminating SVTs
but are not effective at treating ventricular arrhythmias.
The cat from ECG 39a was stabilized and a subsequent ECG was recorded several hours later {ECG 39b).
The ECG shows sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 200 bpm. The PR interval is unusually short (40 ms;
normal: 50-90 ms). resulting in a P wave that appears very close to the QRS complex. This finding
AV pathway. Accessory pathways (APs) are extra-AV nodal pathways situated between the atria and the
ventricles and allow the cardiac impulse to travel directly from the atria to the ventricles while bypassing
the AV node. Normal conduction via the AV node is also present. In ventricular pre-excitation, the AP
reaches the ventricle prior to AV nodal impulses and 'pre-excites' the ventricle, causing early activation and
can result in a QRS complex with a slurred upstroke, called a delta wave.
Pre-excitation by itself has little clinical consequence; however, the presence of the AP along with
the AV node creates a circuit of conduction tissue that promotes development of SvT. SvT as seen in
ECG 39a is often triggered by an atrial premature contraction. The tachycardia utilizes the AV node for
forward conduction and the AP for conduction back to the atria. Drugs that block AV nodal conduction.
such as diltiazem, can terminate the SvT by blocking impulse conduction through the AV node. Other
antiarrhythmic drugs can selectively slow conduction in the AP and can also be effective at terminating the
tachycardia. Cessation of tachycardia that is resistant to medical therapy requires interventional procedures
such as catheter ablation using radiofrequency energy to destroy (ablate) the accessory pathway.
39b
MAAMMMAMMMMAMMAMMMM
人人人人人
84
ECG Cases
Question 40
Question 40
ECG recorded from a 5-month-old German Shepherd dog with a continuous murmur.
1 What are the findings in ECG 40 (50 mm/s; 5 mm/mV)?
 2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
40
85
Answer 40
ECG Cases
Answer 40
 1 ECG 40 shows sinus rhythm with criteria for left ventricular enlargement and a motion artifact.
2 · The heart rate is 115 bpm. The P waves are normal in amplitude and duration. Note that the ECG
was performed with a sensitivity setting of 5 mm/mV, which results in complexes half their normal
size. Thus, the R wave amplitude is increased at 4.0 mV (normal: <3.0 mV in large breed dogs) and
the QRS duration is prolonged at 70 ms (normal: <60 ms). Both of these findings are consistent with
left ventricular hypertrophy. Based on the dog's age and breed and presence of a continuous murmur,
a patent ductus arteriosus is the most likely cause of the left heart hypertrophy.
● The fourth complex from the left is a result of movement artifact. At first inspection, the ECG
complex appears to have a morphology similar to the surrounding QRS complexes and to arrive
earlier than expected, thereby suggesting that it is a supraventricular or atrial premature beat.
However, two characteristics indicate that it is an artifact. Firstly, the *QRS complex' does not have
a characteristic T wave following it similar to all the other beats, and secondly, the *QRS complex' is
absent from lead I. It is impossible for the heart to depolarize (forming a QRS complex) and not to
repolarize (forming a T wave), and it would be highly unlikely that a true QRS complex would not be
detected in all leads. Based on the orientation of leads I, II, and II (see Section 1, Figure 1.1), artifact
 generated by the left hind limb (in this case movement of the leg) will cause artifact in leads II and III,
which both use the left hind limb as one pole of the ECG recording, but be absent in lead I, which
 uses the left and right forelimbs for its ECG recording.
· Electrocardiographic artifact is common in dogs and cats and careful inspection of the ECG is needed
 to avoid misinterpretation of these deflections.
86
ECG Cases
Questions 41, 42
Question 41
ECG recorded in an 11-year-old mixed breed dog.
1 What are the findings in ECG 41 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/m V)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
41
Question 42
ECG recorded from a 4-month-old German Shepherd dog under general anesthesia.
1 What are the findings in ECG 42 (25 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
42
H
600 ms
87
Answers 41, 42
ECG Cases
Answer 41
1 ECG 41 shows sinus bradycardia (SB).
2 ● The heart rate ranges from 44 bpm to 70 bpm. The rhythm is slightly irregular.
● There is a normal P wave, QRS complex, and T wave for every beat.
· Causes of SB include high resting vagal tone, sinus node dysfunction, electrolyte abnormalities (i.e.
hyperkalemia), central nervous system disease, hypothermia, and drugs (e.g. anesthestics, sedatives,
opioids).
· In this case, the cause of the SB is likely related to high resting vagal tone as the irregularity is
suggestive of sinus arrhythmia. If so, a normal response to exercise or administration of atropine
should be an increase in the heart rate and regularity. Failure to respond to these stimuli can signal
underlying conduction system disease.
Answer 42
1 ECG 42 shows VT degenerating into VF.
 2 ● The first two QRS complexes (A) are the result of an artificial pacemaker with a rate of 100 bpm. The
rhythm changes into a rapid and polymorphic VT, before it degenerates into VF (B).VF is characterized
by low amplitude and disorganized electrical activity of the heart where the ECG deflections constantly
change in shape, direction, and amplitude. Normal P-QRS-T waves are not discernible during VF. In 
this example the fibrillatory waves appear relatively coarse. Typically, the amplitude of coarse fibrillation 
becomes progressively lower with ever-finer oscillations detected on the ECG.
· During VF the ventricular muscle twitches randomly, rather than contracting in a coordinated
fashion. Subsequently the ventricles fail to pump blood into the systemic and pulmonary circulation.
VF causes loss of consciousness within seconds, as cardiac output totally ceases, and the rhythm is
fatal if not treated immediately. External electrical defbrillation is the most successful method to
terminate VF and help restore a more effective rhythm.
88
ECG Cases
Questions 43, 44
Question 43
ECG recorded from a 10-year-old Cocker Spaniel.
1 What are the ECG findings in ECG 43 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
43
Question 44
ECG recorded in a 7-year-old male domestic shorthair cat.
1 What are the findings in ECG 44 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
44
89
Answers 43, 44
ECG Cases
Answer 43
1 ECG 43 shows a junctional escape complex.
2 ● The first three beats appear sinus in origin with a rate of 120 bpm. After these beats there is a
period of sinus arrest/pause of approximately 1.4 seconds, followed by a junctional escape beat with
a different P wave configuration. The QRS configuration of the junctional escape beat is normal.
● Junctional escape beats occur when the rate of the sinus rhythm slows below the intrinsic rate of the
junctional escape rhythm (typically 40-80 bpm). The P wave of the escape beat is typically different
from that of the sinus beat, indicating its origin from the escape focus rather than the sinus node.
· Escape rhythms should never be suppressed, rather the underlying cause of the bradycardia should be
investigated.
· The key points are normal QRS complexes with negative or altered P wave configuration occurring
after periods of bradycardia or asystole.
Answer 44
1 ECG 44 shows sinus rhythm
 2 · The average heart rate is 200 bpm. The rhythm is regular with normal P (blue arrows), QRS
(black arrows), and T waves (green arrows).
● Sinus rhythm represents a normal sequence of atrial and ventricular depolarization that occurs
at a normal heart rate. Beats are initiated by depolarization of the SA node, followed by atrial
depolarization (P wave), AV node depolarization (PR interval), and ventricular depolarization (QRS
complex) and repolarization (T wave). The normal T wave in cats is often very low-voltage and may
 not be visualized at all.
· In cats, the rate of sinus rhythm is typically 120-240 bpm.
· Note that in the cat with normal sinus rhythm, the polarity of the QRS complexes is positive in leads
 II and aVF, indicating a normal MEA.
44
90
ECG Cases
Questions 45, 46
Question 45
ECG recorded in a 16-year-old male castrated domestic longhair cat with a suspected aortic
thromboembolism.
1 What are the findings in ECG 45 (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV)}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
45
Question 46
ECG recorded in a 13-year-old domestic shorthair cat.
1 What are the findings in ECG 46a (50 mm/s; 10 mm/mV}?
2 What is the clinical significance of this ECG?
46a
91
Answers 45, 46
ECG Cases
Answer 45
1 ECG 45 shows atrial standstill
 2 ● The heart rate is ~105 bpm and the rhythm is regular
· There is an absence of P waves. The QRS complexes are narrow indicating they are likely
supraventricular in origin.
· The lack of P waves, slow heart rate, and supraventricular QRS complexes are most consistent with
atrial standstill. The QRS complexes are likely junctional escape beats.
· Atrial standstill can be secondary to a degenerative atrial myopathy or secondary to severe electrolyte
abnormalities, such as hyperkalemia
● The degenerative atrial myopathy is typified by loss of functional atrial myocytes and atrial fibrosis,
 and atrial standstill is usually permanent.
· Hyperkalemia can be secondary to metabolic disease (i.e. diabetic ketoacidosis), renal failure, or
reperfusion injury that sometimes accompanies feline aortic thromboembolism. Correction of
hyperkalemia (e.g. diuresis, glucose, insulin, and so on) can restore normal sinus rhythm.
Answer 46
1 ECG 46a shows SVT and a left MEA shift consistent with left anterior fascicular block (LAFB).
2 ● The heart rate is 300 bpm and the rhythm is regular. The QRS complexes are narrow; however, the
QRS polarity is predominantly negative in leads II, Hl, and aVF, while positive in leads I and aVL,
and is consistent with a left MEA shift (see ECG 18, p.56).
· There are P waves in front of each QRS complex indicating that the origin of the QRS complexes is
supraventricular (rather than ventricular despite the abnormal polarity).
· SVT can be due to underlying cardiomyopathy, hyperthyroidism, cardiac neoplasia, or drug toxicity
(e.g. bronchodilators, chocolate, sympathomimetics).
· In this case, the presence of the left axis shift is confirmed as the SVT suddenly terminates (arrows,
ECG 46b) and two sinus beats (arrowheads) appear at a slower heart rate.
46b
92
LLL
In this concise and practical review, the authors recognise
that, among the range of cardiac investigations available
to veterinarians, the standard electrocardiogram (EcG) is
 an indispensable, safe, and inexpensive test in assessing
dogs and cats with heart disease.
Following discussion of the principles of
electrocardiography, the book deals systematically with
the evaluation of the EcG, covering determination of
heart rate, measurement of intervals, derivation of the
mean electrical axis, criteria for atrial and ventricular
enlargement or hypertrophy, intraventricular conduction
disturbances, and both normal and abnormal cardiac
rhythms. It includes flow charts to help users diagnose
arrhythmias with confidence and 46 real cases and ECG
tracings that reinforce the principles and discussion.
Rapid Review of EcG Interpretation in Small Animal
Practice is illustrated throughout and is of value to all
veterinary practitioners, technicians, and students who
wish to improve their skills in interpreting ECCs
CRC Press
6000 Broken Sound Parkway,NW
K21976
Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487
ISBN:978-1-84076-198-6
Taylor & Francis Group
711 Third Avenue
New York,NY10017
00006
an informa business
2 Park Square, Milton Park
www.crcpress.coml
Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN, UK
www.crcpress.com