Small Animal Emergency
and Critical Care:
CaseStudiesinClient Communication,
MorbidityandMortality
Lisa Powell,Elizabeth Rozanski and John Rush
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
Small Animal Emergency and
Critical Care:
Case Studies in Client Communication,
Morbidity and Mortality
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Small Animal Emergency
and Critical Care:
Case Studies in Client
Communication, Morbidity
and Mortality
Lisa L. Powell, DVM, DACVECC
Associate Clinical Professor, Emergency and Critical Care
University of Minnesota Veterinary Medical Center
St. Paul, MN
Elizabeth A. Rozanski, DVM, DACVIM (SA-IM),
DACVECC
Department of Clinical Sciences
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
Tufts University
North Grafton, MA
John E. Rush, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology).
DACVECC
Department of Clinical Sciences
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
Tufts University
North Grafton, MA
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
Edition first published 2011
@ 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing
programme has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form
Wiley-Blackwell.
Editorial Office
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of
specific clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that
 pauee uaaq sy stuaed go waiss aeredas e ' Aq asua Adosoud e paue uaaq aa
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All
brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or
registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or
vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
austqnd au ieun Supueisapun au uo pios st ll 'panaaoo yaheu afqns aul ot pieoau un uoeuojui
is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Powell, Lisa L.
Small animal emergency and critical care : case studies in client communication, morbidity, and
mortality / Lisa L. Powell, Elizabeth A. Rozanski, John E. Rush.
p./ cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
issues. Suggestions are given for appropriate diagnostic plans and therapeutic interventions, and the
vitally important area of client communication is a key theme throughout. Emergency and critical care
veterinarians, residents and interns will find this book to be a reference of lasting value"-Provided by
publisher.
ISBN 978-1-4051-6752-9 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary emergencies-Case studies. 2. Veterinary
critical care-Case studies. 1. Rozanski, Elizabeth A. I1. Rush, John E. (John Edward) Il1. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Emergencies-veterinary. 2. Animals, Domestic. 3. Communication. 4. Critical
Care-methods. 5. Medical Errors-veterinary. 6. Professional-Family Relations. SF 778 Ps84s 2011]
SF778.P69 2011
636.089′6025-dc22
2010016811
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/13 pt Palatino by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
Printed in Malaysia
12011
Contents
Contributor list
xi
Preface
xi
Part One: Medical and Treatment Errors
1
1. Coming Up for Air: When equipment failure can be fatal
3
2.  Alistair and the UTl: Sometimes antibiotics ARE indicated!
6
 3.Double-Check the RX: How a simple math error cost a dog
his life
8
4.Holey Chest Tube!: How some inadvertent complications
led to a change in standard operating procedure
11
 5. Count Your Sponges: A simple procedure can sometimes
result in disaster
14
6.First Off, Do No Harm: Always check tube placement,
by many methods!
17
7.  Right is Wrong: An example of a tragic outcome due to
unmarkedradiographs
21
8.Sabrina the Good Witch: The importance of using the
correct syringe
25
9. Friends in High Places: An illustration of how imperative
it is to correctly prepare and administer medications
28
10.  Midnight: A case describing the consequences of technical
complications
31
11. Sam and the Muscle Medicine: When you should listen
to your gut and not your clients'wishes
35
12.  A Shot in the Dark: The importance of discussing all
38
Part Two: Medical Judgment Errors
43
13.  Another Down Dog: Sometimes things are not as they seem!
45
vi Contents
14. It HAS to Be Blasto!: Surprise endings
47
15. Can You Tap That Cat for Me?: Complications of common
procedures
50
16. Chief's Complaint: Entertain all differential diagnoses
52
17.1
But He's Been Fine!: The importance of assessing thoracic
radiographs in patients experiencing blunt force trauma
54
18.
Would You Like Water with That? A Tale of Two Dogs:
The dangers of hypernatremia!
57
19.
The Great Pretender: ALWAYS consider
hypoadrenocorticism as a differential diagnosis in dogs with
nonspecific symptoms
60
20.  A Lack of Concentration: Another example of how
Addison's disease can masquerade as a disease with a much
worse prognosis
63
21.
Unlucky Lady: Remember to consider ALL possible
differential diagnoses for your patient!
67
22.B
But She Has Heart Disease!: All aspects of a patient's
an illness
69
23.1
Pennies from Heaven: ALWAYS perform abdominal
intravascular immune-mediated hemolytic anemia!
71
24.
Seeing Red!:All ocular abnormalities should be examined
promptly and completely,as irreversible disease may be
present
74
25.9
Sepsis the Next Day?: An illustration of the importance of
analyzing effusions yourself if the results will not be reported
the same day, and to ALWAYS look under the tongue of
a vomiting cat!
77
26.
Anxious to Breathe: Care must be taken when performing
diagnostics on brachycephalic, apprehensive dogs
81
27. The Lost Acorn: A complicated case gets more perplexing!
83
28.
The Lost Puppies: How the inexperience of a junior
veterinarian caused the demise of two puppies
85
29. Don't Be Too Cavalier: A full abdominal exploratory
should always be performed during an abdominal surgical
procedure
88
Contents  vii
30. Too Much Sugar: All causes, puimonary and
extrapulmonary, should be investigated in patients with
respiratory distress
90
31. Tyler: Dehiscence of enterotomy sites should always be
considered as a cause of illness in the 3-5 days following
the operative procedure
92
32. Whiskers: Immunosuppression from administered
medications can result in the development of secondary
infections
94
33. Would You Like Some Salt?: The importance of monitoring
fluidtherapy
96
34. Bambi?: Things to think about when coming into contact
with wild animals
100
35.  The Big C: The dangers of making a pathologic diagnosis
withoutobtainingabiopsy
102
36. To Stent or Not to Stent?: New technology isn't always
the answer
104
37. It Isn't Asthma?: Noting when it is important to look past
the suspected client situation and focus on the patient
106
38.H
Hoping History Doesn't Repeat: An illustration of
the importance of good history taking
108
Part Three: Lessons in Client Communication
111
39. Not All Albumins Are Equal: When transfusing
nonautologous fluids, possible allergic reactions should
always be considered and discussed with the client prior
toadministration
113
40.  Believing the Client: Listen to the client! They know their
pets the best!
116
41.  But I Thought He Would Be Fine?: The importance of
communication about prognosis and risk—junior clinician
errors
119
42. If It's Not in the Medical Record, Did It Happen?:
The importance of a medical director addressing any and
all client concerns
124
43. Hemangiosarcoma Is Bad: Failure to completely evaluate
patients can result in a misdiagnosis
130
vili  Conlents
44.  The Internet Can Be a Dangerous Thing: One must take
into consideration the availability ofinformation on the
Internet, whether it be true or not, when discussing disease
diagnosis and treatment
134
45. Is there Some "Wiggle" Room?: An illustration of how
essential it is to offer a variety of options to clients
138
46.1
But CPCR Was Successful!: Clear, timely communication
about changes in patient status
142
47. Rosie and the Platelets: Novel therapies require a firm
discussion of risk and benefit
144
48.
 The Receptionist's Dog: Family and friends' pets can be
particularly stressfulfor clinicians
147
49.
We'll Take Good Care of Maxwell!: Llnexpected
deterioration of apet afteradmission
149
50.
A Diagnosis to Stand By: A case highlighting why things
are not always as they seem
151
51.
The Confused Setter: Making sure that all presenting
clinical complaints are addressed
154
52.
Tasty Fungi: Working within financial constraints
when the disease and prognosis are unknown
157
53.
Watch What You Write!: A lesson on how to always be
professional
160
54.B
But She Was Just Vomiting!: The importance of organization
in the midst of chaos
162
55.1
 Peroxide Puppy: A case discussing the potential concerns
of phone advice
164
56.
Too Tight!: An illustration of possible complications
associated with bandage placement
167
57.
What Was That Popping Sound?: What to do when a routine
procedure goes wrong
169
Part Four: Communication Issues between Colleagues
and Hospital Staff
173
58.B
Bandit: A case documenting stresses around the holidays, and
illustrating different clinical approaches
175
59.
Check the Medicines: A case describing a very busy day,
with an inadvertent distribution of the wrong medications
178
Contents ix
60. Cricket and the Insidious Radiograph: LInderstanding
the right and wrong ways to teach and learn
180
61. Go Team!: Highlighting the role of experienced technicians
in management of cases
183
62. Not Just Another Blocked Cat: Outlining conflict between
client cost constraints and clinician wishes
186
63. Whose Fault?: Highlighting communication between
a primary care hospital and an emergency clinic
190
64. Shelby and the Needles: What to do when a situation has
changed dramatically since the last physical examination
193
65. Slow and Easy: The problems of "selling"an unfamiliar
procedure toaclient
197
66. The Bandage: An example of noncollegial behavior
200
67. We'll See What the Blood Work Shows: The importance
of timely client communication
202
68.
What Antibiotic Is Best?: Highlighting communication
issues between senior veterinary clinicians
204
69. Molly and the Chicken Bone: A case outlining the
importance of reevaluating patients referred for a second
opinion
206
70.Know the Nodes: Why physical examination is so important
208
71.Nancy's Neck Pain: A case outlining why a specialist may
be helpful
210
Appendix: How to Set Up Your Own Morbidity and
Mortality Conference
215
Index
217
Contributor list
The following is a list of contributors to this book. We asked general
     s  s
to submit pertinent cases. The variety of experiences ofered by this
diverse group of veterinary professionals enhanced the scope of the
cases and provided insight from many different perspectives. In the
 spirit of M&M Round's confidentiality, the contributors are not assigned
 to the authored case. Many thanks to all of the contributors for sharing
their cases!
Lisa Powell, Elizabeth Rozanski,and John Rush
Christopher G. Byers, DVM, DACVECC, DACVIM
VCA,Veterinary Referral Associates, Internal Medicine - Crifical Care
Department, Gaithersburg, Maryland
Patricia Caisse Detflinger, DVM
Sterling Veterinary Cliric, 4 Clinton Road, Sterling, Massachusefts
Paul R. Davis, DVM
Highland Arimal Hospital, Highland, Mlinois
Sarah Gray, DVM
University of Mirnesota Veterinary Medical Center, 1365 Gortner Avenue,
St. Paul, Minnesota
Amy Haarstad, DVM
Animal Wellness Center of Maple Grove, 12006 87th Pl. N., Maple Grove,
Minnesota
Kelly Hall, DVM, DACVECC
 University of Minnesota Veterinary Medical Center, 1365 Gortner Avenue,
St. Paul, Minnesota
Justine A. Lee, DVM, DACVECC
Pet Poison Helpline, 8009 34th Avenue South, Suite 875, Minneapolis,
Mirnesota
Marianne Mallonee
Office Administrator, Wheat Ridge Animal Hospital, 3695 Kipling Street,
Wheat Ridge, Colorado
xii Contributor List
Elisa Mazzaferro, MS, DVM, PhD, DACVECC
Wheat Ridge Veterinary Specialists, 3695 Kipling Street, Wheat Ridge,
Colorado
Maureen MeMichael, DVM, DACVECC
Department of Veterinary Clirical Medicine, Veterinary Teaching Hospital,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1008 West Hazelwood Drive,
Urbana, Illinois
Roberto E. Novo, DVM, MS, DACVS
University of Minnesota Veterinary Medical Center, 1365 Gortner Avenue,
St. Paul, Minnesota
Joshua A. Portmer, DVM, DACVECC
NorthStar VETS, 34 Trenton Lakewood Road, Clarksburg, New Jersey
Jane Quandt, DVM, MS, DACVA, DACVECC
University of Minnesota Veterinary Medical Center, 1365 Gortner Avenue,
St. Paul, Minnesota
Marcella Ridgway, VMD, MS, DACVIM
Deparfment of Veterinary Clirical Medicine, Veterinary Teaching Hospital,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1008 West Hazelwood Drive,
Urbana, Ilinois
Elke Rudloff, DVM, DACVECC
Drive, Glendale, Wisconsin
Claire R. Sharp, BSc, BVMS (Hons), MS
Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, 200 Westboro Road
N. Grafton, Massachusefts
Daniel Stobie, DVM, MS, DACVS
NorthStar VETS, 34 Trenton Lakewood Road, Clarksburg, New Jersey
Beth Streeter, DVM, DACVECC
Eastern Iowa Veterinary Specialty Center, 755 Capital Drive SW, Cedar
Rapids, Iowa
Jami Stromberg, DVM
Brooklyn Park Pet Hospital, 5815 80th Avenue North, Brooklyn Park,
Minnesota
Kelly Tart, DVM
Uriversity of Minnesota Veterinary Medical Center, 1365 Gortner Averue,
St. Paul, Minnesota
Sarah Tibbs, BVetMed
University of Minnesota Veterinary Medical Center, 1365 Gortner Avenue,
St. Paul, Mirnesota
Paul A. Worhunsky, DVM
Internal Medicine Resident, Cornell Uriversity Hospital for Animals, Ithaca,
New York
Preface
mistakes iswhat is calledexperience.
Denis E. Waitley, PhD
Author of The Psychology of Winning
The Morbidity and Mortality conference, or M&M rounds, was first
established as a training and educational tool for medical doctors in
training. Abook published in 2002 by Hanley and Belfus, Inc., authored
by Frank J. Edwards, MD, FACEP, entitled "The M&M Files: Morbidity
 clinical case errors and doctor-patient miscommunications, with added
case assessment and learning points. Based on experience in human
medicine, M&M rounds have been adopted as a forum for case review
and learning opportunities in veterinary medicine. The objectives of
the scheduled conferences include:
● Learning from complications and errors
● Modifying behavior and judgment based on previous experiences
● Preventing repetition of errors leading to complications
● EDUCATION, especially for veterinarians in training
Case discussions, usually presented by interns and residents, are cri-
fiqued by a variety of specialists. The case in question therefore receives
a thorough review, with differing perspectives. The reviewers are often
faculty clinicians, with many years of experience between them. All
cases do not necessarily contain an error, but recommendations for
improved patient care, new research or techniques, or experienced
methods of varying diagnostics and treatments are often presented.
M&M rounds are also confidential, and all participants sign into an
xivPreface
agreement to not discuss cases outside of the rounds forum. In addi-
tion, M&M rounds often include discussions of owner perspectives,
and how communications between clinicians and owners can be opti-
mized to allow veterinarians to better meet owner expectations. It is a
method of teaching and learning from a strong perspective of experi-
ence, evidence-based medicine, effective communication techniques
and retrospective evaluation of all aspects of a patient's clinical course.
The purpose of this book is to provide real case examples from a
variety of experienced veterinarians, primarily specialists in veterinary
emergency and critical care. In addition, there are contributions from
veterinarians and client communication liaisons from different special-
ties, general practice, universities, and private institutions. In the spirit
of M&M conference confidentiality, the cases presented in this book
will not have the author attached; rather, all contributors will be listed
together at the beginning of the book. In addition, all names of patients
doctor-patient-owner relationship.
Academicians are always investigating new ways to teach, to illus-
trate the art of veterinary medicine, and to help explain complex physi
ologic processes. In a time with significant veterinary specialization, a
conference with many different specialists in attendance has elevated
the teaching and practice of medicine through in-depth case analysis.
The goal of this book is to highlight a number of common clinical
problems and communication issues that either did or may lead to
difficulties in case management.
I hope you find the cases illustrated in this book both interesting and
educational. Enjoy!
Lisa L. Powell, DVM, DACVECC
Part One
Medical and Treatment Errors
Coming Up for Air
When equipment failure can be fatal
Barney had been vomiting for 2 days, but this was not usual. Mr. and
Mrs. Thompson explained that Barney vomits about once a day, so they
were originally not that worried about the vomiting. When Barney
failed to stop vomiting and refused his dinner, they knew it was time
to get him checked out. Dr. Crane was working emergency that night,
 p   nd p o s  p o an 
many 4year-old domestic shorthair cats that Dr. Crane had seen,
Barney was clearly overweight but his vital signs were normal. Barney
was a bit quiet and somewhat dehydrated, and Dr. Crane suspected
that Barney's abdomen was a bit uncomfortable; however, no clear
abnormalities were noted on abdominal palpation. If not for the com-
plete oral exam, Dr. Crane might not have found the string trapped
under the base of the tongue.
A presurgical workup was quickly completed, and Barney was given
intravenous fluids and antibiotics. Plication of the small intestines was
suspected based on abdominal radiograph, and Dr. Murray was called
in to perform the surgery so Dr. Crane could continue to manage the
evening's slowly increasing emergency caseload. Anesthesia induction
was smooth, Dr. Murray quickly found the plicated region of the small
intestinal track, and the entire string was removed with only three
 s      s
Barney was returned to the intensive care unit for anesthesia recovery
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
3
4  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
and ongoing care. Postoperative point-of-care testing identified mild
hypokalemia, and Barney was still mildly dehydrated so intravenous
fluids were prescribed. Louise, the technician working at the emer-
gency clinic that night, was busy with other cases, so Dr. Murray added
potassium to the fluids, labeled the bag, then inserted the fluid admin-
istration set. When Louise was free to help, Dr. Murray left to telephone
Mr. and Mrs. Thompson with the surgical findings and the postsurgical
for ongoing supportive care.
The technician started the fluids, and a few minutes later, Barney
collapsed, stopped breathing, and had no pulse. Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) was initiated, and Barney was immediately intu-
bated and external cardiac compressions were begun; CPR was contin-
ued for 15 minutes until bloody edema fluid was seen pouring from
    g aa   a  
 Resuscitative efforts were unsuccessful, and Dr. Murray returned to
the phone to advise the Thompsons of the catastrophic development.
The Thompsons could not understand how Barney could have sur
mistic postoperative update, only to be called 15 minutes later with
notification of Barney's death.
The individuals involved reviewed the case to determine what might
have happened. latrogenic hyperkalemia was entertained as a possibil-
ity, but Dr. Murray was certain she had added the correct amount of
potassium to the fluid bag. Neither Dr. Murray nor Louise could recall
purging the intravenous fluid line of air, and this was a point in transfer
of care between two individuals on the health-delivery team. Heart
disease was considered as a possible complicating factor because of the
bloody fluid noted from the endotracheal tube; however, no cardiad
abnormalities had been noted on exam, there were no abnormalities on
the electrocardiogram during anesthesia monitoring, and Barney was
not short of breath just prior to the cardiopulmonary arrest. It was
suspected that the intravenous fluid line had not been purged of air
prior to the infusion pump being started and the cat had therefore
received an intravenous air bolus of approximately 15-18mL. A post-
mortem thoracic radiograph confirmed air in the right atrium.
The Thompsons called the next day and filed a complaint with the
hospital director. After meeting with the director and Dr. Murray, the
Thompsons had a better understanding about the events and, although
 '     '  s  
and obvious remorse shown by Dr. Murray during this face-to-face
conversation.
Coming Up for Air5
Key Points
●The diagnosis was not delayed, in part due to Dr. Crane's thorough exami-
nation. If the string under the tongue had been missed, diagnosis might
have been delayed and peritonitis could have been a complicating outcome.
●In this case, a simple technical error cost Barney's life. This highlights the
recommendations of having a simple procedural check-off, such as all fluid
sets being checked for air by the person connecting them to the patient,
 pod a sdnd p g asn pdapm a a o ap Aada
time where there is a transfer of duties from one individual to another is a
         s
     s a  s n q 
needs to be done is essential
Catastrophic and unexpected developments are difficult for most clients to
accept, especially when such events are in direct contrast to a recent com-
munication. Clinicians have individual preferences in how to approach
these situations, but honesty about the events is always best. Some clinicians
, i su ps a a a I,    iis
while others might approach it with a longer version culminating with the
loss of Barney The trajectory of the conversation will vary from case to case,
but most owners want to hear specific information about what transpired
just prior to and at the time of the crisis. In many cases, the unexpected
nature of the event and the grief associated with loss of the pet means that
the subject of charges for care is best avoided in this first conversation
unless it is brought up by the owner. Some owners need time to accept this
information, and a subsequent conversation is required to determine dispo
 o     on     n o 
Financial decisions should be made by the hospital owner or practice
 manager, in consultation with their liability insurance carrier.
● Meeting personally with all parties involved allowed this case to be resolved
in a professional manner, and it allowed the Thompsons to fully express
their concerns. In addition, Dr. Murray was able to explain the situation and
express his true remorse about the outcome. In this case, the Thompsons
that the doctors and administrators truly cared for their cat and were very
sorry about what had transpired.
2
Alistair and the UTl
Sometimes antibiotics ARE indicated!
Alistair was a giant ginger-and-white cat. He had been previously
healthy, but last night was in and out of the litter box and this morning
his owner (Ms. Bristol) found him collapsed on the floor. Alistair was
rushed to the veterinarian and was found to have a urethral obstruc-
tion. The obstruction was easily relieved, but Dr. Patrick decided to
keep him in the hospital for a few days until he had completely recov-
ered. It had been relatively hard to pass the original catheter, and Dr.
Patrick wanted to make sure he would not reblock. The routine labora-
tory work was normal; a urinalysis showed no evidence of infection,
but there was a high pH and many struvite crystals.
After 2 days, Alistair seemed to be well recovered, the urinary cath-
eter was removed, and the plan was to discharge him later that same
day. He was treated with only intravenous fluids and no antibiotics;
Dr. Patrick was careful to always explain to clients that a urinary infec-
tion and urethral blockage were very different and that cats with ure-
thral blockage rarely, if ever, had an associated infection.
However, as the day wore on, it was clear that Alistair was not totally
fixed. He was straining a lot and by 4 PM. he had not produced a drop
of urine. His bladder was lemon sized. Dr Patrick recatheterized Alistair
and elected to keep him in the hospital another few days. The urine
looked a bit cloudy, which Dr. Patrick attributed to inflammation.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
6
Alistair and the UTl  7
Two days later, the catheter was pulled again and Alistair was dis-
charged home on canned food (Hills C/D) and prazosin (a medication
to help decrease urethral spasm), with instructions to carefully monitor
his urinations. Ms. Bristol listened carefully to the directions, but
because she had already spent a lot this week on Alistair, she decided
to not to tell Dr. Patrick that she was going to out of town for 36 hours
and Alistair was going to be on his own.
When Ms. Bristol returned from her trip, she found Alistair col-
lapsed, in a puddle of urine. He was immediately brought back to the
hospital. On examination, he was hypothermic, was icteric, was painful
in the abdomen, and had a strong smell to him. Laboratory testing
documented 2000 white blood cells with 1000 bands (a degenerative
left shift). A chemistry profile was supportive of mild azotemia (creati-
nine 1.9mg/dL) and an elevated bilirubin value. A urinalysis showed
"too numerous to count" white blood cells and 4+ rods, and a urine
culture ultimately identified a sensitive Escherichia coli. Alistair was
treated aggressively for urosepsis and, after 7 days in the hospital
made a full recovery.
Key Points
●As believed by Dr. Patrick, the feline lower urinary disease or obstruction
is typically sterile, and careful antibiotic selection is advisable to prevent
multi-drug-resistant organisms from developing.
 Alistair developed a severe urinary tract infection (UTl). The most likely
scenario is that, although the urine was initially sterile, the first somewhat
difficult catheterization had resulted in colonization of the bladder. In most
cats, the urinary system will rapidly clear itself of organisms; however, in
this case, when Alistair reobstructed, there was ample time for infection to
develop.
● Dr. Patrick should have more closely evaluated the urine when it was noted
to be cloudy; infection was already present at this point, and earlier treat-
ment might have limited the development of overwhelming sepsis.
While not clearly his responsibility, Dr. Patrick ideally should have con-
firmed with Ms. Bristol that she would be home for the weekend and would
be able to care for Alistair.
3
Double-Check the RX
How a simple math error cost a dog his life
A 15-month-old, male intact Akita named Dakota was presented to an
emergency doctor for an acute onset of respiratory distress and with
severe lethargy. He had a history of having prednisone-responsive
weakness and collapsing episodes for several months. When the epi-
sodes increased with decreasing dosages of prednisone, he was sched-
uled to be referred to an interrist for further diagnostic tests. Due to
his acute signs of disease, he was evaluated through the emergency
service, then hospitalized and transferred to internal medicine for
therapy and diagnostic testing. In addition to the collapsing episodes,
Dakota was having intermittent difficulty prehending food.
On admission, his body temperature was 103.7°F (39.8°C), his heart
rate (HR) was 156 beats per minute (bpm), and he was panting. His
mucous membranes were mildly cyanotic. No murmur or arrhythmia
was auscultated, and his peripheral pulse quality was weak. Increased
lung sounds were auscultated in all lung fields. Neurologic examina-
tion revealed normal cranial nerve function and no conscious proprio-
ceptive deficits. The next morning. he was fully and strongly ambulatory.
but 6 hours later he was found to have difficulty walking, with signifi-
cant hindlimb weakness. He had a mild amount of muscle wasting in
his head and thigh regions.
Thoracic radiographs showed a megaesophagus, along with an inter-
stitial to alveolar pulmonary infiltrate in the left cranial, right cranial,
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
DoubleCheck the RX 9
and right middle lung lobes. A pulse oximetry reading on presentation
was 86% on room air. A transtracheal wash was performed, and cytol-
Because of his historical clinical signs and diagnostic findings,
test was performed. He was administered 2mL atropine intramuscu-
larly, followed by 5.8mg of edrophonium (tensilon) intravenously.
Following tensilon administration, Dakota immediately rose and
strongly ambulated around the exercise yard for 2 minutes, before
becoming weak again. The test, therefore, was considered a strong
positive for a diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. Definitive diagnosis of
myasthenia gravis is based on results of an antiacetylcholine receptor
antibody test, performed on patient serum, with results available in
10-14 days.
 Neostigmine was prescribed as a therapy for the myasthenia gravis.
Neostigmine is a parasympathomimetic that helps myastheric patients
by competing with acetylcholine for acetylcholinesterase, therefore
allowing prolongation of acetylcholine effects at parasympathetic
receptor sites. The dose Dakota was supposed to receive was 1.5mg as
an intramuscular injection. However, he accidentally received 15mg.
10 times the appropriate dose. An overdose of neostigmine can cause
a cholinergic crisis, exhibited as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive
salivation, miosis, lacrimafion, increased bronchial secretions, bron
chospasm, bradycardia, hypotension, muscle weakness, restlessness,
and agitation.
Ten minutes after receiving the neostigmine, Dakota immediately
rose, ate some food, then began vomiting profusely, and seizured. At
this time, the medication error was recognized, and atropine was
administered as an antidote, following a dose of valium to treat the
significant respiratory distress. Severe bronchoconstriction was sus-
pected. He was then treated with terbutaline subcutaneously and
inhaled albuterol. When these treatments did not improve his respira-
tory status, he was administered epinephrine subcutaneously. It was
then decided to sedate, intubate, and place Dakota on a mechanical
were noted within the tracheal lumen, indicating aspiration.
Dakota was placed on a ventilator and treatment for bronchocon
striction continued. The effects of neostigmine last about 4 hours in
humans, when given parenterally. Despite aggressive respiratory
support, Dakota experienced cardiopulmonary arrest 13 hours after
receiving the overdose of neostigmine. Resuscitative efforts failed.
10  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points
Administering an inappropriate dose of medication can have disastrous
effects. An estimated 770,000 people are injured or die each year in US hos-
pitals from adverse drug events (ADEs), defined as an injury resulting from
are preventable. Incidence of ADEs is not available for veterinary patients;
however, medication errors are known to occur, potentially resulting in
some degree of morbidity and, as in Dakota's case, mortality.
● Client communication and incidence reporting are necessary and ethical
when medication errors occur. Mistakes do occur, and by being honest and
straightforward about the incident, many owners are more understanding
and, although they may be angry, realize that it was an accident that is cur-
rently being addressed. Dakota's owners were immediately contacted and
informed of the mistake made by the hospital. Because it is not a medication
that is used very often, the excessive volume administered did not bring
about alarm. The attending veterinarian continued to stay in very close
       i    
the outcome was fatal, because the owners were kept informed of the full
clinical course and details about Dakota's case, they were more forgiving in
the end. The owners of Dakota were not responsible for the final bill of
$4200.
● Before administering any medication, the dose should be calculated and
checked by another person, especially if it is a drug that is not used
regularly.
 Mistakes occur, and open communication with the owners is paramount to
the success of the case and in future contacts with the clients.
 Good faith compensation, open communication, and honesty about the
error help to maintain a solid reputation and may prevent future
litigation.
Reference
1. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Reducing and preventing
adverse drug events to decrease hospital costs. Research in action, Issue #1,
March 2001. [Available via www.ahrg.gov/aderia/aderia.htm (accessed
April 2010).]
4
Holey Chest Tube!
How some inadvertent complications led to
a change in standard operating procedure
Bruno, a 4-year-old neutered male Husky, presented to the emergency
service with a history of acute respiratory distress. He had no history
of trauma and was closely supervised at all times. He had no history
of prior medical, surgical, or traumatic disease.
On physical examination, Bruno was distressed, tachypneic, and
orthopneic. His mucous membranes had a grayish-muddy discolora
tion. The capillary refill time was normal. His heart rate was 160 beats
per minute, with an auscultatable regularrhythm and moderate femoral
pulse quality. Lung sounds were bilaterally muffled in all fields, espe-
cially dorsally. Abdominal palpation was unremarkable; he was fully
ambulatory, with no evidence of gross traumatic injury.
Pulse oximetry readings were between 88% and 90% on room air,
improving to 92% with oxygen flow-by. Emergent thoracic radiographs
revealed a severe pneumothorax. Thoracocentesis yielded 1200mL of
air from the left hemithorax and 800mL of air from the right hemitho-
rax. The patient stabilized following thoracocentesis and was admitted
to the intensive care unit.
Blood work, including a complete blood cell count and serum chem-
istry profile, was within normal limits. An arterial blood gas was per-
formed following thoracocentesis and yielded a normal acid-base
status, a partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 95 mmHg, and an oxygen
saturation of 97%.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
11
12 Small Animal Emergency and Criltical Care
Two hours after initial presentation, Bruno became tachypneic again,
with increased respiratory effort. Blood oxygen saturation at that time
was 88%, as measured by pulse oximetry. Dull lung sounds were noted
bilaterally, and thoracocentesis was performed once more. At this time,
no endpoint to the air production could be obtained, and thoracostomy
tube placement was recommended.
Bruno was placed under general anesthesia, with propofol induction
and maintenance on inhaled isofluorane. A thoracostomy tube was
placed by making a small skin incision, then forcing the tube into the
pleural cavity by direct pressure. The chest tube entered the pleural
cavity, and continuous air was obtained. Postplacement thoracic radio-
 graphs showed proper placement of the tube, and a mild pneumotho-
rax. The tube was then attached to a continuous pleural suctioning unit
(Pleurovac?) in the intensive care unit. Recovery from anesthesia was
uneventful.
Significant amounts of air were produced from the chest tube over
the next 48 hours. At this time, because the primary differential diag-
nosis was a spontaneous pneumothorax due to underlying pulmonary
bullae, exploratory thoracotomy was performed.
During surgery, the previously placed thoracostomy tube was found
to be impaling one of the lung lobes (see Figure 4.1). No other areas of
air leakage were noted. A partial lung lobectomy was performed, and
another thoracostomy tube was placed surgically, for postoperative
monitoring. No air production occurred over the next 24 hours, and
the chest tube was removed.
Figure 4.1  An inlraoperalive piclure of the chest lube piercing the lung lobe.
Holey Chest Tube!13
Bruno was discharged from the hospital the following day. He has
had no further problems attributed to this hospitalization.
Key Points
● There are many different ways to place percutaneous thoracostomy tubes.
The method often used and taught to veterinary students includes the force
ful "punching" of the tube into the pleural space. The disadvantages of this
method include skin drag from the subcutaneous tunneling, misplacement
of the tube (including into the abdominal cavity), and impalement of
vessels. Although these risks exist, the procedure often goes smoothly, with
no clinical consequence. However, because there is a risk of damaging
intrathoracic structures or of misplacement of the tube, care and skill are
required when using this method of chest tube placement.
●After analyzing Bruno's case with the veterinarians in the hospital, a new
method of placing percutaneous thoracostomy tubes became standard. This
 method includes placing the patient under general anesthesia, pulling the
skin forward, then incising through the skin and into the pleural cavity with
a scalpel blade. The chest tube is then placed through the incision directly
skin, allowing for a subcutaneous tunnel to form from the pleural cavity
incision to the skin. This method allows for direct placement of the tube into
the chest cavity, decreasing skin drag, and virtually eliminates the risk of
impalement of intrathoracic structures.
 Sometimes, "tried and true" diagnostic and therapeutic methods involve
high risk to the patient, especially when there is less experience involved.
Although adverse events in one patient may not support a drastic change
in procedural methods, if there exists a technique with much lower risk
efforts should be made to adapt to this new procedure.
5
Count Your Sponges
A simple procedure can sometimes result
in disaster
Molly, an 18-month-old female German Shorthaired Pointer, presented
to the primary care veterinarian for an ovariohysterectomy (OHE). The
surgery was complicated by some hemorrhage at the ovarian pedicles.
and it was difficult to visualize the source of bleeding due to the
patient's size and deep chest conformation. The hemorrhage was even
tually controlled using extra ligafures at the ovarian pedicles and the
dog recovered uneventfully.
 Molly re-presented to the clinic 3 weeks later for vomiting and leth-
argy of 2 days' duration. She had a mild fever (temperature 103.0°F,
39°C) and a palpable abdominal mass. Radiographs confirmed the
presence of a 4 x 6cm midabdominal mass and some abdominal effu-
sion. She was referred to the local emergency clinic for possible explor-
atory surgery.
 Surgery was performed and four gauze sponges were removed from
the abdomen. Due to the presence of necrosis and adhesions, the
 n pan  m s  go n pan ms
emergency clinic for 2 days, at a total cost of over $3000.
The original surgeon (who was out of town when the dog re-
presented for the sponge foreign body) contacted the owners via tele-
phone shortly after the dog was discharged from the emergency clinic.
Molly was doing well, but the owners were concerned about any long
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
14
Count Your Sponges  15
term complications from the intestinal resection. A claim was submit-
ted to the veterinary clinic's professional liability insurance company,
who agreed to reimburse the owner for the emergency clinic bill. The
practice also reimbursed the owner for the cost of the original OHE.
An issue arose during discussion with the liability insurance carrier
s    d    e  d a 
A Pug had died several months after a Caesarian section was per-
formed by the clinic (a different veterinarian was involved), and
necropsy showed the presence of surgical gauze in the abdomen,
resulting in a severe peritonitis. Because the practice had not instituted
any protocols to prevent this mistake from occurring again after the
initial claim was made, they threatened to drop the clinic after reim-
bursement for the second claim.
 d r  r      
sponge complications. A set number (15) of sponges were placed in
each pack. Immediately after opening the pack, the surgeon would
count and confirm the presence of 15 sponges. All sponges were saved
and counted immediately after surgery to make sure there were still 15
Key Points
●Both veterinarians involved with the mistake of accidentally leaving surgi-
cal sponges in the abdomen were experienced and confident surgeons who
had never personally encountered this complication before. In fact, the
second surgeon was not even aware that the clinic she worked for had had
the insurance claim for the same problem the year prior.
 It has been several years, and Molly has shown no long-term complications
from her surgeries. However, it is unfortunate that she had to undergc
several days of illness and pain, and a second surgery, for a completely
preventable medical error. Of course, for the Pug, the outcome was much
more tragic.
serious complications.
● It is absolutely imperative that all surgical sponges be accounted for. It is
easier than one would think to lose a sponge in an abdomen, even in a small
dog.
● Sponge foreign bodies often result in a severe peritonitis, and the damage
may be permanent. The animal may become sick a few days or a few months
after the surgical procedure has occurred.
(Continued)
16  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points  (Continued)
 Communication between doctors in the same clinic, especially after medical
or surgical errors are made, can help to prevent future mistakes. Strict pro
tocols and morbidity and mortality rounds are two methods that can reduce
the number of errors made by veterinary staff.
 No veterinarian is immune from medical errors, no matter how much expe-
rience he or she has.
First Off, Do No Harm
Always check tube placement, by many methods!
Jade, a l0-year-old, spayed female Beagle, had been diagnosed with
'pe u rn jey e pey ose aus oe sea z aseasip Aaup
owners travel to Europe for a month every year, and a close friend
always takes care of her while they are gone. The caregiver brought
Jade into an emergency clinic one evening, as she hadn't eaten in two
days and had started vomiting multiple times. In addition, she was
very lethargic, just wanting to lie around, which is very unlike her.
On presentation at the emergency clinic, she was noted to be
about 7% dehydrated, with some ulcerations in her mouth. She had
been drinking more than usual, and urinating frequently. Blood
tests showed that she was significantly azotemic, with a blood urea
nitrogen of 175mg/dL (62.4μmol/L; reference range 15-30mg/dL,
5.3-10.6μumol/L) and a creatinine of 13.5mg/dL (1193.4μumol/L; refer-
ence range <l.8mg/dL, 160μumol/L). A urine sample obtained via
cystocentesis was very cloudy and, when analyzed, revealed many
white cells and rod bacteria. Jade was hospitalized on intravenous
fluids, antibiotics, antiemetics, and gastric protectants.
The following morning. Jade was transferred to a specialty hospital
for continued hospitalization and care. She still refused to eat, although
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
17
18 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Figure 6.1  The inilial thoracic radiograph to assure proper placement of NE tube.
she had stopped vomiting. Treatment continued, with intravenous
fluids and antibiotics, gastric protectants, and antiemetics. When she
still hadn't eaten by that evening, a nasoesophageal tube (NE tube) was
placed for nutritional support.
 To verify correct placement of the NE tube, negaive pressure must
be obtained with a syringe, and a lateral thoracic radiograph is taken
to assure proper placement within the esophagus and 2-4cm cranial
to the cardiac sphincter of the stomach. The intern on the evening shift
was unsure if the tube was in the esophagus based on the radiograph,
but negative pressure was obtained via syringe suction, and no cough-
ing was noted. The intern had one of the staff veterinarians assess
the radiograph, and both agreed it was likely in the correct position
(Figure 6.1).
 The next morning, Jade was noted to be coughing, with an increased
  s x   p ' p  Ads
Thoracic radiographs showed significant alveolar infiltrate in the cau-
dodorsal lung lobes (Figure 6.2). The radiologist on duty was con-
cerned that the NE tube placed the night before was actually within
the trachea. To verify this, contrast was injected into the tube, and the
subsequent radiograph verified inadvertent tracheal placement of the
NE tube (Figure 6.3).
spectrum antibiotics, oxygen supplementation, nebulization, and chest
First Off, Do No Harm19
R
Figure 6.2  Lateral thoracic radiograph showing caudal lung lobe infillrale.
R
Figure 6.3  Contras-enhanced radiograph verilying incorrect placement of the NE
tube into the trachea and lungs. It is very uncommon lo give contrast lo prove the
tube is incorreclly placed. This should be considered contradicted.
coupage. Despite this intensive therapy, Jade continued to clinically
decline, and she died of respiratory arrest 36 hours after the pneumonia
diagnosis. A necropsy showed acute, marked, fibrino-suppurative
bronchopneumonia, with widespread intrahistiocytic basophilic foamy
material, likely aspirated food.
20  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points
● Even the most well-meaning medical and surgical interventions can result
in complications. Although there were many safeguards in place, the NE
tube was still placed incorrectly, resulting in severe, fatal pneumonia in this
with the pet owner, no matter how small the risk. If all risks are explained
and a complication occurs, the pet owner has at least some knowledge of
the possible outcome.
psonoip e Aa passasse pou sm asen s u yderoipr isn ieraei a o
as it was performed after-hours. The next morning. the radiologist was
 a  e p p pd a n p
include the upper neck region. If the NE tube is located in the trachea, it is
clearly seen in the neck region as it passes through the laryngeal area.
● Because of this case, a new protocol was developed to assure proper place-
 ment of NE tubes. The radiograph performed to check tube placement
intubation. If the clinician is unsure of proper placement based on radio-
graphs and the syringe aspiration test, the tube should be removed and
 replaced until the clinician is absolutely sure that the tube is in the proper
place.
●The owners were informed of the complications with NE tube placement,
and all hospital charges were credited to the owner because of the error.
7
Right Is Wrong
An example of a tragic outcome due to
unmarked radiographs
Ginger Snap, a 13-year-old, spayed female Golden Retriever, was
referred to a veterinary oncologist for evaluation of a probable bone
  sm p A o s q p  d rr n r
nonsteroidal medication chronically for what the primary veterinarian
assumed was worsening arthritis. However, she still loved to chase
squirrels, and after one afternoon of rurning after a few, she came up
non-weight-bearing lame on the right rear leg. After she did not
improve with rest and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
the owner took her to the veterinarian. Radiographs performed by
the primary care veterinarian showed a lytic area in the proximal
right femur, with bony proliferation noted in the right acetabulum
(Figure 7.1).
The appointment with the oncologist occurred about 2 weeks after
the initial severe lameness began. She was better on the right leg. but
was still limping. A surgical consult found a Grade Ill/IV lameness on
the right hind limb. Thoracic radiographs did not show any obvious
 metastatic disease, and it was decided to take Ginger to surgery for a
right hemipelvectomy and biopsy of the lytic lesions.
Surgery went quite smoothly, and Ginger recovered in the intensive
care unit on intravenous opioids for pain control, and postoperative
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
21
 22  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
2341
Figure 7.1  The inilial ventral-dorsal radiograph of the coxofemoral joints. Nole
that this radiograph is not marked as lo which side is left or right.
  d s  p   
analgesics.
Biopsy results were reported 3 days after submission. Amazingly, no
abnormal tissue was noted. There were no neoplastic cells seen, and
x   snss s n n n n  on
ral joint, nor in any of the samples of bone submitted. Concerned about
these results, the surgeon and the oncologist reviewed the original
radiographs that were performed by the primary care veterinarian
and noticed that the ventrolateral view was not labeled as to which
side was right or left. The owner was contacted and was asked to
bring Ginger back to the hospital for new radiographs of her pelvis
(Figure 7.2).
 After assessing the postoperative radiographs, the surgeon and the
oncologist called Ginger's primary care veterinarian to tell them that
the right rear leg was amputated, but the lesion was in the left rear leg.
All noted that Ginger's lameness was on the right rear leg. Then, it was
time to talk to Ginger's owner, Mrs. Snap.
The oncologist and the surgeon brought Mrs. Snap into a private
room to show her the radiographs, and confess to the mistake that was
Right Is Wrong  23
IDay1041511
4096
Figure 7.2  Postoperalive veniral-dorscl radliograph illustrating the coninued pres
ence of disease in the remaining coxofemoral joinl.
made. Mrs. Snap was shocked and did not know how to respond at
first. However, she was very impressed at how the veterinarians admit-
ted to their mistake, and although nothing could bring the amputated
leg back, they discussed possible next steps. It was then decided to do
a magnetic resonance image (MRl) scan of the remaining pelvic region,
to try to better assess the lesion in the left hip.
The MRI showed a chronic, long-term femoral neck fracture, with
some disruption, and areas of healing. There was no enhancement to
suggest a neoplastic process.
Ginger was subsequently treated with regular weekly physical
therapy, and all previous charges were removed. In addition, all
treatments associated with the hip were not to be charged for in
the future.
 Thankfuly, Ginger responded well to the weekly physical therapy
sessions and continued NSAID administration. She returned to her
daily activity of chasing squirrels within 6 months of the surgery and
continues to do well, to the delight of her owners!
24  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points
Appropriate marking of radiographs is imperative, especially when only
the limbs are present, making it impossible to differentiate the left from
right sides with organ landmarks. In addition, sifus inversus, although rare,
may be present, so that the patient's descending colon is located on the right
side instead of the left. In humans, it has become common practice for sur
 geons to sign the affected limb with permanent marker with the patient
 awake, assuring that the surgical procedure is performed on the appropriate
limb.
● Client communication in this case was the key to a good outcome, in the
face of such a disastrous mistake. Everyone was open and honest with what
had happened and, thankfully, the lesion turned out to be benign. Strong
communication skills, forgiveness of any charges involved, and the willing-
 pol e   dy oi araa pe r op oi ss
of life prevented the owner from pursuing legal recourse in this case.
Sabrina the Good Witch
The importance of using the correct syringe
   p     a  
S aul raao pue '1ea on paaol euqe ,ares poos, yonu ot hq e
she put on some excess weight. So, it was not really a big surprise to
Dr. Sarno when, after Sabrina developed polyuria, polydipsia, and
weight loss at 13 years of age, her blood glucose also peaked out above
    q ps os  (i/<) /
dietary manipulation (Purina DM°) and PZl insulin. Sabrina's diabetes
had been quite difficult to control over the first 6 months, and her
hours.
Sabrina started vomiting on Friday, and over the ensuing 24 hours
she got sicker and stopped eating. Dr. Sarno's calls were being for-
warded to the emergency clinic, and so the Nardelli family brought
Sabrina in. Dr. Quinn examined Sabrina and explained that her diabe-
needed fluids. Dr. Quinn also explained that she was worried about
the possibility of a secondary infection. Sabrina needed to be admitted
to the hospital for fluids, antibiotics, and supportive care. Dr Quinn
also indicated that she planned to call Dr. Sarno to discuss the case and
consider the option of switching to a different type of insulin, to see if
this could better control the diabetes.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
25
26 Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care
Within 36 hours of aggressive care, Sabrina's ketoacidosis had
resolved and her clinical appearance was much improved. She had
stopped vomiting and was starting to eat. A urinary tract infection was
suspected to be a complicating factor in her disease, and a culture was
still pending. Dr. Quinn called Dr. Sarno to discuss the difficulty in
managing Sabrina's diabetes. They both agreed that it would be reason-
able to discontinue PZl and begin insulin glargine. Dr. Quinn ordered
2units of insulin glargine given subcutaneously, with a plan to regu-
larly measure blood glucose levels over the ensuing 12-hour period. A
nurse administered the prescribed dose of insulin, after the patient was
observed to eat a complete meal without complications. Five hours
after insulin administration, Sabrina was visibly lethargic and her
blood glucose level had dropped to 49mg/dL (2.7mmol/L). Another
nurse reviewed Sabrina's medicalrecord to discover the insulin glargine
had been administered via a U-40 insulin syringe (advised for use with
PZl) instead of the U-100 insulin syringe. Since U-100 syringes are
designed to dose insulin that contains 100units/mL, and U-40 syringes
are manufactured to deliver insulin that contains 40units /mL, Sabrina
had inadvertently received 5units of insulin glargine, 2.5 times the
desireddose.
Dr. Quinn was alerted to the error, which resulted from confusion in
dosing using the U-40 syringe. Sabrina's hypoglycemia was promptly
treated via an intravenous dextrose admiristered as a continuous rate
infusion. After speaking with the hospital administrator, Dr. Quinn
called the owners to discuss the error in insulin administration and
outline the possible outcomes from the error. Dr. Sarno was then con-
tacted by Dr. Quinn, to give an update on Sabrina's care and to explain
the medication error. Sabrina was weaned from the dextrose infusion
within 24 hours, and she eventually received 2units of insulin glargine,
administered with a U-100 syringe, without incident. Sabrina was sub.
sequently discharged from hospital without long-term complications
from the insulin overdose. The Nardelli family was not responsible for
charges accrued during the last 48 hours of Sabrina's hospitalization.
The owners were originally very upset at the error, but Dr. Sarno, who
had been Sabrina's trusted veterinarian for many years, was quite
helpful in explaining the situation to them.
Sabrina the Good Witch 27
Key Points
● Administration of the proper dose of insulin in the appropriate insulin
syringe is critical to achieving adequate glycemic control in a timely manner.
Most important, proper dosing and administration will reduce the occur-
rence of hypoglycemia and the potential for long-term neurologic dysfunc-
tion that can result from severe hypoglycemia. All staff members responsible
  a q r  ns sd on s  
route of administration, vessel of administration) to help minimize the
incidence of adverse drug reactions. In addition, because of this error, it
became hospital policy to have one other staff member check the insulin
dose and look at the insulin-filled syringe to verify accurate dosing prior to
administration.
● Documentation of all patient treatments is instrumental for allowing ade-
quate assessment of a patient's response to therapies. In this case, one nurse
administered insulin glargine via a U-40 syringe, and this was properly
 noted in the nurses' notes. When Sabrina developed inappropriate hypogly-
cemia, the next nurse reviewed the nurses' notes and was subsequently able
to determine the cause of the patient's hypoglycemia and lethargy. The
mistake was brought to the attention of the attending clinician, and appro
priate corrective interventions were employed.
● The attending clinician openly discussed the mistake with Sabrina's owners,
and a good working relationship between the emergency clinic and the
primary care veterinarian helped smooth over this challenging situation.
9
Friends in High Places
An illustration of how imperative it is to correctly
prepare and administer medications
A six-year-old, male neutered Golden Retriever was presented to the
emergency service for being obtunded, ataxic, and severely lethargic.
He was a healthy dog and had never had any previous medical prob.
lems. He was closely supervised and lived indoors, but he did spend
some unsupervised time outdoors in a fenced-in, secured yard. He was
up to date on vaccines and current on preventative flea, tick, and heart-
worm medication. Upon noticing the behavioral change and ataxia, the
owner took him immediately to the referring veterinarian, who per-
formed routine blood work (complete blood cell count and chemistry
panel) and abdominal radiographs, all of which were normal. The dog
was then referred for neurologic evaluation due to its progressive
obtundation and for conscious proprioceptive deficits. Upon arrival,
the client expressed that she was a close friend of the Dean of the
Veterinary College, and within minutes the Dean was also in the emer-
gency room overseeing management of the case.
 On presentation to the emergency services on a late Friday afternoon,
the dog was normothermic (100.3°F, 37.9°C), was mildly bradycardic
(heart rate 68 beats per minute; normal 70-120 beats per minute), and
had a normal respiratory rate (12 breaths per minute). The dog was
weakly ambulatory but very ataxic. His mucous membranes were pink
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
28
Friends in High Places29
and moist, and no murmur or arrhythmia was detected. Abdominal
palpation and the remaining physical exam were unremarkable aside
from profound ataxic, slow conscious proprioception in all four limbs,
and obtundation. Cranial nerves were normal.
An intravenous (IV) catheter was placed, and a blood sample was
drawn for an ethylene glycol (EG) test. Meanwhile, recommendations
included admitting the dog into the intensive care urit (ICU) for sup-
portive care, IV fluid therapy, and monitoring. Traditionally, according
to standard operating procedures of the hospital, only urgent or life-
threatening conditions warrant emergency anesthesia, computerized
axial tomography (CT scan), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
after-hours or over the weekend. Due to the stability of the patient, the
owner was instructed that monitoring and supportive care would be
initiated, and that advanced imaging would occur on the following
weekday. Due to the owner's relationship with the Dean, this tradi-
fional decision was overturned by the Dean, and an urgent anesthesia
and CT was performed hastily and immediately.
While the dog was whisked off to anesthesia and CT, the results of
the EG test came back positive an hour later. In an attempt to not miss
the narrow 8-hour window for treatment of EG with the antidote.
fomepizole (4-MP), the drug was ordered from pharmacy by a techni-
cian, who was told to prepare it for immediate administration. The
emergency room doctor took the reconstituted syringe from the techni-
cian and ran down to CT to start admiristration of the 4-MP slowly via
the IV fluid port line. Meantime, the CT was completed, and no sig-
nificant findings were detected. The dog recovered uneventfully in the
ICU and was continued on IV fluid therapy and supportive care. The
patient remained normotensive and, upon recovery, was bright, alert,
and progressively more ambulatory.
 The following midday (approximately 20 hours after initial presenta-
fion, and 24 hours after clinical signs), after the dog had already
received two doses of 4-MP, it was noted by another ICU technician
that the small 1.5-mL vial (containing 1.5 grams) of 4-MP was intact
and was never reconstituted with the 28.5-mL container of saline. It
was sitting intact in the bottom of the box of antidote. Typically, there
are two different bottles in the box of 4-MP (one of saline, one of the
4-MP). Because of how busy the previous day's emergency shift had
been, the technician had failed to read the instructions and had not seen
the bottle of the concentrated 4-MP at the bottom of the box. The tech-
nician had only drawn up saline, which was administered to the dog.
Up to this point, the dog had never received any true antidote and was
now 24 hours out from initial development of clinical signs; more
30  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
important, the dog was now outside the window of effective treatment
of EG with 4-MP
At this time, a venous blood gas was performed, which revealed a
normal anion gap and no evidence of a metabolic acidosis (normal pH,
base excess, bicarbonate). Typically, with EG intoxication, a profound,
severe metabolic acidosis is present based on the presence of glycolic,
glyoxalic, and oxalic acids. Based on these normal values, the dog was
continued on aggressive IV fluid therapy and supportive care (such as
free catch urine output monitoring, repeat venous blood gas analysis).
   s       o 
entation, had physical examination parameters within normal limits.
All of the neurologic abnormalities had resolved.
 In this situation, the dog was suspected to have gotten into a non-
toxic dose of either propylene glycol or ethylene glycol. Upon further
questioning of the owner, no other drugs interfering with a false posi-
tive EG test had occurred. The unintentional, inadvertent medication
error was explained to the owner (and the Dean), and open communi
cation was maintained. The owner was not held financially responsible
for any additional costs related to the medication error and was grate-
ful for the candid discussion and the fortunate outcome. Thankfully,
within 36 hours, the dog was clinically normal, as were venous blood
gas and serum chemistry parameters. The dog survived without inci-
dent and was discharged home 48 hours later.
Key Points
● Prior to administration of any drug, the reconstitution protocol should be
carefully reviewed and verified, and the drug then mixed accordingly.
 The contents of any medical container should be carefully opened to make
sure the proper contents are available and are neither broken nor expired.
 Preferential treatment should never occur, particularly if it bypasses tradi-
tional standard operating procedure. Rushed decision making results in
mistakes, and it adds additional pressure to faculty and support staff, result-
ing in hasty errors.
Serious consideration should be given to whether it is in the animal's best
interest to have a test or procedure accomplished on an overnight shift or
weekend versus regular working hours in a more routine fashion.
10
Midnight
A case describing the consequences of
technical complications
S is e 'm a go n  Asq e u
of other emergencies, an ll-year-old, female spayed black domestic
shorthaired cat called Midnight was admitted to the hospital. She had
been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus approximately 9 months earlier
and has been treated with twice-daily doses of U-100 insulin since
that time. Initially her clinical signs of polyuria and polydipsia were
challenging to get under control; however, after frequent rechecks with
her veterinarian and progressive up-titration of her insulin dose, they
had finally achieved balance, and Midright had been relatively stable
for months now.
A couple of days prior to presentation Midnight's owners had
abruptly swapped her cat food, because the grocery store was out of
stock of her normal food and they bought something that seemed
the last couple of days, but on the morning of presentation she didn't
eat a full meal. Nonetheless her owners thought she had eaten enough,
so they administered the regular insulin dose.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
31
32 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
That night when they got home from work they found Midnight
laterally recumbent and barely responsive, so they rushed her straight
in to the emergency veterinary hospital, arriving at about 6: 15 p.m. On
examination at the time of presentation Midright was mentally
mic (temperature 95.2°F, 35.1°C). She was immediately triaged back
into the treatment room, where the technicians had diligently placed
an intravenous (IV) cephalic catheter and measured a blood glucose
level (BG). Her BG was too low to read on the glucometer, and so 5mL
of 25% dextrose was administered to Midright over a couple of minutes.
Following the dextrose bolus her demeanor seemed to improve and
 her heart rate returned to a normal rate, so she was placed in a cage
withheatsupport.
A BG was rechecked about 30 minutes later and was 80mg/dL
(4.4mmol/L). At that time she was commenced on IV fluids at 2mL/
kg/hr supplemented to a final concentration of 2.5% dextrose, as it was
thought that her BG should be higher at this time. Her temperature,
pulse, and respirations were monitored hourly for the first few hours;
her temperature was gradually coming up and her heart rate was also
within a normal range.
For a few hours she seemed stable, and at 9 PM. the nurses checked
her BG again. Despite the dextrose supplementation her BG was down
to 65mg/dL (3.6mmol/L), so additional dextrose was added to her
fluid bag to achieve a final concentration of 5% dextrose. By this time,
the results of a complete blood cell count, biochemical profile, and
thoracic radiographs were also back; these screening tests were ordered
to rule out a concurrent underlying disease that may have contributed
to Midnight's current condition. Fortunately no new abnormalities
were detected on her blood work and there was no evidence of under
lying metastatic disease, pulmonary parenchymal disease, or cardiac
disease on her thoracic radiographs.
At llpm, as the ER doctor was entering surgery for a cat with a
gastrointestinal linear foreign body, the nurses reported that Midnight's
BG was still only 67mg/dL (3.7mmol/L) and she was still fairly
depressed, although more responsive than at admission. This just
didn't make sense; while it still seemed most likely that Midright had
received a relative overdose of insulin resulting in hypoglycemia, it
was expected that her BG would now be higher after an initial dextrose
bolus and then an ongoing infusion of dextrose-containing fluids. At
this time, the ER doctor asked if the nurses could offer Midnight some
food, as mildly to moderately hypoglycemic animals usually have a
desire to eat. Urfortunately, Midnight did not want to eat and was
Midnight33
becoming fractious and difficult to handle. The dextrose supplementa-
fion was then increased to 7.5% with the plan to reevaluate her in a
few hours.
Just as the ER doctor was finishing up with the multiple enterotomies
and gastrotomy in the linear-foreign-body  cat, a five-year-old
Weimaraner presented with a gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV). His
owners knew what was going on and gave permission for surgery. He
was fluid resuscitated, and the ER doctor was back in the OR, derotat-
ing his stomach and performing a gastropexy. Toward the end of this
 surgery, at around 1 A.M., Midnight's nurse came into the OR to notify
the doctor that the BG was only 45mg/dL (2.5mmol/L). The ER doctor
was mystified and began troubleshooting other causes, such as a
mecharical or technical error with the fluids or the intravenous cath-
eter. The nurse reported back to confirm that the IV was okay and the
fluids were running (she had received a total of 54mL since admission)
Not knowing what else to do, the ER doctor ordered an increase of the
dextrose to 10% in her fluids and planned to check on her as soon as
the current surgery was complete.
The GDV surgery went fine and as soon as the ER doctor scrubbed
out and called the Weimaraner's owners, he finally had a chance to
check on Midnight. Although she was a little difficult to examine due
to her fractious atfitude, it was evident, much to the doctor's dismay
that her IV catheter had become dislodged from the vein, and a large
volume of fluid (containing a high concentration of dextrose) had
extravasated into the subcutaneous space.
This necessitated calling Midright's owner in the middle of the night
to explain what had happened and warn them that having such highly
osmolar fhuid in the subcutaneous ftissues could result in extensive
fissue damage, such that she could slough the affected skin and end
up with a huge skin defect requiring surgical reconstruction or, at
worst, amputation. Her owners were understandably dismayed. The
doctor advised the owners to continue supportive care, monitor the
site, and treat any complications as they arose.
Fortunately, other than experiencing discomfort and swelling at
the affected site, Midnight did not lose any skin. A cephalic venous
catheter was placed in the other leg, and she required only 2.5%
dextrose supplementation for the remainder of the night and following
day to maintain normoglycemia. Within a few days she was eating
discharged into the care of her owners, with a plan to recheck with her
primary care veterinarian a few days later to revise her long-term
management plan.
34  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points
●Catheter complications are common. If a therapy is not having the desired
effect, the catheter and fluid line should always be investigated.
●If things aren't going as planned, it is vital to take the time to reexamine
your patients and reevaluate to make sure that things aren't being missed.
In this case, when the technician was asked to evaluate the cat's IV, she did
not get the cat out and palpate the leg or flush the catheter; rather she just
observed the cat in the cage, presumably because the cat resented handling.
She could not see any swelling, and she read the pump, which was still
 pumping at the appropriate rate; then she made the assumption that it must
be working fine.
 Always when a mistake is made, particularly one that could result in sub-
stantial patient morbidity, it is vital to notify the pet's owners as soon as
possible. In this case the client was informed of the complication, any pos-
sible sequelae that may occur, and steps to be taken to minimize the risk of
further morbidity. Fortunately, Midnight did well and did not experience
any long-term problems associated with the error.
11
Sam and the Muscle Medicine
When you should listen to your gut and not your
clients' wishes
Sam, a 5-year-old, male neutered yellow Labrador Retriever, was
referred to a university teaching hospital critical care service for ongoing
management of oliguric renal failure. Sam had ingested an entire bottle
of alpha-lipoic acid tablets 5 days prior (-200 tablets). The dog's owner
 took the tablets for their reported muscle-building properties.
Following the tablet ingestion Sam had started vomiting. Sam had a
history of eating things he shouldn't and usually vomited until they
were out of his system, so his owners didn't think too much of it. The
vomiting continued overnight and so Sam was seen by his primary
care veterinarian the following day. Sam was actually quite sick by the
He was admited to the hospital for supportive care and diagnostics.
An intravenous cephalic catheter was placed and he was started on
intravenous fluids at 5mL/kg/hr to provide for maintenance and to
start to correct his dehydration. His fluid rate was adjusted over time
in order to account for ongoing losses in the vomit and subsequent
diarrhea that he developed. Famotidine, sucralfate, and maropitant
were administered and Sam was kept NPO. A complete blood cell
count and biochemistry profile were performed, revealing evidence of 
hemoconcentration (hematocrit 65%; total solids 8.5g/dL) and azo
temia (blood urea nitrogen 90mg/dL; creatinine 3.5mg/dL); this was
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
35
 presumed to be prerenal associated with dehydration; however, a urine
specific gravity was not confirmed to rule out renal azotemia.
The following day Sam was no longer clinically dehydrated but
intermittent vomiting. Sam's packed cell volume and total solids (PCV /
TS) and a minichemistry profile were repeated. His PCV was down to
45% and his TS was 6g/dL; however, his azotemia had worsened
(blood urea nitrogen 140mg/dL; creatinine 6mg/dL). This led to
concern that Sam's azotemia might be renal rather than of prerenal
origin. His urine specific gravity at that time was 1.008.
Given concern regarding possible acute renal failure, Sam's fluid rate
was further increased to encourage diuresis. Gastroprotectants were
provided as previously. Sam's veterinarian consulted with an internal
medicine specialist at the closest university veterinary school for advice
regarding management of acute renal failure (ARF). Case management
was discussed but referral for 24-hour care was encouraged given how
tricky ARF can be to manage. The veterinarian passed on the recom-
mendation for referral but Sam's owners were hoping that he could
continue to be treated locally as the veterinary hospital was 4-5 hours
away.
The veterinarian had wanted to pass a urinary catheter to quantify
urine output and evaluate his fluid balance better, as it was hard to
know how much Sam was urinating; however, this was not done as
the practice did not have a catheter long enough (they just stocked
short red rubbers for blocked cats). Instead high rates of intravenous
apparently gained 16 pounds since presentation but his blood urea
nitrogen was now off the scale of their chemistry analyzer and his
creatinine was llmg/dL. He was also markedly hyperphosphatemic
further consultation with the university, Sam's local veterinarian was
             
24-hour specialist hospital, but they could not pick him up and trans-
port him until that evening. Given evidence of fluid overload the intra-
venous fluids were stopped.
r  an n   so s a 
tal. On examination at the time of presentation Sam was laterally
recumbent and mentally obtunded. He was markedly fluid overloaded,
as evidenced by generalized subcutaneous edema, ascites, pleural effu-
sion, pulmonary crackles, and serous nasal discharge (in addition to
the aforementioned weight gain).
Sam and the Muscle Medicine37
Sam was instrumented with a urinary catheter and a central venous
catheter to facilitate monitoring of his central venous pressure. Sam
was given a 2-mg/kg bolus of furosemide and started on a furosemide
constant rate infusion (CRl) in an attempt to encourage urine output.
Treatment with a fenoldopam CRl (0.8μg/kg/min) was also com-
 menced. Given the severity of his fluid overload and azotemia, perito-
neal dialysis was begun. Hemodialysis (either intermittent or as
continuous renal replacement therapy) would have been ideal but was
not available at that institution, and Sam was not stable enough for
transport to the nearest veterinary dialysis center. The doctors in the
intensive care urit worked intensely on Sam overnight; however, at
around 6.30 A.M. the following morning (only about 12 hours after
presentation) Sam had a grand mal seizure, and his owners elected
euthanasia given the severity of his underlying disease.
Key Points
●Acute renal failure can be a rapidly progressive disease that should never
be underestimated.
 prerenal azotemia with a urine specific gravity, such that appropriate man-
agement can be initiated for acute renal failure, if diagnosed.
 It is vital to be able to accurately determine urine output in a patient with
ARF (ideally with an indwelling urinary catheter and closed collection
system), as the progression from polyuria to oliguria then anuria can occur
rapidly. While aggressive intravenous fluid therapy is important in a dehy-
drated and /or hypovolemic patient, once rehydration is achieved, fluids
outputs should be vigilantly monitored. Any indication of oliguria should
prompt administration of diuretics (such as furosemide and /or fenoldopam).
neal dialysis or, ideally, hemodialysis).
12
A Shot in the Dark
The importance of discussing all potential
complications prior to performing the procedure
A 9-year-old, female spayed Labrador Retriever presented as a referral
for abdominal pain, lethargy, decreased appetite, and possible abdomi-
nal masses on radiographs. The dog had been unwell for 1 month prior
to presentation and had 3 weeks of tenesmus and narrow-diameter
bowel movements. The only previous medical problem noted was
arthritis that was being treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
medications.
 Clinical exam revealed a quiet, alert, and responsive patient with
normal heart and respiratory rates, normal temperature, and no
abdominal pain on palpation. She had nonreproducible lumbosacral
pain on palpation, poor anal tone, and no anal reflex; however, no other
neurologic deficits were noted. Multiple imaging procedures followed,
including an initial review of the referral radiographs. No definitive
abnormalities were noted on the abdominal radiographs. Thoracic
radiographs, spinal radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound followed
as further workup in this patient. The thoracic radiographs revealed
subjective mild cardiomegaly and a vertebral heart score of l1.25
(normal' is less than 10.2); however, with no history of a murmur this
was unlikely clinically significant and was not evaluated further. The
spinal radiographs and abdominal ultrasound were normal.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
38
A Shot in the Dark 39
In light of the patient's poor anal tone and spinal pain a lumbosacral
region magnetic resonance imaging (MRl) was performed. The MRI
revealed a mass within the fifth lumbar (L5) vertebra (body, pedicles,
and lamina all had been infiltrated and had bone lysis). The mass
was within the spinal canal and was compressing the spinal cord.
Additionally, the meninges at this level were thickened and contrast
enhancing. A presumptive diagnosis of neoplasia in the L5 vertebra
was made with differential diagnoses of osteosarcoma, plasmacytoma,
or metastatic disease, and the owner was offered further diagnostics to
identify the underlying disease.
 Further diagnostics could be performed, including the following:
surgical decompression and tumor biopsy; computed tomography
 ps id An upn e  pe Asdon n ()
the options were discussed. The risk of CT biopsy was considered less
 s 's n  on A sn    ass
transverse process fracture. Radiotherapy without cytologic or his-
sampling and acquisition of appropriate imaging in case radiation
therapy was indicated.
The patient returned to the hospital for the CT-guided biopsy proce
through L3-L7 were obtained to determine the biopsy site and included
the potential radiation therapy field. This was followed by 2-mm axial
slices just through L5 to prepare for the biopsy procedure. Similar find-
ings of bone lysis and mass in L5 were noted. Three small-gauge
needles were placed percutaneously into the patient's subcutaneous
fissues to provide guidance markers. A scan was repeated, and an 18-
gauge Jamshidi needle was placed percutaneously on the lateral, right
side and directed toward the vertebral body. Multiple intermittent
scans were performed as the bone sampling needle was advanced until
the position was acceptable for needle advancement through the bone.
Upon application of force to drive the Jamshidi needle through the
bone, a sudden loss of resistance was felt; no further movement was
made to the needle, and a CT scan was performed to evaluate posiftion
of the biopsy instrument. This scan revealed that the Jamshidi needle
had been deflected by the curvature of the vertebral pedicle down
toward and through the transverse process. The needle had been
advanced through the transverse process and into the retroperitoneal
space, where it could be seen penetrating the caudal vena cava and
deforming the dorsal aspect of the colon (Figure 12.1)
40  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
5-59>
Dorsal
Guide needles
Jamshidi needle
Left
Right
Aorta
Caudal VenaCava
Colon
Ventral
Figure 12.1 A 2-mm axial image through the L5 vertebral body, showing the
biopsy needle and penelralion of the caudal vena cava [window level 800 and widlh
3000].
The overseeing clinician was alerted and contacted the owners to
explain that a life-threatening complication had occurred and immedi-
ate surgical exploration of the abdomen was necessary. This clinician
also informed the owner of the potential for fatal perioperative outcome.
The owner elected to move forward with surgery. For surgical prepara-
tion, the needle handle was cut away so the patient could be placed in
dorsal recumbency and prepared for ventral midline approach celiot-
 omy. Upon exploration it was noted that the needle entered the caudal
vena cava but did not penetrate full-thickness, and removal and repair
of the defect in the vessel was successful. The lesion at L5 was also
biopsied at the time of surgery.
A diagnosis of plasmacytoma was made and the patient had a full
  sn  n     
cancer.
A Shot in the Dark41
Key Points
● The procedure of CT-guided sampling is considered safe and accurate in
humans, and in the limited number of reports in veterinary medicine it
"appears to be safe and useful."2 In percutaneous vertebral lesion sampling.
complications can occur. The most common complications include minor
hemorrhage or hematoma formation that is usually self-limiting and self-
resolving (0.25%). Occasionally these are classed as major (0.5%) when the
blood transfusion).3 On this topic, reports in humans discuss the potential
for more serious complications, including lacerating or penetrating vital
structures; such an occurrence is considered rare, but it is noted that this
procedure is "not without significant risk."4 Veterinarians often do not
contemplate or discuss in depth with clients all potential risks, common or
rare, prior to performing procedures. In this case, a higher risk procedure
was performed and some risks were discussed. Percutaneous CT-guided
biopsy of vertebral bodies is not a common procedure performed at this
institution. This procedure was performed by a resident with direct clinician
supervision, which may have contributed to the complication; however, any
uncommon procedure has a greater risk due to unfamiliarity with the
technique.
● During CT-guided sampling procedures the needle advancement is per-
formed without continuous monitoring and therefore there is greater risk.
 pss  g   e a  sd 
them and need more in-depth discussion so that clients are completely
informed.
Some preemptive discussion of risk is important to keeping communication
channels open.
 Being succinct and clear when in highly emotional situations was key to the
positive outcome in this case.
 Good-faith compensation and communication helped maintain this client's
confidence and willingness to continue high standard of care at our
References
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2000;30:379-393.
2. Tidwell AS, Johnson KL. Computed tomography-guided percutaneous
biopsy in the dog and cat: description of technique and preliminary evalu-
ation of 14 pafients. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1994;35:445-456.
42 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
3. Lis E, Bilsky MH, Pisinski L, Boland P, Healey JH, O'Malley B, Krol G.
Percutaneous biopsy of osseous lesion of the spine in pafients with known
 Or suspected malignancy. Am J Neuroradiol 2004;25:1583-1588.
4. Olscamp A, Rollins J, Tao SS, Ebraheim NA. Complications of CT-guided
biopsy of the spine and sacrum. Orthopedics 1997;20:1149-1152.
Part Two
Medical Judgment Errors
13
Another Down Dog
Sometimes things are not as they seem!
Snoopy, a 5-year-old Beagle, was referred to a teaching hospital for
evaluation of hindlimb paresis. On physical examination, the dog was
whiny and anxious and was difficult to evaluate. His temperature was
slightly elevated at 103°F (39°C), the heart rate was 140 beats per
minute, and he was panting. The mentation, cranial nerves, and front
limbs were normal, and he was paretic in the hind limbs. The with-
        s 
and urinalysis were submitted to the diagnostic laboratory. It was late
on Friday afternoon, and this was the fourth paralyzed dog that had
presented in the past 2 days. Following a hallway consult with the
neurosurgeons, Snoopy was rapidly anesthetized and transported to
the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suite for diagnostic imaging of 
the spine. The MRI unit was new and there was great enthusiasm for
using the technology. The anesthesia staff anesthetized Snoopy without
incident but was unable to get any blood pressure readings from the
cuff on the hind leg. However, moving the cuff to the front limb resulted
in a reproducible reading of 180/110mmHg.
The MRl scan unfortunately did not reveal any spinal cord disease,
  (r       s   ig
physical examination under anesthesia showed the absence of femoral
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
45
46  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
aorta
Figure 13.1 An MRl showing the presence of a significant caudal aorlic
thrombus.
pulses. Evaluation of laboratory results showed mild azotemia,
decreased serum albumin at 1.9g/dL (19gm/L), increased cholesterol,
and proteinuria, with a 3+ protein and hyposthenuria. A urine protein-
to-creatinine ratio was elevated at 16 (reference range less than 1),
consistent with a diagnosis of protein-losing nephropathy. Antithrombin,
a protein that is similar in size to albumin, is lost in the urine due to
glomerular disease, and this protein is necessary to prevent abnormal
thrombus formation. Because of this, a large thrombus had formed in
the terminal aorta, causing hindlimb paralysis
Key Points
 A thorough physical examination should be performed in all patients, even
those whose diagnosis seems clear and in whom a full examination would
be problematic due to the clinical state of the patient (stressed, painful)
 anxious). Although aortic thromboembolism is not as commonly diagnosed
in dogs as in cats, the inability to palpate femoral pulses on initial examina-
tion would have resulted in a different diagnostic and treatment plan.
 The inability to rapidly assess chemistry profiles and urinalysis after-hours
can confound the diagnosis in some cases. Point-of-care testing should be
available and routinely performed on cases in which the diagnosis is not
clear.
14
It HAs to Be Blasto!
Surprise endings
Bud was a typical 4-year-old yellow Labrador, who was a GREAT
pheasant hunting dog! His owner, Mr Light, had taken him on two
hunting adventures already this Fall, with great success. However, Bud
had not been acting himself for the past few days, seemingly painful
or weak, with heavy breathing. Mr. Light took him to his primary care
veterinarian, who also happened to be Mr. Light's brother-in-law. Bud
was found to have a pretty high fever, and chest radiographs showed
a pattern very consistent with blastomycosis. Blood tests were other-
wise normal, and a blastomycosis antibody titer was submitted to an
outside laboratory. He was started immediately on itraconazole and
some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications and was kept in the
hospital to watch his breathing. His pulse oximetry reading was low
dns xo uo ua %6 0 pd 1n 1q %g 1e
Unfortunately, Bud's respiratory distress started to worsen over the
next few days. It is known that when you start treating for blastomy-
cosis with itraconazole, many patients get worse before they get better,
due to the inflammation induced by the dying fungal spores. When he
continued to worsen and become more oxygen dependent, he was
transferred to a referral hospital for 24-hour care in an intensive care
unit (ICU).
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
47
48 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Figure 14.1  A ventro-dorsal thoracic radiograph represenling severe nodular lung
disease.
On presentation to the referral hospital, Bud was breathing heavily,
but otherwise seemed okay. He still did not want to eat, but his tem-
perature was normal and he seemed bright. Repeat blood tests and an
abdominal radiograph were normal. The chest radiographs were
repeated, and they had worsened (Figures 14.1 and 14.2). He was
admitted into the ICU and was placed in an oxygen cage. At this time,
his blastomycosis antibody titer returned, and it was negative. The ICU
wash, since Bud was not responding, he did not have any other lesions
consistent with blasto, and his titers were negative. It was still extremely
likely that Bud was infected with blastomycosis, but it would be best
to try to confirm it by finding the actual organisms. Mr. Light agreed
to the transtracheal wash and left Bud in the hands of the specialists.
The transtracheal wash procedure went very smoothly. However, the
sample obtained from the wash was poorly cellular, and only red cells
were seen on cytology. No inflammatory cells or blasto fungal organ-
isms were noted.
Bud continued to worsen over the next 24 hours, and it was at that
time that Mr. Light decided to humanely euthanize him. It was a very
I HAS to Be Blasto!49
L
Figure 14.2  Bud's laleral thoracic radiograph.
sad moment, but Bud was really struggling to breathe, and Mr. Light
just couldn't watch him in that state. Mr. Light did agree to a necropsy,
to try to verify the disease, for his peace of mind.
Suprisingly, necropsy results did not show blastomycosis organisms
in lungs. Instead, metastatic hemangiosarcoma was found throughout
all lung lobes. The primary tumor was a 2-cm mass, located on the right
auricle of the heart.
Key Points
● This case illustrates that a seemingly obvious diagnosis can sometimes be
wrong. This dog lived in an endemic blastomycosis area, was a young
hunting dog, and had lesions in the lungs typical of the disease. However.
when the organisms could not be located on any tests performed, and the
dog had no response to therapy, it was reasonable to look for another cause.
 Another diagnostic test that might have been helpful in this case is abdomi-
nal ultrasound and echocardiogram, to identify any potential primary
tumor causing metastatic pulmonary disease. In this case, the tumor was so
small, it might not have been visualized; however, it would have been an
appropriate diagnostic to perform.
●Most of the time, a duck is a duck, but sometimes, a zebra comes along.
15
Can You Tap That Cat for Me?
Complications of common procedures
Boeing, a 12-year-old, neutered male domestic shorthair cat, was con-
sidered a "frequent flyer" since having been identified with biventricu-
lar heart failure. His heart failure was managed with furosemide and
spirolactone-hydrochlorothiazide, as well as enalapril and clopidogrel.
Despite these medications, Boeing still developed clinically important
pleural effusion about every 6 weeks. At one point, Dr. Hurri had tried
to increase his diuretics; although effective, this resulted in Boeing
p sp oa g sp z  dso a on p q
potassium supplementation due to extreme volume contraction and
profound hypokalemia (potassium 1.9mmol/L). Boeing's owners
performed, as he seemed to tolerate them well and his quality of life
was otherwise excellent.
 pass p au raraa re se uae auo pauasard og
last week's appointment to be tapped due to car trouble and, today, he
was in trouble with marked respiratory distress. Dr. Hurri was not
  d n     o '   s
for Boeing. Typically about 220mL of a modified transudate was to be
and welcomed the experience.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
50
Can You Tap That Cat for Me? 51
Boeing was held in sternal recumbency by an experienced technician.
Dr. Aire prepared the site and began to tap the chest using the 2l-gauge
butterfly catheter she had used in other cats. However, it was appar-
ently not long enough to reach the chest cavity. Boeing was a big cat,
22 pounds at his prime, and even now he tipped the scales at 17
pounds. Dr. Aire thought about checking with Dr. Hurri but, wanting
20-gauge needle and associated connection set. After some fishing
around with the needle deep in Boeing's chest and after a small strug-
gle, Dr. Aire removed 230mL of a modified, almost chylous effusion.
 Just as she was starting to feel pleased with herself, she noted that she
also got 20mL of air. Dr. Aire checked the connection, and then reaspi-
rated, this time getting 60mL of air before reaching negative pressure.
 Now nervous, Dr. Aire stopped tapping the chest, removed the needle,
and decided to watch Boeing for the next few minutes. This was clearly
a bad decision, as within 5 minutes, Boeing was laterally recumbent and
gasping for air. A rapid thoracocentesis was performed and 300mL of
air was removed, with no endpoint reached. Boeing did look brighter,
but Dr. Aire was clearly distressed. Boeing's owners were to return
shortly to pick him up, and it was not going to be an easy conversation
to have with them, or with Dr. Hurri. Boeing was treated by placing a
chest tube and placing him on a continuous suction unit; however, after
3 days, there was no improvement, and Boeing's owners elected to
euthanize him as they did not think a thoracotomy was a reasonable
option.
Key Points
●  Iatrogenic pneumothorax is a REAL risk with any thoracocentesis proce-
dure. With healthy lungs (e.g., traumatic pneumothorax), if an iatrogenic
    s ss   s 
intervention.
●In chronic pleural effusions, the pleura on the surface of the lung becomes
thickened and fibrotic and, if torn by a needle, will not seal promptly.
Inadvertently piercing the lung is more likely in cats due to their small size.
● No chronic effusion should be tapped without the owners having a clear
understanding of the potential risks, even when the benefits are high!
●Using a catheter may help limit the potential for trauma.
16
Chief's Complaint
Entertain all differential diagnoses
During morning rounds, a discharge report was found on the table
from the night before. The report read "We are sorry to have diagnosed
Chief with pancreatic cancer; this is an untreatable disease; please take
her to your primary care veterinarian for humane euthanasia after your
family has visited with her." This report piqued the interest of the
daytime critical care doctors, as Chief had presented to the emergency
service during the night. Pancreatic cancer can be hard to diagnosis
without a biopsy or more extensive testing, none of which would have
been an option late on a Saturday night. Therefore, the medical record
was reviewed. The record documented a 6-year-old, icteric Labrador
Retriever with a l-week history of vomiting. An abdominal ultrasound
had been performed, which showed a biliary obstruction and a large
and brightly echogenic pancreas. The ultrasonographer, a first year
radiology resident, had suggested the obstruction was a tumor, a cho-
 leolith, or severe pancreatitis, although he thought cancer was most
likely.
The daytime veterinarian called Chief's owners to see how she was
doing. They were understandably upset; slowly, the idea of further
testing was introduced. Chief's owners were very interested in further
evaluation, if only for their peace of mind, as she was a very good dog
and a member of the family. Chief returned to the hospital and under
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
52
Chiel's Complaint  53
a choleolith. The obstruction was relieved, and an indwelling stent was
placed for 2 weeks. Chief went on to make an unremarkable recovery
and was rapidly back to her regular self.
Key Points
●Consider the best possible outcome for all your differentials. While many
times the outcome is less than ideal, there are many "fixable" diseases that
may initially look very serious.
While the prognosis for advanced pancreatic cancer is grim, it was not at
all clear that was what Chief was suffering from. In this case, the emergency
clinician failed to consider all the options for the conditions and failed to
recognize the inherent limitations in some tests. In all cases where the diag-
nosis is even 1% in question, admission to the hospital or some other follow-
up plan is warranted or at least should be discussed with the client.
 The survival rate following euthanasia is zero; as many junior clinicians are
initially horrified to realize, it is often "easier" to euthanize than to struggle
with the next diagnostic steps, especially with an unclear prognosis.
17
But He's Been Fine!
The importance of assessing thoracic radiographs
in patients experiencing blunt force trauma
Boscoe was a very energetic, 6-month-old Pug. He had, unfortunately,
learned how to dig in the yard; one day, he dug a hole so deep he was
able to crawl under the fence. Once free of the yard, he started running
full out and didn't see the car coming down the street. He was hit on
his side, but the car thankfully was only going about 30mph and
immediately stopped when the driver saw what had happened. Boscoe
had a collar and tags, and the driver called the owner to let him know
       5  1 
knowing he had gotten out of the yard. He was taken to his primary
care veterinarian right away.
 Dr. Johnson had been taking care of Boscoe since the owners obtained
him, administering his puppy shots, and was scheduled to neuter him
car, he was very concerned.
On presentation, Boscoe had pale mucous membranes and was
panting heavily. He was tachycardic, with a heart rate of 180 beats per
minute. His femoral pulse quality was moderately decreased. He had
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
54
But He's Been Fine!55
 pd s or   s   
intravenous catheter, and began a 30mL/kg bolus of crystalloid fluid.
His packed cell volume and total solids were normal, and on chemistry
profile his liver enzymes were elevated, but all else looked fine.
Following the intravenous bolus of fluids, he began breathing more
normally, and his heart rate came back down to normal. Dr. Johnson
gave him an intravenous dose of opioids for analgesia, and continued
monitoring.
By that afternoon, Boscoe was found to be recovering well. He was
walking normally and ate some. He was very anxious in his kennel,
should be discharged, as he would be much more comfortable at home,
and he seemed to be doing fine. Instructions were given to the owner
to bring him back in right away if he noticed any further problems. Dr.
Johnson called and checked on Boscoe a few days later and was told
that he was back to his happy, rambunctious self.
Because of Boscoe's accident, it was decided to put off neutering him
for another month. However, Boscoe's owner didn't schedule him for
the surgery, deciding to keep Boscoe as an intact male dog.
Six months later, near Boscoe's first birthday, the owner noticed that
he was suddenly breathing very hard. He was using his whole body
to breathe and looked like he was about to fall over. Once again, the
owner rushed Boscoe to Dr. Johnson.
On presentation, Dr. Johnson noted that Boscoe was having severe
difficulty breathing and was only saturating at 86% on a pulse oximeter
reading. On thoracic auscultation, the lung sounds were very quiet
on the right and seemed increased on the left. In addition, he thought
he heard borborygmus in the chest cavity. He immediately placed
Boscoe in an oxygen cage and prepared to take some thoracic
radiographs.
Thoracic radiographs showed a diaphragmatic hernia, with intesti-
nal loops herriated into the right side of the chest. Dr. Johnson imme-
diately discussed the situation with Boscoe's owner, including the
recommendation for immediate surgery to repair the hernia. Boscoe's
owner did not understand how this could have happened, as it had
been 6 months since the accident and he had seemed fine since then.
Dr. Johnson then explained that sometimes a hernia occurs at the time
of the accident but does not cause a problem for months, maybe even
years. Boscoe was taken to surgery to repair the hernia and was neu-
tered at the same time. The surgery went very well, and Boscoe returned
home, with no further complications noted.
56  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points
● Blunt trauma is a common emergency presentation in small-animal veteri-
nary patients. Because the rib cage of dogs and cats is very flexible (as
opposed to the rigid nature of the human rib cage), many injuries can be
sustained to the thoracic cavity, with no outward signs of problems. Because
of this, it is ALWAYS recommended to perform thoracic radiography on all
patients after blunt trauma, to identify occult diaphragmatic hernia, mild
pneumothorax, and pulmonary contusions.
 If underlying pulmonary injuries are diagnosed with radiography, it is often
    n  a    an n  e
talization and overnight monitoring and care, even though they appear to
stabilize quickly in the emergency room.
Would You Like Water with That?
A Tale of Two Dogs
The dangers of hypernatremia!
Wolfie
Wolfie, a 7-year-old Husky, was seen for seizures. He had been an
epileptic for 4 years now and had been very hard to control. He has
been receiving phenobarbital and potassium bromide for the last 3
years, but has had several episodes of status epilepticus. He presented
to the emergency clinic, once again in status, and was controlled with
multiple extra doses of phenobarbital and a brief propofol constant rate
infusion. Despite a presenting temperature of 105°F, thought to be due
to hyperthermia from seizure muscle activity, Dr. Leeds chose not to
start intravenous fluids because he was concerned that the chloride in
the fluids would decrease the bromide levels and could potentially
increase the likelihood of seizures. Wolfie was a typical Husky, and he
barked and whined while in the run. The "sheet of shame" was hung
in front of his run, and even though the technicians could hear Wolfie
panting and whining behind the sheet, he was thankfully a bit quieter.
Dr. Leeds ordered Wolfie ad lib food and water, but Wolfie continue to
spill the water and then tried to make a break for it when the run was
being cleaned. Needless to say, Wolfie was not a popular patient, so the
technicians were happy when, behind the sheet, Wolfie finally appeared
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
57
58  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
to go to sleep. About 2 hours later, Dr. Leeds returned from appoint-
 ments to check on Wolfie. He had been pleased not to have been paged
every 5 minutes with a complaint of how annoying Wolfie was.
However, when he went to look at Wolfie, he found him mentally inap-
propriate and disoriented. Quick point-of-care testing showed that
Wolfie's sodium level was 190mmol/L
Precious
Precious Kupffer was a 4-month-old, 1-kg Yorkie puppy. She was pre
sented for failure to thrive. She had not been growing. had a poor
appetite, and had more than her share of hypoglycemic episodes.
Precious would often get particularly sleepy after meals and did not
always seem to recognize her family. On examination, Precious was
found to have dull mentation and was very thin. Dr. Wright was
pleased; it seemed that Precious was a classic portovenous shunt. The
Kupffers were pleased that a possible diagnosis and cure existed for
Precious. Even though she had only been a member of the family for
2 months, she was dearly loved! Dr. Wright prescribed 5mL of lactulose
by mouth 3 times a day and discharged her on a low-protein diet. Blood
samples were submitted for a complete blood cell count, chemistry
profile, and bile acids, and an ultrasound was scheduled for 2 days
later.
The morning of her appointment, Precious presented on emergency.
 a n s '         
and this morning was found collapsed and not moving. A quick blood
check showed that the blood glucose was low at 36mg/dL (2mmol/L)
and her sodium level was very high at 198mmol/L.
Key Points
● Sodium levels most often reflect water balance. In a typical animal, volun-
tary water consumption and renal compensatory mechanisms control
sodium levels quite tightly.
   sd dr n   e g  e si  o
 cause for alarm in pets presenting on an emergency basis.
●For Wolfie, the hypernatremia developed due to the excessive losses from
panting and excessive anxiety (e.g., free water loss), which was not replaced
because Wolfie was spilling the water offered to him, and he was not placed
Would You Like Waler with Thal? A Tale of Two Dogs59
Key Points  (Continued)
on intravenous fluids. The clinical signs of hypernatremia were not detected
sooner because the run was covered by a sheet, in an attempt to keep him
quiet. Panting, anxious dogs have the ability to lose an excessive amount of
water through the respiratory system, especially without access to water.
●  For Precious, the hypernatremia developed due to free water losses from
the osmotic diarrhea, caused by the lactulose medication, without adequate
fluid intake. The lactulose dose for this size puppy was way too high; for a
 frail puppy, hospitalization is often warranted.
● Hypernatremia commonly develops in animals with preexisting polyuria-
polydipsia disease that are given inadequate fluid therapy. For example
even "3x maintenance" might not be nearly enough for a dog with unregu-
lated diabetes.
Animals that are not drinking water should have their sodium levels fol-
lowed, especially if they have excessive losses through the respiratory,
urinary, or gastrointestinal system.
19
The Great Pretender
ALWAYS consider hypoadrenocorticism
as a differential diagnosis in dogs with
nonspecific symptoms
Pepper, a 3-year-old, spayed female black Labrador, presented to the
emergency clinic after she had been seizuring for 30 minutes. The
 owner had taken her to the primary care veterinarian that morning, as
she had been vomiting and lethargic for the past 3 days. Blood tests
had been taken earlier in the afternoon, and the results were to be faxed
to the emergency clinic within the hour.
The emergency intern had just recently become a doctor, and this
was one of his first overnight shifts. On physical examination, the
 intern noted that Pepper was actively seizuring. An intravenous (IV)
catheter was placed, and 5mg of diazepam was administered IV. A
blood glucose taken at that time was low, at 46mg/dL (2.5mmol/L).
Abolus of diluted 50% dextrose was given IV. She then stopped seizur-
ing, although her mentation was still abnormal. Further assessment
showed a heart rate of 100 beats per minute, hypotension with a sys-
tolic blood pressure of 78mmHg. and a normal body temperature.
Intravenous fluids were continued, and the intern went to speak with
the owner.
Historically, Pepper had been ill for the past 3 days. She had notice-
able lethargy and had vomited a few times. She was still eating some,
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
60
The Great Prelender 61
but with much less vigor. She is allowed outside to roam around and
 a on a      p ' q 
weather. She lives on a few acres of land and runs about unsupervised,
about 2 hours a day. Because of the rural nature of the area, she does
have access to potential toxins, including rodenticides and antifreeze.
When the intern left the examination room, the receptionist brought
him the faxed blood test results and urinalysis from the primary care
veterinarian. The clinician immediately noticed that the blood urea
nitrogen and creatinine were elevated, with a urine specific gravity that
was low. Because of the potential for toxin exposure, the seizures, and
the azotemia, the intern was sure that Pepper had ingested a fatal
amount of ethylene glycol.
The intern discussed the very guarded prognosis that goes along
with ethylene glycol toxicity that has progressed to azotemia and sei-
zures. Therapy could be instituted, but it was unlikely that the antidote
-xa sem sop stn sei suis paoeape au ym poog Aue op pinom
ing. In addition, the owner expressed financial constraints and felt that,
since the outcome was so grim, it was probably best to euthanize
Pepper. After the owner said her goodbyes, Pepper was humanely
euthanized.
The next afternoon when the intern came back on shift, there was a
  a  a  d s, rn  s
how Pepper was doing, as based on her blood work, she clearly had
hypoadrenocorticism. The intern raced to the medical records depart-
ment to pull the record and reevaluate the blood work. Sure enough,
the potassium level was elevated and the sodium low. In addition to
the azotemia and mild hypoglycemia, she was also hypercalcemic. The
intern felt horribly guilty and couldn't believe he had made such an
obvious mistake. He called and spoke with the primary care veterinar-
ian, explaining the situation, and it was decided not to tell the owner
of their suspicions. To this day, that intern will never again leave
Addison's disease off the differential list, no matter the presenting
clinical signs!
Key Points
●All diagnostic tests should be completely analyzed, and all potential dif
the diagnosis of toxin exposure to direct the analysis of the blood tests, not
leaving open the possibility of other disease processes.
(Continued)
62  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points  (Continued)
●An open and honest discussion with the primary care veterinarian was key
in this case. The intern admitted his mistake and felt terrible that he had
eutharized a pet that had a disease that was very treatable. However, the
diagnosis was unverified, and you cannot undo euthanasia. Because of this,
it was decided that nothing good would come out of calling Pepper's owner
to explain that she might have had a disease with a better prognosis. This
is a point for debate. While some clinicians would agree with this scenario,
other clinicians would feel strongly that it is important that the client knows
of the final diagnosis. In any case similar to this, a careful debate about the
pros and cons of disclosure should be made, and hospital administration
should be involved. The owner had also admitted to financial constraints,
and although Addison's disease is treatable, lifelong medication is expen-
sive, averaging about $1200-$1500 a year for a dog of Pepper's size.
Despite these assurances, the intern felt very guilty, and it is extremely dif-
ficult to realize that you may have done harm when intending to do good.
However, mistakes do occur, and as long as one learns from them, then
something worthwhile can result.
20
A Lack of Concentration
Another example of how Addison's disease
can masquerade as a disease with a much
worse prognosis
A 5-year-old, spayed female Labrador Retriever was referred for man-
agement of acute renal failure. The dog had presented to the primary
care veterinarian with a 5-day history of anorexia, lethargy, and vomit-
ing. On physical examination, the primary care veterinarian found the
dog to be uncharacteristically subdued but otherwise normal. Weight
loss of 2.8 pounds since the last visit (3 weeks prior, for a urinary tract
infection) was documented. The primary care veterinarian obtained
abdominal radiographs, which were reported to be normal, and in-
house blood work, which included blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 40mg/
dL (2.22mmol/L; normal range 7-25mg/dL), creatinine 1.8mg/dL
(159μmol/L; normal range 0.3-1.4mg/dL), potassium 6.7mEq/dL
(normal range 3.7-5.8), alkaline phosphatase 18U/L (normal range
20-150), and normal values for total bilirubin (0.3mg/dL), alanine
aminotransferase [(ALT) 40U/L], glucose (105mg/dL; 5.8mmol/L),
total protein (7.2g/dL; 123μumol/L), albumin (2.6g/dL; 26gm/L),
amylase (1021U/L), and sodium (144mmol/L), for which normal
 ranges were not indicated. A urinalysis showed a urine specific gravity
of 1.o14. Based on findings of azotemia, isosthenuria, and hyper-
kalemia, the primary care veterinarian made a diagnosis of acute
 primary renal failure and referred the dog for further evaluation and
treatment.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
63
64 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
On admission, the dog was dull and listless with a body temperature
of 100.8°F, pulse 120 beats per minute, respiratory rate 24 breaths per
minute, and body condifion score 4/9. Her mucous membranes
were pink and moist and her capillary refill time was 2 seconds.
Thoracic auscultation and abdominal palpation were unremarkable.
Neurologic and musculoskeletal evaluations were normal. Her systolic
blood pressure at presentation was 85mmHg (via Doppler auditory
ultrasound).
Because of the mild degree of azotemia at the time of initial presenta-
tion for this illness, additional differential diagnoses including
condifions associated with prerenal azotemia and isosthenuria were
kalemia, hypoadrenocorticism was included as a likely differential for
this dog's illness. A complete blood cell count (CBC), serum chemistry
urinalysis, baseline cortisol level, abdominal radiography, and abdomi-
nal sonography were performed. The CBC demonstrated a lymphocy-
tosis of 5.38K/μL. Abnormalities on the serum chemistry profile
included creatinine 3.6mg/dL (318 μmol/L; normal range 0.5-1.6mg/
dL), BUN 56.5mg/dL (3.14mmol/L; normal range 7.0-31.0mg/dL),
phosphorus 8.0mg/dL (0.44mmol/L; normal range 2.4-6.5mg/dL),
sodium 128mEq/L (normal range 141-161), potassium 7.5mEq/L
(normal range 3.9-5.7), sodium-to-potassium ratio 17 (normal range
28-36), chloride 100mEq/L (normal range 104-125), and cholesterol
95 mg/dL (5.28mmol/L; normal range 109-315mg/dL). Urine specific
gravity was 1.019 with a pH of 7. Baseline cortisol was less than 27.59
nmol/L (normal range 58.0-144.0).  Adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) was administered and the cortisol remained less than 27.59
nmol/L. Abdominal radiographs were considered normal; previous
radiographs from the primary care veterinarian were not available for
review. Neither adrenal gland could be identified on abdominal sonog-
raphy, presumably due to small size. The examination was otherwise
unremarkable: the kidneys had a normal sonographic appearance. The
dog was admitted to the intensive care unit for intravenous fluid
therapy with 0.9% NaCl and continuous cardiac monitoring; she at no
time demonstrated electrocardiographic abnormalities. Dexamethasone-
s (o] rd xo  (sa) 
taneously] were administered. The dog showed immediate and
dramatic clirical improvement. Her blood pressure normalized, her
azotemia resolved after 12 hours, and electrolyte abnormalities were
corrected within 24 hours of initiating treatment. She was discharged
on oral prednisone with instructions to continue daily prednisone,
DOCP injections every 25 days, and electrolyte monitoring. She has
A Lack of Concentralion65
returned for subsequent rechecks and is doing exceptionally well,
"better than ever" per the owners. She has gained weight and is able
to concentrate her urine (specific gravity 1.040).
Hypoadrenocorticism may appear clinically similar to renal failure,
especially acute, oliguric renal failure. In both conditions, lethargy,
anorexia, and vomiting are common clinical signs; patients are often
logic abnormalities may include azotemia, acidemia, hyperkalemia,
ratio. Urine specific gravity will be inappropriately low for a dehy-
drated patient in renal failure because of an inadequate population
of functioning nephrons, and in hypoadrenocorticism because of
insufficient levels of aldosterone necessary for sodium reabsorption
and maintenance of the medullary concentration gradient. The clinical
similarities of these two conditions dictate careful consideration and
localization. Misdiagnosis results in incomplete treatment of hypoad-
renocorticism and may result in unnecessary euthanasia, as renal
failure bears a much worse prognosis.
Key Points
●Azotemia is defined as excess urea, creatinine, or other nonprotein nitrog-
enous compounds in the blood. It is further classified as prerenal, renal, or
postrenal in origin. In evaluating azotemic patients, such classification can
can inform communications regarding potential causes and prognosis.
Failure to properly identify the underlying mechanism of the azotemia can
lead to inappropriate or even contraindicated treatment plans. Urine spe-
cific gravity is a useful parameter to help distinguish renal azotemia, in
concentrate and /or dilute urine (isosthenuria), from prerenal and postrenal
causes, where renal function and urine concentrating ability are retained
number of extrarenal conditions, including central diabetes insipidus,
hepatic insufficiency, aldosterone deficiency, hypercalcemia, hyperadreno-
corticism, and Escherichia coli endotoxemia, as well as certain drugs, can
primary renal disease. Patients with these conditions may become dehy-
drated more readily because of the inability of the kidneys to conserve water
    a    mn pu  
(Continued)
66  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points  (Continued)
dehydration, similar to patients with renal insufficiency. It is therefore
important to consider these factors when evaluating a patient with dehydra-
failure and hypoadrenocorticism can be clinically and biochemically very
similar.
● Prerenal azotemia is common in patients with hypoadrenocorticism because
 of fluid losses through vomiting and diarrhea and inability of the kidneys
to conserve water.
● The combination of azotemia and failure to concentrate urine is consistent
with but not pathognomonic for renal failure; extrarenal as well as renal
 disease can compromise the kidneys' ability to concentrate urine.
● Multiple differential diagnoses should be considered for each clinical
problem (i.e., azotemia).
 Dogs that are clinically ill from renal failure generally have more than just
a mild azotemia.
1
patient.
21
Unlucky Lady
Remember to consider ALL possible differential
diagnoses for your patient!
 a y s s   h  e 
evaluated Lady. Her physical examination documented severe ascites,
but all else was okay. Point-of-care testing showed severe hyponatremia
(sodium 129mEq/L), moderate hyperkalemia (5.1mEq/L), and mild
azotemia (blood urea nitrogen 42mg/dL; 15mmol/L). Her hematocrit
was 38% and her total solids 5.9gm/dL (59g/L). Lady's owner com-
mented that she only had a few hundred dollars, and if this was not a
good prognosis, she thought that euthanasia might be the best way to
go. Dr. Margeaux talked with her, said nothing that was even a litle
fixable could cause this degree of hyponatrermia with ascites, and that
it was best to humanely euthanize her. Lady's owners took her home
for the night and returned the following morning for euthanasia. They
agreed to the necropsy suggested by Dr. Margeaux. Necropsy showed
a large volume of pericardial effusion, with no mass or microscopic
lesions. The final diagnosis was idiopathic pericardial effusion.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
67
68  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points
Severe hyponatremia is often caused by decreased effective circulating
volume, as seen with pericardial effusion, and is magnified in those dogs
with right-sided congestive heart failure.
Idiopathic pericardial effusion (IPE) carries a good-to-excellent prognosis,
if treated initially with pericardiocentesis, then dlefinitive surgery to remove
the pericardium (pericardiectomy).
22
But She Has Heart Disease!
All aspects of a patient's history should be
carefully considered when presenting for an illness
Raven, a 12-year-old cat, has not been feeling well since a week after
the new kitten (Finn) came home from the shelter. Raven, a pure black
domestic shorthair cat, was herself found in a dumpster with her
brother (Shadow) as a 6-week-old kitten. About 2 years ago, Shadow
treatment, Shadow has been stable and doing well. Raven herself was
found to also have heart disease, although not as bad as Shadow's. Both
cats had been prescribed enalapril and furosemide every day and while
Raven herself has never been in heart failure, seeing Shadow so sick
has made her owners, the Brewsters, very worried about respiratory
distress.
 Both Finn and Raven had a full-blown upper respiratory infection,
and Raven had not eaten or drunk anything in almost 2 days, when
Mrs. Brewster decided to bring her to the hospital. Finn has recovered
almost completely within 3 days.
On examination, Raven is at least 10% dehydrated and very
weak. In-house blood testing documents a creatinine of 14mg/dL
(1238μumol/L) and a blood urea nitrogen greater than 120mg/dL
(42mmol/L). A urine specific gravity is low at 1.014. Dr. Sparrow, the
emergency doctor, broke the bad news to Mrs. Brewster. It looks like
Raven has bad kidney failure, and he is not optimistic that he can turn
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
69
70 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
her around. It is very challenging to treat cats with both heart and renal
disease. Mrs. Brewster begs him to try; it is almost Christmas and she
can't bear the thought of losing Raven.
Dr. Sparrow starts Raven on "half-maintenance" intravenous fluids
and famotidine, and tries to tempt her to eat or drink. Dr. Sparrow
advised Mrs. Brewster that an immediate echocardiogram is war-
ranted, but the cardiologists will not be available for several days due
to the holidays. The following morning, the day-shift doctor, Dr.
McNamara, takes over care of Raven. She finds that Raven is still very
       
(1220μmol/L). She calls Mrs. Brewster with an update, and Mrs.
Brewster reminds her that Raven needs her heart meds this morning!
Dr. McNamara confirms that Raven has been receiving her heart medi-
cations all along, and realizes this may be part of the azotemia.
Dr. McNamara orders a chest radiograph on Raven and, when that
returns clear, increases her fluid rate to 20mL /hr, which should replace
her dehydration and provide for ongoing needs over the next 12 hours.
   h     s   s
eating; at discharge on day 4, her creatinine is 1.7mg/dL (124jumol/L)
Key Points
Administration of diuretics will cause a dilute urine, even in the face of
dehydration. This can make it easy to misdiagnose renal failure, as Dr.
Sparrow did. Raven got into problems because she was continuing to receive
an angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor and a diuretic, at a time
when she was not eating or drinking.
●It is always wise to confirm if a patient is continuing to receive
medications.
● This problem was further magnified as Dr. Sparrow was anxious about
administering intravenous fluids to a patient with heart disease, even in the
presence of severe dehydration and the absence of any signs of heart failure.
Certainly, fluid therapy should proceed with caution, in a patient with
heart disease, but many tolerate (and NEED) a large amount if they are
dehydrated.
●Chest radiographs are helpful in determining if a patient can tolerate fluids.
23
Pennies from Heaven
ALWAYS perform abdominal radiographs
in patients presenting with signs of intravascular
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia!
Spacey was a 2-year-old, spayed female Cocker Spaniel that presented
to a referral emergency clinic with an acute onset of severe lethargy.
 a      s    
went to work; upon returning in the late afternoon, they found her
unable to rise. She was alert and responsive, but seemingly very, very
weak. She had been previously healthy, was on no medications, and
besides her spay procedure had never had any surgical procedures.
She was also up to date on her vaccines and took monthly heartworm
and flea-and-tick preventative all year round.
     a a d 
gums were very icteric, and although responsive, she was weak and
unable to rise. In addition, she was tachycardic and tachypneic, with
hyperdynamic pulses. She was noted as having a Grade Ⅱl/V1 heart
murmur, and her lungs sounded clear. Her abdomen was soft and
nonpainful, with no noted organomegaly or other abnormalities. The
clinician submitted some stat blood work and diagnosed a severe
anemia, with a packed cell volume (PCV) of 11%. Her serum total
protein was normal at 7.4gm/dL (74gm/L). In the capillary tubes, the
serum was noted to be very hemolyzed.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
71
72 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
The clinician went back into the examination room and discussed
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) with the owners. She
had the more severe form, with noted intravascular hemolysis. This is
a common disease diagnosed in Cocker Spaniels, and treatment
includes immunosuppressive drug therapy, blood transfusions as
needed, and time to allow the medications to start decreasing the
more.
The owners quickly agreed to do whatever was necessary for
Spacey. She was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), and a
blood transfusion was administered from a universal donor. Injectable
dexamethasone was given intravenously, along with gastric protect-
ants. A full serum chemistry, complete blood cell count, coagulation
profile, tick titers, and urinalysis were submitted, and plans were
made to perform thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound
the following day to rule out underlying neoplasia as a cause for the
IMHA.
 The following morning, Spacey was transferred to the ICU doctor
on the day shift for continued care. The tick titers were normal,
and the only abnormality on the chemistry profile was a total bilirubin
of 15mg/dL (256μumol/L; reference range, less than 2.0mg/dL;
34.2jmol/L). The complete blood cell count showed a mildly regenera-
tive, severe anemia, with many nucleated red cells and hemolyzed
serum. Significant hemoglobinuria was documented on a urinalysis.
The thoracic radiographs were normal, as was the abdominal ultra-
sound. Spacey was clinically improved after her transfusion, with a
PCV of 22%; however, she seemed more icteric and had started vomit-
ing. Treatment and monitoring continued as before, and an antiemetic
was added to her intravenous fluid therapy.
  q  r r    
with her PCV dropping to 13%. She was given a second unit of packed
red blood cells, and all other therapies were continued. During cage
rounds in the afternoon, another clinician asked the ICU doctor about
the results of Spacey's abdominal radiographs. The ICU doctor stated
that he had not done abdominal radiographs, only ultrasound, and all
 looked normal. The clinician then stressed that abdominal radiographs
should have been done, to rule out zinc toxicity from ingested US
pennies as a cause of the intravascular hemolysis. Radiographs were
taken right away, and four coins were noted within the stomach. The
S e aq on pnoy am pu doosp 1a paan am s
pennies. After a few more days of hospitalization, Spacey started to
respond to therapy and was discharged normal.
Pennies from Heaven73
KeyPoints
Abdominal radiographs should ALWAYS be performed on patients pre-
  sd s  si   ss
1983 contain zinc, which causes intravascular hemolysis. The pernies should
be removed immediately; although many patients do well, some do succumb
to zinc toxicity, depending on the severity of signs.
24
Seeing Red!
All ocular abnormalities should be examined
promptly and completely, as irreversible disease
may be present
Dolly, a 7-year-old spayed female Shiba Inu, was presented to her
 n  d    a an 
history of pawing at her right eye, with associated blepharospasm.
There was no known history of ocular trauma nor other significant
medical problems. Physical examination revealed blepharospasm,
photophobia, and scleral erythema in the right eye. Light-responsive
mydriasis was also noted in the right eye. Dolly was diagnosed with
conjunctivitis and was discharged home with neomycin/polymixin B/
dexamethasone ointment (l inch of ointment in the right eye three
times a day) as an antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory therapy.
After getting home, Dolly appeared no better, and perhaps worse,
        s a o
same evening for persistent right-eye blepharospasm as well as a new-
onset lethargy, and anorexia. Physical examination revealed persistent
right-eye blepharospasm and photophobia. Furthermore, episcleral
injection was noted. Dolly's right-eye mydriasis was still present but
was no longer responsive to light stimulation; a dazzle response was
not present. Schirmer tear and fluorescein dye testing were within
normal limits for both eyes. Intraocular pressure measured with
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
74
Seeing Red!  75
tonometry was within normal limits in her left eye, but measured
62 mm Hg in her right eye; fundus examination of the right eye revealed
mild optic disc cupping. Systemic blood pressure was 140mmHg
systolic measured via Doppler auditory ultrasound.
Dolly was diagnosed with right-eye acute glaucoma resulting in a
blind eye. She was treated with topical latanoprost (1 drop in the right
eye every 24 hours) and dorzolamide hydrochloride-timolol maleate (1
drop in the right eye every 8 hours). She was evaluated by an attending
with goniodysgenesis in both eyes. The right eye was blind although
the intraocular pressure was reduced to 28mmHg. Surgical therapy
(cyclophotocoagulation, gonioimplantation) and salvage procedures
(enucleation, evisceration with intrascleral prosthesis, intravitreal gen
tamicin injection) were discussed, and the owners ultimately elected
right-eye enucleation without intraorbital prosthesis. The lethargy and
anorexia were attributed to severe ocular pain.
Key Points
Every animal with a red eye should receive a complete ophthalmic examina
tion, as it is essential to differentiate between conjunctival hyperemia and
tion of the episcleral vasculature is indicative of intraocular disease (i.e.,
anterior uveitis, glaucoma). The treatment and prognosis of conjunctivitis
and glaucoma are quite different.
Conjunctivitis results in a diffuse reddening with vessels involved being
small diameter; these vessels may be seen to move if the conjunctiva is
moved. In contrast, episcleral vessels are straighter, overlie the globe, and
the conjunctiva may be moved over them. Evaluation of tear production in
any dog presenting with conjunctival hyperemia is recommended unless
there is an obvious excessive tear production. Furthermore, an eye with
conjunctival hyperemia and evidence of irritation or discomfort should be
stained with fluorescein to check the integrity of the corneal epithelium.
 Dolly's initial examination led the primary care veterinarian to diagnosis
conjunctivitis. However,  complete diagnostic investigation (including
Schirmer tear testing, fluorescein dye testing, and intraocular pressure
invaluable results, empowering the veterinarian with information to make
an accurate diagnosis of acute glaucoma. Early intervention might have
prevented Dolly's blindness.
(Continued)
76  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points  (Continued)
●Canine goniodysgenesis is a bilateral disease, but it usually affects one eye
before the other. Weeks, months, or occasionally years may lapse between
time of onset in the first eye and the second eye becoming affected
Goniodysgenesis is characterized by unpredictable, acute, and often dra-
matic rises in intraocular pressure.
● A complete ophthalmic examination (including fundus examination and
slit-lamp biomicroscopy) and appropriate diagnostic testing (Schirmer tear
testing, fluorescein dye testing, and intraocular pressure measurement)
should be performed in any patient presented with an ophthalmic
complaint.
●Veterinarians are occasionally uncomfortable with diagnosis and treatment
of ocular disease. In these cases, either a concerted effort on the part of the
titioner or a specialist is advised.
25
Sepsis the Next Day?
An illustration of the importance of analyzing
effusions yourself if the results will not be reported
the same day, and to ALWAYS look under the
tongue of a vomiting cat!
p aa  ansn ma r is on paxa Aa sm a
critical care. She was at a busy university, and she loved the experience
of seeing a ton of cases, as she learned much better by "doing" instead
  sm aus e 's a ig ia sm s ,a, Jo
be the only doctor in the whole hospital. Although it was a little daunt-
ing, she was up for the challenge.
Her shift started with five cases waiting: a vomiting cat; two dogs
that had fought over a toy, each with minor bite wounds; a dog with
diarrhea; and a hotspot on a Golden Retriever. With the help of her
very efficient technicians, she ran through all of the cases with ease.
She sent the dogs with the bite wounds home on antibiotics after clean-
ing and flushing the wounds; the dog with diarrhea had some
Clostridium organisms on a rectal smear and was sent home with met-
ronidazole; the dog with the hotspot was clipped and cleaned and
discharged with antihistamines; and she ordered abdominal radio-
graphs on the vomiting cat, named Lilly.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
77
78 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Lilly was a 4-year-old, spayed female calico. She always stayed
indoors, was fully vaccinated, was negative for feline leukemia and
feline immunodefficiency virus, and was the owner's only pet. Janet
asked the owner if Lilly ever ate inappropriate things, and the owner
reported that she did not, although she did like to play with the yarn
when the owner was knitting. The owner was very concerned, as Lilly
had vomited three times today, all that she had eaten, and seemed just
not herself.
On a quick physical examination (there were many cases, and Janet
was trying to be efficient), Lilly seemed a little dehydrated, and she did
tense up when she palpated her abdomen. She was a VERY obese cat,
weighing 13kg, so it was difficult to palpate her intra-abdominal struc-
tures well. Her body temperature was a little low at 99°F. Her heart
and lungs were normal, and she was bright and friendly.
The radiographs of Lilly's abdomen didn't look right, but Janet
a  ao  as  o sm p to  y 1 i
abdominal detail was decreased and, knowing how fat Lilly was, she
should have been able to see the intra-abdominal organs easily (Figure
25.1a,b). She went to talk to Lilly's owner, and it was decided that Janet
would do an abdominocentesis, submit it to the lab, give Lilly some
subcutaneous fluids and an injection of metoclopramide, and send her
home pending the outcome of the fluid analysis. Lilly's owner was very
happy with this plan, as she really didn't want to hospitalize her.
The morning transfers were abundant, and a very critical emergency
 q  a re  e ss   e '
car. Janet briefly went over her discharged patients from the evening
before with her serior clinician, then went home to nap, ready to arrive
that evering for her next overright shift.
Janet arrived about 15 minutes before her shift, allowing time to
review the tests that she had submitted on her outpatients from the
previous evening. She read over Lilly's abdominal fluid analysis, and
started to feel a bit queasy Lilly had septic abdominal effusion! There
were many degenerate neu trophils, and rod bacteria, noted both within
the neutrophils and (a few) free in the fluid. Janet rushed to the phone
to call Lilly's owner. The owner reported that, although Lilly remained
              
during the day. Janet explained the situation and asked that she bring
Lilly in right away On subsequent examination, yarn was found
wrapped around the base of Lilly's tongue, and at surgery she had a
 an g  r an  nm   a 
and a resection and anastamosis was performed on the perforated
Sepsis the Next Day?  79
(a)
R
C2048
(b)
Figure 25.1 A lateral [a] and ventral-dorsal [b] abdominal radiograph of a cat
with a seplic abdomen secondary to a perforaled inteslinal tract due to a linear
foreign body.
80  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
  s t   n s    s
The owner was educated about keeping the yarn away from Lilly, and
a weight loss plan was prescribed.
Key Points
● Emergency patient care can be hectic on very busy shifts. However, each
patient should be addressed fully, as things can be easily overlooked. ALL
cats that present with vomiting should have the base of the tongue inspected
for a string foreign body. The string often gets caught under the tongue,
●If submitted body fhuids cannot be analyzed immediately by a lab, it is
important to make your own slide and look at it yourself, in case of septic
effusions. One may not be comfortable diagnosing neoplastic cells on cytol-
ogy, but those cases can wait for a definitive cytologic analysis. Cases that
may become critical without intervention, such as septic effusions, can be
easily ruled out on a quick cytology. In addition, other tests can be per-
formed on the fluid, such as a glucose level, as a negative difference greater
than or equal to 20mg/dL (1.1 mmol/L) glucose in the abdominal effusion
as compared with serum glucose is highly sensitive for the presence of a
septic effusion.1
●  In a busy emergency practice, it is helpful to ask fellow clinicians on the
day shift to review submitted tests and radiograph interpretations on out-
patients from the night before. If there are critical results that may need to
be addressed sooner than later, the day-shift clinician can then follow up
with the owners themselves.
Reference
1. Bonczynski J, Ludwig LL, Barton LJ, et al. Comparison of peritoneal fluid
and peripheral blood pH, bicarbonate, glucose, and lactate concenfration
as a diagnostic tool for septic peritonitis in dogs and cats. Vet Surg
2004;32(2):161-166.
26
Anxious to Breathe
Care must be taken when performing diagnostics
on brachycephalic, apprehensive dogs
Seamus, a 4-year-old Bulldog, was seen for a right hindlimb lameness.
Seamus had previously been treated for pyoderma of the skin folds
and also severe separation anxiety. On examination, Seamus was obese
(body condition score 8/9) and had loud respiratory sounds. While not
an active dog, Seamus' owner was still concerned about the lameness
and wanted Seamus to be fully evaluated. He expressed concern about
putting Seamus in a cage for the day, as he did not like cages and was
often prone to overexcitement and difficulty breathing. He asked if it
could be performed as an outpatient, or if he could go to radiology
with Seamus. The veterinarian told him no, and assured him that
Seamus would be fine and that dogs are day patients all the time. So,
with trepidation, Seamus's owner agreed to leave him.
Seamus was admitted for the day and placed in a cage until he could
be sedated for films. It was a busy clinic day, and the technicians were
frustrated as two colleagues had called out sick, and there was a lot of
work to do. Seamus was barking and panting endlessly; most members
of the veterinary team did not see the appeal of the bulldog. Finally.
after barking and whining for about 2 hours, Seamus was quiet! About
1 hour later, one of the technicians came to get Seamus for his radio-
graphs and found him nearly agonal. He was rushed to the intensive
care unit, where he was found to be severely hyperthermic (at 108°F;
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
81
82  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
42.2°C) and cyanotic. An intravenous catheter was placed, and he was
bolused fluids to cool him and was emergently intubated. Intubation
was exceedingly difficult due to severe airway swelling and edema.
Following aggressive supportive measures including a soft palate
resection and 4 days in the hospital, Seamus recovered enough to go
home. The cause of his lameness was not determined, although his
owner was no longer interested in pursuing evaluation.
Key Points
 r ns    d  s
promise. While some dogs, like beagles, might be able to bark for hours
without problems, brachycephalics, such as Pugs and Bulldogs, are particu-
larly prone to overheating and airway obstruction.
 While many owners are nervous about hospitalization and sedation, in
some dogs these concerns should be taken seriously. Dogs that are exces-
and any potential threat to the airway should be taken seriously.
27
The Lost Acorn
A complicated case gets more perplexing!
A 9-month-old Boxer puppy was presented to the emergency service
as a referral from a local affliated emergency clinic. The puppy had
been playing with acorns and then suddenly started choking. A tho
racic radiograph showed a foreign body in the trachea. The emergency
clinic referred the puppy promptly at 1l PM. on a Sunday night for
endoscopic retrieval of the acorn, as they did not have the appropriate
equipment or personnel available until the following morning.
 On arrival at the emergency service, the puppy was bright and alert.
Loud upper airway sounds were present, with an occasional paroxysm
of coughing occurring. The admitting clinician evaluated the puppy
and determined him to be stable. The emergency clinician in consulta
tion with an internist at home then decided that because the anesthesia
and surgical team was already in-house for a myelogram and hemil-
aminectomy on a dachshund, and that team had already had a full
day, that the bronchoscopic retrieval could be performed first thing in
the morning. The owner, who had been advised to proceed directly
to the referral hospital, was frustrated, but agreed to that plan of
action. The puppy did well overright, although continuing to cough
periodically.
 The following morning, the puppy was anesthetized and a broncho-
scopic examination was performed through a cuffed &-mm-inner-
diameter endotracheal tube. Surprisingly, no acorn was found in the
airways. The endoscopist elected to look in the puppy's stomach,
where an acorn was found and removed. The puppy had a rocky
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
83
84 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
recovery, with evidence of aspiration pneumonia. After 4 days in the
hospital, the puppy was discharged on antibiotics with a moderate
cough, but afebrile and with a good appetite.
 Two days after discharge, the puppy again developed acute respira-
tory distress and was taken directly to a different referral hospital.
There, the puppy underwent an emergency tracheostomy and retrieval
of the acorn tracheal foreign body. The puppy made an uneventful
recovery, but the clients, in conjunction with their lawyer, drafted a
letter to the State Veterinary Board, as well as a request to have a full
refund from the first visit.
Key Points
● This case was challenging both because of communication errors between
the first admitting emergency room clinician and the emergency room clini-
cian receiving the transfer and because of the medical judgment used in this
case. In the first challenge, the communication between the two veterinar
ians was inadequate. It is very frustrating for clients when they are told that
are not met. The transferring clinician should strive to prepare the client for
what will happen at the receiving facility, and the receiving facility should
make every effort to perform that task. This is often best accomplished by
direct veterinarian-to-veterinarian communication (e.g., a phone call). This
client was referred as an "emergency" and then was told that the recom-
mended procedure would not occur until the following day. It is almost
immaterial whether or not a tracheal foreign body is an emergency, but
rather that there was marked discordance between the clinicians and the
plan for the patient.
● The second challenge in this case was a misjudgment on the part of the
clinician that the acorn was truly aspirated, then coughed up and swal-
lowed, and then retrieved, rather than the one in the stomach being a second
bated with a cuffed endotracheal tube. In order for the acorn to have left
the respiratory system, it would have had to move up the endotracheal tube
and then the puppy would have had to swallow it while still anesthetized.
The scenario seemed preposterous, but given the apparent lack of the acorn
in the airways, it was believed at that time. More suitable options at that
   o s e     p
changing the position of the puppy, or repeating thoracic radiographs to
evaluate the respiratory tract.
28
The Lost Puppies
How the inexperience of a junior veterinarian
caused the demise of two puppies
A 3-year-old intact female Bernese Mountain dog named Geneva is
presented to the emergency hospital by her owner Mrs. Bern with
dystocia at 2 A.M. Her temperature had dropped to 97.5°F (36.4°C) 28
hours ago, and despite intermittent signs of uterine contractions, no
puppies were delivered. It was her first litter. She had finished her
American Kennel Club championship 4 months previously and is also
  n   a        s
There were eight puppies present on abdominal radiographs per-
formed at 5l days of gestation.
On physical examination, the vital signs are normal, with a maternal
heart rate of 80 beats per minute. The cervix is open, but a puppy is
 not palpated. Ultrasound examination documents multiple live puppies
with heart rates (as measured by M-mode) of 140-160 beats per minute.
The emergency clinician recommends evaluating in-house blood work,
with a particular emphasis on calcium and glucose and, if normal,
administering oxytocin due to possible uterine inertia. Mrs. Bern
agrees, but mentions again how valuable ($2500 each) the puppies are
and how important each puppy is to her. She inquires about a C-section.
The emergency clinician advises against a C-section without
first trying medical management. Reluctantly, Mrs. Bern agrees. The
laboratory tests are normal and 5 units of oxytocin are administered
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
85
intramuscularly. Repeat vaginal examination in 10 minutes documents
that a puppy is approaching the cervix, in a breech position. The puppy
cannot be manually delivered. The bitch and Mrs. Bern are instructed
point, with the ongoing absence of either puppies or signs of uterine
contractions, the oxytocin is repeated and Geneva, with Mrs. Bern, is
returned to labor in a quiet examination room. Fifteen minutes later
(3:30 A.M.), there is still no puppy, but the puppy has descended a bit
further in the birth canal. The oxytocin is repeated, and 60 minutes
later, a puppy finally appears. The puppy, despite the efforts of the
emergency clinician, cannot be revived and is pronounced dead. Mrs.
Bern again asks about a C-section for the remaining seven puppies, the
emergency clirician refuses, saying that "Now this first one is out, the
rest should come quickly" Over the next 90 minutes, with multiple
doses of oxytocin, a second puppy is delivered. This puppy is dead as
well. Mrs. Bern is very upset and calls her primary care veterinarian,
who agrees to meet her at her clinic. Mrs. Bern and Geneva travel to
the other veterinary practice, where a C-section is performed within 15
minutes of arrival, with six healthy surviving puppies. Mrs. Bern drafts
a complaint letter to the shareholders of the emergency hospital,
demanding her money back for the care during the dystocia, as well
as $5oo0 for the cost of the lost puppies.
Key Points
●This case was challenging because the client and the clinician were not com-
municating well With valuable breeding animals, a C-section should always
be offered and performed at first signs of dystocia, or even scheduled in
breeds or dogs at risk. The clinician failed to appreciate the importance of
the puppies and failed to hear, or register, the recurrent pleas on the part
   a    d on n  g
that a C-section is a failure and that it should only be performed after
medical efforts are exhausted, rather than as a very viable option.
Veterinarians additionally are often guilty of thinking the client does not
want to spend the money to perform a C-section, so they will persist in
have been avoided by the clinician listening to the client's wishes, as well
as recognizing the likelihood that these puppies were particularly valuable.
Certainly, in some cases medical management is valuable for dystocia, but
not in all.
The Lost Puppies87
Key Points (Continued)
    ia  si p si 
dystocia.
●  Purebred puppies are often very large emotional and financial investments
and should be treated as such by the attending veterinarian.
 Communication as to the risks and benefits of a specific procedure are
mandatory.
29
Don't Be Too Cavalier
A full abdominal exploratory should
always be performed during an abdominal
surgical procedure
A 3-year-old, recently spayed female Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
named Guinevere presented to the emergency service with a recent
history of vomiting, lethargy, pale mucous membranes, and a single
episode of collapse. The week before presentation, the patient was
treated for lethargy and elevated white blood cells at the primary care
veterinarian. At that time, the patient was also approximately 20 days
from parturition. With the concern for an infected uterus, the primary
care veterinarian took abdominal radiographs, then performed an
ovariohysterectomy. Postoperative treatment consisted of intravenous
fluids and antibiotics. Initially, improvement was seen; however, over
the next few days the patient began vomiting. metoclopramide was
then added to the treatment regimen. Despite therapeutics, the vomit-
ing persisted, and Guinevere became progressively lethargic and pale.
 It was at this time that the patient was referred for emergency care.
 On presentation, Guinevere was noted to be depressed, but respon-
sive. She was able to stand for short periods, but preferred to lay in
sternal recumbency. She had a body condition score of 3/9, tacky and
pale mucous membranes with a capillary refill time of 2 seconds, and
a normal systolic blood pressure of 120mmHg. On abdominal palpa-
tion, a firm, tubular structure could be felt in the midventral abdomen.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
88
Don't Be Too Cavalier 89
The patient appeared painful when palpating in this area; however,
her abdominal surgery had been only 48 hours earlier. Guinevere was
also anemic, with a packed cell volume of 18%. Total solids were
normal at 7.4g/dL (74gm/L). Venous blood gas and electrolyte analy-
sis revealed a hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis. She had a leukocy-
tosis, with no left shift. Serum biochemistry revealed significant
hypokalemia and mild hyperglycemia. Abnormally large, gas-dis-
tended small intestine was seen on abdominal radiographs, consistent
with an intestinal obstruction. The patient was stabilized with intrave-
nous fhuids, a blood transfusion, and antibiotics prior to surgery.
Surgical exploration revealed a duodenal linear foreign body with
secondary intestinal perforation and septic peritonitis. The foreign
body was removed, along with resection and anastamosis of the section
of perforated intestine. Supportive care was continued, and 4 days after
surgery the patient was discharged home.
Key Points
● It is very easy to become fixated on a single potential cause for the problems
  o         
variety of differential diagnoses for any given problem, with a resultant
diagnostic plan to rule in or out possible causes.
Whenever the abdomen is approached for a nonelective procedure, a thor-
ough abdominal exploratory must be performed, regardless of a possible
inciting cause being identified. If no cause is identified, several biopsies
should be obtained and submitted for histopathology. With this case specifi-
cally, there was no history of known foreign body ingestion or of gastroin-
testinal signs prior to the original surgery. In addition, because the patient
was pregnant, initial radiographic interpretation may have been hampered
and palpation of an intestinal foreign body would have been more difficult.
However, when surgically exploring the abdomen, all intra-abdominal
structures should be assessed.
30
Too Much Sugar
All causes, puimonary and extrapuimonary, should
be investigated in patients with respiratory distress
It was a busy night in the emergency room. Cases were coming in at a
high rate, and a technician had called out sick. Lincoln, a 9-year-old
neutered male domestic shorthair, arrived with a complaint of diffi-
culty breathing. He had been hiding for a few days, and then today
was clearly breathing with a bit more effort. Lincoln's past medical
history was unremarkable. Although he was an overweight cat, in
recent weeks he had managed to lose about 1 pound. There were seven
other cats in the household, so it was difficult to say anything more
about appetite or eliminations. Lincoln's brother (Truman) had died of
congestive heart failure, so the Washingtons were worried that this is
what Lincoln had as well. Dr. Drew took a cursory look at Lincoln and
found that he was breathing hard. She felt he was likely in congestive
heart failure, so she admitted him to the hospital, gave him a 2mg/kg
dose of furosemide intravenously and some supplemental oxygen. She
had planned to take some thoracic radiographs, but the right got away
from her!
 In the morning, Lincoln was still markedly tachypneic, and the
day-shift doctor, Dr. Carter, took a closer look. On physical examina-
tion, he could not hear a murmur or galop, and Lincoln's pulses
were strong and regular. A rectal temperature was normal at 101°F
(38.3°C). Dr. Carter took Lincoln to radiology himself and performed
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
930
Too Much Sugar91
thoracic radiography Surprisingly, the radiographs were normal, with
 no evidence of congestive heart failure or any other pulmonary disease
that would explain the signs of tachypnea. Dr. Carter decided to check
some blood and urine tests on Lincoln and found that his pH was 7.012
(reference range 7.36-7.44), his bicarbonate (HCO) was very low at
8mEq/L (reference range 20-24mEq/L), and his blood glucose was
out of range, high (>500mg/dL; 28mmol/L). Ketones were 4+ in the
urine.
Lincoln was identified with severe metabolic acidosis due to diabetic
ketoacidosis. The tachypnea was a compensatory response to the meta-
bolic acidosis (Kussmaul breathing), not a reflection of pulmonary
disease. The Washingtons were happy to hear that Lincoln had a treat-
able disease, but they did question how it was missed the night before!
Key Points
●Cats with respiratory distress are challenging, but each animal deserves a
careful evaluation especially if the pieces are not fitting together well.
●In this case, Dr. Drew leapt to the conclusion that Lincoln was in congestive
heart failure. This is not a bad assumption, but either Lincoln should have
responded to the furosemide and oxygen or further steps should have been
taken to better evaluate him.
●The conversation with the Washingtons could be challenging. Honest dis-
cussion of why things were missed and attempts at resolution of the mistake
 can go a long way toward satisfied clients, and veterinarians.
31
Tyler
Dehiscence of enterotomy sites should always be
considered as a cause of illness in the 3-5 days
following the operative procedure
Tyler, a 9-year-old Basset Hound, was prone to eating foolish things at
times. He had had a prior foreign body surgery when he was 3 and
again when he was 6, and last year he had two foreign bodies endo.
scopically removed from his stomach. His owner was very careful to
watch him, but with five other dogs and a new baby in the house, it
was impossible to be sure. Tyler presented with severe vomiting. and
radiographs showed a convincing linear foreign body.
Tyler was taken to surgery, where six enterotomies were performed.
This was the first time that Dr. Freehold had done this type of surgery
by herself. She was very pleased when the surgery was complete, and
she was hopeful that Tyler would recover uneventfully. He was treated
with intravenous fluids and perioperative cefazolin, as the surgery had
taken about 6 hours. The following morning, Tyler was doing well. He
was wagging his tail and looking for something to eat!
 Dr. Freehold elected to wait until that evening to feed him as she
wanted to be sure that everything was healing okay. Later that after-
noon, Dr. Freehold was called to the intensive care unit to look at Tyler.
He was quieter, and the technicians in the intensive care urit were
concerned that he was painful. Tyler was given a dose of buprenor-
phine, yet he didn't seem improved. Dr. Freehold called Dr. Shortz and
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
92
Tyler93
asked what he thought. Dr. Shortz, an excellent surgeon though some-
times a bit impatient, recommended starting intravenous enrofloxacin
and to give an injection of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. Dr.
 Freehold reluctantly agreed and adjusted the orders appropriately.
Tyler did look better after a few hours. She was still concerned, but Dr.
Shortz is very good and has been at this for a long time. As the night
 progressed, Tyler looked weaker, and Dr. Angus, the overnight doctor,
decided to tap his abdomen after a full evaluation. Abdominocentesis
documented intracellular and extracellular bacteria and had a below-
     5     
 room, where all six sites were leaking and there was a severe peritoni-
tis. After a lengthy hospital stay, including development of a multi-
drug-resistant infection, Tyler recovered and was discharged home.
Key Points
● Any animal with clinical decompensation 24-72 hours after an enterotomy
Or resection and anastamosis should be considered to have dehisced until
proven otherwise.
● Adding antibiotics is not a good plan unless you know what you are
treating.
●Pain medication is vital to good patient outcome, but it should not be used
to mask signs of brewing sepsis or cardiovascular instability.
32
Whiskers
Immunosuppression from administered
medications can result in the development
of secondary infections
A 5.9-kg, 4-year-old male neutered domestic longhair cat, Whiskers,
presented to his primary care veterinarian for pulling out fur in the
right lateral thigh area. He was an indoor cat, negative for feline leuke-
mia and feline immunodeficiency virus, and up to date on his vaccines.
He had no significant medical history. There was no evidence of ery.
thema or excoriations on his right thigh. Skin cytology and a skin
scrape were both negative. Even though the skin scrape was negative,
a treatment of selamectin (6mg/kg) topically every other week for
dose of prednisone were started as well.
At the l-month recheck exam, Whiskers was still pulling his fur
out, except now it involved both the right and left lateral thighs and
inguinal area. A fungal culture was negative. A novel protein food trial
was started, along with cyclosporine 25mg (4mg/kg) once a day for
30 days.
Another recheck exam 1 month later revealed fur regrowth on the
right and left lateral thighs and inguinal area. The fur pulling had
stopped. The dose of cyclosporine was decreased to 25mg (4mg/kg)
every other day. The owner felt Whiskers was doing very well on the
medication and was pleased with the results.
One month later Whiskers presented for lethargy and anorexia. The
owner reported Whiskers had not been acting like himself for the past
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
94
Whiskers95
couple of weeks. He was not as playful and was not not eating well.
His weight had decreased to 4.7kg. His physical examination was
otherwise within normal limits.
The complete blood cell count and chemistry profile were normal
except for a slightly low white blood cell count at3100/μL. Cyclosporine
toxicity was suspected and the cyclosporine level was found to be
2847ng/mL (therapeutic range 400-600ng/mL). At the time of
the blood collection Whiskers was on every-other-day dosing. A
cyclosporine level had not been previously evaluated.
Whiskers was hospitalized for several days for intravenous fluids,
antibiotics, antinausea medication, and nutritional support. A recheck
complete blood cell count documented an increased white blood cell
count (7920/μL) although clinically Whiskers remained lethargic and
had developed progressive tachypnea. A pulse oximetry reading on
room air was 89%. Thoracic radiographs revealed severe generalized
interstitial pneumonia. A lung aspirate was performed and organisms
resembling Toxoplasma gondii were seen on the cytology sample.
Additional treatments at this time included oxygen therapy and
intravenous and oral clindamycin (16mg/kg) twice a day. Whiskers
seemed to initially stabilize within the first 24 hours of treatment. His
respiration rate had decreased to 56 breaths per minute and he started
eating on his own. Unfortunately, midafternoon on the fourth day of
Whiskers' hospitalization, he cried out, collapsed, and went into cardiac
arrest from which he could not be revived.
Key Points
● Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressive drug that inhibits T-lymphocyte
function. High levels of cyclosporine could put patients at risk for develop-
ing opportunistic bacterial, fungal, or protozoal infections.
● If therapeutic monitoring had been done, the elevated cyclosporine levels
would have been found and the medication dose either decreased or
discontinued.
● Consideration could have been given to evaluation of toxoplasmosis titers
 Whiskers' owners were very saddened to lose him; additionally, they were
upset that they had not known that opporturistic infection is a possible side
effect of cyclosporine. While they were happy that his fur had come back,
that did not compare to losing him to pulmonary failure.
33
Would You Like Some Salt?
The importance of monitoring fluid therapy
Annie, an 1l-year-old female intact Italian Spinone, was presented to
polyuria. Physical examination revealed purulent vaginal discharge
and pale mucous membranes. A lateral abdominal radiograph was
consistent with pyometra. Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable.
Preanesthesia complete blood cell count and blood chemistry profile
revealed a neutrophilic leukocytosis, mild anemia (34%), and hypoalbu-
minemia. Electrolytes at the time of presentation were normal [sodium
154mmol/L (reference range 144-160mmol/ L), potassium 4.4mmol/L
(reference range 3.5-5.8mmol/L), chloride 118mmol/L (reference
range 109-122mmol/L)]. Annie was admitted to the hospital for
surgery. Surgery and anesthesia were uneventful.
 Postoperatively, Annie was markedly anemic at 12% and required a
transfusion of packed red blood cells. This was attributed to blood loss
and chronic disease. Hetastarch 6% at 13.3mL/kg/day and lactated
Ringer's solution (LRS) at 80mL/kg/day were used postoperatively
for fluid support. Drinking was noted as early as 12 hours after surgery
and drinking well was noted during the afternoon of the following day.
after which, there were no further notations about drinking. Frequent
large amounts of urine in the cage were noted during the following 36
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
96
Would You Like Some Sall?97
hours after surgery (++++ at 15 hours, +++ at 23 hours, ++ at 29 hours,
+++ at 34 hours). The dog was not weighed at any point during her
hospitalization, other than her admission weight.
Thirty hours postoperatively, Arnie was mentally dull and laterally
recumbent. An electrolyte panel revealed serum sodium out of range
(greater than 205mmol/L). Hetastarch was continued at the same rate.
Crystalloid fluids were changed from LRS to 0.45% NaCl, but the infu-
sion rate remained the same. Seven hours later, Annie had two grand
mal seizures that responded to intravenous diazepam. The sodium
remained above measurable limits. Hetastarch was increased to
18.7mL/kg/day; one liter of LRS was administered as a bolus. After
the bolus was completed, the 0.45% NaCl was restarted at 160mL/kg/
day. The attending clinician believed the dog may have intracranial
neoplasia causing diabetes insipidus, despite suggestions during cag-
eside rounds that the rise in sodium was secondary to excessive urina-
fion. Desmopressin acetate was administered for the possibility of
centrally mediated diabetes insipidus. After another 7 hours, the
sodium was 195mmol/L. Two liters of 0.45% NaCl were administered
as a bolus; 0.45% NaCl was then restarted at 250mL/kg/day. A urinary
catheter was placed at that time and urine output averaged 30l mL/hr
for 10 hours. The fluid input was 789mL/hr The sodium had fallen to
168mmol/L (2.7mmol/L/hr decline). The hetastarch and 0.45% NaCl
were continued at the same rates for the next 8 hours. The urine output
  sa      a
to boluses to restore hydration) with the sodium rising to 17l mmol/L.
Over the next 14 hours, the urine output then averaged 410mL /hr and
fluid inputs were only 235mL/hr. Annie had received a 200-mL bolus
of hetastarch and the hetastarch rate had been increased to 24mL/kg/
day, during this 14-hour period; the crystalloids were alternated
between Normosol-R and 0.45% NaCl for each new liter. Furosemide
was administered at 2.2mg/kg for diuresis, and desmopressin acetate
in response to a metabolic acidosis (pH 7.238) with respiratory alkalosis
appropriate for compensatory response; the dose administered was
approximately one-fifth of her calculated bicarbonate deficit. A dose of
dexamethasone sodium phosphate was administered under the belief
that there was an intracranial malignancy that may have some local-
ized edema.
Annie experienced seven grand mal seizures over the next 12 hours.
 The attending clinician recommended euthanasia based upon a grave
prognosis due to severity of seizures and probable intracranial neopla-
sia. Postmortem examination did not identify a brain tumor.
98  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points
● Fluid requirements in sick animals are often different from normal mainte
nance needs. Sometimes, this difference is quite dramatic if there are physi-
ologic factors inducing diuresis or excessive fluid losses. Polyuria in
sick animals can stem from an osmotic diuresis (postobstructive diuresis)
diabetes mellitus, ethylene glycol poisoning), central diabetes insipidus
(idiopathic, traumatic, congenital, hypothalamic neoplasia), nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus (endotoxin, adrenocortical disease, hypercalcemia
hypokalemia, diuretic medications), pressure diuresis (hypertension), or
medullary washout (chronic polyuria and polydipsia, hepatic failure,
hypoadrenocorticism). Excessive fluid losses from other routes are fre-
quently overlooked: abdominal and thoracic drains, exudative wounds
(especially burn wounds), and frequent vomiting or diarrhea. Even constant
panting from pain and discomfort or hyperthermia can lead to increases in
fluid requirements.
● In this case, Annie was likely experiencing significant fhuid losses from
endotoxin induction of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Endotoxin, most
commonly from Escherichia coli, interferes with the action of antidiuretic
hormone at the renal tubule, resulting in polyuria. The excess fluid loss was
not identified due to an inability to truly quantitate urine output without a
catheter, urinations that occurred but were not recorded, and failure to
recognize physical changes in the patient. Frequent weight measurement
would have noted weight loss and prevented the dramatic hypernatremia
that occurred, by permitting the clinician to intervene earlier.
 The hypernatremia resulted in seizure activity, which improved. The rapid
correction of the hypernatremia led to secondary cerebral edema and
damage to nervous tissue; the initial decline in the sodium was five times
the recommended rate of correction.
● There was another factor involved in Annie's decline. Her doctor was
focused on a central diabetes insipidus as the cause of the hypernatremia
despite no evidence of neurologic disease or electrolyte disturbance preop-
eratively and minimal response to desmopressin. When suggestions were
made in rounds that the hypernatremia could be from the underlying
disease process (pyometra) and inadequate fluid support, the attending
clinician did not listen. In the end, Annie was euthanized for a prognosis
related to a brain tumor she did not have. Although the severity of
the hypernatremia may have led to permanent neurologic injury, the
hypernatremia might have been avoided altogether if the fluid needs had
been monitored more closely at the beginning-
Would You Like Some Sall?99
Key Points  (Continued)
● Fluid losses from various sources in sick patients can be much higher than
expected, resulting in significantly higher needs for intravenous fluid
administration; this is particularly common in animals with an obligate
diuresis (e.g., prior polyuric-polydipsic disease such as Cushings, diabetes,
renal failure, or pyometra) or in pets on diuretics such as furosemide.
●Patients suspected of significant polyuria in the critical care setting should
be monitored for physical changes associated with fluid loss. Urinary cath-
eterization and central venous pressure monitoring should also be consid-
ered essential in any pet where the clinician has any doubts about the
clinical ability to assess the patient.
● Patient rounds are designed to allow for collaboration among colleagues,
which can bring in a new perspective. Listen, even when you are sure of a
diagnosis.
(o  s    s  
to prevent cerebral edema. Calculations on how to estimate the effect a fluid
will have on serum sodium can be found in most critical care texts.
34
Bambi?
Things to think about when coming into contact
with wild animals
The wildlife clinic associated with the veterinary hospital was a popular
s        d n  
at the veterinary hospital found the wildlife clinicians "unique" but
had recently agreed to try harder to facilitate the care of stray and
injured wildlife after hours.
One weekend day in May, when the wildlife clinic was closed, two
men in a pickup truck came to the veterinary hospital. They had found
a fawn, and it looked sick. They had seen a doe dead by the side of the
road, and they assumed this was her fawn. The emergency clinician
(Dr. Ramona) went to the truck to look at the fawn. It was easy to see
the newborn fawn, still covered with white spots, was ill. Dr. Ramona
carried the fawn into the back treatment area and began evaluating it.
     e     
but their names and contact information were not recorded.
The fawn was depressed and tachypneic. There was mucopurulent
discharge around the nostrils and a slight fever was present. Dr.
Ramona suspected that the fawn had pneumonia, perhaps similar to
that seen in calves. She placed a jugular catheter and started some
volume resuscitation and administered broad-spectrum antibiotics.
The wildlife clinic was contacted and agreed to send someone over to
pick up the fawn in the next few hours.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
100
Bambi? 101
Meanwhile, the fawn appeared stable. Two of the receptionists and
one volunteer came to visit the fawn; it was very interesting to see a
wild animal in the small animal hospital!
Three days later, the veterinary clinic received a phone call from the
wildlife clinic. The fawn had died and subsequently was found to be
positive for rabies. The two outdoorsmen were ultimately tracked
down by a newspaper article, and seven clinic personal had to undergo
postexposure prophylaxis.
Key Points
● All wild mammals should be considered potential rabies vectors, even small
and cute ones!
Appropriate precautions should be taken in handling animals with the
potential for rabies.
 Unvaccinated personnel should not be allowed to handle wildlife, particu-
larly mammals.
35
The Big C
The dangers of making a pathologic diagnosis
without obtaining a biopsy
Kitty, a well-loved 13-year-old domestic shorthair, was seen in the
emergency room for recurrent vomiting. She had always vomited once
every few weeks, but over the last 3-4 weeks she has been vomiting
every day. On physical examination, Kitty was bright, alert, and
responsive. She was 5%-7% dehydrated. Laboratory testing was within
normal limits with the exception of a mild elevation in the blood urea
nitrogen at 37mg/dL (13.2mmol/L; reference range 8-28mg/dL) and
a bilirubin at the upper limit of normal.
Dr. Azure talked with Kitty's owner about the next step. She advised
a chest radiograph to look for evidence of metastatic disease, and an
abdominal ultrasound to look for evidence of hepatobiliary disease
and /or neoplasia. Kitty's owner agreed; she had obtained her as a stray
right after college graduation, and while she knew she was older, she
wanted to try to help her if at all possible.
 The chest radiographs were assessed as normal, but the abdominal
ultrasound showed mildly enlarged lymph nodes and an irregular
pancreas, thought to be either chronic pancreatitis or, more likely.
pancreatic neoplasia. Dr. Azure relayed the probable poor prognosis
to Kitty's owner and advised a surgical exploration to confirm the
diagnosis. Margie agreed to proceed with surgery, but reiterated her
concerns about quality of life and that she did not want Kitty to suffer.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
102
The Big C103
Dr. Azure agreed and noted these concerns in the record. She was
delighted that Dr. Klein, who was a very experienced board-certified
surgeon, would be performing Kitty's surgery.
The following day, Kitty was anesthetized and surgical exploration
verified a very irregular and thickened pancreas. Dr. Klein called Dr.
Azure into the operating room and definitively stated "this is bad, it is
clearly a cancer." He recommended euthanasia, due to the grave prog-
nosis. Dr. Azure called Margie and gave her the grim news. She very
sadly agreed to euthanize Kitty on the table and thanked Dr. Azure for
her honesty and compassion.
The biopsy of Kitty's pancreas returned as "chronic active pancrea-
fitis, with no evidence of neoplasia.
Key Points
● Cancer is considered a histopathological diagnosis, not usually a visual one.
 Dr. Klein was an experienced surgeon and believed that it was cancer he
         s
and, without clear evidence of metastafic disease or a lesion that might
require advanced surgery, euthanasia based upon appearance of a lesion at
surgery is not advised.
● Much discussion in the hospital revolved around whether or not Kitty's
owner should be told the result of the biopsy. Ultimately, Dr. Azure elected
not to call her with the news, as while her belief was "honesty is the best
policy" it was not clear that this news would be helpful to her
36
To Stent or Not to Stent?
New technology isn't always the answer
Ginger Spice, an ll-year-old Pomeranian, was enjoying a winter in
Florida away from the hustle and bustle of New York City, when she
developed a severe cough. Ginger had coughed off and on for the last
 a a on m  a iq  s
with prednisolone) her veterinarian had prescribed in New York. This
cough seemed a little worse, and Ginger's owner had not established
a relationship with a veterinarian in Florida, so she and Ginger went
off to the local emergency clinic and specialty hospital.
Ginger was immediately triaged to the oxygen cage. Mrs. Spice was
surprised, because Ginger was breathing comfortably, but the emer-
gency room looked busy, and Mrs. Spice wanted the best for Ginger.
After 2 hours of waiting, Ginger was finally evaluated by the emer-
gency doctor. Ginger looked good to her, but the cough Mrs. Spice
described was impressive, so the emergency doctor recommended
admitting her to the hospital to have the internist take a look at her,
and to perform tracheoscopy. Mrs. Spice agreed and went home.
The following morning, Ginger was still in good spirits. An easily
inducible tracheal cough was present, but no other abnormalities were
detected. Chest radiographs showed intrathoracic tracheal collapse.
The internist (Dr. Z) looked at Ginger and called Mrs. Spice and recom-
mended that she have a tracheal stent placed. Dr. Z had just returned
from a conference describing the placement and was eager to start
placing stents in her practice. In fact, the stents had just arrived last
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
104
To Stent or Not to Stent? 105
Figure 36.1  A lateral thoracic radiograph showing the stent placed in the rachea
week. Dr. Z reviewed the possible complications of a tracheal stent, as
well as the benefits of the stent. While the stent itself was quite expen
sive ($10oo), the placement was relatively inexpensive, and Dr. Z felt
that Ginger was an excellent candidate. Mrs. Spice asked about the
Temeril-P that has worked so well in the past. Dr. Z described it as a
steroid that could have negative long-term effects such as diabetes or
Cushing's syndrome. Mrs. Spice was horrified by this; she had not
known the Temeril-P might be dangerous and agreed to have the stent
placed.
The tracheal stent was placed uneventfully and Dr. Z discharged
Ginger the following day Ginger did very well at home for the next
month, but upon her return to New York she started coughing end-
lessly. Repeat films showed no evidence of stent migration, although
the stent was relatively short (Figure 36.1). Bronchoscopy showed a
fine layer of mucus and debris around the stent, and a marked granu-
anti-inflammatories, and cough suppressants, but Ginger continued to
cough.
Key Points
● A tracheal stent may be life-saving for affected dogs but should be consid-
ered a palliative procedure, rather than a first line in a dog that may respond
to medical therapy. A relatively high percentage of dogs have long-term
complications with stent placement and the clients should be well advised
of the likelihood of long-term issues.
●As clinicians, it is often exciting to apply a new skill. However, any proce-
dure should be carefully explained to clients.
37
It Isn't Asthma?
Noting when it is important to look past the
suspected client situation and focus on the patient
A 14-year-old cat belonging to one of the practice techricians has been
nal medicine cases periodically. The cat (Arthur) was a previously
healthy domestic shorthair with a 3-month history of coughing and a
loss of purr. Dr. Diamond had evaluated Arthur and found increased
airway sounds. Chest radiographs were within normal limits for an
older cat (Figure 37.1), but Dr. Diamond assured Jen that this was often
the case in feline asthma. She asked if Arthur should have a tracheal
wash, or any other tests, but Dr. Diamond assured her this was not
necessary. He also knew that Jen did not have a lot of money and had
seven other cats and four dogs, all of whom, like Arthur had been
"rescued" at the clinic over the last 10 years.
Arthur was started on 5mg of prednisone orally twice a day, and
initially started to improve. About 1 week later, he was switched to
prednisolone due to concerns about conversion in the liver. However,
1 month later, his signs were just as bad as ever and he was re-presented
to the hospital for reexamination. There had been discussion about
trying inhaled steroids and Jen was eager to try this if it might help
Arthur. Dr. Diamond was not available, so Dr. Bleu examined Arthur.
Auscultation documented loud upper airway sounds. Dr. Bleu
advised an oral examination, to which Jen promptly agreed. Oral
examination showed a large infiltrative mass, likely a squamous cell
carcinoma. Jen elected to euthanize Arthur, due to quality-of-life issues.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
106
Il Isn't Asthma?107
（134944-1(ALL)>
R
Figure 37.1  Arthur's lateral thoracic radiograph showing the mild interslilial
changes.
She was very frustrated with Dr. Diamond and did not understand
why he had not identified earlier what the source of Arthur's problems
was. Their future interactions were strained, as she continued to blame
him for Arthur's misdiagnosis.
Key Points
Feline lower airway disease is not a condition of elderly cats. Older cats
 s ar s  ,    
cardiopulmonary disease. Dr. Diamond knew this, but was also concerned
about the cost of further diagnostics and therapy, since he knew that Jen
had little disposable income.
About 10% of cats do better with prednisolone than with prednisone, so it
not responding to prednisone.
● Inhaled steroids are very useful in feline asthma, but as oral steroid-sparing
d  e    aa no   s
This situation could have been avoided if Jen and Dr. Diamond had had a
 good discussion about the options for Arthur and if Dr. Diamond had been
less accepting of the diagnosis of feline asthma in an elderly cat.
An illustration of the importance of
goodhistory taking
Troy, a 2-year-old, male intact Standard Poodle, presented to Dr. West
for an acute onset of severe and protracted vomiting. He was not the
type of dog that ate foreign material, and he had seemed fine up until
about an hour ago. He was previously healthy, with no history of
medical or surgical problems. He had no travel history, was up to date
on vaccinations, and did not have access to any toxins.
Dr. West was a very seasoned emergency veterinarian. He had
worked at this same emergency clinic for the past 15 years and contin-
ued to love emergency work. He was very concerned about Troy for a
few reasons: he knew that Standard Poodles are a breed at risk for both
gastric dilatation-volvulus and hypoadrenocorticism. He immediately
did a full physical examination and found that Troy was cardiovascu-
larly stable, with a heart rate of 70 beats per minute and strong pulses,
normal mucous membrane color and capillary refill, and normal men-
tation. When Dr West palpated the abdomen, Troy vomited yellowish
fluid right away. He seemed very sensitive and painful in the cranial
abdomen, but his stomach did not seem visibly bloated.
Because of Dr. West's concerns, he ordered blood tests to check elec
trolytes, and abdominal radiographs because of the severe vomiting
and abdominal pain. The blood work was completely normal. However.
when evaluating the abdominal radiographs, Dr. West noticed two
metallic gastric foreign bodies (Figures 38.1 and 38.2). After discussing
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
108
Hoping History Doesn't Repeal109
R
Figure 38.1 Lateral abdominal radiograph showing metallic gastric foreign
bodies.
Figure 38.2  Ventral-dorsal abdominal radiograph of the gastric metallic foreign
bodies.
110 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
the case with the on-call surgeon and the owner, it was decided to
bodies. One concern was zinc or lead toxicity, since the foreign bodies
had a metal density.
 Troy was placed under general anesthesia and an exploratory
laparotomy was performed. A gastrotomy was done to remove the
metallic foreign bodies. However, the only objects visualized were two
pink tablets. These were removed, and the rest of the abdomen was
explored. No other abnormalities were noted.
Upon further questioning of the owner, it was found that she had
given two tablets of bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol?) about 30
 minutes before arriving at the emergency clinic, because of the severity
of the vomiting. These tablets have a metallic appearance on radio-
graphs, which prompted Dr. West and the surgeon to recommend an
emergency surgical procedure.
Key Points
A good history can often mean the difference in avoiding unnecessary
testing, and it helps guide the clinician for likely differential diagnoses.
●  In this case, an urnecessary abdominal surgery was performed in a dog
with simple gastroenteritis. This burdens the dog, as surgery is an invasive
are costly to the owner.
● Even seasoned veterinarians, with years of experience, need to remember
the basics of good history taking and physical examination. In addition,
when veterinarians assess a patient with likely differential diagnoses based
on breed and age disposition, other diagnoses are not as likely to be
considered.
PartThree
Lessons in Client Communication
39
Not All Albumins Are Equal
When transfusing nonautologous fluids,
bossible allergic reactions should always
be considered and discussed with the client
prior to administration
A 5-year-old, female spayed Rottweiler mix named Jada was presented
to an emergency doctor for acute vomiting and lethargy She had a
history of a lameness for which she had been given the nonsteroidal
s a d      
The lameness had resolved with the firocoxib, and she had no other
medical history.
 On admission, her body temperature was 103.2°F (39.5°C), heart rate
was 210 beats per minute, and she was panting. She had pale pink
mucous membranes and a prolonged, 3-second capillary refill time. No
murmur or arrhythmia was auscultated, but her peripheral pulse
quality was weak. She had significant pain on abdominal palpation.
Due to clinical suspicion of intra-abdominal sepsis due to the fever,
vomiting, and abdominal pain, an ultrasound examination was per-
formed. This documented free abdominal fluid, and cytological exami-
nation confirmed sepsis.
Screening laboratory testing documented low albumin (2.1g/dL
[21gm/L]; reference range 2.7-3.8g/dL [27-38gm/L]) and a degenera-
tive left shift. Surgical exploration was recommended and, after a
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
113
114  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
discussion of the costs and perceived benefits for surgery, consent was
given by the clients. At surgery, a 3-cm perforation was identified in
the pyloric outflow tract. Following repair, closed suction abdominal
drains were placed to help control abdominal effusion.
Jada was recovered in the intensive care unit and was treated aggres-
sively with crystalloid and synthetic colloid fluids, analgesics, broad-
that the serum albumin level dropped to 0.7g/dL (7gm/L), 24 hours
after surgery, which was considered clinically significant. Because of
her size (70kg), plasma transfusion to increase her albumin was con-
sidered imprudent. Jada was given 40mL of 25% human albumin intra-
)     
She started to voluntarily eat on the second postoperative day. Her
abdominal drains were removed after 3 days, and she was discharged
home after 5 days for ongoing supportive care.
 Seven days after Jada was discharged she re-presented for periorbital
swelling and was treated with an antihistamine. Nine days after
discharge she presented with urticaria, vomiting. diarrhea, ventral
hyperemia, and peripheral edema. Her serum albumin was 1.7g/dL
(17gm/L), which dropped to 0.8g/dL within 24 hours. In addition
to being treated with crystalloid and synthetic colloid fluids, she
was treated for an immune-mediated reaction using cyclosporine
a serum albumin of 2.8g/dL (28gm/L), and the cyclosporine was
discontinued.
Key Points
● Albumin plays a major role in maintaining colloid osmotic pressure as well
as the transport and pharmacokinetics of hormones and medications due to
protein binding. Hypoalbuminemia (<2.0g/dL; 20gm/L) is associated with
increased risk of complications following intestinal surgery and of death, in
people and animals. Causes of hypoalbuminemia can be reduced produc-
tion (hepatic insufficiency) and increased loss (glomerular disease, gastroin-
testinal disease, and increased capillary permeability). This prompts some
clinicians to treat with albumin-containing products when moderate to
severe hypoalbuminemia occurs.
Species-specific plasma transfusions contain canine albumin; however
Not All Albumins Are Equal 115
Key Points  (Continued)
22.5mL/kg of plasma would be needed to increase the plasma albumin by
0.5g/dL (5gm/L). It would be anticipated that at least 3000mL (-15 plasma
units) of plasma would be required to increase the albumin by l.0g/dl
(10gm/L) in a 70-kg dog. This is considered cost prohibitive and an inap-
propriate use of a scarce resource. As an alternative, concentrated (25%)
        
canine albumin molecules are not identical, and administration of human
albumin to dogs can result in severe, life-threatening type-ll hypersensitiv-
ity and immune-mediated reactions up to 2 weeks after administration
Therapy may require immunosuppression. In Jada's case, use of cortico-
steroids to treat a presumed immune reaction to human albumin was con-
sidered too risky given her recent history of a perforated gastric ulcer.
Cyclosporine was chosen as a safer, rapid-acting alternative.
Use of human albumin in dogs and cats should occur with the owner's
understanding of the risks and with the owner's consent.
When human albumin is administered, clinical signs of an immune
     r  
several weeks.
Signs of hypersensitivity and immune-mediated reactions related to albumin
treatment in the dog can include vomiting, diarrhea, urticaria, peripheral
edema, flushing of the skin, joint pain, and fever. Owners should be warned
 of the possible side effects, which can be life threatening.
 The use of human albumin should be recommended in select cases, and
only if the true benefits outweigh the possibility of developing a severe
immune-mediated syndrome.
Treatment of immune-mediated reactions associated with human albumin
infusion in dogs usually requires immunosuppressive therapy.
40
Believing the Client
Listen to the client! They know their pets the best!
Two 10-year-old cats were presented to an urgent-care veterinary hos-
pital with a complaint of possibly having eaten a toy with string
attached. The owner was requesting immediate endoscopy Further
historical questioning documented a missing toy with a piece of yarn,
but no discrete evidence that the cats had eaten the toy. However, as
the owner was adamant, the cats were referred to a referral center for
possible endoscopy.
 On arrival, the cats were stable. No further history could be obtained
from the client, other than a conviction that one of the cats had eaten
the toy. The house was large, and the toy had disappeared. A "house
hunt" had not found the toy. The cats had never before eaten any
foreign objects. The admitting intern attempted to send the cats home
for observation, at which point the owner became irate and demanded
to see "someone in charge."
Based upon the owner's conviction, abdominal radiographs were
performed on both cats. One cat's radiographs were completely normal,
while the second showed evidence of gastric contents, thought to be
food (Figure 40.la,b). The owner was insistent upon endoscopy for that
cat and, despite clinical suspicion of food, the cat was readied for
endoscopic evaluation. Due to the possibility of a full stomach, the cat
was premedicated with xylazine with the hope of inducing emesis to
make visualization of the stomach more straightforward
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
116
Believing the Client117
[a
(b)
Figure 40.1  A laleral [a] and ventral-dorsal (b] radiograph from αa cal suspecled
of having ealen foreign malerial.
118  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Approximately 3 minutes after administrating the medication, the
cat vomited approximately 12 feet of blue yarn with a small toy mouse.
The owner immediately identified the missing toy and was very
relieved. The cats were discharged home uneventfully.
Key Points
● Clients are often the best judge of their pets. In this specific case, despite a
lack of solid evidence of actual ingestion of the toy, the client was correct.
         s  
commurication. Had this specific client not been so forceful, the toy might
not have been detected until it was too late to manage nonoperatively.
●Certainly, clients are not correct in their diagnosis in every case, but treating
But I Thought He Would Be Fine!
The importance of communication about prognosis
and risk—junior clinician errors
A 34-kg, ll-year-old neutered male Malamute was presented on emer-
gency at midnight with an acute onset of vomiting, discomfort, leth-
argy, and abdominal distension. There was no history of foreign-body
ingestion or toxin exposure. The patient was not currently on any over
the-counter or prescription medications and was healthy, with no pre-
vious or ongoing medical problems. A physical examination was
performed at the time of presentation and revealed strong synchronous
femoral pulses, pink moist mucous membranes with a normal capillary
refill time, and a 7- to 8-cm firm mass in the cranial abdomen. The heart
rate was tachycardic at 160 beats per minute. At that time differential
diagnoses included an abdominal mass, gastric dilatation-volvulus
(GDV), gastrointestinal foreign body or obstruction, pancreatitis, or
less likely, mesenteric torsion. The receiving veterinarian (Dr. A) per-
formed a right lateral abdominal radiograph that displayed gastric
distension with dorsocranial displacement of the pylorus, consistent
with a GDV. The entire small intestine appeared moderately dilated
with gas. Blood samples were obtained and an immediate lactate was
4.4mmol/L.
After confirming a diagnosis of GDV, Dr. A discussed treatment
options with the dog's owners while the staff placed a peripheral
intravenous (IV) catheter and instrumented the patient with an
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
119
120 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
electrocardiograph (ECG) and blood pressure monitors. Normosol-R
(1L) was administered as a fast bolus to treat hypotension. Hydro-
morphone (0.1 mg/kg IV) was administered to provide analgesia while
the clients considered the prognosis and options.
Dr. A explained the process of GDV, the risk of gastric necrosis due
to decreased gastric perfusion, as well as the potential for splenic
torsion and need for splenectomy. At that time, the veterinarian advised
that surgery was the only option for a potential for recovery; otherwise,
euthanasia was recommended. The clients explained that they had
financial constraints and that,if recovery was not possible, they did not
want to proceed with surgery. The veterinarian quoted the hospital's
survival rate of more than 90% and advised that since the lactate was
less than 6.0mmol/L, there was a good chance of recovery and sur-
vival. The clients then visited with their dog for 1↓ hours prior to
agreeing. with some reluctance, to proceed with the surgery. At that
time, the surgeon (Dr. B) and the on-call anesthesia technician were
called in to perform anesthesia and surgery.
At the time of anesthetic induction, it was noted that the patient's
blood pressure could not be measured with oscillometric methodology.
The patient received a dose of ephedrine and was continued on
10mL/kg /hr IV Normosol-R, and isoflurane gas anesthesia in oxygen.
     d 
the ECG despite a continuous infusion of lidocaine (50μg/kg/min).
Intraoperatively, 20% of the stomach appeared necrotic and was
resected using a thoracoabdominal stapling device. The omentum
bruised easily and had numerous petechial hemorrhages. Following
surgery, Dr. A spoke with the clients and advised that surgery went
well, although there was a need for gastric resection. At that time, the
clients left while the patient continued anesthetic recovery. Five hours
had passed from the time of initial presentation to the end of surgery.
Postoperatively, the patient was treated with intravenous crystal-
loids (2.5mL/kg/hr), famotidine (0.5mg/kg IV twice a day), hetas-
tarch [300mL IV bolus, then 20mL/kg/day IV continuous rate infusion
(CRI)], fentanyl (4μg/kg/hour IV CRI), metoclopramide (2mg/kg/
day IV CRI), and lidocaine (50μg/kg/min IV CRI). No dysrhythmias
were observed on the ECG monitor. He was normotensive, and a
coagulation test was within normal reference ranges.
At 10:00 A.M. the following morning, the dog was evaluated, and no
abnormalities were noted, including a normally healing incision. By
2:30 PM., however, the incision was oozing blood-tinged fluid and the
patient was passing hermorrhagic diarrhea. Fresh frozen plasma was
started, for treatment of potential disseminated intravascular coagula-
But I Thought He Would Be Fine! 121
fion (DlC). Dr. B called the owners and gave them an update, mention-
ing that the patient may be in DIC. At that time, the surgeon seemed
cautiously optimistic, however, and advised that the clients could come
and visit. The clients visited at 7:30 PM. and thought that their dog
seemed to perk up. During the visit, Drs. A and B were not present, and
the attending veterinarian (Dr. C) was occupied seeing a number of
emergencies so was unable to speak to the clients. Dr. A presented for
her shift at 1l:00 P.M. and noticed clinical deterioration of the dog, with
continued hemorrhagic diarrhea and decreased mentation. Dr. A
asked for the dog's CPCR code status. By 12:30 A.M., the patient's con-
dition deteriorated further, developing runs of ventricular tachycardia
with pulse deficits. Aggressive therapy with intravenous crystalloid
boluses, fresh frozen plasma, and antiarrhythmic drugs was instituted.
At 5:00 A.M., the patient lost consciousness and experienced respira-
tory arrest. Dr. A called the patient's owners as CPCR was initiated.
CPCR was continued until the owners arrived; however, the dog was
not responding to CPCR and was taking agonal breaths. The owners
visited with their dog and elected to stop resuscitative efforts at that
time.
Approximately 1 weeks after the patient's death, the clients drafted
of the hospital staff. Their primary complaints were as follows:
1. The first miscommunication was an initial misquote of the price of
the service. Dr. A quoted a price to the owners before speaking
with Dr. B, the on-call surgeon, and did not take into consideration
additional fees to call in the surgeon and technicians. After discuss-
ing the charges with Dr. B, Dr. A then went back to the clients with
another estimate, which was larger than the first that they had been
quoted.
2.  Another concern was that they had been told that the patient had
an excellent chance of recovery, with the potential complication of
splenectomy only; DiC was not mentioned until the patient's clini-
cal deterioration.
3. At the time of the client's visits, the ECG monitor was not conti-
 a   a p   pr 
of the importance of monitoring for potentially fatal cardiac
dysrhythmias.
4.  Finally, when the clients were with their dog during CPCR efforts
, p n   sm  ,  
122  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
In addition, during the 2 weeks that followed the patient's death, the
clients researched GDV and its potential complications. Most of the
research was performed on the Internet and in verbal communication
with their general practitioner, who advised of a much more guarded
prognosis with GDVs in their somewhat limited experience.
Key Points
●Give the client the opportunity to be heard. In this case, the hospital administra
tor and the director of emergency services contacted the clients after review-
ing the letter of concern. The meeting did not include Drs. A and B, the
veterinarians who had been in charge of the patient's care, as it was felt that
this forum would allow the clients to be able to speak freely about their
concerns. Although there was not anything that could be done to bring their
dog back, listening to the client's concerns and providing empathy and
feedback that educated the client with factual, peer-reviewed information,
rather than being defensive of the veterinary team, was important. Meeting
with the clients allowed the hospital representatives to acknowledge the
client's emotional distress and to validate their concerns regarding their
dog's care. In the end, the clients were more satisfied and less blameful. This
experience, so that they could serve them, and other clients, better.
What could the veterinarians and hospital staff have done better? At this facility,
overnight shifts are staffed by interns, who are less experienced than other,
more serior veterinarians. As such, the survival numbers stated to the client
were based on this hospital's survival rate of GDV patients, not on reported
national averages. Similarly, Dr. A had not seen a GDV case that had
required partial gastrectomy, and none of the GDV cases that she had seen
had had any severe complications. Because of this limited experience, Dr.
 s  s        
 dsd pe  ae p si  a  ps
●lse of lactate as an indicator of prognosis. Although lactate concentration
greater than 6.6mmol/dL is a posiftive predictor for gastric necrosis and
need for partial resection in 70% of animals, it is not 100% sensitive or spe-
cific for gastric necrosis or lack thereof. This patient's lactate was 4.4mmol/
dL; therefore it was assumed that there would be no need for gastric resec
tion and that there was a good prognosis for recovery and survival. Owners
often consider complications rare and, in this case, felt that since their dog's
lactate was lower than 6.6mmol/dL, he had a good chance of not requiring
gastricresection.
But I Thought He Would Be Fine!123
Key Points  (Continued)
●The clients' perception of what was happening with their animal was based
on commurication with the techrical staff instead of the veterinarian, and
they presented a concern about their dog's care after some investigation on
theInternet.
● The clients also had concerns about continued resuscitative efforts on their
dog for a prolonged period of time, while they were en route to the hospital.
One of their initial concerns about whether to go to surgery was that they
did not want him to suffer. The owners felt that the veterinarians had pro-
moted the patient's discomfort during CPCR, which is what they had been
trying to avoid. A detailed explanation of cessation of effective circulation
and respirations, and lack of perception of pain or suffering on the patient's
part during CPCR, likely would not have changed the clients' perceptions
that their dog was "alive" as long as the CPCR was being performed and
therefore could feel pain and suffering. As a gesture of goodwill, the hos-
pital credited back some of the fees associated with the CPCR efforts. The
clients were satisfied with this small reduction in fees and asked if the hos-
pital could institute a payment plan for the remainder of the bill. Although
the hospital's policy is to not allow payment plans, under the circumstances,
it was better to be flexible, and the hospital agreed to a plan that the owners
could better mange. They paid the remainder of the bill over the next 2
months.
Lising the Internet as a source of information. The Internet is a powerful source
of information, although unedited, and is a source of the general public's
 experience with this disease, rather than peer-reviewed scientific informa-
tion. Because of this, the Internet is filled with opinion, anecdote, and pos-
sibly erroneous information. To an emotional client without a prior
knowledge or experience of specific disease processes, misconceptions can
occur; at times, these drive clients' decision making and lead to decreased
faith in their veterinarian, especially if certain therapies are not employed.
There are no guarantees. The clients had stated at the time of initial presenta
tion that if there was not a potential for complete recovery, they would not
proceed with surgery. GDV often has a very good prognosis, even if there
is a need for partial gastrectomy. Based on the information received from
Dr. A, the clients chose to proceed with surgery. However, their perception
was that their dog would completely recover and that the potential for
complications was low. The surgeon or the most experienced individual on
the team should ultimately discuss the case and prognosis, and potential
42
If It's Not in the Medical Record,
Did It Happen?
The importance of a medical director addressing
any and all client concerns
The following two cases represent different situations in which clients
contacted the medical director of a specialty veterinary clinic following
     e   nd e r 
plaint, the medical director reviewed the medical records for each case,
so the concerns or complaints could be addressed.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
124
If Il's Not in the Medical Record, Did It Happen?  125
Complaint 1
Ms. Erickson called to complain about the medical care that her dog.
Spike, a 9-year-old spayed female Labrador, had received at the hos-
pital 2 months prior. Specifically she was concerned that she had not
received any written recommendations following a visit to the emer-
gency room. Incidentally, she had received written recommendations
for Thor, her 7-year-old spayed female Labrador, who was evaluated
the same evening. Thor had presented to the emergency clinic for
evaluation after ingesting an unknown amount of chocolate. Thor was
showing clinical signs of agitation and vomiting. Spike was also
brought in for evaluation, just in case, although she was not showing
any clinical signs and, historically, she is not the one who gets into
things. She stated that Spike was found to have normal vitals and
physical examination, so no further treatment or recommendations
were made. Ms. Erickson was concerned that Spike was currently
having some gastrointestinal issues, so she wanted to make sure she
had all her medical records. She also stated that her regular veterinar-
ian had not received any information regarding Spike's visit to the
emergency service.
Both Spike's and Thor's medical records were reviewed. Thor's record
was complete (history, physical exam, lab work, treatments, and dis-
charge summary) and copies of the record had been sent to the primary
care veterinarian. Spike's record did not have any information docu-
mented. No history or physical examination was documented, nor
were discharge recommendations written in Spike's record. A state-
ment in Thor's record was made that the "the other dog appeared
  nq a irs as 'adaa sis ,  p ,
evaluation and additional blood tests, including a packed cell volume,
total protein, blood glucose, and blood urea ritrogen (via Azostix?),
although none of the results were recorded.
126 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points-Complaint 1
● The importance of documentation in the medical record cannot be over-
stated. In this case there was absolutely no documentation in the record that
the patient had been evaluated. In addition, even though minimal lab work
had been performed, these results were not documented. The client had
been charged for these services, which was the only way it was determined
that the minimal lab work had been performed. There is a vague statement
in Thor's record referring to "the other dog"; however, no in-depth detail
was provided. This information, even though it was incomplete, should
 have been documented in the appropriate medical record.
● This client was contacted to inform her of the absence of documentation.
 All charges for Spike's visit were credited, as there was no documentation.
The owner was informed that the hospital was addressing this issue with
the veterinarian involved and that her concerns were being tracked by the
hospital for routine evaluation of hospital complaints, so processes can be
improved. The owner was very surprised that this occurred, and very
thankful that the issues were being addressed.
● Emergency veterinarians are occasionally faced with a second pet, where
the known offender is presented along with a housemate who is "likely not
guilty." Sometimes veterinarians are reluctant to "overcharge" for a rela-
tively brief examination, but a medical record should be maintained for each
pet. It may be that, with hospital administrator approval, a small (20%)
discount might be provided, but free, unrecorded examinations should not
be permitted at any time.
If Il's Not in the Medical Record, Did It Happen?127
Complaint 2
Mr. Bowman contacted the hospital to complain about the follow-up
recommendations that were given for his dog Vinnie, who was being
managed for chronic renal disease by one of the hospital internal medi-
cine residents. He was specifically concerned that the resident was
recommending evaluation of the dog's albumin levels, rather than
kidney values. Mr. Bowman had been following all recommendations
and having lab work performed by the primary care veterinarian and
copies sent to the resident for additional recommendations.
Although Vinnie did well for many months, he eventually devel-
oped an acute episode of renal failure, which ultimately resulted in his
death. His owner's complaint was that if recommendations had been
made to evaluate Vinnie's renal values (rather than just albumin), the
ensuing renal failure might have been caught earlier, and therefore his
 s      e   s 
ited back.
Medical record review
Vinnie's record was evaluated by the medical director and by one of
the internal medicine faculty who specialized in urology Vinnie had
been seen initially at the hospital for renal failure, for which his values
had normalized after the initial medical management. Vinnie was also
diagnosed with a low albumin level, which had not been fully worked
 n n hs a n  a   rn  d
and primary care veterinarian following the initial renal-failure man-
agement were thorough, indicating that Vinnie should have his albumin
checked in 2 months (via a chemistry profile) and that his kidney
disease be checked in 6 months (via a complete blood cell count, chem-
istry profile, blood pressure, urinalysis, and urine culture). It was also
recommended that, once the renal disease was stabilized, the cause of
the low albumin would need to be further evaluated.
 The communication logs in Vinnie's record indicated that referring
blood work had been faxed and the medicine resident had contacted
both the primary care veterinarian and one of the owners (Ms. Bowman)
with follow-up recommendations. Vinnie's albumin continued to be
low at the 2-month recheck, and the renal values remained stable
(within normal range). In addition, there were numerous entries in
the communication log of referring follow-up lab work and of discus-
sions between the medicine resident and Ms. Bowman, all discussing
128  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
appropriate follow-up recommendations, including a reminder that
Vinnie needed a full renal evaluation in 1 month. Based on the com-
munication log, at 7 months following the initial discharge, Ms.
Bowman had questioned the resident about performing a dental
prophylaxis on Vinnie and was informed about the need for full renal
evaluation prior to this procedure, including full blood work, urinaly-
sis, and urine culture, which still needed to be performed as a follow
up to the initial evaluation. The final communication entered in the
medical record was 3 months later, when Mr. Bowman contacting the
medicine resident with the information that Vinnie had come in to the
emergency service at the referral hospital with an acute episode of
renal failure and was subsequently euthanized.
recommendations were appropriate. Although it was likely that Vinnie
developed an acute exacerbation of his renal failure (unlikely to be
predicted with the lab work), he could also have had a slowly progres-
sive kidney failure that could have been detected by earlier monitoring.
The medical director discussed the case with Mr. Bowman via a tele-
phone conversation and then again, in person. Interestingly, in the
discussions, Mr. Bowman produced notes kept by Ms. Bowman in
which she had indicated that the lab work to check the renal values
needed to be performed, and agreed that they had not followed up on
it. Despite this evidence, Mr. Bowman still insisted that the case had
been mismanaged by the resident and that the resident should have
Key Points-Complaint 2
● In this case, much of the care that was provided to the patient was con-
ducted by the primary care veterinarian, under the guidance of the internal
medicine resident. All recommendations and follow-up communications
were clearly documented in the medical record, leaving a clear trail of what
had transpired following the care provided at the referral hospital. The
       
failed to perform the final diagnostic work-up within the time-frame recom-
mended. Unfortunately, it is always challenging to follow up on a case that
is being managed by another veterinarian. In this case the detailed com-
munication logs (which were substantiated by the owners' own notes) pro
vided a very clear trail of the medical care that was being recommended.
If Il's Not in the Medical Record, Did It Happen?  129
Key Points  (Continued)
● This case was also discussed with the hospital social worker, as there
appeared to be more going on. Despite all the evidence provided and Mr.
 ede dn mn o p an se se so
still insisted that the hospital was at fault. In this case, there are likely addi-
tional guilt issues that are preventing the owner from accepting what has
occurred. The owners' need to "blame someone" can be a coping mecha-
nism to avoid accepting blame for their own actions (or lack thereof).
Certainly we often encounter situations similar to this one, where due to
stress, grief, or guilt owners may not "hear" what they are being told. It is
critical in such cases that the medical record, including summaries of com-
munications, be complete.
Final Medical Record Summary
The medical record serves as a legal document that should provide
detailed information regarding pertinent facts, findings, and observa-
tions about an individual animal's health history, including past and
present illnesses, examinations, tests, treatments, and outcomes. The
medical record should document, chronologically, the care of the
patient. In addition, the medical record facilitates the ability of the
veterinarian and technicians to evaluate and plan the patient's immedi-
ate treatment and to monitor his or her health care over time. Especially
when multiple care providers are involved, the medical record helps
with communication and continuity of care among the veterinarians
and technicians. The medical record can also provide information for
use in review and quality-of-care evaluations and can provide data that
are useful for research and educational purposes. Finally, in the event
that a case goes to court, the medical record provides critical informa-
fion regarding the care the patient has or has not received
43
Hemangiosarcoma Is Bad
Failure to completely evaluate patients can result
in a misdiagnosis
nary clinic with a 2-day history of anorexia, lethargy, reluctance to rise,
and urinary incontinence. Physical examination revealed tachycardia
(heart rate 2o0 beats per minute), slightly pale mucous membranes, and
a large, readily palpable midabdominal mass. The packed cell volume
was 28%, and abdominal radiographs revealed a moderate amount of
abdominal effusion, which abdominocentesis revealed to be hemor
rhagic. Radiographs showed a mass larger than a softball in the splenic
region of the abdomen (Figure 43.1). Thoracic radiographs revealed
elevation of the trachea at the level of the heart base and no other
abnormalities.
Based on the signalment and radiographic findings, a presumptive
diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma of the spleen was made, with a possible
concurrent heart-based tumor. The clients were advised of the poor
prognosis, and euthanasia was recommended. The owners declined
and instead decided to take their pet home. They wanted their children
to have the opportunity to say goodbye to their pet, and they were not
 prepared to make such a decision at that time. The veterinarian advised
against this and, in an effort to make the owners aware of the potential
ramification of their decision, described possible scenarios of the pet's
death, any of which would likely occur in a very short period of time
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
130
Hemangiosarcoma Is Bad131
Figure 43.1  A lateral radiograph showing α splenic mass
and be unpleasant for the family to witness. With great trepidation, the
 d   pm p a nd   so
They waited, and they waited, until, after a year's time, the urinary
incontinence was profound, and the pet was no longer able to eat any-
thing but very small meals without vomiting. The mass had now grown
so large that it filled the entire abdominal cavity, displacing the viscera.
 While away on vacation, the situation became dire, so the owners took
the pet to a local veterinary hospital, presumably for euthanasia,
assuming the end had finally come. After an abdominal radiograph
showed an enlarging mass, further sonography was recommended
(Figure 43.2). The ultrasonographer was unable to ascertain the origin
of the mass because of its extreme size and because all of the other
organs were adhered in and around it. Thoracic radiographs were done
to check for pulmonary metastasis, and none were seen. An echocar-
diogram was within normal limits. The tracheal elevation noted 1 year
prior was found to be a "normal abnormality" in this dog. The clients
were understandably distraught that this workup had not been per-
formed a year ago and were upset about the emotional toll the situation
had taken on the family and about the quality of life the pet had been
subjected to, unnecessarily, over the last 12 months. They immediately
consented to surgery. An abdominal exploration was performed, and
a 14-pound spleric hematoma was removed. The dog went on to live
for an additional 6 happy, healthy years.
132  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Figure 43.2 A laleral radiograph showing progression of the size of the mass
The dog also has severe spondylosis.
Key Points
● Most frequently, splenic masses with associated hemoperitoneau are due to
malignant, neoplastic processes; however, this is not true in all cases. It is
therefore imperative to perform appropriate diagnostics to evaluate the
well as diagnostic. Because cytologic differentiation between various types
of splenic disease is challenging, multiple representative sections must be
evaluated. The prognoses for hematoma versus hemangiosarcoma or other
splenic malignancies vary drastically; therefore it is vital that they be appro-
priately identified. Between 24% and 45% of dogs with splenic hemangiosa-
        
tumor as was suspected in this case.
 Managing and communicating with the pet owners is quite possibly the
 most challenging aspect of veterinary practice. It is also perhaps the greatest
investment in time and energy that a clinician can make. When this invest-
ment is made, it is possible to virtually eliminate the disappointed, angry.
or litigious client. When the clinician editorializes, makes judgments or
decisions for a client, it is invariably a recipe for disaster. The veterinarian's
role is to present all options to the client in a clear, concise way, and not to
interject any personal bias or philosophical or financial judgments. After
Hemangiosarcoma Is Bad133
Key Points  (Continued)
empowering the client with information regarding the pet's condition,
workup, and treatment options, as well as potential complications and
implications of same, the client must always be responsible for decisions
regarding the pet's care. Coupling this practice with obtaining informed
consent and meticulous record keeping, the clinician avoids the stress of
repercussion from a dissatisfied client, a guilty conscience, and a damaged
reputation.
 Signs of hemangiosarcoma can be similar to those of hematoma or other
splenic neoplasia. After appropriate staging and stabilization, exploratory
 surgery is indicated, and multiple histological sections must be examined.
 Never allow assumptions to replace sound diagnostics.
 Never presume to make decisions for the clients as to the care of their pet.
Always be objective and complete when presenting rule-outs, workup, and
treatment options. The decision as to how to proceed should always be left
to the discretion of the owners, after a full and educated discussion with
their veterinarian.
The Internet Can Be a Dangerous Thing
One must take into consideration the availability
of information on the Internet, whether it be true
or not, when discussing disease diagnosis
and treatment
A 4-year-old, female spayed Cavalier King Charles Spaniel named
Eliza presented to an emergency clinic with the chief complaint of
lethargy and decreased appetite for 1 week. The owner also noted that
she cried out in pain when picked up to be put on the bed. She had no
other prior medical problems.
On physical examination, she was found to have pain upon ventro-
flexion of the neck. She was ambulatory, with an otherwise normal
neurologic exam. Diagnostics were discussed with the owner, includ-
ing spinal radiographs and advanced imaging; however, due to the
subtle clinical signs, the owner elected conservative outpatient therapy.
Eliza was discharged with carprofen at 2mg/kg orally every 12 hours,
tramadol at 2mg/kg every 8-12 hours as needed for pain, and miso-
prostol at 4μg/kg every 12 hours. All medications were prescribed for
10 days. Eliza improved rapidly at home, and after 3 days she did not
seem to exhibit any further pain.
Twenty-seven days later Eliza re-presented to the emergency clinic
for acute onset of circling, collapse, and seizure activity. She had been
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
134
The Internet Can Be a Dangerous Thing 135
seizuring for the past 1y hours. Her body temperature was 105°F
(40.5°C), heart rate 60 beats per minute, and respiratory rate 20 breaths
per minute. She was treated with two doses of intravenous diazepam.
 d    i 
Diagnostics included a chemistry profile, complete blood cell count,
computed tomography (CT) of the brain, and cerebral spinal fluid
(CSF) collection. The blood work and CT were normal. Cytology of the
 CSF was inconclusive for any specific disease process. While under
anesthesia for the CT and CSF collection, Eliza was maintained on a
ventilator and had a normal anesthetic episode. About 40 minutes fol-
lowing extubation, Eliza became apneic, requiring reintubation and
positive pressure ventilation. Her heart rate decreased to 30 beats per
minute with an irregular rhythm. Once reintubated, 1g/kg of mannitol
was administered intravenously, along with 0.25mg/kg of dexameth-
asone-SP. At this point, it was noted that Eliza's pupils were dilated
and nonresponsive. The owners were contacted and, due to her clinical
state, it was recommended to begin prolonged assisted ventilation with
a mechanical ventilator. Due to the poor prognosis for a positive
outcome, the owners elected humane euthanasia. A necropsy was per
formed and Eliza was found to have granulomatous meningoencepha-
lomyelitis (GME), an inflammatory disease of the central nervous
system; GME is thought to be a progressive immune-mediated disease
of the white matter of the brain and carries a poor prognosis.
Following Eliza's euthanasia, the owner started researching the pos-
sible cause of Eliza's seizures, despite the diagnosis of GME obtained
on necropsy. The owner believed that the carprofen that she received
17 days prior to the onset of seizures was the source of the neurologic
abnormalities. In addition, the owner spent an exorbitant amount of
time on the phone with veterinarians and researchers from the drug
company' discussing the case. She contacted multiple other veterinar-
ians (a toxicologist, internists, pathologists, and a DVM running for
political office) across the country that in her mind were "specialists"
o d aissod ae p as sea sss o ,pasdxa, p
the carprofen on her subsequent clinical course and outcome. The
owner communicated to multiple veterinarians that, in her opinion,
veterinarians, in general, do not spend an appropriate amount of time
However, when the owner was initially discharged with the carprofen,
client drug information handouts (listing indications, how it should be
given, interactions with other medications, and known side effects)
wereincluded.2
Key Points
● It is important for a veterinarian to be aware of the wide range of potential
symptoms that can be seen with certain pharmaceutical agents. Drug com-
paries are required to report to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Center for Veterinary Medicine a quarterly report of "adverse reactions"
that develop in a patient while on any of their medications.? These reports
come from a voluntary reporting system by veterinarians or owners who
have experienced a clinical symptom while on a specific drug that cannot
be accounted for by another underlying disease process. However, there is
x   a      s o
enced symptom. The carprofen drug insert describes Post-Approval
 Experience, where muliple body systems (gastrointestinal, hepatic, neuro-
logic, urinary, behavioral, hematologic, dermatologic, and immunologic)
are listed with their reported reactions. Under the neurologic heading in
this section, the following symptoms are listed: ataxia, paresis, paralysis
seizures, vestibular signs, and disorientation. In Eliza's case there was evi-
dence of another underlying disease causing the seizures; however, carpro
fen could not be ruled out as a cause for the seizure.
● When discussing diseases, diagnostics, and therapies with a client, veteri-
narians need to be as accurate as possible. With the advent of the Internet,
people have access to a large amount of information, both scientific and
nonscientific, allowing for clients who are much more educated about their
pet's health. Veterinarians may need to discuss a variety of information
brought forward by a client to allow for the most accurate information to
be integrated into the course of recommended diagnostics and therapies.
 '  s  n  d e g  n 
this and to find the appropriate support system for the person, such as other
family members, social services, or pet-loss groups.
● The Internet is a powerful source of information. Direct clients to the proper
scientific sources of information, rather than anecdotes or lay reports.
 Due to the limited number of animals and the controlled nature of premar-
keting clirical trials, orly the most common adverse effects of a medication
may be observed. Keeping up to date with the veterinary scientific literature
and reports of adverse events from drug companies will illustrate any
emerging side effects of a specific medication.
● Uncommon effects or problems associated with a drug may not be discov-
ered unfil it has been widely used. Do not discount a possible effect or
clirical sign that a patient is showing without thoroughly investigating all
possible postapproval reactions. Also, if no other clinical diagnosis can be
made to explain a specific symptom, consider administration of a medica-
tion as a potential cause for the problem
The Internet Can Be a Dangerous Thing137
References
1. hftp: / /www.pfizer.com/home (accessed April 2010).
2. Plumb D, Davidson G. Veterinary drug handbook—client information
edition. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2003.
 3. http: / /www.fda.gov /AnimalVeterinary /SafetyHealth/
ProductSafetyIrformafion/uem055369.htm (accessed April 2010).
45
Is There Some "Wiggle" Room?
An illustration of how essential it is to offer
a variety of options to clients
Wiggles loved to chase rabbits; one surny afternoon, she screamed and
was acutely lame after falling in a hole. Her owners brought her imme
diately to the veterinary hospital.
 On presentation, Dr. Catone found that Wiggles, a 6-month-old Pug-
Labrador cross, was three-legged lame, and the radius and ulna were
unstable and at an unusual angle. Overall Wiggles seemed very stable,
and the quick blood tests done in the emergency room were normal.
Mr. and Mrs. Piersol gave permission for a radiograph of the front leg.
but they asked how much the radiograph would cost and how much
money they had spent so far with the emergency visit (Figure 45.1).
After evaluating the radiograph, Dr. Catone started to wonder how
many more bad stories she would have to deliver to owners during
her internship. It seemed like almost everyone wanted to euthanize
their pets-nobody had the money needed to fix the problem using the
high standard of care that she was taught at her university. Although
this case seemed to have a simple solution, she was concerned that the
Piersols would not have the $3500 needed to repair the fracture.
As Dr. Catone predicted, the Piersol family did not have money for
the needed surgery. She began discussing euthanasia with the family.
and the conclusion of that discussion was that this would be the best
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
138
Is There Some "Wiggle" Room? 139
Figure  45.1  An  anterior-poslerior  film  showing   α  dlisplaced  radius-ulna
fracture.
approach. As Dr. Catone started to draw up the euthanasia solution,
Dr. Morris wandered through the emergency room. She stopped and
started to ask questions about the cute dog on the table with the broken
leg. Dr. Morris suggested to Dr. Catone to try casting the leg, as this
 may be an effective option in a young, otherwise healthy puppy.
Dr. Catone tearfully admitted to Dr. Morris that she had not thought
of this option and wondered what to do, as the Piersols were prepared
to euthanize Wiggles. Dr. Morris explained that while "The Cadillac
Plan" should always be recommended as the ideal approach, there are
often other less-expensive options that might be pursued, and this is
an example where talking with the senior clinicians might uncover
other options that have a reasonable chance for a successful outcome.
Dr. Catone, somewhat reluctantly, returned to talk to Wiggles' owners.
The Piersols excitedly agreed to cast the leg. They promised to keep
Wiggles quiet for 10 weeks, to return as needed for recheck evaluations,
and NO rabbit chasing until the leg was fully healed. Following casting
 and exercise restriction, a radiograph showed progressive healing of
the fracture (Figure 45.2).
140 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
<1-1(ALL)>
Figure 45.2  An anterior-poslerior film showing progressive healing of ithe radius-
ulna fraclure affer conservalive managemenl.
Key Points
While some diseases clearly require one specific treatment, in other cases
there are a variety of options that could also result in successful outcomes.
Remember that many diseases can get better on their own and that some
other disease, like a young dog with a fracture, might only need a modest
amount of veterinary help for a successful outcome. Consideration of con
servative therapies is warranted in many disease processes, and carefully
selecting treatment options with a REASONABLE chance of success might
be better than euthanasia in some circumstances. This must be weighed
against the recognition that, in other situations, euthanasia is the best course
of action for all involved.
This case shows how two people working in the same hospital can have
very different perspectives on a situation. Dr. Catone has not found "solid
ground" to stand on and the internship is eroding her confidence, rather
than augmenting it. She has started to look for the logistically easiest
approach to care, especially when it comes to interactions with senior
clinicians, rather than feeling comfortable in advocating for the best care for
the animals under her care. In many cases, this sense of frustration has
Is There Some "Wiggle" Room? 141
Key Points (Continued)
developed from working in an environment where the posive feedback
that Dr. Catone grew up and thrived on is nowhere to be found. Crying and
transient emotional outbursts are not uncommon in the stressful environ
 ment of the emergency room, where life-and-death decisions about animals
are made, and small mistakes can have huge consequences. An environment
where acceptance, understanding, and guidance exist (rather then criticism)
can go a long way in enhancing the confidence of junior veterinarians.
Maturity and an understanding of when to offer something other than the
best possible plan will come with time, and an even give-and-take situation
 among colleagues is essential for learning and teaching.
46
But CPcR Was Successful!
Clear, timely communication about changes
in patient status
Buddy, an ll-year-old Labrador cross, was rushed into the hospital.
He had been previously healthy, and weighed about 90 pounds (41kg).
He had collapsed at home and upon arrival was immediately brought
by the receptionists and technicians to the treatment area. The techni-
cian who met Buddy's owners reported they were very worried about
Buddy and wanted to try to help him.
On physical examination, Buddy was very weak. His mucous mem-
branes were white, and his heart rate was evaluated at 180 beats per
minute. The veterinarian immediately directed the placement of two
large-bore intravenous catheters for resuscitation. Initial screening tests
showed a hematocrit of 25%, a total solids of 4.8g/dL (48 gm/L), and
a lactate value of 1l mmol/L. Two liters of crystalloids were immedi-
ately infused, and an in-house ultrasound showed a large cavitated
splenic mass with free fluid in the abdomen. Abdominocentesis con-
firmed free unclotting blood. Despite the fluids, Buddy continued to
deteriorate and he suffered a cardiopulmonary arrest. Due to a well-
orchestrated cardiopulmonary resuscitation effort, including the rapid
infusion of 4units of packed red blood cells, Buddy was revived.
The clinician went to discuss the progression over the preceding 45
minutes, to gain permission for surgery, and to discuss the likelihood
of hemangiosarcoma. However, to his surprise, Buddy's owners were
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
142
But CPCR Was Successful! 143
upset at the events and, given the potentially grim prognosis, elected
to euthanize Buddy. The costs for the veterinary care to stabilize Buddy,
including the blood products, were in excess of $1oo0, which Buddy's
owners refused to pay, as they had not authorized such care.
Key Points
● This case represents a scenario in which, despite good medical decisions
and initial treatment, the ultimate outcome was not what the clients or the
clinician might have hoped for.
●Early discussion of costs and likely outcome is vital in all cases of critically
ill or injured pets in order to prevent later misunderstanding. In this case,
the medical resuscitation was flawless, but both the client and the veterinar-
ian were left disappointed at the outcome.
47
Rosie and the Platelets
Novel therapies require a firm discussion
Rosie Brown, a 9-year-old spayed female Cocker Spaniel weighing
10kg, was on vacation at the family cottage when she started to have
gingival bleeding. She had been previously healthy, with no medical
problems other than some chronic ear infections. She was presented to
her primary care veterinarian, who detected the presence of petechiae
examination, Rosie was quiet but alert and responsive. There were no
significant findings other than the bruising and slightly pale mucous
membranes. Melena was present on rectal examination. In-house blood
tests showed that her platelet count was less than 1oo0/μL (reference
range 200,000-500,000/μL). Her white cell count was slightly low at
4500/μL, and her hematocrit was 26%. Dr. Allen talked to the Browns
about admitting Rosie and conveyed that it was most likely immune-
mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT) and that, with supportive care.
dogs are usually better within 4-7 days. The treatment would include
prednisone, a single dose of vincristine, and blood transfusions as
needed to maintain her hematocrit. Blood loss through the gastrointes-
tinal tract was a big concern as large volumes of blood could be required
as the lungs or brain did not occur, Rosie would be fine. The Browns
agreed to admit Rosie and confided that they had some financial
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
144
Rosie and the Platelels145
constraints; however, they were eager to do whatever was needed for
Rosie. It sounded like she could be home in a few days.
The next 3 days passed uneventfully. Diagnostic testing did not
identify an underlying cause of the IMT, with no evidence of neoplasia
or infection. However, Rosie had significant gastrointestinal bleeding
and was receiving about 180mL of packed red cells a day to keep up
with her blood loss. The Browns were becoming concerned about the
number of transfusions, and Rosie's platelet count had still not budged.
On day 4, with a platelet count of less than 1oo0/μL, a bone marrow
aspirate was performed to evaluate the ability of her bone marrow to
  d    'd  
 Interpretation of the aspirate showed that there was evidence of meg-
akaryocytic hyperplasia, as well as erythroid hyperplasia. The Browns
were encouraged by this news; Dr. Allen reiterated the relatively good
prognosis for IMT as long as the immunosuppressive therapy was
continued.
On days 5-10 of hospitalization, Rosie again received 180mL of
packed red blood cells per day, with no apparent increase in her plate-
let numbers, with counts always less than 5oo0/μL. Dr. Allen rotated
off service and was replaced by Dr. Li. She was happy to treat IMT and
was eager to take care of Rosie. The Browns asked to meet with Dr. Li,
as they were frustrated with the ongoing transfusions, the duration of
hospitalization, and the relative failure of the veterinarians to resolve
Rosie's bleeding. Dr. Li was kind and patient with the owners, and in
fact she had a new suggestion! Human IVIG, an immunomodulating
agent, had been used in some dogs with IMT, and the reports were
unbelievably good, with many of the dogs' platelet counts increasing
dramatically within 6 hours. The only problem was that it was expen
sive—probably $10o0 for a dog of Rosie's size! After lengthy discus-
sion, the Browns agreed to try the IVIG; they were already close to the
upper limit of their financial reserves, but to them this sounded almost
too good to be true! They had already spent a lot of money and,
  o     r  n r
home and didn't want to eutharize her. The IVIG was administered
uneventfully. However, the following morning, the platelet count was
still 4oo0/μL. Around midafternoon, Rosie collapsed, with a bout of
severe melena. Another transfusion was provided, and Rosie rallied
       s     
him the riot act. Dr. Li had promised them that the IVIG drug would
work and that Rosie would be immediately back to normal. In checking
 ,  n       
IVIG" signed by Dr. Li, but no mention of any of the other specifics.
146 Small Animal Emergency and Criltical Care
Dr. Allen spent an uncomfortable 15 minutes in discussion with the
-s r  n d a    iq ss
sive agent (cyclophosphamide) and to carry on for another few days.
Two more days, and two more transfusions, later Rosie's platelet count
was 78,0o0/μL and she was discharged. Her final bill was about twice
what the Browns had planned to spend, and Rosie had received 12
half-units of blood.
Key Points
typically with a good prognosis, when supportive care and immunosup-
 pressive medications are provided.
 The clinical course can be variable and, although most dogs are better in
4-7 days, not all respond. Good communication about the possible ranges
of the duration of therapy is important so that clients understand the chal-
lenges of therapy.
●The human IVIG is an exciting possibility for treatment of IMT; however,
Dr. Li's discussion with the owners provided, in their mind, false hope of
an immediate response to treatment, and they were very surprised when
Rosie did not respond as promised. All conversations should be carefully
documented, particularly when newer or less commonly used drugs are
involved. Despite the Browns' happiness at getting Rosie home, they were
still frustrated by Dr. Li's recommendation for IVIG and by Rosie's lack of
48
The Receptionist's Dog
Family and friends' pets can be particularly
Major, a 10-year-old mixed-breed Terrier, belongs to the receptionist
(Mrs. JI) of a local veterinary hospital. Major has been polyuric and poly-
dipsic lately, and diagnostic testing has confirmed Cushing's syndrome.
Mrs. J loves Major and is very willing to treat him for Cushing's disease.
Despite having worked at the practice for 25 years, she is not entirely
sure what Cushing's disease is, but she knows that dogs that with that
condition do well, although they seem to come in a lot. Mrs. J and her
husband are going on vacation for 2 weeks to see the grandchildren,
and after that Mr. J is having a knee replacement. Since she wants to
focus on her husband's surgery, and Major seems okay, she asks if she
can wait to start treatment for about 1 month. The primary care veteri-
narian (Dr. K) agrees. Mrs. J is very special to him; she has known him
since he first started as a kennel attendant, and in fact she drove to the
university to watch him graduate from veterinary school 17 years ago.
Thirteen days later, the primary care veterinarian receives a frantic
call from Mrs. J. Major has collapsed while on vacation. She has taken
him to a local emergency clinic; they have diagnosed diabetic ketoaci-
dosis (DKA) as a complication of his untreated Cushing's syndrome.
 e i o    e i  is  
referral hospital rather than back to his primary care practice. Mrs. J is
too upset to think and just wants to do what is right for Major. Dr. K
agrees that Major should go to a hospital with 24-hour care and prom-
ises to call ahead to facilitate Major's care. However, the interrist is too
busy to talk to him because she is behind in appointments.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
147
148  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
          s
better, he looks very weak. He is vomiting almost continuously and is
slightly icteric. The interrist (Dr. I) assures Mrs. J that, despite Major's
condition, he should recover uneventfully but that, in addition to the
Cushings and DKA, he also has pancreatitis. She does chastise Mrs. J
for dlelaying treatment of the Cushing's syndrome, as laboratory testing
showed he was "prediabetic" with a blood glucose of 157mg/dL
(8.7mmol/L). Mrs. J called Dr. K again, very upset at how homesick
Major is, and concerned that she is responsible. After much cajoling.
Mrs. J feels better and decides to get some rest. Dr. K, who has intermit-
tently done relief work at the 24-hour hospital, goes over to check on
Major. He is greeted collegially and proceeds to explain to the over-
night intern how he manages DKA and to make some changes to the
orders. Dr. K liked the old internist at the practice, but she is on mater
nity leave. He has only met Dr. I once, and he didn't think she was
very friendly and thought she looked very young. Dr. K also asks the
overnight intern to call him with questions.
The following morning, Major is still very weak. Dr. I arrives and is
livid that her treatment plan was not followed. She screams at the
overnight intern and then calls Mrs. J to say "if she doesn't trust her.
she should take Major elsewhere." Mrs. J again begins to cry and
doesn'tknowwhattodo.
Key Points
● Open communication is essential. All veterinarians have clients that they
are particularly close to, especially if they are long-standing colleagues. Dr.
K wanted to do what was best for Major, and he probably had some guilt
that Major had not started treatment, even though the outcome would have
been impossible to predict.
● Dr. K had very good intentions, but he should have assumed the role of
either primary clinician or a friend of Mrs. J. Changing a treatment plan
without discussion and instructing an intern on whom to call overstepped
the bounds of professional behavior.
●Dr. I should have taken the time to talk to Dr. K. Had she done this origi-
nally, more of a team spirit could have been reached. If she had recognized
the extent of the relationship between Dr. K and Mrs. J, she could have used
him as an ally in treating Major, rather than helping to foster an adversial
relationship. Additionally, while it might ultimately be important for Mrs.
J to understand the relationship between Cushings and diabetes and pan-
creatitis, it may be wise to leave that until Major is more stable.
We'll Take Good Care of Maxwell!
Unexpected deterioration of a pet after admission
Maxwell, a 4-year-old cat with vomiting, was admitted to the hospital
by the receiving emergency intern (Dr. Y). Maxwell had been previously
healthy although he has been vomiting for about 3 days. On examina-
tion, he was assessed as stable, although he appeared to be painful
in his abdomen. The client (Mrs. Honeywell) left Maxwell for intrave
nous fluids, laboratory testing, and diagnostic imaging. Dr. Y promised
"Tmxe yo ares poos axet, 0i pue aureuo Aure st aral J en 0l
Maxwell was admitted to a fluid ward, and routine laboratory
samples were collected. An intravenous catheter was placed and crys-
talloid fluid therapy was started at a rate designed to counteract his
dehydration and provide for maintenance needs. Buprenophrine was
administered at 0.02mg/kg intravenously for pain relief. Point-of-care
was unremarkable except for an elevated white blood cell count of
22,000/μL (reference range to 16,000/μL) with a mature neutrophilia,
and mild hypoglycemia at 69 mg/dL (3.8mmol/L; reference range
75-120mg/dL, 4.2-6.7mmol/L). Diagnostic imaging was delayed due
to multiple postoperative cases and additional outpatients.
The receiving intern had a busy day as well; when she returned to
check on Maxwell in 2 hours, Maxwell looked to be resting comforta-
bly. Mrs. Honeywell called for an update and was told by the recep-
tionist that no news is good news and that Dr. Y will call when she has
a chance, but the day was really busy. However, later in the day,
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
149
150 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
toward the end of Dr. Y's 14-hour shift, Maxwell was found collapsed
in his kennel. He was hypothermic, bradycardic, and minimally respon-
sive. The emergency intern advised the nurses to move Maxwell to the
intensive care unit and to place him on a heating pad. A 50-mL bolus
of crystalloid was given intravenously and Maxwell seemed a bit
brighter. Dr. Y returned to her other cases, including a laceration repair
and an assortment of other outpatients.
Mrs. Honeywell returned at 6 PM. to visit with Maxwell and was
horrified by his current condition. She demanded to talk to whoever
was in charge. The senior emergency room clinician came to talk with
her and agreed Maxwell looked unwell. He immediately evaluated the
abdominal radiographs, which documented free abdominal air and a
pattern consistent with a gastrointestinal foreign body. Maxwell was
aggressively treated for shock and was taken urgently to the operating
room. Surgical exploration confirmed a jejunal foreign body and a
gastric perforation. The stomach and intestines were repaired, and
Maxwell was returned to the intensive care unit. Following a week of
hospitalization with his care supervised by the senior clinician, Maxwell
ultimately recovered and was discharged home. Mrs. Honeywell was
delighted with Maxwell's recovery, but every day she asked if he would
have been so sick if "this was caught earlier" and "why was she told
that she would be called if there was a problem, when she was not?"
Key Points
●Maxwell's initial presentation was vague and might have represented any
of a number of conditions. However, when he was found collapsed, two
major errors occurred. The first was a failure to act immediately to deter-
mine the cause of his collapse. Self-limiting vomiting does not result in
collapse, so finding Maxwell in this condition should have immediately
directed the focus to identifying the source of the decline. Dr. Y should have
consulted a senior clinician and followed up on the diagnostic imaging
results. Second, and equally important, was the failure to call Mrs.
Honeywell. Moving a pet into the intensive care unit or administering a
flhuid bolus to a previously stable pet suggests that their condition is deterio-
rating. It is much preferred to call and discuss the decline and intervening
steps, rather than to just hope the patient responds to therapy.
●Additionally, while by all accounts Dr. Y was having a busy day and could
not have necessarily predicted that Maxwell would take a turn for the
their pet looked after appropriately.
50
A Diagnosis to Stand By
A case highlighting why things are not always
as they seem
Sheila, a 3-year-old spayed female Australian Terrier, had been diag-
nosed with Addison's disease 6 weeks ago. She had been hospitalized
for 4 days and improved dramatically on her medication [desoxycor-
 n pnd ar [d p () ad s
emergency room because she had acutely collapsed after rurning in
the backyard.
Sheila's owner, Mary Francis, had been told that Addison's
disease promised a good prognosis, both by her veterinarian and
through extensive research on the Internet. However, the last veteri-
nary visit took a lot out of the family, what with Sheila's hospita-
lization, the blood tests, and the recheck exams and injections to
keep Sheila healthy. Mary Francis was watching Sheila run in the
backyard when she had her back legs go out from under her Sheila
immediately cried out and was reluctant to stand. Was this all part
of the disease? Mary Francis picked up Sheila and rushed her to
Dr. Thompson.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
151
152  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Dr. Thompson learned from the receptionist that Sheila was return-
ing, collapsed and unable to stand. Dr. Thompson started to do the
math and consider the options. How long had it been since the last
DOCP injection? Could the bottle have been outdated? Sheila had
looked so good at the last exam.
On physical examination, Sheila's mucous membrane color and
capillary refill time looked normal and her pulses seemed strong.
but this still must be a recurrence of the Addison's disease. There
was no spinal pain, the patellar reflex seemed fine, and Sheila had
normal conscious proprioceptive responses. Maybe she should have
used a higher dose of prednisone with the DOCP? She placed an intra-
venous catheter, handed a blood sample to her technician to get the
electrolytes, and started some intravenous fluids. She also adminis
tered another dose of DOCP and some intravenous cortisone.
Dr. Thompson then went to talk to Mary Francis about hospitalizing
Sheila overnight.
Mary Francis left reluctantly—she did not want to leave Sheila in the
hospital again, but this seemed to be the only option. When Dr.
Thompson called at 5:30 P.M. to let her know that Sheila seemed stable,
but was not yet standing, she started to wonder whether she had made
the right decision 6 weeks ago. She loved Sheila, but she really did not
have all this extra money to cover the veterinary bills.
The next morning, Sheila was not much improved. She was eating
some, but still not standing. The electrolytes had been normal; Dr.
Thompson felt she must be missing something. She asked Dr. Porter,
her boss, what he knew about refractory Addison's disease and
described the case to him. Dr. Porter had been practicing for 20-plus
years, and he was stumped as well. He offered to examine Sheila. Dr.
and subsequently localized the pain to her stifle joints. He also found
cranial drawer, cranial tibial thrust, and mild joint effusion evident in
both stifles. Sheila was diagnosed with bilateral cruciate ligament
rupture, which had caused her inability to stand. Mary Francis was
going to be disappointed. The Addison's disease was stable, but surgi-
cal repair would be required for the cruciate ligament injury, and it
would run to thousands of dollars.
brought Sheila in for recurrence of Addison's disease, and Dr
Thompson had confirmed this diagnosis and started treatment. Now
she had cruciate ligament injury—if this was the case, Mary Francis
was convinced that it must have happened at the veterinarian's office,
and it would be up to the clinic to pay for Sheila's surgery.
A Diagnosis to Stand By153
Key Points
● Due to Sheila's recent diagnosis of Addison's disease, it was initially hard
to consider that another diagnosis might be responsible for her new signs.
Diagnostic evaluation typically tries to link all signs together, and it is
appealing to attribute any new clinical sign to an ongoing problem. However,
in this case, Shelia's collapse and hindlimb weakness was actually due to
a new and completely separate problem. Addison's disease is often charac-
terized by an excellent response to treatment. The dog was well managed
by Dr. Thompson and, given the absence of electrolyte abnormalities, a
        
considered.
 Dr. Thompson was wise to consult a colleague when the response to therapy
was different than what was expected. Colleagues can often bring a differ
ent perspective to the situation, and they might not be as biased by recent
events.
● The response from the owner was not expected by Dr. Thompson. Was this
because she failed to deliver the changing clinical picture in a cohesive
fashion? Was the financial limitation of the client part of the motivation to
assign blame elsewhere? Discussion with clients when a new diagnosis
becomes apparent is often fraught with challenges. Honest discussion of
how and why the diagnosis is different than initially thought is usually
associated with a better response.
51
The Confused Setter
Making sure that all presenting clinical complaints
are addressed
An 8-year-old intact female English Setter was presented to her family
veterinarian for lethargy, confusion, and weight loss. Physical exami
nation at that time was unremarkable except for several 1- to 2-cm
masses in the caudal mammary glands. A complete blood cell count
and chemistry profile were unremarkable. Mastectomy was recom-
mended as treatment for the mammary masses.
Two weeks later, the dog was presented for a surgical evaluation at
a local referral hospital. The dog's clinical signs had not changed, and
perhaps had worsened. She was quiet and still appeared to the client
as if she was disoriented. The remainder of the physical examination
was unchanged although two smaller masses were identified in the
 more cranial mammary glands. The attending surgeon elected to
perform an abdominal ultrasound to exclude pyometra or other intra-
abdominal problems and also to perform three-view thoracic radio-
graphs to evaluate for metastasis. The abdominal ultrasound was
normal and the thoracic radiographs were clear of any evidence of
metastatic disease.
Unilateral complete right mastectomy was performed, in conjuction
with a lumpectomy on the left caudal mammary gland. A routine
ovariohysterectomy was performed at the same time. The dog made a
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
154
The Confused Setter 155
345
Figure 51.1  A CT slice documenling a mass on ihe left side of the brain, seen as
a white round focal lesion.
slow but uneventful recovery from anesthesia and was discharged
home 2 days postoperatively.
Seven days later, the dog re-presented to the emergency service. The
dog had been progressively mentally dull and had a seizure in the car
on the way to the hospital. On examination, the dog was stuporous
and weak. The incisions were healing well. Following discussion, a
computed tomography (CT) of the brain was performed.
The CT scan documented several masses in the brain, which were
thought to be responsible for the clinical signs (Figure 51.1). The his-
Key Points
the attending veterinarian(s) and the client. The presenting complaint, dull-
ness, was not adequately explained by mammary masses. Certainly, surgi-
cal removal of mammary masses is advisable, but not given the other
(Continued)
156  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points  (Continued)
likely distracted by a tangible problem (e.g., the mammary masses). It was
not until the dog demonstrated more outward signs of intracranial disease
that the correct diagnosis was reached.
 The presenting complaint should be adequately addressed in all patients.
 Elective surgical procedures, such as ovariohysterectomy, should not be
 performed on a patient with an unexplained disorder that will not be helped
by surgery.
52
Tasty Fungi
Working within financial constraints when the
disease and prognosis are unknown
Rudolph, a 6-month-old yellow Labrador puppy, was brought to the
emergency clinic with acute neurologic signs. He had just been neu-
tered that day at the primary veterinarian's office and had seemed to
be fine when the owner picked him up about 4 hours earlier. He was
not sent home with any medications and had eaten his dinner well.
The owner had taken him out for a walk about 2 hours prior to the
onset of clinical signs. The owner did mention that she had noticed
some mushrooms in a field in which he had been running. but she was
Beid pi au u anam shop iau o yoq se Aue ea pey au n arnsu
for about 15 minutes.
On physical examination, Rudolph was found to be very ataxic, with
muscle tremors and facial twitching. He was febrile at 104°F (40°C). He
proceeded to have a full grand mal seizure, which responded to an
intravenous dose of diazepam. Other than the neurologic signs, no
other physical examination abnormalities were noted.
The emergency doctor discussed the differential diagnoses with the
owner, including possible toxic effects from the ingestion of mush-
rooms. Some types of mushrooms (Amanita spp.) can cause acute liver
failure and can lead to neurologic signs as well. The owner confided that
she had some significant financial constraints and would not be able to
 pay for a large number of diagnostic tests and treatment. Other differ-
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
157
158  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
entials included a reaction to the sedation given earlier for his neuter,
 underlying congenital liver or central nervous system disease, or other
types of toxins. The emergency room doctor recommended blood elec-
trolyte and glucose analysis, and abdominal radiographs to assess the
size of the liver and to evaluate the other intra-abdominal organs.
The blood glucose and serum electrolytes were within normal limits.
Gastric distension with a large amount of material was seen on abdom-
inal radiographs. Because of the history of possibly eating mushrooms
and the severity of the clinical signs, Rudolph was sedated, intubated,
and gastric lavage was performed. A large amount of mushrooms were
lavaged from the stomach! After fully flushing the stomach with warm
water, Rudolph was recovered from sedation. However, once extu-
bated, he started seizuring and began to breathe very slowly, and pulse
oximetry showed an oxygen saturation of only 85%. He was reintu-
bated and given another dose of intravenous diazepam, which stopped
the seizure activity. He required manual ventilation, as he was not
taking effective breaths on his own.
At this point, the owner was unsure if she could continue to treat
Rudolph, as his clinical progression was deteriorating and he was still
rooms. The added complication of potential assisted ventilation also
negatively impacted his prognosis. The emergency doctor convinced
them to give him a few hours, to see if he would respond to supportive
care. He was extubated after another 20 minutes, although he contin-
ued to breathe very slowly and shallowly. His sedatives were reversed,
he was managed in an oxygen cage, and he was monitored carefully
for clinical deterioration.
By the next morning, Rudolph started breathing more effectively; by
the afternoon, he was jumping and barking at the front of the cage like
a normal puppy! He was discharged normal and did not have any
further complications from the mushroom ingestion.
Key Points
●As veterinarians, it is very difficult to be restrained by finances when trying
to save patients, especially young dogs and cats that may have a reversible
disease. In this case, a toxin was highly suspected, and the emergency doctor
did minimal tests and treatments to give the puppy a chance to live.
Although the prognosis was unknown, the doctor wanted to give the puppy
Tashy Fungi159
Key Points (Continued)
a chance and worked with the owner to stay within financial limits while
giving Rudolph time to recover.
● Sometimes, as veterinarians, we are not able to perform as many diagnostics
and treatments as we would like, due to availability of resources and the
owners’ financial commitment. However, many patients respond to sup-
portive care, and as long as the veterinarian follows the adage "first, do no
harm," many pets can recover and do well.
53
Watch What You Write!
A lesson on how to always be professional
  e  d    
and emergency practice for vomiting and diarrhea on a Sunday after-
noon. The dog was seen and admitted by an intern who had only a
     q     
dog was treated with intravenous fluids and supportive care overnight,
and she appeared to be improving. The owner, however, was very
intense and worried, calling multiple times during the first 24 hours of
the dog's hospitalization. She also questioned the diagnostic and treat-
ment choices made by the intern and was very vocal while at the
hospital.
Because the intern was scheduled for a different rotation the next
day, the case was transferred to a new clinician. As was the standard
i h pd pe Aens a e dn an u a 'sad sn n
an outside pocket of a folder that contained the pet's record. This
transfer summary was not part of the dog's permanent record and
would be discarded after the new clinician read it.
Because of the problems the intern had had with the client, she did
write some things about the client as a warning to the new doctor. One
of the phrases was "The client is crazy and will badger you all day'
However, on this occasion, the owner arrived unannounced early in
the morning to discuss her pet's condition. Since the intern was in the
hospital and the new clinician hadn't yet looked at the dog, it was
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
160
Watch What You Write!161
decided that the intern should go into an exam room to talk to the
client. She brought the folder that contained the dog's chart into the
room with her and had a good discussion with the client about her
pet's condition (which was stable) and care.
The intern left the room momentarily to retrieve the pet's radio
graphs, leaving the dog's chart in the room with the owner. When she
returned, the owner was holding the chart in her hand, and the first
words out of her mouth were, "So you think I'm crazy?" As one can
imagine, the situation was very awkward. The intern tried unsuccess-
fully to explain the words that she had written and it was obvious that
the owner was not pleased.
The owner contacted one of the three partners who owned the vet-
erinary hospital to voice her displeasure. He was able to smooth things
over, but he requested that the intern write a note of apology.
Key Points
●  People have many different types of personalities, and it is important that
a veterinarian be able to work with them all. Additionally, the stress of
having a sick pet will usually amplify many personality traits. This client
was likely a little pushy and demanding, but she became even more so when
her pet was hospitalized. Being able to understand and empathize with a
client during these situations is key to developing a good bedside manner.
●While it is important to communicate all aspects of a case with other veteri-
narians who may be working with the pet, this communication must be
done in a professional manner. Anything written down and attached to the
medical record may be accessed by other veterinarians and the owner, so
it is important to be tactful when describing the client's behavior. As dis-
covered here, even a note that was not intended to be part of the patient's
chart ended up in the wrong hands.
●It is good practice NEVER to leave the patient's record in the room with the
owner, even for a few moments. In many cases, the owner's curiosity will
cause them to read the chart, which may lead to an uncomfortable situation.
Admittedly, this intern was new in her career and had much to learn about
client communication as well as the practice of veterinary medicine.
Veterinarians and veterinary staff must understand that many clients may
exhibit undesirable behaviors as a stress response when their pet is ill
●Do not write anything about a case or client in the medical record, or associ-
ated with the record, that you would not want the client to see.
54
But She Was Just Vomiting.
The importance of organization in the midst
of chaos
  '   n     s 
piling up left and right. At 4 PM., in prompt succession, a blocked cat
(Finn), a vomiting Labrador (Sammy), a Labrador mix that was hit by
a car (Sam), and a heart-failure cat (Stripes) arrived over a 10-minute
span. The most seriously injured was the Labrador mix, Sam, with a
     e   
worked quickly to try to stabilize the traumatized dog, but over the
next 10 minutes Sam continued to decline and suffered a cardiopulmo-
nary arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated, and Dr. Mike
Archibeaux was elected to go talk to the family in the lobby. Dr.
Archibeaux went to the lobby and asked for Sam's owners. A young
couple got up, and the doctor walked them back to the consultation
 s    e  ,   
were, and the doctor broke the bad news: "I am afraid he has died; the
injuries we just too severe." The young couple started crying, and the
 p r i g a n s  i, 's 
with horror, Dr. A realized that he had made a mistake and confused
the Labradors. Samantha was just suffering from a severe gastroenteri-
tis, while Sam, the Lab mix, had been killed in the car accident. Dr. A
apologized profusely and returned to evaluate Samantha. The other
dog's owners were found outside (where they had gone to smoke) and
were given the bad news.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
162
But She Was Just Vomilting!163
KeyPoints
Patient identification is essential to patient care.
 Patients in the hospital should be clearly identified; in emergency situations,
the patient-and-owner relationship should be confirmed prior to any treat-
ment decisions or consultations.
55
Peroxide Puppy
A case discussing the potential concerns of
phone advice
A 3-month-old, male black Labrador puppy named Ben was presented
for evaluation of profound ongoing ptyalism and lethargy that had
occurred following the administration of oral hydrogen peroxide.
Earlier that day, Ben had eaten one-fourth to one-half a bag of milk
chocolate Hershey's kisses. His owner had called their primary care
veterinarian for advice, and it was recommended that she attempt to
induce emesis at home with hydrogen peroxide. The receptiorist with
whom she spoke advised that, while we generally don't worry about
milk chocolate unless a patient has eaten close to l ounce of chocolate
per pound of body weight, Ben had eaten quite a lot so it was better
to be safe than sorry. Not having any peroxide at home, Ben's owner
made a trip to the drugstore where she purchased a 500-mL bottle.
When asked how much peroxide she had given Ben, the owner said
that she gave about a tablespoon at a time, but given that he wouldn't
vomit she just kept giving it until he had received almost the entire
bottle. The person with whom she spoke on the phone had not told her
how much to give, so she continued giving it, becoming progressively
worried that he would not vomit.
On examination at the time of presentation Ben was markedly
depressed. He was considered tachycardic with a heart rate of 180 beats
per minute. He was also mildly febrile with a temperature of 102.5°F
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
164
Peroxide Puppy 165
(39.2C). Ben resented oral examination, but when his mouth was
finally opened it was evident that his oral cavity contained many ulcer-
ative lesions and associated severe pytalism.
It appeared that the large volumes of hydrogen peroxide adminis-
tered had resulted in severe mucosal damage. Politely, the emergency
veterinarian had to inform Ben's owner that by giving hydrogen per-
oxide she had inadvertently created this problem.
Ben was admitted to the hospital, where an intravenous cephalic
catheter was placed and intravenous fluids and opioid analgesia
were administered. Famotidine and pantoprazole were administered
intravenously for their antacid effects, and a sucralfate slurry was
administered orally to help coat the ulcers. Oral green tea rinses, with
occasional dilute chlorhexidine rinses, were also provided in order to
be soothing and to minimize bacterial growth in the oral cavity.
Once Ben was feeling a little better he was offered a slurry of canned
food. Although he was interested in eating and drinking and would
start to lap at the slurry, he was too painful to consume much at all.
As such, Ben was anesthetized the following day and a percutaneous
endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube was placed. Prior to this he had a
 thorough diagnostic upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, which revealed
that the ulcerative lesions extended all the way down his esophagus
and were also present in the gastric walls.
Ben's ulcerative lesions slowly healed, such that by day 6 he was able
to eat larger quantities of food (still as a slurry). By day 14 he was back
to normal and his PEG tube could be removed; he did not suffer any
 permanent damage to his mucous membranes or esophagus.
Key Points
 Although we are frequently in the position of having to give advice over
the phone, it is vital to remember that we are generally advising a member
of the lay public who has no knowledge regarding veterinary medical
matters. It may have been obvious to the person giving advice in this case
that you would try a tablespoon of hydrogen peroxide maybe twice, then
stop if it is not successful; however, this is not necessarily obvious to a lay
person. As such, it is imperative that any advice given over the phone be
completely clear and that clients are always offered the option of being seen
by a veterinarian. Potential side effects of any recommendations given over
the phone must also be discussed, such as the potential of hydrogen perox-
ide to cause mucosal damage.
(Continued)
166 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points  (Continued)
●  While veterinarians are not necessarily liable for advice given over the
phone, caution must be exercised. Veterinarians or their staff cannot diag-
nose a patient's ailment over the phone, nor can they prescribe treatments
without a client-doctor-patient relationship. Giving inappropriate advice
can potentially result in worsening of the patient status, as is illustrated in
thiscase.
● It is also important to remember that many compounds that we use regu-
larly in veterinary medicine have the potential to cause serious side effects,
particularly when used inappropriately.
56
Too Tight!
An illustration of possible complications associated
with bandage placement
Roo, a 6-year-old Australian Shepherd, was presented to the emer-
gency service after being hit by a car. Luckily, his injuries were con-
fined to a dislocated hip. The radiographs showed a cranial dorsal
luxation, with evidence of a normal coxofemoral joint. Dr. Melbourne
recommended closed reduction, with placement of an Ehmer sling. The
  e       
repositioned. Roo was discharged the following day, with instructions
service because the bandage had slipped and was wet. Dr. Sydney had
never placed an Ehmer sling, but, after reading a surgical textbook
describing the procedure, sedated Roo and replaced the bandage. Roo
was again discharged home, and the owners promised to return if the
bandage slipped again. Since the emergency room was busy, Dr.
Sydney did not write discharge instructions but rather verbally con-
veyed the recommendations.
Fourteen days later, Roo was back in the emergency room with a wet
bandage and a swollen foot. The bandage appeared to be too tight on
his skin. Underneath the bandage, there was a circumferential necrotic
lesion, with the metatarsals exposed. Following multiple bandage
changes, and ultimately, a skin graft, the wound healed.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
167
168 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
The owner disputed the final bill, stating that they were not aware
of the complications of a long-term bandage, and they requested full
reimbursement for the costs associated with the wound. A review of
the medical record by the hospital director found that there was inad-
equate reporting of communication with the client, and that the second
veterinarian had not been comfortable with the placement of the Ehmer
sling. Clearly, part of the blame rested with the client for not returning
the dog more quickly when complications became apparent. However,
in the interest of client relations, the director provided a 75% discount
on the services, so that the final bill was only US$612
Key Points
● Bandage complications are common; however, they can be prevented with
good client education and explicit discharge instructions.
● It is sometimes difficult to assess if a bandage is too tight or uncomforta-
 ble—often, dogs and cats do not show adverse signs right away.
● If a veterinarian does not feel comfortable placing a long-term bandage, it
should be suggested that the patient recheck with someone more experi-
enced the following day. This helps to assure that the bandage was placed
 properly, and any other problems can be addressed.
 Good, clear communication would have saved Roo from a lengthy recovery.
In addition, medical record documentation is vital to prevent future prob-
lems with clients, to allow other staff to know what the client was told, and
to allow review of case management when problems with patient care arise.
What Was That Popping Sound?
What to do when a routine procedure goes wrong
Dr. Travis was a new intern in a very busy small-animal specialty
practice. She was on her first week of overnight emergency shifts and
was very excited. She loved emergency cases and was happy when the
shift was busy and interesting. A call came in at 2 A.M. about a male
cat that was having trouble urinating. The cat had a history of two prior
urinary obstruction episodes and had been diagnosed with chronic
cystitis and struvite crystalluria. He had been on a special diet and had
not obstructed in over a year.
On presentation, the cat, named Gibran, had a very enlarged, firm,
nonexpressible bladder. A urinary obstruction was diagnosed, and the
owner consented to further diagnostics and treatment. Abdominal
radiographs were performed, and no radio-opaque cystic or urethral
calculi were noted. Serum electrolytes were within normal limits, and
he was found to be mildly azotemic. Dr. Travis prepared to perform a
decompressive cystocentesis, as was routine when treating a cat with
urinary obstruction at this hospital. During her internship orientation,
the internal medicine specialist had described how to perform the
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
169
170 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
procedure; although she had never done it herself, she felt confident
that she could do it.
Gibran was sedated with a combination of torbugesic, ketamine, and
valium, administered intravenously. Once he was sedated, Dr. Travis
  o p  -1 ' e p
and a 35-cc syringe into the bladder. She began to aspirate urine
and expected to remove approximately 40-60mL of urine. All of a
sudden, however, she heard a subtle popping noise, and a small
amount of blood was aspirated into the syringe. At the same time,
urine ceased to flow into the tubing. Concerned, Dr. Travis pulled out
the needle and palpated the abdomen. To her dismay, she could not
palpate the very large bladder that had been present a few minutes
before, even though she had removed very little urine. She immedi-
ately suspected an iatrogenic bladder rupture and decided to ultra-
sound the abdomen to check for free abdominal fluid. As she had
feared, there was free fluid in the abdomen, and Dr. Travis subse-
quently diagnosed Gibran with a uroabdomen based on creatinine
measurement of the fluid.
Dr. Travis called Gibran's owner to discuss the complications of the
The owner was very upset and complained that Dr. Travis did not
twice before and had beenrelieved of his obstruction without a problem
In addition, the owner stated that, for the two prior episodes, no one
had ever discussed the potential of a bladder rupture from this proce-
dure. She questioned Dr. Travis' experience and technique and asked
to speak to the medical director at the first possible opportunity.
The medical director called the owner in the morning to discuss
Gibran's case. He mentioned that when a bladder is unhealthy, as in
Gibran's case, there is a higher chance of complications from any pro-
cedure involved with the urinary tract. Performing a decompressive
cystocentesis prior to relieving a urethral obstruction is the standard
of care in that hospital, and it had been found to improve the success
of relieving the obstruction. Complications can occur with any invasive
procedure, most of which are unlikely, but still a possibility. However,
since Dr. Travis did not discuss the potential complications of the pro-
cedure with the client, the cost of the surgery was credited to the
owner's account.
The surgery to repair Gibran's bladder was a success, and Dr. Travis
learned an important lesson about discussing all possible complica-
tions of any procedure with owners when getting signed consent,
including the risks of sedation, bladder rupture, and urethral tear.
What Was That Popping Sound? 171
Key Points
●Any invasive medical or surgical procedure carries with it a certain amount
of risk to the patient, and although these risks may be rare, a frank discus-
sion with the owner should take place when obtaining signed consent. If a
complication then occurs, the owner will be better prepared, and less likely
to pursue litigious action. Open lines of honest communication between the
veterinarian and pet owner should always be maintained.
T   r i ia  n r si i 
level, especially during emergency procedures, it is important that tech-
riques be demonstrated to them (potentially on cadavers first). Second,
junior veterinarians should be taught to communicate appropriately with
pet owners about rare but associated complications of each diagnostic or
therapeutic procedure they perform. If possible, jurior veterinarians should
ask for guidance when performing an invasive procedure for the first time.
In this case, Dr. Travis was the orly one in the hospital on an overright
n s e   s r    '
 Although mistakes do happen and the hospital should not have been held
 hd go as n a s n  s 
surgery gratis to the owner helped to maintain a strong and continued
client-hospital relationship and prevented a litigious result.
Part Four
Communication lssues between
Colleagues and Hospital Staff
58
Bandit
A case documenting stresses around the holidays,
and illustrating different clinical approaches
Bandit, a 6-year-old neutered male mixed-breed dog from a rural part
of the state, had been losing weight for the last 5 weeks and vomiting
for 3 days. Dr. Gibbons identified a possible abdominal mass and, after
additional testing, performed an exploratory laparotomy. At surgery.
a large mass was found in the cranial abdomen, adhered to the small
intestines. The mass had a complex blood supply, and Dr. Gibbons did
not feel comfortable resecting the mass. Dr. Gibbons called the McLarty
family in the middle of the procedure and recommended either eutha-
nasia or referral to the University Teaching Hospital. Mr. McLarty
requested referral to the teaching hospital as the family was happy to
undertake the 4-hour drive. Dr. Gibbons closed the abdomen but did
not biopsy the mass as he assumed the surgeon at the university would
be back into the abdomen in the near future.
Bandit and the McLartys arrived at the university emergency service
on the Tuesday night before Thanksgiving. Bandit appeared stable but
a bit uncomfortable on abdominal palpation. The emergency service
was busy and Bandit was admitted and placed on intravenous fluids
and analgesics with the plan of reexploring his abdomen in the morning.
The plan established with the McLarty family was that Bandit would
be transferred to the surgical service the next morning for ongoing
treatment and that the emergency room doctor was sure that Bandit
would go to surgery the next day.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By LL. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
175
176  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
In the morning, the faculty surgeon on duty, Dr. Clarice Winchell,
evaluated Bandit and recommended further evaluation preoperatively,
specifically an abdominal ultrasound. Due to the upcoming holiday
and an already full day of surgery, she advised that it was likely Bandit
could wait until Monday for the reoperation. Dr. Winchell was not
available over the holiday and transferred Bandit's care to a small-
animal intern, Dr. Susan Korde. Dr. Korde continued to carefully
monitor Bandit and, as requested, had an abdominal ultrasound per-
formed. The ultrasound documented a large intestinal mass, near the
root of the mesentery, but further evaluation was challenging due to
the presence of the free abdominal air associated with the abdominal
exploratory surgery the previous day. The radiologist felt that they
could biopsy the intestinal mass, and Dr. Korde elected to perform an
ultrasound-guided, Tru-Cut biopsy of the mass to try to better define
the nature of the malignancy in advance of surgery.
Throughout the day and evening, Bandit appeared stable. At approx-
imately 4 A.M., he began vomiting and developed a fever of 104°F. Dr.
 Korde was paged and a subcutaneous injection of metoclopramide was
administered, antibiotics were added, and the analgesic dose was
increased. However, through the early morning hours, vomiting con-
tinued and Bandit became very weak. The intern added another anti-
biotic and gave a small intravenous fluid bolus. By 10 A.M., Bandit was
very weak. The criftical care service was consulted, and a septic abdomen
was diagnosed by abdominocentesis. Bandit was taken urgently to the
operating room, where the intestinal mass was found to have perfo-
rated. Extensive abdominal contamination was present, and despite
aggressive postoperative care, Bandit developed refractory hypoten-
sion and died 48 hours postoperatively. The biopsy ultimately con-
firmed a leiomyosarcoma.
Key Points
This case had at least four possible decision points where other choices would
have been preferred:
● Dr. Gibbons correctly diagnosed the mass, but then at surgery he lacked the
surgical skill set to address the mass adequately and closed the abdomen
s Aq Ao op aq s pus s ou q am sdnq e ino
 geons, a complete discussion of the anticipated outcomes of surgery should
be reviewed with the owner. For uncommon or potentially difficult surger
Bandit177
Key Points  (Continued)
ies, the pros and cons of referral should be discussed. Some clients would
have been likely to euthanize when the mass was initially assessed as unre
sectable by Dr. Gibbons; if this discussion had been undertaken prior to
surgery, then it would have been known whether referral was a realistic
option. Given that Bandit's owners ultimately wanted to proceed with
aggressive therapy, discussing this prior to the original surgery might have
been prudent.
●Dr. Winchell did not want to reexplore Bandit when he was stable. The
rationale for further imaging at this point was vague and may have reflected
the busy day and the fact that Thanksgiving was the next day. Further
imaging is occasionally helpful, but due to the initial severity of Bandit's
signs, and the presence of a surgical report from a colleague, it was perhaps
aeqod e ym Sop e uo sep g noy Aragns Aeqap oi uerd oi aedondde jou
intestinal obstruction and surgical confirmation of a complex abdominal
tumor.
● Dr. Korde elected to perform a Tru-Cut biopsy of an intestinal mass. This
decision could be questioned in light of the prior surgical report of a vas-
cular mass associated with the intestines. There was some chance that the
tissue could become devitalized and that an intestinal perforation could
result in leakage of intestinal contents from the devitalized bowel loop. In
addition, biopsy results take a minimum of 3 days; because this biopsy was
performed during a prolonged holiday, time to results would have been
evenlonger.
When Bandit began vomiting overright, the intern had not seen enough
cases of bacterial peritonitis to have this clirical picture etched in her mind.
Since Bandit did have septic peritonitis, medical management would never
have fixed the problem: surgery is always required. The additional 6 hours
of sepsis prior to establishing the diagnosis of septic peritonitis could easily
have been a contributor to the dog's ultimate death.
59
Check the Medicines
A case describing a very busy day, with an
inadvertent distribution of the wrong medications
Rowdy, a young Parson Russell Terrier, presented to the emergency
service after a few days of lethargy and a day of difficulty breathing.
Pleural effusion had been identified and, thankfully prior to thoraco-
centesis, his clotting times were checked. His prothrombin time and
partial thromboplastin time were both off-scale; on closer questioning,
days before his signs developed.
Rowdy was admitted to the hospital and given plasma and vitamin
K to treat the anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication. He was given a
good prognosis, as long as he adhered to the medication schedule and
stayed away from more rat poison!
Later that same day, Fred, an older domestic shorthair cat, returned
for a recheck examination. Fred had been diagnosed with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy several years ago, and last summer he had suffered
from a thrombus to the front leg. His heart disease was getting worse,
and he was here to have his chest drained and for a refill of his dalteparin
(low-molecular-weight heparin) and enalapril.
for the students on the emergency rotation: heart disease is not a death
sentence, and anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication often has a good
outcome. She completed the discharges for Rowdy and Fred; she was
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
178
Check the Medicines179
planning to talk with Fred's family at discharge and had already talked
at length with Rowdy's owners.
An hour later, Dr. Park was paged that Rowdy's owners were at the
 on io  n d   a   s
what other questions they had. She was astonished to hear their ques-
tion: "What is the dalteparin for? And how do we give Rowdy shots?"
Rowdy had received Fred's medications. She ran to the front desk and
found Rowdy's medicines all packaged to go home with Fred. A quick
trip to the pharmacy clarified everything. The discharges had been
 p ' s a   p am oq asa ps
medications were mistakenly placed with the wrong patient's dis-
charge notes.
Key Points
●All medications should be verified prior to discharging patients.
 sd   os p  an a a ' n  
appears on each sheet, not just the first one.
Cricket and the Insidious Radiograph
Understanding the right and wrong ways to
teach and learn
Cricket, a 5-year-old Chocolate Labrador, was a favorite patient of Dr
Hershey, who had identified her with an immune-mediated polyar-
thropathy about 3 weeks before, after Cricket presented with lameness
and fever. Cricket had been doing very well on prednisone therapy,
although she was polyuric and polydipsic and had been panting more
over the previous few days. These problems were attributed to the
improve as soon as the dose was lower.
However, one Saturday afternoon, while out for a walk, Cricket
uncharacteristically sat down and refused to walk any further. Her
owner left her with the neighbor and went home to get the car. By the
time she had returned, Cricket was clearly short of breath and was
brought immediately to the veterinary hospital for evaluation.
On examination, Cricket was panting and had marked effort. A
resting pulse oximetry reading was 87%. She was placed in oxygen and
was admitted to the hospital. Dr. Hershey was not available that day.
but Cricket was cared for by Dr. Heath. Dr. Heath, in consultation with
her senior clinician (Dr. Graham), decided to take some chest radio-
graphs (Figure 60.1). The radiographs were a bit confusing: differential
diagnoses included pneumonia, heart failure, and pulmonary throm
boembolism. Ultimately, Dr. Heath settled on pneumonia; because of
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
180
Cricket and the Insidious Radliograph 181
7
Figure 60.1 A thoracic radiograph from a dog idenlified with a pulmonary
thrombus.
her past experiences, she followed hospital protocol and placed Cricket
on an aminoglycoside and a maintenance rate of fluids.
The following morning Cricket was no better, and the plan was
continued. Cricket was exceedingly oxygen dependent, and her owner
asked if euthanasia was advisable. The owner agreed to give her one
more day and see how things developed. The following morning
(Monday), new clinicians came on duty and in reevaluating the radio
graphs realized that there was an area of oligemia (decreased blood
formed, and this showed a large thrombus in the main pulmonary
artery. Armed with this new information, Cricket was promptly admin-
istered anticoagulants and over the following 4 days made a complete
recovery. Dr. Heath, who was eager to learn, contacted Dr. Graham,
who was also off-duty, to report the good news and ask if they should
look at the films again. Dr. Graham became angry at her and told her
that if her advice was not any good, then she was not to consult with
her again.
Key Points
● Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) should be suspected in any patient that
develops respiratory distress while on prednisone or with critical illness;
PTE is often challenging to detect radiographically and may be a diagnosis
of exclusion. No harm exists in giving antibiotics, but anticoagulation should
be considered as well.
(Continued)
182   Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points (Continued)
Pulmonary thromboembolism needs to be suspected to be treated!
Dr. Graham's response to Dr. Heath was inappropriate. No individual is
always right, and an environment where "lifetime learning" is supported is
essential for individuals to feel challenged and to enjoy their careers. Care
always right" approach.
61
Go Team!
Highlighting the role of experienced technicians
in management of cases
Nugget, an ll-year-old Golden Retriever, came to the emergency
service for vomiting and not feeling well. His owners hoped it was
nothing serious; he did, like many Retrievers, have a history of eating
socks and underwear. However, after a quick ultrasound by the emer-
gency clinician, Dr. Bangs, it was clear that the story was more concern-
ing. Dr. Bangs explained that there was fluid around the heart
pericardial effusion, and that what Nugget really needed (and needed
now) was to have the fluid removed with a needle. The family was
very sad that Nugget had to stay in the hospital, and even more upset
when they learned that the prognosis was quite grim if the fluid was
due to a tumor. They said their goodnights and went home to await
the call from the cardiologist in the morning.
diocentesis was fun and rewarding, and she had some experience with
the procedure. It was toward the end of Dr. Bangs' shift, but she would
stay and do the procedure. Fiona Collinsworth was the senior emer-
gency room technician on duty; she had worked in the emergency
 room for over & years, and her calm nature and good judgment had
helped many a patient and new veterinarian. Fiona set up for and
assisted with the pericardial tap.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
183
184  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
The procedure did not go as well as Dr. Bangs had hoped. Rather
than the 300-400mL of fhuid she had hoped to retrieve, she only got
45mL. Multiple arrhythmias developed each time she tried to tap the
pericardial space, and after trying three times she finally elected to
stop. With any luck, she had ricked the pericardium enough to permit
adequate drainage and relief of the cardiac tamponade. Fiona, however
was concerned. She had seen many pericardiocentesis attempts, and
this one did not go smoothly. Dr. Bangs was a sweet person, but she
did get distracted from the work at hand and sometimes she was a bit
too eager to get done with her shift —Fiona hoped this was not one of
those rights. She had a feeling that Nugget was not out of the woods
yet.
About 30 minutes after the attempted pericardiocentesis, Nugget's
heart rate on the continuous monitor had increased back to over 200
beats per minute. His mucous membranes were pale, and his respira-
tion had increased. Fiona quickly identified this deterioration and noti-
fied Dr. Bangs, who said she was busy and trying to get her reports
done so she could go home. Fiona countered that she was worried
about Nugget and felt it was likely that Nugget had reeffused into the
pericardium or was bleeding into the chest. Frustrated, Dr. Bangs
raised her voice and asked her to leave her alone. Fiona returned to
cessful, and autopsy showed a massive pericardial clot, causing tam
ponade. No hemangiosarcoma or other tumor was found.
Key Points
● Communication between experienced technical staff and junior clinicians is
 a common area of conflict. In this case, Dr. Bangs, who was likely tired and
frustrated with herself for failing to perform a successful procedure, acted
in a very poor fashion. Technical input is vital and all concerns should be
addressed in a professional and positive manner. Technicians with years of
experience often hold key pieces of knowledge that are hard gained from
years of experience. Young veterinarians, in contrast, are sometimes working
a bit too hard to prove themselves and to show off what they know. Failure
to heed the concerns of technical staff not only reduces the quality of medical
care, it can disrupt the work environment. Veterinarians who repeatedly
fail to listen to the advice of senior technicians can be labeled as stubborn
or uncaring. While technicians might not have all the answers, their input
should be given due weight in the overall management of the case.
Go Team!185
Key Points  (Continued)
● Another point for consideration is the decision to tap the pericardial sac at
the end of a shift. Pericardiocentesis for cardiac tamponade is often an
emergency, but in this case the dog was stable prior to the tap and it might
have been possible for the next shift to perform the procedure. A good rule
of thumb is to never perform a criftical procedure at the end of your shift.
It is best not to pull a chest tube, administer a higher dose of a new narcotic,
or perform procedures with potential for complications just before you plan
toleave thebuilding.
Outlining conflict between client cost constraints
and clinician wishes
A l-year-old, male neutered Maine Coon cat was presented to an emer-
 gency doctor for further evaluation and therapy of urethral obstruction
that had been originally identified at his primary care veterinarian.
Laboratory testing at that point documented mild azotemia (creatinine
2.4mg/dL). Urethral catheterization had been attempted multiple
times; however, an indwelling catheter was not able to be placed. The
          
blocked cats but had previously been able to unobstruct them without
apparent difficulty. An ultrasound of the urinary bladder was done
and revealed multiple uroliths. The cat was referred to the emergency
hospital for further therapy. The primary care veterinarian had advised
that a combination of a perineal urethrostomy (PU) and cystotomy
would be required to resolve the clinical signs. The client commented
that she was concerned about cost and asked if it would be better to
euthanize the cat. Dr. A recommended treatment and advised that
the prognosis was excellent, although urinary diseases may be quite
frustrating.
On arrival at the emergency referral hospital, the cat was still sedated.
It was a busy night and the receiving doctor (Dr. B) quickly admitted
the cat, with a brief conversation about reattempting to pass a urinary
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
186
Not Just Another Blocked Cat 187
catheter and performing surgery only if necessary Dr. B reiterated that
PUs were potentially risky in young cats due to infection or stricture
and that many stones may be treated medically.
The cat was resedated, intubated, and anesthetized, and intravenous
fluids were initiated. A urethral catheter was passed relatively easily.
but no urine was retrieved. The catheter fhushed "furny" and there had
been a "sliding through tissue sensation," which prompted concern for
a urethral tear. A contrast cystourethrogram confirmed a urethral tear.
The owner was called, and a recommendation was made for surgical
placement of a urinary catheter that would be left in for many days, to
allow for urethral healing. The owner was very upset on the phone and
indicated that she had significant financial constraints. Dr. B indicated
that doing nothing was not an option and that the only humane choice
was either surgical management or euthanasia. The owner consented
to surgery and the cat was transferred to the surgical service at the
hospital.
A perineal exploratory was performed, revealing a urethral tear just
caudal to the ischium. The surgeon was able to pass a urinary catheter
and the decision was made to let the urethra heal by second intention
with a urinary catheter in place, due to the location of the tear and
concern for the degree of inflammation in the distal urethra.
Additionally, a cystotomy to remove a large amount of calculi from the
bladder and urethra was performed. The cat did well following surgery
and started urinating around the catheter four days later. After transfer
to the weekend surgical clinician, the urinary catheter was removed
           ( 
own, with no evidence of urine leakage.
Eight hours after discharge, the cat re-presented to an emergency
doctor (Dr. C) for listlessness and decreased urine output. On examina-
perineal incision. The owner was extremely angry and felt the urinary
catheter was pulled prematurely due to multiple doctor involvement
and lack of interclinician communication. She indicated that she had
to see if the urethral tear had healed prior to pulling the catheter.
Additionally, the owner expressed concern that a PU had not been
eter and perform a urethrogram to check for healing of the tear. Based
on the urethrogram and decreased inflammation, the site of the tear
was in a position where a PU appeared to be an option. The owner
        s  
declined surgery.
188  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
As a result, leaving the urinary catheter in place with weekly ure-
throgram evaluation of tear healing was recommended. The owner
needed to be away on business and requested medical boarding for the
cat. One week later, a repeat urethrogram was performed and there
was no leakage noted from the urethra or evidence of a urethral stric-
ture. There was evidence of irritation or inflammation of the urinary
tract, including a thickened bladder wall and a dilated area of the
proximal urethra; however, urine flowed freely from the bladder out
through the peris. The cat was discharged with the owner.
Eight months later, the hospital was informed that the owner was
taking legal action regarding management of her cat's disease. Her
claim indicated that the doctors involved were negligent in their care
of her cat and failed to exercise reasonable care that resulted in addi-
tional injury. According to court documents, 4 days after final dis-
charge, the cat was not eating, drinking, or urinating and his rear leg
and groin areas were swollen and hardened. The owner took the cat
            
formed. Several days following the PU surgery, the owner noted a
"rotting" smell and the appearance of "decomposition" of the swollen
had the cat humanely euthanized. Her total bills for veterinary care
were in excess of $10,000.
The hospital's defense team supplied extensive documentation
management of this cat's disease. The court ultimately dismissed all of
the owner's claims, primarily due to the owner's inability to provide
proof of her claims. Court documents also stated, "Although (the
            
she did everything she could possibly do for (the cat) and that he was
greatly loved."
Key Points
● This case was complicated. Urinary obstruction, while a common disease
in cats, can range from quite straightforward to very challenging! In this
case, Dr. A had initially recommended a cystotomy and PU; however, Dr
for this—avoiding a PU in a young cat—was reasonable, but practically the
PU that was ultimately performed resulted in the death of the cat. Urinary
diversion is tricky at best; damaged or irritated tissues may have a hard
Not Just Anolher Blocked Cat 189
Key Points  (Continued)
time healing. No surgery comes with a promise of a successful outcome.
However, in this case, the owner realistically could feel that the plan of the
cat's care changed rapidly and without a full understanding of the risks and
benefits of each step.
 It is possible that an immediate PU and cystotomy would have been associ-
ated with a successful outcome. In some cases, it may be wise to proceed
therapy, even if the conservative therapy might be ultimately more appeal-
ing. An example of this would be an amputation of a leg with a severe
degloving injury. It is very likely that, with adequate bandage changes, even
a very severe wound ultimately would heal; however, financially it may be
preferable to amputate than to address the potential complications that
occur with long-term wound management, as well as the ongoing stress and
discomfort experienced by the patient.
In this particular case, the owner's expectations for how the cat's medical
management would proceed were not aligned with progression of the case.
Financial pressures were a factor in the owner's ability to pursue recom-
mended therapy, and her perception that a PU was ultimately recom-
mended, after already spending beyond her capabilities in the attempt to
avoid the PU, created a high degree of frustration.
 Appropriate and timely (signed and dated) documentation of case manage-
ment is not only imperative to facilitate communication between doctors
involved with the same case, but also, in the event that legal action is sought,
to provide evidence of sound case management.
   s a ,     a s 
certain procedure or test, but then additional decisions need to be made that
involve a high degree of emotion (life-or-death decision, significant financial
impact), communication of a plan and verification of understanding from
the owner's perspective is crucial. This is particularly true when several
hospitals or clinicians are involved.
63
Whose Fault?
Highlighting communication between a primary
care hospital and an emergency clinic
On a Tuesday afternoon, an hour before closing, a 7-year-old, neutered
male Shih Tzu named Teddy was presented for a reexamination to Dr.
Bass. On the previous Friday, Teddy had a cystotomy to remove
numerous cystic calculi, performed by one of the other associate vet-
erinarians in the practice. The owner's complaint was that Teddy
seemed uncomfortable and had some bruising around his incision. The
owner reported that Teddy's appetite was good and that he was urinat-
ing well. Dr. Bass examined Teddy and noted a small amount of bruis-
ing lateral to the incision and a small, nonpainful urinary bladder.
Teddy had had postoperative radiographs on Friday that had report-
edly revealed no further calculi. The differential diagnoses at this time
included typical postoperative pain, further cystic or urethral calculi,
and cystitis.
 Dr. Bass discussed repeating abdominal radiographs, performing
urethral catheterization, and culturing Teddy's urine. Based on the lack
of dysuria or stranguria, the owner opted against repeating the radio-
graphs or catheterizing Teddy Teddy was discharged on a nonsteroi-
dal antiinflammatory medication for postoperative discomfort and
inflammation.
The following day, Dr. Bass worked the evening shift at the hospital;
when he arrived, the associate who had performed Teddy's cystotomy
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
190
WhoseFaull?191
informed him that the calculi analysis had been completed and revealed
that they were calcium oxalate. She was unable to reach the owner
but had left a message for her. She also reported that, contrary to
policy, no postcystotomy radiograph was taken, as Teddy had "leapt
off the table" at the conclusion of the procedure. Later that evening.
Teddy's owner called and told Dr. Bass that she had taken Teddy to
the local emergency clinic Tuesday night about 3 hours after he had
seen him. The owner reported that Teddy had a urethral calculus that
formed urgently upon the advice of the emergency clinician. Teddy
was still at the emergency clinic and his owner was going to call to
check on him later.
After talking with the owner, Dr. Bass had several appointments to
see but was very distracted by the news from Teddy's owners. While
going in and out of these appointments, Teddy's case and his respon-
sibility for how things turned out kept running through his mind. The
    o 5      5   
emergency clinic charges; when the appointments were finished, Dr.
Bass called the owner to check on Teddy and to offer this solution. She
gladly accepted the offer and informed Dr. Bass that she had spoken
was still lethargic and bradycardic. The owner was obviously very
concerned. She had been instructed to call back after midnight.
Since Dr. Bass had received no communication from the emergency
clinic to this point, he decided to call to get his own report on Teddy's
condition and to inform the clinic to forward all charges to him. When
he spoke with the emergency clinician, he was told that Teddy was
stable and his bradycardia was mild. Dr. Bass recommended checking
his electrolytes since he was receiving potassium in his intravenous
fluids. Teddy's electrolytes were normal, and when the emergency
-Aperq pue aareuai sl 'shesop auidouandnq s paseaap uoasins
cardia resolved. He was discharged home and is doing well.
Key Points
● In hindsight, Dr. Bass wished he had insisted on re-radiographing and
catheterizing Teddy. Later investigation had documented that postopera-
tive films had not been taken after the original cystotomy because Teddy
recovered too quickly from anesthesia.
(Continued)
192 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points  (Continued)
(      e  s  
would have been appreciated. The out-of-practice costs for Teddy's surgery
were in excess of $2500; the primary hospital would have preferred to
simply absorb the cost of reoperating Teddy. Teddy could have easily been
returned to the clinic for appropriate care, as once a urinary obstruction is
 relieved, cystotomy is not an emergency procedure.
 Procedures performed at emergency hospitals (often at higher fees) that
1
 might be performed by a primary care veterinarian should be undertaken
only after full consultation and communication between colleagues at each
veterinary hospital.
64
Shelby and the Needles
What to do when a situation has changed
dramatically since the last physical examination
Shelby was found collapsed in the backyard—flat out and unable to
stand. Mrs. Needle got her neighbor to help lift Shelby into the car and
Dr. Slocumb simultaneously started to examine Shelby and take a
history. Shelby had been previously healthy but was seen 2 days before
at her primary care veterinarian with a complaint of stiffness and
reluctance to walk. The Needles reported that Shelby had "checked out
well," except for some arthritis in the hips. Some blood tests had been
done at the exam 2 days ago, and the Needles reported that their vet-
erinarian had called back at the end of the day to report that "Everything
on the blood work looks great for a 12-year-old dog" and that it would
be fine to start the arthritis medication dispensed earlier in the day.
On exam, Dr. Slocumb could see that Shelby was very pale and quite
tachycardic. Dr. Slocumb was a fast worker, and within an hour she
had diagnosed anemia, hypoproteinemia, hypovolemia, hemoabdo-
men, and a hazy pattern in the retroperitoneal space. She was only
moderately proficient at ultrasound, but she thought there was a mass
near or at the kidney. Regardless of the exact cause, the internal hemor-
rhage needed to be addressed with surgical intervention. After explain-
ing her findings to the Needles and starting the first transfusion, she
sm ss euu ahrel e Aiagns nr uosans Auaaa a u pann
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
193
194  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
actively bleeding, but it was successfully resected, and the other kidney
looked grossly normal.
Shelby's recovery from surgery was a bit slow, but not unexpected
for the circumstances. On the first postoperative day, when Shelby was
still recovering and under the influence of narcotics, Mrs. Needle was
upset and looking to lay blame somewhere. How could this have hap-
pened when everything was normal only 2 days ago? Did their veteri-
narian miss the tumor? Did the drug for the arthritis bring this on? Dr
Slocumb explained that it was true, the tumor did not grow overnight,
and that it was present during the recent exam, but that kidney fumors
are difficult to diagnose and are very good at "hiding" unless they start
to bleed. Dr. Slocumb also explained that theoretically, it might be pos-
sible for the arthritis medication to have made a minor contribution to
the bleeding, but she did not think the medication had a major role in
causing the tumor to hemorrhage. She made a note of Mrs. Needle's
questions and reminded herself to call the primary clinic to update
them on thecase.
Dr. Newman, the Needles' primary care veterinarian, called Dr.
Slocumb the next day. The Needles had arrived to review Shelby's case;
they were quite upset that he had missed the renal tumor and were
P a s 1  r a P s or 
do the best for Shelby; how could this have been prevented? Dr.
Newman spent a long hour with the Needles, and ultimately they left
happy that Shelby had been in good hands. Dr. Newman, however,
was not happy He had not heard that Shelby was at the emergency
hospital until the Needles appeared in his lobby with questions, and
he was blindsided by the resulting discussion.
Key Points
● This challenging scenario is all too common. The primary care veterinarian,
Dr. Newman, examined a very different dog. The stiffness and reluctance
to walk triggered the investigation with laboratory testing and the initiation
o  ao q ()  A- s 6 g
looked to be in great shape. Yet only 2 days later the dog had a crisis event,
shortly after starting an NSAID. While it is good practice to "go back to the
most recent intervention" and consider whether this might have been a
contributor in any animal with new clinical signs, in many cases the addi-
tion of a medication such as an NSAID is the "red herring" in the story.
Certain diseases simply are ticking time bombs and the onset of clinical
Shelby and the Needles 195
Key Points (Continued)
signs is very sudden, as was the case in this dog. Shelby was overweight
and stiff at the initial exam, with pain localized to her hips. There was no
evidence of cardiovascular instability or of hemorrhage. It can be difficult
to determine the best time to end diagnostic testing, especially for common
clirical scenarios like presumed osteoarthritis in an elderly dog. The hope
that additional testing such as ultrasound or radiographs would redirect
therapy in a stiff, elderly Labrador with normal laboratory data and physi-
cal examination findings must be weighed against both the cost of testing
and the chance that additional testing might cause harm.
● Testing for uncommon diseases sometimes results in spurious findings
lead to additional unnecessary testing and may not be in the best interests
of the animal.
● The discussion between Mrs. Needle and Dr. Slocumb was a trigger, or at
least a catalyst, for the client complaint. Dr. Slocumb answered in a factual
fashion, but Mrs. Needle took away only the parts of the conversation that
she wanted to hear: she heard that the NSAID contributed to the problem
and that Dr. Newman missed the diagnosis. Dr. Slocumb's caveats that
 q '  g  n  n  n  n 1i  
Slocumb likely recognized that Mrs. Needle was upset, could not compre-
hend the entire situation, and was likely heading toward a client complaint.
 In these situations, the emergency veterinarian (or the specialist who has
been referred the case) should feel the obligation to call the primary care
  n s a on  he n asd 5  5 
When situations like this arise in emergency or referral medicine, there can
 be an opportunity for the emergency clinician or specialist to intervene in
a positive fashion, both with the client and with the primary care veterinar-
ian, to head off the client complaint. Recognizing the warning signs and
scenarios that lead to a complaint is the first step in preventing client dis-
trust and a potentially big problem for all.
 Cases with higher risk of client complaint include those that present as an
emergency, those with high costs, clients who cannot afford care, cases with
multiple veterinarians, animals with multiple diagnoses, animals with
changing diagnoses, and animals with unanticipated clinical outcomes. In
these types of cases, second-guessing about the diagnosis or the testing
performed or offered by the primary care clinician should be avoided at all
costs.
(Continued)
196Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Key Points  (Continued)
●Bad-mouthing the primary care veterinarian is detrimental to all involved,
but even mild suggestions such as "we often do it this way instead" or "we
have not had as much luck with that drug so we use this drug instead" can
be a catalyst for clients that are already questioning a difficult situation.
● When faced with a client complaint, it is often useful to spend time deter
mining exactly what the client hopes to accomplish with the complaint. For
some clients, it is almost entirely about the cost of care, and they are either
looking to get out of a large bill or looking to get reimbursed for what they
have already paid. In many of these cases, especially when there might be
reasonable justification for the client complaint, negotiating a financial set-
tlement will eliminate the complaint and solve most problems. In other
cases, clients file a complaint at the State Board of Veterinary Medicine
trying to seek censure of the veterinarian or to have the veterinarian stripped
of their license to practice in the state. A small proportion of clients file a
complaint in an attempt to create a learning experience for the hospital and
 to prevent other clients from being faced with the same situation—in these
cases an open discussion of how the case has been reviewed in-house and
what actions have been taken to reduce the chance of a repeated problem
will satisfy the client. Spending time talking with the client to determine
their motivations and goals can be time well spent when trying to decide
what steps to take next.
65
Slow and Easy
The problems of "selling" an unfamiliar procedure
to a client
 Petunia's collapsing episodes were a recent development, infrequently
occurring over the last 3 weeks. Yet, in the last 24 hours, Petunia had
collapsed five times, and she was totally unresponsive during two of
         
going to recover from these two most recent episodes, despite the fact
that she recovered quickly from all other episodes. Mr. Thompson
brought Petunia to his primary care veterinarian, who identified a very
slow heart rate. Mr. Thompson was urged to go the regional Emergency
 Clinic and Referral Center where they could deal with this sort of thing.
Dr. Callahan, an ambitious intern, carefully examined Petunia, an
1l-year-old spayed female Labrador-Shepherd cross. Dr. Callahan
noted the slow heart rate, about 35 beats per minute, and there was a
long pause with no cardiac activity at all. During this pause, Petunia
 an   nou  rs iq    p  n
The quick in-house blood tests done shortly after presentation con-
firmed Dr. Callahan's suspicion that most major organ systems were
working well, although the blood lactate was high and the kidney
values were slightly elevated. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was per-
formed and the bradycardia was determined to be due to complete
heart block, or third-degree atrioventricular (AV) block (Figure 65.1).
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
197
198  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
Figure 65.1 An ECG showing 3rd degree AV block. Nole the unconducled
p-waves and venlricular escape rhythm.
Dr. Callahan shared the blood work, ECG, and clinical picture with
Dr. Hatt, the senior emergency clinician on duty. Dr. Hatt indicated
that the immediate placement of a permanent transvenous cardiac
pacemaker would be the best approach, with a good to excellent prog-
nosis, assuming no myocardial disease is present on the echocardio-
gram. Dr. Callahan returned with Petunia to share this information
with Mr. Thompson. Shortly, Dr. Callahan returned, stating that Mr.
Thompson would like to simply place a temporary pacemaker until his
son can arrive home from college, and then they will elect to euthanize
Petunia to prevent her from suffering during these episodes.
 Dr. Hatt started to inquire about the conversation with Mr. Thompson
and was concerned by this decision. Was the decision based on finan-
cial limitations? What were Mr. Thompson's main concerns? Since the
episodes should be eliminated by successful pacing, why would the
owner be concerned about suffering during these episodes? At what
stage in the conversation did placement of a temporary pacemaker get
presented as an option, since this would be an unusual course of action
if a permanent pacemaker was not going to be placed? Dr. Callahan
indicated that she had not seen a pacemaker placed and that she was
a bit unsure about the main concerns of deciding factors for Mr
Thompson. Dr. Hatt asked permission to go speak to the client further,
and Dr. Callahan readily agreed to this option.
 Dr. Hatt introduced herself to Mr. Thompson and proceeded to
about the pacemaker procedure and reiterated that, while it is the
Thompson family's decision to make, most dogs do very well with
pacemakers. Petunia's owners elected to go ahead with the procedure,
and the surgery was completely uneventful. A postoperative ECG
showed the improvement in Petunia's heart rate and rhythm (Figure
65.2). Petunia was discharged from the hospital in 3 days, back to her
regularself
Slow and Easy199
Figure 65.2 An ECG affer transvenous implantalion of a pacemaker. Nole the
pacing spikes immediately before the QRS complexes.
Three months later, at Christmas, Peturia's owners sent a card with
her playing in the recent snow "like a puppy again", along with a
donation to the hospital to help support care for an owner who might
not be able to afford this type of special procedure.
Key Points
●In complicated cases, with newer clinicians, it may be wise to have the most
experienced clinician talk initially with the clients (with the junior clinician
in attendance). As much as veterinarians often hate to discuss "sales," this
is a vital part of the service that we provide. Explanation as to pros and
cons of procedures are important to help the client decide what is right for
them. Confidence in explaining how a good outcome might be achieved is
critical in convincing owners to proceed with costly care.
 In this case, Petunia's owners were in hindsight unprepared for the discus-
sion of a transvenous pacemaker, and they thought it seemed very dramatic
and that they were being "selfish" in trying to prolong Petunia's life. The
intern had never seen a dog with a pacemaker and was only theoretically
familiar with how it might be done. A frank discussion about the actual
degree of invasiveness (only moderately invasive), as well as the real poten-
tial for significant improvement, lead to the clients making a decision they
were ultimately very happy with.
 While teaching and referral hospitals are often the site of excellent teaching.
some of the best learning comes in a supported environment, with the more
junior veterinarian learning in the presence of a more experienced clinician,
in real-life situations.
66
The Bandage
An example of noncollegial behavior
Dr. Roberta Jones finished rounds with trepidation. In the last run in
the intensive care unit was a large Great Dane (Bo) with an open tibial
fracture. The dog had been hit by a car last night, and while cardiovas-
cularly stable, the admitting doctor had not placed a splint or large
bandage to stabilize the fractured leg. The wounds in that area had,
  s   p i e a r
overnight doctor why no bandage had been placed on the fractured
leg: the overnight doctor replied that the intern was worried that the
cotton would stick to the wounds and that the dog had come in around
3 A.M. and was scheduled for surgery this morning. Dr. Jones became
concerned, because at the nearly the same moment, Dr. Lafayette was
beginning his rounds. While an outstanding detail-oriented surgeon,
he was almost consistently irritated with the transgressions of the
d d  s    'a 
tioned radiographs, to failure to submit various requests to the anesthe-
sia or radiology services. He was going to be very upset at this failure
to place the bandage. Dr. Lafayette asked to speak with Dr. Jones and
began a convincing diatribe about the lack of the bandage, the general
importance of the bandage, and the urgency of such a bandage. Dr.
Jones knew from experience it was futile to argue with Dr. Lafayette
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
200
The Bandage201
even though she was not there when the bandaging error was made
and had in fact already begun to try to assess the situation.
 In any case, it looked as if the dog would be going for surgery
shortly, and if not, the surgery service could promptly place the
bandage of their choosing.
As the morning stretched on, Bo had not been taken to surgery, nor
had a bandage been placed. Dr. Jones was still frustrated with her
interactions with Dr. Lafayetteit seems she often caught the brunt of
the anger, and he did not seem to realize that Dr. Jones also valued
good wound care. Dr. Jones continued to monitor Bo, and his lack of
both surgery and bandage, and in checking with the anesthesia techni-
cians she realized that Bo was not going to surgery until 3 PM. She
realized that Bo had been on the emergency room service without a
bandage from 3 to 7 A.M., or 4 hours, and by this point in the day Bo
had been on the surgery service for 7 hours without evidence that the
d s  s d a per ae r a ,
a large bandage on Bo's leg. She used four rolls of cotton, and when
However, as the last piece of tape was applied, the anesthesia tech
came to get Bo for his surgery. Dr. Jones watched with mild amusement
as Dr. Lafayette removed the bandage she had carefully placed. The
bandage was a good one, taking about 20 minutes to remove.
Key Points
 Wound care and adequate stabilization of a fracture are important
 While it might be the easiest to direct complaints to the first person that you
see, a better teaching moment inclucdes a frank discussion with the primary
clirician about why their plan was not ideal.
 If discussion with the primary clinician is not possible, the complaint should
be made to a serior clinician with knowledge of that person's involvement
and skills.
shortly. While Dr. Lafayette's behavior was not ideal, a more professional
solution would have been preferred.
We'll See What the Blood Work Shows
The importance of timely client communication
Brandy, a 12-year-old spayed female St. Bernard, is seen through the
emergency service by Dr. M, with a presenting complaint of lethargy.
 poor appetite, and recent weakness. Her owners (the Coopers) explain
that, while they love Brandy, they are worried her quality of life has
   r    g
and believe that is the path they would choose if "anything bad" was
found. However, they are eager to get to the bottom of the problem
and agree to admit her to the hospital.
On physical examination, Brandy is thin, with pale mucous mem-
brane and equivocal hepatosplenomegaly. Blood is collected for a com-
plete blood cell count and chemistry profile, and a urine sample is
obtained by cystocentesis. Diagnostic imaging, including radiographs
of her chest and abdomen, are planned. An intravenous catheter is
placed, and Brandy is started on intravenous fluids and famotidine.
In rounds that evening, Dr. M transfers Brandy to the care of the
overnight doctor. He has not yet seen the results of the laboratory
testing or diagnostic imaging, but he relays that Brandy appears stable
and he describes the family's concern for her quality of life. Dr. M
results.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
202
We'll See What the Blood Work Shows203
The evening doctor (Dr. H) busies herself in the intensive care urit
helping to stabilize a variety of pets. However, about 9 PM., she
remembers that she has not heard from Dr. M about the results, so she
goes to evaluate them herself. Interpretation of the complete blood cell
count documents acute lymphoblastic leukemia with 10o,000 circulat-
ing blasts. The imaging results confirm hepatosplenomegaly. Dr. H
calls Dr. M to determine "the plan" and Dr. M says that, while he saw
the results, he wasn't sure what they meant, and he thought someone
could call the Coopers in the morning with that information; perhaps
they should consider a bone marrow aspirate?
Dr. H hangs up on Dr. M in frustration and calls the Coopers, describ-
ing that Brandy has a form of cancer and that, while there may be some
treatment options, the prognosis is guarded. The Coopers immediately
elect to euthanize Brandy, and come in to visit her within the hour.
They comment to Dr. H how grateful they are to have an answer and
that they are glad Brandy did not suffer.
Key Points
● While giving "bad news" is never pleasant, in this case, Dr. M should have
heard and appreciated the clients' comments concerning euthanasia. For
jurior veterinarians, consultation with more experienced colleagues is vital.
As soon as practical (and absolutely before leaving for the day) all test
results should be communicated to clients. Going home, with the plan of
following up the next day, is almost always a bad plan, as clients (and the
 PETS) deserve prompt notification of significant test results.
68
What Antibiotic Is Best?
Highlighting communication issues between senior
veterinaryclinicians
Pugsley, a 6-year-old spayed female Pug, was recovering from a hem-
ilaminectomy when she was noted to be coughing and to have a
swollen incision. Her past medical history was unremarkable; she had
been seen by the neurology service for ataxia, and over the past several
days she had had first a magnetic resonance imaging scan and subse
quently surgical decompression of her T12-T13 and T13-L1 sites.
       s
 paretic, with deep pain intact, but without motor function. Due to the
respiratory difficulty, Pugsley was returned to the intensive care unit
(ICU) for ongoing care and monitoring. The senior ICU clinician on
service advised that Pugsley's antibiotic regime include amikacin, due
to the concerns about a nosocomial (hospital-acquired) infection. The
senior neurology clinician disagreed and felt that coverage with enro-
floxacin and ampicillin should work fine; he did not like aminoglyco-
sides and was concerned about possible nephrotoxicity. The ICU
clinician strongly disagreed; studies in the ICU at this hospital had
confirmed that all isolates from patients that had been hospitalized for
more than 48 hours (as Pugsley had) were invariably resistant to anti-
biotics other than aminoglycosides. However, the neurology clinician
remained unconvinced and, moreover, banned the neurology resident
from using anything other than enrofloxacin. This was exceedingly
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
204
What Anlibiolic Is Best?205
frustrating for the ICU service, as they were uncomfortable with that
plan. The ICU senior clinician complained to hospital administration
about the neurologist, and the neurologist counter-complained. Finally,
a consensus to perform a tracheal wash was reached, with the thought
of using the final culture and sensitivity data to guide therapy. While
those results were pending. the neurologist insisted that enrofloxacin
be continued. Each day, Pugsley worsened and, finally, on the fourth
day of hospitalization she suffered a cardiopulmonary arrest and could
not be revived. The final culture results documented a multi-drug-
resistant Escherichia coli that was sensitive only to amikacin and
imipenum.
Key Points
● Hospital-acquired infections are commonly multi-drug resistant; knowl-
edge of the specific hospital's resistant patterns is vital when looking to
 Culture results from all hospitalized patients should be monitored so that
commonly resistant organisms are treated appropriately.
 Interpersonal relations between strong-willed individuals can be challeng-
ing at best. Specifically in this case, both parties were stubborn. No one
individual can be the most up to date on every topic; consultation and col-
laboration improves patient care and limits mistakes.
69
Molly and the Chicken Bone
A case outlining the importance of reevaluating
patients referred for a second opinion
Molly, a 6-month-old, female mixed-breed dog, was referred to a uni-
versity veterinary emergency service for endoscopy to remove a gastric
foreign body. The previous day she had eaten an entire chicken leg
bone, which she had stolen off a dirty dish in the kitchen. Her owners
were initially not concerned as they thought that she would be able to
digest it, but overnight she had been vomiting up small amounts of
fluid and was very lethargic. A radiograph taken by her primary vet-
erinarian revealed a large chicken leg bone in her stomach. No other
foreign material was evident. She was referred to a specialist for endos-
copy because the owners did not have the money to have a gastrotomy
performed (an estimated $20o0 for surgery and perioperative care with
intravenous fluids, gastroprotectants, analgesia, etc.).
On presentation to the specialty hospital, Molly was found to be
depressed, but otherwise her physical examination and vital signs were
normal.
a $1000 estimate for endoscopy. Molly's owners had already spent a
few hundred dollars at their primary veterinarian's office, and they had
to spend a bit of time to get money together for the deposit. Fortunately,
they were able to come up with the funds.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
206
Molly and the Chicken Bone207
As the intern was in the process of calling in anesthesia and a medi-
cine resident to perform the endoscopy procedure, the attending emer-
gency room (ER) doctor walked into the ER to see how things were
going with the intern and her cases. The intern described Molly's situ-
ation and told the attending that everyone was called in for the emer-
gency endoscopy procedure. However, the ER attending challenged
the intern to think about other ways to approach the situation, particu-
larly with the dog's owners wanting to do what was best for Molly
but having significant financial constraints. While they were pondering
this thought, the ER attending administered Molly an intravenous dose
of apomorphine (alternatively, a subconjunctival dose can be used).
up the entire chicken leg bone! Molly was then reurited with her very
concerned owners, with the total cost to the owners being only US$175.
Shortly thereafter the intern called Molly's primary veterinarian to
inform him what had happened with Molly. The intern was a little
worried that he might be angry with her for not having had Molly
scoped, as they had recommended. Quite to the contrary, he was over
joyed that Molly was able to vomit up the chicken bone, saving the
owners money and preventing an anesthetic event and invasive pro
cedure for Molly!
Key Points
● While induction of emesis is contraindicated in the case of some toxin and
foreign-body ingestions, such as caustic substances and fish hooks, it is an
excellent option for many cases and is associated with much less morbidity
and with lower cost to the client. It is recommended that the relative risks
appropriate imaging) be considered carefully, and on a case-by-case basis.
● While the primary care veterinarian undoubtedly wanted what was best for
Molly, it is important, particularly as a veterinarian working in a referral
 d   d   n    s
some management options may not have been considered upon initial
evaluationl.
● As it turns out, the primary veterinarian had considered induction of emesis,
but decided against it because Molly had already vomited fluid and had
not vomited up the bone. However, the emetic effects of apomorphine are
so potent that it can induce more forceful emesis than naturally occurring
vomiting, allowing for more material to be expelled.
70
Know the Nodes
Why physical examination is so important
Riley was a 4year-old, very aggressive, overweight, male intact
 Rottweiler who presented to the veterinarian for a few days of lethargy
and inappetance. He had been previously healthy, was on no medica-
urinating normally, had no travel history, was always supervised when
outside, and had no gastrointestinal signs. Because of his aggressive
nature, a cursory physical examination was performed and diagnostics
were recommended.
A complete blood cell count, serum chemistry analysis, and urinaly.
sis on a free-catch sample were completed, and no abnormalities were
noted. Because of the inappetance, abdominal radiographs were per-
formed and were also found to be normal. Riley was sent home with
some gastric protectants for suspected gastroenteritis, and his owners
were told to recheck if no improvement was seen within a few days.
Four days later, Riley's owners called the veterinarian to let him
know that Riley was really no better. He was still lethargic and now
was not wanting to eat anything at all. The owners had not brought
him back in, as they had to travel out of town unexpectedly. However,
now that they were back, they were quite concerned: Riley had visibly
lost weight, was holding his head down, and was salivating exces-
sively. The veterinarian recommended a referral to the local specialty
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
208
Know the Nodes  209
hospital, as he had run the diagnostics he was capable of and still did
not have an answer as to why Riley was not improving.
Thankfully, the specialty hospital agreed to see Riley that day. The
owners brought the initial diagnostic tests with them to the specialist
and warned the new doctor and technician about how aggressive and
unpredictable Riley could be. A full history was taken, and Riley was
then brought into the treatment room for a muzzle and full physical
examination. Immediately after the muzzle was placed, the specialist
found that Riley's mandibular and prescapular lymph nodes were very
enlarged, measuring 6 cm across. In addition, axillary nodes were pal-
pable. The lymph nodes were aspirated, and lymphoblastic lymphoma
was diagnosed.
Key Points
●A thorough physical examination should always be performed, regardless
of the demeanor of the patient. Obvious abnormalities can be missed, and
other diagnostics may not delineate the source of the problem, as in this
case.
● Client communication in this case can be tricky, as the specialist should not
infer to the client that the initial veterinarian missed the presence of the
enlarged at that time, the specialist did not examine Riley that day, so it
remains an unknown. If the owner wished to pursue the issue, discussion
with the primary veterinarian should occur, with full disclosure of the initial
physical examination findings in the medical record.
Mistakes do occur, and physical examination findings can be missed. Being
honest and straightforward about potential errors in examination of a cli-
ent's pet will help to ensure a strong doctor-client relationship in the future.
71
Nancy's Neck Pain
A case outlining why a specialist may be helpful
A phone consultation was sought with a board-certified veterinary
neurologist by a frustrated Dr. Smith. He had just rechecked a
4-year-old, spayed female Beagle dog named Nancy. Earlier that
week, Nancy had presented to him with a complaint of severe neck
pain. Her owners reported that, within a couple of minutes of letting
her outside on Monday morning, Nancy started screaming loudly and
persistently. Nancy was not supervised while outside but she was in a
fenced yard, so trauma seemed unlikely. Her owners immediately ran
outside to see what had happened and found her standing in one spot,
her head held low, crying out loudly. They tried to encourage her to
come back inside, but she was reluctant to move. Ultimately they had
to tempt her inside with her favorite food.
Inside, Nancy was not much better. She tried to eat but as soon as
she put her head down to the bowl she started screaming and made
no further attempts to eat. When Dr. Smith saw her that morning, she
did indeed have severe neck pain such that you could barely touch her
without her crying out. This made a full examination difficult, but from
what he could tell, she was using her legs normally. She also had a
slightly high temperature (102.9°F, 39.4°C) that he attributed to pain
and anxiety.
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
210
Nancy's Neck Pain 211
Dr. Smith had discussed with the owners some of the differential
(IVDD), a cervical spinal cord space-occupying lesion (e.g., neoplasia),
cervical soft tissue injury (i.e., neck sprain- or strain-type injury second-
ary to trauma), and intracranial disease.
Given financial constraints, the owners elected conservative manage-
ment with crate rest and pain relief. Nancy was sent home with a
week's worth of oral tramadol (2mg/kg orally every 8 hours) and
carprofen (2mg/kg orally every 24 hours). The following day Nancy
was still very painful so they called Dr. Smith, who recommended
adding gabapentin for additional analgesia, and increasing the doses
of both her existing medications (up to 4mg/kg of tramadol every 8
s,uen Aepsil1 Aa (sanoq 7l Aiaaa uajordrs go Sy/z pe sinoy
owners still had seen no improvement. The crying and howling was
unrelenting, and Nancy still wouldn't eat (which is very unusual for
her). They just felt horrible for her and so brought her back in to see
Dr. Smith, to see if there was anything else he could do.
At the time of recheck Dr. Smith was concerned that, given the lack
of improvement, Nancy would need to be referred for a full workup
with a neurologist, which would likely include a magnetic resonance
and analysis; this generally costs around US$2500. Nancy's owners
were devastated, as they really didn't have the money to pursue such
extensive testing, let alone afford neck surgery if it was a cervical disc
(likely another US$2500). They wanted to do everything for Nancy but
these costs were just not possible for them. Nancy's owners were con-
sidering euthanasia when Dr. Smith decided to just call the university
been devastated to have to euthanize Nancy at such a young age, but
he just didn't know what else to do. He was a little embarrassed to call
the university given that it was unlikely that he was going to be able
to refer his client, but overcame this concern and called anyway.
service. He explained Nancy's situation and sought advice. Dr. Spock
recommended that Nancy be referred regardless of the financial situa-
fion of the owners, as long as they could afford the US$100 examination
fee, as it would be useful for him to just evaluate the dog. He discussed
            
drome (a sterile, steroid-responsive meningitis arteritis) that can cause
the other differentials that Dr. Smith was considering were also plau-
sible, this was something that could easily be ruled in or out. Dr. Spock
212  Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
advised that, although imaging is ideally recommended, a presump-
tive diagnosis of beagle pain syndrome can be made on the basis of
signalment, clinical signs, and the results of a CSF tap. In fact Dr. Spock
said that he had some time in his schedule that afternoon, so Nancy's
owners could bring her straight over and he could do the CSF tap that
day if they were able.
Accordingly Dr. Smith discussed this option with Nancy's owners
and Nancy was seen by Dr. Spock that afternoon. As previously, Nancy
had severe neck pain and a mild fever on examination, with no other
obvious neurologic abnormalities. With her owners' permission, Nancy
was anesthetized and a CSF tap performed. Nancy did well for the
anesthesia and procedure; CSF cytology revealed profound neu-
trophilic inflammation consistent with Dr. Spock's suspicion of Beagle
pain syndrome. Given that an underlying infectious meningitis could
not be ruled out, samples of CSF were submitted for culture and serol
ogy. Since she had been receiving nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
medications for the prior 3 days, Dr. Spock allowed a 24-hour washout
period until starting corticosteroids. Nancy's owners continued to rest
       d  
started on immunosuppressive doses of prednisone after the washout
period, to which she had a good response. Doxycycline had been
started, given that tickborne disease could not be ruled out, but was
subsequently stopped when the infectious disease testing came back
negative.
   s  s ir     e i
essentially resolved and she was back to eating and drinking normally.
Nancy's owners were very glad that Dr. Smith had referred them see
       s     
cost them about US$5o0 and Nancy was back to her normal self!
Key Points
   d   A ae sa ss n o
phone at no charge. Such a consultation is welcomed and encouraged even
if the client is potentially unable to afford referral and full workup. In this
age of progressively advancing veterinary specialist medicine, consultation
with a specialist should be viewed as part of the diagnostic process for any
case seen in practice that is not straightforward. It is also important that pet
owners are given the option of referral.
Nancy's Neck Pain213
Key Points  (Continued)
 This may be the only case of beagle pain syndrome that Dr. Smith will see
in his career as a general practitioner, but by consulting with a neurology
specialist he was able to draw on their expertise and experience, allowing
him to broaden his list of differential diagnoses. Because of the referral, a
diagnosis was achieved and Nancy was successfully treated with a good
long-term outcome.
Appendix:
How to Set Up Your Own Morbidity and
Mortality Conference
Format
Cases should be organized and presented in a format to include perti-
nent historical findings, physical examination, laboratory tests, imaging
modalities, surgical intervention, treatments, and outcome. If possible
necropsy results should be included. Differential diagnoses should be
 presented prior to definitive diagnosis. Questions should be generated
should be maintained by not including names, case numbers, and
so on.
Discussion
The goal of the morbidity and mortality (M&M) rounds is to present a
forum in which cases can be discussed and evaluated by different clini-
cians in all specialties. To that end, individual case presentations should
be limited to 30-40 minutes with an additional 20-30 minutes set aside
for audience discussion and debate. Pathophysiology related to the
clinical case of interest may be appropriate in your presentation, but
not at the expense of questions, comments, and insights offered by
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care, First Edition By L.L. Powell, E.A. Rozanski, and J.E. Rush
@ Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
215
216 Small Animal Emergency and Crilical Care
clinicians in your audience. We would like to support an open forum
for the discussion of cases when complications arise, and to begin to
learn from these cases without the fear of presenting clinicians feeling
clear and strive to make these sessions educational, and at the same
time, improve patient care.
Confidentiality
It is standard practice in human M&M rounds for discussion of patient
cases to be held in complete confidentiality within the M&M group
session, primarily because of doctor-patient confidentiality. We feel we
Basically, all that is discussed within the confines of the rounds will
not be allowed to be discussed following the M&M session.
Confidentiality agreement
1
, promise to maintain strict client/ patient
confidentiality, and will not discuss cases presented within M&M
rounds except during the rounds session.
Signature
Date
acute lymphoblastic leukemia 203
cyclosporine 114, 115
A-a gradient 11
cystic calculi, urinary 190
adding antibiotics 92, 204
advanced diagnostic imaging 28, 45, 52, 155
diabetes 25,90, 147
adverse drug event 8, 25, 28, 31, 94, 134
diabetic ketoacidosis 90, 147
aggressive dogs 208
diagnostic error 45, 50, 71, 83, 175, 208
agonal breathing 119
dialysis 35
air embolism 3
diaphgramatic hernia 54
albumin 113
discharge instructions 167
alpha-linoic acid 35
discussion on finances 8, 21, 142, 190
amputation 21
disseminated intravascular coagulation 119
 anesthesia complication 3
dosing error 8
ascites 67
drug dosing error 28
assisted ventilation 158
dysphagia 8
attention to detail 31, 77, 83, 88, 90, 108, 130, 151,
dystocia 85
162
E. coli 6, 96
bandaging complications 167
Ehmer sling 167
biliary obstruction 52
endemic disease 7
bladder rupture 169
esophagitis 164
blastomycosis 47
ethylene glycol 28, 60
blood pressure 45, 71
 exploratory surgery 88, 130
brachycephalic 81
extra hepatic biliary obstruction (EHBO) 52, 102
brain tumor 155
bronchoscopy 83
feline asthma 106
bronchospasm 8
fluid therapy with heart disease 69
foreign body 83, 92, 110, 116, 149, 206
canine albumin 113
fracture 138,200
cardiomyopathy 69,90
cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation (CPCR) 3,
gastric dilatation-volvulus 119
8, 142, 162, 184
glaucoma 74
catheter issue 31
collapse 8
heatstroke 81
communication within practice 14, 50, 57, 92, 96,
hemangiosarcoma 47, 130, 142
104, 119, 138, 144, 186, 200
hemolytic anemia 71
computed tomography 154
hepatic disease 157
conjunctivitis 71
hospitalized pet behavior 57, 81
conservative therapy 138, 206
hunting dog 47
cortisol 63
hydrogen peroxide 164
coxofemoral luxation 167
hypernatremia 57, 69,96
"crazy"clients 160
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) 60, 63,
cruciate ligament 151
151
C-section 85
hypoglycemia 60
CT guided biopsy with Jamshidi needle 38
hyponatremia 67
217
218  Index
iatrogenic complication 50, 169, 175, 183
presenting complaint 116, 154
immunological reaction 113
communication 25, 60, 71, 83, 147, 186, 190,
immunosuppression 94
193, 206
insulin 25, 31
procedural error 11, 14, 17,21, 25, 28, 50,54, 71,
Internet usage by clients 134
88
itraconazole 47
progression of disease 190
pulmonary edema 3
junior doctor 60, 92, 96, 102, 119, 138, 149, 167,
pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) 181
169, 175, 183, 197
PZI insulin 25
lactulose 57
rabies 100
linear foreign body 3,31,77,88
red eye 71
liver failure 157
referring to a specialist 35, 50, 147, 206, 210
lymphoma 209
renal failure 6, 17,35, 127
lytic lesion 21,38
respiratory distress (brachycephalic) 81
respiratory failure 47
massive transfusion 142, 144
routinue surgery/case 11, 186
mastectomy 154
medical records 124, 144, 160, 186
seizures 35,57,155,157
meningitis 211
sepsis 6, 8, 77, 88, 92, 113, 149, 176
metabolic acidosis 90
spay 14
metabolic alkalosis 88
spontaneous pneumothorax 11, 50
missed infection 6
struvite crystalluria 169
MRI examination 45
surgical sponges 14
muscle tremors 157
syncope 197
mushroom toxicity 157
myasthenia gravis 8
teaching styles 180
technical error 11, 14, 17,25, 31, 38,50, 96
nasogastric tube 17
technician-doctor interactions 104, 147, 183
neckpain 210
telephone advice 164
non-collegial behavior 200, 204
third degree atrioventricular block 197, 198
nosocomial infection 204
thoracic trauma 54
thoracocentesis 11, 50
opportunistic infection 94
thoracostomy tube 11
owner contact for hospitalized patient 149, 202
toxin ingestion 35, 157, 164
owner education/options/communications 6, 38,
50,85,94,104, 116,119,142,144, 149,151, 162,
tracheal collapse 104
169, 186, 193
tumor, abdominal 175, 193
oxygen therapy 47, 50
tumor, brain 155
oxytocin 85
tumor, mammary glands 154
tunnel vision 63, 67, 102, 130, 151
pacemaker 198
pancreatitis 52, 102
urethral calculi 190
panting(excessive) 57
urinary catheter 6, 190
pericardial effusion 67, 183
urinary obstruction 6, 169, 186
perineal urethrostomy (PU) 188
urine specific gravity 63, 69
pneumonia 17
uroabdomen 170
point of care testing 45, 77
portosystemic shunt 57
volume overload 35
potential drug side effects 134
vomiting 3
preferential client treatment 28,147
pre-renal azotemia 63,69
zinc toxicity 71, 108