RECORD
Veterinary
MedicalTeam
Handbook
ANDREW J.ROSENFELD
Blackwell
Publishing
The Veterinary Medical Team Handbook
The Team Approach to Veterinary Medicine
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
The Veterinary Medical Team Handbook
The Team Approach to Veterinary Medicine
Andrew J. Rosenfeld
DVM
Diplomate, American Board of Veterinary Practitioners
Canine andFeline
Blackwell
Publishing
Andrew J. Rosenfeld, DVM, Diplomate ABVP, is the founder and president of Veterinary Team Education Course. He lec-
tures frequently on topics in emergency medicine, small animal anatomy and physiology, and cardiology. He has practiced
small animal critical care and emergency medicine for 16 years and served as hospital director of Paradise Valley Emergency
Animal Clinic in Scottsdale, Arizona, for 3 years. Previously, Dr. Rosenfeld was director of technical education for the Pet's
Choice family of veterinary hospitals and specialty practices and an adjunct professor at Mesa Community College and
Arizona State University.
@2007 Blackwell Publishing
All rights reserved
Blackwell Publishing Professional
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014, USA
Orders:
1-800-862-6657
Office:
1-515-292-0140
Fax:
1-515-292-3348
Web site: www.black wellprofessional.com
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
9600 Garsington Road Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel.: +44 (0)1865 776868
Blackwell Publishing Asia
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel.: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by
Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of pay-
  i   s          s 
1/2007.
First edition, 2007
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rosenfeld, Andrew J.
The veterinary medical team handbook: the team approach to veterinary medicine/Andrew J. Rosenfeld.—-Ist ed.
p.icm.
Includes bibliographical re ferences and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-7817-5759-1 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-7817-5759-2 (alk. paper)
1. Veterinary medicine—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title.
Handbooks. SF 748 R813v 2007]
SF748.R67 2007
636.089—dc22
2006036123
The last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Dedicated to Lisa, Lauren, and Jillian, who act as my center,
Contents
Preface
ix
Section 3
CD-ROM Instructions and Contents
xi
Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the
Diagnostics
Section 1
Chapter 21(
Complete Blood Count
293
The First Two Days on the Job
Chapter 22(
 Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level
 Chapter 1
Basic Terminology
Clinical Pathology
3
309
Chapter 2
Vaccines, Heartworms, and Their
Chapter 23
 Urinalysis and Fecal Clinical
Terminology
7
Diagnostics
337
Chapter 3
Elective Procedures
15
Chapter 24
Electrocardiogram
353
 Chapter 4
25
Chapter 25
 Radiology, Ultrasound, and Endoscopy
Safety and Restraint
Chapter 5
 Obtaining an Adequate and Precise
Techniques
365
History
33
Chapter 6
The Medical Record and the 30-Second
Section 4
Triage Examination
39
Understanding the Concepts of Disease and
Treatment
Section 2
Chapter 26
Pharmacology
379
Anatomy and Physiology-
-The Science behind
Chapter 27
 Toxins and Poisons
397
the Diseases
Chapter 28
Fluid Therapy
409
Chapter 7
Physical Exam
51
Chapter 29
Anesthesia
419
Chapter 8
Skeletal System
63
Chapter 30
Shock
435
Chapter 9
Teeth and the Oral Cavity
87
 Chapter 31
Cardiopulmonary Cerebral
Chapter 10
Gastrointestinal System
103
Resuscitation (CPCR)
453
Chapter 11
Respiratory System
129
Chapter 12
 Cardiovascular System
147
Appendix
461
Chapter 13
Urogenital System
173
Glossary
487
Chapter 14
Index
Liver
193
505
 Chapter 15
 Exocrine and Endocrine Pancreas
207
Chapter 16
Thyroid Gland
217
Chapter 17
Adrenal Gland
223
Chapter 18
 Reproduction
235
Chapter 19
249
Chapter 20
 Eyes and Ears
273
vii
Preface
Veterinary medicine is a dynamic field, allowing all team
●give the paraprofessional the education and tools to dis-
-d   an o pae a   
cuss and understand the different disease, diagnostic, and
sion. It is the only medical profession that allows a medical
ban a  pn sassad 
●serve as a quick reference source for the paraprofessional
medicine, internal medicine, and surgery teams all in one
 on general practice subjects; and
day. With increasing expectations of quality care and tech-
● reinforce the concepts of each section with interactive
nology, a team member's knowledge and responsibilities are
 clinical cases in a PowerPoint format.
growing at an exponential rate.
This book is dedicated to that veterinary team that works
Using this book either as a simple resource or as a part of
as one unit to
a formal training program will help refine the skills of the
staff and make them greater resources within the hospital
focus the doctor's attention where the hospital needs him
team.
or her most,
 utilize the staff to their fullest potential,
Acknowledgments
● increase staff satisfaction and loyalty as well as decrease
employee tumover,
Thanks to the following professionals who reviewed the
increase revenue by becoming more effective communi-
book: Dr. Curt Coffman, Fellow of the Academy of
-d  ass m e  s p s
Veterinary Dentistry, Aid Animal Dental Clinic, Scottsdale,
lems and deal with upset clients, and
Arizona; Dr. Kimberly Coyner, DVM ACVD, Dermatology
● turm the veterinary technician field into a profession that
Clinic for Animals, Phoenix, Arizona; Dr. Sharon Dial,
can be financially and professionally rewarding.
 DVM ACVP (Clinical and Anatomic Pathology), associate
research scientist, Department of Veterinary Science and
au pue suuen e se pasn aq on papuau si yooq su
Microbiology at University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona;
   n   n n  m  
Victoria M. Lukasik, DVM, Diplomate ACVA, Southwest
 source for the veterinarian, the patient, and the client.
Veterinary Anesthesiology, and assistant research scientist,
Radiology, University of Arizona College of Medicine,
Phoenix, Arizona.
How to Use This Book
Thanks also to Stephen Bistner, DVM DACVO, Ply-
Each section of this book is divided into sections. The sections
mouth, Minnesota, and Jeffrey Bowersox, DVM ACVO,
are broken down into the following: The First Two Days on the
Wilmington, Delaware, for editing support and images.
Job, Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the
Special thanks to Caron Cann, who has been my profes-
Diseases, Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the
sional sounding board and a compass for me while I finished
Diagnostics, Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treat-
this project.
ment, and the Appendix. The overall goal of this book is to
ix
Veterinary Medical Team Handbook
Interactive CD-ROM
The goal of the interactive CD-ROMs is to practice the key
To Load the CD
concepts of each section of the book. The CD-ROM is split
into two programs.
Both CD-ROMs contain self-loading narrated PowerPoint
The first CD-ROM is meant for practice with the first
based programs that work on any computer (PC or
Macintosh). Both contain large files and will take 3 to 5
two sections of the book with special focus on:
minutes to load. Simply place the CD-ROM into your CD-
 ROM drive and allow the program to load. The program will
●Auscultation Trainer—Reviews basic concepts of aus-
cultation and allows team members to practice ausculting
then instruct you on how to navigate through each program.
hearts with different murmurs in case formats.
    an ss  
To Navigate in the PowerPoint Environment
 concepts of nomenclature, lesion position, and obtaining
Once in the PowerPoint environment, you will be able to
a medical history and understanding the concepts of sur-
gery, vaccination, and heartworm prevention.
navigate through each slide by clicking on selected tabs to
move forward, answer a question, evaluate a heart rhythm, or
+
 Section II Cases—A slightly more advanced program
outlining and testing concepts of basic anatomy and
 u au n si asa moe asead 'ssd
physiology, diseases, clinical diagnostics, and communi-
cation with clients about the cardiac, renal, liver, and pan-
environment.
creatic organs.
1. When the program begins, you get a Macro Warning.
 soron, palo spus ueuoo sunond su
The second CD-ROM contains advanced rounds for the
allow the participant to move throughout the environ-
medical team focusing on physical examination, clinical di-
ment, listen to sound files, and view image files con-
 agnostics, and treatment concepts. Topics contained on the
CD-ROM are:
  o   a as  as o 
computer or its ability to function. In order to use the
CD-ROMS you will need to select to activate the macros
 EKG Trainer and Case Rounds—This section reviews
in this presentation.
the basic concepts of the electrical rhythm of the heart,
step-by-step protocols on how to evaluate an EKG, and
how recognize basic arrhythmias.
      
 a n ss a o n an g
Security Alert-Macro
hospital at the same time; the team has to evaluate which
animal is more of an emergency at each step of the eval-
uation.
through toxin and poison ingestion cases and focuses on
w
common physical symptoms and clinical diagnostics as-
sociated with common poison ingestion.
Complete Blood Count Rounds—This program shows
the medical team how to evaluate a complete blood count
focusing on red blood cell morphology, white blood cell
changes, and platelet estimation on the blood film.
Fluid Rounds—This section takes the medical team
 In order to view this program properly, please select
through how to evaluate the patient for dehydration, de-
Enable Macro and click Okay. The program will then
termine fluid need, and practice fluid calculation.
load and run normally.
七
xii
CD-ROM Instructions and Contents
 2. When selecting a tab, make sure that the mouse arrow
 3. When using the mouse, you inadvertently click or use
has changed to a small hand before left clicking the
the dial to move one slide forward. If you do inadver-
mouse button. This will select the proper tab, and will
tently move to the next slide and are out of place, simply
ond an ui pmg aps auo no ao 1ou
 right click the mouse, which will bring up the following
options:
VMIHCD-RO
VMTHCD-ROM#1
Auscultation
Trainer
sectionI
Correct way—The mouse has gone from arrow to hand,
showing you are selecting the proper tab.
By right clicking the mouse, the following options be-
come available, please highlight Previous and click with
VMTHCD-ROM#1
the left mouse button. This will move you back one slide
space.
4. There is no narration for the slide. On occasion,
PowerPoint may not initiate the narrative sequence. To
restart the narration process, simply click the left mouse
button once.
Finally—The programs are meant as fun exercises to rein-
force the concepts of the book. At no time does the program,
the book, or the author suggest that the medical team is re-
sponsible for diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment of the patient.
Incorrect Way—In this image the arrow has not changed
into the hand, and clicking the mouse will move the pro-
 gram forward one slide only.
Section 1
The First Two Days on the Job
 This section is for the new employee who has an active interest in learming the fundarmentals of being a part of the veterinary
team. It is a training manual that outlines what all team members should know on the first 2 days on the job.
Chapter 1
Basic Terminology
Introduction
Figure 1.2. Each toe or finger is closely related to our fin-
gers and toes. The first digit, which represents our thumb, is
As with the study of any science or profession, there is a lan-
the dog and cat's dewclaw, a small digit that does not directly
 guage and terminology unique to this knowledge; veterinary
have a function in weight bearing and is often removed when
medicine is no different. Understanding the basics of veteri-
the animal is young (3-4 days old).
nary terminology is a critical aspect of becoming an excel-
The first digit is closest to the medial plane of the animal
lent team member and will better serve your clients and pa-
and hence we say that the first digit is the most medial. The
tients. Many clients will use terminology that they pick up
other digits are farther away from the medial plane from the
from other hospitals, the Intermet, or human medicine, and if
first digits and hence we refer to these digits as being lateral
 a team mermber does not fully understand what the client is
to the first digit.
asking for, miscommunication and poor client service can
Therefore, the third digit is medial to the fifth digit and
occur. For example, consider the following situations.
lateral to the first and second digits, and the fourth digit is
medial to the fifth digit and lateral to the first, second, and
●A client calls and informs you that their pet needs to
third digits.
Also, we must be able to inform the medical team where
steroid injection for allergies or an allergen vaccine for a
ay uo uoisod s11 0i uonejau ul sal A1nfun 1o 'sseu 'uoiba1 e
pet that has been skin tested for allergies.
limb. Hence the closer the area of concern lies to the body,
●A client comes in and requests that "their pet needs to be
the more proximal it is. The farther away the injury or area
put to sleep." In most cases this suggests that their pet is
lies from the body the more distal it is said to be. In the il-
 on n sn a s i az aq o
lustration in Figure 1.2, the wrist is proximal to the toes, or
for sedation for a pet that may need to be groomed or that
the toes are said to be distal to the wrist. This directional ter-
is going on a car trip.
minology refers only to limbs.
A client brings their male cat in for a “spay." If the sex of
When discussing the main torso of the animal's body, we
the animal is not quickly determined, the cat may be
define areas closer to the spine as having a dorsal position
-syoao ue iog dn pas Aionans Aiaissod pue paddand
terectomy.
which have a ventral position. Hence a dog's ears are gener-
ally dorsal to their eyes, or the eyes sit more ventral to the
All these situations sound amusing, but they have oc-
canine's ears
curred in everyday clinical settings. Therefore, it becomes
Further directional terminology occurs when we explain
pe pisapun n Aisudsai s pssd Aaan 
where the body part lies in its relation to the head or tail.
educate the clients so that they can make an informed choice.
Body parts that lie closer to the head of the pet are cranial
in their position, whereas body parts that are closer to the
Directional Terminology
tail are caudal in their location. Thus a pet's ears are cranial
to their shoulders, or their shoulders are caudal to the ears.
 To properly describe a lesion, injury, or other problem, the
For a review, see Figures 1.3 and 1.4.
first thing that must be mastered is the directional terminol-
ogy that helps locate the problem on the pet's body (Figure
History Terminology
1.1). To systematically do this, we create a series of planes
that split the pet into sections. The most important plane we
Taking a good medical history is one of the chief focuses of
deal with is the median plane that splits the pet into two
this book and will be discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
symmetrical halves.
However, there are certain abbreviations that are used in tak-
Once this plane is established, we compare where a body
ing an accurate history and relaying this information to the
part or injury falls in relation to the proximity of the median
medical team. Some abbreviations used in taking the ani-
plane. For example, the forelimb of a dog is illustrated in
mal's history are as follows:
3
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
DESCrIPTIVE TERMS - PLaNES - SECTIONS
1. Dorsal
2.Ventral
Figure I.1. Descriptive terms. (Courtesy of Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini, Susan. Sudz
Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used with permission from Sudz Publishing.)
●C: coughing
●BAR: bright, alert, and responsive
S: sneezing
 QAR: quiet, alert, and responsive
V: vomiting
 Depressed: animal is not active or normally responsive to
D: diarrhea
stimuli
PD: polydipsia (increased thirst)
 Comatose/obtund: animal is not responding to any stim-
 PU: polyuria (increased urination)
uli, severe depression without consciousness
+
BM: bowel movement
Anorexia: not eating
For the baseline parameters of overall health the terms
● Lethargy: depressed/decreased energy and activity
used are as follows:
T: temperature
Terminology of the Physical Exam
P: pulse
- n  o si  a s i 
R: respiration
pasq uaiss Apoq siad aun po sioadse pue ad aun suissno
 MM: mucous membrane
on the physical exam. To properly communicate with the
CRT: capillary refill time
 medical team, the team member must have an understanding
Hydration
of this terminology. Although we will discuss the physical
exam in detail in Chapter 5, there are medical abbreviations
Abbreviations for the body systems are as follows:
that are commonly used to describe an animal properly.
 Cat description abbreviations include
 CV: cardiovascular system (heart and vascular system)
Resp: respiratory system (trachea, bronchi, and lungs)
DLH: domestic long hair,
Abd: abdomen
+
●DMH: domestic medium hair, and
 LN: lymph nodes
● DSH: domestic short hair.
 MS: musculoskeletal system
E-E-N-T: eyes, ears, nose, and throat
There are many abbreviations for physical examination
 Neuro: neurologic system
nomenclature, as well. For mentation (how the pet presents 
 Int: integumentary systerm (skin)
mentally), the abbreviations are as follows:
Uro: urogenital system (reproductive organs)
Chapter 1: Basic Terminology
5
Progressive disease refers to disease entities that have
worsening symptoms over time. Both acute and chronic
disease can have progressive symptoms.
Pharmacological Terminology
When dispensing medication to an animal there are specific
abbreviations and terms that apply to the route by which the
drug is given, how often it is given, and to what part of the
anatomy it is applied. Understanding these terms is extremely
 important because a mistake can produce serious side effects.
Dosing
 The abbreviations used for dosing, particularly the frequency
of administration of medication per day, are as follows:
 EOD: every other day
 SID: once per day
BID: twice per day
TID: three times per day
QID: four times per day
 PRN: as needed
ETD: every third day
● q: normally written in lowercase case, q translates to
every (i.e., q 8 hrs means every 8 hours).
See examples of using this terminology in clinical set-
tings next.
Example l: You are a part of a busy medical team.
Your doctor has talked with Mr. Doe about his dog
Rufus at length. Rufus is on phenobarbital. Mr. Doe
left a message for the doctor that Rufus is still seiz-
 ing and asks what he should do about the medication.
The doctor leaves you the following message: "Please
call John Doe about Rufus. Instruct him to increase
4
Rufus's phenobarbital from 1-25 mg tablet SID to
1-25 mg tablet BID by mouth (PO). If the seizing con-
Figure 1.2. The forelimb of a dog. (Courtesy of Anatomy of
Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini,
tinues, I will need to see Rufus. This message indi-
Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used with permis-
cates that you need to instruct Ms. Doe to increase
sion from Sudz Publishing.)
Rufus's phenobarbital from 1-25 mg tablet 1X/day to
1-25 mg tablet 2X/day by mouth.
Disease Terminology
When obtaining a thorough history and understanding the
concerms of the client, it is important to define the onset and
Example 2: Your veterinarian asks you to assist her in
progression of the pet's disease. In these cases, the following
filling a prescription for 500 mg aspirin. The chart in-
terms are used to help define these parameters.
dicates the following instructions: Give one (1) tablet
q 12 hours PRN. This translates to “Give one tablet
 n  a e  s  g s s
every 12 hours as needed" (for pain, limping, or for
affected the patient rapidly as the patient went from good
whatever the disorder indicated).
health to illness in a short period of time.
Chronic onset of disease refers to a disease entity that a pa-
 tient has been dealing with over longer periods of time. Symp-
Anatomical Abbreviations for Ears and Eyes
toms can worsen or stay the same during the duration of the
When dealing with the eyes and ears, specialized abbrevia
illness, but the patient is still affected over the long term.
tions allow us to determine which ear or eye is to be treated.
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Dorsal
Cranial
Caudal
Proximal
Ventral
Distal
Figure I.3. Cranial/caudal and dorsal/ventral nomenclature.
A good way to remember the letter combination is that it
was once thought that people who shook hands with their
" sa s aa rass, aq on nn am pu a
Administration Routes
The way a drug is administered to the animal also has its
 own abbreviations.
Lateral
Laterl
● IV: intravenous-in the vein (typically done through an in-
travenous catheter)
Medial
 IM: intramuscular-in the muscle
IN: intranasal-in the nose
IC: intracardiac-in the heart (rarely done)
 IT: intratracheal-in the throat (or intratracheal tube)
 PO: per os-by mouth
 SQ: subcutaneous-under the skin
Figure 1.4.
 Lateral/medial nomenclature.
It is very important to never fill a prescription or give a
medication without full knowledge of the drug, the drug's
function, and any potential side effects or drug interactions.
The following abbreviations are used for eyes:
a uauo no uondosad e uo uonsanb e iaa si aau l
 garding the route or the dosing of a medication, the prescrip-
 OD: right eye
OS: left eye
tion should not be filled until all questions are discussed
+
with a veterinarian. Pharmacology will be discussed com-
OU: both eyes
 prehensively in Chapter 26.
The following abbreviations are used for ears:
AD: right ear
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
AS: left ear
Please try the cases for Section I (The First Two Days on the
●AU: each ear
Job) to help reinforce the information presented here.
Chapter 2
Vaccines, Heartworms, and Their Terminology
Although many diseases will be discussed in depth in subse-
throughout its life. The types of vaccines given can vary but
quent chapters, all members of a medical team will need to
in general they are as discussed next.
have knowledge of specific diseases, vaccines, and heart-
worm prevention from the first day on the job. Every prac-
DHPP
 oe  as e s  pa p a
Also known as DAP, the DHPP vaccine is generally given
their vaccine recommendations, how often the vaccines
subcutaneously three to four times in the juvenile phase
should be administered, and how to discuss the vaccines
(6-16 weeks) every 2-4 weeks and is then repeated annually.
with the client. It is important to get an understanding of
It can be given in conjunction with other vaccines (corona
how your medical team approaches this topic; however, this
virus/leptospirosis). The diseases that are vaccinated for are
section will help provide a basic overview of vaccination
canine distemper, hepatitis, parainfluenza, and parvo virus.
principles and nomenclature.
Canine Distemper Virus
Canine distemper virus(CDV; see Chapter 1 1), the D in DHPP,
Canine Vaccines
 is a highly infectious upper respiratory virus that can cause
There are generally two schedules of vaccines given to ca-
nines in a general practice, the schedule for the puppy and
 severe high body temperature (fever),
the schedule for the adult. The puppy is generally vaccinated
 anorexia,
three to four times over the first 6-16 weeks of life to help
depression,
boost long-term immunity for many juvenile and adult dis-
lethargy,
eases. The adult vaccine is generally an annual booster to
coughing,
help maintain the animal's immunity to specific diseases
sneezing,
?
 sinusitis, and
neurologic signs.
 There are some basic points to raise when discussing
vaccines with clients.
Fifty percent of the time CDV enters the central nervous sys-
tem, causing seizures, coma, and death.
●Vaccines are killed or weakened bacteria or viruses
that are injected into a healthy animal to help it de-
velop immunity to a specific disease.
Key Points in Discussing Distemper Virus with
 In order for vaccines to be effective, the pet must
Clients
 be in good health with a normal immune system.
● Distemper virus is an upper respiratory illness that is
 No vaccine is 100% effective, and if the animal is
 cormmonly found in large kennel facilities with young
exposed to enough of the infectious agent, they can
animals, such as a pound or animal control facility.
still become ill. However, in some cases, the vac-
The infection will start as a severe upper respira-
cines generally can help reduce the capacity of a
tory infection causing loss of appetite, depression,
microorganism to cause disease (virulence).
runny purulent (pus) ocular and nasal discharge,
Vaccines will not prevent the disease in an already
and fever.
infected animal.
●Fifty percent of the time the virus will infect the 
Although rare, any vaccine can produce an allergic
central nervous system producing seizures, muscu-
 reaction, and there is no way to tell if an animal
lar tremors, coma, and death.
will have a reaction to a vaccine until the vaccine is
If the animal begins to exhibit neurologic symp-
given.
toms, the animal's prognosis is generally poor.
Vaccine reactions can occur in the first minutes to
A full set of vaccinations as a puppy and regular
hours after inoculation.
adult vaccines is very protective against the virus.
8
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Canine Hepatitis Virus
Leptospirosis
Canine hepatitis virus, the H (or A in DAP) in DHPP, is an
Leptospirosis is a spiral bacteria (spirochete) that can cause
adenovirus that produces a life-threatening infection of the
an acute kidney or liver disease and can affect blood cell
liver, causing
populations. As the infection occurs, the animal's ability to
remove toxins from the body is impaired producing signs of
●depression,
anorexia,
 depression,
 yellowing of the gums, whites of the eyes and skin (jaun-
 anorexia,
dice),
vomiting,
vomiting, and
diarrhea,
●diarrhea.
 profound dehydration,
 yellowing of the gums, whites of the eyes, skin (jaun-
Parainfluenza
dice),
Parainfluenza, the first P in DHPP, is a flu virus causing
vomiting blood (hematemesis),
 upper respiratory and or pneumonia.
 frank blood in the stool (hematochezia), and 
 nose bleeds (epistaxis).
Parvo Virus
Parvo virus (CPV; see Chapter 10), the second P in DHPP,
This vaccine can be given subcutaneously by itself or with
is a severe viral disease of juveniles (8 weeks-18 months of
the DHPP vaccine. This is one of the most common vaccines
age) that lives in the environment through exceptional cold
to produce an allergic reaction in the pet.
and heat for years. The virus attacks the cells of the intestine
that absorb water and food. The animal is unable to properly
absorb food and water causing the following
Canine Rabies
Rabies is a debilitating and lethal viral infection of the cen-
 Massive diarrhea and vomiting (often bloody).
tral nervous system that is spread through the saliva and bite
Anorexia.
of an infected animal. Rabies can be spread by wildlife
 Severe life-threatening dehydration.
(skunks, raccoons, bats, foxes, coyotes, etc.). All dogs in the
Massive whole body infection (sepsis). The virus tem-
United States are required to be vaccinated. Generally, the
porarily decreases the white blood cell population in the
juvenile vaccine is given subcutaneously or intramuscularly.
pet. The animal is then open to massive infections from
The adult vaccine is then boosted after l year and then re-
any bacterial source.
peated every 1-3 years depending on how prevalent rabies is
 in the geographic region (endemic). Rabies is also infec-
Key Points in Discussing Parvo Virus with Clients
tious to humans (zoonotic).
Parvo virus is an illness of the gastrointestinal sys-
Bordetella
tem that is found in large numbers in the environ-
 The Bordetella vaccine protects against infectious tracheo-
ment. The virus is very hardy and able to live
bronchitis (kennel cough; see Chapter 11). Bordetella causes
through temperature extremes for years.
 a mild upper respiratory/sore throat complex for which vaccine
 The infection temporarily destroys the cells that ab-
 sun ue ynon  ad san g mn om paspe si
sorb food and water, so the pet cannot properly di-
vaccine or once a year through a subcutaneous vaccine.
gest and absorb it. This produces severe vomiting
and diarrhea, often with blood.
Lyme Disease
 The virus also temporarily decreases the pet's white
Lyme disease is an intracellular parasite (Borrelia burgdor-
blood cell population making them very suscepti-
feri) that is spread by a tick bite and occurs in specific geo-
ble to infection.
 graphic regions of the United States (New England and
 These pets dehydrate and become severely infected
other regions). It produces acute lameness, fever, anorexia,
leading to a life-threatening state.
 and occasionally heart disease. This vaccine is given intra-
● Although the vaccine does not always prevent a pet
muscularly in endermic regions of the country.
 from contracting parvo, the more vaccinations the
pet has received usually decreases the virulence of
Feline Vaccinations
the disease.
As with the canine, there are two set schedules for vacci-
nation: one for the kitten and one for the adult. However,
Corona Virus
vaccine recommendations are currently undergoing a dra-
 Corona virus (CV) is a weak gastrointestinal virus that causes 
matic reexamination due to potential long-term reactions to
mild vomiting and diarrhea. The vaccine can be given subcu-
specific vaccines (see below), and many hospitals and med-
taneously with DHPP or by itself.
ical teams have very different recommendations for their
Chapter 2: Vaccines, Heartworms, and Their Terminology
vaccine schedule. However, the general vaccines for cats are
subcutaneously or intramuscularly. The adult vaccine is then
discussed below.
boosted after 1 year and then repeated every 1-3 years de-
pending on how endemic rabies is in the state. Rabies is also
FVRCP
infectious to humans (zoonotic).
 The FVRCP vaccine is generally given subcutaneously three
times in the juvenile phase (6-16 weeks) every 2-4 weeks
Feline Leu kemia Virus
and is then repeated every 1-3 years. The diseases that are
Feline leukemia virus (Felv) is an incurable, potentially lethal,
vaccinated for are feline viral rhinotracheitis, feline calici
viral disease that infects the cat's white blood cells, causing an
virus, and feline panleukopenia virus.
inability of the white blood cells to reproduce and protect the
body from infection. Cats can carry the disease for years
Feline Viral Rhinotracheitis
without showing infection and can spread the disease over
Feline viral rhinotracheitis (the FVR in FVRCP) is a feline
long-term exposure to other cats through cat fights, groom-
 herpes virus that produces a mild to moderate upper respira-
ing, eating from the same food bowls, or sexual intercourse.
tory infection generally in young kittens. As with other her-
Signs and onset of the disease can be extremely variable de-
 pes virus in all species, the animal can overcome the infec-
pending on where the viral disease begins to show itself.
tion and then be reinfected with the virus at other points in
the pet's life related to stress, the animal's health status, and
Acute Felv Disease (Disease of Sudden Onset)
other factors. The signs of the disease are
Respiratory disease causes an acute precipitation of white
 blood cells and fluid of the body building up within the chest
coughing,
cavity producing signs of
sneezing,
watery ocular discharge,
 shortness of breath,
squinting,
 open mouth breathing,
 bluing of the gums, whites of the eyes, tongue,
fever,
 abdominal breathing, and
anorexia, and
 corneal ulceration.
●death
Feline leukemia virus can invade the central nervous sys
Feline Calici Virus (FCV)
tem producing (although rarely)
 Feline calici virus (FCV), the C in FVRCP, is an upper res-
 piratory virus generally of the young cat or adopted cat. It
seizures,
produces signs of
fever,
coughing,
sneezing,
Key Points in Discussing Feline Leukemia with
watery ocular discharge,
Clients
drooling from the mouth,
 There is no link between human leukemia and the
anorexia, and
feline leukemia virus.
ulcers of the tongue.
 Outside or inside/outside cats are the most at risk.
Cats spread the disease from cat fights/bites,
Feline Panleukopenia Virus
Feline panleukopenia virus (or feline parvo virus; FPV), the
cats through grooming and eating out of the same
P in FVRCP, is often called feline distemper. However, fe-
food bowl, sexual coitus.
 line panleukopenia is a parvo virus. As with the canine form
 Cats can carry the disease and be infectious for
 of the disease, it produces a severe viral juvenile disease (8
years without any physical symptoms.
weeks-18 months of age) that attacks the cells of the intes-
Most vaccines are about 70% effective, and cats
tine that absorb water and food. The pet is unable to properly
that do roam outside should be tested annually.
absorb food, causing massive diarrhea and vomiting (often
Vaccines will not prevent the disease in an already
bloody), anorexia, and severe life-threatening dehydration.
infected animal, so if there is a concern with Felv,
The disease has a high mortality rate in cats.
that cat should be tested prior to initial vaccination.
Although rare, the vaccine can make the cat de-
Feline Rabies
pressed, lethargic, and grumpy for a few days after
 Just as with the canine form, feline rabies is a debilitating
the vaccination, similar to our reaction to a human
and lethal viral infection of the central nervous system
flu shot.
spread through the saliva and bite of an infected animal.
Feline leukemia vaccine does have some potential
 Rabies vaccination and licensing in cats can be required de-
long-term side effects of concerm (see below).
pending on state law. Generally, the juvenile vaccine is given
10
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
depression,
sode. The disease usually affects the cat's immune system
coma, and
and then secondarily will affect other body systems. The
●death.
virus can cause a wide variety of signs.
Respiratory disease presents with
Chronic Felv Disease (Disease of Slow Onset)
With chronic disease, signs can be dependent on which body
 chronic nasal discharge,
systems the virus infects; however, general signs are
+
chronic ocular discharge (eyes),
 trouble breathing,
increased respiratory rate,
weight loss,
+
open mouth breathing, and
anorexla,
 severe dental disease,
collapse.
 diarrhea/vomiting (if the intestinal system is affected),
Gastrointestinal disease presents with
 poor abilities to heal,
 muscle wasting, and
 severe gingivitis,
●poor hair coat.
ulcers in the mouth and tongue,
chronic vomiting,
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
 chronic diarrhea,
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) vaccine protects against a
weight loss, and
viral disease of the corona virus family that produces a fatal
 nonresponsiveness to medication.
inflammatory disease of the abdomen and chest. The virus
interacts with white blood cells of the body, producing mi-
 Neurologic disease presents with
croscopic clumps of white blood cells and virus on tissue.
+
seizure,
 These nests of inflarmmatory cells cause organ damage and
aggression, and
disease on the tissue level. The disease is most common in
fever of unknown origin.
young and stray cats. The disease produces signs of
anorexia,
Key Points in Discussing FIV with Clients
lethargy,
 FIV is in the same family of viruses as HIV.
weight loss,
 There has never been a reported case of humans 
depression,
contracting FIV from a cat.
fever,
● Cats can carry the disease and be infectious for
 accumulation of fluid in the abdomen (ascites),
years without any physical symptoms.
 accumulation of fluid in the chest (pleural fluid), which
Outside or inside/outside cats are the most at risk.
presents as
●Cats spread the disease from cat fights/bites,
- shortness of breath,
chronic exposure (over months to years) to infected
 open mouth breathing,
cats through grooming and eating out of the same
 bluing of the gums, whites of the eyes, tongue,
food bowl, and coitus.
abdominal breathing, and
There is a vaccine available, however at this time,
 death.
 its ability to promote protection is still under inves-
tigation.
 Any cat that has been vaccinated for FIV will show
Key Points in Discussing FIP with Clients
positive on the FIV screening test, making it im-
 Outside or stray cats are the most at risk.
possible to differentiate a cat that has been vacci-
 Currently it is unknown exactly how the disease is
nated from one that has been infected.
spread.
 The virus belongs to a large family of viruses; the
exact virus type within the family is so far un-
Potential Side Effects of Vaccination
known. Therefore there is no absolute test for FIP.
 FIP vaccine is given through an intranasal vaccine,
Short-Term Reactions: Allergic and Anaphylactic
typically for animals that are at risk.
Reactions
There are a few basic concepts that must be understood
when discussing and monitoring allergic reactions in pets.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus
 Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is an incurable viral
Any medication, whether vaccine or medicine, whether
 disease that can attack any system in the cat's body, causing
injectable or oral, can produce an allergic reaction in an
a chronic wasting disease or an acute life-threatening epi-
animal.
Chapter 2: Vaccines, Heartworms, and Their Terminology
11
There are some very basic points to raise when dis-
cussing an allergic reaction with the client. With
ads e o pasodxa uaaq nou a eun s uno
cific vaccine before,
 inform them that allergic reactions are very rare
and usually mild problems, but they can occasion-
ally occur;
● review symptoms of a possible allergic reaction
and stress to the client that they should be aware of
what to look for in the next 12-24 hours;
make sure the owner has emergency contact num-
bers for your hospital or a local emergency clinic if
any signs are noted;
 if signs are noticed, the animal should be seen im-
mediately to prevent a mild allergic reaction from
Figure 2.1. Image of a canine allergic reaction. Note the
getting worse; and
 inform the client that if a pet shows sensitivity to a
 occur minutes to hours after vaccination.
specific vaccine, steps can be taken in the future to
prevent the pet from having repeat incidence on
Canine Allergic Reaction
 their next vaccination.
When administering puppy vaccines, remember that the pup
has had very limited or no exposure to previous vaccinations,
With older animals that have been repeatedly ex-
so allergic reactions to vaccinations are always possible and
posed to the same type of vaccinations
should be discussed with the client prior to the vaccine being
given. The reaction is caused by the body responding to the
 always check the chart and with the client to ensure
chemical or metal components of the vaccine that are respon-
that there has been no previous history of vaccine
sible for stimulating an immune reaction in the body. These
reaction; and
chemicals or portions of microscopic metal that produce an
immune response are called an adjuvant. This immune re-
01 joud yeaq snad au ui sauuo pu uaa su
sponse stimulates the white blood cells of the body to capture
vaccination. If so, inform the veterinarian imme-
the deactivated or killed infectious agents and produce im-
diately.
munity against the specific disease. With an allergic reaction,
the body is overreacting to the adjuvant with a release of a
substance called histamine, which regulates the allergic re-
 ua e u ad Aue ju ln n Am ou si a
sponse. The most common vaccine to produce an allergic
the first time will have a reaction.
reaction is the leptospirosis vaccine; however, any vaccine
The allergic reactions in the dog and the cat manifest
-ds u  u e u uo e as 
 themselves with completely different symptoms.
 toms of a mild allergic reaction (see Figure 2.1) are
 Allergic reactions are uncommon.
●swollen face,
lergic reactions can precipitate into more severe reactions
 swollen eyes,
if the pet is not treated in a timely fashion.
itchy muzzle,
 The allergic reaction can take place in the first few min-
hives, and
utes after injection or several hours after exposure.
 red ears, abdomen, armpits.
n ai  s  s  
reaction to a medication or a vaccine they have never
There are rare occasions when severe reactions, called ana-
been exposed to previously. It is not impossible for a dog
phylactic reactions, can occur. Anaphylactic reactions can
to start to show a mild allergic reaction on its first rabies
be an acute problem where an oversensitized animal will go
vaccination.
through a massive allergic reaction. However, it is important
 Typically, patients produce allergic reactions after being
to know that a mild allergic reaction can lead into a severe
exposed to a vaccine or medication for a second or third
anaphylactic reaction if not properly treated or recognized.
time. This is not usually due to a change in the manufac-
Signs of an anaphylactic reaction are
turer of the vaccine (see below) but can be because the
pet has built up a small allergic response to the vaccine
 respiratory noise when breathing.
over time.
 breathing (rasps breathing pattem),
12
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
 shortness of breath,
sticker or highlighter to indicate that the patient has a
vomiting,
history of allergic reactions to a specific medication or
 slow heart rate,
vaccine.
●poor pulse quality,
weak to nonresponsive, and
Hf a Pet Had a Vaccine Reaction in the Past
●cold.
Every hospital team handles patients with a history of vac-
cine reactions differently; however, some basic tenets of
Anaphylactic reactions are life-threatening emergencies that
treatment are that the pet receive a dose of antihistamine
must be dealt with immediately or the pet may die. Since
 30-120 minutes prior to the vaccination. The antihistamine
some anaphylactic reactions can precipitate from mild aller-
helps to block the release of the histamine producing the al-
gic reactions, all clients must be informed of what to do if
         
they are concermed their pet is having a reaction to medica-
owner or in an injection at the hospital.
tion (see below).
The pet is then vaccinated and then must be monitored
for a few hours after the vaccination for any signs of an al-
Feline Allergic Reactions
lergic reaction. Often the pet can be hospitalized for the day;
As with most situations, cats react very differently from
however, if owners are reluctant to leave the pet, a recom-
dogs when responding to an allergic reaction. Although cats
mendation should be made that the pet and owner stay with
will occasionally have mild to severe reactions to vaccines
the pet in the hospital for 30-60 minutes after the vaccina-
and medication, their symptoms can be quite different. Cats
tion should be made. This allows the veterinarian the ability
can show any of the following symptoms.
to assess that there is no obvious reactions in that time and
discharge the pet. The owners must also be aware that these
●depression
animals still need to be closely monitored with owner super-
lethargy
dan s  pu sou t-l rxau an n ui
 reddening of the ears and mucus membranes
immediately to the hospital.
profuse vomiting
dehydration
Long-Term Reactions
weak pulse
There can be some long-term concerms from vaccinations
●collapse
that are also tied to the animal's response to the adjuvant. As
The most common vaccine to produce mild symptoms of de-
imal will have a long-term reaction until the vaccine is
pression and lethargy is the feline leukemia vaccine, which
given. Overall, the owner should be aware that these reac-
can produce mild flu-like symptoms of soreness, lethargy,
tions are extremely rare and the probability that these reac-
and change in attitude (grumpiness) in some cats.
n e ym uoshido u ls Aaaa si noo pnom su
larger probability of a pet getting a disease if the animal is
What To Do When a Vaccine Reaction Occurs
not properly vaccinated.
Vaccine reactions are generally mild and reported by the
A sterile abcessation at the vaccine site (vaccine knot) ap-
owner usually in the first 12-24 hours after the vaccination.
pears as a small knot that is noticeable over the vaccination
 Since the animal is not in the hospital, there is no way to
site, especially after rabies vaccination. Most of these knots
assess the patient's stability over the phone. Therefore, it
are a small, nonpainful mass or nodule of chronically in-
is recommended that the client be rechecked immediately ei-
flamed tissue (granuloma) that occurs and disappears in
 ther by the hospital or the emergency clinic.
14-28 days. On a few occasions, these knots can develop a
If the client is hesitant to have their pet seen, it is impor-
clear or purulent (pus) fluid accumulation and become
      n    n
larger. These are extremely rare, but if noted, the abscesses 
   n       
may need to be lanced and drained.
checked and the reaction is not halted. If the client is still
Injection site sarcoma is a malignant destructive cancer
hesitant to have their pet seen,
nfpe aui oi ansodxa oi asuodsau ul pateioosse uaaq seu ne
vant of feline leukemia and, more rarely, feline rabies vac-
● the doctor should be consulted immediately;
cine. It occurs in less than 0.1% of all cats vaccinated.
● at no time should over-the-counter medication ever be
 However, without advanced diagnostics or surgical excision,
suggested to a client without a veterinarian's recommen-
an injection site-induced fibrosarcoma and a vaccine knot
dation;
are impossible to distinguish. Therefore, all swellings or
● the chart should be documented with the highlights of the
lumps in cats should be carefully monitored, especially
phone conversation and that an allergic reaction to a vac-
 around vaccine sites.
cine has occurred; and
In some practices, the vaccines are given in different
the folder or the top sheet of a chart (usually a patient's
anatomical locations so that the medical team can monitor
 e m  aa us ( d 
 any reactions to each specific vaccine. For example, FVRCP
Chapter 2: Vaccines, Heartworms, and Their Terminology
13
vaccine will be given subcutaneously over the right shoul-
 Tabie 2.1  Feline vaccination schedule.
der, avoiding the midline, and as distal as possible. Felv will
be given subcutaneously in the left hind leg. Rabies vaccine
Vaccines
Kittens
Adults
 Recommendations
will be given subcutaneously in the right rear leg. Thus the
medical team can be able to monitor each specific site and
Felv
Vaccinated at
Vaccinated every Given in left hind
know what vaccine was administered there.
12 and 16
3 years
leg.
weeks of age
Recommended for
inside and out-
Vaccine Side Effect Concerns
side or outside
cats only.
 The concerns with long-term side effects from vaccines are
Cats should be
radically changing the recommendations of what vaccina-
tested for FELV
pe aa pinous an uao mo ue ua aq pnous su
annually.
 istered. It is very important to discuss with the medical team
Rabies
Vaccinated at
Vaccinated at
 Given in right hind
16 weeks
what the hospital's recommendations are for vaccines, and
1 year and
leg.
of age
then every
Per state law, all
their time table, before discussing any vaccinations with
3 years
cats must be
clients. Constructing a simple vaccine schedule for dogs and
vaccinated and
cats can become a useful resource for new employees. An
licensed.
example of a vaccine schedule is seen in Table 2.1.
FVCRP
Vaccinated at
Vaccinated every Given over the
8,12, and
3 years
shoulder blades.
16 weeks
FIP
Not recom-
Not recom-
 Only given on
Key Points in Discussing Potential Long-Term
mended at
 mended at
request of
Vaccine Side Effects with Clients
this time.
this time.
owner.
FIV
Not recom-
Not recom-
●Just as with allergic reactions, there is no way to tell
if a vaccine will produce a long-term side effect until
mended at
mended at
this time.
this time.
the vaccination is given.
 The possibility of formation of a vaccine-induced sar-
FVCRP, Feline viral rhinotracheitis, calici virus, panleukopenia virus; FIP,
coma occurring is less them 0.1%.
feline infectious peritonitis; FIv, feline immunodeficiency virus.
●The vaccine's protection for exposed or at-risk ani-
mals far outweighs the possibilities of long-term side
effects.
other parts of the United States. Outside, unprotected an-
 The owners should monitor the vaccine sites for the
imals are at the highest risk.
 next 2-4 weeks and report any changes or concerms
that they note immediately.
Common Signs in Medical History
In canines the disease produces a chronic progressive dis-
ad an  s a  aas an 'sa ul a
enters acute cardiac failure. Common medical complaints
Heartworm Disease
can be
Note that a complete discussion of heartworm disease is
 covered in Chapter 12. Heartworm disease is a parasitic in-
●sudden death (cats),
fection of a bloodbome parasite, Dirofilaria immitis (see
weakness/lethargy/collapse,
Figure 2.2). The disease is spread by mosquitoes, which feed
 decreased ability to exercise,
on infected dogs and cats. The mosquitoes pick up larval
 coughing (rare in cats),
heartworms (microfilaria), which they in turn inject into an
 shortness of breath,
uninfected animal the next time they feed.
weight loss, and
 fluid buildup in the abdomen (ascites) with formation of
 The parasite is injected into the tissue, and over the next
 obstructive right heart disease in severely affected animals.
3-6 months it migrates through the tissue to the blood
supply and to the right heart.
Common Points in Physical Examination
 There the worms mature and reproduce, causing an ob-
 Physical signs depend on heartworm burden, length of dis.
structive heart disease in the right heart and lung fields
 ease, age of the pet, and other underlying disease conditions.
(see Figure 2.2).
Signs are species dependent.
 The disease can be as ymptotic initially (especially in fe-
 In canines, patients may present with a mild to worsening
lines), but as the infection worsens, the right side of the
cough. In severe cases animals may be unable to exercise
 heart begins to obstruct and potentially fail.
properly. There may be evidence of a right tricuspid murmur
 The infection affects dogs and cats (rarely) in mosquito-
dn suunoo aq Ke nad aui 'spunos suni pasaoun um
endemic regions, along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, and
blood.
14
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
There are some basic points to raise when discussing
heartworms with the client.
Disease
Heartworm disease is a bloodborme parasite infec-
tion that is spread by mosquito bites.
 The disease is endemic in warm climates where
there are active mosquito populations.
● However, specific geographic regions are more en-
demic for the disease (i.e., northeast and southeast
coastal states, Texas, and parts of the Midwest).
 The disease is transmitted by the mosquito that
feeds on a currently infected animal and then bites
 an unaffected pet.
● The mosquito injects a small larval form of the par-
asite into the tissue, which over 46 months mi-
 grates into the right heart and lung fields.
 There the parasite begins to reproduce and become
 obstructive to the heart and lungs.
Physical Signs
● In the canine, pets generally develop a persistent
worsening cough that can develop into weakness,
inability to exercise, and collapse in severe cases.
● In feline heartworm disease, the worm loads can be
much less, with infections having only a few worms
evident. Physical symptoms are mild to nonexistent
umtil the feline enters a cardiovascular shock/crisis.
Clinical Diagnostics
Although there are many diagnostic tests used to diag-
Figure 2.2. Image of multiple lung fields. Note the high num-
nose and confirm the extent of heartworm disease, the
ber of adult heartworms in the incised lobe. These worms become
initial clinical test is a simple blood test that evaluates
obstructive to the heart and lungs, producing a severe cardiac and
the pet's blood for the presence of antibodies against
respiratory disease.
the adult heartworm. Many of these tests can be run in
 a few minutes within the hospital setting.
 In felines, pets may not show any physical signs until the
Control
 pet is in cardiovascular failure or death.
Through annual to biannual heartworm testing and
placing the pet on heartworm prevention, the pet is
Diagnosis
highly unlikely to develop the disease. The preventa-
Diagnosis is largely based on screening patient blood for an-
tives are monthly tablets that kill any of the larval par-
tibodies against the adult heartworm. In canines, there are
 asites that the pet comes in contact with.
many excellent in-hospital tests to determine potential expo-
sure. In feline patients, there are tests available through
many of the outside animal health laboratories.
Prevention
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter
Annual to biannual heartworm testing and routine heart-
Please try the cases for Section I (The First Two Days on the
worm prevention (every month to every 6 months dependent
Job) to help reinforce the information presented here.
on the product) can greatly reduce the chance of heartworm
infection for pets living in endemic regions.
Chapter 3
Elective Procedures
This chapter will focus on discussing basic elective proce-
● any contingencies that would make the procedure more
dures with the client. Although approaches and types of
complicated.
elective surgical procedures vary from hospital to hospital,
the basic concepts of each will be covered along with some
The second part of the discussion outlines what the client
key points regarding how to approach discussing surgery
needs to monitor after surgery. This is usually discussed at
with the client.
the time of discharge and should be done both verbally and
As with all components of veterinary medicine, surgery
with written instructions for the client to take home so the
also has its own terminology and special terms. An overview
 client may reread the information at a later time.
of these surgical terms follows.
Besides specific concerms that need to be discussed with
each procedure, general comments about monitoring inci-
Ovariohysterectomy (OVH), or spay, refers to a com-
sions and incision care should always be reviewed with the
plete removal of the ovaries and uterus from a female pa-
client at the time of discharge.
tient. After the procedure, the female is unable to repro-
duce or have heat cycles and has a much lower chance of
 developing infections of the uterus (pyometra) or having
Discussing Monitoring the Incision Site with the
mammary tumors in later life.
Client
 Orchidectomy/castration, or neuter, refers to a com-
●The incision site should be checked daily for
plete removal of both testicles of a male animal, render-
swelling, draining, heat, or any evidence of incision
ing the pet unable to reproduce and decreasing secondary
line breakdown. If there are any changes noted, the
sex characteristics (i.e., aggression, voice change, terri-
hospital should be notified immediately.
tory marking, etc.).
 The incision site may have some mild, firm
 Feline onchyectomy, or declawing, refers to the removal
swelling after the first week, which is usually local-
+
 e  (xd  s  sa an go
ized over where the last suture knot was placed.
These procedures are typically done on the forelimbs or
This swelling will disappear as the sutures are ab-
 done on all four legs to prevent the pet from scratching
sorbed over the next 4-6 weeks.
and damaging its environment.
 The animal should not be bathed and the incision
 Feline tendonectomy refers to an alternative surgical
should not be allowed to get wet.
procedure to declawing where a small section of tendons
If absorbable suture is used to close the skin, the
that flex and exteriorize the claws is removed. This pro-
client should be informed that the suture will dis-
cedure prevents cats from extending their claws, but
solve on its own, but the incision should be checked
leaves the nail and fingertip intact.
10-14 days after the procedure.
 Dental prophylaxis is a thorough dental cleaning, oral
 If nonabsorbable suture is used, the incision should
examination, gingival examination, and polishing of the
be checked between postoperative days 10 and 14
patient's mouth. With severe disease, dental x-rays can be
and the sutures removed when the incision has
taken and tooth extractions or advanced procedures (i.e.,
healed.
root canal) can be performed.
 If the pet is bothering or licking the incision at any
time, the hospital should be contacted and a Buster
When discussing surgery with the client, there are two
or Elizabethan collar placed on the pet to keep the
 main topic groups. The first is what the client should know
animal away from the incision.
about anesthesia and surgery before the procedure. How to
discuss anesthetic procedures with the client will be covered
later. The discussion of surgery should focus on
The Ovariohysterectomy
the goals of the procedure,
An ovariohysterectomy (OHE), or spay, is a complete re-
● how the procedure is physically done, and
moval of both ovaries and the uterus to the cervix. Once the
15
16
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
+
Figure 3.1.
. Image of the ventral abdomen (belly) shaved and cleaned in preparation for surgery (a). An incision is made in the midle
of the abdomen (b). The abdomen is then explored (c), isolating the uterine horns and exteriorizing the ovaries and ovarian pedicle (d).
The pedicle is then double-ligated (tied) with absorbable suture and the ovary and uterine horn exteriorized.
 pet is placed under anesthesia, the abdomen (belly) is shaved
ture, and lastly the edges of the skin are brought together.
and surgically prepped with an antiseptic/antibacterial soap
The incision is then cleaned, and animal is moved into the
and then rinsed with alcohol to reduce hair and bacterial
recovery area (see Figure 3.3).
load. The surgical boundaries are then covered with sterile
 If the female animal is in heat or pregnant at the time of
towels (draped), and an incision is made into the abdominal
 surgery, the procedure will be more complicated because the
wall. The ovaries are first located and exteriorized; their
iddns iennosen paseanoun ue seu pue iasel si snuan
blood and nerve supplies are tied off with an absorbable su-
Animals that are in heat can still be attractive to males
ture (ligated). The procedure is repeated with the other
and must be kept separated from any male animal until
ovary (see Figure 3.1).
signs of heat disappear If the patient is accidentally
With both ovaries freed from their blood supply, the
 bred, the internal sutures could break down and the pet
uterus is exteriorized and ligated just above the cervix. The
could begin to bleed internally.
uterus with its ovaries is then completely removed from the
After this procedure, the patient will not be able to repro-
abdomen (Figure 3.2).
duce or go into heat. An animal is spayed to prevent heat and
The abdominal wall is closed with three separate suture
 pregnancy but also to reduce the risk of marmmary tumors
layers: first the muscle wall is closed with absorbable suture,
and disease of the reproductive tract in middle-aged to older
then the subcutaneous tissue is closed with absorbable su-
females (see Chapter 18).
Figure3.2.
With both ovaries ligated, the entire uterine body is exteriorized to the cervix (a). Here the uterus is clamped above the
cervix, and the region is double-ligated (b). The uterus, uterine horns, and ovaries are then removed (c). The cervix and uterine stump are
then examined to make sure there is no obvious bleeding (d).
layer, then the subcutaneous layer, and lastly the skin is brought together (b).
17
81
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Discussing an Ovariohysterectomy with a Client
Before Surgery
An ovariohysterectomy is a surgical procedure to
completely remove both ovaries and the uterus of
'y mui so uoy ad an aad m  a
spreading sexually transmitted diseases, or being
able to reproduce.
Furthermore, a spay helps reduce the chance of
mammary cancer and severe life-threatening dis-
eases of the reproductive tract that are often seen in
middle-aged to older pets (usually more than 4
years of age).
If the pet is in heat or pregnant, the procedure can
 be more complicated, because the uterus is larger
 and has an increased blood supply.
Testicle
Discussing an Ovariohysterectomy with a Client
After Surgery
+
The pet has been through a major abdominal sur.
 gery and may seem sore, depressed, and may not
eat well for the first 24 hours.
 If the pet was in heat, she can still be attractive to
males for days after the surgery and should never
be left alone with a male until the sutures are re-
moved. If she is accidentally bred, the intermal su
tures could break down and the pet could begin to
bleed intemally.
 Incision care should be discussed as previously
 outlined in this chapter.
 The pet should be closely monitored for the first
10-14 days after surgery, and the hospital should
be contacted if
the pet is trying to produce urine but cannot;
-the pet stops eating, drinking, or begins to vomit;
the pet's abdomen seems tense or painful;
-there is any other change in the pet's health.
Orchidectomy/Castration
Canine Neuter
A canine neuter (castration) is a complete removal of both
testicles from the scrotum. Once the pet is placed under
anesthesia, an area in front of the scrotum is shaved and sur-
gically prepped with an antiseptic soap. The boundaries of
Figure 3.4.  Image of the shaved region in front of the scrotum
the area are then draped with sterile towels. An incision is
(a). Through a small prescrotal incision, each testicle is exterior-
ized, ligated, and then removed (b). After the excision, the subcu-
made into the skin in front of the scrotum. The testicles are
taneous and skin layers are closed (c).
then pushed forward into the incision area and exteriorized.
The blood and nerve supplies are ligated with sutures and
the testicle removed. The same procedure is completed with
the other testicle, and then the subcutaneous and skin tissues
inate behind the kidneys and descend through the abdomen
are brought together with suture. The area is then cleaned
into the scrotum through a slit in the abdominal muscles (in-
and the animal is moved into the anesthetic recovery area
guinal canal) that allows the abdomen to communicate with
(see Figure 3.4).
the subcutaneous tissue and scrotum. This process is com-
 In normal testicular development, the fetal testicles orig-
plete by birth or within the first few months of life. Some
Chapter 3: Elective Procedures
19
After a castration, the pet will not be able to reproduce
3.Bulb of petls
and is less likely to mark his territory. Male dogs neutered
late in life will stiffly lift their leg and may also be able to
 d n pa a siad a a  
dental pregnancy, transmission of sexually transmitted dis-
Uirethralis m.
eases, and decrease the risk of prostate disease and cancer in
later life.
1. Cavernous body
[corpus cavernosum]
Discussing a Castration with a Client Before
Os penls
Surgery
● A neuter is a surgical procedure to completely re-
move both testicles from the animal to prevent the
pet from being able to reproduce.
2.Spongy body
(corpus spongiosun)
dogfights, marking of territory, sexually transmit-
ted diseases, and prostatic disease and cancer.
● If the pet has retained testicles, testicles that are not
Figure 3.5.
5. Illustration of normal testicular and penile
evident within the scrotum of the pet, the procedure
anatomy. (Courtesy of Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition.
can be more complicated because the testicles must
Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini, Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot
 be located and removed from the inguinal canal or
Point, Tx 1989. Used with permission from Sudz Publishing.)
the abdomen.
Discussing a Castration with a Client After
male patients do not have their testicles descend normally
Surgery
and the organs may sit within the inguinal canal or anywhere
 The pet has been through a surgical procedure and
within the abdominal cavity (see Figure 3.5). These animals
 g l i o ue assaa 'aos aas A
 are referred to as being cryptorchid. Neutering an animal
first 24 hours.
with retained testicles can make the surgery a much more
Incision care should be discussed as previously
lengthy and complicated procedure.
 outlined in this chapter.
 Animals that are cryptorchid should be neutered young
The pet should be closely monitored for the first
for the following reasons.
10-14 days after surgery, and the hospital should
be contacted if
+
Cryptochidism is a congenital symdrome that can be
tou pnq an aonpod o sun si lad au
passed to males in future litters.
the pet stops eating, drinking, or begins to vomit;
 The patient can still potentially breed and has all male be-
the pet's abdominal, inguinal, or scrotal region
havioral characteristics.
seems tense or painful;
Over long periods of time, the increased body tempera-
 sad a i a ao  si a
ture can make the retained testicles more likely to be-
 come cancerous in later life. These testicular tumors can
produce large quantities of sex hormones (testosterone,
Onchyectomy
estrogen) that can have life-threatening effects on the pa-
tient's blood cell populations.
 The onchyectomy (feline declawing) is a highly controver-
sial procedure. Many animal rights groups suggest this pro-
Feline Neuter
cedure is inhumane and unfair to the cat. However, for many,
A feline neuter (castration) is a complete removal of both tes-
the procedure allows the cat to live in the household and pre-
ticles from the scrotum. Once the pet is placed under anes-
vents damage to the furniture and destruction to the home.
thesia, the scrotal area is surgically prepped with an
Arguments of morality aside, the feline declaw is still very
antiseptic/antibacterial soap. The boundaries of the area are
 much apart of the general practice and a very important sur-
then draped with sterile towels. An incision is made into the
 gery about which to properly educate the clients.
scrotum. The testicles are exteriorized; their blood and nerve
The onchyectomy is the surgical removal of the fingertip
supplies are ligated with sutures, surgical clips, or tied off
and nail bed of the pet's digits. This prevents the animal
with a section of their own blood supply; and the testicle is
from being able to scratch or destroy things within the home.
removed. The same procedure is done with the other testicle 
Once the pet is placed under anesthesia, the nails and finger-
(see Figure 3.6). The scrotum heals together without the need
s ya das  yi paa n a s
for suture. After the testicles are removed, the area is cleaned.
A tourmiquet is placed above the paw to minimize bleeding
20
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Figure 3.6. Ilustration of a prepared surgical site for feline
castration (a). An image of the exteriorization of the testicle and
spermatic cord before ligation (b). Once ligated the testicle is re-
moved, and the incision heals without sutures.
during the procedure. Using either a scalpel blade, sterilized
nail clippers, or a surgical laser, the fingermails and finger-
tips are dissected away from the rest of the paw. The skin in-
cision is closed with suture or a special glue resin and the
paw bandaged to prevent postoperative bleeding (see Figure
3.7). The same procedure is repeated for the other paw. The
declawing is usually done on the front paws only; however,
in some circumstances all four paws are declawed.
The declaw procedure has an increased chance of mild
postsurgical complications. Once the bandage comes off the
feet and the cat goes home, the cat will be walking on and
Figure 3. 7. The nail is exteriorized and, with a special blade,
using the paws in litter directly on the incision sites, which
excised from the paw (a). Once the nails have been removed,
greatly increases the chance for infection and breakdown of
the skin margins are closed (b). Once both paws are declawed,
the incision line in the first 10 days after surgery. Often
bandages are placed on the legs to prevent oozing from the
 n a lads e as m pai a sd a
incision (c).
10-14 days after surgery to prevent small particulates of
normal litter from embedding themselves within the inci-
sion, increasing the chance of infection. In some cases, the
Chapter 3: Elective Procedures
21
age produced by the cat's claws. The procedure removes a
Discussing a Declawing with a Client Before
small section of tendon in each toe to prevent the extension
Surgery
of the animal's claws. The nails and the tip of the toe still re-
● A declaw is a surgical procedure in which the tips
main intact, and there is no overall change in dexterity and
of the toes and the nails are surgically removed
less postoperative pain.
from the pet.
Once the pet is placed under anesthesia, the interdigital re
 Once declawed, the pet's abilities to defend itself
gions are surgically prepped with an antiseptic wash solution.
and climb are greatly reduced, so the animal should
A toumiquet is placed above the paw to minimize bleeding
remain indoors for life.
during the procedure. With a scalpel blade, a small incision
● After surgery, the pet may be feeling moderate pain,
is made behind the small metacarpal pads of each digit. A
and the use of pain medications may be required.
small hemostat dissects and elevates the deep digital flexor
 The cat may also have an altered or changed gait
tendon. A small section of the tendon is then incised. The
for 46 weeks after surgery as it adjusts to the
 skin incision is left open, and a bandage is placed to prevent
change in dexterity.
bleeding until the skin margins begin to heal in 12-24 hours.
 The same procedure is repeated for the other paw.
Discussing a Declawing with a Client After Surgery
 The pet has been through a surgical procedure and
may seem sore, depressed, and not eat well for the
first 24 hours.
Discussing a Tendonectomy with a Client Before
● Incision care should be discussed as previously
Surgery
 outlined in this chapter.
●A tendonectomy is a surgical procedure in which
 The procedure is moderately painful, and if the pet
tendons that aid in extension of the claws of the
seems to still be favoring the legs or in pain even
paw are cut so that the animal cannot extend the
with medication, please contact the hospital im-
nails normally.
mediately.
●Once the tendons have been cut, the pet's ability to
 The pet should be closely monitored for the first
 defend itself and climb are greatly reduced, so the 
10-14 days after surgery, and the hospital should
animal should remain indoors for life.
be contacted if
 The pet's nails will continue to grow and will need
 i suaq no sp sa sdos nad a-
the pet's paws continue to be painful;
overgrowth and injury to the pads.
the pet excessively licks, chews, or bothers the
 Rarely, the cut tendons can repair themselves and
incisions or there is a breakdown of the incision
the pet may be able to extend one or more claws. If
lines;
this occurs, the procedure would have to be re-
there is any other change in the pet's health.
 peated on that digit.
Discussing a Tendonectomy with a Client After
patient may also be placed on antibiotics to further reduce
Surgery
the chance of infection.
 The pet has been through a surgical procedure and
 The procedure can also produce a period of postoperative
may seem sore, depressed, and not eat well for the 
0 doy  no s a u y n    a 
first 24 hours.
s  A      s  a 
 Incision care should be discussed as previously
days after surgery. Since the tips of the digits have been sur-
 outlined in this chapter.
gically removed, there is a change of dexterity the pet must
 The procedure is mildly painful, and if the pet
adjust to, so these animals can appear to have an altered or
a ud un no saa a s aa ls mn saas
abnormal gait for up to 46 weeks after surgery. Finally, and
with medication, please contact the hospital im-
most important after the procedure, the cat's ability to protect
mediately.
itself and climb are severely diminished; it is recommended
 The pet should be closely monitored for the first
that your cat remain indoors after having this procedure.
10-14 days after surgery, and the hospital should
Not all (or any) of these complications will occur after
be contacted if
surgery, but the client should be aware of all these concems
the pet stops eating, drinking, or begins to vomit;
before the surgery is performed.
-the pet's paws continue to be painful;
the pet excessively licks, chews, or bothers the
incisions or there is a breakdown of the incision
Feline Tendonectomy
lines;
A feline tendonectomy is an altermative procedure that is
u sad a u a r A si a
used in place of declawing to help control household dam-
22
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
The tendonectomy has an increased incidence of postsur-
gical complications that the owner should be aware of prior
to surgery. Just as with declawing, the incisions are very sus-
ceptible to postoperative infections as the pet walks, cleans
its paws, and uses the litter. The patient will need to use a
special paper litter to reduce grit and debris that can infect
the incision sites. Secondly, the nail is still intact and grow.
ing, so regular biweekly to monthly nail trims are a necessity
to prevent the nails from growing into the paws. Further-
more, since the nails do not extend and are not regularly
 on ru  a a a Aan  a a a
Cats that are not easy to restrain in order to clip the nails reg-
ularly are not good candidates for this procedure. Lastly, on
 o s a  a a n  a   
Figure 3.8.  Image of teeth showing moderate dental tartar and
Dental Prophylaxis
some recession of the gums, especially over the canine teeth.
We will be discussing dental anatomy, physiology, dental
diseases, and the components of a dental health program in
Chapter 9. However, a dental cleaning is a routine procedure 
 Rolling food from one part of the mouth to the other
for a general veterinary practice, and a brief discussion of a
 Pain on palpation of tooth
dental surgery protocol is necessary.
 In as little as 2-3 years, a pet's teeth begin to wear down,
 Over many years chronic bacterial infection of the teeth
and the gums can becorme irritated. Dental tartar and plaque,
can lead to more serious health concerns such as kidney,
which is rich in bacteria, can build up and cause moderate to
liver, and heart disease.
severe swelling and infections of the gums (gingivitis). As
     d  o
the gums weaken, bacteria can migrate down into the tooth 
 healthy, routine dental cleanings are recommended every
root, causing pain, infection, and loosening of the tooth.
 6-12 months. Pets should have a thorough oral examination
Owners may notice the following signs at home:
   a   n d 
If there is evidence of dental tartar, recession of the gums, or
Bad breath
broken teeth, then the medical team will discuss the need for
Salivating
a dental prophylaxis (see Figure 3.8).
Inability to eat hard food or snacks or inability to eat at
The dental prophylaxis is a surgical procedure in which
all
the oral cavity is examined for broken teeth, pockets in the
Eating on only one side of the mouth
gum line around the tooth root, exposed roots, and lesions
Figure 3.9.
 Image of a canine mouth with mild to moderate dental tarter (a). Once under anesthesia, the gum lines (gingiva) are
probed and explored for deep pockets around the teeth, suggestive of dental disease (b)
Chapter 3: Elective Procedures
23
Discussing a Dental Cleaning with a Client Before
Surgery
A dental cleaning is a surgical procedure in which
the teeth and gums are examined for disease and
infection, the teeth are cleaned and polished, dental
x-rays are taken if there is a concern regarding an
infected tooth, and the gums and teeth can be med-
ically and surgically treated.
● It is often impossible to detect serious dental dis-
ease with the pet awake. Furthermore, full proper
dental cleanings and other procedures such as ex-
tractions, dental radiographs, or root canals and
crowns can only be completed with the patient un-
der anesthesia.
●After surgery, the pet may be placed on antibiotics 
or pain medication, depending on the procedures
completed.
 Dental care is a lifetime concern, and recommen-
 dations for brushing the teeth, applying special oral
rinses, and using special treats to reduce dental tar-
tar may also be suggested after surgery.
Discussing a Dental Cleaning with a Client After
Surgery
d ns r e ynon uaa s nad a
dure and may have some minor oral pain, act de-
pressed, and not eat well for the first 24 hours.
If teeth were extracted, the owner may notice a
small amount of blood in the patient's food or water
bowl. Furthermore, the client may notice sutures in
the mouth that will dissolve in the next 2-3 weeks.
 The pet should be closely monitored for the first
10-14 days after surgery, and the hospital should
be contacted if
—the pet stops eating, drinking, or begins to vomit;
the pet acts as if it is feeling pain while eating.
drools excessively, or if its mouth seems sen-
sitive;
there is any swelling, heat, pain, or discharge in
the mouth or around the face;
there is any other change in the pet's health.
Figure 3.9.  (continued) In many cases, the patient will have
dental x-rays performed to check questionable teeth for pathology,
health of the tooth root and check for dental abcessation or
abcessation, and disease (c). Finally, the teeth are polished and the
disease. If a tooth root is exposed and sensitive and the tooth
animal is recovered (d).
is weakened, a dental extraction or an advanced dental pro-
cedure (i.e., root canal and crown) may need to be com-
pleted. After the procedure, the pet may need to be placed on
 antibiotics and/or pain medication.
that may need medical or surgical treatment (see Figure 3.9).
 Once the mouth is examined, the teeth are cleaned using an
ultrasonic cleaner to remove the dental tartar and bacteria.
 The teth are then polished to rermove any microscopic
CD-ROM 1 reviews material presented in this chapter.
scratches that could be a site for dental plaque to reform.
Please try the cases for Section I (The First Two Days on the
Dental x-rays can be also taken at this time to assess the
Job) to help reinforce the information presented here.
Chapter 4
Safety and Restraint
Within any veterinary environment, there is risk taken with
●All workers’ compensation forms needed for the emer-
one's health and well-being on a day-to-day basis. Whether
the risks are from an animal bite or scratch, handling med-
book.
"olo Aay ai e sul o 'sans sua o uo
 Later, the appointed safety team member had an incident 
every hospital or clinic should have a set protocol in the han-
report filled out and filed with the veterinary hospital
dling of various health hazards and conditions. Every hospi-
 manager and medical director.
tal or clinic should have an OSHA (Occupational Safety and
Health Administration Requirements) handbook, which cov-
Although these steps sound rather formal and rigid, it is
ers how to handle potential risks and accidents that occur
extremely irmportant to know what to do in an emergency
within the workplace. It is the responsibility of the veteri-
situation.
nary hospital to provide the necessary OSHA information
for reference in an emergency and to provide the necessary
Personal Safety
protective equipment. Every staff member should be famil-
iar with this information and refer to it whenever a potential
 s g a a s a a 
exposure or danger occurs.
 personal safety that should always be followed.
For example, an animal is being put to sleep with an in-
The first and foremost rule is that if a team member feels
jection of euthanasia solution. As the injection is being
uncomfortable performing a specific task or assisting in a
given, the syringe separates from the needle and euthanasia
 pnous qa an a go ansun a a apa
solution is sprayed into the air, landing on the technician
for help. It is better to make sure that the team member com-
a an sd  a  a an si 
 pletely understands the assignment rather than do something
and mouth of the team member. Although this is a scary sce-
that could place the patient or a team member in danger.
nario, it has occurred in many hospitals at different times.
Anyone who is pregnant or may be pregnant should never
What would be the correct protocol for handling this situa-
take part in taking x-rays or assisting with gas anesthesia.
tion? How dangerous is the drug, especially to the eyes and
The team member should notify the hospital of the health
if received orally? What is the first thing to do? The veteri-
concerm and should not participate in those procedures, even
nary hospital team must know the emergency protocols and
if there has to be a change in team member responsibilities.
first steps in handling exposure to dangerous chemicals in
With the same concerm, clients who may be pregnant and
order to minimize trauma and injury. This is how one clinic
small children should stay away from the areas in which
responded to the above scenario.
these procedures take place.
Proper handling of chemicals and prescription medica-
 The contaminated technician immediately went to the
tion is everyone's responsibility within the hospital. Certain
eye-wash station and began rinsing out her eyes and
-s au pue us aun anauad uo sleu pue sanp
washing out her mouth with cold water.
temic effects on the body. For example, chemotherapeutics
Another team member retrieved the OSHA notebook,
(1.e., cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine), if absorbed
found the Material Data Safety Sheet for the drug, and
into the skin, can cause massive side effects and decreases in
read the information on drug contact for the eyes and
the white blood cell population. Other drugs (i.e., Cytotec,
what to do following oral ingestion.
etc.), if handled by a pregnant employee, could produce an
 Furthermore, the technician contacted the local poison
abortion if some of the drug were introduced into the body
control that was listed in the OSHA notebook and dis-
through a cut or irritation in the skin. The team member
cussed the concems of exposure with a toxicologist.
 The exposed technician continued to rinse her eyes for
or disposal concerms.
another 15 minutes, and because there was concerm re-
All needles and syringes should be disposed of in an
garding irritation to the eyes, the team member was taken
OSHA-approved container. When full, the container should
to the hospital.
be disposed of appropriately by an approved process (i.e.,
25
26
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
incinerated). Any diagnostic blood work going out to a lab
    n s     
should never contain needles, and all glass should be dis-
time, tries to get a pet out of a cage, or simply restrains a pet.
posed of in an OSHA-approved sharps container.
There is a constant risk of any animal biting in fear, self-
There will be times when team members may be faced
 defense, or aggression in a new environment. An owner
'n e no ye j ue o sus Anfun u y
 must accept that risk when bringing the pet into a veterinary
Unless there is a certified EMT or human medical personnel
 hospital.
 on site, it is extremely important to follow the following
 If an animal has a history of possible aggression or ex-
protocols.
hibits questionable behavior, the animal should be muzzled
 If the injuries seem life threatening or the person seems
or chemically restrained. (See how to discuss restraint with
shocky, nonresponsive, and weak, contact 911 immediately.
the owner below.) Animals with a history of aggression
should have their chart marked with a caution, and the
Minimize Contact with Blood
owner should already know what precautions must be taken
If a client or another person is bleeding, the team mermber 
before the pet comes into the hospital. For example,
should not touch or handle the wounds or injuries.
 If the person is able to clean up his or her own injuries,
the team member should do the following:
the examination,
 some pets will be on sedatives provided by the hospital,
●Take the injured person to a bathroom or sink and offer
and
water and antiseptic solution.
 some pets will be placed in carriers and taken to an an-
Never directly handle the wound.
esthetic chamber for sedation so that the pet can be
Never clean and bandage a wound. If the person wants to
examined.
bandage his or her injury to stop the bleeding, give him
some light bandaging material. A team member without
Pet Safety
human medical training should never attempt to dress the
wound.
  o   n  s a   n
● Refer the injured person to a medical facility immedi-
 and our own safety, team members must also be primary
ately. Document all incidences in written format (OSHA-
advocates for pet safety. Animals must be protected against
 approved injury report for hospital use).
injury and harm from other animals, exposure to infect-
ious disease, possible escape, or other dangerous and life-
If the person is unable to clean up his or her own injuries,
dards, the following guidelines are suggested.
contact 91 1 immediately,
use gloves to separate yourself from the blood,
Restraint in the Lobby
 refer the person to a medical facility immediately, and
All animals that enter the hospital should be on a leash or in
● document all incidences in written format (OSHA-
 a carrier so that they may be restrained to ensure there is no
approved injury report for hospital use).
contact with other animals.
Bite Wounds
There should be a sign emphasizing hospital policy on
If an animal bites a human, rabies information on the animal
leash restraint on all hospital entry doors.
should be obtained immediately, the incident should be doc-
 If an owner does not have a leash for a pet, extra leashes
umented, and a state bite report may need to be filed.
should be made available.
If the owner is bitten by her own animal, the owner may
 If an owner has a small, pocket pet (rat, hamster, ferret)
elect not to report her own animal to rabies animal control.
or cat that is not able to be restrained by a leash, and no
The client should still be advised to seek medical assistance
carrier is available, the client should be moved into a
immediately.
room or the patient be placed in a kennel in the back until
An incident report should be filed outlining the incident,
an exam room is available.
the client's refusal to contact rabies animal control against
When walking hospitalized or boarded animals use two
hospital advice, and the documentation for the hospital's
leashes; thus if one leash breaks, there is a backup re-
recommendation that the client seek medical attention
straint.
immediately. No matter how the incident occurred, this
bite wound could still be the veterinary hospital's liability
Infectious Diseases
and responsibility, therefore documentation is extremely
 If based on the history there is a concerm the animal may
important.
have an infectious disease, upon entering the hospital the
If someone else is bitten by an owned or stray animal,the
animal and owner should be moved into isolation or a low-
state animal control must be contacted immediately and the
traffic exam room. Animals with the following complaints
rabies status of the pet reported. These bite wounds can
may fall into this category.
Chapter 4: Safety and Restraint
27
Vomiting/diarrhea: These symptoms in a young dog or
cat (usually less than 12-18 months of age) can suggest
canine parvo virus or feline panleukopenia. Even if upon
     s ad a 
should be moved away from the general population.
Sneezing and coughing: These symptoms in younger
       
groomed, or adopted may have contagious upper respira-
tory disease or canine distemper virus.
Skin conditions: If a pet comes in with concerms about
hair loss; red, irritated skin and/or severe itchiness (pru-
ritis); or fleas or ticks, the pet may have an infectious skin
condition (i.e., ring worm, fleas, or sarcoptic mange; see
Chapter 19). These patients should be isolated and human
contact with the pet minimized.
Once the exam has been completed and the animal
moved on to treatment, the room should be thoroughly dis-
infected and cleaned.
Identification of the Animal
All animals admitted to the hospital for procedures or treat-
ment should have a breakaway paper collar that identifies
the animal and gives the reason the patient has been admit-
ted, the name of the hospital, and a contact phone number.
All regular collars, tags, or halters should be removed prior
to the animal being placed in its kennel. Normal tags and
collars can catch on grates and kennel doors, sometimes
trapping or even choking the pet.
Approaching and Handling an Animal
Figure 4.1. What behaviors might these animals show? Figure
It is hard to always anticipate how an animal will respond to
as A sp  aa a e un s 
ment and not quick to anger. However, in Figure B, the cat with
nom aq o A1n pue Imos 1im ynq shien 1ayn sem pue Ays
its ears down and expression of angst may be a more cautious and
much provocation. Whether it is fear, protecting its owners,
possibly aggressive patient.
or pain, a pet's fractious behavior can be magnified. Dogs
defend themselves by biting. Cats may scratch and/or bite.
Horses tend to kick and bite. Rabbits also bite. In any case,
Dog Behavior under Stress
even the most docile animal may render harm to the handler.
Avoidance Behavior
With certain neurological conditions, patients may show
Avoidance behaviors are exhibited as the animal tries to re-
  a     re 
lieve the tension or its concerm about the situation. The pet
aggressively. Patients that have ingested toxins (e.g., an-
may bite or scratch at a body part during a time of pain, fear,
 tifreeze), that are suffering from infectious diseases (e.g., ra-
or dominance. The animal may also appear to be wagging its
bies, distemper), and that have central nervous system dis-
 tail while baring all teeth as a team member enters the exam
ease (e.g., spinal meningitis) may all act abnormally with
room. An important distinction to help identify these ani-
fits of aggression. Any patient that demonstrates strange be
mals is that the animal does not generally try to make eye
havior should be treated with caution, and client and person-
contact with the person but glances at therm from the side of
nel contact should be minimized. The veterinarian should be
its eye, making no attempt to approach the team member.
informed immediately, and if there are any concerns about
exposure to rabies, the patient should be safely and quickly
Fight or Flight
isolated.
Fear biters become so stressed or nervous due to a new or
It is also important to recognize a pet's body language and
dangerous situation the pet functions on pure adrenaline.
behavior that suggest what actions the patient may take (see
The patient acts purely on stimulus and response (fight or
Figure 4.l). Dogs will show a variety of behaviors while
flight), producing a large amount of adrenaline. Physical
under stress. Some of the most common are as discussed next.
   iss     s
87
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
bounding heart rate, dilated pupils, and tense muscles that
amination or carry out a procedure, if the patient is a safe
are prepared for high energy bursts.
anesthetic risk (see Chapter 29).
All team members should have a working knowledge of
Aggressive Behaviors
the handling and restraint of all pets seen by the hospital. To
Aggression is a form of antagonistic or conflict behavior
begin, it may be best to approach an animal with minimal re-
that leads to physical signs of aggression and fighting. Ag-
straint, and then based on its response, the veterinary tech-
sis psd s jo adi a uo quudp s uiss
 nician may add more or less restraint as needed.
of aggressive behavior are direct eye contact, raised scruffs,
It is advantageous to the handler or examiner to approach
and curled lips.
the animal with caution, making slow movements so that the
When approaching an unknown dog, there are a few
a u odn pasodn no pau a ou sap 
 guidelines to use to help minimize injury.
exam room, avoid comering the animal; try to do any proce-
dure in the middle of room or on the table. If the animal be-
● If the pet is showing any signs of possible unfriendly be-
comes uncooperative or aggressive, separate the pet from
havior, ask the owner if the pet typically allows their tem-
the owner. Also, when dealing with a female and her new lit-
perature and initial exam be done without some form of
ter, puppies and kittens should be examined in another room
restraint. Some owners already know the pet may need to
away from the mother.
be muzzled, taken to the back, or even tranquilized.
Restraint takes practice and control. It may take many
●Alow the pet to come to you. Do not approach the pet,
weeks to months for a team member to be able to adequately
especially if the patient is hiding in a corner or behind the
control a pet in most situations. New team members should
owner.
      a n s  i
● If the pet is not coming over and its behavior is question-
abilities with time and experience. If the team member ever
able, ask the client to move the pet into the center of the
feels that the pet is too hard to restrain or the team member
room.
is becoming frustrated with the pet, the animal should be
● If the patient continues to demonstrate escape or aggres-
confined until more help is available.
sive behaviors, ask the owner if they would be comfort-
able placing a muzzle on the pet. If at any point, the ani-
Canine Restraint Methods
mal starts becoming aggressive with the owner, have
Vice Grip Restraint
 The most cormmon type of restraint for the dog is called the
● In some cases, the pet can be taken to the back to be muz-
vice grip, where the restrainer's strong hand comes under the
zled and examined; some animals are protective of
neck of the pet and the restrainer's body is behind and over
their owners and show less aggressive behavior if the
the head of the animal. The other hand can help extend a leg
 owner is not present.
and hold off a vein (see Figure 4.2). In the room, the owners
can stand in front where animal can see them and they may
Cat Behavior under Stress
comfort their pet; however, do not let owners touch or hold
Felines can show all of the previously discussed behaviors;
the patient's face.
 Felines manifest signs of aggression as tail flipping, hissing,
Side Restraint
and spitting, and they defend themselves by biting and
Another common form of restraint is to have the dog lie
scratching. A dog bite or wound can be very serious and
down on its side in lateral recumbency. To do this, the owner
need medical attention, but a cat bite almost always results
or another person helps to position the pet on its side and a
in some degree of infection. Cat bites should receive med-
 team member grabs the pet's lower front paw while placing
light pressure on the pet's neck with the elbow. The lower
ing of the wound and administration of antibiotics. Further-
hind paw is similarly restrained while the team member
more, when handling potential fractious cats, all doors and
ad an saad s 'sd sad an uo anssd ni sa
from being able to roll or get up.
has a limited area to hide in. If the team member is not care-
ful, cats can hide for days in small unreachable areas under
Removing an Animal from a Kennel
a cage or within a wall.
When trying to remove a dog from a kennel, do not make
loud or quick movements into the cage or at the animal. Do
Restraining and Handling Animals
not just reach in and grab the animal, let it come to you. If
the animal is backing into the cormer of the cage and avoid-
 In an effort to work effectively, it is necessary to restrain the
nd aun q 0 ndae 1o aui ou op 'rapuy aun su
animals for treatment. The levels of restraint vary according
If possible, try to lasso it with a leash. If the pet is still act-
to how the animal responds to being handled or the amount
ing aggressively, charging, or resisting restraint, then give
of pain the patient may be in. In some situations, it is easier
the pet time to calm down and relax. Discuss the concerms
to sedate or anesthetize an animal in order to perform an ex-
with the doctor.
Chapter 4: Safety and Restraint
29
Canine Restraint Devices
A leash is placed with the looped end over the head and
A muzzle is used by placing it over the nose and securing it
used accordingly.
behind the animal's ears. The technician's hand tightens the
The rabies pole is a long, rigid pole with a thick wire
latch so that the animal cannot bite.
cable running throughout its hilt. The end of the cable is
looped so that it can be secured around the animal's neck
and pulled. This is used as a last resort for restraint for very
aggressive animals. Usually, the rabies pole helps restrain
animals while they are being sedated or anesthetized. These
animals will fight back aggressively as they are being forced
to the floor to be given an injection. The owner must under-
stand the concerms and what will happen to these pets while
they are being restrained. This is the last option in restraint.
Feline Restraint Methods
 Cats are much more flexible and acrobatic than dogs. An ag-
gressive cat can lunge, bite, and claw before a hand is placed
on it. Caution must be taken, as well, since cats that are re-
strained can become severely stressed to the point of shock.
Just as with dogs, restraining cats must be practiced. Types
of restraint for the cat are discussed next.
Scruffing the Neck
 Using the strong hand, the team mermber grabs and holds the
top of the neck, being sure to grab skin and hair. The other
hand can help hold the hind legs to prevent the cat from es-
caping. This does not harm the animal but is similar to how
a mother cat carries her kittens. This hold is very helpful in
restraining the animal for a physical examination or vaccina-
tion (see Figure 4.3).
Stretching and Scruffing
This restraint is used when simple scruffing is not sufficient
and the cat is still potentially aggressive. The restrainer
scruffs the cat with one hand, while the other hand grabs and
holds the rear legs, stretching the cat into a straight line.
Generally, this holds a cat in a secure position. It also allows
Figure 4.2. The figure demonstrates the proper approach to
applying the vice grip restraint on a canine. Here the team
member is placing one forearm around the patient's neck while
extending the patient's limb forward for venipuncture (a). The
team member can then also place the pointer finger on top of the
animal's elbow to hold off the large cephalic vein to aid in blood
draw (b).
Figure 4.3. Image of the proper approach to scruffing the cat.
30
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Figure 4.5.
 Image of the proper approach to extending the
neck for a jugular blood draw (a).
wrists. The technician's other hand extends the neck dorsally
by lifting the head upward by the muzzle. If need be, the cat
can be placed on the end of a table to help the team member
get better access to the neck (see Figure 4.5).
Feline Restraint Devices
Towel or Blanket Technigue
Wrapping the cat in a towel or blanket like a "burrito" can
 e jo yuan pu wxa isud an ui dia a
Figure 4.4.
 Image of the proper approach to scruffing and
tious animal. A thick towel is generally placed over the ani-
stretching a cat. Generally, with this restraint the cat can be held
mal, and using the towel to help restrain the pet, the cat is
and manipulated for proper examination and blood draw (a). The
wrapped up with its head exposed. This can allow the cat to
hind leg can then be extended by an assistant while the medial
saphenous vein is held off for blood draw with the bottom of the
be confined while the towel is lifted in specific regions to
restrainer's hand (b).
examine or treat the pet (see Figure 4.6).
Cat Bag
another person to have access to a hind limb to draw blood
A similar device is a cat bag, which allows the cat to be
administer medication, or treat a region (see Figure 4.4).
wrapped in a large nylon bag, leaving only the head exposed.
xa aq o sal e moe en suiaai iaddiz ae ai
Restraint for Jugular Venipuncture
for blood draw or treatment. Both the towel and cat bag can
The animal is placed farther forward on the table; its front
 also be used in combination with a muzzle to further prevent
legs are extended outward and the technician holds the
the cat from biting (see Figure 4.7).
Chapter 4: Safety and Restraint
31
Figure 4.5.
(continued) In some cases, extending the neck and
 pulling the forelimbs downward over the table edge may give
some team members a better approach to the jugular vein (b).
Anesthetic Chamber
 In some cases, the cat is so aggressive that no form of re-
straint will be sufficient. These pets need to be placed into
 an induction chamber, which is a large glass or plastic
aquarium-like structure with a locking air-tight lid. Once in
 the chamber, anesthetic gas can be filtered to place the pet
under light anesthesia. There is some moderate risk in anes-
 thetizing animals that cannot first be examined; however, in
many cases it is a safer option for the medical team, owner, 
 and even the animal (see Figure 4.8).
Discussing and Rationalizing Restraint with
the Client
 The goal of restraint is using just enough to complete the ex-
amination or procedure without endangering the animal or
the restrainer. The hospital and its trained technical person-
 nel are liable for injuries and damage done by an animal
Figure 4.6.  Image of cat being approached with a towel,
allowing the team member to restrain the cat without risking a
scratch or bite (a). Image of a towel restraint, which allows the
 cat to be isolated and restrained with decreased stress (b)
32
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
 ad a  o a o a-r m pn s
comes fractious in the new environment. The owner is under
the assumption the pet will never attack them or a family
member, and they do not understand that when a pet is
threatened, adrenaline takes over. Even the gentlest animal
can become aggressive in the right circumstance. The team
member's primary job as a restrainer is to protect the
animal and the owner from injury and harm.
Discussing Restraint with the Client
●The goal is to restrain the pet just enough to ac-
complish the procedure and protect the team mem-
bers and the owner.
 Before attempting restraint, describe how the pa-
tient will be restrained.
Figure 4. 7.  Image of cat being restrained in a cat bag. Many
●An animal in a new environment may react aggres-
bags will have multiple openings that allow a patient's leg to be
sively or defensively because it is unsure of what is
exteriorized while still restraining the patient.
going to happen. These actions can be driven
largely by adrenaline and fear, and the pet may
even attack the owner unknowingly.
 A muzzle is a temporary measure to help restrain
the pet. It is placed on tightly so the pet cannot re-
 move it. A muzzle does not suggest a pet is an ag-
gressive or dangerous animal, just that the pet is in
a new environment and may react unexpectedly.
 The owner can help place a muzzle on the pet, but
another means of restraint may be need to be em-
ployed.
In some cases, the pet may become protective of
the owner and will attack if the owner is present. If
 u h a an mn ssa si il 'so s
area to be worked on.
Some patients become so stressed that sedation is
 the only option. Stress can be a life-threatening
concern, and in these cases sedation or anesthesia
Figure 4.8.
 Image of cat being anesthetized in a chamber so
may be used to protect the pet.
that an examination, diagnostics, and possible treatments can be
completed.
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter
attack. It is extremely important that proper restraint is al-
Please try the cases for Section I (The First Two Days on the
ways performed or overseen by a team member (this in-
Job) to help reinforce the information presented here.
volves transport, pain management, etc.). The owner can be
 helpful under proper direction but should never be allowed
to be the sole restrainer of the animal without supervision.
Chapter 5
Obtaining an Adequate and Precise History
In most medical and surgical cases, obtaining an accurate
able to more accurately make recommendations and help the
medical history can be a large percentage of the diagnostic
 pet as quickly as possible.
process. Because the receptionist, kennel assistant, and tech-
nical staff are the team members to make first contact with
Getting an Adequate History from a Client's
the client by phone or in person, it becomes extremely im-
 portant that all personnel be able to obtain a brief but thor-
Phone Call
ough history. When presented with a life-threatening emer-
Just as with the example above, there are many clients who
gency, it often becomes the responsibility of the technician
ask questions about their pet's health that may never reach
the doctor's attention unless a proper history is taken. When
all other members of the medical team are treating the emer
handling a client on the phone, a team member should not.
 gency patient. It is just as important to be able to complete a
hesitate to take time to get a file and ask some basic infor-
thorough physical examination, it is important to establish a
mation about the pet so that the medical team has sufficient
set protocol of questions that covers most situations. The
information to make a decision. Some basic questions are as
team member must also be able to discerm if there is more
follows.
 going on than what the client can perceive. For example,
consider the following.
Basic Questions
What Is the Signalment of the Patient?
The signalment of the patient is the physical description,
A client calls a clinic late in the day just prior to clos-
age, sex, reproductive status, and weight of the animal. This
ing. The client informs the receptionist that their cat
certainly can be taken from a client's file if the pet has been
Whiskers has been acting constipated for the last 1-2
seen; however, reconfirming the information with the client
days. Whiskers is straining to defecate and is vocaliz-
ing, and now seems more and more depressed. The
is always helpful. On many occasions, the signalment of a
owner wants to know what they should do; can they
  aa n g a d sas  
give it a children's suppository? Is there some over-
sick patient.
the-counter medication that can help? Or should the
 pet be seen, and can it wait to the morming?
 For example, a client calls with a 4-month-old, male,
35-pound, gold and tan rotteweiler with vomiting and
diarrhea. A well-informed medical team will already
What questions should the receptionist ask to assess if the
be suspicious of possible parvo virus, will have the pet
pet is truly in need? The team member could hand the infor-
immediately placed in an isolation exam room, and
mation over to a technician or take the message for a doctor
possibly even have the diagnostic tests pulled out and
to return, but what if the message does not get answered
warming up to room temperature.
tonight? Will the pet be okay?
  s    s
male tom cats are more often suffering from a urinary ob-
What is the Chief Complaint?
struction than actual constipation. If the male is not seen
Although this sounds like a straightforward question, the
quickly, the inability of the pet to urinate and the buildup of
team member must always realize the emotionally attached
toxins could put the pet in a life-threatening state. It is not
client does not have the same level of medical training. It is
up to the receptionist to decide over the phone if the pet's life
very important to discover what the client perceives as the
is threatened. If the team member asks the right questions
main concerm. Frequently a client may only pick up on a
and reports to the doctor that a male tom cat is straining and
small symptom that may be hiding a much more serious
vocalizing and acting constipated, the veterinarian will be
problem (see Figure 5.1).
33
34
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
   m     
from a full history (see below) to help the client distinguish
if the pet is showing other specific symptoms such as
vomiting,
diarrhea,
coughing,
sneezing,
increased thirst,
 increased urination, and
●weight loss.
These symptoms can suggest profound systemic disease
and should never be ignored, whether you are dealing with
These four basic and simple questions can set the tone for
how seriously ill the patient is and what steps the hospital
team may need to take in order to make sure the pet is diag-
nosed and treated. Clients will often expect serious deci-
sions to be made based on the information that they give the
medical team over the phone. It is important to be very
precise and get a history but not give out medical infor-
mation or even suggest a diagnosis over the phone.
Taking an Adequate History Prior to Physical
Examination
Figure 5.1.
What is the signalment on this pet?
(Answer): A 40- to 50-pound lab mix.
As important as taking a history from clients over the phone,
a full medical history prior to or during a medical examina-
tion is paramount to a proper medical diagnosis. The history
For example, a client calls to inform you that their 8-
A 2.5-year-old, male, neutered, 15-pound bichon frise
year-old, male, neutered, gray Himalayan cat is shed-
came into an emergency hospital for acute onset of in-
ding and has a poor hair coat. When the pet arrives at the
ability to balance, lack of coordination, collapse, and
clinic, you discover that the pet has lost 4 pounds in 1
weakness. A technician and doctor went through the
month and its ears, whites of the eyes, and gums are yel.
medical history thoroughly, and the client assured the
low. Obviously there is more going on than just a mild
team that the pet was in perfect health and had no ex-
skin problem, but if a proper history is not taken, this pet
pos ure to toxins or poisons. The veterinarian informed
may wait days to be seen at a busy general practice.
that the pet certainly could have a serious neurologic
problem, and although the pet could be started on flu-
ids and routine blood work, a neurologic consultation
How Long Has This Been Happening?
be needed in the moming. The clients were willing to
   aas  m a, a s 
anything for their pet and agreed to begin treatment.
own health and their pet's health. However, determining the
The pet was admitted, started on intravenous fluids,
duration of an illness can certainly help the medical team
and routine blood work was sent to the lab. The clients
 s    a ss  
came to the back to say goodnight to their pet, es-
a a a si a n a  Ais A
corted by a hospital team member. As the clients were
  s       
leaving, one client looked at the other client and said,
Some clients will immediately bring their pet in at the first
"You know I don't think he liked the vodka as much as
sign of illness; some clients may wait days to weeks from the
his normal bourbon." On further questioning, it was
initiation of physical illness.
discovered that the dog shared evening cocktails with
the client and recently began drinking martinis rather
Is the Pet Showing Any Other Signs of Hllness?
than just bourbon on the rocks. The clients had no idea
The goal of a team member is to be extremely specific in
that a little vodka could be toxic to their pet.
discussion with the client. When asking this last question,
Chaper 5: Obtaining an Adequate and Precise History
35
When discussing health concerms with clients on the phone, there are some common questions a client may ask.
Do You Think the Pet Should Be Seen Immediately?
ous j an ua ue si li yn shaay pue n on ynoua panm si jua au jn n si qun yo anu po y
probably should be seen.
 The medical team should then be consulted using the proper history and the pet scheduled or brought in immediately
per the recommendation of the veterinarian.
Is There Anything I Can Give the Pet Over the Counter?
 At no time should anyone on the medical team (except the veterinarian) recommend any medications (holistic or
 Even something as benign as aspirin or an aspirin-like drug can have serious to life-threatening side effects.
As with all other examples, the medical team should be consulted and a retum call made to the client.
Is There Anything I Can Do at Home for Him?
 e a a a u  au no s o 'aa sad an y s s 
advice or physical exam.
 Even discussion of placing a pet on a bland food diet should first be discussed with the doctor on staff once an ade-
quate history is given and the veterinarian has had time to review the medical record.
 Any medical advice given to a client makes the entire hospital liable for the information. If the pet has a severe re-
action or is not seen promptly and dies, the client could hold the hospital responsible for the incident.
After the conversation with client, the most important thing to do is to document the call in the client's record, includ-
ing the hospital team's recommendation and the client's response. Through proper documentation, the hospital can keep
 axa  si n a 'sssi   sni  a as a  As  sd  jo n
documentation.
9/12/03 Ms. Schadler called (Owner). Buffy is vomiting for 3 days, recommended exam immediately, owner de-
clined and will feed bland food diet for 12-24 hours, will recheck if worse. Scheduled a call back for 9/13.
   a  a  a pn
questions should be asked for pets being seen for wellness
checking in the patient. The doctor can then come into the
exams, admitted for surgery, or checked because of illness.
room with a clear idea of what additional questions need to
Below are some basic medical questions that can be used for
be asked. This sometimes makes the client go through some
pets being admitted for medical concerns.
aspects of the medical history twice; however, very often the
client will start thinking of certain problems or concems
Medical History Questions
during the first set of questions and may expand the infor-
What Is the Chief Complaint?
mation to the doctor.
It is very important to define what the owner is concermed
The history should be thorough and precise. When asking
about in relation to the pet's health.
 questions, the team member should be very specific in what
they ask the client. A very common question to ask a client
How Long Has This Been Happening?
with a sick animal is, Could the pet have gotten into any poi-
 The duration of the illness can help suggest if the disease is
sons or toxins? The concept of a toxin or poison can some-
acute or chronic in nature.
times mean very different things to a client.
The moral of this story is to be precise and specific when
Could the Pet Have Gotten into Any Poisons, Medications
talking with clients.
(Human or Animal),or Toxins?
A team member should develop a routine for medical
As illustrated by the example above, being very specific can
questions and ask them in the same format and order each
assod e on ansdxa Aue uaaa s aau j aaup dia
time. Medical history questions can change depending on
toxic element. Remember that some pets can get into drugs
why the pet is being seen, in what part of the country the an-
 a s n    s  
imal hospital is located, and the living conditions of the an-
tasting, the medication will be eaten by certain animals (i.e.,
imal. There is no set number or type of questions that should
Labrador retrievers).
be used, but the medical team should discuss what types of
Over-the-counter products, especially aspirin-like drugs
99
Section 1: The First Two Days on the Job
(non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) such as Aleve, ibu-
● hormonal disease: diabetes, hyperadrenocorticism, hy-
 profen, Tylenol, and aspirin-free medications can produce se-
poadrenocorticism, and
rious or life-threatening complications, especially in cats.
hyper tension.
Common basic poisons/insecticides include
Are There Changes in Appetite?
●  rodent poison (Warfarin and others),
 og jo a u  n    s
 gopher bait (strychnine),
complete anorexia and can certainly suggest severe disease.
 rose feed/bone meal (organophosphate),
Long-term anorexia can produce its own life-threatening con-
●antifreeze (ethylene glycol),
cerms, especially in the cat (see Chapter 14; hepatic lipidosis).
●snail bait (metaldehyde), and
●ant/roach spray (pyrethrins).
Any Evidence of C/S/V/D/PU/PD?
zaus suynoo noy spuis /nd/aS/ uur a
Plants also can have toxic side effects and are specific to
ing, vomiting, diarrhea, increased thirst, and increased uri-
particular regions. Some examples of toxic plants include
 nation. Changes in these parameters can suggest diseases of
 major body systems.
+
oleanders (cardiac toxin),
mushrooms (death cap),
Respiratory/Cardiovascular System
 algae (algae poisoning), and
 Coughing and sneezing can suggest changes in the heart and
● Other regional plants.
lungs. Coughing can be associated with upper respiratory,
 pulmonary, and cardiac disease.
 Toxic animals are also regionally specific. Some exam-
Sneezing is generally associated with upper respiratory
ples of these are
 Or pulmonary problems. When coughing and sneezing is
combined with nasal or ocular discharge, the possibility of
scorpions,
infectious disease is a concem, and the pet should be placed
 snakes, and
      o n   
+spiders.
Gastrointestinal System
There are some drugs that may not be prescription, but
Vomiting and diarrhea are common signs of many potential
still may be dangerous to the animal, such as marijuana,
gastrointestinal problems. Possible categories of diseases
crack, etc. Remember that concerms of illegal drug con-
that produce these signs can be
sumption should be handled delicately and possibly may
 need to be handled by the veterinarian.
 dietary indiscretion,
gastrointestinal parasites,
Any Chance of Trauma?
infectious diseases: parvo virus,
Be specific when asking about possible trauma (e.g., fall, hit
 intestinal obstruction/foreign bodies (i.e., clothing, rocks,
by car, animal attack). Also, some owners do not realize that
dog toys), and
cats that climb up to 14-foot ledges could easily fall and sus-
 inflammatory disease.
tain damage.
Other systemic disease can also produce vomiting and di-
Is There a History of Previous Disease?
 arrhea. These are diseases where there is a buildup of toxins
When confronted with a pet in a life-threatening emergency,
in the body (i.e., kidney disease, liver disease, severe dia-
owners will sometimes forget that their pet has a long his-
betes, other hormonal diseases) producing gastrointestinal
tory of disease. Some owners will forget that their pet once
signs due to the nausea and toxins the pet must deal with.
had a disease if the last symptoms were seen months or years
 If young animals (under 12-18 months of age) with a his-
before. Also, some owners will not understand that a pet
a  n       
may be suffering from a serious disease if the pet was diag-
should be placed into an isolated exam room away from
nosed with a disease but never treated for the problem. For
other waiting pets.
example, a client may inform you that their pet had seizures,
but that the last one was many years ago. A client may say
Polyuria/Polydipsia
that their pet was diagnosed with Cushing's disease, for in-
Polyuria (PU) refers to a pet that has a sharp increase in
stance, but they never treated it.
urinating. Polydipsia (PD) is defined as an increase in
Diseases of concern are
water consumption.
These increases can start subtly over days to weeks and
heart disease,
be the first indicators of chronic serious disease.
seizure/epilepsy,
  d on  go p   y mn p s
● organ disease: kidney, liver, pancreas,
flush toxins out of their system when there is chronic disease
Chaper 5: Obtaining an Adequate and Precise History
37
increasing the amount of toxins in the body. Along with in-
creased water consumption, animals urinate more often.
PU/PD can be the first indicator of many chronic older-
age diseases.
Kidney disease
+
+
Diabetes mellitus
+
Hyperthyroidism (cats)
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushings disease)
Liver disease
+
Other systemic diseases
When asking if the dog is PU/PD, it should be noted if
 these symptoms have been occurring over weeks to months
rather than being an acute situation.
 ad  as q a sad ase 
(i.e., vaccinations) should also be questioned about changes
Figure 5.2.
 Image of an abdominal radiograph that shows that
in thirst and urination since chronic increase can be more
the canine ate a belt buckle.
suggestive of an underlying systemic disease.
Has There Been Any History of Fainting, Decreased
Ability to Exercise (Exercise Intolerance), or Collapse?
 many types of disease that can manifest themselves in how
-i snoas isans ueo pe snoas Aia aq uo suis asa
the animal acts.
diac or systemic disease. Animals with inability to handle
- a  n  nn s n  p
Does the Pet Eat Abnormal Things?
tially in a life-threatening condition and need to be handled
Especially with pets being seen with complaints of vomiting
as a critical care emergency.
and diarrhea, questions of what the pet could have gotten
These animals cannot keep up with simple demands of
into need to be addressed. The team member should ask ex-
  on  aq  n ssas   
tremely specific questions because owners will sometimes
collapse or are unable to complete the task. Some of these
assume that their pet would never eat anything that tastes
animals can become so challenged that they simply collapse
bad or is abnormal (see Figure 5.2).
 and die.
Some possible foreign bodies can be
 Some diseases that can produce these symptoms include
heart disease or systemic disease causing weakness, such as
●electric cords,
toys,
infectious disease,
●bones,
 metabolic disease,
rocks,
tumor,
 clothing, and
blood loss/anemia,
trash (i.e., corn cobs, feminine products, plastic).
bleeding abdominal tumor, and
 clotting problems.
Has the Pet Traveled?
 A very important question can be if the pet has a travel his-
If a pet comes in with a history of collapsing or fainting,
tory or if it has just moved from another location. These pets 
n nnona pu Aouagaa ue se paan aa pinous sad asa
could have contracted a regional disease that may not show
the medical team's attention immediately (see Chapter 30).
physical symptoms for weeks to months. These diseases
may be uncommon or nonexistent in the current location.
Has the Pet Shown Any Change in Neurologic Behavior?
 Some regional geographic diseases are
 Changes in neurologic behavior, such as seizures, nystag-
mus (uncontrolled rapid eye movements), or general
heart worm,
 e i s ss   s
+
valley fever,
 getfulness, sudden blindness) can suggest central nervous 
histoplasmosis,
system disease or systemic illness. Owners will bring ani-
 leptospirosis,
o a  a  y an 1 as  s
blastomycosis,
behavior, suddenly or over time as the pet ages. It is very
Lyme's disease,
important to have the owner specifically describe the
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and
  a o s n   s
salmon poisoning.
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Are There Other Animals in the Household, and How Is
In the later sections of this book that deal with specific
Their Health?
organ systems and their diseases, each chapter will have a fo-
It is important to determine if there are any other pets in the
-mous siad 1og A1is poog e pag o mo uo uissnosp pasno
household that could be showing signs suggesting an intox-
ing specific organ disease. Just like all aspects of veterinary
ication or infectious disease affecting more than one pet. Are
medicine, the entire medical team should practice and be able
-n n mn qs  p n sa o a
to routinely take an excellent history from the client.
e saoe un asop uaaq isnf si seun asas sno
 For example, if a new 4-month-old puppy has been tested
and diagnosed with parvo viral infection, it is important to
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter
determine if there are other pets in the household that could
Please try the cases for Section I (The First Two Days on the
be at risk.
Job)tohelp reinforcethe informationpresented here.
Chapter 6
The Medical Record and the 30-Second
Triage Examination
This chapter will review the legality of the medical record,
other diagnostic test reports are also part of the medical
-d suuosu ue jo Aqs an aena o Aem idoid au
record and must be kept in conjunction with state laws.
tient (triage), and basic knowledge of diseases that are in-
Clients are allowed to request copies of medical records as
fectious to both animals and humans (zoonotic diseases).
 needed for veterinary specialty consultations, personal
Although understanding the importance of the physical
records, or other needs. Radiographs can be loaned out to
exam and knowing how to do a proper triage examination is
the client as needed but remain the property of the hospital.
important, many medical teams feel that this is the veterinar-
Most hospitals will have a radiograph sign-out form to track
ian's responsibility. However, although the ultimate liability
the location and the responsible party for the x-rays. If a
rests squarely on the veterinarian's shoulders, all members
client wants to have a copy of radiographs made, there are
 of the team must be able to assess if a pet is getting into trou-
human medical radiography offices that can duplicate the
ble. For example, consider the following.
films for a set fee.
 The hospital maintains a client-patient relationship with
●A technician monitoring a pet on fluids begins to notice
the owner who presented the pet for treatment. The
that the pet is gaining weight, has increased lung sounds,
client-patient relationship does not allow disclosure of pet
and a moist cough.
information without the verbal or written consent of the
● A kennel assistant notices the large-breed canine boarder
owner. Permission to disclose medical information to an-
is acting weak and in pain and has a large, bloated ab-
other person should be documented in the chart with the
domen. This team member may be the only one observ-
date of the permission, who in the family gave the permis-
ing this pet 90% of the time.
sion, and to whom the information is allowed to be given.
●A groomer notices a severe ear infection and skin rash
Although rare, there can be incidences of dispute between
and can help the medical team catch important medical
family members, an owner and breeder, or individuals where 
concerms for the health of the pet.
 A receptionist that checks in a cat for an eye problem no-
 There are many possible medical record formats available
tices that the pet is severely dehydrated, icteric, and has
to a hospital. Whether written records, computer records, or
its third eyelids elevated. This pet may need immediate
records on a PDA, the basic medical record may follow many
attention.
 possible outlines.
It is impossible for the veterinarian to evaluate and monitor
Conventional: This is a source-oriented file that follows
all of these patients, initiate diagnostics, and begin treatment
chronological order of what the pet presented for each
without the help of a well-educated medical team. Building
visit. Some source files will have a master problerm list as
and educating the team members so they can identify abnor-
a top sheet of the record. This page lists all dates of all
 major diseases and diagnosis and serves as a diagnostic
an employee goes up to another team member and says,
index for the pet.
“Could you please check Herman, I think there is some-
 Problem oriented: This file follows full documentation
thing abnormal going on, the medical team is beginning
 of a pet per problem situation. Every time the pet comes
to properly use all it resources.
in for a continuing problem (for instance, pancreatitis),
there is a specific section in the pet's file for this diagno-
sis, and the workup is listed chronologically.
Medical Records
A medical record is the compilation of pertinent facts about
Whatever format and medium is used, a thorough med-
the individual animal's life and health history. The medical
ical record should contain the following.
record is the property of the hospital and should be main-
tained on site for at least 1-3 years, depending on state law.
 Owner's information
s un da a m paau  s a 'sas as ul
- Name
age for up to 7 years. Radiographs, ultrasound images, and
Address
39
40
Section 1: The First Two Days on the Job
Employment
Phone number
 Financial information
Animal information
Case number
 Signalment
●Record
Symptoms
History
Vaccination history
Consultations
Diagnosis
 Discharge summaries
Prognosis
 Continuing education for aftercare
—Biopsy/necropsy findings
Client communication
Figure 6.1.1
 Even the ffiendliest cat will not often lie on its
side, not moving or exploring a new environment. This pet is in
It is extremely important, from a liability perspective,
trouble.
that all team members understand, be able to interpret, and
notate on the medical record any contact with the client and
information about the pet or changes in the pet's medical sta-
tus. If ever there is a dispute regarding the patient care or
lie down on their stermum or side and relax as if they are at
communication with the client, the medical record and its
home. The friendliest dog often stands up and explores the
entries become the first document examined.
environment, especially when someone new enters the
room. Animals that are carried in, lie on their sides (lateral
The 30-Second Triage Examination
recumbency), or even on their chest (stermal recumbency)
should already raise the concerm level (see Figure 6.1).
The difference between a true emergency and a perceived
When encountering a potentially sick pet that seems se-
emergency is derived by physical exam and history (see
verely lethargic or depressed and is not up and moving
Chapter 5). The focus of this exam is to assess the overall
around, you must consider that these pets may need immedi-
status of the patient in a brief 30-second examination. The
 n   s     
 goal of this examination is not to make a nonveterinarian
between life and death.
d e ng sisood e aa no asp m ae qa 
tient but rather to make sure the borderline or shocky patient.
Point HI: A Review of the Respiratory System-Is the
is seen immediately.
Pet Breathing?
Each employee should have a basic understanding of
A quick visual review of how the pet is breathing can
what a true emergency is so the team member can commu-
quickly differentiate an animal that is life threatened from a
nicate her concerms to the client and veterinarian. Triage ex-
stable pet. Of course, if there is no respiration, the caution
amination is something that must mastered by all employees
level is automatically critical; however, the pet's body posi-
and be constantly practiced in order to perfect. If there is
tion, its respiratory rate, and how it is breathing can tell the
ever a concem regarding stability of a patient, always err on
medical team a great deal.
the side of caution—remember the words “I think this is ab-
 Normal respiration rates are 8-30 breaths per minute
normal, could you please check this," can save lives
The physical examination is broken into steps of obser-
animals).
vation. A patient does not need to meet a specific number of
 A panting pet should not be confused with a pet in respi-
criteria for the team member to feel that the patient is of
 u so pu sao o a arn pu ssa Ao
increased concerm. If the medical team member is uncertain 
pant in a stressful environment. If a cat comes in panting and 
a a jo noa ao u aq aq  pad a 
is acting as if it is in respiratory distress, often asking the
exam, the rest of the medical team should be informed im-
 owner if the cat typically stresses and open mouth breathes
mediately.
every time it comes in may help clarify whether the cat is an
emergency or just nervous. Even with a cat with a known
Point I: General Review of the Animal (Mentation)-
history of panting, a team member should still evaluate the
Conscious or Unconscious?
pet to make sure that this open mouth breathing is not a
 Mentation is defined as the mental status or attitude of the
manifestation of a new problem.
pet. Very few pets come into a medical facility and calmly
Normal breathing patterns in a relaxed animal are slow
Chapter 6: The Medical Record and the 30-Second Triage Examination
41
Figure 6.2. In this image the pet is in an oxygen cage. This
dog is having severe respiratory difficulty. Note the following: ex-
tended head and neck, ears back, open mouth breathing. A video
 of this pet breathing is not needed to detect that this pet is having
respiratory problems.
chest expansion and depression. The animal should not be
extending the neck and head as it tries to breathe (see Figure
6.2). There is no component of normal breathing that in-
Figure 6.3.
 Image of a team member taking the femoral pulse.
cludes abdominal movement or open mouth breathing.
This is accomplished by placing the flat of the hand on the inside
 Signs of concerms are an abdominal push with breathing,
 hind limb just distal to the inguinal fold. A strong pulse should be
observed.
Point MI: A Review of the Cardiovascular System-
Is the Heart Beating?
Pulses are a reflection of cardiac output. There are times
To get a pulse, the team member should place the fingers
when there may be a strong heart rate, but weak pulses (i.e..
Over a large artery. A team member's thumb should not be
 shock). Pulse rates are more important than heart rates as
used because the pulse of the individual can also be felt
long as the pet has an observable heart rhythm. Changes in
while trying to take a patient's pulse, and this could falsely
 a a go asa sos ssas uo rnb as
increase the pet's pulse rate. There are a number of locations
lungs, massive dehydration, trauma, intermal bleeding, and
in which to find a strong pulse.
ad a u s o sa  'sd ao 
rate should be discussed immediately with the medical team
● Femoral artery: This is the most common location to
and veterinarian.
take a good pulse. By placing your hand inside the in-
All members should be able to evaluate a pulse. Whether
guinal fold on the medial aspect of the hind leg, where
it is necessary to evaluate a potential emergency, check a
 the hind leg meets the skin, the femoral pulse can be felt 
 patient prior to surgery, or simply check a boarder, it is im-
(see Figure 6.3).
a  aa mn a a sa n ne i n
Axillary pulse: In some animals, especially in larger
pulse rate. This is mastered with practice and patience. If a
dogs, a pulse can be picked up behind the forearm in the
team member has problems isolating a pulse, a heart rate
armpit region. By placing your fingers against the medial
can be observed by placing a hand at the left side of the
aspect of the forelimb in the armpit region, a good pulse
chest at the left elbow level. Remember, the key is to feel an
may be picked up against the fingers (see Figure 6.4).
abnormal heart or pulse rate, so the team members should
● Metacarpal pulse: As with humans, a pulse can be
 d  a  p s  n uo a
found in some pets over the wrist below or above the
smaller pets. A quick note of caution is to make sure the pet
 metacarpal pad of the front limb (see Figure 6.5).
d e  aa    no aiss no si
Digital pulse: In some pets a strong pulse can be picked up
rate.
 in the interdigital region between the toes (see Figure 6.6).
42
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Figure 6.6.
 Image of a team member taking an interdigital
pulse. This is accomplished by placing the pointer and middle
strong pulse can often be observed.
Once a pulse is identified, the following criteria should
be evaluated.
Evaluating the Pulse
Sl e ui sasind jo iaqunu aun qunoo 'aei asind aun 1om
second time frame and multiply by four; this gives you pulse
per minute.
-1  () 1      
(feline).
Figure 6.4.
. Image of a team member taking an axillary pulse.
d a pus () 0lol< a as 
 This is accomplished by placing the flat of the hand on the
inside arm just dorsal to the elbow. A strong pulse can often be
out to the medical team.
● A pulse rate <80 (bradycardia) should also be noted and
obser ved.
 discussed with the medical tearm.
As important as pulse rate is the quality of the pulse—-its
overall strength or weakness. As the team members become
more practiced in determining a normal pulse quality, they
 will be able to point out abnormality. Pulse quality should be
evaluated as follows.
●Yes versus no: If no pulse is evident, with or without a
heart rate, it is an absolute emergency, and the doctor and
medical team should be notified immediately.
Weak pulse: Pulses that seem weak or are nonexistent
could suggest that an animal is in serious shock or in res-
 piratory or cardiac arrest. Animals with weakened pulses
should be brought to the attention of the medical team
immediately.
●Hyperdynamic: This pulse type is defined as rapid, hard
 pulses that lift your finger off the limb. This change can
psun ue ym dn daa on un oq aun isaans
need, and it may soon be unable to maintain this demand.
 Although this can be normal in happy, excited, or even
Figure 6.5.  Image of a team member taking a metacarpal
pulse. This is accomplished by placing the pointer and middle
scared pets, animals that come in sick and depressed may
finger just dorsal to the larger metacarpal/metatarsal pad on
be in early shock. Hyperdynamic pulses in depressed or
the caudal aspect of the limb. A strong pulse can often be
ill patients should be pointed out to the medical team im-
obser ved.
mediately.
Chapter 6: The Medical Record and the 30-Second Triage Examination
43
Point IV: Mucus Membrane (Gums)-What is the Gum
Color?
The mucus membranes refer to the nonhaired regions of
 the body where the normal color of the skin can be seen. The
mucus membrane regions of the body are the gums, whites
of the eyes, inside ear flaps (pinna), rectum, penis, or vulva.
Caution should be taken when assessing gum color or capil-
lary refill rate to make sure the animal is not fearful or ag-
 gressive and will not try to bite.
 Normal healthy gum color is a light to moderate pink,
and this color reflects proper oxygenation of tissue. Ab-
 normal coloration of this tissue can suggest different disease 
entities.
 Purple, blue, and gray reflects an inability of the body
pay sunsans Ans anssn aue aeuaxo Aadod 
 Or respiratory disease. These colorations suggest severe
 life-threatening concerm. The pet should be placed in an
Oxygen-rich environment and the doctor and medical
team notified immediately.
 Pale pink to white suggests that the body is unable to
maintain the demands placed upon it due to shock, dehy-
dration, or blood loss. The animal must alter the blood
flow to small peripheral capillaries in the gums and other
mucus membranes, causing a paling or lack of color in
 these regions. This change should also be noted and the
medical team informed.
Yellow pigmentation usually suggests a buildup of toxins
within the tissue that are normally detoxified and elimi-
Figure 6.8.
 Image of evaluating the capillary refill time.
 Being cautious of aggressive animals, the lip is lifed and the
nated by the liver. A buildup of these toxins in the body
gum color evaluated. A finger then presses on the gums with
causes a yellowing of the gums, whites of the eyes (con-
enough pressure to blanch the membrane. The finger is then
junctiva), and skin (icterus or jaundice) (see Figure
removed, and the time it takes for gums to return to normal color
6.7). Early jaundice can be detected initially by examin-
is measured.
ing the roof of the mouth (hard palate) with a light
source and observing a yellow coloration. Care must be
taken with fearful or aggressive animals when evaluating
 the hard palate. Icterus can suggest a serious liver disease 
or other disease entity.
Point V: Capillary Refill TimeDoes the Gum Color
Return Quickly?
The capillary refill time (CRT) refers to the time it takes for
the gums to retum to normal color after the mucus mem-
branes are pressed with a light pressure.
 Normally the process should take less the 2 seconds
(see Figure 6.8).
Abnormality suggests the body is unable to refill the
smallest capillaries of the body in an adequate time frame.
This can be a very important factor in assessing for early
shock. When the body is challenged and cannot keep up
with the demands placed upon it, the CRT slows. Some
causes that change the CRT are dehydration, shock, allergic
reaction, toxins, and other diseases. Please note that it is not
Figure 6. 7. Image of a ear pinna. These areas should be
possible to get an accurate CRT on an already pale or icteric
checked for yellowing of the skin suggestive of jaundice of
 s    si     
icterus.
reason to have it evaluated.
44
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Figure 6.9. Evaluating the gums and skin for abnormal bruis-
Figure 6.10.
. Image of a medical team member evaluating skin
ing is key to picking up early bleeding problems. In this image,
turgor for dehydration. In this patient the skin does not bounce
the patient has massive bruising of the gums secondary to a
 back quickly, suggesting moderate to severe dehydration.
rattlesnake bite.
Point VI: Brusing--Is There Bruising of the Mucus
Point VIll: Dehydration--Is the Pet Losing or Unable
Membrane?
to Maintain Normal Hydration?
Spontaneous bruising of the gums without evidence or his-
Dehydration is a measurement of how severely a pet is
1o o Apoq au jo Aiq ue ysns uo un jo A1n
fluid compromised on presentation. It is measured by obser-
blood normally (coagulopathy). This is of special concerm if
vation in the physical exam through a number of parameters.
  q pas aq uo po jo  adodl 'i
Skin turgor is the overall elasticity of the skin or how
platelet count that makes the pet more susceptible to bleed
quickly the skin bounces back after being lifted or tented.
ing, certain infectious diseases, rat poison or other toxin in-
The more dehydrated the pet, the less the skin's ability to
 gestion, heat stroke, and other disease entities. Spontaneous
bounce back quickly (see Figure 6.10). Common loca-
bruising or bruising in general should be pointed out to the
tions to check for dehydration are the skin over the shoul-
medical team immediately (see Figure 6.9).
 ders, on the forehead, and over the eyelids (typically the
most sensitive).
Point VII: Temperature - What Is the Pet's Temperature?
 One exception to this rule is that animals with severe
 Both extremes of temperature can suggest serious disease.
weight loss can have poor elasticity and could seem se-
Normal rectal temperature is 100-102.5° Fahrenheit for
verely dehydrated.
the dog and cat.
pepu-lam u Aadds pue ysio Aeaus ae sn
Hypothermia, or less than normal body temperature, can
animals. The gums become drier and tackier as the ani-
suggest the animal is severely weakened and sick, or it can
mal becomes more dehydrated.
suggest that the animal is in cold shock after exposure to
Eyes have fat pads behind them that help keep the eyes
cold or falling into icy waters. Hypothermia is life threaten-
 protruded. As an animal dehydrates, these fat pads de-
ing and needs to be reported to the medical team at once.
crease in size as moisture is removed to help rehydrate the
 Higher than normal body temperature, which is called
animal. Thus the more the animal is dehydrated, the greater
fever or hyperthermia, can also be a strong concerm, and if
is the sunken appearance of the eyes. Also, as the eye sinks
severely elevated (>106° Fahrenheit) can be life threatening.
in, the third eyelids or lower eyelids begin to protrude over
Fever is generally a response to intermal substances and oc-
 the eye, giving the appearance of a red swollen eye.
curs secondary to infection, inflammation, or neoplasia
(cancer). Life-threatening hyperthermia results from massive 
Measuring Dehydration
infection, inflammation, or heat stroke, which occurs when
Dehydration is a measurement based on the physical exam-
the temperature increases above 106°. Heat stroke can pro-
ination of the pet (i.e., skin turgor, mucus mermbrane, and
duce damage to the organs, the body's ability to clot blood,
appearance of the eyes). Severe dehydration can be a life-
and central nervous system. High fevers are life threatening,
 threatening concern that could push a sick or injured animal
and the pet must be brought to the attention of the medical
into a worsening state of shock. Levels of dehydration are as
team immediately and cooled down (see Chapter 30).
follows.
Chapter 6: The Medical Record and the 30-Second Triage Examination
45
Early dehydration: In this stage the pet is usually not de-
tectably dehydrated, but the history of severe fluid losses
(i.e., vomiting and diarrhea) may suggest the pet's hydra-
tion status is being challenged. Although early dehydra
 tion is not a life-threatening emergency, the medical team
d aui san mi paau aun juaio aun on uidxa in paau 
tient with some form of fluid therapy before the condition
worsens.
 Mild dehydration: In this level of dehydration, the ani-
mal is beginning to show initial dehydration; the skin tur-
 gor is slowed (slightly), gums are moist to dry, and eyes
may be less shiny and slightly sunken in. Animals may be
slightly depressed.
 Moderate dehydration: With moderate dehydration skin
turgor is more severely slowed, gums are dry, eyes are
sunken, and the pet tends to be more depressed.
 Severe dehydration: This is a life-threatening dehydra-
Figure 6.11.
. Image of a patient with Shift-Sherrington syn-
tion; there is no skin elasticity, gums are bone dry, eyes
drome. This canine has been hit by a car and presents rigid and
are severely sunken, and the animal is usually lifeless,
fixed in the front limbs and neck but is relaxed and flaccid in the
lying on its sternum or its side. These pets require imme-
hind limbs. This type of presentation after a trauma suggests a
diate medical attention.
broken back.
Point IX: Changes in Body Conformation--Does the
Pet's Body Look Abnormal?
of stability discussed above are within normal limits, the
There are a few changes in the pet's body conformation that
team member must explain that the patient may need to wait
- g paau e pu uu ouaa u isns e
until the medical team is able to handle the case. Or if the
      s   
 paau  pad a 'sanfn nans yim ansn si ad
 spection of the animal and should be dealt with as soon as
be stabilized before the less serious injuries are addressed.
possible.
Flowchart of Triage
Bloated Abdomen
Figure 6.13 is a flowchart used to evaluate the stability of a
When a dog, usually a large to giant breed presents with a
patient. There is no one right way, and any system that ade-
 large distended abdomen with a history of gagging and try-
quately evaluates the patient and can be repeated in a sys-
ing to vomit, this suggests a true emergency in veterinary
tematic way is acceptable (see Table 6.1).
medicine. This condition, called bloat or gastro-distention
volvulus (see Chapter 10), is a life-threatening condition in
Zoonotic Disease
which the patient's stomach has rotated around its own axis,
cutting off the blood supply to the stomach and spleen. This
When approaching or triaging pets, the team mermber should
disease is much like a horse colic and if not treated quickly
always keep in mind that there are some diseases that the an-
may lead to a life-threatening state and potential death.
imal may be infected with that can also be transmitted to hu-
mans (zoonotic disease). Transmission of the disease can
Shift-Sherrington Syndrome
occur via ingestion, inhalation, or direct contact. It is very
When a canine comes in after a trauma (usually from being
easy to come into contact with blood, urine, or other speci-
hit by a car) and presents with a rigid ummovable forelegs
mens, especially if the team member does not wear protec-
 and neck and a hind end that is completely relaxed, this usu-
tive gloves. Those in the human health-care field have very
q iamo a ui ao e uaaq su aaui eui sisans e
-      s 
and the spinal cord may be damaged or severed (see Figure
mens and the patients themselves. It is important to recog-
6.11). This syndrome typically carries a poor prognosis, and
soq no go sunnan pu san aun mn aau pu az
the pet needs to be treated with the utmost care.
or clinic when handling specimens and patients. Precautions
include the following.
Point X: Lesser Concerns: Body Conditions-
Lacerations, Eye Injuries
●Know specific zoonotic diseases in your geographic re-
 Although very disconcerting, lacerations and superficial in-
 m y y o   s a  
juries must come second to shock and stabilization of an an-
mans. For example, in the Arizona mountains, bubonic
imal (see Figure 6.12). However, to the owner, these injuries
plaque is endemic. This lethal disease, spread by fleas,
ss au a jl a ap ue a e a aas A
can also infect cats. Cats will come in with severe upper
46
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Figure 6.12.  With a patient in shock, although very disconcerting to the owner, a laceration (a) or a proptosed eye (b) are non-
life-threatening secondary injuries.
respiratory signs of nasal discharge, sneezing, and cough-
Signalment
ing. The animals will all have high fevers, rashes, and are
As discussed previously, all  facts describing the animal
usually covered in fleas. This pet is a human health hazard
 should be listed so the medical team has a complete picture
and must be moved into isolation immediately.
of what the animal is upon first observation.
+
When dealing with pets with undiagnosed skin condi-
tions, always wear gloves and wash thoroughly when
Subjective Statement(S)
 done. Many stray and owned animals may be exposed to
The subjective statement is a personal observation of the
skin diseases such as sarcoptic mange or ringworm.
physical appearance, mentation, and attitude of the patient.
These diseases can cause mild to moderate discomfort to
Some common statements in this category are listed
humans that come in contact with the pet.
here.
With dogfights, being hit by car, and other trauma acci-
dents, it is impossible to determine whether one might
 Dog is bright, alert, and responsive (BAR).
come into contact with animal or human body fluids.
 Dog is quiet, alert, and responsive (QAR).
When dealing with animal attacks or trauma, it is impos-
Dog is depressed.
sible for the inspecting team members to avoid getting
 Dog is comatose.
blood and fluids on themselves. Some owners or con-
Dog is aggressive.
cerned citizens that bring pets in may have also been in-
 Dog is emaciated.
jured or bitten. Although the risk of blood contamination
is low, team members should always be concerned about
Objective Statement (O)
direct contact with human or animal blood without pro-
tective clothing.
The objective statement is a discussion of all physical data
evaluated for the patient. The temperature, pulse, respira-
tion, mucus membrane color, CRT, and hydration are evalu-
Documentation
 ated. As well, each body system is evaluated and commented
on. All team mem bers should be able to evaluate the first six
Although discussed in the next chapter, all team members
parameters of the objective part of the SOAP.
should be able to document the findings of a basic triage ex-
amination. Often the initial findings are the first real physi-
cal prior to a true emergency, and another physical examina-
Assessment (A)
'pis si iad aun iae ln paou aq nou A u
The assessment part of the SOAP is done by the veterinarian
Therefore, it is important for the team member to be able to
 to outline potential disease entities that may be producing
 properly document observations for the medical record.
 symptoms in the patient.
There is no absolute system for how to do this; however,
using components of the SOAP (subjective, objective, as-
Plan (P)
sessment, plan) method is probably the most accepted (see
The plan part of the SOAP is completed by the veterinarian
Chapter 7). This method follows the following criteria.
to outline a diagnostic and treatment plan for the patient.
What is the pet's
mentation?
ABNORMAL
Pet is responsive
What is the
respiration rate
and character?
ABNORMAL
 Pet is breathing normally
Have the pet
What is the
ABNORMAL
 evaluated by
pulse or heart
another
rate and
character?
member of the
medical team.
Pulse rate / heart
rate are normal
ABNORMAL.
Check the
Mucus
Membranes and
CRT
Pet's color and CRT are
ABNORMAL
Normal.
Is the pet
dehydrated?
Pet is not dehydrated?
Pet's condition
suggests
stability
Figure 6.13.
Algorithm of stability.
47
48
Section I: The First Two Days on the Job
Table 6.1.
You know you are in trouble based on physical
A pet is brought into your hospital. A team member
exam when.
 completes the following triage exam.
System Examined
Canine
Feline
$
 Signalment: A 40- to 50-pound black female,
 spayed Lab mix.
 Disposition 
Nonresponsive
Nonresponsive
 Subjective statement: Dog is depressed.
Comatose
Comatose
Lateral recumbent
Lateral recumbent 
 Objective statements:
 Breathing
Increased rate >45
Increased rate >45-60
-Temperature: 98.79
Abdominal breathing
Abdominal breathing
Pulse: 100 (weak)
 Open mouth breathing
-Respiration: 80 (abdominal)
(panting)
Pulses/heart
Increased rate >200
Mucus mem brane: pale pink
Increased rate >150
beating
Pulse quality:
Pulse quality:
CRT: >3 seconds
None
None
Hydration: severe
 Hyperdynamic
 Hyperdynamic 
Weak
Weak
Based on this triage exam, this pet would need the im-
Gum color
White
White
 Purple/gray
 Purple/gray
mediate attention of the medical team and should be
Yellw
Yellow
taken into a treatment area.
 Capillary refill time
CRT >2 seconds
CRT >2 seconds
 Bruising
 Any bruising should
 Any bruising should
be monitored
be monitored
Increased bruising 
Increased bruising 
 Body temperature
Temp <98° or
Temp <98° or
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
Temp >106°
Temp >106°
 Bloated in abdomen 
Please try the cases for Section I (The First Two Days on the
Body confirmation
 Bloated in abdomen
Bloated in chest 
Bloated in chest 
Job)to helpreinforce the information presented here.
Shift-Sherington
Shift-Shemrington
Section2
Anatomy and Physiology-
The Science behind the Diseases
   n si  sn ro  a n   an  ss p n j o  si s s
understanding of the anatomy of each body system, be able to obtain a medical history from the client, look for key physical 
symptoms suggesting disease, understand the clinical diagnostics and diseases of each system, and be able to discuss these
aspectswiththeclient.
Chapter 7
Physical Exam
u au pue uoeuaunoop iadond uo snoog m iadeuo s
physical examination of the patient. It is a necessity that the
Signalment: 1.5-year-old, male, 10-pound, black
DSH cat
technical team be able to document and perform a thorough
physical examination. Even though the liability of the pet's
CC: Constipation
 health is the doctor's responsibility, the medical team must
Concern: Often the owner will mistake a male
have members that can auscult, examine, and palpate hospi-
tom's inability to urinate as an attempt to defecate.
talized and ill pets to assist the doctor in determining the
Blocked male cats are a life-threatening concern
that should be evaluated by the medical team as
health and medical status of the animal.
soon as possible.
SOAP Method
The subjective part of the SOAP is the evaluator's subjec
 Documentation of the veterinary exam is achieved through the
tive opinion of the behavior or mentation of the pet and the
SOAP method (as discussed in Chapter 6). SOAP stands for
 physical disposition of the animal. Changes in the subjective
s e psns ss  ad paso e go uaa
S: subjective,
O: objective,
nificant change in the overall health of the animal.
A: assessment, and
P: plan.
For example, a pet is hospitalized for a general gas-
troenteritis or possible foreign body of the intestine;
 a  u sa n  n 
the pet is monitored by the medical team at 2 pm and
input in the assessment and plan stages of the SOAP, all team
is bright, alert, and responsive. At 6 pm the pet is
members should be aware of proper documentation styles so
reevaluated and shows signs of depression; this may
that they may accurately review a record to determine the
be a red flag of a change in the pet's status.
health concerns of the pet and recommendations of the vet-
erinarian.
As discussed previously, the beginning of each medical
Common descriptors for mentation are as follows.
record should start with the signalment of the pet and the
 BAR: Bright, alert, and responsive
chief complaint (cc). The signalment is the legal description
+
 QAR: Quiet, alert, and responsive
of the pet's breed, weight, sex, hair color, species, and if the
pet is altered. The chief complaint is the owner's primary
 Depressed
 concern, or why the pet is brought into the hospital. In many
Lethargic
 Obtund/comatose
circumstances, the signalment itself can sometimes start the
Aggressive
medical team preparing for the potential cases.
Fearful
 For example, the following might be entered in a med-
●Other: Seizuring, neurologic
ical record.
Other common descriptors of physical body condition
can be
 Signalment: 3.5- month-old, 25-pound, male intact
 black and gold rotteweiler puppy
●normal,
CC: Vomiting and bloody diarrhea
thin,
 Concern: This could suggest an infectious disease
 emaciated (the animal is skeletally thin), and
(parvo), parasites, or other causes. Often the med-
obese.
ical team will separate the pup into an isolation
exam room to prevent possible contamination to
The objective part of the SOAP is all of the veterinarian's
the environment.
 objective is split into two categories.
51
52
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Tenets of Stability
These elements were covered in Chapter 6's discussion of
the 30-second triage exam. These parameters allow the med-
ical team mermber to assess stability. The brief overview of
the parameters is discussed next.
Temperature
What is the pet's temperature?
 Normal temperature for canines/felines is 100- 102.59
Fahrenheit.
Hypothermia, a temperature colder than normal, can be
caused by environmental exposure, metabolic disease, or
shock. Fever or hyperthermia can be secondary to infec-
tion, inflammation, or neoplasia (cancer).
Figure 7.1.   Checking mucus membrane color.
Heat stroke, temperatures of >106°, can produce heat
damage to the organs, central nervous system, and blood
supply. It can occur secondary to
Breathing rate should be monitored for slow respiratory
rate, rapid respiratory rate (tachypnea), and breathing pat-
extreme fever/infection,
tems: abdominal versus normal, open mouth versus normal,
environmental exposure,
shallow.
 prolonged seizure activity,
toxins, and
Mucus Membrane (Gums)
●other causes.
Normal gum color is light pink (see Figure 7.1).
 Abnormal gum color is white and suggests the following:
Pulse
Anemia: Low red blood cell volume
Dehydration: Low blood fluid volume
 Normal pulses (canine/feline) are 80-120 beats per
 Bleeding: Loss of both cells and fluid
minute.
Pain
 Hypotension: Decreased peripheral blood pressure
 Red gum color suggests ingestion of toxin or hyperthermia.
Pulses are a reflection of cardiac output. There are times
Yellow suggests
when there may be a strong heart rate but weak pulses.
liver disease,
Pulses should be monitored for both rate and quality.
 autoimmune disease, and
Slow heart rates are termed bradycardia, and rapid heart
gall bladder obstruction.
rates are termed tachycardia. Pulse weakness is indicated
 Purple to blue to gray suggests
by those pulses that have decreased pressure and volume as
cardiovascular disease,
compared with a normal pulse. A hyperdynamic pulse is
respiratory disease, and
one that is rapid and lifts your fingers off the artery with
Tylenol intoxication (cats).
each pulse.
When ausculting the heart, for each heartbeat there
Bruising of the Gums
should be a pulse. If there is not, this is called a pulse defi-
Spontaneous bruising of the gums can suggest problems
cit. It can suggest abnormal contractions of the heart (pre-
with the body's ability to clot blood (coagulopathy). Any
 mature ventricular contraction, or PVC) or shock.
evidence of bruising should be reported to the medical team
A paradoxical pulse refers to a change in the pulse
  aq a   a a 
strength, from strong to weak, as the animal breaths in and
spontane ously.
 ayl punone pim jo uonenunooe ue isasans ueo sui "no
heart (pericardial effusion) and can be a great concerm.
Capillary Refill Time
Capillary refill time (CRT) is the amount of the time it takes
Respiration
for the gum color to return to normal when pressure is ap-
plied (see Figure 7.2).
Normal rate for the canine/feline is 20-50 breathes
per minute.
Normal CRT is less than 2 seconds.
Chapter 7: Physical Exam
53
Figure 7.3. Monitoring skin turgor for dehydration can be done
over the shoulder, on the forehead, or over the eyelid.
Measuring Dehydration
 Overall, on physical examination, dehydration is measured
as a percentage of the total dehydration of the animal. It is
generally stated as a percentage from 0 to 12%.
● 0-5% dehydration—undetectable dehydration: The
animal may have significant losses of fluid (i.e., vomit-
Figure 7.2.
When evaluating CRT, caution should always be ex-
ing/diarrhea), but there are no physical symptoms at this
ercised with potentially aggressive or fearful patients.
level of dehydration.
 57% dehydration—mild initial dehydration: Physi-
cally, the patient will begin showing signs of dehydration.
Abnormality suggests an inability of the body to main-
Slowed skin turgor
tain normal blood flow to the tissue (perfusion) and to the
Slightly dry gums
smallest peripheral arterioles and venules, that is, blood is
 Eyes less glossy or sunken in
 not moving adequately through the body
 Normal mentation to mild depression
Examples of disease that can affect the CRT are
7-9% dehydration—moderate dehydration: Physi-
cally, the patient is showing more severe physical signs of
heart disease,
dehydration.
●shock,
 Significantly decreased skin turgor
 severe dehydration, and
Dry gums
 acute blood loss.
 Eyes less glossy and sunken in
- Depressed
 Remermber that an animal must have normal gum color in
912% dehydration—life-threatening dehydration.
order to assess the CRT properly.
 Physically, the patient will show severe symptoms that
can also start to affect other body systems.
Dehydration
- No skin turgor-the skin does not return to normal
 In general, dehydration is a measurement of how severely a
 after tenting.
 pet is fluid compromised (see Figure 7.3). Dehydration is
Severely dry gums.
 never a normal finding.
 Eyes are dull and sunken in, and third eyelids are ele-
Dehydration is measured qualitatively on the physical
vated.
exam by a number of parameters.
 Animal is depressed and in stermal or lateral recum-
bency.
Skin turgor
 Heart rate can be variable from bradycardia to tachy-
Gums
cardia.
Eyes
Respiratory rate may be shallow and increased.
54
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Systems
is obscuring the normal heart sounds. Pathology that can ob-
scure the heart sounds are
The next part of the objective SOAP is an evaluation of body
systems by the medical team member. This requires the abil.
 increased lung sounds,
ity to palpate, auscult, and observe the patient system by
mass between the chest wall and the heart,
system. It requires practice to develop the concept of what is 
mass in the lung fields (see Figure 7.5),
normal for each body system and a systematic approach of
 mass in the chest cavity itself, and
how the physical is done. There is no correct step-by-step
 fluid in the chest, lungs, or pericardial cavities (see
system of a proper physical exam. It is important that the
Figure 7.6)
 a  n s s a   
not overlook a body system. The systems examined are as
Is There a Murmur?
follows.
A murmur is an alteration in the normal heart sounds from
turbulent or abnormal flow of the blood through the valves,
Cardiac System (Heart)
heart wall, or an abnormal blood vessel. Although a com-
The best way to evaluate the cardiovascular system is by
plete discussion of murmurs and cardiac pathology will be
auscultation with a good stethoscope. The only way to be-
discussed in Chapter 12, it is important for the medical team
come proficient in auscultation is to listen and practice on
to distinguish if there is a murmur present. With time and
healthy animals. The overall goal is to identify what sound
may be abnormal and then discuss those concerms with the
doctor.
The steps for proper auscultation are as follows.
Begin ausculting the heart where the left forelimb is at-
tached to the chest, caudal to the left elbow (see Figure
7.4). This is typically the ventral third intercostal space.
●Move the stethoscope to the middle of the fourth inter.
costal space and again distally to the low fifth intercostal
space. This will cover most of the valves of the heart.
 Repeat the same patterm on the right side of the heart.
●Then auscult the heart through the stermum.
Can You Hear the Heartbeat?
At this location a strong heart beat should be auscultable. If
there is no sound, there may be a disease process present that
B
Figure 7.4.  Image of how to auscult the left chest to appreciate
the different valves. (P) = pulmonary, third lower intercostal space
Figure 7.5. Diseases in the lungs, such as this fungal pneumo-
(left); (A)= aortic valve, fourth middle intercostal space (lef);
nia, can produce severe lung sounds that may hide or diminish the
(M)= mitral valve, fifth ventral intercostal space. The tricuspid
normal cardiac sounds (a). Fluid within the chest, around the
valve is on the lower third of the intercostal space on the right
heart and lung (pleural effusion), can make the heart very hard to
side of the pet.
auscult (b).
Chapter 7: Physical Exam
55
Abdomen
When palpating the abdomen, a light, practiced, gentle touch
to distinguish abnormality is important. Knowledge of the
abdominal architecture is helpful; the overall evaluation
should include the following points.
● Abdominal Pain/abdominal tenderness: With light pal-
-gd ayi saysnd 'uona Aiaipne on suaq iad aun j! 'uoned
pator's hands outward, or tenses so severely as to resist
palpation, this suggests an acute abdomen. Although
there are many causes of an acute abdomen (i.e., pancre-
atitis, intestinal foreign body, peritonitis), the evidence of
abdominal pain and its severity should be noted.
● Large, distended, painful bladder: With light palpation,
 a large, distended bladder in the caudal abdomen can be
detected with practice. Heavy palpation has been noted to
Figure 7.6.  Fluid accumulation in the lungs from pneumonia,
rupture a bladder, but careful, light hands can easily de-
"a'l) Ainui Areuound io (euape Aieuouind) aseasp jeau
tect a full, painful bladder as seen with blocked male cats,
drowning) can produce crackles where the lung pathology exists.
and male and female dogs.
● Fluid in the abdomen: With practice, a team member
can detect large amounts of fluid in the abdomen. The
experience, the team may be able to identify the location of
team member can gently place their hand on one side of
the murmur and if the murmur is valvular or constant. Initi-
the dilated abdomen and gently apply an on again/off
ally, it becomes important to distinguish if a murmur exists.
again pressure. This force will produce a wave that can be
perceived by the other hand. This feeling of fluid rushing
Are There Irregular Rhythms or a Pulse Deficit?
toward the other side of the abdomen is called a fluid
Lastly, and most importantly, does the rhythm seem abnor-
wave. It suggests the evidence of blood, urine, or other
mal, or does the rhythm not match the pulse? Any aberration
fluids building up.
in heart rate or pulse deficit should be brought to the atten-
tion of the veterinarian immediately.
Musculoskeletal System
When doing an initial assessment of the musculoskeletal
Respiration
system, the team member is basically evaluating and docu-
Appreciation of normal lung sounds comes with practice.
 menting whether the pet seems to be favoring (not using)
The quiet movement of air through normal bronchi produces
the limb, or if there is a section of the limb that has swelling.
 a slight perceivable sound of air movement. Abnormal lung
pain, or heat evident. Light palpation and pressure of the
sounds can sometimes aid in detection of the underlying pri-
limb can sometimes be applied to evaluate pain, but caution
mary disease process. Abnormal lung sounds are as follows.
should be used because animals can react aggressively to
pain. Simply documenting the limb affected and the possible
Crackles: The sound is best represented as the crumpling
location of the physical pain or swelling is sufficient (see
of cellophane paper. Here the normal airways and alveoli
Figure 7.7).
are filled with cells and fluid. The crackle sounds are pro-
duced as air passes through the cramped region (see
Neurologic System
Figure 7.6).
With the neurologic system, the focus of the evaluation is
Rasps: This sound is best represented as air flows
the neurologic status of the animal and the ability of the an-
through narrowed or constricted airways, which produces 
imal to stand and bear weight. Neurologic status of the ani-
a musical whistle. Diseases that produce fibrosis or nar-
mal reflects any physical symptoms that may suggest the
rowing of the bronchi (e.g., feline asthma, allergic reac-
animal's central nervous system is affected. Some possible
tion, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), produce the
symptoms follow.
whistle.
 Referred sound from the upper airway: These sounds
● Seizuring: Animal comes in with petite to grand mal
 se me raddn au pue an an wo panpod a
seizures. The pet can be unaware of its surroundings and
result of obstruction from debris, masses, or fluid. The
be lateral recumbent, having its head extended and front
sounds are heard with slightly decreased volume deeper
legs rigid (opisthotonus), and losing its urine and evacu-
in the chest. In some short-nosed breeds (pugs, English
ating its bowels (see Figure 7.8).
bulldogs, shar-peis) these sounds can be normal due to
 Depression/coma/decreased pain perception: Animals
the narrowed, shortened airway.
that have suffered a severe trauma or have severe meta-
99
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
1335746629
Figure 7.7.  Observing the physical swelling at and distal to the
Figure 7.9.   The patient does not know where his limbs are in
hock is sufficient for the initial documentation of the patient's
space, so it cannot place its paws properly and cannot stand due
musculoskeletal system.
to lack of proper inner vation to the muscle groups.
Eyes/Ears/Nose/Mouth
Assessing for abnormalities in eyes, ears, nose, and mouth
diseases affecting the animals. It is important to have an idea
of what the normal anatomy and physiology looks like, so
 abnormality and its cause can be assessed thoroughly.
Eyes
 Normally, the eyes are shiny and responsive. The white of
the eyes (sclera) are white with small blood vessels evident.
The pupils are equal sized and responsive to light, and the
cornea is clear. Changes to normal coloration of the eye can
suggest systemic or ocular disease. Some noted changes can
be as follows.
ticus) suggesting central nervous system or metabolic disease.
● Bruising: Spontaneous bruising or hemorrhage of the
eye can suggest a severe local trauma or a systemic prob-
lem, such as clotting blood. Any spontaneous hemor-
rhage should be documented and reported immediately.
bolic disease can have a lack of normal neurologic re-
 Jaundice: A yellow tinge or color to the whites of the
sponse or stimulus. After a trauma event (i.e., hit by car,
eyes can suggest liver or blood disorders where there is
fall, animal attack), the lack of response does not always
 increased level of body toxins building up.
 0 Arepuoas aq Keu inq aseuep quaueuuad isagans
Anemia (lack of color): When the animal has a low red
shock or injury.
blood cell count, the normal small vessels usually visible
● Inability to perceive normal position of limbs or bear
on the sclera disappear as the body shuts down smaller
weight on leg: If there has been a spinal cord injury or pe-
peripheral capillaries.
aq on Aiq aun aso Ae jad aun infui aaau iad
 Red/swollen/irritated eye: Red irritated, swollen sclera
weight or sense pain and/or position of the limb. In pets
can suggest specific diseases of the eyes (see Figure 7.10;
with neurologic disease, the limbs are relaxed (flaccid),
see also Chapter 20).
and the pet cannot properly place them or stand normally
 on the limb. This is usually due to injury of the peripheral
 Changes in the comea, pupil, and internal architecture of
nerve of the leg, with the result that the body does not
the eye can also suggest central nervous system, ocular, or
know where the limb is in space (see Figure 7.9).
systemic disease.
Chapter 7: Physical Exam
57
Figure 7.11. Pupils with different iris sizes (anisicoria) can
suggest a concussion or CNS damage, especially after a severe
trauma. Pupils should be regularly evaluated when assessing and
monitoring traumas.
Figure 7.10. Changes in the sclera and cornea of this eye sug-
gest severe corneal disease.
 Is there squinting, excessive blinking, increased tear-
ing or sensitivity to light? Painful eyes can show in-
creased sensitivity to bright light, increased tearing,
 squinting, and holding the eye closed.
Are the pupils fixed, abnormal, or an uneven size
(anisicoria)? Abnormalities can suggest central nervous
system disease, concussion, or ocular damage. Pupils
should be checked regularly after any life-threatening
trauma for symmetry (see Figure 7.1 1).
 Is there a normal pupillary light response? The eye re-
sponds to the amount of light present in the environment
Figure 7.12.1
 Blood in the eyes can suggest a serious possible
life-threatening condition for the pet.
(see Chapter 20). The light level is analyzed and the iris
of the eye is opened or closed by a reflex pathway of the
optic nerve. If there is low light or darkness, the iris
 ayi J1 ul sujuoo uail jo qunoue ayi suseaou 'dn suado
Ears
environment is bright, the iris constricts, decreasing the
Generally, the ear canal and ear flap (pinna) should be light
level of light reaching the retina. This is called the pupil-
 pink and free of discharge. Changes in the ear itself can sug-
lary light response (PLR). Both irises will respond to a
gest local infection or inflammation. The pinna should also
bright light perceived by one iris. If a light shines into one
be monitored for changes suggestive of whole body disease.
iris and it constricts, we call this a direct PLR. If a light
In the ear canal, debris, swelling, and odor can suggest
 shines into one iris and the opposite pupil constricts as
mild to severe infections. Serious inner ear infections can
well, it is called an indirect PLR. If a direct or indirect
also produce balance and coordination problems for the pet
 PLR is absent in a pet, it can suggest disease of the eye,
(see Figure 7.13).
optic nerve, or a part of the central nervous system.
 Just as with the sclera of the eye, the pinna can suggest
 Rapid irregular eye movements: Rapid irregular eye
systemic disease by changes in its appearance. Bruising in
movements from side to side, up and down, or in a circu-
the ear pinna suggests an inability of the blood to clot nor-
waoid aoueeq e isasns ueo (snuseisau) uoou l
mally and could indicate a serious, possibly life-threatening,
caused by an ear infection or central nervous system dis-
disease. Icteric or jaundiced pinna, a yellow tinge or col-
ease. The eyes are moving rapidly from side to side be-
oration to the ear flap, can suggest liver or blood disorders
cause the body is having a hard time establishing normal
in the pet (see Figure 7.14).
balance.
 Blood inside the eye: The presence of blood inside the
Nose
n  A    ssas  () a
 Changes in discharge in the nose can suggest local or
 pet to clot blood normally (see Figure 7.12).
systemic respiratory diseases. When nasal discharge is en-
58
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Figure 7.13.
 A red, swollen ear can suggest a serious ear
problem.
countered, several points should be evaluated and docu-
mented.
The team member should note if the discharge is coming
from one or both nostrils (unilateral or bilateral discharge).
A unilateral discharge usually suggests disease localized to
that nostril from infection, a foreign body, mass, or trauma.
A bilateral discharge usually suggests that a systemic or
respiratory disease process is occurring. Especially with pu-
rulent debris, the material will come up from the lungs and
Figure 7.14. Check the ear flap for yellow pigmentation. It may
fill both nostrils.
be the first hint that there is a serious disease in the pet.
Discharge can consist of blood or pus. Unilateral blood
can suggest bleeding from a trauma, a mass, or a foreign
body. Bilateral bleeding can suggest a problem with the 
body's ability to clot blood. Purulence (pus) found in a uni-
lateral discharge suggests a localized upper respiratory in-
fection, tooth root abscess, or reaction to a foreign body or
-nnd sisaans aaeosi ieiea (si'l ainsie aas) s
lence and infection evident from the lower respiratory tract
 and the lungs.
 The mouth refers to the gums, teeth, and oral cavity. The
mucus membrane color and CRT should have already been
assessed. The team member should be evaluating the mouth
for changes that are suggestive of disease.
 Is there halitosis? Although bad breath can simply be
linked with diet and dietary indiscretions, severe halitosis
can suggest underlying disease, especially if the halitosis 
Figure 7.15. Unilateral nasal discharge can suggest localized
comes on acutely in a sick pet. Such disease states could
infection, foreign body, or mass.
include
- kidney disease,
liver disease,
 oral tumor, and
 severe diabetes (ketoacidotic diabetic),
 oral foreign body.
 severe periodontal disease,
 Are there lacerations or ulcers of the gums? Ulcera-
- tooth root abscess,
tions of the gums can sometimes suggest acute severe
Chapter 7: Physical Exam
59
Figure 7.16. Severe dental disease can set up other serious dis-
Figure 7.17. These localized regions of hair loss in this animal
eases of the older pet, such as liver, kidney, or heart disease.
suggest a primary mite infection (demodex).
disease where toxins are building up so quickly within
the body, they are burming the skin lining inside the
mouth lateral to the teeth (buccal mucosa). Diseases
such as acute renal and liver disease or antifreeze intoxi-
 cation can produce acute ulcers. Some upper respiratory
virus (i.e., calici virus) can also produce marked ulcera-
 tion of the gums and tongue.
● Is there dental disease?: Dental disease can suggest a
primary disease of middle-aged to older animals, and if
not monitored and treated, chronically infected teeth and
gums could produce severe secondary disease (see Figure
7.16; see also Chapter 9).
Lymph Nodes
The lymph nodes of the body are part of the immune system
 of the animal. They produce white blood cells and filter the 
white blood cell system and lymph systems for infection or
Figure 7.18. Chronic symmetrical hair loss, thin fragile skin,
debris. There are numerous locations of lymph nodes
and increased pigmentation can suggest underlying systemic
throughout the body. They enlarge secondary to infection or
disease.
cancer. Common locations are
submandibular,
d a i  ss  ss    
popliteal,
skin disease or be secondary to an underlying chronic
inguinal,
disease (see Figure 7.17). Localized asymmetrical hair
 prescapulary, and
loss can suggest primary skin disease (i.e., ringworm,
 axillary.
mange [skin mites], allergies). Symmetrical hair loss
over the entire body or over the flank could suggest a
Skin (Integument)
chronic systemic or hormonal disease. Also, increased
The skin is a great reflection of the overall health of the pet.
pigmentation of the skin, fragile thin skin, or even chron-
Subtle chronic diseases may first manifest themselves with
s  e is  s  
physical changes to the hair coat. A thick, normal, healthy,
disease (see Figure 7.18).
shiny hair coat that begins to thin or look unkempt may sug-
●  Is the skin red and inflamed? Red and inflamed skin
 gest the pet is beginning to suffer from a chronic disease, nu-
usually suggests localized infection or allergies. How-
tritional deficiency, hormonal disease, or primary skin prob-
ever, it is important for the team member to note the lo-
lem (i.e., allergies, ringworm, skin mites, etc.) There are
cation and extent of the inflammation because this can
changes that should be monitored and documented.
sometimes suggest systemic allergic reaction, insect bite
60
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Figure 7.19.  Red inflamed areas can be secondary to allergies
(hot spots), infections, bites, or stings, or even chemical or
Figure 7.20.  Nodules and masses within the mammary chain
physical burns.
can suggest a serious possible malignancy.
or sting, snake bite, and other localized trauma (see
Figure 7.19).
● Is there severe itchiness? Severe itchiness (pruritus) is
usually linked to primary skin disease caused by aller-
gies, infection, or inflammation.
Genitourinary Systems
The genitourinary system refers to the reproductive and
     q an o s 
focused on these systems in Chapter 18, a team member
  s   a  n 
for irregularities and abnormalities. The following changes
should be monitored and documented.
● Masses or tumors in the mammary tract: Potential
masses of the mammary tract can suggest serious malig-
Figure 7.21. Generalized swelling of the mammary chain can
nancy in spayed and intact females (see Figure 7.20).
 suggest a massive infection or inflammation.
Generalized swelling, heat, and pain: Focal or general-
-ay suon Annsn "ioun ue u ud pue sums paz
male can suggest infection or inflammation within the
mammary chain (see Figure 7.21).
ison with the other should be documented as well (see
The vulva should be checked for the following.
Figure 7.22).
● Penis: Abnormal swelling or discoloration of the penis
● Discharge: Bloody and purulent (pus) discharges can
could suggest entrapment or injury. Any purulent or
bloody discharge should be documented as well because it
suggest infection or a mass and is evident within the re-
productive tract or bladder.
● Mass: There are some vaginal/vulva masses that can be
evident and extend outside the vulva.
Assessment
 In the male, both the penis and testicles should be moni-
 The assessment is performed by the veterinarian and lists the
tored and documented for abnormalities.
overall medical concerns that are challenging the animal.
The assessment of problems should be directly linked to the
●Testicles: Testicles should be lightly palpated for normal
 observations noted on the physical exam. See the following
size and shape. Any difference in one testicle in compar-
example.
Chapter 7: Physical Exam
61
Figure 7.22.
 Abnormal testicular size and shape could suggest a
Figure 7.24. Image of severe pustular rash on inguinal canal of
testicular tumor or infectious disease; in this image note one en-
 male dog.
larged testicle and one small or atrophied testicle.
Skin scrape
 Fungal culture
 Antibiotic trial
Prognosis
 The prognosis is also completed by the veterinarian and out-
lines the overall prognosis for the pet given the information
 available. Common descriptors for the prognosis are
excellent,
good,
fair,
 poor,
 guarded, and
+grave.
Figure 7.23. Entrapment of the penis in the young dog can be
severely painful and damaging to the animal.
Documentation of the Physical Exam
Although the responsibility of the physical examination is
 the veterinarian's, the technical team should be able to per-
 Objective—INT: Severe rash and pustules on in-
form and document a cursory full physical exam. All hospi-
guinal region and abdomen (see Figure 7.24).
talized animals should have a full physical examination done
Assessment—skin:
at least one to two times per 24-hour period to reassess the
Bacterial infection
animal's hydration, weight, overall health, and/or changes
Mites (demodex, sarcoptes)
from initial physical presentation. Furthermore, with critical
Fungal infection (i.e., ringworm)
care patients, a brief triage exam should be conducted and
documented every 3-4 hours minimum. Parameters that
should be assessed are
Plan
+
temperature,
 The plan is produced by the veterinarian and lists the diag-
pulse,
nostic and treatment plans that are recommended by the doc-
respiration,
tor. For example, with the case above, the doctor may recom-
hydration,
mend the following.
 capillary refill time,
62
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
mucus membranes,
mentation,
fluid input/urinary output,
food intake,
+
fecal output, and
fluid loses (vomiting/diarrhea).
Example of SOAP
Signalment: A 40-50 pound, black, female, spayed
Lab mix (see Figure 7.25).
CC: Owners found dog down and suddenly weak.
S (subjective): Dog is depressed to obtund.
O (objective): Tenets of stability.
Temperature: 98.7.
Pulse: 80 (weak)
Resp: 80 (abdominal)
 MM: pale pink
CRT >3 seconds
Hydration: severely dehydrated
System
●Cardiovascular (CV): Bradycardia ± mild murmur,
unsure of where murmur is loudest.
 Respiration (Resp): Increased lung sounds ± crack-
les in upper airway.
 Musculoskeletal (MS): Within normal limits (WNL)
 Neurologic (Neuro): Dog is depressed
 Lymph node (LN): Increased popliteal lymph node 
 Abdomen (Abd): Pain on abdominal palpation.
Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Throat (E-E-N-T): WNL
Fig ure 7.25. Signalment of the patient.
 Genitourinary (Genit): WNL
Assessment (done by the veterinarian)
Congestive heart disease
 Pneumonia
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter Please
Cancer (neoplasia)
try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology—The
Sciencebehind the Diseases) to help reinforce the informa-
Plan (done by the veterinarian)
tion presented here.
 Recommend IV fluids, complete blood work, x-ray,
urinalysis. Depending on outcome, hospitalization
and fluid care may be required.
Chapter 8
Skeletal System
Bone is a living, constantly changing organ that supplies sta-
Irregular Bones
bility, flexibility, and movement to the animal. Bone is com-
 Irregular bones are commonly found in the spinal column,
posed of rapidly changing, actively metabolizing tissue that
 making up the bone of the vertebral body (see Figure 8.4).
may be altered in size, shape, and position by mechanical
and biochemical demands. It responds in a variety of ways
Long Bones
to vitamin, mineral, and hormone deficiencies and excesses.
The long bones (e.g., femur, radius, or ulna) are generally
The inner aspect of the bone, the bone marrow, is a location
used to provide movement and stability (bone shaft), as well
of blood precursor cells responsible for the production of
as red, white, and platelet cell precursors (bone marrow).
much of the body's red and white blood cells and platelets.
 The anatomy of a long bone has very similar architecture
Without a careful understanding of bone and cartilage, com-
(see Figure 8.5).
mon serious and potentially life-threatening disease could
not be diagnosed and treated. Overall, bone functions to
Epiphysis (Growth Plate)
In young animals, the epiphysis is an active area of bone growth
+
 support and protect the body and its organs,
where soft spongy bone (cancellous bone) is produced. There
 act as a protective outer defense for intermal organs,
can be multiple growth plates in a bone. They are usually
work as a lever for muscular action,
 only visible in young, growing animals (see Figure 8.6).
 serve as a storehouse for minerals, and
be a site for blood cell formation.
Metaphysis
The metaphysis is the area of primary (trabecular) soft
Classification of Skeletal Elements
bone located on the farthest ends of the bone. This area of
Bone is classified according to shape and size. There are
bone flares out to increase the articular surface of the joint,
five basic divisions.
providing a larger surface area to more evenly balance
weight distribution.
Short Bones
These bones are confined to the carpus (wrist) and the tar-
Diaphysis
sus (ankle). Each joint contains seven short bones. The
Diaphysis is the area of dense cortical bone in the middle of
bones have variable size and shape. Their surfaces can either
the bone shaft, also called the bone shaft. The thickened
be interlinked with a joint where bone is on bone (articular)
strong bone is used for support of the axial skeleton.
or not associated with a joint (nonarticular). The bone sur-
faces provide locations for placement of ligaments, arteries,
Medullary Canal
and veins (see Figure 8.1).
 The medullary canal lies inside the column of bone. This is
where the blood precursor cells (red blood cells, white blood
Sesamoids
cells, and platelets) develop in the bone marrow.
These small bones formed in muscle tendons function to
protect tendons at the points of greatest friction. They in-
crease the ability of the tendons to pull and move. The
Perisoteum
sesamoid tends to be articular, with its surface in contact
The perisoteum is a thick, connective tissue membrane cov-
with the bone (see Figure 8.2).
ering the bone. It is responsible for protection and nutrition
of the bone.
Flat Bones
 Typically, flat bones are found in the limb girdles (pelvis) to
Joints
serve as muscular attachments. Also, flat bones are present
 Joints are the intersections of bones or other articulations
that serve to unite the bones firmly or allow free movement.
and the brain (see Figure 8.3).
The first category of joints is the fibrous joint (synartho-
9
Examples
ofshort
Figure &.1.1
 Bones in the wrist (carpus) and in the ankle (tarsus)
are examples of short bones. This is a radiograph of the hock.
Figure 8.3.  Flat bones are located in the pelvis and head for
protection and attachment of ligaments and tendons.
A
Patella
is
Poo5
example
of
sesamoid
Figure 8.4.  Image of irregular bones that make up the vertebral
column. These bones grow around and protect the spinal cord and
Figure 8.2.
 The most common sesamoid is the patella.
spinal ner ves.
64
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
65
10. Growth plate
5. Articular surfacc
8.Apophysis
2.Epiphysis
3. Metaphysis
12. Cancellous bone
11. Compact bone
6. Medullary cavity
Figure 8.6.  Image of a young proximal tibia (distal to the
9.Cortex
stifle). The radiolucent lines within the long bones show the
growth plate. These areas will calcify as the animal ages.
-1, Diaphysis
4. Periosteum
1. Joint capsule
2. Fibrous layer
2.Epiphysis
4. Articular cartil:
5. Articular surface
Figure 8.7.
 Example of a synovial joint—the stifle. (Courtesy
. Illustration of long bone. (Courtesy of Anatomy of
of Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris,
Figure 8.5.
Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini,
and Pasquini, Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used 
Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used with permis-
with permission from Sudz Publishing.)
sion from Sudz Publishing.)
s     a s  
(diarthrosis). These joints are freely movable and are united
These mostly occur in the skull, also called sutures. Sutures
by a fluid-filled cavity (see Figure 8.7). The joint consists of
 allow the developing skull to grow as the animal ages.
the following.
The second type of joints are cartilaginous joints; these
are bones connected by dense cartilage. These types of joints 
Joint Capsule and Joint Cavity
are called synchondrosis; this includes the joints formed
The joint capsule is a thick connective band of fibrous tissue
between the epiphysis and diaphysis of young animal long
that surrounds the joint and keeps the bone aligned. The 
bones.
joint capsule is innervated. The area within the joint capsule
The most common form of the joint is the synovial joints
filled with the lubricating synovial fluid is the joint cavity.
66
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Articular Surface
The articular surface refers to the region within the joints
5. Intracapsular lig.
where bones contact and move with other bones. These bony
(caud, cruciate lig.)
regions are covered with articular cartilage, typically hyaline
cartilage. This tissue conforms to the underlying bone to help
cushion and support the joint. The articular cartilage has vari-
able thickness depending upon the location within the joint.
The cartilage has no vascular or nerve supply.
Synovial Membrane
The synovial membrane is the thin layer of connective tissue
that stretches out over the entire articular surface (where
bone interdigitates with bone). The overlying joint capsule
strengthens the membrane that serves to produce the syn-
 p p a on sa  ps a  l
the nutrition of the joint. When the joint is inflamed from in-
jury or disease, the joint capsule begins to swell outward as
joint fluid production increases secondary to inflammation.
The presence of these swollen palpable regions, called a
 f  m  sa n
Menisci or Discs
The menisci structures are formed from hyaline cartilage, fi-
brocartilage, and fibrous tissue. They sit within the joint sur-
face to add stability and shock absorption to the joint.
8. Meniscus
Ligamenis
Thick cartilaginous ligaments help maintain normal move-
6. Extracapsular lig.
(collateral lig.)
ample of this type of structure is the cranial (anterior) cru-
ciate ligament. This ligament attaches to the femur and the
Figure 8.8.   The anterior cruciate ligament (cranial) helps pre-
se (pa io jeuo) quano jouqe qand on ea
vent forward or medial movement of the femur on the tibia. If the
the joint moves (see Figure 8.8).
ligament is ruptured, the pet is unable to stand, and if the patient 
bears weight, the movement of the femur on the tibia causes pain
and joint swelling. (Courtesy of Anatomy of Domestic Animals,
Nomenclature of the Fracture
7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini, Susan. Sudz
Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used with permission from
When discussing and documenting a fracture with the
Sudz Publishing.)
medical team, there are a number of factors that must be
considered.
Furthermore, the fracture can also be categorized as a
Name of bone or joint affected (Figure 8.9 shows the
proximal or distal fracture depending on its position within
skeleton of the dog and outlines the nomenclature for
the bone.
each bony structure of the skeleton.)
 The location of the fracture on the bone
Type of Fracture
The type of fracture
 The type of fracture refers to how the bone is broken and can
● If the fracture is communicative with the outside of the skin
 suggest to the medical team the level of fixation needed. The
●How many bone fragments occur with the fracture.
types of fracture are discussed below.
Location of the Fracture in the Bone
 Greenstick fracture: A greenstick fracture is generally a
The location of the fracture in the bone helps the veterinar-
mild fracture of one side of the bone column, but it is not
ian evaluate the type of fracture and the type of fixation that
a complete fracture of the bone. These fractures are not
may be needed. The location of the fracture could be
severe and can generally be repaired with simple fixation
(1.e., cast/splint; see Figure 8.10).
diaphyseal,
 Transverse fracture: A transverse fracture is a complete
metaphyseal, or
fracture of the bone straight across the bone column (see
+epiphyseal.
Figure 8.11).
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
67
3. Vertebral
14. Sacrum (part of
column
vertebral column)
1. Skull
15.0s coxae
6. Scapula
4. Ribs
22. Os penis
16. Femur
2. Hyoid apparatus
17. Patella
19. Fibula
7. Humerus
5.Sternum
8.Radius
18. Tibia
9. Ulna
20. Tarsal bones
10.Carpal bones.
21. Metatarsal bone
11.Metacarpal bones
12.Phalanges
12,Phalanges
13. Sesamoid bones
13.Sesamoid bones
Figure &.9. Canine skeleton. (Courtesy of Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini, Susan. Sudz
Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used with permission from Sudz Publishing.)
Oblique fracture: In this injury, the fracture line is diag-
Number of Bone Fragments Involved
onal to the column of the bone (see Figure 8.12).
Simple fractures usually contain two bone fragments (see
Spiral fractures: Spiral fractures are complete fractures
Figure 8.15). Comminuted fractures contain multiple bone
of the bone where the fracture line curves around the
fragments, usually suggestive of severe traumatic injury (i.e.,
bone column, cutting the column at different locations
gunshot wound, hit by a car). These types of fractures gener-
 and producing a spiral staircaselike lesion (see Figure
ally require major orthopedic fixation (see Figure 8.16).
8.13).
● Joint dislocations (luxation): In articular joints, a dislo-
Obtaining a History in Orthopedic Cases
cation pushes the bone off the articular surface of the
other bone, preventing normal movement of the joint and
It is very important to take a thorough history of when and
producing swelling and pain (see Figure 8.14).
how the orthopedic concern occurred and if any other body
systems are affected. Some factors to consider are discussed
Exposure to the Outside
next.
In open fractures, the bone has punctured through the skin
and is exposed to the outside. It has an increased chance of
The Signalment
infection. Open fractures may require increased care and
Although fractures and general orthopedic disease can be
 long-term medications.
seen in both young and older dogs and cats, there are some 
- n   o s   
specific conditions to consider, depending on the age of the
ronment.
 animal, the species, and in some cases the breed.
68
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Figure 8.10. A greenstick fracture is a fracture of one the side
Figure 8.11.
 Transverse fracture of the distal femur. This is a
of the bone column. This fracture is a greenstick midshaft diaphy-
distal diaphyseal or epiphyseal fracture of the distal femur.
seal fracture.
In general, cats do not have specific orthopedic diseases.
 Their injuries are generally secondary to trauma or injury.
d a a m pn s aa ns p 
with their stifle, having both possibilities of cruciate liga-
 ment injury and luxating patella.
pue 'aseasip eled penuauoo aaey Keuu ssop Sunok
s o p   p o m  a
 in which the ligament within the stifle ruptures (see below).
Large Breed Dogs
 Larger breed dogs tend to have hip and elbow injuries and
 disease as well as long bone disease.
Young Animals
There are some problems specific to young animals.
● Hip/elbow dysplasia: Congenital misalignment of the
 hip and elbow joints potentially produce an arthritic joint 
(see below).
● Panosteitis: An inflammation of the medullary canal in
Figure 8.12.
.This radiograph reveals an oblique mid-diaphyseal
the long bones in rapidly growing large to giant dog
fracture of the femur.
breeds (see below).
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
69
Figure 8.13. Spiral fractures produce sharp, pointed fractures of
the bone. This is a spiral mid-diaphyseal fracture of the humerus.
Figure 8.15. Image shows a simple, closed, transverse mid-
 diaphyseal fracture of the femur and a femoral head dislocation.
History Questions
s pssns a ss ous os  e yno
 Chapter 5), the following questions should be documented:
What was the onset of disease? Acute lameness can
suggest sudden injury or trauma. Some examples are
—fracture,
 anterior cruciate rupture,
Figure 8.14. This radiograph shows a dislocation of the elbow.
- torn toe nail,
soft tissue injury,
sting/bite, and
+
 Osteochondritis dissecans: A disease of improper carti-
 pad injury.
lage formation within specific joints (see below).
 Is this a chronic progressive lameness?: Chronic lame-
Epiphysitis: An inflammation of the growth plate in
-u no snaui aissaid mois e isaans uo ssu
 young, rapidly growing large to giant breed canines.
matory disease.
 Infectious disease: coccidiomycosis (a chronic fungal
Middle-Aged to Geriatric Animals
infection), Lyme disease
 There are some problems specific to older animals.
Arthritis
Tumor
Arthritis
● Is the pet three-legged lame? Non-weight-bearing limbs 
 Anterior cruciate injury/rupture
 can suggest serious injury, such as fractures or tendon/
 Neoplasia
ligament injury.
70
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
● Is there any history of travel? Some animals who travel
to specific geographic regions could contract systemic
disease, which can produce signs of lameness and bone
pain weeks to months after travel. Some examples of
such disease are
New England/Midwest: Lyme disease, and
Southwest: Coccidiomycosis
● Are there any signs of systemic disease? There are sys-
temic diseases that can produce secondary bone pain and
lameness. Specific signs of systemic disease are cough-
ing, sneezing, vomiting, diarrhea.
Initial Assessment
 The assessment of the musculoskeletal system is based on
observation and palpation of the pet. The goal of the physical
Figure 8.16.
 Image of a severely comminuted fracture of the
examination is to locate and appreciate the severity and loca-
tibia/fibula.
tion of the lameness. However, some injured animals may not
show signs of lameness while in the office. Nervous animals
can withhold any evidence of pain in the office if the cause
 Does animal warm out of lameness or get worse with
of the lameness is not too severe. This is a beneficial test in
exercise?
itself. If the lameness is not apparent in the room, it may be
 If an animal can warm out of lameness, it suggests a
a subtle or mild lameness. Furthermore, it is important to be
 chronic or mechanical injury that begins sore and gets
mindful of the pet's pain sensitivity. It is important to make
better as the pet warms up.
sure the pet is as pain free as possible while in the exam room.
- If animals become lame with exercise, it suggests a
serious, painful injury that may also be reinjuring it-
● Make sure the pet can stand on a good traction surface
self with activity.
while waiting in the exam room.
What is the pet's level of activity?
● If the pet is unable to stand, help the pet to lie down com-
- Very active and exercising pet can suggest athletic
fortably on soft bedding with good traction.
injury
 More sedentary animals with an injury can suggest in-
When initially assessing the animal and obtaining the
 jury due to chronic infectious, inflammatory, or neo-
  s n s  n s s  s
plastic (cancerous) disease.
 brought into the exam room, and document the following:
Are other limbs affected? When other limbs are af-
fected with a constant or waxing and waning lameness,
 Is the pet toe touching, unable to move the limb or limbs,
this can suggest systemic inflammatory, infectious, or 
or is the pet non-weight bearing? (See Figure 8.17.)
immune-mediated disease. An immune-mediated disease
 Is the pet rotating the limb unusually inward or outward,
is one in which the body's white blood cells attack a spe-
or does the limb have an abnormal configuration? (See
cific region or tissue of the patient as if it is foreign bac-
Figure 8.18.)
teria. In this case, the patient's immune system attacks the
 Does any part of the limb appear swollen? And if so, at
joints, producing pain, swelling, and lameness (i.e.,
which joint? (See Figure 8.19.)
rheumatoid arthritis). Some other disease examples are
panosteitis
Diagnostics
 infectious diseases: coccidiomycosis, Lyme disease, etc.
After observing the pet, a light palpation may be performed
● Is there a previous history of the disease to that limb?
 starting at the bottom of the limb, beginning by palpating the
Previous fracture or injury can sometimes set up chronic
toes with a light pressure. Care should be taken not to pro-
 arthritis or injury in later life.
duce pain or discomfort for the pet. The limb should be pal-
●Has the animal been given anti-inflammatory medica-
pated from the toe proximally, checking for heat, swelling,
tion and has it been effective?
or changes in the muscle mass of the leg. While doing the
Many pets may have already been on anti-
light palpation, the team member should compare the in-
inflammatory medication and the lameness may still
 jured limb to the other leg (see Figure 8.20.)
be present.
Clinical diagnostics for the orthopedic system largely
- If an animal responds to anti-inflammatory medica-
focus on imaging of the bone, blood work to check for sys-
tion, it can suggest a soft tissue injury or chronic in-
temic disease, joint taps, and bone marrow aspirates to de-
flammatory disease.
tect infections and changes in the bone marrow.
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
71
Figure 8.17.  This pet is unable to use its left front leg.
 Radiology is the most common diagnostic tool used for
Figure 8.18.  Abnormal rotation or configuration of the limb
bone disease. Proper radiographic studies of the bone can
(e) uopuan io juaueail paimdni e Aiqissod 1o anoey isasans ueo
help detect
Note the fracture of the carpus in this radiograph (b)
 changes in bone density,
fractures,
masses,
 joint architecture,
How to Explain the Necessity of Blood Work in
 growth plates, and
Orthopedic Cases to Clients
 bone deformities.
The doctor is recommending blood work to see if
there are changes in the complete blood count that
 It is always important to take two views when assessing
 may suggest chronic infection or inflammation that
bones. Furthermore, with some lesions in the limbs, it may
may be occurring due to the orthopedic disease.
 The doctor would like to assess the organs and
erinarian can compare the affected limb to the normal limb
body calcium levels, which could suggest a hor-
 and check for pathology (see Figure 8.21). Radiographic di-
monal or cancerous disease process.
agnostics are discussed in Chapter 25.
 Finally, in specific geographic regions, there are
Clinical blood work is often collected to assess if there
diseases for which the animal should be tested that
are any changes in the complete blood count that could sug-
can produce limping and bone and muscle pain.
 gest an infection or inflammation. Increases in blood cal-
 cium levels can sometimes suggest serious cancerous or hor-
monal diseases. Finally, blood titers of regional diseases can
A surgical joint tap is used to detect infection, inflam-
help detection of illnesses that can produce bone or muscle
mation, or neoplasia in the joint. A joint tap is indicated with
lameness.
chronically swollen joints that typically do not respond
72
Section2:Anatomy andPhysiology-TheSciencebehindtheDiseases
Figure 8.19.
Swelling at a specific joint (joint effusion) can
Figure 8.20. When trying to determine if mild or moderate
swelling occurs, it is important to compare that limb to the other
process, a neoplastic process, or a fracture. In this picture
leg.
swelling of the hock (ankle) occurred secondary to a distal
diaphyseal fracture of the tibia.
How to Explain the Need for Bone Marrow
Aspirate in Orthopedic Cases to Clients
to medication and rest and when x-rays and other diagnos-
 A bone marrow aspirate is being recommended to
tics are not helpful in indicating the pathology of the dis-
obtain a sample of bone to detect infection, inflam-
ease. The procedure is usually completed with the pet in
 mation, or cancer within the bone because there are
mild to moderate sedation or placed under anesthesia. Once
concerns regarding changes in bone density in the
sedated, the needle is placed into the joint capsule and joint
radiograph.
fluid is harvested. The fluid is then prepared for evaluation.
A bone marrow aspirate is done with the pet under
Changes in joint fluid can suggest inflammatory joint dis-
general anesthesia.
ease (i.e., arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis), infection (septic
The region over the bone is shaved and surgically
joint), or cancer.
prepared for the procedure.
How to Explain the Necessity of a Joint Tap in
Diseases of the Skeletal System
Orthopedic Cases to Clients
 A joint tap is being recommended to obtain a sam-
Fractures
ple of fluid and cells from the joint to aid the vet-
A fracture is a break in a bone or multiple bones due to
erinarian in detecting disease that could be causing
 trauma, infectious disease (rarely), or neoplasia. Fractures
the chronic lameness and joint swelling.
 can occur in both dogs and cats at any age.
● A joint tap is done with the pet under light sedation
with general anesthesia; this depends on the pet
Common Points in History
 and the pain associated with the procedure.
 Sudden onset of lameness
 The region over the joint capsule is shaved and sur-
 Pet is not bearing weight on leg
gically prepared for the procedure.
 Can be associated with trauma
 A sterile needle is then placed into the joint, and
 Common in outside animals
samples are taken to test for infection and for
Common Observations on Initial Assessment
cytology.
●Swollen limb (see Figure 8.23).
 Pet is not bearing weight.
 Limb is abnormally deviated.
A radiographic abnormality in the bone density can sug-
+Pet is in pain.
gest infection or cancer. With these concerms, a biopsy of
that section can be taken with the animal under anesthesia.
Complications
The biopsy is then submitted to a histopathologist (see
If the fracture goes untreated, it can lead to chronic pain,
Figure 8.22).
lack of use, and muscle atrophy. Due to the location of the
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
73
A
B
Figure 8.22.1
Image of questionable region within the femur of
a cat.
Figure 8.21.1
 These x-rays are of a dog that was hit by car. The
first x-ray (a) shows a ventro-dorsal view of this pet's back and
hips. This view appears normal. It is only until a lateral view (b)
is taken that there is a pelvic fracture.
Figure 8.23.
 The right upper limb shows moderate swelling
 fracture, there may be nerve damage, inhibiting the ability of
s  s (sme um) ss g p d  m
the limb to move or bear weight properly.
a fracture of the femur or hip.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made on physical exam, palpation, and radi-
nature and location of the fracture, the preference of the vet-
ographs of the limbs. Radiographs are necessary to help
erinarian, and the financial constraints of the client.
characterize the type of fracture and the fixation needed to
External fixation uses an external device such as a
repair the fracture.
Robert Jones Bandage, bandage and splint, hemi cast, or
cast. This type of fixation isolates and confines the limb for
Treatment
a period of 48 weeks to allow the bones to heal properly
 There are many types of external and intermal repairs avail-
(see Figure 8.24). Some guidelines for this type of fixation
 able to the veterinarian. The type of repair is based on the
follow.
74
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Intermal fixation devices are placed surgically to help iso-
late and stabilize a fracture. Types of internal fixators are
cerclage wire, intramedullary (IM) pins, bone plates, and
screws (see Figure 8.25). Some guidelines for this type of
fixation follow.
●More advanced fractures, which have multiple pieces or
are at an uncastable region, can be isolated and stabilized.
How to Discuss Fracture with the Client
Disease
A fracture is caused by a sudden, acute trauma of the
bone, producing a break or multiple breaks of the
bone column. The trauma can sometimes be a signifi-
cant injury (i.e., hit by a car or a fall from a height);
however, depending on the animal, the injury can
occur from a fall out of owner's hands to the floor 3
feet below.
Chinical Diagnostics
Fractures are diagnosed primarily with radiographs.
The radiograph allows the veterinarians to
 assess the location and type of injury,
● assess the best options for medical or surgical fix-
ation,
●assess if the fracture involves a joint surface, or
 observe if the location of the fracture could injure
other structures (i.e., nerves).
Treatment
Figure 8.24.
 Radiograph of a young kitten with a fracture of the
The goal of treatment is to isolate and stabilize the in-
distal epiphyseal region of the tibia. The fracture (dark arrow)
-do edau ag fuadod seaq auoq au run Aant
shows a cranial movement away from the bone. The other lines 
tions are cage rest, extermal fixation, and surgical
(white arrows) are normal growth plates in a young cat (a). A
 treatment.
Robert Jones bandage and splint are placed to help stabilize the
With some minor fractures where there is reason-
fracture (b).
able alignment of the break, the veterinarian may sug-
gest to simply cage rest the animal for a period of 48
weeks. The animal will need strict confinement for the
fracture to stabilize.
 The device is used to isolate movement in a fracture by
Extermal fixation largely uses casts, splints, and
limiting the movement of the joint above and below the
support wraps to help stabilize the fracture. To do this
fracture site. Thus these devices can only be used to iso-
the fixation method must isolate the joint above and
late fractures below the knee or elbow.
below the fracture site. Casts and splints
●Casts and splints cannot properly isolate fractures of the
femur or humerus, since they are unable to isolate the
●work well on simple fractures below the elbow and
shoulder or hip.
knee;
● Casts and splints work best with simple fractures; the
require cage rest confinement;
highly comminuted fractures (multiple pieces) cannot be
● often require rechecks, follow-up radiographs, and
stabilized by this method.
changes of the bandage under anesthesia or sur-
●Generally, the animal needs to be rechecked throughout
gery; and
 the 4-8 week period with x-rays and bandage changes.
 can cause significant muscle loss after the cast or
The animal needs to be limited to cage rest to properly
splint comes off, producing increased recuperation
heal the fracture and keep the bandage or splint from slip-
time.
(continued)
ping or excessive wear.
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
75
● if there is any nerve damage, and
How to Discuss Fracture with the Client (confinued)
● most importantly, the client's compliance with the dis-
Surgical fixation uses orthopedic hardware such as
charge information.
plates, screws, and wires to stabilize the fracture.
 These procedures are generally used with more com-
Prevenfion
plex fractures or with fractures that cannot be isolated
Limiting animals’ access to areas that could produce a
with a splint or cast. Orthopedic surgery
trauma can prevent fracture occurrence (i.e., outside animals
that roam freely).
●allows for quicker recovery without significant
muscle loss from the pet;
Arthritis
 allows a quicker returm to function as the limb can
Arthritis is an inflarmmation of the fluid-filled (symovial)
 maintain moderate weight bearing and movement
joints caused by a wearing down of the normal articular car-
after surgery;
tilage of the joint until bone begins to rub on bone.
 repair is generally more expensive than other pro-
Articular cartilage damage is produced from
cedures; and
 may require additional surgery to remove the plate
 congenital malformation/poor articulation of bones (i.e.,
or pin after the limb has healed.
hip dysplasia),
●chronic injury/fracture to the joint (i.e., ruptured cranial
Chient Compliance
cruciate ligament injury),
 The most important part of successful fracture repair
 congenital disease of the cartilage (i.e., osteochondritis
lies in proper client compliance.
dissecans), and
chronic infection/inflammation of the joint (i.e, septic
● It is very important that all rechecks and rebandag-
 joint infection, rheumatoid arthritis).
the fixator and the progress of bone healing.
Once the injury begins, articular damage occurs until the
 Many animals will want to resume normal levels of
bone surface becomes raw and swollen. The body responds
activity once the limb is pain free. The owner must
by sending inflammatory cells (i.e., WBC, neutrophils) to
restrict activity of the pet; even the best plate and
the joint. The white blood cells migrate through the bone in
cast can fail.
response to inflammation and pain. Over time, from chronic
 The cast or splint must be carefully monitored for
inflammation, the bone remodels irregularly, producing
signs of swelling, slippage, or bandage tightening
sharp, irritating bone spicules on articular surfaces. The
to make sure the external fixator is doing the
sharp bony ends produce pain and lameness.
proper job.
 Arthritis from malformation and injury is an underlying
 The surgery site should be monitored for regions of
 o a f an u sq a m un 
swelling, pain, or discharge, which suggests a break
producing an overall weakened conformation. This weak-
or movement of the intermal screw, wire, or pin.
ened architecture makes the joint less stable, making it eas-
ier to injure the cartilage with normal activity and wear and
tear. For example, with hip dysplasia, the following can
 Generally, after surgery, the pet can begin bearing light to
occur (see Figure 8.26).
moderate weight on the limb, preventing muscle loss and
decreasing recovery time.
● In young, rapidly growing dogs, the femoral head should
The pet must not returm too quickly to normal activity
fit into the hip like a ball in a socket joint.
while the internal fixation device is used, since move-
When the head of the femur is not very well seated into
ment or breakage of the device can occur leading to fail-
the socket of the pelvis, the leg moves easily in and out
ure of fracture stabilization.
 of the joint.
When dealing with IM pins or surgical plates, these de-
●The chronic movement produces damage to the articular
vices may have to be removed surgically after the bone is
cartilage and starts inflammatory change.
properly healed.
Generally, surgical repair is more costly than the use of
Common Signalment
extermal fixation.
-ads auos ane aayn 'se Aue pe inono ueo se yanou
cific generalizations. Arthritis can be prevalent in both dogs
Prognosis
and cats. Predisposing factors can be
Prognosis for the fracture depends upon
 genetic predisposition in certain breeds,
 the age of the animal,
+
 athletic or working dogs,
 the location and extent of the injury,
● obese animals, and
76
Section2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind theDiseases
B
'(e) uonexni du e pue amoey ieasudide jeiouey ieisp e aimoey ierouy asaasuen leasydep-piw e jo ydeisoipey sz'g anaig
used to stabilize the fracture (b).
● animals with hormonal diseases (such as Cushing's dis-
St. Bermards,
ease, diabetes mellitus).
 Labrador retrievers,
+
Rotteweilers,
Common Breeds Affected by Arthritis
German shepherds,
 For felines there is no breed specificity.
Golden retrievers,
 In canines, hip dysplasia and elbow dysplasia can occur.
 Bemese mountain dogs,
sumoa piden paaq aae u uouoo aou yno
Chow chows,
dogs, any size or breed of dog can have poor hips. Some
 Bearded collies, and
breeds predisposed to hip dysplasia are
 Newfoundlands.
●St. Bernards,
Age of Onset/Incubation
●Labrador retrievers,
 Usually, arthritis is seen in middle-aged to older animals due
●Rotteweilers,
to chronic damage to joints. However, this can occur in
 German shepherds, and
young animals as young as 4-5 months of age.
●Golden retrievers.
Common Points in History
Elbow dysplasia is a highly inheritable disease of large
Animals worsen with exercise or activity.
breed dogs in which there is improper formation of the bones
Animals cannot get up as well, or move as well, espe-
of the elbow. Due to joint instability, acute inflammatory
cially in the hind end.
-u oe ue sonod quof aun um dn jas ae sau
 Patients lose their ability to jump on furniture.
dition. Common breeds for which this is most common are
 The lameness responds to aspirin or aspirin-like drugs.
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
77
R
Figure 8.26. A comparison of hip joints. In this picture, the
right head of the femur (white arrow) is well seated within the
socket of the pelvis, and there is little movement and therefore
very little arthritis. In the left leg (red arrow), the femoral head
sits much shallower in the pelvic socket. As the animal moves, the
leg rubs and irritates the bone and begins the inflammatory
process. Notice the changes in the femoral head and neck from
arthritis. This limb is painful to the pet because the sharp jaded
edge digs into the joint capsule as the pet moves.
 Animals walk abnormally, noticeable particularly in the
hind end.
 Chronic lameness that progressively gets worse with
time
Bunny hopping (young dog)
Shifting their weight from side to side in the hind end
Unable to walk well on slick surfaces
Figure 8.27. X-ray of mild hip dysplasia with slight squaring of
the femoral heads. The heads are well seated into the hip (a).
Weakness in the hind end
X-ray of severe hip dysplasia with severe arthritic change in the
 Non-weight bearing in limbs
femoral heads and neck (squaring of the neck). Notice the
Lameness, which is made worse with exercise, long
() neoos du un ou speu ieoay an jo sueas rarood
 periods of lying down, rapid changes in weather
(barometric pressure)
History of Previous Joint Injury
 Ruptured cranial cruciate ligament
Complications
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)
● Chronic pain/unable to use limb: With severe chronic
Poorly healed fracture of the joint
arthritis, animals can become increasingly immobile,
pain filled, and less active.
Common Observations on Initial Assessment
 Muscle loss: As the pet continues to use the affected limb
The animal may be weak or slow in the hind end.
less and less, the muscle associated with movement of
They may keep the hind limbs undermeath them and be
 that limb becomes decreased (disuse muscle atrophy).
reluctant to walk a full stride.
There may be specific muscle wasting of the upper hip
Diagnosis
muscles or gluteal muscle range.
 The initial diagnostics for a lame animal generally use radi
With severe hip arthritis, animals may fall down or col-
 ographs of the affected limb and possibly the unaffected
lapse on a slippery or angled surface.
limb. Generalized blood work may be indicated if there are
They may have a stiff walk or run, sometimes getting bet-
concerms of infectious or neoplastic process in the bone.
ter as the dogs warms up.
-ad aq Aeu saisdonq auoq no sden uof 'aseasip ououo ym
 Bunny hopping may occur in young dogs, with animals
formed due to physical exam signs, diagnostics, and re-
that move their hind end like a rabbit rumming
sponse to treatment (see Figure 8.27).
78
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Treatment
Femoral Head and Neck Excision (FHO)
There are both medical and surgical options in the treatment
 This surgery removes the femoral head from the hip joint
 of arthritis. Determination of which type of surgical and
out of the acetabulum and then severs the femoral head from
medical treatment is chosen is based upon physical signs,
the femur. The procedure allows the removal of the in-
clinical diagnostics, and response to treatment.
 flamed, irritated bone from the hip joint, instantly relieving
Medical treatment is generally done initially with mild to
the pain. Over time, the hip muscles tighten up, forming a
moderate lameness or done chronically in the nonsurgical
false joint around the upper femur (pseudoarthrosis). The
cases.
animal is then able to bear weight and walk. The procedure
is typically done on the worst leg and can later be done on
● Diet: Making sure obese animals lose weight and keep-
the remaining leg, after the animal begins to be mobile
ing other animals lean makes the wear and weight on the
again.
joints much less.
The procedure is extremely effective in cats and small
●  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication:  These
dogs that bear little weight on each leg. The procedure is
medications are a class of nonsteroidal drugs that reduce
harder on larger animals that must support a larger amount
inflammation in the body. In this category are aspirin,
of weight per limb.
Ascriptin, carprofen, meloxicam, and other drugs. They
can be extremely effective but can cause gastrointestinal
Complete Hip Replacement
upset, and some may affect the kidneys and liver in sen-
When the joint is severely inflamed and shows extreme bony
sitive animals. This type of drug should be used with ex-
 a u yuof dy mau e ud pu su
treme caution in the cat (see Chapter 26).
In this procedure, the affected head and neck is removed
● Chrondroprotective agents: These drugs help increase
and replaced with a plastic prosthesis. The hip socket (ac-
joint fluid while protecting the cartilage. In general, they
etabulum) is also replaced. The new femoral head is then
have mild to no side effects and can be reasonably effec-
 placed within the new hip joint. It produces a painless well-
tive in controlling inflammation. Drugs in these cate-
moving joint.
gories are chondroiten sulfate and glucosamine hydro-
This surgery can be done on both hips, generally starting
o si inq aisudxa  si Aaans a du ism ay uo
chloride.
●Other types of anti-inflammatory medication: DMSO
of the most effective treatments for severe hip arthritis. This
is a potent anti-inflammatory that is generally given in
 procedure is generally done by a board-certified veterinary
pill or powder form. It has minimal side effects to the
surgeon.
1l aaq a as   aq m pau A 1nq po
The prognosis is good to poor, depending on the physical
 signs, clinical diagnostics, and response to treatment.
takes effect.
Prevention
 Surgical repairs are typically done with hip dysplasia or
Because in some large breed dogs this disease has a congen-
hip arthritis. The procedure can be done as a prophylactic
 ital basis, prevention can focus on the following.
 s  ss   s  ad p
 treatment for the animals with chronic hip arthritis. The sur-
Reproduction
gical procedures are discussed next.
If a pet is going to be used as a sire or dam, hip radiographs
(OFA or PennHIP) should be taken and reviewed for dogs
Triple Pelvic Osteotomy
more than 2 years old for evidence of hip dysplasia. Animals
This procedure is done prophylactically in young animals
who have marginal hips should not be bred.
with evidence of early hip dysplasia and poor hip conforma-
tion, where the femoral head is not well seated within the
Diet
hip. The goal of surgery is that when young animals are de-
 Young animals on high-energy/high-protein diets can grow
tected with femoral heads that sit superficially within the ac-
to be young adults that are slightly obese. These animals
etabulum and are easily movable within the joint, the acetab-
with hip dysplasia can have early onset of hip arthritis (8
 n  os pasoda aq u d an jo uona 
months of age or older).
       
fractures the pelvis in three different locations, and the bone
● Keeping large and giant breed canines lean as young
is repositioned such that it more fully covers the femoral
adults by switching them to an adult diet when they reach
head. Once positioned, the pelvic bone is plated. The proce-
68 months or 75 pounds (giant breeds) is recommended.
-s d l    n a aa  
This will not stop the pet from reaching its normal size
 gery can be done later if the joint destruction continues. This
and weight, but it will slow the growth curve slightly, pre-
 q   a  si g
venting the pet from becoming a slightly obese (paunchy)
surgeon.
 pup in the 6- to 12-month interval.
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
79
e pu an go undns a pasn a mn nunon
How to Discuss Arthritis with the Client
ture of the bone.
Arthritis is a degenerative, painful change in the bone
and cartilage of the normal joint due to congenital ab-
Common Signalment
normalities or chronic injury. The abnormal architec-
The disease typically affects dogs from 5 to 18 months of
ture of the joint causes increased destruction of the
age; however, it has been reported in dogs from 2 months to
normal protective cartilage. As an exposed section of
5 years of age. German shepherds and German shepherd
bone begins to rub on the bone in the joint, sharp bony
mixes are most commonly affected. Males tend to be more
spicules occur, producing pain, lameness, and a de-
affected than females.
creased use of the limb. In some breeds of animals,
 because of congenital abnormalities in the pet's joint,
Common Points in History
early onset of arthritis can occur.
No history of trauma.
 The pets show a mild to moderate lameness.
Clinical Diagnostics
 The limping can affect more than one limb, and signs can
Arthritis is diagnosed primarily with radiographs.
wax and wane from one leg to the other.
Other diagnostics, such as joint taps or general blood
 On occasion there can be other mild systermic signs, such
work, may also be used. (See above for client discus-
as
sion points on this topic.)
Decreased appetite,
Depression,
Treatment
Weight loss, and
Treatment is based on the severity of the pet's arthri-
tis, the clinical diagnostics, and the response to treat-
- Fever.
ment. However, there are two overall medical pro-
tocols.
Common Observations on Initial Assessmenf
On initial assessment, a team member may note that the
 Medical Treatment: Medical treatment of arthritis
●animal can be mildly to severely lame,
is focused on the use of aspirin-like drugs to reduce
inflammation and pain, nutritional supplementa-
●animal can be non-weight-bearing to toe-touching lame,
tion (i.e., chondroiten sodium and glucosamine hy-
and
 d   of a m o
● animal can have mildly swollen lower limbs.
tilage, and an exercise and weight-loss regime.
Medications may only be used when the pet is in
Complicafions
 pain and may be needed for the lifetime of the
There are usually no long-term complications for animals
animal.
being treated with panosteitis.
Surgical Treatment: With significant arthritic
disease or arthritis that has not responded signifi-
Diagnosis
As with arthritis, the diagnosis of panosteitis is largely made
cantly to medication, surgical treatment is indi-
 based on radiographic changes in the diaphysis of the long
cated. It will be up to the veterinarian to recom-
bones. The medullary canal of the affected bone shows and
mend which procedure would best help the pet
increased grainy appearance in comparison with the other
based on size of the animal and changes in the
limbs (see Figure 8.28).
joint.
Treatment
Prevenfion
 Prevention of the disease should be focused on pre-
Panosteitis is a benign self-limiting disease. The goal of
smoia sop aui lun ssauaos pue ued snpai on si juaean
breeding radiographic screening of large breed dogs
that have a genetic predisposition for hip dysplasia
out of the condition. There are two overall goals in medical
and careful control of the diet of the young, rapidly
treatment: medication and activity.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication such as
growing giant and large breed dogs.
 Carprofen is used to control pain and inflammation during
severe episodes.
 Decreased activity may decrease pain associated with
 panosteitis; however, decreased exercise has not been shown
Panosteitis
to help with remission of the disease.
 Panosteitis is a benign, painful condition of the long bone
affecting young, rapidly growing dogs. At this time, the
Prevention
cause of this disease is unknown. Pain and limping is
There is no way to prevent panosteitis.
08
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind theDiseases
a
B
Figure 8.28.
 An x-ray comparison. A radiograph image of a humerus affected with panosteitis. Note the grainy appearance of the bone
above the joint (a). Note the unaffected bone (b).
Cranial Cruciate Ligament Rupture Release
How To Discuss Panosteitis with the Client
The cranial cruciate is a ligament that attaches from the
 Panosteitis is a self-limiting disease of the long bone
femur (long bone of the upper rear leg) to the tibia (long
It produces mild pain and inflarmmation of the inside
bone of the lower hind leg, below the knee). It prevents the
column of the long bones of the limbs. This inflamma-
grating of the femur on the tibia when an animal bears
tory change produces lameness in possibly one to all
weight on the leg. It also prevents internal rotation of the
four limbs. The disease produces no long-term change
joint. The rupture of the ligament causes instability in the
in the bone or growth of your pet. The disease usually
knee and decreases the ability of the animal to bear weight
is outgrown by 12-18 months of age.
on its hind leg. Partial rupture of the ligament is also possi-
 ble, causing a chronic degenerative lameness.
Clinical Diagnostics
There are many possible causes of rupture of the cranial
Panosteitis is diagnosed primarily with radiographs
cruciate ligament; however, the most common is caused by
and presentations of physical signs. (See above for
trauma due to hyperextension or flexion of the joint. An
 client discussion points on this topic.)
immune-mediated degenerative arthritis can also predis-
pose the ligament to rupture. Animals with conformational
Prevenfion
problems in the knee are also likely to have a cruciate rup-
 There is no prevention available for this disease process.
ture (e.g., animals with severe luxating patella). Predispos-
ing factors for a cruciate rupture are obesity, animals with
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
81
Complications
u si an pa a a p sn of an 
corrected adequately with rest and medication, there is a good
chance that severe arthritis can occur within a few months.
Diagnosis
Diagnoses is based on orthopedic examination and radi-
 Ruptured anterior
 ographs. Diagnosis is generally made by a thorough orthope-
cruciate ligament
dic veterinary exam with a sedated or anesthetized patient. The
key to diagnosis is to observe an increased forward movement
in the tibia when the bone is pulled cranially as the femur is
held in place. This movement is called a cranial draw sign and
suggests the cruciate is damaged. Nonsedated/anesthetized
patients can lock the muscle around the knee to prevent this
forward motion, which is why sedation is recommended.
ai ssasse diu on pasans sas ae sudeioes
bony components of the stifle joint for fractures, signs of
infection, or the beginnings of arthritis. Radiographs will
show only the bony structures of the joint and cannot
show a ruptured cranial cruciate ligament.
Treatment
Figure 8.29.  In this diagram the cranial cruciate is ruptured.
In small breed dogs, especially with a partial tear of the cra-
This allows increased forward and medial rotational movements
nial cruciate ligament, conservative treatment of rest, heat,
(arrows) as the pet bears weight on the leg. To prevent this move-
and anti-inflammatory medications may allow for joint con-
ment, pets often come in with their limbs pulled upward and
tracture and a returm to partial to full function. However,
rotated medially.
     sa  a  
gical repair options available.
Cranial Cruciate Ligament Repair Using Allograft or
Suture Prosthesis
poor conformation, or animals with luxating patella (see
This surgical repair uses a thick-gauge suture or thick tissue
Figure 8.29).
above the knee to act as a false ligament (prosthesis). During
surgery, the veterinarian will also open the joint to make sure
Signalment
a g    o   nu  a
  o si     j 
 of the knee, especially the menisci. The menisci (see Figure
dogs; however, it is more common in rotteweiler and Labra-
8.8) are thick, cartilaginous structures within the joint that help
dors, where ligament rupture can occur in dogs less than 4
hold the joint in place. With a destabilized joint, the cartilage
years old. In other breeds, cranial cruciate ligament rupture 
can tear or fold up as the bone moves abnormally against it. A
occurs in dogs older than 5 years. It is more common in fe-
folded meniscal cartilage can produce a severe inflammatory
male dogs and rare in cats.
response that can lead to severe arthritis. Damaged cartilage is
 removed to prevent further arthritic change in the joint.
Common Points in History
Complications to the procedure are possible. If the ani-
 The pet usually presents with a sudden acute non-weight-
mal is obese, extremely active, or young at the time of
bearing lameness.
injury, it is possible for the prosthesis to break. It may need
There can be a history of trauma, a fall, or increased
to be replaced over time. It is also possible for the other knee 
activity.
to have a cranial cruciate rupture.
The pet may have a history of patellar luxation.
Tibial Plateau Leveling Osteotomy Procedure (TPLO)
Common Observations on Initial Assessment
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy is a newer procedure that
● Inability to stand on the leg
allows the transposition of a section of the tibia bone (tibia
Leg rotated inward
plateau) into a new position on the bone. It allows the joint
 Toe-touching lameness without bearing weight
ul pue suof aun dn uado on paau aun gnoum pazis aq o
Swelling of the knee joint
spect the internal structures. This procedure is thought to be
Heat and pain on the knee
an improved stabilizing procedure in the larger-breed dogs.
78
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
 groove) on the large long bone called the femur. The muscu-
How to Discuss Ruptured Cranial Cruciate
lar attachments to the patella and the patellar attachments to
 Ligament with the Client
 m (n an   a) a an jo sq a
There are two thick, fibrous ligaments in the knee of
patella to act as a hinge so that the animal can bear full
 your pet that help stabilize the movement of the knee
weight on its hind legs. With patellar luxation, the small
joint. The first ligament helps prevent forward motion
bone can move in and out of the patellar groove causing
of the upper bone (the femur) that may cause it to
mild to profound lameness.
grate and rub on the lower bone (the tibia) as your pet
Medial patellar luxation is a congenital abnormality in
bears weight. When the ligament snaps, the bones
the formation of the patellar groove, the position of the tibia
 begin to grate on each other, producing pain, swelling,
and femur in respect to the patella, or the attachments of the
and lameness. Once this ligament is completely rup-
muscle bodies on the patella. Medial luxation is typically
tured, the body cannot repair it. If the joint is not sta-
seen in young toy and small breed dogs. Medial patellar lux-
bilized over time (months), the joint can become se-
ation is graded I-IV, depending on the severity of the disease
verely arthritic and painful to the animal.
(see Figure 8.30).
Clinical Diagnostics
 Grade I (mildest form): Here the patella moves out of
 A ruptured anterior cruciate ligament is diagnosed
the groove when pressure is placed on the kneecap, but
 primarily with an orthopedic examination and radi-
 the patella quickly moves back into position.
ographs.
 Grade II: The patella can be manually removed from its
The orthopedic exam is usually done on a sedated
 groove and the kneecap will remain out until it is placed
or anesthetized animal so the doctor can fully ap-
back in or the animal flexes its legs.
preciate the movement in the pet's joint without the
 Grade MI: The patella spontaneously moves out of its
pet feeling too much pain.
groove but will replace itself when replaced manually or
 Radiographs will not show the ruptured cruciate
the animal extends or flexes its knees.
ligament, but they will allow the doctor to assess if
 Grade IV (most severe): The patella freely moves out of 
there are any fractures or disease of the bony com-
its groove and does not reposition itself normally.
ponents of the joint.
 Lateral patellar luxation is also possible in small and toy
Prevention
Prevention of the disease should be focused on the
breeds in middle to older patients and is also observed in
following.
young large to giant breed dogs.
 Preventing obesity in the pet: Obese pets have a
Signalment
great deal more weight on their limbs, increasing
Medial patellar luxation occurs often in dogs but is rare in
the chance of joint injury.
cats. It has been associated more commonly with miniature
Decreasing activities that could injure the knee:
 and toy breeds of dogs, especially
 Animals that climb and jump down or play in activ-
ities with a great deal of up and down movement
Yorkshire terriers,
(i.e., Frisbee play) have an increased chance of cru-
 Pomeranians,
ciate injury.
Pekingese,
 Proper fixation of previous joint injury: Cruci
 Chihuahuas, and
 ate injuries can occur from a previous congenital
+Boston terriers.
condition (i.e., patellar luxation) or a bony injury
 of the stifle joint that is not properly repaired.
 Medial patellar luxation tends to be more prevalent in fe-
 males. Clinical signs are typically seen shortly after birth.
Prevention
Common Points in History
 Preventing cranial cruciate ligament damage should focus on
 Pet has waxing and waning lameness.
 Pet has a history of three-legged lameness and then spon-
 weight control in the pet,
taneously soundness.
decreasing activities with a large vertical component (i.e .,
 Pet will run with limb extended, locked in position.
Frisbee), and
● Usually pet has no other physical signs.
● properly stabilizing the knee joint from congenital or trau-
matic injury (i.e., congenital patellar luxation; see below).
Common Observations in Initial Assessment
 The animal will present as non-weight bearing but may
Patellar Luxation
produce a normal gait.
The patella (kneecap) is a small bone (sesamoid) within the 
As animal walks, the limb may be unable to bear weight
pet's knee that sits within a small groove (the patellar
for a few strides and then pop back into a normal stride.
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
8
FEMUR
3
TIBIA
TIBIALTUBERCLE
PATELLA
NORMAL
GRADE1
GRADE 2
NORMAL
GRADE4
 MEDIAL PATELLAR LuXaTION
GRADE3
GRADE 4
Figure 8.30.  llustration of a normal patella compared with a limb with abnormal architecture producing advanced degrees of patella
Philadelphia, PA, 1990.
 On light palpation of the knee, the patella moves in and
● Medications: Anti-inflammatory medication may be
out of the groove.
prescribed, focused on reducing inflammation and pain
 The patella may be palpated on the medial or lateral side
produced from the chronic movement of the patella in
 of the joint
and out of the patellar groove.
● Diet: Obesity can make patellar luxation occur more
Complications
o a  pas  a a  
 If severe patellar luxations are not properly repaired chronic
of the bone. Weight loss may be suggested to help de-
arthritis and further joint injury (i.e., cranial cruciate liga-
crease the amount of weight the pet needs to carry on the
ment damage) can occur, causing the pet severe pain and re-
leg and decrease the joint instability.
quiring more serious surgery that may leave the affected
 Cage rest: With mild luxations, if the lameness is acute 
limb with decreased function.
and the joint inflamed, the pet may need to be cage rested
to decrease movement and injury in the joint.
Diagnosis
 Surgery: Depending on the severity of the luxations and the
Diagnosis of patellar luxation is based largely on history,
 a  an s e 'ss  ai
 physical examination, and radiographs. The radiographs will
The repairs depend on how severe are the luxation and the
allow the veterinarian to see how severely the joint is af-
congenital changes in the bones and muscles. Surgery can
fected  and  what medical  or surgical treatment  may  be
involve
 needed to correct the underlying problem.
- deepening of the patellar groove,
 repositioning the attachment of the patella onto the
Treatment
tibia, and
Treatment is based on the presentation of the animal and the
- tightening of the tissue around the kneecap.
 severity (grade) of the disease noted. Some medical proto-
 cols may require the following.
8
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
How to Discuss Patellar Luxation with the Client
The patella (kneecap) is a small bone (sesamoid)
within the pet's knee that sits within a small groove
(the patellar groove) on the large, long bone called
the femur.
When properly held in place, it allows the pet to
 bear full weight on the leg.
 Patellar luxation is a congenital disease in which
the patella can freely move in and out of its groove,
producing a waxing and waning lameness.
 The pet usually will become three-legged lame
acutely, and then just as suddenly become sound on
the leg as the patella moves in and out of the joint.
Clinical Diagnostics
 The diagnosis of patellar luxation is based on its pres-
an o pao sa pu xa gisud uo aa
radiographs. The radiographic changes help the med-
 ical team recommend medical and surgical treatment
protocols for the pet.
R
Prevention:
Prevention of the disease should be focused on
+
 early detection of patellar luxation in the pet and
repair if necessary, and
● prevention of obesity in mildly affected animals.
Complicafions
 In severe cases, if the patellar luxation continues, the
joint will be destabilized, setting the joint up for cru-
ciate ligament rupture and arthritis.
Prevenfion
 Preventing patellar luxation injury should focus on early de-
tection of congenital problems and repair that can prevent
continued damage to the joint. Weight control in the pet is
OCD Lesion
also important.
Osteochondritis Dissecans
 In all moveable joints of the body, there is a soft spongy car-
tilage, called hyaline cartilage, that produces a thick, vis-
cous lubricant called hyaluronic acid. The purpose of this
tissue is to act as a lubricant to decrease the chance of irri-
tation, inflammation, and bony change in the joint.
 In osteochondritis dissecans (OCD), there is change in
the normal laying down of cartilage lining the joint, produc-
ing areas of thickened irregular cartilage prone to injury and
breaking loose. When this occurs, a nonhealing ulcer results,
Figure 8.31. Illustration of a normal shoulder joint (a) and one
which produces chronic pain upon movement of the joint.
that had an OCD lesion in the proximal humerus (b). This ex-
Also, the small irregular piece of cartilage (called a joint
posed bone has a ulcerative sore evident that causes pain and
mouse) that has broken off can lodge itself between the
lameness as the scapula moves. Furthermore, the free-floating
moving bones, causing severe pain and inflammation (see
cartilage (joint mouse) can lodge in the moving joint, causing
Figure 8.31).
 pain, swelling, and further lameness.
The cause of OCD in not yet fully understood. It is
Chapter 8: Skeletal System
85
thought that there may be changes in the normal nutrition of
locations where the defect in the bone can be seen. Specific
 the cells that produce the forming cartilage, thus causing the
locations of OCD within the joint are as follows.
improper formation of the tissue. There is also a genetic
 component to this disease.
 Shoulder: Typical lesion is a lucent or darker area of the
OCD commonly affects
 humerus overlying the caudal dorsal aspect of the greater 
tubercle.
the shoulder,
●Hock (talus): Typical lucent lesions can be noted on the
the knee,
+
medial aspect of the trochlea of the talus.
the ankle,
 Stifle: The typical lesion is seen on the medial aspect of
the elbow, and
the lateral femoral condyle.
 possibly the back.
 Elbow: A lesion can be seen on the distal humerus on the
cranial/medial aspect. The lesion can represent itself as a
Signalment
small triangular wedge that has broken off from the main
 The disease has been reported with a high incidence in large
bone.
breed dogs.
 Labrador retriever,
How to Discuss Osteochondritis Dissecans with
Newfoundland,
the Client
Rotteweiler,
 All bones that make up joints are covered with a
+
Great Dane,
soft spongy cartilage called hyaline cartilage.
 Bermese mountain dog,
In some young dogs, there is a problem with the
 English setter, and
normal maturation of the joint cartilage.
 Old English sheep dog
 In specific areas of the joint, a piece of cartilage
can break away from the bone, producing an ulcer-
OCD of the shoulder is seen more in male animals (2:1
ative lesion and making the bone painful and sore.
Furthermore, the free-floating piece of cartilage,
over females).
also called a joint mouse, floats free within the
Common Points in History
joint. If this cartilage moves into the bone as the
The pet is usually a young adult large breed dog.
 joint moves, the pet can also have pain and become
 The pet presents for ongoing progressive larmeness affect-
lame.
ing one or multiple limbs.
 Osteochondritis dissecans usually presents as a
The lameness generally becomes worse with exercise.
 progressive lameness that can altermate from mild
 The lameness can begin acutely and may come and go
to severe in the rapidly growing large breed dog.
over weeks to months.
 Although there is suggestion of a congenital com-
ponent of the disease, the cause of the disease is
Common Observations in Initial Assessmenf
unknown at this time.
On physical examination,
Clinical Diagnostics
 the animal will show a mild to severe (usually unilateral)
The diagnosis of OCD is based on its presence on
lameness;
physical exam and changes noted on joint radiographs.
the affected leg has decreased range of motion when
-o uen ppau a diy sao oyopi a
walking, or the animal may not be weight bearing;
ommend medical and surgical treatment protocols for
if the lameness is severe enough, muscles around the
the pet.
joint may be atrophied (muscle atrophy); and
ae) yonn on nou pu uams aq  jasi of a
Complications
episode).
 If the OCD lesion is not repaired, the joint can become
arthritic and the pet can have chronic pain and be un-
Complications
 able to bear weight on the leg.
 If OCD lesions are not properly repaired, chronic arthritis
aaas iad aun susn inoo uo Ainun suof iauny pue
 pain and requiring more serious surgery that may leave the
Treatment
 affected limb with decreased function.
Treatment is based upon the presentation of the animal and
the severity of the disease noted on physical examination
Diagnosis
and radiograph. Although the use of anti-inflammatory med-
 Diagnosis is largely made based upon physical signs and ra-
ications and cage rest may help decrease physical signs of
diographic changes in the joint. OCD lesions have specific
lameness, often surgical exploration of the joint and clean-
98
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
ing out the joint mice and affected flaps of cartilage to allow
for proper healing is one of the best options to prevent
the affected limb is recommended to reduce the chance of
 arthritic change in the joint.
metastasis of the tumor and reduce pain and immobility
of the patient. The owner must understand that there is
Bone Neoplasia--Osteosarcoma
still a high potential that metastasis has already occurred
Bone neoplasia is a cancerous condition of the bone, which
prior to surgery.
is the primary tumor of the bone in the dog. These types of
● Chemotherapy: The use of aggressive chemotherapeutic
tumors can carry a poor prognosis due to their high rate of
medication can help extend quality of life. Owners will
spread into other tissues of the body (metastasis). This is
need to be educated on the strict schedule of the chemo-
less common in the cat and carries a slightly better progno-
therapy drugs, the follow-up clinical diagnostics needed,
sis due a decreased rate of metastasis.
 potential side effects, and cost before beginning therapy.
There is no known cause for osteosarcoma.
Prognosis
Signalment
 In canines prognosis is poor. Most pets that do not have am-
Tumors tend to be more common in large and giant breed
putation and chemotherapy succumb in the first 4 months
dogs with a median age of 7 years. It has been reported in
 after diagnosis. With amputation alone, mean survival time
patients as young as 6 months of age. It has also been re-
is 4 months. With amputation and chemotherapy survival
ported in older domestic short hair cats.
time can be as high as l year. It is important to understand
that these survival times are averages of animals diagnosed
Common Points in History
with osteosarcoma, and patients can live longer or succumb
The patient presents with a history of lameness with moder-
much quicker than expected.
ate to severe pain. Owners may also report mild to moderate
 In cats with treated with amputation only, the mean sur-
 swelling of the affected leg.
vival time is greater than 4 years.
Common Observafions in Initial Assessmenf
On physical examination, the animal will show
How to Discuss Osteosarcoma with the Client
Disease
●swollen limb or
 Osteosarcoma is a cancer of the bone, causing swelling,
●swelling that can often be firm to hard on palpation and
pain, and lameness. Osteosarcoma can occur on any
very painful, and
bone in the body. These tumors can spread aggressively
● non-weight-bearing lameness.
into other organ systems of the body, especially the
lungs. It is more common in large to giant breed dogs. It
Complications
is rare in cats.
With aggressive osteosarcoma, decalcification of the bone
can be so severe that the leg can break without any trauma
Clinical Diagnostics
(pathologic fracture). Without aggressive treatment, metas-
Diagnosis is made by physical examination, radi-
tasis of the tumor to other organ systems (i.e., lungs) may
ographic changes in the bone, and bone biopsy. If os-
occur. In many cases, metastases have already occurred even
teosarcoma is suspected, chest radiographs may also be
 prior to the tumor mass being identified.
recormmended to evaluate for any potential spread of tul-
mors to the lung fields.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is largely made based upon physical signs and ra-
Complications
diographic changes in the bone. Bone density can be in-
 If not diagnosed osteosarcoma can spread aggressively
creased, decreased, or a mixed patterm (see Figure 8.22). In
to other tissues of the body and lead to death of the
more advanced cases bony loss can be so severe that a frac-
patient.
ture may occur. The diagnosis is confirmed through bone
 be suggested by the veterinarian to detect any obvious meta-
static masses within the lung fields.
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter
Please try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology
Treatment
The Science behind theDiseases)tohelp reinforce the infor-
 Treatment is based upon the location of the mass (limb ver-
mation presented here.
sus body), the physical status of the patient, and if there is
 obvious metastatic masses detected elsewhere. With tumors
 of the limbs, treatment options are as follows.
Chapter 9
Teeth and the Oral Cavity
In a busy general practice, a great deal of energy and time are
'saads o sanads uoy Aia adi pue iaqnu yaan a
spent with the client and patient in implermenting a strong
However, basic anatomy of the small animal tooth is similar
dental wellness program. In recent years, dental health and
(see Figure 9.1). They contain the following.
preventative medicine has become a large part of general
practice. With the advent of more advanced and affordable
● Cusp: Top surface of the tooth also known as the oc-
dental x-ray machinery, equipment, advanced procedures
clusal surface
(i.e., root canals and crowns), and more choices of antibiotics
Crown: Part of the tooth that protrudes above the gum line
and pain medications, the medical team can offer a more pro.
Neck: A constriction of the tooth where the crown meets
gressive dental program. Furthermore, with clients able to
the root as it dips below the gum line
sympathize with dental disease and tooth pain, client educa-
Root: Part of the tooth embedded in the tooth socket
tion about dental treatments can be straightforward and eas-
(alveolus) of the jaw
ily accepted by the pet owner.
 Pulp cavity: Central cavity in the tooth extending from
the root a variable distance toward the crown. The pulp
cavity narrows as the animal ages.
Dental and Oral Anatomy
Mouth
The architecture of the teeth depends on the animal's diet
The mouth (oral cavity) is the beginning of the digestive
and evolution. Felines are strict carnivores (eat meat only),
so their teeth are meant for ripping and tearing, their jaw
process. The overall function of the mouth and early diges-
tive tract is to break down food into smaller molecules that
movement is sharp and scissorlike, and the table surfaces of
can be digested. Proteins are broken down into smaller
the teeth are sharp angles.
amino acid chains, fats are broken down into triglycerides,
On the other hand, canines are omnivores eat meat and
and complex sugars are broken down into simple small-unit
vegetables). Their jaws function for both carmivore and her-
bivore diets; their incisors and canines are sharp and can
sugars. To complete this function, the animal relies on its
teeth to break down the large foodstuffs into smaller units so
tear, and their molars have a flat surface for grinding. Their
that the intestinal system can facilitate digestion.
jaws have both scissor motion and grinding circular motion.
Furthermore, to help facilitate digestion the salivary
 Animals have specific dental formulas that help to quan-
glands secrete saliva to help emulsify food into a liquid so-
titate and describe their teeth type and number. The canine
lution. There are four sets of salivary glands. Each gland is
formula enumerates half the skull's upper and lower teeth
named for the anatomical region of the face where the
and is as follows (see Figure 9.2).
glands lie. The four glands are the parotid gland, sub-
 mandibular gland, sublingual gland, and the zygomatic
Canine Teeth
gland. These glands function to produce saliva, which ho-
Deciduous teeth number 28 total (baby teeth):
-s uan si 1l 'ayo pmb w oui poo an sazuo
3 incisors (I); 1 canine (C); 3 premolars (P)
ported into the stomach and small intestine. Saliva also con-
(×2 for entire skull)
tains chemicals (enzymes) that begin breaking down the
3 incisors (I); 1 canine (C); 3 premolars (P)
food stuffs to start the digestive process, (e.g., trypsin).
Permanent teeth number 42 total:
Teeth
3 incisors (I); 1 canine (C); 4 premolars (P); 2 molars (M)
×2
Each tooth has its own function.
3 incisors (I); 1 canine (C); 4 premolars (P); 3 molars (M)
● Incisors are smaller teeth in the front of the jaw. They are
(See Table 9.1.)
meant to rip and tear skin and meat.
Canines are next to the incisors and are meant for tear-
Feline Teeth
ing, piercing, and catching prey.
Felines have a slightly different dental architecture compared
 Premolars and molars are used to grind and shear the food.
 s  d   (a  a sp 
87
88
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
6.Enamel
1.CrowD
7. Dentin
9. Pulp carity
2. Neck
Figure 9.2.  Illustration of canine skull with teeth. (Courtesy of
3.Root-
Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris, and
Pasquini, Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used with
permission from Sudz Publishing.)
Figure 9.1. Anatomy of the tooth. (Courtesy of Anatomy of
Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini,
Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used with permis-
Tabfe 9.2.
 The feline's tooth eruption schedule.
sion from Sudz Publishing.)
Eruption of
Eruption of
Tabfe 9.1.
The canine's tooth eruption schedule.
Teeth
Temporary Teeth
Permanent Teeth
Ilncisor 1
2-4 weeks
3-4 months
Incisor 2
2-4 weeks
 3-4months
Incisor 3
2-4 weeks
3-4 months
Teeth
Temporary Teeth
Permanent Teeth
 Canine
3-4 weeks
4-5 months
Incisor 1
3-4 weeks
3-5months
 Premolar 2
3-6 weeks
4-6 months
Incisor 2
3-4 weeks
3-5 months
 Premolar 3
3-6 weeks
4-6 months
Incisor 3
3-4 weeks
3-5 months
 Premolar 4
3-6 weeks
4-6 months
Canine 
3-5 weeks
4-6 months
 Molar 1
4-5 months
 Premolar 1
4-6 months
 Premolar 2
4-12 weeks
4-6 months
Note: Eruption times may vary depending on the breed and size
Premolar 3
4-12 weeks
4-6 months
of the individual animal.
Premolar 4
4-12 weeks
4-6 months
Molar 1
5-7 months
Molar 2
5-7 months
However, many other disease processes are frequently seen
Molar 3
5-7months
affecting the teeth and oral cavity, the most common of
Note: Eruption times may vary depending on the breed and size
which is periodontal disease. This disease affects the gums
 of the individual animal.
(gingiva) and other tissues in the mouth that surround and
support the teeth. Periodontal disease affects over two-thirds
of all adult dogs and cats, making it one of the top diseases
are missing from the upper jaw. Also, their first and second pre-
seen in pet dogs and cats.
molars and second and third molars are missing from the lower
 jaw (see Figure 9.3). Their dental patterns are as follows:
Dental Disease Terminology
311C3P
311C3P1M
× 2 (26 total)
× 2 (30 total)
 Plaque is the soft “slime” layer of material found on
3I1C2P
311C2P1M
tooth surfaces and comprises salivary proteins, decayed
food materials, and bacteria. It is hard to see with the
naked eye and is easy to remove with brushing, but it re-
Oral and Dental Diseases
turms quickly.
Dental disease in dogs and cats can take many forms. The
Calculus is mineralized plaque deposits that are often
obvious forms include broken, infected or decayed teeth.
yellow to brown in color. It adheres to teeth and is diffi-
Chapter 9: Teeth and the Oral Cavity
68
weight loss,
- decreased appetite, and
-- trouble breathing (occasional).
● Heart: Some medical studies suggest that a heavy bac-
teria load can enter the bloodstream and cause infections
in the heart. A common site for bacterial buildup is on
the mitral valve or left atrial/ventricular valve between
the left atrium and left ventricle. If enough bacterial de-
nu m an l a 'a s uo dn sq s
close properly and mitral regurgitation can occur (see
Chapter 12).
●Kidneys: Increased bacterial load can infect the filtering
 devices of the outer kidney (the glomeruli) and produce
a chronic underlying infection that can lead to chronic
kidney disease or kidney failure (see Chapter 13).
● Liver: Just as with the kidneys, increased bacterial
buildup can set up a bacterial infection of the liver (hep-
atitis), which can seriously affect the ability of the liver
teins (see Chapter 14).
Figure 9.3.  Image of feline skull from below with upper arcade.
It is important to realize that these disease processes do
not typically occur quickly with light dental calculus and
mild oral disease, but rather occur over years with signifi-
cult to remove, requiring professional cleaning under
cant buildup of periodontal disease. Regular professional
anesthesia. It is often called tartar by laypersons.
dental cleanings will help prevent these disease processes.
Gingiva is the term used to describe the soft tissue that
lines the oral cavity and surrounds the teeth. It is gener-
Obtaining a History for Dental Disease
ally pink in color but may be dark pigmented in some
 breeds. It is often called the gums by laypersons.
 Dental disease can produce a vast array of physical signs and
Gingivitis is considered to be inflammation of gums
complaints.
(gingiva). It is the first stage of periodontal disease. Gin-
givitis causes the gum tissue to be swollen, red, and bleed
Anorexia: With dental disease animals may stop eating
easily when touched.
due to dental pain, although some animals with severe
Prophylaxis is a term used to describe the process of
dental disease still continue to eat normally.
cleaning a patient's teeth under anesthesia in the veteri-
 Halitosis: Animals may have mild to severe bad breath.
nary hospital. It can also be called professional dental
Ap s dos o  ad a dde un s 
cleaning or professional dental prophylaxis.
food and eat only soft food because this type of food will
produce less dental pain.
Weight loss: This is secondary to anorexia and dental
Systemic Manifestations of Dental Disease
disease.
The physical manifestations of dental disease are not just
Vomiting: Animals who have severe dental disease typi-
limited to the health of the mouth and teeth. The dental cal-
cally do not chew their food well enough to have the
culus that is seen so often with chronic dental disease con-
-a a  ssad s a a on
tains pathogenic bacteria. The chronic infection of the teeth
ing food pieces may be vomited back up.
and gums can produce heavy bacterial loads that can seed to
Excessive drooling: Drooling associated with eating can
other parts of body, potentially producing life-threatening
d pun asasip uap o asuodsan ui a
and life-limiting disease. Common sites of secondary infec-
 Sneezing/sinusitis, nose bleeds, and nasal discharge:
tion can be in the following areas.
Many of the large premolars and molars have deep roots
that communicate with the nasal sinuses. Chronic infec-
 Sinuses: The tooth roots in the upper jaw cormmunicate
tion of these tooth roots can seed causing a progressive
with the nasal sinuses. Heavy bacteria-laden dental calculus
sinusitis.
can lead to chronic sinusitis that can respond to antibiotics
 Facial swelling/chronic abscess formation in the jaw:
initially, but then will reoccur. These animals will show
 Many animals with chronic dental abscesses may have
chronic sneezing,
reoccurring facial swelling as well as abscess formation
- nasal discharge (blood and pus),
in the lower and upper jaws.
06
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind theDiseases
Eating abnormally: Animals with dental pain and sensi-
tivity may roll their food or push the food to one side of
the mouth while eating.
The goal of the history and physical examination is to
discover if the cause of the medical complaint is from the
teeth and oral cavity or if the problem is located lower in the
gastrointestinal tract. To help the medical team accomplish
this task, the following questions should be asked.
●What is the duration of illness? Dental disease is usually
 a chronic on-going progressive problem where the clinical
signs start mildly and then become more significant.
●  Does the pet eat hard or unusual substances? Certain
substances (i.e., rocks) can cause the increased wear or
fractures of the teeth. The incisors may show wear from
   s    
tured from hard chew bones or rocks.
● Does the pet show pain when eating? Oral pain or ab-
normal eating patterns can suggest dental disease.
Certain eating patterns to ask the client about are as
follows:
Does the pet roll the food in its mouth?
— Is there excessive drooling when eating?
 Is there facial swelling?
- Is there trouble swallowing?
 Does the pet chew on only one side of the mouth?
●  Is the pet a chronic vomiter? Vomiting can sometimes
suggest dental disease, since the pet is not adequately
breaking down food for digestion. If the pet is vomiting,
other questions to ask the client to help identify the cause
of the problem can be as follows.
-- How many times does the pet vomit per day?
Figure 9.4.  Images of mild dental tartar (a) and severe dental
Is it associated with eating or drinking?
disease (b). Based on simple observation, it is understandable that
a u nuasad sqap uia no poo Au aaun sl
the pet in (b) has significant dental disease, dental pain, and may
vomitus?
have secondary disease (i.e., heart, kidney, or liver disease) from
●  Is the pet chronically sneezing or having nasal dis-
chronically infected teeth.
charge? With chronic severe dental disease, the nasal si-
nuses can be infected. Pets may have waxing and waning
purulent and/or bloody nasal discharge and chronic
●Dental calculus: By carefully examining the teeth, the
sneezing.
amount of dental calculus present, the severity of halito-
Does the pet have bad breath? Bad breath (halitosis)
sis, and the health of the gums, a dental problem can be
can be a symptom of dental infection and periodontal
identified (see Figure 9.4).
disease.
 Evidence of dental pain: Dental pain can be appreciated
by carefully examining the gum regions through the lips
for sensitivity on the lower and upper dental arcades.
Observation on Initial Assessment
 Evidence of oral and dental lesions: Abnormalities in
The main focus of the initial assessment should be to deter-
-uap pasearun mn pad aun asodsipand uo mef no yaan a
mine if there is significant dental disease evident to account
tal calculus and dental disease. Furthermore, oral masses
for the patient's symptoms. Care should always be exercised
to make sure the pet will allow its mouth to be evaluated.
ogy. The mouth should be exarmined for the following:
Generally, with severe oral disease, there are significant
normal bite (see Figure 9.5), underbite (see Figure 9.6),
changes within the oral cavity. The factors that should be ob-
overbite (see Figure 9.7), retained baby (deciduous) teeth
ser ved and documented in an oral examination to help deter-
(see Figure 9.8), broken teeth (see Figure 9.9), gingival
mine if significant dental disease is present are as follows.
inflammation (see Figure 9.10), and oral masses/growths
(see Figure 9.11).
Chapter 9: Teeth and the Oral Cavity
91
Figure 9.5.
This dog has a normal bite and occlusion of the
Figure 9.7.  In this dog the upper jaw is much 1longer than the
incisor and canine teeth. This is often called a scissors bite or
lower, causing misalignment of the teeth. This is commonly
class O occlusion.
called an overbite or a class 2 malocclusion. (Reprinted by
permission of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic,
7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
Figure 9.6.  In this dog the lower jaw is much longer than the
Figure 9.8. Note how much calculus is evident due to the
upper, causing misalignment of the teeth. This is commonly
presence of the retained baby tooth, which causes an abnormal
called an underbite, or a class 3 malocclusion. (Reprinted by
region where plaque can build easily.
permission of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic,
7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
 Temperature: A fever (hyperthermia) can suggest in-
● Enlargement of the submandibular lymph nodes: The
fection or inflammation caused by chronic dental infec-
submandibular lymph nodes located ventral to the
tion or dental abcessation.
mandible drain infection from the head and neck. With
Focal facial swelling or discharge: Focal facial
chronic infection of the oral cavity or teeth these nodes
swelling and purulent (pus) discharge can suggest dental
 may be enlarged and obser ved by palpation.
root abcessation. Usually, the swelling occurs over the
●Evidence of a heart murmur: Severe periodontal dis-
larger premolars and molars causing a focal swelling
ease can produce a secondary bacterial infection of the
ventral to the eye or on the lower mandible (see Figure
heart valve leaflets, especially affecting the mitral valve,
9.12).
producing mitral valve regurgitation (see Chapter 12).
92
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind theDiseases
Figure 9.9.  Note the broken right lower first molar. The break is
exposing the pulp cavity, opening the tooth for pain and a tooth
root abscess.
Figure 9.10. Evidence of both dental calculus and red swollen
gums indicate gingivitis and periodontal disease, suggesting that
the teeth, roots, and the surrounding tissues are affected.
(Reprinted by permission of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid
Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az
85250.)
Key Points in Discussing Dental Disease with a
Client
 There are several points to discuss with a client when
dealing with dental disease.
Dental disease is usually a chronic problem that de-
velops into an acute problem.
 If not properly treated, severe dental disease can pro-
duce kidney, liver, and heart diseases.
 Even if the animal does not show physical pain or
other symptoms, they can have significant disease 
that could be life limiting over the pet's normal life-
time.
With severe dental infection and periodontal disease,
professional dental cleanings and periodontal treat-
ment requires more time and care as well as potential
removal of teeth.
Clinical Diagnostics for Pets with Dental
Disease
Figure 9.1l. Evidence of an abnormal mass associated with the
 Diagnostic test recormmendations depend upon the history,
eoueo 1o sseesip (eio snoies isesans ueo ansuon 1o suns
(Reprinted by permission of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid
the presenting medical complaint, and the physical examina-
Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az
tion findings. Some diagnostics that may be suggested are
85250.)
discussed next.
Baseline Diagnostic Blood Work and Urinalysis
● Complete blood count: Severe chronic infectious dis-
Most patients with chronic dental disease are middle-aged
ease can produce significant changes in the complete
and older animals. Because chronic dental disease can be as-
blood count in the following parameters.
sociated with heart, kidney, and liver disease, baseline blood
 Low red blood cell count (anemia): Both chronic in-
work and urinalysis should be recommended.
fection and bleeding from infected teeth can produce
Chapter 9: Teeth and the Oral Cavity
93
● Dental radiography: With dental radiography technol-
 ogy and equiprment becoming less expensive and more
available, many medical teams are finding dental radiog-
raphy units a necessary diagnostic tool. Dental x-rays can
be used to evaluate broken and chipped teeth, periodon-
tal disease, oral masses (tumors), and jaw fractures (see
Figure 9.13).
 The ability to assess the tooth and roots radiographi-
cally can help detect the presence of early infection
and abcessation.
 The pet can then be spared chronic dental infection
and tooth loss when these changes are noted early and
 proper cleaning and medical treatment is completed.
Key Points in Discussing the Need for Dental
Figure 9.12.
. Image of a focal facial abscess secondary to an in-
X-Rays with a Client
fected lower molar.
● Just as with the human dentist, dental radiographs
allow the veterinarian to evaluate the teeth for early
dental changes, as well as examine regions below the
mild to moderate red blood cell decrease that should
gum line that may have infection and abcessation.
be obser ved and monitored.
Because pets cannot tell us about teeth sensitivity
- Increased white blood cell count: Chronic infection
and pain, routine dental radiography allows the med-
can produce elevations in the white blood cell popula-
ical team to evaluate and detect problems early to
tions that suggest mild to moderate infection.
 prevent chronic dental pain, tooth loss, and infection.
 Clinical chemistry: As discussed previously, chronic
The pet must be under general anesthesia to take
+
dental disease can be associated with kidney, liver, and
dental x-rays. The pet will not remain still and hold
cardiac changes. The medical team should evaluate the
the film in the mouth while awake.
blood work for changes in the kidney or liver enzymes
that may suggest early organ disease. Since many of these
pets are in the middle- to geriatric-age interval, evalua-
The Professional Dental Prophylaxis
tions and early detection for other organs and hormonal
disease (i.e., diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, etc.) is
 Performing a professional dental prophylaxis (cleaning) is
important to document.
an important part of preventative care and prolonging the
Urinalysis: Early changes in urinary components (i.e.,
life span of the pet. Chronic dental disease can cause weight
protein, blood glucose, etc.) and the kidney's abilities to
loss, chronic pain, and decrease in their quality of life, lead-
concentrate urine and filter the bloodstream properly may
ing to secondary disease in the heart, kidney, or liver. Even
be an early indicator of renal or hormonal diseases (see
with such long-term health concerms, severe dental health
Chapter 13).
problems often go completely unnoticed by the owner. The
following parameters should be used when discussing den-
tal disease with the owner and recommending a dental pro-
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a Complete
cedure.
Diagnostic Baseline with a Client
With moderate to severe dental disease, the accu-
When to Recommend a Dental Procedure
mulation of calculus represents a large accumulation
Although dental disease can affect any breed at various
of bacteria that the body must deal with on a daily
stages in life, the following factors may help distinguish
basis.
which patients are most likely to need dental care.
 Over years, these bacteria can seed into the blood-
stream, producing disease in other organs of the
Predisposing Factors
body, primarily the heart, kidneys, and liver.
Age of animal: Dogs and cats as young as 3 years of age
 To properly evaluate the effect of the dental disease
can form cavities, get tooth root infections, and develop
and establish if the patient is a good candidate for
infections of the gums (periodontal disease).
anesthesia, general blood work is recommended to
 Signalment: Short-faced (brachiocephalic) breeds (i.e.,
detect early changes in the kidneys and liver as well
pug, bulldog, etc.) can have increased dental calculus and
as the other organ systems in the body.
disease due to improper alignment and crowding of teeth
in the shortened muzzle.
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
● Diet: Animals that eat only canned food may have in-
creased dental disease because there is very little abrasive
contact of the diet with the teeth.
●Abnormal dietary elements: Animals that are chronic
rock eaters and tennis ball players can have increased
dental wear and fractured teeth, leading to pain and in-
fection.
Evidence of Dental Disease
As outlined earlier in the chapter, animals with mild to mod-
erate changes in dental calculus, gingivitis, or evidence of
significant dental lesions should have professional dental
prophylaxis.
The Components of a Thorough Dental Examination
Anesthesia
 Anesthesia allows complete cleaning and examination of all
the surfaces of the teeth above and below the gum line. This
is not possible in an awake animal. Professional dental pro-
s a  ss s o a  sn si
particles of water to clean the teeth. The patient is placed
under full anesthesia with an endotracheal tube in place to
prevent the water particles and bacteria from passing into
the trachea and lungs.
Protective Gear
As the veterinary technician/assistant is cleaning the heavy
dental calculus and bacteria from the teeth, the ultrasonic
DentalRoot Abcessation
cleaner produces a fine mist of bacteria-laden water. It is im-
portant to wear protective equipment covering the eyes,
nose, and mouth. Further protective gloves should be used to
a mo pno  sas p s o ansoxa a
bacteria to seep into the body (see Figure 9.14).
Dental Cleaning
The components of a thorough professional dental prophy.
laxis should include a thorough oral examination in which
 the oral cavity is checked for dental lesions and pathology.
Each tooth is probed and checked for pockets that could sug-
gest the beginning of periodontal disease, early tooth abces-
sation, or weakening of the teeth (see Figure 9.15)
●Rinsing: The mouth should be rinsed with an antibacter-
Figure 9.13. With more dental radiography units available, it
ial solution such as chlorhexidine prior to the prophy-
becomes easier to detect dental disease and infection (a). The
laxis. This will reduce the bacterial levels that the techni-
radiograph of the fourth premolar shows a dark halo around the
cian and patient are exposed to during the prophylaxis.
roots, indicative of root abcessation (b). (Reprinted by permission
 Ultrasonic cleaning and hand scaling: Plaque and cal-
of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E.
Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
culus are cleaned from the tooth surfaces using ultrasonic
and hand-scaling instruments.
 Polishing: Dental polishing removes the microscopic
scratches produced from the dental cleaning to help pre-
●Health status of the animal: Animals with immunosup-
vent new calculus formation (see Figure 9.16).
pressive diseases (feline leukemia virus, feline immunod-
 Dental radiographs: After the pet's teeth are cleaned
eficiency virus, etc.) will have accelerated dental disease
dental x-rays are taken of any abnormal teeth, regions of
since the normal protective mechanisms of the body are
periodontal disease, or any other diseased oral tissue.
slowed or impeded by their infection.
● Perioceutic treatments: If there are periodontal pockets
Chapter 9: Teeth and the Oral Cavity
95
Figure 9.15.
 Careful probing of the gums around the tooth can
suggest early disease.
Figure 9.14. The proper protective eyewear, gloves, and mask
should worn to protect the team member performing dental
procedures. (Reprinted by permission of Curt Coffman, DVM
ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108,
Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
within the gums around the pet's teeth, these regions may
be treated with a long-acting antibiotic polymer that
helps control infection and decrease the pocket size.
Tooth extraction: Some teeth can be severely infected
Figure 9.16.
 Polishing the teeth after an ultrasonic cleaning is
a isn au y aam os aq e pu ao pu
very important for preventing a premature formation of calculus
on the microscopic scratches produced by the ultrasonic cleaner.
extracted to reduce pain and infection.
(Reprinted by permission of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid
 Dental charting: Problems identified during the dental
Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108, Scotsdale, Az
prophylaxis are recorded on a dental chart. Treatments
85250.)
performed, such as extractions or perioceutic treatments,
are also recorded. The dental chart becomes part of the
 patient's medical record.
 Dental aftercare: Dental aftercare can take many different
trol should be prescribed using pain medications (i.e.,
forms, including pain management, antibiotics, and tooth
buprenorphine or other opioids) or anti-inflammatory
brushing to help prevent reoccurring dental problems.
 medications (i.e., carprofen, meloxicam)
Antibiotic medications: With moderate to severe
● Preventative care: There are many types of dental pre-
dental disease, large amounts of bacteria can be re-
ventative care that aid in decreasing recurence of dental
leased into the bloodstream when the teeth are
disease and maintaining good oral health. Some available
cleaned. Antibiotics can be prescribed to help heal the
dental products are:
mouth and reduce the amount of bacteria that can
 dental toothbrush and toothpaste,
enter the system circulation.
-- antiseptic oral rinses,
Pain medications: Pain management is especially im-
enzymatic dental chews, and
portant when dealing with dental extractions. Pain con-
diets and biscuits.
96
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind theDiseases
Figure 9.17. Clinical signs of swollen inflamed gums, pus and
Figure 9.18.1
 Image of red swollen gums bleeding when the gum
debris around the teeth, receding gums, and potential pockets
line is probed. This indicates gingivitis and a periodontal pocket.
under the gum line all suggest periodontal disease is present in
(Reprinted by permission of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid
these upper premolars in a dog. (Reprinted by permission of Curt
Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az
Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral,
85250.)
Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
 swollen gums,
Periodontal Disease
 bad breath (halitosis),
 anorexia or decreased appetite, and
Periodontal disease is a process that causes destruction of
salivation.
suodns asau aan au punoe sans suodns a
structures include the gums (gingiva), the bone that forms
Common Points on Initial Assessment
the tooth socket (alveolar bone), and the connective tissue
Visible calculus on the teeth
that attaches the tooth into the tooth socket (periodontal lig-
Bad breath (halitosis)
ament). In people, periodontal disease is often called gum
Swollen gums
disease.
Bleeding from the gums
 Teeth that appear loose
Etiology
 Pus and debris around the teeth
 The primary cause of periodontal disease is bacteria. As
plaque and calculus build on the teeth, it forms an ideal en-
Complic ations
vironment in which disease-causing bacteria multiply. These
In advanced cases periodontal disease can weaken the gum
bacteria gradually invade the gums and other supporting tis-
tissue and bones surrounding the teeth, leading to recession
sue around the teeth. When the bacteria invade below the
of the gums, bone loss, and eventually tooth loss.
gum line, they cause infection and inflammation leading to
the destruction of the periodontal tissues (see Figure 9.17).
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of periodontal disease is based on the presence of
Common Signalment
the clinical signs listed above and the diagnostics discussed
All breeds of dogs and cats can develop periodontal disease.
next.
 Many of the smaller breeds of dogs may be predisposed due
to crowding and malocclusion of the teeth. Some purebred
Radiographs
cats also seem to be more commonly affected.
Dental x-rays are essential in determining the extent of peri-
odontal disease once it progresses below the gum line.
Common Points in History
 Dental x-rays will show destruction of the supporting bone
 In the early stages of the disease the pet may show no signs
around the teeth in areas of moderate to severe periodontal
other than mild redness of the gums. As the disease pro-
disease (see Figure 9.19).
a saa aan an o sno go dnq an sassa
visible. Pet owners may describe symptoms of:
Periodontal Probing
 oral pain,
A special instrument called a periodontal probe is used to
- bleeding from the gums (see Figure 9.18),
Chapter 9: Teeth and the Oral Cavity
6
reabsor
ption
Figure 9.19.  A dental x-ray shows advanced periodontal disease
Jo uissuad Aq paudey) sop e u neou isy iamol su punone 
Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E.
Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
tal pockets and areas of gum loss around the teeth (see
Figure 9.20. Periodontal probe with a graduated tip for measur-
Figure 9.20).
ing periodontal pockets. (Reprinted by permission of Curt
Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral,
Treatment of Periodontal Disease
Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
 Dental cleaning: Early stages of periodontal disease 
need thorough, professional teeth cleaning above and
below the gum line.
How to Discuss Periodontal Disease with the Client
 Periodontal disease is a disease of the gums and other
tissues surrounding the teeth. Studies have shown
that over two-thirds of dogs and cats over 2 years of
age have some level of periodontal disease.
 If untreated, periodontal disease will lead to painful,
 bleeding gums, chronic infection, and tooth loss.
 Common breeds affected are small and miniature
breed dogs and purebred cats.
 Periodontal disease can be prevented by keeping the
pet's teeth clean. Although home tooth brushing,
dental chews, and dry food are very important, pro-
 fessional teeth cleaning while the pet is under anes-
thesia is the only way to ensure all surfaces of the
Figure 9.21. Perioceutic treatment of a periodontal pocket in a
tooth are cleaned.
dog. (Reprinted by permission of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD,
Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az
Clinical Diagnostics
85250.)
 Periodontal probing and dental x-rays are necessary to
 determine of the extent of periodontal disease.
Prevention
● Medications: Perioceutic antibiotics are used for treat-
Good dental hygiene to prevent plaque and calculus
ment of periodontal pockets (see Figure 9.21). Oral an-
buildup is the goal for prevention of periodontal disease.
 tibiotics are often prescribed after professional cleaning
 Daily tooth brushing at home, as well as regular pro-
with moderate to severe dental periodontal disease.
fessional teeth cleaning at the veterinary hospital are
 s s   o ad  n a
necessary.
daily tooth brushing and oral rinsing to prevent recur-
rence of the disease.
86
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind theDiseases
● Prevention: Good dental hygiene and home tooth brush-
ing will help prevent periodontal disease. Even pets with
no established periodontal disease need their plaque and
calculus removed by professional prophylaxis to prevent
the onset of periodontal disease.
Retained Deciduous Teeth in the Young
Animal
Dogs and cats can begin to lose baby (deciduous) teeth at
3-4 months of age and should lose all remaining baby teeth
by 6-8 months of age. In some pets, baby teeth can take
longer than 8 months to fall out. Retained teeth can cause
malocclusions, periodontal disease of the gums, and trauma
accelerated plaque formation on surrounding teeth as well as
be painful or irritating to the gums. If deciduous baby teeth
are present in the pet's mouth once the adult teeth begin to
 erupt, they should be removed surgically (extracted).
Retained baby teeth are a developmental problem caused
by improper alignment of jaws or teeth that produces crowd-
ing and malocclusions, leading to periodontal disease and
pain.
Common Signalment
Retained teeth are more common in smaller breeds of dogs
(i.e., pugs, Lhasa apsos, poodles, etc.). They are less com-
mon in large breed dogs and cats.
Common Points in History
These pets may have no physical complaints or symptoms
of the retained teeth. Occasionally, pets may show dental
Figure 9.22. Image of retained canine tooth on the side of
pain or sensitivity if the deciduous teeth are cutting into the
mouth (a). Image of retained tooth removed (b). (Reprinted by
gums.
permission of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic,
7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
Common Points on Physical Exam
●Presence of a deciduous tooth once the adult tooth has al-
ready erupted
 Increased plaque and calculus on adult teeth
Treatment
Halitosis (due to calculus buildup)
With the pet under general anesthesia, the deciduous teeth
Irritated red gums
are extracted (see Figure 9.22).
● Indents or holes in gums and jaw secondary to misplaced
teeth
Prevention
●Malocclusions
There is no way to prevent retained baby teeth. Treatment is
indicated as soon as the problem develops.
Complications
If the retained teeth are not removed at a young age, they can
Carnassial Tooth Root Abscess
increase dental calculus formation on the adult teeth. They
 also will cause malocclusion of the adult teeth, leading to in-
 a s is rmn u sd n rn a
creased dental wear and continued oral pain.
largest teeth in an animal's mouth and are called carnassial
teeth. Each tooth has two to three roots and can become se-
Diagnosis
verely infected if injured, broken, or affected with advanced
 The presence of baby teeth in a pet's mouth at the same time
periodontal disease. The upper carnassial teeth have tooth
as the counterpart adult tooth indicates the abnormality.
roots close to a large sinus, called the maxillary sinus.
Chapter 9: Teeth and the Oral Cavity
99
Common Points in Initial Assessment
Discussing Retained Deciduous Teeth with the
When the pet develops a severe infection of these roots, the
Client
sinus also becomes infected and fills with pus and debris,
●Retained deciduous teeth occur in pets with over-
causing the following signs.
 bites, underbites, and poor teeth alignment in which
the baby teeth are not in a normal position to be
 Focal facial swelling around eye and cheek area
pushed out when the adult teeth erupt.
 A swelling with an area of purulent (pus) drainage
 Retained deciduous teeth frequently occur in small
Salivating
     n
Bad odor present
are more common (i.e. pugs, Lhasa apsos, teacup
 Pain on palpation of tooth or side of the face
poodles).
 Obvious fracture of the fourth premolar or first molar
 Without proper care and treatment, these baby teeth
can cause dental pain, irritation of the gums, and ac-
celerate the formation of dental calculus and peri-
Complications
Without proper treatment and care, root abscess can produce
odontal disease.
The presence of a baby tooth in the mouth at the
chronic nasal and sinus infection, dental pain, and chronic
same time as the adult counterpart tooth is abnormal
periodontal disease. These complications can cause ano-
and treatment is recommended.
rexia, weight loss, and other organ diseases.
 Treatment is focused on removal (extraction) of the
baby teeth under anesthesia.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of a carmassial tooth root infection is based on phy-
sical signs, diagnostic blood work, and dental radiographs.
Etiology
Treatment
 The large camassial teeth can be injured as the pet chews on
 Professional dental prophylaxis: A thorough dental
bones, rocks, or other hard materials. If the tooth is cracked
 cleaning and oral examination are performed to remove
or fractured, bacteria from the mouth may invade inside the
the calculus, polish the teeth, and explore the oral cavity
tooth, causing infection leading to a root abscess. A root ab-
for evidence of infection or disease.
scess can also be caused by advanced periodontal disease
around the tooth. The infection can progress from the root to
 the maxillary sinus, causing a swelling or open sore below
the eye.
How to Discuss Carnassial Tooth Root Abscess with
Common Signalment
the Client
Carmassial tooth root abcessation can occur in any feline or
 Carmassial tooth root infection is an infection of the
   p     
root of the large premolar or molar teeth of the cat or
ken, fractured teeth.
·sop
 The large teeth roots are closely associated with the
Common Points on Medical History
nasal passage and sinuses.
As with general dental disease, the pet will show a com-
Chronic infection from dental disease produces a
mon history of dental pain and infections, including these
focal swelling and draining tract above the upper pre-
symptoms.
molar or below the lower tooth and produces chronic
swelling and purulent discharge.
Halitosis
 Diagnosis of a camassial tooth abscess depends on
 Chronic nasal discharge
 the history and physical signs, as well as blood work
Change in appetite (not eating dry food as well as/or only
 and dental x-rays (see above discussion on diag-
wet food)
nostics).
Complete anorexia
Proper dental prevention, such as brushing the teeth,
Chronic weight loss
oral rinses, and special diets or treats can help reduce
Chronic vomiting
 dental plaque and calculus. This can aid in the reduc-
Eating abnormally, such as
tion of periodontal disease. Avoiding hard bones,
rolling food to other side of mouth,
chews, or toys that can cause tooth injury will pre-
excessive salivation while eating, and
vent fractures of the teeth.
wincing while eating.
100
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
-The Science behind the Diseases
● Dental extraction: In some cases, due to severe root ab-
Diagnosis
scesses and damage to the tooth, the veterinarian may
Diagnosis is based on the presence of excessive gum tissue,
recommend extraction of the affected tooth.
 gingival mass, or swelling of the gums and the following
● Root canal and crown: Another option is to remove
further diagnostics.
the nerves and infected pulp from the affected tooth
s  p n l  d q
●Radiographs: Both dental and skull x-rays aid in deter-
ation.
mining if teeth are affected and if any of the surrounding
● Antibiotics and pain medications: Long-term antibi-
bone is also showing changes.
otics are indicated to help resolve the infection. Pain
Biopsy: Depending on the size and location of the gingi-
medication is needed to reduce pain or sensitivity after
val mass or gingival swelling, your veterinarian may sug-
the oral surgical care.
gest attaining a biopsy to diagnose the disease.
Treatment
Gingival Hyperplasia
Initially, if the pet is on any drugs that may make them pre-
 Gingival hyperplasia refers to excessive growth or enlarge-
a pnous uona au 'asas go adsi s mn pasods
 discontinued. Surgery is then generally elected to remove
ments of the pet's gums (gingiva). The size of the growth
aa sisouip p Asdon ng ss no 1anua aissaxa a
 0 a    a m l q 
 Figure 9.23). Repeat procedures may need to be perforrmed
and/or solid. There can be single or multiple masses.
because gingival hyperplasia often reoccurs.
Etiology
Prevention
The exact cause of the disease is unknown. The surrounding
Good dental hygiene to reduce dental infection may help
teeth usually have plaque and calculus buildup. Although the
prevent gingival hyperplasia.
 gums do not have to be inflamed, inflammation is typically
associated with chronic dental disease.
How to Discuss Gingival Hyperplasia with the
Com mon Signalment
Client
 Gingival hyperplasia is a redundancy or overgrowth
There is a predisposition shown in the boxer and possibly the
of the gums typically associated with chronic dental
great Dane, collie, Doberman pinscher, and Dalmatian. It
disease.
 has been shown in association with administration of primi-
 Although typical masses of gingival hyperplasia are
 done and cyclosporine.
benign, these regions can enlarge, leading to peri-
 odontal disease, and can become focally destructive
Common Points on Medical History
 to the surrounding teeth and underlying bone.
Often the pet will show no signs, but lesions are seen either
 Common breeds affected are the boxer, great Dane,
on the preanesthetic exam or during the oral exam while the
collie, Doberman pinscher, and Dalmatian.
pet is under anesthesia. However, symptoms can occur if the 
Also, pets that have been on primidone or cyclo-
pet bites down on the swollen tissue, producing
sporine (Atopica) may be prone to the disease.
 Diagnosis of gingival hyperplasia is based on physi-
 oral pain,
cal presence of excessive gingiva or gingival mass,
bleeding from the mouth,
dental radiographs, and biopsy of the growth.
halitosis,
Good dental hygiene to prevent chronic dental in-
 anorexia, and
fection can help slow the recurrence of gingival hy-
salivation.
perplasia.
Common Points in Physical Exam
Bad breath
Root Canal Treatment and Crown Restoration
 Presence of an enlarging gum or masses around the teeth
In cases where a large tooth, such as a canine, large molar,
Bleeding from the gums
 Or premolar tooth, is infected or damaged the medical team
●Teeth that appear loose around the mass area
may suggest a root canal and a crown restoration.
This endodontic procedure performed by veterinarians
Complications
with advanced training in dentistry can be less traumatic and
 Gingival hyperplasia can lead to periodontal disease weak-
invasive than extraction and maintains a functional nonpainful
ening tissue surrounding the teeth. This can cause recession
tooth. The procedure involves removing the sensitive part of
of the gums, bone loss, and ultimately tooth loss.
the tooth (pulp) from the center of the tooth (root canal).
Chapter 9: Teeth and the Oral Cavity
101
Figure 9.24.  A broken canine is opened using a dental drill to
remove the diseased pulp. (Reprinted by permission of Curt
Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral,
Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
 Figure 9.23. Gingival hyperplasia in a dog (a). Image of the
same gums after treatment (b). (Reprinted by permission of Curt
Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral,
Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
The root canal procedure involves several steps.
 The root canal is opened and the nerve (pulp) is removed.
(see Figure 9.24).
 The tooth is disinfected, dried, and a filling material is
applied to seal the inside of the root canal (see Figure
9.25).
 The tooth surface is then restored with a hard dental fill-
ing material (see Figure 9.26).
 In some cases a metal crown is placed to further protect
the tooth (see Figure 9.27).
Figure 9.25. A filling material called gutta percha is added to
seal the disinfected canal (a).
102
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Discussing Root Canal Treatment with the Client
When dealing with larger infected or broken teeth,
such as a canine or larger molar or premolar, there
 p   so   
the tooth.
Just as in humans, the root canal can be treated
and the nerve (pulp) removed to block pain and
sensitivity.
 Once completed, a crown can be placed over the
 tooth to maintain dental strength and prevent further
breakage.
 After a crown is in place, the tooth must be moni-
 tored and cleaned regularly to ensure the long-term
success of the root canal and crown restoration.
Figure 9.26.  This tooth has been restored with a tooth-colored
dental composite filling. (Reprinted by permission of Curt
Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral,
Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
 Figure 9.27. Image of the metal crown over the canal-treated
tooth. (Reprinted by permission of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD,
Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E. Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az
85250.)
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
Figure 9.25.  (continued) A radiograph is taken to visualize the
Please try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology—
pulp cavity and prepped root canal (b). (Reprinted by permission
The Science behind the Diseases) to help reinforce the infor-
of Curt Coffman, DVM ACVD, Aid Animal Clinic, 7908 E.
mation presented here.
Chapparral, Suite 108, Scottsdale, Az 85250.)
Chapter 10
Gastrointestinal System
Introduction
ple, small-unit sugars. To do this, the animal relies on its
teeth to break down the large foodstuffs into smaller units
As discussed in the last chapter, the gastrointestinal system
where the intestinal system can facilitate digestion. Also, the
is a specialized tube running from the animal's mouth to its
mouth secretes saliva to help emulsify food into a liquid so-
rectum. The main functions of this system are to break down
lution and contains chemicals (enzymes) to begin the break-
and absorb foodstuffs, reabsorb water to form well-formed
down process.
feces, and excrete toxins from the kidneys and liver. Closely
Once the food leaves the mouth (oral cavity), it enters
associated with the intestinal system are specific glands to
the esophagus (see Figure 10.1). The esophagus is a mus-
aid in absorption of nutrients and toxin removal.
i  an o  an  ss n a 
ynx) to the stomach. It is divided into three segments cover-
 The pancreas (Chapter 15) produces pancreatic enzymes
ing the neck (cervical region), the chest (thoracic region),
that facilitate the breakdown of foodstuffs. Enzymes such
and the stomach (abdominal region). The esophagus is a
as lipase, which breaks down fats, and amylase, which
thick, well-muscled section of striated muscle where the
aids in the breakdown of sugars, gain access to the small
lumen is closed by deep, lengthwise longitudinal folds that
intestine through a common tubular system, the pancre-
constrict and propel food into the stomach. The esophagus
atic duct and the accessory pancreatic duct, which
enters the stomach by a thick muscular sphincter called the
drains the pancreas and the liver.
cardiac sphincter, which prevents stomach acid and con-
The liver (Chapter 14) secretes toxins that are stored in
tents from flowing back into the esophagus.
the gallbladder and are then excreted into the intestines
  jo u  e si s 
through the common bile duct.
tract between the esophagus and small intestine. It lies be-
tween the diaphragm and liver on the left side of the ab-
The intestinal tract is innervated by a complex nervous
domen (see Figure 10.2). The stomach produces hydrochlo-
system. This organization of intestinal muscles and nerves is
ric acid (HCl), which helps to break up food's chemical
as complicated as the central nervous system and is respon-
- nn ausan ns an on sassd uaun pog aui 'suo
sible for complex movements of food through the intestinal
ther digestion. The stomach also produces other enzymes,
   s o   s  
which further break down foodstuffs into smaller molecules.
muscle wall helps propel and churm the food by a process
Overall, the stomach has limited absorptive abilities, but
called peristalsis.
rather moves food into the small intestine for absorption.
Food leaves the stomach through a thick muscular sphincter
called the pyloric sphincter.
Anatomy of the Gastrointestinal System
 The small intestine is a tube that connects the stomach to
The gastrointestinal system is broken down into common re-
the cecum and large intestine. It consists of three parts: the
gions: mouth, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and large
duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. The duodenum is
intestine. Each region has its own specific anatomy, func-
a short S-shaped tube leaving the stomach from the pylorus.
tion, and disease processes. It is important to gain under-
It contains the opening of the common bile duct, and pancre-
 standing of the unique anatomy and physiology of each re-
atic ducts empty into this region, bringing digestive en
gion to better understand the diseases that can affect each
zymes from the pancreas and waste from the liver (see
area.
Figure 10.2). The jejunum makes up about 90% of the total
As discussed in Chapter 9, the mouth (buccal cavity),
length of the small intestine and serves as a major site of ab-
teeth, and the salivary glands are the beginning of the di-
 sorption. Its intermal lining (mucosa) has many repeating
gestive process. The overall function of the mouth and early
 a     a e s s
digestive tract is to break down food into smaller molecules
amount of nutrients the jejunum can absorb. Finally, the
ileum is a shortened section of intestines that runs from the
into smaller amino acid chains, fats are broken down into
jejunum to the large intestine (colon and cecum). The ileum
triglycerides, and complex sugars are broken down into sim-
has limited absorptive ability but can serve as a site of bac-
103
104
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Esophagus
Trachea
Figure 10.1. Image of the esophagus as it moves from the back of the mouth, through the neck, and into the chest, where it meets the
stomach in the cranial abdomen.
ileum and large colon and is virtually inactive in the small
animal (with exception is the rabbit).
The cecum then enters into the colon or large intestine.
The large intestine is broken into the ascending loop, the
transverse loop, and the descending loop. Overall, it func-
tions to absorb water from the remaining ingesta to produce
Splee
well-formed fecal material. This function helps prevent de-
hydration. The large intestine also can serve as a site of lim-
R
ited microbial fermentation, producing the B vitamins and
vitamin C.
Obtaining a History for Gastrointestinal
Disease
The goal of obtaining a history and performing a physical
examination is to determine the location of the intestinal dis-
ease and choose proper diagnostic tools to aid in diagnosis.
Figure 10.2. Normal anatomy of the liver, stomach, spleen, and 
 There are many diseases that secondarily affect the intes-
pancreas. The gallbladder empties its toxins and the pancreas
tines causing vomiting and diarrhea (e.g., kidney disease,
empties its digestive enzymes through a common small duct, the
liver disease, diabetes, etc.) However, this chapter is con-
common bile duct, which empties into the duodenum.
 the gastrointestinal system. Due to the complexity of the
types of gastrointestinal disease, it becomes extremely im-
terial fermentation. The entire intestinal system is suspended
 portant to get a detailed history from the client. Guidelines
from the top of the abdomen by a sheet of connective tissue
for obtaining an accurate history are discussed next.
called the mesentery (see Figure 10.3).
 The ileum empties into a small vestigial region of the in-
What is the Duration of the Mlness?
testines called the cecum, which is closely related to the
 Acute onset of severe disease suggests animals are suddenly
human appendix. It is a blind sack situated between the
 affected by an infectious, obstructive, or metabolic disease
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
105
these diets can produce serious health issues. Understanding
the goal of the diet and the health concerns of the pet are key
to making sure the pet is on the correct prescription.
 Forms of diet can be dry, canned, or semimoist.
Canned and semimoist diets are highly palatable and eas.
ily digestible. These types of diets are high in carbohy-
drates and can accelerate dental disease and obesity issues.
A dry diet is better for oral and dental health, overall. On
occasion, in smaller pets, larger chunks of dry food can
become obstructive to the oral cavity or esophagus.
Sudden changes in diet, even from one similar type of
food to another, can produce serious gastrointestinal dis-
Figure 10.3. Normal intestinal anatomy. (Courtesy of Anatomy
ease: vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, and flatulence.
of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini,
Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used with permis-
Does Your Pet Get Human Food or Table Scraps and If
sion from Sudz Publishing.)
So, What?
It is very important to ask, specifically, how much and how
often human food is available to the pet. Clients vary dra-
that produces a wide progression of vomiting, diarrhea, or
matically on what they feel is reasonable for their pet (i.e., a
anorexia. Although the pet can be severally dehydrated and
teaspoon of ice milk once in a while versus splitting a half-
sick, most of these pets do not show chronic signs of weight
gallon of banana ice cream with their pet).
and muscle loss, emaciation, or wasting.
 In a chronic disease state animals can have a long-time
Did the Animal Get into the Trash?
history of vomiting, diarrhea, and decreased appetite to peri-
Many animals have access to trash and debris. Exposure to
ods of anorexia. Chronic disease can also be produced from
trash, bones, and other debris can lead to serious gastroin-
long-term inflammatory, metabolic, or neoplastic disease of
testinal and pancreatic disease. Furthermore, if the pet does
the intestinal system. Due to the length of illness, these pets
get into the trash, is it a kitchen trash, bathroom trash, or
usually have history of weight loss and emaciation.
trash from another room? Kitchen trash can contain food re-
 mains, wrappers, and other consumables; bathroom trash
What Is the Pet's Diet or Has There Been a Sudden
may contain medication, razors, and other dangerous goods.
Change in Diet?
Many gastrointestinal upsets can start with sudden changes
Has the Pet Been Given a Bone or Had Exposure to
in diet or improper diets; therefore, it is important to get a
Bones?
full understanding of exactly what the pet is eating. Some
 Pets with exposure to bones can have severe irritation to the
guideline questions follow.
intestines, possible obstruction, or even perforation from the
sharp edges.
What Brand, Type, and Form of Diet Is Fed?
 r   n     
Does the Pet Eat Unusual Things?
they recommend. Whether it is IVD, Iams/Eukanuba, Hills,
Animals that eat abnormal things can easily become ob-
etc., is not the overall concerm. However, clients who switch
structed. Some common materials causing obstructions are
from one brand to another of the same type of diet (i.e.,
adult, puppy) may randomly produce gastrointestinal signs
toys,
 due to the difference in the dietary components.
shoes,
Diet types can be puppy, adult, senior, or hypoallergenic
strings/tinsel/yarm (especially cats),
diets. Some diseases can occur or be made worse when the
balls,
pet is being fed the wrong type of diet for its life stage or
underwear/stockings,
medical condition.
baby nipples,
For example, some clients may bring a pet in for chronic
com cobs, and
weight loss. When questioning the client, they inform the
● foam packing material.
team member that the pet is on a weight-reducing diet be-
cause another pet in the household has chronic obesity is-
Are There Any Poisons or Plants That the Pet Could
sues. This pet is on the wrong type of diet.
Get Into?
Some prescription diets for health conditions are only
Many clients do not understand that many plants and med
meant for short-term administration. Over months to years,
ications that are commonly available in a household may be
106
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
severely toxic to animals. Being as specific as possible with
the client helps the client understand what type of toxic
agents may be of concern.
Poisons
 d  ss   
signs; some are
antifreeze,
cleaners,
fertilizer,
rat poison,
gopher bait, and
snail bait.
Medications
 There are many over-the-counter and prescription medi-
Figure 10.4. Radiographic image of a dilated megaesophagus
cations that owners give their pet that may produce severe
 above the trachea and heart; this animal would present regurgi-
gastrointestinal signs, especially in the cat. Some of these
tating, not vomiting.
drugs are
aspirin,
● It is a passive process, where the animal simply opens the
 acetaminophen (i.e., Tylenol),
mouth and the food comes out with abdominal contraction.
ibuprofen,
 Regurgitation suggests esophageal disease, not stom-
naproxen, and
ach or intestinal disease.
prednisone.
 Typically, regurgitation is a sign of a pathologically
dilated esophagus (megaesophagus) that is unable to
Plants
contract to push food down into the stomach (see Figure
Almost all plants can produce gastrointestinal signs; how-
10.4).
ever, some plants with some more serious side effects
 Megaesophagus can be secondary to chronic gastroin-
include
testinal disease or other systemic diseases.
 With chronic megaesophagus, food lies in the esophagus
 mushrooms,
for hours until the pet opens its mouth and the food
oleander,
+
comes out.
 poinsettia, and
 Many affected pets can have severe secondary aspiration
●dieffenbachia.
pneumonia, because food particles can enter the trachea
and lung fields as the pet regurgitates.
Is There Pain When Eating?
As discussed in Chapter 9, pain or sensitivity while eating
Vomiting
 can suggest dental or oral disease. Some questions to help
Unlike regurgitation, vomiting is an active contracture of the
determine oral pain or sensitivity are as follows:
 abdomen and stomach producing a violent forceful return of
food. When determining if there is vomiting, the following
 Does the pet roll the food in its mouth?
guidelines are also important to document.
 Is there excessive drooling when eating?
● Is there facial swelling?
●How many times per day is the pet vomiting? As a gen-
● Is there trouble swallowing?
eral rule, animals that vomit multiple times per day (more
●Did the patient stop eating dry food and is now eating
than five times) can suggest severe disease. Repeated
only canned food?
multiple vomiting can quickly overwhelm a patient and
produce dehydration.
Is the Pet Regurgitating or Vomiting?
 Is the vomiting associated with eating or drinking?
This is one of the most important questions when beginning
When animals vomit spontaneously without an assoc-
a medical case.
iation of food and water, it can suggest a severe gastro-
intestinal (i.e., intestinal foreign body/obstruction) or
Regurgitation
metabolic disease. These pets have a severely inflamed
+
 Regurgitation is the mechanical process of food being
intestinal tract that continues the vomiting reflex without
brought back up that has remained in the esophagus.
oral stim ulation.
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
107
Tabfe I0.1.
 Comparing small vs. large bowel disease.
Table 10.2. Triage concerns in the gastrointestinal patient.
Signs
Small Intestine
Large Intestine
Sy stems
Signs Indicating an Emergency
Consistency
Cow patty to liquid
Liquid or squishy
Mentation
 Depressed or lethargic animals that are
Force
Nonstraining
 Straining
mildly to nonresponsive
Amount
Increased
 Normal to decreased
Fever
Temp >104.5° or <99.5° Fahrenheit
Blood
Black/tarry
Fresh
Hydration
Dehydration >5-7%
Mucus
No
Yes
Gum color
Pale pink 
White
Yellow
Red
Blue or gray
●  Is any blood present in the vomit? The evidence of
Capillary refill time (CRT)
CRT >2-3 seconds
Abdominal pain
Any animal that vocalizes, winces or
 blood suggests moderate inflammation and ulceration of
 becomes aggressive when the
the stomach and intestinal mucosa. Blood in the vomit
abdomen is lightly palpated 
 can suggest a more serious intestinal disease.
 Is any foreign debris present in the vomit? Evidence of
foreign material in the vomit can suggest the cause of the
Mucus
irritation and symptoms.
●Straining
Is Diarrhea Evident and If So, What Type?
Although large bowel diarrhea can be seen chronically, an
When assessing gastrointestinal disease with diarrhea, it be-
inflammation of the large bowel (colitis) is typically associ-
comes imperative to differentiate large bowel and small
ated with an acute inflammatory change brought on by gas-
bowel disease, since diagnostic tests and treatment can be
trointestinal or systemic disease.
dramatically different. The nature and consistency of the di-
o s     a s nn  
Is Coughing, Sneezing, Increased Thirst, or Increased
 g       o 
Urination Evident?
the small or large bowel, it is important to document what
 Coughing, sneezing, increased thirst, and increased urina-
the main type of diarrhea seen is (see Table 10.1).
tion can suggest infectious disease or other system disease
that produces secondary gastrointestinal signs.
Small Bowel Diarrhea
 As stated previously, the small intestine's main function is to
What Is the Vaccination Status of the Pet?
digest and absorb nutrients. When the small intestine is un-
Young pets with no to limited vaccination history are more
able to complete this task, the following symptoms are
 prone to parvovirus infections.
noted:
Observations on Initial Assessment
Soft cow patty diarrhea to liquid
Increased odor
The main goal of the initial assessment is to ascertain if the
 Black or tarlike feces suggesting digested blood
-je si jad aun Aisnouas mou pue sneis Aouasiaua ue ui s lad
Ravenous appetite
fected (see Table 10.2). The basic tenets of the initial assess-
Weight loss
ment for the gastrointestinal system are discussed next.
Normal to increased amounts of feces
Mentation
Small bowel diarrhea can be associated with chronic dis-
 The less responsive the dog, the more potentially serious and
ease of the pancreas or small intestine. These pets usually
life threatening is the case. Animals with depression, stupor,
present as bright, alert, and responsive, but eat ravenously
or coma should be evaluated immediately by the medical
and can be very thin to emaciated because of their inability
team.
 to digest food normally.
Temperature
Large Bowel Diarrhea
pue asneo yoq isasans ueo ainqeiaduat Apoq ui saauu
The large bowel's primary function is to reabsorb water from
severity of the underlying disease.
the ingesta to produce well-formed stool. When the colon is
not functioning properly, the following symptoms are noted:
● A fever (hyperthermia) can suggest infection or inflam-
mation resulting from massive whole-body infections (sep-
Liquid
sis) caused by parvovirus infection, ruptured intestines, and
●Fresh/frank blood
ingestion of toxins and poisons, and other causes.
108
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
●  Low body temperature (hypothermia) can be an even
Fecal Smear
greater concerm, because the animal is unable to fully
A small amount of feces is mixed with saline on a micro-
maintain its metabolic process to keep body temperature
 scope slide and a coverslip is applied (see Chapter 23.). The
normal. In this case, hypothermia can be caused by
fecal material is examined for specific protozoa (i.e., giar-
 shock or massive infection,
dia) and other microscopic single-cell parasites that can be
- massive dehydration, and
seen only in the wet saline preparation.
 metabolic disease, such kidney disease, liver disease,
diabetes.
Fecal Cytology
 The feces are spread on a slide and heat fixed (see Chapter
Dehydration
23). The slide is then stained with Wright-Giemsa or Gram
With gastrointestinal disease, dehydration can be an im-
stain preparation. The feces are then examined for abnormal
portant indicator of serious pathology. Animals that have
bacteria and white blood cells that could suggest infection or
significant gastrointestinal acute losses can become life-
disease.
threateningly dehydrated in a few hours.
Fecal Culture
All animals with moderate diarrhea/vomiting are as-
Occasionally, the medical team will obtain multiple fe-
sumed to be at least 3-5% dehydrated.
 cal samples to culture for fecal bacterial pathogens (e.g.
● Most dehydrated animals do not adequately eat and drink
salmonella, campylobacter, etc.) that can cause bacterial
secondary to depression. With persistent vomiting and
enteritis.
diarrhea, these animals can become life-threateningly
dehydrated.
Enzyme-Linked Immunoassay Tests
Enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) tests allow the feces
Gum Color/Capillary Refill Time
to be checked for the presence of surface molecules (anti-
With severe dehydration from gastrointestinal losses, capil-
 gens) on specific pathogens that are being shed within the
lary refill time (CRT) could be prolonged and may suggest 
feces. The meaning of the results follow.
serious underlying disease. CRTs of more than 2-3 sec onds
should be reported to the medical team immediately.
●A positive result suggests that the pet has been exposed
to and is currently infected with the infectious agent.
Abdominal Pain/Palpation
 A negative test does not rule out the infection, because
 Increased abdominal tendermess can suggest severe abdom-
 the pet may not have enough antigen of the infectious
inal disease. If the abdomen is extremely painful, the med-
agent to produce a positive test.
ical team should be notified, and the patient should be eval-
Multiple ELISA tests may be necessary to confirm an
uated quickly by the veterinarian.
infection.
Clinical Diagnostics of the Gastrointestinal
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a Fecal
System
Exam with the Client
 Diagnostic tests depend on the history, physical signs the pet.
● If a pet is coming in for a diarrhea or gastrointesti-
 presents with, and the physical examination findings. Not all
nal problem, recommend they bring in a fresh fecal
clinical tests are indicated with each case.
sample (less than 2 hours old).
 Fecal exams are generally recormmended to detect
Getting a Fecal Sample and Doing a Fecal Examination
parasites and other abnormalities in the feces.
Any time there is a diarrheal condition, taking a fecal
 There are several different types of fecal diagnostic
sample is strongly recommended. There are many ways of
tests that aid the veterinarian in detecting intestinal
doing a fecal examination. The most common are discussed
parasites or infection.
 Some animals may need repeated fecal exams to
here.
allow proper detection of the parasite or problem
Fecal Floatation
since some infections can be chronic and evident
One of the most common fecal screenings done allows the
only in low numbers in the intestinal tract.
( nd aas) sa anisd g paxa a m sa
When checking a fecal ELISA test, a negative re-
sult does not always rule out the possibility of the
●The feces are placed in a tube with a very dense liquid
disease. ELISA tests help to confirm the disease,
(i.e., with zinc sulfate) solution and mixed thoroughly and
but at times the pet may not be shedding sufficient
allowed to sit for 15 minutes.
 antibody levels against the infectious agent to turn
 Any intestinal parasite eggs will float to the top of the so-
the test positive.
lution and be trapped on a coverslip.
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
109
● It is important to understand the lack of advancement of
the barium is not always suggestive of an obstruction.
With some severe intestinal disease, the normal peri-
staltic moverment of the intestine is interrupted (ileus).
In some cases, severe ileus prevents normal flow of
the barium through the intestines, making it appear as
if there is a foreign body present.
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a
Radiographic Evaluation with the Client
A radiograph study is being recommended
● to address concerms regarding abdominal tendermess;
to appreciate the region of the abdomen behind the
rib cage that cannot be effectively palpated by the
Figure 10.5. X-ray of the stomach and small intestines filled
veterinarian for any changes suggestive of obstruc-
with a radio-dense foreign material (rocks)
tion or abdominal disease; and
to appreciate changes to organs and the abdomen
(i.e., stones, areas of enlargement, masses, fluid,
ELISA tests are now available to check for the presence of
etc.) that cannot be evaluated without a radi-
ographic image.
giardia,
Clostridium perfringens,
Radio-dense material such as stones, bones, and metal
cryptosporidium, and
will be visualized in the intestines. There are certain
 par vovir us.
materials and items that will not show up on a plain
film x-ray. Items such as cloth, plastic, wood, and other
Radiographs
non-dense items may not be seen. However, the veteri-
Radiographs are a key diagnostic tool of gastrointestinal dis-
narian is also examining for changes in the intestinal
        
pattern, that could suggest a soft tissue obstruction.
studies that aid in assessment of the abdomen.
 If your pet still is vomiting and a plain film radi-
ograph does not conclusively show an obstruction, a
Study I: Plain Film Radiograph
barium series (an upper gastrointestinal test) may be
 The plain abdominal radiograph will help detect the follow-
needed.
ing (see Figure 10.5):
 Barium is administered to the pet orally or by stom-
 Radio-dense foreign body (rock, metal)
Aq uonnso jo ansans saunu an  u
ach tube.
 Barium is an opaque radio-dense liquid that will
non-radio-dense material (i.e., clothing, plastic, wood)
accentuate the stomach and intestines and allow the
Abdominal masses
veterinarian to evaluate the barium's flow through
+
Organ enlargement
the intestines over time.
 Other abnormalities
If the barium fails to move through the intestines in
a set amount of time, or if there are areas that con-
Study H: The Upper Gastrointestinal Radiographic Series
tinue to have uptake from the barium, it could be
 a e si saas eon psaons radn a
 agnostic test that allows the intestines to be evaluated for an
suggestive of a mass or obstruction.
obstruction, mass, or ulceration that would not show up on a
normal radiograph.
Ultrasound Examination
 Initially, after the two plain abdominal films are taken,
An abdominal ultrasound can aid in the detection of abnor-
the animal is administered barium, a radio-dense liquid
malities within the intestines or the accumulation of abdom-
that will show up on radiographs (see Figure 10.6).
inal fluid that could be suggestive of a intestinal perforation
 Radiographs are taken over the next 0-8 hours at regular
(see Chapter 25; see also Figure 10.7).
intervals, and the flow of barium is monitored through
the intestinal tract.
Endoscopy
 If the barium gets to a specific location and stops, an ob-
Under anesthesia, a fiber-optic camera can be passed into
str uction or mass may be suggested.
the stomach/early duodenum or large colon (see Chapter
110
Section2:Anatomy and Physiology—TheScience behind theDiseases
15
minutes
30 minutes
60 minutes
120 minutes
Figure I0.6.  Radiograph of an upper gastrointestinal study. Note how the barium accentuates the stomach and small intestines.
25). Images of these regions can then be produced and small
mation as a basis to discuss and educate the client, but
sections of masses or intestinal wall can be taken for biopsy.
never to diagnose a patient.
Abdominal Tap
Intestinal Parasites
The abdominal tap is performed when there is suspicion of
Intestinal parasites are responsible for significant disease
fluid in the abdomen. If there is an intestinal perforation, ab-
and death in animals. Parasites that live within the intestines
dominal fluid can be greenish brown with a fetid odor. On
are called endoparasites. Some common endoparasites are
microscopic examination, there can be the presence of de-
 generate white blood cells, bacteria, and food particles.
 protozoa: giardia, cryptosporidium;
cestodes: tapeworms;
 trematodes: flukes; and
Diseases of the Intestinal System
 nematodes.
Although not all diseases are mentioned below, the common
roundworms
 diseases are discussed, with the main goal being to under-
hookworms
stand and be able to explain to the client what the diseases
strongyles
are, how they can present themselves, and what can be the
whipworms
overall short- and long-term concerms of each disease. Any
discussion of overall diagnostic and treatment protocols 
Life Cycle
should be discussed based on the recommendations of the
Certain parasites can survive and reproduce in only  one
doctor and the medical team. Please use the following infor-
species (host specific), whereas others are capable of infect-
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
111
parasite is then introduced to the host by ingestion of the
vector or bite/sting of the vector to the primary host. For ex-
ample, tapeworms must mature in small fleas or rodents be-
fore becoming infectious to the dog or cat. The infected flea
paus oi suiaaq lad aun pue "jad aun Aq paisagui si juapo1 1o
SEER
tapeworms in their stool.
Expression of Disease
FLUIDL
The damage to the host from the infection is dependent
upon parasite load on the intestine, location of the parasite 
in the host, production of toxins from the parasite, and in-
terference with normal physiological processes within the
intestine.
 There are many animals with asymptomatic infec-
LKID
 tions of parasites. These pets are still shedding the parasite
and infecting the environment. Furthermore, these pets can
be more severely affected by other gastrointestinal disease if
a parasite is also involved.
Parasitic Infections
Hookworms (Ancylostoma caninum, Uncinaria steno-
cephala)
 Hookworms are a collection of nematode parasites that
  n s    
tentially severe anemia.
OB
Life Cycle
1. The hookworm is transmitted by ingestion of the parasite
SONOU
 or by skin penetration from a contaminated environment.
2. The eggs hatch in the environment and produce a small lar-
val parasite, which burrows into the skin or is swallowed.
3. The parasite then migrates through the body into the
LIUER
bloodstream and into the lung fields.
4. It then matures into adult and migrates up the bronchi
 and trachea, where it is coughed up and then swallowed.
5. Once in the intestinal tract, the parasite latches on to the
lining of the small intestine, absorbs the partially di-
 gested nutrients, and upsets the stable beneficial bacteria
Figure 10. 7. Ultrasound images allow the evaluation of the in--
in the gut.
ternal architecture of organs, thickness of intestines, and checking
6. As it feeds, it begins to shed eggs into the environment to
begin the entire cycle again.
for other abnormalities within the abdomen.
7. The parasite causes the pet to not absorb food properly
(malabsorption syndrome), and the hook worm's sharp,
 ing many species. The basic parasitic life cycle has multiple
pointed mouth piece attached to the intestine produces
life stages.
moderate to severe hemorrhagic disease.
sasud 1np  (91  Im) wog ll  sa ae sa
Etiology
→.
The cause of the disease is a collection of small microscopic
 The third larval form (Ls) is usually the infectious life
parasites (6-20 mm) from the genera Ancylostoma and
stage.
Uncinaria.
Most life cycles have a phase where they live in the envi-
ronment (environmental phase).
 The parasite is commonly found in dogs and cats and is
 more likely in young pups than adult dogs.
Vectors
 Kenneling situations increase the prevalence of the disease.
A vector is a third-party organism that carries the larval
 Pregnant animals can pass the infections to their young
 stage to allow proper maturation to its infectious state. The
through the placenta.
112
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Signalment
Canines and felines can have hookworm infection without
any age, sex, or breed predilection. Younger animals are
  s  s e   
may have chronic, more subtle disease.
Common Points in History
These animals can be severely depressed and weak with
 general complaints of:
vomiting,
diarrhea (usually with blood),
 anorexia, and
●dry cough.
Common Points in Initial Assessment
The parasite generally causes acute disease in young ani-
mals so severe it can mimic par voviral infection (see below)
In the older pet, hook worms can produce more chronic or in-
termittent signs. Common signs of hookworm infection are
●dark, tarry stools;
Figure 10.8.
 Image of the hookworm egg under high magni-
 pale gum color;
fication.
constipation;
●debilitation (secondary to diarrhea), especially in the
young or newborns;
decreased appetite;
dry cough;
 Blood products: In very young small pets, the blood loss
 severe bloody diarrhea with or without vomiting;
Jo uisnsn e abau A jad aun jun aaas os aq e
 severe anemia; and
aq aay nun sass aun adai diay m siond poo
+sudden death.
sustained.
Complications: Zoonotic Disease
Prevention
 In contaminated areas, this parasite can infect humans. The 
 Prevention is focused on routine fecal screening in adult and
larval form burrows through the skin, causing erosive paths
 young pets to detect hook worms in asymptomatic animals to
usually seen in the feet or legs (cutaneous larval migrans).
 prevent disease and contamination of the environment. Fur-
ther monthly heartworm preventatives (Heartguard Plus, In-
Diagnosis
terceptor) can also help to eliminate low-lying infection and
● Diagnosis of hook worm infections is based largely on the 
 prevent reinfection.
observation of the hookworm eggs in the feces (see
Figure 10.8).
Roundworms (Ascariasis)
   s as  s 
Roundworms are serious infections that cause moderate to
numbers of eggs present on the fecal floatation.
 severe gastrointestinal infection, especially in newborn pup-
● Because hookworms can produce a severe hemorrhagic
 pies and kittens.
diarrhea, the veterinarian may also suggest other diag-
nostics (i.e., parvoviral ELISA test) to make sure the pet
Life Cycle
isn't dealing with multiple infections.
1. The parasite is transmitted by ingestion of eggs from a
contaminated environment.
Treatment
 s e anpoid pue aunsaun ls aui u yey sa au1 7
The goal of treatment is to deworm the patient with medica-
larval parasite.
tions that will eradicate the adult worms and to provide sup-
 3. It then matures into a large adult, which decreases intes-
portive care, as follows:
tinal movement and utilization of food, causing diarrhea
and poor body condition.
●Fluid support: Due to severe fluid losses producing de-
 4. A pregnant animal can pass the infection to its off-
 jo g  a  sd s d
spring through the placenta, causing newborn ani-
therapy (i.e., intravenous fluids, subcutaneous fluids).
mals to be born with a preexisting infection.
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
113
poui go uons aun q passd aq ose ue sa a 's
rodents.
Etiology
The cause of the disease is a collection of a small micro-
scopic parasite from the Toxocara genus.
 The parasite is commonly found in dogs and cats and is
more likely in young pups than adult dogs.
 Kenneling situations increase the prevalence of the
disease.
 The larva can cross the placenta and infect embryonic
 pups and can be passed in milk as well.
Common Points of History
Toxocara infection can produce mild to moderate intestinal
disease. However, older animals can have mild to moderate
numbers of roundworms without evidence of an infection.
Common complaints are,
 anorexia,
bloating, and
 small amount of fecal production.
Figure 10.9.
 Image of the roundworm egg under high magni-
Common Points in Initial Assessment
fication.
 The parasite generally causes acute disease in young ani-
mals and more chronic or intermittent signs in adults. Com-
mon signs are
 abdominal distention,
 poor body condition—emaciation,
tion, some patients may require some form of fluid therapy
(i.e., intravenous fluids, subcutaneous fluids).
gas pain,
passing adult worms in the feces (looks like spaghetti),
vomiting adult worms, and
Prevention
sudden death in neonates.
Prevention is focused on routine fecal screening in adult and
young pets to detect roundworms in asymptomatic animals
 to prevent disease and contamination of the environment and
Complications: Zoonotic Disease
reduce the zoonotic potential to humans. Further, monthly
 There is a serious zoonotic potential for the parasite to in-
heartworm preventatives (Heartguard Plus, Interceptor) can
 fect humans in contaminated areas through the ingestion
of the eggs.
also help eliminate low-lying infection and prevent rein-
fection.
 People that ingest contaminated feces (especially raccoon
or other wild carriers) may develop the disease.
od suo pu anssn ynon sa a a
Whipworms are a serious infection that causes moderate to
causing a serious liver or kidney disease (visceral larval
severe gastrointestinal infection.
migrans).
Life Cycle
Diagnosis
1. The parasite is transmitted by ingestion of eggs from a
Diagnosis of roundworm infections is based largely on the
contaminated environment.
 observation of the roundworm eggs or adult worms in the 
 anod pue ausaui les aui u yo uaun sa ai 7
feces (see Figure 10.9).
small larval parasite.
3. The worm matures into a large adult, which decreases in-
Treatment
testinal movement and utilization of food, causing bloody
 The goal of treatment is to deworm the patient with medica-
 diarrhea and poor body condition.
tions that will eradicate the adult worms and to provide sup-
4. The adult worms begin producing eggs that are then
portive care. Due to severe fluid losses producing dehydra
passed into the feces and into the environment.
114
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
 5. The eggs have a thick outer coating, which can make
them survive in the environment for months to years.
Etiology
The cause of disease is a collection of small microscopic
 parasites from the Trichuris genus.
● The parasite is commonly found in the cecum of dogs,
foxes, coyotes, and other canines and is more likely in
young pups than adult dogs.
Kenneling situations increase the prevalence of the dis-
ease. The eggs are passed into the environment and have
a very thick shell, making them survive in the environ-
ment for years.
Common Points in History
The parasite generally causes acute disease in young an-
imals, producing a history of diarrhea, anorexia, and poor
condition.
·Chronic or asymptomatic disease can be evident in the
 older pet without significant symptoms.
Common Points in Initial Assessment
Common signs of whipworm infections are
●abdominal distention,
Figure 10.10.
 Image of the whipworm egg under high magni-
 gas pain,
fication.
bloody diarrhea, and
+ poor body condition.
Complications
Without proper deworming and environmental control,
whipworm infestation can be a long-standing problem.
Life Cycle
1. Giardia exists in the environment in small eggs called
Diagnosis
cysts that live in contaminated water and soil.
 2. Once ingested, the cysts then produce a motile protozoon,
 observation of the eggs in the feces (see Figure 10.10).
which infects the small intestine (see Figure 10.1 1).
3. The parasites absorb the partially digested nutrients and
Treatment
upset the stable, beneficial bacteria in the gut.
The goal of treatment is to deworm the patient with medica-
4. These cause the pet to not absorb food properly (malab-
tions that will eradicate the whipworms and provide sup-
sorption syndrome).
portive care. Some form of fluid support may be needed in
 young pups that become dehydrated and malnourished sec-
Etiology
ondary to infection.
The cause of the disease is a small microscopic one-celled
bacterium-like parasite called giardia.
Prevention
 Prevention is focused on routine fecal screening in adult and
 The parasite is more commonly found in dogs than cats
 young pets to detect roundworms in asymptomatic animals
and more likely in young pups than in adult dogs.
to prevent disease and contamination of the environment.
The parasite can also be seen in contaminated water and
Further, monthly heartworm preventatives (Heartguard Plus,
soil sources.
Interceptor) can also help eliminate low-lying infection and
Kenneling situations increase the prevalence of the disease.
 prevent reinfection.
Common Points in History
Giardia (Giardiasis)
 The parasite can cause acute, chronic, or intermittent signs 
Giardia is a microscopic protozoal parasite that causes mild
 Aa e si a a  ' l  go
 to moderate gastrointestinal infection.
 common medical complaints can be
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
115
diarrhea, soft or liquid;
vomiting (occasionally);
anorexia; and
 increased flatulence or gas.
Common Points in Initial Assessment
Common signs of animals with clinical giardiasis are
increased flatulence or gas,
diarrhea, and
dehydration (occasionally).
Complications
largely come from contaminated water supplies.
Figure 10.11.
. Image of giardia adult protozoa under high mag-
nification.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of giardia infections is based largely on the obser-
test (see Figure 10.11).
 seeing the adult “rice-shaped" worm, and
 pets scooting on their hind ends.
Treatment
 m n a mp  si n o  a
Common Points on Initial Assessment
 cations that will eradicate the giardia and to provide supportive
Generally the pet shows no evidence of physical change ex-
care. Occasionally dehydrated pets will need fluid support.
cept the observation of the tapeworms themselves.
Prevention
Complications
 Prevention is focused on routine fecal screening in adult and
Animals can become reinfected if re-exposed to the vec-
young pets to detect protozoa.
tor (flea or rodent).
 Cleaning up standing water and puddles can decrease the
 transmission of giardia into the environment.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of tapeworms is based on the presence of the
Tapeworms
adult worm in the feces or tapeworm egg seen on fecal float 
 Tapeworms are a minor intestinal infection that causes small
(rare) (see Figure 10.12).
 tapeworm segments to be passed in the stool and some hind
end pruritis.
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to deworm the patient with medica-
Life Cycle
tions that will eradicate the tapeworms. It is possible for
 The parasite is transmitted by ingestion of fleas or ro-
 clients to see dead tapeworms passed days after deworming.
 dents (vectors) infected with the larval form of the tape-
worm.
Prevention
Once ingested, the larva infects the dog and cat and
The goal of prevention is to
 grows to adult in the large intestine.
 The worms are passed into the environment and picked
 control and eliminate flea populations, and
up by the vector to become infective to a new host.
 prevent animals from hunting rodents.
 The eggs are stored in the worm segments and are very
rarely seen in a fecal exam.
Coccidia
Coccidia are a collection of parasites that cause mild to
Etiology
 moderate gastrointestinal infection.
The cause of the disease is collection of a small microscopic
-d a 'naa pu  au au o asd
Life Cycle
site is commonly found in dogs and cats.
1. Eggs are passed into the environment.
Common Points in History
testinal system.
      
3. The larvae grow into adults and begin to pass eggs into
disease, generally the only complaints are
the feces.
116
Section2:Anatomy andPhysiology-
TheSciencebehind theDiseases
Key Points in Discussing Intestinal Parasites with
Clients
● Most intestinal parasites cause a mild to moderate
gastroenteritis, producing diarrhea, anorexia, and
sometimes vomiting.
In younger animals, hookworms and roundworms
can produce a more life-threatening disease with
dramatic vomiting and diarrhea that can sometimes
mimic par voviral infection.
Recommending a Fecal Sample
● Even when no worms are seen, most parasites are
microscopic and infections can be severe.
● Even though newboms are not exposed to the envi-
ronment, they can get an infection from their
Figure I0.12. Image of an adult tapeworm. The tapeworm eggs
mother in utero or from her milk.
are carried in the body segments of the adult
With diarrhea and sometimes, vomiting, a fecal
sample should always be examined.
● Even if the animal is wormed with a general
wormer, there are parasites (giardia, coccidia, and
ad on o dsan l n (s
Etiology
medication.
 Coccidial infections are from the genus Isospora. Canines
 Even if other fecal examinations have been done, it
carry Isospora canis and felines carry Isospora felis. These
sometimes takes multiple fecal exams to identify a
parasites are host specific and are not infectious to other
disease-producing parasite. Some chronic infec-
tions can be produced by low numbers of parasites.
species. Cryptosporidium is a very small parasite that is also
 being found to produce severe diarrhea in young animals.
Zoonotic Disease
Hookworm (cutaneous larval migrans) or roundworm
Common Points in History
infections (visceral larval migrans) are produced by
 Coccidial infections cause general mild signs of diarrhea,
either oral ingestion (roundworms) or physical contact.
anorexia, and bloated abdomen.
with contaminated feces. These symdromes can pro-
  isa     a s 
Common Points on Initial Assessment
control these diseases is by limiting contamination of
Except in very young patients, animals appear to be within
the environment through a regular parasite control
 normal limits. Young neonates may appear weak.
program for the patient.
Complications
 Animals can become reinfected by ingesting ova in contam-
Intestinal Obstructive Disease
 inated environments.
Esophageal Foreign Bodies
i as a e si o ua osa u
that gets lodged within the esophagus.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of Isospora is made by demonstration of the small
Etiology
ova on fecal cytology and smear. Due to the minute size of
The cause of disease is swallowing a nondigestible foreign
cryptosporidium, diagnosis is done by ELISA antigen test-
material that becomes lodged within the esophagus. Objects
ing of the feces (see Figure 10.13).
can vary vastly: bones, toys, balls, and other items (see
Figure 10.14).
Treatment
Signalment
The goal of treatment is to deworm the patient with medica-
 Although any pet can get an esophageal obstruction, it is
tions that will eradicate the tapeworms.
 most commonly seen with young dogs.
Prevention
Common Points in History
Coccidia infections can be reduced through reducing envi-
Patients with an esophageal foreign body can show mild to se-
ronmental contamination of fecal debris.
vere signs. The pet's symptoms can be subtle with a possible
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
117
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.14. Radiograph of esophageal foreign body above the
heart base (a). Enlargement of the same image of object stuck 
Figure 10.13.
 Image of the coccidia oocyte under high power
within the esophagus (b).
(a). Image of cryptosporidium under high magnification (b).
change in temperament, attitude, or a history of swallowing
 foreign material. Common complaints with this disease are
Complications
If the esophageal foreign body is not removed, the mass 
regurgitating (not vomiting);
drooling;
scarring and narrowing of the esophagus (esophageal
extending the neck;
stricture).
 trying to swallow hard, having pain while swallowing; and
 anorexia.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of esophageal foreign bodies is based on the his-
Common Points on Initial Assessment
tory, physical examination, and radiographs.
Common symptoms are
●Plain film radiographs: These radiographs can often de-
trying to swallow repeatedly,
tect dilation of the esophagus and the foreign body.
drooling,
 Barium swallow: If the foreign material does not show,
respiratory distress,
the barium, flow will stop or outline the potential ob-
 pain while swallowing, and
struction. Barium should only be used if regurgitation is
extending the neck.
not of concern.
118
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Treatment
 The goal of treatment is removal of the foreign body from
the esophagus. The approaches to removal are by endoscopy
 and/or surgery.
Ideally, removal of the foreign material with the use of an
endoscope is highly recommended.
 This is a noninvasive anesthetic procedure where the en-
doscope shows the foreign material and either removes
it through the mouth or pushes the material into the
stomach.
● The endoscope can also inspect the esophagus for perfo-
ration, ulceration, or strictures.
The owner will need to be informed that if the mass
cannot be removed with the endoscope, surgery may be
indicated.
'yoau) po una an jo un an uo suudaa
 chest, or abdomen), surgery may be required and entry may
Figure 10.15.
Radio-dense foreign bodies are easy to detect on
be through the chest and ribs. This procedure, called a tho-
 plain film radiographs.
racotomy, is a very complicated procedure. Furthermore,
-dosa pue agns rae lam peay nou saop snudosa a
ageal strictures can be common side effects.
● Tender painful abdomen
Prevention
 Constipated and straining to defecate
 The goal of prevention is to limit access of foreign material
Unable to hold down food or water
for animals that have a history of eating unusual objects.
 Dehydrated and weak
Gastrointestinal Foreign Body (Gastric/Intestinal)
Complications
A gastrointestinal foreign body is an acute syndrome
 If not properly treated, the obstruction can wear through the
 brought on by the consurmption of foreign material that is 
intestine causing intestinal rupture and massive infection
obstructing the stomach or small intestine.
 of the abdomen (called peritonitis). Peritonitis can be life
threatening.
Etiology
The cause is a soft or rigid obstruction that partially or com-
Diagnosis
 pletely obstructs the stomach or small intestine (see Figure
 Diagnosis is made based upon history, physical exam, plain
10.15).
film radiographs, and/or a barium series.
Signaiment
Treatment
 Although any pet can get an intestinal obstruction, it is most
The goal of treatment is removal of the foreign body from
commonly seen with young dogs.
the stomach or small intestine. Approaches to removal are as
follows:
Common Points in History
Classically, animals with an obstruction of their stomach or
 Inducing vomiting: If caught early, with some soft tissue
 small intestine have the following complaints:
foreign bodies (i.e., clothing, paper products) the veteri-
narian may induce vomiting to bring up the foreign ma-
Vomiting
terial before an obstruction can occur.
Anorexia
 Care must be taken by the veterinarian to select the
Depression
 Inducing vomiting on jagged or irregular material
Common Points on Initial Assessment
may risk esophageal obstruction.
Furthermore, inducing vomiting in patients that have
physical changes:
 swallowed petroleum products (i.e., gas) may produce 
a stomach or intestinal rupture.
Depression
 Endoscopy: In some cases, with specific foreign mate-
Vomiting (usually excessive)
rial, a fiber-optic endoscope can be passed into stomach
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
119
(d)
Figure 10.16.  When removing a foreign body from the intestines, the section of intestine is packed off with "lap' sponges from the
rest of the abdomen (a), the intestine is then opened, and the foreign body removed (b). The intestine is then surgically closed with ab-
to remove a foreign body. As with the esophageal proce-
●The intestine is then surgically closed and the abdomen
dure, the owner will need to be informed that the mass
copiously rinsed (lavaged) with sterile fluids to decrease
may not be able to be removed with the endoscope and
the risk of infection.
surgery may be indicated.
 Surgery: Exploratory surgery is recommended for obvi-
dence of severe damage or perforation. Any severely in-
ous (radio-dense) masses of the stomach and small intes-
jured intestine may require surgical removal of the af-
tines that are not removable by endoscopy. Further surgery
fected section.
is indicated if the pet has undergone a barium study and
 the barium is suggestive of an obstruction. Key points to
With possible non-radio-dense foreign bodies (i.e., fab-
exploratory surgery are discussed next.
ric, plastic, plant material, etc.),
With a radio-dense foreign body (stones, rocks, bones,
etc.) the following procedure is followed (see Figure 10.16).
●the goal of surgery is to evaluate the stomach and intes-
tinal tract for possible obstruction;
● The abdomen is entered surgically and the veterinarian
● if an obstruction is found, then the material will be re-
exteriorizes and visualizes the intestine and stomach and
 moved as discussed in the section above; and
locates the foreign body obstruction.
●if there is no obvious obstruction, the veterinarian may
The affected intestine is isolated and opened and the for-
elect to take intestinal tissue for biopsies to determine the
eign body is removed.
cause of the disease.
120
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—T
The Science behind the Diseases
 par voviral infection, and
(a)
other causes.
Signaiment
 Intussusceptions are most common in animals less than 1
year of age. Specific types of intussusception (gastro-
esophageal intussusception) can be seen in German shep-
herds and Siamese cats.
Common Points in History
With an intussusception, animals are usually acutely ill and
depressed. Common medical complaints are
depression (usually acute),
 anorexia, and
vomiting (usually excessive).
(b)
Common Points on Initial Assessment
Clinical signs of this disease depend on the location of the
intussusception.
With high intussusception (in the small intestines close to
 the stomach), animals display
depression,
anorexia,
tender, painful abdomen,
vomiting blood,
 shortness of breath, and
collapse.
With lower intussusception (in the large intestine, close
to rectum), animals display
Figure 10.17.  Image of an intestinal intussusception (a) caused
by a sock foreign body (b).
 constipation and straining to defecate,
 bloody and mucosal diarrhea,
 intermittent vomiting, and
weight loss.
Prevention
Complications
The goal of prevention is to limit access of foreign material
 If not properly treated an acute intussusception can per-
for animals that have a history of eating unusual objects.
forate, causing intestinal rupture and massive infection
 a  se  o   o
Intussusception
threatening.
An intussusception is an invagination of a section of small
intestine into another adjoining section, causing an obstruc-
Diagnosis
tion. These areas of intussusception can occur in the small or
Diagnosis is made based on history, physical exam, plain
large intestine (see Figure 10.17).
film radiographs, a barium series, and/or an ultrasound
examination.
Etiology
 as an go a   si an so sso 
Treatment
pathic). However, it has been associated with
The general goal of treatment is the removal of the affected
section of intestines. Simple reduction of the intestines back
inflammation of the intestines (enteritis),
   d  s  pu 
 intestinal foreign bodies,
the intussusception.
abdominal surgery,
heavy intestinal parasites,
Prevention
●intestinal masses,
There is no known prevention for this disease.
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
121
Signalment
Key Points in Discussing Foreign Body
●All dogs from 6 weeks to 18 months can be affected.
Obstruction with Clients
 Dobermans and rotteweilers are more sensitive to the
●A foreign body is a solid mass or collection of de-
disease.
bris that obstructs the normal flow of ingesta
Vaccinated animals have increased resistance to the dis-
through the intestines.
ease; however, they can still be affected.
 Foreign material can vary from a collection of hair
● Older animals (2 years and older) that are unvaccinated
and plant material that has been accumulating over
can be also infected.
months to a solid metal object (i.e., belt buckle).
 The length of time it takes from exposure to clinical signs
If an animal has swallowed something acutely, in-
(incubation period) is generally 10 or more days, but
ducing vomiting should never be recommended
can range from 24 hours to days.
umtil the veterinarian is consulted. Potentially,
some foreign bodies can become lodged within the
esophagus or lacerate the intestines or esophagus if
Common Points in History
vomiting is induced.
The disease usually produces an acute severe intestinal dis-
● All foreign bodies are a potential emergency and
ease. In general, these pets have limited to no vaccine status.
 the client should be advised that a physical exami-
Common medical complaints are
nation by the doctor is necessary.
 a  r  s  a
●anorexia,
depression,
eign bodies can become lodged and produce a per-
foration that could start a life-threatening infection.
vomiting, and
Not all foreign material shows up on x-rays (i.e.,
diarrhea (usually with blood).
cloth, plastic, wood, hairballs, and other nonmetal/
nondense debris).
Common Points on Initial Assessment
-Radiographs are generally recommended.
Clinical signs of this disease can be
If an obstruction is suspected and does not show
up as an obvious foreign body, a barium series
depression (sometimes to comatose),
may be recommended (see diagnostic section).
vomiting (possibly with blood),
 All foreign bodies are potential surgical emergencies.
+
diarrhea (usually liquid with blood),
 abdominal pain,
 seizing (secondary to septic shock),
coma, and
Infectious Intestinal Disease
+death.
Parvoviral Infection
 o       s
stomach and small intestines in dogs.
 Patients that come in with symptoms suggestive of
this disease should be isolated immediately due to
Etiology
 its infectious potential to other patients.
 Parvo is a viral infection that attacks the cells that absorb
food in the small intestine, slowing the body's ability to
absorb food or water.
Furthermore, the virus attacks white blood cell popula-
Complications
tions, causing the pet to be unable to fight off secondary
Septic shock (see Chapter 30) and intussusception (rare) can
 infection (immunosuppression).
 be complications of parvoviral infection.
 Food and water are unable to be properly absorbed and
this produces vomiting and diarrhea.
 Because of the viral-induced immunosuppression, bac-
 Often there is blood in the vomit and diarrhea, secondary
a an pu waoo an u dn pq uo en
to bleeding from infected sites along the intestines.
produce.
The dog becomes dehydrated secondary to fluid loss and
中
 The infection begins to consume large amounts of the pa-
is more prone to secondary infection. These animals can
tient's blood sugar level.
debilitate rapidly and die suddenly, looking almost like a
 The brain requires adequate sugar levels to maintain nor-
poisoning.
 mal function. With decreasing sugar levels, the pet may
Parvoviral infection can be lethal.
show
Long-term environmental contamination occurs be-
increasing depression to the level of coma,
cause the virus is very hearty and will live in the environ-
seizures, and
ment through the heat of summer and cold of winter.
death.
122
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Diagnosis
vomited and had diarrhea with a 10% bleach solution,
 Diagnosis is made based on medical history, physical exam-
 Parvosol, or other hospital disinfectant is recormmended.
ination, and diagnostics. Some possible diagnostics are a
fecal ELISA parvo test and a complete blood count.
Feline Panleukopenia (Feline Distemper)
Feline Panleukopenia is a severe viral infection of the gas-
 Many pets will show a decreased total white blood cell
trointestinal system of cats.
count.
●Pets with a total white blood cell count of less than 1000
Etiology
cells per microliter are at high risk for massive infection
Feline panleukopoenia, which is closely related to canine
and sepsis.
 parvovirus infection, attacks the intestinal cells that absorb
food and water.
Treatment
Treatment is focused on supportive care while the animal
 These cells temporarily are unable to function, and the
unabsorbed food and water are removed from the body by
overcomes the virus.
vomiting and diarrhea.
● It is recommended that the dog have some form of fluid
 The virus also temporarily causes a decreased response
therapy to maintain hydration, antibiotics for secondary
by the immune system, making the animal much more
 infection, and monitoring of electrolytes and blood sugar
prone to secondary infection.
levels.
 Infections of pregnant cats can cause infections of the
●Overall, it is strongly recommended that the dog be hos-
central nervous system of the kittens, resulting in perma-
pitalized for intravenous fluids and antibiotics and care-
nent changes within brain.
ful monitoring for dehydration, electrolyte imbalances,
and low blood sugars.
Signalment
 The disease is evident in cats and minks. It is usually appar-
Prevention
ent in young, unvaccinated cats, typically between the ages
Vaccination: Multiple vaccinations of pups beginning at
of 2 to 6 months.
6-8 weeks of age are recommended. Further isolation of
the pet from large populations of dogs until the pet is
Incubation Period
fully vaccinated will limit exposure to the virus.
 Incubation period of this disease is 10+ days.
Environment: Because parvo virus can live in the envi-
Common Points in History
   a s   's  
gastrointestinal signs and depression in young cats with
Key Points in Discussing Parvoviral Infection with
variable levels of vaccination. Common medical complaints
Clients
for this disease are
 Parvovirus is potentially lethal.
 Parvovirus can infect young dogs from 6 weeks to
vomiting,
+
18 months.
diarrhea,
Even vaccinated dogs can be infected with the dis-
anorexla,
 nasal and ocular discharge, and
ease.
Vaccines usually help produce a less severe form of
 an inability to stand properly (in new borns).
the disease, but no vaccination prevents 100% of
Common Points on Physical Exam
all diseases.
Dehydration (severe)
 Parvoviral infection destroys the cells that absorb food
 Nasal and ocular discharge
and water and also secondarily lowers the animal's
● In newboms, the inability to stand properly and falling
immune response so it cannot fight off infection.
—Pets become dehydrated from massive vomiting
over easily
Loss of balance
and diarrhea.
 Blindness (retinal detachment)
-Animals can potentially succumb to massive infec-
 tion from secondary bacterial pathogens (sepsis).
Complications
 Some animals can get over the infection in a few
days, and some require days to a week plus of treat-
to the cerebellum and eyes. Animals will be born blind and
ment. Response is variable.
imable to properly balance thermselves and walk normally.
 Once an animal recovers from a parvoviral infec-
tion, it can live a normal healthy life span without
Diagnosis
any long-term problems from the infection.
 Diagnosis is made on medical history, physical exam, and
fecal ELISA parvoviral (canine) test.
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
123
 Even though the test is used largely for canine parvoviral
Chronic Disease of the Intestine
infection, cats with high virus levels will show positive
Constipation/Obstipation
with the same diagnostic exam.
Constipation is an obstruction of the large colon with an in-
 As with canine parvovirus, there are times when the virus
complete ability to pass dry, hard, firm feces. Obstipation is
is shed in the feces. A positive test is strongly suggestive
a severe obstruction with an inability to defecate at all.
of parvoviral infection; however, a negative test does not
rule out the disease.
Etiology
Constipation can occur with any disease that impairs fecal
Treatment
transit through the colon, produces profound dehydration
As with most viral infections, treatment is focused on sup-
such that large amounts of water are removed from fecal ma-
 portive care while the animal overcomes the virus.
terial slowing transit, or with diseases that slow or stop in-
testinal movement (ileus). Some suggested causes of disease
It is recommended that the cat have some form of fluid
are discussed next.
therapy to maintain hydration, antibiotics for secondary
 infection, monitoring of electrolytes and blood sugar
Dietary Changes
levels.
 Animals that ingest large quantities of bones, hair, and for-
 Overall, it is strongly recommended that the cat be hospi-
eign bodies can produce a large colon obstruction.
+
talized for intravenous fluids and antibiotics and careful
monitoring for dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, and
Environment
low blood sugars.
 When there are changes in environment (such as new pet added
There is a very high percentage of fatality associated
to a household, changes in litter box location, changes in litter),
with this disease.
animals may defecate less, leading to possible obstruction.
Prevention
Drugs
Proper vaccination of kittens with the FVRCP vaccine can
 Certain types of medications can be constipating:
help prevent or minimize the disease.
Antihistamines
Pain medications
Key Points in Discussing Panleu kopenia Viral
Antacids
Infection with Clients
Diuretics
 Although feline panleukopenia is called feline dis-
 Other medications
 temper, the virus is related to canine parvovirus.
 The feline virus typically attacks unvaccinated kit-
 Animals with rectal disease that causes pain while defe-
tens frorm 2 to 6 months of age.
cating will decrease the amount of time it defecates, leading
 Feline panleukopenia viral infection destroys the
to constipation. Some diseases are
 cells that absorb food and water and also secondar-
ily lowers the animals’immune response so they
 anal gland abcessation,
cannot fight off infection.
 rectal strictures, and
—Pets become dehydrated from massive vomiting
rectal trauma.
and diarrhea.
Furthermore, the animals can potentially suc-
Animals with mechanical obstruction of the outflow tract
cumb to massive infection from secondary bac-
can also obstipate. Some types of diseases are
terial pathogens (sepsis).
 Some animals can get over the infection in a few
 tumors pushing down on colon,
days, and some require days to a week of treatment.
 tumors of the large intestines, and
Response is variable, but mortality from the infec-
+polyps of the large colon.
tion can be high.
 Once an animal recovers from panleukopenia, they
Neurologic Disease
can live a normal, healthy life span without any
Older animals can lose nervous control of their large colon
long-term problems from the infection.
(megacolon). The colon cannot propel food forward out of
 Pregnant queens that are infected with the virus
the rectum; instead, the feces builds up until severe consti-
m suan anod uo fouad a su
pation occurs.
central nervous system dysfunction. These kittens
can be blind and unable to walk and balance
Hormonal Disease
properly.
Animals suffering from specific hormonal disease that
can chronically dehydrate the pet and lead to dry hard feces
124
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
can produce obstipation/constipation. Some of these dis-
Treatment
eases are
 The goal of treatment is to relieve the cause of the constipa-
tion/obstipation while treating the primary underlying dis-
 hyperthyroidism,
ease. Some treatment options may be as follows:
+
hypothyroidism,
kidney disease, and
● Enemas: The repeated use of soap and water and other
●liver disease.
chemical enema solutions is used to help break up the
hardened fecal material.
Signalment
 Fluid therapy/hospitalization: Severely dehydrated pets
Obstipation/constipation can occur both in dogs and cats,
 may require some form of fluid therapy to aid in rehydra-
but it is more common in cats.
tion and help intestinal motility.
 Medication: There are specific medications available
Common Points in History
that aid in stool softening and help intestinal motility.
 Some types of medications can be
Common medical complaints from chronic constipation are
Dietary supplementation: Addition of some fiber
form to the diet can help increase water inflow into
 straining to defecate,
the large bowel producing soft, well-formed stool.
defecating small amounts of dry hard firm stool,
 Lubricants/emollients: The veterinarian may suggest
 straining with small amounts of liquid stool,
oral medications that aid in the lubrication and move-
 occasional vomiting, and
ment of ingesta through the intestinal system.
+not wanting to eat.
 Motility modifiers: When dealing with constipation
not associated with obstructions, these drugs aid in in-
Clinical Points on Initial Assessment
creasing motility of the intestines.
 Common physical exam findings can be
Prevention
depression,
 Prevention of chronic constipation/obstipation is dependent
lethargy,
on the cause of the symptoms. Prevention can be focused on
+
dehydration, and
abdominal tendemess.
 preventing dehydration,
 early detection of systermic disease that produce consti-
Complications
pation,
Chronic constipation can lead to loss of innervation of the
limiting exposure to foreign bodies that can be ob-
large bowel. Furthermore, constipation can produce dehy-
structive,
dration, chronic vomiting, and, in severe cases, intestinal
changing environmental conditions that could prevent
perforation.
normal bowel movements in animals, and
 other treatment options.
Diagnosis
 Because there are many potential causes of constipation, the
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
clinical diagnostic workup can vary depending on the med-
ical history and physical examination. Some diagnostics that
process that can affect the stomach, small intestine, or the
may be recommended are:
large bowel. The affected areas of the gastrointestinal system
become infiltrated with white blood cells at a microscopic
● Radiographs: Abdominal x-rays can aid in detection of
level causing these areas to malfunction.
the potential underlying cause and severity of the consti-
pation in the large colon.
Etiology
● Complete blood count/chemistry: Blood work may be
 Inflammatory bowel disease is caused by a local sensitiv.
suggested to determine if there are any underlying meta-
ity within the affected section of intestine to some com-
bolic, infectious, or neoplastic diseases that may be the
ponent of the diet, which produces a localized infiltration
cause of the constipation.
of white blood cells at a microscopic level.
● Colonoscopy/biopsy: Sometimes with chronic constipa-
 The dietary component usually is something common to
tion, an endoscope is used to explore the large bowel and
most commercial diets (i.e., wheat, chicken, meat, pork,
take intestinal wall tissue to biopsy for possible masses
corn, etc.) and generally produces sensitivity over the
and polyps. Furthermore, sections of the intestinal wall
 long term (i.e., a sudden change in one cormmercial diet
for another diet does not typically produce an inflamma-
ease process.
tory response.)
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
125
Signalment
● Fecal examination/fecal ELISA: These diagnostics are
inq ase Aue jo seo pue saop yoq roae ues auoipus su
used to rule out possible parasitic infections that could
generally begins once the animal is over 2 years old. Com-
cause chronic diarrhea and weight loss.
monly affected breeds are
 Radiographs: Abdominal x-rays can aid in detection of
the potential underlying cause, masses, or changes in
Irish setters,
organ size.
boxers,
+
● Complete blood count/chemistry: Blood work may be
French bulldogs,
+
suggested to determine if there are any underlying meta-
basenjis, and
bolic, infectious, or neoplastic disease that may be the
Lundehunds.
cause of the constipation.
 Infectious titer screens: Depending on the geographic re-
Common Signs in History
gion and the species, the veterinarian may suggest blood
 Inflammatory bowel disease can be very subtle and chronic
work to check for infectious disease (feline leukemia, fe-
 and can mimic other intestinal and systemic ailments. Phy-
line immunodeficiency virus, fungal infections, etc.).
sical symptoms depend on the section of the gastrointestinal
 Endoscopy/biopsy: Sometimes with chronic gastrointesti-
tract affected.
nal disease, an endoscopic procedure to explore the early
With areas of the stomach and early small intestines af-
small intestine or large bowel and to take tissue to biopsy
fected, the chief complaints are
the intestinal wall for possible masses and polyps can de-
termine if there is an underlying disease process occurring.
weight loss;
diarrhea, with soft stool (cow patty-like), and increased
Treatment
amounts, with possible dark blood;
With concerms of inflammatory bowel disease, the patient is 
flatulence;
treated with a combination of medicine and diet change to
vomiting; and
help reduce the microscopic inflammation within the intes-
 ravenous appetite.
tinal tract. Some treatment options are as follows:
With areas of the lower small intestine and large intestine
●Medications: Medications for inflammatory bowel dis-
 affected, the chief complaints are
ease focus on using anti-inflammatory doses of steroids
or immunosuppressants to reduce the white blood cell re-
chronic watery diarrhea,
sponse and returm normal function to the affected sec-
straining while defecating,
tions of intestines.
frank blood or mucus present, and
● Diet: Hypoallergenic diets (such as fish and potato, lamb
producing feces more often with small amounts each
and rice, venison and potato, and rabbit and potato) can
 aid in reducing the inflarmmatory process by eliminating
time.
the component of the food that is stimulating the white
Common Points on Initial Assessment
blood cell response.
Animals can be unaffected to severely ill. Some common
Prevention
signs are
 p n      i 
dehydration,
depression,
Key Points in Discussing Chronic Intestinal Disease
with Clients
anorexia,
 vomiting (sometimes severe), and
 Diseases such as obstipation/constipation and in-
 abdominal sensitivity to abdominal pain.
flammatory bowel disease are usually chronic long-
term problems that can affect a pet for a majority of
Complications
its life span.
Complications to chronic inflammatory bowel disease can
 Animals with chronic constipation, vomiting, and di-
produce moderate to severe weight loss, severe vomiting,
 d  s sa   
and profuse waxing and waning diarrhea.
the overall cause of disease.
Specific hospitals have in-depth questionnaires to
Diagnosis
help get a detailed history and help isolate the causes
Diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease is made by a diag-
of chronic disease.
nosis of exclusion, because other gastrointestinal disease
m aun quauuodde aou paau Aeu shoo
must be first ruled out. Some possible clinical diagnostics
clients to discuss, perform physicals, and do advanced
examination can be as follows:
diagnostics that are required for a thorough workup.
126
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Emergencies of the Gastrointestinal System
 poor gum color;
Gastric Dilation-Volvulus
 lying on side; and
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV) is a serious life-
coma.
threatening disease of the large and giant breed dog, al-
though it can occur in smaller breed dogs as well.
Complications
If not treated immediately and aggressively the patient will
Etiology
die. After the GDV has been corrected, due to the severity of
The underlying cause of the disease is unknown; however,
the metabolic upset produced from this disease, there are
there are predisposing factors, such as
many possible postoperative concerns.
+
eating food too quickly,
 Irregular heart rhythm: The ventricles can misfire
exercising too close to a meal,
causing a premature ventricular contraction (PVC).
having one large meal per day instead of more frequent
 Infection of the abdomen (peritonitis).
small feedings, and
 Severe temporary stasis of the gut (ileus).
·●sudden changes in diet.
Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC): DIC
is a severe metabolic upset that stimulates clot formation
The mechanisms of the disease are as follows:
in all vessels, exhausting the chemicals (clotting factors)
that produce the clot. With the clotting factors gone, the
●The disease is caused by an increase of gas content in the
 patient begins to bleed spontaneously.
stomach with or without rotation of the stomach on its
longitudinal axis.
Diagnosis
+
As the gas increases it causes the stomach to shift on its
Diagnosis is based upon the medical history, the physical
own axis and rotate out of normal position.
symptoms, and abdominal radiographs. When the stomach
●The rotation of the stomach decreases normal blood flow
 bloats and rotates, there is a specific patterm seen in the cra-
to the stomach and spleen and makes the animal unable
nial abdomen on radiographs. The stomach, which has ro-
to vomit.
tated on its own axis, shows two distinct distended regions:
● The enlarged rotated stomach decreases normal blood
flow back to the liver and heart and produces a severe
shock and metabolic upset to the system.
lorus, that has rotated above the normal position of the
●The ensuing disease can be life threatening.
stomach (see Figure 10.18).
Signaiment
Treatment
GDV tends to occur in large to giant breed dogs; however, the
 Initially, in the first few minutes, treatment is geared to-
disease has occurred in small dogs (dachshunds, schnauzers).
ward stabilizing the patient with intravenous fluids and
medications (see Chapter 30).
Common Points in History
 Once stabilized, the dog is placed under anesthesia, and a
This disease is an acute onset of a life-threatening process
stomach tube is passed to help decompress the stomach
 producing depression, shock, and death in a matter of a few
and expel the gas and ingesta.
hours (30 minutes-120 minutes). Common medical com-
 Once the stomach tube is passed, the stomach is lavaged
plaints can be that the pet
   o     
contents.
has a bloated abdomen ,
 If a stomach tube cannot be passed, then a surgical repair
is retching-or is trying to vomit but cannot,
is indicated.
is salivating and drooling heavily,
 After the stomach is decompressed, permanent surgical
 is uncomfortable, and
attachment of the stomach to the abdorminal wall (gas-
+is unable to get up.
tropexy) is recommended. This procedure will help pre-
vent the stomach from rotating in the future. However,
Common Points on Initial Assessment
the stomach can still bloat.
Physical signs can be severe, rapid in onset, and life threat-
 If surgical repair is not done, there is increased chance of
ening. These signs can include
 the stomach bloating and rotating again.
● While in surgery, the stomach, spleen, and esophagus
retching, trying to vomit;
will be explored for any damage or injury they may have
salivating;
sustained due to the rotation process.
weak and unable to get up;
 If there is severe extension and rotation of the stomach,
abdomen distended, sometimes severely;
there can be permanent damage to the spleen, stomach,
● poor, rapid pulses;
and or the esophageal wall.
Chapter 10: Gastrointestinal System
127
● Offer smaller feedings multiple times during the day
 rather than one large feeding.
 Try to avoid abrupt changes in diet.
●Do not let your pet exercise heavily an hour before or an
hour after eating.
Key Points in Discussing GDV/Bloat with Clients
GDV is one of the true veterinary ermergencies where
every second counts.
soe ae yun sop paaq a ae sds Aay
lethargic, depressed, trying to vomit but can't, or any
other signs of bloat. If present, the dog should be
evaluated immediately.
 Dogs that actually have bloat gastropexy surgery can
Figure 10.18. X-ray image of a rotated stomach. The arrows in-
still bloat. They generally do not rerotate, but the 
dicate where the free end of the stomach (pylorus) moves as the
stomach rotates, blocking off the arteries and veins. This rotation
stomach can fill with air and distend.
is often called "the double bubble," indicating the two obvious
●Bloated animals are open to numerous postoperative 
sections of the stomach.
complications that may require the pet to be hospital-
ized for days.
 Dogs with a gastric distention volvulus will die if not
 treated.
Sometimes removal of the spleen and/or affected areas 
within the wall of the stomach must be done for the over-
all health of the animal.
Rarely, damage is too extensive to repair.
CD-ROMIreviews materialpresented in thischapter.
Prevention
Please try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology—
 To help prevent pets from bloat and stomach rotation, the
TheScience behind theDiseases) to help reinforce theinfor-
following recommendations can be made to the owner:
mation presented here.
Chapter 11
Respiratory System
Anatomy of the Respiratory System
●Alveolar sacs
+
Alveolar ducts
a a  xo aau so  s n 
Alveolus
ergy for normal function and growth. In order to produce en-
ergy, these cells take I unit of sugar molecules and, through
At the end of the duct system, the alveoli are structures
a process called cellular respiration, convert sugar into en-
of specialized cells that are closely associated with small
ergy (ATP), water, and carbon dioxide (COz). The chemical
capillary and venous beds. These are the sites where oxygen
formula for this reaction is:
enters the bloodstream and binds to hemoglobin within the
red blood cell. Hemoglobin is a special iron-based chemical
6 0 + Cg H12O 6 (sugar) →→ 6 CO2 + 6 HzO+ Energy (ATP)
that has the ability to carry oxygen and COz through the
pooa pau ayi Aq paqosqe si uaaxo au aues ayn iv poq
Once the chemical reaction has occurred, the produced
cells, COz is released from the hemoglobin into the lungs
CO2 must be excreted. CO2 becomes toxic and can inhibit
and expired (see Figure 11.2).
breathing centers of the central nervous system if the con-
 centration becomes too high. In order to exchange gases,
The act of respiration is controlled by the autonomic
nervous system, which is part of the central nervous system.
mammals have developed an extensive tubular system to
Initiation of breathing is stimulated by the respiratory center
bring air in to absorb oxygen and expel CO2. The anatomy
 of the respiratory system (see Figure 1l.1) includes the
in the brain that monitors CO2. Increasing blood CO2 stim-
ulates the autonomic nervous system to increase respiration.
 Abnormally high levels of COz suppress respiration.
nasal cavity/sinus,
pharynx,
The muscles that produce an inspiration are the smooth
trachea,
muscles around the alveoli, the muscles between the ribs
primary bronchus,
(intercostal muscles), and the diaphragm. The diaphragm
secondary bronchus,
is a musculoskeletal partition that completely separates the
 terminal bronchus,
thoracic cavity from the abdomen.
alveolar ducts,
The lungs are able to expand and contract because they
 alveolar sacs, and
exist within a vacuum. As the diaphragm and chest expand
alveolus.
and increase the volume within the chest cavity, the volume
of lungs also increases proportionally. This action forces the
 The upper respiratory system comprises the nasal cavity.
air to rush into the lungs. As the diaphragm and chest relax,
nasal sinuses, and the common region of the nose and mouth
the volume decreases and air is expelled from the chest.
called the pharynx. These air passageways are lined with
The rate at which the animal breathes normally while at
a m   sp r m    
rest is called the normal respiration rate. It can vary dra-
them from entering the body. Once the air moves through the
matically, depending on the size, species, and sex of the an-
i suni an pu 1aonn an sraua il 'smassd pe
imal. In general, female animals breathe faster than males,
of the thoracic cavity.
younger animals breathe faster than older animals, and
The lungs occupy the greater part of the chest cavity and
    ao  s 
communicate with the outside air via the trachea and
Some examples are
bronchial system. The lungs are divided into lobes. Each
 lobe contains a series of ducts that get smaller and smaller
horses: 8-16 breaths per minute,
n  an no d a a an   p
dogs: 20-40 breaths per minute, and
the ducts is as follows:
cats: 24-42 breaths per minute.
 Primary bronchus
Although these are the accepted respiratory rates of these
Secondary bronchus
species, stress, pain, and nervousness can greatly increase
 Terminal bronchus
respiratory rates.
129
130
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Bronchofes
Respiratory
bronchioles
Alveolar
ducts
Figure 11.1.  Image of the respiratory system from the trachea
into the bronchi and the al veolar duct system.
Alveolar
sacs
Pathology of the Respiratory System
Like the gastrointestinal system where physical symptoms
Alveoli
occur due to the abnormal function of the stomach and in-
Figure 11.2.
 Image of alveolar sacs, where oxygen is absorbed
testines to digest food stuffs and absorb nutrients and water,
into the blood stream and carbon dioxide is expelled. (Courtesy
the respiratory symptoms occur due to the impedance of gas
of Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris,
exchange at the alveolar level of the lungs. Primary respira-
and Pasquini, Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point, Tx 1989. Used
tory signs occur from the causes discussed next.
with permission from Sudz Publishing.)
Physical Obstruction of the Airways and Alveolus
If fluid, cells (i.e., pus), or masses physically fill and ob-
struct normal bronchioles and alveolar tissue, oxygen ex-
Pneumonia
change cannot occur. As the airways are obstructed, the ani-
Pneumonia refers to the accumulation of white blood cells,
 mal begins to cough reflexively, trying to clear and bring up
infectious agents, and inflammatory debris that fills the air-
debris and fluid.
ways secondary to a bacterial, fungal, rickettsial, or viral in-
As further obstruction continues, the animals respiratory
fection.
 rate increases in response to increasing COz levels in the body.
 Finally, as oxygenation ability is severely impaired, the 
Mass/Tumor
pet's peripheral mucus membrane (i.e., gums) becomes
Sunl aut apeaul oi suibaq sseuu 1o 1ouni plos e aseo sun ul
cyanotic (blue), the animal becomes weak, has trouble
fields and physically destroys normal tissue as it grows
breathing, breaths abdominally, and can faint or pass out.
larger.
Causes for obstruction of airways are discussed next.
Narrowing of the Trachea/Bronchioles
Pulmonary Edema/Congestion
There are specific chronic diseases that can, over time, pro-
Although discussed more thoroughly in Chapter 12, pul-
duce profound narrowing of the trachea and bronchioles. As
monary edema refers to a filling of the airways with fluid.
the disease progresses, the airways become thickened with
The excess fluid accumulates in the lung fields secondary to
fibrous tissue that continues to limit normal airflow. Some
drowning, heart disease, electrical injury, and other causes.
 diseases that can produce these changes are
Chapter 11: Respiratory System
131
feline asthma,
eign body, or an allergenic condition (i.e., acute asthma, se-
 collapsing trachea,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and
of a short-term duration (usually fewer than 3-5 days).
 allergic/anaphylactic reactions.
Chronic respiratory disease can be a more complicated
progressive disease that produces waxing and waning or per-
Thoracic Disease
sistently worsening signs. Chronic diseases of the respira-
Diseases that affect the chest cavity can inhibit normal res-
tory system can be chronic long-term infection (i.e., fungal
piration and exchange of gases within the lungs. These
infection) and obstructive (collapsing trachea), parasitic
disease syndromes produce signs identical to the first
(heartworm disease), or cancerous (neoplastic) disease.
category and must be differentiated by clinical diagnostics.
The following syndromes can produce primary thoracic
Is a Cough Present?
disease.
 Identifying the type and nature of the cough is very impor-
tant to help distinguish its cause. Some basic questions are
Pleural Effusion
as follows.
A pleural effusion, as discussed later in the chapter, is an ac-
cumulation of fluid within the chest, surrounding the lungs
How often does the cough occur? Is this a mild infre-
and heart. If enough fluid accumulates, the normal expan-
quent cough or is the pet coughing regularly?
sion of the lungs can be affected. Pleural effusions can be as-
● Is the cough becoming worse or more frequent? Wors-
sociated with heart disease, infection/foreign body, tumors,
ening coughs can suggest a more progressive problem.
trauma, and systemic disease.
 Is the cough worse with excitement? Coughs that be-
come worse with exercise or exciterment can suggest
Pleuritis
a poe n na ars s sai  pu
 Pleuritis is a viral, bacterial, fungal, or rickettsial infection
pet's ability to exercise normally.
of the lining of the chest (pleura). It can be associated with
 Is the cough productive? Purulent debris (pus) that
a severe pneumonia that can rupture out from affected lung
aun ue isasns ueo sunoo si lad aun uam dn saon
tissue, producing an infection within the chest cavity.
tious disease.
 Is the cough worse at night? When air cools at night,
Mass/Tumor
water droplets can condense and pool in the lung fields.
Cranial and caudal to the heart, between the lungs, is a re-
Healthy lungs can handle the increased fluid condensa-
gion called the mediastinum. If a tumor or mass occurs in
tion. Animals with chronic conditions, such as heart dis-
this region and grows to significant size, lung expansion
ease patients that have decreased ability to remove fluid
may be affected.
from the lung fields, can have a more productive cough
at night.
Pneumothorax
Although discussed later in the disease section of this chap-
Does the Pet Tire More Often and Require Rest More
ter, a pneumothorax is an injury to the chest or lung fields
Frequently?
that allows the introduction of air into the thorax. The chest
If pets cannot maintain normal levels of activity (exercise in-
exists in a vacuum, and the lungs are able to expand and con-
tolerance), it suggests that their tissues cannot be oxy-
tract only as long as this vacuum exists. If air is introduced
genated adequately and can suggest severe disease. If this is
into the chest from an injury, the lungs will begin to collapse
noted, further questions may need to be documented.
and respiration will become seriously affected.
Have There Been Any Episodes of Collapsing or
Fainting?
Obtaining a History for Respiratory Disease
Animals that have a history of collapse or weakness can
The key to a thorough evaluation of a potential respiratory
have severe cardiac disease.
or cardiovascular patient is to try to isolate the cause of the
physical symptoms based upon history, auscultation exami-
These pets should be handled with extreme caution since
nation, and a thorough physical examination. There are key
their heart is so severely affected that the pet collapses or
points in the history that can help the medical team deter-
loses consciousness with any exertion.
mine if the disease is an upper or lower respiratory problem
Furthermore, these patients may need to be placed on
or a cardiovascular disease. Some important questions to ask
 Oxygen and the medical team notified immediately.
when taking a history follow.
Does the Pet Have Periods of Increased Respiratory
What Is the Duration of Mlness?
Effort?
Acute onset of respiratory disease suggests the pet has been
Patients that seem to have episodes of increased rigor while
-  s l   e   
breathing, breathing abdominally (see below), breathing
132
Section 2:Anatomy andPhysiology
The Science behind the Diseases
with their head and neck extended, or making abnormal
What is the Respiratory Rate and Nature of the
sounds while breathing may have serious respiratory or car-
Breathing Cycle?
diac disease.
Normal respiratory rates in a hospital situation can be
slightly more elevated:
Is Sneezing Evident?
Just as with coughing, the nature and occurrence of the
Canines: 30-60 breaths per minute
sneezing can help distinguish the types of disease. Sneezing
Felines: 40-70 breaths per minute
can be seen with infection of the respiratory tract, a foreign
body, or an allergic reaction.
Is the Pet Tachypneic?
Animals can breath more rapidly (tachypnea) when nervous;
Is There Nasal Discharge?
however, rates above the following parameters can suggest
The type and location of nasal discharge can significantly
abnormality:
help distinguish between different types of respiratory dis-
ease. Some key points are as follows:
 Canines with more than 80-100 breaths per minute
● Is the discharge bilateral or unilateral? Unilateral dis-
charge suggests a localized problem within the upper air-
Is the Pet Dypsneic?
way. Bilateral discharge suggests that the discharge is
 The normal respiratory patterm is a slow expansion and re-
from a problem with the trachea or lower respiratory sys-
laxation of the chest. Animals that are having trouble breath-
tem or a systemic disease.
 ing (dyspneic) and with altered breathing styles can suggest 
What is the type of discharge present?
compromised respiratory systems. Some concerms to ob-
 Mucopurulent (pus) discharge generally suggests a
serve are the following.
bacterial or fungal infection or a foreign body.
Clear (serous) discharge generally suggests a viral
Is the Pet Breathing Abdominally?
infection or allergy. However, it is important to note
 that with canine distemper virus, a mucopurulent dis-
nent, if animals must use their abdomen to drive air in and
charge can be noted.
 out of their lung field, it can suggest serious respiratory dis-
 m  -o n n o s  s
tious disease, bleeding problem, trauma, or tumor.
maximize the amount of air entering the respiratory system.
Is the Pet on Heartworm Prevention?
Is There Respiratory Noise?
In specific geographic regions of the country, heartworm
 Is the dog making respiratory noise that can be heard with-
disease (see Chapter 12) is endemic for both felines and ca-
out a stethoscope? Animals with a respiratory noise (also
nines. In these regions, animals that are not on a program of
called a stridor) can suggest a potential obstruction of the
 prevention may be at increased risk.
upper airway or bronchial constriction of the lower airway. It
is important to note if the stridor is occurring during inhala-
What Is the Vaccination Status of the Pet?
tion, exhalation, or both.
Young pets with no to limited vaccination history are more
prone to canine distemper viral infections.
Are the Neck and Head Extended While Breathing?
ounfoo ui pemdn peau pue yau a puaxa siad l
Obtaining an Initial Assessment on a Patient
respiratory or cardiac disease. These pets are so severely af-
with Respiratory Disease
anosqe ue u ean au day isnu Kaun yeu paa
When assisting in a clinical evaluation of a pet affected with
straight line to maximize airflow into the lungs. Many pa-
a possible respiratory disease, it becomes important to be
tients will have their elbows held away from their body as
able to fully auscultate the animal for abnormalities. A tech-
well (see Figure 11.3).
-qe pue ju on uuis ad on ae aq isn un
normal chests with the stethoscope to aid in proper evalua-
Does the Pet Have Decreased Shallow Breathing?
tion of the sick and hospitalized pet
Severely depressed animals with a slow, shallow respiratory
The most important concept is that these are potential life-
  a as a   s  a
threatening diseases that may need quick assessment and
 may need the full attention of the medical team.
treatment. If a team member is unsure if a pet may have a
life-threatening respiratory difficulty. oxygen is never con-
What Is the Color of Gums and the Capillary Refill
traindicated (see Chapter 30). If the pet seems stable enough,
Time (CRT)?
- s     ssss 
Patients with respiratory difficulty, who are having problems
cussed next.
 Oxygenating their tissue, have cyanotic mucus membranes.
Chapter 11: Respiratory System
133
Tabie I1.1.
 Triage concerns in the respiratory patient.
Systems
Signs Indicating an Emergency
Mentation
Stressed, eyes dilated
Fever
Temp >104.5° (due to increased
respiratory effort or infection
Temp <99° (due to shock, DIC, coma)
Hydration
Dehydration >5-7%
Gum color
Blue, purple, or gray
 Capillary refill time 
CRT >2-3 seconds 
(CRT)
 Respiratory nature,
 Nature: Pet's open mouth breathing.
 auscultation, and
abdominally breathing with head and
neck elevated
Auscultation: Severely increased
respiratory noise, evidence of rasps,
rubs, or crackles
Figure 11.3.
. Image of a dog in an oxygen cage with severe res-
 Rate: Respiratory rates >80-100 breaths
 piratory disease. Note the pet is extending his neck and head up-
per minute
ward while open mouth breathing.
Heart rate and pulse 
Rate: Heart rate <80 bpm or >180-200
bpm
 Pulse: Weak or decreased pulse quality.
Their gums, whites of their eyes, rectum, and other tissue
pulse deficits, or paradoxical pulses 
 can be light purple to blue to gray.
(see Chapter 12)
The CRT is often hard to assess because the gum color is
cyanotic.
Auscultation
● Rubs: This sound is best represented as a friction rub
Whether initially assessing a respiratory patient or reevalu-
produced when there are adhesions between the lungs
ating a hospitalized patient, auscultation is the most impor-
and the chest wall causing a sound like sandpaper rub-
tant part of the respiratory examination.
bing on wood.
 Referred sound from the upper airway: These are
Auscultating the Chest
 sounds produced from the trachea and the upper airway.
 Auscultation should be done in a quiet region of the hospi
- These sounds are produced from the obstructions of
 tal where slight changes in chest sounds can be ascertained.
 debris, masses, or fluid in the upper airway and are 
To fully appreciate the lung sounds, a team member should
heard slightly decreased deeper in the chest.
start auscultating in the cranioventral aspect of the right or
 In short-nosed breeds (i.e., pug, English bulldog,
left lung field, starting where the elbow meets the chest wall
etc.), there can be significant upper-airway sounds
(see Figure 11 .4). Slowly sweep caudally, moving dorsally to
that are normal due to the shortened compressed air-
ventrally until the entire field is auscultated.
ways of the nostrils.
The goal of auscultation is to differentiate a region where
the sounds become abnormal and different.
 See Table 1 1.1 for a summary of signs indicating an emergency.
 Normal sounds of the lungs are represented by air flow-
Clinical Diagnostics of the Respiratory System
counters narrowing or fluid, the sounds change.
 In general, diagnostics of the chest are focused on blood and
Abnormal Sounds
 s        
+
Crackles: The sound is best represented as the sound of
tion, diagnostic imaging of the chest and heart, and chest
crumpling cellophane paper. It is produced as air goes
through fluid or cells, such as with pneumonia. The nor-
mal airways and alveoli are filled with cells and fluid.
Blood Work Diagnostics
The crackle sounds are produced as air passes through
General blood work helps determine if there are changes in the
the cramped region.
complete blood count suggestive of bacterial or fungal infec-
Rasps: This sound is best represented as air flows
 tions. Furthermore, specific blood testing for infectious agents 
through narrowed/constricted airways, producing a musi-
 or bloodborme parasites are also done based on the geographic
cal whistle. Diseases that produce fibrosis or narrowing
endermic diseases. Blood chemistry and urinalysis may also be 
of the bronchi (e.g., feline asthma, allergic reaction, and
recommended if there are concerms about organ or hormonal
others) produce this whistle (see Figure 11.5).
disease affecting the respiratory or cardiovascular systems
(d)
Figure1l.4.1
 Image of auscultating the chest. Start by placing
the stethoscope behind the elbow (a), sweep the lung fields from
sh uoioan ainua aun un Aepneo suou (o) [enuaa on (q) [esio
auscultated (d). Then repeat it for the other side of the chest.
134
Chapter 11: Respiratory System
135
ceivable by auscultation.
s sy As  d a  "a)
Radiography
Chapter 13). Some possible clinical diagnostics are
 A large part of clinical testing of respiratory disease is diag-
nostic imaging of the chest and heart. Plain film radiographs
a complete blood count and chemistry,
are often the first screening procedure in thoracic disease.
urinalysis,
Chest films allow the veterinarian to detect obvious pathol-
infectious disease titer screens, and
ogy or changes within the heart, trachea, and mediastinum.
fungal screens:
The chest should be assessed when the lungs are fully in-
coccidiomycosis
flated (see Figure 11.6).
aspergillosis
A metastatic chest protocol is used when there are con
blastomycosis
cerns of possible masses or tumors of the lung field. With
histoplasmosis
this protocol, three chest views (right lateral, left lateral,
cryptococcus
and a back to front view [V/D] are taken because small tu-
parasite screens:
mors are not always seen with the patient down on only one
ehrlichia
lateral side. When imaging the animal in lateral recumbency,
 toxoplasmosis
the down side of the chest is always slightly compressed.
heartworm
This accentuates the up side's lung field and may show a
small mass in comparison with the lower field. If the animal
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a Blood and
was placed in an opposite view, a small mass may be lost 
Urine Evaluation with the Client
due to the slight compression of the lower lung field (see
 General changes in blood work can help the medical
Figure 11.7).
team evaluate the possibility of infectious, metabolic,
When concermed about tracheal disease or collapse, im-
 inflammatory, or parasitic respiratory diseases.
aging the neck and chest on both inspiration and expiration
 Depending on the geographic region, there are spe-
helps distinguish whether there is abnormal narrowing in the
cific clinical diagnostics that will help evaluate the
trachea at the height of inspiration. Once the inspiratory/
pet for a disease (i.e., heartworm test).
expiratory study is completed, a comparison of the tracheal
 These clinical diagnostics, in combination with
diameter on both films helps determine if there is pathology
other imaging studies, will help evaluate the over-
evident. However, since tracheal collapse is an ongoing, dy-
all health of the pet.
namic process, plain film radiographs do not always capture
the extent of narrowing (see Figure 11.8).
136
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
a
a
t
u
Cranial
m
Lung Field
Aorta
Caudal
Right
REART
Left
Heart
Heart
audal
Cranial
Lung Fselda
Figure 11.6.
 Radiographic images of normal thoracic cavity anatomy in both views of the chest.
Advanced Diagnostics
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a
A thoracic ultrasound has limited applications in the diag-
Radiographic Evaluation with the Client
nosis of respiratory disease because ultrasound waves do not
A radiograph study is being recommended for the fol-
carry in air. Therefore, an ultrasound exam of the chest can
lowing reasons.
help diagnose fluid within the chest cavity or masses in be-
tween the lungs (mediastinum) but cannot aid in diagnosis
Symptoms of coughing, respiratory distress, or
of lung lesions or masses, unless the lesions are in direct
changes in the physical examination suggest dis-
contact with the chest wall (see Chapter 25).
ease of the chest and lungs.
 A chest tap (thoracentesis) is a diagnostic and therapeu-
The study will help the medical team assess
tic procedure focused on removing air or fluid from the
 changes in the trachea and lung fields that could
 chest. When radiographic studies suggest a fluid accumula-
suggest infection, obstructive disease, fluid accu-
tion around the lung fields (pleural effusion), a needle is in-
mulations within or around the lung fields, or
serted into the chest cavity to help remove the excess fluid
masses in the chest cavity.
 and obtain a diagnostic sample (see Figure 11.9).
 Finally, the study will help assess changes in the
Diagnostically, a chest tap is used to gain a sample of
heart and large vessels of the chest.
fluid that has accumulated within the chest around the lungs
(pleural effusion) in order to determine the cause of the fluid
With specific concerms, advanced radiographic stud-
accumulation. The type of fluid can help suggest the type of
ies may need to be performed to help evaluate the pet
disease process.
for functional tracheal disease or concerms of masses
 or tumors within the lung fields.
●Clear: A clear or straw-colored fluid can suggest an ac-
cumulation of fluid due to
 heart disease (especially in the cat; see Chapter 12),
 feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), and
- a thoracic mass/tumor.
[a)
Figure I1.7. Image of a small to medium chest mass in the cau-
dal dorsal lung fields
(b)
111
(C)
Figure 11.9. Image of a chest tap: A needle is inserted into the
chest to help relieve fluid accumulations around the lung fields
and heart (pleural effusion) that accumulate secondary to serious
disease (a). In the first radiograph (b), the heart and lower lung
fields are obstructed by a gray fluid line. The second radiograph
Figure 11.8.  Image of an inspiratory thoracic radiograph with
(c) was taken after the fluid was removed from the chest, note
evidence of tracheal narrowing (white arrows)
that the ventral heart and lungs are more easily visualized.
137
Section 2: Anatomy andPhysiology
-TheScience behind theDiseases
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a Chest Tap
Key Points to Discuss about Other Advanced
with the Client
Procedures with the Client
 The chest tap is used when there is concern that
Transtracheal wash: A transtracheal wash is
there is a fluid accumulation within the chest sur-
 being recommended to obtain pathogenic bacteria
rounding the heart and lungs.
and cells from the trachea and bronchi that can sug-
A chest tap cannot remove fluid within the lung
 gest the disease process affecting your pet. The pet
fields (pulmonary edema).
will be placed under light sedation, and a small 1-
 Some pets may require light sedation or anesthesia.
to 2-inch square prepared over the trachea. A small
A small, square region of the chest is surgically
incision is made through the skin and into the tra-
shaved and prepared on both sides of the chest
chea, and a small sterile rubber catheter is inserted.
wall.
A small amoumt of sterile fluid is flushed into the
 A needle is introduced under the skin and then en-
trachea and bronchi, which stimulates the pet to
ters the chest cavity.
cough. Upon coughing, the fluid is aspirated, and
As much of the fluid as possible is removed.
the samples are used for cytology and culture to
Samples are kept for diagnostic evaluation.
help determine the disease affecting your pet.
The consistency and color of the fluid helps the
Trac heoscopy/bronc hoscopy: A tracheoscopy/
medical team assess the nature of the disease af-
bronchoscopy is a surgical procedure in which a
fecting your pet.
fiber-optic camera is passed into the trachea and
down the large bronchi to help examine the lower
lung fields. Although the smallest bronchioles and
●Purulent (pus): Purulent debris can suggest an infection
  n aa n  s o  n
of the thoracic cavity (pleuritis) or a foreign body that
samples and cultures of the lower airway can be ob-
may have penetrated into the chest.
tained to help the medical team determine the dis-
ease process.
ble tumor of the thoracic cavity or a rupture or injury of
●A MRI/CAT scan: A scan has been recommended
the thoracic duct. The thoracic duct is a vessel that
by the medical team due to concems that there may
brings digested fat and triglycerides through the chest
be a small mass or tumor evident in the lung fields
 that cannot be seen through a radiograph or iden-
cavity and into the caudal vena cava. Once the fat enters
the bloodstream it moves to the liver for utilization and
tified through other procedures. The scan can dis-
storage.
tinguish normal lung tissue from that of a mass or
●Blood: Blood can suggest a trauma or a tumor within the
tumor.
chest, or a pet with a generalized bleeding disorder.
A transtracheal wash uses a sterile catheter or red rub-
Diseases of the Respiratory System
ber feeding tube placed between the tracheal rings of a se-
dated animal. The catheter is run down the trachea as far as
Although not all diseases are mentioned below, the common
possible, and a small amount of sterile fluid is flushed into
  sn o  an ym pss ar ss
the trachea and lower airways. This stimulates the animal
stand and be able to explain to the client how these diseases
to cough and bring up debris. The sterile fluid and debris
- o n     ssn  
are then aspirated for culture and cytology. This procedure
and long-term concerms of each disease. Any discussion of
      n   
 overall diagnostic and treatment protocols should be based
on the recommendations of the veterinarian. Please use the
lungs.
following information as a basis to discuss and educate the
client, but never to diagnose a patient.
fiber-optic camera down the trachea into the lung fields; the
s o n  a  s aas na  
Obstructive Disease of the Lungs
 gest infection or neoplasia. Tissue and brushings of the
Collapsing Trachea
bronchi can be obtained for biopsy evaluation and culture
The syndrome of collapsing trachea refers to a chronic con-
and sensitivity.
dition of imperfect cartilage formation within the trachea
Finally, a computeraxial tomography (CAT) scan and
  s na a s an n n a s
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan may be per-
 sults in a temporary repeating obstruction.
formed because not all masses can be imaged with x-ray or
ultrasound; an advanced imaging technology may help dis-
Etiology
tinguish smaller masses within the lung fields that may be
 The condition in dogs is thought to be linked to a decrease
hidden by the heart or trachea.
of necessary elements within the cartilage. Causes of carti-
Chapter 11: Respiratory System
139
 Cough suppressants: Oral cough medication may help
 a nutritional deficiency, or even a genetic abnormality.
decrease the coughing response. Most of these medica-
tions also have a mild sedative effect (i.e., butorphanol,
Signalment
Hycodan, etc.).
This disease affects mainly dogs, and rarely cats, and has
 Bronchodilators: Drugs such as theophylline and terbu-
been associated with
   n     d 
creasing the lower airways to allow the maximum flow of
miniature poodles,
air in and out of the body. Although these drugs do not
Yorkshire terriers,
work on the trachea itself, they increase air inflow so an-
Chihuahuas,
imals do not have to work as hard to breath.
 Pomeranians, and
●Steroids: The veterinarian may suggest regular dosing of
other small and toy breeds
medications such as prednisone to decrease inflammation
 in the airway and help prevent the chronic collapse.
Collapsing trachea has been seen in animals from 4 to 14
Weight loss: Obesity is a major contributor to this con-
years of age. Obesity may predispose an animal to this con-
dition.
dition, and over weight animals should be placed on a
calorie-restricted diet to help decrease body size.
 Activity and environment: Over excitement, especially
Common Points in History
in a humid environment, can cause crisis. Owners should
Pets with collapsing trachea may show mild to severe signs.
 The syndrome produces a deep honking (gooselike) nonpro-
monitor activity closely, especially during the hotter
months of the year. Lastly animals should have harnesses
ductive cough. The cough can be made worse with excite-
on rather then collars since this can decrease chronic irri-
ment or exercise and can occasionally be severe enough to
tation over the trachea caused by a neck collar.
cause the patient to collapse. Patients may have a history of
 Surgical correction: In severe cases, surgical repair re-
obesity as well. Common complaints with this disease are
 placing diseased cartilage rings with artificial replace-
coughing (honking),
 ments can be completed. This type of procedure is gener-
respiratory difficulty (dyspnea),
ally done at a surgical referral center.
retching, and
inability to exercise.
Prevention
The best prevention in small breed dogs with concerms of
Common Points on Initial Assessment
collapsing trachea is to maintain the normal weight of the
Common signs are
pet.
coughing (honking),
respiratory difficulty (dypsnea),
Key Points in Discussing Collapsing Trachea with
retching,
Clients
increased respiratory rate,
 Collapsing trachea is a syndrome of increasing
pale gums,
 amounts of tracheal cartilage loss affecting gener-
weakness/collapse (syncope) in severe cases,
ally middle-aged, small breed dogs.
an inspiratory chest sound in severe cases, and
The loss of cartilage allows the trachea to collapse
 cyanotic mucus membranes (blue to purple to gray).
on itself on inspiration, producing a significant
honking cough.
Complications
As the disease progresses, the pet may not be able
 If not properly treated and controlled, this syndrorme can
to exercise normally, may collapse (rarely), or even
 produce a life-threatening obstructive disease.
faint.
The disease has been linked to congenital abnor-
Diagnosis
malities with the formation of cartilage, chronic
 Diagnosis of collapsing trachea is based on radiographic or
respiratory disease, and nutritional deficiency.
endoscopic examination of the trachea collapsing on inspi-
 If not controlled, collapsing trachea may produce a
ration. An inspiratory/expiratory radiographic study is usu-
 life-threatening respiratory syndrome.
ally recommended to help see changes in the tracheal diam-
eter (see Figure 11.8).
Feline Asthma
Treatment
Feline asthma is an allergic condition in the cat that is very
 Treatment is focused on decreasing tracheal irritation and
similar to human asthma. In this condition, allergens cause
predisposing factors that produce tracheal collapse. The vet-
's  n  n o s sos 
erinarian may suggest the following:
causing mild to severe clinical signs.
140
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
Etiology
●Radiographs: Can help determine if there are significant
The cause of the disease is a reaction of the tissue (epithe-
 changes and thickening in the bronchioles and lung fields
lium) lining the bronchi to a noxious chemical or chronic al-
 that can suggest asthma.
lergen, causing swelling of the tissue (bronchoconstric-
tion), production of mucus and other excretions, and
Treatment
 Treatment options are focused on reducing bronchial
infiltration of white blood cells (inflammatory cells) into the
lumen of the bronchi, causing an obstruction.
swelling and controlling reactions to inhalant irritants. Some
possible treatment options are discussed next.
Signalment
 Steroids: The veterinarian may suggest short-term oral
The disease generally affects cats of any age and is more
steroid medications to longer-term steroid injections.
 common in the Siamese and Himalayan breeds.
This allows good control of the inflammatory process
that stimulates the bronchoconstriction as well as reduc-
Common Points in History
ing bronchial swelling. Steroids are handled well by most
Cats with asthma can have mild to severe attacks of respira-
cats, with very few side effects. However, over long-term
tory difficulty (dypsnea), open-mouth breathing, collapse,
use, steroids can cause liver disease and promote dia-
fainting, and occasionally, death. Common medical com-
betes mellitus.
 plaints are
 Bronchodilators: Bronchodilators, such as theophylline
or terbutaline, may be suggested to help in bronchodila-
respiratory wheeze or noise,
tion to increase the amount of air coming into the lung
collapse, and
fields.
exercise intolerance during episodes.
 Antihistamines: Antihistamines such as cyproheptadine
-i oiane aissod au aseaap oi pasans aq A
Common Points on Initial Assessment
tions that stimulate the asthma condition. Response to an-
The initial assessment reveals a cat with mild to severe trou-
tihistamines is more variable than response to steroids.
ble breathing.
 Inhaler therapy: In severe cases, the use of a specialized
inhaler with steroidal or bronchodilator medication to de-
 The patient may be open-mouth breathing with a wheeze
liver microscopic levels of drugs into the bronchial ducts
audible without a stethoscope.
may also be suggested.
● The patient may have an increased respiratory rate or
effort.
Prevention
 Auscultation reveals mild to severe wheezing over local-
    m nd   i 
ized or generalized sections of the chest.
ever, keeping the cat indoors in a clean environment may
●Further, the pet may be symcopal or have severe tachyp-
help decrease severity of the attacks.
nea.
 Mucous membrane color can be light pink to severely
pale gum color
Key Points in Discussing Feline Asthma with a
 Finally, the pet may have a chronic mild to severe cough.
Client
● Much like human asthma, feline asthma is an aller-
Complications
gic condition of the cat that produces chronic
With severely affected animals, an asthma attack may pro-
bronchial airway thickening.
duce a respiratory emergency.
 The disease is episodic, producing mild to severe
uaa ue pue uag yno-uado unos
Diagnosis
respiratory wheeze.
There is no one absolute diagnostic test for feline
 Animals with severe disease can have acute life-
asthma; it is a diagnosis of exclusion. Clinical diagnostics
 threatening episodes that may require critical care
are recommended to rule out other forms of infectious, ob-
hospitalization, oxygen, and medications to help
structive, cardiac, cancerous, and other disease forms. Some
 reduce the severity of bronchial constriction.
diagnostics follow:
There is no cure for feline asthma; the goal of treat-
o s an    si 
●Complete blood count/chemistry/urinalysis: Allows
the episodes.
the medical team to evaluate any changes in the blood
work that could suggest infectious, metabolic, or hor-
monal diseases.
Infectious Diseases of the Respiratory System
● Infectious screens: Allows the evaluation of the pet for
Pneumonia
specific viral (i.e., Felv, FIV, FIP) or fungal diseases that
Pneumonia is a bacterial, fungal, or viral infection involving
can produce respiratory symptoms.
the lung fields, the bronchi, and the trachea. The infection
Chapter 11: Respiratory System
141
produces an infiltration of white blood cells and fluid into
fever, the veterinarian may suggest that the pet be hospi-
these areas.
talized for intravenous fluids, intravenous antibiotics, and
possibly oxygen support.
Cause of Disease
● Medications: Medications are focused on controlling or
The cause of the disease is a bacterial, fungal, or viral infec-
eliminating the infection, opening up the airways, and
decreasing severe coughing or irritation. The following
passages), or, less often, from the blood.
medications may be discussed.
Antibiotics are indicated if there is a concerm regard-
Signalment
ing bacterial pneumonia.
Pneumonia is more common in dogs than in cats and has
 Antifungals are indicated if there is a concem regard-
s s  rn    
ing fungal infection (see below).
hounds, working dogs, and larger breed dogs. It has been re-
Bronchodilators (i.e., theophylline, terbutaline, etc.)
 ported in animals from 2 months to 15 years of age.
are used to help open up bronchi and increase the
amount of air brought into the lungs.
Common Points on Medical History
 Depending on the causative agent producing the pneumonia,
Key Points in Discussing Bacterial Pneumonia
the disease can progress slowly to a very acute stage, and
symptoms can be mild to severe. Common complaints with
with a Client
 Bacterial, fungal, or viral pneumonia is generally
animals suffering from pneumonia can be
 an acute infection of the bronchial and lung tissue
of the pet.
weight loss,
 depression and lethargy,
 The infection fills normal airways and lung tissue
with purulent debris (pus) and infection, decreas-
 not wanting to eat or drink,
inability to exercise,
ing the ability of the lungs to oxygenate the tissue.
Animals will typically present with a moist, pro-
 productive deep cough,
ductive cough, fever, depression, anorexia, and in-
 sneezing, and
 nasal discharge.
creased breathing difficulty.
 If enough lung tissue is affected, pneumonia can be
a life-threatening condition.
Common Points in Initial Assessment
 Pneumonia produces the following clinical signs:
Fever
Prevention
 Increased breathing rate (tachypnea)
To help prevent bacterial pneumonia, try to maintain ani-
Extending the head and neck when breathing
mals in a thermoneutral environment (70° Fahrenheit or
 Inability to exercise
more) during colder winter months.
Discharge of the eyes and nose
 Wheezing or crackling noise present on auscultation 
Coccidiomycosis (Valley Fever)
 Coccidiomycosis is a fungal infection that can affect the res-
 piratory, skeletal, abdominal organs; integumentary system
Complications
(skin); central nervous system; and other systems of the
If left untreated, pneumonia can cause a life-threatening
 body. The disease is very slow growing and can take weeks
whole-body infection (sepsis), producing severe illness,
to months to start showing symptoms.
shock, and death.
Etiology
Diagnosis
The cause of the disease is a fungal arthrospore from the
 Diagnosis of generalized pneumonia is based on changes in
species Coccidiodes immitis, which exists in warm dry envi-
the complete blood count, suggesting infection, thoracic ra-
ronments (the Southwest of the United States) and typically
diographs, and aspirates of the trachea and bronchi collected
affects only canines.
through advanced procedures (i.e., transtracheal wash/
bronchoscopy).
Signalment
Boxers and Doberman pinschers can be most sensitive to the
Treatment
infection. The disease is very rarely seen in cats.
 Treatment is based on the presentation of the animal and the
severity of the disease noted.
Common Points in Medical History
Valley fever is a slowly progressing disease in which symp-
Hospitalization/supportive care: In some cases if the
toms worsen over weeks to months, and initial signs may be
pet is dehydrated, unable to eat or drink, or has a high
very mild. Common medical complaints are
142
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
weight loss,
ated also with moist, rotting organic debris, such as bird
 depression and lethargy,
 droppings. Areas of decreased sunlight also help the spore to
coughing,
proliferate (i.e., old barns).
limping, and
seizures.
Signalment
Male canines between 1-5 years of age, especially Dober-
Common Points on Initial Assessment
man and Labrador retriever breeds, are the most susceptible.
Since valley fever can affect multiple body systems, physi-
 ae se  amaq (isdsd xas o s
cal exams can show multiple system symptoms. Some
commonly at risk.
changes in the physical exam can be
Common Points in Medical History
● chronic fever that is not responsive to antibiotics,
 depression and lethargy,
Blastomycosis is a slowly progressing disease in which
coughing,
symptoms worsen over weeks to months, and initial signs
may be very mild. Common medical complaints are
 increased lung sounds, crackles to rasps,
+
limping,
draining purulent (pus) tracts in the skin,
inability to exercise (exercise intolerance),
+
infections within the eye (uveitis), and
 anorexia/weight loss (chronic),
● disease of the central nervous system, including seizures
 lameness,
and depression.
cough, and
seizures.
Complications
Complications can vary depending on the systems affected,
Common Points on Initial Assessment
the animal, and the severity of infection. In some cases, un-
Since blastomycosis can affect multiple body systems, phys-
treated valley fever can produce life-threatening disease.
ical exams can show multiple system symptoms. Some
changes in the physical exam can be
Diagnosis
 i so o ps a  a ana po si
fever,
complete blood count suggesting infection, thoracic radi-
chronic cough/shortness of breath,
 ographs suggesting a pneumonia, and clinical serology test-
+
lymph node enlargement,
 ing for antibodies evident against valley fever (i.e., coccid-
skin lesions—abscesses or fluid-filled granulomas,
iomycosis titers).
lameness,
hind limb paralysis (cats), and
eye problems—-infections inside the eye (uveitis).
Treatment
● Treatment is focused on use of long-term antifungal
drugs, supportive care, and anti-inflammatory medica-
Complications
 Complications can vary depending on the systerm affected,
tion for pain while the animal overcomes the fungus.
The treatment of this disease can be extremely long term,
the animal, and the severity of infection. In some cases,
umtreated blastomycosis can produce life-threatening
and may take months to a year to treat.
● Overall, it is strongly recommended that the pet have re-
disease.
stricted activity for the first 1-2 months of treatment.
Valley fever is spread in the air throughout the Southwest,
Key Points in Discussing Fungal Pneumonia with
is not usually directly contagious from animal to animal,
a Client
and is not considered zoonotic.
●Fungal pneumonia is a chronic, slowly progressing
disease affecting the lung fields and possibly other
Blastomycosis
body systems (i.e., eyes, central nervous system,
Blastomycosis is a fungal infection caused by the fungus
organs, intestine).
Blastomycosis dermatitidis and can affect the respiratory,
The disease may start with mild subtle signs of
skeletal, integumentary (skin), central nervous, and other
cough, weight loss, anorexia, and depression and
systems of the body. The disease is very slow growing and
 then may develop into severe systemic disease.
can take weeks to months to start showing symptoms.
Because fungal infections grow very slowly, treat-
ment may take months to cure.
Etiology
If untreated, fungal infections can produce whole-
The cause of the disease is a fungal arthrospore, which ex-
body life-threatening systemic infections.
ists in warm/high-humidity environments. Growth is associ-
Chapter 11: Respiratory System
143
Diagnosis
a history of chronic upper respiratory disease, sometimes
 Diagnosis of blastomycosis can be based on changes in the 
within the last 30 days;
complete blood count suggesting infection, thoracic radi-
 seizures, focal to grand mal; and
ographs suggesting pneumonia, and clinical serology testing
changes in behaviors.
for antibodies evident against blastomycosis (i.e., blastomy-
cosis titers).
Common Points on Initial Assessment
Clinical signs can vary depending on what systems are being
Treatment
infected by the virus.
 Treatment is focused on use of long-term antifungal drugs,
 In the acute/upper respiratory form, signs may be
●fever (usually high, more than 104°);
while the animal overcomes the fungus. The treatment of
 purulent (pus) nasal and ocular discharge;
this disease can be extremely long term and may take
 dehydration; and
months to a year to treat. Overall, it is strongly recom-
vomiting and diarrhea (rare).
mended that the pet have restricted activity for the first 1-2
months of treatment.
In the chronic/neurologic form, signs may occur in con-
a  o on  s a o  a an  g
Canine Distemper Virus (CDV)
days later. Common signs are
This disease is passed by airborne exposure or from direct
contact of nasal or ocular discharge. The disease does not
 seizures, focal to grand mal;
exist in the environment for long. The disease can have two
 changes in behavior;
+
phases: acute, which is the upper respiratory form, and
increased sensitivity to pain (hyperesthesia);
chronic, which is the neurologic form.
coma; and
If neurologic signs occur, there is a poor prognosis for re-
death (up to 90% mortality).
covery.
 Patients that come in with symptoms suggestive of
Etiology
this disease should be isolated immediately due to its
The cause of the disease is a virus affecting dogs and other
infectious potential to other patients.
camivores. Often the acute form will occur within 10 days
 of exposure initially, with neurologic signs showing up pos-
sibly 30 or more days later.
Complications
There are some common complications to CDV.
Signalment
All dogs can be affected with the disease. However, with
● Seizures: If the patient recovers from the neurologic
regular vaccinations adult dogs have a better chance of re-
phase of the disease, the patient may have seizures for its
sistance.
lifetime.
●Dental lesions: In juvenile patients, the high fever can
Incubation Period
 produce enamel lesions to the adult teeth, causing breaks
Once exposed, the dog may begin to show signs within
in the surface of the enamel on the teeth.
10-28 days.
Hard pad: Some juvenile pets will have hardening of
their pads secondary to the virus.
Common Points on Medical History
Since canine distemper virus can produce two distinct syn-
Diagnosis
 dromes, either simultaneously or separated by a few weeks,
 In general, the tentative diagnosis of CDV is based on the
the chief medical complaints can vary.
 presence of physical signs and changes in the blood work.
 In the acute, or respiratory, form complaints may be
Some clinical diagnostics are as follows.
depression,
●CDV blood titers: This is a clinical diagnostic test for the
anorexia,
presence of antibodies in the blood against the distemper
sneezing,
virus. However, any vaccinated animal will have some
coughing, and
positive titer level to CDV.
 purulent nasal or ocular discharge.
CDV titer—cerebral spinal fluid: This test of the cere-
bral spinal fluid for antibodies against CDV can suggest
 In the chronic, or neurologic, form the disease may occur in
a distermper viral infection of the central nervous system.
 Conjunctival smear: As with many viral infections,
days later. Common signs are
CDV does leave intracellular remnants called inclusion
144
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
-The Science behind the Diseases
bodies in specific cells of the body. With CDV, inclusion
Etiology
bodies can be found in the cells of the inner eyelid (the 
 Kennel cough is caused by an initial viral infection that de-
conjunctiva) during the acute upper respiratory phase of
velops into a secondary bacterial component.
the infection. Observation of these inclusion bodies sug-
 gests CDV infection.
Signalment
All dogs and cats can be potentially affected. Dogs and cats
Treatment
     n       
 The treatment is focused on supportive care while the ani-
form of the disease. The incubation time is 410 days.
mal overcomes the virus. It is recommended that the dog
have some form of fluid therapy to maintain hydration and
Common Points in Medical History
antibiotics for secondary infection. Overall, it is strongly
Kennel cough is a mild to moderate upper respiratory infec-
recommended that the dog be hospitalized for intravenous
 tion producing the complaints
fluids and antibiotics and careful monitoring for dehydra-
tion, electrolyte imbalances, and low blood sugar.
coughing,
+
sneezing,
Prevention
 depression, and
-as Addnd aiua iaun yano auos aaeu iu suaned so
 anorexia (occasionally).
ries of vaccinations and are up to date on adult vaccinations
 have high immunity against CDV.
Common Points on Initial Assessment
 Kennel cough generally produces mild upper respiratory
signs producing
Environmental
 Clean the exposed area with a 20% bleach solution, Parvo-
sol, or other hospital disinfectant. The virus lives in the en-
coughing,
vironment for only a short period of time (days).
sneezing,
 nasal discharge,
 ocular discharge,
Key Points in Discussing Canine Distemper Virus
 increased respiratory effort with increased lung sounds,
with a Client
ou la Asan adn ane u si Aa
pue
fever.
that generally infects unvaccinated young dogs.
 Physical signs of the upper respiratory disease are
severe nasal and ocular discharge, fever, anorexia,
 Patients that come in with symptoms suggestive of
depression, and coughing.
this disease should be isolated immediately due to its
Fifty percent of animals infected with CDV will
infectious potential to other patients.
also have infection of the central nervous system as
well.
 Physical signs of the neurologic system are
seizures, increased sensitivity to pain, behavior
Complications
changes, and death.
 If gone untreated, a mild to severe bacterial or fungal pneu-
 There is a high mortality rate (approximately 90%)
monia may occur.
associated with animals that have central nervous
system infections.
Diagnosis
 Neurologic signs can occur up to 30 days after the
There is no obvious diagnostic test for kennel cough.
upper respiratory phase of the disease.
 Diagnosis is made on physical signs, history, blood work
 Most dogs that have gone through their full set of
-eann oi asudsa pue 'aseas rauo pn au on snss
 puppy vaccinations and that are up to date on their
ment.
adult vaccinations are highly resistant to CDV in-
fection.
Treatment
 Distemper virus exists for only a short time in the
Unless the disease is severe, the animal should be placed on
environment (days).
 a broad spectrum of antibiotics and kept in a thermoneutral
vaporized environment. If the pet develops dehydration and
anorexia, hospitalization, fluids, and other medication may
Canine and Feline Kennel Cough—Tracheobronchitis
be indicated.
Tracheobronchitis is a highly infectious upper respiratory
and bronchial infection that is a combination of a viral and
Prevention
bacterial or fungal infection affecting most dogs and cats,
There are intranasal and subcutaneous vaccines that offer
 especially in a shelter environment.
 protection for 3-6 months.
Chapter 11: Respiratory System
145
Keeping infectious dogs isolated from the general popu-
Common Points in Medical History
lation and maintaining ample disinfection to exposed cages,
Animals may present with just a history of trauma and
pans, and other environmental regions are important to de-
crease the infectious potential of disease.
vanced pneumothorax, some complaints may be
increased respiratory difficulty,
●restlessness,
Key Points in Discussing Kennel Cough with a
●weakness, and
Client
collapse.
●Kennel cough is generally a mixed viral and bacte-
laddn auapouu on piu e suonpoid uooau l
Common Points on Physical Examination
respiratory infection/sore throat complex in cats
 and dogs.
Signs depend on the severity of the pneumothorax. With a
● Common symptoms of kennel cough infection are
a deep productive cough, sneezing, nasal dis-
ens, common physical concerns are
charge, and occasionally depression and anorexia.
Animals with exposure to other pets in shelters,
open-mouth breathing,
dog parks, grooming salons, and other locations are
 increased respiratory rate and difficulty,
at higher risk to infection.
 abdominal breathing,
 There are vaccines that help decrease the risk of
 purple to blue to gray mucus membrane color,
disease and physical signs of disease.
 Kennel cough disease is rarely a life-threatening
bounding pulses,
 generalized increased lung sounds,
disease.
evidence of air under the skin (subcutaneous emphy-
sema),
collapse,
Trauma to the Respiratory System
 shock, and
Pneumothorax
 death.
A pneumothorax occurs when there is an injury or trauma
to the chest that allows air into the thoracic cavity. When the
Complications
If gone untreated, pneumothorax can produce a life-
vacuum of the chest is interrupted, air rushes into the chest,
threatening emergency.
collapsing the lungs and preventing normal respiration.
How quickly the air enters the chest and the amount of air
Diagnosis
present determines how severe and acute the signs are. The
 Diagnosis of pneumothorax is based on history, physical ex-
condition can become life threatening 12-24 hours after
the initial injury as air slowly accumulates within the chest
amination, and thoracic radiography (see Figure 11.10).
cavity.
Etiology
A pneumothorax occurs when an acute trauma either
punctures a hole in the thoracic cavity or produces severe
bruis-ing and trauma to the lungs such that air sponta-
neously leaks from the lungs themselves. Some possible
types of trauma are
being hit by car,
falling,
 animal attack,
direct bite wounds into the chest,
a smaller animal shaken by a larger one (i.e., a big
dog-little dog attack),
gunshot/BB wound.
Figure I1.10. Thoracic radiography of a pneumothorax demon-
strates three overall concerns: (l) The heart is floating off the
Signalment
sternum on a cushion of air (red arrow); (2) lungs look consoli-
There is no age, sex, or breed predilection to a pneumo-
dated and lung margins can be appreciated. (yellow arrow);
thorax.
(3) There is flattening of the diaphragm (white arrow).
146
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
TheSciencebehind theDiseases
Treatment
Key Points in Discussing a Pneumothorax with a
 Treatment depends on physical signs.
Client
 If a mild pneumothorax is detected on thoracic radiogra-
The chest cavity exists in a vacuum, which allows
a 'sds gisd ou a aan nnq 'nn e ae ud
the lungs to expand and contract when the pet
veterinarian may simply recommend monitoring.
breathes.
With mild to moderate physical symptoms, the pet may
If air is introduced into the chest cavity from a
need a chest tap to remove the air accumulated, and the pet
puncture of the chest wall or from an injury to a
hospitalized and monitored.
lung, the lungs may collapse.
With severe pneumothorax that does not improve with a
This process can occur suddenly, producing symp-
-u pue paoeid aq o paau Ae aqn isauo e 'dei aus 
toms of severe shortness of breath, blue to purple
 tained under critical care hospitalization.
gum color, collapse, weakness, and even death.
This process can also be a slow condition over
Prevention
12-24 hours, and symptoms may not occur for sev-
 Preventing possible trauma can help decrease the chance of
eral hours after the trauma.
 pneumothorax.
If not treated quickly, these conditions can be
fatal.
 Types of traumas that can produce a pneumothorax
are
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
being hit by car,
Please try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology-
-chest trauma/bite,
The Science behind theDiseases) to help reinforce the infor-
-falls, and
mation presented here.
small animals shaken by larger animals (animal
fight).
Pneumothorax is diagnosed by thoracic radi-
ographs, and radiographs are often recommended
after a pet has had a serious injury or attack, even
if the pet is asymptomatic at the time of exam.
 It is strongly recommended that animals with
pneumothorax be hospitalized for monitoring and
treatment.
Chapter 12
Cardiovascular System
Anatomy of the Cardiovascular System
1. Deoxygenated blood from the cranial and caudal vena
cava enters the right atrium.
In mammals, the heart is a four-chambered structure, with
2. As the right atrium contracts, blood is then passed
each chamber separated by valves. The heart lies on the floor
through the right AV valve (tricuspid valve) into the
of the thoracic cavity surrounded by the lungs. It is divided
right ventricle.
into two halves (see Figure 12.1).
3. Next, the right ventricle contracts, pushing blood into the
lungs to be oxygenated via the pulmonic artery
The Overall Anatomy of the Heart
 4. Once the blood is oxygenated at the alveolar level, blood
Right Heart
then moves back into the left atrium from the lungs via
The right heart receives deoxygenated blood from the body
the pulmonic vein.
and carries it to the lungs for oxygenation. The right side of
5. As the left atrium contracts, the blood is pushed through
the heart is further separated by two valves:
the left AV valve (mitral valve) into the left ventricle.
6. Finally, as the left ventricle contracts, the blood is pushed
 The right AV (tricuspid or right A/V valve) separates
into the body via the largest artery, the aorta.
the right atrium and the right ventricle.
●The pulmonic valve separates the right ventricle from
Heart contraction is divided into two phases; the first
the pulmonary artery, which takes blood to the lungs for
phase, the diastole, describes the phase of contraction of the
oxygenation.
atriums. The goal of this phase is to move blood from atria
into the ventricles.
Left Heart
The left heart receives oxygenated blood from the lungs and
1. Both atriums contract at the same time to pass the blood
distributes the blood to the rest of the body. The left side of
from the atriums into the ventricles.
the heart is further separated by two valves:
 2. Here the AV valves open and then snap shut at the end of
diastole.
 The left atrioventricular valve (mitral valve or left AV
●The right atrium pushes deoxygenated blood into the
valve) separates the left atrium from the left ventricle and
right ventricle.
an ou sun aun wo pooa pauxo ysnd on suado
 The left atrium pushes oxygenated blood into the left
lower ventricle.
ventricle.
●The aortic valve separates the left ventricle from the
3. At the end of the diastolic cycle, the AV valves snap shut.
aua aui oui poonq paeuaaxo ysnd oi suado pue eioe
This action produces the first heart sound (*lub") or S
body.
(see Figure 12.2).
Pericardium
The next phase of the heart beat is systole and describes
The heart is surrounded by a sheet of clear tissue called the
the phase of contraction of the ventricles (see Figure 12.3).
pericardium. It separates the heart from the rest of the
chest, preventing an infection of the heart. It produces a
1. Contraction of the left and right ventricles pushes blood
small amount of clear sterile fluid, which normally keeps
into the body at the same time.
   sd  io s  
 The right ventricle pushes deoxygenated blood
up an infection.
through the pulmonic valve toward the lungs.
 The heart is composed of specialized striated muscle that
 The left ventricle pushes oxygenated blood through
works collectively to stimulate its own contractions and con-
au yanoun pooq dund o ynoua Auos 1un auo se sionn
 general circulation.
body. Blood flows through the heart and into the body in a
 2. The action of the closing of the aortic and pulmonic
dynamic cycle to meet the demands of oxygenation. A nor-
valves at the end of the systolic phases produces the sec-
mal cardiac cycle begins as follows.
ond heart sound ("dub") or S2
148
Section 2: Anatomy andPhysiology
-TheSciencebehindtheDiseases
Aorta
Aorta
Vena
vena
cava
Pulmonary
cava
Pulmonary
artery
artery
Left
Left
atrium
 atrium
 Pericardium
Pericardium
Right
Right
 atrium
Left AV
atrium
Left AV
valve
valve
eft
Right AV
Left
Hight AV
ventricle
ventricle
valve
valve
Aortic
Aortic
valve
valve
Right
Hight
ventricle
Pulmonic
ventricle
Pulmonic
valve
valve
Normal heart
 Diastole
Figure 12.1.
 An illustration of the normal heart.
Figure 12.2.
An illustration of the normal heart during diastole.
For each successive normal diastolic and systolic cycle,
Aorta
blood is pushed out of the aorta into the body. This pressure
vena
causes a wave of blood flow through the elastic arteries,
cava
Pulmonary
which produces
artery
●a perceivable strong pulse,
 pink mucous membranes, and
a capillary refill time (CRT) of less than 2 seconds
Left
atrium 
Heart disease occurs when blood is unable to flow
Right
Pericardium
through the heart at a normal rate to meet the demands of the
body. This chapter will discuss many potential causes of
atrium 
Left AV
valve
heart failure. Cardiac pathology can occur in either the left,
right, or both sides of the heart. However, when the normal
Right AV-
Left
flow of blood is slowed or inhibited, the following patho-
valve
ventricle
logic changes can occur.
 In a chronic condition, the contractions of the ventricles
with a leaking AV valve produce a retrograde flow of blood
back into the atrium. Over time, this increased volume causes
Aortic
valve
 atrial enlargement.
As the atrium enlarges and the blood continues to have
Right
ventricle
Pulmonic
decreased flow, an accumulation of blood in the tissue im-
valve
 mediately caudal to the right and left atriums occurs. On the
Systole
right side, the blood will back up into the liver; on the left
side the blood backs into the lung fields.
Figure 12.3.
An illustration of the normal heart during systole.
148
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
149
Aorta
Vena
cava
Pulmonary
zrtery
Liver
Left
 atrium
Aortic
valve
Right
Left AV
atrium
Ascites
valve
Left
Right AV
ventricle
valve
Right
Pulmonic
ventricle
valve
Right-sided heart disease
Figure I12.4.  An illustration of right-sided heart disease with hepatic congestion.
As there is decreased flow through these organs, the fluid
Obtaining a History of Cardiac Disease
component of blood may begin to move out of the vessels
and collect within the organs and/or the body cavity. This is
The most important key to getting a thorough history re-
called congestion. Depending upon which side of the heart
garding cardiac disease is to understand the basic difference
is affected, pathologies may occur.
between canine and feline heart disease.
In right-sided heart congestion, the blood begins to pool
In canines, heart disease is generally a slowly progres-
within the liver (hepatic congestion) and collect in the ab-
sive chronic disease that presents with worsening symp-
dominal cavity. This fluid is called ascites (see Figure 12.4).
toms over time until the animal enters a cardiac failure state.
 In left-sided heart failure, in the dog, the fluid begins to ac-
Typically, chief complaints are weakness, lethargy, inability
cumulate in normal airways. This is called pulmonary edema
to exercise properly (exercise intolerance), coughing, and
(see Figure 12.5). In the cat, fluid builds up around the lungs
shortness of breath.
and heart; this is called pleural effusion (see Figure 12.6).
 In felines, heart disease generally presents as a sudden
Although discussed in detail in Chapter 13, a common sec-
 and acute process with little to no previous history or symp-
 ondary component to chronic heart disease is kidney disease
toms. The cat can act completely normally just hours before
 and failure. The kidneys require a constant rate of blood flow-
it presents with acute signs of cardiac failure. The disease it-
 m a sap m s  e a yno s
self has been going on for months to years, but felines rarely
kidneys have decreased ability to filter blood at an acceptable
show chronic evidence of heart problems until they are in an
rate. Over time, kidney tissue becomes damaged and chronic
acute failure episode.
renal disease can occur. Since many of the medications (i.e.,
As with respiratory disease (see Chapter 11), the focus of
furosemide, enalapril, etc.) for heart disease increase the
obtaining a history is trying to differentiate if the symptoms
kidney's output, it is very important to have the medical
are stemming from pathology of the respiratory or cardiac
team inform the pet's owner of potential secondary renal
systems. At times it is impossible to differentiate the signs.
 disease and monitor the animal regularly for changes in
However, some key questions to help indicate if there is car-
blood work results.
diac disease are presented here.
150
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Aorta
Vena
cava
Pulmonary
artery
Left
atrium
Aortic
valve
Right -
Left AV
atrium
valve
Right AV-
valve
Left
ventricle
Right
ventricle
Pulmonic
valve
Mitral valve disease
(a)
(c)
Pulmonary edema
(b)
Figure I2.5. An illustration of left-sided heart disease with he-
patic congestion (a). The radiograph (b) shows enlargement of the
left atrium as noted by extension of the caudal heart silhouette
dorsally and caudally (white arrows) and fluid accumulation in
the caudal dorsal lung lobes (dark arrows) and (c).
Is a Cough Evident?
Is the Cough Worse at Night?
 In general, coughing produced by heart disease is due to pul-
At night when the air cools, water droplets condense and
monary congestion or enlargement of the heart, which
-u an apuy u sui Auah 'sia suni an u pood
pushes upward on the trachea, producing a significant cough.
creased fluid condensation. Animals with chronic condi-
 This type of cough is generally associated with the following.
tions, such as heart disease patients that have decreased abil-
ity to remove fluid from the lung fields, can have a more
·Excitement: Coughs that are made worse with exercise
 productive cough at night.
 Or excitement can suggest heart problems severe enough
to affect the pet's ability to exercise normally.
Does the Pet Show Exercise Intolerance?
●Exercise: Animals that cough when exercised or with in-
When pets cannot maintain normal levels of activity, it sug-
creased activity may have cardiac disease. These animals'
ue Aianbap anssn an axo no Aan n sis
hearts cannot keep up with the demands that are associ-
they may have cardiac disease. If this is noted, further ques-
 ated with increased activity.
tions may need to be asked.
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
151
Aorta
Vena
cava
Pulmonary
artery
Left
 atrium
LeftAV
valve
Right -
 atrium
Right AV
valve
Left
ventricle
Right
Aortic
ventricle
valve
 Pulmonic
 Pleural effusion
valve
Hypertrophic heart
(a)
Figure I2.6.  Illustration and radiograph of pleural effusion in
the cat (a). Compare this radiograph to the one in Figure 12.5.
Note the loss of detail (line) of the ventral lung fields and cardiac
silhouette (b). This is caused by the buildup of fluid in the ventral
chest.
Has There Been an Episode of Collapse or Fainting?
Is the Pet on Heartworm Prevention?
●These pets should be handled with extreme caution be-
In heartworm-endemic regions, heartworm testing and med-
cause their heart is so severely affected that the pet col-
ication status is important to document. Furthermore, it is 
lapses or loses consciousness with any exertion.
important to determine if the pet has traveled to any heart-
 These pets should be placed in oxygen and the medical
worm-endemic regions in the last 6 months, especially in the
team notified immediately.
spring and summer months (see below in disease section).
Does the Pet Have Periods of Increased Respiratory
Obtaining an Initial Assessment with Cardiac
Effort?
Disease
 pasr jo sposia au on s sd um
while breathing, breathe abdominally, breathe with their
Just as discussed in the last chapter, when assisting in the
head and neck extended, or make abnormal sounds while
initial assessment of a pet affected with a possible cardiac
breathing, it suggests serious disease (see Figure 12.7).
 n   n   n s  
152
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology
—The Science behind the Diseases
Tabie 12.1.
 Triage concerns in the cardiology patient.
Systems
Signs Indicating an Emergency
Mentation
Stressed, eyes dilated
 Nonresponsive/comatose 
Fever
Temp >104.50
Temp <99° (due to shock, DIC, coma,
 sometimes due to aortic thrombo-
embolism)
Hydration
 Dehydration >5-7%
Gum color
Blue, purple, or gray
 Capillary refill time 
CRT >2-3 seconds
 Respiratory nature,
Nature: Pet's open-mouth breathing.
auscultation,
 abdominally breathing with head and
and rate
neck elevated.
Auscultation: Severely increased respiratory
 noise, evidence of rasps or crackles.
Figure 12. 7.  Image of a dog in an oxygen cage with severe
 Rate: Respiratory rates >80-100 breaths
respiratory disease. Note the pet is extending his neck and head
per minute
Heart rate/pulse
Rate: Heart rates <80 bpm or >180-200 bpm
upward while open-mouth breathing.
Pulse: Change in pulse quality
● Weak pulse
esind oN 
● Paradoxical
Pulse deficits
auscultate the animal for abnormalities. A technician must
Limbs (feline)
 Animal is unable to bear weight on limbs
be able to practice listening with the stethoscope to normal
that are cool, painful, swollen, and
and abnormal cardiac sounds in order to properly evaluate
without a pulse, or has decreased pulses
the sick and hospitalized pet.
(thromboembolism).
The most important concept is that these are potentially
sase yb pau   sass su-a
and treatment.
 Bradycardia is defined as an abnormally slow rate.
Bradycardia rates are defined as follows.
 Practice Point: If a team member is unsure if a pet
Canines: <60 beats per minute
may have life-threatening cardiac failure, oxygen is
Felines: <80 beats per minute
never contraindicated (see Table 12.1).
Pulse Ouality
 Evaluation of pulse quality is extremely important in the dif-
Pulse
 ferentiation of cardiac disease. Evaluating overall quality re-
The pulse is one of the most important indicators of heart
quires the team member to practice determining what a nor-
disease. It represents cardiac output and efficiency. There
mal pulse feels like on numerous healthy animals. All
s no oa un un sad   s a
members of the hospital team should be able to determine
situation with reasonable heart rates, but have abnormal or
what a normal versus an abnormal pulse feels like.
missing pulse rates. Changes in the pulse do not always in-
 dicate heart disease; however, the pulse must always be eval-
Weak Pulse
uated when there are concerns of cardiac problems. The
 Pulses that are diminished or not perceivable suggest that
pulse should be evaluated as follows.
the heart cannot adequately perfuse tissue. This always sug-
 gests a life-threatening emergency and can be caused by
Puise Rate
many disease entities:
Changes in pulse rate can be suggestive of a cardiac or sys-
temic disease.
Heart disease/failure (see below)
 Normal pulse rates are generally as follows.
Shock (see Chapter 30)
Canines: 80-120 beats per minute
 Severe dehydration
Felines: 100-140 beats per minute
 Partial arterial thrombus (see below)
Tachycardia is defined as an abnormally rapid or accel-
erated heart rate. Tachycardic rates are defined as follows.
Pulse Deficit
Canines: >200 beats per minute
For each heartbeat there should be a definable pulse. Each
 Felines: >220 beats per minute
team mermber should place his or her hand on the femoral ar-
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
153
Abdominal aorta
Thromboembol
Bladder
Figure 12.8. An illustration of a saddle thrombus (thromboembolism) in the terminal aorta.
tery (or brachial, digital, or other arteriole) while auscultat-
Cardiovascular Shock—No Cardiac Output
In cardiovascular shock there is still an evident heartbeat,
not, this is a pulse deficit.
 but the heart is unable to maintain any cardiac output. If not
treated immediately, the pet will go into complete cardiovas-
 This is an extremely important observation to make since
cular collapse.
detection of a pulse deficit can be the first indication of
a life-threatening cardiac arrhythmia or shock situation.
Cardiovascular Collapse—Code
Animals with severe pulse deficits can be in life-
 In cardiovascular collapse, there is no pulse or respiration
threatening cardiac failure.
evident. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation must be initiated
 Any pulse deficits should be reported to the medical team
immediately (see Chapter 31).
immediately.
Thromboembolism-Feline
Paradoxical Pulse
With severe feline heart diseases the ventricles and atria can
Another important distinction of pulse quality is the para-
be enlarged, causing abnormal blood flow within the heart.
doxical pulse. This is a syndrome in which the pulse weak-
As this occurs, a clot can form, attaching itself to the heart
ens and strengthens as the patient inhales and exhales. This
muscle.
change suggests a fluid accumulation around the heart, a
The clot can break loose (called a thromboembolism)
pericardial effusion.
and begin moving through the arteries until it lodges within
a smaller artery. A common site for an embolism to lodge
11 m jo siunoue ae Aq papunonns si hay aun sy 
is where the aorta splits to become the femoral artery,
 tries to push blood out while fighting increasing pressure
which feeds the hind legs (see Figure 12.8). If the limbs
within the pericardial sack.
have no pulse and are cool, it can suggest an arterial throm-
 As the pet breathes in, the interthoracic pressure increases,
boembolism.
and the heart is unable to maintain normal cardiac output.
 sans nad a s ua on sasnd an sasn s
Breathing
strengthen as the pet expires, due to the changes of in-
As discussed in Chapter 11, respiratory rate and quality can
 terthoracic pressure.
be significantly altered in animals with left-sided heart dis-
 d  sisa os r a n 
ease. The following parameters should be noted.
medical team determine if there is a pericardial effusion,
detection of a paradoxical pulse is an important observa-
Is the Pet Tachypnic?
tion of serious disease.
Animals can breathe more rapidly (be tachypnic) when
       n
No Pulse
suggest abnormality:
Lack of a pulse is a life-threatening condition suggestive of
cardiovascular shock, cardiovascular collapse, and throm-
 Canines with respiratory rates greater than 80-100
boembolism in the feline.
breaths per minute
154
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
● Felines with respiratory rates greater than 100-120
flow produces a high-pitched trill that masks the sounds
breaths per minute
of valve closure. When auscultated, the murmur is loudest
over the valve. These types of murmurs are produced two
Does the Pet Have Decreased Shallow Breathing?
ways.
Severely depressed animals with a slow, shallow respiratory
Over time AV valves can become leaky, allowing blood to
cycle are animals that may be severely life threatened and
reflux when the valve is normally closed (see Figure 12.9).
may need the full attention of the medical team.
 In pulmonic/aortic valves,there is typically a narrowing
of the area in front, at the valve level or above the valve. This
Does the Pet Have Abnormal or Noisy Respiration?
is called a stenosis. The sound is produced as the blood in-
 The normal respiratory pattern is a slow expansion and re-
creases speed going through the narrowed region.
laxation of the chest.
Other murmurs are produced when there is an abnormal
         
Abdominal breathing: Although panting can appear to
pathology usually produces a constant flow of blood from
have an abdominal component, if animals must use their
the right to the left side of the heart (see Figure 12.10).
abdomen to drive air in and out of their lung field it can
suggest serious respiratory disease. Increased abdominal
When auscultated, the murmur has a constant machine-
breathing can suggest trouble breathing (dyspnea).
like sound without the normal sounds of valve closure.
● Respiratory noise: Is the pet making respiratory noise
The murmurs are usually during both the diastole and
that can be appreciated without a stethoscope? If so, res-
systolic phases of contraction.
piratory noise (also called a stridor) can suggest a poten-
tial obstruction of the upper airway. It is important to note
Auscultation of the Lung Fields
if the stridor is occurring during inhalation, exhalation, or
As discussed in Chapter 11, changes in the lung fields can
both?
 also suggest cardiac disease.
Is There Extension of the Neck and Head While
Respiratory Crackles
Breathing?
Of all the respiratory sounds discussed, the one of most con-
Pets that extend their head and neck upward in conjunction
cerm in connection with cardiac disease is respiratory
with increased respiratory effort may have life-threatening
 crackles. The sound is best represented as the crumpling of
respiratory or cardiac disease. These pets are so severely
cellophane paper.
sne u ui eaon ha da is an  pa
In this situation, the sound is produced because air must
s s n   1  n  s 
papis-ual Aq pasneo (pinn) euapa Areuound ysnoui o3
Figure 12.7).
heart disease. The normal airways and alveoli are filled with
cells and fluid. The crackle sounds are produced as air
Color of Gums/Capillary Refill Time
 passes through the cramped region.
 Pets with respiratory disease that are having problems oxy-
genating their tissues have cyanotic mucous membranes.
Lack ofSound
 Their gums, whites of their eyes, rectum and other tissues
The inability to hear the heart can be as important as auscul-
 are light purple to blue to gray.
tating an abnormal heart sound. Inability to hear a normal
CRT is often hard to assess because the gum color is
heart sound can suggest
cyanotic.
●the presence of a pleural effusion or a pericardial effu-
Auscultation of the Heart
sion, which can produce decreased heart sounds, or
 Proper auscultation techniques of the cardiac systerm are de-
a mass in a lung field or near the heart that can obscure
-a  si a a  s g d  pa
normal sounds.
normal flow of blood through a valve or a septal defect. The
irregular flow of blood produces abnormal sounds as the
Also, in some deep-chested dogs the heart can sit to one
blood flows in an altered path, masking the normal heart
side or the other side of the chest and decrease heart sounds
on one side.
has an altered heart sound. With practice, the team member
should be able to identify the types of murmurs discussed
Diagnostics for the Cardiovascular System
next.
        
Valvular Murmurs
other systemic inflammatory, infectious, metabolic, and hor-
Valvular murmurs usually occur at one phase of heart con-
monal diseases, a cardiac evaluation may involve in-depth
traction (systole versus diastole) as blood flows retro-
clinical diagnostic procedures. An overview of these proce-
gradely through a narrow or damaged valve. The altered
dures are presented next.
Aorta
Vena
cava
Pulmonary
 artery
Left
atrium
Right 
atrium
Left AV
valve
Right AV-
Left
valve
ventricle
Aortic
valve
Right
ventricle
Pulmonic
valve
Normalheart
Mitralvalvedisease
the left AV valve during diastole and then pushes blood through the aortic valve during systole, producing a normal "lub-dub" as the
val ves close. With mitral valve disease, the blood flows into the ventricle during diastole, but then flows through both the aorta and 
the partially closed mitral valve. This would produce a "lub-swish" sound, which would be heard loudest over the mitral valve during
auscultation.
Blood flow through a septal defect
Figure 12.10.
 Image of flow of blood through an atrial or ventricular septal defect. The blood flows constantly through the opening,
producing a constant machinelike murmur in both diastole and systole.
155
156
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Diagnostic Blood Work
An additional diagnostic test, the heartworm test, is dis-
Blood diagnostic tests help determine if there is underlying
cussed below.
 organ, infectious, or hormonal disease that could predispose
' as  sa  ss mn a 
Diagnostic Imaging of the Chest and Heart
 it allows the veterinarian to evaluate if there is existing organ
New advances in veterinary medicine allow us to view the
 disease that may limit medical treatment options.
chest, heart, and lungs. These newer technologies allow the
veterinarian to image the intermal architecture of the heart and
Complete Blood Count
measure changes in wall thickness and overall contractility of
A complete blood count allows the veterinarian to determine
the heart. Some imaging diagnostics are discussed next.
if there is any underlying anemia (low red blood cell count),
increased white blood cell count, or low platelet count that
Thoracic Radiography
may be adding additional stress to the pet.
Chest films allow the veterinarian to detect changes within
the chest, heart size, tracheal position, mediastinum (region
Chemistry
between the lungs), fluid in the chest, air in the chest, or pos-
 A blood chemistry test is recommended to ensure there is no
sible masses or tumors (see Figure 12.11).
other organ, such as kidney, liver, or pancreas, affected.
There are several general health concerms that can be evalu-
 When evaluating the heart, the thoracic cavity should be
ated with a blood chemistry workup.
 assessed on inspiration, when the lungs are fully inflated,
with the pet on its right side; another radiograph should
Kidney disease is a common secondary concem with any
be taken with the animal on its back.
heart disease due to decreases in blood flow to the kidney.
Care must be taken with animals with cardiac disease.
Severe alterations in normal electrolyte concentrations
Some animals cannot comfortably be positioned for radi-
(calcium, potassium, sodium, magnesium, etc.) can have a
 ographs without producing severe respiratory distress.
profound effect on normal electrical rhythms of the heart.
Radiographic procedures should never be attempted in
 Increased thyroid hormone levels in the body can cause an
pets that are having severe respiratory difficulty
 increase in metabolism that can make the heart more prone
to arrhythmias. This could apply to hyperthyroid cats (see
uuaadns pioun uo sop pue (gl ade
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a
Radiographic Evaluation with the Client
● A radiograph study is being recormmended because
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a Blood and
of concerns about coughing, respiratory distress, or
Urine Evaluation with the Client
changes in the physical examination that suggest
 There are serious underlying organ and hormonal
disease of the heart and lungs.
diseases that can make heart disease worse.
●The study will help the medical team assess
General blood work and urinalysis can allow the
changes in the heart, chest, and lung fields that
veterinarian to assess the overall health status of
could suggest the difference between heart and pul-
the pet.
monary disease and will allow the veterinarian to
Furthermore, heart disease can cause secondary
make other diagnostic and treatment choices.
kidney disease. Since many of the medications in-
 crease the workload of the kidneys, it is important
to ascertain normal organ function through routine
Utrasound
blood work.
 Utrasound of the heart allows the veterinarian to assess if
Depending on the geographic region, there are spe-
 there is fluid within the heart sack (pericardium) around
cific clinical diagnostic tests that will help evaluate
the heart and if there are changes in the size of the ventri-
the pet for disease that can affect the heart and
 cles, thickening of the heart wall, changes in the valves of
lungs (i.e., heartworm test).
the heart, and masses within the heart (see Figure 12.12).
 These clinical diagnostics in combination with
Furthermore, the veterinarian can take ultrasound measure-
aa an ana diu lm saps s ao
ments of the
health of the pet.
●left atrium,
 left ventricle, and
 In addition to a blood chemistry workup, a urinalysis is
 contractility of the heart.
important as well. It allows the veterinarian to evaluate the
s  sas po n sa a n s
 These measurements allow the veterinarian to assess the
Changes in urine protein, concentrating ability, and urine
degree of heart damage and, in future ultrasounds, the re-
 sediment may indicate early renal pathology.
sponse to heart medications and treatments.
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
157
the left atrium enlarges, elevating the trachea and in time produces pulmonary edema (left heart disease). The changes in the heart and
thorax allow the veterinarian to decide on further diagnostic and treatment options.
Key Points in Discussing the Need for an
Ultrasound Evaluation with the Client
· Because there is concem regarding underlying
heart disease from evidence found on physical
exam or other diagnostic tests, a cardiac ultrasound
 is being recommended.
The cardiac ultrasound allows the medical team to
create an image of the intermal architecture of the
heart, its chambers, and its movement.
 This allows the veterinarian to evaluate changes in
 the heart wall and valves that could suggest disease
or cancer.
● Furthermore, diagnostic measurements can be
taken to evaluate the severity of the heart disease
and the heart's ability to pump blood. These meas-
urements can also be used as a baseline for further
studies to see the effectiveness of treatment and the
progression of disease.
Figure 12.12. Ultrasound image of the heart showing an abnor-
mally large heart with a possible mass associated with the right
atrium. The darkened region above the heart represents evidence
Electrocardiogram
of a pericardial effusion.
An electrocardiogram (EKG) allows the medical team to as-
      an   s  
electrical pump producing a specific electrical rhythm that
initiates normal contraction of the atria and ventricles. Ab-
Pulse Oximetry
normal electrical rhythms are possible in many cardiac
Pulse oximetry determines the oxygen-carrying capacity of
diseases and secondary to other systemic concerms. An ab-
the blood. A decrease in blood oxygen levels can suggest
normal EKG rhythm suggests an abnormal contraction of
poor oxygenation of tissue or decreased ability of the lungs
the heart. If these abnormal rhythms occur often, the ani-
to properly bring in oxygen. A pulse oximetry with a rectal
mal's life can be threatened. (EKGs are fully discussed in
or tendon probe can be an excellent tool to monitor changes
Chapter 24.)
in the oxygen-carrying capacity of the body. Normal pulse
158
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
 g us uxo  1o %0 aq ous Aa
tocols should be discussed based on the recommendations of
nine and feline blood.
the doctor and the medical team. Please use the following in-
formation as a basis to discuss and educate the client, but
Blood Pressure
never to diagnose a patient.
 Because heart disease can occur from systemic hypertension
Before discussing specific cardiac disease, understand-
(high blood pressure) and cause systemic hypertension,
ing congestive heart failure is critical. Although cardiac dis.
blood pressure monitoring is of key importance in diagnos.
ease can affect the heart valves, cardiac muscle, and rhythm,
ing and treating cardiac patients. Increasing blood pressure
all these diseases can end in the syndrome of congestive
can increase the strain on the heart's ability to perfuse the
heart failure and cardiovascular shock.
body and can make the disease condition worse. (See
Cardiovascular shock (congestive heart failure) is the loss
Chapter 13 for more information on blood pressure.)
of the normal ability to perfuse the body and maintain nor-
mal blood pressure and cardiac output due to an obstructive,
functional, or metabolic disease process. Symptoms and
Key Points in Discussing the Need for Further
pathology of the disease depend on which side of the heart
Diagnostics in a Cardiac Patient
is most affected. In general,
EKG
An EKG measures the heart's electrical impulses
 left-sided heart failure produces an acute respiratory car-
that stimulate normal contraction.
diac collapse even in the presence of chronic disease, and
If the electrical impulse is abnormal, it suggests the
● right-sided disease produces a chronic progressive he-
heart is not contracting normally.
 patic and abdominal disease.
 Abnormal cardiac rhythms can greatly affect the
heart's output and can endanger the pet.
Left-Sided Heart Failure
 The medical team needs to evaluate the heart's
Pathology
electrical impulses to ensure there are no underly-
With left-sided heart disease, the heart is unable to advance
ing abnormal cardiac contractions.
 blood at a rate adequate to meet the body's metabolic needs.
 This syndrome may be caused by
Pulse Oximetry
When there are concerns that the heart cannot meet
 pressure overload of the left heart,
the demands of the body for oxygenating tissue, a
impediment of the left heart filling, and
 pulse oximetry allows the medical team to quantita-
 rhythm disturbances.
tively evaluate the oxygen saturation in the blood. A
Heart failure may be caused by a combination of disease
normally functioning heart can maintain 90-100%
of the muscle, cardiac arrhythmias, and valvular disease.
oxygenation of the blood at all times. Decreases in the
Jo l r a a ad aq A ag a ansu
result of a pulse oximetry can suggest the severity of
these components. Not all heart failures will have a cardiac
heart disease.
murmur, an arrhythmia, or a disease of the cardiac muscle.
Blood Pressure
Etiology
 Blood pressure measures the overall resistance to
 a s no s d i  
blood flow in the arteries that the heart pumps against
caused by underlying disease of the heart, metabolic disease,
to produce a normal pulse. Abnormally high blood
hypertension, and other diseases. Some underlying diseases
pressure (hypertension) from underlying disease can
that can potentiate left-heart failure are
make the heart work much harder than necessary. If
  a n a  ss d 
cardiomyopathy (see below),
 pressure, the veterinarian can suggest courses of med-
hyperthyroidism (see Chapter 26),
ications to reduce hypertension and reduce the work-
systemic hypertension (see Chapter 13),
load on the heart.
mitral valve disease (see below),
cancer of the heart,
●narrowing of the outflow tract of blood leaving the heart
Diseases of the Cardiac System
(aortic stenosis), and
 any other disease entities that increase the heart output
Although not all diseases are mentioned in this discussion,
(e.g., hyperthyroidism, anemia, etc.) that can make heart
the common diseases are presented with the goal being to
understand and be able to explain to the client what the dis-
eases are, how they can present themselves, and what the
Signalment
overall short- and long-term concerns of each disease can
There is no breed or sex predilection with cardiovascular
be. Any discussion of overall diagnostic and treatment pro-
shock.
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
159
Common Points in Medical History
weak pulse,
In canine disease, congestive heart failure is a slowly pro-
paradoxical,
gressing chronic disease that presents with worsening symp-
 pulse deficit, and
toms over time until the animal enters a cardiac failure state.
 no pulses.
Common medical complaints are
Auscultation
weakness,
As with the pulse rate, auscultation can give the medical
+
lethargy,
team an indication of the cause of disease. Common charac
inability to exercise properly,
teristics to observe while auscultating are
 coughing, and
+
 shortness of breath.
valvular murm urs,
lack of sound, and
In feline disease congestive heart failure generally presents
 respiratory noise—crackles and wheezes.
itself as a sudden and acute process, with little to no previ-
ous history or symptoms. The cat can act completely nor-
Complications
mally hours before the syndrome occurs.
Congestive heart failure can be a life-threatening disease
even with complete medical support.
Common Points on Initial Assessment
These animals present in a life-threatening symdrome of res-
Diagnosis
piratory and cardiac failure, which may progress to car-
Because cardiovascular shock can occur secondary to disease
diopulmonary arrest.
 of the cardiac valve, heart muscle, cardiac arrhythmia, or other
If the pet seems severely challenged, you may not be able
systemic disease, a thorough workup as discussed in the diag-
to complete a thorough triage exam and emergency treat-
nostic section may be indicated. Clinical diagnostics must be
ment may be indicated immediately.
completed as the pet stabilizes and can handle the stress.
 There are several common physical signs of cardiovascu-
lar shock.
Treatment
The goal of treatment of heart failure is to reduce the burden
Dyspnea
and stress on the animal while treating the underlying heart
Respiratory rates greater than 80-100 breaths per minute
disease.
(canine) and greater than 100-120 breaths per minute (fe-
 Oxygen is frequently used in treatment. In fact, there is
line) indicate cardiovascular shock. Open-mouth breathing,
with head extended and ears back, and abdominal breathing
greatly improve simply by the increased oxygenation of the
are other signs.
bloodstream and decreased demands on the heart. Admini-
stration of oxygen should be done with as little stress as pos-
Color of Gums
sible. There are many ways to administer oxygen to a patient:
 Blue, purple, or blue coloration of gums suggest poor oxy-
genation of tissue (cyanosis).
Oxygen cage
争
 Anesthetic induction chamber
Pulse
Open face mask
The pulse should be monitored for both rate and quality to
Oxygen e-collar
help determine the cause and magnitude of the cardiac dis-
Nasal oxygen (best way)
ease evident. Some common factors to observe are the pulse
 rate and quality.
Catheter
 In tachycardia, in early heart failure, the pulse rates are as
 Once the animal is stable enough to handled, an intravenous
follows.
catheter should be set to allow venous access for medica-
tions and possible fluids.
+
Feline: >220 beats per minute
Canine: >200 beats per minute
Fluids
Large fluid boluses to stabilize for this kind of shock are not
In bradycardia, in later failure, the pulse rates are as
indicated! Excess fluid is already accumulating in the lung
follows.
fields. The key to treatment is to try to move the excess fluid
 out of the lungs and body.
 Feline: <80 beats per minute
 Canine: <60 beats per minute
Medications
Diuretics: The goal of diuretics such as furosemide
The quality of the pulse observed includes the categories
(Lasix) is to produce a diuresis within the kidneys to in-
160
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
crease the outflow of fluid through the urine. A high dose
Pulse deficit
 Nonresponsive or decreased responsivity
congestion. Although this will challenge the kidneys and
 s    a   o
Fluid Monitoring
this may be of secondary concern to the pet in this criti-
Fluids must be carefully monitored in animals with severe
cal syndrome.
heart conditions. Because the heart's ability to move blood
●Venodialators: Drugs such as nitroglycerine help dilate
adequately is compromised, pulmonary and hepatic conges-
venules in the lungs, causing decreased left atrial filling
tion can occur. These animals must be carefully monitored
pressure and reducing the factor that produces pulmonary
for fluid overload.
congestion. The drug is generally applied topically and
absorbed transdermally. Latex gloves should be used
Diagnostic Monitoring
when applying this medication or systemic uptake can
With continued care and hospitalization, regular diagnostic
occur in the medical staff.
checks of the following may be necessary.
●Antiarrhythmics: Drugs such as digoxin or lidocaine
are used in the presence of specific types of cardiac ar-
EKG: A regular check for abnormal rhythms, slow, or
rhythmias.
rapid heart rate is indicated.
ACE inhibitors: Drugs such as enalapril can aid in de-
Pulse oximetry: In some cases with poor oxygenation
creasing blood pressure, thus decreasing the amount of
Aadond mn saui au yo Aine pasaroap no anssn jo
work the heart must do to move blood.
 1o   m Aaxo asnd e 'uxo ui 
Sedating drugs: In some cases, animals require light se-
 don probe can be an excellent tool to monitor changes
dation to decrease their concerm about the severe dypsnea
in perfusion.
and oxygenation of tissues. The patient's hyperventilation
 Electrolytes: Animals on long-term fluids or on diuretics
can actually can increase pulmonary edema.
(i.e., Lasix [furosemide]) may become depleted in spe-
cific electrolytes, especially potassium. With low potas-
Monitoring
sium, heart arrhythmias can be more common.
 Because left-sided congestive heart failure is an emergency
Kidney function: As discussed previously, a common
situation, monitoring the critical care patient is important. It
sequlae to heart disease can be renal disease due to de-
is always important to remember that no monitoring or clin-
creased perfusion of the kidneys over time. Especially
ical diagnostics should be attempted if the pet is unstable
during an acute episode, with patients already on medica-
and cannot handle the stress of the procedures.
tions that can stress kidney function (i.e., enalapril,
Animals should be monitored regularly (potentially every
furosemide), function should be assessed.
15-60 minutes), at least visually, for
Prevention
respiratory effort,
Through careful screening of susceptable breeds and geri-
 mentation (i.e., attitude, responsiveness), and
atric animals, cardiac disease may be identified before
+1
urine output.
congestive heart failure occurs. Many forms of heart disease
are not curable but can be controlled with medications and
If possible, perform the following tasks with the least
diet. There may be periods of time when any pet with car-
a uo supuadap 'snou t- Araaa aaissod ssans go quno
diac disease may still go through episodes of congestive
patient's stability.
heart failure.
Auscultate the heart.
Right-Sided Heart Failure
 Monitor pulses: check for pulse deficits.
With right-sided heart disease, the heart is unable to advance
Auscultate the lungs: Check for moist lung sounds and
blood at a rate adequate to meet the body's metabolic needs.
crackles.
u  a jo o assa a ps a u s
 Check mucous membrane color.
impediment of the right heart filling, or a rhythm distur-
 Check the capillary refill time.
bance. Right-sided heart failure produces a chronic disease,
+Check hydration.
producing moderate to severe abdominal ascites, distention,
and respiratory difficulty. It is less likely to produce an acute
The following concerns should be observed, documented.
life-threatening crisis.
and discussed with the medical team:
Etiology
 Cool limbs—no pulse
There are many potential causes of congestive heart failure,
 Increased respiratory effort or rate
including underlying disease of the heart, metabolic disease,
 Change in pulse quality and rate
hypertension, and other diseases. Some underlying diseases
● Poor mucus membrane color
that can potentiate right heart failure are
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
161
cardiomyopathy (see below)
heartworm disease (see below)
Key Points in Discussing Cardiovascular
pulmonary hypertension
Shock/Congestive Heart Failure with Clients
tricuspid valve disease
●Congestive heart failure/cardiovascular shock is a
syndrome produced from an underlying heart disease.
cancer of the heart
narrowing of the outflow tract of blood leaving the right
The pet's heart cannot keep up with the demands
heart (pulmonary stenosis)
 placed upon it, and the patient cannot properly oxy-
 any other disease entities that increase the heart output
genate their tissues.
 This produces a life-threatening respiratory and
(e.g., hyperthyroidism, anemia) and that can make heart
disease more severe until there is a potential failure.
cardiac syndrome.
Canine
Signalment
● Cardiac disease is a slowly progressing condition
There is no breed or sex predilection with cardiovascular
that produces a chronic cough that worsens with
shock.
excitement or activity, weight loss, decreased abil-
ity to exercise, and possibly collapse.
Common Points on Medical History
 Right-sided heart disease is a more chronic condition that
As the pet enters congestive heart failure, fluid be-
gins to accumulate within the lung fields due to de-
can have both symptoms of right- and left-sided disease. The
creased blood flow through the lungs.
decreased blood flow through the right heart produces he-
 This fluid, called pulmonary edema, further de-
patic congestion and ascites. Common medical complaints
creases the animal's ability to oxygenate its tissues
can be
 and increase demands upon the heart and lungs.
weakness,
 Treatment focuses on the following
lethargy,
abdominal distention,
 Treatment is focused on supporting the pet through
decreased ability to exercise, and
the crisis with medications that decrease the fluid
weight loss.
accumulations within the lung fields and decrease
the amount of work the heart must do.
Common Points on Initial Assessment
Furthermore, the pet is generally placed in a rich
 These animals can present with large distended abdomens
oxygen environment to help increase oxygen con-
and minimal to severe respiratory symptoms. Some pets
centration within the body.
  s s  s  
 With this disease, the fluid accumulations cannot
be physically removed from the lungs, but require 
abdominal distention inhibiting normal movement of the
 diaphragm. Cormmon physical signs of cardiovascular
 medication to decrease the fluid level.
shock are
Feline
 Cardiovascular disease is a chronic condition and
abdominal distention,
an un sds snoo ou mos A aay a
dyspnea,
pet is in an acute cardiac crisis.
cyanotic gums,
Unlike the canine, the decreased movement of
changes in pulse quality and rate, and
 blood through the lungs and heart produces an ac-
+
 auscultation shows
cumulation of fluid within the chest cavity itself.
valvular murmurs
-lack of sound
This fluid, called pleural effusion, begins to further
decrease the ability of the heart and lungs to expand
and contract, worsening the overall disease process.
Complications
Right-sided congestive heart failure can be a chronic life-
If not treated, the pet can progress into cardiovascular
threatening disease, producing severe ascites and respiratory
arrest. Treatment of the feline focuses on the following.
 difficulty from the abdominal fluid load.
As with the canine, the goal of treatment is to sup-
Diagnosis
port the pet in an oxygen-rich environment with
 Because cardiovascular shock can occur secondary to dis-
medications that help decrease the overall work-
ease of the cardiac valve, heart muscle, cardiac arrhythmia,
load of the heart.
 Or other systemic disease, a thorough workup as discussed in
 Unlike the canine, the pleural effusion can be re-
 the diagnostic section may be indicated. Clinical diagnostics
       
must be completed as the pet stabilizes and can handle the
procedure called a chest tap.
stress.
162
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
—TheScience behind theDiseases
Dilative Cardiomyopathy
Aorta
Vena
Pulmonary
cava
artery
Left
atrium
Right-
atrium
Left AV
valve
Right AV-
-Left
valve
ventricle
Aortic
valve
Right
ventricle
Pulmonic
valve
Normal heart
Dilated heart
Figure 12.13.
Treatment
begins to build back into the left and right atrium and into
Treatment is focused on treating the underlying cardiac or
the lungs and liver. The heart then tries to pump more blood
systemic disease producing the hepatic congestion. Further-
at an increased rate to make up for the decreased amount of
more, with severe hepatic congestion, removal of large
blood ejected. The enlarging ventricles can also pull the AV
amounts of abdominal fluid (ascites) may need to occur at
valves apart, causing them to leak (mitral valve or tricus-
regular intervals.
pid insufficiency).
 If the process of canine dilatative cardiomyopathy goes
Prevention
 untreated, it can progress to heart failure and secondary kid-
Through careful screening of susceptiable breeds, routine
ney disease.
diagnostic testing for heartworm disease, and monitoring of
geriatric animals, cardiac disease may be identified before
Etiology
congestive heart failure occurs.
 The cause of the disease is unknown; however, viral, proto-
zoal, genetic, and nutritional causes have been suggested.
Diseases of the Cardiac Muscle
Signalment
Canine Dilatative Cardiomyopathy
 Dilatative cardiomyopathy can be prorminent in all breeds of
Dilatative cardiomyopathy is a degenerative disease of the
dogs, especially the Doberman pinschers, boxers, cocker
heart in which the muscles of the ventricles become thin and
spaniels, Irish wolfhounds, great Danes, and other giant
weakened. The weakened muscle is unable to contract with
breed dogs. The average age of onset is from 4 to 10 years.
the same force, decreasing the amount of blood that can be
This disease is more common in males than females.
expelled from the ventricles (see Figure 12.13).
 This produces decreased contractility of the left and right
Common Points in Medical History
ventricle, increasing the amount of blood that is retained in
Unlike most forms of canine heart disease, the Doberman
both ventricles after each ventricular contraction. Over time,
and boxer forms of this disease can come on acutely without
the ventricles enlarge. As this process continues, the blood
any previous history or symptoms of cardiac disease. These
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
163
pets may be admitted to the hospital in cardiovascular shock.
● Bronchodilators: These drugs help dilate the bronchi to
However, some pets may show a chronic progressive dis-
 "a) s n mn xo jo  a 
ease. Some medical complaints can be
phylline, aminophylline, terbutaline).
●ACE inhibitors: This category of drugs helps lower the
weakness, lethargy, and collapse;
blood pressure in the body, decreasing the amount of
decreased ability to exercise;
work the heart must do to pump blood through the body.
coughing; and
(e.g., enalapril, benazepril).
weight loss.
● Antiarrhythmics: These drugs help prevent irregular
heart rhythms (e.g., lidocaine, procainimide).
Common Points on Initial Assessment
Physical signs depend on the severity of the disease; if right,
Diet is an important part of treatment.
left, or both ventricles are affected; and how rapidly the
 changes in the heart occured. Care should be taken with
A low-salt/low-protein diet is recommended. Low-salt
diets decrease the amount of fluid retained in the body,
and enter cardiopulmonary arrest with minimal stress. Pos-
decreasing the amount of dietary salt can slow the
sible physical signs of disease are as follows.
buildup of fluid within the lung tissue. Low-protein diets
decrease the amount of work the kidneys have to do in
+
 A cough is present that worsens at night. Pets may find it
clearing toxins produced from protein metabolism.
hard to lie down and get comfortable.
 Amino acid supplementation: Some heart conditions
● Pets may have increased respiratory difficulty with
can be linked to low dietary levels of specific amino
 head extended
acids, taurine or carmitine. These amino acids can be sup-
- elbows abducted,
plemented to help slow continuing heart damage.
 abdominal breathing, and
 Vitamin supplementation: The vitamin supplement co-
 increased respiratory rate.
enzyme Ql0 has been used as a dietary supplement and
 Pets may have changes in pulse rate and quality (pulse
aids the heart in conduction of energy within its muscle
deficits).
fibers.
 There may be changes in capillary refill time and mucous
membrane color (cyanosis).
Prevention
Auscultation reveals
Through careful screening of susceptiable breeds, routine
murmur,
diagnostic testing for signs of early heart disease, and mon-
 lack of heart sounds, and
itoring geriatric animals, cardiac disease may be identified
 respiratory crackles.
 before congestive heart failure occurs.
● Pets may have a bloated abdomen with ascites present.
Discussing Canine Dilatative Cardiomyopathy
Complications
with the Client
 If not diagnosed and treated dilatative cardiomyopathy can
 Dilatative cardiomyopathy is a disease of the heart
 progress into congestive heart failure and cardiopulmonary
muscle in which the muscle itself becomes thin and
arrest.
irregular.
 The heart's large ventricles that pump blood to the
Diagnosis
Dilatative cardiomyopathy can also affect the cardiac valves,
lungs and the body become dilated and unable to
 pump with enough force to move blood adequately
produce cardiac arrhythmias, and lead to secondary organ
through the body.
disease. A thorough workup as discussed in the diagnostic
 The disease can affect the muscle, valves, and
section may be indicated.
rhythm of the heart.
 As the disease progresses, the pet becomes less and 
Treatment
Treatment is focused on reducing the amount of work the
less able to keep up with the demands of the body
 heart must do, correcting irregular heart beats, reducing the
and can show signs of weakness, coughing, inabil-
amount of fluid on the lungs caused by the buildup of fluid,
ity to exercise, and potential collapse.
and restricting activity. Some therapies are discussed next.
 In some cases, symptoms may not become evident,
 Medications commonly prescribed fall into the following
even with severe disease, until the pet is in a life-
threatening syndrome.
categories.
 The cause of canine dilatative cardiomyopathy is
Diuretics: These drugs help decrease the amount of fluid
unknown.
-s  sn   s  n 
Common breeds that are more susceptible to this dis-
ing the kidneys to push out more fluid from the body
ease are the boxer, Doberman, and cocker spaniel.
(e.g., furosemide, chlorothiazide).
164
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Aorta
Vena
cava
Pulmonary
artery
Left
atrium
Right-
atrium
Left AV
valve
Right AV-
-Left
valve
ventricle
Aortic
valve
Right
ventricle
 Pulmonic
valve
Normal heart
Hypertrophic heart
Figure I12.14.  Illustration of a normal heart (left) in comparison to one affected by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Feline Dilatative Cardiomyopathy
Etiology
 Feline dilatative cardiomyopathy is a rare disease of the
The cause of the disease is unknown.
heart muscle secondary to an amino acid (taurine) defi-
ciency. When adequate levels of taurine are supplemented in
Signaiment
the diet, this form of heart disease is rarely observed. Almost
Usually predominant in large breed dogs (i.e., German shep-
 all feline diets have sufficient levels of taurine. Cats on non-
herd), it is seen on average from 10 weeks to 13 years of age.
feline diets (i.e., human tuna fish diets) are at risk for devel-
This disease is more common in males than females.
oping dilatative cardiomyopathy. Although taurine defi-
ciency is thought to be a component of canine dilatative
Common Points in Medical History
disease, it is not the only factor in producing canine disease.
The disease can come on rapidly or chronically. Common
medical complaints can be as follows:
Canine Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
 Canine cardiac hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a disease of
● A cough that worsens at night. Pets may find it hard to lie
the muscle wall, where the ventricular muscle wall becomes 
down and get comfortable.
 thickened, narrowing the ventricles severely, decreasing the
Trouble breathing.
 amount of blood that can fill the ventricular area (see Figure
Collapse.
12.14). This produces increased blood volume retained in
Weakness/inability to exercise.
the atria after each diastole. Over time, the atria enlarge be-
Bloated abdomen/ascites.
cause they have to handle a larger amount of blood. As this
Weight loss.
 occurs, pulmonary and hepatic congestion can occur. The
heart then tries to pump more blood at an increased rate to
Common Points on Initial Assessment
make up for the decreased amount of blood ejected through
Physical signs depend on the severity of the disease; if right,
the narrowed ventricle. The enlarging ventricle can also pull
left, or both ventricles are affected; and how rapidly the
the AV valves apart, causing it to leak (mitral valve or tricus-
changes in the heart occurred. Care should be taken with
 pid insufficiency).
these pets because, with severe disease, pets can collapse
Ifthis process goes untreated it can progress to heart fail-
and enter cardiopulmonary arrest with minimal stress.Pos-
ure and possibly secondary kidney disease.
sible physical signs of disease are
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
165
changes in pulse rate and quality (pulse deficits);
Prevention
moist, deep cough;
Through careful screening of susceptiable breeds, routine
changes in capillary refill time and mucus membrane
diagnostics, and monitoring of geriatric animals, cardiac dis-
color (cyanosis);
ease may be identified before congestive heart failure occurs.
 increased respiratory difficulty with
head extended,
elbows abducted,
Discussing Canine Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
abdominal breathing, and
with the Client
 increased respiratory rate
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a disease of the
dypsnea/abdominal breathing;
heart muscle in which the muscle itself becomes
respiratory crackles;
thickened and irregular.
murmur;
The heart's large ventricles that pump blood to the
lack of heart sounds;
lungs and to the body become narrowed and smaller
 bloated abdomen/ascites; and
by the abnormally thickened cardiac muscle.
collapse.
The disease can affect the muscle, valves, and
rhythm of the heart.
Complications
As the disease progresses, the pet becomes less and
If not diagnosed and treated, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
less able to keep up with the demands of the body
can progress into congestive heart failure and cardiopul.
and can show signs of weakness, coughing, inabil-
monary shock.
ity to exercise, and potential collapse.
 In some cases, symptoms may not become evident,
Diagnosis
even with severe disease, until the pet is in a life-
 Because hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can also affect the
threatening syndrome.
cardiac valves, produce cardiac arrhythmias, and lead to sec-
The cause of canine hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
 ondary organ disease, a thorough workup as discussed in the
is unknown.
diagnostic section may be indicated.
 The breed that is more susceptible to this disease is
the German shepherd.
Treatment
Treatment is focused on reducing the amount of work the
 heart must do, correcting irregular heart beats, reducing the
amount of fluid on the lungs, and restricting activity. Some
Feline Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
 therapies include the following:
Feline cardiac hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is one of the
more common forms of feline heart disease. As with canine
● Diuretics: These are drugs that help decrease the amount
disease, the ventricular heart muscle becomes abnormally
of fluid within the lung fields. They accomplish this by
thickened, which can produce AV valve murmurs and ar-
stimulating the kidneys to push out more fluid from the
rhythmias. However, there are specific differences seen only
body (e.g., furosemide, spirolactone, chlorothiazide).
in the feline.
Calcium channel blockers: Drugs such as Cardizem and
verapamil help slow the flow of calcium into the heart
●Ventricular thickening can occur symmetrically as with
muscle, slowing the rate of contraction of the heart, in-
the dog, or asymmetrically within just the intraventricu-
creasing the amount of fluid filling the ventricle, improv-
 lar septum, or irregularly through the ventricle wall.
 ing oxygenation to the heart muscle, and controlling ir-
 Furthermore, due to abnormal blood flow, small clots can
regular heart rhythms.
form in the ventricle, which can be pushed into the aorta
Beta-bloc kers: This group of drugs (i.e., propranolol,
as the ventricle contracts. These clots are then called em-
atenolol) help slow down rapid bounding heart rates,
bolisms or thromboembolisms.
making the heartbeat slower but more effective.
 The embolism can lodge in the lower aorta where it di-
 A low-salt/low-protein diet: Dietary changes are recom-
vides, obstructing blood to the legs (see Figure 12.8).
mended. Low-salt diets decrease the amount of fluid re-
 The emboli can also lodge within another arteriole in
tained in the body. Decreasing the amount of dietary salt
another limb, the lungs, the central nervous system, or 
can slow the buildup of fluid within the lung tissue. Low-
other organs (see Figure 12.15).
protein diets decrease the amount of work the kidneys
● Finally, feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can be asso-
have to do in clearing toxins produced from protein me-
tabolism.
 Activity: Decreasing and limiting activity may also be
Etiology
  a  g  an  m ss
 The cause of the disease is unknown, but it can be associated
do.
with feline hyperthyroidism.
166
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Signalment
Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can be prominent in all
 breeds, especially the Maine coon cat. It has been reported
in animals from 5 to 7 years of age, but has been seen in pa-
tients from 6 months to 16 years. This disease is more com-
mon in males than females.
Common Points in Medical History
Medical complaints can be similar to canine disease; how-
  a a  s  si   s
in an acute crisis of chronic disease. The owner may report
that the pet was completely normal 12-24 hours prior to the
crisis.
Common Points on Initial Assessment
 Commonly these patients are seen in acute ermergency due 
to accumulation of pleural effusion or an arterial throm-
boembolism.
 Signs of heart disease without thromboembolism are as
follows:
 Severe respiratory difficulty
 Open-mouth/abdominal breathing
Cough (occasionally)
●Cyanotic mucous membrane color
+
Changes in pulse rate and quality
● Increased lung sounds
●Possible murmur
Figure 12.15.1
 Image of a front limb affected by a thromboem-
●Lateral recumbency
bolism.
●Respiratory/cardiac arrest
●Death
Often the pet will show no signs of cardiac disease as de-
●The pet can produce another emboli at any time in other
scribed above. Instead, the pet will show an inability to use 
places in the body. These animals can push clots into the
the hind limbs, although other limbs, organs (i.e., lungs), or 
lungs, central nervous system, and other organs, causing
the central nervous system can be affected. It is important to
death.
note that in the canine embolisms are rare and do not occur
●Furthermore, even with successful treatment of this con-
secondary to heart disease.
 dition and the heart disease, emboli can reoccur causing
Physical signs are
another potential obstruction.
acute inability to use the limbs (typically hind limbs; see 
Diagnosis
Figure 12.15);
The clinical diagnostic protocols for uncomplicated feline
cold, painful, and possibly swollen legs;
disease is similar to the canine workup. Diagnosis of throm-
● trouble breathing—panting;
boembolism is made largely based on the physical signs and
●vocalization;
history of the patient.
●anxiety;
● poor color of the gums; and
Treatment
●weak to no pulses in the limbs.
With uncomplicated feline disease, treatment options are
similar to canine disease. With hypertrophic disease with
Complications
thromboembolism, the goal of treatment is to support the
animal until the body is able to degrade and destroy the ob-
line can decompensate into cardiovascular failure and/or
structive clot. At the same time, the goal is also to prevent
throw an aterial thromboemolism. Untreated feline hyper-
more clots from forming. Prognosis for response to treat-
trophic cardiomyopathy with thromboembolic disease car-
ment and recovery is generally very poor. Overall treatment
ries an extremely poor prognosis.
options may include the following.
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
167
Supportive Care
●Aspirin: Aspirin therapy must be given very carefully to
 These animals are in need of intensive care. The veterinarian
cats because they can handle only a small amount of the
 may suggest oxygen therapy, catheter and fluids, and blood
medication every 2-3 days. The aspirin helps slow
work to help monitor the pet's condition. The pet must be
 platelet function that initiates clotting.
very closely monitored until the clot has been reabsorbed and
 Sedatives: These drugs are an antianxiety medication
there is a response to treatment. This may take several days.
given to lightly sedate the pet and decrease pain and
Medications are focused on slowing the clotting process
anxiety.
to help prevent further emboli formation. These medications
Cardiac medication: The veterinarian may suggest car-
 include the following.
diac medications to make the heart work more effectively.
These medications may need to be started after a com-
Heparin: Heparin is a drug that helps slow the blood-
plete cardiac consultation and diagnostic workup are
clotting process. While on this drug, the pet must be
completed.
 closely monitored due to increased chance of bleeding.
Prevention
Through careful screening of susceptiable breeds, routine
Discussing Feline Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
 diagnostic testing, and monitoring geriatric animals, cardiac
with the Client
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is one of the most
occurs.
common cardiac diseases of the cat.
 In this disease, the muscle itself becomes thickened
Valvular Disease of the Heart: Mitral Insufficiency
and irregular.
 Cardiac mitral insufficiency is a disease of the mitral valve
a on pooa dnd n sa a shy a
(left AV valve), which separates the left atrium and left ven-
lungs and to the body become narrowed and smaller
 tricle of the heart. The mitral valve becomes thickened and
by the abnormally thickened cardiac muscle.
does not close properly, allowing the valve to leak. This al-
 The disease can affect the muscle, valves, and
lows blood to be ejected back into the atrium and lungs each
rhythm of the heart.
time the ventricle contracts. Over time, the atrium enlarges,
 As the disease progresses, the pet becomes less and
because it must handle a larger amount of blood. The ventri-
less able to keep up with the demands of the body.
cle also enlarges as the heart tries to pump more blood into
 In some cases, symptoms may not become evident
the body to make up for the blood ejected backward due to
umtil the pet is in a life-threatening syndrome.
the leaky valve. As the disease progresses, the left heart be-
 The cause of feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is
comes enlarged and the blood begins to build up in the left.
unknown.
atrium and lung fields.
 The common breed that is more susceptible to this
The disease can occur secondarily to dilatative or hyper-
disease is the Maine coon cat.
 trophic cardiomyopathy.
 A possible life-threatening complication to feline
heart disease is the formation of a thromboem-
Etiology
bolism.
 The disease can either be a primary congenital malforma-
tion of the mitral valve or an acquired disease secondary to
Thromboembolism
thickening of the valve leaflets. The thickening of the valve
 Due to turbulent flow of blood through a diseased
can occur secondary to chronic bacterial infection (i.e., se-
heart, the blood itself can begin to clot.
vere dental disease; see Figure 12.16).
 The small clot can remain attached to the heart wall
or break free and move through the blood vessels
Signalment
(thromboembolism).
Cardiac mitral insufficiency is usually predominant in small
The emboli will lodge in a blood vessel, occluding
 breed dogs. This disease is more common in males than fe-
that vessel and inhibiting normal blood flow.
males.
 The most common location for this to occur is at
the end of the aorta where the blood supply feeds
Common Points in Medical History
the hind legs.
The disease can come on rapidly or it can be chronic.
 This produces an inability to use the hind end.
Common medical complaints can be as follows.
 The limbs are generally cold, painful, and stiff.
Emboli can also lodge within the central nervous
A cough is present that worsens at night. Pets may find it
system and lungs, causing acute death.
hard to lie down and get comfortable.
 The presence of thromboembolism is a very poor
 The pet has difficulty breathing and has labored breathing.
 prognosis for the longevity of the pet.
The pet has decreasing ability to exercise (exercise intol-
erance).
168
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
—TheSciencebehind theDiseases
Aorta
Vena
cava
Pulmonary
artery
Left
atrium
Right-
atrium
Left AV
valve
Right AV-
-Left
valve
ventricle
Aortic
valve
Right
ventricle
 Pulmonic
valve
Normal heart
Mitral valve disease
Figure I2.16.  Image of a normal heart in comparison with a heart with mitral valve disease.
● Secondary kidney disease develops (as the disease pro-
Complications
gresses), with
If not diagnosed and treated, mitral valve disease may
weight loss,
progress into congestive heart failure and cardiopulmonary
vomiting,
shock. However, there are mary patients with mitral valve
 decreased appetite, and
murmurs that do not progress into physical symptoms.
 increased urination/thirst.
Diagnosis
Common Points on Initial Assessment
Because mitral valve disease can be secondary to other
Physical signs depend on the severity of the disease and how
heart diseases and produce secondary organ disease, a thor-
rapidly the changes in the heart occurred. Care should be
aq  uooas osoup au u passnosip s dnm yono
taken in handling these animals and collecting samples from
mdicated.
them because, with severe disease, pets can collapse and
enter cardiopulmonary arrest with minimal stress. Possible
Treatment
physical signs of disease are
 Treatment is focused on reducing the amount of work the
heart must do and decreasing the amount of fluid on the
coughing (deep moist productive cough),
lungs caused by decreased blood flow and congestion. Some
 changes in mucous membrane color (cyanosis),
therapies used are as follows.
● increased respiratory difficulty, with
 head extended,
Diuretics: These are drugs (e.g., furosemide, spirolac-
elbows abducted,
tone, chlorothiazide) that help decrease the amount of
 abdominal breathing,
fluid within the lung fields. They accomplish this by
increased respiratory rate, and
stimulating the kidneys to push out more fluid from the
changes in capillary refill time and mucous mem-
body.
brane color (cyanosis).
 ACE inhibitors: This class of drugs (i.e., enalapril, be-
nazepril) decreases blood pressure and decreases the
Upon auscultation, murmur and respiratory crackles are
amount of work the heart must do to move blood through
evident.
the body.
Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
169
Diet: A low-salt/low-protein diet is recommended to de-
Etiology
crease fluid buildup on the lungs while also decreasing
 The cause of the disease is the bloodborne parasite, Diro-
the amount of work the kidneys need to do.
filaria immitis. The bloodborme parasite must mature within
 Activity: Decreasing and limiting activity may also be nec-
a mosquito for 15-17 days at a temperature greater than 589
essary to decrease the amount of work the heart must do.
Fahrenheit.
Prevention
Signalment
Through careful screening of susceptible breeds and geri-
The infection affects dogs and cats (rarely) in mosquito-
atric animals, mitral valve disease can be diagnosed in its
endemic regions, along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, and
early phases. Furthermore, routine dental care and cleanings
other parts of the United States. Outside, unprotected ani-
can decrease the amount of bacteria in the body and slow or
mals are at the highest risk.
stop the progression of bacterial thickening and infection of
the mitral valve.
Common Points in Medical History
In canines the disease produces a chronic progressive dis-
Discussing Mitral Valve Insufficiency with the
ease. In felines, the disease can be asymptotic until the pet
Client
enters acute cardiac failure. Common medical complaints
● Mitral valve insufficiency is a disease of the valve
can be
separating the left atrium from the left ventricle of
the heart.
 sudden death (cats);
 Over time this valve can become leaky, and every
weakness, lethargy, collapse;
time the left ventricle constricts, blood also is
decreased ability to exercise;
pumped into the left atrium.
 coughing (rare in cats);
 Furthermore, the blood backs up into the fields be-
 shortness of breath;
hind the left atrium, and fluid begins to collect in
weight loss; and
the lung tissue secondary to decreased blood flow
 fluid buildup in the abdomen (ascites) in a severely af-
(pulmonary edema).
fected animal due to obstructive right heart disease.
● As the disease progresses, the pet becomes less and
less able to keep up with the demands for oxyge-
Common Points on Initial Assessment
nated blood and can show signs of weakness, cough-
Physical signs depend on heartworm burden, length of dis-
ing, inability to exercise, and potential collapse.
ease, age of the pet, and other underlying disease conditions.
 The disease can be secondary to diseases of the
Signs are species dependent.
cardiac muscle.
 In canines, patients may present with a mild to worsen-
 The disease is typically caused by chronic bacterial
ing cough. In severe cases animals may be unable to exercise
infection causing thickening of the mitral valve.
properly. There may be evidence of a right tricuspid murmur
 Small breed dogs more commonly have mitral
with increased lung sounds. The pet may be coughing up
valve disease.
blood.
 In felines, pets may not show any physical signs until the 
pet is in cardiovascular failure or death.
Infectious Diseases of the Heart
Heartworm Disease
Complications
 Heartworm disease is a parasitic infection of a bloodborne 
Without proper treatment, heartworm disease can cause
parasite, Dirofilaria immitis. The disease is spread by mos-
right-sided obstructed heart disease, kidney disease, disease
quitoes, which feed on an infected dog. The mosquitoes pick
of the lung, and possibly death.
up larval heartworms (microfilaria), which they in turm in-
 ject into an uninfected animal the next time they feed.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is largely based on screening patient blood for
The parasite is injected into the tissue, and over the next
specific proteins (antigens) on the surface of the adult
3-6 months it migrates through the tissue to the blood
heartworm. In canines, there are many excellent in-hospital
supply and to the right heart (see Figure 12.17).
tests to determine potential exposure. In feline patients,
 There the worms mature and reproduce, causing obstruc-
there are tests available through many outside animal health
tive heart disease in the right heart and lung fields
laboratories. Once diagnosed with heartworm disease, the
The disease can be asymptotic initially (especially in fe-
medical team may follow up with general blood work and
lines), but as the infection worsens, the right side of the
radiographs to help determine the extent of the damage to
heart begins to obstruct and potentially fail.
the heart and lumgs.
170
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Discussing Heartworm Disease with the Client
●Heartworm disease is a bloodbome parasite infec.
tion that is spread by mosquito bites.
The disease is endemic in warm climates where
 there are active mosquito populations.
 However, specific geographic regions are more en-
demic for the disease (i.e., north and southeast
coastal states, Texas, and parts of the Midwest).
● The disease is transmitted by the mosquito that
feeds on a currently infected animal and then bites
 an unaffected pet.
 The mosquito injects a small larval form of the par-
asite into the tissue, which over 46 months mi-
grates into the right heart and lung fields.
 There the parasite begins to reproduce and become
 obstructive to the heart and lungs.
Physical Signs
● In the canine, pets generally develop a persistent,
worsening cough that can develop into weakness,
inability to exercise, and collapse in severe cases.
● In feline heartworm disease, the worm loads can be
much less, with infections having only a few
worms evident. Physical symptoms are mild to
 nonexistent until the feline enters a cardiovascular
shock crisis.
Clinical Diagnostics
Although there are many diagnostic tests used to diag-
nose and confirm the extent of heartworm disease, the
initial clinical test is a simple blood test that evaluates
 the pet's blood for the presence of specific proteins
(antigens) from the adult heartworm. Many of these
tests can be run in a few minutes within the hospital
setting.
Treatment and Control
 Although once diagnosed with heartworm there are
treatment options available. The simplest way to con-
trol heartworm disease is through prevention.
Through annual to biannual heartworm testing and
placing the pet on heartworm prevention, the pet is
highly unlikely to develop the disease. The preventa-
tives are monthly tablets that kill any of the larval par-
Figure I2.17.  Image of heart and lungs. Heart is infested with
 asites that the pet comes in contact with.
heartworms (a). Image of heart with right ventricle filled with
heartworms (b).
●The animal is placed on 2 days of a medication that de-
Treatment
stroys the adult heartworm infection present in the body.
Treatment is focused on reducing the adult worms within the
The drug used is called Immiticide. Animals may be hos-
heart and lung field gradually so that the decreased worm
pitalized while being treated with Immiticide.
load does not overwhelm the pet. A general protocol for
 The pet is sent home under strict rest and confinement as
heartworm follows.
the body begins to break down the dead heartworms.
 Chapter 12: Cardiovascular System
171
In 34 weeks, the pet is brought into the hospital and
Prevention
given a medication, called ivermectin, to destroy any re-
Anmual to biannual heartworm testing and routine heartworm
maining baby heartworms (microfilaria) still evident in
prevention (every month) can greatly reduce the chance of
the system.
heartworm infection in endemic regions.
 In another 3-4 weeks, a test to check for microfilaria in
the body is conducted. If positive, another course of iver-
mectin is completed.
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
 Once the pet tests negative for the microfilaria, the pet
Please try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology-
can be started on a heartworm preventative.
TheScience behind theDiseases)to helpreinforce theinfor-
Ninety days after beginning the heartworm preventative,
mation presented here.
another adult heartworm test should be run.
Chapter 13
Urogenital System
Introduction
structures called glomeruli (Bowman's capsules). The
glomeruli are a set of tubules closely interdigitated with
The urogenital system compromises the kidneys, ureters,
small arterioles that serve as filters for the body. The begin-
 bladder, urethra, and reproductive organs of the animal. This 
ning of the glomeruli has very fine openings (called fenes-
 chapter will deal with the kidneys and urinary system; other
trations) that allow small molecules to filter into the tubules
chapters will discuss the reproductive anatomy and physiol-
from the bloodstream. Initially, as blood filters through the
  m si   ss   
small arterioles and glomerular region, all of the small mol-
m ro u oq an  sn u sm jo 
ecules within the blood flow passively into the glomeruli.
accomplish this, the kidneys function to
The smaller molecules are sugar, amino acids, waste prod-
ucts, and electrolytes (sodium, potassium, chloride, etc.).
filter out toxins and waste through specialized structures
 Larger molecules such as proteins (e.g., albumen, globulin,
called glomeruli (renal cortex), and
etc.) cannot pass through the healthy glomerular membranes
 concentrate the urine by reabsorbing water in the loops of
(see Figure 13.3).
Henle (renal medulla) to prevent fluid loss producing
Once the molecules and fluid have been passed into the
dehydration.
beginning of the glomerular capsule, the liquids move on
into the proximal convoluted tubules. The function of these
Furthermore, the kidneys also play a key role in other body
tubules is to actively reabsorb all of the necessary nutrients
functions.
the body needs back into the bloodstream. This process is an
 Control of blood pressure through the renin-angiotensin
active process accomplished by cellular pumps within the
walls of the proximal and distal tubules. Once the necessary
system
Acid/base control of the blood
nutrients are reabsorbed, the fluid within the convoluted
tubule moves into the loops of Henle within the renal
 Balance of electrolytes (sodium and potassium) within
the body
medulla (see Figure 13.4).
The renal medulla houses a section of the nephron called
The body cannot survive without normal kidney function,
the nephrotic loops (loops of Henle), which function to re-
and kidney disease is one of the most common diseases in
absorb most of the fluid component of the urine. This system
the geriatric animal.
of fluid reabsorption is key to maintaining adequate hydra-
Each animal is bom with two kidneys, the right and the
tion in the animal. To reabsorb the water, the cells of the
left. The kidneys sit close to the spine in the middle of
nephrotic loops actively absorb sodium ions (Na) and move
them into the medullary tissue around the nephrotic loops.
the abdomen. The left kidney is slightly more caudal than
  s an  sd si m   
Water passively diffuses into this space to try to balance the
right kidney lies within the rib cage. The right and left adre-
salt gradient. As the urine moves through the medulla, up to
nal glands are positioned at each kidney 's cranial poll (see
two-thirds of the fluid within the nephrotic loops is passively
Figure 13.1).
reabsorbed (see Figure 13.5). Pets that cannot reabsorb most
The intermal anatomy of the kidneys is split into several
of the fluid within the urine can dehydrate and become
u p  o s u us ya so
acutely ill.
(see Figure 13.2). The anatomical sections are
The glomeruli, the convoluted tubules, and the nephrotic
loops are called a nephron and represent the smallest func-
renal cortex,
tional unit within the kidney. Once the urine leaves the loops
 renal medulla,
of Henle, it enters the collecting ducts and enters the renal
 renal pelvis, and
pelvis. The renal pelvis sits in the middle of the kidney and
●ureter (leading to the bladder).
collects all the urine produced before moving into the
ureters. The ureters run dorsally within the abdomen until
The renal cortex is the outer most tissue region of the
they enter the bladder at the bladder's neck in the area called
kidney, which houses hundreds of thousands of specialized
the trigone. Once urine collects in the bladder, it then moves
173
174
Section 2:Anatomy andPhysiology—TheSciencebehind theDiseases
Adrenal
gland
Cortex
Medulla
Renal crest
Right kidney
Vena cava
Renal pelris
Ureter
Left kidney
Rcnal hilus
Abdominal
aorta
reter
9.Renal sinus
Figure I3.2.  Illustration of cross section of the kidney.
(Courtesy of Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition.
Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini, Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot
Bladder
Point, TX 1989. Used with permission from Sudz Publishing.)
 Angiotensin II is a potent constrictor of blood vessels,
Figure I3.1. Ilustration of the dorsal abdominal anatomy. Note
thus causing a whole-body arteriole constriction.
the location of the kidneys and adrenals on the ventral spine.
With increased constriction of the blood vessels, blood
pressure rises, increasing blood through the kidneys and
increasing glomerular filtration.
through the urethra into the penis or vagina and exits from
One of the primary causes of hypertension (high blood pres-
the urethral opening (see Figure 13.6).
sure) is chronic renal disease. As glomeruli begin to fail and
The kidneys also play an extremely important part in the
their ability to filter blood decreases, the active glomeruli
control of blood pressure in the body. At any one minute,
continue secreting renin in response to decreased glomeru-
over 20% of the blood of the body is pumped through the
lar filtration. This continued process can produce constant
kidneys. When this percentage decreases, the kidneys are
hypertension (see Figure 13.7).
not able to maintain the normal rate of filtering (glomeru-
The kidneys also play a key role in the production of red
lar filtration) of the blood, and over time the kidneys can
 blood cells from the bone marrow. A normal healthy kidney
 begin to deteriorate. To help prevent a decrease in blood vol-
secretes a hormone called erythropoietin, which stimulates
ume, the kidneys have their own mechanism called the
red blood cell production from the bone marrow. In chronic
renin-angiotensin system that increases blood pressure.
renal disease, erythropoietin levels drop, decreasing the nor-
This mechanism operates as follows.
mal production of red blood cells and producing chronic
anemia.
●Specialized cells, called juxtoglomerular cells, are pres-
ent within the arterioles of the glomeruli. These cells
Expression of Renal Disease
stretch, depending on the blood pressure.
As blood pressure decreases, which produces a decrease
Generalized renal disease can take the following forms:
in glomerular filtration, the juxtoglomerular cells shrink.
This process stimulates the release of a chemical called
 Glomerular disease, producing a buildup of toxins within
renin. Renin circulates within the bloodstream and acti-
the bloodstream
vates angiotensin I, which then activates angiotensin II.
 Tubular disease, producing the inability of the kidneys to
 Angiotensin I is then changed into angiotensin II within
concentrate urine normally
the lungs.
 A combination of glomerular and tubular disease
Chapter 13: Urogenital System
175
6. Glomerular capsule
10. Prox
9.Urinary space
7. Visceral layer.
8.Parletallayer
Glomerulus
3.Afferent,
arteriole
arteriole
12. Dist. convoluted tubule
13. Colecting duct
11. Nephric loop
14. Papillary duct
Figure I3.3. Illustration of glomeruli, proximal tubules, and loops of Henle. (Courtesy of Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition.
 Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini, Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point, TX 1989. Used with permission from Sudz Publishing.)
Renal Glomerular Disease
● infections of the kidneys: pyelonephritis;
● inflammation within the kidneys: chronic interstitial
Glomerular disease produces an inability of the kidneys to
nephritis;
filter out toxins from the bloodstream into the urine. The
 neoplasia: renal lymphoma, adenocarcinoma; and
severity of the disease is directly proportional to the amount
 kidneys that have lost their ability to function with age
 of toxins within the bloodstream. In general, it takes
(end-stage kidneys).
65-70% of the glomeruli of both kidneys to be affected be-
fore there is a rise in renal toxins (azotemia). Causes of
 Glomerular disease is monitored by changes in the toxin
glomerular disease can be
level within the bloodstream. Although glomerular disease
176
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Urinary
Proximal
Glomerular capsule
space
convoluted
Parietal layer
Proximal
tubule
Visceral laye
Arteriole
convoluted
tubule
Efferent.,
arteriole
Interlobuler
artery
Sugar
BUN/
amonia
Afferent
 arteriole
 Sodium
Distal
convoluted
tubule
 Potassium
Creatinine
Collecting
lonp
Aminc
acids
Nephric
loop
Figure 13.4.
4. A magnified section of a proximal tubule of a nephron illustrating reabsorption of nutrients into the blood supply
the changes in blood work discussed next can suggest a renal
Renal
component.
Convoluted
cortex
tubule
Blood Urea Nitrogen
Bowman's
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a form of conjugated ammo-
capsule
  paxa aq mn i  al a  p 
kidney. Although BUN does elevate secondary to a kidney
problem, elevations in BUN can also be seen in animals that
are having episodes of intestinal bleeding (e.g., gastroin-
Renal
medulla
testinal ulcerations, parvo, disseminated intravascular coag-
Hg0
ulopathy) and dehydration.
H20
Na
1
0°H
Creatinine
 Creatinine is a small amino acid excreted primarily by the
kidneys. In general, the more glomerular filtration is af-
Loop of
Henle 
fected, the higher the blood creatinine level.
Collection
tubule
Phosphorus
Phosphorus is an electrolyte excreted by the kidneys. With
severe renal disease, elimination can be very difficult, and
phosphorus levels can increase dramatically.
Proteinuria
Proteinuria is defined as the presence of abnormally high
Figure 13.5.
 Illustration of water reabsorption from the
amounts of protein in the urine. The presence of protein in
 nephrotic loops.
the urine can reflect damage to the glomerular filters.
Chapter 13: Urogenital System
177
Kidney
No Renin secretior
Ureter
二二
Blad der
（）
Vasoconstriction
Figure I3. 7.  An illustration of the renin-angiotensin system.
As blood pressure drops through the nephron and the juxtom-
glomerular cells are not stretched, renin is released. the renin
activates angiotensin I, which then in turn activates angiotensin I1,
a potent constrictor of blood vessels. The generalized constriction
of the vessels increases overall blood pressure.
~Trigone
severe potassium-depleting disease such as chronic renal
failure (see Figure 13.8).
Urethra
Renal Medullary Disease
Renal medullary disease affects the animal's ability to con-
Urethral
centrate urine. These animals have lost the ability to actively
opening
reabsorb sodium, thus are unable to create a high sodium
Figure I3.6.  Image of the lower urinary tract.
gradient to reabsorb water from the kidneys. In the early
stages of the disease, these pets drink large amounts of water
  ss e s e    
pets will begin to show increased thirst and urination as a
However, protein in the urine can also suggest an active
first symptom of these diseases. The inability to concentrate
bladder infection, since inflamed and infected bladder walls 
urine can be caused by the following.
can leak protein. Presence of urinary blood white blood
cells, and bacteria can help differentiate between an active 
●Chronic renal disease: Kidneys loose the ability to con-
 bladder infection and a true renal proteinuria.
centrate urine normally (i.e., chronic renal disease in the
older cat).
Potassium
Hormonal disease: In specific diseases, a hormonal im-
 In normal functioning kidneys, potassium is excreted by a
balance inhibits the kidney's abilities to concentrate urine
specialized cellular pump in the proximal tubules at the 
normally. Some hormonal diseases are
same time sodium is reabsorbed (see Figure 13.4).
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease; see Chapter
As kidneys begin to fail, their ability to concentrate urine
16); hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease; see
also fails. This produces a massive loss of fluids through the
Chapter 16); and diabetes mellitus (see Chapter 15).
kidneys (called diuresis). So much fluid is lost that there can
 Renal neoplasia: Renal tumors (i.e., lymphoma, adeno-
be a general dilution of electrolytes. This can produce low
carcinoma) can destroy normal renal tissue affecting the
blood potassium (hypokalemia), especially in cats. Normal
kidney's ability to concentrate urine.
stimulates normal muscle and neurological activity. With se-
Assessing Medullary Disease
verely affected cats, potassium depletion can be so severe
The kidney 's ability to concentrate urine is measured by an
that they are unable to lift their neck into a normal position.
instrument called a refractometer (see Chapter 23). This
This is called ventroflexion of the neck and is observed with
instrument measures the specific gravity or the measure of
178
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
 if renal disease is present. Normal values for urine are as
follows.
 Canines: urine specific gravity (USG) >1.025
● Felines: USG >1.035
Assessing Pre-renal, Renal, and Post-Renal Azotemia
Azotemia is defined as the buildup of toxins within the
bloodstream, which is defined as increases in the BUN and
creatinine. It is necessary when assessing renal function to
be able to differentiate between pre-renal, renal, and post-
renal azotemia (see Table 13.1). Azotemia that is produced
from a primary renal disease is caused by a kidney that can
no longer filter out toxins or concentrate urine. Pre- and
post-renal azotemia is caused by the body's inability to fil-
ter out toxins due to another systemic disease affecting
glomerular filtration. In these syndromes, the animal is still
severely azotemic but does not lose the ability to concentrate
urine.
Pre-Renal Azotemia
 Pre-renal azotemia is defined as an increase in blood kidney
chemistry elevations due to a primary problem that de-
creases blood perfusion and glomerular filtration to the kid-
neys. The problem is not associated with kidney disease but
is secondary due to the body's inability to adequately per-
fuse the kidneys. The primary cause of pre-renal azotemia is
dehydration. In severe cases, dehydrated animals have de-
creased amounts of fluid in the blood. The animal cannot
perfuse its body normally, and glomerular filtration de-
creases. In these animals
● the pet is azotemic (i.e., increased elevations in the crea-
tinine and BUN);
Figure I3.8.  Image of a cat with ventroflexion of the neck. The
 the urine specific gravity is high because the kidneys
cat is unable to lift its neck due to a profound hypokalemia.
        o 
 body is doing everything it can to conserve fluids; and
 the azotemia reverts to normal levels after hydration is re-
 the concentration of a fluid. The specific gravity of fluids
stored.
is measured from 1.001 to above 1.045. The higher the
number, the more concentrated the fluid. A urine specific
Renal Azotemia
gravity is the best assessment of the concentrating ability
 In renal azotemia there is an increase in blood kidney chem-
 of the renal medulla and is a key indicator in determining
 istry elevations due to a primary problerm with the kidneys.
Tabfe I3.1. Outline of azotemia.
Type of Azotemia
Urine Specific Gravity
Cause
Prognosis
Other Con cerns
Pre-Renal
High
Dehydration
Kidney chemistry values usually
return to normal when patient 
is rehydrated
Azotemia
Dilute
Primary renal
Can be poor due to underlying
Hypokalemia
disease
renal disease
Proteinuria
 Post-renal azotemia
High (but can become
 Urinary obstruction
Can be poor if obstruction is 
 Hyperkalemia
dilute with long-term
(FLUTD)
 prolonged, which can produce
urinary obstruction)
primary renal disease
Chapter 13: Urogenital System
179
The disease can either be glomerular or medullary or both.
Has the Progression of the Disease Been Sudden or
Up to 65-70% of the kidneys must be damaged before these
Chronic?
elevations in BUN, creatinine, and phosphorus are seen, and
The length of progression can differentiate between chronic
chemistry elevations can be significant. The kidneys have
and acute renal disease, which can change the veterinarian's 
lost the ability to concentrate urine, thus the urine specific
disease differential list, the diagnostic tests, and the poten-
gravity can be much lower than normal <1.015. It is ex-
 tial treatment plan.
Kaupi ssass Ai on sisn e u on n aa
function, since azotemia with diluted urine is the key to di-
Has There Been a Sharp Increase in Water
agnosing primary renal disease. With severe chronic renal
Consumption or Urination?
disease, kidney enzymes may not revert to normal.
● Dramatic increases in water consumption (polydipsia) and
urination (polyuria), especially over the past few days,
Post-Renal Azotemia
weeks, and months, can suggest impaired renal function.
In post-renal azotemia, there is a rise in kidney enzymes
 Pets that cannot adequately concentrate urine must drink
due to an obstruction of the outflow of urine distal to the
 larger quantities of water to prevent dehydration.
kidneys. This causes a retrograde backflow of urine into the
 In felines, increased urination can be demonstrated by in-
kidneys that then produces a back flow of toxins. The best
creased saturation of the litter box. Owners may report an
example is a lower urinary tract obstruction (i.e., feline
increased incidence of heavy litter boxes that must be
lower urinary tract disease [FLUTD]). Renal enzymes
changed more often.
can be severely elevated; however, urine specific gravity
tends to be high. Also with this acute obstruction, blood
Has There Been a Decrease in Appetite?
potassium levels can be very high and potentially life
p uo suxon jo dna piden aun 'asasp ane ym
threatening. Generally, once the animal is unobstructed, and
to rapid loss of appetite, depression, and vomiting.
rehydrated on fluids, the azotemia can dissipate. However,
With chronic disease, the buildup of toxins can slowly
-iad aonpod ueo ainssaid Areun apeigoau supmq aul
wean the appetite.
manent kidney disease if the obstruction remains long
enough.
Has There Been a Progressive Weight Loss?
The key to understanding these three syndromes is that
s   g a a  ss 
all affected pets are ill, dehydrated, and may have a marked
by the client. Weight loss of just 1-2 pounds in a 10-pound
azotemia. However, only animals with affected kidneys
animal can represent 10-20% loss of body mass.
(renal azotemia) have lost the ability to adequately concen-
 trate their urine in times of severe dehydration, indicating a
Is the Animal a Chronic Vomiter or Is Vomiting
primary renal disease. The differentiation of these animals is
made by the animal's inability to concentrate urine measured
Occurring More Often?
With the chronic increase of toxins, vomiting can occur
by the urine specific gravity.
more readily because of hyperacidity of the stomach. The
hormone, gastrin, which produces stomach acid, is elimi-
Obtaining a Thorough History with
nated in the kidneys. With kidney disease this hormone in-
Urogenital Disease
creases in the bloodstream. This can cause hyperacidity of
the stomach, producing chronic vomiting.
aq Aeuu eyn jeuue ue ul A1oisy poos e 1as o1 quejuodul s!i 11
presenting with moderate to severe renal disease. Pets can
have a serious disease that presents with very mild medical
Is the Animal Having Chronic Diarrhea?
complaints and can show virtually no physical symptoms.
Animals with renal disease can have a profound colitis be-
 s pa e  uaa ssnb a a
cause of the increased blood toxins and stress.
presented next.
Has the Pet Been Acting Constipated?
Is the Animal Young or Old?
au fo siaumo aof usanb unudui auaxa un si su
Renal disease tends to be a middle- to older-age problem.
cats. Many early obstructed male cats will go to the litter
However, kidney disease can occur in younger animals.
box and strain, acting as if they are constipated. Most clients
 bring the pet in for constipation only to find that the male cat
What Is the Breed of the Pet?
is obstructed.
Some specific breeds can be more prone to kidney disease.
Some of these breeds are as follows:
Practice Tip: Potential “constipated" male cats should 
Felines: Abyssinian and Persian
be handled as an emergency situation until the med-
 Canines: bull terrier, Caim terrier, Gerrman shepherd, and
ical team can assess the pet fully.
Sharpei
180
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Has the Pet Been Exposed to Toxins or Poisons?
 In most temperate climates in fall and winter, there is in-
creased risk of exposure to antifreeze. Ethylene glycol, a
major component of antifreeze, is a very toxic chemical,
( as a ae  ae sd 
Has the Animal Had Trouble Urinating?
Trouble urinating, including straining to urinate or vocaliz-
ing while urinating, can suggest lower urinary tract disease,
- oeisond isans ose uo 1l 'uonnsqo u Aaissod 
ease (canines only).
Obtaining an Initial Assessment on a Patient
with Renal Disease
Renal disease may not be easily diagnosed by medical his-
tory and physical examination. The pets may only show mild
signs of weight loss, anorexia, and depression and still have
nia buildup in the blood (azotemia).
significant chronic disease. Animals with acute renal dis-
ease can be severely affected, but may show only signs of
life-threatening dehydration, vomiting, and diarrhea. Some
Table 13.2.
 Triage concerns in the renal patient.
key points to monitor when dealing with a possible renal pa-
tient follow.
Trouble Signs That Indicate
Systems
 an Emergency Situation
● Mentation: Animals with acute renal disease can show
Mentation
severe depression and neurologic signs because of the
 Nonresponsive/comatose or seizures/
rapid accumulation of toxins within the body. Animals
hyperexcitability
Fever
Hypothermia, temperatures <99° (secondary
can be depressed to comatose and can also have seizures
to severe metabolic upset)
or neurologic excitement due to the increased ammonia,
 Possible fever (temperature >102°) secondary 
which affects the central nervous system.
to infectious renal disease (i.e., leptospirosis)
●Hydration: Dehydration with acute and chronic renal
Hydration
Severe dehydration >5-7%
disease can be significant and potentially life threatening.
Gum color
Injected (red)/tacky mucous membranes
CRT
CRT >2-3 seconds
Oral Ulceration: Animals with acute azotemia may have
Heart rate/pulse
Rate: Heart rates <80 bpm or >180-200 bpm
oral ulcerations and halitosis because of severe blood am-
 Pulse: Change in pulse quality secondary to
monia levels (see Figure 13.9).
seizure and shock
●Abdominal palpation: (See below.)
●Weak pulse
●No pulse
● Paradoxical
Abdominal Palpation
●Pulse deficits
One method used to gather information for an initial assess-
ment is through palpation of the abdomen. Palpation should
CRT, capillary refill time; bpm, beats per minute.
be accomplished with light pressure, checking for abdominal
tendermess, organ enlargement, or other abdominal masses.
When evaluating the abdomen during an initial assessment,
Urogenital Diagnostic Tests
special attention should be focused on evaluation of the blad-
der. With obstructive disease (FLUTD), the bladder may be
Because renal disease can be a chronic subtle process and
very large and painful, and the pet may vocalize and act un-
      n s 
comfortable when the region is palpated. Extreme care
other disease entities (dehydration, urinary obstruction), a
should be used in palpating a large bladder, because rupture
full diagnostic workup may be indicated. An overview of
is possible. In some cases, it is sometimes hard to tell if an
these procedures follows.
 abnormal structure in the caudal abdomen is a mass or an en-
larged bladder.
Diagnostic Blood Work
Diagnostic blood tests help determine if there are elevations
-s a   p aas a  sa 
 in kidney enzymes. Further changes in the complete blood
 ble, the parameters presented in Table 13.2 should be moni-
 ao o san ns  s p 
tored to help distinguish if the pet is in a life-threatening
or hormonal diseases that could change medical and treat-
condition.
ment options.
Chapter 13: Urogenital System
181
Urinalysis
A decreased red blood cell population (anemia) can be
Urinalysis (see Chapter 23) is one of the most important
secondary to chronic renal disease due to a lack of erythro-
 clinical tests in assessing renal function. Major components
poietin.
that can suggest renal disease are as follows.
Elevations in the White Blood Cell Count
 Urine specific gravity: Low urine specific gravity in the
In infectious renal disease, there can be significant eleva-
face of azotemia suggests primary renal disease.
tions of the white blood cell populations.
Presence of protein in the urine: Without the presence
of a urinary tract infection the presence of protein in the
Blood Chemistry
urine may be suggestive of glomerular disease.
As described above, elevations in creatinine, BUN, phos-
+
 Sediment: Cellular cytology may suggest the evidence of
phorus, and changes in electrolytes can all aid in the diagno-
renal casts, white blood cells, urinary crystals, or abnor-
sis of potential azotemia.
mal cells, indicating disease of the bladder, kidneys, or 
reproductive organs (e.g., prostate).
Radiography
Abdominal x-rays can be very helpful in suggesting kidney
Practice Tip: It is important to note that urine samples
disease. Some parameters examined are discussed next.
that have been sitting out for long periods of time (re-
frigerated or at room temperature) can form artifactual
Kidney Size
 calcium oxalate crystals. When receiving a sample
 Enlarged kidneys can be suggestive of acute renal disease,
from a client, the team member should obtain a brief
kidney neoplasia, or obstruction from renal stones (see
 history of how long ago the sample was collected and
 Figure 13.10). Small and irregular-shaped kidneys may sug-
how it was stored.
gest chronic end-stage kidneys.
Presence of Urinary Stones
Complete Blood Count
The presence of stones can suggest chronic infection and/or
metabolic disease. There are many possible types of renal
The complete blood count allows the veterinarian to assess
and bladder calculi and stones; not all stones are visible on
the following parameters that can be associated with renal
disease.
x-rays.
Changes in the Red Blood Cell Count
Kidney Stones
Unlike humans, kidney stones (renolithiasis) are less
Increases in the red blood cell count can be generally asso-
ciated with dehydration secondary to an acute or chronic
common in pets. The presence of small to medium-sized
renal syndrome. The pet is unable to adequately concentrate
A pue ood aaas isans sme pou  sas
its urine; hence, the pet can easily dehydrate, increasing the
need only be monitored at regular intervals. Stones are not
 amount of red blood cells in the blood in relation to its fluid
generally passed nor do they produce a serious health con-
component (see Chapter 21).
cern. If stones occur near the renal pelvis or urethra and
 become obstructive, surgery may be indicated (see Figure
13.11).
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a Blood and
Urine Evaluation with the Client
Bladder Stones
General blood work allows the veterinarian to de-
Bladder stones (urolithiasis) are a more common problem
termine if there are increases of toxins within the
 than renal calculi in dogs and cats. These stones can range
bloodstream that should normally be eliminated by
from small to very large. They represent formation of di-
the kidneys.
etary elements that precipitate out of the urine in response to
Increases in these toxins can suggest a decrease in
urinary pH and infection. The stones have very rough, irri-
the removal of these toxins (glomerular filtration).
tated surfaces that can house bacterial pathogens even while
 A urinalysis allows the medical team to assess if
the pet is on antibiotics. Further stones can obstruct the
the pet can concentrate urine normally, if there is
lower urinary outflow tract producing a life-threatening con-
protein in the urine (suggesting problems with the
dition (see Figure 13.12).
kidneys? ability to filter), and if there are changes
 in the cells of the urine that could suggest infection,
Ultrasound
neoplasia, or other kidney disease.
 Ultrasound imaging can allow visualization of the internal
 The urinalysis is a very important diagnostic tool in
architecture of the kidneys and bladder. Furthermore, on ul-
determining if increases in kidney toxins are second-
trasound studies, images of bladder stones that may not able
 ary to renal disease or another systermic problem.
to seen on x-ray, as well as bladder tumors, renal tumors, and
cysts, can be evaluated.
182
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind theDiseases
B
Figure I3.10. X-ray image of enlarged kidneys. Normal kidneys should be about 2-2.5 times the size of the second lumbar vertebra
(a). In this radiograph, the right kidney is almost 4 times the length of the second lumbar vertebra (b).
Key Points in Discussing the Need for a
Radiographic and Ultrasonic Evaluation with the
Client
A radiograph study is being recommended because of
concerns regarding a urinary tract disease. The radi-
 ographs will allow the veterinarian to do the following.
● Assess size and shape of the kidneys that may sug-
gest acute or chronic disease.
 Check for the presence of renal or bladder stones
da on juaan pipa no ans paau Ae e
eliminate long-term problems. However, it is im-
portant to note that not all types of urinary stones 
will show up on plain film radiographs.
●Check for extermal changes in kidney, bladder, and
Figure I3.11. Image of large renal stones. These stones are
  o   o 
large enough to become obstructive, producing an obstructed
tious, cancerous, or other metabolic diseases.
kidney that may require surgical removal.
An abdominal ultrasound is being suggested to as-
sess the intermal architecture for changes that could
suggest infectious, metabolic, and cancerous disease.
Furthermore, ultrasound allows imaging of certain
Advanced Diagnostic Procedures
types of bladder stones and soft tissue masses that may
Urine Protein/Creatinine Ratio
 not be visible on radiographs.
The urine protein/creatinine ratio test is usually run when
there is a persistent urine protein presence without evidence 
of urinary tract disease. Normally, the protein molecules are
too large to pass through the glomerular filters. The smaller
In-House Urine Protein Quantitation
amino acid creatinine is released in the urine in large
As with the urine protein/creatinine ratio, there are in-house
amounts. When there is glomerular damage, protein can
clinical diagnostics that are used as screening tests to detect
leak through the filters, increasing the amount of protein in
minimal levels of albumen in the urine (i.e., ERD test).
the urine and increasing the protein/creatinine ratio. Gen-
 d     a  
erally, the higher the ratio, the more severe the glomerular
disease.
renal disease.
Chapter 13: Urogenital System
183
tially worse, monitoring blood pressure routinely will help
- a jo suis s anaq usu n us
ease occur (e.g., retinal hemorrhage, cardiac enlargement,
retinal detachment, etc.). (See below in the disease section.)
Ethylene Glycol Test
If antifreeze intoxication is suspected, an ethylene glycol test
  g aa  m p a   a 
system for up to 8 hours.
Key Points in Discussing the Need For Advanced
Diagnostics with the Client
Urine protein quantitation (urine protein/
creatinine ratio or in-house diagnostic): This di-
agnostic test is an early-detection clinical diag-
Figure I3.12.  X-ray images of multiple bladder stones that may
nostic for kidney disease used to quantitate the
amount of protein leaking into the urine. In healthy
kidneys, protein molecules are too large to pass
through the glomerular filters. As the glomerular
filters are damaged, protein can leak into the urine.
The more protein in the urine, the more serious the
kidney disease.
●Urine culture and sensitivity: A urine culture and
sensitivity is being suggested to check the urine
teria that could produce a kidney or bladder infec-
 tion. The test identifies the bacterial component, as
well as the antibiotics that will be effective against
the infection.
 Blood pressure monitoring: A cormmon second-
ary disease to kidney disease is high blood pressure
or hypertension. Diseased kidneys that cannot ade-
quately filter blood toxins at a normal level in-
LKID
Renal Medulla
crease blood pressure to increase the speed the
 blood is moving and filtering through the kidneys.
As the disease process worsens, the kidneys con-
tinue to raise blood pressure and eventually can
produce hypertension. Since hypertension can lead
to heart disease, a worsening of the existing kidney
problems, and other serious problems, blood pres-
Figure 13.13.
Ultrasound image of the left kidney in cross
section. Notice the bright renal cortex above the darker renal
sure is an important parameter to monitor in the pet
 medulla.
with chronic kidney problems.
 Ethylene glycol test: This clinical diagnostic tests
for the presence of ethylene glycol, a component of
Urine Culture and Sensitivity
antifreeze, in the bloodstream. This chermical pro-
 If a resistant pathogenic bacterium is suspected, a urine cul-
duces an acute kidney failure, which, if not de-
ture and sensitivity test may be run to determine what the
tected and treated immediately, can produce life-
pathogen is and what antibiotics would prove to be most ef-
threatening disease.
fective. Urine culture can be run only on sterile urine sam-
ples taken from a catheter sample or a needle aspirate of the
bladder (cystocentesis).
Diseases of the Urogenital System
Blood Pressure Monitoring
Not all diseases are mentioned below, but the common dis-
Since high blood pressure (hypertension) can both occur
eases are discussed with the main goal being to understand
and be able to explain to the client what the diseases are,
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
how they can present, and what the overall short- and long-
 Chemotherapy drugs: These potent drugs that are used
term concerms of each disease can be. Any discussion of
in specific types of cancer can have serious secondary ef-
overall diagnostic and treatment protocols should be dis-
fects on other organ systems.
cussed based on the recommendations of the doctor and the
medical team. Please use the following information as a
There are many potential toxins that can affect the kid-
basis to discuss and educate the client, but never to diagnose
neys acutely. Some are antifreeze (ethylene glycol—see
a patient.
below) and heavy metals (lead, mercury, arsenic).
Acute Renal Disease
Infectious Disease
There are a few bacterial infections (i.e., leptospirosis) or
In acute renal disease, the kidney's glomerular filtration
massive infections of the body (sepsis) that can acutely in-
rate and renal concentration is decreased, producing a life-
threatening renal azotemia and dehydration. Furthermore,
fect renal tissue, inhibiting glomerular filtration and urine
 the toxins present as a result depress appetite and water con-
 production.
sumption, which dehydrates the pet and decreases nutrient
intake. Finally, the acute buildup of toxins can act on the
Systemic Disease
 central nervous system, producing seizures and other neuro-
     sss s  
sion and affect kidney tissue, disrupting normal function.
logic signs.
Some examples of these conditions are
Etiology
hepatic disease,
 Causes of acute renal failure can be due to multiple diseases,
heart disease, and
discussed next.
cancer.
Emergency Conditions
Signaiment
  suo Auaa ua-a ae a
Acute renal disease can affect animals of any species, breed
acutely affect normal blood flow through the kidneys due to
 or sex.
low blood pressure, blood loss, or massive dehydration.
These syndromes can inhibit normal glomerular filtration
Common Points in Medical History
and produce an acute renal shutdown.
With these syndromes, the pet's renal function is acutely im-
When body temperatures increase above 106° Fahrenheit,
paired, producing a massive buildup of toxins in the blood.
the pet can enter a life-threatening syndrome, heat stroke,
 This produces an acutely ill, profoundly affected animal.
 producing massive dehydration, poor blood flow, and meta-
Common medical complaints in this condition are
bolic disease. The resulting syndrome can stop glomerular
filtration and shut down renal function and urine production
vomiting,
(see Chapter 30).
not eating,
Although there are many forms of shock (see Chapter
 profound depression,
30), a shock situation can greatly decrease normal perfusion
history of seizures, and
to renal tissue and lead to shutdown of glomerular filtration
diarrhea.
 and urine production.
 There are a number of drugs and toxins that can affect 
Common Points on Initial Assessment
the kidneys and produce acute renal disease and failure.
These affected pets can be severely ill and depressed from
-di ae aey e anoe ue anod yen siia
the increased toxin load. However, since this disease has af-
cally associated with overdose situations where the pet
fected these animals so acutely. their body condition and
ingests a large quantity of the medication suddenly, or
weight are usually normal. Key points to monitor during the
when the pet is placed on the wrong type of medication
initial assessment are as follows.
by an owner or client. Some examples of drugs that can
 produce acute renal failure are as follows.
● Hydration: Pets can be moderate to life-threateningly
dehydrated.
Aminoglycoside antibiotics: Systemic antibiotics such
Oral cavity: Some pets may have ulcers on the tongue,
as amikacin or gentamycin can produce kidney toxicity.
 gums, and lips due to the high levels of ammonia, which
 Antifungal medication: The antifungal amphotericin B
 causes burns of the oral cavity.
can produce severe kidney disease
 Abdominal palpation: Due to acute onset of renal dis-
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs):
ease, the following changes may be noted:
Typically, the over-the-counter drug preparations (i.e., as-
 Pain over the middle back region (kidney area)
pirin, Naprosyn, ibuprofen) given at inappropriate doses
can damage renal tissue and potentially produce acute
 Small bladder present, suggesting decreased urine
renal disease.
production
Chapter 13: Urogenital System
185
Mentation: The pet may be acutely depressed to severely
in the diet before it is absorbed by the body, thus decreas-
comatose.
ing the amount of work the kidneys do.
Neurologic: Some pets may show focal to grand mal
 seizures and have altered vocal and behavior patterms.
Diet
Low-protein diets, such as Hill's K/d, also help to decrease
Complicafions
ingested proteins, decreasing the amount of ammonia pro-
If acute renal disease is not diagnosed and treated, the pet
duced from protein metabolism that must be removed by the
may develop acute renal failure, halting glomerular filtra-
kidneys.
tion, stopping urine production (anuria), and producing a
life-threatening syndrome.
Advanced Procedures
Typically, these procedures are done at critical care and uni-
Diagnosis
versity facilities. These procedures, discussed next, are not
Since acute renal failure can be caused by many possible
always options due to availability of equipment, prognosis of
diseases and syndromes, a thorough workup involving blood
case, or financial constraints.
 q  n   ss a p
ommended.
 Dopamine administration: Dopamine is administered
when the kidneys shut down. The drug helps to increase
Treatment
kidney blood flow to help return urine formation. If urine
 Treatment is focused on diagnosing and treating the underly
production decreases or stops, the pet's prognosis is grave.
ing disease while treating and relieving the toxin load that is
Peritoneal lavage: Administration of specialized fluids
building up and allowing the kidneys to returm to normal func-
directly into the abdomen can sometimes help decrease
tion. Some possible treatment options are discussed next.
the toxin load. The fluid is then drained from the ab-
domen. This procedure may have to be performed regu-
Intravenous Fluids
larly. This suggests a poor to grave prognosis.
Intravenous (IV) fluid therapy is strongly recommended to
 Blood dialysis: This process is the continuous filtering of
 help increase glomerular filtration to help the kidneys push
toxins from the blood. It must be sustained many times
the toxins into the bloodstream (diuresis). Further, IV fluids
per week with specialized machinery, usually done in a
help to rehydrate and maintain the patient.
university setting.
●Kidney transplants: Kidney transplants have been done
successfully in a university setting. Treatment can in-
Practice Tip: It is extremely important to monitor
clude long periods of hospitalization, blood dialysis, sur-
urine output while acute renal failure patients are on
 gery, and long-term medications that cause immunosup-
large amounts of IV fluids. These patients can stop
pression.
spim dn pimq o ugaq pue (eunue) auun Suonpoid
within the tissue and lung fields (pulmonary edema).
Prevention
Anuria carries a very poor prognosis, and decreased
od u eu snp pue upa o Ana siad suaa
urine production should be reported to the veterinar-
 duce an acute renal disease can help prevent its occurrence.
ian whenevident.
Discussing Acute Renal Disease with the Client
Medications
 Acute renal disease can be caused by bacterial or sys-
Medications are focused on decreasing the amount of toxins
temic diseases, or the ingestion of toxins or poisons.
the pet has to deal with and decreasing the nausea and vom-
The syndrome causes an acute shutdown of the fil-
iting secondary to renal disease. Some medications are dis-
tering abilities of the kidneys, causing a massive
cussed next.
buildup of ammonia toxins within the body.
This rapid buildup can make the pet very ill, de-
 Anti-emetics: Drugs, such as metoclopramide and oth-
hydrated, nauseous, and life-threateningly dehy-
ers, help reduce vomiting and can make the pet feel more
drated.
The overall prognosis depends on what has caused
comfortable, allowing them to eat.
 Decreased acid producers: Drugs, such as cimetidine
the renal disease. However, if severe enough, the
and famotidine, help decrease stomach acid that builds
kidneys can shut down and stop producing urine. If
up secondary to kidney disease.
this occurs, the pet's prognosis is poor.
Antibiotics: Antibiotics may be indicated if a bacterial
 Most animals will require hospitalization, intensive
 infection is suspected.
fluid therapy, and medications to begin treating the
Phosphate binders: These groups of oral medications,
acute renal symdrome.
such as Amphogel, allow the binding of oral phosphorus
981
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Antifreeze Poisoning
change in vocalization,
Although already discussed in the acute renal disease sec-
acting blind,
tion, antifreeze intoxication is a specific renal toxin.
 sudden aggression.
Antifreeze is sweet tasting and will be consumed by dogs
and cats when available. Most antifreeze contains a toxin
In late disease, signs can be
called ethylene glycol, which is a severe renal toxin. The
longer the toxin is in the body, the more damage is done. If
severe kidney disease,
the animal is seen more than a few hours after ingestion
+
decreased to no production of urine,
takes place, there may be irreversible kidney disease and a
coma,
life-threatening condition.
seizure, and
 death.
Etiology
 Antifreeze is absorbed into the body rapidly, causing severe
Complications
 metabolic upset. The toxin begins to crystallize in the blood-
 If not diagnosed and treated immediately, ethylene glycol in-
stream, especially within the kidneys, selectively destroying
toxication can produce acute renal disease/failure and death.
 the tissue and causing acute and potential irreversible kidney
disease (see Table 13.3).
Diagnostics
Clinical diagnostics for suspect antifreeze intoxication can
be the following.
Tabie I3.3. Minimum lethal dose of anti freeze.
Complete blood count: Changes observed in the com-
 Canine
2-3 ml/kg
plete blood count are elevations in red blood cell count
Feline
1.4 ml (1/5 of a teaspoon)/kg
and total protein secondary to severe dehydration.
● Chemistry: With ethylene glycol poisoning there can be
significant elevations in the renal enzymes (BUN, creati-
nine, and phosphorus), as well as elevations in potassium
 and blood sugar.
Signalment
Urinalysis: Urinalysis can show a dilute urine (urine spe-
The disease can affect any dog and cat. This problem is seen
cific gravity <10.15), suggesting a renal azotemia.
 generally in the colder months of the year when radiators are
Further evidence of antifreeze intoxication is the pres-
winterized.
ence of calcium oxalate crystals in the urine within 8
hours after intoxication.
Common Points in Medical History
 Ethylene glycol test: A positive ethylene glycol test
As discussed with acute renal failure, medical complaints
within 6 hours after ingestion suggests the presence of
usually reveal animals that are rapidly affected and may be
the toxin in the bloodstream. After 6 hours after inges-
 profoundly ill. Some medical complaints can be
tion, the test can be negative.
mild to severe depression,
Treatment
nausea,
Treatment is dependent on history, diagnostic tests, and
vomiting,
physical exam findings on presentation of the pet. However,
 inability to balance properly,
it is important to note, especially in the feline, the longer the
tripping easily,
pet goes without treatment after ingestion, the worse the di-
 altered vocalization, and
agnosis. Some treatment options may be the following.
·acting strangely.
● Hospitalization and fluid therapy: It is extremely im-
Common Points on Initial Assessment
mn spm snun uo si nad aun ans a on uo
 Physical signs depend on the amount of toxin ingested and
continue perfusion to the kidneys and stimulate urine
the duration since ingestion occurred. In early disease signs
formation.
can be
Vomiting and gastric lavage: If ingestion has just oc-
curred, the goal is to induce emesis (vomiting), remove
 severe muscular tremors,
any remaining antifreeze in the intestinal system, and ad-
tremor movements in the eyes (nystagmus),
 minister activated charcoal to deactivate any remaining
head tremors,
toxin.
increased thirst and urination,
Medication:
low body temperature,
 4-methylpyrazole inhibits the crystallization of ethyl-
●acting abnormally
 ns  s ao an   
Chapter 13: Urogenital System
187
administered over 48 hours with the pet in the hospi-
Abyssinian and Persian cats, bull terrier, Caim terrier, Ger-
tal. This drug is only effective in dogs.
 Ethanol: The use of 95% grain alcohol also inhibits
for kidney disease.
 the formation of the crystal from the blood. It is the
-  aq is  s un an ae 
Complications
travenously over 2 days.
Without proper diagnosis and treatment, the pet can con-
tinue with chronic weight loss, vomiting, and anorexia. If
Monitoring
toxins continue to rise unchecked the pet can chronically
The pet will have to be monitored very carefully in the hos-
waste and may enter a life-threatening state. Furthermore,
pital for urine formation and changes in the blood chemistry
 secondarily, hypertension (high blood pressure) can be a sig-
to help the veterinarian determine the overall prognosis. If
nificant concern (see below).
kidney toxin blood levels begin to climb and urine produc-
tion is not present in the first 24-48 hours, the prognosis is
Common Points on Medical History
usually grave.
This disease can be slow and insidious in progression.
 Medical complaints can vary depending on how affected the
Prevenfion
kidneys are and how long the pet has dealt with chronic
The key to prevention is to limit the availability of antifreeze
azotemia. If renal damage occurs slowly, animals can appear
or use antifreeze without the ethylene glycol component.
asymptomatic, with severe renal impairment. Some com-
mon medical complaints can be
 Discussing Ethylene Glycol Intoxication with the
● chronic weight loss, sometimes severe, with animals los-
Client
ing 30-40% of original weight;
Most antifreeze contains a toxin called ethylene gly-
+
 increased thirst and urination;
col. Once ingested, it is rapidly absorbed into the
 chronic vomiting, and
body and enters the bloodstream. The chemical be-
●decreased appetite.
gins to crystallize out of the blood as it enters the kid-
neys. The progressive crystallization destroys normal
Common Points in Initial Assessment
kidney tissue, producing an acute kidney failure.
These pets can show very few physical symptoms because
The failure can begin within hours after ingestion,
they have adapted to the slow increase in azotemia and are
 and if not diagnosed and treatment begun, the prog-
still eating and acting normally. However, other pets may
nosis is very poor.
have acute episodes because of sudden dramatic rises in
 Cats are much more susceptible to the toxin.
blood toxins. The following symptoms may be evident on
 Clinical signs are depression (sometimes to coma
 initial assessment.
level), vomiting, diarrhea, changes in attitude,
seizures, and possibly death.
●Dehydration
 Treatment can require days of hospitalization and
Weight loss and poor body condition
medications; there may still be high risk of kidney
 Diarrhea and constipation
shutdown and death.
●Neurologic signs—seizure
Diagnostics
Chronic Renal Disease
Since chronic renal disease can present with very mild to se-
Chronic kidney disease is a slowly progressive destruction
vere general medical symptoms (i.e., weight loss, vomiting,
 of kidney tissue. This causes renal toxins to build up in the
 depression), a thorough workup, including blood work, uri-
 bloodstream and makes the pet nauseous, anorexic, and de-
nalysis, radiology, and other diagnostics, may be recom-
hydrated.
mended.
Etiology
Treatment
The disease is a chronic destruction and breakdown of nor-
 Treatment of chronic renal disease can take several forms,
mal renal tissue secondary to age, inflammatory or infec-
depending on the severity of disease, physical symptoms of
tious disease, or cancer. Physical signs occur as over 75% of
the pet, and how the owner elects to manage treatment at
the kidney tissue is slowly, progressively destroyed, inhibit-
home. Treatment goals are broken into two categories: short-
ing normal glomerular and medullary function.
term goals and long-term goals.
Signalment
Short-Term Goals
The disease can affect both dogs and cats, with higher inci-
 Fluid therapy: Usually accomplished with intravenous
dence in older pets (mean age of onset is 9 years old). The
fluids, the goal of fluid therapy is to help clear the toxins
881
Section 2:Anatomy andPhysiology
The Science behind the Diseases
from the bloodstream by forcing kidneys to push out the
Lower Urinary Tract Disease
toxins while rehydrating the pet (diuresis). This process
Lower urinary tract disease is caused by a bacterial infec-
is usually done in the hospital on intravenous fluids over
 tion of the bladder and/or obstruction of the urinary outflow
a period of days.
tract with urinary crystals, stones (urolithes), or debris.
Medication: During severe episodes of kidney disease,
There are, overall, two forms of the disease that cause ob-
the hormone gastrin, which produces stomach acid, stays
struction.
high in the body, causing increased amounts of stomach
acid. This can make the pet feel nauseous. By placing the
 Primary bacterial bladder infections with secondary
animal on drug that decreases stomach acid, such as
urolithiasis (predominant canine form): The diseases
cimetidine, it may help stimulate the pet's appetite.
occur as bacteria invade and irritate the bladder wall,
Correcting electrolyte abnormalities: Restoring the
which becomes inflamed and thickened. As this occurs,
normal levels of sodium, potassium, and chloride help to
blood and protein begin to ooze from the bladder wall,
 decrease lethargy, weakness, and anorexia.
serving as further nutrients for the bacteria and making
the infection worse. As the infection continues, dietary
Long-Term Goals
components can crystallize in the urine. These crystals
● Subc utaneous fluids: Once the kidneys have undergone
can further unite and form stones. It is these crystals and
diuresis, giving subcutaneous fluids under the skin at
stones that obstruct the urethra (outflow tract of the blad-
home every other day to a few times a week may allow the
der) and can cause an obstructed bladder.
kidneys to maintain adequate hydration on detoxification.
With primary urolithiasis (predominant feline form):
● Potassium supplementation: Giving oral potassium
The urinary outflow tract (urethra) obstructs with crys-
  sa  a   s
talline debris, mucus (mucous plugs), or stones that crys-
and help maintain appetite.
 tallize out of the urine due to the urinary environment and
● Medications: The pet may be placed on medications to
dietary components. These crystals obstruct the urinary
help decrease nausea associated with toxin buildup and
outflow tract causing the bladder to swell and urine to
help bind phosphorus in the diet before it enters the body.
backflow into the kidneys. This can severely decrease or
Erythropoietin supplementation: This hormone, which
permanently damage kidney function.
is produced by the kidney, stimulates red blood cell pro-
duction in the bone marrow. In advanced cases of chronic
Etiology
renal disease, this hormone helps stimulate red blood cell
 There are predisposing factors for lower urinary tract disease.
formation and prevent anemia.
 Conditions that keep the animal from urinating nor-
Prevention
mally or fully, such as an infrequent cleaning of the litter
There is no way to prevent chronic renal disease. However,
box.
through routine blood and urine diagnostics in older animals
Stress in the household, such as new pet.
and breeds that are more sensitive to renal disease, early di-
 Dietary factors that change urinary pH or environment.
agnosis and treatment can help increase quality of life and
Dietary factors high in a specific compound that precip-
life span of the pet.
itates out in the urine to form crystals.
 Insufficient water intake, which can also predispose to
bladder infections and bladder stones.
Discussing Chronic Renal Disease with the Client
Chronic renal disease is a chronic, progressive de-
 There are many types of crystals that can precipitate out
struction of both kidneys.
of the urine causing obstruction and disease. The most com-
 Physical symptoms of chronic vomiting, weight
mon ones are:
loss, and anorexia become evident as 66-75% of
the kidney tissue is damaged.
● Struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate) crystals
Blood and urine clinical diagnostics can help deter.
occur as the urine begins to have an alkaline pH (>7.0).
mine the extent of the kidney disease and help the
The diet may have higher amounts of the mineral magne-
veterinarian decide on effective treatment options.
sium. The presence of the alkaline urine and the higher
 There is no cure for chronic renal disease. The goal
dietary magnesium level combines with normal urine
of short-term and long-term treatment is to help
components to form crystals.
maintain hydration, decrease toxin load on the
● Calcium oxalate crystals are produced when there are
body, and maintain appetite and quality of life.
high levels of calcium in the diet and the urine is acidic
● Hypertension can be a common secondary disease
(pH <7.0). The stones are seen more in males than fe-
concem from chronic renal disease, and blood
males. They are more common in Himalayan and Persian
pressure should be routinely monitored.
cat breeds and miniature schnauzers, Lhasa apso, and
Yorkshire terriers dog breeds.
Chapter 13: Urogenital System
189
Signalment
 Surgical treatment consists of the following.
Urinary obstruction can occur in both dogs and cats, affect-
ing the male pet more commonly.
●Felines—perineal urethrostomy/cystotomy: In some
cases in cats that have recurrent obstruction, a surgery to
Complications
 create a new opening above the penis is preformed. This
 If not treated immediately, a blocked pet will develop severe
procedure is called a perineal urethrostomy. It de-
accumulations of renal toxins, develop secondary renal dis-
 creases the likelihood of reobstruction. Also if stones are
ease, and enter acute renal failure and death.
present within the bladder, a surgery to remove these
stones (cystotomy) may also be recommended.
Common Points on Medical History
 Canines--cystotomy: In general, bladder stones are sur-
 The disease can start subtly with increases in urination, vo-
gically removed through a cystotomy.
 calization while urinating, urinating outside of the litter pan, 
 and spraying urine (male or female cats). The urine can have
a blood tinged or brown color. Occasionally, pets will come
acutely obstructed, severely depressed dehydrated, and
Discussing Urinary Tract Disease and Urinary
vomit due to the acute azotemia. Often feline patients will be
Obstruction with the Client
brought in with the complaint of constipation because both
Bladder infection can occur as urine sits for ex-
female and male cats strain and posture to suggest issues
tended periods of time. The bacteria in the urine
with constipation.
begin to reproduce and irritate the bladder wall; the
d au o e d ya on suq ip
Common Points in Physical Examination
tein and blood acts as an excellent growth medium
-a aas a  n l la  aq a sia as
for the bacteria, making the bladder infection
pressed due to the buildup of toxins in the bloodstream.
worse. The cells, debris, and protein can combine 
Clinical signs on initial assessment can be
and obstruct the urinary outflow tract.
Urinary crystals form as dietary components begin
dehydration,
to crystallize out from the urine at a specific uri-
vomiting,
nary pH. Crystals can occur primarily or as associ-
lateral/sternal recumbence,
ated with urinary tract infection. Given enough
painful abdomen with a large bladder evident,
time, crystals can form into urinary stones.
vocalization while palpating abdomen,
Cellular and bacterial debris and crystals can ob-
licking vaginal/penile region, and
struct the urinary outflow tract, making the pet
 extended red, raw penis
unable to clear the toxins from its body. These
toxins begin to backflow into the kidneys and
Diagnosis
back into the bloodstream. This produces an acute
Diagnosis is made based on medical history, physical exam-
syndrome that can make the pet very ill and dehy-
ination, and changes in the blood and urine clinical diagnos-
drated.
tic tests.
Urinary obstruction is a life-threatening emergency
that, if not treated immediately, can produce a life-
threatening syndrome within a very short period of 
Treatment
If urinary obstruction is evident, it should be considered a
time (<4-8 hours).
life-threatening emergency. The treatment is focused on both
 In tomcats with a repeated history of obstruction,
short- and long-term care.
aad pns e isaans  ua 
called a perineal urethrostomy (PU). This proce-
Short-Term Care
 dure creates a larger opening above the pet's penis.
Medical treatment consists of the following.
Although these sites can still obstruct, the larger
opening decreases concerm for obstruction.
To help prevent re-formation of the urinary crystals
 Catheterization of the bladder with a urinary catheter al-
lows normal flow of urine (usually done under sedation).
Or stones (i.e., struvite), it may be recommended
 Fluid therapy, either intravenous or subcutaneous, to
that the pet go on a specific diet that changes the
urinary pH and has decreased elements of the spe-
flow of urine.
cific stone in the diet.
 The use of antibiotics to help clear up the initial bladder
 The veterinarian may recormmend routine recheck
infection, if present.
 of the urine to help detect any changes that may
 If the catheter is removed and the pet re-obstructs, sur-
 precede crystal reformation.
 gery may be needed to clear the obstruction (see below).
190
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Long-Term Care:
Tabfe I3.4. Normal blood pressure levels.
●Diet: Once the type of crystal or bladder stone (uroliths)
has been identified, the pet should be placed on a pre-
 Mean Arterial
scription diet that alters the pH of the urine and has de-
Species
Systolic
Diastolic
creased dietary elements to help prevent reformation of
Pressure
crystals.
Canine
<160 mm Hg
6H Ww 96>
117 mm Hg
● Urinalysis: Once diagnosed and placed on a prescription
 Feline
<180 mm Hg
<120 mm Hg
140 mm Hg
diet, regular re-evaluation should be performed on urine
for changes suggestive of bladder infection or crystal re-
occurrence.
Common Points on Initial Assessment
Prevention
Hypertension can produce very subtle signs on initial as-
 Prevention is focused on diagnosing and treating urinary
 sessment of the patient. Some concerms may be
tract disease before a pet obstructs. If crystals or urolithes
have been diagnosed, specific diets to help control pH and
acute blindness,
bleeding from the nose, and
dietary components are available to help prevent stone reoc-
central nervous system disease (e.g., seizures, depression).
currence.
Complications
Renal Secondary Hypertension
 If hypertension is not detected and treated, it may produce
Hypertension is a chronic elevation of blood pressure caus-
 displacerment of the retina of the eye, producing acute blind-
 ing a potentially severe systermic disease.
ness, heart disease and failure, and central nervous system
signs.
Etiology
 In chronic renal disease, hypertension is an increase in sys-
Diagnostics
temic blood pressure caused by an increased production of
Clinical diagnostics for hypertension are completed with a
renin-angiotensin due to decreased glomerular filtration in
 Doppler or oscillation method to obtain systolic systemic pres-
 diseased kidneys. The activated angiotensin produces a sig-
sure. Animals are said to have systemic hypertension when
nificant vasoconstriction increasing systemic blood pres-
their blood pressure is above the values given in Table 13.4.
sure. Hypertension can also occur secondarily to the follow.
A persistent elevation in any of the three blood pressure
ing disease entities:
categories is defined as hypertension.
diabetes mellitus (dog and cat),
Treatment
hyperadrenocorticism (dog mostly),
Treatment is focused on the following guidelines.
hyperthyroidism (cat mostly),
heart disease (cat mostly), and
 Identify and treat the underlying disorder: Because
●can also rarely occur as a primary disease
hypertension commonly occurs as a secondary disease
entity, identification of the primary disorder and treat-
Signalment
pressure. The veterinarian may suggest getting a diagnos-
Hypertension affects both dogs between 2 and 14 years of
tic baseline of blood work, urine, x-rays, and other tests
age (mean age of 8-9 years) and cats between 7 and 20 years
to help rule out any primary disease.
ad xas o  o si a ( l jo a ua) a jo
Decreasing dietary sodium: By decreasing salt content
disposition.
in the diet, it decreases the amount of fluid retained by
the body, thus decreasing the amount of fluid the body
Common Points in Medical History
must pass through the heart and blood supply.
Hypertension can be a very subtle disease process; the chief
Medications: Medications are focused on decreasing sys-
medical complaint is that the pet may be slowing down or
     
"getting older."' Concerms of hypertension should occur with
system. These drugs inhibit the activation of renin in the
a history of chronic renal disease or any of the above-listed
kidney, which decreases the production of the vasocon-
 diseases. Some other medical complaints can be
stricting hormone angiotensin.
 bumping into furniture and objects (acting blind),
Prevention
nose bleeds,
The key to prevention of hypertension is early detection of
weight loss, and
high blood pressure in animals and identification of the un-
+exercise intolerance.
derlying primary disease.
Chapter 13: Urogenital System
191
Discussing Secondary Renal Hypertension with
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
the Client
Please try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology-
● High blood pressure is an increase in constriction
The Science behind the Diseases) to help reinforce the infor-
of peripheral blood vessels, which increases resist-
mation presented here.
ance in blood circulation in the body.
 Normal, healthy kidneys require 20% of the body's
blood to flow through kidney filters every minute
to maintain normal detoxification of the blood.
To maintain glomerular filtration, the kidneys re-
lease a potent chemical that stimulates constriction
of the blood vessels of the body, increasing blood
 pressure and blood velocity.
 As kidneys become diseased and there are fewer
filters available in the kidney tissue, the kidney
continues to secrete large amounts of hormone to
maintain adequate circulation for filtration of the
blood.
 Over time this process can elevate blood pressure
ss d s   o
 Over time hypertension can produce blindness,
seizures, and produce or worsen cardiac disease.
 Monitoring blood pressure routinely can help pre-
vent serious life-limiting disease.
If hypertension is diagnosed, medication can help
control blood pressure.
Chapter 14
Liver
Introduction
bladder. The gall bladder serves as a collecting bag for the
toxins excreted by the liver. Many of these toxins are pig-
The liver is the largest gland in the body. It serves as a ware-
ments (i.e., bilirubin) that give the feces its color. The gall
house and production plant, producing most of the products
bladder empties through a duct known as the biliary tree into
essential for life. The liver functions in the following areas.
a common bile duct that empties into the duodenum. The
● Storage: The liver stores an extremely small sugar sup-
common bile duct also shares ducts from the pancreatic
ducts that secrete digestive enzymes that aid in digestion of
s au raa y sau Aoq an uua as m i
food. Ingestion of food and water stimulates the release of
molecule called glycogen is transformed from glucose by
the pancreatic enzymes and constriction of the gall bladder
the liver for storage. When the body is running low on
through the common bile duct.
sugar, the liver converts the glycogen back into sugar.
The blood supply to the liver is a unique system to help
● Detoxification of toxins: There are heavy loads of toxins
keep the liver healthy while detoxifying the body. The major
and bacteria brought to the liver from the gastrointestinal
nutritional support for the liver is from the hepatic artery,
tract. Enzymes in the liver detoxify these toxins into inert
a branch of the celiac artery, which supplies nutrition for the
waste products that are then excreted by the intestines
 liver. The hepatic vein takes deoxygenated blood and nutri-
and kidneys.
ents away from the liver toward the heart, emptying into the
Formation of building blocks: The liver takes amino
caudal vena cava. However, another large venous system
acids and proteins, triglycerides (fat), and simple sugars
called the portal vein drains the stomach, small intestines,
from the intestine and uses them to produce necessary
 proteins and structures for the body. The liver can change
and colon, and helps to bring absorbed nutrients, toxins, and
bacteria to the liver (see Figure 14.2). The portal vein is the
these nutrients and then export them for:
only venous system in the body that does not have a match-
production: milk, eggs,
ing arterial system with it.
growth: muscle, fat,
The intermal architecture of the liver is composed of one
 maintenance: skin, hair, clotting factors, blood pro-
cell-thick layers of hepatocytes that are surrounded by
tein, and
 h   s   s    
 reproduction.
Figure 14.3).
The liver is located behind the diaphragm in the cranial
 The function of these cells is to absorb all toxins, bacteria,
aspect of the abdomen. It sits cranial to the stomach, small
and nutrients that are in the portal blood supply. The nutrients
 are absorbed changed into proteins, energy, and fats that the
intestine, pancreas, and spleen. The liver is covered in peri-
toneum, the same tissue that lines the abdomen. This tissue
body can use, and then re-released into the blood supply to
secretes a clear sterile fluid to prevent attachment of bacte-
enter the general circulation through the caudal vena cava
ria to help resist infection. The liver sits more on the right
and the heart. The toxins and bacteria are detoxified and de-
side of the abdomen and is divided into a number of lobes
activated and then released into channels, called canniculi,
by fissures or separations within the tissue (see Figure 14.1).
running through the layers of hepatocytes. These canniculi
The lobes are divided into the
then connect to the bile ductules, which lead to the gall blad-
der. The major waste material secreted is a chermical called
left lateral lobe,
bilirubin. Bilirubin is a breakdown pigment from blood.
left medial lobe,
When the red blood cell becomes aged and fragile, the spleen
right lateral lobe,
destroys the red blood cells and harvests the hemoglobin in-
right medial lobe,
side. Hemoglobin is the part of the red blood cell that carries
quadrate lobe, and
oxygen. The spleen removes iron molecules that are closely
●caudate lobes.
related to the hemoglobin and passes the rest of the molecule
to the liver as bilirubin, a yellow waste pigment.
Within the liver architecture, there is a special indenta-
Within the hepatocytes are specific chemicals called en-
tion (fossa) within the right medial lobe that houses the gall
zymes that function to change or produce specific body pro-
193
194
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Portal
vein
Stomac
Splee
Figure I4.1.  Illustration of the canine liver.
Jejunur
teins, sugar, and fats or to detoxify toxic chemicals in the
body.
 Enzymes involved with protein metabolism are
alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
aspartate aminotransferase (AST),
Figure 14.2.
 Illustration of the portal system.
lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), and 
●gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT).
There are series of enzymes (called pathways) that deac-
 s  a s  s  ss
●glucoronidation enzymes, and
cytochrome P4so enzymes.
 These enzyme systems are responsible for deactivating
many of the drugs that are used in veterinary medicine.
Without these enzymes, even normal doses of antibiotics or 
vein
other drug categories could become toxic to our body. Fur-
Branch
.portal
thermore, felines lack the glucoronidation enzymes; this is
why cats are much less able to handle ingestion of specific
categories of drugs (i.e., nonsteroidal anti-inflarmmatory
medication, or NSAIDs).
 Hepatocytes also produce chemicals called bile acids
that help emulsify fat within the small intestine. Eating stim-
ulates bile acid production, and they empty through the gall
Figure 14.3.  Cross-section of the liver. Notice the branch of the
bladder and into the common bile duct. As the gall bladder
portal vein bringing in nutrients, toxins, and microbes into the
empties into the small intestine by the common bile duct,
liver tissue. The hepatocytes absorb the nutrients and modify them
these chemicals are then released to help in the breakdown
for use by the body. The toxins and microbes are detoxified and
of fat. The bile acids are then rapidly reabsorbed by the
then pushed into the bile canaliculi, which then accumulate in the
small intestine.
gall bladder.
Chapter 14: Liver
195
Clinical Expressions of Liver Disease
  ae a os   a  aq  sss
lignant cancer. Some common primary liver tumors are
Because the liver functions on so many levels, liver disease
can produce variable signs depending on the type of disease
 hepatic adenocarcinoma,
evident. As with other organ disease, liver malfunction can
hepatic cholangioadenocarcinoma,
be acute or chronic, subtle or severe, and each form of the
+
 lymphoma,
disease can be treated very differently. Disease categories
 mast cell tumor, and
are discussed next.
●hemangiosarcoma.
Infectious Liver Disease
Metabolic Disease
-       a  l a
This form of liver disease occurs as inert proteinaceous ma-
 asitic infection. The infection invades normal liver tissue,
terial or fat builds up within the liver, destroying the normal
slowing or stopping the liver's ability to detoxify the body
architecture and function. Examples of metabolic liver dis-
and produce building blocks. Some examples of infectious
ease are
hepatic diseases are
 amyloidosis (protein), and
canine viral hepatitis,
hepatic lipidosis (fat).
bacterial hepatitis,
fungal hepatitis (e.g., coccidiomycosis), and
Toxic Disease
 parasitic hepatitis (e.g., liver flukes).
 Because the liver is the major shock organ in the dog and is
a source of detoxification, severe toxins can affect normal
Inflammatory Disease
liver metabolism and function.
which the liver is unable to breakdown the pigments and in-
Porto-Systemic (Porto-Caval) Shunts
fection, producing an influx of white blood cells into hepatic
The portal vein brings nutrients, toxins, and bacteria to the
tissue. The white blood cells invade through the healthy
liver to be metabolized, used, and excreted. In some animals,
liver, causing damage and irritation. Inflammatory disease
small vessels, called shunts, can bypass the liver, moving
can be broken down into three categories, depending on the 
blood directly into the caudal vena cava, heart, and central
 chronicity of the process.
nervous system. The increased blood toxin load can produce
severe neurological and systemic signs. Shunts can occur as
Acute hepatitis
a congenital defect or as an acquired disease and can occur
Chronic hepatitis
within the liver (intrahepatic) or outside of the liver (extra-
End-stage liver disease—cirrhosis
hepatic) (see below).
Neoplasia
The liver is both the site of primary cancer and a common
Signs Specific to Liver Disease
site of metastatic disease (see Figure 14.4). Although liver
Liver disease can show specific symptoms that can suggest
liver dysfunction.
Jaundice
 Jaundice refers to a buildup of yellow pigmented toxins
within the skin, sclera of the eye, and gums of the animal
(see Figure 14.5). This process occurs secondary to the
buildup of bilirubin due to one of the following concerms:
● Inability of the liver to detoxify the waste products (i.e.
liver disease)
 Obstruction of the gall bladder (i.e. cholestatic disease)
 Massive destruction of the red blood cells within the
blood vessels of the body (e.g., immune mediated he
molytic anemia)
Ascites
 Ascites refers to the buildup of a low protein-low cellularity
Figure 14.4.  Abnormal diseased liver with evidence of neopla-
abdominal fluid (transudate or a modified transudate).
sia or metastasis.
This can occur secondary to the following.
196
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
●bruising,
nose bleeds,
 rectal bleeding, and
+ poor color.
Animals for which there are concerms of significant liver
disease or failure must be monitored closely for spontaneous
hemorrhage or bruising. When drawing blood from these
pets, only smaller blood vessels (i.e., the cephalic—front
arm) should be used. A team member should never draw
blood from the jugular vein in a pet with a potential coagu-
lopathy because of the concern for continued bleeding from
the larger jugular vessel.
Obtaining a Thorough History with Hepatic
Disease
Figure 14.5. Ear pinna are common sites to evaluate for
jaundice.
Diagnosing hepatic disease based on physical examination
get a good history in an animal that may be presenting with
moderate to severe hepatic disease. Animals can have seri-
most normal on physical examination. Some key questions
● Liver disease: The liver produces a series of proteins
when obtaining a medical history are presented next.
(mainly albumin) that maintains vascular pressure
within the vessel, which keeps fluid within the blood.
Is the Animal Young or Old?
With severe liver disease, blood protein levels decrease,
Although liver disease tends to be evident in middle-aged to
allowing fluid pooling outside of the blood supply.
older animals, it does not have to be an old-animal problerm.
Right-sided heart disease: When there is disease in the
Some very young animals can have serious liver problems.
right heart, blood canmnot flow properly, causing a backlog
 or congestion within the hepatic sinusoids. When this oc-
Is There Breed Specificity for Liver Disease?
curs, the liver begins to ooze fluid into the abdomen (as-
Specific breeds can have underlying liver disease at differ-
cites; see Chapter 12).
ent life stages. Although liver dysfunction can occur in any
animal, the following breeds have a greater genetic disposi-
Hepatic Encephalopathy
tion for hepatic problems.
Hepatic encephalopathy refers to a neurologic symdrome
caused by the improper hepatic detoxification of toxins. The
 Beddlington terrier
toxins build up within the bloodstream and directly affect
West Highland white terrier
 the central nervous system. The symdrome cormmonly occurs
Skye terrier
15-20 minutes after eating a meal because of the massive in-
Doberman pinscher
flow of toxins associated with eating. Common neurologic
Yorkshire terrier
signs can be
Shar pei
seizures,
Has the Progression of the Disease Been Sudden or
disorientation,
+
Chronic?
circling,
 The progression of the disease can differentiate between
head pressing,
chronic and acute disease and potentially change the differ-
 atypical behavior, and
a a n  sisn s an is  
blindness.
+
veterinarian and medical team.
Coagulopathy
Has There Been a Sharp Increase in Water
A coagulopathy refers to a patient that has a decreased abil-
Consumption or Urination ?
 s oas s nl a o n n Ai
As with renal disease, increased water consumption (poly-
help in clot formation. In severe liver disease and failure, the 
dipsia) and urination (polyuria) occur as the pet tries to ex-
aae  pann g nou a sd 
sai q Aoq naun ui sx a sisa ynn aa
levels. Animals can present with
their water intake and urination. It is important to discuss if
Chapter 14: Liver
197
the changes have occurred over the last few days, weeks, or
● Anticonvulsants: Medications such as phenobarbital can
months. Furthermore, with cat owners, the most notable
 also affect liver function and produce liver damage.
change may be that the litter box is more saturated or heavy.
 Steroids: Long-term steroid usage (such as prednisone,
 dexamethasone, triamcinolone) can have an effect on
Has There Been a Slowly or a Rapidly Decreasing
liver tissue.
Appetite?
With chronic disease, the loss of liver function and increased
What Is the Vaccination Status of the Patient?
 blood toxins can slowly suppress the appetite.
Both adenovirus and leptospirosis can cause an infectious
hepatitis. Determining vaccine status can help the medical
Has There Been a Progressive Weight Loss?
team determine if the pet is at more risk due to a lapse in
" an  ou s  a aq  ss m
vaccination.
Weight loss of 1-2 pounds in a 10-pound animal represents
10-20% weight loss. It is very important to differentiate
Have There Been Any Neurologic Signs or Disorders
over what period of time this weight loss has occurred.
Have there been any seizures, acting blind, changes in vocal-
 as   an i s i i 
 ization, etc., especially associated with eating? Because of
 acute shutdown of the liver due to infiltration of fat into the
limited detoxification of toxins and microbes associated
liver tissue (hepatic lipidosis; see below). With chronic
with liver disease, neurologic symptoms can occur as a
 liver disease, there tends to be more severe chronic anorexia
sharp increase in bloodborne toxins affect the central nerv-
associated with a decreased liver function, producing physi-
ous system (hepatic encephalopathy; see below).
 cal symptoms such as a pendulous or pot-bellied abdomen
and a poor hair coat.
Has Your Pet Traveled in the Last 3-6 Months?
There are specific gastrointestinal parasites (i.e., flukes) that
Is the Animal a Chronic Vomiter or is Vomiting
can migrate to the liver and destroy normal tissue. If there
Occurring More Often?
has been an extended travel history, the medical team should
With the chronic increase of toxins, vomiting can occur
be informed to research any possible regional disease that
more readily.
could produce liver dysfunction.
Is the Animal Having Chronic Diarrhea?
Obtaining an Initial Assessment on a Patient
Animals with liver disease can have a profound small bowel
with Hepatic Disease
diarrhea because of lack of normal digestive enzymes that are
produced by the liver (maldigestion syndrome; see Chapter
As with renal disease, liver disease may not be easily diag-
10). However, with enough toxins, large-colon diarrhea is also
nosed with physical examination. Pets may show just
possible. Furthermore, gastrointestinal bleeding secondary to
generic symptoms of weight loss, anorexia, vomiting, and or
coagulopathies can produce digested blood (melena) from the
diarrhea. Specific signs such as jaundice and ascites may
small intestine and frank blood frorm the colon.
help indicate a hepatic dysfunction; however, these symp-
toms can also suggest other disease problems. Furthermore,
Has the Animal Been Exposed to Toxins or Poisons?
there can be significant liver disease without jaundice or as-
a s n sn aa Ara a n 
cites. Some important observations to evaluate on the initial
liver tissue, almost all toxins are eliminated by the liver and
assessment follow.
therefore can damage normal liver tissue. Some possible
toxins to discuss with the owner are
●Hydration: Animals with an acute liver dysfunction can
be extremely dehydrated due to the buildup to toxins pro-
 mushrooms, and
 ducing dehydration and anorexia.
acetaminophen (Tylenol).
 Poor, unkempt hair coat/distended pendulous ab-
domen: The decreased production of proteins and other
Is the Patient on Any Long-Term Medications?
metabolic needs associated with chronic liver disease can
 Patients on long-term medications can develop secondary
chronically produce a poor hair coat, large distended ab
liver disease. In many circumstances, these patients have
domen from potential ascites, and abdominal muscle
routine blood work evaluated to make sure there is no evi-
breakdown (see Figure 14.6).
dence of liver issues. However, even with screening blood
 Jaundice: Yellowing of the mucous membranes or ear
work, patients can develop serious liver dysfunction.
pinna (see above).
Common drugs that can affect the liver are discussed next.
 Bruising: Obvious evidence of bruising on the abdomen
 Or other parts of the body can suggest a problem with the
 NSAIDs: Drugs such as carprofen (Rimadyl) and other
animal's ability to clot blood. Small pinpoint hemor-
NSAIDs can have a chronic effect on liver function in
rhages are called petechiation. Large more geographic
some cases.
hemorrhages are called ecchymosis (see Figure 14.7).
198
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—T
The Science behind the Diseases
Tabie I4.1.
 Triage concerns in the cardiology patient.
 Trouble Signs That In dicate
Systems
an Emergency Situation
Mentation
Nonresponsive/comatose/seizures
Fever
Hypothermia: Temperatures <99° (secondary
 to severe metabolic upset)
Possible fever: Temperature >102° (secondary
to infectious liver disease, i.e., bacterial
hepatitis)
Hydration
Severe dehydration >5-7 %
Gum color
Jaundice
 Capillary refill time 
CRT >2-3 seconds
Integument (skin)
 Spontaneous bruising
Heart rate/pulse
Rate: Heart rates <80 bpm or >180-200 bpm
 Pulse: Change in pulse quality secondary to
seizure and shock
Figure 14.6. Schnauzer with a poor, unkempt hair coat and dis-
Complete Blood Count
tended abdomen, possibly suggestive of liver disease.
Red Blood Cells
With chronic wasting disease, low red blood cell count
may be present (anemia).
●Anemia is secondary to the lack of precursors for cellu-
lar material; with liver disease, the body does not have
enough material to produce cellular components.
 Also, chronic liver disease can produce animals that are
more prone to bleeding and hence there may be chronic
blood loss and anemia.
sse si wnd suaa jo adi sn rnn
with lower total protein and lower platelet counts.
 The animal should be carefully assessed for bruising.
White Blood Cells and Platelets
With infectious processes, elevation in white blood cells
may be observed.
With certain forms of cancer (i.e., hepatic lymphoma),
white blood cell elevations can be severe. White blood cells
can have an extremely abnormal cytology, and populations
can be very high. A blood smear is always suggested with
Figure 14.7.
 Spontaneous ecchymosis from an acute coagulopa-
sick animals to better assess cell morphology (red blood
thy on the ventral abdomen.
cells and white blood cells; see Chapter 2l) as well as
platelet numbers. With animals with coagulopathy, platelets
counts are low.
Although pets can have severe hepatic disease and be sta-
ble, the following parameters should be monitored to help
Chemistry
 distinguish if the pet is in a life-threatening condition (see 
 Blood work on a routine chemistry panel can be extremely
Table 14.1).
variable with chronic liver disease, portal-caval shunts, and
neoplasia. It is important to understand the difference be-
tween clinical diagnostics that assess liver damage and
Hepatic Clinical Diagnostics
those that assess liver function.
Because there are many potential forms of liver disease,
 In acute liver disease with significant damage to liver
blood work can be normal and there can still be significant
cells, the intermal enzymes with the hepatocytes leak out and
disease. Blood work serves as a useful tool but must also be
increase dramatically in the bloodstream. This suggests
assessed along with history, physical examination, and other
acute liver damage.
diagnostic aids. Some clinical diagnostics are discussed next.
However, with chronic disease, where only small
Chapter 14: Liver
199
amounts of the liver may be affected day to day, the inter-
Indicators of Liver Function
nal enzymes may be normal or low. In these cases, the vet-
These chemicals are normally produced by the liver. As the
erinarian must assess clinical diagnostics that indicate liver
liver becomes damaged production of these enzymes can be
function. These are chermicals that are produced by the liver
altered. Although alterations in liver function can occur with
normally. Chronic disease impairs liver function.
     s   
entiating chronic liver dysfunction where liver enzymes can
Indicators of Liver Damage
be normal.
These enzymes increase in the bloodstream as normal hepa-
tocytes are damaged acutely. These enzymes suggest an
Total Protein/Albumin
acute or ongoing large-scale injury to the liver.
The liver produces albumin, which is a small protein used for
carrying other compounds and minerals throughout the blood.
Alanine Aminotransferase
Decreases in albumin can represent a functional problem
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT or SGPT) is an intrahep-
with the liver. Decreases in albumin can suggest liver disease;
atic enzyme that is responsible for the conversion of 2-
 however, decreased albumin can also be seen with
 Oxoglutarate to pyruvate and glutamate. Increased levels of
the enzyme in the blood occur when there are alterations in
 internal bleeding,
the lipid membrane of the hepatocytes, secondary to injury,
 hormonal disease,
inflammation, or infection within the liver. ALT can also
 renal disease—glomerular disease,
be elevated secondary to
 intestinal disease, and
 certain types of cancer.
trauma (i.e., hit by car),
anticonvulsants (i.e., phenobarbital), and
Blood Urea Nitrogen
steroids.
The liver unites two ammonia molecules together to form
 blood urea nitrogen (BUN). This toxin is then removed from
Aspartate Aminotransferase
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST or SGOT) is an intracellu-
lar enzyme in all cells, but is predominantly in larger concen-
Discussing Clinical Diagnostics with the Client
tration in muscle and liver cells. AST can be elevated in mus-
 The doctor has recormmended general blood work
cle disease or disease that affects muscle acutely, such as
to determine if there is liver damage, suggestions 
of liver dysfunction, or other changes in the body
trauma, and
to suggest infection, inflammation, or other organ 
seizure.
disease.
 The basic blood work evaluates the level of intra-
AST is also present in red blood cells, thus massive red
cellular liver enzymes in the bloodstream. The
blood cell destruction (immune-mediated hemolytic ane-
 more cellular liver damage in an acute disease
 mia) can also increase AST levels
process, the higher these enzymes levels register.
With acute disease, these values can change signif-
Alkaline Phosphatase
Alkaline phosphatase refers to a large number of intracellu-
●In chronic disease, in which only small amounts of
lar enzymes that are present within the liver, intestine, bone,
the liver are affected day to day, the internal liver
kidneys, and placenta. On most chemistry panels, alkaline
enzymes may be low to normal. However, the
phosphatase levels represent all alkaline phosphatase
chronic damage may have greatly affected the over-
sources of the body. The liver form has high levels within the
all function of the liver. To better evaluate if the
hepatocytes and the canniculi. It is a very helpful indicator
liver is functioning normally, the doctor may sug-
of bile stasis or gall bladder obstruction and can also be seen
gest liver function tests.
with liver disease and other hormonal diseases (i.e., hypera-
 One common liver function test is paired bile
drenocorticism; see Chapter 27).
acids. Bile acids are norrmally produced by the liver
to help emulsify fat in the diet. Once secreted and
Gamma-Glutamyl Transferase
used, they are readily absorbed by the liver. This test
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) is an intracellular en-
evaluates the animal's ability to secrete and reab-
zyme responsible for clearing a specific chemical group
sorb bile acids in a fasted animal. Pets with chronic
from a larger molecule. All cells contain GGT; however,
liver disease will have mildly high bile acids prior to
renal epithelial, bile duct, and hepatic cells contain the high-
feeding and exceedingly high bile acids 1-2 hours
est activity. Elevations can be represented with decreased
after a meal. This observation suggests liver dys-
bile flow (cholestasis), especially in felines. GGT is more of
function and potential serious disease.
a liver enzyme indicator in large animals.
007
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
the body through the kidneys. With decreased liver function,
Utrasound
BUN levels can be low.
Abdominal ultrasounds can suggest changes within the in-
temal tissue of the liver. Focal masses, focal abscesses, and
Bilirubin
diffuse disease can be visualized. Ultrasound cannot diag-
 The normal liver deactivates this toxin produced from red
o   a   a r  a a a
blood cell destruction and pushes it into the intestinal sys-
the liver is affected and if the disease is focal (i.e., a mass)
tem through the bile ducts and gall bladder. With certain
or diffuse (see Figure 14.9). Ultrasound-guided biopsy fine-
forms of liver disease or gall bladder disease, the pigment is
 ssu a   p a a  a aia
not properly deactivated by the liver and builds up in the
diagnosis of the type of disease.
bloodstream and the tissue. Elevations of total bilirubin can
suggest functional liver disease. However, disease that
Exploratory/Laparoscopic Surgery
causes massive destruction of the red blood cells can also
On occasion, the abdomen does need to be explored and
raise bilirubin levels.
  l a   sis ss aa 
needed.
Bile Acids
As described earlier, bile acids are secreted to help emulsify
fat when an animal eats. In liver disease, bile acids are not
Discussing Imaging and Biopsy Diagnostics with
properly reabsorbed. Clinically, to test for bile acids, an an-
the Client
imal is fasted for 12 hours, then a baseline level of bile acids
An abdominal radiograph will help the veteri-
is drawn. The animal is then fed, and 2 hours later another
narian assess the liver region for changes in liver
level is collected. In normal animals, the acid level in the
size and liver margins suggestive of acute or
fasted sample is very low, and the postprandial sample is
chronic disease. Furthermore, the veterinarian can
only slightly more elevated because a normal liver reabsorbs
assess for the presence of gall bladder stones
the bile acids quickly. In an animal with liver dysfunction,
(cholelithiasis).
prefeeding (preprandial) bile acids are high and postfeed-
An abdominal ultrasound will allow the veteri-
 ing (postprandial) bile acids are even higher.
narian to assess the internal architecture of the liver
tissue to differentiate the difference between focal
Radiology
disease (i.e., tumor, abscess, or nodule) and diffuse
As with renal disease, changes in liver size can be sugges-
disease. Also, the gall bladder, the bile ducts, and
tive of disease. Hepatomegally refers to generalized liver
gall bladder wall can be imaged for changes sec-
enlargement, which can suggest acute disease, abscess, or
ondary to disease. The ultrasound cannot diagnose
 possibly cancer (see Figure 14.8). Smaller livers can suggest
 the type of liver disease, but it can help obtain fine-
chronic liver disease or a portal-caval shunt. Finally, gall
needle aspirates or core samples to help the veteri-
bladder stones (choleliths) are small, radio-dense stones
narian obtain a diagnosis.
near or within the liver parenchyma. Often these stones are
● Exploratory/laparoscopic procedures may be
 unobstructive and can be happenstance findings.
needed. On occasion, when larger samples of the
liver are needed for diagnosis or when a mass is de-
tected, an exploratory surgery may be recom-
mended. Under anesthesia and through an abdomi-
nal incision, the abdomen is explored and tissue for
 biopsy taken.
Liver
Diseases of the Hepatic System
Although not all diseases are mentioned below, the common
diseases are discussed. The main goal of this section is to
understand and be able to explain to the client what the dis-
eases are, how they can present themselves, and what can be
the overall short- and long-term concerms of each disease.
Any discussion of overall diagnostic and treatment protocols
should be discussed based on the recommendations of the
Figure 14.8.X-ray showing a liver extending beyond the edge
 doctor and the medical team. Please use the following infor-
 of the rib cage. This suggests pathologic enlargement or he-
mation as a basis to discuss and educate the client, but never
patomegally
to diagnoseapatient.
Chapter 14: Liver
201
doses that can cause these reactions are anticonvulsants
(i.e., phenobarbital), NSAIDS, antimicrobials (i.e., tetra-
cyclines), specific types of mushrooms, heavy metals,
and other toxins.
Signalment
Acute liver disease can affect animals of any species, breed,
or sex.
Common Points in Medical History
With these syndromes, the patient's hepatic function is
cals and microbes and exposing the body to a high level of
LIUER
toxins. This produces an acutely ill, profoundly affected an-
imal. Common medical complaints in this condition are
6
vomiting,
+
anorexia,
Figure 14.9.  Liver (outlined by line) with a focal mass evident
 profound depression,
within the tissue (outlined by white arrows).
 diarrhea, and
 possible neurological signs, such as
seizure,
coma,
Acute Liver Disease
 dementia, and
Acute (rapid) liver disease occurs because of a sudden loss
- blindness.
of liver function due to a severe metabolic, toxic, or infec-
 tious cause. The disease comes on rapidly and makes the pet
Common Points on Initial Assessment
very ill.
These affected pets can be severely ill and depressed from
the increased toxin load. However, since this disease has af-
Etiology
fected these animals so acutely, their body condition and
Acute hepatic disease is caused by sudden injury to the cells
weight are usually normal. Key points on the initial assess-
of the liver. The disease tends to affect dogs more than cats.
ment are presented next.
There are no breed or sex predilections. Acute hepatic dis-
 ease can be caused by the following:
●Jaundice: Yellowing of the mucous membranes (i.e.
 gums, rectum, penis, whites of the eye) or skin can sug-
+
 Shock: Any pet that becomes unable to maintain the de-
gest an acute buildup of toxins in the bloodstream that is
mands placed on its body enters a shocky state. Altered
 secondarily building up in the tissue.
blood flow, toxins and/or increased bacterial toxins asso-
Hydration: Pets can be moderate to life-threateningly
ciated with shock can produce an acute liver disease.
 dehydrated.
Some examples of types of shock that can produce sec-
 Mentation: The pet may be acutely depressed to severely
ondary liver disease are heat stroke or massive bacterial
comatose.
infection (sepsis) (see Chapter 30).
 Neurologic symptoms: Some pets may have grand mal
-d  l  a  s 
seizures, act blind comatose, and have altered vocal and
mary obstruction of the bile ducts and gall bladder. The
behavior patterns.
obstruction causes a backflow of bile toxins back into the
blood, causing an acute depression and illness. Obstruc-
Complications
tion can occur secondary to severe pancreatitis (see
 If acute hepatic disease is not diagnosed and treated, the pa-
Chapter 15), cancer or tumors of the bile ducts, and gall 
tient may develop acute life-threatening dehydration, pro-
stones (rare).
found neurologic depression, bleeding problems, shock, and
 Infectious agents: Infectious agents (i.e., infectious hep-
death.
atitis virus or leptospirosis), can cause a massive infec-
tion and inflammation of the liver, producing an acute 
Clinical Diagnostics
disease/failure syndrome.
Since acute liver disease and failure can be caused by many
Drugs/toxins: Overdose or reaction to ingested drugs
possible diseases and syndromes, a thorough workup involv-
 and toxins can cause acute liver damage and cell death
ing blood and urine diagnostics, abdominal imaging, and liver
(necrosis). Examples of types of toxins and drug over-
fine-needle aspirate/surgical biopsy may be recommended.
202
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
Treatment
● Infectious agents: Infectious hepatitis virus (adenovirus)
Treatment is focused on providing fluid support, diuresis,
can cause chronic liver disease.
and reducing toxin and microbial lode in the patient. Treat-
Drugs: Chronic exposure to long-term anticonvulsants
 ment protocols may include the following.
(i.e., phenobarbital), steroids, and antimicrobials can pro-
duce chronic damage of the liver.
● Fluids: Fluid therapy is used to help rehydrate the pet
 Toxins: Chronic exposure to heavy metals (such as cop-
while diluting the toxins within the body (diuresis).
per) can lead to a chronic inflammation and damage to
Antibiotics: Antibiotics are often used to help the body
the liver.
reduce the increased bacterial load absorbed from the
 Immune-mediated causes: In these cases, the immune
small intestine, which the liver normally detoxifies.
system attacks the liver due to chronic inflammation and
Antiemetics: Drugs that help decrease vomiting and
disease. The white blood cells respond by entering and
nausea caused by secondary upsets to the gastrointestinal
 going through healthy liver tissue to the inflamed and in-
tract are often used.
fected sites. Over time, this can produce severe inflam-
● Stomach acid blockers: These drugs help decrease
mation and fibrosis through the entire liver.
stomach acidity and decrease nausea.
Lactulose: This drug helps decrease ammonia in the
Signalment
small intestinal system, which would normally be ab-
Chronic active hepatitis is a common syndrome in the older
sorbed and detoxified by the liver.
dog. The disease tends to affect dogs more than cats, with fe-
● Fresh whole blood or plasma: Infusions may need to be
males being more affected. The mean age of onset is 6 years
 s - s d m 
old. Common breeds affected are Bedlington terrier, Dober-
 produced by the liver.
man pinscher, cocker spaniel, Labrador retriever.
Common Points on Medical History
Discussing Acute Hepatic Disease with the Client
This disease can be slow and insidious on progression.
 Acute liver disease is a severe disease with sudden
n  yon moy u a a  sn 
onset caused by many possible bacterial, toxic, ob-
liver is affected and how long the patient has dealt with the
structive, or systemic diseases.
chronic buildup of toxins. If the damage has been done
The syndrome causes an inability of the liver to de-
slowly. animals may appear asymptomatic with severe liver
toxify chemical and bacterial toxins from the body.
impairment. Some common medical complaints can be
The resulting rapid buildup can make the pet very
 ill, dehydrated, and nauseous.
●chronic weight loss, sometimes severe, with animals los.
 The overall prognosis is dependent on what has
ing 30-40% of original weight;
caused the hepatic disease. However, if severe
 increased thirst and urination;
enough, the pet can have problems clotting blood
 chronic vomiting; and
and may begin to bleed spontaneously. This carries
decreased appetite.
an extremely poor prognosis.
 Most animals will require hospitalization, intensive
Common Points on Initial Assessment
an suean uaq mn sunoipa pue deaun pin
 These patients can show very few physical symptoms be-
 acute liver syndrome.
cause they have adapted to the chronic disease. However,
other pets may have acute episodes, such as blood toxins be-
Au sods sum a aan on y on un
Prevention
be evident on initial assessment:
 To help prevent acute renal disease, the patient's exposure to
- an pun paul aa pinous suosiod pue suxon pud
 Dehydration
 mal should be regularly vaccinated for adenovirus and lep-
 Jaundice
tospirosis (in endemic areas).
 Fluid accumulations in the abdomen (ascites)
Weight loss/poor body condition
Chronic Active Hepatitis
 Diarrhea/constipation
Chronic active liver disease occurs secondary to a slowly
Neurologic signs: seizure, acute blindness, changes in be-
progressive buildup of fibrosis and inflammation within the
havior
liver tissue at the microscopic level. The disease can have
acute flare-ups because the liver can have decreased ability
Clinical Diagnostics
to detoxify poisons and chemicals.
Because chronic liver disease can be caused by several dis-
eases, a thorough clinical diagnostic workup, including blood
Etiology
work, urinalysis, abdominal imaging and hepatic biopsy, may
 Chronic liver disease is caused by many possible factors.
be recommended.
Chapter 14: Liver
203
Treatment
Congenital Porto-Systemic Shunt
Treatment is focused on providing fluid support, diuresis,
In the congenital porto-systemic shunt (PSS, or porto-caval
and reducing toxin and microbial load in the patient.
shunt) disease process, toxins that are normally metabolized
 Treatment protocols may include the following.
[ an o ap o pu u a ssdq ai an a
circulation and central nervous system, causing severe meta-
 Fluids: Fluid therapy is used to help rehydrate the pet
bolic and neurologic reactions. It is important to note the PSS
while diluting the toxins within the body (diuresis).
can be an acquired disease secondary to chronic liver disease.
 Lactulose: This drug helps to decrease ammonia in the
The congenital form will be discussed.
small intestinal system that would normally be absorbed
and detoxified by the liver.
Etiology
 Antibiotics: Antibiotics are often used to help the body
As animals with PSS are developing in utero, the pet's blood
reduce the increased bacterial lode absorbed from the
is detoxified by the matermal liver. Because the animal's
small intestine that the liver normally detoxifies.
liver is not needed to detoxify blood coming in from its por-
L-Adenosyl methionine (SAM-E): This is a nutrient
tal system, a small vessel, called the ductus venosus, con-
   a s  s
nects the portal vein to the caudal vena cava bypassing the
toxic injury to hepatocytes.
liver (see Figure 14.10).
 Immunosuppressant drugs: This drug category is used
 Normally, this vessel closes down shortly after birth. In
in different forms of inflammatory liver disease to help
patients affected by porto-caval shunts, the vessel remains
decrease the inflammatory response of the body and de-
open and takes blood from the intestinal tract around the
crease white blood cell invasion of the liver.
liver and sends it directly into systermic circulation. This
Urosidiol: This drug helps deactivate toxic bile acids 
 produced by the liver into a less dangerous form.
mally inactivated by the liver. These toxins enter the central
nervous system and begin causing neurologic signs.
Prevention
There is no way to prevent chronic hepatic disease. Routine
Signalment
blood and urine diagnostics in older animals and breeds that
PSS is more common in dogs than in cats. Congenital shunts
are more sensitive to liver disease can help diagnose and treat
are seen in animals between 6-24 months of age. There is no
liver disease, potentially increasing the patient's quality of life.
 a   as s n  ps
susceptible to porto-caval shunts are Yorkshire terriers and
Discussing Chronic Hepatic Disease with the
miniature schnauzers.
Client
Chronic liver disease is a slowly progressing and
Common Points in Medical History
 With congenital PsS, most affected animals seem small and
 damaging disease. The syndrome causes an inabil-
ity of the liver to detoxify the body, causing a mas-
sive buildup of toxins and microbes.
and poor hair coats because of decreased liver production of
necessary proteins and amino acids. Other common medical
●Animals can have sudden acute episodes as the pet
becomes overwhelmed with chemicals and bacteria
complaints are generally associated with hepatic en-
that are normally detoxified by the liver.
 Physical symptoms are chronic weight and muscle
fed. These complaints include
mass loss, poor hair coat, increased thirst and uri-
● drooling (especially in cats),
nation, and potentially a yellowing of the skin,
+
behavior changes,
gums, and whites of the eyes (jaundice).
 Diagnosis of liver disease may require general
+
visual deficits (blindness),
●circling,
blood work, urinalysis, abdominal imaging, and
seizures,
biopsy. Routine liver enzymes may be normal since
 head pressing, and
the destruction to normal liver tissue is a slow
comas.
process taking months to years.
 The overall prognosis depends on what has caused
Common Poinis on Initial Assessmenf
the hepatic disease. However, if severe enough, the
Often these pets can present during or after a seizure
pet can have problems clotting blood and may
 od e  a sii g hs s A ad a oia
begin to bleed spontaneously. This carries an ex-
immature hair coat and poor muscle development.
tremely poor prognosis.
 Most animals will require hospitalization, intensive
Complications
fluid therapy, and medications to begin treating the
If not diagnosed and treated, animals affected with PSS will
acute flare-ups of the chronic liver syndrome.
continue to be chronic poor doers with worsening neuro-
logic signs.
204
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Vena cava
vena cava
Shunt
Figure 14.10.
S     u    a pd n  m  u srs i    au
what compromises a shunt, in which the majority of blood moves around the liver and into the vena cava from the portal vein.
Diagnosis
gical implants are used to slowly reduce blood flow
 A workup for possible PSS can include blood work (especially
through a shunt over time.
 bile acids), urinalysis, and advanced abdominal imaging.
Prevention
Treatment
There is no way to prevent PSS.
Treatment is based on the location of the shunt (intrahepatic
versus extrahepatic) and the severity of the disease noted.
 Treatment options can include the following.
Discussing Porto-Systemic Shunt with the Client
A porto-systemic shunt is typically a congenital ab-
Intravenous fluids/hospitalization: With severely af-
normality in which a small congenital vessel shifts
fected animals, the patient may require hospitalization,
incoming blood from the intestines around the liver
monitoring, intravenous fluids, and diagnostics to moni-
and into general circulation.
tor the pet.
 In affected pets, the chemical- and microbe-laden
Medications: Medications depend on the signs with which
blood from the intestines does not go through the
the pet presents and can be focused on decreasing the
liver to be detoxified.
amount of ammonia produced from the intestinal digestion, 
 The toxins enter the general circulation and have a
helping decrease bacteria and bacterial toxins within the in-
direct effect on the body and central nervous system.
testine, and preventing or treating systemic disease.
 These pets start out as smaller poor doers because
●Diet: Diet can aid in decreasing the amounts of ammonia
and fat the liver has to deal with, thus decreasing the
 Furthermore, these pets may show neurologic signs,
toxin load.
such as seizures, blindness, and attitude change be-
●Surgery: Especially with extrahepatic shunts, the goal of
cause the toxins directly affect the central nervous
surgery is to carefully close down the shunt and redirect
system. These signs are closely associated after
blood flow back to the liver. Care must be taken to slowly
feeding due to the inflow of increased toxins from
the intestine.
sion. On occasion, multiple surgeries or specialized sur-
Chapter 14: Liver
205
Hepatic Lipidosis
Hepatic lipidosis is a severe metabolic disease of the liver,
 mainly affecting cats, in which the liver becomes infiltrated
with large amounts of body fat, shutting down the liver, and
leading to a buildup of hepatic toxins in the bloodstream.
Etiology
Hepatic lipidosis is a massive shunting of fat into the liver
that is so severe that the liver is unable to function on a mi-
croscopic level (see Figure 14.11). Hepatic lipidosis can be
a primary problem or secondary to some other disease en-
tity. The primary causative factor is anorexia (not eating).
causing a massive mobilization of fat to the liver. In cats this
can occur with as little as 2 days of anorexia. This can be
caused by
stress and changes in the environment,
Figure I4.11.   Liver affected by the hepatic lipidosis. Note the
intestinal disease (inflammatory bowel disease; see
 mottled appearance of the liver and the large amounts of fat evi-
Chapter 10), and
dent in the abdomen.
 other organ and infectious diseases that produce a sus-
 tained anorexia.
Signalment
The disease affects cats from I to 16 years of age (mean age
0f 8 years). Obesity can be a predisposing factor. This pos-
 sibly can occur more frequently in female cats.
Treatment
 Treatment for this disease is focused on the following.
Common Points on Medical History
These pets present with a history of massive short-term
● Treating the underlying disease: The veterinarian may
weight loss (i.e., 3-4 pounds in 2-3 weeks in a 16-pound
suggest further clinical diagnostics (i.e., liver and intes-
cat), anorexia, depression, and possible neurologic symp-
aposip Aed e asoup diay on (sdoa pun
toms (i.e., seizures).
 Fluid therapy: Fluid therapy (usually intravenous fluids)
d a asa p apau da m pauaan si
Common Points on Initial Assessment
● Antibiotics: Antibiotics may be used if there is a suspi-
Pets present acutely depressed, weak, and dehydrated. Other
cion of infection. Also, they can help the liver deactivate
clinical signs of the disease are
bacterial pathogens normally destroyed by liver action.
● Lactulose: Lactulose is a drug that aids in breaking down
not eating (can be as little as 2-3 days),
ammonia buildup in the intestine. The liver normally
 jaundice (yellowing of gums, whites of eyes, skin, etc.),
breaks down the ammonia.
vomiting,
 Diet and feeding tubes: The most important treatment is
loss of muscle mass,
to keep the patient eating so that eventually the liver can
neurologic disease (acting blind, seizuring, head press-
metabolize the fat and remove it from the affected tissue.
ing, circling).
 To maintain adequate energy needed, the veterinarian
may suggest a long-term feeding tube (i.e., stomach
Complications
tube). This will allow the medical team or the client to
If not diagnosed and treated, these patients can enter acute
feed the pet daily while the patient may be too sick to
 liver disease and failure, which can be life threatening.
want to eat. These tubes can stay in for months if needed.
Diagnosis
Prevenfion
A workup for possible hepatic lipidosis shunt can include
 Keeping cats within normal weight recommendations and
blood work, urinalysis, advanced abdominal imaging, and
preventing obesity can decrease the concerns of hepatic lipi-
 possible liver biopsy.
dosis.
206
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
—The Science behind the Diseases
Discussing Hepatic Lipidosis with the Client
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
 Hepatic lipidosis is a metabolic disease in the cat in
Please try the cases for Section 2(Anatomy and Physiology-
which large amounts of fat are shunted into the
The Science behind the Diseases) to help reinforce the infor-
liver in response to a stress or an underlying sys-
mation presented here.
temic disease.
 The normal response to decreasing blood sugar is
 to move fat into the liver to be modified into sugar.
With hepatic lipidosis, large amounts of fat move
into the liver, completely infiltrate the tissue, and
shut down the liver.
The disease occurs secondary to other organ and
 intestinal disease that produces anorexia in the pet
for more then 2 days.
 Once the liver is completely infiltrated with fat, it
looses the ability to detoxify chemicals and mi-
crobes in the body, and the pet becomes very ill,
 dehydrated, nauseous, and jaundiced.
 Obese animals are more predisposed to hepatic
 lipidosis than leaner pets.
Chapter 15
Exocrine and Endocrine Pancreas
The pancreas is a white/pink organ separated into two dis-
produce systemic inflammation affecting the liver and the
tinct lobes. The right lobe lies parallel to a section of the
kidney and possibly producing a severe whole-body infec-
duodenum extending from the middle part of the right kid-
tion (sepsis). As discussed below, pancreatitis can produce
 ney to the pyloric region of the stomach. The left lobe lies
acutely ill patients with severe vomiting, diarrhea, and
parallel to the greater cur vature of the stomach (perpendicu-
anorexia due to the severity of the systemic inflammation
lar to the duodenum) (see Figure 15.1).
and possible infection.
-aud pu ran da  sp omn s sar a
 Exocrine exhaustion (exocrine pancreatic insufficiency,
atic contents into the duodenum. Both ducts enter the duo-
or EPl) occurs when the pancreatic cells are unable to pro-
denum through a small opening called the duodenal
duce normal lipase and amylase enzyme levels because of
papilla. The ducts are the accessory pancreatic duct, the
congenital disease or damage secondary to inflammation
 n d aun  (p) sa a jo mnp u
and infection (see Figure 15.3).
smaller, less-evident duct that is sometimes absent in the
 e p a  a n siad a
dog.
tion/malabsorption syndrome results. Physical symptoms of
The pancreas works both as an exocrine and endocrine
EPI include severe small bowel diarrhea (see Chapter 10),
organ. Exocrine glands discharge their secretions out-
weight loss, and abnormal voracious appetite. There are two
wardly through a duct. Their secretions control many impor-
forms of the disease.
tant body functions (i.e., salivary glands, sweat glands,
mammary glands, etc.). The exocrine pancreas secretes the
Primary disease: This juvenile idiopathic form is a
digestive enzymes lipase and amylase through the pancre-
 e w so o ui so gn as p
atic duct into the duodenum to aid in the breakdown of food.
of sufficient production of lipase and amylase in the pan-
stuffs. Amylase breaks large sugar molecules into smaller
creas. The cause of the disease is unknown.
single-unit sugars. Lipase helps breaks down fat into free
 Secondary disease: A condition secondary to chronic re-
fatty acids and triglycerides for absorption by the intestine.
lapsing pancreatitis produces massive scarring and loss
Lipase and amylase are produced in response to ingestion of
of normal pancreatic tissue.
food and water and increased production of hydrochloric
 acid by the stomach. Both enzymes are critical to the diges-
Lastly, pancreatic cancer (adenoma/adenocarcinoma)
tive process
can be destructive to normal tissue, causing inflammation,
Endocrine glands secrete hormones or other chemicals
necrosis, and changes in pancreatic function. Symptoms
directly into the bloodstream and influence metabolism and
 a   sd a e   n 
other body processes (i.e., pituitary, thyroid, sex organs,
chronic and longer in duration. Typical types of pancreatic
etc.). The pancreas produces insulin and glucagon, which
tumors are pancreatic adenoma and adenocarcinoma.
help maintain normal blood sugar levels. Insulin and gluca-
gon are produced by specialized cells within a region of the
Obtaining a History for Exocrine Disease of the
pancreas called the islets of Langerhans (see Figure 15.2).
Pancreas
As with other organ syndromes, diseases of the exocrine
Exocrine Disease of the Pancreas
pancreas have specific questions to ask to help the medical
team delineate if pancreatic disease may be evident.
Acute or chronic inflammatory condition of the pancreas
(pancreatitis) causes leakage of pancreatic enzymes to the
What Is the Age of the Animal?
pancreas and surrounding tissue. This produces an inflam-
In general EPI is seen in younger animals. Pancreatitis can
matory change so severe that the pancreas can become sec-
occur in middle-aged to older animals.
ondarily infected, producing abcessation. Furthermore, in-
flammation can obstruct the comrmon bile duct, producing
Is There Breed Specificity?
gall bladder obstruction and secondary liver disease. The in-
Specific breeds can be more predisposed to pancreatic ex-
flammation and secondary infection can be severe enough to
ocrine disease. These breeds are as follows.
207
208
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Pancr
Delta cell
Red bloo
cells
R
Beta cell
Islets of Langerhans
Figure 15.1.
Illustration of normal pancreas, stomach, liver, and
Figure 15.2.  The pancreatic acini are responsible for producing
Adue pue uuni jenuo neu oui Adue jey seurzue ansaa
spleen.
into the intestinal systems via the pancreatic ducts (exocrine func-
tions). The islet of Langerhans cells are responsible for producing
For EPI, German shepherds are more predisposed.
insulin and other hormones that enter the bloodstream and control
For pancreatitis, breeds of concems are
 blood sugar in the body (endocrine glands).
miniature schnauzer
 miniature pinscher
- cocker spaniel
Siamese cat
Is There a Previous History of Disease?
Animals with a history of pancreatitis can have reoccur-
rences even when on controlled bland diets. The resulting
episodes of pancreatitis can be much more severe.
What Has the Animal's Body Condition Been in the Last
Few Months to Years?
●Has the pet been chronically thin? With EPI, there is
improper digestion of food because of malabsorption/
maldigestion. The animal cannot maintain body weight
and is very thin.
●Has the pet been chronically obese? Obesity can make 
the animal more predisposed to pancreatitis.
Is There Diarrhea and What Type of Diarrhea Is Present?
●Small bowel diarrhea (cow patty) suggests EPI because the
Figure 15.3.  Image of an exhausted pancreatic region. Note the
pet cannot absorb nutrients through the small intestine.
smaller, scarred pancreatic tissue.
● Colitis and/or small bowel diarrhea is caused by general-
ized inflammation. The inflammation can affect either
the large or small bowel.
Is the Animal a Chronic Vomiter?
With pancreatitis, pets can vomit due to inflarmmation and
How Is the Pet's Appetite?
toxin buildup.
With EPI the animal cannot eat enough (polyphagia). These 
Does the Pet's Diet Change Rapidly or Does the Pet Get
nutrients. These pets may also try to eat abnormal or unusual
into Abnormal Things?
things (i.e., their own feces, rocks, bones, etc.). With pan-
Animals that have rapid changes in diets or eat table food or
 creatitis animals have decreased to no appetite due to vom-
 trash are much more prone to inflammation in the pancreas,
iting and nausea.
setting up pancreatitis.
Chapter 15: Exocrine and Endocrine Pancreas
209
Initial Assessment of Pets with Exocrine Disease of the
Tabie 15.1.
 Triage concerns in the exocrine pancreatic patient.
Pancreas
Most animals with pancreatic disease can show mild to se-
vere signs. Signs vary dramatically depending on whether
Trouble Signs That Indicate
Systems
an Emergency Situation
they have EPI or pancreatitis. Key elements to observe in the
initial assessment of these syndromes are as follows:
Mentation
Nonresponsive/comatose/seizures
Fever
Hypothermia: (Temperatures less than 99°)
EPI: These animals are suffering from a severe malab-
 suggestive of massive shock secondary
to severe pancreatitis.
sorption/maldigestion symdrome. The pets are usually
Fever: (Temperature >104%) secondary to
bright, alert, and responsive; however, the body condition
 infection or inflammation of the pancreas
is usually severely thin to skeletal. Their hair coat is poor,
Hydration
Severe dehydration >5-7%
with dry skin evident due to decreased nutrient uptake.
Gum color
Jaundice
The pet will have decreased muscle as it converts muscle
Capillary refill time
CRT >2-3 seconds
ad e au m sd as  a o s
Abdomen
Pain, tensing or groaning on light palpation
Heart rate/pulse
Rate: Heart rates <80 bpm or >180-200 bpm
cow patty diarrhea.
Pulse: Change in pulse quality secondary
 Pancreatitis: These animals tend to be quiet, alert, and
to pain or shock.
range from responsive to depressed. Patients can have
normal to extremely painful abdomens, which are sensi-
tive to palpation. Depending on the amounts of vomiting
p as o  aa u sad sad  p
drated. Furthermore, if there is obstruction of the pancre.
In pancreatic tumors chronic (nonregenerative) anemia
atic and gall bladder ducts secondary to inflammation
aas an ro au aissad au on anp paou aq 
and swelling, jaundice may be present.
that consumes normal red blood cell precursors that are nec-
 Pancreatic tumors: Tumors in the pancreas can closely
essary to produce normal red blood cells (anemia of chronic
mimic pancreatitis. Patients may have symptoms of
disease).
chronic vomiting and diarrhea, abdominal tendermess, de-
hydration, and depression.
Chemistry
 Just as with the complete blood count, blood chemistry work
Although pets with exocrine pancreatic disease can be sta-
can vary dramatically. With pancreatic insufficiency, chem-
ble (i.e., EPI), the following parameters should be monitored
istry results are generally within normal listed parameters.
to help distinguish if the pet is in a life-threatening condition,
The blood chemistry results for pancreatitis may vary in
especially with a severe pancreatitis (see Table 15.1).
the canine and the feline.
Exocrine Pancreatic Clinical Diagnostics
● In the canine: Amylase and lipase can be elevated in the
As with liver disease, blood work is a large part of the diag-
acute disease as the inflammation and infection of the
nostic protocol; however, with chronic inflammatory disease,
pancreas causes leakage of the enzymes into the tissue
baseline blood work may not indicate the severity of the syn-
and into the bloodstream, producing higher blood en-
drome. Some clinical diagnostics are discussed below.
zyme levels. In chronic disease, there can be significant
pancreatic inflammation and infection, but since there is
Complete Blood Count
slow, progressive damage to the tissue, blood enzyme lev-
 Changes in the complete blood count can vary depending on
els can be normal.
the disease entities and the acuteness or chronicity of the
 In the feline: Lipase and amylase levels can be com-
pletely normal even with severe or chronic disease.
plete blood count.
The blood counts for pancreatitis vary depending upon
With pancreatic tumor, prolonged elevations of lipase
whether the disease is acute or chronic.
and amylase can be observed due to increased production of 
the tumor mass within the pancreatic tissue.
With acute disease: The red blood cell count can be in-
creased due to dehydration. The white blood cell count
Trypsin-Like Immunoassay
can be increased due to infection and inflammation.
 In the canine, a trypsin-like immunoassay (TLI) is a blood
Furthermore, it is important to check peripheral
  n s  n  n s n i
blood smears for immature neutrophils (bands) to de-
trypsin, a proteolytic enzyme, in the body. Trypsin activity is
tect acute inflammatory or infectious changes in the
directly linked to pancreatic function as follows:
white blood cell population (see Chapter 21).
With chronic disease: The complete blood count can be
 Increased TLI levels are suggestive of chronic pancreati-
normal.
tis or pancreatic cancer.
210
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Decreased TLI levels are a key diagnostic indicator of de-
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirates are extremely help-
creased pancreatic function or exocrine pancreatic insuf-
ficiency.
Diseases of the Exocrine Pancreas
Discussing Clinical Diagnostics with the Client
Although not all diseases of the pancreas are mentioned
●The doctor has recommended general blood work
below, the common diseases are discussed, with the main
to evaluate if there are changes that suggest pancre-
goal being to understand and be able to explain to the client
atic disease, inflammation, infection, or other
what the diseases are, how they can be present, and what can
organ disease.
be the overall short- and long-term concerms of each disease.
The basic blood work evaluates the level of intra-
Any discussion of overall diagnostic and treatment protocols
cellular pancreatic enzymes in the bloodstream.
should be discussed based on the recommendations from the
 The more pancreatic cellular damage in an acute
 doctor and the medical team. Please use the following infor-
disease process, the higher these enzymes levels
mation to discuss the treatment and educate the client, but
go. In the canine with acute disease, these values
never to diagnose a patient.
can change significantly because of significant
 damage to pancreatic tissue.
Pancreatitis
● In chronic disease, in which only small amounts of
When the pancreas becomes inflamed the digestive en-
the pancreas is affected day to day, the internal en-
zymes produced from the pancreas leak out of damaged
Zymes may be low to normal. However, the chronic
cells and begin to digest pancreatic tissue. The inflamma-
damage may have greatly affected the overall func-
 an   s s  n
tion of the organ. To better determine if the pan-
testine, liver, and kidneys. The secretion of digestive en-
creas is functioning normally, the doctor may sug-
zymes is stimulated by food and water or by increased
gest a trypsin-like immunoassay (TLI)
 gastric acid.
A TLI is a blood test that analyzes pancreatic acti-
vation of the enzyme trypsin; thus a TLI is a pan-
Etiology
creatic function test and helps the veterinarian de-
 There are many theories for the cause of pancreatitis; how-
lineate an inability of the pancreas to produce
ever, it has been shown to be associated with
digestive enzyme for the intestinal tract.
●rapid changes in diet,
eating garbage,
Radiology
eating unusual food (table scraps), and
e aae mn pu ae uau d a ui sa
 taking certain types of medications (especially steroids).
radiographs. Some diagnostic changes can be seen, such as
enlargement of the pancreas due to inflammation and sec-
These changes produce an inflammation of the pan-
ondary infections.
creatic tissue, which allows the digestive enzymes to leak
out and begin autodigestion of the surrounding tissue. The
Utrasound
inflarmmation that is produced can affect other organs of
Ultrasound studies of the pancreatic region are very helpful
ussaone onearoued on peal raissod pue rpoq a
in diagnosing pancreatic disease, abscess, or neoplasia.
Pancreatitis can reoccur in an animal's life. It can become
more severe,causing chronic damage and destruction to the
pancreas.
Discussing Imaging and Biopsy Diagnostics with
the Client
Signalment
●An abdominal radiograph will help the veterinar-
 Pancreatitis occurs in both dogs and cats. It is more common
ian assess the pancreatic region, other organs, and 
 in miniature schnauzer, miniature pinscher, and cocker
intestines to suggest disease syndromes.
spaniel dog breeds and the Siamese cat breed. It is more
 An abdominal ultrasound will allow the veteri-
common in females than males.
 narian to assess the intermal architecture of the pan-
creas and differentiate between focal disease (i.e.,
Common Points in Medical History
pancreatitis, pancreatic tumor, etc.) and diffuse dis-
In acute syndromes, pets can be severely affected, producing
ease. The ultrasound cannot diagnose the type of
depression and gastrointestinal signs. Chronic disease can
pancreatic disease, but it can help obtain fine.
produce a much more subtle entity, showing mild to moder-
- a d mn s a  s aan
ate gastrointestinal signs, weight loss, anorexia, and other
narian obtain a diagnosis.
organ disease. Common medical complaints in this condi-
tion are, in acute disease,
Chapter 15: Exocrine and Endocrine Pancreas
211
 lethargy/depression,
continued production of pancreatic enzymes, making the
not eating,
inflammation worse. While the animal is being treated
vomiting (often severe), and
for this disease in a hospital setting. food and water are
watery diarrhea (sometimes bloody).
generally not started again until vomiting and pancreatic
enzyme levels decrease.
Complaints in chronic disease are
● Fluids: Fluid therapy, usually in a hospital setting, is
used to maintain hydration, diurese toxins and inflamma-
 chronic vomiting (1-2 times per day or less),
tory by-products, and maintain nutrition while the pan-
 anorexic or a “finicky” appetite,
creas is allowed to heal.
 decreased energy, and
Drugs that decrease acid production: Drugs such as
 secondary diabetes mellitus.
famotidine help to decrease stomach acid, which stimu-
lates pancreatic secretions.
Common Points on Initial Assessment
Antibiotics: Drugs that help treat secondary infection
Physical signs on initial assessment depend on the onset and
caused by pancreatitis may be administered.
severity of disease. For acute disease, some common ele-
 Surgery: In rare instances, with severe inflammation or
ments that should be focused on during the initial assess-
abcessation of the pancreas and obstruction of common
ment are as follows.
bile ducts, some animals may require surgery to trans-
plant the common bile duct to another location within the
 Dehydration: Mild to severe dehydration may be noted,
intestine, lavage the abdomen, and drain a pancreatic
depending on the amount of vomiting and diarrhea evident.
abscess.
 Tender abdomen: More noticeable in canines, pets may
tense due to pain on light palpation of the abdomen.
 In the feline with acute disease treatment focuses on the
Walking hunched: Patients with severe abdominal pain
following.
can have an altered gait—walking hunched to the point
that some owners will consider this back pain.
Force feeding: Unlike treating canine pancreatitis, the
 Jaundice: Yellowing of the gums, whites of the eyes, and
feline patient must continue to eat a high-fiber bland diet.
n isns sd ym s n 
(such as Science diet W/d, etc.) to help prevent hepatic
there is obstruction of the gall bladder and bile ducts sec-
lipidosis.
ondary to severe pancreatic swelling and inflammation.
● Fluids: Fluid therapy, usually in a hospital setting, is
This is a sign of a severe pancreatitis and, if noted, should
used to maintain hydration, diurese toxins and inflamma-
be discussed with the veterinarian immediately.
tory by-products, and maintain nutrition.
nn sd  sn  m sn
severe changes on initial assessment. The pet may have a
Discussing Pancreatitis with the Client
      o o
 The pancreas is an organ lying between the stom-
body systems may be within normal limits.
ach and small intestine that produces digestive en-
zymes to help break down food and water. It se-
Complicafions
cretes the digestive enzymes into the intestines by
If untreated, acute pancreatitis can cause severe dehydration,
the pancreatic duct.
infection of the abdomen (peritonitis), and liver and kidney
When there are rapid changes in the diet, the pan-
disease and can be life threatening. Successive episodes of
creas can become inflamed, and the digestive en-
pancreatitis can result in diabetes mellitus.
zymes can leak into the pancreas causing digestion
of the pancreatic tissue and systemic inflammation.
Clinical Diagnostics
 The inflamed pancreas produces severe vomiting,
Since acute and chronic pancreatitis can be a very subtle dis-
diarrhea, not eating, depression, and a tender ab-
ease at times, a thorough workup involving blood work and
domen.
abdominal imaging may be recommended.
With severely acute disease, the inflammation can
produce a massive infection and abcessation of the
Treatment
 pancreas, liver, and/or kidney disease.
Treatment of pancreatitis depends on the acuteness and
 In some cases, chronic pancreatitis can produce
 ae ro saras ae p as j Aa
weight loss, poor body condition, chronic vomit-
 In the canine with acute disease treatment focuses on the
 ing, and diabetes mellitus.
following.
Pancreatitis can occur with rapid changes in diet,
 obesity, and getting into abnormal dietary elements 
Keeping food and water away from the animal-
(i.e., trash, table food, etc.).
nothing per os (NPO): Eating and drinking can cause
212
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
-The Science behind the Diseases
 Drugs that decrease acid production: Drugs such as
Treatment
famotidine help decrease stomach acid and stimulate
With affected pets, the addition of a powdered enzyme,
appetite.
 called Pancreazyme, sprinkled on the food prior to feeding
will begin the digestion process and replace the lipase and
Prevention
amylase that is not being produced.
The occurrence of pancreatitis can be decreased by prevent-
 ing obesity in the pet, making very slow transitions in diet
Prevention
change, and avoiding table scraps and foods high in fat.
Preventing reoccurrences of chronic pancreatitis (see above)
 saroud aun mn ap aissaond quaad dpay 
Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency
may set up pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.
 EPI is caused by a decreasing production of the digestive en-
zymes produced by the pancreas.
Discussing Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency with
Etiology
the Client
 The pancreas secretes the digestive enzymes lipase and amy-
The pancreas is an organ that lies between the
lase, which aid in the digestion of sugars and fats. Due to
stomach and small intestine that produces digestive
congenital disease or chronic inflammatory pancreatic dis-
enzymes to help break down food. It secretes the
ease, the pancreas loses the ability to produce the necessary
digestive enzymes into the intestines by the pancre-
digestive enzymes to break down food and water.
atic duct.
 In this disease, the pancreas loses the ability to pro-
Signalment
duce the digestive enzymes to break down normal
The disease can affect both dogs and cats; however, it is rare
dietary elements.
in cats. In German shepherds the disease has been reported
● Because the pet cannot properly digest and absorb
to be hereditary, affecting primarily younger dogs. The dis-
food, the patient has heavy, foul-odor cow patty di-
ease can also be associated with animals that have chronic
arrhea, weight loss, and ravenous appetite.
 pancreatitis.
 This disease can occur congenitally or secondary to
severe chronic inflammatory disease of the pan-
Common Points in Medical History
creas (i.e., pancreatitis).
These pets present as happy and energetic, with history of
● Once diagnosed, the disease can be controlled by
severe cow patty diarrhea (small intestine diarrhea), raven-
 the addition of topical enzymes to the diet.
ous appetite, and an inability to maintain normal weight.
Furthermore, the pet may have a history of increased flatu-
lence as well as an aberrant appetite (i.e., eating feces, rocks,
Disease of the Endocrine Pancreas
etc.).
 Disease entities of the endocrine pancreas focus largely on
Common Points on Initial Assessment
the production of insulin by the islets of Langerhans (see
Affected animals are generally stable, bright, alert, and re-
Figure 15.2). The islet cells of Langerhans produce two hor-
sponsive. Furthermore, the symptoms on initial assessment
mones in response to blood sugar.
may be as follows.
●  Insulin is secreted in response to increasing blood sugar
● Body score: The patient may be thin to emaciated with
to stimulate uptake of glucose by the cells. Without in-
generalized poor muscle mass.
sulin present, there is no way for the cells of the body to
 Gastrointestinal signs: The patient may have chronic
utilize sugar. Furthermore, insulin stimulates the produc-
        Am
tion of glycogen in the liver and fat deposition in the
tion), severe flatulence (gas), and increased intestinal
body.
sounds (borborgymi).
 Glucagon is secreted in response to decreasing amounts
 of blood sugar to stimulate the liver to increase blood
Complications
sugar levels by converting glycogen to glucose. Glucagon 
If not diagnosed and treated, the pet will continue having
also breaks up fat for the production of sugar (gluconeo-
profuse diarrhea, weight loss, and dietary problems.
genesis).
Clinical Diagnostics
 The most cormmon disease entity produced by the en-
 Since pancreatic exocrine insufficiency can mimic gastroin-
docrine pancreas is diabetes mellitus, which occurs when in-
testinal and other organ disease, a thorough workup is recom-
sulin production is not sufficient to adequately control nor-
mended. Common clinical testing may include blood work,
mal blood sugar levels. In the absence of insulin, the body
 including TLI, fecal examination, and abdominal imaging.
  yno axa q s po ssaa  is
Chapter 15: Exocrine and Endocrine Pancreas
213
As blood glucose increases to extremely high levels, the
Is the Patient on Any Long-Term Oral and Injectable
body metabolizes excess sugar by converting sugar to ace-
Medication?
tone, a ketone. Acetone is a toxin that acidifies the blood
Certain long-term medications (i.e., steroids, diethylstilbes-
making the pet anorexic, ill, and weak. The condition is
  m      (a 
called ketoacidosis and can produce a life-threatening con-
 blood sugar (hyperglycemia) and predispose it to diabetes.
dition. Diabetes can occur because of exhaustion of the islet
cells secondary to disease, cancer, and chronic obesity.
Initial Assessment of Pets with Endocrine Disease of the
Some diseases that can cause diabetes are hyperadrenocorti
Pancreas
cism (Cushing's disease; see Chapter 16), chronic pancreati-
 Physical symptoms can vary dramatically, depending on the
tis, hyperthyroidism (see Chapter 16), and a long-term drug
patient's diabetes status (i.e., uncomplicated vs. ketoaci-
therapy (i.e., progesterone, estrogens).
dotic; see below). Key elements to observe in the initial as-
A less-common disease of the endocrine pancreas is a
sessment of these syndromes are presented next.
tumor of the endocrine islet of Langerhans, called an insuli-
noma. These tumors are usually benign microscopic or en-
Physical Condition
capsulated tumors within the pancreatic mass that are meta-
a aade paaod e au i  a  s
bolically active. These tumors can overproduce insulin,
cause of muscle wasting and fat utilization. Cats can be thin
causing a severe decrease in blood sugar that continues to
with moderate to severe weight loss. The patient's hair coat
produce insulin even with decreased blood sugar levels. The
can be poor with oily skin due to inappropriate nutrient uti-
tumors can be localized or diffuse. Due to the rare occur-
lization.
rence of this disease, the discussion of insulinoma will be
limited to dealing with acute hypoglycemia in emergency
Mentation
conditions (see Chapter 30).
Animals can tend to act normally, but with ketoacidosis can
 be severely depressed and lethargic.
Obtaining a History for Endocrine Disease of the
Pancreas
Cataracts
As with exocrine syndromes, diseases of the endocrine pan-
Diabetic animals are more prone to cataract formation due
creas have specific questions to ask to help the medical team
to prolonged hyperglycemia (see Figure 15.4).
determine if pancreatic disease may be evident.
Neurologic
 Cats with long-term diabetes can develop an abnormal gait
Is the Animal Young or Old?
Endocrine pancreatic diseases are typically more common
in which the pet begins to walk on its hind end, dropping its
in middle-aged to older animals.
full weight from its toes, and walking on the back of its
hock. This is a called plantigrade gait and is secondary to
prolonged low blood sugar in the cells of the long nerves
Is There a Chronic History of Other Systemic Diseases?
au u asaop e snd al an jo (aaiau ons)
Animals with a long-term history of pancreatitis/pancreatic
function (see Figure 15.5). When noted, this is highly sug-
 abcessation and other systemic disease are at higher risk for
gestive of diabetes.
diabetes.
Has There Been an Acute Weight Loss and Loss of Body
Condition?
Body cells cannot intermalize glucose without insulin, and
pue ej suseauou Aq paau ienlao aui o spuodsau Apoq aul
muscle utilization, further increasing blood sugar and pro-
 ducing a significant weight loss and emaciation.
How Is the Pet's Appetite?
Animals can have normal to ravenous appetites. However,
ketoacidotic animals can have decreased to no appetite due
to increasing toxins (i.e., acetone) in the bloodstream.
Is the Animal Drinking and Urinating More?
This is usually a key symptom for the beginning of diabetes.
The pet consumes more water to excrete the excess sugar
into the urine. As the patient drinks more, urinary output
Figure 15.4.
 Note the early cataract formation in this eye sec-
increases.
ondary to hyperglycemia from diabetes mellitus.
214
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
abetes. Another concerm is the presence of ketones (acetone)
in the uncontrolled diabetic, suggestive of a ketoacidotic di-
abetic (see below). Furthermore, bacterial bladder infections
can occur because of the higher levels of sugar in the urine,
increasing bacterial growth in the urine (see Chapter 13).
Fructosamine Levels
 si pn ns poo jo ad a si aus
bolized in the body at a slower rate. A fructosamine level
 si  an     an s
tabolizing sugar over the past 7-10 days. Significantly ele-
vated fructosamine levels can suggest decreased control of
blood sugar. Low levels may suggest too little release of glu-
a-al og rod susans poq an u asn
hypoglycemia.
Figure 15.5.  In this image the feline has dropped its weight
from bearing weight on its toes to bearing weight on the caudal
 Discussing Clinical Diagnostics with the Client
aspect of the tarsus (ankle; white arrows).
The doctor has recormmended general blood work
to evaluate the potential for diabetes mellitus or
other organ or hormonal diseases that could be af-
Endocrine Pancreatic Clinical Diagnostics
fecting your pet.
Clinical diagnostics for diabetic patients are largely based
 The veterinarian will be evaluating the blood and
 on blood and urine testing.
urinalysis for evidence of increased blood sugar
levels suggesting early to severe diabetes.
Complete Blood Count
Furthermore, the pet's urinalysis will be evaluated
Typically in diabetic animals there are no overall changes in
for the presence of a toxin called acetone, which
complete blood count.
suggests severe diabetes that may require more sig-
nificant care.
Chemistry
Blood Sugar
 If the pet is diagnosed with diabetes and treatment
is initiated, continued diagnostic monitoring of
- ni  si  a    n a
blood and urine may be needed until the pet has
stabilized on insulin therapy.
there can be moderate elevations in blood sugar with stress.
     an n   s
blood sugar just because of the change of environment. In gen-
Diabetes and ketoacidotic diabetic crises are discussed
eral, the following glucose level may be associated with stress:
next. The main goal is to understand and be able to explain
Canines: Glucose <200 mg/dl can be secondary to stress.
to the client what the diseases are, how they can present
+
Felines: Glucose <300 mg/dl can be secondary to stress.
themselves, and what can be the overall short- and long-term
concerms of each disease. Any discussion of overall diagnos-
If a pet presents with a questionable elevation in blood
tic and treatment protocols should be discussed based on the
  y  r s o e  a 
recommendations of the doctor and the medical team. Please
This can help distinguish stress from diabetes.
use the following information as a basis to discuss and edu-
cate the client, but never to diagnose a patient.
Liver Enzymes
With chronic diabetes, mild to moderate elevations in liver
Diabetes Mellitus (Uncomplicated)
enzymes (i.e., alanine transferase, aspartate transferase) can
Diabetes mellitus is a lack of insulin production or decreased
be observed. Furthermore, due to increases in fat metabo-
responsiveness to insulin in the body. This produces an in-
lism, the blood cholesterol level elevations can be observed,
ability of the cells of the body to uptake and use insulin as an
and the serum of the blood can have a white coloration from
energy source. Diabetics are more prone to infection and dis-
increased fat (lipemia).
ease and must be monitored more closely than other animals.
Urinalysis
Etiology
A urinalysis is key in the diagnosis and maintenance of the
 The disease can occur as a primary syndrome or occur sec-
diabetic patient. The evidence of glucose in the urine can
ondarily to other systemic disease (i.e., chronic pancreatitis,
support the finding of hyperglycemia in the diagnosis of di-
hyperadrenocorticism, chronic obesity, etc.).
Chapter 15: Exocrine and Endocrine Pancreas
215
Signalment
● Insulin therapy: Injectable insulin is the main therapy
Diabetes can occur in canines or felines between the ages of
for controlling the diabetes. The type of insulin is chosen
4-14 years (canine) and 8-13 years (felines). In dogs, the fe-
based on its duration of effect on the animal. In canines,
 male is more susceptible, whereas in cats the male is more
insulin-N (NPH) is typically used twice a day. In felines,
sensitive to the disease. The following breeds of canines are
PZI insulin is generally recommended 1-2 times a day. In
 at more risk.
most managerment cases, insulin is given subcutaneously
by the owner.
Keeshond
● Diet: The pet can bum its carbohydrates on a slower
Puli
 schedule, making the insulin more effective by feeding
+
 Miniature pinscher
-qoq panq pide un mo pu aa un y sia
 Caim terrier
drates. Generally 40-50% of the diet is given in the
Poodle
morming with the initial insulin injection, and the remain-
Dachshund
 der is given 12 hours later with the second insulin shot (if
Miniature schnauzer
a second shot is needed).
Beagle
●Monitoring glucose: To help make sure the animal is on
an adequate level of insulin that helps control the dia-
For felines there is no breed specificity.
betes but does not leave the pet hypoglycemic, blood or
urine glucose levels are monitored.
Common Points on Medical History
 Blood glucose levels in the hospital: These levels are
 generally monitored in hospital by taking routine fruc-
 In uncomplicated early diabetes, the client may notice a mild
to moderate weight loss, increased thirst and urination, and
tosamine levels or by doing a glucose curve. A blood glu-
changes in the hair coat and abdomen.
cose curve monitors blood sugar levels over the course of
 a on aau  sisa as 'ad -t 0 -l e
peated a number of times until the proper level of insulin
Common Points on Initial Assessment
is found to control the patient's blood sugar.
Physical symptoms observed during initial assessment can
 Blood glucose levels at home: In some cases, glucose
vary depending on the severity and duration of onset of the
 monitoring is done at home by the owner by taking small
diabetes. Physical signs can consist of
amounts of blood from the pinna or other region of the
body.
a poor body condition with increased muscle loss;
a poor hair coat;
 a chronically bloated abdomen;
Prevention
 Keeping pets lean and reducing concerms that may lead to
lethargy/depression;
chronic pancreatitis (see above) may help decrease the po-
chronic vomiting;
tential for diabetes.
 neurologic signs—in cats walking flat on back legs to the
level of the ankle (plantograde stance); and
Long-Term Complications
ocular changes—early cataract formation/bluing of the
In treating the diabetic animal, there are many possible com-
corneas
plications that can occur secondarily. The major concerms
are:
Short-Term Complications
If diabetes goes untreated or is improperly treated, animals
● Infection: Diabetic animals are less effective at fighting
can have chronic weight loss, poor condition, or, due to se-
off infection and at healing. These pets tend to be more
vere hyperglycemia, can become ketoacidotic (see below).
 fragile and must be closely monitored while treating any
type of skin or systemic infection.
Clinical Diagnostics
Hypoglycemia: The brain and the muscles depend on
As described above, the diagnosis of diabetes is based on the
glucose for normal activity. If too much insulin is given
clinical blood work and urinalysis.
to a pet or the pet receives its normal amount of insulin
and does not eat properly, the pet can become hypo-
Treatment
glycemic. Signs of hypoglycemia can include
Treatment is focused on long-term diet and medical treat-
depression,
ment of the patient. Medical control of diabetes can be a
decreased activity,
 slow and protracted process, relying on a great deal of owner
weakness,
compliance and medical care. Owners need to understand
shaking,
that medical treatment of the diabetic is a life-long process
unresponsiveness,
that will change the long-term care of their pet. Medical
seizure, and
 treatment of diabetes focuses on the following.
death
216
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
-The Science behind the Diseases
Communication with the Owner
vomiting,
Owners must understand the concerms and physical symp-
diarrhea,
toms of hypoglycemia and what to do if their pet starts
 anorexia, and
showing its signs. Sending take-home instructions or a med-
weakness.
ical release can help the owner understand and identify this
potentially life-threatening syndrome.
Treatment
These pets can be so severely ill that, if not treated, they can
become life threatened. Treatment generally requires hospi-
Sample Take Home Information for the Client
talization and fluid therapy, focusing on lowering the body's
 Please contact us immediately
glucose levels and removing ketones from the body.
Treatment components can be a follows.
1. if your animal begins to act weak, depressed, is not
Bisagsns Keu n Surypys ao Buiunzias si no Sulina
IV fluids: Fluids are used to help to rehydrate the patient,
low level of sugar due to too much insulin;
help control acidosis, and flush the toxins from the body.
2. if your pet is not eating and you have given the nor-
 Short-acting insulin therapy: The pet is given a dose of
mal dose of insulin;
short-term insulin (Humilin R) every 1-3 hours until the
 3. if you have given the wrong dose of insulin or you
blood sugar and ketone levels returm to normal, which
are not sure how much insulin your pet has re-
can take 24-48 or more hours.
ceived; and
 Hospitalization and monitoring: The patient must be
 4. if your pet is depressed, vomiting, and listless.
closely monitored to assess the pet's blood glucose and
urine ketone levels, while making sure the pet does not
If you are concemed place a small amount of honey or
enter a hypoglycemic state.
Karo syrup across tongue. Never squirt directly back into
the mouth as this could cause aspiration into the lungs.
Discussing Long-Term Treatment and Potential
Complications with the Client
● Managing the diabetic patient is a life-long com-
mitment to monitoring diet, blood and urine sugar,
Discussing Diabetes Mellitus (Uncomplicated)
and changes in the pet's health.
with the Client
 Treatment can involve daily to twice daily injec-
Diabetes mellitus is a lack of insulin production or
tions of insulin and monitoring the pet's diet closely.
nonresponsiveness to insulin in the body.
The diabetic patient is more fragile, being much
Without insulin, the cells camnot utilize sugar, and
more susceptible to infection and disease. Pets
the body increases fat and muscle breakdown in re-
must be more closely monitored for chronic sys-
sponse to a decrease of sugar within the cells.
 ens poo y aissaxa ue sd s
temic and skin infections.
While treating diabetes with insulin therapy, the pet
 the pet must eliminate through the urine. To push this
  o u jo sd  
large molecule into the urine, the patient must drink
sugar. These pets can get severely weak, disori-
large amounts of water and urinate large volumes.
ented, and could potentially become comatose and
 Early signs of diabetes are increased thirst and uri-
die. Therefore, the patient must always be moni-
nation, weight loss, an unkempt hair coat, and loss
tored for clinical signs of low blood sugar.
of muscle tone.
● If the pet is not well and has very high blood sugar,
Once diagnosed, diabetes is controlled with med-
the patient may change its glucose into a toxin
ication and diet.
called ketones. These toxins acidify the blood and
 Typically, diabetics will require medication and
make the pet extremely weak, nauseous, and poten-
monitoring for life.
tially life threatened.
 If there are any concerns or changes in the health
status of the pet, medical attention should be
Ketoacidotic Diabetes
d   a saa as e  ii
sought immediately.
mui ason ayn sun suaq Apoq aun pue spoad paguol
ketones. The presence of ketones produces a metabolic aci-
dosis, making the pet ill and depressed.
The animal's clinical signs can be
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
pumqo oi passaidap ●
The Science behind the Diseases) to help reinforce the infor-
●dehydration,
mation presented here.
Chapter 16
Thyroid Gland
The thyroid glands are a set of paired dark red glands on ei-
 In hyperthyroid animals, a thyroid tumor of the gland it-
ther side of the trachea, sitting lateral and ventral to the tra-
self produces an overproduction of thyroid hormone. This
chea. There can be tremendous variation between location
disease is most commonly seen in cats, where small, micro-
and numbers of variations of glands depending on the ani-
scopic tumors within the thyroid gland lead to an overpro-
mal. The more proximal edge of the thyroid begins close to
duction of hormone. This is a common symdrome in older
the distal laryngeal region and ends at the fifth tracheal ring
felines, with 97% of the tumors being benign and only 3%
(see Figure 16.1).
chance of a malignant thyroid adenocarcinoma. In canines,
 The thyroid glands are responsible for the production of
 y e a so pn iq an si asa a
the thyroxin hormone that sets the basal metabolic rate
chance of malignancy.
(BMR). The BMR regulates the level at which cells burm en-
ergy and turmover. The hormone is released with ebb and
flow patterms throughout the day to produce a sustained ef-
Obtaining a History for Animals Affected by
fect. Animals with decreased production (hypothyroid) do
Thyroid Disease
not burn energy fully or tum over cells in a normal time pe.
riod. These animals have a poor hair coat due to decreased
Thyroid disease can manifest itself with very nonspecific
hair turmover, can be chronically obese, can seek out warmth
signs. Many times thyroid disease is found secondarily when
even in hot environments, and can have decreased energy.
running general blood work. Some questions to focus on
Animals with increased production (hyperthyroid) produce
when thyroid disease is suspected are presented next.
energy at too rapid a rate. These animals are chronically thin
with a history of weight loss, chronic vomiting, increased
What Is the Age of the Patient?
asa    () s
Thyroid disease tends to affect middle-aged to older ani-
energy.
 mals. The disease can come on very slowly, and its full ef-
There are two categories of diseases that can affect
fect may not be fully observed by the owner.
thyroid function; diseases that produce a low thyroid state
(hypothyroidism) and diseases that produce a hyperactive
thyroid condition (hyperthyroidism). The diseases that
What Is the Breed of the Pet?
produce hypothyroidism are broken into the following cat-
There are some specific breeds that are more prone to thy-
egories.
roid disease; however, any breed can be susceptible to thy-
roid dysfunction.
 Idiopathic thyroid gland atrophy: The normal thyroid
With hypothyroidism, the susceptible breeds are the
tissue is replaced over time with fat tissue. The cause of
disease is unknown.
 airedale,
 Immune-mediated disease: Immune-mediated thryoid-
争
boxer,
itis is an inflarmmatory disease in which the white blood
cocker spaniel,
cells of the body attack the thyroid cells as foreign bacte-
dachshund
ria. The white blood cells functionally destroy the thy-
 Doberman pinscher,
 roid-producing cell and cause a decreased production of
 golden retriever,
thyroid hormone.
+
Great Dane,
 Pituitary neoplasia: The pituitary is a small gland in the
Irish setter,
brain that regulates the release of hormones from other
miniature schnauzer,
glands of the body (see Chapter 17). A pituitary tumor,
 old English sheepdog.
which occurs rarely, destroys the pituitary's ability to re-
 Pomeranian,
lease the thyroid-stimulating hormone. Without this
 poodle, and
hormone, no thyroxin can be produced.
 Shetland sheepdog.
217
218
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Is the Animal a Chronic Vomiter or Regurgitator?
Hyperthyroid animals may eat so rapidly that they are
Thyroidgland
prone to chronic vomiting. Hypothyroid animals may rarely
develop a megaesophagus (see Chapter 10). The abnormal
Trachea
dilated esophagus cannot properly propel food into the
stomach, causing chronic regurgitation.
Does Your Pet Have a Tragic Expression?
Some hypothyroid animals can have a sullen or tragic ex-
pression. This is secondary to improper tumover of skin,
e sa an a n sr s pn n o
Figure I6.1. Illustration of the thyroid gland sitting on the tra-
 pear down turned.
chea.(Image courtesy of Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for
Veterinary Technicians. Colville, T., and Bassert, J. Mosby,
Does the Pet Have a History of Chronic Ear Infections?
Philadelphia, PA 2002. Used with permission of Elsevier 
Low-thyroid animals may have chronic, sustained ear in-
publishing.)
fections, secondary to decreased skin turnover and skin
immunity.
Does the Animal Have a History of Reproduction
Problems?
With hyperthyroidism there is no breed predilection;
Rarely, low-thyroid animals may have decreased ability to
however, the disease is mostly observed in cats.
produce sperm and eggs, ovulate properly, have normal con-
What Is the Pet's Energy Level?
ception, and maintain pregnancy. Generally, this is obser ved
only in animals with severely low thyroid.
Aeu Aiaua siad ai paoe si na asneoa ieauag ul
also be altered. Some general patterms are listed here.
Key Points on Assessing a Patient with
● Hypothyroid: The animal may be lethargic and have de
Thyroid Disease
creased energy. With low-thyroid animals, their BMR
decreases their available energy.
Animals may have severe thyroid disease and not all physi-
Hyperthyroid: These patients may be hyperactive, with
cal signs are present. Some patients may be diagnosed with
explosive energy. The animal burns energy at an explo-
thyroid dysfunction secondary to routine blood work. The
s suad an n iaa yn os snd 'an ai
 thyroid glands affect many of the body's systems, including
hyperactive. These animals cannot consume enough food
the skin, cardiac, neuromuscular, intestinal, reproduc-
to maintain their needs. Some animals may have aggres-
five, and ocular systems. It is important to try to get an ac-
 sive behavior changes.
n so  d    s 
 initial assessment, which may suggest thyroid dysfunction.
Is There an Overall Problem with Weight?
Some key points to observe on initial assessment are dis.
Pets may have chronic weight change because the BMR is
cussed next.
accelerated or slowed. Some basic patterms of weight change
may be as follows.
Changes in the Pet's General Appearance
 s     rn  s 
 Obesity: Hypothyroid anirmals will not burn energy nor-
a lackluster appearance that appears unkempt.
mally. Their energy intake goes into storage and is not
rapidly turned over.
Hyperthyroid animals have very thin coats, which tend
● Leanness: Hyperthyroid animals will burn energy so
  a   a     
rapidly that most animals cannot keep muscle and fat
Furthermore, these patients may have chronic weight loss
stored in their body. In some cases animals can have se-
with poor muscle quality and muscle atrophy.
vere weight loss, which may be the only physical symp-
Hypothyroid animals also show severe shedding, with
tomevident.
potentially poor hair coat and with a symmetrical hair
loss over the sides of the abdomen (symmetrical flank
Has the Animal Been Shedding Excessively?
alopecia). There can be increased pigmentation of the
With both hyper- and hypothyroid animals, their coat does
skin, dry or oily skin, and thickening areas of skin. The
not turn over properly. Usually, both conditions produce se-
animal may seem to have low energy, a tragic facial
vere excessive year-round shedding that occurs regardless of
expression, and is more prone to skin and allergy
season.
problems.
Chapter 16: Thyroid Gland
219
Figure 16.2. Chronically infected and inflamed ear can be sec-
ondary to low thyroid disease.
Ears
Low-thyroid patients may have chronic ear infections with
red inflamed ears (see Figure 16.2).
Heart Rate
Because the BMR is affected, heart rate may also change.
Although not always noted with animals that have thyroid
dysfunction, if abnormality is observed, it should be docu-
Figure 16.3. Image of proper approach to palpating an enlarged
mented and discussed with the medical team. General
changes in heart rate can be as follows:
thyroid gland.
Bradycardia (heart rates <80 beats/minute) can occa-
sionally be noted in hypothyroid patients.
Tachycardia (heart rates >200 beats/minute) can be ob-
served in hyperthyroid cats. In extreme cases, the rapid
Neuromuscular Changes
heart rate can make the heart prone to cardiac arrhyth-
Although rare, animals may have facial nerve paralysis.
mias and murmurs.
 Sorme animals may present with an inability to blink, move
their ears, or have increased drooling due to decreased lip
Thyroid Gland Enlargement
tone. This is due to decreased facial nerve function that in-
Most hyperthyroid animals have palpable thyroid glands on
nervates the muscle. This process has been linked to hy-
one or both sides.
pothyroidism. This disease is most commonly seen in the
To evaluate for thyroid enlargement perform the follow-
cocker spaniel.
ing examination.
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca
●Flex the neck to one side, and then place a finger down
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), or dry eye, can be a sec-
the ridge of the jugular groove on the other side.
ondary problem to hypothyroid patients. Patients with red,
 A small nodelike mass can be palpated above the jugular
inflamed eyes, chronic purulent discharge, and decreased
groove if the gland is enlarged.
 s a n  p d 
Repeat on other side.
test) should be evaluated for hypothyroid disease (see
 This should be done three to four times per second to
Chapter 20; see Figure 16.4).
make sure the gland can be palpated (see Figure 16.3).
Emergency concerms are rare when dealing with thyroid
dysfunction; even severely affected animals are usually sta-
If an enlarged thyroid gland is palpable, it is abnormal,
ble. If there are concerms of stability based on the team
and the finding should be reported to the medical team. Most
member's triage assessment (see Chapter 6), the medical
animals with a palpably large thyroid gland will either be hy-
perthyroid or turm hyperthyroid within the next 6 months.
other conditions.
220
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
TheScience behind the Diseases
fight off a chronic problem while not being able to keep
up with normal thyroid production.
Free T4 done by equilibrium dialysis: This test is a
measure of the active free hormone in the bloodstream.
Early thyroid dysfunction may cause changes in these
levels before total T4 is affected.
●T Level: The T level is a precursor to the active T4 hor-
mone. Decreases in this hormone can sometimes indicate
a hypothyroid state.
 T3/T4/thyroglobulin autoantibodies: These diagnostics
test for the presence of antibodies against thyroid hor-
mone and thyroid precursor hormone in the body. It is the
key test for immune-mediated thryoiditis.
Discussing Clinical Diagnostics for Thyroid
Figure I6.4.  Image of red irritated eye with corneal ulcer that
Dysfunction with the Client
can occur secondary to chronic dry eyes. Animals with KCS
Blood work has been suggested to detect if your pet
should have their thyroid levels evaluated.
has evidence of thyroid dysfunction.
●Furthermore, other clinical diagnostics (i.e., com-
plete blood count and chemistry) will help evalu-
ate if there is evidence of other underlying hor-
Clinical Diagnostic Testing for Evaluating
monal, organ, infectious, or inflammatory disease
Thyroid Function
that may be secondarily suppressing normal thy-
roid production.
The diagnosis of thyroid disease is determined by blood
● If thyroid levels appear normal but there is sugges-
tests, which largely evaluate primary thyroid hormone levels
tion of early disease based on history or physical
and secondary changes in the organ function occurring from
examination, there are tests that evaluate the con-
thyroid dysfunction. Some possible clinical diagnostics
centration of active free thyroid hormone and thy-
follow.
roid precursor hormones in the bloodstream. In
some cases these hormone levels will show early
Chemistry
- n  aaq  i s
●With a hyperthyroid patient, there can be changes in
mone levels are affected.
liver enzymes. Increased alanine transferase (ALT) levels
have been reported secondary to increased metabolism
and energy tumover. Less commonly, there can be eleva-
tions in alkaline phosphotase, blood urea nitrogen, glu-
Diseases of the Thyroid Gland
cose, phosphorus, and bilirubin.
 Although not all diseases are mentioned below, the common
With the hypothyroid patient, elevations in blood cho-
lesterol levels can be observed due to alterations in me-
diseases are discussed with the main goal being to under-
stand and to be able to explain to the client what the diseases
tabolism secondary to a lowered BMR.
 aq    sn d  a  'a
Evaluating Thyroid Level
overall short- and long-term concerms. Any discussion of
overall diagnostic and treatment protocols should be dis-
There are many different tests to evaluate changes in thyroid
cussed based on the recommendations of the doctor and the
production. Depending on the age and species of the pet, the
medical team. Please use the following information as a
concerms of the medical team, and the symptoms observed,
guideline to discuss and educate the client, but never to di-
monitoring of the following hormone levels may be recom-
agnose a patient.
mended.
Total T4: A total T4 represents that total amount of active
Hyperthyroidism
thyroid and inactive thyroid hormone in the bloodstream.
Hyperthyroidism is an overproduction of thyroid hormone
Abnormal elevations can suggest hyperthyroidism,
from the thyroid glands. The hormone, thyroxine, helps
control the rate with which cells bum energy in the body
ever, chronic organ or infectious disease can suppress thy-
n on si aa o si l un uum ()
roid production. This condition, called euthyroid sick,
thyroxine in the body, and the rate with which cells burm en-
occurs as the patient mobilizes its nutritional reserves to
 ergy and turm over is greatly accelerated.
Chapter 16: Thyroid Gland
221
Etiology
Treatment
Hyperthyroidism is caused by microscopic masses within
        
the thyroid gland that overproduce thyroxine. In cats 97% of
 Treatment is based on the animal's condition, the severity
 these tumors are benign and do not metastasize. In dogs, the
and concerms of the disease, and the medical options avail-
 percentage of malignancy is higher.
able to the medical team.
Signaiment
Medication
This disease is common in older cats (usually more than 8
 Medications, such as methimazole, are an antithyroid com-
years of age). The disease is rare in dogs. There is no sex or
pound that blocks thyroid hormone formation. This medica-
 breed predilection.
tion is usually the first course of medication prior to surgi-
cal or radiation treatments to help the patient normalize
Common Points in Medical History
thyroid levels. Methimazole can also be the primary treat-
Owners can report a variety of medical complaints with a
ment choice; however, the medication would need to be
hyperthyroid patient. The most common is weight loss,
maintained for life, and thyroid and organ function would
which can be mild to severe. Other common symptoms can
need to be monitored regularly.
be the following.
Surgical Removal of the Thyroid Gland
 Increased appetite (ravenous): Pets with an increased
Thyroidectomy, or surgical removal of the thyroid gland, re-
BMR can have increased energy needs producing an in-
ad a  s o p r  a so
creased to ravenous appetite.
neck. If both glands need to be removed, the procedure could
 Increased thirst and urination: Due to increased meta-
 make the patient hypothyroid and may require the pet to be
bolic rate and tumover of cells, patients tend to drink
supplemented with thyroid medication. The surgery may
more water and secondarily urinate more.
also affect a smaller gland near the thyroid gland, called the
 Explosive energy (hyperactive): Patients can have ex-
parathyroid gland, which controls the level of calcium
plosive energy bordering on hyperactivity due to the in-
within the bloodstream.
creased BMR.
Shedding and hair loss: Cells are turmed over at an accel-
Radioactive Iodine Therapy
erated rate, which produces constant year-round shedding.
 Thyroxine is composed largely of iodine molecules. Eighty
 Behavior changes: With increased energy output, pa-
percent of the iodine in the body is stored within the thyroid
tients may develop behavior changes; the most common
glands. By injecting a radioactive isotope of iodine into the
is aggression.
Gastrointestinal signs—vomiting and diarrhea: Se-
condary to increased metabolic turnover and ravenous in-
Discussing Hyperthyroidism (Feline) with the
take of the diet, pets may develop chronic vomiting and
Client
diarrhea.
 The thyroid gland sits in the middle of the neck of
most animals and secretes a hormone called thy-
Common Points on Initial Assessment
roxin.
Affected animals are generally stable, bright, alert, and re-
 Thyroxin regulates at what rate the cells burn en-
 sponsive. They may show the following symptorms on initial
ergy; this is called the basal metabolic rate.
assessment:
 In the large majority of hyperthyroid feline pa-
tients, there is an overproduction of thyroid hor-
 Thin to emaciated
mone due to microscopic benign tumors within the
Generalized poor muscle mass
thyroid gland.
Tachycardia
Due to their increased energy utilization, these pets 
+
 Poor hair coat
can show many different symptoms. The most
 Palpable thyroid gland (see above)
common is weight loss; however, pets can also
show increased appetite, hyperactivity, shedding,
Complications
 and changes in personality.
 If left untreated, hyperthyroidism may cause hypertension,
Hyperthyroidism can usually be detected with rou-
heart disease, liver disease, kidney disease, retinal detach-
 tine blood work and controlled with medical or sur-
ment, and death.
gical care.
 If hyperthyroidism is not diagnosed and treated, pa-
Clinical Diagnostics
tients can develop serious secondary disease, such
 As described above, hyperthyroidism is diagnosed by blood
 as hypertension, heart disease, blindness, and organ 
work. Typically a total/free T4 can be very helpful in sug-
disease.
gesting hyperthyroidism.
222
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
body, it can selectively destroy the thyroid tissue without af-
● Reproductive issues: Hypothyroid patients may not have
fecting other tissues in the body. Generally, the pet will have
to be in isolation for a few days to a few weeks while the treat-
These pets tend to have decreased sperm production,
 ment is completed. Isolation interval varies from state to state.
ovulation, abnormal heat cycles, and have problems with
normal fertilization and maintenance of pregnancy.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent hyperthyroidism from oc-
Common Points on Initial Assessment
curring. However, through routine clinical diagnostic screen-
The chronic hypothyroid patient may show very few physi-
ing of the senior patient, the disease can be picked up in its
cal signs on initial assessment. The concerm of low thyroid
early stages, minimizing severe systemic affects of the disease
may be associated with older animals with poor skin, ears,
 allergy, and obesity issues.
Hypothyroidism
Complications
Hypothyroidism is an underproduction of thyroid gland
 If left untreated hypothyroidism may cause chronic skin,
from pituitary or idiopathic/immune-mediated disease of the
obesity, and hair coat issues.
thyroid (see above).
Clinical Diagnostics
Signalment
As described above, hypothyroidism is diagnosed by blood
The disease is most common in middle-aged to older dogs
work. Typically, a total/free T4 test can be very helpful in
and very rare in cats. The common canine breeds are the
suggesting hypothyroidism.
airedale,
Treatment
 golden retriever,
Treatment is medical supplementation of thyroid hormone
boxer,
called thyroxine. This medication is given once or twice a
 great Dane,
  s  'l s an jo is an r 
cocker spaniel,
-dns rog paau ae asnaq at sad aun nouno payoa
Irish setter,
 plementation can change as the pet ages.
dachshund,
miniature schnauzer,
Prevenfion
 Doberman pinscher,
M  d n m  ou si a
old English sheep dog,
ever, through routine clinical diagnostic screening of the
 Pomeranian
 sin  dn p a  as an 'd 
 poodle, and
stages, minimizing severe systemic affects of the disease.
Shetland sheep dog.
Discussing Hypothyroidism (Canine) with the Client
Common Points in Medical History
The thyroid gland sits in the middle of the neck of
 Often the diagnosis of hypothyroidism is found in routine
most animals and secretes a hormone called thyroxin.
diagnostic blood work. Owners may be unaware of any med-
 Thyroxin regulates at what rate the cells burn en-
-moH ioyn moi isans Ae n nad an u sauo n
ergy; this is called the basal metabolic rate.
ever, the following observations should be discussed with
● In the large majority of hypothyroid canine pa-
owners.
tients, there is an underproduction of thyroid hor-
mone.
Chronic obesity: Hypothyroid animals are generally
ad an n saa psaap na on an o
obese, even with significant dietary restrictions.
can show many different symptoms. The most
Chronic skin/shedding issues: Hypothyroid patients
common is chronic obesity; however, pets can also
have decreased turnover of hair and skin cells. Many pa-
show chronic shedding, ear and skin infections,
tients will present with a focal symmetrical hair loss on
and reproductive problems.
both sides of the abdomen (flank alopecia). The pet can
Hypothyroidism can usually be detected with rou-
have chronic year-round shedding problems. Further-
 tine blood work and controlled with medication.
more, patients may present with chronic ear and skin in-
fections as the normal healthy skin barrier cannot be ad-
equately maintained.
● Decreased energy: Patients with decreased BMRs may
have low energy and seem more lethargic.
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
Animal bec omes heat seeking: Due to decreasing BMR,
Please try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology-
pets may be unable to maintain normal intermal warmth
The Science behind the Diseases) to help reinforce the infor-
 and may seek warm areas even in hot environments.
mation presented here.
Chapter 17
Adrenal Gland
The adrenal glands are organs that control chronic and acute
sugar. The process is controlled by a small gland in the brain
stress in the body by regulating blood pressure, heart rate, bron-
called the pituitary gland, also called the master gland.
chodilatation, electrolyte balance, and emergency blood sugar
p Ad an sns poo moi sass una an um
levels. The adrenal glands are small peanut-shaped glands that
releases a hormone called adrenocorticotropic hormone
sit cranial to both left and right kidney (see Figure 17.1).
(ACTH) to stimulate the adrenal gland to produce cortisol.
The gland is composed of two distinctive and separate
ACTH is released into the bloodstream until it encounters
tissues, and each part has a different function.
specific protein receptors in the adrenal cortex to stimulate
The adrenal cortex is the outer tissue layer responsible
the release of cortisol. Cortisol is then released into the
for producing different types of steroids for maintenance of
bloodstream to stimulate the breakdown of protein and fat
blood sugar, electrolytes, and sex steroid production. The
into sugar. As cortisol levels rise in the body, the pituitary
cortex has three distinct levels and compromises 75% of the
decreases the amount of ACTH release. This is called a neg-
entire gland. It comprises three distinct tissue layers.
ative feedback loop (see Figure 17.2).
 Zona granulosa: This is the outermost area of the cortex,
Adrenal Mineralocorticoid Production
which is responsible for producing a steroid hormone
called aldosterone, also called a mineralocorticoid.
The adrenal cortex also produces a mineralocorticoid called
 Zona fasciculata: This layer is the inner region of the ad-
aldosterone that is responsible for the reabsorption of
renal cortex that produces a prednisone-like steroid
sodium and expulsion of potassium in the proximal convo-
called cortisol.
luted tubules in the kidney. Without this hormone, the renal
 Zona reticularis: The zona reticularis is the inner region
medulla is unable to maintain the high sodium gradient and
of the adrenal cortex that produces a prednisone-like
cannot concentrate urine. (see Chapter 13). This hormone,
steroid called cortisol.
above all other adrenal hormones,is needed for normal
handling of stress and body maintenance. Without sufficient
The adrenal medulla is the section of tissue in the middle
levels of this hormone. an animal can get into a life-
of the gland that is responsible for producing epinephrine
threatening crisis. Aldosterone is necessary for the following.
to assist the body in times of crisis or life and death concerms
(fight or flight). Epinephrine has the following effects on
● It is necessary for maintenance of the sodium/potassium
the body:
balance within the body. Sodium is the electrolyte found
in highest concentrations in the serum and extracellularly
 Increases heart rate
in the body. Potassium is found in the highest concentra-
 Increases blood vessel constriction, thus increases blood
tions inside the cell.
pressure
When the body needs to produce an electrical rhythm to
Dilates bronchial airways
produce muscular contraction, nerve depolarization,
 Decreases intestinal secretion and movement
heart contraction, and millions of other muscular and
Dilates the eyes
neurologic activity, sodium is pumped intracellularly at
the same time potassium is pumped extracellularly. This
In general, the adrenal gland serves the body in three
 moverment of electrolytes across the cell membrane pro-
functions to aid in normal maintenance and response to
duces an electrical potential (see Figure 17.3).
stress: cortisol production, adrenal-mineralocorticoid pro-
When the normal sodium and potassium levels are af-
duction, and epinephrine production.
fected, the body has a more difficult time producing the
normal electrical activity, and the pet becomes weakened.
Adrenal Cortisol Production
with muscle fasciculations and abnormally slow heart
rhythms. Severely affected animals can arrive in shock
Cortisol is produced by the adrenal cortex to take protein
and life threatened. This syndrome is called an Addiso-
and fat and turm them into glucose in times of low blood
nian crisis (see below).
223
224
Section2:Anatomy andPhysiology
—TheSciencebehind theDiseases
Adrenal
gland
Right kidney
ACTH
Vena cava
stimulates
Ureter
Left kidney
Abdominal
Adrenal
aorta
gland
Bladder
Inhibits
1) Stimulates fat and protein
CORTISOL
breakdown
 2) Increases blood sugar
production
Figure 1 7.1.  Ilustration of the normal position of the adrenal
Figure I7.2.  Illustration of normal release of ACTH to stimulate
gland in the body.
the release of cortisol. Cortisol then stimulates production of
blood sugar from fats and muscle, while also decreasing the pro-
duction of ACTH. This type of model is called a negative feed-
back loop.
Adrenal-Epinephrine Production
Epinephrine is closely associated with the sympathetic nerv-
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH):
ous system, a division of the autonomic nervous system of
-d oidoosornu Aq panpod si aops assp s
the body. Epinephrine is produced when an animal is threat-
itary tumors that overproduce ACTH, stimulating the ad-
ened, making the animal ready to stand and fight or to run
renal glands to constantly produce cortisol. These tumors
(flight or fight response). This reaction produces the fol-
do not respond to negative feedback of increasing
lowing changes in the body:
amounts of cortisol. If the tumors within the pituitary be-
come enlarged, neurologic disease may (rarely) be seen
Quick bursts of speed
(i.e., seizures, etc.) (see Figure 17.4).
+
 Increased heart rate
 Adrenal tumor-neoplasia: A less common event is a
 Increased blood pressure
tumor of the adrenal cortex, which can produce excessive
 Bronchodilatation to increase airflow into the lungs
amounts of cortisol. In this syndrome, one adrenal gland
 Stopping intestinal movement and salivation
is usually affected. The high levels of cortisol and the
●Dilation of the eyes
secondary increase of glucose produces a significant
negative feedback on pituitary. Because there is de-
Hyperadrenocorticism
creased ACTH, the other adrenal gland is usually small
 and atrophied (see Figure 17.5).
There are three overall manifestations of adrenal disease
 Iatrogenic cause: Animals on a long-term dose of oral or
commonly seen in general practice. The first is hypera-
injectable steroids (i.e., prednisone) can mimic the phys-
drenocorticism (Cushing's disease), which is an overpro-
pue Aend an q pasno suopuoo pue suodus n
duction of cortisol caused by a primary adrenal or pituitary
adrenal forms of this disease. In this symdrome, both ad-
disease. There are three overall forms of the disease.
renal glands are small and atrophied due to decreased
Chapter 17: Adrenal Gland
225
Sodium (Na)
Sodium (Na)
Potassium (K+)
Potassium (K+)
Cell
ACTH
stimulates
Electrical potential
Negative
feedbackduei
Tumor
Figure 17.3. Illustration of sodium/potassium exchange that oc-
to excessive
curs within the cell to produce an electrical wave. These electrical
levelsof
cortisol
Atrophy
lar actions. Without proper levels of sodium and potassium, the
patient is severely weakened.
 1) Stimulates fat and protein 
 CORTISOL
breakdown
 2) Increases blood sugar
production
Figure 17.5. With a tumor of the adrenal cortex, the affected
gland overproduces cortisol, irrespective of the ACTH level of the
body. The increasing blood sugar levels decrease ACTH produc-
ACTH
tion, causing a secondary atrophy of the unaffected adrenal gland.
stimulates
No
inhibition
Both adrenals
X
enlarge as
theyproduce
more cortisol
The second form of adrenal disease is hypoadrenocorti-
cism (Addison's disease), which is a decreased production
of aldosterone. With this disease, the lack of aldosterone in-
hibits the body's ability to retain sodium and expel potas-
sium. Addison's disease can be produced by the following
disease symdromes.
1) Increased muscle and protein
Idiopathic (immune-mediated) hypoadrenocorticism:
Increased cortisol
breakdown
This syndrome is caused by a generalized systemic in-
production
2) High levels of blood sugar
flammatory disease of unknown cause that destroys the
evident
cortex of the adrenal gland.
Figure 17.4.  llustration of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocor-
 Granulomatous disease: Granulomatous disease is the
ticism. In this disease, both adrenal glands enlarge secondary to
destruction of the adrenal cortex by a chronic infectious
chronic pituitary ACTH stimulation. The pituitary tumors do not
or inflammatory product that produces a microscopic
respond to the increasing levels of blood sugar; increased ACTH
granulomatous reaction within tissue.
 continues to produce cortisol.
 Neoplasia: Cancer of other tissue (i.e., adrenal medulla)
can destroy normal adrenal cortical tissue.
The third and final syndrome is cancer of the adrenal
ACTH production. This occurs because of negative feed-
medulla (i.e., epinephrine-producing tissue). This rare type
back on the pituitary from the steroidal medications ad-
of cancer is called a pheochromocytoma. This adrenaline-
ministered. This form of the disease can sometimes be
 rsd s  u o o
corrected with a slow withdrawal of oral steroids.
heart rates, weakness, and eventually death.
226
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
-The Science behind the Diseases
Obtaining a Medical History for Adrenal
Tabie I 7.1.
 Triage concerns in the adrenal patient—-Addisonian
Disease
crisis.
physical examination can be very difficult. It becomes ex-
Trouble Signs That Indicate
         
Systems
 an Emergency Situation
that may be presenting with moderate to severe adrenal dis-
Mentation
Nonresponsive/comatose
ease. Patients can have serious disease and present with
Fever
Temp <99° (due to shock, DIC, coma)
very mild signs and can be almost normal on physical ex-
Hydration
Dehydration >5-7%
amination. Some basic questions for the client are pre-
Gum color
 Pink to pale pink (poor perfusion)
 Capillary refill time 
CRT >2-3 seconds
sented next.
(CRT)
Heart rate/pulse
Rate: Heart rate <80 bpm
How Old Is the Pet?
 Pulse: Pulses can have normal to decreased
Adrenal disease is not necessarily a problem of old age in
quality depending on whether the pet is in
animals. However, adrenal dysfunction tends to be observed
shock.
in older animals.
Is There Breed Specificity for Adrenal Disease?
Has the Animal Been on Oral Steroidal Medication
Although adrenal dysfunction can occur in any breed, there
(Prednisone)?
are some breeds more sensitive to adrenal disease.
Hyperadrenocorticism: Chronic steroid usage over
months to years can produce iatrogenic hyperadrenocor-
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease): Canine
ticism (see above).
breeds that are more susceptible are poodles, dachshunds,
 Hypoadrenocorticism: Animals that have been on oral
Boston terriers, boxers, and beagles. There is no breed
steroids and that have been removed from the medication
sensitivity in the cat.
● Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease): Canine
The prednisone naturally inhibits the body's production
breeds that are more susceptible are the great Dane, rot-
of cortisol. If the patient is removed from the steroid to0
teweiler, Portuguese water dog, standard poodle, West
rapidly, the body does not have enough time to restart ad-
Highland white terrier, and the Wheaton terrier. There is
equate production, and the patient can enter an Addi-
no breed sensitivity in the cat.
sonian crisis (see below).
Has the Progression of the Disease Been Sudden or
Initial Assessment of Pets with Adrenal
Chronic?
Most adrenal disease is chronic in nature. However, with hy-
Disease
poadrenocorticism, there are acute manifestations called an
Most animals with adrenal disease can show a variety of
Addisonian crisis (see below). The body is unable to main-
symptoms. The patient may have no overall medical com-
-a ad an p 'q ss p os  n u
plaints or may be severely affected (see Table 17.1).
ters a crisis state.
Hypoadrenocorticism
Has There Been a Sharp Increase in Water
In hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), except for ani-
Consumption (Polydipsia) or Urination (Polyuria)?
mals in severe crisis, animals may show little to no physical
With hyperadrenocorticism, there can be a sharp increase in
symptoms of disease. The owner may bring the pet in with a
water consumption and urine output, especially over the past
history of lethargy, depression, gastrointestinal signs, and or
few days, weeks, and months. In felines, this may be noted
muscle tremors.
as increased saturation in the litter box. This increase in
thirst and urination is due to the steroid's affect on the renal
Mentation
medulla (see Chapter 13).
Patients can be depressed to comatose and can be stermally
 to laterally recumbent.
Does the Animal Shake, Have Muscle Tremors, or Act
Weak?
Symptoms
 Animals with abnormal electrolyte levels may produce se-
 Cardiovascular symptoms: Animals can be severely
vere muscle weakness, shaking, and tremors.
bradycardic with heart rates less than 60-80 beats per
minute. Pulses can vary depending on how severely af-
Has There Been a History of Vomiting and Diarrhea?
fected the pet is.
Hypoadrenocorticism patients can have periodic and
 Musculoskeletal symptoms: Pets may occasionally have
episodic vomiting and diarrhea.
muscle tremors or spasms from electrolyte abnormalities.
Chapter 17: Adrenal Gland
227
●Dehydration: These pets can be moderately to severe de-
hydrated due to improper reabsorption of sodium, lead-
ing to a decreased ability of the kidneys to concentrate
their urine.
With hyperadrenocorticism, symptoms are generally
mild, with the chief complaints being changes in the skin
and muscle, increased thirst, and increased urination. With
hyperadrenocorticism, there tends to be more severe protein
 and fat breakdown. This produces moderate to severe mus.
cle loss and changes in the hair coat and skin (see Figure
17.6). There are some common notable changes.
●Pendulous abdomen: The abdominal muscle becomes
weakened and thinned, making the animal appear pot-
bellied.
Flank alopecia: The hair coat of a hyperadrenocorticism
dog can show severe symmetrical bilateral hair loss in the
flank region over the dorsal and lateral hips. It is impor-
tant to note that this hair coat change can be observed
with other hormonal diseases, too (i.e., hypothyroidism,
diabetes mellitus) (see Figure 17.6).
● Increased pigmentation of the skin: Often these pets
will have increased regions of pigmentation, thinning of
s an go aade u sao p (e us a
due to increased protein turnover and chronic affects of
steroids.
(b）
(C
Regions of
increased
eral hair loss (flank alopecia), which can be observed with patients suffering from hormonal disease (a). Note the thinning hair coat and
228
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Clinical Diagnostics of the Adrenal System
effect is caused by the steroids producing an electrolyte
washout in the renal medulla (see Chapter 13).
Testing for adrenal dysfunction can be a complicated
process, requiring advanced blood and imaging diagnostics.
Radiology
 Each hospital team has its own diagnostic protocols for each
Abdominal radiographs are used to assess organ enlarge-
ment (i.e., hepatomegally) or potential adrenal masses asso-
the syndrome present.
ciated with Cushing's disease.
Hyperadrenoc orticism
Advanced Diagnostics
For hyperadrenocorticism, it is very difficult to diagnose
Although there are multiple clinical diagnostics available,
most forms of Cushing's disease with baseline blood work.
 there is no one correct diagnostic path to indicate Cushing's
Although indications of adrenal hormonal disease can be
   n s    s 
suggested, diagnosis of this disease based solely on baseline
ommended are discussed next.
blood work is difficult. Advanced blood work and imaging
diagnostics are needed to diagnose Cushing's disease and
 differentiate between primary pituitary and adrenal disease
Urine Cortisol/Creatinine Ratio
 In animals with Cushing's disease, the excess cortisol is ex-
(see Table 17.2). Some common clinical diagnostic results
for adrenal dysfunction are discussed next.
creted by the kidneys, increasing the amount of cortisol in
comparison to the normal levels of creatinine in the urine.
By obtaining a urine sample at home and submitting it to the
Routine Diagnostics
lab, a simple test for increased cortisol levels in the body can
Complete Blood Count
be assessed.
The complete blood count can be essentially normal.
Increased levels of cortisol raise the cortisol/creatinine
However, on occasion, a stress leukogram can be seen. A
ratio greater than 1. A normal urine cortisol/creatinine ratio
stress leukogram is noted by
rules out Cushings disease; however, an elevated ratio does
not absolutely identify it. Elevated levels of cortisol can be
● a slight increase in the white blood cell count,
seen with other systemic disease (e.g., liver disease, neoplasia,
●an increased neutrophil count, and
 other hormonal diseases, etc.). Thus, this test is used primarily
 a decreased lymphocyte count.
 as a prescreening test to rule out hyperadrenocorticism.
Chemistry
 Results from blood work for a routine chemistry panel can
ACTH Stimulation Test
 Follow the following procedure for an ACTH Stimulation
be extremely variable. There is no absolute baseline test for
test.
adrenal disease on routine chemistries. There are some ob-
servable changes, however.
● In a 12-hour-fasted dog, a blood sample is taken for a
 prestimulation cortisol level.
Alkaline phosphatase: This refers to a large number of
 Then ACTH (pituitary hormone) is given, either intra-
intracellular enzymes that are present within the liver, in-
muscularly or intravenously, depending on the form of
testine, bone, kidneys, and placenta. Alkaline phos-
ACTH.
phatase can be elevated with liver disease, gall bladder
One or 2 hours later (depending on the ACTH form), a
obstruction, and other types of organ and systemic ill-
 poststimulation cortisol level is obtained.
ness. However, increases in alkaline phosphatase are also
associated with liver tissue chronically exposed to long-
Hyperadrenocortical patients show a significant eleva-
term steroids (i.e., cortisol, prednisone, etc.).
tion of cortisol levels (far above normal response to ACTH)
● Cholesterol: Increased cholesterol can be seen with
after stimulation of the adrenal gland due to hypertrophic ad-
Cushing's disease due to increased fat breakdown into
ss u dia si asas sn os 's g
sugar.
hyperadrenocorticism, this does not distinguish it from pitu-
● Blood sugar: Animals with chronically high levels of
itary-dependent Cushing's disease or from an adrenal tumor.
cortisol can be hyperglycemic. Blood sugar in nondia-
betic animals can range from 200 to 300 mg/dl. If an an-
Low-Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
imal is chronically hyperglycemic long enough, diabetes
 Follow the following procedure for a low-dose dexametha-
can occur.
 sone suppression test.
Urinalysis
 In a fasted animal, a blood cortisol level is drawn.
With Cushing's disease, the ability of the kidneys to concen-
 A low dose of dexamethasone is injected intravenously.
trate urine can be affected. Animals are usually hypos-
Six and 8 hours after injection, additional blood cortisol
thenuric, with urine specific gravities less than 1.015. The
levels are drawn.
Chapter 17: Adrenal Gland
229
The normal animal will suppress its cortisol levels by
This test is an excellent screening for Cushing's disease.
half the pre-cortisol level amount 6-8 hours after the initial
However, it does not differentiate between pituitary and ad-
dexamethasone injection. This is caused by the dexametha-
renal Cushing's disease.
sone reducing the ACTH production in the pituitary and sec-
 ondarily reducing the cortisol production.
High-Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
In the hyperadrenocortical animal, there is no suppres
This test can be completed after the low-dose dexametha-
sion of the cortisol after 8 hours.
sone suppression test to differentiate from adrenal or pitu-
itary forms of Cushing's disease.
With pituitary disease, the small pituitary tumors will
Follow the following procedure for a low-dose dexam-
not decrease ACTH levels when faced with increasing
ethasone suppression test.
cortisol or cortisol-like drugs.
With adrenal tumors, there is no decrease in cortisol
 In a fasted animal, a blood cortisol level is drawn.
 production when faced with decreasing ACTH levels.
● A high dosage of dexamethasone is injected intravenously.
The decision tree in Table 17.2 is designed to give team members an idea of what some of the clinical diagnostic pro-
tocols may be in order to help confirm or rule out hyperadrenocorticism. This diagram is not meant for the team mem-
 ber to help diagnose the disease, but to understand the complexity of testing to help discuss diagnostic options with the
client.
Cushing's disease is suspected
basedon
Signalment
History
Physical Exam
 Initial Blood work
T
Option I
1 uodo
-Option III
Urine Cortisol
Low Dose Dex
Creatinine Ratio
ACTH STIM
Suppression
Abnormal
Abnormal
Abnormal
Low Dose Dex or
ACTH STIM
Ultrasound
High Dose Dex
Suppression
Abnormal
Abnormal
Bilateral Enlarged
 Unilateral Enlarged
Cortisol Suppresses →
No Suppression →
Ultrasound
Adrenals →
Adrenal and smaller
secondary adrenal →
Pituitary Dependent
Adrenal Tumor
Pituitary Dependent
Adrenal Tumor
Cushing's Disease
Cushing's Disease
Cushing's Disease
Cushing's Disease
Bilateral Enlarged
Unilateral Enlarged
Adrenals →
Adrenal and smaller
secondary adrenal →
Pituitary Dependent
Cushing's Disease
Adrenal Tumor
Cushing's Disease
230
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
●Six and 8 hours after injection, additional blood cortisol
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's Disease)
levels are drawn.
Primary Addison's disease is more easily diagnosed with
routine blood and urine diagnostics. Observable changes in
With pituitary-dependent Cushing's disease most pitu-
baseline diagnostics can be as follows.
itary tumors will decrease the ACTH level in the face of
higher dexamethasone levels. The decreased ACTH de-
Chemistry
creases cortisol, and the animal suppresses cortisol.
With primary Addison's disease, blood electrolytes are out
In an adrenal tumor form of Cushing's disease, three
of balance.
out four tumors will not suppress cortisol in the face of
higher dexamethasone levels.
 The patient has decreased levels of sodium and increased
concentration of potassium.
 The electrolyte balance is described in a sodium/potas-
Ultrasound
sium ratio.
Once hyperadrenocorticism is suspected through routine
 The normal ratio is more than 25:1 (Na/K); when the ratio
clinical diagnostics or a Cushing's screening test (i.e., ACTH
of Na/K is less than 23: 1, Addison's disease is suspected.
response test), abdominal ultrasound imaging can help con-
firm bilaterally enlarged adrenal glands. Ultrasound can
Urinalysis
help detect the following.
The ability of the kidneys to concentrate urine is affected
due to the decreased sodium in the renal medulla (see
Pituitary-dependent disease: With this form of the dis-
Chapter 13). Animals are usually hyposthenuric with a urine
ease, an abdominal ultrasound can help confirm enlarge-
 specific gravity of less than 1.015.
ment (1-2 times normal size) of both adrenal glands due to
increased ACTH production from the pituitary gland.
ACTH Stimulation Test
Adrenal tumor: With this form of the disease, an ab-
With animals that may have a questionable sodium/potas-
dominal ultrasound can help assess if there is moderate
sium ratio, an ACTH response test is recommended to eval-
enlargement of one adrenal gland and atrophy of the sec-
uate the adrenal gland's response to ACTH.
ond gland secondary to negative feedback of increasing
 The normal response produces a measurable moderate
cortisol levels and decreasing ACTH levels.
rise in blood cortisol 2 hours after ACTH administration. In
Pheochromocytoma: With a pheochromocytoma, an ep-
 the hypoadrenocortical patient, there is poor response to cor-
inephrine-producing tumor of the adrenal medulla, an
tisol levels after stimulation.
abdominal ultrasound can reveal a moderate to severe en-
largement of one adrenal gland. The other gland is usu-
ally a normal size.
Discussing Clinical Diagnostics for
Hypoadrenocorticism with the Client
● The veterinarian is recommending initial baseline
blood and urinalysis diagnostics to help evaluate
Discussing Clinical Diagnostics for
your pet for Addison's disease, which is lack of
Hyperadrenoc orticism with the Client
production of steroids from the adrenal gland.
 The veterinarian is recommending initial baseline
The veterinarian will evaluate changes in the urine
and the blood electrolytes (i.e., sodium and potas-
your pet for Cushing's disease, which is an over-
 an n aq  as o n (
production of steroids from the adrenal gland.
mal regulation of sodium and expulsion of potas-
Although baseline blood and urine will not ab-
sium from the body.
solutely confirm if Cushing's disease is evident, the 
 If Addison's disease is suspected, advanced blood
diagnostics will help indicate if further testing is
work may be recommended.
needed to confirm the disease. Furthermore, the
blood and urine will allow the veterinarian to as-
sess other organ and hormonal disease that could
Diseases of the Adrenal Gland
occur secondary to Cushing's disease (i.e., diabetes
mellitus).
Although not all diseases are mentioned below, the common
If Cushing's disease is suspected, advanced blood
diseases are discussed, with the main goal being to under-
work and abdominal imaging may be suggested.
stand and to be able to explain to the client what the diseases
 The proper form of the disease must be diagnosed
 are, how they can present themselves, and what the overall
aq mn pooogoud quaean aedoidde ue iot apno u
short- and long-term concerms are for each disease. Any dis-
recommended.
cussion of overall diagnostic and treatment protocols should
be discussed based on the recommendations of the doctor
Chapter 17: Adrenal Gland
231
 and the medical team. Please use the following information
Complications
as a basis to discuss and educate the client, but never to di-
Due to chronic hyperglycemia, diabetes mellitus can occur
agnose a patient.
if Cushing 's disease is not treated. Furthermore, the chronic
release of cortisol can also trigger chronic hypertension or
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's Disease)
high blood pressure. Patients, even those under control for
Cushing's disease is a hormonal imbalance from overpro-
Cushing's disease, should have their blood pressure rou-
duction of a prednisone-like steroid, called cortisol, in the 
tinely monitored.
adrenal glands of the body. Cortisol is normally produced in
times of stress to break down protein (muscle) and fat to
Diagnosis
produce sugar. The release of cortisol is controlled by an-
As outlined above, clinical diagnostics for Cushing's disease
 Other hormone, called ACTH, from the pituitary.
- sisn      n 
vanced clinical blood and urine diagnostics, radiography,
Etiology
and abdominal ultrasound.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, there are three forms of
hyperadrenocorticism.
Treatment
Treatment is based on the presentation of the animal and the
Pituitary-dependent form: This is the most common
type of Cushing's disease evident. In general, overall treat-
form of the disease. In this form, there is an overproduc-
ment guidelines are as follows:
tion of pituitary ACTH from microscopic tumors within
the pituitary. This causes an overproduction of steroid
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism: With
from both adrenal glands.
pituitary-dependent disease, patients are generally placed
 on medication that is focused on stopping steroid produc-
 Adrenal-dependent form: This is a cancerous process in
one adrenal gland, causing it to enlarge and overproduce
tion in the adrenal glands. These medications are gener-
cortisol. The other adrenal gland is atrophied.
ally needed for the life of the pet. These patients must be
 Iatrogenic form: This disease is produced in animals on
closely monitored at regular intervals for normal adrenal
function, diabetes, liver disease, and hypertension.
long-term oral or injectable steroids (i.e., prednisone).
 These patients have been on medications for months to
years, and the chronic levels of oral and injectable
 steroids begin to produce signs of Cushing's disease.
Discussing Hyperadrenocorticism with the
Signalment
Client
The disease is commonly seen in older dogs of both sexes.
Each pet has two adrenal glands that sit in front of
 The breeds with higher prevalence are poodles, dachshunds,
the kidneys. Their function is to produce adrenaline 
Boston terriers, boxers, and beagles. This disease is rare in
and specific steroids for emergency situations.
 Cortisol is produced from the adrenal gland to take
cats.
 muscle and protein and produce sugar. It is stimu-
Common Points in Medical History
lated by the hormone ACTH, produced by the pitu-
Owners can report a variety of medical complaints with a
itary gland of the brain. ACTH is stimulated in re-
sponse to stress or low blood sugar.
Cushing's disease patient. The most common is increased
thirst and urination. Other symptoms can be
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease) is an
overproduction of the hormone cortisol.
hair loss/alopecia,
 The disease is caused by either changes in the pitu-
 decreased energy,
itary or the adrenal gland itself. The disease can
 increased panting,
also be associated with the administration of long-
muscle loss, and
term oral or injectable steroids.
neurologic signs—seizures (rare).
 Initial signs of the disease are increased thirst and
urination due to the chronic exposure to pred-
Common Points on Initial Assessment
nisone-like steroids.
Affected animals are generally stable, bright, alert, and re-
 Over time this chronic breakdown of muscle and
sponsive, but may show the following symptoms on initial
fat leaves the pet pot-bellied, with a poor hair coat
assessment:
and chronic changes and irritations in the skin.
 If not diagnosed and properly treated, the pet can
 Pendulous (hanging) abdomen
have secondary liver disease, diabetes mellitus,
Hair loss, especially over the top of the backbone
chronic skin and urinary tract infections, and high
Whole-body generalized muscular wasting
blood pressure (hypertension).
 Increased regions of pigmentation on skin
232
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
-The Science behind the Diseases
●Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism: With adre.
Common Points in Medical History
nal tumors, a removal of the affected adrenal gland is rec-
Unless the patient has a severe Addisonian crisis, most
ommended.
Addisonian patients may have very mild medical com-
● Iatrogenic Cushing's disease: In these patients, to pre-
plaints. These can be
vent an Addisonian crisis (see below) prednisone medica-
tion is slowly reduced over time until the patient is com-
●lethargy,
pletely weaned off prednisone.
weakness,
 chronic vomiting/regurgitation (episodic),
Prevention
weight loss, and
There is no way to prevent hyperadrenocorticism. However,
increased thirst and urination.
through routine wellness blood work and urinalysis of the
middle-aged to older pet, Cushing's disease can be detected
Common Points on Initial Assessment
in its early stages.
o ju ade  sis an u un ou ae n s
  s s  n s ssn s
the following symptoms:
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's Disease)
Addison's disease is a lack of production of the hormone
 Lethargy to stermal recumbence to lateral recumbence
aldosterone. Aldosterone is produced to aid in the reabsorp-
Slow heart rate (usually less than 60-80 beats per minute)
tion of sodium and expulsion of potassium from the kidneys.
Chronic diarrhea
 Increased thirst/urination
Etiology
Collapse
 There are several potential causes that can damage the nor-
Muscle tremors
 mal adrenal tissue that produces aldosterone.
 Black tarry stools
● Immune-mediated disease: The body sends white blood
Complications
cells to destroy the adrenal gland itself. The cause of this
If primary Addison's disease is not diagnosed and treated
process is unknown.
patients can enter a life-threatening Addisonian crisis, which
● Granulomatous disease: Infectious diseases produce
leads to hypovolemic shock (see Chapter 30) and, poten-
chronic infection within a specific organ or tissue. In this
tially, death.
case, the disease occurs within adrenal tissue, the gland
itself can be injured. Fungal infections (i.e., valley fever)
Diagnosis
can produce these long-standing granulomatous diseases.
As outlined above, clinical diagnostics for hypoadrenocorti-
● Overdose of Lysodren medication: Animals that are
cism can involve baseline diagnostic blood work and urine
treated for Cushing's disease with a medication called
and advanced clinical blood diagnostics (i.e., ACTH re-
Lysodren (Op'DDD) can develop significant destruction
sponse test).
of the adrenal cortex.
● Cancer: A metastasis from tumor types somewhere else
Treatment
in the body can grow into the adrenal gland.
 Treatment is dependent on the presentation and history of
 Too rapid a withdrawal of long-term prednisone ther-
the patient.
apy: A too-rapid withdrawal of long-term steroidal med-
ication can produce an Addisonian crisis. Patients must
 Addisonian crisis: These animals generally need to be ad-
be taken off steroid medication slowly to allow the body
mitted to the hospital for fluid therapy and medication to
enough time to restimulate its normal cortisol produc-
help rebalance their sodium and potassium levels. These
tion. Animals removed too quickly will not resume nor-
 pets may be in shock and severely life-threatened states.
mal cortisol and aldosterone production and can enter a
 Chronic primary Addison's disease: These animals are
crisis situation.
stable but will require life-long daily medications or
monthly injections to replace the aldosterone and possi-
Signalment
bly the cortisol not produced by the adrenal glands.
Addison's disease affects dogs from 1 to 12 years of age and
cats from 1 to 9 years of age. Female canines are more predis-
Prevenfion
posed to this syndrome, whereas there is no sex predilection
There is no way to prevent hypoadrenocorticism. However,
in the cat. Common canine breeds affected by hypoadrenocor-
through routine wellness blood work and urinalysis of the
ticism are standard poodles, great Dane, Portuguese water
middle-aged to older pet, Addison's disease can be detected
dogs, West Highland white terriers, and Wheaton terriers.
in its early stages, and if treated successfully, it can prevent
There is no reported breed predilection in felines.
a life-threatening crisis.
Chapter 17: Adrenal Gland
233
Discussing Primary Hypoadrenocorticism with
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
the Client
Please try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology-
●Each pet has two adrenal glands that sit in front of
The Science behind the Diseases) to help reinforce the infor-
 the kidneys. Their function is to produce adrenaline
mation presented here.
and specific steroids for times of emergency need.
 One such steroid hormone is aldosterone; it is pro-
duced in the adrenal gland to stimulate the reab-
 sorption of sodium and expulsion of potassium in
the kidney.
These electrolytes are responsible for producing
 the body's electric current that produces muscle
movement, heart contraction, neuron function, and
 other necessary body functions.
●Without normal levels of aldosterone and cortisol,
the pet cannot respond to stress. These patients can
become weak and lethargic (sometimes comatose),
have abnormally slow heart rhythms, muscle
 spasms, low blood pressure, and may collapse.
● If not diagnosed and treated, the pet may enter a
crisis situation.
Chapter 18
Reproduction
Surgical sterilization, breeding animals, and neonate care
the testicles descend by birth, but they can remain in the in-
can be a large part of the medical team's responsibilities in a
guinal or abdominal region for 6-12 months. Animals with-
busy general practice. It is important to have a good work-
out normally descended testicles are called cryptorchid.
ing knowledge of the reproductive system to be able to dis-
which is a heritable condition. If left unresolved, the in-
cuss the importance of sterilization and health concerns of
creased body temperature of the inguinal canal or abdomi-
both the male and female pet with the client.
nal cavity can make the testicles more likely to become can-
cerous in later life. These animals can show normal sexual
interest but tend to be infertile.
The Female Reproductive Tract
The female reproductive tract comprises
duce sperm. The early sperm then move into the epididymis
where they mature and are stored. During sexual contact, the
 reproductive organ: ovaries;
 sa a o sp s an yno ao as
female duct system: oviducts, uterus, and cervix; and
ejaculation.
+
 external genitalia: vagina and vulva.
The male also has accessory sex glands, which produce
secretions for transport and maintenance of the sperm. In the
The ovaries are the primary reproductive organ that pro-
canine, the most important secondary sex gland is the
duces the female gametes (ova), as well as the female hor-
prostate gland. This single gland is located around and
 mones progesterone and estrogen (see Figure 18.1).
along the urethra just behind the excretory ducts of the
When the pet is in heat (estrus), the maturing ova begin to
vesicular gland, producing a small amount of fluids for the
produce a hormone called estrogen. Increasing estrogen lev-
ejaculate and producing necessary electrolytes to help sperm
els are responsible for the physical signs of estrus: swollen,
motility and fertility.
enlarged vulva, attractiveness to the male, a willingness to
The penis is the external genitalia that encompass a route
stand for mounting, and a bloody vaginal discharge. Once the
for both the reproductive and urinary systems. Different
ova have matured, one to several eggs are released into the 
-p az dia  sd a jo sua aa sars
oviducts and uterus where fertilization takes place. After con-
ery of the sperm.
ception, the embryos implant in the uterine wall and mature
 In the canine, there are two overall specializations.
through a normal pregnancy cycle. The ovaries are then re-
sponsible for producing a hormone called progesterone,
 Glans penis: The glans penis is the region of specializa-
which helps to maintain the pet's pregnancy.
tion located in the middle of the penis. It will swell like a
balloon prior to and during sexual contact. It prevents
premature separation from the female during coitus and
The Male Reproductive Tract
increases the chances of fertilization.
The male reproductive system consists of
 Os penis: The male penis contains a bone called the os
penis. It is a common site of urinary obstruction second-
 reproductive organ: testes;
ary to stone formation.
male duct system: the epididymis and spermatic cords;
pue
 In intact male cats, the feline penis has barbs on the dis-
external genitalia: the penis.
tal surface of the penis; the barbs are there only under the in-
fluence of testosterone
The testicles (see Figure 18.2) are the primary organ of
reproduction, producing the male gametes (the sperm) and
The Reproductive Cycle
testosterone, the male sex hormone.
In mammals, testes are carried outside the body cavity;
Puberty is defined as the age at which a female has a first
they develop behind the kidneys in the fetus, and then de-
heat cycle with an ovulation or the age at which the male can
scend into the scrotum through the inguinal canal. Normally.
produce fertile sperm. The age of puberty varies.
235
236
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—T
TheScience behind theDiseases
●In the feline: The female will come into heat every 3-4
months for 3-4 weeks at a time.
Uter
Most species are spontaneous ovulators, which means
Body
there is no one specific event that stimulates ovulation.
Uterine Horns
However, cats and ferrets are induced ovulators. These an-
imals will go into heat and become sexually active, but will
not ovulate unless sexual contact occurs. The sexual act
stimulates a neuroendocrine response that stimulates ovula-
Cervix
tion. This greatly increases chances of conception with just
one sexual encounter.
Ovary
Species have also developed variations in sexual contact
(coitus) to help increase the chance of conception. In dogs,
Figure18.1.
 Image of an enlarged uterus secondary to infec-
the male will mount, enter, and rotate around the female so
tion. Note the normal anatomy of the ovaries and oviducts (en-
they are standing back to back. At this point the animal is
cased in the fatty pedicle), the uterine horns, and the uterine body.
aag aun o aeas on aun si pe an, aq on pis
It will take at least 20-30 minutes for the tie to break and be-
fore the pets are able to separate.
Practice Note: Reproductive behavior of the cat and
dog can seem abnormal or strange to new pet owners.
These clients may call with very serious concerns
about their pet's normal sexual behaviors and ana-
tomy. Some common examples follow.
Example I The owner calls to inform the
medical team that their female cat is acting ex-
tremely strangely, vocalizing, rolling on the
ground, attacking the owner's feet, and then run-
ning away. The cat may also be very tempera-
mental. This may suggest normal symptoms of
feline estrus.
Example I The owner calls and informs the
medical team that they are concerned that their
ae faun 1o shuad sii uo sseu e sey Addnd mau
afraid that the pet got bit or stung on its penis.
Figure 18.2.
 Illustration of the male reproductive system.
This may suggest the pup has become excited
(Image courtesy of Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition.
and has inflated its glans penis. In a few min-
Pasquini, Chris, and Pasquini, Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point,
 utes, the swelling tends to go away.
TX 1989. Used with permission from Sudz Publishing.)
Example Iml An owner calls to inform you
that their male and female canines are stuck to-
Canine puberty can range from 4 to 6 months in small
gether and they cannot get separated. Although
dogs and up to 6-8 months in larger dogs.
this is a normal part of coitus, new owmers can
Feline puberty generally occurs by 4-6 months of age.
 Furthermore, owners should be instructed not to
The estrus or heat cycle is defined as the period prior to
try to physically separate these animals.
ovulation and is denoted by the physical signs of heat (i.e.,
standing to be mounted, interest in the male, vaginal
Although these concems could suggest other, more
swelling, and discharge).
serious problems, it is important to discuss with new
owners normal sexual habits of intact pups and kittens
● In the canine: The canine generally comes into heat every
before they enter puberty.
4-6 months, and the length of the heat cycle is 9-30 days.
Chapter 18: Reproduction
237
Pregnancy and Labor
 Patients that exceed these time parameters can suggest a
problem pregnancy or dystocia. These pets should be evalu-
Average pregnancy lengths are as follows.
ated by a veterinarian immediately.
All fetuses have an individual placenta around them.
Canine: 60-63 days
Many owners will become concermed when they note one
●Feline: 60 days
placenta or extra membrane ruptures and the puppies do not
quickly pass. Overall, one placenta can rupture and the re-
The term of expected pregnancy is calculated from the
maining pups can be very stable. Furthermore, 40% of all
first day of conception. However, because canines may
canine and feline fetuses are borm normally in the breach po-
breed on a daily basis, the pregnancy due date can vary up
sition. This is a very important point to reinforce with the
to 5-7 days.
    s   s 
The fetuses mature within the uterus, each in its own pla-
with a human pregnancy. Finally, the normal placental pig-
centa. In the first two trimesters of pregnancy (40-46 days),
 ments are black and green, and this does not suggest prob-
the fetuses mature, specialize, and grow with very little out-
lems with the pregnancy.
-a nad a s s a ul  a u sau pem
gins to show signs of pregnancy, which include
 enlargement and engorgement of the mammary tract,
Discussing Labor with the Client--Key Points
 abdominal distention, and
A pet can maintain the first stage of labor indefinitely.
+
 behavior changes (late pregnancy); nesting.
Once early signs of labor are displayed, new breeders
 a   ad an    
signs of nesting until the animals are borm. It is impor-
As the female canine prepares to enter labor, her proges-
tant for the client to understand that most times even
terone (the hormone of pregnancy) begins to decrease
 24-48 hours prior to the initiation of labor. When this oc-
the most devoted animal wants to be alone during
 labor. Suggest that the clients make the pet comfort-
so t oe dop lm aad oq sa an sn
able in her nest and check on her occasionally (i.e.,
prior to the initiation of labor. If the owner takes the dog's
every 30-60 minutes).
temperature at the same time every day and notices a .5° de-
Have the clients monitor for the first contraction,
crease in temperature, it suggests labor may start within
which will signal the second stage of labor. Once this
2448 hours.
 In the dog, there are two phases of labor. The first phase
occurs the pet should be monitored as follows:
of labor can be seen as early as a day or two before full labor.
● Females that are having their first litter should have
Common physical symptoms of this phase are
their first pup within 4 hours.
Females that have had litters before should have a
excitement,
kitten or pup within 2 hours.
+
 nest building,
Then, from there the female should have one new-
anxiety,
bom every 2 hours on average. Females may have
decreased appetite,
two offspring initially and then wait 2-3 hours for
vomiting, and
another. But on average one should come every 2
restlessness.
hours.
sad auou au u sao Aa pasn aie suis as
 Finally, and most importantly, let the mother handle
in the animal's body. This phase can last for a very long
the newborns.
time,and the animal can prolong this period indefinitely if
shefeels nervous or unsure of her environment.
 Many owners want to help the newborms by break-
The second phase of labor starts with the first abdominal
ing the placenta and handling the newbom animal
 contraction. Once this phase begins, the animal is in full
for the mother.
labor and there is no way to stop this process. Once abdom-
Unless there is some problem with the mother
inal pushing begins,
 cleaning the newborn and breaking the placenta
themselves, allow nature to take its course. This
●if it is the patient's first litter, she should produce a first
allows
puppy or kitten within 4 hours and average one kitten or
-strengthening of the matermal bond,
puppy every other hour; and
-decreases chance of matermal rejection, and
 if the animal has already had its first litter, she should
—prevents bite or injury of owner from protective
produce her first offspring within 2 hours and average
mother.
 one kitten or puppy every other hour.
238
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Once the newbom is cleaned off and inspected by the
mother, the neonate should be allowed to nurse. The female's
first milk is a thicker, waxy secretion called colostrum. It
contains matermal antibodies to help the animal's resistance
Heat lamp
to disease in the first 5 weeks of life. The mother should be
current on vaccinations and have lived in her whelping envi-
ronment for the last trimester of her pregnancy to make sure
she has adequate immunity in her colostrum.
Owners should be encouraged to contact the medical
药
90
-   p a   o 
cerns during this process.
Neonate Care
Proper neonatal care and environment are essential for the
 proper health and growth of the pets. The female should be
exposed to the whelping area a few days to a few weeks prior
to labor. This allows the pet to get comfortable and relaxed
Figure 18.3.A
 An illustration of an environmental setup for a
in her whelping environment and, thus, be less likely to try
neonate. Their area should be kept at a constant temperature range
from 90 to 95° Fahrenheit.
to move the newborms after birth. The area should be clean
and free from electrical outlets, hard surfaces where new-
borms can be crushed, or plants. If the area is portable and
light, it makes it easy to clean and dry every few days. A
●By 21-28 days, they should be more active and possibly
 good example is a child's new plastic play pool, which can
ready to start another diet, such as milk replacer or soft
then be disposed of after 6-8 weeks of use.
canned puppy food. Start any dietary supplement at this
Newborn puppies and kittens have very little fat reserves 
time slowly, because it can change the stool.
to help them maintain normal body temperature. Their area
 By day 35-42, pups or kittens should begin weaning onto
should be kept at a constant temperature range from 90-959
dry or canned food and are ready for their first vaccines
Fahrenheit (see Figure 18.3). A heat lamp above the whelp-
and check of the stool for parasites.
ing area is highly recommended. This will allow the center
 of the area to be slightly warmer than the outer region; if the
newborms are too warm they can lie on the outer area to be
Signs of Neonate Problems
cooler. If a safe heat lamp is not available, warm water blan-
 Newborms will not nurse or cannot suckle.
kets or warm water bottles (filled with warm bath water) un-
● Newborns try to nurse but do not seem to get
dermeath the blankets can help maintain environmental tem-
enough nutrition. They cry excessively.
perature. Although more labor intensive, these systems are
 Newborns do not gain weight daily or do not dou-
safer than heating pads. Newborns are unable to move cway
ble weight by day 10.
from an uncomfortable heat source and a heating pad can
●Newborns are sleeping on top of each other, shiv-
cause pain and severe burns to the skin.
ering and moving very slowly.
New pups and kittens should eat 5-8 times per day, sleep,
 Newborms have a liquid diarrhea.
and have normal stool and urine. Newborms in a comfortable
 Milk keeps appearing at nostrils while newborm is
environment should sleep on their sides without signs of
suckling, and the newbom is not growing well or
shivering or piling on each other for warmth. They all should
acting right.
be nursing contently without too much crying. It is recom-
mended that each animal be weighed and identified with a
marker (i.e., a spot of colored nail polish works well). This
Wellness for Pregnant Animals
will allow the client to keep track of the daily weight of the
newborms. Basic weight guidelines for the neonate are as
Creating a preventative wellness plan for a pregnant animal
follows:
that outlines recommendations for monitoring and care can
-on aissod as uo aun o anosan ann ue aa
●Newborms should gain weight every day or at least main-
 ommendations for a wellness program are discussed next.
tain weight.
They should double their birth weight in the first 10 days
Prebreeding
and then double that weight again by day 20.
 All perspective breeding animals should have a prebreeding
By day 10-14, the pets? eyes should be opening up and
exam.
they should be more mobile.
The exam should evaluate the pet for chronic or low-
Chapter 18: Reproduction
239
 m  sa a     
Pregnancy Interval
 pregnant and maintain pregnancy. Depending on the breed-
Medications
ing situation, this may require full blood work to evaluate
 Specific medications should be avoided in the pregnant ani-
body and organ function and to test for infectious diseases.
mal. Some medications (i.e., steroids) can lead to early abor-
 In canines that are used primarily for breeding, a blood
  n sa    s s 
 a  sis as e an n rsn
nates. All medications (prescribed and over the counter)
Brucellosis is a sexually transmitted disease producing in-
should be discussed with the veterinarian.
fertility in the male and abortion and fetal death in the fe-
male. Furthermore, felines should be tested for feline
Physical Examination
leukemia and feline immunodeficiency virus prior to breed-
The schedule for examinations may vary from doctor to doc-
 ing to prevent spread of the diseases to the newborn kittens.
tor, but in general the following schedule is suggested.
The exam should identify any congenital disease that
may potentially discourage the owner from breeding the pet.
● Day 21-24: Ultrasound detection of pregnancy. Al-
Some examples of concerm regarding congenital disease are
though not always a required exam, an ultrasound exam
can pick up early fetal heart beats in puppies and kittens.
hip dysplasia (see Chapter 8),
This exam is recommended for animals that have had a
luxating patella (see Chapter 8),
previous problem with conception.
a propensity for demodectic mange (see Chapter 19),
·Day 25-30: A thorough physical exam. An exam can
 history of cryptorchid males in the family line, and
evaluate the mother for any early signs of disease and fur-
+1
 pets with jaw length abnormalities.
ther help detect a dilated enlarged uterus.
Day 55: X-rays of the abdomen. At this time, an x-ray
During the exam all vaccines should be updated.
is safe for the mother and may be used to determine fetal
Vaccines may have a small chance of affecting the develop.
size and number. Generally, two views of the abdomen
ing embryo or producing a systemic reaction; vaccinations
are recormmended to get a close estimate of the number
  ad an ui pua a u a
of newborms expected, as well as to get an estimation of
female patients should be brought up to date on vaccines for
fetus size (see Figure 18.4). This is also an excellent time
all regional infectious diseases to help promote a strong im-
     o s n   0
munity for their newborns.
expect and what should be monitored with the client.
Figure 18.4. An x-ray image of the abdomen of a pregnant ca-
nine. At day 55, the fetal skeletons can be imaged, a number of
 pups can be estimated, and the fetuses can be evaluated for size in
relation to pelvic canal width to indicate if there may a dystocia.
240
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
pregnancy problems focus on the diagnosis of infertility in
the pet. Because almost any chronic disease can produce re-
productive failure, a systemic approach in the evaluation of
all the patient's systems must be taken by the veterinarian.
Many veterinarians will have specific, thorough question-
a un a an  d   s
This chapter will not focus on reproductive failure and preg-
nancy issues
 Primary reproductive disease refers to problems within
the urogenital system. These diseases can occur secondary
to pregnancy, the age of the animal, and if the animal re-
mains intact in its later life. The following questions aid in
obtaining a thorough history in patients with reproductive
disease.
What is the age of the animal? Reproductive disease
Figure 18.5.
 Image of a complete cleft palate, a congenital
tends to affect middle-aged to older animals. However,
 opening from the roof of the mouth and the nasal cavity.
there are some forms of vaginitis or vulvitis that can be
seen in young pets.
 Is the pet spayed or neutered, and if so when was this
done? Late-spayed and neutered animals can still have
Newborn Interval
significant tumors and disease of the reproductive tract.
Medications
Some owners may not know if the animal has been
 s   n s  a 
 spayed or neutered (i.e., animals are adoptions or strays).
of drug buildup in the milk and affect the newborm animals.
When was the last heat cycle in the female dog?
While the female is lactating, all medications should be dis-
Chronic infections or full-blown infections of the uterus
cussed with the veterinarian.
  n  s l  a  (a)
cycle. Furthermore, lack of a heat cycle can suggest hor-
Physical Examination
monal imbalance, such as thyroid disease, liver disease,
and kidney disease.
● Day 1—After pregnancy: The mom and newboms
 Is the pet straining to urinate or dripping urine? This
should all be examined and their health status should be
on A  o () p asnd o uis  a 
checked. Each neonate should be examined for congeni-
disease.
tal abnormalities, such as cleft palate, limb abnormali-
 Is the pet dripping blood from its penis or vagina?
ties, etc. (see Figure 18.5). Also, all pups should be
Male dogs with prostate disease, pets with urinary ob-
weighed and identified so that the clients can continue to
struction, or patients with a vaginal or a bladder tumor
monitor weight in the next 10 days.
can also drip blood.
● Day 3-4: Tails and dewclaws should be removed from
When, if ever, was your pet last bred? Animals who
newborm pups if needed.
● Day 10: All newborns should be rechecked to evaluate
ted disease: that is, brucellosis (canine), transitional
their weight, which should be a 100% increase above the
venereal tumor (TVT), feline immunodeficiency virus,
birth weight. Any problems or concerns about mother and
 or feline leukemia virus.
newbom animals should be discussed with the client.
 Is the animal still showing signs of heat or acting like
● Day 20: Recheck all newborms and make sure there is a
they are constantly in heat? This can suggest ovarian or
100% increase in weight from day 10. Any problems or
uterine disease, infection, or cancer.
concems should be discussed with the client about
 Is the animal having a progressive vaginal discharge?
mother and newbom animals.
Any vaginal discharge in an intact or spayed female is ab-
● Day 42: Puppy or kitten fecal evaluations and first
normal and should be discussed with the veterinarian.
vaccines.
What is the reproductive history of the pet? Finding
 Out a full history of breeding and pregnancy is important
Obtaining a Medical History for Reproductive
to determine if the pet has had past problems becoming
Disease
 pregnant or if it has had a history of abortion or dystocia.
 Does the vulva show a progressive swelling or mass?
Reproductive problerms usually fall into two categories: re-
 Small to large vegetative or round masses can suggest a
s Ared pue suanqond Aouuad pue auney aanpond
tumor, polyp, or overproduction of the normal tissue of
ease of the reproductive system. Reproductive disease and
the vagina.
Chapter 18: Reproduction
241
 Is there any coughing, sneezing, diarrhea, vomiting,
Tabie 18.1.
 Triage concerns in the reproductive patient.
increased thirst (polyuria), or polydipsia (C/S/V/D/
PU/PD)? Other systemic signs may help you discrimi-
nate whether the reproductive concerms are a primary re-
Trouble Signs That Indicate
Systems
an Emergency Situation
productive disease or secondary to other systemic illness.
Furthermore, animals with pyometra (massive infection
Mentation
Nonresponsive/comatose
of the uterus) often show vomiting, anorexia and in-
Fever
Temp <99° (due to shock, DIC, coma)
creased thirst.
Temp >104° secondary to infection or
muscular tremors
Initial Assessment of Pets with Reproductive
Hydration 
 Dehydration >5-7%
Gum color
 Pink to pale pink (poor perfusion)
Disease
 Capillary refill time 
CRT >2-3 seconds
(CRT)
'uaed aun jo xas aun pue aseasip jo adi aun uo supuadaa
Heart rate/pulse
Rate: Heart rates <80 bpm (eclampsia) or
reproductive illness can show a variety of symptoms. It is
>200 bpm (early shock)
Pulse: Pulses can have normal to decreased
tients because some reproductive diseases (i.e., pyometra)
 quality dependent if the pet is in shock.
      
Muscular activity
Animal is having uncontrolled muscular
 tremors and spasms.
18.1). Key elements to observe in the initial assessment of
Vulvar/penile
 Evidence of purulent (pus), sanguineous
these syndromes are as follows.
discharge
(blood), or serosanguineous (serum and
blood) discharge
 Fever: Fever can suggest an infectious or metabolic dis-
ease affecting the reproductive or mammary system in
the female. Fever may also suggest inflammation, infec-
tion, or cancer of the prostate in the male.
● Muscle spasm/rigidity: Certain reproductive disorders
Chemistry
(1i.e., eclampsia, see below) can produce severe muscular
There is no clinical diagnostic assay for reproductive organs
spasms and rigidity in lactating female dogs. Some pa-
available. Unlike human medicine where assays have be-
 -     os   s
come available (i.e., PSA for prostate disease), the chem-
(see Figure 18.8 in the eclampsia section).
istry does not rule in or out reproductive disease. However,
Weakness/dehydration: This may suggest a systemic ill-
with eclampsia (see below), significant hypocalcemia (low
ness stemming from the reproductive system (i.e., py-
body calcium) can be observed.
ometra).
Discharge from the reproductive organs: Drainage or
Urinalysis
- u onoisud lou isans n aeos
Urinalysis helps to differentiate diseases of the reproductive
flammation, and cancer. Any obvious extermal discharge
organs with that of the lower urinary tract. Urine samples
should be collected by cotton swab or in a sterile col-
obtained by cystocentesis and catheter can help distinguish
 lection vial in case the sample is needed for clinical diag-
changes in the urine that are occurring in the bladder and
nostics.
 kidney versus through the urethra and reproductive organs.
 Swelling, heat, or pain from the mammary tract: This
 can suggest an infection (mastitis) or cancer of the mam-
Cytology
mary glands (see Figure 18.9 in the mastitis section).
Cytological evaluation of vulvar or penile discharge can aid
 in the diagnosis of reproductive disease.
Clinical Diagnostics of the Reproductive
Radiology
System
 Abdominal radiographs are evaluated for changes in the in-
The core of clinical diagnostics for reproductive disease is
termal reproductive organs or pregnancy. Furthermore, with
baseline blood work, urinalysis, cytology, radiology, and
concerms of possible mammary tumors, radiographic evalu-
 possibly ultrasonic examination. Although clinical outcomes
ation of the thorax (metastasis protocol; see Chapter 25)
may vary depending on medical diseases, a general over-
may be recommended to evaluate the lung fields for obvious
view of reproductive diagnostics follows.
metastatic tumors.
Complete Blood Count
Ultrasound
The complete blood count may be normal; however, with
Abdominal ultrasound is an excellent resource for evaluat-
concerms of infection (i.e., pyometra) there can be sharp
ing reproductive organs for pregnancy, infection, or cancer.
elevations in the white blood cell population secondary to
In specific cases, fine needle aspirates or biopsy can be
infection.
completed in conjunction with an ultrasound examination.
242
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
with pus and debris. On occasion in spayed females, infec-
tion of the remaining uterine stump can occur, causing signs
s   si s     
 pyometra infection.
Common Points in Medical History
A pyometra is a severe whole-body infection (sepsis) pro-
ducing moderately to severely ill patients that are depressed,
listless, anorexic, vomiting, and have increased thirst.
Symptoms can appear acutely.
Common Points on Initial Assessment
Affected animals can be severely ill, dehydrated, and de-
pressed. There is commonly vulvar swelling, with purulent
vaginal discharge that can have a severe fetid odor. Animals
can have significant fevers (>104.5° Fahrenheit). Further-
Figure I8.6. Image of a pyometra. This uterus is severely in-
more, the patient's abdomen may be distended and painful.
fected and filled with purulent (pus) debris. If not treated, the
infection may cause erosion of the uterine wall and spillage of
Complications
the infectious debris into the abdomen. This can set up a massive
 If not aggressively treated, pyometra can rupture through the
 infection of the abdomen (peritonitis) and a potential life-
 uterus, producing a massive peritonitis and potentially death.
threatening conditi on.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of pyometra is based on medical history,
physical signs, and the following possible changes in clini-
Diseases of the Reproductive System
cal diagnostics.
Although not all diseases are mentioned below, the common
reproductive diseases are discussed with the focus being to
● Complete blood count: In most cases, patients will have
understand and explain to the client what the diseases are,
a significant rise in white blood cells, suggesting a mas-
how they can present themselves, and what can be the short-
sive infection. If a blood smear is made (see Chapter 21),
and long-term concerms of each disease. Any discussion of
increased band neutrophils may be observed, suggesting
overall diagnostic and treatment protocols should be dis-
an acute massive infection.
cussed based upon the recommendations from the doctor
Cytology: Degenerate neutrophils and bacteria can be
and the medical team. The following information is a basis
 observed on cytology of the vaginal discharge.
to discuss and educate the client, but never a tool to diag-
 Radiographs: Abdominal radiographs can show a large dis-
nose a patient.
tended mass craniodorsal to the bladder (see Figure 18.7).
Pyometra
A pyometra is a severe overwhelming infection of the uterus
of a female intact dog. As a female pet goes in and out of
heat cycles over years, low-grade infections of the uterine
lining may occur (endometritis). Eventually, the uterus can
become overwhelmed with the infection and can fill with
purulent debris (pus), acting much like a human appendici-
tis (see Figure 18.6). The uterus may become so infected and
enlarged that it can rupture, causing a massive and life-
threatening infection of the abdomen, peritonitis.
Signalment
Pyometra is typically seen in both older intact female dogs
and cats, but it can occur in young animals (2-3 years of
age), as well.
Etiology
Pyometra is caused by chronic infection of the uterus that
Figure I8. 7. Radiographic image of a pyometra. Notice the
eventually produces a massive infection, filling the uterus
large soft-tissue density in the caudal abdomen.
Chapter 18: Reproduction
243
 Ultrasound: Abdominal ultrasound can reveal an en-
every cell in the body to control cellular activity, aid in mus-
larged or distended fluid-filled uterus suggestive of
cular contraction, help heart function, and aid nerve conduc-
infection.
tion, as well as other body functions. With the demands of
 a   o n s  n 
Treatment
cannot compensate, and the muscular, cardiac, and neuro-
The goal of treatment is to resolve the uterine infection or to
logic systems are severely affected.
surgically remove the infected uterus while supporting the
 pet with medications and fluids for the massive bacterial in-
Signaiment
fection. With severe pyometra, surgery is usually recom-
The disease is more common in small breed dogs and is
mended due to the concerm of uterine perforation and peri-
more predominant in the animal's pregnancy with its first
tonitis.
litter. The disease is rare in cats.
Prevenfion
Etiology
 A complete ovariohysterectomy at a young age helps prevent
Eclampsia is caused by an increased demand on body cal.
pyometra.
cium for lactation. Large litter size, improper diet, and im-
     s  
pet's body to be unable to keep up with its calcium needs.
Discussing Pyometra with the Client
A pyometra is an overwhelming infection of the
Common Points in Medical History
uterus whereby the uterus fills with purulent debris
Symptoms come on acutely and the owners will report the
and pus.
following:
● Much like human appendicitis, the chronically in-
fected uterus can rupture and can spill the infection
●Restlessness
 into the abdomen, producing a life-threatening in-
+
Nervousness
fection of the abdomen (peritonitis).
Whining
+
 Pyometra is common in older intact female pets.
Walking stiffly
The hormone interactions that are produced in the
normal heat cycle can set up a chronic reoccurring
Common Points in Initial Assessment
infection in the uterus. As the pet ages, the infec-
Pets can be severely affected and can present with the fol-
 tion can become overwhelming and produce a py-
lowing signs:
ometra.
 Diagnosis of a pyometra can be focused on routine
Muscular tremors
blood work, cytology of vaginal discharge, and ab-
Walking stiffly (see Figure 18.8)
dominal imaging.
Seizure-like activity
 With severe bacterial infection and concern of uter-
 Rapid respiratory rates
 ine rupture, treatment may be focused on fluid sup-
 Convulsions
port, medication, and surgical removal of the in-
●High body temperature (secondary to muscular spasms)
fected uterus.
●Although similar to a spay surgery, pyometra sur-
Complications
 gery removes a much larger infected uterus and
Eclampsia can produce a life-threatening symdrome of mus-
ovaries from the abdomen. The surgery is much
cle spasms, irregular heart rhythms, and high body temper.
 longer and more complicated, and the uterus must
atures if not diagnosed and treated.
be handled very carefully so as not to produce a
rupture.
Diagnosis
If the pyometra is severe and the pet ruptures the
 The diagnosis is based on history, physical signs, and evidence
uterus, the resulting infection can make the pet
 of a low blood calcium level in the blood chermistry panel.
very ill and life threatened.
The best way to prevent pyometra is to spay the fe-
Treatment
male pet while young.
 Pets can be severely affected and often require hospitaliza
tion, intravenous fluids, and calcium supplementation. The
newborms are generally weaned and placed on milk replacer
Eclampsia
because of the concern of continued hypocalcemia.
 Eclampsia, or postparturient hypocalcemia, is a serious
condition affecting the canine shortly after pregnancy. When
Prevention
the female begins to produce milk (lactation), the body's
There is no way to predict if a female pet will become
stores of calcium drop quickly. Calcium is needed by almost
eclamptic. However, small pets with larger litters should be
244
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
monitored carefully. Supplementation with calcium after
birth in early lactation can help blood calcium levels. How-
ever, it may be recommended that the patient be spayed if se-
vere eclamptic episodes occur.
Mastitis
Mastitis is the inflammation or infection of the mammary
chain in dogs and cats. Mastitis is caused by infectious bac-
teria entering the gland ascending from the teat, a topical in-
jury to the mammary chain, or from bloodbome infections
of the body.
Signalment
 Infections are typically associated with female dogs and cats
 after birth when animals are lactating.
Etiology
 The cause of mastitis is a bacterial infection or a general in-
flammation of the mammary gland. If the infection is severe
enough, it can cause a life-threatening whole-body infection
(sepsis).
Figure 18.8.
 Image of a female dog with eclampsia. Notice the
rigid limbs and sawhorse position evident. This patient is unable
Common Points in Medical History
to have normal muscle contraction and is rigid and stiff.
Affected animals can act sore and sensitive to touch or lift-
ing from the ventral abdomen. Pets may be anorexic, de-
 pressed, and lethargic because of infection. Owners may re-
port that the puppies or kittens are not nursing well and are
constantly hungry.
Common Observations in Initial Assessment
Discussing Eclampsia with the Client
 These patients present with mammary glands of variable size
Eclampsia is a metabolic disease of the lactating
and swelling and firmness affecting one gland to the entire
female generally in the first 2 weeks after preg-
chain or both chains. There can be evidence of bloody, puru-
nancy.
 sass Ae aun wo aeosp pay o (snd) ua
 The disease is caused by the increasing demand of
chains can be painful or hot to the touch. Pets may also have
calcium for the milk.
mild to moderate fevers (see Figure 18.9).
 Calcium is an element needed by the body for mus-
cular contraction, heart movement, electrical con-
duction of nerves and many other normal body
functions.
With excessively low calcium levels, the body can-
not maintain normal function and pets become se-
verely stiff, can have muscle spasms and seizures,
and have elevated body temperature secondary to
prolonged muscular activity.
 Diagnostic blood work does indicate low blood cal-
cium levels and aids in the diagnosis of eclampsia.
 If not diagnosed and aggressively treated, affected
animals can become life threatened, shocky, and die.
 If eclampsia is severe, the newborns may need to
 be weaned to prevent this episode from occurring
again in this lactation.
 Females with larger litters, especially small pets,
should be carefully monitored and potentially sup-
plemented with calcium in early lactation.
Figure 18.9. Image of hot, swollen, painful mammary glands
secondary to mastitis
Chapter 18: Reproduction
245
Complications
 The infection is controlled by placing the patient on an-
Mastitis can greatly affect milk production and normal nu-
tibiotics and hot packing the mammary gland once to twice
trition, health, and weight gain in the newborm if not diag.
a day. With more severe sepsis, the patient may need to be
 nosed and treated. Severe mastitis can produce abcessation
admitted to the hospital for fluid support, intravenous antibi-
of the mammary gland, loss of a gland or mammary chain,
 otics, and monitoring.
and possible whole-body infection (sepsis).
Prevention
Diagnosis
There is no known way to prevent mastitis. Careful monitor-
Diagnosis of mastitis is based upon history, physical exami-
ing of the female pet and the mammary chain, and prevent-
 nation, elevations in the white blood cell count suggestive of
ing injury, can help detect and treat mastitis before it be-
infection, and cytology of the milk.
comes a severe sepsis.
Treatment
Canine/Feline Mammary Tumors
Treatment can vary depending on one gland or multiple
 Mammary tumors are benign or malignant growths of the
glands being affected. The goal of treatment is to stop milk
-a gu uuda nqn au pue anssn A
production in the affected glands while controlling and elim-
 nocarcinomas of the marmmary chain can be fast growing,
inating the infection.
metastasize to the body rapidly, and are life threatening.
 Isolating the infected mammary glands or chain is neces-
sary to prevent the newborms' access to the affected glands.
Signaiment
In many cases the pet may need to have the affected mam-
Mammary tumors are generally observed in intact female
mary glands wrapped (i.e., with a T-shirt) to prevent the
pets more than 5 years of age. However, less commonly,
newborms from nursing on the infected gland. With severe
 mammary tumors have been reported in spayed females and
infection, the pups or kittens may have to be weaned early
male pets.
and placed on milk replacer. The lack of nursing will stop
lactation in those chains.
Etiology
 The causes of mammary masses are unknown but generally
linked to chronic stimulation of the mammary chain associ-
Discussing Mastitis with the Client
ated with the pet's heat cycle. Masses can be benign or ma-
Mastitis is a localized infection of one mammary
lignant. Malignant mammary tumors do metastasize rap-
gland, one mammary chain, or both chains.
idly, typically going into the local lymph nodes and then into
 The disease is caused by bacteria invading the lo-
the lung fields, although mammary tumors can also metas-
calized gland, trauma to the mammary chain, or
tasize to other tissue (liver, spleen, kidneys, etc.).
from a whole-body infection.
● The infection sours and infects the milk, so that
Common Points in Medical History
newborms will not suckle from the infected glands.
Owners will usually present the pet with a concerm of a focal
The newborms will try to suckle and not be able to
swelling on the chest or abdomen. Masses can range from
Aiguny ioe pue Aio o usaq uonunu aenbape 1as
pea-sized to a large grapefruit. The tumor can be producing
 and eventually loose weight and energy.
uo mued aq Aeu pue aeuosip (snd) yuannd/poog e
 Affected pets can be depressed lethargic, and
palpation. In more severely affected animals, the owner may
anorexic. They may be very sensitive to touch on
discuss concerms of weight loss, decreased energy, and
 the abdomen. The glands can also be very painful,
cough.
swollen, and hot to the touch.
 Diagnosis of mastitis is based on history, physical
Common Observations in Initial Assessment
exam, and changes in the milk and blood that can
Pets will present with a focal mass in the mammary chain.
suggest infection.
Other symptoms can be
 Treatment is focused on isolating the infected
gland from the newborms and treating the infection.
weight loss,
In severe cases, the newborns may need to be
 poor body mass,
weaned and placed on milk replacer.
 chronic cough, and
 If not diagnosed, newboms can become weak,
●enlarged lymph nodes.
 loose body mass, and can die. The female can have
severe infection and abcessation of the mammary
Complications
 chain and can have a severe life-threatening bacte-
 If not diagnosed, malignant mammary tumors can metasta-
rial infection.
size to the lungs and chest and produce a life-threatening
cancer.
246
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Diagnosis
Treatment
Diagnosis is based on physical presence of the tumor, clini-
The presence of a mammary mass warrants surgical removal
 cal diagnostics, fine-needle aspirate or surgical biopsy of the
and biopsy. A mastectomy is a removal of a section of the
mass. Some possible recommended diagnostics follow.
mammary chain. The surgical procedure requires that the
area of affected mammary chain, the teats overlying the
● Complete blood count/chemistry: Although blood work
gland, and a large area around the affected tissue is taken.
is beneficial to evaluate the pet for surgical risk, underly-
This may remove a large area of tissue overlaying the ab-
ing disease, or infection, there is no blood test available
 domen. Once removed the subcutaneous layer and skin are
for the detection of mammary cancer.
closed. If there is a large area of tissue removed, a plastic
Radiographs--metastasis screen: Radiographic evalu-
drain may be placed within the incision to allow the surgical
ation of the chest for obvious tumors within the lung
site to drain debris as the body heals (see Figure 18.10).
  a   s i 
Chemotherapy or radiation therapy may be available de-
metastasis (see Chapter 25). If tumor masses are observ-
 pending on the type of tumor and its location.
able, systemic cancer is already evident, and the patient
is a significant anesthetic risk.
Prevention
a aun Ads m si s Ar quand o Am isaq a
Fine-Needle Aspirate versus Surgical Biopsy
male patient before its first heat cycle (less than 6 months of
 Fine-needle aspirate of the mass can suggest benign versus
a isi an aaa ads sad en us uaaa s il (ae
malignant tissue. However, fine-needle aspirates sample
have eight times less chance of developing mammary tumors
only hundreds of cells out of millions. If an area of the mass
than an intact fermale. Females spayed before 2 years of age
aspirated does not show a malignant region, this could pro-
have four times less change of developing mammary tumors.
duce a false-negative test.
The presence of a mammary tumor can warrant the rec-
Prostate Disease
The prostate is a secondary sex organ located behind the
important for the mass to be evaluated and its margins ex-
bladder that secretes fluid into the ejaculate for nutrition and
amined. If the mass is malignant, the mass should be com-
protection of the sperm. In males with exposure to chronic
pletely removed, along with one-quarter inch of normal tis-
testosterone, the prostate can enlarge, become infected, or
sue around it. Although this does reduce the chance of
     o a sn
regrowth, it does not eliminate the possibility, and the region
Figure 18.11).
should be continued to be monitored.
Signalment
 Enlargement of the prostate is seen in male dogs between 1l
Discussing Mammary Tumors with the Client
and 16 years of age, with mean age of 7-1l years. It occurs
Mammary tumors are a concern in intact older fe-
 only in the male and seems to occur more commonly in
male patients.
 Doberman pinschers.
 Although masses can be benign, there is a high per-
 s      
Etiology
the lungs and the body
There are many causes of prostatic enlargement in dogs and
 Once detected, the patient should be evaluated with
cats. Some causes can be as follows.
clinical blood work and urinalysis to evaluate the
pet for other infectious, metabolic and organ dis-
● Infections: Bacterial infections and abcessation can
ease, as well as evaluating the pet for anesthetic
 Occur as bacteria ascend the urethra from the penis or de-
risk.
scend from a urinary tract infection. Once seated, a pain-
● The veterinarian may also recommend chest radi-
ful systemic infection can occur. Chronic fungal or gran-
 ographs to evaluate the chest for obvious metasta-
ulomatous prostatis is rare.
 tic masses to the lungs. If lung masses are visibly
● Cancer: Male dogs can have prostatic adenocarcinoma
present, it can make the prognosis of survival poor
and make the patient a poor anesthetic risk.
nodes, lungs, and skeleton.
 Once surgically removed, the masses should be
 Benign enlargement: The prostate will enlarge due to
 s an aa on os n un s
chronic stimulation of testosterone.
 determine if the surgical margins are clean of any
malignant tissue. Although a clean margin of a
Common Points on Medical History
malignant tumor carries a better prognosis, it does
 Patients present with a concern of inappropriate urination,
 not eliminate the possibility of tumor regrowth or
pain while urinating, the presence of blood or pus dripping
metastasis.
from the penis, and possibly pain while rising or going up or
down stairs.
Chapter 18: Reproduction
247
Figure 18.10.
 Images of a surgical mastectomy. Note how large
an incision is needed to remove these two smaller nodules. With
this procedure, the masses, the skin, the teats, and large amounts
 of tissue are removed and submitted for biopsy.
Common Observafions in Inifial Assessmenf
Clinical signs of prostatic disease can be
frank blood or purulent debris (pus) from the penis,
fever,
depression, and
Bladder
having trouble defecating.
Complicafions
If not diagnosed and treated, infectious or benign enlarge-
ment produce continued signs, discomfort, and potential
persistent infection. If prostatic adenocarcinoma is present,
 the disease can metastasize to lymph nodes and other organ
systems. This progression may still occur with treatment.
Figure 18.11. Image of an enlarged prostate (lightly shaded
Diagnosis
arrows) caudal to the bladder (white arrows).
Diagnosis of prostatic disease can be made through the fol-
 lowing possible diagnostics.
● Urinalysis: Urinalysis can suggest blood, protein, and
Rectal palpation: Rectal palpation to check for prostate
cells that may support a prostatic disease.
size and sensitivity can aid in the diagnosis of prostatic
 Radiographs: Caudal abdominal radiographs can suggest
disease.
enlargement of the prostate caudal dorsal to the bladder.
 Blood work: Changes in routine blood work can suggest
Radiographic prostatic enlargement cannot differentiate
changes in the prostate. Increases in the white blood cell
between infection, inflammation, or cancer of the prostate.
population can indicate whole-body infection or inflam-
 Ultrasound: Abdominal ultrasound can help evaluate
mation stemming from prostatic disease. There is no PSA
prostatic size and shape and ultrasonic fine-needle aspi-
testing available for animals.
rates can be taken to determine the disease process.
248
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Treatment
 Treatment is based on the type of disease evident.
Discussing Prostate Disease with the Client
Disease of the prostate is common in middle-aged
Neutering: Chronic testosterone stimulation can produce
to older adult male dogs.
inflammation and irritation of the prostate. By removing
●Prostatic disease can be infectious, cancerous, or
the testicles and decreasing testosterone levels, prostatic
secondary to chronic testosterone stimulation.
 Physical symptoms of disease are inappropriate
swelling can decrease. This can be curative for benign
prostatic enlargement.
urination, dripping blood/pus, pain or discomfort
 Medications: Antibiotics can help in reducing infected
while urinating, and occasionally pain getting up
 enlarged prostates.
and down.
 The veterinarian may recommend blood work, uri-
 Surgery: With adenocarcinoma of the prostate, surgical
excision is possible.
nalysis, radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound
 exam to evaluate the prostate for changes sugges-
tive of disease.
Prevention
The likelihood of prostatic disease can be decreased by neu-
●Depending on the type of disease, prostate prob-
lems can usually be controlled with neutering the
tering young male pets.
male pet and medication. Occasionally with prosta-
tic cancer more in-depth procedures may need to
be recommended.
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
 Please try the cases for Section 2(Anatormy and Physiology-
The Science behind the Diseases) to help reinforce the infor-
mation presented here.
Chapter 19
Integument
Introduction
seen a number of veterinarians and been placed on many
treatments, which can include injectable and oral medica-
This chapter will focus on skin diseases, with an emphasis
tions, food trials, and topical treatments. When encountering
on diagnostic approaches, an overview of treatment options,
a new patient with chronic skin problems, it is essential to
 and client education. The anatomy and physiology of the 
get a full and detailed history. Some medical teams have de-
skin will be discussed in the disease section of this chapter
veloped a dermatologic questionnaire that can be given to
and will be limited to changes in the skin architecture.
clients before the appointment time and filled out at home.
Because skin is one of the first organ systems affected in
These questionnaires help start the diagnostic process.
 many systemic diseases, the medical team must pay close at-
 These questions are presented next.
tention to medical history, initial assessment, and clinical di-
agnostics to help the veterinarian determine if there is a pri-
When Did the First Signs Occur?
mary or secondary disease state occurring. Some examples
Documenting when signs first occurred in the patient's life
of diseases that can affect the skin but that are not primary
can give the veterinarian an understanding of how chronic
skin diseases are
this problem is.
nutritional disease/deficiency,
What Other Treatment Has the Pet Had?
chronic infectious disease,
sad l u  mn pa a Pnos ro a
intestinal parasitism,
medication or records that relate to past treatments.
kidney disease,
Furthermore, the client should be questioned about how ef-
liver disease,
fective each treatment was in controlling or eliminating the
hormonal disease, and
physical symptoms.
cancer.
Does Your Pet Have a Reoccurrence of Skin Problems
 Some of these skin diseases (i.e., ringworm and sarcoptic
Seasonally?
mange) can be zoonotic, thus causing infection in humans.
Seasonal skin changes can suggest an allergenic problem
Although the diseases produced are usually not serious, they
when the grass and weed pollens may be at highest levels in
can cause discomfort, itching, and irritation. These infec-
the environment.
an no puny aun jo saods an uaum dn payond aq uo sun
skin mite come in contact with the skin. Furthermore, some
Does the Pet Stay Mainly Inside or Outside?
animals with ringworm can be chronic carriers and may not
'los pue uonaaa on ansodxa ao aaeu siad apisino
 Inside animals have more exposure to detergents and topical
flaking of the skin, or itchy (pruritic) skin should also be 
cleaners on floors, carpets, furmiture, and to house dust
treated as a potential suspect. If a zoonotic disease is sus-
mites. Changes in these environments could suggest the be-
pected, gloves should be worm when handling the pet, and
 ginning of a topical allergy or new sensitivity (i.e., rug
the team member should wash well after contact. Most im-
shampoos, new grass/trees, lawn treatments, etc.).
portantly. when discussing the potential diseases with the
owners,make them aware of the zoonotic concerns, and
Does Your Pet Have Problems with Fleas and Ticks?
document this discussion in the chart.
Chronic tick or flea infestation and other ectoparasites can
 produce skin problems and irritations.
Obtaining a History in Patients with Skin
Have There Been Changes in Topical Medications Used
Disease
on Your Pet?
A great deal of the diagnosis depends on a strong history
Changes in hair and coat products (i.e., shampoos, condi-
gained through physical examination and appropriate diag-
tioners, topical medications, topical oils, etc.) can produce
nostic testing. With chronic skin disease, patients may have
dry skin, irritation, and itchiness (pruritus).
249
250
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
What Diet Has Your Pet Been on and For How Long?
Food allergies can stem from long-term dietary exposure.
Getting a history of what types of diets and for how long the
animal has been on them can help the veterinarian determine
if food sensitivity may be present.
Is Your Pet on Any Dietary Supplements?
saueuo aonpoid ueo suauaddns Aeap jo sad uea
in the skin and other body systems.
Has Your Pet Shown Any Signs of Systemic Disease?
Coughing, sneezing, vomiting, diarrhea, increased thirst,
and increased urination can suggest other systemic and hor-
monal diseases that may secondarily affect the integument.
Figure I19.1.  Image of a patient affected with an erythema of the
Has There Been a History of Weight Change or Chronic
skin around the eye. Although the redness cannot be shown, the
Obesity?
moist, irritated skin around the eye should be noted.
History of significant weight loss (more than 5%) in a short
period could suggest other systemic or hormonal disease.
Further, chronic obesity may suggest other hormonal dis-
eases (i.e., canine hypothyroidism)
Are There Any Other Animals in the Household?
Are the other animals present in the household healthy?
 d n isns  ss res m siad r
infectious or parasitic disease.
Physical Changes in the Hair Coat Noticeable
on Initial Assessment
The key to understanding and explaining dermatologic con-
ditions is that the same physical symptoms can be evident in
many different types of skin disease. Common symptoms
 are presented here.
Figure 19.2.
. Image of a large hot spot-like lesion on the dorsal
● Erythema: Redness of the skin secondary to inflamma-
 neck. This was created by severe pruritus secondary to allergies.
tion, infection, or allergy. The redness can be localized or
generalized, depending on the condition (see Figure 19.1).
Pruritus: Pruritus is generalized itchiness secondary to
infection, allergy, topical irritation, and inflammation.
 Hyperpigmentation: With chronic pruritus, hormonal
Pruritus can be localized to a specific region (i.e., head
conditions, and skin damage, the affected region can start
and ears) or generalized all over the body. Severe pruritus
having increased amounts of pigment in response to the
can make the animal scratch so severely that the patient
chronic irritation (see Figure 19.6).
can darmage the hair coat and skin (see Figure 19.2).
 Seborrhea: Seborrhea is characterized by a defect in ker-
Alopecia: Hair loss can be a primary concerm from hor-
atinization (skin formation) with increased scaling with or
 monal and nutritional disease or secondary to pruritus
without excessive greasiness of the skin and coat and
(see Figure 19.3).
often secondary inflammation. There are two types of se-
● Pustules: Pustules can occur due to bacterial, parasitic,
borrhea: dry (seborrhea sicca) and oily (seborrhea
 m   o  i  l o
oleosa). In most animals, seborrhea is not a disease but a
mediated skin conditions (see Figure 19.4).
symptom of many possible diseases. Common diseases
● Excoriation: Excoriations occur when the skin is dam-
 that cause seborrhea are allergies, infection, parasites, nu-
aged into its deeper layers, producing a red, inflamed,
tritional imbalances, or hormonal disease. Topical antise-
moist lesion. Excoriation is secondary to pruritus and
borrheic products can be keratolytic (help remove scales)
secondary to allergy, infection, or topical irritation (see
Figure 19.5).
decrease scale and skin oil production) (see Figure 19.7).
Chapter 19: Integument
251
(a)
(b)
Figure I9.3. Image of focal alopecia on the dorsum of a paw (a) and over the dorsal neck (b)
Figure 19.4. Image of pustules within the inguinal region due to
Figure I9.6. Image of hyperpigmentation of the skin in the in-
bacterial infection.
 guinal area secondary to chronic irritation.
When performing an initial assessment, the entire hair
coat of the animal should be evaluated for change. It is im-
 portant to assess where the changes in the hair coat are oc-
curring most often.
The underarms of the forearm (axilla) and inguinal re-
gion should be evaluated because they are areas of wear and
can show redness (erythema), itchiness (pruritus), and hair 
loss (alopecia) before there are changes to the entire hair
coat. Furthermore, the region where the hair coat meets the
skin margins (mucocutaneous junctions) should be evalu-
ated. Examples of mucocutaneous junctions are the nail bed.
lips, around the eye, the nasal planum, and areas around the
genitals. These areas may be the first to see ulcers or irrita-
tions from immune-mediated disease, sunbum, topical skin
irritants, and other sources.
Emergency concerms are rare when dealing with skin
Figure 19.5. Image of ulceration and excoriation of the skin
disease; even severely affected animals are usually stable.
with a secondary maggot infestation.
If there are concermns of stability based on the team mem-
252
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Figure I9. 7.  Image of oily seborrhea affecting the forelimb of a patient (a). Image of dry seborrhea affecting the skin and coat of an-
 other patient (b).
ber's triage assessment (see Chapter 6), the medical team
Procedure—Performing a Skin Scraping
should be notified and the pet evaluated further for other
conditions.
1. For a skin scraping you will need a pair of clippers with a
#10 blade, a dulled scalpel blade (#10 or #11, whichever
you are more comfortable with), mineral oil, and several
Diagnostics for Skin Problems
microscope slides and coverslips (see Figure 19.8a).
Although general blood work (i.e., chemistry and thyroid
levels) is important in evaluating skin conditions, there are
specific dermatologic diagnostic tests that help the medical
(a)
the in-hospital clinical diagnostics is discussed next.
Skin Scrapings
A skin scraping should be performed on all pruritic animals.
Animals presenting with weeping or moist lesions, crusts,
excoriation, erythematous or alopecic areas, papules or pus
tules should also have skin scraping performed. A properly
performed skin scraping may aid in the diagnosis of Demo-
dectic and Sarcoptic mange, and less commonly, identify
cheyletiella mites (see below). Bacteria, yeast, and various
inflammatory cells may also be present on a skin scrape but
are best diagnosed and evaluated by skin cytology methods.
Skin scrapes should be repeated any time there is develop-
ment of new lesions, lesions that do not resolve with treat-
Figure19.8fa)
Chapter 19: Integument
253
2. Place a drop of mineral oil on the slide (see Figure
(d)
19.8b).
(b)
Figure 19.8(d).
Figure 19.8(b).
5. Transfer the material from the scalpel blade to the min-
eral oil on the prepared slide. Pinching the skin through-
 out the scraping process will help express mites from the
hair follicles (see Figure 19.8e).
3. Choose a spot at the edge of an alopecic area or clip an
area of hair over the skin lesions with a #10 blade (clip-
ping is optional). Do not scrub the area (see Figure
19.8c).
Figure 19.8(e).
Figure 19.8(c)
6. The slide is then placed on the microscope and evaluated
at low (4×) power to evaluate the slide for possible para-
sites (see Figure 19.8f, see Flowchart 19.1, p. 256).
4. Dip the end of the scalpel blade into the oil. Hold the
Black Light
scalpel blade at a 90-degree angle to the skin while
Some species of infectious fungal pathogens (dermato-
pinching the portion of the skin you are going to scrape
phytes) will light up or fluoresce in the presence of a black
between your thumb and forefinger. Scrape the skin with
light. Fluorescing can suggest a fungal infection; however, if 
short strokes between your finger until there is a redden-
aq s pinos uonoafui tunf n dn sut nou saop eae a
ing and a small amount of blood forms on the surface of
present. Additionally, false-positive fluorescence tests can
the skin (see Figure 19.8d).
254
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
DENTAL
Figure 19.80).
Discussing a Skin Scraping with the Client
The veterinarian is recommending a skin scrape to
evaluate the skin for possible parasitic infection.
A suspect region of hair loss, irritation, or infection
is isolated and scraped with a scalpel blade until
the region begins to bleed.
The scraped skin debris is then placed on a micro-
scope slide and evaluated for skin parasites.
Evidence of a specific skin mite is diagnostic for a
parasitic infection. A negative skin scrape does not
rule out a mite infection because not all skin mites
are easily obtained.
 Multiple scrapings may be required and on occa-
sion some animals are treated for skin mites based
on physical changes in the skin.
Figure 19.9(a).
Fungal Culture
 Fungal culture is used to help detect and identify dermatophyte 
(ringworm) infection. The cultures use a special medium
ai yaam tz e iao suaid qsuny so e
2. Brush the entire area of concerm at the skin level with the
toothbrush (see Figure 19.9b).
Procedure-Performing a Fungal Culture
 3. The DTM agar is opened, and the toothbrush is placed on
A fungal culture is used to isolate and define the infectious
both sides of the agar (see Figure 19.9c).
fungal pathogen. Once the sample is collected and plated it
 4. The agar is then sealed, labeled with the patient's name
can take up to 4 weeks to adequately grow the dermatophyte
and the date, and then stored in a dark place. The agar is
for identification.
checked every day for growth and color change. Derma-
To properly culture for dermatophyte/fungal infection,
tophytes will change the agar to red (see Figure 19.9d).
the team member will follow this process.
 Positive dermatophyte pathogens are noted as white or
1. You will need a clean disposable tooth brush and DTM or
brown colonies that change the agar color to red as they
other dermatophyte agar (see Figure 19.9a).
grow. Contaminants are usually gray, black, or green in
Chapter 19: Integument
255
Figure 19.9(c).
colony and then lifted and pressed onto a slide and stained
with Lactophenol Cotton Blue dye. The slide is then exam-
ined under high power for hyphae and fruiting fungal bodies
(macroconidia) (see Flowchart 19.2, p. 257).
Skin Cytology
With concerns of bacterial and fungal skin infection, skin
Figure 19.9(b).
cytology can be an extremely helpful tool in identifying
causative agents that produce signs of pruritus, alopecia,
Discussing Fungal Culture with the Client
 The veterinarian has recommended fungal black light
test and culture to determine if the patient is affected
by a fungal pathogen.
 Black light evaluation: Certain types of ringworm
(fungal) infections will fluoresce when a black
light is shone over the affected region of the skin.
Although a positive test strongly suggests ring-
worm, a negative evaluation does not rule out the
fungal infection because some strains of fungus do
not fluoresce under a black light. Furthermore,
false-positive results can occur.
●Fungal culture: If ringworm is suspected, the vet-
erinarian can sample affected hair and dander
around the lesion and place it on a special culture
media. If the culture grows organisms and there is
a red coloration in the agar below the colonies, then
Figure 19.9(d).
 a fungal infection is suspected. It takes up to 2-4
weeks to produce a positive culture.
color, and the agar color change does not occur for several
 If fungal pathogens are detected, the veterinarian
 days after the development of the colonies. Once a possible
en suoneoipau pue sooduus ooads isasns Aeu
pathogen is isolated, samples of the colony are collected
will selectively destroy the fungal infection.
 Sarcoptes / Notodedres Mites
Cheyletiella
Negative Scraping
Wutcome
Ffowchart I9.1.
256
(  o   o   go s)
19.7: These are samples of contaminant fungi
after the colonies grew. Note the different
minant
e1
Cont
pathogenic fungi.
257
psea padeus inuead] ezzase[n pue (ooos punou [ews) euaoeqjo uoneuquoo e jo saewl g s
Malasezzia & Cocci
izingepithelial cells
rganisms)colo
3760Rocky
258
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Fig 19.10b: Eosinophils are cells that
and parasitic infections and allergies.
Abnormal cell types can help the veterinarian identify possible autoimmune skin disease or cancer. Any observed abnormal cytology should be discussed
Mast Cells
White Blood Cells
Lymphoma
common in bacterial infecti on.
White Blood Cells.
Histiocytoma
Outcome of Microscopic Examination-
Abnormal Cytology
icanthocytes
259
260
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
(a)
(a)
Figure 19.10(a).
erythema, scaling, and rash. There are many excellent ways
1. The team member will need slides, stain, and a syringe to
to evaluate skin cytology.
obtain the liquid sample (see Figure 19.1la).
2. The team mermber then aspirates fluid and cells from the
Performing Skin Cytology
lesion with a syringe (see Figure 19.11b).
There are many methods of performing skin cytology, de-
 3. The content of the syringe is then applied to the middle of
 pending on the type of lesion evident. No matter which
the slide. At a ninety-degree angle another slide is placed
method is used, the key is to try to identify cells and organ-
on top of the original slide. The slides are then drawn
isms that can be suggestive of the cause of infection.
away from each other in a single motion, smearing the cell
and debris over the original slide (see Figure 19.11c).
Scotch Tape Preparation
4. The team member then heat fixes and stains the slide
 The Scotch Tape procedure is helpful in identifying fungal
using a preferred staining system (see Figure 19.1 1d)
and bacterial components in moist, red, and raw regions of
5. The microscope slide is then evaluated for fungal hyphae,
skin where active infection is occurring.
bacteria, and abnormal cellularity.
1. To perform a Scotch Tape cytology, the team member will
Impression Smear
need Scotch Tape, slides, and a staining system (i.e., New
Impression smears are obtained when there is a lesion that is
Methylene Blue, tricolor, Gram stain, etc.) (see Figure 19.10a).
moist or producing a clear, purulent, or hemorrhagic dis-
 2. The Scotch Tape is applied to the regions of concern on
charge. These lesions are open and draining such that infec-
the patient, and a light pressure is applied to the length of
an po aoejns aun ie quanedde aq Ae shao pue suase sno
the tape (see Figure 19.10b).
skin. To perform the smear the following procedure is used.
3. The tape is then applied to a clean slide, sticky side down,
adn aui 'apts au o pandde ue si anssad ui pu
1. The team member will need slides and stain to obtain a
is then removed (see Figure 19.10c).
sample of debris and discharge from the lesion (see
4. The slide is dried and examined under the high-power oil
Figure 19.12a).
objective (100x) for abnormal cell types and infectious
 2. The slides are placed directly onto the lesion and a slight
pathogens (see Figures 19.10d and e).
pressure is applied to the area to increase production of
the exudate from the region (see Figure 19.12b).
DirectSmear
 3. The slide is heat fixed and stained using a preferred stain-
Direct smears are used when lesions produce a liquid dis-
 ing system (see Figure 19.11d).
charge, which can be clear, purulent (pus), or bloody in na-
 4. The microscope slide is then evaluated for fungal spores,
ture. To perform the smear, the following procedure is used.
fungal hyphae, bacteria, and abnormal cellularity.
Chapter 19: Integument
261
b
b
Figure 19.10(b).
3. The slide is heat fixed and stained using a preferred stain-
 ing system (see Figure 19.11d).
4. The microscope slide is then evaluated for fungal spores,
fungal hyphae, bacteria, and abnormal cellularity.
Fine-Needle Aspirate
 A fine-needle aspirate is performed to obtain cell and fluid
aspirates of masses and lesions that are involved within or
below the skin. The fine-needle aspirate samples a few hun-
dred cells out of millions, and although it can be very help-
ful in suggesting the cause of the mass or lesion, a negative
fine-needle aspirate cannot rule out malignancy. To perform
a fine needle aspirate the following procedure should be
used.
1. The team member will need a syringe, surgical prep, clip-
Figure 19.10(c).
pers, slides, and stain to obtain a sample of debris and
discharge from the lesion (see Figure 19.14a).
 2. The region is generally shaved and cleaned with surgi-
Swab Method: The Cotton Swab Method
cal prep to minimize contamination of the site. The re-
A cotton swab is used to obtain crusts and debris from re-
gion is held by the thumb and pointer finger, and a sy-
gions where a direct or impression smear is not possible
 ringe and needle is placed through the mass in a sewing
(i.e., ear canal, interdigital region, skin fold, etc.). To per-
 machine-like motion to obtain cell samples (see Figure
form this cytology the following procedure is used.
19.14b).
a an m pde ua si as a jo j a '
1. The team member will need cotton swabs, slides, and
of the slide. At a ninety-degree angle another slide is
stain to obtain a sample of debris and discharge from the
placed on top of the original slide. The slides are then
lesion (see Figure 19.13a).
2. The swabs are placed directly onto the lesion and exudate
the cell and debris over the original slide (see Figure
 and debris is collected. The applicator swab with debris is 
19.14c).
then rolled with a slight pressure onto the slide (see
4. The slide is heat fixed and stained using a preferred stain-
Figure 19.13b).
 ing system (see Figure 19.11d).
d
Figure 19.10(d).
（a)
Figure 19.10(e).
Figure 19.11(a).
262
Chapter 19: Integument
263
5. The microscope slide is then evaluated for fungal spores,
(b)
fungal hyphae, bacteria, and abnormal cellularity.
(See Flowchart 19.3a and 19.3b, pp. 258 and 259.)
Discussing Skin Cytology with the Client
 The veterinarian is recommending a skin cytology to
help identify bacterial or fungal pathogens or abnor-
s s an  a   s n 
Depending on the type of lesion, the medical team
may obtain cells using a catheter, direct contact
onto a slide, or a cotton swab.
●By examining these cells with a special stain under
a microscope, the veterinarian can evaluate the
cause of the skin problems.
 If abnormal cell types are identified, the veterinar-
Figure 19.11(b).
ian may recommend submitting the slides for a re-
view by a pathologist.
(C)
Figure 19.11(c).
d
d
d
Figure 19.11(d).
(a)
(a)
Figure 19.12(a).
(b)
(a)
Figure 19.12(b).
Figure 19.13(a).
264
Chapter 19: Integument
265
(b)
Figure 19.13(b).
(a)
(a)
Figure 19.14(a).
Advanced Diagnostic Procedures
Skin Allergy Testing
In a manner very similar to that which occurs in human
Skin Biopsy
medicine, the animal is tested for specific allergens to in-
Taking a small skin biopsy of the full thickness of the skin
halant allergies. Once the types of irritants are known, a vac-
with a specialized blade can allow veterinarians to more
-ads aui 0i pad au azisuasap diay on A1 0i ape aq uo au
specifically identify what types of diseases may be affecting
cific allergens.
the pet's skin. The procedure is done with light to no seda-
tion and a small local block at the biopsy site. The tissue is 
Blood Allergy Testing
placed in formalin and sent into the reference lab for
It is also possible to draw samples of blood to help detect to
histopathology.
what allergens the patient is sensitive. From the results of
266
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
(b)
(b)
Figure19.14(b).
（C）
C
Figure19.14(c).
 blood allergy testing, desensitization vaccines can be pro-
Diseases of the Integumentary System
 duced. Blood allergy testing can be less specific than skin
Although not all diseases are mentioned below, the common
testing, producing less reliable results.
diseases are discussed, with the goal being to understand and
explain to the client what the diseases are, how they can
Blood Chemistry Panels
present themselves, and what can be the overall short-and
Blood work can help detect if there are changes in the blood
long-term concerms of each disease. Any discussion of over-
suggestive of chronic infectious, organ (i.e., liver or kidney),
 all diagnostic and treatment protocols should be discussed
 inflammatory, or hormonal diseases that can cause the skin
based on the recommendations of the doctor and the medi-
problems. Furthermore, thyroid blood work can evaluate if
cal team. Please use the following information as a guideline
the patient has a thyroid abnormality (see Chapter 16).
to discuss and educate the client, but never to diagnose α
Chapter 19: Integument
267
com, poultry, beef, pork, the cereal fillers, and other compo-
Discussing Advanced Diagnostic Procedures with
nents. Most diets contain some similar dietary elements. An
the Client
 animal that becomes allergic to com, cereal fillers, or some
 The veterinarian has recommended advanced diagnos-
other dietary component will show sensitivity to most com-
tics, such as the following, to help identify the cause
mercial diets since they contain similar products.
 of the skin changes.
Another major type of allergies is flea allergy. This is
an allergy to a single fleabite. The animal does not need
 Skin biopsy: In some cases full-thickness skin sec-
to be infested with fleas to have this allergy. One single
tions may aid in diagnosis of skin disease. The tis-
bite can cause red, inflamed skin, heavy itching, and dis-
sue for biopsy is taken usually with a special round
comfort.
blade with no to light sedation. The specimen is
 Lastly, contact allergies to a specific chemical or plant
 then sent to a histopathologist for evaluation.
can cause redness and discomfort when the animal's skin is
 Blood work: In some cases, the veterinarian may
exposed to the irritant.
suggest evaluating blood work to establish if there
is some organ, infectious, or hormonal disease that
Common Points in Medical History
could be producing secondary skin symptoms.
As discussed previously in this chapter, obtaining a specific
Examples of systemic disease that can secondarily
detailed history of previous treatments and the animal's re-
affect the skin are
liver disease,
ment. Common points in medical history are
thyroid disease,
hyperadrenocorticism, and
● reoccurring pruritus, erythema, and hair loss that occurs
diabetes.
seasonally (i.e., fall and spring) or year-round;
Allergy testing: Discussed later.
 chronic ear infections;
●chewing and licking between the toes;
● pustules or rashes; and
patient. Changes in the skin due to hormonal disease (i.e.,
 excessive shedding.
thyroid, adrenal, and pancreatic diseases) are discussed in
the related chapters.
Common Observations in Inifial Assessmenf
All skin disease can have very similar signs. Common symp-
Allergies
toms may be
 Allergies are one of the most frustrating non-life-threatening
illnesses the patient and client may have to face. Allergies
itching/scratching (often severe),
are an allergic response to components of diet, inhalant al-
redness of the skin,
lergens, fleas, and topical irritants. Successful treatments
licking of the paws,
's A an u pu q on qud m A
 chewing between the toes,
medications, and desensitization vaccinations.
 red-hot, inflamed draining areas in the skin (hot spots),
discharge of the eyes and nose (occasionally),
Signaiment
 pustules or rashes,
 Allergies can occur in both dogs and cats of any age, sex, or
 areas of hair loss, and
breed. There is a genetic component. Allergies can begin at
dry flaky skin.
any age; however, the younger the animal begins showing
signs, the worse the pet's allergies may be. Allergies tend to
Complications
worsen as the animal ages.
 If not diagnosed and treated the pet can be significantly
affected with chronic skin infections, severe pruritus, and
Etiology
hair loss.
Typically, the pet is not sensitive to just one type of allergen.
 The animal is usually allergic to a large number of irritants
Diagnosis
As discussed previously, a full diagnostic workup can in-
sure. There are four basic components of allergies.
volve skin scrapes, fungal cultures, blood work, hypoaller-
 The most common cause of allergies is called atopy.
 genic diet trials, and allergy testing.
Atopic animals have allergies to airborme material, such as
 pollen, dust, mites, cat dander, and ragweed. These allergens 
Treatment
lie in the hair coat and are absorbed through the skin (trans-
There is no absolute cure for allergies. The goal of treat-
dermally) to produce an allergic response.
ing allergies is to control the symptoms with the appropriate
The second common type of allergies is food allergies.
 medication. Medical options in treating pets with seasonal
This is an allergy to some component of the diet, such as
and year-round itching are as follows.
268
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
Antihistamines: Antihistamines, such as diphenhy-
dramine, chlorpheniramine, or hydroxyzine, can be moder-
gens from the patient's diet to see if any signs of allergies
ately to extremely effective at controlling the itchiness as-
become less severe. A new diet is chosen based on the pa-
sociated with allergies. These drugs are extremely safe and
tient's existing diet. The goal is to choose a protein and
 can be used as needed without worrying about stopping or
vegetable source that the animal has never been exposed
starting medication. Antihistamines sometimes do cause
to, such as fish and potato, lamb and rice, or venison and
drowsiness. They work well with skin vitamins to further
rice. A diet trial takes 8-12 weeks to see if there is any
help control the symptoms associated with allergies. The
change in allergy signs. The pet must be on that diet and
 only drawback is that not all antihistamines work with all
animals; sometimes two or three different types of antihist-
make the test inaccurate.
amines must be used before one is found that is effective.
Allergy testing/desensitization vaccines: The goal of al-
Essential fatty acids (EFA): EFA supplements help to
lergy testing is to determine what environmental allergens
minimize the effects of inflarmmation and scratching,
the animal is sensitive to so that a serum can be produced
which damage the hair coat. These capsules work symer-
to help desensitize the patient. The serum is relatively
gistically with antihistamines.
safe and produces natural immunity to the allergies. It
 Steroids: Steroids (i.e., prednisone) are extremely effec-
 unuui annbapn aonpoud oi sunak oi suuou say
tive at decreasing the redness and irritation associated
allergy serum does not always produce a complete or par-
with systemic allergies. There are short-acting steroids,
 tial resolution of allergies.
such as prednisone, that last for a few days to a week.
There is also longer-term medication, such as triamci-
Prevention
nolone or beta-methasone, that can last for weeks at a
There is no known way to prevent allergy issues in the pet.
time. However, steroids have immediate side effects of in-
creased thirst, urination. and appetite, and if used over
Demodecosis (Demodectic Mange)
the long term can affect liver and adrenal function.
 Demodecosis is a parasitic mite infection of the hair follicle.
● Cyclosporine: The use of the immunosuppressant cy-
closporine has helped reduce allergic symptoms in many
Signalment
patients that have been refractory to other treatment op-
Most common forms of the disease are seen in young ani-
tions. Cyclosporine therapy comes as oral medication
mals from 3 to 6 months of age. There are no sexual or breed
that is given 1-2/day; at this time the expense of the drug
predilections. When the disease is seen in adult animals, it
can be a limiting factor for some clients, and the effects
may suggest a genetic predisposition to demodex infections
of long-term therapy are uncertain.
or an underlying disease that is challenging the normal im-
mune system. Animals that are genetically sensitive to
Discussing Allergies with the Client
demodectic mange can pass on this sensitivity to their off-
● Allergies are a chronic, recurring potentially incur-
spring; therefore, these animals are discouraged from repro
able non-life-threatening disease.
ducing. Additionally. animals treated chronically with
Pets can have allergies to inhalant allergens, food,
steroids are immunosuppressed and prone to development of
fleas, and topical products.
demodecosis.
 Unlike humans, animals will begin to itch, scratch,
lose hair, and have reddening of the skin in re-
Etiology
sponse to exposure.
Canine demodectic mange is a parasitic infection of a skin
 Allergies are a sum total of multiple allergens and
mite in the hair follicles of the pet. The mite is normally
Psa a ss us on an i p a
present in the pet's skin, but when overwhelming numbers of
to a significant number of allergens. The more aller-
mites occur, the patient can show symptoms (see Figure
gens exposed, the worse the physical signs may be.
19.15). Demodectic mange is noninfectious and nonconta-
 Allergies can be seasonal (i.e., spring and fall) or
gious to humans or other animals.
can be year-round.
 Allergies can get worse as the pet ages.
Common Points on Medical History
 Diagnosis of allergies depends on physical signs,
Generally, demodectic mange produces a mild to moderate
medical history, and outcome of skin and blood di-
 pruritic localized to generalized infection in young pets.
 agnostic testing.
Treatment can be a combination of medication,
Common Observations in Initial Assessment
diet, and desensitization serum. There is no one
Common physical symptoms are
specific treatment for an allergy patient; treatment
canvary fromanimal to animal,evenwith animals
 areas of hair loss (localized to general),
in the same litter.
redness of the skin,
itchiness,
Chapter 19: Integument
269
from reproducing.
. Furthermore, chronic steroid therapy
should be avoided.
Discussing Demodectic Mange with the Client
Demodectic mange is a skin mite infection of the
hair follicle. The demodectic mite lives on all cats
and dogs in low numbers but does not usually pro-
duce physical symptoms.
Young pets are more prone to localized systemic
 infection producing hair loss, reddening of the
skin, rash, and itchiness.
 On occasion, adult pets may have a genetic sensi-
sis jisud mous pu uoi a e o A
when stressed. This sensitivity is genetically based
and can be passed to a pet's progeny.
 This infection is not contagious or infectious to hu-
mans or other animals.
 aun jo uoaiasqo Aq apeu Ajaael s sisousi
mite in a skin scrape.
 Treatment can be a combination of medication,
medicated dips, and topical ointments.
Sarcoptic Mange (Scabies)
 a ws e ym u sid e si a o
Figure 19.15.  Image of adult demodectic mange mite as seen on
the epidermal skin layers. The infection produces a severe,
a skin scrape.
intensely pruritic skin disorder as the mite burrows through
the deeper skin layers. Sarcoptic mange has a high incidence
of infection to other animals or humans through direct con-
 areas of the skin that begin to ooze pus and debris (sec-
tact; care must be taken when handling affected pets.
 ondary bacterial infection), and
 scaling and dry flaky skin.
Signalment
The mite can affect both dogs and cats, but outdoor roam-
Complications
ing animals or animals in multi-pet households are at more 
 If not diagnosed and treated, demodectic mange can produce 
risk.
 generalized whole-body erythema, alopecia, and pruritus.
Etiology
Diagnosis
Sarcoptic mange, also called red mange or scabies, is caused
Diagnosis of the mite is based upon finding the mite on a
by the transmission of the Sarcoptes scabei mite from an al-
microscopic examination of a skin scraping. If the pet is an
ready infected animal (see Figure 19.16).
 older animal with generalized demodex infection, other clin-
ical diagnostics (i.e., complete blood count, chemistry, thy.
Common Points on Medical History
 -ans aq Aeu (ssuuaaros asasp snonoau pue jued pioi
 Sarcoptic mange produces a severely pruritic pet with re-
gested to make sure there is no underlying disease that may
 gions of alopecia, rashes, and scaling.
 be challenging the pet's immune system.
Common Observations in Initial Assessment
Treatment
Common physical symptoms are
Demodectic mange can be treated with topical salves, whole-
body dips, or oral medications to help eliminate the active in-
●areas of hair loss (localized to general),
fection. While under treatment, repeated skin scrapes will be
redness of the skin (severe),
necessary to see how the animal is responding to treatment.
itchiness,
 areas of the skin that begin to ooze pus and debris (sec-
Prevention
 ondary bacterial infection),
 Because there is genetic sensitivity for demodectic mange,
 scaling and dry flaky skin, and
treatment is focused on preventing susceptible adult animals
 generalized enlargement of all extermal lymph nodes.
270
Section2:Anatomy andPhysiology—T
TheScience behind the Diseases
Discussing Sarcoptic Mange with the Client
 Sarcoptic mange is a skin mite infection of the
deeper skin layers.
The sarcoptic mange mite produces a severe
whole-body infection, hair loss, itchiness, and red,
irritated skin.
- a m s  a s si 
mals and humans, and care should be taken when
handling pets infected with them.
 Diagnosis of sarcoptic mange is based on history,
physical examination, and skin scraping. Because
the skin mite lives deeper in the skin tissue, a neg-
ative skin scraping does not rule out an infection.
On occasion a fecal examination will reveal mite
eggs or adult skin mites.
Treatment is based on topical and oral medications
to help eliminate the mite and any secondary bac-
terial infection and to control itchiness and scaling.
The pet may have to go through weeks of treatment
umtil the infection is cleared.
and humans through direct contact; care must be taken
when handling affected pets.
Figure 19.16.
f. Image of adult sarcoptic mange mite as seen on a
Etiology
skin scrape.
Ringworm is a skin fungal infection caused by Microsporum
canis, M. gypseum, and Trychophyton mentagrophytes. These
skin fungal agents (dermatophytes) exist in moist, warm en-
Complications
vironments and are introduced to a break in the skin. Animals
If not diagnosed and treated, sarcoptic mange can produce
that are immunocompromised or on medications that produce
severe hair loss and skin damage and can be infectious to
immunosuppression are more likely to be affected.
 other animals and humans.
Signalment
Diagnosis
Ringworm can affect dogs and cats of any age; however, it is
 Diagnosis is based on medical history, physical signs, skin
 more common in younger animals. In the cat, long-haired
scraping, and response to treatment. Unlike demodex infec-
breeds are also more commonly affected.
tion, sarcoptic mange is sometimes hard to find on multiple
skin scrapings. A negative skin scrape does not rule out sar-
Common Points on Medical History
coptic mange. Furthermore, on occasion, a fecal flotation
Affected animals present with small- to moderate-sized re-
may show mite eggs or adult mites evident in the feces. In
 gions of hair loss and dry, flaky skin with moderate levels of
some cases, responding to a treatment protocol for sarcoptic
 pruritus.
mange may be definitive enough to provide a diagnosis.
Common Observations on Initial Assessment
Treatment
Some pets may have no physical symptoms of disease; cats
 Treatment generally involves oral, topical, or injectable
are often carriers of the disease without any physical signs.
medication to eliminate the infection, oral antibiotics to help
 The fungus can exist below the hairline, and it can still be in-
decrease secondary bacterial infection, and oral and topical
fectious. However, classic symptoms can be
medication to decrease pruritus. Furthermore, all dogs that
have contact with the patient should also be treated.
 circular regions of hair loss,
 poor hair coat,
Dermatomycosis (Ringworm)
scales,
 Ringworm is a cutaneous fungal infection affecting the re-
erythema,
gions of the hair, nails, and the superficial layers of the skin.
areas of hyperpigmentation, and
Ringworm has a high incidence of infection to other animals
 pruritus.
Chapter 19: Integument
271
Complications
Prevention
If not diagnosed and treated, ringworm can produce a
 sa yp pu m m asdxa u a
chronic skin infection that can affect other animals and hu-
stray animals, ringworm infections can be reduced.
mans.
Diagnosis
Discussing Ringworm with the Client
 Diagnosis is based on medical history, physical examina-
 Ringworm is a fungal infection of the skin.
tion, and the following clinical diagnostic methods.
 It produces dry, scaly regions with hair loss and
moderate alopecia.
 Black light evaluation: Some dermatophytes will fluo-
-ua au woy snuny aun yim jouoo Aq peaids si 11
resce under a black light. A positive test strongly suggests
vironment or other infected animals through a
ringworm, a negative test does not eliminate the possibil-
break in the skin layer.
ity, and false-positive tests can occur.
 Ringworm is potentially infectious to humans and
 Dermatophyte culture: The affected region is scrubbed
 other animals, and caution should be used when
with a clean, unused toothbrush and the scraping is then
 handling pets that are infected.
applied to the dermatophyte culture. If fungal dermato-
 Diagnosis is based on identification of the fungal
phytes are present, the agar will grow the fungus and
 organism on a cultured media.
change to a specific color, usually red. Impression smears
 Treatment is focused on long-term oral and topical
can then be sampled from the agar, and microscopic iden-
medications until there are two successive negative
 tification can help diagnose the dermatophytes.
fungal cultures.
Treatment
 Treatment is based on topical medicated shampoos, topical
antifungal ointments, and oral antifungal medications.
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter
 Fungal cultures are repeated at 2- to 4-week intervals. The
patient may need to be treated for weeks to months until the
The Science behind the Diseases) to help reinforce the infor-
pet has had two negative dermatophyte cultures.
mation presented here.
Chapter 20
Eyes and Ears
In this section, the anatomy, physiology, physical examina
environments, and the cone cells, which process bright light
tion, diagnostic testing, and diseases of the eyes and ears 
and colors. In general, domestic animals have poor color vi-
will be discussed. A discussion of the oral cavity has already
sion and better vision in dim light and darkness because they
been presented in Chapter 9.
have more rod cells in the retina.
The light level is analyzed, and the iris of the eye is
The Eye
 opened or closed by a reflex pathway of the optic nerve. If
there is low light or darkness, the iris opens up, increasing
The eye consists of three ocular walls of tissue (tunic). The
the amount of light entering the eye. If the environment is
 outer tunic consists of the thick fibrous scleral wall, nor-
bright, the iris constricts, decreasing the level of light
mally opaque, which consists of the white portion of the eye,
reaching the retina. This is called the pupillary light re-
and the clear outermost section of the eye, the cornea. The
sponse (PLR). Both irides will respond to a bright light
second tunic of the eye consists of the vascular layer, the
perceived by one iris. If a light shines into one iris and it
uveal coat of the eye, which supplies nutrients and oxygen.
constricts, we call this a direct PLR. If a light shines into
The cranial aspect of the uvea contains the iris; the caudal
one iris and the opposite constricts as well, it is called an
 aspect of the uvea contains the blood supply to the retina.
consensual PLR. If a direct or indirect PLR is absent in a
The third ocular tunic consists of the neural tissue contain-
pet, it can suggest disease of the eye, optic nerve, or a part
ing the retina and optic nerve (see Figure 20.1).
of the central nervous system. Furthermore, in times of oc-
The eye has three ocular cavities:
ular pain (i.e., comeal ulceration), the iris of the affected
eye can be constricted. Any changes in pupil response
 1. The anterior chamber occupies the space cranial to the
should be brought to the attention of the medical team im-
lens; it is filled with aqueous fluid that helps to maintain
mediately (see Figure 20.2).
the shape and nutrition of the cranial aspect of the eye.
 The lens is located behind the iris and is supported by fi-
 2. The posterior chamber lies between the caudal aspect of
brous ligaments within the eye. The tension on these liga
the iris and the cranial aspect of the lens.
ments can be changed by muscle activity altering the focal
 3. The vitreous chamber lies between the caudal aspect of
length of the lens, allowing the eye to switch focus from the
the lens and the retina. This chamber has a special type of
far to the near field. This process is called accommodation.
fluid called vitreous, which further supports the shape
 In general, domestic animals have poor accommodation
and health of the eye.
capabilities
The lens should appear clear. A true opacity of the lens is
The outer fibrous tunic allows the attachment of the ex-
 called a cataract (see Figure 20.3). However, normal ageing
traocular muscles to control the movement of the eye; the
of the lens in animals produces a chronic thickening that is 
lids and third eyelids to protect the eye; the lacrimal gland
 perceived as a bluing of the lens. This process is called
and gland of the third eyelid to lubricate the eye; the glands
lenticular sclerosis and is not a cataract formation.
of the lids to protect the comea, and the skin around the eye
 The aqueous fluid in the anterior chamber should be
(conjunctiva) to protect the entire globe.
clear. Aqueous fluid is constantly being formed and leaves
The eye may be considered to function like a camera; rays
the eye in small drainage angles near the iris. Aqueous fluid
of light coming in from an object being viewed travel to
in the anterior chamber maintains the pressure within the
the cormea where they enter the eye. The lens focuses the
eye. Abnormalities in the aqueous fluid circulation may re-
light on the retina and optic nerve, which communicates with
sult in elevated pressure in the eye, producing a disease
the brain, bringing images into the cerebrum for conscious
called glaucoma.
response
The cornea is made up of a series of cellular layers. The
The cells of the retina that process light into an electrical
comea should be clear, free of blood vessels or pigment.
signal are called photoreceptors. There are two types of
Sensory nerves in the anterior cormea make the tissue very
cells: the rod cells, which process light in the dim and dark
sensitive to irritation (see Figure 20.4).
273
274
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Salera
vitreal Chambe
Figure 20.3. A cataract is a complete thickening of the lens
until no light or images can pass into the posterior chamber and
Lens
OpticNerve
be visualized by the retina. Reprinted with permission from
Jeffrey Bowersox, DVM ACvO, Veterinary Specialty Center of
Delaware, 1212 E. Newport Pike, Wilmington, DE 19804.
Figure 20.1.
 Cross section of the eye. Image courtesy of
Anatomy of Domestic Animals, 7th Edition. Pasquini, Chris, and
Pasquini, Susan. Sudz Publishing, Pilot Point, TX 1989. Used 
with permission from Sudz Publishing.
A = Anterior chamber
Figure 20.2.
 Notice the left iris is constricted smaller than the
right. Especially with a trauma case, this can suggest concussion
or CNS damage.
Figure 20.4.  In this picture note the corneal edema around the
central lesion in the eye. Reprinted with permission from Jeffrey
Obtaining a History in Patients with Ocular
Bowersox, DVM ACVO, Veterinary Specialty Center of Delaware,
Disease
1212 E. Newport Pike, Wilmington, DE 19804.
In a general practice, the majority of ocular disease is pre-
sented as an acute problem. Ocular problems can be second-
ary to other systemic diseases, such as allergies and infec-
Is There Ocular or Nasal Discharge or Debris Evident?
tious, organ, and metabolic disease. When obtaining a
 The evidence of bloody to purulent discharge (pus) can sug-
 general history, the same basic guidelines should be used as
gest infection, trauma, or a foreign body.
outlined in Chapter 5. However, some key ocular questions
are discussed next.
Is the Pet Rubbing the Eye with Their Paw or on the
Ground?
Does the Eye Seem To Be Sensitive to the Light?
p qn o  on nad a s u u 
Animals with ocular disease can have sensitivity to bright
 m a  a  s aa a  
lights. These patients may squint or move the affected eye
eye and cornea and may need to be corrected with an Eliza-
away from a bright light source.
bethan collar.
Chapter 20: Eyes and Ears
275
right of a severe corneal ulceration with edema. With this type of injury, it is impossible to assess the internal anatomy of the eye.
Reprinted with permission from Jeffrey Bowersox, DVM ACVO, Veterinary Specialty Center of Delaware, 1212 E. Newport Pike,
Wilmington, DE 19804.
Does the Eye Itself Seem To Be Enlarged?
An enlarged eye indicates chronic alterations in intraocular
pressure (i.e., glaucoma).
Has There Been a Color Change to the Iris of the Eye?
Due to intermal infection of the eye (uveitis) or certain tumor
types (i.e., melanoma), part of or the entire iris may appear
to have a color change. However, in some cases, color
change can be normal.
Physical Changes to the Eye on Initial
Assessment
When evaluating an animal on an initial assessment, some
very simple observation of the eyes can tell you a great deal
about the vision and overall health of the animal.
Figure 20.6. Image of a red, inflamed conjunctivitis. Reprinted
Can You Visualize the Eyes?
with permission from Jeffrey Bowersox, DVM ACVO, Veterinary
Many animals have a great deal of redundancy of skin
Specialty Center of Delaware, 1212 E. Newport Pike,
around the face, causing abnormal turming in of the eyelids.
Wilmington, DE 19804.
This is called entropion. Chronic irritation of the comea by
hair follicles of the eyelids can result in chronic inflam-
mation of the cormea, pain, and visual alterations (see
Are the Irides Responsive to Light and Are the Pupils
Figure 20.5).
the Same Size?
Iris should constrict evenly and quickly to a bright light.
Are There Changes to the White of the Eye?
 Irides that are uneven (anisocoria) or nonresponsive can
The white of the eye (sclera and the overlying tissue, the
suggest the following (see Figure 20.2):
conjunctiva) may become red and the blood vessels become
congested due to infection, inflammation, or metabolic dis-
Concussion/CNS trauma
ease of the eye and surrounding tissue (see Figure 20.6). The
Blindness
white of the eye can also appear yellow with jaundice from
● Internal disease/infection of eye
liver and blood disease.
●Corneal injury/ulcer
276
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
layers are not. Thus, if there is a scratch or irritation to the
cornea, the dye will adhere to the deeper layers and fluo-
resce under the black light.
 Schiotz tonometry: The tonometer measures the normal
 pressure within the eye itself. In order for the test to be
completed, the eye cannot have any corneal ulceration or
scratches present because the tonometer itself must be
placed onto the eye. The eye must also be topically anes-
thetized with a short-acting topical anesthesia.
 Electronic tonometry: An electronic tonometer also
measures the normal pressure within the eye itself. The
eye must be topically anesthetized with a short-acting
topical anesthesia. When used properly, the electronic
 tonometers (i.e., Tonopen) can produce accurate quantita-
tive intraocular pressures.
Figure 20. 7.  Image of blood in the anterior chamber of an eye.
 Fundic examination: A fundic examination refers to a
Reprinted with permission from Jeffrey Bowersox, DVM ACVO,
full examination of the retina and the optic nerve by the
Veterinary Specialty Center of Delaware, 1212 E. Newport Pike,
veterinarian. Generally, a short-term topical drug is used
Wilmington, DE 19804.
to dilate the iris so the entire eye can be viewed.
Discussing Clinical Diagnostics for the Ocular
Is the Aqueous Fluid in the Anterior Chamber Clear?
Evidence of blood (hyphema) can suggest trauma or a
System with the Client
 bleeding problem (see Figure 20.7). Cloudiness in the aque-
The veterinarian has suggested specific diagnostics to
help assess the eye for primary ocular disease. These
ous fluid suggests intraocular inflammation.
tests help identify specific conditions that may require
Do the Eyes Seem Less Shiny, Sunken, Dull, and Are the
medication, blood work, or surgical care.
Third Eyelids Elevated?
● Fluorescein stain: This test allows the veterinarian
 Eyes that change appearance, becoming less shiny, sunken,
to assess if there are corneal scratches or ulcera-
 and dull, with an elevated third eyelid, can be a sign of de-
tions that are not visible with the naked eye. The
hydration. There are large fat pads behind the eye that keep
superficial layer of the cormea is waterproof, the
the eyelid in a normal position in the skull. As animals be-
deeper layers are not. This water-based stain will
come dehydrated, the fat pads lose moisture and shrink,
pue eaoo aun jo eane radaap pasodxa Aue oi yoe
making the eye sink back into the socket. As this occurs, the
fluoresce under a black light.
third eyelid elevates upward and the eyes sink backward.
Schirmer tear test: The Schirmer tear test deter-
mines the amount of tears produced per minute by
Diagnostics of the Eye
the tear glands of the eye. The veterinarian is sug-
gesting this test to assess if the pet has chronic dry
As with most body systems, the eye has individual diagnos-
eye. Tear production of less than 20 mm tears per
tics that allow us to determine disease and the condition of
minute is suggestive of dry eye problems.
the eye. However, ocular examination and diagnostics must
Tonometry: This test allows the veterinarian to de-
be done carefully and when indicated. The ocular diagnostic
termine the internal pressure inside the eye.
tests are listed next.
Increased ocular pressure can suggest serious un-
derlying disease that could cause blindness, pain,
●Schirmer tear test: This test checks for normal tear pro-
and sensitivity.
duction in an eye. The Schirmer test strips are longitudi-
Fundic examination: In some cases where the en-
nal thin lengths of filter paper. By placing the paper
tire retina needs to be examined, the veterinarian
within the eyelid, the veterinarian can evaluate the
will suggest a complete retinal examination and
amount of tears being produced over a I-minute interval.
will need to use short-term eyedrops to dilate the
Decreased tear production can suggest chronic dry eyes
iris and examine the entire retinal region.
(keratoconjunctiva sicca; see below).
Fluorescein stain: This test evaluates intact cormeal ep-
ithelium; that is, it checks for ulcerations or scratches to
Ocular Diseases
the cornea. The fluorescein stain is a water-soluble stain
that covers the eye and fluoresces under a black light. The
Although not all diseases are mentioned below, the common
superficial part of the cormea is waterproof; the deeper
aun mn sa ls u an  pasns ae sas
Chapter 20: Eyes and Ears
277
stand and to be able to explain to the client what the diseases
     s     'a
short- and long-term concerns of each disease. Any discus-
sion of overall diagnostic and treatment protocols should be
based on the recommendations of the doctor. Please use the
 following information as a guideline to discuss and educate
the client, but never to diagnose a patient.
Protruding Third Eyelid (Cherry Eye)
Cherry eye refers to the swelling and inflammation of the
 gland on the back side of the third eyelid, producing a pro-
 trusion and elevation.
Signalment
This syndrome is common in the dog, but rarer in the cat.
 Breeds predisposed to cherry eye are the
 cocker spaniel,
bulldog,
+
beagle,
bloodhound,
+
Lhasa apso,
Shih Tzu, and
 Burmese and Persian cat breeds
Cause of Disease
Cherry eye is a congenital condition due to the weak attach-
ment of the gland of the third eyelid.
Figure 20.8. Image of a protruding, inflamed third eyelid.
Common Points in Medical History
Reprinted with permission from Jeffrey Bowersox, DVM ACVO,
Veterinary Specialty Center of Delaware, 1212 E. Newport Pike,
The chief complaint is a red, irritated eye with a noticeable
Wilmington, DE 19804.
swelling in the medial aspect of the eye. There may also be
a history of clear or purulent (pus) debris.
Common Observations on Initial Examination
ment of the eye and the treatment options. Some diagnostics
 Common changes in the affected eyes are as follows:
may be a
Red inflamed painful eyes
 Schirmer tear test,
Swollen membranes around the eyes
Ocular cormeal staining, and
Clear to heavy purulent discharge evident
●Ocular pressure readings.
Eyes closed in normal to bright light
Protruding, swollen third eyelid (see Figure 20.8)
Treatment
 Increased tearing of the eye (epiphora)
 Treatrment is based on the presentation of the animal and the
severity of the disease noted. Some treatment options are
Complications
discussed next.
Unless linked to an another primary underlying disease of
the eye, elevation of the third eyelid may not produce any
Medications: Medications are focused on decreasing in
significant ocular disease and could present as a simple cos-
 flammation of the third eyelid with topical medication.
metic change to the face.
Topical medication may reduce the swelling of the third
eyelid but the eyelid may also require surgical treatment.
Diagnosis
●Elizabethan collar: If the pet is rubbing at the eyes, an
Because cherry eye can be linked to other ocular diseases, it
 Elizabethan collar or buster collar may be suggested to
may be recommended that the affected eye be checked for
prevent further injury to the eyes.
corneal ulcerations or irritations, for chronic dry eye, or in-
 Surgery: In many cases, the patient may need an elective
creased ocular pressure, depending on how the pet presents
surgical procedure. The procedure is tacking of the third
 at the time of physical exam. This will allow a better assess-
eyelid, in which the third eyelid itself is sutured back into
278
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
place with a single suture, anchoring the eyelid to the
lower orbital bone.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent elevation of the third
eyelid.
Discussing Elevation of the Third Eyelid with the
Client
 All domestic animals have a triangular third eyelid
-0nd dia 0 aa an jo poadse raun aun ui shs 
duce tears and protective antibodies for the eye.
When the gland of the third eyelid becomes in-
flamed and swollen, the third eyelid itself becomes
visible in the cormer of the patient's eye.
● It is common in younger animals, especially in the
Figure 20.9.  Image of a red, inflamed eye with swelling of the
cocker spaniel, bulldog, beagle, bloodhound, Lhasa
skin around the eye (conjunctivitis). There is also a central
apso, Shih Tzu, and Burmese dog breeds and Per-
corneal ulcer. Reprinted with permission from Jeffrey Bowersox,
sian cat breed.
DVM ACVO, Veterinary Specialty Center of Delaware, 1212 E.
 Diagnosis is based on medical history, physical
Newport Pike, Wilmington, DE 19804.
 signs, and diagnostic tests to help rule out other oc-
ular and systemic disease.
Treatment can be a combination of medical and
Common Observations on Initial Examination
surgical options.
Common changes in the affected eyes are
 red, inflamed eyes (see Figure 20.9),
Conjunctivitis
 swelling of the conjunctiva,
Conjunctivitis is defined as a redness, swelling, and inflam-
 ocular discharge, and
mation of the tissue lining the eyelids and around the eye.
 rubbing or scratching at or around the eyes.
Conjunctivitis can be acute or chronic in nature and can have
 an abnormal ocular discharge.
Complicafions
 If not diagnosed and properly treated, conjunctivitis can pro-
Signalment
duce chronic ocular irritation, cormeal ulceration, pigmenta-
Conjunctivitis is common in both dogs and cats of any age.
tion, and loss of vision.
Etiology
Diagnosis
There are many causes of conjunctivitis in dogs and cats.
Because conjunctivitis can be a primary or secondary dis-
 The disease can be a primary or secondary disorder. Some
ease, clinical diagnostics can include the following.
causes can be
 Viral serology: Testing for specific antibodies against
         p
 potential chronic infections (i.e., feline leukemia [Felv],
upper respiratory infection (herpes virus, chlamydia,
feline immunodeficiency virus [FIV], herpes virus, etc.)
etc.),
-uno aaisuodsau souo ym ppu aq ru
infectious disease/upper respiratory infection,
tivitis in felines.
 allergic reaction,
 Infectious disease titer screens: As with viral serology,
foreign body (e.g., branch, spine, cactus, etc.),
testing for regional bacterial and fungal infections may
●a mass or a topical irritant, and
also be recommended when faced with a persistent con-
chronic dry eye.
junctivitis.
Schirmer tear test: The tear test is a key diagnostic to
Common Points in Medical History
rule out chronic dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis sicca or
   n  n   si  
red, irritated eyes, with swelling of the skin around the eyes
 Ocular corneal staining: Staining is also necessary to help
(conjunctiva), and clear to purulent (pus) discharge. With
rule out cormeal ulceration producing secondary disease.
secondary conjunctivitis, there may be other systemic signs
When treating conjunctivitis, ruling out cormeal ulceration
also noted (i.e., sneezing, coughing, hives, pruritus, etc.).
is important for proper choices of medical treatment.
Chapter 20: Eyes and Ears
279
Ocular pressures: With chronically irritated red eyes,
cocker spaniels, bulldogs, West Highland white terriers,
Ocular pressures may be indicated.
 Lhasa apsos, and Shih Tzus. Some reports suggest female 
 Conjunctival cytology: With concerns of specific infec-
dogs may be more predisposed.
tions (i.e., distemper virus), the veterinarian may obtain
cell samples of the conjunctiva. These cytology samples
Cause of Disease
can be sent into a reference lab and evaluated for changes
There can be many causes of KCS in dogs. Some causes
 in the cellular architecture suggestive of disease.
can be
Treatment
● chronic inflammation of the tear glands of the eye
 Treatment is based on the presentation of the animal and the
(chronic adenitis),
 severity of the disease noted. Specific treatment options may
 congenital dry eye,
be as follows.
 drug related—increased sensitivity to sulfa-containing
antibiotics
 Medications: Medications are focused on decreasing con-
Tribrissen
 junctival inflarmmation or infection around the eye. Medi-
Primor
cations can vary depending on the cause of the disease.
●secondary to removal of the third eyelid.
 Sedatives/anti-inflammatories: Depending on how irri
tated the eye is and how painful the eye may be, the vet-
Common Points in Medical History
erinarian may suggest sedatives or anti-inflammatory
  y an  n   si na a
medication.
chronic red, irritated eyes, with swelling of the skin around
Elizabethan collar: If the patient is rubbing at the eyes,
the eyes (conjunctiva), and mucoid (pus) discharge.
an Elizabethan collar or buster collar may be suggested to
prevent further injury to the eyes.
Common Observafions on Initial Examination
Common changes in the affected eyes are
Prevenfion
 By monitoring, diagnosing, and properly treating primary
red inflamed eyes (see Figure 20.9),
disease that can produce secondary ocular disease, conjunc-
 abnormal mucoid ocular discharge,
tivitis may be prevented.
 rubbing or scratching at or around eyes,
 cormeal pigmentation, vascularization, or ulceration, and
+elevation of the third eyelid.
Discussing Elevation of the Conjunctiva with the
Client
The conjunctiva is the skin that lines the inner eye-
Complications
 lid and eye within the eyelids.
If KCS is not diagnosed and properly treated the patient
● Conjunctivitis is an inflammation or infection of
may develop secondary chronic conjunctivitis, cormeal ul-
these tissues producing swelling, redness, and pos-
 ceration, corneal pigmentation, and decreased visualization.
sibly ocular discharge.
 Conjunctivitis can occur as a primary allergenic,
Diagnosis
infectious, or irritation process, or can occur sec-
Because this can be a primary or secondary disease, clinical
ondary to other ocular and infectious diseases.
 diagnostics for conjunctivitis can include the following.
 Diagnosis is based on medical history, physical
signs, and diagnostic tests to help rule out other oc-
 Schirmer tear test: The tear test is a key diagnostic to
ular and systemic disease.
rule out chronic dry eyes (KCS) that may be producing
 Treatment is focused on treating the conjunctivitis
secondary ocular disease.
and any other underlying disease process.
● Ocular corneal staining: Staining is also necessary to
help rule out cormeal ulceration. When treating conjunc-
tivitis, ruling out cormeal ulceration is important for
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca (KCS)
proper choices of medical treatment.
KCS (dry eyes) is defined as a lack of normal tear produc-
● Ocular pressures: With chronically irritated red eyes,
jo quauas iano aui jo uoi sunpod aa aui u uon
 Ocular pressures may be indicated.
the eye, inflammation of the comea, and chronic mucoid
discharge.
Treatment
Treatment is largely focused on increasing tear production,
Signalment
supplying tear replacement, controlling infection, and re-
 KCS is common in dogs and rare in cats. It can affect dogs
ducing inflammation. Medication may need to be adminis-
at different ages; however, it has been reported commonly in
tered for the life of the pet.
280
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Prevention
 small fixed pupil,
There is no known prevention for KCS.
visible break or irritation in the comea (see Figure 20.5),
 possible foreign body evident in cornea, and
●evidence of blood vessels invading from comea of eye.
Discussing Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca (KCS) with
the Client
Complications
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) is a chronic lack
 of normal tear production of the eye.
 If not diagnosed and treated, corneal ulcers may become
deeper and can perforate.
 Due to decreased tear production, the eyes have
chronic conjunctivitis, comeal irritation and ul-
ceration, pigmentation of the cornea, and loss of
Diagnosis
vision.
Primary diagnosis of corneal ulceration is made by the ob-
 KCS can be associated with chronic ocular irritation
servation of the ulcer with comeal stain. Even with an obvi-
and long-term use of certain ocular and systemic
 ous ulceration, staining can help distinguish the depth of the
drugs and is prevalent in the following breeds:
ulceration as well as other ulcers that may not be visible
Cocker spaniels
without stain. Furthermore, since ulceration can be a pri-
Bulldogs
mary or secondary disease, other clinical diagnostics can in-
clude the following.
—West Highland white terriers
Lhasa apso
-Shih Tzu
● Viral serology: Testing for specific antibodies against
KCS is diagnosed based on medical history, physi-
potential chronic infections (i.e., Felv, FIV, herpes virus,
 cal exam, and decreased tear production as meas-
etc.) may be indicated with chronic nonresponsive con-
ured by the Schirmer tear test.
junctivitis and ulceration.
 The goal of treatment is to implement medications
 Infectious disease titer screens: As with viral serol-
to increase tear production, decrease ocular inflam-
ogy, testing for regional bacterial and fungal infections
mation and irritation, and decrease pain.
may also be recommended when faced with a chronic ul-
 o pase aq o pau A uon
ceration.
life of the patient.
 Schirmer tear test: The tear test is a key diagnostic to
rule out chronic dry eyes that may be producing second-
ary ocular disease.
Corneal Injuries
The cormea is the most superficial clear layer protecting the
Treatment
eye. It contains about 7-11 cell layers in thickness, and the
Treatment is based on the presentation of the animal and the
innermost membrane (Descemet's membrane) functions to
severity of the disease noted. Some treatment components
remove fluid from the cormea to maintain its clarity.
 are presented next.
Signaiment
Medications
 Corneal injury can happen in any age or breed of dog or cat.
●  Medications are focused on decreasing conjunctival and
 ocular inflammation (either topically or systemically) or
Cause of Disease
 The disease can be a primary or secondary disorder; some
infection around the eye while keeping the eye lubricated.
 Furthermore, medications to dilate the pupil may also be
causes are chronic dry eyes, a bite or fight, infection within
suggested if the eye seems painful and the pupil fixed and
small.
touching the eye (entropion), dysfunction within the cor-
Caution must be used in treating corneal ulceration with
nea, glaucoma, and other causes.
ophthalmic steroidal medication (i.e., triple antibiotic
Common Points in Medical History
with hydrocortisone, bacitracin/neomycin/polymyxin B
Corneal disease is often uncomfortable for the patient, with
with hydrocortisone, etc.). This type of medication slows
 the chief complaint being patients with their eyelids closed
 the healing of cormeal ulcers and can actually cause more
damage.
(especially to bright light [photophobia]) and abnormal oc-
ular discharge.
 Sedatives/tranquilizers: Depending on how irritated the
eye is and how much pain the pet may feel, sedation or
Common Observations on Initial Examination
tranquilizers may be suggested.
Common changes in the affected eyes are
If your pet is rubbing at its eyes, an Elizabethan collar or
●red, inflamed eyes,
 Anfu auy nuaad mn pansans aq Ae oo nsg
●cloudiness of cornea,
the eyes.
Chapter 20: Eyes and Ears
281
Discussing Corneal Ulceration with the Client
 The cornea is a thin, superficial clear layer protect-
ing the eye. The cornea also actively pumps mois-
ture out to maintain its normal clarity.
When the cornea is damaged by physical trauma or
disease, the eye becomes red and irritated and the
conjunctiva becomes swollen and inflamed. The
iris may also constrict secondary to ocular pain.
Furthermore, the cornea may also begin to be
cloudy and grayish because its abilities to remove
 fluid and maintain clarity have been impaired.
 The diagnosis of corneal ulceration is based on
positive identification of the ulcer with fluorescein
 stain. Since cormeal ulceration can occur secondary
 to other ocular disease, the veterinarian may sug-
 gest other clinical and ocular diagnostics.
 Treatment is generally focused on medical man-
Figure 20.10.  Image of an eye affected with uveitis. Notice the
agement of the eye to maintain lubrication, reduce
cellular infiltrate and constricted pupils. Reprinted with permis-
infection and inflammation, and control pain. In se-
sion from Jeffrey Bowersox, DVM ACVO, Veterinary Specialty
vere ulceration, the veterinarian may suggest surgi-
Center of Delaware, 1212 E. Newport Pike, Wilmington, DE
cal treatment to promote healing.
19804.
Uveitis
 Trauma: Blunt or traumatic injury, toxin, or irritation
Uveitis is an inflammation of the uveal coat of the eye; the
can set up chronic inflammatory change within the eye.
anterior uveal coat is the iris and the posterior uveal coat is 
 Neoplasia: Masses or tumors within the eyes can cause
the blood vessels supplying the blood to the retina.
uveitis.
Signalment
Common Points in Medical History
 Uveitis can occur in any species at any age.
The chief complaint is chronic red irritated eyes, with
swelling of the conjunctiva and purulent (pus) discharge.
Etiology
 s    n aas  a  sa a
Uveitis is an immune-mediated inflammation of the eye.
au punoe yonoi oi aasuas pue ud ui aq ose Ae quaned
Severe cases can alter intraocular structures, resulting in ex-
eyes. Some owners will also suggest that there may be a
cessive scar tissue and tissue adhesion that may alter the nor-
change in eye color, which is secondary to the presence of
mal function of the eye.
white blood cells and cellular debris within the anterior
chamber.
Infectious Disease
There are many bacterial, fungal, and viral diseases that can
Common Observations on Initial Examination
set up an ocular inflammation. Examples of these types of
disease are
Red, inflamed painful eyes
feline leukemia virus FELV,
 Swollen membranes around the eyes
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP),
 Clear to heavy purulent discharge evident
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV),
 Sensitivity to light (photophobia)
coccidioidomycosis,
 Rubbing or scratching at or around eyes 
blastomycosis, and
 Cloudiness to the comea and anterior chamber
ehrlichiosis.
Constricted pupils (see Figure 20.10)
●Blood or cellular precipitates evident within the eye
Other examples include the following.
Complications
 Immune-mediated disease: Alterations of the lens with
If not diagnosed and treated uveitis can block normal
cataract formation and other metabolic disturbances in
 anpond pu ou snoa pu snoanbe go au
the eye can produce an immune-mediated inflammation
increasing intraocular pressure leading to glaucoma and
of the eye itself.
blindness.
282
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Diagnosis
Prevention
Because there are many possible systemic diseases that
Diagnosing and treating a primary disease before uveitis can
can cause uveitis, systemic and ocular diagnostics are often
occur can help prevention of the disease.
recommended. Some of these diagnostics tests are listed
here.
Glaucoma
Glaucoma is a disease of the neural tissue involving the
●Baseline blood clinical diagnostics (ie., complete
optic nerve and the retina. The major precipitating cause of
blood count and chemistry): This clinical diagnostic
 glaucoma is an increase in intraocular pressure. Normal oc-
tool evaluates the body for signs of systemic infection
ular pressure in dogs and cats is approximately 15-25 mm
 and metabolic or organ disease that may produce a sec-
Hg, as measured by tonometry.
ondary uveitis.
●Viral serology: Viral testing for Felv, FIV, and other
Etiology
chronic systemic diseases can help identify a potential
The eye produces a fluid called aqueous humor, which is
 primary cause of disease.
Apoq Are aun paeo sui aui puaq uoisau e ul paonpoud
Infectious disease titer screens: Testing for specific dis-
 Aqueous fluid is produced at a constant rate and therefore
   o n a l an  a
must drain from the eye at a constant rate in order for in-
chronic infections in the eyes may be suggested (i.e. coc-
traocular pressure to be normal. Aqueous fluid normally
cidioidomycosis, ehrlichiosis, histoplasmosis, blastomy
 umaa paoi saue aaup yn aa ai sa
cosis, etc.).
cornea and the root of the iris. If the drainage angle is abnor-
● Ocular pressures: Ocular pressures are strongly recom-
mal because of congenital anatomical defects or becomes
mended to monitor the eyes for possible secondary glau-
blocked with inflammatory cells, blood, or fibrin, intraocu-
coma.
lar pressure will elevate to abnormal levels. Glaucoma can
come on acutely and affect either one or both eyes. Under-
Treatment
lying causes of glaucoma are
Treatment is focused on medication that decreases inflam-
 mation or infection in the eye while also treating any under-
 congenital abnormal development of the drainage angle,
lying systemic cause of the uveitis. Medications can vary de-
 inflammation within the eye (uveitis),
pending on the cause of the disease.
 luxation of the lens from its normal position, and
● trauma to the eye causing blood in the eye (hyphema).
Signalment
Discussing Uveitis with the Client
 The disease is possible in both dogs and cats, but rarer in
+
Uveitis is an infection or inflammation of the inner
cats. The disease typically affects dogs 4-9 years of age.
aspect of the eye.
Breeds with a predilection for primary glaucoma are the
 The disease can occur as a primary problem from
trauma, irritant, or topical solution and sets up a mod-
●artic breeds (husky, malamute),
erate to severe inflammation. Uveitis can also occur
Bouvier,
secondarily to other systemic infectious disease.
basset hound,
Common signs of uveitis are red, inflamed eyes
chow chow,
that are sensitive to light with possible clear or mu-
 shar-pei, and
copurulent discharge. The eyes can be painful to
 spaniel breeds (American and English cocker, Welsh
touch, the pupils may be constricted secondary to
springer).
ocular pain, and vision may be affected because of
the pet's sensitivity to light.
Common Points in Medical History
 Diagnosis is based on ocular examination and clin-
 The chief point is severe red, irritated eyes (conjunctivitis).
ical diagnostics, as well as systemic blood work to
 There is acute pain and sensitivity to light. The patient may
help define the cause.
be acutely blind. Finally, with chronic disease, the eye itself
 Treatment is focused on medically treating the in-
may be enlarged (see Figure 20.11).
fections and inflammation of the eye and treating
the primary systemic disease if evident
Common Observations on Initial Examination
 The patient must be closely monitored while being
 Common changes in the affected eyes are
treated because of the concerms that the infection
may affect the normal drainage of intraocular fluid,
 an eye that is sensitive to light,
increasing intraocular pressure and potentially pro-
 a painful eye,
ducing glaucoma and blindness.
a red, inflamed eye,
● a clear discharge from eye,
Chapter 20: Eyes and Ears
283
Discussing Glaucoma with the Client
 The eye produces a thick viscous liquid that helps
maintain the shape and gives nutrition to the inter-
nal structures of the eye.
 This liquid medium is produced by small glands lo-
cated behind the iris and is eliminated through
small pores also located near the iris.
If at any time there is a decrease in drainage of this
liquid media, the ocular pressures can increase.
If pressures are more than 25 mm Hg, the retina
and nervous tissue within the eye can become dam-
aged or destroyed.
Figure 20.11. Image of a right eye affected with glaucoma. This
 Glaucoma is more common in canines between 4
eye is swollen, painful, and blind. Reprinted with permission from
and 9 years of age. The following breeds are more
Jeffrey Bowersox, DVM ACVO, Veterinary Specialty Center of
susceptible to the disease:
 Delaware, 1212 E. Newport Pike, Wilmington, DE 19804.
-Artic breeds (husky, malamute, etc.)
-Bouvier
-Bassett hound
-Chow chow
 an eye (itself) that begins to look swollen and enlarged,
-Shar-pei
-Spaniel breeds (American and English cocker,
a chronically inflamed eye, and
 cloudiness to the comea.
Welsh springer)
 The patient presents with red, irritated eyes that
Complications
10 umbs Aeu ad au1 yono 0n mud aq Ae
 If not diagnosed and treated quickly, glaucoma can produce 
show pain in normal room light or daylight. The
  ae aaq aa an m ap ad
eyes themselves may appear swollen.
rapidly progress to permanent visual loss.
Diagnosis is based upon ocular pressures meas ured
by a manual or electronic Tonometer. Other blood
Diagnosis
work may be recommended if the veterinarian is
 The diagnosis of glaucoma is based on increased intraocular
concermed about other ocular or systemic disease
pressure (more than 25 mm hg) as observed by Schiotz or
that could produce a secondary glaucoma
 Treatment is based on how severe and acute the
digital tonometry (i.e., Tonopen). Because glaucoma can
occur from other disease entities, the veterinarian may sug-
onset of disease occurs. In acute cases, treatment is
focused on medication and support. With chronic
gest other diagnostics to assess if there are any other ocular
 or systemic diseases that may predispose the eyes. Some of
-sp aq ose  aa an rg sundo ns 'a
 these diagnostics tests can be the following.
cussed.
Without treatment, the pet can become blind and
Baseline blood clinical diagnostics (i.e., complete
have a severely painful eye.
blood count and chemistry): This clinical diagnostic
 Many of these cases may need a referral to a veteri-
tool evaluates the body for signs of systemic infection
nary ophthalmologist for more in-depth medical
and metabolic or organ disease that may produce uveitis.
and surgical treatment options.
Viral serology: Viral testing for Felv, FIV, and other
chronic systermic diseases can help identify a potential
primary cause of disease.
Treatment
Infectious disease titer screens: Testing for specific dis-
 Because acute glaucoma can rapidly progress to permanent
ease in the geographical area that could be linked to
visual loss, initial treatment by veterinarians is aimed at re-
chronic infections in the eyes may be suggested (i.e., val-
ducing intraocular pressure with oral and intravenous med-
ley fever, tick fever, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, etc.).
ications. Glaucoma cases may need to be referred to a vet-
+
Schirmer tear test: The tear test will evaluate the eyes
erinary ophthalmologist early in the onset of the disease for
for an accompanying dry eye condition, which would
more specific medical and surgical treatment.
also need to be treated.
With acute glaucoma treatment goals are as follows.
 Ocular corneal staining: Staining detects ulceration in
the cornea that can occur secondary to glaucoma.
Hospitalization and fluids: The patient may need to be
 Cormeal staining is also necessary to make sure that it is
admitted into the hospital for monitoring intraocular
safe to use Shiotz tonometry to evaluate ocular pressures.
pressure and the administration of intravenous and
284
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
i  a d m  
Common Points in Medical History
pressure.
The chief complaint is irritated eyes with excessive tearing.
 Medications: Both topical and systemic medications are
used to aid in the decrease of pressure within the eye.
Common Observations on Initial Examination
Treating the underlying disease: If there is the presence
Common changes in the affected eyes (see Figure 20.5) are
of an underlying cause for the glaucoma (e.g., lens luxa-
tion, chronic infection inside the eye, etc.), the primary
● increased tearing of the eyes (epiphora),
disease must also be treated and controlled.
 red, inflamed eyes,
chronic mucoid discharge from eyes,
With chronic glaucoma treatment goals are as follows.
cloudiness of comea, and
+
visible pigmentation in the cormea.
● Treating the underlying disease: See the discussion
above.
Complicafions
●Medications: Medications are both topical and systemic
 If not diagnosed and corrected, entropion can produce
 and will aid in the decrease of pressure and pain within
chronic irritation, ulceration, and pigmentation that may
the eye.
 lead to pain and discomfort as well as decreased vision.
Surgery: With blind, painful eyes, an eye enucleation
(removal) or a prosthetic implant may be suggested.
Diagnosis
The disease is generally diagnosed with evidence of con-
Prevention
junctivitis, cormeal ulceration, and the presence of repetitive
 Monitoring ocular pressures in breeds that are predisposed
skin folds irritating and touching the comea. However, since
to glaucoma and monitoring patients with underlying dis-
this disease could be caused by other causes, the veterinar-
ease that could produce glaucoma can prevent the disease.
ian may suggest the following diagnostic tests:
Entropion
Entropion is an abnormal turning of the lid with resultant ir-
ritation of the cornea by hair and lashes. Over time, chronic
Discussing Entropion with the Client
 irritation and ocular pain make the affected animal very un-
●Entropion is an abnormal tuming of the lid with
comfortable.
resultant irritation of the cormea by hair and lashes.
Entropion is commonly seen in dogs and cats, es-
Signalment
pecially in those breeds with short noses and exces-
 Entropion is commonly seen in dogs and cats, especially
sive skin folds. The following common breeds are
those breeds with short noses and excessive skin folds. It has
affected:
been reported in puppies as young as 2-6 weeks old (espe-
Shar-pei
cially chow chow and shar-pei), but usually affects animals
Chow chow
 m As s os 1l 'a jo  1  ssa
Spaniels
infection around the eye (conjunctivitis/uveitis). Common
-Retrievers
breeds affected are the
-English bulldogs
Pugs
●shar-pei,
Pekingese
●chow chow,
Mastiffs
 spaniels,
Saint Bernard
retrievers,
Newfoundland
+
 English bulldog,
 Clinical signs include red, irritated eyes with heavy
pug,
au p (nd) as and on a
Pekingese,
tearing. The eyes themselves may be hard to visu-
mastiff,
alize due to swelling of the skin around the eyes
 Saint Bemard, and
and hair touching and irritating the cormea.
+
Newfoundland.
● Treatment usually entails surgical procedures that
+
temporarily or permanently tack up the extra skin
Etiology
-l pue sunn nu juaaad o sa au punoe
 Entropion is generally caused by a congenital predisposition
ing the cormea.
in facial conformation producing an excess and redundancy
●If entropion is not diagnosed and treated the
 of skin and facial folds on the head and eyes. In some cases,
 chronic irritation can produce corneal ulceration,
entropion can occur secondary to chronically inflamed and
 pigmentation, and, rarely, blindness.
irritated eyes (spastic entropion).
Chapter 20: Eyes and Ears
285
 Diagnostic blood work
Schirmer tear test
Ocular comeal staining
 Conjunctival smear/biopsy
Treatmen
Pinna
 Treatment is based on the presentation of the animal and the
severity of the disease noted.
 Medications: Medications are focused on decreasing
conjunctival and ocular inflammation (caused secondar-
ily by the skin irritation) while keeping the eye lubri-
cated. Medications can vary depending on the type of
secondary disease present (e.g., conjunctivitis, corneal
External
auditory meatus
ulceration)
 Surgery: If the eyes are persistently irritated from inva-
sion of the excess skin, temporary or permanent surgical
repair may be recommended depending on the age of the
 pet and the severity of the condition.
Prevenfion
 Early monitoring of susceptible breeds as puppies for obvi-
 ous entropion can help decrease and prevent chronic corneal
irritation and minimize damage and sight impairment.
The Ear
The ears have two functions; they receive auditory stimuli
 and maintain equilibrium and balance (see Figure 20.12).
The ear is divided into two parts: the extermal and intermal
Inner
structures
of
the
ear
aspects of the ear.
within
boney
skull.
Comprising the middle and inner
ear canals.
●The external ear anatomy consists of the earflap (pinna)
and the canal that leads from the eardrum outward (ex-
Figure 20.12.
Illustration of the architecture of the ear.
Reprinted with permission from Jeffrey Bowersox, DVM ACVO,
ternal acoustic meatus). These structures function as a
Veterinary Specialty Center of Delaware, 1212 E. Newport Pike,
funnel-like receptacle that collects sound vibrations and
Wilmington, DE 19804.
focuses them toward the inner ear.
●The inner ear structures, housed within the bony skull,
 are composed of the middle and inner ear, which func-
Obtaining a History in Patients with Otic
tions to transmit and convert the sound vibrations into
Disease
nerve impulses; they also act as a receptors for equi-
librium.
 Key questions to ask when obtaining a history from a patient
with ear disease are presented next.
 In a general practice, the majority of otic disease is pre-
sented as an inflammatory extermal ear problem (otitis). In
Does the Pet Have a History of Chronic Ear Infections?
As previously discussed with skin allergies (see Chapter 19),
ness issues. Otitis exterma may be associated with bacterial,
it is important to know how often ear infections occur and
fungal, yeast, or parasitic infections (ear mites). Otitis can
what was used to treat the ear in the past.
 be made worse with other systemic problems, such as aller-
gies, hormonal disease (i.e. hypothyroidism), and localized
Does the Pet Scratch and Chew Elsewhere, or Does the
masses and tumors (i.e., polyps). Narrowing of the extermal
Patient Have a History of Skin Allergies?
ear canal, hair growing in the ear canal, and a pendulous
Animals with chronic skin allergies can also have flare ups
floppy ear pinna may be associated with inadequate air
of ear infections. These patients may also need systemic
 mn n a asospa  p a an u n
medication for allergies to help reduce whole-body inflam-
infection.
mation and pruritus.
286
Section 2:Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Is the Canine Patient Being Treated for
Hypothyroidism?
 Low-thyroid animals can be more predisposed to ear infec.
tions.
Is the Animal a Swimmer?
 Pets that swim frequently can predispose themselves to
chronic ear infections.
Does the Animal Have a Long Pendulous Pinna That
Covers the Opening of the External Ear Canal?
Animals that have longer pinna that fully cover the ear canal
-Axo pasaap mn anp suaun a mn auond ao aq e
 gen concentration in the deeper ear.
Does the Pet Have Exposure to Strays and Other
Animals?
Figure 20.13. Image of an infected ear canal. Note the severe
 Pets with exposure to other animals and strays have in-
swelling of the canal itself.
creased risk of contracting ear mites.
Physical Changes to the Ear on Initial
Assessment
When evaluating an animal on an initial assessment, some
very simple observation of the ears can tell you a great deal
about ear infections and the overall health of the animal.
These factors are as follows.
● Is there debris, odor, or purulent discharge evident in
the ear canal? Does the ear canal seem swollen and in-
flamed (see Figure 20.13)? Does the ear canal appear to
be narrowed?
● Is there unusual pigment or bruising to the earflap?
Yellowing of the earflap (jaundice) can be seen with liver
disease or autoimmune hemolytic anemia (see Figure
20.14). Bruising on the earflap and on other parts of the
blood.
Figure 20.14. Image of a yellow ear flap. This pigmentation can
Does the pet have a head tilt? Animals with severe inner
suggest liver or an autoimmune disease.
ear infections will sometimes preset with significant
head tilts to the left or right side. The direction of the tilt
 can suggest which ear is affected.
● Does the pet have a balance problem, rapid side-to-
side eye movement, or act as if it cannot balance itself?
 Furthermore, some patients may be in pain and may need se-
Inner ear disease can present with severe loss of balance,
 dation or a short-acting anesthetic in order to perform a thor.
rapid eye movements (nystagmus), and uncoordination
ough ear examination. Some potential diagnostic tests may
so severe that the pet may almost seem as if it is seizur-
be as follows.
ing. However, it is important to note that loss of balance
can also be related to central nervous system disease as
 Ear cytology: A clinical diagnostic test for acute/chronic
well.
ear disease is an ear cytology using tri-color/Diff-Quik
 stain. Cytology can show bacterial and fungal pathogens,
Diagnostics of Ear Disease
as well as the presence of white blood cells.
 Ear mite cytology: Similar to ear cytology, the debris
As with the eye, there are specific ear diagnostic tests to
from the ear is placed on a slide containing mineral oil. If
help identify the cause of the problem. However, it is impor-
ear mites are present, the mite and its eggs may be ob-
tant to note that because the ear is also apart of the integu-
served.
Chapter 20: Eyes and Ears
287
 Culture and sensitivity: When chronic bacterial infec-
shut and calcifying into bone. As the ear canal begins to
tion is suspected, the bacteria can be cultured and an ef-
close, infection continues at a more rapid rate, infecting the
fective antibiotic can be indicated.
inner ear. Otitis can occur secondary to masses and polyps
 Diagnostic blood work: When concerns of systemic dis-
within the inner ear or from a bloodborme infection (rarely).
ease causing changes to the skin and ear canal are sus-
pected, diagnostic blood work might be suggested:
Common Points in Medical History
- Complete blood count
Patients will present with a history of shaking the head, rub-
Chemistry panel
bing at their ears, malodor coming from the ears, ear sensi-
 Thyroid level
tivity, and observable debris within the ear canal.
Viral serology (Felv/FIV)
 Infectious screens (fungal)
Common Observations on Initial Examination
Physical symptoms depend on the type of ear infection, its
chronicity, and severity of infection. Common signs may be
Discussing Clinical Diagnostics for the Ears with
as follows.
the Client
Ear cytology: By taking an ear swab and examin-
Physical Signs of Otitis Externa
ing it under the microscope, the veterinarian can
 Ears red and inflamed
observe if the infection is caused by yeast, bacteria,
 Scratching of the ears
or if it is a mixed infection. This will aid in the
Tilting of the head
 choice of medication for treatment.
 Pain and sensitivity around the ear
 Ear mite cytology: By examining the debris in min-
 Odor and debris in the ear canal
eral oil under magnification, the veterinarian can ob-
serve if adult ear mites or ear mite eggs are evident.
Physical Signs of Inner or Middle Ear Infection (Otitis
 Culture and sensitivity: With chronic severe ear
Media/Interna)
infections, the debris can be cultured to find out ex-
●Shaking of the head
actly what type of bacterial component is evident
 Smell noted from the ears
 an s no sa  mn a p
+
 Ears red and inflamed
teria are sensitive.
 Tilting of the head
Diagnostic blood work: Since ear infections can
 Pain and sensitivity around the ear
Occur secondary to other systemic diseases, general
Problems walking/uncoordination
blood work, thyroid levels ,and infectious diseases
Vomiting/nausea
titers may be suggested.
 Inability to eat properly
 Rapid movement of the eyes back and forth (nystagmus)
●Elevation of the third eyelid
Diseases of the Ear
Complicafions
Ear Infections (Otitis)
If not diagnosed and treated an outer ear infection (otitis
 Typically, ear infections are inflammations and/or infections
externa) can become a chronic severe infection that enters
 the middle and inner ear drum, causing problems with the
tions (otitis externa) are generally the most common and
 animal's ability to balance and hear.
benign. More rarely, infections of the inner ear canal (otitis
 media or otitis interna) can be much more serious because
Diagnosis
the infection can begin to affect balance.
 As discussed above, clinical diagnostics for the ear can in-
volve cytology, culture and sensitivity, and possibly sys-
Signalment
temic blood work. The clinical tests depend on how the pa-
Ear infections can affect both cats and dogs of any age.
tient presents, the appearance of the ear canals based on
 However, dogs with long earflaps are more predisposed to
preliminary examination, and past history of ear infections.
infections. Some species with this type of ear anatomy are
cocker spaniels, springer spaniels, golden retrievers, terriers,
Treatment
 and poodles. There is no age or sexual predilection.
Treatment is focused on destroying the infection present in
au aq  il ay adod on ea a sua ue a a
Etiology
essary to continue treating the ear infection until all signs of
The disease is caused by a chronic buildup of waxy debris
infection have been gone for 2-3 weeks. Stopping treatment
and bacteria that cause a progressive inflammation within the
ear canal. As the infection becomes more chronic, the ear
produce a severe chronic ear infection. Some possible treat-
canal's cartilage can become chronically infected, swelling
ment options are discussed next.
288
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology
The Science behind the Diseases
● Medications: With mild ear infections, ear-cleaning liq-
Ear Mite Infection (Otitis)
uid and topical medication may be suggested. Systemic
Ear mite infections are inflammations of the outer ear canal
antibiotics are also possible given the evidence of severe
caused by the ear mite Otodectes cynotis.
infection.
● Surgical ear flush/otoscopy: With chronic infection or
Etiology
evidence of deeper infection, an ear flushing and inmer
 Ear mite infection is common in young puppies and kittens
ear exam under anesthesia can be extrermely beneficial.
or outside cats. There is no age, breed, or sexual predilec-
This will allow the veterinarian to examine the deeper ear
tion. The disease is spread by direct contact from animal to
canal for foreign material, polyps or masses, or possible
animal and is very contagious.
 punctures to the inner eardrum, while also allowing a
cleaning of the ears with large quantities of antiseptic
Cause of Disease
solutions.
The disease is caused by the ear mite Otodectes cynotis.
● Surgical repair to the ear canal and opening of the
inner ear drum: This procedure is generally done only
Common Points in Medical History
in severe infection of ear cartilage with closing of the ear
Patients will present with a history of shaking the head, rub-
canal and infection of the inner ear and bony labyrinth.
bing at their ears, malodor coming from the ears, ear sensi-
This surgical resection of the ear canal and opening of the
tivity, scratching at the ears, self-traumatizing the head and
- n o pa  a n n a 
ear regions, and observable debris within the ear canal.
rial may be the only way to resolve a severe chronic in-
fection.
Common Observations on Inifial Examination
Physical symptoms of an ear mite infection are
Prevenfion
 Routine cleaning of the pet's ears and monitoring for changes
shaking of the head,
in odor and debris can help prevent or detect early infection
smell noted from the ears,
before a more serious long-term problem can occur.
ears red and inflamed,
black to red flaky debris evident in ears,
 tilting of the head,
Discussing Bacterial or Fungal Otitis with the Client
scabbing and hair loss on head and ear region, and
Ear infections are inflammation of the outer ear
● pain and sensitivity around the ear.
canal, middle ear, or the inner eardrum and bone
Complications
caused primarily by bacteria or fungus.
 If not diagnosed and treated, ear mite infection can produce
 In most cases, infections are mild and of the outer
 a chronic irritated outer ear infection that is infectious to
ear canal, producing discharge and odor from the
ear, sensitivity, and redness.
 other animals in the household.
 In severe cases, ear infections can infect the carti-
lage and bone of the ear, producing chronic in-
flamed ears that may not easily respond to medica-
Discussing Ear Mite Otitis with the Client
tion. Furthermore, the pet may also have deafness
● Ear mite infections are caused by a microscopic
and balance problems.
mite, Otodectes cynotis.
 Diagnosis of ear infections is based on cytology of
●  In most cases, infections are mild and of the outer
the ear debris, culture and sensitivity, and possibly
ear canal, producing discharge and odor from the
 general blood work, if a systemic cause of the dis-
ear, sensitivity, and redness.
ease is suspected.
 Ear mites are contagious to other animals.
 Treatment is based on topical and systemic med-
Diagnosis of ear infections is based on observing
ications. In very sensitive or chronically infected
 an a u uon saa an ou san
ears, surgical options to flush and clean the ear may
 Treatment is based on topical and systemic med-
need to be explored.
ications.
If not treated, severe chronic ear infections can
If not treated, the patient will develop severe
occur, producing early deafness, balance problems,
 chronic ear infections that can be infective to other
 and severe infections that may require surgery.
animals.
Chapter 20: Eyes and Ears
289
Diagnosis
Ear mite cytology is usually suggested to observe the ear
mite and its eggs.
Treatment
Treatment is focused on topical or systemic medication that
kills the ear mites and cleaning of the ear. Repeat treatment
to prevent reinfection may be necessary, as well as treating
all pets within the household.
Aural Hematoma
An aural hematoma is an accumulation of blood between
the cartilage of the earflap and the skin causing a firm, en-
'sassaoid payood aun sy 'pimq on pm jo yayood suail
the earflap becomes more engorged and painful.
Signalment
Figure 20.15. Image of an aural hematoma. The swelling of the
A ural hematomas can affect dogs and cats of any age.
pinna is filled with blood secondary to the pet shaking its head
and causing capillary bleeding.
Cause of Disease
The cause of the formation of the aural hematoma is due to the
pet's shaking its head vigorously until blood vessels within the
earflap begin to ooze and blood accumulates. Causes of head
Discussing Aural Hematomas with the Client
       s    a 
 An aural hematoma is a collection of blood within
the ear, or a small mass or polyp within the ear canal.
the ear flap.
Normally, the ear flap is closely associated with the
Common Points in Medical History
Patients will present with a swelling evident on the ear pinna
cartilage of the ear, and as the pet shakes its head,
        n
and may also present with shaking the head, rubbing at their
bleed and ooze. As this process continues, a pocket
ears, malodor coming from the ears, ear sensitivity, and ob-
of blood can form.
 servable debris within the ear canal.
Aural hematomas usually occur secondary to ear
 infections, ear masses and polyps, and pruritis.
Common Observations on Initial Examination
 Physical symptoms or an aural hematoma can be
 Diagnosis of the cause of the hematoma can in-
 clude ear cytology, culture and sensitivity, and gen-
earflap becoming enlarged, swollen, and painful (see
eral blood work.
Figure 20.15),
Treatment is focused on draining the hematoma,
shaking the head and ears,
usually surgically, and placing sutures or a drain to
head tilt toward affected ear,
help prevent the blood clot from reforming. Once
rubbing ear on ground or scratching ear, and 
drained, the pet can be placed on medication to help
 smell or odor coming from the ear.
control the cause of head shaking and itchiness.
 Aural hematomas can occur elsewhere on the pinna
Complications
or on the other ear as well.
Once the hematoma is created, blood will continue to fill the
 If not treated, the hematoma can enlarge, affecting
area until the region is lanced and repaired. Without any
the entire pinna, become painful, and cause a per-
form of treatment, the earflap can be chronically painful and
manent cosmetic change to the ear.
change its normal appearance.
Diagnosis
Treatment
 Because this disease is possibly produced from an underly-
 The goal of treatment is to drain the hermatoma and control
ing infection, cytology, culture and sensitivity, and systemic
the cause of the head shaking and pruritus. There are many
blood work may be recommended.
different techniques used to lance and drain the hematoma.
290
Section 2: Anatomy and Physiology—The Science behind the Diseases
Some techniques that have been used are
CD-ROM I reviews material presented in this chapter.
● repetitive drainage of the hematoma in the awake animal,
Please try the cases for Section 2 (Anatomy and Physiology-
 surgical drainage and placement of a Penrose drain/teat
The Science behind the Diseases) to help reinforce the infor-
canula, and
mation presented here.
surgical drainage and placement of full-thickness sutures
to form granulomas that helps prevent reformation of the
hematoma.
Please be aware, however, that hematomas can occur on
other parts of the same earflap and on the other ear at any
time.
A surgical ear flushing may also be recommended at the
o  a aa dy m  u go a
 debris and infection occurring in the ear. Finally, topical and
systemic medication can be used to help control/cure the un-
derlying cause of the hematoma.
Prevenfion
Early detection and control of ear infections, polyps, and
masses can prevent head shaking and pruritis.
Section3
Clinical Diagnostics-
The Science behind the Diagnostics
The goal of this section is to understand how each diagnostic test is performed and what each test's significance is. A team
what other samples may need to be collected if there are abnormalities detected.
Chapter 21
Complete Blood Count
The complete blood count (CBC) examines the blood for
too long to collect or if the tube was not adequately
changes in the red and white blood cell count, platelet count,
mixed. The presence of a clot will not allow an accu-
blood parasites, and changes in cell morphology that can
rate determination of the platelet number and red blood
suggest underlying diseases. A CBC is an integral part of a
cell count (PCV).
routine minimum database or metabolic health screen. It's
● Agglutination: When mixing the purple-topped tube,
components are
it is important to check to see if the red cells precipi
tate out like snow in a snow globe. This can be sugges-
a packed cell volume (PCV)/total protein,
tive of a severe disease process, immune-mediated
red blood cell count,
hemolytic anemia. In this disease process, the red
white blood cell count,
 blood cells adhere (agglutinate) to each other because
●a platelet count, and
the patient's immune system is responding to their red
blood film evaluation (differential).
blood cells as if they were a foreign substance. Once
stuck together, the red blood cells are removed by cells
Depending on the hospital, the CBC can be done in-house
in the spleen and destroyed. If there is a concern of ag-
or sent out to a veterinary diagnostic laboratory. The in-
glutination, the veterinarian should be notified imme-
  i     sn s
diately (see Figure 21.1).
cell counts; however, the hospital team members should be
comfortable in evaluating PCV, total protein, and a differen-
tial blood film. All team members need to become proficient
Sample Preparation and Evaluation
 o h poo u sa a aa un
There are three components to the complete blood count
 can help the medical team understand diseases affecting a pa-
 They are the
tient. Furthermore, all team members should be able to dis-
cuss why the CBC is being recommended and be able to ex-
PCV/total protein,
plain the type of information it gives the veterinarian.
white and red blood cell count, and
●differential slide cytology.
Obtaining and Handling the Blood Sample:
The Purple-Topped Tube
Each test is an important key to evaluating the overall health
of the patient. Although it is the veterinarian's responsibility
1. Once collected from a peripheral vein, the blood is placed
to evaluate and interpret changes in the blood work, the
into an EDTA (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid). At
medical team members should have an understanding of
least I cc of blood is needed in most cases.
what each test evaluates and the possible diseases the abnor-
 2. The tube should be gently inverted 5-10 times to mix the
malities suggest. This will allow the team member to alert
anticoagulant thoroughly with the blood. This tube pre-
the veterinarian when there are significant changes, better
vents blood clotting and allows a CBC to be performed.
monitor the patient, and more effectively communicate the
3. Check the tubes. On initial blood collection, the blood
importance of the diagnostic tests to the client.
tubes should also be checked. Changes in the EDTA tube
can suggest disease or artifacts that can affect the CBC.
Packed Cell Volume (PCV/Total Protein)
The tube should be checked for the following.
The PCV is the most reliable measurement of the red blood
● Amount: If the tube cannot be completely filled, at
cell level in a patient: It is the percentage of red blood cells
least l cc of fresh blood should be added to a standard
present in a peripheral blood sample. It allows qualitative
purple-topped tube. If there is not enough blood, the
evaluation of any change in the volume of red blood cells in
EDTA fluid can dilute the sample and decrease all
whole blood that could suggest a disease process (see Figure
blood parameters.
21.2). Many blood cell counters do a calculated hematocrit
● Blood clots: Although a blood clot is not suggestive of
(HCT), which is an evaluation of red blood cell concentra-
pathology, a blood clot occurs if the blood sample took
tion that is a calculated measurement based on the total red
293
294
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
Packed Cell volume
 or Hematocrit
-Serum
Total
volume
-Buffy coat
Red blood cell
volume
Figure 21.2. Normal hematocrit. In this illustration, the hemat-
ocrit is spun down and separated into the red blood cell volume,
the buffy coat, and the serum.
blood cells and platelets. Significant increases or de-
creases in this level should be recorded.
6. The layer above the buffy coat is the plasma (or fluid
Figure 21.1.
. The image shows two purple-topped tubes. The
component of the blood); it should be opaque and straw-
 one on the left is normal blood. The one on the right shows agglu-
colored. Changes in color should be recorded in the
tination. This pattern, which looks like snow in a snow globe,
suggests the white blood cells are attacking the red blood cells as
record.
7. The tube is then broken above the buffy coat layer and the
foreign bacteria. This suggests an immune-mediated hemolytic
anemia.
plasma is placed on a refractometer. The sample is exam-
 ined and the total protein is measured. This result is then
recorded in the chart.
blood cell count and the size of the red blood cells. In an ill
patient, abnormalities in the red and white blood cells can
Normal Measurements
affect the PCV, making the measurement incorrect by a few
In Table 21.1, normal values of the PCV/total protein are
percentage points.
 listed. These reference ranges can vary depending on the lab
The procedure for obtaining a PCV and total protein is as
or instrument used. The values are meant only as a refer-
follows.
ence, and any concems regarding these measurements must
always be discussed with the veterinarian.
1. Whole blood from an EDTA or heparin tube is placed
into a microhematocrit tube. The tube is sealed with
Abnormalities in Packed Cell Volume
clay.
d aui ui aseasip snoas isasans ueo Ad ay u sasu
 2. The tube is placed in a centrifuge and spun for 5 minutes
tient. Any significant changes should be discussed with the
at high speed. The centrifuge should maintain a constant
veterinarian immediately. The significance of overall
high speed to prevent artifactual changes in the cells
changes is discussed next.
3. While spinning, the blood separates into columns of red
blood cells, white blood cells, and plasma.
Low Packed Cell Volume(Red Blood Cell Concentration)
4. The tube is placed on a hematocrit card reader, and the
Decreases in the red blood cell concentration suggest dis-
top of the plasma column and bottom of the red blood
ease or maybe an artifact. A low PCV can be caused from
cell column are lined up with the card. The red blood cell
the following.
level is then read and recorded as a percentage.
5. The white layer just above the red blood cells, the buffy
Dilution: If the blood sample is too small, the EDTA in
m an suasada pue (%l> Annsn) hs st eo
the tube can dilute the PCV In this case, other parameters
Chapter 21: Complete Blood Count
295
Table 21.1. Normal hematocrit values.
ment of the patient or excessive aspiration pressure of the
 syringe has artifactually produced hemolysis. If hemoly.
sis is noted, the EDTA tube should be checked for agglu-
Measurement
Normal
tination.
Hematocrit
Canine: 35-55%
Yellow: Jaundice indicates an increased concentration of
Feline: 26-46 %
bilirubin in the plasma. Bilirubin is a breakdown pig-
Buffy coat (qualitative
 Should always be evident, but generally
ment of hemoglobin from the red blood cell. Jaundice can
measurement)
less than 1% of column.
occur when there is marked red blood cell breakdown in
Serum
Clear to light straw color.
 Total protein
5.5-7.5 mg/dl
the vessels or removal of red blood cells by the macro-
phages in the spleen and liver (i.e., immune-mediated he-
molytic anemia) or decreased clearance of bilirubin by
the liver. If jaundice is caused by red blood cell break-
down, there should be anemia with either hemolysis or
(i.e., white blood cells and platelets) are also usually low.
agglutination noted in the EDTA tube.
 If there is concerm for dilution, a new sample should be
White: Lipemia indicates high fat content in the plasma.
drawn and tested.
It is often seen in animals that have just eaten a fatty meal
Blood clot: A blood clot in the EDTA tube lowers the
that causes an increase in the fat (lipid) content in the
amount of red blood cells available to be measured by the
plasma. It can also be associated with specific diseases af-
PCV. If a clot is suspected, a new sample should be drawn
fecting fat metabolism (i.e., diabetes mellitus, hypera-
and tested.
drenocorticism, pancreatitis, liver disease, hyperlipidemia,
 Increased destruction of red blood cells: If the patient
hypercholesterolemia). Lipemia can affect many parame-
is destroying red blood cells at an increased rate due to an
ters in the chemistry and should be noted in the record.
immune-mediated disease (i.e., immune-mediated he-
molytic anemia), the PCV will be low. Furthermore,
Abnormalities with Total Protein
there may be agglutination present in the EDTA tube; the
Although many diseases can affect total protein concentra-
plasma should be hemolyzed (see below).
tion, it is important to understand overall changes in protein
Blood loss: When a patient is actively bleeding, the PCV
can suggest serious disease. Overall changes in protein con-
will be low. With severe blood loss, there can also be a
centration should be correlated with changes in the animal's
low total protein and low platelet count evident (see
overall health (see Table 21.2).
below).
Anemia of chronic disease: In patients suffering from
Abnormalities in the Buffy Coat
severe chronic disease (i.e., renal, liver, or infectious dis-
The buffy coat is the layer of cells just above the red blood
eases), the animal may become increasingly anemic as
cell column that corresponds to the white blood cells and
the disease progresses. This is usually a mild anemia.
platelets. The buffy coat layer is normally less than 1% of
the total blood column. Changes in the buffy coat can sug-
Increased PCV (Red Blood Cell Concentration)
gest serious disease processes (see Table 21.3).
Increases in the PCV generally suggest dehydration. As the
patient's hydration status becomes more challenged, the
The Complete Blood Cell Count
 amount of fluid in the blood decreases, increasing the per-
centage of red blood cells in the PCV. The more significant
With newer, less expensive technologies, complete red blood
the dehydration, the higher the PCV Dehydration also causes
cell, white blood cell, and platelet counts can be obtained
elevation in the total protein.
with an automatic cell counter in the hospital or by submit-
ting a sample to an outside laboratory. Most instruments
Qualitative Abnormalities in the Plasma
 offer reliable evaluation of cell populations in most disease
Serum color can change significantly with metabolic and
processes. Because of the availability of affordable cell
immune-mediated diseases, difficulty with venipuncture,
counters, most hospitals do not spend the time or money ed-
and feeding. It is extremely important to note changes in the
ucating their staff on performing manual blood cell counts.
plasma because they can suggest disease conditions, as well
 The manual techniques are time consuming, expensive, and
as affect other chemical measurements in the chemistry pro-
 must be practiced regularly for accuracy.
file (see Chapter 22). Common changes in the plasma are
However, no cell counter can evaluate changes in blood
discussed next.
cell morphology that can assist in characterizing acute infec-
tions, blood parasites, sepsis, cancer, and metabolic dis-
 Red: Hemolysis, or increased red blood cell destruction,
eases. It is essential that every technical team member be
is seen with diseases that disrupt or lyse red blood cells
able to perform a blood cell differential count and identify
(i.e., immune-mediated hemolytic anemia) or seen sec-
changes inred blood cell,whiteblood cell,and plateletmor-
ondary to a difficult blood draw where increased move-
phology. These observable changes may be the only indica-
296
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
Tabfe 21.2.  An overview of changes in total protein.
Tabie 21.3.
 Changes in the buffy coat.
Measurement
Possible Cause
Measurement
Possible Cause
Increased total protein 
● In general, increases in total protein 
Increased buffy coat
● If buffy coat is increased, it can sug-
Total protein >7.5 mg/dl
concentration are seen with dehydra-
(>1% of entire
 gest infection, inflammation, or 
tion. Similar to the increase in the
column)
cancer (i.e., lymphoma, mast cell
hematocrit, the protein concentration 
leukemia, etc.).
is higher in blood with a lower fluid 
● When noted, a buffy coat smear is
volume.
recommended. (See blood cell
●It is important to note that chronic in-
differential.)
fectious, inflammatory, and neoplas-
●The presence of abnormal cells in 
 tic disease can also cause increases
the buffy coat may suggest white
 in total protein concentration.
 blood cell cancer (i.e., lymphoma,
 Decreased total protein 
When decreased total protein con-
leukemia).
Total protein <5.0 mg/dl,
centration and decreased PCV are
Decreased buffy coats 
● Decreased buffy coat layer size is as-
with decrease in
seen in acute disease conditions, the
(<1%)
sociated with decreased white blood
hematocrit
main concern is external blood loss.
cell counts. They can be seen with
 When the animal is actively bleeding.
 severe viral infections that cause
protein will follow the red blood cells
immunosuppression by decreasing 
out of the vessels.
the white blood cell numbers.
● It is important to note that chronic
● Decreased white blood cell counts
infectious, inflammatory, and neo-
can also be seen with neoplastic.
 plastic diseases can also cause 
hormonal, and severe inflammatory
decreases in both measurements.
disease.
 Decreased total protein
 Decreased total protein concentra-
Total protein <5.0 mg/dl
tion with a nomal red blood cell
with normal hemato-
population can suggest diseases as-
crit.
 sociated with decreased absorption
of protein (gastrointestinal disease),
there are any heartworm parasites, platelet clumps, or large
decreased production of protein (liver
abnormal cells present on the blood film. The parasites,
disease), or increased excretion of
 platelet clumps, and abnormal cells are often at the feath-
protein (renal disease)
 Other chronic inflammatory or neo-
ered edge (see Figure 21.4).
 plastic disease can also produce 
Once the slide is scanned at low power, the slide is then
these changes.
nsa ho pue Ap yu) ramod aun pun pauxa
 objectives) and the slide is moved to the feathered edge
region where the red blood cells are touching but not over-
lapping each other. This area is where cell morphology is
tion of early serious disease. In order to evaluate blood cell
evaluated.
morphology, the team member must be able to produce a
good blood film. There are many ways to produce a good
The Red Blood Cell
blood film. Here is one method.
Mammalian red blood cells are non-nucleated biconcave
discs without intermal organelles. Each cell is bound by a bi-
1. Place a single drop of blood at the end of a microscope
layered lipid membrane and contains 35% hemoglobin by
slide.
volume. Hemoglobin is a large protein molecule closely as-
2. Place another slide in front of the drop of blood at a 45-
sociated with iron. Hemoglobin gives the cells their ability
degree angle to the first slide.
to carry oxygen and CO2.
3. Draw the angled slide back into the drop of blood and
then quickly push it forward across the bottom slide, pro-
Function
ducing a feathered edge (see Figure 21.3). The feathered
 Red blood cells function to carry oxygen to and remove CO2
edge is a tapering at the end of a blood film where the
si uasxo 'sui au q panladxa aq 0 anssn aun woy
cells are not touching. This is where the bulk of the blood
anod pue esns aen on Apoq aun u lao Aiaaa Aq papaau
film evaluation occurs.
 COz, water, and energy in a process called respiration. With-
 out this process, cells cannot produce energy and will die.
Once produced, the slide should be heat fixed and stained
with a differential stain such as a Wright-Giemsa stain or
Life Cycle
Diff-Quik stain. The stain is dried, and the slide is initially
 Red blood cells are produced primarily in the bone marrow.
examined under low power. The entire slide should be
A small amount of red blood cell production occurs in the
scanned to appreciate the overall blood film density, qualita-
liver and spleen. All blood cells, including platelets, are de-
tively observe white blood cell number, and determine if
rived from bone marrow stem cells (see Figure 21.5). When
Chapter 21: Complete Blood Count
297
Figure 21.3.
. To obtain a good feathered edge smear the team member will need two slides and the blood sample (a). One technique is
to place a small bleb of blood on the lower slide (b), then back the advancing slide into the drop (c). Allow the drop of blood to expand
pueey papunoi e yim sps e suionpoid (p) piemioy apls suoueape sn ysnd uun pue spis suoueape au jo ulieu rmoi aun rao
edge (e).
Metarubricyte
WhiteBloodCell
Figure 21.4.Blood smear viewed under low-power lens. This
smear should be evaluated for blood parasites such as heart-
worms, changes in the white blood cell population, and changes
in red blood cell population, suggestive of disease conditions. On
this slide 8-10 white blood cells can be seen without any obvious
large blood parasites seen.
Figure 21.5. Image of normal red blood cells and a nucleated
red blood cell (metarubricyte) that has been pushed out from the
bone marrow. Increased numbers of nucleated red blood cells can
suggest a regenerative response due to an acute or chronic blood
stem cells divide, one daughter cell remains a stem cell and
loss (anemia).
the other can go on to develop into any of the blood cell
types, depending on the hormonal stimulus it receives. If the
cell is destined to be a red blood cell, it will differentiate into
philic red blood cell, and mature red blood cell. The meta-
a rubriblast, the first cell that can be recognized as being in
rubricyte and polychromatophilic red blood cell are often
the red blood cell series. Once the process of differentiation
seen on the blood film, especially with a regenerative ane-
mia. The term nucleated red blood cell (NRBC) is used for
blood cells mature through recognizable stages. In order
any red blood stage with a nucleus; the metarubricyte is the
from least mature to most mature, the red blood cell stages
NRBC most commonly seen on the blood film.
are rubriblast, rubricyte, metarubricyte, polychromato-
The average life span of a mature red blood cell is
298
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
90-120 days. As the cells age, the lipid membranes become
fragile after continuous daily wear and tear as the cells move
through veins and arteries at high speed. As the cells filter
through the spleen, damaged and weakened cells are de-
Roleaux
stroyed. The leftover hemoglobin is degraded to bilirubin,
Formation
sent to the liver, and excreted in the bile.
Agglutination
Changes in Red Blood Cell Number
With low red blood cell count (low PCV) the major concern
Figure 21.6.
 At left, agglutination caused by an immune-
associated with a decrease in red blood cell number is loss 
mediated disease. At right, roleaux formation, a nonpathologic
 of red blood cells through active bleeding or decreased pro-
change in the red blood cell smear.
duction of red blood cells in the marrow. A lower than nor-
mal red blood cell count or PCV is called an anemia.
Significant anemia can be life threatening because the
patient has decreased ability to oxygenate tissues. A de-
Is There Agglutination or Roleaux Formation?
crease in red cell number results in a bone marrow response 
As discussed above, agglutination is the clumping of red
to produce new red cells: this response takes 3-5 days.
blood cells associated with an immune-mediated disease.
As the bone marrow and other tissues respond to the in-
 These cells precipitate out of the blood and can be seen mi-
creased demand, immature red blood cells can be released
croscopically and in the EDTA blood tube. Agglutination
into the peripheral blood.
suggests serious life-threatening disease.
Metarubricytes (nucleated red blood cells), polychro-
Roleaux formation is a stack of red blood cells like a
matophilic red blood cells (see below), and Howell-Jolly
stack of coins. In the horse this is a normal nonpathlogical
bodies (see below) are commonly seen on the blood film
event as blood settles. In the dog and cat it is often seen with
 when there is an appropriate response to a decrease in red
increased total protein or changes in the type of proteins in
blood cell numbers. When these cells are seen in significant
the blood. It is often seen in inflammatory diseases (see
number on a blood film from an anemic patient, this is
Figure 21.6).
termed a regenerative anemia.
 To confirm a regenerative anemia, a special stain process
is used so that the number of immature red blood cells may
Practice Tip: To differentiate between roleaux and
be counted. This stain is new methylene blue, and the im-
agglutination, make a saline prep of a blood drop.
mature red blood cells seen when this stain is used are called
 Roleaux formation will break apart in normal saline;
reticulocytes. Their number often, but not always, correlates
Agglutinated red blood cells continue to stay together.
with the number of polychromatophilic red cells seen on the
routine Diff-Quik or Wright-Giemsa stain.
With increased red blood cell count, as discussed above,
Is There a Variance in the Central Pallor or Color of the
elevations in the red blood cell count is generally associated
Red Blood Cells?
with dehydration. However, there are diseases that are asso-
The central pallor refers to the light area at the center of each
ciated with an increased red blood cell count without any ev-
cell. Dogs have a more pronounced area of central pallor
idence of dehydration.
compared with the cat. The central pallor is due to the con-
cave disc shape of the dog's red blood cell. The cat's red
Evaluating the Red Blood Cell Morphology on
blood cell is less concave and therefore has a much less-
pronounced central pallor.
the Blood Film
 Hypochromasia refers to an increase in the size of the
Normal red blood cells should be evaluated for size, shape,
area of central pallor and is most often due to a decrease in
aod  r as  d a p
the concentration of hemoglobin within the red blood cell.
 cell artifacts, any significant change to the cell morphology
should be discussed with the veterinarian immediately.
 The two most common causes for increased central pal-
(Please see the Red Blood Cell flowchart and Table 21.4).
lor are immature red blood cells and blood loss associ-
 ated iron deficiency.
Evaluating Normal Blood Films
 These cells are larger than mature red blood cells and
A systematic approach to blood film evaluation is necessary
have a lower hemoglobin concentration for the larger cell
to ensure accurate identification of changes in blood cell mor-
volume. They therefore appear to have increased cental
phology. After scanning the slide under low power, the region
pallor.
just inside the feathered edge (the counting region) should be
 Significant chronic blood loss results in iron deficiency
scanned under the oil immersion objective. As the slide is
and, as a consequence, decreased concentration of hemo-
scanned the observations discussed next should be made.
globin within red blood cells.
Chapter 21: Complete Blood Count
299
 In some cases, there can be a small region of increased
worms. This chronic inflammatory disease can produce
central color making a targetlike apperance. These cells 
strands of fibrin and clots and can shear red blood cells.
are called target cells and are most often nonspecific
 Splenic and hepatic disease: With chronic inflamatory
changes seen with numerous diseases. Target cells are
liver and splenic disease, fibrin stands can be produced,
often polychromatophilic as well (see Plate I).
also causing red blood cell shear.
Hypochromasia should not be confused with punched out
Neoplasia Vascular neoplasms such as hemangiosarcoma
red blood cells. Punched out red blood cells are a drying
can cause shearing of the red blood cells due to small
artifact in which the hemoglobin in the red blood cell
clots within the vascular channels.
moves to the perephery of the cell. Usually, this cell type 
has a more regular, even appearance, with the hemoglo-
Spherocytes
bin near the cell wall (see Plate II).
Spherocytes are small, dense red blood cells without the
normal central pallor. Spherocytes are difficult to identify in
Polychromasia refers to a bluish coloration in the red
cat blood due to the small size and lack of central pallor in
blood cells due to remnants of nuclear material. This patterm
the normal cat red blood cell (see Plate VI). Although sphe-
is typically seen when red blood cells are released early from
rocytes appear smaller on the blood film, they do not have a
the bone marrow as the body responds to loss or destruction
significant decrease in cell volume. They are usually seen
of red blood cells (regenerative anemia) (see Plate IHI).
with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. When serum an-
tibodies adhere to the surface of the red blood cell, the
Is There Significant Abnormality in the Red Blood Cell
macrophages in the spleen and liver recognize the damaged
Shape and Internal Structure?
protion of the red cell membrane and pinch it off. The loss
 The slide should be evaluated for overall changes in cell
of cell membrane changes the shape of the red blood cell to
shape. The most important aspect of the evaluation is to
a sphere. Spherocytes should be suspected when there is
identify consistent abnormalities in the cells. Many early
large variability in red blood cell size.
disease conditions can be detected by the technical team
scanning the slide for changes in red cell morphology and
Intracellular Structures
reporting any abnormal cell shapes to the veterinarian or a
Changes in intracellular structures can be subtle and hard to
clinical diagnostic lab. Some possible abnormalites of red
identify. Recognition of abnormal intermal cellular struc-
 blood cell morphology are discussed next.
tures can be the key to early detection of asymptomatic dis-
ease. A possible internal structure is intracellular parasites,
Echinocytes
which are not uncommon in the dog and cat. Mycoplasma
Echinocytes are red blood cells with clublike projections
(formerly Hemobartonella), Babesia, and Cytauxoon are
from the cell surface (see Plate IV). This cell shape change
parasites that can be found in red blood cells (see Plate VII).
can occur in association with
Some of these parasites can produce significant disease and
others can be as ymptomatic. Identification of these parasites
+
 diseases affecting fat metabolism, which produces alter-
and diagnosis at a clinical pathology lab can help prevent
ations in cell mermbrane formation.
acute severe illness in the patient.
a vascular tumor (i.e., hemangiosarcoma) in which
blood is moved through irregular vascular channels
Other Abnormalities
within the tumor at a high rate of speed.
●Howell-Jowell bodies are nuclear remnants seen within
snake bites (i.e., rattlesnake, diamondback, sidewinder),
the cytoplasm as dark-staining bodies. They are typically
whereby blood is exposed to specific snake venoms and
seen with regenerative anemias as the body increases pro-
the red blood cell membrane becomes altered.
duction of red blood cells (see Plate VIII).
crenation, which is produced by the slow drying of blood
 Heinz bodies are denatured hemoglobin fused to the cell
films producing artifactual echinocytes. If crenation is
membrane. Heinz bodies are associated with a specific
toxic injury to red blood cells (oxidative injury). It is
ated for echinocytes.
commonly associated with toxins such as acetaminophen
and onions or garlic. Heinz bodies are often difficult to
Schistocytes
see on a routine Diff-Quik or Wright-Giemsa stain. They
Schistocytes are fragmented red blood cells that are produced
are more easily seen on the new methylene blood stain for
by colliding with intravascular fibrin strands as the body at-
reticulocytes (see Plate IX).
tempts to form clots within the blood vessels (see Plate V).
 These cell types can be associated with the following.
The Immune System and the White Blood Cell
Population
Heartworm disease: Generalized heartworm disease
produces chronic inflammatory reactions in the lungs'
The immune system is a complex cellular defense that rec-
vascular supply as the patient deals with the adult heart-
ognizes foreign substances and infectious agents and
Intracellular Changes -
- Altered fat
CONSULT DOCTOR
metabolism, tumor, toxin
-AIHA
CONSULT DOCTOR
 Regenerative anemia
toxic injury
Redraw sample and start over
deficiency
Spherocytes -
Echinocytes-
Polychromasia
70
000
Blood Clot
CONSULT
ON
ON
Draw EDTA blood sample
evaluate the red blood cells
Yes
 Go on to WBC evaluation
 Make a blood film and 
and check tube
Yes
 Is the sample
Is the cell normal?
Complete Blood Count Differential Flow Chart—-Red Blood Cell Evaluation.
White Blood Cell Population: Count 100 Cells
Roleaux
Agglutination
Agglutination
 Check a saline prep for
CONSULT DOCTOR
agglutination
mediated hemolytic
anemias
Flowchart 21.1.
PCV:
P
300
Number Seen
Normal
Values
 uedoo au ui sanuea pan yep pue usedoio
 Yud e ym yonu puues sau sudonnn
  e  ()
Increased Bands Suggest Acute Disease
Description
 producing immunoglobulin.
or allergic reactions.
staining cytoplasm.
infections.
staining 
for
Neutrophils
Eosinophils
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Cell type'
Bands
100
PiateI:
Hypochromasia occurs secondary to iron deficiency.
Plate Il: Punched-out red blood cells are cells that have their
The lack of iron limits hemoglobin production and produces red
hemoglobin pushed out to the cell margin. These are produced as
blood cells with marked increase in central pallor and margination
a drying artifact and suggest no pathology. Punched-out red blood
 of normal color to the periphery of the cell.
cells can be mistaken for hypochromasia.
Plate Ill:  Polychromasia refers to an increased blue tinge of the
Plate IV: Echinocytes are alterations in the red blood cell mem-
a ar u srd s s nu in anp se 
 brane produced by improper drying of the slide (crenation), dis-
 red blood cells. Changes in these red blood cells suggest a regen-
ease affecting fat metabolism, vascular tumor (i.e., hemangiosar-
erative response to anemia.
coma), or snake bite envenomation.
Plate V: Schistocytes are fragmented red blood cells that are
produced by colliding with intravascular fibrin strands as the body
attempts to form clots within the blood vessels. These cell types
can be associated with heartworm disease, spleen and hepatic
disease, and cancer.
302
Mycoplasma
Spherocyts
Piate VI: Spherocytes are small, dense red blood cells without
Plate VIl: Mycoplasma (formerly Hemobartonella), Babesia,
the normal central pallor. Spherocytes are difficult to identify in
Cytauxoan are parasites that can be found in red blood cells.
cat blood due to the small size and lack of central pallor in the
Some of these parasites can produce significant disease whereas
 normal cat red blood cell. Although spherocytes appear smaller on
others can be asymptomatic. Identification of these parasites and
the blood film, they do not have a significant decrease in cell
diagnosis at a clinical pathology lab can help prevent acute severe
volume. They are usually seen with immune-mediated hemolytic
illness in the patient.
anemia. When serum antibodies adhere to the surface of the red
blood cell, the macrophages in the spleen and liver recognize the
damaged protion of the red cell membrane and pinch it off. The
loss of cell membrane changes the shape of the red blood cell to a
sphere. Spherocytes should be suspected when there is large vari-
Heinz Bodies
ability in red blood cell size.
Howell - Jowell
bodies
Piate IX:
 Heinz bodies are denatured hemoglobin fused to the
cell membrane. Heinz bodies are associated with a specific toxic
injury to red blood cells (oxidative injury). It is commonly asso-
 Heinz bodies are often difficult to see on a routine Diff-Quik or
Wright-Giemsa stain. They are more easily seen on the new
methylene blood stain for reticulocytes.
PiateVIlI:
Howell-Jowell bodies are nuclear remnants seen
within the cytoplasm as dark staining bodies. They are typically
 of red blood cells.
Segrrenited
/Nucleus
Pink-
Cytoplasrm 
Piate X:
 Canine neutrophil. Note the segmented nucleus and the
lysosomes within the cytoplasm.
Neutrophil
Pink
Segrrenited
Cytoplasrm
Nucleus
BAND
Segrmented Nucleus
Unsegrmented
Nucleus
Pink Cytoplasrm
Lysosormie
Plate Xll:   Canine band neutrophil. Note the unsegmented
neutrophil, the pink-staining cytoplasm, and the vacuoles in the
Plate XI: Feline neutrophil. Note the segmented nucleus and the 
 nucleus. Increased bands suggest a response to an acute inflam-
lysosomes within the cytoplasm.
 matory or infectious disease. If observed, increased bands should
 be reported to the veterinarian.
Pink Cytolplasm
egmented
 Segmented Nucleus
Nucleus
Red staining
granules
 Darker Staining
Plate XIII:
 Canine eosinophil. Note the pink cytoplasm,
Granules
segmented nucleus, and red granules. When noted in increased
 numbers, fungal, parasitic, and allergic reactions (rare) are chief
Plate XIV:
 Feline eosinophil. Image of feline eosinophil; these
concerns.
cells contain segmented nuclei, dark-staining granules, and a pink
cytoplasm.
Plate XV:  Canine monocyte. Note the blue-staining cytoplasm
and unsegmented nucleus, It is important to differentiate these 
cell types from band neutrophils. Monocytes are seen with more
chronic infections.
Neutrophil
Piate XVI:
 Feline monocyte. Note the blue cytoplasm and un-
Piate XVHl:  Canine lymphocyte. Note the round large nucleus
segmented nucleus.
with dark blue cytoplasm. These cells produce immunoglobulin
aunuu ue junou pue sepeaui uaiaoy Aynuapi diey on uajoid
response.
Platelet
Piate XVIlI:
 Feline Lymphocyte. Note the round large nucleus
with dark blue cytoplasm. These cells produce immunoglobulin
protein to help identify foreign invaders and mount an immune 
response.
Piate XIX:
 Image of smaller platelet clumps evident.
Giant Platelet
Plate XX: Image of a giant platelet that can sometimes be seen
in a peripheral blood smear.
305
900
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics-
The Science behind the Diagnostics
mounts a reaction to destroy the foreign agent. The system
Granulocytes
responds to infectious agents (bacterial, fungal, and viral),
Mature Neutrophils
parasites, and foreign material. The response often results in
 Neutrophils are medium-sized cells one to two times larger
an inflammatory or allergic reaction. The components of the
than red blood cells and have multiple variations in the nu-
immune system are listed next.
cleus diameter (a segmented nucleus). The cytoplasm is
clear to light pink. There can be vacuoles in the cytoplasm,
● Lymph nodes: Lymph nodes are small round or oval
and with extensive bacterial infection, the cytoplasm can ap-
structures within the subcutaneous tissue and abdominal
pear foamy, light blue (basophilic), and bacteria can occa-
and thoracic cavities that function to filter extracellular
sionally be seen within the cytoplasm (see Plates X-XI).
fluid (lymph) for foreign material and produce white
blood cells (specifically lymphocytes) that then produce 
Functions
antibodies in response to foreign infection.
Neutrophils are the first responders to the site of infection.
●White blood cells: These are specific cell types that re-
They function to engulf bacteria and foreign debris. Once
spond to foreign material and infectious agents (see below).
the material is phagocytized it is exposed to membrane-
The white blood cells involved in the immune systerm are
bound vesicles (lysosomes) that contain enzymes that can
monocytes,
destroy the foreign agent. The neutrophil will also secrete
- neutrophils,
chermicals to attract and stimulate other white blood cells,
lymphocytes,
inducing a more extensive inflammatory response. Neutro-
 basophils, and
phils are the major cellular component of a purulent (pus)
eosinophils.
discharge as they respond to foreign material and bacterial,
Immunoglobulin: Proteins produced from lymphocytes 
fungal, and viral infections.
that recognize specific foreign material are called im-
munoglobulin. Antibodies are part of the final stage of
Normal Blood Values
snoau azenau, u A asuodsan au a
Canine: 3000-11,500/μl
agents (viruses), promote the phagocytosis and killing of
Feline: 2500-12,500/μl
bacteria, and assist in recruiting white blood cells to the
site of inflammation or infection.
Changes in Neutrophil Population
● Recognition of self: In order for the immune system to
An increase in the neutrophil population number is referred
work effectively, the body must be able to differentiate
to as a neutrophilia and can be associated with acute and
foreign cells and material from the patient's cells. To ac-
chronic infectious or inflammatory diseases. Sharp de-
complish this, all cells of the body have proteins on their
creases in the neutrophil population number are referred to
surface that are specific only to those individuals cells.
as a neutropenia and can be seen with patients undergoing
This allows the immune system to differentiate between
chemotherapy, suffering from specific viral infections (i.e.,
 a n o  h -,  ,
canine parvovirus, canine distemper, or feline panleukope-
specific proteins; when specific white blood cells en-
nia), or from overwhelming inflammatory or infectious dis-
counter them, they stimulate an immune response.
ease that exceeds the bone marrow's ability to produce neu-
trophils.
Overall Changes in White Blood Cell Populations
Increase in white blood cells (leukocytosis) is generally seen
Immature Neutrophil (Bands)
when the patient has an infectious, parasitic, or inflammatory
Immature neutrophils are medium-sized cells one to two
disease. It can also be seen with certain types of cancers of
times larger than red blood cells, which have a uniform U-
the white blood cells (i.e., lymphoma, leukemia, etc.).
shaped nucleus. Although a band can be mistaken for a
Decrease in white blood cells (leucopenia is observed
monocyte, the cytoplasm stains clear or light pink (in Roma-
when the patient is infected with specific infectious diseases
now ski or Diff-Quik stain kits). As with mature neutrophils,
(i.e., parvo or distemper virus), the patient is suffering from
there can be vacuoles in the cytoplasm, and with extensive
a severe inflammatory disease process that depletes their
- pue Auy adde uo usedoo aun uooau lao
ability to produce normal cell numbers, or the patient is un-
teria occasionally seen in the cytoplasm (see Plate XII).
dergoing chemotherapy. Animals with significantly low
counts of white blood cells are susceptible to massive infec-
Functions
tions and can go into shock (septic shock; see Chapter 30).
The band neutrophils have the same function as the mature
neutrophils. Identification of band neutrophils is very impor-
tant when evaluating a blood film. Most automated hematol-
Cells of the Immune System
ogy analyzers cannot differentiate band cells from other
 Each white blood has a specific function and responds to
types of white blood cells in the blood. They are most often
different types of infection. There are two overall categories
miscounted as monocytes. Identification of band neutrophils
 of white blood cells: the granulocyte and the agranulocyte.
is most accurately done on examination of the blood film.
Chapter 21: Complete Blood Count
307
Band neutrophils indicate early release of immature neu-
 granules in the basophil also vary in size and number in dif-
trophils when the bone marrow cannot keep up with the de-
ferent species. Their cytoplasm, when visible between the
mand for neutrophils in the face of a significant inflamma-
granules, is clear to lightly blue.
signs of serious illness. In some cases the white cell count is
Functions
normal, and the severity of the inflammatory disease is only
The function of basophils is not well understood. Basophils
determined by the white blood cell differential and identifi-
are rare in peripheral blood and thought to be related to
cation of band neutrophils. Increased bands suggest a patient
allergic reaction. Basophilia often accompanies an eosino-
 has a severe infection. When identified, these patients may
 philia.
require more intensive care to control the infection.
Normal Blood Values
Normal Blood Values
 Canine: 0/μl
+
Canine: 0-500/μl
●Feline: 0/μl
 Feline: 0-500/μl
Changes in Bas ophil Population
Changes in Band Neutrophil Numbers
An increase in basophil numbers is referred to as basophilia
 Increases in the band neutrophil number are referred to as a
and can be seen with allergenic conditions.
 left shift and can be associated with an acute massive early
infectious or inflammatory disease (i.e., septic shock; see
Agranulocytes
Chapter 30).
Monocyte
 The monocyte is the largest white blood cell, three to four
Eosinophils
times the red blood cell size. It has a round- to irregular-
 Eosinophils are medium-sized cells one to two times the size
shaped nucleus with blue cytoplasm. Vacuoles can some-
of a red blood cell. They are often slightly larger than the
times be seen within its cytoplasm (see Plates XV-XVI).
 neutrophil. Just as with mature neutrophils, they contain nu-
 clei with variable thickness (segmented). The cytoplasm ap-
Function
pears pink in Diff-Quik and Romanowski stain systems. The
Monocytes respond to chronic infections to help clear up de-
 most noticeable difference in these cells is the red granules.
 bris and inflarmmatory products from an on-going inflamma-
Different eosinophilic species have different shapes and
tory response. Like neutrophils, monocytes contain lyso-
numbers of red granules; all eosinophils have similar archi-
somes that have specific enzymes and nonenzyme chemicals
tecture (see Plates XIII-XIV).
inside that kill and degrade bacteria.
Functions
Normal Blood Values
 Eosinophils respond to fungal and parasitic infections and
●Canine: 150-1350/μl
foreign bodies, and they participate in allergic reactions.
●Feline: 0-850-/μul
Common fungal and parasitic agents associated with an
eosinophilic response in the tissues include Cryptococcus,
Changes in Monocyte Population
Coccidioides, Blastomyces, Histoplasma, heartworm, intes-
An increase in monocyte number is referred to as monocy-
tinal parasites, and fleas). These cells are often a significant
tosis and can be associated with chronic infectious or in-
part of allergic reactions and result in some of the adverse
flammatory diseases.
effects associated with allergies.
Small and Large Lymphocytes
Normal Blood Values
Lymphocytes vary in size from a small lymphocyte, just
Canine: 100-1250/μl
larger than a red blood cell, to a larger lymphocyte, the same
●Feline: 0-500/μl
size or larger than a neutrophil. Lymphocytes are round cells
with light to deep blue cytoplasm and round to slightly oval
Changes in Eosinophil Numbers
or indented nuclei. The nucleus often makes up the majority
An increase in eosinophil numbers is referred to as an
 of the cell with only a small, thin rim of light blue cytoplasm
eosinophilia and, as discussed previously, can be seen with
surrounding it. Nuclei are rarely lobulated (see Plates
 Systemic fungal-, parasitic-, and allergy-related disease.
XVII-XVIII).
Basophils
Function
Basophils are medium-sized cells one to two times the size
Lymphocytes produce specific blood proteins called im-
of a red blood cell and have a segmented nucleus. Like the
munoglobulins (antibodies). After the lymphocytes are ex-
eosinophil, they have distinct granules within their cyto-
n snn o g ra o sd in pso
plasm, except their granules are deep to light purple. The
by macrophages, the lymphocytes produce specific immu-
800
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
noglobulin proteins. These proteins will recognize and at-
Normal Blood Values
tach to the invading bacteria, parasite, fungus, or virus. Once 
Canine: 164,000-500,000/μl
attached, these proteins activate other white blood cells and
Feline: 170,000-600,000/μl
blood proteins that help destroy the pathogen. When first ex-
posed to a new foreign agent, the production of im-
Changes in Platelet Number
munoglobulin takes about 14 days. The second time lym-
An increase in platelet number is a thrombocytosis.
phocytes are exposed to the same foreign agent, there is a
Increased platelet numbers can be seen with certain meta-
more rapid and effective immune response. This second
bolic diseases and often is seen in markedly regenerative
rapid response is due to specific lymphocytes, memory
anemia. Thrombocytosis can also be associated with cancer,
cells, that remain after the previous infection was cleared.
 including cancers arising from megakaryocytes (the cells
 These cells are already primed to respond to the same agent
that form platelets). A decrease in platelets is thrombocy-
within a few days rather than 2 weeks. Memory cells are re-
topenia. There are many causes for thrombocytopenia, in-
sponsible for the protection provided by vaccination for spe-
cluding infectious disease, neoplasia, bone marrow injury,
cific infectious diseases.
and imm une-mediated disease.
Normal Blood Values
Evaluating Platelet Number
 Canine: 100-1250/μl
The platelet count can be determined by automated or man-
●Feline: 1500-7000/μl
ual methods. It is essential to review a blood film before any
platelet count is accepted. Especially if there are clumps of
Changes in Lymphocyte Numbers
platelets at the feathered edge or within the body of the
An increase in lymphocyte number is referred to as lympho-
blood film, the platelet count will be artifactually decreased
cytosis and can be associated with chronic infection or some
and should not be reported. A quick method for estimation
cancers. A decrease in lymphocyte number is a lymphope-
 of platelet numbers can be done from a blood film. Using
nia and can be associated with stress, acute viral infection,
the following method:
some cancers, and chemotherapy.
Estimated platelet number = the average number of platelets × 15,000
Platelets
The platelet estimate should be done on the area of the blood
 Platelets are small cell components of blood that are several
film where the red blood cells are overlapping, not in the
    h o n   s s
counting area where the differential is performed. The number
o y  s s a  s n 
 of platelets seen on a 100X high-power immersion field are
large cells within the bone marrow (megakaryocytes) (see
 then averaged. Note that this is not accurate in anemic animals.
Plates XIX-XX).
Function
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of understanding and dis-
 Platelets are necessary for normal blood clotting. They form
cussing clinical diagnostics and the disease conditions rep-
the initial blood clot at the site of vessel injury. After this
resented. The exercises can be done individually or as case
"platelet plug"” is formed, circulating proteins (clotting fac-
rounds as they explore specific topics in veterinary medicine
tors) are deposited on the platelet plug to strengthen it and
"cement"' it in place.
that discuss clinical diagnostics and treatment.
Chapter 22
Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
Chemistry
After the clot forms, the sample is placed in a centrifuge
and spun for 10-15 minutes or according to the centrifuge
A blood chemistry analysis (chemistry profile) and other
manufacturer's instructions. Centrifugation separates the red
chemical diagnostics allow the veterinarian to evaluate the
blood cells from the serum. If a sample is spun that does not
patient's physical condition, metabolic function, and re-
   e n  s s  
sponse to treatment. No single clinical test can evaluate an
separate the serum from the clot once it has finished spin-
animal's overall condition; the assessment of the animal de-
ning. If the serum is allowed to lie on top of the clot, the pro-
pends on the history, physical exam, clinical diagnostics,
longed exposure of the serum to the red blood cells will
ag o si laduo sn jo s au 'luuan oi asuodsi pu 
decrease the level of glucose and increase the level of phos-
the team member an understanding of clinical assays, how
phorus, causing an inaccurate measurement. Do not pour
they are performed, how changes can reflect disease
the serum off the clot. A pipette should be used to remove
processes, and how to discuss these clinical tests with the
the serum to avoid any red blood cell contamination.
client. The veterinarian is always responsible for interpret-
 There are many organ systems that can be evaluated gen-
ing the clinical diagnostics and outlining treatment option.
  s     
It is important for the team member to understand why spe.
cific diagnostics are performed to more efficiently deter-
Individual Clinical Chemistry
mine the veterinarian's needs, to properly monitor the hospi-
talized patient, and to educate the client.
Alanine Aminotransferase
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)is an indicator of liver dam-
Sample Handling
age in the dog and cat. It does not aid in evaluation of liver
When obtaining blood samples for chemistry profiles or
function.
drug levels, the medical team must be able to perform a
blood draw in a clean environment with a clean venipunc-
Function
ture. The way in which the sample is handled impacts the ac-
ALT is a hepatic intracellular enzyme that is responsible for
curacy of results. For example, hemolysis, red blood cell
the conversion of 2-oxoglutarate to pyruvate and glutamate
breakdown with release of hemoglobin in the serum, can
in the liver cells (hepatocytes).
occur if there is difficulty in puncturing the vein or if excess
pressure is applied to the syringe during collection. Lipemia,
Where It Is Produced
fat accumulation in the serum, is most common and is
(dau) nao l an ui ad aza e si I
caused by collection of blood after the patient has eaten.
Both hemolysis and lipemia occur as a result of the disease
Abnormalities
process or as an artifact (see Table 22.1). These changes can
 Changes in ALT activities generally occur when hepatocytes
also falsely increase or decrease other clinical pathology
are damaged, causing a leakage of cellular contents into the
values; each in-house chemistry and lab test should list how
bloodstream.
changes in the serum will affect specific chemistries. If
Decreased ALT activity is not generally associated with
there are abnormalities noted in the serum,it should be
disease conditions. In rare cases, low activity has been
noted in the record and discussed with the veterinarian.
mildly associated with congenital porto-systemic shunts
 For clinical chemistry profiles, most samples collected
(see Chapter 14).
should be placed in a clot tube (red-topped tube) or a serum-
 Increased ALT activity of the enzyme in the blood occurs
separator tube (red/yellow or red/gray tube). Once the blood
when there are alterations in the lipid membrane of the he-
is in the tube, it must sit until a clot forms completely. This
patocytes secondary to injury, inflammations, or infection
may take anywhere from 10 to 15 minutes. If a clot does not
within the liver. Significant increases of ALT activity are as-
form in this time, a doctor should be notified immediately
sociated with acute hepatic disease, which affects many he-
because this can suggest problems with the animal's ability
patocytes simultaneously.
to clot.
   so e i n o  
309
310
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
Tabfe 22.1.(
 Changes in serum—-artifact vs. disease.
Tabte 22.2.
 Organ systems and correlating clinical diagnostic
components.
Change in Serum
 How Change Can Occur in Patients
Organ System
 Clinical Diagnostic Examination
Lipemia 
 Artifactual: Occurs if pet has eaten a fatty
 meal before blood draw.
 Kidney dysfunction
 Blood urea nitrogen 
WHITE SERUM
Disease
Creatinine
Hyperlipidemia: Rare disease, usually in 
Phosphorous
schnauzers.
Potassium
Hypercholesterolemia: Common secondary
Albumin
 abnormality associated with liver, meta-
Liver damage
ALT (alanine aminotransferase)
 bolic, and endocrine diseases.
AST (aspartate aminotransferase)
Hemolysis
 Artifactual: Occurs if the venipuncture was 
 SAP (serum alkaline phosphatase)
 traumatic. A traumatic venipuncture can
GGT (gamma-glutamyltransferase)
cause lysis of the red blood cells and
Triglycerides
 release of hemoglobin.
Cholesterol
RED SERUM
Disease
Liver function
Abumin
Hemolysis: Can be noted in immune-
 Total bilirubin
 mediated hemolytic anemia in which the
Blood urea nitrogen
 red blood cells are being lysed by anti-
Glucose
 bodies that have attached to their surface.
Exocrine pancreatic function
Amylase
Icterus
Artifactual: None
Lipase
YELLOW SERUM
Disease
Cholesterol
 Can occur with liver, immune-mediated
Endocrine pancreatic function
Glucose
 hemolytic anemia (IMHA), anemia, or gall
Cholesterol
 bladder obstruction. The buildup of biliru-
 Adrenal dysfunction
Sodium (Na)
 bin can be due to inability of the liver to 
(hypoadrenocorticism)
Potassium (K)
clear bilirubin from the body, the inability 
Chlorine (Cl) 
to secrete the gall bladder contents back 
 Adrenal dysfunction
Cholesterol
into the intestine, or a massive destruction 
(hyperadrenocorticism)
Alkaline phosphatase
of red blood cells in the vessels.
Glucose
 Muscle function
CK (creatinine kinase)
Gall bladder function
 Alkaline phosphatase
 Gamma-glutamyltransferase
 Bilirubin 
severity of the damage to the hepatocytes or degree of re-
versibility of the disease process.
With chronic liver disease causing only mild liver dam-
diarrhea,
age over a longer period of time, there may be significant
 jaundice (although not always directly associated with el-
disease evident, and enzyme activity may be normal or only
evations of ALT), and
mildly increased. Increases in ALT activity only imply liver
 neurologic signs.
 degeneration but do not assess liver function.
ALT activity can also be increased secondary to
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
Other clinical diagnostic tests are used to help evaluate the
trauma (i.e., hit by car),
cause of increased ALT activity. These diagnostics suggest
●anticonvulsants,
that hepatocyte degeneration or cholestasis (decreased bile
steroids,
flow) can be helpful in determining the cause of increased
cardiac disease,
ALT activity.
+
hypoxia, and
severe anemia.
+
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
 Alkaline phosphatase/skeletal alkaline phosphatase (ALP/
SALP)
Symptoms Associated with Increases in ALT Activity
Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT)
The symptoms vary, depending on the severity of the disease
 and its underlying cause. Many signs are nonspecific and
(Please also see algorithm for liver disease on p. 332.)
include
Other diagnostics that suggest decreased liver function
and can assist in determining the cause of increased ALT ac-
anorexia,
tivity are for
depression,
weight loss,
 blood urea nitrogen (BUN),
vomiting,
 albumin,
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
311
total bilirubin,
● External or internal bleeding: Acute blood loss (i.e.,
cholesterol, and
trauma) or chronic loss (i.e., gastrointestinal bleeding)
bile acids (paired).
can produce decreased blood and protein levels. As an
animal bleeds, both red blood cells and serum (with albu-
min) are lost. When there are concerms for acute blood
Discussing Changes in Alanine Aminotransferase
loss, both the packed cell volume (PCV) and total protein
Level with the Client
(m d as) a  a s (
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is a hepatic intra-
●  Liver disease: Any disease that significantly decreases
cellular enzyme necessary for metabolism of spe-
the number of functioning hepatocytes will compromise
cific nutrients within the liver.
the liver's ability to produce albumin. As a general rule,
Decreasing ALT activity is not generally associated
at least 75% of normal liver function must be lost before
with disease.
albumin concentration is decreased due to lack of pro-
 Increasing activity can be associated with acute or
duction by hepatocytes. When attributable to liver dis-
 ongoing damage to the liver, causing the leakage of
ease, hypoalbuminemia is an indicator of decreased liver
ALT into the blood.
function (see Chapter 14; see also the liver disease diag-
 A normal ALT level does not rule out chronic liver
nosis algorithm on p. 332).
disease or dysfunction where mild liver damage oc-
 Kidney disease: The kidneys function to filter toxins
curs over a long period of time with a cumulative
from the body, regulate electrolytes, and concentrate
effect.
urine. The fine openings within the filtration barrier of
 Increases in ALT activity can be of concerm, but the
the glomeruli can be damaged secondary to diseases af-
 blood test must also be fully evaluated, along with
fecting the glomeruli. This allows larger molecules such
the pet's condition, history, other diagnostics, and
as proteins to leak into the urine. This syndrome is called
response to treatment, before conclusions can be
protein-losing nephropathy and is denoted both by hy-
reached.
poalbuminemia and significant proteinuria (see Chapter
13; see also the kidney disease diagnosis algorithm on
p.331).
Albumin
●Intestinal disease: The intestines loose the ability to ab-
 Albumin is monitored to help evaluate the patient for
sorb necessary proteins and other food stuffs because of
specific forms of intestinal disease and cancer (i.e., in-
hydration status,
flammatory bowel disease, intestinal lymphoma).
blood loss,
These patients are unable to produce enough albumin in
liver dysfunction/liver disease,
i an  ss aissaa an  s m l 
protein-losing nephropathy/renal disease (glomerular),
testine. This syndrome is called protein-losing en-
and
teropathy and is usually seen in patients with chronic
 protein-losing enteropathy/intestinal disease (i.e., inflam-
gastrointestinal signs (i.e., vomiting and diarrhea) and
matory bowel disease).
weight loss (see Chapter 10).
●Hyperalbunemia: Although not linked to a disease en-
Funcfion
tity, hyperalbunemia is associated with significant dehy-
Albumin is a small carrier protein that binds to hormones
dration because the amount of fluid decreases within
and other components in the bloodstream to maintain and
blood, concentrating the albumin and PCV (see hypov-
olemic shock; Chapter 30).
bumin is a protein molecule, it maintains a constant pull of
fluid from the tissue into the bloodstream. This effect, called
Symptoms Associated with Changes in Albumin Level
n ss    ass 
 Hypoalbuminemia: With chronic low albumin concen-
these protein molecules help draw and hold fluid inside the
tration, patients can lose oncotic pressure, which is pro-
vessels.
duced from the albumin concentration in the blood. As
albumin decreases, fluid begins to pool within the tissue,
Where It Is Produced
causing swelling of the limbs (peripheral edema) and
Albumin is produced in the liver.
-[nd) sauni au u dnpiq pue 'mef pue yoau jeuaa
monary edema). When this happens, patients should be
Abnormalities
monitored for
Hypoalbuminemia
- swelling of the digits and distal limbs,
 Decreases in blood albumin concentration can occur gener-
 swelling under the neck and jaw,
- e n ss a o  e  
 moist cough,
tion or loss of the protein molecule. Some disease concerms
 increased respiratory effort,
are as follows:
- abdominal breathing,
312
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
poor capillary refill time,
● BUN,
cyanotic mucous membranes: purple to blue to gray, and
creatinine,
decreased ability to exercise.
urinalysis, and
Hyperalbuminemia: Physical signs are directly attribut-
urine protein/creatinine ratio.
 able to dehydration, and the proper monitoring of the pa-
tients is discussed in Chapter 28 and Chapter 30.
Intestinal Disease
Clinical diagnostic tests that help determine if intestinal dis-
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
ease is the cause of hypoalbuminemia are
Bleeding
 Monitoring PCV and TP can help determine if there is con-
fecal floatation/smear,
tinued bleeding.
 pancreatic lipase inhibitor (PLI),
tr ypsin-like immunoassay (TLI),
Liver Disease
endoscopy, and
Evaluating other chemistry tests that suggest liver damage
 intestinal biopsy.
 may support decreased production by the liver as the cause
of hypoalbuminemia (please see the algorithms for liver
Alkaline Phosphatase
 disease and kidney disease on pp. 331 and 332). These tests
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and skeletal ALP (SALP) is
are for
monitored to help evaluate the patient for
AST,
 hormonal disease/hyperadrenocorticism,
+
ALT,
 liver disease, and
ALP or SALP, and
+gall bladder disease or obstruction.
●gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT).
Function
Au uonouy aall ssns e sisa Ansauo suena
ALP removes inorganic phosphate molecules from many
 also indicate the cause of hypoalbuminermia. These tests are for 
compounds, such as glucose phosphates.
● BUN,
Where It Is Produced
 total bilirubin,
ALP refers to a large number of intracellular enzymes that
 cholesterol,
are present within the liver, intestine, bone, kidneys, and pla-
glucose, and
centa. On most chemistry panels, ALP activity represents
bile acids (paired).
the combined activity of all ALP sources of the body.
Realistically, since all non-liver ALP has very a short half-
Kidney Disease
life, serum ALP activity reflects that of the liver enzyme.
Some clinical diagnostic tests that help determine if glome-
Exceptions to this include increased bone origin activity
rular disease is the cause of the hypoalbuminemia are
during active bone growth in young animals or active bone
destruction in neoplasia.
Discussing Changes in Albumin Levels with the
Abnormalities
Client
Increased ALP activity can come from several possible
Albumin is a small protein produced by the liver to
pathological and nonpathological conditions. Unlike ALT
carry other nutritional and hormonal components
and AST, SALP activity does not increase due to "leakage"
through the blood.
● Marked elevations in albumin are associated typi-
production of the enzyme (induction) by the hepatocytes in
cally with marked dehydration because albumin
response to disease. Some conditions that increase ALP ac-
concentration increases with decreasing fluid lev-
tivity are as follows.
els in the blood.
 Decreasing albumin levels can be associated with
 Hyperadrenocorticism: Although not a specific test for
acute and chronic bleeding or chronic disease of
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease; see Chapter
the liver, kidneys, or intestines.
17), chronic increases in ALP activity may suggest the ef-
Changes in albumin concentration can be of con-
fects on the liver of an overproduction of corticosteroids
-a y aq os is sn poo an 1nq 'ao
from the adrenal gland. In addition, the administration of
ated, along with the pet's condition, history, other
corticosteroids can cause increased ALP activity.
diagnostics, and response to treatment, before a di-
 Liver and gall bladder disease: With chronic disease of
agnosis can be made.
the liver and/or gall bladder (infection, obstruction, can-
cer), increases in ALP activity can be observed.
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
Long-term medication: Long-term administration of
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushings Disease)
specific medication (i.e., phenobarbital, prednisone) can
Diagnostic tests for hyperadrenocorticism are
affect the liver and increase ALP activity in the serum.
 Bone growth: Increases in bone ALP can be seen in rap.
 adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test,
idly growing animals and can also be elevated in bone
 low-dose dexamethasone suppression test, and
disease.
 urine cortisol/creatinine ratio.
Symptoms Associated with Elevations ofAlkaline
Phosphatase
Discussing Changes in Alkaline Phosphatase
Symptoms associated with elevation of ALP can be seen in
Levels with the Client
liver disease/gall bladder obstruction or hyperadrenocorti-
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and skeletal ALP
cism. The symptoms can vary depending on the severity of
(SALP) are hepatic intracellular enzymes evident
disease and its cause.
in many body tissues (i.e., gall bladder, liver, mus-
cle, bone).
Liver Disease/Gall Bladder Obstruction
A decrease in SALP or ALP levels is not generally
Signs for these diseases include
associated with disease.
Increased levels can be associated with multiple
 anorexia,
 organ systems. Some examples of diseases in this
depression,
case are
weight loss,
liver or gall bladder disease,
vomiting,
-hormonal disease (hyperadrenocorticism), and
diarrhea,
exposure to chronic medication (i.e., prednisone,
increased thirst (polydipsia),
 phenobarbital).
 imcreased urination (polyuria),
Elevations in SALP or ALP can be of concern, but
painful abdomen (gall bladder obstruction),
the blood test must also be fully evaluated, along
jaundice (although not always directly associated with el-
with the pet's condition, history, other diagnostics,
evations of ALP), and
and response to treatment, before conclusions can
 neurologic signs.
be reached.
 Often, other forms of clinical diagnostic tests are
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's Disease)
 necessary to identify possible causes in elevations
Signs of this disease include
of SALP or ALP.
increased thirst (polydipsia),
increased urination (polyuria),
lethargy,
Amylase
Amylase is an indicator of pancreatitis in the canine. It is not
 poor hair coat—especially bilateral over the flank, and
helpful in evaluation of feline pancreatitis.
 pot-bellied appearance.
Funcfion
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
Amylase is an enzyme that helps break down larger, more
Liver Disease
 Evaluating other liver enzymes that suggest liver damage
complex sugars into small I-unit sugars for absorption.
 may indicate the cause of increased ALP activity. These di-
Where It Is Produced
agnostic tests are
 Amylase is produced in the pancreas and enters the duode-
 sns uo y mn sp d an yn 
ALT,
digestion.
物
AST, and
GGT.
Abnormalities
 Evaluating other diagnostic tests that suggest altered liver
Amylase is released when there are changes within the pan-
function may indicate the cause of increased ALP activity.
creatic cells that produce a leakage of the enzyme into the
These diagnostic tests are
 bloodstream. This pancreatic damage is secondary to infec-
tion and inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis; see
BUN,
Chapter 15) or pancreatic cancer.
 total bilirubin,
cholesterol,
Symptoms Associated with Increases in Amylase Activity
bile acids (paired), and
Symptoms associated with increases in amylase activity are
glucose.
due to the infection or inflammation of the pancreas and re-
314
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
sulting pancreatitis. Common signs of acute severe pancre-
o d  s srn o ids uaaq sn o-o
atitis in the dog are
normal protein metabolism.
 anorexia,
Where It Is Produced
depression,
AST is an enzyme produced in the hepatocytes.
vomiting,
+
diarrhea,
Abnormalities
+
 jaundice, and
 Changes in AST activity generally occurs when hepatocytes
sepsis.
 are damaged, causing a leakage of cellular contents into the
bloodstream.
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
Decreased AST activity is not generally associated with
Tests that are used to help evaluate the cause of increased
 disease conditions. In rare cases, low activity is seen in con-
         
genital porto-systemic shunts (see Chapter 14).
 ocrine pancreatic disease 0n p. 333).
AST activity is increased for many of the same reasons
ALT activity is increased. Increased activity of the enzyme
●Lipase
in the blood occurs when there are alterations in the lipid
+
TLI
membrane of the hepatocytes secondary to injury, inflam-
 Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI)
mation, or infection within the liver.
● Complete blood count
Elevation of white count
●Significant increases of AST activity are associated with
 Increased band neutrophils
acute hepatic disease that affects many hepatocytes si-
 Total bilirubin
multane ously.
●The degree of increase in activity does not indicate the
 Discussing Changes in Amylase Levels with the
severity of the damage to the hepatocytes or the degree of
reversibility of the disease process.
Client
With chronic liver disease causing only mild damage
 Amylase is an enzyme produced by the pancreas to
 help break down sugar for absorption in the small
over a protracted period of time, there may be significant
disease, and enzyme activity may be normal or only
intestine.
 In the dog, elevations in amylase can suggest an in-
 mildly increased.
 Increases in ALT activity only imply liver degeneration
fection or inflammation of the pancreas (i.e., pan-
but does not assess liver function. AST can also be ele-
vated with
leak out of normal pancreatic cells and into the
bloodstream.
muscle disease or disease that affects muscle acutely
 In the cat, elevation of pancreatic enzymes does not
(1.e., trauma or seizure).
destruction of red blood cells due to disease or as an
directly correlate with pancreatitis.
 Rarely, elevations of amylase may suggest pancre-
 artifact.
atic cancer in the dog and cat.
● It is important to note that patients, especially with
Symptoms Associated with Elevations of AST
chronic disease, can have severe pancreatitis with-
 Symptoms of elevated AST are associated with liver disease
out elevations of lipase.
(see Chapter 14). The signs can vary depending on the cause
 Elevations of amylase can be of concerm, but the
 and severity of the disease and may include
blood test must also be fully evaluated, along with
the pet's condition, history, other diagnostic tests,
anorexla,
and response to treatment, before conclusions can
 depression,
be reached.
weight loss,
vomiting,
diarrhea,
Aspartate Aminotransferase
 jaundice (although not always directly associated with el-
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)is an indicator of acute
evations of AST), and
liver damage in the dog and cat. It does not aid in evaluation
 neurologic signs.
of liver function.
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
Funcfion
Liver Disease
AST is an intracellular enzyme that is in all cells, but is
 Evaluating other liver enzymes that suggest liver damage or 
predominant in muscle and liver cell damage. AST transfers
cholestasis may indicate the cause of increased AST levels.
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
315
(Please see the algorithm for liver disease on p. 332.) These
Abnormalities
diagnostic tests are
Physical signs occur as bilirubin builds up in the tissue sec-
ondary to liver disease, gall bladder obstruction, or massive
ALT,
destruction of red blood cells in the body, producing high
SALP or ALP, and
levels of free hemoglobin (hemoglobin to bilirubin). If the
+
GGT.
buildup of bilirubin is caused secondary to liver disease, the
presence of increased bilirubin concentration can suggest
Evaluating other diagnostics that suggest liver function may
functional liver disease.
indicate the cause of increased AST. These diagnostic tests
are
Symptoms Associated with Increases in Bilirubin
Concentration
+
BUN,
Physical signs can be associated with the liver disease, gall 
 total bilirubin,
 bladder obstruction, or immune-mediated hemolytic ane-
cholesterol,
 mia, producing the increases in bilirubin in the blood and
 bile acids (paired), and
A  ss a (a   tl  aa) s
glucose.
depending on the cause and severity of the disease.
Liver Disease
Discussing Changes in Aspartate
Signs of liver disease are
Aminotransferase Levels with the Client
●Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) is a hepatic in-
anorexia,
tracellular enzyme involved in protein metabolism
depression,
within the liver.
weight loss,
●Decreasing AST activity is not generally associated
vomiting,
with disease.
diarrhea,
 Increasing activity can be associated with acute
 jaundice, and
 damage to the liver, causing the leakage of AST
 neurologic signs.
into the bloodstream.
 Normal AST activity does not rule out chronic liver
Gall Bladder Obstruction
disease or dysfunction where only small numbers
 Signs of gall bladder obstruction are
 of hepatocytes are damaged per day.
Although elevations of AST can be of concern, the
blood test must also be fully evaluated, along with
 abdominal tendermess/pain,
the pet's condition, history, other diagnostics, and
 jaundice (directly linked to obstruction of the gall
bladder),
response to treatment, before conclusions can be
vomiting,
reached.
anorexia,
 dehydration, and
●diarrhea.
Bilirubin
Bilirubin is used to evaluate the liver's ability to detoxify and
to eliminate toxins from the body. It is a liver function test.
Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia
 Increased levels of bilirubin can also suggest increased in-
 Signs of immune-mediated anemia are
travascular red blood cell destruction in immune-mediated
hemolytic anemias.
 pale mucous membranes——possible jaundice,
weakness,
Function
lethargy,
 Bilirubin is a potentially toxic metabolite produced from
 jaundice (directly linked to massive red blood cell break-
an un suid ao pe uoou jo uopnq a
down and release of hemoglobin in the vessels),
body.
vomiting,
 diarrhea, and
Where It Is Produced
anorexia.
 Heme pigments are broken down by the liver and excreted
into the small intestine as a part of bile. Normally, a small
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
amount of bilirubin is excreted by the urogenital system in
Liver Disease
dogs. Larger amounts of bilirubin can be excreted by the
 Evaluating other liver enzymes that suggest liver damage
kidneys in both dogs and cats with hyperbilirubinemia.
may indicate the cause of hyperbilirubinemia. (Please see
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
the algorithm for liver disease on p. 332.) The diagnostic
eliminating ammonia from the body and is excreted by the
tests are
kidneys.
ALT,
Where It Is Produced
SALP or ALP
BUN is produced from ammonia in the liver and transported
AST, and
by the bloodstream to the kidneys, where it is largely ex-
+GGT.
creted through the glomerular filters.
Evaluating other diagnostics for liver function may indicate
Abnormalities
 the cause of hyperbilirubinermia. These diagnostic tests are
Increases in BUN concentration can be associated with the
●BUN,
following.
 cholesterol,
● Decreased glomerular filtration rate: BUN concentra-
+
bile acids (paired), and
 tion is generally increased when there is a decrease in the
● glucose.
patient's glomerular filtration rate. Causes of decreased
glomerular filtration rate include
Gall Bladder Obstruction
Pre-renal azotemia: When the patient is dehydrated,
Tests for gall bladder obstruction are
 the body cannot maintain adequate perfusion through
 the kidneys at a rate adequate to produce a normal fil-
●ALP
GGT,
tration rate.
 abdominal x-rays, and
Renal azotemia: When damage to the kidneys results
in loss of normal renal tissue, glomerular filtration
●abdominal ultrasounds.
rate of the kidneys is not sufficient to clear toxins and
Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia
metabolites such as BUN from the body.
 Diagnostic tests for immume-mediated hemolytic anemia are
 Postrenal azotemia: When the lower urinary tract is
obstructed (i.e., blocked tomcat), the increased pres-
 PCV/TP,
sure and lack of urine outflow inhibits normal filtra-
+
complete blood count, and
tion. As a result, substances normally excreted by the
 blood film—-agglutination, spherocytes.
kidney build up in the serum.
● Gastrointestinal bleeding: Intestinal bleeding can pro-
duce increases in BUN. Gastrointestinal diseases that
 Discussing Changes in Bilirubin Level with the
produce intestinal ulceration and bleeding (i.e., parvovi-
Client
ral infection) can secondarily increase BUN levels in the
 Bilirubin is a breakdown product of hemoglobin.
 blood. Blood contains a large amount of protein that is di-
 Bilirubin is delivered to the liver to be detoxified
 gested just like a high-protein meal.
and excreted through the gall bladder and intestinal
 High-protein meal: If a blood sample is taken following
system.
a meal high in protein, there will be a transient increase
When there is a liver dysfunction, gall bladder ob-
in serum BUN as the protein is metabolized.
struction, or massive breakdown of red blood cells
in the body, bilirubin builds up in the serum and
Decreases in BUN concentration can be associated with
tissue.
the liver's inability to produce BUN. When attributable to
 Although increases in bilirubin concentration can
liver disease, it is an indicator of severe liver dysfunction. A
be of concern, the blood test must also be fully
 low BUN by itself does not always indicate liver dysfunc-
evaluated, along with the pet's condition, history,
tion. Low-protein diets can also result in a low BUN.
other diagnostics, and response to treatment, be-
fore conclusions can be reached.
Symptoms Associated with Changes in BUN
Concentration
Increased BUN concentration is generally associated with
Blood Urea Nitrogen
decreases in glomerular filtration, producing increasing
BUN concentration evaluates the patient's kidney function.
serum BUN concentration. As the pet becomes more toxic
With decreased production, BUN also can be an indicator of
(azotemic), physical signs include the following.
liver dysfunction.
With acute azotemia signs are
Function
vomiting,
+
diarrhea,
tein metabolism. BUN is produced in the liver as a means of
anorexla,
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
317
 dehydration, and
 neurologic signs—seizures.
Discussing Changes in Blood Urea Nitrogen
Concentration with the Client
With chronic azotemia signs are
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is a metabolite pro-
duced in the liver to remove ammonia from the
body. Once produced, the body transports BUN to
weight loss,
the kidneys for excretion in the urine.
chronic vomiting,
Marked increase in BUN concentration is typically
chronic diarrhea,
muscle loss,
associated with the body's inability to filter toxins
(glomerular filtration) through the kidneys. This
increased thirst (polydipsia), and
can be caused by marked dehydration, kidney dis-
 increased urination (polyuria).
ease, or urinary obstruction.
 Occasionally, increases in BUN concentration can
 Decreased BUN concentration is generally associated with
be associated with diseases that can produce gas-
 diseases that produce liver dysfunction. For a more complete
 trointestinal ulceration and bleeding.
discussion on these signs, please refer to Chapter 14.
Decreased BUN concentration levels can be asso-
ciated with liver dysfunction.
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
Although changes in BUN concentration can be of 
Other clinical diagnostic tests are used to help evaluate
concerm, the blood test must also be fully evaluated,
 changes in BUN concentration, as well. (Please see the algo-
 along with the pet's condition, history, other diag-
rithma for liver disease and kidney disease on p. 331, 332.)
nostics, and response to treatment, before conclu-
 Increased BUN may occur due to decreased renal glome-
sions can be reached.
rular filtration. Diagnostic tests are
creatinine,
phosphorus,
urinalysis—-urine specific gravity, and
Calcium
serum electrolytes (especially potassium).
When elevated, calcium can suggest certain endocrine dis-
eases or some forms of cancer (i.e., lymphoma, anal sac
 Gastrointestinal bleeding may also result in increased
apocrine gland adenocarcinoma, osteosarcoma, fibrosar-
BUN. Diagnostic tests are
coma). In lactating dogs, low levels of calcium can suggest 
eclampsia (see Chapter 18).
PCV/TP,
parvo cite test,
Funcfion
fecal examination, and
+
Calcium is a mineral that is used by the body for production
endoscopic examination of the gastrointestinal tract
 of bone, many chemical reactions (blood clotting, many en-
zymatic reactions), and muscular contractions. It is essential
Decreased BUN concentration may be associated with
for body function, milk formation, and reproduction.
liver dysfunction. Evaluating other liver enzymes that sug-
 gest liver damage may indicate the cause of decreased BUN
Where It Is Produced
concentration. The diagnostic tests are
Calcium is absorbed from the diet and stored in the bone. As
it is needed, calcium is reabsorbed from the bone and carried
ALT,
in the bloodstream for numerous body functions.
SALP or ALP,
AST, and
Abnormalities
+
GGT.
 Increased blood calcium concentration (hypercalcemia) can
 be associated with specific types of tumors and rare hor-
Evaluating other diagnostics that suggest liver function
monal disease. Hypercalcemia is a significant clinical find-
 may indicate the cause of decreased BUN concentration.
ing associated with cancers that produce the hypercalcemia
These diagnostics are
of malignancy. In fact, in the dog and cat, the most common
cause of hypercalcemia is cancer.
 albumin,
Decreased blood calcium concentration (hypocalcemia)
bilirubin,
is generally associated with female dogs immediately after
cholesterol,
whelping that are producing large amounts of milk for many
bile acids (paired), and
puppies. This symdrome is called eclampsia (see Chap-
glucose.
ter 18).
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics-
-TheSciencebehind theDiagnostics
Discussing Changes in Calcium Concentration
with the Client
Calcium is a mineral that is used for production of
bone, chemical reactions in the body, and muscular
contraction. Calcium is absorbed from the diet and
stored in the bone.
Abnormal increases in calcium concentration are a
significant concerm and can be associated with
certain types of malignant cancers or hormonal
diseases.
● Decreased calcium concentration is associated
with serious diseases in the postwhelping dog that
is producing large amounts of milk for numerous
pups.
 Although changes in calcium concentration can be
of concern, the blood test must also be fully evalu-
ated, along with the pet's condition, history, other
diagnostics, and response to treatment, before con-
clusions can be reached.
Figure 22.1.
 Image of a female dog with eclampsia. Notice the
rigid limbs and sawhorse position. This patient is unable to have 
Creatinine
normal muscle contraction and is rigid and stiff.
 Tests for creatinine evaluate the patient's kidney function.
Function
Symptoms Associated with Changes in Blood Calcium
Creatinine is a small amino acid that is a metabolite of mus-
Concenfrafion
 cle creatinine and is excreted by the kidneys.
● Hypercalcemia: Significantly increased blood calcium
concentration can produce calcification of abdominal or-
Where I Is Produced
gans and potential organ disease (i.e., kidneys, liver,
Creatinine is produced in the body during normal muscle
lungs). Physical signs are generally associated with the
metabolism.
organs and the diseases produced. Hypercalcemia can
cause a significant increase in urination (polyuria).
Abnormalities
Hypocalcemia: With low blood calcium concentration
Increases in creatinine concentration can be associated with
the pet is unable to sustain normal muscle control, heart
changes in glomerular filtration rate. Creatinine concentra-
rate, and coordination because calcium is needed for
tion is generally increased when there is a decrease in the
muscular contraction. Affected female pets present with
kidney's glomerular filtration rate. Causes of decreased
rigid limbs (see Figure 22.1),
 glomerular filtration rate include the following.
 muscular tremors,
 hyperthermia (due to constant muscular spasms),
● Prerenal azotemia: When the body has decreased fluid
weakness, and
(i.e., dehydration), the heart cannot pump blood through
 bradycardia.
the kidneys at a rate adequate to produce a normal
filtration rate. As a result, creatinine concentration is
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
increased.
Diagnostic tests that are used to help evaluate cause of in-
●Renal azotemia: When damage to the kidneys results in
creased calcium concentration include the following.
loss of normal renal tissue, the glomerular filtration rate
of the kidneys is not sufficient to clear toxins and meta-
Hypercalcemia: With concerns of significant hypercal-
bolites such as creatinine from the body.
cemia, a complete blood count, blood chemistry, radi-
 Postrenal azotemia: When the lower urinary tract is ob-
ographs, and ultrasound may be needed to evaluate the
structed (i.e., blocked tomcat), the increased pressure and
cause of the increased blood calcium concentration and
lack of urine outflow inhibit normal filtration. As a result,
assess organ damage.
a se yons au a a paxa u sasns
Hypocalcemia: With the history of a postwhelping dog
atinine, build up in the serum.
with a large litter, physical signs and blood calcium concen-
tration are often sufficient for the diagnosis of eclampsia.
A decrease in creatinine is not indicative of disease.
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
319
Symptoms Associated with Changes in Creatinine
Function
Concenfrafion
GGT is an intracellular enzyme responsible for cleaving
 Increased creatinine concentration is generally associated
 C-terminal glutamyl groups from one substrate or molecule
with decreased glomerular filtration rate. As the pet becomes
to another. It is thought to be involved in pathways used to
more toxic (azotemic), physical signs can be as follows.
 protect cells from oxidative injury.
With acute azotemia signs are
Where I Is Produced
vomiting,
All cells except muscle contain GGT; however, renal epithe-
+
diarrhea,
lial, bile duct, and hepatic cells contain the highest activity.
anorexia,
 dehydration, and
Abnormalifies
neurologic signs: seizures.
Increased GGT activity can be seen with decreased bile flow
(cholestasis). GGT can increase with liver damage that re-
With chronic azotemia signs are
sults in cholestasis. Significant increases in GGT are associ-
ated with hepatic disease and bile duct obstruction. Unlike
weight loss,
AST and ALT, GGT does not “leak from hepatocytes; its ac-
chronic vomiting,
tivity is increased due to increased production (induction) of
chronic diarrhea,
the enzyme in response to disease. Increases in GGT activity
muscle loss,
can be the result of pathologic and nonpathologic conditions.
increased thirst (polydipsia), and 
 increased urination (polyuria).
Symptoms Associated with Changes in GGT Activity
Changes in GGT activity can be associated with liver disease
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
or bile duct obstruction (see Chapter 15). The symptoms can
Diagnostic tests that are used to help evaluate increases in
vary depending on the severity and cause of the disease.
 creatinine include
Liver Disease
phosphorus,
 For liver disease, symptoms include
 urinalysis—urine specific gravity,
 BUN, and
 anorexia,
+
 serum electrolytes (especially potassium).
depression,
weight loss,
(Please see the algorithm for kidney disease on p. 331.)
vomiting,
 diarrhea,
 jaundice (although not always directly associated with el-
Discussing Changes in Creatinine Concentration
evations of GGT), and
with the Client
 neurologic signs.
● Creatinine is a metabolite produced during muscle
metabolism that is excreted by the kidneys.
Gall Bladder Obstruction
Marked increase in creatinine concentration is typ-
 For gall bladder obstruction, symptoms include
ically associated with the body's inability to filter
toxins (glomerular filtration rate) through the kid-
●abdominal tendemess/pain,
neys. This can be caused by marked dehydration,
 jaundice (directly linked to obstruction of the gall bladder),
kidney disease, or urinary obstruction.
vomiting,
 Decreasing creatinine levels can be associated with
?
anorexia,
muscle wasting but are usually not significant.
dehydration, and
 Although changes in creatinine levels can be of
diarrhea.
concerm, the blood test must also be fully evaluated,
along with the pet's condition, history, other diag-
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
nostics, and response to treatment, before conclu-
Diagnostic tests that are used to help evaluate the cause of
sions can be reached.
increased GGT activity include those for liver disease and
 gall bladder obstruction.
Gamma-Glutamyltransferase
Liver Disease
 Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) is an indicator of non-
ap rail sans n saa rll o sung
movement of the gall bladder (cholestasis) in the dog and
may indicate the cause of increased GGT activity. These di-
cat. It does not aid in evaluation of liver function.
agnostic tests are
320
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
ALT,
Abnormalities
 SALP or ALP, and
Hyperglycemia
●AST.
Hyperglycemia is defined by glucose levels, as follows:
 Other diagnostic tests for liver function may indicate the
Canine: Blood glucose >300 mg/dl
cause of increased GGT activity. These diagnostic tests are
 Feline: Blood glucose >200 mg/dl
●BUN,
Some patients bec ome hyperglycemic due to stress and
 total bilirubin,
can produce blood glucose levels above 200-300 mg/dl.
cholesterol,
 Diabetes mellitus can cause pathologic increases in blood
+
bile acids (paired),
glucose (see hyperglycemia values above) due to lack of in-
glucose, and
sulin production or insulin resistance in the tissue (see
TP.
Chapter 15).
Gall Bladder Obstruction
Hypoglycemia
Some clinical diagnostic tests that help determine if gall blad-
Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia <60 mg/dl) is produced by
 der obstruction is the cause of changes in GGT activity are
msulin overdose, massive body infection, or tumor. It can also
occur in young neonates that do not have enough body reserve
total bilirubin,
to maintain normal blood sugar levels (i.e., juvenile hypo-
 alkaline phosphatase,
glycemia). Hypoglycemia is a life-threatening concern that
 abdominal X-ray, and
should be brought to theveterinarian's attention immediately.
●abdominal ultrasound.
Practice Tip: When dealing with a potential hypo-
 Discussing Changes in Gamma-Glutamyltransferase
glycemia there are two factors the team member
Activity Levels with the Client
should evaluate:
Gamma-Glutamyltransferase (GGT) is a hepatic
 intracellular enzyme that is involved in protecting
1. Has the blood sample been sitting for too long?
cells from cellular injury.
It is important to note that if a blood sample is left
 Decreased GGT activity is not generally associated
sitting for too long, the red blood cells will con-
tinue to consume the glucose in the tube, producing
with disease.
 Increased activity can be associated with damage to
artifactual hypoglycemia.
 2. Is a human glucometer being used? When using
the liver, causing increased production of GGT by
 the hepatocytes and release into the bloodstream.
a human glucometer, blood glucose levels can be
A normal GGT activity level does not rule out liver
higher by 30-40 mg/dl. The manufacturers set the
 disease or dysfunction where only small armounts
glucometer high to ensure that human diabetics
of liver tissue has decreased function.
will eat before their blood sugar level is too low,
 Although elevations in GGT activity level can be of
hence a blood sugar of 80 may show up as 40 on a
concerm, the blood test must also be fully evaluated,
human machine.
along with the pet's condition, history, other diag
 nostics, and response to treatment, before conclu-
sions can be reached.
Symptoms Associated with Changes in Glucose Levels
Symptoms can vary depending on the severity and cause of
the disease and may include the following.
Glucose
Hyperglycemia associated with diabetes mellitus pres-
ents with
of carbohydrates and other food stuffs.
 increased thirst (polydipsia),
 increased urination (polyuria),
Function
increased appetite (polyphagia), and
Glucose is metabolized intracellularly into adenosine triphos-
weight loss.
 phate (ATP) energy through a process called respiration
Hypoglycemia is a life-threatening condition affecting
Where It Is Produced
the central nervous system directly, producing
Glucose is absorbed through the intestines from digestion of
carbohydrates and obtained by fat and protein metabolism in
weakness,
the liver.
lethargy,
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
321
coma,
Function
seizure,
Lipase is an enzyme that helps break down larger lipid mol-
+
death.
ecules for absorption.
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
Where Ht Is Produced
The following changes can be associated with diabetes mel-
Lipase is produced in the pancreas and enters the duodenum
through the pancreatic ducts to break down lipids for digestion.
litus (hyperglycemia).
Abnormalities
Complete Blood Count
d a   si a e ps si as
 There is no overall change in CBC blood work.
cells that produce leakage of the enzyme into the blood-
stream. Pancreatic damage is secondary to infection and in-
Chemistry
flammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis; see Chapter 15) or
Tests are as follows:
pancreatic cancer.
Hyperglycemia
Symptoms Associated with Increased Lipase Activity
 Increased liver enzymes
Increased lipase activity is associated with the infection or in-
ALT
flammation of the pancreas and the resulting pancreatitis.
AST
 Cormmon symptoms of acute severe pancreatitis in the dog are
 Lipemic serum
 Increased cholesterol
●anorexia,
 Increased fructosamine
depression,
+
Urinalysis
vomiting,
Glucos uria
 abdominal pain,
Ketonuria
 diarrhea, and
 Evidence of secondary urinary tract disease, such as
● jaundice.
proteinuria, hematuria, crystals, etc.
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
 Hypoglycemia, which if present, needs to be brought to
Diagnostic tests that are used to help evaluate the cause of
the attention of the medical team immediately.
increases in lipase activity include
●amylase,
TLI,
 Discussing Changes in Glucose with the Client
 pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity,
 Glucose is the energy source of the body that is
 converted into cellular fuel called ATP by the cells
of the body.
Discussing Elevations of Lipase with the Client
● Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) commonly oc-
 Lipase is an enzyme produced by the pancreas to help
curs secondary to massive infection, insulin over-
break down sugar for absorption in the small intestine.
dose, or cancer. It also occurs in small newborns
● In the dog, elevations in Amylase can suggest an
that do not have the body reserves to maintain nor-
infection or inflammation of the pancreas (i.e.
mal body blood sugar levels.
pancreatitis). The disease process causes the en-
 Hypoglycemia is an emergency condition that can
zyme to leak out of normal pancreatic cells and
produce coma, seizures, and death, and it must be
into the blood stream.
treated immediately.
In the cat, increased pancreatic enzyme activity
 High blood sugar levels (hyperglycemia) occur sec-
 does not directly correlate with pancreatitis.
ondary to stress or disease conditions such as dia-
 Rarely, increased lipase activity may suggest pan-
betes mellitus.
creatic cancer in the dog and cat.
 Persistent hyperglycemia may require the medical
 It is important to note that patients, especially with
team to do further diagnostic testing to help differ-
 chronic disease, can have severe pancreatitis with-
entiate if the patient has diabetes or has a stress-
out elevations of lipase.
 induced hyperglycemia.
- g aq   n  
cerm, the blood test must also be fully evaluated,
along with the pet's condition, history, other diag-
Lipase
nostics, and response to treatment, before conclu-
Lipase is an indicator of pancreatitis in the dog. It is not
sions can be reached.
helpful in evaluation of feline pancreatitis.
322
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
●complete blood count,
+ BUN,
elevation of white count.
creatinine,
 increased band neutrophils
urinalysis——-urine specific gravity, and
+total bilirubin.
serum electrolytes (especially potassium).
(Please see algorithm for kidney disease, p. 331.)
Phosphorus
Discussing Increases in Phosphorus
 Increased phosphorus concentration is associated with de-
Concentration with the Client
a  no n  s  u a
●Phosphorus is a mineral that is used for stability of
disease.
bone and is a key element in the production of cel-
ap aui uoy paqosqe si snudsoud aaua iein
Function
 Phosphorus is a mineral that plays an important part in many
 and stored in the bone.
cell functions, including bone formation, energy metabo-
Abnormal increases in phosphorus concentration
are generally associated with renal disease because
lism, muscle contraction, and acid-base balance.
 the kidneys lose their ability to filter out phospho-
Where It Is Produced
rus in the urine.
 Although changes in phosphorus can be of con-
Phosphorus is absorbed from the diet and stored with cal-
cium in a complex structure in the bone. The combination of
cerm, the blood test must also be fully evaluated,
 calcium and phosphorus architecture gives bone its strength.
along with the pet's condition, history, other diag-
 Phosphorus is also a key element needed for energy produc-
nostics, and response to treatment, before conclu-
tion in the cell.
sions can be reached.
Abnormalifies
 Increased blood phosphorus concentration (hyperphospho-
Potassium
temia) is associated with both acute and chronic renal dis-
Significant changes in potassium can produce severe whole
ease. Phosphorus is eliminated by glomerular filtration. As 
body disease. Changes in potassium concentration can suggest
with BUN and creatinine, kidney disease that results in de-
creased glomerular filtration rate can cause an increase in
●hormonal disease—hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's
disease),
mones can also affect serum phosphate concentration.
feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD),
   p  os  s 
 renal disease, and
high-phosphate substances (i.e., many antifreeze products
 gastrointestinal disease.
have high phosphorus concentration).
Function
Decreased phosphorus concentration (hypophospho-
temia) is not generally associated with disease conditions.
 ducing skeletal and cardiac contraction muscle, depolariza-
However, significant hypophosphatermia can result from
 acid-base imbalance and aggressive insulin therapy.
tion of nerves, and other metabolic functions.
Where It Is Produced
Symptoms Associated with Increased Phosphorus
Potassium is an electrolyte that is absorbed through the di-
Concenfrafion
gestive system through dietary elements, stored intracellu-
Generally associated with kidney disease are decreased glo-
larly, and excreted through the kidneys.
merular filtration rate and retention of increased amounts of
phosphorus in the bloodstream. Physical symptoms can be
Abnormalities
Increased blood potassium concentration (hyperkalemia) is
●weight loss,
a life-threatening derangement of the body's electrolyte bal-
chronic vomiting,
 ance. It is generally associated with hormonal dysfunction,
●chronic diarrhea,
kidney disease, and urinary obstruction.
muscle loss,
increased thirst (polydipsia), and
●FLUTD: Animals with obstruction of their lower urinary
+
+1
increased urination (polyuria).
tract are unable to eliminate potassium from the body.
Over 8-12 hours, the hyperkalemia can be so severe that
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
it produces weakness, muscle fasciculations, and cardiac
 Diagnostic tests that are used to help evaluate the cause of
arrhythmias.
increases in phosphorus concentration associated with renal
Hypoadrenocorticism: Hypoadrenocorticism (Addi-
disease include
son's disease; see Chapter 16) is a lack of the hormone
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
323
aldosterone from the adrenal gland. This hormone stimu-
lates the release of potassium in the kidneys while reab-
sorbing sodium. Addisonian animals can have significant
alterations in normal sodium and potassium concentra-
tion, causing generalized weakness, bradycardia, muscle
fasciculations, and collapse.
Decreases of body potassium (hypokalemia) are associ-
ated with disease entities that cause increased loss of fluids
from the body (i.e., vomiting or diarrhea, polyuric renal dis-
ease) or increased fluid excretion through the kidneys (i.e.,
diuresis). Common diseases that can produce profound hy-
pokalermia are listed below.
Gastrointestinal disease: Severe hypokalemia (<2.5
-s ao n sss ym prsse aq o b
nificant fluid losses from vomiting and diarrhea.
Diseases such as colitis, parvoviral infection, panleuko-
penia, gastric foreign body, and others can produce se-
vere low body potassium levels.
Kidney disease: Animals with kidney disease lose the
ability to concentrate their urine (see Chapter 13). To
compensate, these patients must drink large amounts of
water and excrete large amounts of urine. This mechani-
cal diuresis increases the amount of potassium excreted.
Figure 22.2.  Image of a cat with severe ventroflexion of the
Hospitalized animals on IV fluids: When anorexic animals
 neck secondary to profound hypokalemia.
 are on intravenous fluid support in the hospital seting,
they may demonstrate diuresis-associated hypokalemia.
Discussing Changes in Potassium Concentration
Symptoms Associated with Increased Potassium
with the Client
Concenfration
Potassium is an electrolyte that is responsible for
Physical signs of hyperkalemia can be life threatening be-
normal contractions of the heart and skeletal mus-
cause the body's normal balances of sodium and potassium
cle and nerve impulses as well any many other in-
are affected, decreasing the body's ability to produce electri-
tracellular metabolic functions.
cal impulses required for normal cell function. The cells
 Abnormal increases in potassium concentration are
most severely affected are nerves, skeletal muscle, and car-
 serious, life-threatening conditions generally asso-
diac muscle. Symptoms of hyperkalemia are
ciated with urinary obstruction or hormonal dys-
function.
anorexia,
Abnormal decreases in potassium are associated
weakness,
with gastrointestinal losses (vomiting and diarrhea)
muscle fasciculations,
or increased fluid loss through the kidneys (i.e.,
 abnormal heart rhythms—-ventricular premature contrac-
kidney disease).
tions,
 Although changes in potassium concentration can
pulse deficits,
be of concerm, the blood test must also be fully
collapse, and
evaluated, along with the pet's condition, history,
 bradycardia.
other diagnostics, and response to treatment, be-
fore conclusions can be reached.
Although less severe, hypokalemia also affects the body's
 ability to produce normal electrical impulses. Common
symptoms of hypokalemia are
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
Diagnostic tests that are used to help evaluate the changes in
weakness,
 potassium concentration include the following.
ventroflexion of the neck (see Figure 22.2),
 For hyperkalemia tests are.
anorexia,
depression, and
BUN,
 cardiac arrhythmia.
+creatinine,
324
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
 phosphorus,
blood cells to produce immunity because of immunosup-
sodium and chloride,
 pression or chemotherapy.
ACTH stimulation test (see below),
 abdominal radiographs, and
Symptoms Associated with Changes in Total Protein
electrocardiogram.
Concentration
Increased TP concentration can be associated with dehydration,
For hypokalemia tests are:
similar to the increase in albumin concentration. It can also be
associated with chronic infection, inflammation, or cancer.
 BUN,
Decreased TP concentration can be associated with condi-
creatinine, and
tions that produce decreased albumin concentration (see
urinalysis——-urine specific gravity.
above). Further decreases can be seen with diseases that lower
the body's response to infection (immunosuppression).
Total Protein
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
Total protein (TP) is monitored to help evaluate the patient
for hydration status and blood loss.
Diagnostic tests are used to help evaluate changes in TP con-
centration. For increased TP, associated with increased albu-
Function
min concentration, the tests are
TP is the sum of albumin and globulin in the bloodstream.
Albumin has already been discussed earlier in this section.
+PCV
 albumin, and
Globulin is a protein produced from the lymphocytes of the
body (white blood cell) to fight off infection, for example,
 urine specific gravity.
immunoglobulin.
For increased TP associated with increased globulins,
secondary to chronic infection, inflammation, or cancer, the
Where H Is Produced
tests are
Albumin is produced from the liver. Irmmunoglobulin is pro-
 duced by lymphocytes in the bloodstream in response to infec-
complete blood countswhite blood cell count,
tious organisms or other foreign substances (see Chapter 21).
 globulin blood level, and
 infectious disease titers, including
How Level Is Evaluated
fungal screens,
TP can be evaluated two ways: using a refractometer and
rickettsial screens, and
through clinical blood chemistry tests.
feline infectious peritonitis (feline corona virus).
An estimate of TP concentration can be determined using
the spun PCV microcapillary (hematocrit) tube.
Discussing Changes in Total Protein Levels with
 After the sample is spun down and the PCV recorded, the
the Client
hematocrit tube is broken in the serum region above the
 Total protein (TP) is a combination of blood albu-
red blood cell column and buffy coat.
min and globulin proteins in the blood.
●The serum is then placed on a refractometer and read on
 Albumin is produced by the liver as a carrier pro-
a scale from 1 to 12 mg/dl.
tein to carry nutrients and hormones through the
●The value is recorded along with the PCV.
bloodstream.
Globulins are proteins produced from a type of white
TP can also be obtained through a clinical chemistry or
 blood cell (lymphocytes) to help fight off infection.
an individual in-house chemistry unit. Blood should be ob-
 Elevations in TP can suggest increases in albumin,
tained through a red-topped tube or serum separator.
 secondary to dehydration, or elevations in globulin,
secondary to chronic infection.
Abnormalities
 Decreases in TP can be associated with chronically
Changes in TP depend on overall changes in albumin and
low albumin due to extermal bleeding or chronic
immunoglobulin.
kidney, liver, or intestinal disease. Rarely, de-
As discussed earlier (see albumin), decreased albumin
creased production by lymphocytes (immunosup-
 concentration can suggest liver, renal, and intestinal disease,
pression) can be associated with a low globulin.
as well as acute or chronic blood loss. Increased albumin
 Although elevations in TP can be of concerm, the
concentration is generally associated with dehydration.
blood test must also be fully evaluated, along with
Immunoglobulin concentration is generally increased in
the pet's condition, history, other diagnostics, and
  si   n s
of cancer (i.e., lymphoma, myeloma). Decreased immuno-
reached.
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
325
 For decreased TP due to decreased albumin tests are
PCV/TP (blood loss),
liver enzymes (liver disease),
BUN/creatinine (protein-losing enteropathy), and
TLI/PLI (inflammatory bowel disease).
For decreased TP due to decreased globulins, secondary
 to immunosuppression, the diagnostic test used is a com-
plete blood count.
ACTH
stimulates
Advanced Diagnostics for Adrenal Gland
Function
Adrenal
Advanced blood clinical pathology diagnostics are tests that
 gland
are run in-hospital or through reference laboratories to de-
tect specific infectious, metabolic, or organ-associated dis-
eases. The diagnostic tests are used to help differentiate spe-
cific diseases that cannot be evaluated through normal blood
chemistries. Each section below outlines the clinical proto-
cols used to perform each test; however, every reference lab-
oratory is different in their approach. It is important to dis-
cuss the testing protocols with the each lab prior to
performing the clinical diagnostic test.
Inhibits
1) Stimulates fat and protein
The veterinarian is always responsible for interpreting
CORTISOL
breakdown
the clinical diagnostic tests and outlining treatment options.
2) Increases blood sugar
 It is important for the team member to understand why spe-
production
cific diagnostic tests are performed to better anticipate the
Figure 22.3. 1llustration of normal release of ACTH to stimulate
the release of cortisol. Cortisol then stimulates production of
tient, and to educate the client.
glucose from fat and protein, while also decreasing the production
of ACTH. This type of model is called a negative feedback loop.
Diagnostic tests for adrenal gland function help to evalu-
ate overproduction of cortisol from the adrenal gland (hy-
peradrenocorticism) or decreased adrenal production of al-
 dosterone (hypoadrenocorticism) (see Chapter 17).
ACTH Stimulation Test
The ACTH stimulation test helps evaluate overproduction
of cortisol produced by hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's
How the ACTH Stimulation Test is Performed
disease). It does not differentiate between a pituitary- or
 The patient is fasted for 12 hours. The patient cannot
adrenal-dependent form. Furthermore, the ACTH stimula-
be on any topical, injectable, or oral prednisone med-
tion test helps assess for decreased production of cortisol
ication.
produced by hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
1. A baseline (pre-ACTH) blood sample is drawn in a
Function
red-topped or serum separator tube.
ACTH is the hormone produced by the pituitary gland to
 2. ACTH can be given as a liquid suspension or as a
stimulate production of cortisol by the adrenal gland. Cor-
corticotrophin gel. It is given as follows:
 tisol is used in times of stress and emergency to provide
ACTH dose: 2.2 IU/kg IM
glucose to the cell by metabolism of fat and proteins (see
Corticotrophin gel: ACTH can be given as a liq-
Figure 22.3).
uid suspension or as a corticotrophin gel.
 3. A post-ACTH blood draw is performed as follows:
Where It Is Produced
● If ACTH is given, draw the cortisol baseline 1
ACTH is produced in the pituitary gland.
hour after injection in a red-topped or serum-
separator tube.
Evaluation of the Test
● If Corticotrophin is given, draw cortisol baseline
 The test evaluates both overproduction of cortisol in hyper-
 2 hours after injection in a red-topped or serum-
adrenocorticism (Cushing's disease) and decreased cortisol
separator tube.
with hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease).
326
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
Abnormalities
● High-dose dexamethasone suppression test: (See next
Alterations in the ACTH response test suggest abnormalities
 page for more detail.) If the ACTH stimulation test iden-
in adrenal gland function.
tifies hyperadrenocorticism, the high-dose dexametha-
Increased response  suggests hyperadrenocorticism
sone suppression test helps determine if the cause of the
(Cushing's disease). It does not differentiate whether the dis
increased cortisol is pituitary or adrenal in origin.
ease is occurring within the pituitary (with increased release
 Abdominal radiography: Radiography can be used to
of ACTH) or within the adrenal gland (overproduction of
help examine the mid-dorsal abdomen for suspicious
cortisol by an adrenal tumor).
masses that may be suggestive of an adrenal tumor.
Decreased response can suggest hypoadrenocorticism
 Abdominal ultrasound: Ultrasound allows the patient's
due to decreased production of cortisol and/or aldosterone
adrenal glands to be visualized and examined for changes
from the adrenal gland.
tumor.
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
 Diagnostic tests are used to help evaluate changes in ACTH
Low-Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
stimulation.
Similar to the ACTH stimulation test, the low-dose dexa-
For increased response, further clinical diagnostic tests
methasone suppression test screens for hyperadrenocorti-
are used to help differentiate the type of Cushing's disease
cism. The test evaluates the normal suppression of cortisol
 present (i.e., adrenal versus pituitary disease). Some of these
that should occur as increased amounts of dexamethasone (a
diagnostic tests listed next.
cortisol-like steroid) are administered to the body. It is im-
portant to note that different labs require different protocols
● Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test: (See below
for the diagnostic test; the lab should be consulted prior to
for more detail.) If the ACTH stimulation test is inconclu-
the test to ensure that their protocol is followed.
The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test helps eval-
because it may be a more sensitive indicator of adrenal
uate overproduction of cortisol produced by hyperadreno-
function.
corticism (Cushing's disease). It does not differentiate be-
tween a pituitary- or adrenal-dependent form.
Discussing Changes in the Adrenocorticotropic
Function
Hormone Response Test with the Client
 In a normal patient, by giving a small amount of exogenous
The adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) re-
   lm A  o a m 
sponse test is used to help detect abnormal in-
duction and normal cortisol levels will decrease. This is
creases or decreases in the body's cortisol level in
called a negative feedback loop. In animals with Cushing's
response to stimulation.
disease, the production of cortisol does not depend on nor-
●ACTH is a hormone that is produced from the pi-
mal ACTH secretion, and the cortisol levels continue to be
tuitary gland in the brain to help stimulate cortisol
secreted at increased rates (see Figure 22.3).
production in the adrenal gland.
 To evaluate the pet for changes in normal cortisol
production, a blood sample for determination of
How the Low-Dose Dexamethasone Suppression
baseline cortisol concentration is drawn from your
Test Is Performed
fasted pet.
 The patient is fasted for 12 hours. The patient cannot
 The patient is then given ACTH and a second blood
 be on any topical, injectable, or oral prednisone med-
sample for determination of cortisol concentration
ication.
is drawn 1-2 hours later.
 Increased response to the ACTH stimulation test
1. A (pre-LDD suppression) blood sample for deter-
suggests that the pet is suffering from hyperadreno-
mination of the baseline cortisol concentration is
corticism. However, it does not differentiate be-
drawn in a red-topped or serum-separator tube.
tween pituitary and adrenal causes of Cushing's
2. A low dose of dexamethasone is given intra-
disease.
venously (0.0l mg/kg).
 Decreased response of ACTH stimulation is sug-
3. A blood sample for determination of post-LDD
gestive of hypoadrenocorticism.
suppression of cortisol concentration is drawn as
 Although derangements in cortisol production in the 
follows:
ACTH response test can be of concern, the blood
● A sample is drawn at 6 hours in a red-topped or
test must also be fully evaluated, along with the pet's
serurm-separator tube.
condition, history, other diagnostics, and response to
● Another sample is drawn at 8 hours in a red-
treatment, before conclusions can be reached.
topped or serum-separator tube.
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
327
Evaluation of the Test
 abdominal ultrasound, which allows the patient's adrenal
The test evaluates the patient's ability to suppress cortisol
glands to be visualized and examined for changes that could
 production when exogenous steroids are injected. Normal
indicate pituitary-dependent disease or adrenal tumor.
patients will show a 50% suppression (reduction) in cortisol
levels within 6-8 hours.
High-Dose Dexamethasone (HDD) Suppression Test
The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test is performed
s e  ps aq s a r
Abnormalities
 If there is no obvious suppression within 6-8 hours, it sug-
ing test (i.e., ACTH stimulation or low-dose dexamethasone
suppression test). The test uses a dose of dexamethasone 10
gests hyperadrenocorticism. The test usually does not differ.
entiate whether the disease is occurring within the pituitary
times higher than that used in the low-dose dexamethasone
suppression test to help differentiate pituitary-dependent ad-
(with increased release of ACTH) or within the adrenal
renal disease from adrenal-dependent forms.
gland (overproduction of cortisol).
The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test helps to
determine if the diagnosed hyperadrenocorticism patient is
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
suffering from a pituitary- or adrenal-dependent form of the
 Further clinical diagnostic tests are used to help differentiate
disease.
the type of Cushing's disease present (i.e., adrenal versus pi-
tuitary disease). Some of these diagnostic tests are
Function
In pituitary-dependent adrenal disease (see Chapter 17),
high-dose dexamethasone suppression test (discussed
higher doses of dexamethasone usually produce suppression
below);
of cortisol levels in 6-8 hours. With adrenal-dependent dis-
 abdominal radiography, which can be used to help exam-
ease, the cortisol concentration in the serum of three out of
ine the mid-dorsal abdomen for suspicious masses that
four patients with adrenal tumors will not be suppressed
may be suggestive of an adrenal tumor; and
when the patient is given higher levels of dexamethasone.
How the HDD Suppression Test Is Performed
Discussing Results of the Low-Dose
The patient is fasted for 12 hours. The patient cannot
Dexamethasone Suppression Test with the Client
be on any injectable or oral prednisone medication.
●A low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is
used to help detect abnormal increases in the
1. A blood sample for determination of baseline (pre.
body's cortisol level caused by increased pro-
HDD suppression) cortisol concentration is drawn
 duction of a releasing hormone within the pituitary
in a red-topped or serum-separator tube.
or overproduction of cortisol from an adrenal
2. A high dose of dexamethasone is given intra-
tumor.
venously (0.1 mg/kg).
 To evaluate the pet for changes in normal cortisol
3. A blood sample for determination of post-HDD
production, a baseline blood cortisol concentration
suppression of cortisol concentration is drawn as
is drawn from your fasted pet.
follows:
● The patient is then given a low dose of dexametha-
● A sample is drawn at 6 hours in a red-topped or
sone (a cortisol-like drug) intravenously and two
ser um-separator tube.
more blood cortisol concentrations are drawn 6 and
● Another sample is drawn at 8 hours in a red-topped
8 hours later.
 or serum-separator tube.
In normal patients, the blood cortisol concentration
 decreases by 50% as the body detects increasing
levels of steroid and decreases production.
Evaluation of the Test
 Hyperadrenocorticism patients do not normally
The test determines the patient's ability to suppress cortisol
suppress after 6-8 hour's.
production when exogenous steroids are injected. Most pa-
 The test helps to diagnose Cushing's disease but
tients with pituitary-dependent Cushing's disease will show
does not differentiate between the diseases caused
50% suppression of serum cortisol concentration within 6-8
by pituitary or adrenal glands. Although derange-
hours. Most patients with adrenal-dependent disease will
ments in cortisol production in the low-dose dex-
not show suppression of serum cortisol concentration at any
amethasone suppression test can be of concerm, the
time during the test.
blood test must also be fully evaluated, along with
the pet's condition, history, other diagnostics, and
Abnormalifies
  sis    s
 If there is suppression within 6-8 hours, it suggests pituitary.
reached.
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. If there is no suppression,
adrenal disease is suspected.
328
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics-
-TheSciencebehind theDiagnostics
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
Further clinical diagnostic tests are used to help differentiate
How the Phenobarbital/Potassium Bromide Level
the type of Cushing's disease present (i.e., adrenal versus pi-
Test Is Performed
tuitary disease). Some of these diagnostics are as follows.
The patient has a blood sample for determination of
the drug concentration drawn 46 hours after the last
Abdominal radiography: This can be used to help ex-
dose of the medication is given.
+
amine the mid-dorsal abdomen for suspicious masses
The blood sample is drawn into a red-topped tube
that may be suggestive of an adrenal tumor.
or a specialized serum-separator tube that does not in-
Abdominal ultrasound: This allows the patient's adrenal
terfere with evaluation of blood drug levels.
glands to be visualized and examined for changes that could
indicate pituitary-dependent disease or adrenal tumor.
Evaluation of the Test
The test measures the concentration of KBr or phenobarbi-
Discussing Results of the High-Dose
tal in the body to determine if the level is below, within, or
Dexamethasone Suppression Test with the Client
above therapeutic ranges.
A high-dose dexamethasone suppression test is
used to help differentiate if the patient is suffering
Abnormalities
from an adrenal or pituitary form of hyperadreno-
Alterations in drug levels can suggest overall response to
corticism.
treatment. With each specific drug, the following is noted.
A baseline blood sample for determination of cor-
tisol concentration is drawn from your fasted pet.
●Phenobarbital: Low therapeutic levels suggest there is
 The patient is then given a high dose of dexametha-
not enough drug present in the blood to help control
sone (a cortisol-like drug) intravenously, and two
seizures. Elevated concentration may suggest that the pa-
more blood samples for determination of cortisol
tient is receiving too much medication, which can pro-
concentration are drawn 6 and 8 hours later.
 duce hepatic toxicity.
 In animals affected by pituitary-dependent hypera-
 KBr: Low therapeutic levels suggest there is not enough
drenocorticism, the blood cortisol concentration
drug present in the blood to help control seizures.
decreases by 50% as the body detects increasing
 Increased levels of KBr are rarely associated with organ
levels of steroid and decreases production.
toxicity.
 In animals affected by adrenal-dependent hypera-
 drenocorticism, there is generally no suppression
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
noted in blood cortisol concentration.
There are diagnostic tests that are used to help evaluate the
Although derangements in cortisol production as
changes in phenobarbital. For KBR no other tests are in-
seen in the high-dose dexamethasone suppression
dicated.
test can be of concem, the blood test must also be
 It is important to note that for phenobarbital an elevated
fully evaluated, along with the pet's condition, his-
level does not indicate liver damage or dysfunction. Fur-
tory, other diagnostics, and response to treatment,
thermore,phenobarbital within the normal drug ranges
before conclusions can be reached.
can still produce liver damage dysfunction. To better evalu-
ate liver damage and disease, the following tests may be
indicated.
 Evaluating other liver enzymes that suggest liver damage
Advanced Blood Diagnostics and Drug Assays
 may indicate the phenobarbital liver toxicity. These diagnos-
Monitoring Therapeutic Drug Levels
tic tests are
These diagnostic tests help evaluate if a prescription medica-
tion is reaching effective levels within the bloodstream with-
●ALT,
 out crossing over into a toxic range. The most common drug
 SALP or ALP, and
levels evaluated are phenobarbital and potassium bromine
AST.
(KBr), which are used for long-term control of seizures.
xan sn un passsp om o a ae snp asaun yno
 Evaluating other diagnostics that suggest liver function
therapeutic drug levels are also available for other long-term
may indicate phenobarbitol liver toxicity. These diagnostic
medications (i.e., thyroxine, fluconazole, ketoconazole).
tests are
Function
BUN,
 Phenobarbital and KBr are given continually to help de-
 total bilirubin,
crease the severity, occurrence, and length of seizures in the
cholesterol,
 patient.
bile acids (paired),
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
329
Where It Is Produced
Discussing Changes with Phenobarbital/
Bile acids are produced by the liver for secretion into the
Potassium Bromide Drug Levels with the Client
small intestine.
●Phenobarbital or potassium bromide (KBr) levels
are being tested to help evaluate if the concentra-
Evaluation of the Test
tion of drugs in the blood is within therapeutic
The test determines the patient's ability to excrete bile acids
 range needed to help control seizure episodes.
 The blood samples for determination of drug con-
 in response to eating and then normally reabsorb the acids in
a 2-hour time frame. Patients with decreased liver function
centration are drawn 4-6 hours after a dose of the
have decreased ability to reabsorb bile acids postprandially.
medication.
 The greater the postprandial bile acids, the greater the liver
 Decreased concentration may suggest that there is
dysfunction.
 not enough drug within the system to help control
seizures effectively.
 Increased concentration of phenobarbital could be
Abnormalities
associated with toxicity and must be monitored
Alterations can suggest functional liver disease. The test
closely.
does not help in diagnosing the cause of the liver disease but
 There are limited toxicity concems with elevated
does indicate that the liver is not functioning normally. It is
concentration of KBr.
usually of no further diagnostic use to measure bile acids if
 Although changes within the phenobarbital or KBr
the bilirubin concentration is already increased.
levels are of concerm, the overall change in blood
work must be further evaluated, along with how the
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
 pet is responding to medication and other blood
Diagnostic tests that are used to help diagnose the cause of
work diagnostics.
liver dysfunction are
 abdominal ultrasound  and  ultrasound-guided liver
biopsy,
 albumin, and
 laparoscopic surgery and biopsy, and
glucose.
exploratory surgery.
Liver Function (Bile Acids Assay)
A test for bile acids is a true liver function test. With chronic
Discussing Changes in Bile Acids Assay with the
Client
mal liver enzymes (i.e., ALT, AST) and bilirubin. A bile
Bile acids are salts that are excreted into the small
acids assay evaluates normal liver function.
intestine to help emulsify fats for digestion.
When there are concerns of liver dysfunction, as-
Function
sessing bile acids helps determine if the liver is
Bile acids are secreted by the liver into the small intestine
able to excrete and reabsorb bile acid normally.
when an animal eats to help emulsify and increase the di-
 In a fasted patient, a blood sample to determine
gestibility of fat.
 prefeeding bile acids concentration is drawn. The
patient is then fed, and 2 hours later another blood
sample is taken to determine postfeeding bile acids
How the Bile Acids Assay Test Is Performed
concentration.
The patient is fasted for 12 hours.
     
 Or significantly increased bile acids concentration
1. A sample of blood is drawn to detect preprandial
prior to eating and significantly increased bile
(before eating) bile acid concentration.
acids concentration after eating.
 2. The animal is then fed a small amount of high-
Although this test is a valuable indicator of liver
energy food.
function, it does not help determine the cause of
3. Two hours after eating, a blood sample is drawn
the liver damage. When abnormal, it indicates that
to determine the postprandial bile acids concen-
further diagnostic tests and biopsies are necessary
tration.
to help diagnose the liver disease.
 Although changes within the bile acids are of con-
 The blood samples are drawn into a red-topped tube or
cerm, the overall change in blood work must be fur-
 a specialized serum-separator tube that does not inter-
 ther evaluated, along with how the pet is responding
fere with evaluation of blood drug levels.
 to medication and other blood work diagnostics.
330
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
Pancreatic Function
The trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) test measures the
How the Thyroid Level Test Is Performed
activity of specific digestive enzymes (trypsinogen) in the
In initial evaluation of the thyroid function, the patient
blood. The test helps detect if there is decreased production
can have a thyroid hormone concentration determined
 of these enzymes suggesting pancreatic enzyme insuffi-
from a general blood sample without fasting or prepa-
ciency (PEI; see Chapter 15).
ration. However, if the patient is on a thyroid medica-
tion and hormone concentrations are being rechecked,
Function
it is recommended that the level be evaluated 46
Trypsinogen is a digestive enzyme produced in the pancreas
hours after the medication is given.
and secreted into the duodenum to cleave proteins into
The blood sample is drawn into a red-topped tube
smaller amino acids for digestion.
or a specialized serum-separator tube that does not in-
terfere with evaluation of blood drug levels.
Where It Is Produced
Trypsinogen is produced in the acinar cells of the pancreas.
Where It Is Produced
The thyroid produces thyroid hormone, which is released in
How the Trypsin-Like Immunoassay Test is
the blood to set the basal metabolic rate of cells. The pri-
Performed
mary circulating thyroid hormone is the transport form, and
an mn oud sou 7l iseai ne rog paiseg si jud a
it is present in the bloodstream as active free T4 and T4
test. Eating will artifactually bump up the trypsin-like
bound to albumin. The metabolically active form of the hor-
immunoassay (TLI) to the low-normal range in some
mone is T3.
animals with early exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
The blood sample is drawn into a red-topped tube
Evaluation of the Test
or a specialized serum-separator tube that does not in-
The test determines the patient's serum concentration of
terfere with evaluation of blood drug levels.
 total T4 and free T4
Abnormalities
Evaluation of the Test
Decreased levels of T4 production can be associated with a
 The test determines the serum concentration of trypsinogen.
lack of production at the pituitary or thyroid level (hypothy-
Abnormaliies
roidism). An increase in T4 is associated with an overpro-
duction of thyroid hormone due to benign (most common in
Decreased production of trypsinogen is suggestive of pan-
n jo s (so un u 1so) m o (s
creatic exocrine insufficiency, a condition in which the pan-
thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism). Free T4 levels are used to
creas loses its ability to produce normal digestive enzymes.
evaluate animals with borderline increases and decreases in
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
total T4. Free T4 levels can change more dramatically in
Diagnostic tests are used to help evaluate pancreatic dys-
early disease than total T4 levels and hence may be a good
function or disease.
indicator of early thyroid disease. It is important to remem-
ber that many dogs and cats with low total and free T4 have
●Fecal parasites sereens: floatation, smears, ELISA (see
decreased concentration of thyroid hormone because of
Chapter 23).
nonthyroid disease (euthyroid sick syndrome).
● Fecal fat evaluation: Increased amounts of fat in the
feces can suggest abnormal digestion or absorption of fat 
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
due to pancreatic or intestinal disease.
-uod ana diau o pasn ae e sisn le ae aau
Blood folate levels: Changes in blood folate concentra-
tial diseases of the thyroid gland.
tion can suggest chronic inflammatory changes in the
For decreased thyroid function the tests are as follows:
bowel and pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.
 Cholesterol/triglyceride levels: With low thyroid func.
Thyroid Function—Total T4 and Free T4 Levels
tion, serum fat and triglyceride concentration can be in-
Total T4 and free T4 levels help evaluate the patient for dis-
creased.
eases causing overproduction (hyperthyroidism) and under-
 Complete blood count: Some hypothyroid animals will
production (hypothyroidism) of the primary hormone pro-
have a mild nonregenerative anemia.
duced by the thyroid gland.
For increased thyroid function the tests are as follows:
Function
Thyroid hormone is produced to help cells set the basal meta-
 Liver enzymes: Prolonged hyperthyroidism can increase
bolie rate of the body, the rate at which cells bum energy.
ALT, AST, and ALP levels.
of primary renal disease.
ON
ON
Low body Albumen
 At risk patient
Urine / Protein Quant
Other signs
 Obtain a urinalysis
Run advanced diagnostics:
Is the USG low?
iImages reprinted with permision from Heska Corp., 3760 Rocky Mountain Avenue, Loveland CO 80538.
PU / PD
Is there:
。
ON
Other elements: Increased
2
Othe:
Yes
thereanazotemia
 Obtain a urinalysis
Is the USG low?
Low potassium
phosphorus
functions - i.e., Blood
Renal Azotemia
Evaluate other
pressure
331
 May require further testing
 No obvious liver problems 
 At this point there are no concerns
disease
 of hepatic disease.
ON
No
Evaluate other functions - i.e., Bile acids,
 Recommend Fasting Bile Acids
 Is there evidence of liver
dysfunction?  Low body:
Yes
Yes
 Are the Bile Acids
abdominal ultrasound
images reprinted with permission from Heska Corp., 3760 Rocky Mountain Avenue, Loveland, CO 80538.
Albumen
Glucose
Elevated?
Nna
Liver Disease
ooo
ON
functions - i.e., Bile
Liver Disease
Elevated AST, ALT, GGT,
Increased T Bili(Jaundice)
Evaluate other
Is there evidence of acute
 Reevaluate a blood smear
No
Yes
Is there agglutination?
Liver trauma?
LDH
Yes
May
332
There are no obvious changes in the
blood work to support panereatitis;
however, with chronic disease
 advanced diagnosties may be
Abdominal Ultrasound
needed:
0
ON
Algorithm for Exocrine Pancreatic Disease (i.e., Pancreatitis)i11
Examine a WBC smear. Are
Intracellular Bacteria
Toxic Neutrophils
Yes
mImages reprinted with permission fom Heska Corp,. 3760 Rocky Moumtan Avenue, Loveland CO 80538.
 Radiographs
punosenn
s
there:
diagnostics:
1LL
0
 other panereatic exocrine disease.
Early or Mild Pancreatitis or
Continue diagnostic protocols
ON
ON
Examine a WBC smear. Are
White Blood Cell
Are there elevations of:
(CANINES ONLY)
Yes
Intracellular Bacteria
Toxie Neutrophils
Amylase
Lipase
Count
Fulminating Acute
Severe concern
Pancreatitis
there:
Yes
At this point there are no concerns
for diabetes mellitus.
 for diabetes mellitus.
aun pue asoonig pooq suouou wopuey
2
Possible Transient Diabetic (Early disease)
No
Chronic Obesity
At risk patient
 Other signs
 Obtain a urinalysis
Yes
PU / PD
Fructosamine
Is there:
3
No
 Obtain a urinalysis
 Is there an acute
hyperglycemia?
Canine > 200
Feline > 300
1
the urine?
Evaluate urine for ketones
 and other abnormalities
Diabetes mellitus
Chapter 22: Organ, Hormonal, and Drug Level Clinical Pathology
335
Hypertension: High blood pressure is a common sec-
Table 22.3.
Normal values for canine/feline chemistry.
ondary disease of the hyperthyroid animal.
Test
Canine Normal Range
Feline Normal Range
Discussing Changes in Thyroid Level with the
ALP
10-150 U/I
0-62 U/I
Client
ALT (SGPT)
5-60 U/
27-76 U/I
●A thyroid hormone concentration determines the
AST (SGOT)
5-55 U/I
5-55 U/l
amount of active hormone being produced from the
GGT
0-14 U/I
0-6 U/I
 Abumin
2.5-3.6 g/dl
2.3-3.3 g/l
thyroid gland.
TP
5.1-7.8 g/dl
5.9-8.5 g/l
●A decrease in thyroid hormone concentration can
Gobulin
2.8-4.5 g/dl
3.6-5.6 g/l
suggest a lack of hormone production within the
 Total bilirubin 
Ip/bU 0-0
0-0.4 mg/dl
thyroid gland (hypothyroidism).
BUN
7-27 mg/dl
15-34 mg/dl
An increase in thyroid hormone concentration can
Creatinine
0.4-1.8 mg/dl
0.8-2.3 mg/dl
Glucose
60-125 mg/dl
70-150 mg/dl
suggest an overproduction of thyroid hormone due
Calcium 
8.2-12.4 mg/dl
8.2-11.8 mg/dl
to benign or malignant tumors within the thyroid
 Phosphorus
2.1-6.3 mg/dl
3.0-7.0 mg/dl
gland (hyperthyroidism).
Chloride (Cl)
105-115 mEq/l
111-125 mEq/l
Although derangements in thyroid production can
Sodium (Na)
141-156 mEq/l
147-156 mEq/l
be of concern, the blood test must also be fully
Potassium (K)
4.0-5.6 mEq/l
3.9-5.3 mEq/l
evaluated, along with the pet's condition, history,
other diagnostics, and response to treatment, be-
fore conclusions can be reached.
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of understanding and dis-
cussing clinical diagnostics and the disease conditions rep-
resented.The exercises can be done individualy or as case
rounds as they explore specific topics in veterinary medicine
that discuss clinical diagnostics and treatment.
Chapter 23
Urinalysis and Fecal Clinical Diagnostics
Both fecal and urine clinical diagnostic tests are commonly
Cystocentesis
performed within the hospital for a thorough evaluation of
This procedure is generally done by the veterinarian. In this
the patient's medical condition. As with the blood film in
protocol, the patient is placed on its side or back and re-
evaluation of the complete blood count, microscopic evalu-
strained while the bladder is palpated. A small-gauge needle
ation of fecal and urine samples must be practiced to iden-
(i.e., 20-22 gauge) on a 15-ml syringe is then introduced
tify abnormalities and suggest disease conditions. Sample
into the bladder through the abdominal wall and urine is col-
handling and preparation are key in obtaining reliable con-
lected. This sterile sample can be used for culture and sensi-
sistent results. To achieve this goal, the client must be edu-
tivity of potential bacterial pathogens. This collection
cated in how to properly obtain and store the fecal and urine
method can produce a small amount of blood in the urine
that is not related to bladder disease.
sample storage, old samples, and poor sample handling can
produce artifacts in the sample that can mimic serious dis-
Catheterization
 In this protocol, a urinary catheter is placed through the
tools to discuss the importance of each diagnostic test, to ob-
penis or vulva to obtain a sterile urine sample. This sample
tain and handle the sample, to perform the diagnostic test,
can be used for culture and generally does not produce arti-
 and to discuss the test and its outcome with the client
factual blood in the urine. Furtherrmore, this diagnostic helps
the veterinarian assess possible lower urinary tract obstruc-
Urinary Clinical Diagnostic
tion secondary to a stone, mass, or prostatic disease.
Urinalysis
Sample Handling
 The urinalysis is one of the most important clinical diag-
 Urine samples should be evaluated as soon as possible to
avoid changes in the urine that could mimic actual disease-
diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, hypoadrenocorti-
induced abnormalities. If samples must be stored before they
can be evaluated, they can be refrigerated up to 12 hours.
tion with routine blood work, this diagnostic test provides a
Once the urine is ready for evaluation, it must be allowed to
baseline for evaluation of the patient's overall metabolic
warm up to room temperature. Many components of urine
function.
room temperature. Conversely, if the urine is allowed to sit at
Sample Collection
room temperature too long, urinary crystals (i.e., struvite,
Urine collection is achieved in a variety of ways, depending
calcium oxalate, and other types) may form as the urinary
 on what type of clinical diagnostic tests are to be performed.
 gest the patient has been forming urinary crystals.
Free Catch
 In this protocol, the urine is collected while the animal is
Performing a Urinalysis
voiding its sample or collected fresh from a litter box. In ca-
The urinalysis is composed of three diagnostic steps, which
nine collection, a midstream sample is collected using a
are presented next.
specimen cup or other sampling device. A few milliliters
(1-2 teaspoons) are sufficient to perform the necessary
Urinary Chemical Strip
tests. With cats, the litter box is cleaned thoroughly and
-ap oi aun ainadua-uoou aun ou paddp si ds s
lined with strips of plastic, glass beads, or specially pro-
termine the chemical composition of the urine. Each strip
 duced crystals that do not absorb the moisture. The sample
has small chemical reagent squares that are sensitive to one
should be collected as soon as possible after it has been
specific component of the urine (see below). Each reagent
voided and without fecal contamination. Free-catch or
square reacts and changes color within 30-120 seconds and
voided samples cannot be used for culture or sensitivity of
is read at the appropriate time by comparing the color
potential bacterial pathogens.
change to the guide on the container's label
337
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
Refractometer
Urine Appearance
 The refractometer evaluates the concentration of the urine,
Urine samples can be turbid (cloudy) or clear. The turbidity
the urine specific gravity (USG). A few drops are placed on
 of urine samples is related to the concentration of cell, crys-
the refractometer's reading surface and the refractometer is
tals, or mucin in the sample.
10) st0'1 0 lo0'1 woy pea1 st Dsn ug au1 0 dn pay
>1.045). The USG is a very important diagnostic test to
Urine Specific Gravity
evaluate kidney function. Although some urine chemical
USG is the measure of urine concentration compared with
strips do have a reagent square for USG, a refractometer
distilled water (USG 1.000).
reading should always be completed to get an accurate eval-
USG is a major indicator of primary renal function. As
uation of concentration of urine.
discussed in Chapter 13, the kidneys serve two major func-
tions: to filter out toxins and concentrate urine. The kidneys
Urine Sediment
also function to control blood pressure and acid/base and
Lastly, the urine is placed in a test tube and spun for 6 min-
electrolyte balance. With serious renal disease, the kidney
 utes at low speeds in a centrifuge. This separates the cellular
loses its ability to filter toxins and concentrate urine. Since
components from the urine. Once spun down, the liquid por-
there are major diseases and syndromes that can decrease
tion (supernatant) is poured off and the sediment is mixed
glomerular filtration and azotemia (i.e., blood urea nitrogen,
with a small amount of saline or stain and evaluated under
 yinns diay o Dn a ( p 'na o
the microscope. Changes in cellularity can suggest infec-
tween primary kidney disease or other causes of azotemia,
tion, inflammation, formation of dietary crystals, or cancer
such as prerenal azotemia due to dehydration.
 Increases in USG are normal, and increased concentra-
of the kidneys or bladder.
tion (USG >1.045) does not suggest disease, just normal
ability of the kidneys to concentrate urine. Increased USG is
Evaluating the Urinalysis
 seen in dehydration.
Urine Color
 Decreased USG (USG <1.015) can suggest the patient has
Urine color can suggest disease conditions of the kidneys
 adequate to increased hydration and does not need to concen-
and lower urinary tract. Any abnormal colors should be re-
trate urine at this time. However, if the patient is dehydrated,
 ported to the veterinarian. Possible color changes are red, or-
azotemic (increased BUN/creatinine), or generally ill, a low
 ange, and yellow.
USG can suggest renal or other systemic disease that is in-
hibiting normal concentrating ability of the kidneys.
Red
 A red color change could indicate increased red blood cells
How Is It Evaluated
(hematuria) in the urine from infection, cancer, or sponta-
 USG is evaluated by placing a drop of urine on a refractome-
 p    sa an  a so
 ter and reading where the urine line forms on the USG line.
oration can also be due to increased red blood cell destruc-
tion and release of hemoglobin (hemoglobinuria) or muscle
Normal values of USG.
cell destruction and release of myoglobin (myoglobinuria)
in the urine. Hemoglobinuria can be associated with dis-
Species
Range
eases in which red blood cells are destroyed at increasing
Canine
USG >1.015: 1.025-1.040
 levels in the body from immune-mediated disease (immune-
 Feline
USG >1.022: 1.025-1.045 (or greater)
mediated hemolytic anemia).
Myoglobinuria is associated with significant muscle
Terminology
damage. To differentiate hemoglobinuria and myoglobinuria
 Isosthenuria refers to urine that has the same specific
from hematuria, the urine sample should be spun down. Red
 gravity as plasma or serum: USG 1.010-1.015.
blood cells will be concentrated in the pellet, and the urine
Hyposthenuria refers to urine that has more dilute spe-
will lose its red color. Hemoglobin and myoglobin will re-
cific gravity than plasma or serum: USG <1.008.
 main in the supermatant.
It is more difficult to differentiate hemoglobinuria from
Physical Symptoms Associated with Changes in USG
myoglobinuria. Because myoglobin is more rapidly cleared
Generally patients with chronic low USG are drinking more
from the serum by the kidneys than hemoglobin, the serum
(eniod) an ao sunod pu (eisdiod) ram
in myoglobinuria will be clear and in hemoglobinuria will be
than normal patients. Because patients cannot concentrate
red.
their urine, they must drink larger amounts of water to keep
up with their increased urine production.
Orange or Yellow
 An orange or yellow color change can suggest increased
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
bilirubin and liver disease or increased breakdown of red
 The other clinical diagnostic tests that will help evaluate
blood cells from immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
kidney function are
Chapter 23: Urinalysis and Fecal Clinical Diagnostics
339
BUN,
+
 packed cell volume,
creatinine,
bilirubin, and
phosphorus,
 blood film—agglutination/spherocytes.
 urine protein/creatinine ratio, and
electrolytes.
Blood
Blood in the urine consists of red blood cells, hemoglobin,
Urine Chemistries
or myoglobin.
Bilirubin
 Blood in the urine can be suggestive of active inflamma-
Bilirubin is a hemoglobin breakdown product produced as
tion of the bladder, the kidney, the reproductive organs, or a
red blood cells are lysed and hemoglobin is released in the 
tumor within the urinary tract. Blood in the urine occurs
body. The bilirubin is then absorbed by the liver, detoxified,
most commonly secondary to urinary tract disease, urolithi-
and passed into the intestine for excretion. Increased levels
asis (bladder stones), or prostate disease. Blood occurs as
 of bilirubin in the blood can suggest underlying liver disease
the bladder wall becomes thickened and inflamed and the ir-
in which the liver cannot take up bilirubin and excrete it,
ritated tissue bleeds into the urine. Occasionally, blood in the
causing large amounts of bilirubin to be excreted in the
urine can also be secondary to kidney disease, problems
urine. Increased urine bilirubin concentration can also be as-
clotting blood, and tumors of the bladder and kidneys.
sociated with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, where
Evidence ofblood inthe urine isaconcern and should bere-
red blood cells are being lysed. In the dog, bilirubinuria can
ported to the veterinarian. The blood reagent pad measures
 be normal, especially in concentrated urine. However, in the
intact red blood cells, hemoglobin, and myoglobin.
cat, any evidence of bilirubinuria is abnormal and should be
Determination of which condition is present is done by eval-
reported to the veterinarian immediately.
 uation of the urine color and the sediment evaluation.
How It Is Evaluated
How It Is Evaluated
Bilirubin is evaluated by dipping a urine stick into urine and
Blood in the urine is evaluated by dipping the urine stick
allowing a specific time interval to pass and then examining
 into urine, allowing a specific time interval to pass, and then
the chemical square for color change.
examining the chemical square for color change.
Normal values of bilirubin.
Normal values red blood cells, hemoglobin, or myoglobin.
Species
Range
Species
Range
Canine
 Negative to weakly positive
 Canine
Negative
Feline
 Negative
Feline
Negative
Terminology
Terminology
Bilirubinuria refers to the presence of bilirubin in the urine.
Hematuria refers to blood in the urine.
Physical Signs Associated with Changes in Bilirubin
Physical Signs Associated with the Presence of Blood in
 Animals with increased bilirubinuria will present with jaun-
Urine
dice, vomiting, diarrhea, and anorexia secondary to the pres-
 Physical signs of blood in the urine are generally associated
ence of diseases associated with decreased liver function or
with blood spotting or the passing of blood clots in the urine. If
hemolytic anemia.
it is secondary to lower urinary tract disease (i.e., urinary tract
infection, urolithiasis, mass), other associated signs can be
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
 To help evaluate liver disease clinical tests include
 straining to urinate,
 polyuria/polydipsia,
 aspartate aminotransferase,
urinating small amounts, and
alanine aminotransferase,
urgency while urinating.
gamma-glutamyltransferase,
 allkaline phosphatase,
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
bilirubin,
To help evaluate urinary tract infection/urolithiasis these
bile acids,
tests include
 BUN, and
+：
glucose.
urine protein,
urine sediment,
Tests to help evaluate for immune-mediated hemolytic
urine leukocytes, and
anemia tests include
urine culture.
340
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
 To help evaluate for other possible diseases, tests include
Ketones
Ketones are a metabolite of fat metabolism associated with
●BUN,
unregulated diabetes mellitus.
creatinine,
Ketones in the urine can be suggestive of a severe life-
 abdominal radiographs,
threatening syndrome, diabetic ketoacidosis, caused by ex-
 abdominal ultrasound, and
cessive uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. As the patient contin-
clotting times.
ues with uncontrolled diabetes, the body cannot use glucose
and must turm to fat metabolism. The end products of fat me-
Glucose
tabolism are ketoacids, including acetone. Evidence of ke-
Glucose in the urine can be suggestive of diabetes mellitus,
tones in the urine is a concern and should be reported im-
other systemic diseases (rare), or stress. In the dog, glucose
mediately to the veterinarian (see Chapter 15).
in the urine occurs generally when the patient is diabetic and
cannot use blood glucose. Serum glucose concentration in-
How Is It Evaluated
creases and passes into the urine. Glucosuria is also evident
Ketones are measured by dipping the urine reagent stick into
when patients become stressed in a hospital setting and pro-
the urine, allowing the specific time interval to pass, and
 then examining the chemical square for color change.
duce enough blood glucose to spill into the urine. Gluco-
suria due to stress is most common in the cat. Evidence of
Normal values of ketones.
glucose in the urine is a concern and should be reported to
the veterinarian.
Species
Range
Canine
Negative
How It Is Evaluated
 Feline
Negative
Glucose in the urine can be evaluated by dipping urine stick
into urine, allowing a specific time interval to pass, and then
Terminology
examining the chemical square for color change.
Ketonuria refers to ketones in the urine.
 Normal values of glucose concentration.
 Physical Signs Associated with Changes in Urine Ketone
Concentration
Species
Range
Ketoacidotic diabetics are generally significantly ill due to
 Canine
Negative
the buildup of ketones in the blood, which produces a life-
Feline
Negative
threatening acidosis. Common signs are
Terminology
vomiting,
Glucosuria refers to glucose in the urine.
diarrhea,
anorexia,
Physical Signs Associated with Changes in Glucose in
weakness,
Urine
 dehydration, and
 depression.
 Increased thirst and urination are associated with chronic
 glucosuria in diabetic animals. The patient must drink more
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
water to replace fluid lost due to the diuretic effect of gluco
To help evaluate for diabetes mellitus the following clinical
suria. The increased urination causes increased thirst and
diagnostics can be performed.
polydipsia.
 Complete blood count and chemistry evaluate the pa-
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
tient for primary diabetes or other systemic disease that
 To help evaluate for diabetes mellitus, the following clinical
could make the patient diabetic secondarily (i.e., hyper-
 diagnostics are helpful.
adrenoc orticism).
●Testing blood gases help evaluate blood pH and deter-
Blood glucose: Blood glucose (see Chapter 22) between
mine the degree of acidosis in the patient.
200 and 300 mg/dl can be related to stress and result in
glucosuria. Blood glucose concentration above 300 is
Protein
more suggestive of diabetes.
Urinary protein levels reflect the amount of protein from the
● Fructosamine: Measuring another form of glucose that
blood that enters the urine secondary to kidney, bladder, and
increases when there is persistent hyperglycemia is help-
other systematic disease.
ful. Serum fructosamine measurement allows the veteri-
 Protein in the urine can be an indicator of renal, bladder,
marian to evaluate how the patient is controlling glucose
or other systematic diseases. The presence of increased urine
 metabolism over the past several days.
Chapter 23: Urinalysis and Fecal Clinical Diagnostics
341
Kidney disease: Proteins are large molecules that nor-
For renal disease, the symptoms are as follows. (Note that
mally do not cross through the glomerular filters into the
(dse aq  d an 'ass go sas  u
urine. With kidney disease, damage to the glomerular fil-
ters can allow protein to leak into the urine. The presence
 Polyuria/polydipsia
of protein without other signs of urinary tract infection
Anorexia
Weight loss
(i.e., hematuria, leukocytes, active sediment) can be an
Chronic vomiting
indicator of glomerular disease.
● Urinary tract disease: Protein can also increase in the
 Diarrhea
urine due to infection and inflammation in the bladder.
When the bladder wall becomes inflamed and irritated,
To help evaluate for renal or bladder infection, inflam-
protein and blood can leak into the urine.
mation, or cancer the following clinical diagnostics can be
 Other systemic diseases: Other chronic inflammatory
performed.
and neoplastic disease may increase protein concentra-
tion in the urine.
● Complete blood count and chemistry tests evaluate the
 patient for increases in renal enzymes, other organ en-
How It Is Evaluated
zymes, and changes in the complete blood count that
 Urine protein is measured by dipping the urine reagent stick
could suggest a kidney or other systemic disease.
into urine, allowing the specific time interval to pass, and
Urine sediment evaluates changes in the cellularity of
urine for red blood cells, white blood cells, casts, and
then examining the chemical square for color change. There
cells that can suggest infection, inflammation, or cancer 
are some key points to monitor when evaluating protein con-
of the kidney or bladder (see below).
centration in the urine.
 Urine culture and sensitivity isolates possible bacterial
●Urinary pH: Alkaline pH (>7.5) will produce an artifac-
pathogens and determines their sensitivity to specific an-
tibiotics secondary to urinary or renal disease.
tual proteinuria. Animals being evaluated for signs of
Urine protein/creatinine ratio determines a quantitation
o  an n d e a a 
 alkaline urine must be resampled at another time or begin
of the amount of protein to the amount of creatinine ex-
creted for comparison. It is used when there is concern
medications to acidify their urine to more adequately
evaluate renal protein loss.
about protein loss in the kidneys (glomerular disease). In
healthy kidneys, there is very little protein excreted com-
 Bladder infection: There is no test available to differen-
 tiate between protein produced from a bladder infection
 pared with creatinine (urine protein/creatinine ratio <1).
The more leakage from the glomeruli, the higher the
and protein that is leaked by damaged kidneys. If a blad-
der infection is prevalent, the resulting infection must be
urine protein/creatinine ratio and the worse the kidney
cleared before protein can be evaluated as an early indi-
glomerular disease (see Chapter 13).
cator of renal disease.
D
Normal values of protein.
Although not directly associated with disease, abnormalities
 l s a n u ssn aad u   u
Species
Range
produce artifacts in the urinalysis.
ua ou uo axa ue si Hd Aen
Canine 
 Negative to trace
Feline
 Negative
evaluating a patient for urolithiasis. Urinary crystals and
stones form from dietary elements in the presence of urinary
Terminology
tract infection and proper pH of the urine (see Table 23.1).
 Proteinuria refers to the presence of high protein levels in
Many treatment options are focused on correcting pH of the
urine to help control the formation of future stones or crys-
the urine.
tals. Furthermore, alkaline urinary pH can produce an arti-
factual proteinuria (see proteinuria).
Physical Signs Associated with Changes in Urine Protein
Concentration
Physical signs associated with proteinuria are generally as-
sociated with urinary tract disease (i.e., urinary tract infec-
tion, urolithiasis, acute renal disease).
Tabie 23.1. Changes in urine depending on pH.
 For urinary tract disease the signs are as follows:
Straining to urinate
Acidic Urine (pH <6.5)
Alkaline Urine (pH >7.5)
Polyuria/polydipsia
 Calcium oxalate urolithiasis 
 Struvite (triple phosphate) urolithiasis
Urinating small amounts
 Artifactual proteinuria
Urgency while urinating
342
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
How It Is evaluated
3. After thoroughly mixing the sediment, place a drop on a
Urine pH is determined by dipping the urine reagent stick
clean glass slide and cover with a large coverslip.
into urine, allowing the specific time interval to pass, and
 4. Examine the slide by lowering the microscope condenser
 then examining the chemical square for color change.
or closing the iris diaphragm to increase the contrast.
5. On low (10X) power, scan the slide to get an overall view
Normal values of urinary pH.
of the cellularity and number of other formed elements
Range
such as casts and crystals. Large epithelial cells (squa-
Species
mous epithelial cells and transitional epithelial cells) can
 Canine
6.5-7.5
be quantitated at this power and noted as number of cells
Feline
6.5-7.5
per low-power field (lpf).
 6. On high (40X) power, all formed elements can be quanti-
Terminology
fied as number per high-power field (hpf). Bacteria are usu-
 pH <7: Acidic
ally noted as few, moderate, or many, rather than counted.
pH >7: Alkaline
 Normal values of urine sedimentation.
Other Clinical Diagnostics
To help evaluate for bladder urolithiasis and bladder infec-
Formed Element
Number/hpf in normal urine
tion, the following clinical diagnostics can be performed.
Epithelial cells 
Few to many
Red blood cells
 0-5/hpf
●  Urine sediment evaluates changes in the cellularity of
White blood cells
0-8/hpf 
urine for red blood cells, white blood cells, casts, and
Casts
 Rare hyaline and granular casts (<2/lpf)
cells that can suggest infection, inflammation, or cancer 
Crystals
Few dihydrate calcium oxalate or
 phosphate crystals
of the kidney or bladder (see below)
 Bacteria
None
●  Urine culture and sensitivity isolates possible bacterial
pathogens and determines their sensitivity to specific an-
tibiotics secondary to urinary or renal disease.
Terminology
● Hematuria refers to increased numbers of red blood
Urine Sediment Evaluation
cells in the urine.
The examination of urine sediment is a very important part
+
 Pyuria refers to increased numbers of white blood cells
of urinalysis. The identification and quantification of
in the urine.
formed elements (cells, casts, crystals, infectious agents) in
Cylinduria refers to increased numbers of casts in the
the urine are necessary for a full evaluation for urinary tract
urine.
disease.
Crystalluria refers to increased numbers of crystals in
Urine sediment examination assists in identification of
the urine.
infectious and inflammatory disease in the urinary tract.
 Bacteriuria refers to the presence of bacteria in the urine.
Occasionally, urine sediment can also assist in the diagnosis
of urinary tract cancer and certain toxicities, such as ethyl-
Cellular Elements
ene glycol (antifreeze) poisoning.
 The cellular elements that are identified within the urine
 sediment include squamous epithelial cells, transitional ep-
How It Is Evaluated
ithelial cells, red blood cells, and white blood cells.
Urine sediment is examined microscopically. Specific
formed elements are identified and quantified at low and
 Squamous epithelial cells: Squamous cells are seen in
high power. The quantification of formed elements is an es-
free-catch and catheter samples. These cells are from the
timate (semiquantitative) due to the large number of factors
urethra and are considered insignificant findings. They
that need to be standardized. The sediment can be stained
are the largest cells and often have angular sides. They
prior to viewing it under the microscope or it may be exam-
may or may not have a nucleus.
ined without stain.
Transitional epithelial cells: Transitional cells are usu-
To perform the test a clean urine sample is obtained, pre-
ally smaller than squamous cells. They can vary consid-
ferably by cystocentesis or catheterization. A sample obtained
erably in size and are round with round nuclei. They are
first thing in the morning provides the most information.
commonly shed into the urine as a normal process of
bladder mucosal epithelial cell turnover. Increased num-
1. Pour 10 ml of urine into a conical centrifuge tube and
bers are often shed when there is inflammation in the
 (di oosn) suas mo e  anuao a u ssod
bladder.
5 minutes.
 Red blood cells: Red blood cells should not be present in
2. Pour off the supernatant, leaving about 0.5 ml of fluid in
normal urine. They are slightly refractile and may have a
the centrifuge tube to resuspend the sediment.
slight red coloration. They can vary from their normal bi-
Chapter 23: Urinalysis and Fecal Clinical Diagnostics
concave discs to crenated cells, depending on the specific
epithelial cells can still be discermed within the cast and
gravity of the urine.
are held together by a protein matrix.
High specific gravity causes crenation.
Granular casts: Granular casts form within the renal
Low specific gravity (less than 1.005) can cause lysis
tubules and are composed of sloughed renal epithelial cells.
of the red blood cells. When the cells lyse, they may ap-
The casts can be coarsely or finely granular depending on
 pear as “ghost'’ cells with little hemoglobin left inside.
how long the cast stayed in the tubules before being flushed
Unlike epithelial cells, they are small and do not have in-
out. The longer the cast is retained in the tubule, the finer
ternal structures. They can be confused with lipid
the granularity will be when viewed in the sediment exam-
droplets. They will be in focus with the rest of the formed
 ination. When viewed with increased contrast, granular
elements that have settled to the surface of the glass slide,
casts often have ill-defined intermal structure that gives
whereas lipid droplets will be in a focus plane above the
-de uago s ypim nau aueeadde enuna an wan
rest of the cellular elements. If red blood cells are seen
 proximately three times the diameter of a white blood cell.
upon sediment examination, there should be a positive 
Waxy casts: Waxy casts are granular casts that have re-
blood reaction of the chemical urine strip.
mained in the renal tubule until all the cellular compo-
White blood cells: Urine sediment can contain white
nents have degenerated completely. They have straight
bood cells as a result of inflammation or hemorrhage.
ends and cracks along the sides. They are often larger
When present as a result of hemorrhage, white blood cells 
than most granular casts and may form in the larger col-
will be in much smaller numbers compared with red blood
lecting ducts of the kidney rather than the proximal or
cells. With inflammation, white blood cells may outnumber
distal tubules or loops of Henle.
red blood cells. In most cases, inflammation of the bladder
White blood cell casts: White blood cell casts are
or kidney will be associated with some degree of hemor-
formed when white blood cells migrate into the renal
rhage. White blood cells are slightly larger than red blood
tubule as a result of inflammation within the nephron.
cells and smaller than most epithelial cells. They have in-
They can be difficult to differentiate from epithelial cell
termal structure and often “glitter” when viewed with in-
casts. The cells within a white blood cell cast are usually
creased contrast. A sediment stain can be used to confirm
smaller than those seen in an epithelial cast. White blood
the presence of white blood cells if they cannot be defini-
ai l n, o on as a  o pn s
tively identified on the unstained preparation. In most
cast as they do when present free in the urine sediment.
 cases, the most numerous white blood cells seen in urine
 Hyaline casts: Hyaline casts are composed of a protein
sediment are the neutrophils. However, eosinophils, lym-
matrix and can be found in low numbers in normal urine.
phocytes, and monocytes or macrophages can be present.
They are similar to the waxy cast in that they do not con-
tain intermal structure. In contrast to waxy casts, they
Importance of Identification of Elements in Urine
have rounded ends and no cracks on their sides. They are
+
 Squamous and transitional cells: These cells are usu-
usually smaller than waxy casts.
ally common and have no significance. Increased num-
 Miscellaneous casts: Bilirubin casts (bilirubin-stained
bers of transitional cells without any evidence of inflam-
 granular casts and protein casts), lipid casts, hemoglobin
mation are sometimes seen with bladder cancer.
casts, and myoglobin casts can also be seen in urine sed-
 Red blood cells: Red blood cells indicate hemorrhage in
iment. They are relatively uncommon.
the urinary tract. If the sample was obtained by cystocen-
tesis, blood may be present due to hemorrhage at the time
Importance of Cast Identification in Urine
the sample was taken (iatrogenic hemorrhage). The hem-
The presence of epithelial cell and granular casts indicate
Aaup aui no iapp a u sunno aq Aeuu so
sloughing of renal epithelial cells. These casts can be seen as
White blood cells: In urine samples obtained by cysto-
a result of acute or chronic renal disease. They are often in-
centesis or catheterization increased numbers of white
creased as a result of hypoxia. Increased numbers of granu-
blood cells indicate inflammation in the bladder or kid-
lar casts can be seen following prolonged dehydration or
ney. In free-catch samples, the inflarmmation may also be
 kidney disease that results from renal epithelial cell necrosis
present in the urethra, vagina, or prepuce.
or degeneration.
Casts: Casts are aggregates of protein or cells that form
Waxy casts are strongly suggestive of chronic renal disease.
+
inside the kidney tubules. They are “casts" of the tubular
Red blood cell casts form in the tubules as a result of
lumen. There are cellular casts (red cell, white cell, ep-
hemorrhage into the nephron. They are composed of red
ithelial cell, and granular casts), protein casts (hyaline),
 blood cells, fibrin, and may contain a few other cell types.
and waxy casts. Casts have linear sides and rounded ends.
They will have red-orange coloration and will have distinct
cellular outlines in fresh urine. They can degenerate over
Types of casts are as listed next.
time if the sample is not evaluated promptly. As they degen-
erate, the red blood cells may lyse and the color may take on
Epithelial casts: Epithelial casts are composed of
a more yellow-red hue. Red blood cell casts indicate hemor-
sloughed epithelial cells that have not degenerated. The
rhage within the renal tubule.
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
The presence of white blood cell casts indicates inflam-
● Dihydrate calcium oxalate crystals are found in normal
mation within the kidney tubule.
dog and cat urine. They can be seen in association with
When present in significant numbers, hyaline casts indi-
oxalate uroliths. Monohydrate calcium oxalate crystals
cate increased protein loss into the renal tubule. Increased
are not found in normal urine. When present in large num-
numbers can be seen following strenuous exercise.
bers, ethylene glycol (antifreeze) poisoning should be the
first consideration. In small numbers, they may indicate
Crystals
hypercalciuria (increased loss of calcium in the urine).
Crystals are formed by precipitation of minerals and salts.
 Bilirubin crystals are relatively normal in the dog, but
Their presence can be normal or indicate underlying disease
when present in large numbers, especially in dilute urine,
processes. The most common crystals seen in dog and cat
they may indicate increased serum bilirubin. In the cat,
urine include triple phosphate, dihydrate calcium oxalate,
their presence may be more significant because bilirubin-
monohydrate calcium oxalate, bilirubin, and ammonium bi-
uria usually indicates hyperbilirubinemia in this species.
urate. There are a few crystals, such as cysteine, associated
Ammonium biurate crystals are associated with hy-
with inherited metabolic diseases. In addition, medications
perammonemia (increased serum ammonia) and usually
such as antibiotics can be associated with crystals that may
seen in animals with altered liver function. Classically,
precipitate out in the urine as the drug is excreted. The most
these crystals are associated with portal vascular shunts,
S    s s 
developmental anomalies that allow blood from the intes-
such as sulfadiacine and ampicillin and contrast agents used
tinal tract to bypass the liver. They can be seen as the re-
in radiography.
sult of metabolic abnormalities in the Dalmatians and
Types of crystals include the following.
English bulldogs. They are rare in normal dogs and cats.
● Triple phosphate: Triple phosphate crystals (struvite,
Pathogenic Organisms
magnesium ammonium phosphate) are common findings
Bacteria
in dog and cat urine. They are usually present in alkaline
Bacteria are the most difficult elements to accurately identify.
urine and are colorless, prismlike crystals that often re-
It is not uncommon for inexperienced team members to mis-
semble a coffin lid.
identify amorphous granular material in the urine as bacteria.
● Calcium oxalate: Two types of calcium oxalate crystals
can be found in urine sediment. Both crystals are color-
● Rod-shaped bacteria are often motile and will be seen
less. Monohydrate calcium oxalate crystals are most
moving in a progressive manner across the field of view.
often elongate crystals with pointed ends (resembling the
 Coccoid bacteria are rarely motile and are most often
slats of a picket fence). However, they can be spindle,
confused with amorphous granular material. Coccoid
oval, or dumbbell shaped. Dihydrate calcium oxalate
bacteria should be seen in chains or in clusters. Staining
crystals are usually square with intersecting diagonal
 the urine sediment may assist in confirming the presence
lines that form an “envelope” appearance.
of bacteria. However, care should be taken to ensure stain
●Bilirubin: Bilirubin crystals are light to darkly yellow or
 precipitate is not confused with bacteria.
yellow-brown in color. They form structures resembling
bundles of wheat sheaths or needlelike structures. They are
Fungal Elements
((op a a u asa) a pa  
The presence of fungal mycelia or yeast bodies is not un-
Ammonium biurate: Ammonium biurate crystals are
common in urine. If seen, they should be confirmed by ex-
often light to dark brown in color. They have a distinct
amination of a stained preparation and submission of the
sample to a diagnostic laboratory for assistance in identify-
body of the crystal (thomy apple form). This appearance
 ing the type of fungal organism.
is striking, making this crystal difficult to confuse with
 Both bacteria and fungi in urine sediment indicates an in-
Others.
fectious process that should be confirmed by culture of the
● Miscellaneous crystals: Additional crystals that are
urine.
rarely seen in urine sediment examination are uric acid,
 There are several elements that are commonly found in
cysteine, leucine, and tyrosine. Leucine, cysteine, and ty-
free-catch urine samples that can be confused with other
rosine crystals are associated with loss of these amino
formed elements, especially microorganisms such as fungal
acids into the urine and usually are the result of inherited
elements and parasite eggs. Plant pollen can be a contami-
metabolic diseases.
nent, especially in a free-catch urine sample from a male
dog, and may be confused with a pathogenic organism.
Importance of Identification of Crystals in Urine
Triple phosphate crystals may be found in normal ani-
Overview of Urinalysis Evaluation
ease, or associated with struvite uroliths. They are a non-
The following flowcharts are meant to help the team mem-
 specific finding.
ber understand the urinalysis evaluation and what the ab-
Chapter 23: Urinalysis and Fecal Clinical Diagnostics
345
normalities can suggest. Pathologic changes in urine can
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
suggest disease and further suggest other clinical diagnos-
 Other diagnostic tests are helpful in diagnosing the cause of
tics that may need to be evaluated. The flowcharts are not
urinary disease problems.
meant to be used by the team members to diagnose a dis-
ease condition, but rather to make them aware of concerms
Complete blood count-increased white blood cell popu-
so they can inform the doctor of serious pathology, be more
lation, changes in white blood cell on blood film
prepared to run other diagnostics, and help educate the
 Chemistry (renal enzymes)
client.
 Abdominal ultrasound
 Discussing Changes in Urine Culture and
Discussing Urinalysis with the Client
●A urinalysis is an important part of the evaluation
Sensitivity with the Client
A urine culture and sensitivity test has been recom-
 of an animal's metabolic baseline because it allows
mended by the veterinarian to evaluate the urine for
the veterinarian to evaluate kidney function, uri-
possible pathogenic bacteria in the urine.
nary tract disease, systemic disease, and neoplasia
 sss  a jo as 
that can occur in the patient.
within the kidney or bladder.
A component of the urinalysis is the evaluation of
 Once the bacteria are isolated, further tests help
chemical reagents that allow the veterinarian to
evaluate which antibiotics are the best choice to
evaluate abnormal components (i.e., blood sugar,
blood, protein, or toxins) in the urine that can sug-
 treat the infection.
gest disease.
 Furthermore, the urinalysis evaluates concentrating
ability of urine, which can serve as a direct evalua-
tion of kidney function.
Urine Protein/Creatinine Ratio
 To evaluate protein loss in the urine caused by early kidney
-a o pe si qs aun a 
ate cellular components of the urine that could sug-
disease, a urine protein/creatinine ratio is determined. Pro-
gest infection, inflammation, or cancer.
tein loss suggests damage to the glomerular filters, which
With many patients in early disease such as kidney
allow larger protein molecules to pass into the urine.
disease, diabetes mellitus, and other systemic dis-
Function
eases, early changes may be seen in urine and blood
work before physical signs are noted in the patient.
As discussed in Chapter 13, proteins are large blood mole-
urine. When these filters are damaged, protein can leak into
the urine at increased amounts. This test evaluates the
Advanced Urinary Diagnostics
amount of normal protein in the urine in comparison to cre-
Urine Culture and Sensitivity
 atinine, a small amino acid normally secreted in the urine.
 Urine culture and sensitivity tests are used to identify urine
pathogenic bacteria stemming from a kidney or bladder in-
How Test Is Performed
fection and identify nonresistant antibiotics.
For the urine protein/creatinine ratio, the patient does not
The patient can have a urine culture and sensitivity test
need fasting or special preparation. A large sample of urine
completed without fasting or special preparation. A large
is collected from the patient (>6 ml) by catheter or cystocen-
sample of urine is collected from the patient (>6 ml) by
tesis. Depending on the type of container used, a free-catch
catheter or cystocentesis. A sterile sample must be taken for
sample may add extermal protein from the sample container.
the test to be accurate. It can take 48-72 or more hours for
The sample should be immediately submitted to the lab or
test results to be available.
run in-hospital.
How It Is Evaluated
Evaluation of Test
 Growth of pathogenic bacteria suggests infection of the kid-
In healthy patients, the amount of protein lost in the urine is
neys or bladder. The antibiotics that stop the growth of the
generally much less than the amount of creatinine in the
bacteria are indicated.
urine. Increasing amounts of protein suggest glomerular dis-
ease and may be an indicator of renal disease.
Normal values of bacteria
Normal
Normal
 It is important to understand that this test will produce an
Test
Canine Results
 Feline Results
increased ratio if the patient is suffering from a urinary
tract infection due to increased protein loss from an in-
Urine culture and sensitivity
No growth
No growth
flamed bladder wall.
Observe Urine Sediment, PCV / TP,
Hemoglobinuria - Supernatant Red
Bright YELLOW or ORANGE - Concerns liver disease or increased red
 Potassium..) / Urine
Concerns of UTI, Bleeding Mass,
Platelet.. Consult Veterinarian
It can be associated with animal on IV fluids or an animal that has adequate
Observe PCV / TP, CBC, Blood
Concerns of Red Blood Cell
Film. Consult Veterinarian
Bleeding problem...
Destruction.
Phosphorus,
() 1 > 5 / ()  > 5)
Observe -Chemistry (Renal Function: BUN, Creatinine, 1
cell count - Consult Veterinarian
However, can be concerns of early 1
 Document Turbidity on urinalysis report.
blood cell breakdown
 If Supernatant Red - Hemoglobinuria
RED - Spin down and determine if
 If Supernatant Clear - Hematuria
hematuria or hemoglobinuria
hydration.
2.
 Flowchart A.  Evaluating Urine Color, Turbidity, and Specific Gravity
1
ON
ON
ON
 Continue on to Flowchart B
Is urine color
 Is the urine
 Is the urine
 concentrated?
appearance
normal?
YES
YES
YES
346
infection or tumor or other systemic disease that affects the body's ability
e s   o s   m
Observe Liver Enzymes, Packed Cell Volume, Blood Film (Spherocytes,
Ketones in the urine can be strongly suggestive of a severe Diabetes
produced. This toxin can makethe pet very ill and can be a serious
Observe Urine Protein, Leucocytes, Urine pH, and Urine Sediment
Observe Urine Glucose, Blood Sugar, Chemistry.. NOTIFY
chronic inflammatory disease, neoplasia and other causes.
Observe Urine Ketones, Blood Sugar, Chemistr...
to clot is also possible.
VETERINARIAN
Agglutination)
emergency.
stress.
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 Continue on to Flowchart C
Is there protein in
 o a si 
Is there bilirubin
 Is there sugar in
in the urine?
 the urine?
the urine?
the urine?
ON
ON
ON
ON
ON
347
Jo ssu uoau yoen aeun 'siseoni aseasp poen aeun ramot sisins aensn aun u pooa
White blood cells in urine usually suggest lower urinary tract disease (urinary tract infection, mass or 
Observe white and red blood cell counts, examine sediment for infectious pathogen... NOTIFY
Observe Urine Protein, Urine Blood, Urine pH, Complete Blood Count, Chemistry
 Observe Urine pH, Urine Blood & Urine Protein... NOTIFY VETERINARIAN
Observe Urine Protein, Leucocytes, Urine pH
chronic renal disease, infection, or neoplasia.
ability to clot is also possible.
the type of crystal - see above.
VETERINARIAN
the bladder.
 Finish U/A - Discuss Abnormal with Veterinarian
SH人
SH人
SH人
SH人
SH人
Flowchart C. Evaluating Urine Sediment 
 blood cells in the 
an   s
Are there crystals
an au u paou
noted in the urine?
Are there white
 blood cells in the
 Are there red
Are there casts
Are there
urine?
urine?
N
ON
ON
Chapter 23: Urinalysis and Fecal Clinical Diagnostics
Patients with an alkaline pH (pH >7.5) will have artifac-
 Any abnormalities should be recorded and pointed out to
tual proteinuria that could also increase this ratio.
the veterinarian. Furthermore, the presence of maggots that
were deposited by flies after the feces were excreted should
Normal protein-creatinine ratios.
be pointed out to the owner, since these are not an intestinal
parasite but an environmental contamination.
Normal
Normal
Cortisol Level
Canine Ranges
Feline Ranges
Routine Fecal Diagnostics
Urine protein/creatinine ratio
<1
<1
Fecal Floatation
Fecal floatation is the standard fecal clinical diagnostic test
Reference values can vary from lab to lab. It is important to
 to evaluate the patient for intestinal ova.
 diagnostic trial.
Importance
Other Clinical Diagnostic Tests
The fecal floatation test is an important diagnostic evalua-
Diagnostic tests that are helpful in diagnosing the cause of
tion to find intestinal parasites in patients. Many young and
kidney function are
adult animals may be carrying asymptomatic infections that
can produce a more severe gastrointestinal infection second-
 complete blood count/chemistry (renal enzymes), and
ary to an initial gastrointestinal disease. Furthermore, these
 abdominal ultrasound and ultrasound guided renal biopsy.
patients continue to increase the parasite load to the environ-
ment, acting as a reservoir for the parasites.
Discussing Changes in Urinary Protein/Creatinine
Ratio with the Client
Discussing Fecal Floatation with the Client
 The urine protein/creatinine ratio is an important
●A fecal floatation allows the medical team to eval-
diagnostic test in evaluating early protein loss that
uate the feces for the presence of microscopic
could suggest early kidney disease.
- oisd e 1sans u  sa pu sased
 The kidneys’ filters (glomeruli) are microscopic
fection.
filters that filter the blood, removing toxins and
 Many intestinal parasites are microscopic as adults
small particles.
and will not appear grossly in the feces.
When the filters are damaged, the larger protein
Furthermore, many adult pets will shed parasites into
molecules work their way through the damaged fil-
 the environment without showing physical signs.
ters and enter the urine.
 Fecal examination allows the veterinarian to deter-
 Increased urine protein loss can suggest early renal
mine if the patient has a parasitic infection that can
a   ss p aa a
be treated and thus reduce the parasite load within
the environment.
Fecal Diagnostics
How It Is Evaluated
The intestinal parasites and their life cycles are outlined in
A fresh fecal sample (<4 hours old) is placed into a con-
Chapter 10. Clinical diagnostics of feces allow the medical
tainer and mixed with a dense fluid medium (i.e., zinc sul-
fate, dextrose). The container is covered with a coverslip or
 genic bacteria, white blood cells, and skin parasites (occa-
slide and allowed to sit for a minimum of 15 minutes. After
sionally). Samples should be as fresh as possible (ideally less
the allotted time, the slip is placed on the microscope slide
than 4 hours old) to prevent degradation of fecal ova and bac-
and examined at 10X and 40X objective. Intestinal ova vary
teria. If samples are obtained the night before, they should be
depending on the geographic location, but typical intestinal
refrigerated. Samples should be free of debris, gravel, or kitty
 parasites are seen in Figure 23.1.
litter. When brought in to the hospital for evaluation, a direct
visual examination should occur prior to clinical diagnostics.
Fecal Smear
 The sample should be opened and evaluated for
A fecal smear is the standard fecal clinical diagnostic test
used to evaluate the feces for obvious protozoa (i.e., giardia),
●blood,
increased bacteria, abnormal cell types, and possibly ova.
+
mucus,
●parasites,
Importance
roundworms,
The fecal smear is an important diagnostic to evaluate the
tapeworms, and
feces for motile protozoa. Mobile forms of many protozoa
- maggots (nonintestinal parasites).
can be appreciated under high dry power as they move
 foreign debris (plant material, foreign bodies).
350
Section 3:ClinicalDiagnostics
-TheSciencebehind theDiagnostics
Figure 23.1. Common parasites seen on 40X objective. Parasite ova present are Toxocara (hookworms) (a), Trichuris (whipworms) (b),
Isospora (Coccidia)(c), and Giardia oocysts (d).
small amount of dilute betadine can make the small single-
 celled organisms easier to evaluate.
How It Is Evaluated
A small fresh fecal sample (<4 hours old) is placed on a
slide with physiological saline, and then a coverslip is placed
on top. The slide is immediately evaluated on high dry
power for giardia (see Figure 23.2) and other coccidia evi-
dent. Normal values may be seen in Figure 23.1.
Discussing Fecal Smears with the Client
A fecal smear allows the medical team to evaluate
the feces for the presence of protozoal parasites
n sd e iss  n sa u
Figure 23.2.  Image of the motile form of giardia on 40X mag-
 Many intestinal parasites are microscopic as adults
nification (high dry).
and will not appear grossly in the feces.
 Furthermore, many adult pets will shed parasites into
the environment without showing physical signs.
 Fecal examination allows the veterinarian to deter-
mine if the patient has a parasitic infection that can
be treated and thus reduce the parasite load within
How It Is Evaluated
 the environment.
A small, fresh fecal sample is smeared on a slide and heat
fixed. The cytology sample is then stained with a Gram stain
or Diff-Quik protocol. The slide is dried and then evaluated
Fecal Cytology
under high-power oil immersion. The slide is evaluated for
Fecal cytology is a useful diagnostic used to evaluate pa-
pathogenic bacteria and white blood cell or abnormal cell
tients with significant diarrhea for bacterial pathogens and
types that may suggest disease. There is always a bacterial
abnormal cell types (i.e., white blood cells).
component evident in feces; the presence of increased bac-
terial pathogens and white blood cells are abnormal.
Importance
 Normal values for levels of bacterial pathogens.
bacterial pathogens (i.e., Clostridium spp.) and white blood
Normal
Normal
cells to help evaluate the patient for a primary or secondary
Fecal Flora and Cells
Canine Ranges
Feline Ranges
 bacterial gastroenteritis. Although not always the primary cause 
Fecal white blood cells
 Negative
Negative
of a patient's symptoms, observation and treatment of the infec-
Clostridium spp.
<1/hpf
<1/hpf
tion may help decrease or resolve gastrointestinal signs.
Chapter 23: Urinalysis and Fecal Clinical Diagnostics
351
 Normal values for pathogen antigens.
Discussing Fecal Cytology with the Client
A fecal cytology allows the medical team to assess
Normal
Normal
the feces for the presence of pathogenic bacteria
Fecal Flora and Cells
Canine Ranges
Feline Ranges
and white blood cells that can suggest a primary or
Parvo cite
 Negative
Negative
secondary bacterial infection of the intestines (bac-
Clostridium toxin
 Negative
Negative
terial gastroenteritis).
Cryptococcus spp.
 Negative
Negative
 Although not always the primary cause of intestinal
Giardia
 Negative
 Negative
disease, proper diagnosis and treatment of the bac-
terial infection can decrease physical signs and
 treatment time for the patient.
Discussing Fecal ELISA with the Client
A fecal ELISA test allows the medical team to
evaluate the feces for proteins on the cell wall
Fecal Enzyme-Linked Immunoassay Tests
(antigens) of specific infectious and parasitic dis-
Fecal enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) tests help de-
ease organisms of the intestine.
tect surface proteins (antigens) of specific viral, bacterial,
 In specific intestinal disease (i.e., parvo, clostrid-
and parasitic pathogens in the feces.
ium, giardia, cryptococcus), where normal fecal
and blood work clinical diagnostics cannot identify
Importance
the pathogen, these tests can help isolate the spe-
Many of these infectious diseases can be insidious and hard
cific pathogen.
to diagnose based on blood work and fecal examination.
 The test does require that the pet has a sufficient
ELISAs examine the feces for antigens of specific patho-
population of the infectious agent to produce a pos-
 gens. These tests can be run in-hospital or sent out to a med-
itive response. Therefore, in some cases, the patient
ical laboratory. Each clinical diagnostic evaluates the fol-
may have a negative ELISA test and still have the
lowing pathogens.
infection.
A positive test is strongly suggestive of an active
 Parvo ELISA: Detects for antigens against canine par-
 infection frorm the specific pathogen.
vovirus infection. It can also aid in the diagnosis of fe-
line panleukopenia (see Chapter 10). The test can pro-
 duce a false negative if the patient is not shedding large 
Cytology Samples-Ears
amounts of the virus. Furthermore, the test may show a
Diseases of the ear are discussed in Chapter 20. Clinical
vovirus within 10 days of the test. The test is available in-
diagnostics of the ears allow the medical team to evaluate the
hospital and at a veterinary laboratory.
patient for bacterial, fungal, or parasitic infections. Samples
+
Giardia ELISA: Detects for antigens against the intes-
should be taken in-hospital and evaluated microscopically for
tinal parasite, giardia. It is an excellent screening test for
chronic diarrhea patients in which the animal has no vis-
bacteria,
ible giardia evident and does not respond to medication.
fungi (malasezzia and cocci),
The test is available in-hospital and at a veterinary labo-
ear mites (Otodectes), and
ratory.
●white blood cells.
Cryptococcus: Detects for antibodies against the intes-
tinal parasite, cryptococcus, a very small intestinal para-
Any abnormalities should be recorded and pointed out to
as nxa  si nl (soxn n als) as
 the veterinarian. The procedures for the clinical diagnostics
test for chronic diarrhea patients in which the animal has
are discussed next.
no visible parasites evident and does not respond to med-
ication. The test is available at a veterinary laboratory.
Ear Cytology
+
Clostridium toxin: A screening test for animals exposed
A diagnostic test is performed to detect pathogenic bacteria,
to the clostridium toxin. These patients may have severe
 parasites, and fungal pathogens within the ear canal.
gastrointestinal signs without obvious clostridium over-
load in the feces. The test is available at a veterinary lab-
Importance
oratory.
This diagnostic test allows the medical team to determine
the type of infectious agent producing the ear infection.
How It Is Evaluated
 Fecal samples are collected and checked for the presence of
How It Is Evaluated
surface proteins (antigens) for specific infections. In these
Similar to the fecal cytology, a sample of ear debris is col-
ELISA tests, positive results indicate an active infection.
lected with a nonsterile swab and placed on a microscope
352
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics-
-The Science behind the Diagnostics
slide. The cytology sample is then stained with a Gram or
Ear Culture and Sensitivity
Diff-Quik stain. The slide is dried and then evaluated under
 The culture and sensitivity test is performed to identify path-
high power-oil immersion. The slide is evaluated for bacte-
 ogenic bacteria from a chronic ear infection and identify
ria, fungi, and white blood cells. The following should be
nonresistant antibiotics.
noted on each smear.
How Test Is Performed
●Bacteria: The type of bacteria should be noted (i.e., rod,
The patient can have an ear culture and sensitivity com-
cocci) and as well as if bacteria are also evident within
pleted without fasting or special preparation. A sample of
the white blood cell. The amount of bacteria is qualita-
ear debris is collected from the patient on a sterile culturette.
tively gauged from mild to severe.
The sample is then plated and incubated or sent to the lab for
Fungi: The presence of the peanut-shaped dimorphic
identification. It can take 48-72 or more hours for test re-
malasezzia and the single cocci fungi can suggest a fun-
 sults to be available.
 gal infection. The amount of fungi is qualitatively gauged
from mild to severe.
How It Is Evaluated
White blood cell: The presence of white blood cells can
Growth of pathogenic bacteria suggests infection of the ear
suggest a more severe chronic infection in which the
 canal. The antibiotics that stop the growth of the bacteria are
body is now trying to mount an immune response to fight
 indicated.
off the ear infection. The evidence of white blood cells
Normal values of pathogenic bacteria.
may require systemic medications to help resolve the in-
fection.
Normal
 Normal
Test
Canine Results
Feline Results
Ear mite swab: In this diagnostic test, the ear debris is
collected with a nonsterile swab and mixed with mineral
Ear culture and sensitivity
No growth
No growth
oil on a microscope slide. The slide is then covered, and
the debris is examined for ear mites or mite eggs.
Discussing Changes in Ear Culture and
Sensitivity with the Client
Discussing Ear Cytology with the Client
● Ear culture and sensitivity has been recommended
 Ear cytology has been recormmended by the veteri-
by the veterinarian to evaluate the ear for possible
narian to help distinguish the type of organism pro-
pathogenic bacteria.
ducing the ear infection.
 The presence of the bacteria suggests infection
 Common infectious agents are bacteria, fungus,
within the ear canal.
and ear mites.
 Once the bacteria are isolated, further tests help
The course of treatment depends on the type of
evaluate which antibiotics are the best choice to
 pathogen found.
treat the infection.
 In some chronic severe cases, further diagnostics
(i.e., culture and sensitivity) may be needed to eval-
 uate if there is a specific bacterial pathogen evident.
 and what antibiotics would be successful in treating
the infection.
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of understanding and dis-
cussing clinical diagnostics and the disease conditions rep-
resented. The exercises can be done individually or as case
 Normal values of bacteria, fungi, and white blood cells.
rounds as they explore specific topics in veterinary medicine
that discuss clinical diagnostics and treatment.
Normal
Normal
 Fecal Flora and Cells
Canine Ranges
Feline Ranges
Bacteria
Negative
Negative
Fungi
Negative
 Negative
Mites
Negative
Negative
White blood cells
 Negative
Negative
Chapter 24
Electrocardiogram
To understand the basic concepts of the electrocardiogram
3. The electrode clips are placed.
(EKG), the team member must have a working knowledge
· The right and left forelimb clips are placed at the level
of the flow of blood through the heart in diasystole and sys-
of the elbow on the caudal surface.
tole (see Chapter 12). The heart is an electrical pump that
· The right and left hind limb clips are placed at the me-
produces normal electrical rhythms that then stimulate
dial aspect of the knees.
muscular contractions. These electrical impulses are stimu-
·A cardiac electrode (the fifth lead “C") is found on
lated within the heart muscle itself; the heart initiates its
some machines and is placed on the ventral aspect of
own electrical rhythm without any outside stimulation. The
the thorax (see Figure 24.4).
ability to produce this rhythm is called automaticity. The
4. Alcohol is placed on the lead to increase conductivity of
central nervous system does increase and decrease the heart
the signal.
rate in response to the body's needs, but the heart initiates its
5. The EKG is started on lead II at either the 25 mm or 50
signal, carries the electrical depolarization throughout its
mm/second rate. Some machines cannot set the rate of
muscle cells, and contracts as one unit.
speed at which the EKG reads the patterns.
The EKG is a modified oscilloscope that graphs electrical
 6. The sensitivity should be adjusted until a large enough
changes within the heart. As the electrical wave moves toward
 complex is printed within the margins of the paper or
the EKG sensor, the graphed wave goes upward. As the elec-
screen. On some machines sensitivity cannot be set.
trical wave moves away from the sensor, the graphed wave
moves downward (see Figure 24.1). By understanding normal
Conduction Anatomy
electrical patterms, cardiac arrhythmias can be diagnosed.
Although evaluation of the EKG is the responsibility of the vet-
erinarian, the team members should be able to perform and
Performing the EKG
To perform an EKG the team member places three to five
 EKG monitoring is often incorporated in anesthesia monitoring
metal clips on the patient on regions of the forelimb and
and evaluation. To evaluate the electrocardiogram, the team
hind limb, and possibly the chest. These clips are the sensors
 member must understand the conduction anatomy of the heart.
that evaluate the electrical rhythm of the heart. The location
 The initiator of the conduction signal is high in the right
of the observation point of the electrical signal can be
atrium in a region called the sino-atrial node (S-A node).
switched from one clip to the next. In doing this, the EKG
Because the S-A node has the highest automaticity of the
can evaluate the heart from six different leads. These leads
heart fibers, it can stimulate a wave of depolarization on its
are I, II, III, AVL, AVR, and AVS.
own without outside stimulation. Because the S-A node pro-
Although EKG machinery can vary from company to
duces the initial rhythm that starts the heartbeat, it is called
company, a basic protocol for performing an EKG is as
the pacemaker of the heart. The S-A node is closely inte-
follows.
grated with the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous
systems (part of the autonomic nervous system) to control
1. The animal should be placed on a nonconductive surface.
heart rate, depending on the body's need for oxygenated
If a metal table or grate is being used, a towel should be
blood and maintenance of blood pressure. However, the
placed over the work surface (see Figure 24.2). If the
heart stimulates its own contraction.
metal clip comes in contact with a metal table, artifactual
Once the S-A node fires, it begins waves of depolariza-
images could be produced that could be misread as car-
tion over the atrium to produce an atrial contraction. As the
diac arrhythmias.
current runs from the S-A node toward the EKG monitor it
 2. The patient should be placed in right lateral recum-
produces a positive deviation. The electrical wave then
bency or, if the animal isn't nervous, the test can be done
spreads over the atrium away from the EKG sensor, and the
with the animal standing (see Figure 24.3). If at all pos-
wave returms to baseline. This is called the P wave. After the
sible, minimal to no chemical restraint should be used be-
P wave is produced, both atria contract, producing diasystole
cause these drugs can affect heart rate.
(see Figure 24.5).
353
354
Section 3:ClinicalDiagnostics
TheSciencebehindtheDiagnostics
+
+
?
Figure24.1.
sensor displays as a positive deviation, an impulse across the heart reads as a small positive deviation, and a wave away from the sensor
is shown as a negative deviation
Figure 24.2.  Image of an EKG setup in a hospital
Figure 24.3. The patient is placed on right lateral recumbency.
As the P wave occurs, the current from the S-A node trav-
els toward the top of the interseptal wall where a collection
of fibers, called the atrial-ventricular node (A-V node),
focuses the signal down the septal wall. After the P wave is
completed, the current travels down toward the ventricles via
a number of specific conductive fibers called the Purkinje
fibers (bundle of His). As the current spreads through the
septal wall, it produces a slight negative deviation away from
the EKG, producing a downward deviation; this is the Q
Figure 24.4.  The clips are placed on the forelimbs, hind limbs,
wave. The current then moves directly toward the sensor as
and on the chest. Some machines will have only have three or
it approaches the base of the heart, producing the R wave.
four leads.
Once the electrical wave reaches the heart base, it begins to
Chapter 24: Electrocardiogram
355
Evaluating the Electrocardiogram
Sino-atrial node
(pacemaker)
The EKG is typically read in lead II; however, if the electri-
Bundlle of His
cal wave is small or hard to evaluate, it can be read in other
(Purkinje fibers)
leads that may have more identifiable P-QRS complexes.
 For nonanesthetized patients, EKG evaluation should be run
Atrial ventricula
node
for at least 30-60 seconds.
Arrhythmias occur due to
 disease, infection, or trauma in the S-A node,
 an obstruction in the A-V node or in the bundle of His,
● a region of muscle that becomes irritated and begins
 Stimulation of
 p-wave prior to
transmitting its own depolarization wave, and
atrial contraction
●an electrolyte abnormality that decreases the electrical
 potential of the heart.
Contraction of atria
Diasystole
Although a full evaluation of the EKG can be an in-depth
 process, the technical team should be able to perform a basic
Figure 24.5.  The illustration shows the production of the P
evaluation using these steps (see Algorithm: Evaluating the
wave (a small positive deviation wave that washes over the
EKG).
atrium) that stimulates atrial contraction.
Step I: Calculate the Heart Rate
Although many EKG machines will calculate the heart rate,
abnormal complexes and artifactual rhythms could alter the
Sino-Atrial node
underlying heart rate. The team member should evaluate the
(pacemaker)
Bundle of His
(Purkinje fibers)
heart rate on the printed report using the following.
 25 mm/second speed: Count 75 mm (75 boxes; 3 sec-
Atrial ventricular
 onds). Count the number of normal rhythms and multi-
node
S-wave
ply by 20 to get beats per minute (see Figure 24.7).
 50 mm/second count: Count 150 mm (150 boxes; 3 sec-
onds). Count the number of beats within the 150 mm and
 a a   s     
see also Table 24.1 for normal heart rates.)
Procuction of
QRS wave
Step II: Identify Changes in the Pattern
Tachycardia refers to rapid heart rates above normal limits.
Contraction
In the example below, the calculated heart rate shows a per-
of ventricle
sistent tachycardia (see Figure 24.8). Tachycardia should be
Systole
reported to theveterinarian immediately.
Bradycardia refers to slow heart rates below normal lim-
Figure 24.6. Image of the A-V node focusing energy down the
its. In the example below, the calculated heart rate shows a
septal walls via the Purkinje fibers and up and around the ventric-
ular wall, producing the QRS patter and stimulating ventricular
persistent bradycardia (see Figure 24.9). Bradycardia s hould
bereported to theveterinarianimmediately.
contraction.
move up the outside ventricle wall; this produces the S
 an d si xa  an a A aa
Tabfe 24.1.
 Normal heart rates.
tricles contract (see Figure 24.6).
After the full heartbeat occurs, the muscle goes through a
wave of repolarization in which the electrolytes of the body
Species
 Normal Heart Rates
When To Be Concerned
 r         
This is called the T wave. This wave of repolarization can be
Canine
80-120 bpm
Heart rate <60 bpm
Heart rate >200 bpm
directed toward, away from, or parallel to the EKG. Thus the 
Feline
120-180 bpm
Heart rate <80 bpm
 T wave can be positive, negative, or have no deviation after
 Heart rate >220 bpm
the QRS complexes
S u isol aq Aeu saaem-d eprenen og aien jrei aneniea
Metabolic Disease: Can be electrolyte abnormality or metabolic
Concerns of Heart Disease, Shock, Metabolic, Infectious Diseases ...
Concerns of Heart Disease, Shock, Metabolic, Infectious Diseases ...
Tachycardia - HR > 200 Canine / HR > 240 Feline 
NOTIFY VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
Bradycardia - HR < 60 Canine / HR < 80 Feline 
Bradycardia - HR < 60 Canine / HR < 80 Feline
NOTIFY VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
NOTIFY VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
NOTIFY VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
No P-waves:
disease.
2i
3
2
NO
ON
NO
NO
Algorithm: Evaluating the EKG
Is the QRS normal
 Is the heart rate
 Is there a p-wave
for every QRS?
interval normal?
normal?
Is the R-R'
s
356
Chapter 24: Electrocardiogram
357
7.A1000
rate of speed the EKG was reading, the heart rate could be calculated as
25 mm/sec: Heart rate = 3 normal beats in 3 seconds × 20 seconds = 60 bpm
50 mm/sec: Heart rate = 4 normal beats in 3 seconds × 20 seconds = 80 bpm
P
T
QRS
Figure 24.8.  At a 50-mm/second reading speed, if the above strip represents a 3-second strip, the heart rate is
50 mm/second speed for 3 seconds = 11 beats × 20 seconds = 220 bpm
It is important to note that with this tachycardia, the P-waves are beginning to be obscured by the last QRS-T complex
Step IMl: Identify Each P-Wave and Ensure a QRS
     s   s 
Complex Is Associated With It
Figure 24.8). This can sometimes be seen secondary to ex-
Each normal heart contraction should have a P-wave with an
citement or stress but can also be seen with serious disease
associated QRS complex. If there are no P-waves or if the P-
conditions. Tachycardia should be reported to the veterinar-
waves are not associated with a QRS pattem, it can suggest
ianimmediately.
an arrhythmia. P-waves can be absent or not associated with
a QRS complex when there are no obvious P-waves.
Premature Ventricular Contraction
One of the most important arrhythmias to detect is the pre
No Obvious P-waves
mature ventricular contraction (PVC). In this situation a re-
Tachycardia
gion of ventricular muscle becomes irritated by trauma, dis-
In times of extreme tachycardia, the heart rate can be so fast
ease, or infection. This region is so irritated that it produces
that the P-wave can become obscured in the QRS complex,
a depolarization wave that stimulates a ventricular contrac-
358
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
Figure 24.9.  At a 50-mm/second reading speed, if the above strip represents a 3-second strip, the heart rate is
50 mm/second speed for 3 seconds = 3 beats X 20 seconds = 60 bpm
Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism; see Chapter 27),
Bundle of His
Sino-Atrial nod
(Purkinje fibers)
renal disease (see Chapter 13),
pacemaker)
Irritated muscle fiber
 urinary obstruction (FLUTD; see Chapter 13),
with automaticity
ketoacidotic diabetes (DKA; see Chapter 15), and
Prodluction of a VPC
 shock (see Chapter 30).
Atrial ventricula
node
P-Waves Not Associated with QRS Complexes
If there is infectious, traumatic, neoplastic, or inflammatory dis-
ease of the A-V node or Purkinje fibers (bundle of HIs), normal
electrical impulses cannot be passed from the atrium to the ven-
 tricle (see Figure 24.10). This condition is called heart block
and can vary from mild signal interruption (primary heart
block), to moderate interruption (secondary heart block), to
complete interruption (complete heart block). Affected pa-
tients will show P-waves that are not directly associated with
Figure 24.10. Illustration of a PVC in which irritated muscle
QRS complexes. There can be normal P-QRS complexes as
fiber with greater automaticity than the S-A produces an abnor-
well when the depolarization wave does enter the ventricle.
mal ventricular contraction. The resulting arrhythmia produces a
With complete heart block, there is no communication be-
large, wide abnormal rhythm with no associated P-wave. This
animal could present with an abnormal heart rhythm and pulse
tween atria and ventricle, and the ventricle produces an escape
beat to move blood throughout the body (see Figure 24.12).
deficits.
Step IV: Small (Isoelectric) QRS Complexes
Small or isoelectric patterms can suggest a number of disease
tion independent of the S-A node. The PVC occurs because
conditions that interfere with evaluation of the EKG or de-
 the affected muscle fiber has greater automaticity than the
 crease normal electrical output.
S-A node (see Figure 21.10). PVCs can occur when there is
no blood within the ventricle. This produces an abnormal or 
Normal Rhythm
skipped beat that produces no perceivable pulse (pulse
Some machines have decreased ability to evaluate felines or
deficit). Persistent PVC can be life threatening and should
specific patients, depending on their body conformation and
be reported to the veterinarian immediately.
position of the heart in the chest. If the EKG patterm is small,
changing to other leads may differentiate a true pathologic
Metabolic Disease
condition from an isoelectric lead.
 Sodium, potassium, and other electrolytes are necessary to
produce the electrical current that produces the heart
Disease Conditions
rhythm. When there are metabolic diseases that affect the
There are disease conditions in which an accumulation of
 normal electrolyte population, abnormal EKG rhythms can
fluid, air, or infection within the chest (see Figure 24.13),
be observed (see Figure 24.11). Specific diseases that affect
around the heart or within the lungs, can decrease the signal.
the P-waves are
Some of these disease entities are
Chapter 24: Electrocardiogram
359
QRS
QRS
Figure 24.11. Image of QRS complexes without obvious P-waves.
Figure 24.12. Image of complete heart block. Here there are P-waves with no associated QRS. The ventricle stimulates its own escape
beat to help pump blood into the body.
 pericardial effusion,
Figure 24.14) or bursts of normal heart rhythms with a sud-
pneumothorax,
den sino-atrial pause. Changes in the R-R' interval can
pleural effusion, and
occur due to sinus arrhythmia and sick sinus syndrome.
pulmonary disease.
Sinus Arrhythmia
Step V: Evaluate the Distance between Complexes
Sinus arrhythmia is an altermating rhythm of rapid heart rate
The distance between complexes (from one positive R spike
with a slowing rhythm that corresponds to the patient's res-
to the next; R-R' interval) can suggest a disease process in
piratory rate. This is a normal rhythm in canines and does
the A-V node. Disease, inflammation, or trauma of the node
can slow normal signals, producing severe bradycardia (see
tial arrhythmia.
360
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
Trauma
Any patient that suffers from a significant trauma (i.e., fall,
hit by car, shake injury) should have an EKG to monitor the
heart for arrhythmia. The most common arrhythmia is PVC
below).
Cardiac Disease
As discussed in Chapter 12, any form of cardiac disease
(i.e., cardiomyopathy, valvular disease, cardiac tumor, car-
diovascular shock) can have an arrhythmia component. An
EKG should be performed as long as the patient is stable and
not stressed.
Anoxia/Surgical Monitoring
Figure 24. I3. X-ray of a chest with a pleural effusion evident.
Decreasing oxygen concentration to the heart muscle can
The fluid (evident by a lack of detail below the dotted line)
cormmonly produce abnormal rhythms (i.e., PVC). While
around the heart and lungs is decreasing the ability of normal
under anesthesia the patient can have decreasing amounts of
electrical signals to be evaluated by the sensor.
oxygen concentration, producing arrhythmias. These events
can be small and isolated and are simply treated by increas-
ing oxygen concentration in the bloodstream.
Sick Sinus Syndrome
Sick sinus syndrome is a disease of the S-A node in which
Metabolic Disease
the disease process slows the normal waves of depolariza-
Patients with severe metabolic or emergency disease can ir.
(l'a a aa) aay a sao p o
ritate cardiac muscle fibers producing life-threatening ar-
rhythmias. Some diseases are as follows:
When To Perform an Electrocardiogram
Gastrodilatation volvulus (GDV; Chapter 10)
Although the veterinarian is responsible for indicating the
Tumors/masses of the spleen (hemangiosarcoma)
need for an electrocardiogram, the medical team should be
FLUTD/obstruction (Chapter 13)
ready to perform an EKG in any situation. Some indications
Ketoacidotic diabetes (Chapter 15)
are as follows.
●Shock (Chapter 30)
R-R'interval
Figure 24.14.
4.The line denoting the R-R' interval is prolonged suggesting disease of the S-A node or other heart or systemic disease
process.
Chapter 24: Electrocardiogram
361
Preanesthetic Evaluation
Etiology
In the geriatric animal (patients older than 7-8 years of age)
A PVC is caused by disease that irritates ventricular muscle
 and in specific breeds that are prone to heart disease (i.e..
fibers, increasing automaticity and initiating an abnormal
boxer, Doberman pinscher, cocker spaniel, Maine coon cat),
cardiac rhythm. Disease processes that can affect the ven-
  s  s      
tricular muscle fibers are
early or silent arrhythmias who could be poor candidates for
anesthesia.
trauma,
争
cardiac disease,
 anoxia/anesthesia,
Wellness Examination
 As discussed with preanesthetic evaluation, performing a
 metabolic disease, and
shock.
routine EKG on breeds predisposed to heart disease may aid
in early diagnosis and treatment of a silent cardiac disease.
Signaiment
 PVC is commonly seen in large breed dogs with cardiomy-
Key Points in Discussing the Electrocardiogram
opathy, especially boxers and Dobermans, but can also be
seen in felines with a history of cardiomyopathy or hyper-
with the Client
thyroidism.
●An electrocardiogram (EKG) evaluates the electri-
cal current through the heart.
Complications
 The heart is a specialized muscle that initiates its
If gone untreated, PVCs can develop into runs called ven-
 own electrical heart rhythm to stimulate heart con-
tricular tachycardia that can produce severe weakness and
traction.
anoxia. If not treated, it can develop into ventricular fibrilla-
 Specific diseases can alter and affect the heart's
tion and cardiac failure.
electrical rhythm and ultimately affect its ability to
beat correctly. This is called a cardiac arrhythmia.
Common Points in Medical History
 In many cases, the arrhythmias do not produce ob-
 PVC can be asymptomatic in the affected patients until se-
vious symptoms until the patient is in an emer-
vere cardiac disease is evident. Clients may note the follow-
 gency life-threatening situation.
ing changes:
● Diseases that can produce an EKG are heart dis-
ease, trauma, metabolic disease, infectious disease,
Weakness
cancer, shock, and many others.
Inability to exercise
If not detected and treated, arrhythmia can be life
Collapse
threatening.
Coughing
 Many types of arrhythmias can be controlled with
medication.
Common Points on Initial Assessment
 Severely affected animals may be life threatened and may
require immediate attention. These patients must be handled
Diseases of the Cardiac System
with minimal stress because they can collapse and die with
 any excitement. Common physical changes can be
Although not all diseases are mentioned below, the common
arrhythmias are discussed with the main goal being to iden-
 pulse deficits,
tify the arrhythmia and to understand and be able to explain
 escape beats/third beat of the heart,
to the client what the abnormalities are, how they can pres-
 cyanotic mucous membrane color/capillary refill time
ent themselves, and what can be the overall short- and long-
(CRT),
term concerms of each disease. Any discussion of overall di-
cough,
agnostic and treatment protocols should be discussed based
dyspnea,
 on the recommendations of the doctor and the medical team.
 collapse/syncope, and
 Please use the following information as a basis to discuss
 sudden death.
and educate the client, but never to diagnose a patient.
Diagnostics
Premature Ventricular Contraction
EKG Pattern
PVC is a rhythm initiated within irritated ventricular muscle
PVC is represented as wide, irregular QRS waves without
fibers instead of the S-A node. This rhythm produces an ab-
the presence of P-waves (see Figure 24.15). These rhythms
normal contraction when there may be limited blood in the
do not tend to have a pulse associated with the contraction
because of decreased cardiac output. Multiple complexes of
pulse (pulse deficit).
PVC are called ventricular tachycardia.
362
Section 3:ClinicalDiagnostics-
TheSciencebehind theDiagnostics
M/Y
26/05/2005
12:37
FROZEN
25mm/s
G
IIX1
EXTD
QRS
VPO
without obvious P-wave.
Complete Blood Count/Chemistry
the PVC to normal rhythms. Examples of these medica
Changes in electrolytes, especially in potassium and sodium,
tions are lidocaine, procainimide, and quinidine.
 can precipitate PVC.
Prevenfion
Thyroid Profile
There is no way to prevent PVCs. However, through routine
 In cats, checking thyroid levels is very important to help dis-
clinical diagnostics in older animals and breeds that are
tinguish if the causes of PVC are from hyperthyroidism (see
more sensitive to heart disease, early diagnosis and treat-
Chapter 16).
ment can help increase quality of life and life span of the
pet.
Radiology/Ultrasound
A full radiographic evaluation of the heart and lung fields
can help determine if there are changes in the cardiac silhou-
Discussing Premature Ventricular Contractions
ette and lung fields suggestive of heart, infectious, or can-
with the Client
- m suad au susodspaid aq  i assp sno
●Premature ventricular contraction (PVC) occurs
rhythmias. Further intermal ultrasound examination of the
when an area of ventricular muscle becomes dis-
heart can help evaluate cardiac muscle thickness, valvular
eased inflamed, infected, or traumatized.
disease, or cardiac cancer.
The affected muscle releases a depolarization wave
that produces a premature contraction of the ven-
Treatment
tricles.
Treatment options depend on physical symptoms of the pa-
The contraction can occur when little to no blood is
tient and the extent of the arrhythmias. Some treatment op-
evident in the ventricles, producing a heart rhythm
tions are listed here.
without a pulse.
●Continued contractions can produce weakness, col-
Oxygen therapy: By increasing oxygen concentration in
lapse, and even cardiovascular shock if the arrhyth-
the body, the heart does not have to work as hard. By in-
mia is not controlled and normal circulation re-
creasing oxygen concentration in a low-stress environ-
stored.
ment, it may decrease heart rate, oxygen need, and ar-
The diagnosis is based on history, physical exam,
rhythmias.
and EKG studies to evaluate the heart's electrical
 Monitoring: The animal should be treated as an inpatient
rhythm.
with cage rest activity restrictions. Frequent ECG and
 Most forms of PVC can be controlled with medica-
blood pressure monitoring may be recommended if the
tion, monitoring, and hospitalization.
they can be completed without stressing the patient.
 If not corrected, PVC can produce life-threatening
Medications: Anti-arrhythmatic medications help to im-
cardiac shock
prove conduction through the ventricle and help convert
Chapter 24: Electrocardiogram
Atrioventricular Block (Heart Block)
 This arrhythmia is produced by a blockage of the conduction
Sino-atrial node
Obstruction of
(pacemaker)
bundle of His
of the electrical signal through the A-V node and the bundle
of His. The obstruction prevents the normal transmission of
Over tirme, without input from the
Atrial-ventricular
A-V node, the ventricle fires an
the signal from the S-A node to the ventricle.
escape beat to push blood into the
node
body - the beat resembles a vPC.
Bundle of His
Etiology
(Purkinje fibers)
 Heart block produces atrial contraction independent of ven-
tricular contractions. If there is a long enough pause be-
tween ventricular stimulation, the ventricle will produce an
escape rhythm. The escape rhythm produces a VPC wave.
The key to diagnosis is the observation of multiple P-waves
without a normal QRS pattern. There are different degrees
of heart block, from partial to complete.
Contraction
of ventricle
First-degree heart block: This is usually an asympto-
Figure 24.16.1
 Illustration of a complete heart block. Here the
matic form where an occasional P-wave will fire with no
resulting QRS complex. This can be associated with
normal depolarization waves cannot transmit through the bundle
of His. P-waves are produced normally; however, they are not as-
anesthetic procedures.
sociated with the QRS complex. The ventricle produces an escape
+
 Second-degree heart block: This block is a more sig-
beat (PVC) to push blood out of the ventricles and into the body.
nificant obstruction of the A-V node and bundle of His.
There are still some normal P-QRS complexes; the dis-
ease process can still be asymptomatic. If this is caused
Common Points in Medical History
 from a heart disease, it can develop into complete heart
With mild heart block,the patient may be asymptomatic.
block.
With more severe heart blocks, clients may observe
 Complete heart block: These patients have a complete
blockage through the A-V node and bundle of His. P
weakness,
waves are not associated with wide PVC escape beats.
 inability to exercise, and
The patient can be severely affected.
●collapse.
Signalment
Common Points on Initial Assessment
 Heart block is commonly seen in older dogs and cats with
 Severely affected animals may be life threatened and may
thickening and fibrosis of the conduction pathways. Com-
require immediate attention. These patients must be handled
mon breeds affected are
with minimal stress because many patients can collapse and
die with any excitement. Common physical changes can be
 Doberman pinschers,
pugs,
bradycardia,
dachshunds,
abnormal heart sounds,
cocker spaniels, and
cyanotic mucous membranes,
 cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
 poor capillary refill time, and
 cardiovascular shock.
 Furthermore, underlying diseases that can produce heart
block are
Diagnostically
 EKG pattern: The P-waves look normal but are often
 congenital cardiac disease,
without normal QRS complexes. The QRS complexes
cardiomyopathy,
can be wide, bizarre, and PVC-like, depending on the lo-
toxicity to cardiac medication (i.e., digitalis),
cation of where the escape beat is produced. The ventric-
 infection or inflammation of the heart muscle (myocar-
 (d 0-t u ssa sn) ad s aa 
ditis), and
slower than the atrial rate P-wave (see Figure 24.16).
electrolyte disorder.
● Complete blood count/chemistry: Changes in elec-
trolytes, especially in the potassium and sodium, can pre-
Complications
cipitate heart block.
With mild forms of heart block, there may be no physical
 Thyroid profile: There are possible arrhythmias that can
symptoms or deterioration of the heart. If more serious
 be produced from changes in normal thyroid production.
forms go untreated, complete heart block can develop into
 Radiology/ultrasound: A full radiographic evaluation of
weakness, collapse. and sudden death.
the heart and lung fields can help determine if there are
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics-
-The Science behind the Diagnostics
changes in the cardiac silhouette and lung fields sugges-
Prevention
tive of heart, infectious, or cancerous disease that may be
 There is no way to prevent heart block. However, through
predisposing the patient to arrhythmias. Further internal
 routine clinical diagnostics in older animals and breeds that
ultrasound examination of the heart can help evaluate
 are more sensitive to heart disease, early diagnosis and treat-
cardiac muscle thickness, valvular disease, or cardiac
ment can help increase quality of life and the life span of the
cancer that can also produce heart block.
pet.
Treatment
 In milder cases, treatment is not necessary unless there is an
Discussing Heart Block with the Client
underlying cause of the heart block. In more advanced cases,
● Heart block is an arrhythmia of the heart that
 treatment may be focused on the following.
 blocks normal conduction of electrical signals
from the atrium into the ventricles, blocking the
 Treatment of the underlying disease causing the heart
normal wave of energy that stimulates ventricular
block.
contraction.
● Oxygen therapy: By increasing oxygen concentration in
There are many mild forms of the disease that
the body, the heart does not have to work as hard. By in-
 occur without symptoms or need for treatment.
creasing oxygen concentration in a low-stress environ-
● With severe obstruction, the patient can become
ment, heart rate, oxygen need, and arrhythmias may be
weak, cannot exercise, and can collapse due to the
decreased.
decreased blood flow out of the ventricles.
Monitoring: The animal should be treated as an inpatient
 These patients can develop cardiac collapse and
with cage rest activity restrictions. Frequent ECG and
life-threatening disease.
blood press ure monitoring may be recommended.
 Severe heart block is controlled with medication
● Medications: Parasympatholytic drugs (e.g., atropine,
and possibly implantation of a pacemaker.
glycopyrrolate) that block the normal neurologic input
from the parasympathetic nervous system, which slows
the heart rate, can be used to increase the normal heart 
rhythm.
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of understanding and dis-
Surgery: With severe heart block, an electronic pace-
cussing clinical diagnostics and the disease conditions rep-
maker may need to be implanted under the skin with
resented. The exercises can be done individually or as case
leads that attach to the heart. This electronic device can
rounds as they explore specific topics in veterinary medicine
then produce an initial depolarization signal that can aid
that discuss clinical diagnostics and treatment.
 in complete atrial and ventricular contraction.
Chapter 25
Radiology, Ultrasound, and Endoscopy Techniques
The goal of this chapter is to focus on discussion of the tech-
the cassette. Some x-rays are transferred directly to the film,
nology of each diagnostic test, safety measures needed
and some scatter off in all directions (scatter radiation).
while performing these evaluations, indications of when the
The scatter radiation is of concerm to the hospital staff.
diagnostics are recommended, and how to communicate the 
 Absorbed radiation builds up over time and never dissipates
importance of the evaluation to the client.
once absorbed into the body. To prevent excessive damage
from compounding exposure to radiation, safety standards
Radiology
and recommendations should be set up by the hospital team.
    s   
Radiographs are one of the most commonly used diagnostic
hospital, some basic safety guidelines are as follows.
tools within veterinary medicine. The radiograph allows the
doctor to noninvasively (i.e., no surgery is needed) view in-
All nonessential personnel should stay away from the
termal structures within the pet. Radiographs can be evalu-
X-ray area while films are being taken. Employees that
ated almost immediately by the veterinarian. Animals often
 are not assisting and not wearing protective gear should
require no anesthesia to minimal sedation for radiographic
be away from the machine. Clients should never be al-
tests; therefore, they are able to go home the day of the
lowed in the area while their pet is being x-rayed. Fur-
study.
thermore, clients should not be allowed to help restrain
         
Technology
training in restraint and x-ray safety. Pregnant women or
X-ray radiation is focused, nonluminous electromagnetic ra-
young children should never be allowed in the area while
diation with a very short wavelength. The short wavelength
x-rays are being taken; there are too many health risks.
allows x-rays to penetrate solid objects. X-rays are produced
 Protective clothing should always be worn at all times
when the electrons emitted from a tungsten filament within
when x-rays are being taken. Leaded aprons with thy-
the x-ray machine are stopped by a solid structure (i.e., an
 roid shields, leaded goggles, and leaded gloves should al-
animal's body).
ways be used to help minimize exposure to the hands
 The amount of electrons released is based upon the
while restraining the pet. X-ray gloves should never be
jo ansea sn suau ayn o padde Kiaua jo qunoue
included in the x-ray film. Even these leaded gloves are
the energy applied is called kilovoltage (kV). The greater
not enough to protect the holder's hands from x-rays in
the kilovoltage, the more electrons are produced and the
the primary field. They are meant to protect the holder
deeper the electrons can penetrate into tissue. Therefore, the
only from scatter radiation.
larger or broader the animal the more kilovoltage is used.
 All protective clothing should be x-rayed regularly.
The length of time the electrons are exposed to the tissue
This is to make sure that the lead is still thick enough to
is called the milliamperage seconds (MaS). The combina-
prevent x-ray penetration. With time, large holes can de-
 sp ss au  a o n
velop in the aprons and gloves and produce areas where
aeu onsouep e anpod on papaau isenuoo pue ydap
scatter radiation can easily pass through.
(see Figure 25.1).
 X-ray monitoring badges should always be worn by
 The collision of the electrons into tissue produces 99%
the medical team taking the film. These badges moni-
pa Aahaua ao au1 aua Ai-x %l ym aua 1eay
 tor the exposure to scatter radiation. They are generally
off, the more x-rays are produced. The x-rays that come in
changed every month, and a radiation report is sent to the
contact with the x-ray film help to expose it, producing an
hospital. The radiation report should be either posted or
image.
available to all employees. Significant changes or eleva-
tions in radiation exposures warrant a review of radiation
Safety
safety and a recheck of the x-ray unit.
 X-ray radiation, in enough quantity, can destroy healthy liv-
 Technique charts should be developed and used to
ing tissue. The x-ray radiation that is produced from the
maximize the efficiency of the films. Technique charts
x-ray tube does not all stream through the patient and onto
are a recording of exposure times and power settings
365
998
ferred, radiographs can be copied through a human radiol-
Kilovoltage (kV)
ogy service.
All radiographs should be permanently labeled with the
following information:
Electrons
MaS
●Name of animal
 Patient identification number
Date of exam
99% Heat
Name of hospital
 Section of body being x-rayed
1% X-ray
Labeling of the x-rays can be done by leaded letters and
mumbers, label tape, light-flasher system, or a film label cam-
era. Furthermore, all radiographs should also be filed in an
 X-ray film
x-ray log. These logs should contain the following information.
 Log number identifying the radiographic study
 Date the x-ray was taken
Figure 25.1.
 Illustration of x-ray radiation being produced. The
Patient name
tungsten filaments within the x-ray unit produce electrons. The
Machine settings
greater the amount of energy (kV), the more x-rays are released
●Number of films taken
and the deeper the penetration of the beam into the tissue. The
duration of exposure (MaS) dictates the level of clarity and
Types of Studies
contrast the image produces.
 The following section outlines types of radiographic studies
and gives examples of normal and abnormal structures. The
based on the thickness of the body region x-rayed. They
goal of this section is to understand the important structures
d Apoq yoa rog pasn aq on anban isaq an mo
and pathology observable in each radiographic study.
and its thickness measurement. If done correctly, it min-
imizes the amount of x-rays needed and prevents more
Orthopedic Films
exposure to scatter radiation.
As discussed in Chapter 8, an orthopedic study refers to an
evaluation of bone and bony detail. These studies allow the
● X-ray equipment should be regularly checked and
veterinarian to assess bone health.
monitored.
The Density of Bone Tissue
Radiographs as Part of the Medical Record
Changes in bone density can suggest bone cancer (i.e., 0s-
Radiographs are part of the medical record and the property
teosarcoma and other neoplasia), inflammation (panos-
of the veterinary hospital. Although state laws vary, radi-
teitis), and bony infection (osteomyelitis). The veterinarian
ographs are generally required to be maintained on site for 3
can determine loss and increased or abnormal calcification.
years. In some states, radiographs may need to be available
 Significant changes in bone density may suggest the need
to the hospital for 7 years.' Radiographs should be available
for loan to the client or referring veterinarian. The client
for further diagnostics (i.e., complete blood count and chem-
should fill out a form that gives the following information.
istry, infectious titers, bone biopsy; see Figure 25.2).
Bone Fractures
●Where the x-rays are going
If there is an obvious fracture or break in the bone, radi-
 For what purpose they are being lent out
When they are to be returmed to the hospital
ographs help the doctor evaluate the location, the extent of
+
damage, and type of repair needed for the fracture (see
Figure 25.3). As discussed in Chapter 8, cormmon types of
This form should stay with the medical record until the
fractures are
films are returmed. The radiograph folder itself should state
that the x-rays are the property of your hospital and they
greenstick,
transverse, and
erinarian is done with them. If the owner needs a copy or is
comminuted.
permanently changing hospitals and wants all files trans-
Evaluation of the Joint
The soft tissue structures of the joint (i.e., ligament, menisci,
erinary hospital should consult with state legal statutes to ascertain what
 tsn o    o ( 
types of information should be available within the radiographic log.
x-rays allow the veterinarian to evaluate the joint for
Chapter 25: Radiology, Ultrasound, and Endoscopy Techniques
367
Soft Tissue Studies
Soft tissue studies allow the veterinarian and the veterinary
team to evaluate the soft tissue structure within the chest and
abdomen for changes in organ size, masses, foreign mate-
rial, fluid, or infection. Although radiographs are not able to
visualize intermal changes within organs, changes in organ
size, position, and external silhouette can indicate serious
disease. Examples of soft tissue studies are discussed next.
Thoracic (Chest) Studies
 Thoracic studies allow visualization of the normal anatomy
while identifying changes that suggest trauma, infection,
cardiac disease, or cancer (see Figure 25.5).
Abdominal Studies
Abdominal studies allow visualization of the normal ana-
 tomy while identifying changes that suggest trauma, infec-
tion, disease, or cancer.
Normal architectures (see Figure 25.6) that can be appre-
ciated are
●liver,
stomach,
 small and large intestines,
 spleen,
kidney,
争
bladder,
 abdominal lymph nodes, and
Figure 25.2.
2. Changes in bone density seen in this femur can be
+uterus/prostate.
 an old fracture that has healed irregularly or it can suggest cancer
or bony infection.
Examples of diseases (see Figure 25.7) that can be appre-
ciated with normal abdominal radiographs are
●arthritis (see Figure 25.4),
 masses/tumors,
dislocation (subluxation) of the bones,
kidney/bladder stones,
Orthopedic Foundation of America (OFA)'s Penn hip,
 torsed or rotated stomach (gastrodilatation volvulus),
screenings of hip dysplasia, and
●fluid in the abdomen, and
+joint infection.
●changes in abdominal organ size.
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 25.3.  Radiographs of different types of fractures: greenstick fracture (a); transverse fracture (b); comminuted fracture (c). The
x-ray allows the veterinarian to assess the potential damage and what type of repair is recommended.
898
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
(a)
(b)
Figure 25.4.  Radiographs of joint evaluations. The x-ray shows significant arthritis within the hip (a). The humerus is subluxated out
of the elbow joint (b).
Contrast Studies
2. Change of radiograph settings: From the plain film
Contrast studies are x-rays taken with the aid of some chem-
settings increase the kilovoltage by 2-3 kV to produce
ical or material that allows a change in the contrast of the
a sharper image because of the increased contrast ma-
surrounding tissue. This change of contrast allows the vet-
terial in the intestine. The time of the study (i.e., 30,
erinarian to image structures, obstructions, or masses that
60, 120 minutes) should be written or encoded on
each film.
rial can be air (carbon dioxide), barium, iohexal (Omni-
3. Schedule of x-rays: Radiographs are taken over 4
 paque), or renograffin.
hours (it can be longer) or until the barium has moved
Specific materials (i.e., bone, metal, stone) are radio
entirely into the large colon. Radiographs should be
dense and will show up on a radiograph. Other material (i.e.
taken on the following schedule:
 plastic, paper, and fabric) are not dense enough to observe 
—Time O—lateral and ventrodorsal (V/d)
on a normal x-ray. To increase contrast, these materials (i.e.
Time 15—lateral and V/d
air, barium, etc.) are administered orally or injected. The vet-
——Time 30—lateral and V/d
erinarian then takes a series of x-rays to monitor the normal
Time 60—lateral and V/d
flow of the material through the specific organ or cavity to
—Time 120—lateral and V/d
 assess if there is an obstruction or obstructive density.
-Time 240—lateral and V/d
● Myelogram: This dye study of the spinal cord uses a
Upper GI: An upper GI is a radiographic study in which
water-soluble iodine-based solution, called iohexital, to
the patient ingests barium and x-rays are taken at set in-
check for strictures and pressures in the spinal cord
tervals to evaluate possible obstruction, mass, or ulcera-
caused by intervertebral disc extrusion or spinal masses.
tion of the esophagus, stomach, and intestine. Radio-
ds q paad nn si anpd s
 graphs are generally taken until the barium flows into the
hospitals and requires general anesthesia and careful
large colon (see Figure 25.8). If the barium stops at a
monitoring of the patient. The dye is injected into the
given point or is retained within a section of intestine; it
space around spinal cord. Lateral and V/d x-rays are
 can suggest an intestinal obstruction (see Chapter 10).
taken. Normally, the upper and lower dye lines should
Although there are many possible protocols for per-
flow down the spinal column without obstruction (see
forming an upper GI barium series, one suggested proto-
Figure 25.9).
col is as follows.
1. After plain films are taken: Administer 3-5 cc/lb
Limitations of Radiology
barium orally. Care should be taken to slowly admin-
 Although an extremely useful diagnostic tool, radiographs 
ister the barium through a feeding syringe to prevent
  sss a us n so s a
barium aspiration.
client when applicable.
(a)
Aorta
Lung
Fields
Trachea
Heart
B
L
Figure 25.5.  Thoracic radiographs allow the veterinarian to assess normal chest anatomy (a) and disease pathology. Examples of
disease process that can be appreciated on an x-ray are seen in (b-d). Pleural effusion (b). In this film, normal anatomical definition is
being obscured by a fluid line secondary to infection, cardiac disease, trauma, or other diseases of the chest. Pneumothorax (c). In this
study, the heart is floating on a cushion of air as it rushes into the chest after a trauma, destroying the vacuum, and collapsing the lungs.
  o s     e ss     g
Figure 25.6. X-ray image of an feline abdomen. In this study,
contrast.
369
370
Key Points in Discussing the Importance of a
Radiographic Evaluation with the Client
● Radiographs allow the doctor to assess the normal
structures of the body and determine if there are
any abnormalities that could suggest disease.
 There can be changes to the organs and bone (i.e.,
stones, areas of enlargement, masses, fluid,
changes in bone density) that cannot be seen with-
 out an x-ray image.
In some cases, repeat films (upper Gl, animal with
heart disease with fluid on the lungs, drowning an-
imals) may need to be taken to assess the animal's
status, its response to treatment, and the need for
further diagnostics.
● With the concerms of abdominal foreign bodies,
there are certain materials and items that will not
show up on a plain film x-ray.
●Items such as cloth, plastic, wood, and other non-
dense items may not be seen. However, the veteri-
narian is also examining changes in the intestinal
patterm that may suggest a soft tissue obstruction.
● If your pet still is vomiting and a plain film x-ray is
not enough to detect an obstruction, a barium series
(an upper GI) may be needed.
●An upper GI is done when barium is given to the
pet. Barium will light up and allow the veterinarian
to see the liquid flow through the intestines.
● If the barium fails to move through the intestines in
a set amount of time or there are areas that continue
to retain barium, this could be suggestive of a mass,
ulceration, or obstruction.
X-rays are a very helpful diagnostic tool; however,
they have limitations, and even the best x-ray stud-
ies or contrast studies may not be completely inclu-
sive. Other diagnostics may be suggested.
 Radiographs do not visualize non-radio dense mate-
B
rial or soft tissue structures. X-rays do not allow the ap-
preciation of non-radio dense foreign material (i.e., cloth,
plastic, paper, string) that could cause severe gastro-
intestinal obstruction. Furthermore, orthopedic radi-
 ographs cannot visualize sof tissue structures associated
with joints, the spinal column, and limbs. Therefore, an
injured ligament, an extruded intervertebral disc, or a
torm tendon will not show up on an x-ray.
 Radiographs cannot distinguish pathology in internal
organ disease: X-rays can suggest changes in organ size
Figure 25. 7.  Examples of diseases that can be detected with
abdominal radiography. Abdominal masses (a). A large mass
(arrows) is pushing the intestines to the right and taking up a
large portion of the middle abdomen. Stones (b). A large calcified
 bladder stone is evident. Stomach torsion (c). The stomach is
twisted around its own axis (gastrodilatation volvulus)
Chapter 25: Radiology, Ultrasound, and Endoscopy Techniques
371
15minutes
30 minutes
60 minutes
120minutes
Figure 25.8. Radiographic images of an barium series. Although both lateral and V/d radiographs were taken at each time interval, the
lateral x-rays show a progression of dye through the stomach and small intestine and into the lower small intestine.
suggesting disease pathology. However, merely seeing
abnormally enlarged organs (i.e., kidney, liver, spleen)
cannot distinguish the cause of the organ enlargement.
 Radiographs are a health hazard to the medical team:
As stated previously, radiograph radiation can be a health
hazard to the medical team. Standardized protocols in
 d u q  s   
minimize radiation exposure and risk to the team and the
patient.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound examination allows imaging of internal thoracic
Figure 25.9.  Radiograph of a myelogram series. Note the dye
lines on the dorsal and ventral aspect of the spinal cord. The
units are portable and pose no radiation risk. Ultrasound
arrow delineates an area where the ventral line is pushed dorsally
exams allow a visualization of internal structures and archi-
and the dye line thins. This could be suggestive of a mass or disc
tecture that can suggest disease, infection, inflammation, or
pushing upward on the spinal column.
pathology.
372
Technology
Sound is defined as a mechanical pressure wave made up
of a series of compressions and rarefactions transmitted
through a specific medium. Ultrasound uses focused sound
waves that are ermitted at a specific frequency (speed) that
then encounter a tissue density. Some of these waves are
reflected back to the ultrasound emitter. Different densities
of tissues reflect the sound waves at different speeds and
amounts. These waves are visualized as images of gray;
the stronger the echoed wave, the brighter the image. Thus
increased density means increased echo and a brighter
image.
 Ultrasounds use piezo crystals. The electrical energy in
the crystal produces mechanical sound waves that echo back
after hitting dense structures. The piezo crystals then reab-
sorb the sound waves and turm their amplitude into a physi-
cal image that is transmitted on a monitor. These crystals lis-
ten for rebounding waves 99.9% of the time and ermit sound
Figure 25.10. Image of a spleen surrounded by abdominal fat.
waves .1% of the time, so there is very little sound energy
e ney supunoins pue (siop Aq pepunons) uaeids au yog
released while performing an ultrasound. Ultrasounds are
echoic structures, but the fat is hyperechoic (brighter) in compari-
able to produce and rebound their sound waves through solid
son with the spleen.
and liquid interfaces but are unable to visualize through an
air interface (i.e., the lungs).
Safety
Because ultrasounds emit only a small amount of sound
Ultrasound Exam
waves, there are no health concerns to patients or the med-
Types of ultrasound studies used can vary from species to
ical team secondary to ultrasound exposure.
species.
 For large animals, ultrasound studies can be used for the
Preparation of Animal
following purposes.
● Hair contains air pockets and hence ultrasound waves
cannot go through the hair coat.
 Pregnancy diagnosis: Ultrasound studies are used for
 The animal must be shaved and a conduction gel must be
intrarectal examination in the horse and large ruminant
applied to allow the passage of sound waves.
(i.e., cow) or abdominal detection in the small ruminant;
Most healthy animals will tolerate an ultrasound exam
it is an excellent tool to use to diagnose and follow preg-
without any form of sedation or anesthesia, just proper
nancy. Furthermore, the ovaries can be imaged to aid in
restraint.
estimation of the heat cycle and breeding times.
 Tendon examination: Ultrasonic exam of the limb al-
Terminology
lows the imaging and evaluation of deep tendons and
Ultrasound studies produce grayscale images of internal
muscles for damage, infection, or masses. Furthermore,
structures. Veterinary evaluation of the images compares the
the ultrasound can help obtain a cellular aspirate of a
brightness and density of one organ to another tissue. These
mass or drain fluid-filled regions in damaged tissue.
 grayscale comparisons have specific terminology.
 Abdominal disease: As with the small animal examina-
tion, ultrasound examination of intemal organs can be
● Echogenieity: The strength or amplitude of the returming
performed to detect infection, inflammation, or masses in
echo is referred to as echogenicity. Echogenic structures
abdominal structures.
produce echoes, and anechogenic structures are unable
to produce echoes (i.e., lung tissue)
 For small animals ultrasound studies can be used for the
● Density: Images are discussed in terms of density (see
following purposes.
Figure 25.10) as
Hyperechoic: Structures that are brighter than the
● Abdominal: Abdominal studies allow the veterinarian to
surrounding tissue.
10 uad anssn lou ul sauuo ae ahaun j! ssasse 
 Isoechoic: Structures that have the same brightness as
changes in tissue brightness, internal masses, or fluid-
surrounding tissue.
filled structures that can suggest disease (see Figure
Hypoechoic: Structures that have decreased bright-
 25.11). Furthermore, the abdomen can be evaluated for
ness as surrounding tissue.
evidence of free fluid, suggesting liver disease, bleeding,
Chapter 25: Radiology,Ultrasound,and Endoscopy Techniques
373
Figure 25.11.l
 Ultrasound image of a spleen and left kidney. The
ultrasound allows an evaluation of internal structure as well as a
Figure 25.12.  An ultrasound of the long axis of the heart. This
comparison of echogenicity to other tissues, which could suggest
heart is surrounded by fluid due to a mass on the right atrium (RA))
organ disease.
cancer, and other potential causes. Lastly, the ultrasound
Discussing Ultrasound with the Client
can aid in guiding biopsy instruments so tissue and fluid
Ultrasound is a noninvasive diagnostic test that al.
samples can be obtained.
lows the veterinarian to image the internal architec-
Chest: Cardiac ultrasound is an extremely important di-
agnostic tool to evaluate changes in the cardiac wall,
ture of the abdominal organs and the heart.
 Ultrasound cannot image the lung fields because
changes of the valves within the heart, evaluation of con-
the sound waves cannot reflect back through air.
tractility of the heart, evidence of masses or tumors, and
-na jepieouad o jeaq aul punoe pm jo uoneiaidde 
There are many times when the ultrasound will re-
veal a mass or fluid-filled area that can directly re-
sion (see Figure 25.12). Furthermore, the region between
the heart and lungs, the mediastinum, can be evaluated
late to a disease problem.
for masses or fluid from infection or cancer.
However, there are times when the ultrasound will
- an uo pse so u sao isans o
ness or change in tissue density.
Limitations of Ultrasound Diagnostics
Ultrasounds are not a replacement for x-rays, be-
Thoracic Studies
cause radiographs allow the veterinarian to get spe-
Ultrasound waves cannot be carried through an air medium.
Therefore, lung tissue cannot be evaluated with an ultra-
cific information about sizes of organs, changes in
the chest cavity, and changes in the bone that ultra-
sound exam. Masses within the lungs must be in direct con-
sounds cannot always pick up.
tact within the chest wall in order to be visualized. Further-
● A cardiac ultrasound can help the veterinarian un-
more, the lung fields can obscure and limit the exposure of
the heart or mediastinal region.
derstand the inner anatomical changes and function
of the heart so that the best medical recommenda-
Abdominal Studies
tions are available to treat the underlying disease.
 Ultrasound can be a very powerful diagnostic test,
Ultrasound is very good at detecting changes within tissue
but there are times when further diagnostics may
that can suggest organ disease or cancer. However, without
need to be recommended to more fully understand
a biopsy, ultrasound cannot identify the type of disease af-
the disease process.
fecting an organ system. Multiple diseases (i.e., infection,
 cancer, inflammation, metabolic disease) can all appear as
similar diffuse organ disease on ultrasound diagnostics. In
many cases, (i.e., liver, kidney, spleen, and other organ dis-
Endoscopy
eases), owners must understand that although the ultra-
sound can help distinguish if an organ seems affected, it
aq ueo ieun eiauo ondo-iaqu e jo asn aun si Adoosopu
passed into the upper gastrointestinal system, the lower in-
sue biopsy.
testinal system, and the respiratory system to help image
374
Section 3: Clinical Diagnostics—The Science behind the Diagnostics
and diagnose disease. The procedures are done under gen-
eral anesthesia, but are not invasive because there is no sur-
gical incision. The endoscope allows access to regions that
normally would be unreachable without major surgery.
Some of these regions are
●esophagus,
+
trachea,
bronchi,
 nasal sinus, and
the vulva.
There are both rigid and flexible endoscopes of different
sizes and for different purposes. One endoscope does not
have the ability to handle all sizes of animals and all needs.
Technology
The fiber-optic endoscope allows for intestinal exploration
 of the upper gastrointestinal system (the esophagus, stom-
ach, and possibly early small intestines). The lower colon
can also be imaged by introducing the endoscope through
the rectum. Finally, the trachea and bronchi can be examined
through a special connecter in the anesthesia machine that
allows the scope to enter through the endotracheal tube (see 
Figure 25.13. Endoscopy allows access to many regions of the
Figure 25.13).
body without surgery. It can further aid in the removal of certain
foreign material, biopsy of sites, or even perform culture and
Safety
sensitivity tests for potential infections.
 Because endoscopy requires general anesthesia, there is a
mild anesthetic risk to the patient (see Chapter 29).
Types of Studies
 n  m r  p a a 
Removal of Foreign Bodies/Foreign Material
ples that may suggest the infectious cause or evidence of
In some cases certain foreign material can be removed with
cancer.
the endoscope from the early intestinal system without the
need for surgery. These items are usually small enough to
Preparation
 grasp with the endoscope's basket or graspers and removed
Animals need to fast for at least 12-18 hours prior to the en-
through the esophagus. Items that can sometimes be re-
 doscopy to ensure that the stomach is ermpty. The endoscopy
moved with this procedure include
does not work well navigating through intestinal contents.
 For a lower endoscopy (colonoscopy), multiple enemas are
●hooks and needles,
generally given the day before with a solution called
●bone spurs, and
Golytely to aid in cleansing the colon prior to the test. All
● other small foreign debris.
animals undergoing an endoscopy should be good anesthetic
candidates for the procedure.
Examination of Intestinal or Bronchial Lining (Mucosa)
and Biopsy
Limitations to Endoscopy
The endoscope can image the intestinal lining and take tis-
Depending on the size of the endoscope, the pet, and its
sue for biopsy. The biopsy tissue is a very small, partial.
 n n  s    
thickness section of the region that will be examined to aid
 that need to be examined, especially going into the small in-
in the overall diagnosis of the disease.
testine or smaller bronchi. Not all foreign bodies can be re-
moved due to their size, thickness, and location. If they can-
Culture and Sensitivity/Brushings of the Respiratory
not be removed with the endoscope, the foreign bodies will
Tract
 need to be removed surgically.
When there are concems of chronic infection or potential
cancer in the trachea and lungs, the endoscope can be passed
Obtaining Biopsy Tissue
  s     n 
The tissue for biopsy obtained are small samples of the in-
samples of debris and purulent material can be collected to
testine. The samples are surface layers and do not go to full
Chapter 25: Radiology, Ultrasound, and Endoscopy Techniques
375
thickness. The endoscope can only take tissue from the
upper gastrointestinal tract or lower colon. If the tissues are
Discussing the Endoscopy with Clients
An endoscopy is an exploration of the stomach and
not inclusive enough, the animal may need to have ex-
n aa n o sn n  os  
early small intestines, the colon, or trachea and
bronchi with a fiber-optic or rigid camera.
 An endoscopy requires anesthetic, and the animal
Endoscopy of the Trachea and Bronchi
must be a good candidate for anesthesia.
The endoscope can penetrate to the level of the deeper
An intravenous catheter, with or without fluids,
 presurgical blood work, and full anesthetic moni-
  so n    m n  
Some diseases will not be evident at the bronchi level, and
toring may be needed to fully evaluate and main-
some tumors will not shed enough cells to suggest disease at
tain the patient while under anesthesia.
this level either. In some cases when an endoscopy is not
 An endoscopy is limited to the ability of the scope
 helpful, other procedures such as an MRI or CAT scan may
to access the sites in question. Depending on the
be needed to help visualize the entire lung field. In other
animal's anatomy and the size and length of the
cases a surgical approach to the chest (thoracotomy) may
 scope, some areas cannot be reached. The endo-
be needed to examine the chest and possibly remove a mass
scope cannot reach all areas of the intestines or
Iungs.
or severely infected lung lobe.
If there is a foreign body evident, it may not be pos-
 sible to retrieve it with an endoscope, and the pet
 may still require surgery. Furthermore, if the ani-
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of understanding and dis-
mal has eaten prior to ingesting the foreign body, it
cussing clinical diagnostics and the disease conditions rep-
may be impossible to navigate around the intestinal
resented. The exercises can be done individually or as case
contents to retrieve the material with an endoscope.
With respect to a biopsy, the endoscope can take
that discuss clinical diagnostics and treatment
small, partial (not full thickness) samples of the
areas that are within reach. The partial-thickness
sa ne inq sisoep an ul diay uo Asdoiq anss
full-thickness samples of the entire intestine may
be needed. In order to do this, an exploratory sur-
 gery may be needed.
 The endoscope can go only into a certain depth of
the trachea and bronchi (bronchoscopy). Culture
 and sensitivity and brush samples may be very help-
ful in diagnosis of the disease; however, other pro-
cedures may need to be done to more fully explore
the chest cavity, such as a CAT scan, MRI, or a sur-
gical exploration into the chest (a thoracotomy).
Section 4
Understanding the Concepts of
Diseaseand Treatment
The goal of this section is to understand the concepts of treatment so the team member can monitor the patient, identify symp-
toms of shock, and help the veterinarian treat the hospitalized animals.
Chapter 26
Pharmacology
Introducion
Intramuscular Route
 Intramuscular (IM) drugs are meant to go into a large mus-
A drug is defined as a substance used therapeutically in the
cle mass for slightly slower absorption than those given by
treatment of a disease or illness. In veterinary medicine
IV administration. Drugs that are delivered intramuscularly
drugs fall into many categories, such as treatment of disease,
should be labeled for IM use. Some drugs can be very irri-
anesthesia, behavioral modification, treatment of pain, and
u aas asn  p Aisnu un nou ji 
other needs. For the purpose of this book, the drugs will be
tions if not given by their normal route. Commonly, IM in-
limited to prescription medications, wormers and antipara-
jections are given in the large muscle mass of the hind limbs
sitics, and emergency injectable medication. A list of com-
or in the muscle of the lumber spine (canine). Caution
 monly used drug categories is as follows:
should be used when giving IM injections into the large hind
limb muscle mass; improperly injected, it can accidentally
Antibiotics
enter into the sciatic nerve, a long nerve of the hind limb.
+
Fluids
01 Aaqeu pue sisfeed supus-suol anpod ueo su
Antifungals
use the leg properly.
Antiparasitics
Antivirals
Subcutaneous Route
Chemotherapeutics
Subcutaneous (Sq) drug administration is the safest and eas-
Anesthesias
iest route of drug delivery. However, it is also the slowest
Sedatives
route for the drug to take effect for the animal. Some drugs
Behavioral modifiers
(i.e., dextrose or fluids with dextrose) can be irritating and
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications
Steroids
action or skin sloughing can occur. If there are any questions
Vaccines
consult your veterinarian.
Dosing Terminology
Drug Delivery Systems
As with most fields of veterinary medicine, drug dosing and
Drugs can be given by various routes depending on the dis.
anatomical charting has its own nomenclature for prescrip-
ease process, the drug, and the needs of the patient. It is im-
tion documentation. The basic abbreviations are as follows.
portant for the medical team member to understand the
 For dosing, the nomenclature is
 goals and risks of medicating the patient using each route of
SID: 1×/day
administrat1on.
BID: 2X/day
TID: 3X/day
Intravenous Route
 oi as ae eu snp aluais a snp (a) snoual
QID: 4X/day
EOD: Every other day
through an intravenous catheter or syringe. Only drugs
+
 marked safe for IV use can be given intravenously. If a drug
ETD: Every third day
not labeled for this use is given intravenously, an animal
PRN: As needed.
could die instantly of anaphylactic shock. In general, IV
For anatomical nomenclature, the terms are as follows.
drugs should be given slowly and the patient monitored for
reactions. If there is any concerm regarding giving a drug in-
Eyes
travenously, a veterinarian should be consulted prior to ad-
OU: Both eyes
ministration of the drug. IV drugs tend to have an instanta-
OD: Right eye
neous or quick-acting effect on the animal.
OS: Left Eye
379
380
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
●Ears
Step 3: Calculate the patient's dose requirement. Often this
AU: Both ears
step is calculated by the veterinarian; however, there are doses
AD: Right ear
that may be common knowledge to the team members (i.e.,
AS: Left ear
dose of amoxicillin: 10 mg/lb). To calculate the patient's dose:
●By Mouth: Per OS (PO)
Patient's dose = Dose in mg/kg or mg/lbs X weight
Example A: Give 100 mg amoxicillin BID PO X
(kg or pounds
14 days: translates into 1 tablet twice a day by
mouth for 14 days.
● Example A: 40 pound dog requires 10 mg/pound
Example B: Give 1/8-inch strip of Triple
dose of Amoxicillin Sq:
Antibiotic ophthalmic medication TID OU X 14
Dose = 10 mg/pound × 40 pounds = 400 mg IM
 days: translates into give 1/8 inch in both eyes three 
Example B: 30 kg dose requires a dose of 1.5
times per day for 14 days.
Example C: Give 300 mg cefazolin TID IV × 3
mg/kg of a drug IM
days: translates into give 300 mg intravenously
Dose = 1.5 mg/kg X 30 kg = 45 mg
every 8 hours for the next 3 days. (This would be
an in-hospital treatment).
Step 4: Calculate milliliters needed for the dose. Once the
patient's dose has been calculated, the amount of milliliters
needed is the final step. To accomplish this, the team mem-
Drug Dosing
ber multiplies the number of milligrams needed divided by
concentration of the drug (mg/ml).
 To properly medicate a patient, all team members should be
able to calculate the proper drug dose. Although it is the vet-
erinarian's responsibility to make sure the proper dose and
Milliliters needed for dose = dose ÷ concentration of
route is used, the team members should be able to calculate
drug
the proper dose and administer the medication when re-
quested. The following protocol is meant to help make sure 
● Example A: 400 mg of ampicillin/100 mg/ml
the proper dose is always calculated and administered safely.
ampicillin = 4 ml or cc.
Step l: Never give any medication by any route of
Example B: 45 mg of drug/20 mg/ml of drug =
which you are unsure. If a team member is faced with giv-
2.25 ml or cc.
 ing a new medication or giving a known medication by an
unusual route (i.e., giving a subcutaneous medication intra-
venously), the medication should not be given without first
When dealing with solutions with a percentage of con-
discussing it with the veterinarian.
centration (i.e., 2% lidocaine, 50% dextrose, etc.), the per-
 Step 2: Convert the pet's weight into the proper units (i.e.,
cent solution refers to the fact that 100% solution = 1000
kilograms to pounds or pounds to kilograms). Many doses of
mg/mg or 1000 g/l. To calculate how many milligrams per
medication can be milligrams per kilogram or milligrams per
 milliliter are in a percent solution, perform the following:
pound. It is very important that the medical team dose for the
correct weight measurerment. A miscalculation can overdose
Mg/ml = % solution X 10, then as above.
or severely underdose a patient. The conversions from
Milliliters needed for dose = dose ÷ concentration of
 pounds to kilograms or kilograms to poumds are as follows.
drug.
Example A: 2% lidocaine solution contains = 2 X
1 kg = 2.2 lb or 11 lb = 5 kg
10 = 20 mg/ml. Dose needed is 200 mg. Milliliters
needed = 200 mg/20 mg/ml = 10 ml.
Example A: Convert 33-pound dog to its weight in
Example B: 50% dextrose contains = 50 X 10 =
kilograms:
500 mg/ml. Dose needed is 25 mg. Milliliters
33 = 3 × 11 1b = 3 × 5kg = 15 kg or 
needed = 25 mg/500 mg/ml = 0.05 ml.
33 1b/2.2 = 15 kg
Example B: Convert a 20-kilogram dog to its
weight in pounds:
Responsibilities of the Medical Team
20 kg × 2.2 Ib/kg = 44 Ib
Although the liability of prescription medication is ulti-
mately the responsibility of the veterinarian, all team mem-
Chapter 26: Pharmacology
381
bers are responsible for filling prescriptions and medicating
Drug Classes
patients. Each team member must be responsible for under-
Antibiotics
standing the following information about each drug before
Antibiotics are drugs that stop the growth of or kill infec-
administering or filling any medication.
 of function to stop or destroy bacterial cell growth. There are
Type of Drug Administered
two overall groups:
Each team member should have an understanding of the
drug given, its function, and why it is being administered. If
Bacteriostatic antibiotics: These antibiotics stop the
team members do not have a basic understanding of why the
 growth of foreign bacteria, but do not kill them. The pa-
medication is beinggiven, they cannot monitor if the patient
is responding properly to medication. Furthermore, certain
a s on ss a a   s n
drugs (i.e., chemotherapy drugs) must be handled and dis-
inactivated bacteria.
a mn ap e asod uo an asnoa ao jo pasod
 Bactericidal antibiotics: These antibiotics destroy bac
teria populations and wipe out the possible infections.
medical team or the client.
Bactericidal antibiotics are generally not used with other
bacteriostatic antibiotics because bactericidal medica-
Route of Administration
tions rely on large populations of rapidly dividing normal
As discussed previously, all medications have safe routes of
bacteria to stop bacterial action. If the bacterium is being
administration. Specific drugs cannot be given intra-
wiped out from another bacterial agent, bacteriostatic
venously without concerm of massive anaphylactic reaction
bacteria are less effective.
and death, whereas other drugs should not be given subcuta-
 neously due to irritation or skin sloughing.
Penicillin Family
Date of Expiration
Antibacterial activity is accomplished by inhibition of bac-
It is always important to evaluate the expiration date to make
    s il ss n 
sure the drug is still effective. Furthermore, specific medica-
gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. Access to mam-
tions that may need to be reconstituted with sterile saline
malian tissue is generally adequate to combat bacterial in-
may have only a limited date of effectiveness. For example,
fections with exception of intraocular and intracerebral sites.
certain intravenous antibiotics once reconstituted may be
 Inflammation to these sites may enhance penetrability to the
usable for only 72-96 hours with refrigeration.
site of the infection. Penicillins are very safe because they
target a process in bacterial cell walls that are not present in
Contraindications
mammalian cells.
 s      s 
 group, sex, or species. It is extremely important that the medi-
Forms of Drug
cal team be aware of the most common drugs’ contraindica-
●Penicillin (Procaine Pen-G)
tions to make sure that certain drugs are not administered or
 Amoxicillin trihydrate/clavulanate potassium (Clavamox/
prescribed. For example, acepromazine (tranquillizer) should
Unasyn)
 not be administered to pets prone to seizures (see below).
+
Ampicillin (Polyflex, Ampicillin IV)
Amoxicillin (Amoxi-Tabs)
Side Effects
As with contraindications, some drugs produce moderate to
Route of Administration
serious side effects. The medical team should be aware of
 The route of drug administration depends on the prepara-
i   d a  o s 
 tion of the penicillin. There are penicillins that are only to be
changes and to foreworn the client of potential changes in
given subcutaneously or intramuscularly (i.e., Polyflex,
 their pet. For example, oral and injectable steroidal medica-
Amoxi-Inject, Procaine Pen-G). There are other groups that
tions can increase thirst, urination, and appetite in canines.
are safe for intravenous administration (i.e., Unasym, ampi-
Drug Interactions
ication is safe for administering intravenous penicillin.
Many drugs can have serious to life-threatening side effects
Almost all forms of penicillin have an oral form.
if given in combination with other medication. The medical
team should be aware of the more common drug interactions
Contraindications
and make sure the patient is not on medications that inter-
The penicillin family is generally safe for use in marmmals.
fere with others. For example, steroidal medication and
However, these drugs should not be used with animals that
other types of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication
are allergic to the penicillins. Furthermore, for animals with
(i.e., aspirin) should never be given together unless the vet-
impaired renal function, the dosage of the drug should be
erinarian and client are both aware of the potential concem
decreased with the extent to which renal function is im-
of gastric ulceration and/or perforation.
paired. (i.e., creatinine clearance).
382
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Side Effects
anaphylaxis (rare): collapse, weakness, bronchocon-
Side effects are rare but can include the following.
striction, respiratory wheezes, and death.
 Gastrointestinal upsets: Vomiting and diarrhea
Drug Interactions
Allergic reaction: Animals sensitive to penicillins can
have
with bacteriostatic (i.e., tetracycline) antibiotics because
 mild allergic reactions: Rashes, erythema, pruritus,
these drugs impair bacterial wall synthesis.
and hives
Cephalosporins may enhance nephrotoxicity (kidney
 anaphylaxis (rare): Collapse, weakness, bronchocon-
damage) of aminoglycoside (i.e. Gentacin, amikacin).
striction, respiratory wheezes, and death.
Fluoroquinolone Family
Drug Interactions
A fluoroquinolone antimicrobial drug is a bactericidal antibi-
It is generally recormmended that penicillins not be used
otic that affects a wide spectrum of gram-negative and gram-
with bacteriostatic (i.e., tetracycline) antibiotics because
positive aerobic bacterial pathogens. It is ineffective against
these drugs impair bacterial wall synthesis.
anaerobic bacteria and has variable effectiveness against
streptococci. The fluoroquinolone's mechanism of antimicro-
Cephalosporin Family
bial action is an inhibition of enzymes necessary for bacter-
Antibacterial activity is accomplished by inhibition of bac-
ial DNA replication and is unique among antibiotics. The
terial wall synthesis. The antibiotics generally have broad
drug's ability to penetrate tissue, including difficult to access
 bacterial activity against gram-negative and poor response
regions such bone, prostate, and cerebrospinal sites, super-
to gram-positive bacteria. Access to mammalian tissue is
sedes that of most antimicrobial agents. Penetration into
generally adequate to combat bacterial infections, with ex-
mammalian cells makes it effective for infections at intracel-
ception of intraocular, prostatic, and intracerebral sites.
lular sites (chlamydia, mycoplasma, mycobacterium). Since
 Inflammation of these sites may enhance penetrability to the
high concentrations of active fluoroquinolones and metabo-
site of the infection. Cephalosporins are very safe because
lites are eliminated in the urine, the drug is valuable in the
they target a process in bacterial cell walls that is not pres-
treatment of genitourinary tract infections.
ent in mammalian cells.
Forms of Drug
Forms of Drug
●Enrofloxacin (Baytril)
●Cephalexin
Marbofloxacin (Zeniquin)
Cefazolin sodium (cefazolin)
●Ciprofloxacin (Cipro)
Cefadroxil (Cefa-Tabs)
Cefoxitin (Mefoxitin)
Route of Administration
Simplecef
The route of drug administration depends on the preparation
of the fluoroquinolone. Care should be taken to make sure
Route of Administration
medication is safe to administer intravenously. Most of this
The route of drug administration depends on the preparation
family comes in oral medication; however, enrofloxacin is
of the cephalosporin. Care should be taken to make sure
also available in injectable and otic preparations.
medication is safe for intravenous administration.
Contraindications
Contraindications
The drug should be used cautiously in skeletally immature
 The cephalosporin family of antibiotics is generally safe in
 animals (including pregnant females) because the drug may
mammals. However, these drugs should not be used for ani-
cause microscopic cartilage lesions leading to lameness in
mals that are allergic to the cephalosporins. Furthermore,
weight-bearing joints of the body. Age restriction should be
the dosage of the drug should be decreased in animals with
aodau osiy sop paaq raaei un (suuo gl mi dn) rauo
impaired renal function, depending on the severity of renal
to cause retinal lesions in cats.
dysfunction (i.e., creatinine clearance).
Higher doses of fluoroquinolones may promote seizure ac-
tivity. This tendency may be enhanced in epileptics and in
Side Effects
animals with structural central nervous system (CNS) disease.
Side effects are rare, but can include
Side Effects
 gastrointestinal upsets (i.e., vomiting/diarrhea),
Side effects are rare but can include
 allergic reaction (animals sensitive to cephalosporin),
producing
gastrointestinal upsets (i.e., vomiting/diarrhea), and
mild allergic reactions: rashes, erythema, pruritus,
retinal lesions in felines when doses exceed 2.5-5 mg/
 and hives
kg/day.
Chapter 26: Pharmacology
Drug Interactions
● GI protectants and supplements: Drugs such as nutri-
Caution should be exercised when fluoroquinolones are
tional supplements and drugs (antacids, antiemetics, and
used with the following drugs.
antidiarrheal preparations) containing calcium, magne-
sium, aluminum, zinc, iron, and bismuth can bind tetra-
GI protectants: Drugs such as sulcrafate, magnesium-
cyclines and lower their overall activity.
and aluminum-containing antacids, and calcium- and
 Bactericidal antibiotics: In general, it is recommended
iron-containing dietary supplements decrease oral ab-
that bacteriostatic antibiotics such as tetracycline not be
sorption of enrofloxacin.
administered simultaneously with bactericidal drugs (i.e.
 Chloramphenicol: The antibiotic chloramphenicol may
 penicillins, cephalosporins) that affect bacterial cell wall
decrease enrofloxacin efficacy.
formation.
Theophylline: The bronchodilator's metabolism may be
slowed by fluoroquinolones leading to accumulation of
TrimethoprimSulfa Family
 toxic (CNS stimulatory) levels of the latter drug.
The trimethoprim family disrupts folic acid metabolism and
nucleic symthesis. Against bacteria it generally exerts a bac-
Tetracycline Family
tericidal action. The drug has a relatively broad spectrum of
 Tetracyclines act by inhibition of microbial protein synthe.
antibacterial activity against gram-negative and gram-
sis. It is a bacteriostatic and affects a broad spectrum of aer-
positive bacteria and generally has a greater effect against
obic and anaerobic bacterial and nonbacterial pathogens, in-
aerobic than against anaerobic organisms. A specific drug in
cluding Mycoplasma, Chlamydia, and Rickettsia species. As
this family (i.e., Tribrissen) also inhibits the growth of pro
 a group, tetracyclines affect spirochetes, including Lyme
tozoa (i.e., coccidia, toxoplasma).
 disease-causing organisms.
Form of the Drug
Forms of Drug
Trimethoprim-Sulfa (Tribrissen)
Doxycycline
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim)
Tetracycline
 Ormetoprim/sulfadimethoxine (Primor)
Oxytetracycline
Route of Administration
Route of Administration
 Most drugs in this family come in oral medication; however,
Most of this family comes in oral medication; however,
some forms of the drug are available in injectable prepara-
some forms of the drug are available in injectable prepara-
tions. Care should be taken to make sure medication is safe
tions. Care should be taken to make sure medication is safe
to administer intravenously.
 for administration intravenously.
Precautions/Contraindications
Contraindications
 Organ disease: Caution should be used in animals with
The drug should be used cautiously in skeletally and den-
extensive liver or kidney disease.
tally immature patients (i.e., no permanent teeth descended)
Breed sensitivity: The drug should be avoided in animals
with breed susceptibilities (see below) and in animals 
teeth, leading to permanent lesions. These drugs should be
with ocular disorders.
ssoro Aean aun asnaq Aouuand qnouanoul papion
-ue quuand ym pasn aq pinous uon oueuan 
the placenta and also should be avoided in neonatal life
mals, since birth defects have been reported with certain
(until bone/teeth development is completed) if possible.
sulfa drugs.
Side Effects
Side Effects
Side effects are rare but can include
 Gastrointestinal system: Upsets (anorexia, vomiting,
and diarrhea) may result from flora alterations.
gastrointestinal upsets (i.e., vomiting/diarrhea),
Urinary tract: Trimethoprim sulfa can precipitate in the
fevers (hyperthermias) in cats, which are more sensitive
urine to cause crystalluria (especially if urine is acidic).
 n s     s 
 Anaphylaxis: Too rapid intravenous administration may
temperature (rare), and
lead to a shocklike state with weakness, tremors, and
rashes or irritations of mucous membranes (photosensiti-
collapse.
zation), causing lesions on the skin and mucocutaneous
 Blood populations: Particularly with prolonged therapy,
tissue when exposed to ultraviolet light (rare).
blood population abnormalities, such as anemia, throm-
bocytopenia, and granulocytopenia have been noted; this
Drug Interactions
may be prevented/treated with folic acid therapy.
Caution should be exercised when tetracyclines are used
Dry eye: Keratoconjunctivitis sicca is a side effect of sul-
with the following drugs:
fonamide therapy in dogs.
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
● Autoimmune conditions: Large breed dogs (e.g., Dober-
lead to a diminished effect of metronidazole or drugs that af-
mans, rotteweilers) have demonstrated a higher incidence
fect biotransformation may increase its activity. The follow-
of hypersensitivity reactions (polyarthritis, hemolytic
ing drugs should be used with caution with concurrent ad-
 anemia, hepatic disorders).
ministration of metronidazole.
Hypothyroidism: Long-term therapy in dogs may lead to
Drugs that promote hepatic metabolism and decrease
thyroid dysfunction.
 Metronidazole activity are
Drug Interactions
 phenobarbital, and
Because trimethoprim sulfa drugs are extensively bound to
 primidone.
plasma proteins, concurrent use with other plasma protein-
Aq Aaqeniaoq au poae Aeuu (udse :?a) sanp punoq
Drugs that reduce hepatic metabolism and increase
displacement from binding sites.
metronidazole activity are
Metronidazole
 cimetidine, and
Metronidazole is a synthetic antimicrobial agent. Following
chloramphenicol.
intracellular conversion to metabolic products, it interacts
with microbial nucleic acids, leading to a lethal effect on the
Antihistamine Medication
organism. It has a limited spectrum of antibacterial activity,
Antihistamines prevent and reverse the pathological effects
affecting primarily anaerobic organisms. It also has wide-
of endogenously released histamine (e.g., in allergic disor-
spread antiprotozoal activity and is used to treat Giardia and
ders, by concurrent drug administration, with histamine-
Trichomonas infections. In mixed aerobic and anaerobic
bacterial infections, additional antibiotics are required to
producing tumors such as mast cell tumors). These medica-
tions also exert an antiemetic action, especially in cases of
eliminate the aerobic organisms.
motion sickness. The sedative effect may be of value in ani-
Form of Drug
mals with severe pruritus, with the tendency to cause self-
 Metronidazole (Flagyl) is available in tablets, liquid suspen-
mutilation.
sion, and injectable form.
Form of the Drug
Route of Administration
 There are many different types of antihistarmine medica-
Metronidazole is available in an oral and injectable form.
tions. Most medications come in oral tablets, syrups, and
suspensions. A few types (i.e., diphenhydramine) come in
Contraindications
injectable medication. Antihistamine effects can be ex-
● Hepatic disease: Dosage should be decreased for ani-
tremely variable from animal to animal. Common types of
mals with hepatic disease.
antihistamines are
● Pregnancy: Because of its teratogenic effects, the drug
should not be administered to animals that are in their
diphenhydramine (Benadryl),
first trimester of pregnancy unless there is no other drug
hydroxyzine (Atarax),
altermative.
clemastine (Tavist), and
 Neurologic disease: Animals with neurologic dysfunc-
chloraphenaramine maleate (Chlor- Trimeton).
tion may be more susceptible to the concentration-
dependent neurotoxicity of metronidazole.
Route of Administration
Side Effects
Most of this family comes in oral form; however, some
● Gastrointestinal upsets: Vomiting and diarrhea may
forms of the drug are available in injectable preparations,
 Occur if medication is not given with food.
which can be given subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or in-
CNS toxicity: Metronidazole causes concentration-
travenously. Care should be taken to make sure specific
 dependent CNS dysfunction producing signs of
medication is safe to administer intravenously.
 ataxia,
—lethargy,
Precautions
 Anticholinergic side effects: Antihistamines can block
tremors, and
aspects of the parasympathetic nervous system, which is
seizure.
● Birth defects: Flagyl can produce birth defects in preg-
responsible for maintaining normal body function (i.e.,
nant animals due to metronidazole's ability to affect cel-
intestinal motility, slowing heart rate, constriction of the
eye, production of salivary glands). Antihistamines can
lular DNA.
aggravate conditions such as glaucoma, urinary obstruc-
Drug Interactions
tion, and gut hypomotility disorders.
Due to metronidazole's reliance on hepatic biotransforma-
Effects in cardiac patients: Animals with cardiovascu-
 tion for elimination, drugs that induce drug metabolism may
Chapter 26: Pharmacology
385
 Effects in pregnant patients: Some antihistamines (i.e.,
 aspirin,
- panod a ssop y ui ([x] axop
 ibuprofen, and
atogenic effects in laboratory animals; use caution in
 ace taminophen.
 pregnant or potentially pregnant animals.
 Naproxen (Aleve) should never be prescribed for any
Side Effects
animal.
 Depression: Antihistamines can cause significant CNS
depression (sedation, ataxia).
Route of Administration
CNS excitement: Large doses may cause CNS stimula-
All NSAIDs are available in oral tablet form. Some newer
 ss n dq ss san  
 medication is also available in injectable form.
vulsions.
Anticholinergic side effects: As stated previously, anti-
Side Effects
● Gastric ulceration: All NSAIDs can cause gastric ulcer.
histamines can block the parasympathetic nervous sys-
tem, producing side effects of dry mouth, tachycardia,
 ation, producing vomiting and diarrhea. Often it is rec-
and possibly constipation.
decrease the chance of ulceration.
Kidney toxicity (nephrotoxicity): At higher doses (toxic
Drug Interactions
levels), NSAIDs can produce kidney damage. This con-
CNS depressants: The CNS depressant effects of anti-
cern is much more common if a patient has had an over-
histamines may add to that of any other class of CNS de-
dose of medication, is given a potent over-the-counter
pressants (e.g., anesthetics, tranquilizers, narcotic anal-
drug (i.e., Naprosyn), or has a significant underlying kid-
gesics, sedatives).
ney disease.
 Atropine/glycopyrrolate: Anticholinergic side effects
 Liver disease: Rarely, in some cases some prescription
(ileus, tachycardia, pupil dilation) of antihistamines
NSAIDs can affect liver function.
 could add to those produced by atropine and glycopyrro-
late (see Chapter 29).
Contraindications
The following animals should not take a NSAID.
Anti-Inflammatory Medications
This classification of drugs belongs to steroidal and non-
 Animals with gastrointestinal ulcers.
steroidal medication (NSAID) that is used to decrease
Animals with kidney and/or liver disease.
whole-body inflammation, pain, and swelling. These med-
Animals on steroids, because this greatly increases the
 g   n-s g  aq  s
chance of gastrointestinal ulceration (see Figure 26.1).
long-term disease (i.e., arthritis).
Cats, because they are extremely sensitive to most of
these drugs. Their livers are unable to break down the
drug, and the drug can cause severe side effects. Some
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Medications (NSAIDs)
NSAIDS are now used with caution by veterinarians.
Function
This group of drugs reduces pain and inflammation in
the body caused by trauma, fever, wear and tear, and athletic
injury. By decreasing inflammation, the body reduces its
response to white blood cells and the animal has less pain.
Form of Drug
Prescription drugs include
 carprofen (Rimadyl),
meloxicam (Metacam),
deracoxib (Deramaxx),
etodolac (Etogesic), and
 phenylbutazone (Bute).
 Over-the-counter drugs are very potent and are generally
 not recommended in dogs, and NEVER in cats. These drugs
should only be prescribed by the veterinarian.
Over-the-counter drugs occasionally prescribed by vet-
Figure 26.1. Image of an intestinal perforation caused by con-
erinarians for canines include
current use of steroid and NSAID medication.
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Drug Interactions
● An example of normal dosing regimes is 1 tab 2X/day for
Use of these drugs with other NSAIDs or steroidal anti-
x days, then 1 tab 1 X/day for x days, then 1 tab EOD.
inflammatory agents may lead to additive toxic effects in the
 Once steroids are given, the animal's body begins to slow
gastrointestinal system.
normal production of its steroid, cortisol.
sond esnd on puoq Aii a eun snp ao
Cortisol is used to help produce sugar from the break-
(e.g., sulfonamides, digoxin) may be displaced if used si-
down of fats and proteins.
multaneously with a NSAID.
Similar to an Addisonian reaction (see Chapter 17), if
The diuretic effects of furosemide (Lasix) may depend, in
oral corticosteroids are withdrawn too abruptly, the ani-
part, on the generation of vasodilatory prostaglandins.
mal's body does not have time to adjust and the animal
NSAIDs decrease prostaglandin production and may dimin-
can become weak, lethargic, collapse, have poor pulse,
ish the diuretic action of Lasix. Furthermore, concurrent di-
 and have vomiting and diarrhea.
uretic therapy may lead to volume depletion and enhance-
ment of the nephrotoxicity of carprofen.
Side Effects
Steroidal medication has both short- and long-termm side
Steroidal Medication
effects.
This family of drugs is used for its anti-inflarmmatory ef-
 Short-term side effects occur as the pet is exposed to in-
fects, immunosuppression, shock, and emergency. Each ef-
creased amounts of the medication. These conditions usually
fect is dose dependent, requiring increasing dosage as the
subside as the patient is withdrawn from medication. These
side effects are
nosuppression to emergency stabilization. The goal of each
dose level is as follows.
 polyuria/polydipsia (increased thirst/urination),
?
 increased appetite,
●Anti-inflammatory doses: At lower doses these drugs
changes in behavior,
 panting, and
decrease white blood cell activity that responds to infec-
vomiting/diarrhea (gastric ulceration).
tion and inflammation. These steroids reduce the body's
response to inflammation, hence reducing pain (i.e.,
Long-term side effects are systemic conditions that occur
arthritis, back pain).
as the pet is exposed to corticosteroids over long periods of
● Immunosuppression: At higher doses these drugs serve
time (i.e., months to years). These conditions can produce
to slow or completely suppress the white blood cell re-
 long-term disease that may require hospitalization and long.
sponse to the body, causing an immunosuppression.
Animals are more likely to become secondarily infected
term care.
because the white blood cells and the immune system have
Muscle breakdown (long term)
decreased function. This dose level is used for lymphoma
Secondary infection
(certain forms), immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, or in
Liver disease
conjunction with specific treatment protocols in certain
Hyperadrenocorticism (see Chapter 17)
types of cancer.
● Shock doses: Although potentially controversial, in case
Contraindications
of severe shock (anaphylactic and other forms), a short-
 Corticosteroids can produce serious and life-threatening
term steroid at an extremely high dose can be given. It is
side effects if given to patients with underlying conditions or
thought to help stabilize the body from shock by increas-
disease. Some concerns are listed here:
ing blood sugar supplies, stabilizing and protecting the
cell membrane, and maintaining blood pressure.
 Pregnant animals: In most species, systemic cortico-
steroids can induce labor and produce abortion. Care
Form of Drugs
should be taken, even with topical steroidal medications,
 Prednisone (Solu-Delta-Cortef)
-ss ynoua aa u suopa asanjo aos asn
Dexamethasone (dexamethasone SP)
temic absorption to induce premature labor.
Triamcinolone (Vetalog)
● Congestive heart failure: Corticosteroids initiates a
● Methyl prednisone (Depo-Medrol)
medullary wash out within the kidneys, reducing their
ability to reabsorb water from the urine (see Chapter 13).
Routes of Administration
These effects increase water consumption and urine out-
●  Most steroidal medications come in injectable, oral, and
put. Secondary to polydipsia, patients with congestive
topical forms. Care should be taken to ensure medication
 dn pq o uan uo ay pu asas ia
is safe to administer intravenously.
within the lung field, producing pulmonary edema.
The use of oral corticosteroids must be slowly tapered,
 Hepatic disease: Care should be taken when using corti-
not stopped quickly.
costeroids in patients with certain forms of liver disease.
Chapter 26: Pharmacology
387
Over the long term, steroidal medication can produce
chronic topical application. This may disappear with con-
chronic damage to hepatocytes.
tinued use and is readily reversed by discontinuing
 Animals with existing infection: As stated previously,
DMSO application.
    ss o s sn
Halitosis: The oysterlike odor on the breath may be
munosuppression, which can worsen a preexisting in-
noted.
fection.
● Animals on concurrent NSAIDs: As discussed previ-
Contraindications
ously, concurrent use of corticosteroids and steroidal
Caution must be exercised to prevent inadvertent contami-
medication can produce additive effects of gastrointesti-
nation of DMSO with other drugs or toxins whose absorp-
nal ulceration and possible perforation.
tion into the systemic circulation may be facilitated by
DMSO.
Drug Interactions
 Use in pregnant animals is questionable because DMSO
 Phenobarbital induces the rate of hepatic metabolism,
exerts teratogenic effects in laboratory animals.
which can increase the rate of corticosteroid elimination.
Concurrent administration with NSAIDs (aspirin,
Drug Interactions
carprofen, deracoxib) may increase the likelihood of de-
DMSO is a cholinesterase inhibitor. It can potentiate the ef-
veloping gastrointestinal ulceration.
fects of other drugs (organophosphate and carbamate insec-
 Corticosteroids increase blood sugar, increasing require-
ticides, neuromuscular blocking agents such as succinyl-
ments for insulin in the diabetic animals.
choline), which also inhibit cholinesterase.
Corticosteroids can attenuate the immunologic response
to vaccines.
Glucosamine
 Cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, estrogens, mitotane, 0r
 For the management of severe osteoarthritic disease (trau-
erythromycin can increase corticosteroids′ effect if given
matic or degenerative in origin) in dogs, these drugs can be
concurrently.
used in conjunction with NSAIDs or corticosteroids. Gluco-
samine is a complex molecule of high molecular weight.
Miscellaneous Anti-Inflammatory Agents
Chemically, it is a sulfated polysaccharide similar to that
This group of medications is commonly used with NSAIDs
found endogenously in cartilaginous tissues. Used for the
and corticosteroids to decrease inflammatory response, dis-
management of osteoarthritic disease, these drugs are be
 able chronic pain pathways in the spinal cord, and help in-
lieved to have a number of effects that may lead to a restora-
crease joint movement and protect hyaline cartilage.
tion of damaged cartilage. They inhibit the synthesis of in-
flammatory prostaglandins and counteract the adverse
Dimethyl Sulfoxide
effects of catabolic enzymes released in the arthritic joint. It
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is an organic solvent with nu-
may stimulate the production of endogenous hyaluronic
merous pharmacological actions. It is used primarily as an
acid, which leads to an increased viscosity and cushioning of
anti-inflammatory agent, particularly to reduce acute soft
the joint fluid. Glycosaminoglycans are components of pro-
tissue swelling associated with trauma. Among other effects,
 teoglycans, which provide structural integrity to cartilage.
 DMSO is a free radical scavenger, which accounts for its po-
tent anti-inflammatory action. Anti-inflammatory effects
Form of the Drug
have been reported in musculoskeletal injuries, CNS inflam-
Glucosamine is available in an injectable liquid (Adequan)
matory processes, and CNS trauma.
or in an oral tablet combined with chondroitin (i.e.,
Cosequin).
Form of the Drug
The drug comes in a liquid solvent, an otic preparation (syn-
Route of Administration
optic), and an oral powder, methylsulfonylmethane (MSM).
The injectable form is meant to be given intramuscularly;
the tablets are given orally.
Routes of Administration
 DMSO is meant for topical, otic, and oral administration.
Side Effects
 Care should be taken to wear gloves when administering this
The following side effects can be observed.
 drug topically. This drug is absorbed readily and can pro-
duce similar side effects in the administrator.
 Pain at injection site: There may be transient pain at the
intramuscular injection site.
Side Effects
 Hypersensitivity: Repeated administrations may pro-
There are some common observable side effects.
voke hypersensitivity reactions.
Gastrointestinal upset: Occasionally vomiting and
Localized dermatological reactions: Reddening, itch-
diarrhea can be observed with administration of glu-
ing, blister formation, and dry skin may occur with
cosamine.
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Precautions
once per month. It is active against the third- and fourth-
Glucosamine is not for use in animals that have exhibited
stage larvae.
hypersensitivity to it.
Form of Drug
Drug Interactions
Ivermectin and similar drugs come in oral tablets and chews
 No interactions have been reported.
for monthly administration. An injectable and oral solution
is also available. Common forms of ivermectin are
Tramadol
Tramadol is an opiate agonist for the treatment of pain or
Heartgard,
cough in the dog.
 Interceptor, and
Ivomec.
Form of the Drug
 Tramadol is available in tablet form.
Route of Administration
Ivermectin/avermectin are administered orally or are in-
Route of Administration
 jected subcutaneously.
Tramadol is administered orally.
Side Effects
Side Effects
Ivermectin is an extremely safe drug under most circum-
Tramadol appears to be well tolerated by dogs. However, it 
stances due to its restriction from the CNS in mammalian
can produce the following side effects:
species.
+
CNS excitement: Agitation, anxiety, tremor, and dizziness.
CNS depressant effect: Lethargy, ataxia, tremors pro-
● Gastrointestinal upset: Anorexia, vomiting, constipa-
 gressing and prolonged (days to weeks), and coma may
tion or diarrhea.
●Chemical dependence (low risk): Pets have been taking
occur with extremely high dosages or if given to breeds
(e.g., collies and shelties) that apparently accumulate
tramadol long term should be withdrawn slowly from the
more of the drug in the CNS.
drug.
 Anaphylaxis: When used as a microfilaricide to kill lar-
val heartworms in the treatment of heartworm disease, an
Precautions
● Opioid sensitivity: Tramadol should not be used in pa-
anaphylactic shocklike effect may occur due to the mas-
sive death of the parasite. It is recommended that animals
tients that have shown allergic or hypersensitive reaction
be observed for adverse effects for 12-24 hours after the
to other opioid drugs.
● CNS disease: Tramadol should be used with caution in
drug is used in this manner.
patients with underlying CNS disease.
Geriatric/debilitated patients: Due to its potential for
Precautions/Contraindications
+
 Breed specificity: Dosages in excess of those used for
CNS depression, tramadol should be used with caution in
debilitated or older animals.
collie-type dogs.
 Hepatic/renal disease: Due to how it is metabolized, tra-
 Neonates: The drug is not recommended for dogs and
madol should be used with caution in patients with un-
cats less than 6 weeks of age.
derlying liver or kidney disease.
 Patients with heartworm disease: Animals should be
Drug Interactions
checked for an existing heartworm infection prior to ini-
tiating ivermectin preventive therapy.
 Due to its affects on the CNS, tramadol should be used with
caution with other drugs that affect neurochemical levels
Drug Interactions
(i.e., serotonin) within the CNS. Examples of these drugs are
Although no interactions are commonly reported, the possi-
●SAM-E and
ble additive CNS depressant effect of ivermectin and other
●selegine (Anipryl).
 drugs that affect mammalian CNS should be noted. Drugs
 that would fall into this class are as follows:
Antiparasitic Agents
 Although types of antiparasitic medications can vary from
Barbiturates: morphine, oxymorphine
hospital to hospital, the main prescription drugs will be cov-
 Benzodiazepine: Valium, Telazol
ered here.
 Tranquilizers: acepromazine
Ivermectin/Avermectin
Pyrantel Pamoate
 Ivermectin is approved for use in dogs and cats as a heart-
Pyrantel pamoate is used for the removal of ascarids (Toxo-
worm (Dirofilaria immitis) preventive; it is administered
cara canis, Toxascaris leonina) and hookworms (Ancylo-
Chapter 26: Pharmacology
389
stoma caninum, Uncinaria stenocephala) in dogs and pup-
Drug Interactions
pies. Although not approved for use in cats, it has effective-
 No drug interactions are reported in small animals.
ness against similar parasites in this species.
Praziguantel
Form of Drug
 Praziquantel is approved for the removal and control of the 
Pyrantel comes in a liquid suspension and a tablet form
following tapeworms in dogs:
(Nemex).
Diplydium caninum
Teania pisiformis
Route of Administration
 Pyrantel is administered orally.
Echinococcus granulosus
Echinococcus multiocularis
Side Effects
 In cats, praziquantel is recommended for the removal and
Although pyrantel is extremely safe, occasionally animals 
 may experience vomiting following pyrantel administration.
control of
Taenia taeniaeformis, and
Complications
Diplydium caninum.
Caution must be employed if using pyrantel in sick or debil-
itated animals.
Because the worms are likely to be digested in the gas-
trointestinal tract of the host, there may be no evidence of
Drug Interactions
 drug efficacy by seeing worms in the feces.
Pyrantel should not be administered simultaneously with
other antiparasitic drugs that also affect the acetylcholine-
Form of Drug
type receptors in the parasite, and, potentially, in the host;
The drug is available in tablet or injectable form as Droncit.
for example,
Route of Administration
levamisole,
The drug is administered in the oral or injectable form. The
piperazine,
 injectable form is typically given by subcutaneous or intra-
 organophosphates, and
muscular route.
●diethylcarbamazine.
Precautions
Fendbendazole
 There are no known contraindications for the use of prazi-
 Fenbendazole is approved for the control and removal of as-
quantel in dogs and cats, including breeding or pregnant an-
carids (Toxocara canis, Toxascaris leonina), hookworms
imals. The drug is not intended for puppies less than 4 weeks
(Ancylostoma caninum, Uncinaria stenocephala), whip-
 of age or kittens less than 6 weeks of age.
mis) in dogs. Extra-label use includes the removal of
Side Effects
Capillaria, Filaroides, Paragonimus, and Giardia in dogs
 Pain: Pain at the site of injection is a common side effect.
and for the treatment of gastrointestinal and lungworm
Gastrointestinal side effects: Vomiting, anorexia, diar-
(Aelurostrongylus, Capillaria) infections in cats.
rhea, excessive salivation may occur.
 Mild CNS signs: Drowsiness, lethargy, mild ataxia may
Form of Drug
occur with the oral or parenteral preparation.
The drug is available in granules or in powder form as
Panacur.
Drug Interactions
 No drug interactions have been reported.
Route of Administration
 The drug is administered orally.
Sulfadimethoxine
Sulfadimethoxine is used for the treatment of coccidiosis
Precautions
where it exerts a coccidiostatic action.
There are no known contraindications, although animals
with extensive hepatic disease may be in greater jeopardy of
Form of Drug
adverse effects.
Sulfadimethoxine (ALBON) comes in a tablet and liquid
suspens1on
Side Effects
Minor gastrointestinal upsets (vomiting) may occur infre-
Route of Administration
quently.
The drug is administered orally.
390
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Contraindications
drugs’ antimicrobial action due to competition at a similar
● Renal/hepatic disease: Administration of sulfadimeth-
site of action in microbial protein synthesis.
oxine to animals with extensive liver or kidney disease
should be done carefully.
Gastrointestinal Drugs
Large breed dogs: Large breed dogs (Dobermans, rot-
These categories of drugs focus on reducing stomach acid-
teweilers) have demonstrated a high incidence of hyper-
ity, which decreases nausea, blocking vomiting and lining
sensitivity reactions with the sulfonamides. Some condi-
and protecting the intestinal mucosa in case of gastrointesti-
tions noted are
nal ulceration.
- polyarthritis,
hemolytic anemia, and
Decreased Acid Producers
 hepatic disorders.
These drugs are used for the prevention and management of
Ocular disorders: Animals with ocular disorders should
vomiting and other clinical signs associated with gastroduo-
also be treated with caution.
 denal hyperacidity states. These may be related to infectious,
 Pregnant animals: Teratogenesis is noted with animals
drug (corticosteroids, NSAIDs), stress, or concurrent disease
in early pregnancy treated with sulfa drugs.
(e.g., uremia, mast cell tumors) phenomena. It exerts a pro-
phylactic and curative effect in gastric and duodenal ulcers.
Side Effects
● Urinary tract: Sulfonamides and its metabolites tend to
Form of the Drug
 precipitate in the urine, causing crystalluria (especially if
 In general, all medications are available as over-the-counter
the urine is acidic), although this is generally less promi-
tablet medication. There is also an injectable form. Ex-
nent with sulfadimethoxine.
amples of these drugs are
Ocular: Sulfa drugs have been shown to cause kerato-
conjunctivitis sicca (dry eye).
cimetidine (Tagamet),
famotidine (Pepcid), and
Drug Interactions
ranitidine (Xantac).
Because sulfadimethoxine and other sulfa drugs are exten-
sively bound to plasma proteins, concurrent use with other
Route of Administration
 plasma protein-bound drugs (e.g., NSAIDs) may affect the
 Tablet form is given orally. The injectable form can be given
bioavailability by displacement from the binding sites.
subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or intravenously.
Tylosin Tartrate
Precautions
Tylosin is used for the elimination of cryptosporidium, a mi-
 Renal disease: Since most acid blockers are eliminated
croscopic parasite producing profuse diarrhea. Furthermore,
by direct renal excretion, dosage adjustments may be
tylosin can be used for the management of chronic large bowel
needed with patients suffering from renal disease.
diarrhea/colitis. Modulation of intestinal flora in the large
Hepatic disease: Hepatic disease may also impair elimi-
bowel (e.g., anaerobes) by tylosin contributes to this effect.
 nation, especially with orally administered cimetidine.
Form of the Drug
Side Effects
 Tylosin comes in a powder form as Tylan powder.
 Gastrointestinal signs (anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea)
may be observed during drug therapy, but these may be
Route of Administration
related to the gastrointestinal diseases being treated.
Tylosin is administered orally.
 Massive overdoses (especially with IV administration)
may lead to cardiovascular toxicity with hypotension,
Precautions
tachycardia, and syncope.
 Because tylosin is eliminated in the bile, decreasing the dosage
in animals with extensive hepatic disease is recommended.
Drug Interactions
 Carafate: Although controversial, some clinicians believe
Side Effects
that concurrent use with acid blockers may impair the abil-
Gastrointestinal side effects (vomiting, anorexia, and diar
ity of Carafate to disperse and protect the gastric mucosa.
rhea) may accompany oral administration of tylosin. This
It is recommended that administration of Carafate and acid
may be attributable to alterations in bowel flora or to direct
blockers be staggered, with a 2-hour separation.
irritation of the gut mucosa.
 Medication requiring acidic conditions for absorp-
tion: Concurrent administration with drugs that require
Drug Interactions
acidic conditions in the gut for optimum absorption (e.g..
Lincosamide antibiotics (clindamycin, lincomycin) and ty-
ketoconazole) may diminish the efficacy of the latter un-
less they are staggered as above.
Chapter 26: Pharmacology
391
Medication detoxified by the liver: Some acid blockers,
found than in dogs. The drug is especially valuable in cases
such as cimetidine, have been documented to inhibit the
where there is a centrally mediated component to the vomit-
biotransformation and elimination of drugs from the liver
ing due to circulating endogenous or exogenous toxins.
or alter hepatic blood flow, potentially increasing the tox-
Furthermore, chlorpromazine may be used prophylactically
icity of these agents. Examples of these drugs are
to inhibit vomiting induction by drugs (i.e., chemotherapeu-
theophylline,
tic agents).
 metronidazole,
 propranolol, and
Form of the Drug
lidocaine.
Chlorpromazine is available as an oral suspension, tablet,
and timed-released capsule. It is also available as an in-
Gastrointestinal Protectants
jectable solution.
Sucrafate
 Sucrafate has a nonspecific beneficial effect in the manage-
Route of Administration
ment of gastrointestinal ulcers, ulcers related to infections,
Chlorpromazine is generally used as an injectable drug for
drugs (e.g., corticosteroids, NSAIDs), stress or concurrent
subcutaneous, intramuscular, and intravenous administra-
 disease (uremia, mast cell tumor). It is particularly useful in
tion. The oral forms are given by mouth.
counteracting the gastric ulceration associated with NSAID
therapy. It exerts a prophylactic effect in gastric and duode-
Side Effects
 sa d sso  p  
● Sedation: Excessive amounts of chlorpromazine may
 cause profound CNS depression and hypotension, espe-
Form of Drug
cially in debilitated or dehydrated animals that have suf-
Sucrafate (Carafate) comes in an oral tablet form or liquid
fered prolonged emesis.
suspension.
 Parasympathetic nervous system effects: These in-
 clude xerostormia (dry mouth), pupillary dilation, gut hy-
Route of Administration
pomotility (ileus), and tachycardia.
Sucrafate is administered orally.
 CNS effects: Phenothiazine tranquilizers can produce
tremors, muscle rigidity, and spasms.
Precautions
 Dehydrated animals or animals with a history of constipa-
Drug Interactions
tion may be more vulnerable to the constipating side effects
●Other sedatives or analgesics: Chlorpromazine may ac-
of sucrafate.
centuate the CNS depression produced by virtually any
other type of drug that is capable of producing this action
Side Effects
(injectable and inhalation anesthetics, butyrophenone and 
 Because sucrafate is not absorbed systemically, it generally
benzodiazepine tranquilizers, sedatives, narcotic anal-
is an innocuous substance. Excessive amounts of sucrafate
gesics, etc.).
may produce constipation.
Atropine/glycopyrrolate: The activity of chlorpro-
mazine could add to that of the antiparasympathetic ef-
Drug Interactions
fects of these drugs, producing more significant tachy-
Sucrafate may bind to simultaneously administered oral
cardia, ileus, and pupil dilation.
drugs and prevent their systemic bioavailability. To help pre-
 Antihistamines: Chlorpromazine can enhance the seda-
vent this occurrence, administration of Carafate should be
tive effects of antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine
given 2 hours before the administration of any other medica-
(Benadryl) and hydroxyzine (Atarax).
tion. Examples of these medications are as follows.
Chloramphenical/fluoroquinolone: These drugs slow
hepatic biotransformation, which is instrumental in
Tetracyclines: Tetracycline, oxytetracycline, doxycy
chlorpromazine elimination and can therefore enhance
cline
the duration/effect of chlorpromazine.
+
 Fluoroquinolones: Enrofloxacin (Baytril), ciprofloxacin
(Cipro), marbofloxacin (Zeniquin)
Precautions
Decreased acid producers: Cimetidine (Tagamet), rani-
●Cardiac: Chlorpromazine can lead to profound hypoten-
tidine (Xantac), famotidine (Pepcid)
sion; caution should be used in animals with cardiovascu-
●Cardiac drugs: Digoxin (Lanoxin)
lar disease.
 Seizure patients: Animals with a history of seizures may
Antiemetic Medication
have this condition worsened by chlorpromazine.
Chlorpromazine
Hepatic disease: Animals with hepatic disease have de-
 Chlorpromazine is used for the management of vomiting in
creased ability to eliminate this drug, causing potential
 dogs and cats. The antiemetic action in cats may be less pro-
toxicity.
392
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Metoclopramide
inflammatory fluid. In emergency settings, this drug is used
Metoclopramide is used for the management of severe eme-
to help reduce fluid accumulation within the lung fields
sis (e.g., that is associated with cancer chemotherapy or
(pulmonary edema) associated with congestive heart failure,
other circulating toxins) or nausea and vomiting associated
 drowning, and electrical injury.
with gastroesophageal reflux, gastric ulceration, or delayed
gastric emptying. Furthermore, the drug can be used as a
Form of the Drug
motility modifier, which may have value in preventing gas-
Furosemide (Lasix) is available in tablet and syrup form, as
troesophageal reflux (increased tone of the lower esophageal
well as in an injectable solution.
  dsa 'nl o   (
ing the upper small intestine.
Route of Administration
 Furosemide (Lasix) can be given orally or by subcutaneous,
Form of the Drug
 intramuscular, or intravenous injection.
Metoclopramide (Reglan) is available in tablet, liquid sus-
 pension, and injectable form.
Precautions
Severe renal disease: Therapy with Lasix should be
Route of Administration
discontinued in cases of progressive renal disease with
The tablet and suspension are for oral administration. The
increasing azotemia and lack of urine production
injectable medication can be given subcutaneously, intra-
(anuria).
muscularly, intravenously, or in fluids in a constant rate in-
 Hepatic disease: Animals with hepatic disease may have
fusion medication.
the condition exacerbated by the fluid/electrolyte shifts
caused by the diuretic and must be closely monitored.
Precautions
 Diabetes: Diabetic patients should be monitored closely
● Seizure disorders: Metoclopramide is not to be used in
 patients with seizure disorders. Metoclopramide may ag-
because furosemide has a mild tendency to cause hyper-
glycemia.
gravate seizure activity.
 Sulfa antibiotic sensitivity: Individuals sensitized to
Gastrointestinal obstruction: Reglan is contraindicated
sulfonamides may respond adversely to furosemide due
in obstructive disease of the gastrointestinal tract.
to its sulfalike chemical structure.
Side Effects
Side Effects
● Neurologic: Metoclopramide may produce dose-dependent
CNS side effects (nervousness, restlessness, and tremors).
Excessive increased urinary output (diuresis) produced by
 Lasix may lead to electrolyte wasting and deficiency (e.g.,
Gastrointestinal: Excessive drug doses may cause colic,
 diarrhea, or constipation
hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypochloremia, etc.) and dehy-
 dration, producing signs of
Drug Interactions
lethargy,
Specific drugs can block the gastrointestinal stimulatory ef-
fect of metoclopramide. These drugs are as follows.
gastrointestinal disturbances,
tachycardia, and
Anticholinergic drugs: Atropine, glycopyrrolate
anorexia.
Opioid narcotic analgesics: Morphine, oxymorphine
Antihistamines: Diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
Drug Interactions
Tranquilizers: Certain tranquilizers may potentiate the
 Drugs eliminated by renal excretion: Concurrent ad-
adverse CNS effects of metoclopramide. Examples of
 a   a s a 
these drugs are
(e.g., digoxin, potassium bromide) could lead to more
 phenothiazine tranquilizers: Acepromazine
rapid elimination of these drugs and diminished pharma-
 butyrophenone tranquilizers: butorphanol (Torbutrol),
cological effect.
pue
 Aspirin: Because aspirin and Lasix are excreted by sim-
 bupronorphine (Buprenex).
ilar mechanisms, aspirin levels may be increased when
used in conjunction with furosemide.
Emergency Drugs
Digoxin: Furosemide induces potassium loss, which may
 This category of drugs is used in emergency situations to
increase the toxicity of concurrently administered digi-
stabilize patients in critical condition. Although not all med-
talis (digoxin) cardiac medication.
ications are listed, the basic emergency drugs are discussed.
 Corticosteroids: Both steroidal medication (i.e., pred-
nisone) and Lasix produce profound potassium loss.
Furosemide
Furosemide is used for the treatment of ascites, hydrothorax,
additive effect, which could produce a serious hypo-
 pulmonary edema, or any pathological accumulation of non-
kalemia.
Chapter 26: Pharmacology
393
Atropine
●Digoxin's (digitoxin) effect of slowing the heart rate and
Atropine blocks a section of the CNS (i.e., parasympathetic
decreasing arrhythmia can be compromised by concur-
nervous system) that regulates normal body function to slow
rent atropine administration.
heart rate, produce intestinal peristalsis, produce bronchial
secretion, and constrict the iris and other body functions.
Atropine can slow the effects of medications (motility
 The principal use of atropine is as a preanesthetic agent to
 modifiers) that stimulate peristalsis (contraction of the intes
decrease salivary and bronchial secretions and prevent po-
tine) and urinary bladder contraction. Examples of these
tential bradycardia associated with anesthesia. It is an anti-
drugs are
dote in cases of overdosage with drugs or pesticides that
cause excessive CNS stimulation. It is also used in the man-
cisapride (Propulsid),
agement of specific cardiac arrhythmias (i.e., heart block)
metoclopramide (Reglan), and
 and is used as an ophthalmologic agent for dilation of the
 bethanechol (Urecholine).
iris in ocular disease.
Epinephrine
Form of the Drug
 Epinephrine is indicated in the following situations.
Atropine is available in an injectable solution and oph-
thalmic eye drop and solution.
Cardiac resuscitation: Epinephrine is used in conjunc-
 s a  s s o  
Route of Administration
electrical stimulation in cardiac arrest or asystole.
Injectable atropine can be administered subcutaneously,
 Intravenous, intratracheal, or direct intracardiac adminis-
intramuscularly, intravenously, and intratracheally. The
 as on pas aq  adaa  un
contraction and maintain heart rate and cardiac output.
the eye.
 Anaphylactic shock: Epinephrine is extremely effective
and often lifesaving in treatment of acute anaphylactic
Precautions
shock due to the reversal of hypotension and broncho-
 Glaucoma: Both injectable and ophthalmic forms of at-
 constriction. Epinephrine provides immediate relief
ropine produce iris dilation that can decrease the excretion
from bronchial asthma through the potent bronchodila-
of aqueous humor from the eye. In patients with glau-
tory action.
coma, this can elevate ocular pressure (see Chapter 20).
● Hemostasis: Local application (1:100,000 to 1:20,000
 Tachycardia: Patients with underlying cardiac arrhyth-
      
mias can produce more abnormal heart rhythms due to
-ou g psn aq  uau au u Aa pas 
stasis from small vessels.
tration.
Ieus: Patients suffering from gastrointestinal hypomotil-
Form of the Drug
ity disorders may be worsened by atropine
 Epinephrine is available in an injectable solution.
Renal/hepatic disease: Animals with kidney or liver
 disease may show signs of atropine accumulation and
Route of Administration
toxicity.
Injectable epinephrine can be administered subcutaneously,
intramuscularly, intravenously, intracardially, and intertra-
Side Effects
cheally.
 Atropine can produce gastrointestinal hypomotility
(ileus), causing constipation or colic.
Precautions
 Atropine can produce iris dilation, which can make the
● Cardiac arrhythmias: Since epinephrine may promote
patient sensitive to light (photophobic).
the development of cardiac arrhythmias, extreme caution
With excessive amounts, atropine can cause CNS stimu-
must be employed in patients with hypoxia-induced or
 lation that could cause seizures.
other cardiac arrhythmias.
 Due to atropine's affects on the heart, excessive use may
 Hyperthyroidism: Concurrent treatment with hyper-
 provoke cardiac arrhythmias and decrease cardiac output.
thyroid also increases the likelihood of arrhythmia in-
duction.
Drug Interactions
Due to the tachycardial effects of atropine on the heart, spe-
Side Effects
cific cardiac medications can be affected.
● Cardiac arrhythmia: Epinephrine may promote the
development of tachycardia and fatal ventricular ar-
 Antiarrhythmic medication such as quinidine or pro-
rhythmias.
cainamide can have additive effects on the tachycardia
 Hypertension: Hypertensive crises occur from epineph-
produced by atropine.
rine overdosage.
394
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Drug Interactions
 Hyperthyroid/Addisonian patients: It should not be
Certain drugs and hormone therapies can make patients
used in patients with untreated Addison's disease and hy-
more prone to epinephrine's effects to produce cardiac ar-
perthyroidism.
rhythmias. Some of these drugs are
Form of Drug
thyroid hormone,
Try to avoid switching brands of thyroxine once animals are
digitoxin (digoxin), and
established on a dosage regime. Commonly, there are differ-
+Halothane anesthetics.
ences in potency and bioavailability between different
sources.
Dextrose 50% Solution
Dextrose 50% solution is used to correct states of carbohy-
Side Effects
drate and energy insufficiency associated with hypo-
 Excessive dosages may cause signs of hyperthyroidism,
glycemia in various disease states.
which can produce
Form of the Drug
CNS stimulation/hyperactivity,
The drug is available commonly.
tachycardia,
 hyperthermia,
Route of Administration
 polyuria,
The drug can be given orally or diluted with sterile water to
polydipsia,
be given intravenously (25% solution) or in fluids as a con-
 increased appetite (polyphagia), and
tinuous rate infusion drug (see Chapters 27 and 30).
alopecia.
Precautions/Contraindications
Drug Interactions
Dextrose should never be administered subcutaneously or
 Epinephrine: Thyroxine potentiates the effects of epi-
intramuscularly because it can be very irritating and can
nephrine.
cause tissue damage and necrosis.
Digitoxin: Thyroxine inhibits the cardiovascular potency
of digoxin.
Side Effects
 Insulin: Thyroxine exerts anti-insulin effects and may in-
Excessive amounts may lead to fluid overload with resultant
clinical signs such as dyspnea and cardiovascular dysfunction.
 Ketamine: Cardiovascular effects of ketamine are in-
Drug Interactions
creased in the presence of thyroxine.
 Anticonvulsants: Drugs, such as phenobarbital, de-
No drug interactions have been reported.
crease thyroxine levels, possibly by increasing the rate of
hepatic metabolism and clearance.
Miscellaneous Drugs
This category of drugs outlines commonly used medications 
Phenobarbital
that are prescribed in general practice every day.
Phenobarbital is used orally for the long-term control of
epilepsy and seizures in dogs and cats. Combination therapy
Levothyroxine Sodium/L-Thyroxine Sodium
with phenobarbital and other antiseizure medications (e.g.,
Levothyroxine sodium/L-thyroxine sodium is used for the
potassium bromide) is commonly employed for long-term
treatment of hypothyroidism, where life-long therapy with
seizure control. Administered intravenously, it may be used
the hormone is required. Reversal of clinical signs of hy-
to abolish acute seizures (e.g., cluster seizures).
pothyroidism may take weeks (lethargy, bradycardia, and
 other cardiovascular signs) to months (e.g., skin and hair
Form of the Drug
coat changes).
Phenobarbital is available in pill form, as an oral elixir, or as
Form of the Drug
 an injectable solution.
Thyroxine comes in tablet form as Soloxine, L-thyroxine,
Thyrotabs, and many other names.
Route of Administration
 Phenobarbital can be given orally or intravenously.
Route of Administration
Thyroxine is administered orally.
Precautions/Contraindications
 Cardiovascular disease: Animals with preexisting com-
Precautions/Contraindications
promise of respiratory or cardiovascular function should
Heart disease/hypertension: Thyroxine should be used with
be considered more vulnerable to the depressant effects
caution in patients with hypertension and cardiac disease.
of barbiturates on these systems.
Chapter 26: Pharmacology
395
● Liver/kidney disease: Animals with hepatic or renal dis-
● Blood abnormalities: Anemia has been reported and
ease may have altered elimination of phenobarbital, in-
hematological parameters should be determined serially.
creasing the potential for phenobarbital side effects.
   ssr p 
Drug Interactions
and may lead to excessive CNS depression in the fetus.
As with all barbiturates, other drugs that have CNS de-
Injection site reaction: Administration of phenobarbital
pressant properties, such as anesthetics will add to the ex-
extravascularly can lead to severe tissue damage.
tent of CNS depression produced by phenobarbital.
Chemical dependence: A form of addiction may occur 
 Drugs that inhibit hepatic metabolism (e.g., chloram-
with chronic use, leading to an increased likelihood of se-
-qouad n uuis  (ioud
vere seizures if the drug is abruptly stopped.
induced CNS depression.
 y    a  s
Side Effects
lism (e.g., theophylline, metronidazole) could be elimi-
Side effects are dose dependent and can be as follows.
 nated more rapidly in animals on chronic phenobarbital
therapy.
Behavior changes: Animals may show behavioral
 changes (anxiety, agitation) at the start of therapy.
Systemic side effects: There may be polyuria, polydip
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of Understanding the
sia, and polyphagia.
Concepts of Disease and Treatment. The exercises can be
CNS depressants: Sedation and ataxia occur with exces-
done individually or as case rounds as they explore specific
sive amounts
topics in veterinary medicine that discuss clinical diagnos-
Cardiovascular side effects: Hypotension and de-
tics and treatment.
creased cardiac output are potential complications.
Hepatotoxicity: Long-term therapy may lead to liver
damage; serial monitoring of hepatic function is recom-
mended.
Chapter 27
Toxins and Poisons
Introduction
placed on a vitamin supplement. However, many homeo-
 pathic herbs (i.e., nightshade, St. John's wort, etc.) can pro-
This chapter will examine and discuss common toxic and
duce serious to toxic side effects.
poisonous substances that can affect most small animal pa-
tients. The goal of this chapter is to understand how toxins
Is the Pet on Any Over-the-Counter Medication?
can affect the animal, how to approach a history and initial
As with homeopathic medications, many owners will give
assessment on potential poisonings, and understand treat-
their pets over-the-counter medications without consulting the
ment options.
veterinarian. In discussing these types of medications with
 In approaching a potential intoxication, the patient should
 the client, the team member should be specific when listing
first be triaged (see Chapter 6), because many patients are in
the types of drugs of concerm. These drugs may include
shock. Once the patient is stable, a complete history should
be obtained (see Chapter 5). With concerms of intoxications,
aspirin,
the following specific questions should be asked (see also
ibuprofen,
Flowchart of Treating Toxicity at the end of this chapter).
 acetaminophen (i.e., Tylenol or aspirin-free medication),
尊
naproxen (Aleve),
Could the Patient Have Ingested Poison or Toxin?
 antihistamines, and
The hospital team member must be specific when asking
 cough medications.
this question and give examples of types of common drugs 
or poisons. Many clients will not consider that specific
Has There Been Green Vomitus or Blue-Colored Stool?
 agents (i.e., antifreeze, cleaning supplies, fertilizer, plant
Blue- or green-colored vomit or stool can be suggestive of
food, and other chemicals) may be a toxin or that their pet
specific toxins.
would even ingest the chemical.
 Patients with blue fecal contents may have ingested a
third-generation rodenticide. Many of these rat poisons have
Is Your Pet on any Medications?
        
Some patients have been on medications for years (i.e., phe-
   s   a on sp  ai so
nobarbital, digitoxin, thyroxine, insulin, etc.) that may now
 noticed 1-2 days earlier, before physical symptoms have
be causing toxicity. Furthermore, owners may be altering the
occurred.
schedule of drug administration or increasing the dose of
Often patients suffering from strychnine toxicity (i.e., g0-
medication without discussing these changes with the vet-
pher bait) will produce a dark green-tinged vomit. This eme-
erinarian.
sis should be obtained and held for the veterinarian because
strychnine levels can be detected in this fluid.
Could the Pet Have Ingested Human Medications?
Often clients will not consider that the pet may have gotten
into a family mermber's medication. Some clients feel that the
Seeking Help for the Poisoned Pet
Although some poisoning can occur as a chronic condition
not even consider the possibility of exposure. If there is any
(i.e., heavy metal toxicity), most intoxications produce acute
concern for ingestion of prescription medication, the client
severe syndrormes with potential life-threatening physical
should obtain the exact name of the medication, the dosage,
symptoms. Often the patient presents acutely ill without any
and the number of tablets the patient could have ingested.
chronic history of disease. Since toxins can affect multiple
body systems producing a variety of physical signs, initial as-
Is Your Pet on any Homeopathic Medications?
sessment should be done to evaluate the patient for instability
Some pet owners may administer homeopathic medications to
or shock (see Chapter 6). Any patient that presents in a life-
the patient without consulting a veterinarian. Because many
threatened status should be immediately brought to the veteri-
homeopathic drugs are considered neutroceuticals, many
narian's attention and stabilization begun (see Chapter 30).
clients administer these medications as if the patient is being
If a drug or poison is suspected by the owner, all infor-
397
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
mation on the type of drug or active agent, the amount in
Acetaminophen Toxicosis
gested, and the time it was ingested should be documented.
Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is a non-narcotic analgesic drug
If a toxin or poison (i.e., rose food, rat bait, etc.) is suspected,
with a very small margin of safety in animals, causing se-
the client should be instructed to bring in the packaging of
vere effects on the liver and blood.
 the product as well. These potential toxins will have a listing
of their active ingredients and often a contact phone number 
Etiology
from the corporate producer.
 In dogs, acetaminophen can affect the liver, causing an acute
There are tens of thousands of potential toxins that can
necrotic liver disease.
 affect a patient. When researching if a chemical or medica-
Cats are much more susceptible to acetaminophen intox-
tion is toxic to a patient, the following resources are avail-
ication. Acetaminophen changes hemoglobin, a chemical
able to most hospital teams:
within the red blood cell that is responsible for carrying oxy-
 gen to the tissue, to methoxyhemoglobin. This compound is
● Corporate contact information: On most household
unable to carry oxygen into the body, and the animal slowly
products there is a contact phone number for consumer
begins to suffocate.
information and emergencies. Most companies will have
Signalment
contact with their product. Some companies' information
Acetaminophen toxicosis can affect dogs and cats of any
 n   n  m p a 
age. There is no breed or sex predisposition.
specific information for animal consumption.
● Local poison control: Although an excellent and free
Toxic Dose Levels
service on most toxins and poisons, local poison control
Acetaminophen is the chemical toxin found in many human
numbers do not typically carry information on the effect
headache and pain-relieving medications. Although Tylenol
of toxins on the animal population. Although symptoms
is the brand name for acetaminophen, there are numerous
and treatments in humans can sometimes correlate to the
 products that contain acetaminophen, so please check labels
veterinary patient, often intoxications in animals can
carefully, especially on products labeled, aspirin free. It is
 s  s  n  n n o
ASPCA—University of Mlinois Poison Control: This
toms at much lower doses (see Table 27.1).
service is a database of thousands of toxins and medica-
tions that can affect the veterinary patient. The service of-
 Children's Tylenol contains 80 mg of acetaminophen.
fers the client or veterinarian direct access to a veterinary
 Regular-strength Tylenol contains 325 mg of acetaminophen.
 toxicologist who can aid the medical team in identifying
 Extra-strength Tylenol contains 500 mg of acetaminophen.
the toxin of most concerm, discuss physical signs and du-
ration of drug effects, and outline treatment protocols and
Onset of Physical Signs
prognosis. There is a fee for the initial consultation.
Physical signs occur shortly after ingestion.
(Phone number: 800-548-2423.)
Key Points in Medical History/Initial Assessment
Acetaminophen toxicity can produce severe organ and respi-
Just as physical symptoms can change dramatically de-
pending on the type of poison, clinical chemistry and blood
ratory disease. In some cases, despite all treatment options,
 populations can vary dramatically. If the toxin has been
the patient will succumb. Physical symptoms of acetamino-
identified, specific blood work may be recommended to
phen toxicosis are as follows.
 In dogs, symptoms are
evaluate the poison's effect on the body. If intoxication is 
suspected in a patient but the poison is unknown, complete
 blood work and urinalysis is generally recormmended.
vomiting,
depression (progressive),
 abdominal pain, and
Common Toxins and Poisons
dark-colored urine.
Although not all intoxications are mentioned below, the
In cats, onset of toxicosis is acute (1-2 hours). Symptoms are 
common poisonings are discussed with the main goal being
 to understand and be able to explain to the client what the in-
salivation,
not eating,
selves, and what can be the overall short- and long-term con-
vomiting.
cerns of each disease. Any discussion of overall diagnostic
brown tinge of gums/ears/white of eyes,
and treatment protocols should be discussed based on the
 dark chocolate-colored blood and urine, and
recommendations for the doctor. Please use the following
swelling of the face, paws, and forelimbs.
information as a basis for discussion and to educate the
client, but never to diagnose a patient.
Death can occur in 18-36 hours.
Chapter 27: Toxins and Poisons
399
Tabie 27.1.   Toxic dose of acetaminophen.
Tabfe 27.2.  Dose of theobromine in chocolate.
Cats
Dogs
Type of Chocolate
Level of Theobromine/Oz
Toxic dose 
 50 mg/kg
150 mg/kg
Milk Chocolate 
45 mg/oz
Unsweetened Chocolate
400 mg/oz
Table 27.3.
Theobromine toxicity per weight of animal.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of acetaminophen is largely based on history and
evidence of physical symptoms. However, in felines, a sig-
Unsweetened
Weight (kg)
Milk Chocolate
Baker's Chocolate
nificant symptom is brown coloration of the serum and
urine as hemoglobin is transformed into methoxyhemoglo-
5
11 ounces
1.25 ounces
10
22 ounces
2.5 ounces
bin. There can also be Heinz bodies noted in the red blood
20
44 ounces
5 ounces
Cells.
30
66 ounces
7.5 ounces
40
88 ounces
10 ounces
Treatment
50
110 ounces
12.5 ounces
 The goal of treatment depends on physical symptoms of the
patient. Overall guidelines for acetaminophen toxicity are as
follows.
 Induction of vomiting: If the animal has recently in-
Signalment
gested the acetaminophen, inducing vomiting may bring
Chocolate toxicosis can affect dogs and cats of any age.
up any undigested medication. However, due to the con-
There is no breed or sex predisposition.
cerns of a patient accidentally pushing emesis into the
lung field (aspiration), inducing vomiting should never
Toxic Dose Levels
be attempted if the patient is having seizures or cannot
Theobromine
swallow properly.
Symptoms occur when 100 mg/kg of theobromine is in-
Activated charcoal: Charcoal is an inert substance that
gested. The type of chocolate contains different levels of
helps absorb toxins left in the intestinal system. Activated
theobromine (see Table 27.2).
charcoal can also be combined with Sorbitol (cathartic)
 It is important to note that toxic ingestion depends on
to help move any remaining residues out into the feces.
how much total chocolate the patient has ingested (see Table
Fluid therapy: For more seriously affected animals (i.e.,
27.3). Many candies and sweets can be a mix of chocolate
dehydration, tachycardia, shock, etc.), hospitalization and
 and other products (i.e., caramel, cake, nuts, etc.). Therefore,
 intravenous fluids are recommended to help maintain hy-
an 8-ounce candy bar may only contain only 3-4 ounces of
dration and flush toxins from the body (diuresis).
milk chocolate.
Oxygen therapy: In felines that are having problems
Furthermore, some animals may have symptoms that in-
oxygenating their tissue, oxygen therapy may be recom-
dicate much lower doses of chocolate.
mended to increase oxygen saturation in blood.
 Medications: Multiple administrations (5-7 doses) of
Caffeine
acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) over 20-28 hours (every 4
The toxic dose level for caffeine is 140 mg/kg.
x o  an r d  (s
moglobin.
Onset of Physical Signs
Signs occur shortly after ingestion.
Chocolate Toxicosis
Chocolate toxicosis is a possible life-threatening disease
Key Points in Medical History/Initial Assessment
caused by the ingestion of too much chocolate, which con-
Often patients will show signs of gastrointestinal disease
tains theobromine and caffeine.
lasdn ose Aeud aui on anp suodus iauo on od
caused by the change of diet. More severe signs can occur as
Etiology
 larger quantities of chocolate are ingested. Common symp-
 The chocolate can cause severe gastrointestinal upset
toms can be
whereas the theobromine and caffeine affects the amounts of
calcium in the cells, causing muscular tremors and increased
vomiting,
heart activity.
diarrhea,
400
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
hyperactivity,
Tabfe 27.4. Minimum lethal dose of antifreeze.
restlessness,
 increased urination,
 muscle tremors,
Canine 
2-3 m/kg
Feline
1.4 ml (1/5 of a teaspoon)/kg
increased heart rate,
+
sometimes decreased heart rate,
 increased body temperature,
seizures,
 coma, and
Signaiment
death.
The disease can affect any dog or cat; this problem is seen
 generally in the colder months of the year when radiators are
Treatment
winterized.
The goal of treatment depends on physical symptoms of
the patient. Overall guidelines for chocolate toxicity are as
Toxic Dose Levels
follows:
Toxic dose levels for animals are very small, especially in
the feline where less than I teaspoon can produce irre-
-  s  a  i j 
versible kidney damage (see Table 27.4).
gested the chocolate, inducing vomiting may be at-
tempted. However, due to the concerns of aspiration, in-
Onset of Physical Signs
ducing vomiting should never be attempted if the patient
 Signs occur within hours after ingestion.
is having seizures or cannot swallow properly
Activated charcoal: Charcoal is an inert substance that
Common Points in Medical History
helps absorb toxins left in the intestinal system. Activated
 Unless the client witnessed the ingestion, patients come in
charcoal can also be combined with Sorbitol (cathartic)
 acutely affected and may be profoundly ill. Chief complaints
to help move any remaining residues out into the feces.
commonly can be
●Fluid therapy: For more seriously affected animals (i.e.,
with dehydration, tachycardia, shock, etc.), hospitali-
mild to severe depression,
zation and intravenous fluids are recommended to
nausea,
help maintain hydration and flush toxins from the body
vomiting,
(diuresis).
 inability to balance properly,
●Sedation: In more hyperactive and excitable animals, the
 tripping easily,
 pue ssds aosn aonpan on uopas paau Ae juand
 altered vocalization, and
hyperactivity.
 acting strangely.
● Monitor cardiovascular function: With animals that are
severely affected and that may have severe changes in
Common Points on Physical Examination
heart rhythm, the heart rate and electrocardiogram may
 Physical signs depend on the amount of toxin ingested and
need to be monitored for severe tachycardia or arrhyth-
the elapsed time since ingestion occurred. In early disease,
mias that may require medications.
signs can be
Ethylene Glycol Toxicity (Antifreeze Poisoning)
 severe muscular tremors,
Antifreeze is sweet tasting and will be ingested by dogs and
 tremor movements in the eyes (nystagmus),
cats when available. Most antifreeze contains a toxin called
 head tremors,
ethylene glycol; this toxin begins to crystallize in the blood-
 increased thirst and urination,
stream, especially within the kidneys. As the chemical con-
low body temperature, and
tinues to crystallize within the kidney tissue, the kidneys are
 acting abnormally,
selectively destroyed, causing acute and potential irre-
change in vocalization,
versible kidney disease. The longer the toxin is in the body,
 acting blind, and
the more damage is done. If the animal is seen more than a
- sudden aggression.
few hours after ingestion takes place, there may be irre-
versible kidney disease and a life-threatening condition.
In late disease signs can be
Etiology
severe kidney disease,
Antifreeze is absorbed into the body rapidly, causing severe
 decreased to no production of urine,
metabolic upset and crystallization in the kidney tissue.
coma,
Over a short period of time, there is significant kidney tis-
seizure, and
sue destruction.
death.
Chapter 27: Toxins and Poisons
401
Complications
If not diagnosed and treated immediately, ethylene glycol in-
toxication produces acute renal disease/failure and death.
Diagnostics
 Clinical diagnostics for suspected antifreeze intoxication can be
Complete blood count: Changes observed in the com-
plete blood count are elevations in red blood cell count
and total protein secondary to severe dehydration.
 Chemistry: With ethylene glycol poisoning there can be
significant elevations in the renal enzymes (blood urea
nitrogen, or BUN, creatinine, and phosphorus), as well as 
elevations in potassium and blood sugar.
Urinalysis: Urinalysis can show a dilute urine, urine spe-
cific gravity (USG) of <1.015, suggesting a renal azo-
temia. Further evidence of antifreeze intoxication is the
Figure 27.1.  Image of red blood cells with Heinz bodies (dena-
presence of calcium oxalate crystals in the urine within 8
tured hemoglobin). Usually appear as small nodules fused to the
hours after intoxication.
red blood cell membrane.
Ethylene glycol test: A positive ethylene glycol test
within 6 hours after ingestion suggests the presence of
the toxin in the bloodstream. After 6 hours postingestion,
 the test can be falsely negative.
the veterinarian determine the overall prognosis. If kidney
enzymes begin to climb and urine production is not present
Treatment
in the first 24-48 hours, the prognosis is usually grave.
Treatment depends on the animal's history, diagnostic tests,
and physical exam findings upon presentation of the pet.
Heinz Body AnemiaOnion (and Garlic) Toxicosis
However, it is important to note, especially in the feline, the
 Exposure to large amounts of onions in canines and onions
longer the pet goes without treatment after ingestion, the worse
and garlic in felines can produce oxidative injury to the red
the prognosis. Some treatment options are discussed next.
blood cells, producing a life-threatening anemia.
Hospitalization and Fluid Therapy
Etiology
It is extremely important to make sure the pet is on intra-
Exposure to onions and garlic (wild onions and store pur-
-s pue saupi aun jo uoisnad anuuon on spim snouaa
chased) produce an oxidative injury to red blood cells, dena-
ulate urine formation.
turing the hemoglobin in the red blood cell and forming
Heinz bodies (see Figure 27.1). Other causative agents that
Vomiting and Gastric Lavage
If ingestion just occurred, the goal is inducing emesis (vom-
can produce similar anemias are
iting), removing any remaining antifreeze in the intestinal
 acetaminophen,
system, and administering activated charcoal to deactivate
any remaining toxin. However, inducing vomiting should
 mothballs,
never be attempted if the patient is having seizures or can-
 onions,
not swallow properly due to the concerns of aspiration.
 garlic (felines), and
zinc toxicity.
Medication
 4-methylpyrazole: This drug inhibits the crystallization
Signalment
-p aq isn  oq a  po aa jo
          
ministered over 48 hours with the pet in the hospital. This
affect dogs and cats without any sex, age, or breed predis
drug is only indicated for the canine.
position.
Ethanol: The use of 95% grain alcohol also inhibits the
formation of the crystals from the blood. It is the only
Toxic Dose Levels
available treatment in cats and must be given intra-
Toxicity depends on the type, concentration, and exposure to
venously over 2 days.
 toxic agents that produce oxidative injury to red blood cells.
Monitoring
Onset of Physical Signs
 The pet must be monitored very carefully in the hospital for
Depending on how much toxin is ingested, symptoms can
urine formation and changes in the kidney enzymes to help
occur acutely to chronically.
402
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Key Points in Medical History/Initial Assessment
Toxic Dose Levels
This type of toxicity can produce a history of acute weak-
As with most NSAIDs, ibuprofen can produce toxic effects on
ness, depression, and collapse. Physical symptoms can be
the gastrointestinal system and the kidneys. Although some
animals can show symptoms at much lower doses, overall
pale mucous mem branes,
symptorms can be observed at the following dose levels.
fever,
+
 anorexia,
 Gastrointestinal symptoms occur when 150 mg/kg of
collapse, and
ibuprofen are ingested.
reddish brown urine (hemoglobinuria)
 Renal disease/failure occur when ibuprofen levels reach
300 mg/kg.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of Heinz body anermia is based on history and ev-
Onset of Physical Signs
idence of physical symptoms. Observed changes in the
Signs occur shortly after ingestion.
blood work can be as follows.
 In complete blood counts, changes can be
Key Points in Medical History/Initial Assessment
Often patients will show signs of gastrointestinal symptoms
decreased packed cell volume,
 initially, with renal disease issues occurring with higher
increased reticulocytes (regenerative response),
 doses. Cormmon symptorms can be
Heinz body formation,
fragments of red blood cells (eccentrocytes),
vomiting, possibly with blood;
hyperbilirubinemia seen in blood chemistry, and
diarrhea, possibly with digested blood (melena) or frank
bilirubimuria seen in urinalysis.
blood;
+
 increased thirst;
Treatment
increased urination;
The goal of treatment depends on physical symptoms of the
 dehydration;
patient. Overall guidelines for Heinz body toxicity are as
 pale gums if intestinal bleeding is severe enough;
follows.
weakness; and
seizures with severely affected kidneys.
● Identify and remove causative agent: Exposure to any
of the above agents or addition of onion or garlic forms
Diagnosis
(raw, sliced, powder, etc.) should be removed from the
Because ibuprofen toxicity can cause gastrointestinal bleed-
pet's diet.
ing and kidney disease, the following blood work profiles
●Fluid therapy: For more seriously affected animals (i.e.
are recommended to monitor gastrointestinal bleeding and
with dehydration, tachycardia, shock, etc.), hospitalization
renal concerns.
and intravenous fluids are recommended to help maintain
hydration and flush toxins from the body (diuresis).
● A complete blood count and chemistry: These tests
● Oxygen therapy: In patients that are having problems
will help determine if there is evidence of severe gas-
oxygenating their tissue, oxygen therapy may be recom-
trointestinal bleeding, renal disease, or changes in the
electrolytes that may need to be treated.
Blood transfusion: In patients with severe anemia, blood
 Urinalysis: A urinalysis will assess the kidneys’ ability
transfusion may be needed to stabilize the patient.
to concentrate urine and expel toxins.
Ibuprofen Toxic osis
Treatment
Ibuprofen  is  a nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory
drug
 The goal of treatment depends on how badly the pet is affected.
'se u Aaes jo uae ns Aia e ym (avSN)
causing severe effects on the kidneys and intestinal tract.
 Induction of vomiting: If the animal has recently in-
 gested the ibuprofen, inducing vomiting may be recom-
Etiology
aul u uoeoipauu paisasipun Aue dn Suuq on papuau
 Ibuprofen is a potent NSAID. All drugs within this class can
stomach. However, inducing vomiting should never be at-
 have ulcerative effects in the gastrointestinal tract and can be
tempted if the patient is having seizures or cannot swal-
potentially toxic to the kidneys. Each tablet of adult regular.
low properly due to the concerns of aspiration.
strength ibuprofen contains 200 mg/tablet.
● Activated charcoal: Once the animal has vomited the
 use of activated charcoal may be suggested to help absorb
Signalment
any drug residues left in the intestinal system. Charcoal
 ue go so pu so ne u sisoxn ugnl
a un al suxo qos sday n ausqns an u si
There is no breed or sex predisposition.
intestinal systerm.
Chapter 27: Toxins and Poisons
403
Fluid therapy: For animals with more serious vomiting
Onset of Physical Signs
and diarrhea (with or without blood), hospitalization and
Physical symptoms depend on how much lead is ingested.
 intravenous fluids can help maintain hydration while giv-
Signs can occur chronically over time.
ing the intestinal system time to rest. Fluids also allow
toxins to be flushed from the body (diuresis).
Key Points in Medical History/Initial Assessment
 Blood products: If there is severe bleeding within the in-
Initial symptoms start with gastrointestinal signs followed
testinal tract, the use of red blood cells and plasma may
 by central nervous system symptoms. Common symptoms
be recommended.
can be
 Medication: The goal of medications would be to de-
crease inflammation and bleeding and protect the lining
vomiting,
of the intestinal systerm. Also, if there are concerns for
diarrhea,
+
 secondary infection, antibiotics may also be suggested.
 anorexia,
+
 abdominal pain,
Lead Toxicity
 blindness,
 Lead poisoning occurs with chronic or acute ingestion of
 seizures, and
lead, producing gastrointestinal and neurologic symptoms.
death.
Exposure to lead can come from
Diagnosis
 old paint,
Diagnosis is made based on medical history and physical
linoleum,
symptoms. However, complete blood count can show in-
car battery,
creased nucleated red blood cells without obvious anemia.
sodder,
Anisocytosis, polychromasia, target cells, and hypochroma-
golf balls, and
sia may be also noted. Red blood cells may also show ba-
lead objects (e.g., sinkers).
sophilic stippling of the red blood cell cytoplasm due to lead
Etiology
toxicity damage of the red blood cells (see Figure 27.2).
Lead toxicity interferes with multiple enzyme pathways
within the body, which affects production of red blood cells.
Treatment
 Furthermore, lead may affect capillaries within the central
The goal of treatment depends on how badly the pet is af-
fected. Treatment may consist of the following.
nervous system, increasing the risk of damage to the brain
 and spinal cord.
 Induction of vomiting: If the animal has recently in-
Signalment
gested the poison, inducing vomiting may be recom-
 Lead intoxication can affect dogs and cats of any age. There
aui u uoneoipau pasaapun Aue dn Suq on papuau
 is no breed or sex predisposition.
stomach. However, inducing vomiting should never be at-
tempted if the patient is having seizures or cannot swal-
Toxic Dose Levels
low properly due to the concerns of aspiration.
Physical symptoms occur when lead levels >0.4 ppm in the
●Activated charcoal: Once the animal has vomited, the
blood.
use of activated charcoal may be suggested to help absorb
(a)
Polychromatic
ce
Figure 27.2.
. Images of polychromasia (a) and hypochromasia (b), which can be noted with lead poisoning. There may not be a true
anemia present, but due to lead's effects on the red blood cell synthesis, red blood cell and hemoglobin maturation can be affected.
404
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
any drug residues left in the intestinal system. Charcoal
Treatment
is an inert substance that helps absorb toxins left in the
The goal of treatment depends on how badly the pet is af-
intestinal system.
fected. Treatment may consist of the following.
● Fluid therapy: Hospitalization and intravenous fluids
can help maintain hydration while giving the intestinal
  s p an j a jo 
system time to rest. Fluids also allow toxins to be flushed
gested the poison, inducing vomiting may be recom-
from the body (diuresis).
aui u uonoipa paisasipun Aue dn suuq on papuau
stomach. However, inducing vomiting should never be at-
Medication
tempted if the patient is having seizures or cannot swal-
The goal of medications are to control seizures, excitement,
low properly due to the concerns of aspiration.
and muscle spasms. Other medications are used to help in-
 Activated charcoal: Once the animal has vomited the
activate lead levels in the bloodstream.
use of activated charcoal may be suggested to help absorb
any drug residues left in the intestinal systerm. Charcoal
Metaldehyde Toxicity (Snail & Slug Bait)
is an inert substance that helps absorb toxins left in the
 Metaldehyde is a key poison in slug and snail bait as well as
intestinal system.
-a e sanoid n paisaaun uaua 'saais do u pasn lan 
Cool water bath: For patients that present with body
vere excitatory effect on the central nervous system.
 temperatures greater than 106° Fahrenheit, a cool water
pue aieiaduan Xpoq aonpa on papaau aq Keu yeq
Etiology
control secondary side affects from heat stroke (see
The cause of the toxicity is unknown. However, it is thought
Chapter 30).
to affect the neurotransmitter levels within the central nerv-
Fluid therapy: Hospitalization and intravenous fluids
ous system.
       
system time to rest. Fluids also allow toxins to be flushed
Signalment
from the body (diuresis).
Metaldehyde toxicosis can affect dogs and cats of any age.
 Medication: The goal of medications is to control
There is no breed or sex predisposition.
seizures, excitement, and muscle spasms.
Toxic Dose Levels
Organophosphate/Carbam ate Toxic osis
Toxic dose levels depend on how methaldehyde is ingested
Organophosphates/carbamates are common ingredients in
 and its concentration in the poison.
pet flea and tick control products, household insecticides,
yay on pasodxa si lad aun uaum 'sionpod ainnouse pue
Onset of Physical Signs
levels of these drugs, it interferes with the normal muscle
  d a  i '  s o s
and nervous function.
hours to have an effect.
Etiology
Key Points in Medical History/Initial Assessment
 In normal muscle activation, an activated neuron releases a
 The chief complaints are changes in behavior and seizures.
chemical called acetylcholine. This chemical diffuses away
Common symptoms can be
from the nerve toward the muscle in a space called the neu-
romuscular junction. The contact of acetylcholine with spe-
convulsions,
cific proteins (acetylcholine receptors) on the muscle stim-
 muscular tremors,
ulates muscular contraction. Shortly after activation, a
increased sensitivity to touch or pain (hyperesthesia),
chemical enzyme, called cholinesterase, inactivates the
hyperthermia (>108° Fahrenheit),
acetylcholine, giving the muscle time to reset and be stimu-
tachycardia,
lated again. With organophosphate toxicity, the toxin in-
hypersalivation,
hibits cholinesterase, which stops the inactivation process of
vomiting,
acetylcholine, producing continued muscle and nervous
coma,
stimulation. Depending on the form of organophosphate, the
●hepatic disease (l-3 days after ingestion if the patient
discontinuation of the inactivation enzyme could last over
survives the initial episode), and
days to weeks.
 death.
Signalment
Diagnosis
Cats are more adversely affected and more sensitive to
Diagnosis is made based on medical history and physical
organophosphate toxicity. The drug can be stored in fat tis-
symptoms. Stomach contents can be sent to the lab for eval-
sue, so lean cats and thin breed dogs (e.g., sight hounds and
uation of methaldehyde levels.
racing breeds) also can be more susceptible to toxicosis.
 Chapter 27: Toxins and Poisons
405
Toxic Dose Levels
giving the intestinal systerm time to rest. Fluids also allow
 a an uo uuadp Aa  sal as io
toxins to be flushed from the body (diuresis).
organophosphate used, the concentration of the poison per
 Medication: The goal of medication is to try to minimize
milligram, and how it is absorbed or administrated. Any pa-
 the nervous effects, control seizures, and decrease mus-
 adsoo   n ui  s n s
cular contractions.
should be evaluated immediately.
 Oxygen therapy: Depending on how severe the breathing
pad a sod isns  an  'si 
Onset of Physical Signs
 Physical signs can occur within minutes to hours of physical
contact or ingestion of organophosphate toxins, producing a
Rodenticide (Rat Poison) Intoxication--Warfarin or
rapid and life-threatening condition. Clinical signs of
Coumadin Poisons
 organophosphate and carbamate toxicity are
Although there are three different types of rat poison, the
most common is warfarin and anticoagulant poisons. These
vomiting,
compounds interfere with the normal clotting agents that
diarrhea,
clot blood and stop bleeding. Animals spontaneously bleed
increased salivation,
millions of times a day, and without the necessary chemicals
small fixed pupils,
to stop the bleeding process, patients can quickly become
 depression (progressive),
life threatened.
muscular tremors,
high body temperature secondary to muscular contractions/
Etiology
seizures,
The anticoagulants found in rat poison interfere with the
seizures,
normal activation of vitamin K, a fat soluble vitamin associ-
 slow heart rate, and
ated with clotting of blood. Vitamin K works with several of
death.
- n n  no  n      
vent severe hemorrhage.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of organophosphate exposure is largely based on
Signalment
history and evidence of physical symptoms. However, there
Rat poison can affect dogs and cats of any age. There is no
is a clinical diagnostic blood test to check for cholinesterase
breed or sex predisposition.
activity (the enzyme that breaks up the acetylcholine) that
'q apisino ue on poona suuas Aq paad aq ueo
Toxic Dose Levels
Animals affected by this toxin often only have 25% of nor-
 Jo unaua aui uo supuadap Aea ueo siaal asop oi
mal cholinesterase levels.
rodenticide used, concentration of the poison per milligram,
and the amount ingested. Any patient that has ingested ro-
Treatment
 denticide should be evaluated immediately.
 The goal of treatment depends on how badly the pet is af-
fected. Treatment may consist of the following.
Onset of Physical Signs
Signs appear 2-3 days after ingestion of the toxin.
Induction of vomiting: If your animal has recently in-
gested the organophosphate poisons, inducing vomiting
Key Points in Medical History/Initial Assessment
oipa paisapun Aue dn suq on pansagns aq Ae
 Patients can show the following physical symptoms associ-
in the stomach. However, inducing vomiting should never
 ated with rat poison ingestion:
be attempted if the patient is having seizures or cannot
swallow properly due to the concerns of aspiration.
Nose bleeds
Cool water bath: With patients that have high body tem-
 Spontaneous bruising
+
peratures (>106° Fahrenheit) secondary to persistent
+
Weakness
muscular tremors or seizures, a cool-down bath may need
Collapse
 Pale mucous membranes
 Activated charcoal: Once the animal has vomited, ad-
+
 vomiting blood or dark bloody stool
ministration of activated charcoal may be recommended to
 Shortness of breath
help absorb any drug residues left in the intestinal system.
 Bloated, fluid-filled abdomen
 Fluid therapy: For animals with more serious muscular
tremors, weakness, seizures, high body temperatures, or
Diagnosis
gastrointestinal signs, hospitalization and intravenous
Because this disease produces clinical signs of weakness,
fluids may be needed to help maintain hydration while
poor color, increased chance of bleeding, and other signs
406
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
that could be seen in other diseases (e.g., idiopathic throm-
 Hospitalization and fluids: In animals with severe
bocytopenia; von Willebrand's disease; chronic liver dis-
 bleeding problems that may have massive blood loss,
ease; infectious diseases such as tick fever, Rocky Mountain
the pet may need to be hospitalized and placed on
spotted fever, etc.; and splenic tumor), the following diag
fluids to monitor and control potential life-threatening
nostic tests may be indicated.
bleeding.
 Blood products: If the pet has severely elevated clotting
Diagnostic Blood Work
times or a very low red blood cell count, red blood cells
● Complete blood count and chemistry: These diagnostic
or plasma may need to be administered to help replace
tests will help determine how low the red blood cell count.
blood loss and clotting factors.
is, the level of platelets in the blood, if the white blood
cell count is elevated (suggesting a severe inflammatory
Strychnine Poisoning
response or infection), or if there are other suggestions of
Strychnine is a potent poison affecting the central nervous
diseases in the kidneys, liver, or other organs.
 system. It is commonly foumd in gopher, rat, mouse, and
● Clotting times: With concems of bleeding, clotting
other pest baits.
times may be needed to help assess what type of bleeding
problems may be occurring.
Etiology
Infectious disease titer screens: The veterinarian may
Strychnine interferes with normal neurotransmitter levels in
suggest testing for specific disease in the geographical
the central nervous and muscular systems producing pro-
area that could be linked to bleeding problems (i.e., tick
found reflex hyperactivity. If enough poison is ingested, the
fever [ehrlichiosis], Rocky Mountain spotted fever, etc.).
 muscles of breathing can be affected, producing respiratory
Proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism (PIVKA):
 arrest (apnea) and death.
 This blood test is a highly suggestive clinical diagnostic
test that detects proteins that are produced when drugs
Signalment
that interfere with vitamin K are present in the body.
Strychnine poison can affect dogs and cats of any age. There
●Radiographs: X-rays of the abdomen will aid in diag-
is no breed or sex predisposition.
o e no so o no s an u a so
mass that could be producing spontaneous bleeding (e.g..
Toxic Dose Levels
splenic hemangiosarcoma, tumors of the liver, etc.).
 Lethal doses of strychnine are as follows:
Further thoracic x-rays may be suggested to evaluate the
chest and lung fields for evidence of frank bleeding.
Canine: 0.2 mg/kg
Ultrasound: An ultrasound will allow the visualization
 Feline: 0.5 mg/kg
 aa go aasd a ssass d on uapne an g
 suggestive of internal bleeding. Furthermore, the vete-
Onset of Physical Signs
rinarian can evaluate the abdominal organs and intes-
Physical signs can occur within 2 hours of ingestion.
tines for other causes of bleeding, weakness, and general
disease.
Key Points in Medical History/Initial Assessment
Animals generally present with violent seizure activity that
Treatment
is made worse with loud noises. The seizures generally end
Treatment is based on the presentation of the animal and
with the patient in a lateral recumbency with increased rigor
the severity of the disease noted and may consist of the
of all muscle groups. The limbs are locked out in space with
following.
the patient's head perpendicular to its spine (opisthotonus;
see Figure 27.3). Other symptoms are
● Induction of vomiting: If the animal has recently in-
gested the poison, inducing vomiting may be recom-
muscle stiffness,
au ui uopau pasalpun Aue dn suq on papua
+
tachycardia.
stomach. However, inducing vomiting should never be at-
 decreased respiratory rate, and
tempted if the patient is having seizures or cannot swal-
 death.
low properly due to the concerns of aspiration.
Activated charcoal: Once the animal has vomited, the
Diagnosis
Qosqe diau ot paisaaans aq Ae leoseuo paeanoe jo asn
pue Aiosu eoipaui siad aui uo paseq apeu si sisouse
any drug residues left in the intestinal system. Charcoal
physical symptoms. However, urine, stomach contents, and
is an inert substance that will help absorb toxins left in
abdominal organs can be evaluated for strychnine levels.
the intestinal system.
Medications: Medications are focused on replacing vita-
Treatment
min K with oral or injectable medications or preventing
The goal of treatment depends on how badly the pet is af-
secondary infections.
fected. Treatment may consist of the following.
 Does the patient have a history of poison 
ingestion or show signs of toxicity?
Common Signs of Toxicity:
Acute Syndrome (General)
 Changes in Mental Status from
No
Excitement/Coma
YES
Severe Gl signs: Vomiting/Diarrhea
Muscular Spasms
Generalized Weakness
Triage the
Collapse/Coma/Death
 patient.
 Triage the animal and
2.
Obtain a full
make sure the patient is
history.
No
stable.
3.
Help the doctor
Is it stable?
investigate other
con cerns.
YES
Stabilize Patient: BE READY WITH
1.
Catheter and fluids
Obtain a Full History
2.
OXYGEN
3.
Induction of vomiting*
1.
Any toxins possible?
4.
Activated charcoal**
2.
Any human medications?
5.
Sedation
3.
Homeopathic medications?
4.
Over-the-counter drugs?
BE SPECIFIC!!!!
Research the Toxin
Treat by Outlined Protocol
1.
 Manufacturer information
1.
 Antidote - if possible
2.
 Local poison contro]
2
 Understand short-term concerms
3.
ASPCA ILLINOIS POISON
4.
Discuss prognosis & short- & long-
CONTROL-800-548-2423
 term concems with client
* Induction of vomiting should only be done if ingestion is recent. Further induction may be contraindicated with specific toxins and medications.
endse jo suaon a on anp adod aoeas on aqeunio luzias s jed aup  panduane aq laaau pnous suuoa lunpun iaaaao
** Activated charcoal should never be attempted in comatose or seizuring patients or patients that are unable to swallow.
Flowchart 27.1. General flowchart for treating toxicity.
408
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
● Activated charcoal: Once the animal has vomited, the
use of activated charcoal may be suggested to help absorb
any drug residues left in the intestinal systerm. Charcoal
the intestinal system.
● Fluid therapy: Hospitalization and intravenous fluids
can help maintain hydration while giving the intestinal
system time to rest. Fluids also allow toxins to be flushed
from the body (diuresis).
● Medications: The goal of medications is to control
seizure activity and relax muscular spasms.
● Anesthesia: With severe cases, patients may need to be
anesthetized and ventilated for 1-3 days if the patient en-
ters respiratory arrest. These patients must continue to be
supported and diuresed until the strychnine has been re-
moved from their bodies.
Figure 27.3.
Opisthotonus. The rigidity of the forelimbs with
the hyperextension of the neck and head.
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of Understanding the
Concepts of Disease and Treatment. The exercises can be
●  Induction of vomiting: If the animal has recently in-
done individually or as case rounds as they explore specific
topics in veterinary medicine that discuss clinical diagnos-
gested the poison, inducing vomiting may be recom-
 ayl u uoneoipau paisaaipun Aue dn Suq oi papuau
tics and treatment.
stomach. However, inducing vomiting should never be at-
tempted if the patient is having seizures or is unable to
swallow properly due to the concerns of aspiration.
Chapter 28
Fluid Therapy
The goal of this chapter is to provide the team member with
● mild gastrointestinal disease (see Chapter 10), and
a basic understanding of the goals of intravenous therapy, in-
● mild upper respiratory infections (see Chapter I1).
cluding how to calculate a fluid rate for the pet, how to mon-
itor intravenous fluids, and how to discuss treatment con-
Chronic Disease
cerms with the client. Administration or changes to fluid
Subcutaneous fluids are used at regular intervals in pets with
therapy should never be done without proper instruction and
chronic disease to help maintain their hydration. These pa-
consent from the veterinarian.
tients' diseases are usually under control, and the pets are
It is essential to have a well-educated hospital team that
eating, drinking, and feeling good. Examples of a chronic
can monitor a patient on intravenous fluids for dehydration,
disease where subcutaneous fluids can be given are
 fluid overload, and fluid ins/outs. In specific cases where
there are increased toxins in the bloodstream secondary to
●chronic renal disease (see Chapter 13), and
renal disease, liver disease, certain forms of diabetes, or
 chronic liver disease (see Chapter 14).
other toxic or systemic diseases, increased amounts of flu-
ids (1.5-2 X maintenance) can aid in removing toxins from
These fluids can be administered in the hospital setting,
the body (diuresis). The goal of fluid maintenance is to pro-
or the owner can be taught to administer subcutaneous flu-
vide support to aid in rehydration, maintenance, and possi-
ids at home.
bly diuresisforthepet.Fluid support is thekey hallmarkfor
stabilization in a majority of emergency care. Necessary
supplements and drugs can be added to the fluid regime to
Practice Tip: It is recommended that the client admin-
aid in the pet's recovery. Nutrients such as dextrose and
istering subcutaneous fluids at home be educated about
potassium, and medications such as metoclopramide, lido.
 and comfortable with this type of fluid administration.
caine, and dopamine, can be added to intravenous fluids to
One suggestion is to have the client observe how to ad-
provide a continuous rate of infusion (CRI) of the needed
minister subcutaneous fluids and practice administra-
drug.
tion in a hospital setting with the medical team mem-
ber during the first few times of administration.
Types of Fluid Support
 Fluid support can be given in two forms: subcutaneous flu-
Emergency Conditions
ids and intravenous fluids. Each type of delivery has its own
Although not as valuable as intravenous fluids in emergency
strengths and weaknesses.
situations, subcutaneous fluids can help to mildly rehydrate
a patient that has severe perfusion problems. Once subcuta-
Subcutaneous Fluids
neous fluids are administered and absorbed, a vein may be
Subcutaneous fluids are a moderate to large bolus of fluids
more easily catheterized.
 given under the skin to create a fluid repository that can be
slowly absorbed by the pet over a 3- to 6-hour period of
Contraindications
time.
With proper administration of subcutaneous fluids, there are
few contraindications. However some concerms are as follows.
Indications
Subcutaneous fluids are meant for slow replenishment of the
 Intravenous fluid additives: Some caution must be ex-
mild to moderately dehydrated patient. Administration of
ercised that certain fluid additives (i.e., dextrose), which
fluids can be indicated for several reasons.
are normally given intravenously, are not given subcuta-
neously. These types of fluid additives can cause irrita-
Acute Disease
tion and damage to the overlying skin.
Underlying disease conditions: Caution should be exer-
ids. Disease states that may require fluids are, for example,
cised with patients that have underlying disease condi-
409
410
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Table 28.1. Guidelines for subcutaneous fluid therapy.
Administrafion
Subcutaneous fluid administration is generally given in
unsedated animals over the short term to create a fluid reser-
Animal's Weight
Approximate Subcutaneous Fluid Amount*
voir. In most pets, administration can be done with minimal
<10 pounds
50-200 ml
restraint (see Figure 28.1). The process is as follows:
11-40 pounds
200-500 ml
41-70 pounds
500-700 ml
1. With the animal restrained, a sterile needle is placed
>70 pounds +
>700-1000 ml +
under the skin over the interscapular area (shoulder) with
the needle parallel to the spine.
*These fluids are suggested fluid ranges based on pet weights.
 2. The sterile fluids are placed subcutaneously while moni-
These ranges are meant for animals without primary disease that
toring the fluid pocket for tension and tightness.
could produce pulmonary edema and congestion (i.e., congestive
heart failure, electric cord injury, etc.).
 3. If the pocket becomes tight and firm, another location is
chosen until the total amount of fluid is given.
4. Once administered, there should be pressure applied to
tions that have the propensity for pulmonary edema.
the skin where the needle was placed to prevent leakage
Although of much less concern than when using intra-
of fluid from the repository site.
venous fluids, repeated subcutaneous fluids may increase
the likelihood of build up of fluid within the lung fields.
Intravenous Fluids
Some of these conditions are
 Intravenous fluids are one of the hallmark treatments for the
congestive heart failure,
hospitalized and emergency care patients in practice. Team
severe renal disease (end stage),
members must be able to
drowning, and
 electric cord injury.
 master evaluating dehydration,
 understand the benefits and concerms with different fluid
Calculation of Fluid Need
types (i.e., crystalloids vs. colloids),
understand how to calculate fluid need,
The veterinarian will make recommendations for subcuta-
 monitor a patient on intravenous fluids, and
neous fluid boluses for the pet. However, the veterinary team
 properly document the fluid administration.
should have an understanding of approximate fluid parame-
ters to prevent miscommunication or overadministration of
There are two larger groups of intravenous fluid choices,
fluids (see Table 28.1).
which are discussed next.
Crystalloids
Discussing Subcutaneous Fluid Administration
The crystalloid category is made up of types of fluid that
(In-Patient) with the Client
have a concentration (isotonic) density similar to blood. The
 Subcutaneous fluids are the placement of sterile
goal of these fluids is for long-term intravenous administra-
fluids under the skin of your pet to help rehydrate
tion for patients needing rehydration, diuresis, and emer-
 Or maintain hydration during mild to moderate ill-
 gency care. Examples of commonly used crystalloids are
ness.
 0.9% NaCl, lactated Ringer's solution, and Normosol.
 The procedure is completed over 5-10 minutes as a
large amount of fluid is placed in a pocket under
Colloids
the skin.
The colloid category is made up of fluid types that have an
 Initially, the pet will have a large pocket of fluids
increased density (hypertonic) as compared with blood.
evident in the shoulder region.
These fluids are separated into two further categories.
 Once the fluid is absorbed, it can migrate under the
skin downward between the forearms, making
● Natural colloids: blood, packed red blood cells, and
them appear slightly swollen, until it is completely
plasma that are meant for blood replacement products in
absorbed over the next 46 hours.
anemic or bleeding animals (see Chapter 30).
 The process is painless and can be done with min-
 Synthetic colloids: hypertonic solutions that are used for
imal restraint.
ss as di o s a e ys
 Subcutaneous fluids help maintain hydration of the
blood pressure or serve as a blood replacement product
mildly ill pet, but are more limited when dealing
(see below).
with patients with significant dehydration, fluid
losses through vomiting and diarrhea, or acute dis-
Applications and Administration of Intravenous
ease producing a buildup of toxins (i.e., kidney/
Fluids-Crystalloids
liver disease).
Crystalloids are fluids containing electrolyte and nonelec-
trolyte solutes capable of entering all body fluid compart-
Chapter 28: Fluid Therapy
411
Figure 28.1. Image of subcutaneous fluids administered to a small dog. Note the needle is entered under the skin parallel to the spine,
and the pet is maintained with minimal restraint.
ments. They are the most common form of parenteral
volumes of intravenous fluids. These patients do not have
(nonoral) fluid therapy and are classified as replacement so-
001 J1 Xpoq au 01 uaAxo Aueo 01 shlao pooa pa1 yanoua
lutions (composition resembling extracellular fluid) or
much intravenous fluid is administered, the blood can be-
maintenance solutions (see Figure 28.2). The choice of fluid
come more dilute, decreasing its oxygen-carrying capacity.
depends upon the disease process. The most useful crystal-
Some potential diseases producing a serious acute or
loid solutions for routine use are balanced replacement solu-
chronic anemia include
tions such as Ringer's or lactated Ringer's solution,
Normosol-R, 0.9% saline and 5% dextrose in water.
●chronic renal disease (see Chapter 13),
 chronic liver disease (see Chapter 14),
Indications
 blood loss/trauma (see Chapter 3), and
Crystalloid fluids are indicated for the treatment of ill patients
 immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
 that need rehydration, diuresis, or emergency care. Intravenous
support can be given safely over hours to days. Nutrients such
Calculation of Fluid Need
 as dextrose and potassium chloride can be added to fluids to
Calculation of fluid need depends on
help provide minimal nutritional support as well as to balance
electrolytes. Furthermore, drugs (such as metoclopramide and
the pet,
lidocaine) can be given for CRI of the sick patient.
the disease,
fluid losses (i.e., diarrhea and vomiting),
Contraindications
the pet's level of dehydration, and
 Because intravenous fluids provide a constant flow of liquid
● if the pet is in shock.
directly into the vein, caution must be exercised with pa-
tients with specific diseases. Careful monitoring is neces-
The amount of fluid administered is determined by the
sary for patients with underlying disease conditions that may
veterinarian. However, the team member must have a con-
produce pulmonary edema. Because these pets cannot con-
cept of the types of fluids, the daily fluid needs, and rates of
 trol the rate at which fluids enter their body, the patients can
uoe anbape ue sua si lad aun ainsua oi uai spin
become overhydrated and begin building up fluid within the
of fluids to rehydrate while not overloading the pet (see fluid
lung tissue (pulmonary congestion). Some diseases that re-
quire caution are
dration are discussed next.
+
 congestive heart failure (see Chapter 12),
Maintenance
+
 severe renal disease (end stage; see Chapter 13), and
Maintenance fluids are the minimum amount of fluids
+
 drowning or electric cord injury.
 needed for a pet that is not having significant fluid losses
(i.e., vomiting or diarrhea) to maintain normal hydration. All
Furthermore, animals that have diseases producing pro-
animals require 66 ml/kg/day fluids for the body to function
found anemia or blood loss can be made worse with high
normally.
412
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Dehydration
Dehydration is a qualitative measurement of hydration level
aadde aa 'suns og us uo pas suand an go
and/or packed cell volume. As discussed in Chapter 6, dehy-
dration is based on the following scale.
LOT58
20.0
● 0-3%: Undetectable dehydration secondary to an animal
 that has been vomiting or having mild diarrhea
口
00
7053-09
 5-7%: Beginning of detectable dehydration with slight
 decrease in skin turgor and beginning of dry gums
Ring
 7-9%: More perceivable dehydration with much more
 decreased elasticity of skin, dry gums, and sumken eyes 
SP
AM CHLOROE
 9-12%: Life-threatening dehydration with no elasticity of
CONTAINS
2-
skin, sumken eyes, dry gums, depression, and weakness 
SOOIL
LAETATE.
CAUCIUMCHLORIDE
Calculation of dehydration uses the following formula:
 Dehydration = % Dehydrated in Decimal Form X wt
(kg) × 1000 ml/l
LARAE.28mEQ.
CAITON OO NOT ADMINISTER CALCIUM
DONTANNG SOLUTIONS CONCURRENTLY WITH
For example, a 10-kg dog is 10% dehydrated.
SOEBOODNDTFOUSEINTHEEATMNT
LACTC ACIDOSISADOITIVES MAY BE
NIMFATRLE.CONSULTWITHPHARMAIST
Dehydration = (0.1) × (10 kg) × 1000 mls/l
ALABLWHENINTROOUCING AODITIVES.USE
Dehydration = 1000 mls
ASEFTIL TECHNOUE MIX THORDUGHLY ANDDO
NISTORE SINGLEDOSE CONTAINER FOR
 This animal then needs 1 1 (l000 ml) of fluids just to re-
7_ATFAVENOUS OR SUBCUTANEDUS USE USUAL
hydrate.
DSEE INSERT.STERILENONPYROGENC
It is important to note that if the pet has reached normal
DAUTIONFEDERAL IUSAI LAW PROHIBITS
NINGWITHOUT PRESCRPTION USECNY
hydration in the first day, there are no fluids needed for de-
OLUTONIS CLEAR ANO CONTANERIS
hydration in the second 24 hours.
ONOAVAED MUST NOT BE USED IN SERES
Total fluid need is the amount of fluid the animal needs
CONECTIONS.
PATENT PENOING
in the first 24 hours and is the sum of maintenance plus de-
hydration fluids.
Total Fluid Need = Maintenance + Dehydration
Figure 28.2.
 Image of crystalloids-lactated Ringer's solution
fluids.
Example I: A 10-kg dog with no significant fluid losses is
Maintenance = Body Weight (kg) × 66 ml/kg/day
10% dehydrated.
Maintenance = 10 kg X 66 ml/kg/day = 660 ml/day
x 01 x Aep/y/u g9 sainba1 sop gx-01 e sp1om 1ayo u1
Dehydration = (0.1) × 10 × 1000 = 1000 ml
= 660 ml/day to maintain normal hydration.
Total Fluid Need = 1660 ml
This amount does not include what that animal needs for
maintenance if there is any fluid losses (blood loss, vomit-
Thus this pet needs 1660 ml in the first day and if rehy-
 drated will only need 660 ml each following day.
ids per day. Generally, with significant vomiting and diar-
rhea, the pet may require 1.5-2 times the maintenance dose.
Example II: A 12-kg parvo dog with significant vomiting
and diarrhea is 5% dehydrated. Here the veterinarian has
These maintenance rates would be:
recommended placing the pet on 2X maintenance.
1.5 X maintenance: 99 ml/kg/day
2× Maintenance = 12 kg × 132 ml/kg/day = 1584 ml/day
 2 × maintenance: 132 ml/kg/day
Dehydration = 12 kg × (0.05) × 1000 = 600 ml
Total fluid need = 2184 ml
Chapter 28: Fluid Therapy
Thus this pet needs 2184 ml in the first day, and if rehy-
IV system. To do this, milliliters per second must be calcu-
drated may need 1584 ml the following day (if vomiting and
lated first.
diarrhea continue).
Administering Intravenous Fluids
Milliliters/sec = (hourly fluid rate)/(3600 sec/h)
Once the total fluid need is determined by the veterinarian,
fluids are administered. There usually are two administra-
tion protocols followed.
Example V: A 10-kg dog with no significant fluid losses is
10% dehydrated.
Hourly Fluid Rate
Hourly fluid rate is calculated by taking total fluid need and
Maintenance = 10 kg X 66 ml/kg/day = 660 ml/day
dividing by 24 hours per day.
Dehydration = (0.1) × 10 × 1000 = 1000 ml
Total fluid need = 1660 ml
Hourly Fluid Rate = (Total Fluid Need/day)/(24 h/day)
Hourly fluid rate = 1660 ml/24 h = 69 ml/h
  = (s 0)/ 6) = P  
Example Ml: A 10-kg dog with no significant fluid losses
To calculate drops per second, the team member must
is 10% dehydrated.
know what IV line system is being used. There are generally
two systems.
Maintenance = 10 kg × 66 ml/kg/day = 660 ml/day
Dehydration = (0.1) × 10 × 1000 = 1000 ml
Macro drip system: 10 or 15 drops/ml
Total Fluid Need = 1660 ml
 Micro drip system: 60 drops/ml
Hourly Fluid Rate = 1660 ml/24 hours = 69 ml/hr
Bolusing Fluids
 To calculate drops per second:
 In times of severe dehydration, prior to a surgery or treat-
ment, the doctor may want to give an intravenous bolus to
Drops/sec = ml/sec × drops/ml (drip system)
help replace the fluid loss more quickly. There is no specific
amount of fluid administered; however, a general guide for
Aep 1eun 1oy pm lenon jo %0z-01 aq ueo squaed susniog
Example VI: A 10-kg dog with no significant fluid losses is
The overall bolus is subtracted from total fluid need and
10% dehydrated.
hourly fluid rate is calculated. When bolusing fluids, the pa-
tient must be monitored for fluid overload (see below)
Maintenance = 10 kg × 66 ml/kg/day = 660 ml/day
Dehydration = 0.1 X 10 X 1000 = 1000 ml
Example IV: A 12-kg parvo dog with significant vomiting
Total fluid need = 1660 ml
and diarrhea is 5% dehydrated. Here the veterinarian has
Hourly fluid rate = 1660 ml/24 h = 69 ml/h
recommended placing the pet on 2X maintenance.
Milliter per second = (69 ml/h)/(3600 sec/h) = 0.02 ml/sec
2× Maintenance = 12 kg × 132 ml/kg/day = 1584 ml/day
Using a 10 drop per milliliter system minus drops per
Dehydration = 12 kg × (0.05) × 1000 = 600 ml
second:
Total Fluid Need = 2184 ml
Drops/sec = 0.02 ml/sec × 10 drops/ml =
The doctor suggests a bolus of 400 ml initially (20% of total
0.2 drops/sec or 1 drop/5 sec
fluid need). After the bolus, the pet requires an additional
() 1 00 - 1 t817 s  1x a 11 1 t841
Once drops per second are calculated, a chronicity strip
can be used to make sure the animal's hourly needs are being
calculated (see Figure 28.3). This type of strip, usually made
Hourly Fluid Rate = 1784 ml/24 h = 74 ml/h
of 1-inch white tape, is placed on a bag of fluids, and the times
are correlated with what the estimated fluid levels should be
 at that given time. This allows the technician the ability to ad.
Once the hourly rate is calculated, it can be entered into
just the fluid rate as it is checked every l-2 hours.
a fluid pump. The team member should still monitor hourly
the fluid intake because fluid pumps can be inaccurate. If a
Fluid Therapy for Shock
fluid pump is not available, the team member will need to
There are times when an animal is in a life-threatening con-
dition, such as shock or cardiovascular shutdown, and an
414
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
emergency fluid dose may need to be given. At this time,
Fluid for
this patient needs high fluid volumes to maintain their blood
Jasper
pressure and cardiac output. Emergency doses of fluids are
2/12/99
not associated or subtracted from daily need. They are given
69 cc/hr
until normal perfusion and cardiac output are returned and
the patient is no longer in shock. General guidelines for
emergency boluses are as follows:
1 drop / 5 sec
●Dogs: 90 ml/kg /h X wt (kg)
●Cats: 45 ml/kg/h X wt (kg)
3 pm
Example VlII: A 40-kg dog is hit by a car. He has poor
 pulse, gum color, and is nonresponsive. He is determined to
be in shock by the veterinarian, this patient can receive;
 5 pm.
Shock Dose = weight (kg) × 90 ml/kg/h
Emergency Dose = 40 kg × 90 ml/kg/h = 3600 ml/h
7 pm
Due to the life-threatening emergency, these fluids are
given as quickly as possible, often with a high-pressure bag
to maximize fluid administration (see Figure 28.4).
It is important to understand that these shock doses re-
present the maximum amount of fluids a "healthy” pet can
9 pm
receive in l hour before fluid begins to build up within
 the tissue. There are many patients that cammot tolerate
these large doses, and the animal must be closely moni-
tored for fluid overload while shock doses are being ad-
ministered.
11 pm
Once the pet is stabilized, it is re-evaluated by the veteri-
ap uo supuadap auissan si aen pn rnou pue ueu
hydration, medical disease, and current physical condition.
Please refer to Table 28.2 for a rough overview of fluid need
based on the patient's physical condition.
1 am
Complications-Fluid Overload
Fluid overload refers to the situation in which an animal is
receiving too many intravenous fluids or receiving fluids to0
3 am
quickly. If too much fluid is given, the excess fluid can begin
to pool outside the vessels and produce fluid buildup in the
tissue. If enough fluid accumulates in the lungs, the pet can
drown. Signs of fluid overload are
5am
clear nasal discharge as fluids are being given,
licking lips,
acting nauseous,
 fluid buildup in feet, under neck (edema), and
7 am
increased respiratory effort and respiratory crackles
evident.
9 am
Practice Tip: If signs of fluid overload occur, fluids
should be temporarily stopped and the doctor con-
Figure 28.3.Example of a chronicity
strip used to help monitor fluid rate of
tacted immediately.
a patient over time.
Chapter 28: Fluid Therapy
415
Discussing Intravenous Fluid Administration
(In-Patient) with the Client
Intravenous fluids are sterile fluids delivered di-
rectly into a vein for rehydration, flushing of tox-
ins, and fluid support of sick hospitalized patients.
 Animals on intravenous fluids must be maintained
in a hospitalized setting to monitor the pet for hy-
 dration or changes in the stability of the pet.
●Animals on intravenous fluids may be supported
for days in the hospital environment, depending on
their disease conditions.
 Intravenous fluids are meant to maintain fluid hy-
dration while also being able to supply the body
with needed electrolytes, sugars, and medications
necessary for the ill patient.
Applications and Administration of Intravenous
FluidsColloids
Colloids are large macromolecular synthetic solutions (i.e.,
hetastarch, pentastarch) or natural solutions (i.e., blood,
plasma, packed red blood cells) used in the treatment of
Figure 28.4.  An image of a modified human blood pressure
shock and the maintenance of intravascular fluid balance.
cuff. Fluid bags are slid into the pocket and the cuff inflated to
These large, dense molecules enter the blood vessels and in-
200-300 psi. This allows large amounts of fluids to be given in-
crease the amount of fluid drawn into the vessels, resulting
travenously in a matter of minutes. The patient must be carefully
in increased blood pressure. There are two categories of col-
monitored for fluid overload while the emergency bolus is being
loids: natural and synthetic.
administrated.
 Natural colloids include whole blood, plasma products,
and albumin.
Adminisfrafion
 Synthetic colloids are formulated from various sources,
 Intravenous fluids are administered through an indwelling
such as gelatins, polysaccharides (dextrans), or amylo-
peripheral vein, central line, or an intraosseous (in the bone)
pectins (hetastarch).
catheter. The fluids are administered through a sterile fluid
line, extension set, and possibly a t-connector into the cathe-
Pharmacologic classification is based upon molecular
ter. Each hospital has its own protocols for IV catheteriza-
weight, plasma half-life, and colloid oncotic pressure. Each
tion and fluid administration; the goal of the procedure is to
colloid solution within these groups has specific character-
 place a sterile system in place and bandage it to support the
istics, qualities, and side effects that must be considered in
catheter for long-term hospitalization.
the selection of the appropriate therapy for each patient.
Table 28.2. Estimate of fluid need based on hydration and fluid loss status.*
Species
Condition
Significant V/D
Suggested Fluid Administration Level
 Feline & canine
 0-5% dehydrated/stable
N
Maintenance→ 1.5 × maintenance
Feline & canine
 0-5% dehydrated/stable
Y
Bolus + 1.5-2×/maintenance
Feline & canine
7-9% dehydrated/stable
N
 Bolus + maintenance →> 1.5× maintenance
Feline & canine
7-9 % dehydrated/stable
Y
Bolus + 2X maintenance
Feline & canine
 9-12 % dehydrated/stable
N
Bolus + 2x maintenance
Feline & canine
9-12% dehydrated/stable
Y
Bolus + 2x/maintenance
Feline 
Unstable
Y or N
Shock fluid doses (45 ml/kg/h)
Canine
Unstable
Yor N
Shock fluid doses (90 ml/kg/h)
relative fluid level needed for a sick patient. Al ftuid administration rates are based solely on the veterinarian recommendations.
416
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
● Allergic reaction: These chemicals can produce moder-
ate to severe allergic reaction in the pet and should always
be administered slowly in a hospital situation.
function to pull fluid into the vascular supply, the pet
must be reasonably hydrated before administration. Giv-
ing colloids to a dehydrated animal can lead to further de-
hydration and poor circulation because the body is unable
to move these larger molecules to the bloodstream.
Calculation of Fluid Need
The only colloid that will be discussed for calculation infor-
 mation is hetastarch. Hetastarch is given in emergency cases
when normal intravenous fluids are not returming normal per-
fusion and strong pulses to the shocky patient. As with all
other fluid calculations, recommendations for fluid adminis-
 tration are made by the veterinarian. However, in an emer-
400
gency situation, the medical staff should have an understand-
ing of the needs of the patient and anticipate the veterinarian
in order to be ready to begin treatment of a life-threatened pet.
 A dose of hetastarch is based on the following.
●Cat: 11-15 ml/kg/day
Dog: 11-22 ml/kg/day
Figure 28.5.   An image of the synthetic colloid hetastarch.
Example VIll: A 5-kg feline with poor pulses and in shock
has already been given a large bolus of intravenous fluids.
The veterinarian is now recommending the use of hetastarch
in conjunction with the IV fluids. Dose range would be:
Indications
Colloids can serve two overall functions. They can increase
5 kg × 11-15 ml/kg/day = 55-75 ml/day
fluid uptake into the vessels from the tissue increasing blood
pressure. The colloids generally used for this function are
Complications
hetastarch (see Figure 28.5) and pentastarch.
Colloids can produce mild to severe allergic/anaphylactic re-
Colloids can replace necessary blood factors needed for
actions to administration (see Chapter 30). Patients should
oxygenation of tissue, clotting of blood, and wound healing.
be always maintained in a hospital setting under direct su-
The colloids used for this function are as follows.
pervision. Fluids should be given slowly, initially, to make
sure the pet is not having any severe reaction, especially in
● Packed red blood cells: Packed red blood cells serve as
felines. Although this is an uncommon complication, the pet
a source of red blood cells to help the patient increase its
must be closely monitored for
packed cell volume and increase the oxygen-carrying ca-
pacity of the blood.
 increasing dehydration,
●Plasma: Plasma is the fluid portion of blood that carries
increased respiratory effort,
the proteins necessary for clotting blood. Furthermore,
increasing heart/pulse rate,
plasma is rich in a protein called albumin, which main-
 paling of the mucous membranes,
respiratory wheezing,
sels. Without proper levels of albumin in the blood, fluid
 decreased mentation/responsivity,
can pool in the tissue, causing edema and decreasing
lateral or sternal recumbence,
blood pressure. Furthermore, albumin is a key protein in
collapse, and
tissue healing.
 cardiopulmonary arrest (severe cases).
Contraindications
Administration
 Each of these colloids has its own limitations, depending on the
Hetastarch can be administrated by a number of procedures.
patient's condition. The main contraindications are listed next.
Two possible procedures follow.
Chapter 28: Fluid Therapy
417
1V Fluid Administration Algorithm
 Step I: Maintenance Fluids:
Step II: Dehydration:
Wt (kg)× 66 cc/kg/day =
cc/day
Wt(kg）×
% Dehyd × 1000 m1/ =
cc/day
Note: Maintenance fluid may be I / - 2 X
Dehydration is expressed in decimal form: (ie., 5%
maintenance (99 - 132 cc/kg/day) due to fluid
dehydrated = 0.05, or I0% dehydrated = 0.1)
losses or diuresis.
Step III: Total Fluid Need (TFN)
TFN = Maintenance = Dehydration
With Fluid
Bolus
TFN
cc/day =
Step IIla: Bolus:
StepV: Drops/ Second
Bolus = TFN X 0.2
Without Fluid
M1/ Sec = hr/ 3600 sec
Bolus =
Bolus
× 02 =
Sec=
/ 3600 =
Drops / Sec
Step IIIb: Recalculate TFN
Step IV: Hourly Rate (hr)
Identify IV set drops/m]
New TFN = TFN - Bolus
Hourly Rate = TFN / 24 hrs
Usually 15 or 60 dr/ml
New TFN 
hr
24
cc/hr
Drops / Sec = ml/s × dr/ml
Dr/sec =
×15 or 60
drops /sec
+
Small patient (<10 pounds; requirements of <75 ml):
The hetastarch can be mixed with an even volume of in-
Discussing Colloid Therapy (In-Patient) with the
travenous fluids in an IV burette system and given over
Client
30-120 minutes.
●Colloids are a special class of fluid used to help in-
Larger patient (>15 pounds; 100-500 ml): The medica-
crease blood pressure or return necessary blood
-          
products to the life-threatened patient.
utes. Furthermore, the drug could be drawn up into a
 These liquids are slowly given intravenously in a
 number of syringes and injected into the IV line over the
hospitalized setting to help stabilize the patient.
same period of time.
 Although rare, these fluids can produce an allergic
for any changes in its stability.
 These fluids can greatly help in the stabilization of
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of Understanding the
the patient.
Concepts of Disease and Treatment. The exercises can be
done individually or as case rounds as they explore specific
topics in veterinary medicine that discuss clinical diagnos-
tics and treatment.
Chapter 29
Anesthesia
Introduction
these procedures are major orthopedic surgeries (i.e.
 tibial plateau leveling osteotomy), or an ear canal
Anesthesia is defined as a loss of sensation in a body part
ablation.
(local) or the entire body (general). The anesthetic drugs de-
●Stage IV: Deep anesthesia, which is close to death.
press part of the central or peripheral nervous system activ-
ity. Some goals of anesthesia are amnesia of the surgery,
muscle relaxation, lack of movement, and freedom from
Understanding the Anesthetic Machinery
pain. There are four stages of anesthesia.
The medical team must have a basic knowledge of the anes-
thetic equipment. This includes machine maintenance needs
Stage I: Voluntary movement: The patient will respond
and understanding the physical symptoms of the patient that
to stimuli and can move voluntarily.
would occur if there is a failure in the machinery. Equipment
 Stage II: Excitement phase: As the animal begins to
needs for anesthesia are discussed next.
succumb to anesthesia, the patient goes through an ex-
citement phase, which is noted by flailing of its limbs and
Endotracheal Tubes
acting as if it is trying to escape. The patient still sharply
Endotracheal tubes are plastic tubes that range from 2.5 mm
responds to stimulus and will blink briskly when the me-
to 14 mm and are a connective link between the patient's air-
-au [eiqadied) padden s! plaa al jo apoa jeseu je
way and the anesthetic machine. The tube should be clean
-n aq nouu pu au mf hn s ad a (asuods
prior to intubation and inflated to make sure the balloon cuff
bated with an endotracheal tube at this time. This is a
does not have any leaks. The balloon cuff expands to fill the
stage of delirium and involuntary movement.
tracheal dimensions. The seal prevents air from escaping
Stage Ml: Surgical anesthesia: The patient still re-
around the endotracheal tube and food and particulate mate-
sponds to stimuli but the jaw tone is relaxed so the ani-
rial from entering the trachea. The endotracheal cuff should
d a ai ss a si   a  p
always be deflated prior to extubation to prevent tracheal
tient may still have a normal heart and respiratory rate
and laryngeal damage.
and a sharp palpebral response, but can go through a sur-
gical procedure without response to stimuli and have am-
Laryngoscopes
nesia. This level can progress to a deeper surgical plane
Laryngoscopes are lighted oral speculums that are used to
in which the animal becomes profoundly depressed. The
 depress the tongue and adequately visualize the larynx. This
 patient's eyes roll back in its head there is no jaw or mus-
enables placing the endotracheal tube into the trachea (intu-
cle tone, a minimal or absent palpebral response is noted,
bation) with accuracy and limits the possibility of esopha-
and there is slowing of heart and respiratory rates. This
geal intubation. There are different sizes of laryngeal blades
stage is divided into four planes.
that allow the intubation of different sizes of animals.
 Light: The light anesthetic plane provides enough
central nervous system depression for minor proce-
Anesthetic Machines
dures (i.e., skin laceration repair).
The purpose of anesthetic machines is to deliver oxygen,
 Moderate: The moderate anesthetic plane provides
control the levels of anesthesia, and assist ventilation. The
enough central nervous system depression for minor
basic components of the machine are a compressed gas
to moderate anesthetic procedures (i.e., castration,
source (oxygen), a pressure regulator that controls pressure
subcutaneous lump removal).
leaving the compressed gas canister, a pressure gauge in-
Medium: Medium anesthetic depth produces more
mo e 'un uaxo an u al s jo juo a su
profound depression for major procedures such as
meter that controls the flow of oxygen, a vaporizer that
minor orthopedic care, spays, and declawing.
facilitates delivery of a controlled concentration of anesthe-
 Deep: The deep anesthetic plane is the deepest sur-
sia, and an oxygen flush valve that allows a rapid flush of
gical anesthesia used for major surgical procedures
oxygen directly into the anesthetic circuit, bypassing the va-
that produce significant pain response. Examples of
porizer.
419
420
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
APop-offValveblockstheflowof
gases out of the system.It is
closedwhen thepatientis
ventilated(Seebelow)
OxygenFlowMeter
Vaporizer
CarbonDioxideCollection
System
Anesthesia Circle
OxygenReservoirBag
BreathingCircuit
OxygenPressureGauge
Compressed gas source
Figure 29.1. Image of an anesthetic system.
Equipment Function
29.1). This system allows the animal to rebreathe the mix-
Vaporizer
ture of anesthesia and oxygen, reducing the amount of
 A vaporizer converts a volatile liquid anesthesia into vapor.
anesthetic liquid and oxygen used during the procedure.
Without functional carbon dioxide absorbents, the system
Carbon Dioxide Canisters
can build up an increased amount of carbon dioxide.
Canisters containing carbon dioxide-absorbent granules
 Non-rebreathing circuit: Non-rebreathing circuits
are
(i.e., Sodasorb) help filter carbon dioxide (toxin) out of the
used in patients that weigh less than 10 pounds and that
breathing circuit, preventing accumulation of carbon diox-
can fatigue easily from the increased work of breathing re-
ide in the body. If carbon dioxide levels are not controlled,
quired to move gas through the circle system. The carbon
increasing levels can inhibit many physiological processes,
dioxide and waste gases that are expired are eliminated
such as muscle, brain, and organ system functions. Granules
from the patient's next breath by the high oxygen flow into
should be changed for every 10 hours of anesthesia. In most
the circuit. This type of circuit increases the amount of liq-
cases the granules will show a bluish color change, but not
 uid anesthesia used because it requires higher oxygen
always.
flow to prevent rebreathing of carbon dioxide.
Active Scavenger Systems
Hospital Team Anesthetic Maintenance
Active scavenger systems are venting systems that actively
Requirements
expel anesthetic gases out of the environment. It is impor-
tant to reduce anesthesia exposure, which can cause fatigue
The hospital team must perform daily, weekly, and monthly
and headache. If using an absorbent canister system, it
maintenance on the anesthetic machinery to make sure that
should be routinely weighed to assess if the canister needs to
the anesthetic equipment can safely anesthetize the pet. By
be changed. These canisters are exhausted when they gain
far, the most important common cause of anesthetic acci-
50 g in weight.
dents and death is mismanagement of the anesthetic equip-
 aa an u s an g a 
Breathing Circuits
the following schedule.
There are two types of breathing circuits: non-rebreather and
a uo pas uasouo si adi adode au ssss a
Daily
patient's weight.
 At the beginning of each day, prior to any anesthesia proce-
 dures, the medical team must have the equipment evaluated
Circle circuit: This is the most common type of anes-
for safety. It must also be set up for the first surgical proce-
thetic circuit used for patients over 10 pounds (see Figure
 dure. An initial checklist follows.
Chapter 29: Anesthesia
421
1. Make sure the oxygen and scavenger systems are on.
 A general recommendation for canine endotracheal tube
 Ensure that oxygen levels are sufficient for the day's pro-
size is as follows.
cedures.
 2. Maintain anesthetic levels in the vaporizer. The vapor-
izer should be filled when indicated by the fill lines on
Endotracheal Tube Size
 Canine Patient's Weight
the window on the front of the vaporizer.
5 mm
4-6 Ib (1.8-2.7 kg)
3. Evaluate carbon dioxide granules for signs of exhaus-
5.5 mm
7-8 Ib (3.2-3.6 kg)
tion. If carbon dioxide builds up to toxic levels within an
6 mm
9-11 Ib (4-5 kg)
anesthesia circuit, the patient's respiratory center will be
6.5 mm
12-14 Ib (5.5-6.4 kg)
7 mm
15-20 Ib (6.8-9 kg)
imhibited stopping respiration. The carbon dioxide-
7.5 mm
17-20 Ib (7.7-9 kg)
absorbent granules should be evaluated for exhaustion
8mm
21-26 Ib (9.5-11.8 kg)
after every procedure and at the end of the day.
8.5 mm
27-28 Ib (12.3-12.7 kg)
 4. Assemble the anesthesia machine. The anesthetic ma-
9.0 mm
29-31 Ib (13-14 kg)
chine should be assembled with the correct circuit based
9.5 mm
32-33 Ib (14.5-15 kg)
10 mm
31-40 Ib (14-18 kg)
upon the patient's weight. An oxygen reservoir bag
11 mm
41-65 Ib (18.6-29.5 kg)
should be placed on the machine that best correlates to
12 mm
66-85 Ib (30-38.6 kg)
the patient's weight. The bag should be chosen as follows.
14-16 mm
86-120 Ib (39-55 kg)
Reservoir Bag Size
Patient's Weight
Recommendations of endotracheal tube size for feline
0.5-I bag (circle or non-rebreather)
<20 Ib
patients are based on weight.
11
20140
21
40-60
31
60-100
Endotracheal Tube Size
 Feline Patient's Weight
3 mm
2-3 Ib (0.9-1.4 kg)
5. Evaluate machinery for gas leaks.
3.5 mm
4-6 Ib (1.8-2.7 kg)
● Tum on the oxygen supply to the anesthesia machine.
4 mm
7-10 Ib (3.2-4.5 kg)
5 mm
11 Ib or more (5 kg +)
Ensure there is enough oxygen in the oxygen cylinder
for the entire procedure.
● Close off the pop-off valve and cover the Y-piece with
the palm or thumb.
 7. Have monitoring devices and warm water heating
●Turn on the oxygen until the reservoir bag is inflated to
pads ready.
20-cm water pressure.
 8. Make sure pop-off valve is open. The pop-off valve is
● Turm the oxygen off and watch the manometer (pres-
 closed for ventilation and to evaluate the anesthetic sys-
sure gauge) or the reservoir bag, if using a non-
tem for leaks. If the valve is not open while the patient is
rebreathing circuit. If the pressure drops rapidly, or the
 attached no gas can escape the system. This creates a
reservoir bag deflates, gradually tum on the oxygen
buildup of pressure that can damage the lungs and cause
flow meter until the pressure remains constant. The
potential death. This cannot be overemphasized as this is
flow rate of oxygen necessary to maintain a constant
the primary cause of anesthetic accident.
pressure indicates the size of the leak, or leaks, in the
 anesthesia machine.
At the end of each day, team members should do the fol-
o  asa 'su u   o
lowing.
inlet and outlet, any screw-down fittings, and the seals 
 s qoso an o n  don an 
1. Open the pop-off valve all the way and leave it open
leaks. When the pressure remains constant with the
 overmight so that any moisture in the valve can evaporate.
oxygen turmed off, the machine can be considered leak
 If moisture evaporates with the valve closed, it may cause
free.
 the valve to stick in the closed position.
● Open the pop-off valve after the leak check.
2. Remove the dome on the expiratory side of the rebreath-
 6. Get the endotracheal tube and laryngoscope ready.
ing circuit, dry the flutter valve, and leave the dome off
Two to three sizes of endotracheal tubes should be read-
 ovemight to allow any moisture that has accumulated in
ied for the procedure. The size of the endotracheal tube
the circuit to dry.
depends on the patient's weight, size, and breed. Certain
3. Rinse the breathing hoses with mild soap or dilute beta-
breeds of dogs (i.e., pugs, shar-peis, English bull dogs)
 dine solution and allow them to air dry overnight.
        
4. Check the carbon dioxide absorbent. If the absorbent is
body weight suggests.
not discarded when the indicator initially tums color, it
422
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
will fade back to white even if the absorbent is exhausted.
adrenocorticism, etc.) should be identified prior to adminis-
 Baralyme and soda lime are caustic when wet; keep them
tering anesthesia.
away from your eyes, nose, and mouth,as well as endotra-
cheal tubes, breathing hoses, and any other means by
Is the Patient on Any Prescribed, Homeopathic, or
which it could reach your patients' lungs.
Over-the-Counter Medication?
5. Tum all medical gasses off at the tank.
Many medications can affect anesthesia or surgery. For ex-
6. Look at the machine, especially the base and wheels. Use
ample, chronic aspirin therapy can produce slowed platelet
a nonvolatile product to clean the machine; Windex
function and increased bleeding. Many owners will not real-
works well. Never use a petroleum-based product such as
Aue jo is!l v 'suoneoipauu ane udse se yons sanup yeul az!
WD-40 or Vaseline on your anesthetic machine.
current medications should be obtained prior to surgery. To
Weekly and Monthly Maintenance Needs
place a statement on the surgical release form, such as “Your
Needed weekly and monthly maintenance can vary from ma-
pet should not receive any supplements, vitamins, aspirin, or
chine to machine. It is recommended that the service manual
other medications or over-the-counter products 24 hours
be reviewed for long-term maintenance needs and that the
prior to anesthesia'
medical teams implement a schedule of proper weekly and
monthly maintenance based on the service manual.
Has the Pet Ever Shown Allergies to Any Medication,
Food or Vaccinations?
It is important to know if a patient is allergic to any medica-
An Overview of the Anesthetic Procedure
tions. If medication is given under anesthesia (i.e., antibi-
Although the veterinarian is responsible for the surgical pro-
otics) or in recovery, the patient may not show typical symp-
cedure, the medical team member is responsible for properly
toms of allergic reaction and may develop a more severe
monitoring the anesthetized patient and should be able to
anaphylactic shock. An understanding of any drug allergies
  am o   n d 
The team member must be able to monitor the patient ade-
thesia. It is important to evaluate if the patient is sensitive to
egg/chicken protein, because propofol anesthesia is egg
record their findings, and relate the information to the other
based.
team members. The team member responsible for monitor-
 ing must be able to perform the following steps.
Has the Patient Ever Had a Problem with Anesthesia?
 In some cases owners will report that their pet had a prob-
Step I: Obtain a Thorough Medical History on
lem with anesthetic during its last procedure, such as a slow
Admittance
recovery, low blood pressure during the procedure, etc. If
It is recommended that the history be obtained through a
there has been a concerm with a prior procedure, the medical
written questionnaire that the client signs. Although outlined
in Chapter 5, a complete medical history should be dis-
records obtained for the veterinarian to review prior to anes-
cussed with the client to make sure the patient is a good
thesia to determine what may have caused the problem.
anesthetic candidate. Some key questions should be asked.
Step II: Obtaining Presurgery Clinical Diagnostics
When Did the Patient Last Eat?
Presurgery clinical diagnostics can vary depending on the
Patients should not have access to food for 8 hours prior to
 age, health, history of disease, and the medical concerns by
surgery. A patient may vomit if there is food in its stomach
the veterinarian. Each hospital team develops their own list
while under anesthesia. The unconscious patient cannot
 of recommendations/requirements for specific ages, breeds,
properly swallow, allowing an aspiration of food particles
pue
species of their patients. An example of possible
into the trachea and lungs, producing a life-threatening
presurgery clinical diagnostics may be
pneumonia (aspiration pneumonia). In some situations,
surgery may need to be postponed until the animal is prop-
 Juvenile blood screen (for patients <12 months old):
erly fasted. However, small amounts of water up to admis-
Complete blood count
 Mini-chemistry (i.e., BUN, creatinine, ALT, glucose,
etc.)
Is There Any History of Previous Disease or Medical
●Adult blood screen (for patients 1-6 years):
Conditions?
Complete blood count
A questionnaire with a list of important medical conditions
- Full chemistry and electrolytes
or diseases may help the client focus on primary concerns
 Urinalysis
that could be affected by anesthesia. Conditions such as
 Geriatric clinical diagnostic (for patients 7 years +):
seizures, heart disease, kidney or liver problems, infectious
Complete blood count
disease, or hormonal diseases (i.e., diabetes mellitus, hyper-
 Full chemistry and electrolytes
Chapter 29: Anesthesia
423
Urinalysis
member must understand the purpose of each drug used its
Thyroid (felines)
physiological effect on the patient, and any possible side ef-
 Electrocardiogram
fects. A brief overview of the drugs and their purpose in the
Blood pressure
anesthetic process are discussed next.
Step HHl: IV Catheterization and Intravenous Fluid
Preanesthetic Medication
Placement of an intravenous catheter and administration of
This category of medication refers to a variety of medica-
fluids during surgery can be very important in maintaining
tions that can be used to sedate the patient, reduce the
hydration and blood pressure, administering emergency
amount of anesthesia needed, decrease pain, and minimize
 drugs and medications, and ensuring adequate organ and tis-
autonomic reflex activity that slows the heart and respiratory
sue perfusion. Suggest surgical fluid rates are
systems. The choices of which medications to use depend on
the experience and preference of the veterinarian.
10-20 ml/kg in the first hour of surgery
5-10 ml/kg/h in each successive hour
Anticholinergic Drugs
This category of drug blocks the part of the autonomic nerv-
Fluid rates should be decreased if the patient is suffering
ous system that reflexively slows the heart, increases produc-
from cardiac disease, acute renal failure, hypoproteinemia,
tion of secretions from the respiratory and gastrointestinal
or other diseases that could produce increased risk of fluid
system, produces movement of the intestines, and constricts
overload and pulmonary edema (see Chapter 27). Fluid rates
the iris of the eye. The goal of this medication is to
can be increased with concerns of hypotension, blood loss,
 or disease conditions that require an increased fluid rate. If
 increase heart rate,
blood loss is occurring during surgery, it takes three times as
 increase bronchodilatation, and
much fluid to make up for the amount of blood lost.
 decrease secretions within the gastrointestinal and respi
Furthermore, if the packed cell volume is less than 20%,
ratory system.
whole blood should be used immediately. If bleeding is
rapid, packed cell volume may not show the actual decrease
Examples
for 1-2 hours. An estimate of blood loss is
Examples include
1 blood-soaked 3 × 3 cotton sponge = 10 cc blood
 atropine, and
10 Q-tips soaked = 1 ml of blood
+glycopyrrolate.
Step IV: Evaluating the Anesthetic Patient
Function
This should not be confused with the veterinarian's physical
sa  ui pn aq A sp oo
examination of the patient, which should be completed con-
 procedures but are most often used in conjunction with other
currently. Prior to anesthesia and surgery, the monitoring
drugs.
team member should do a thorough precursory physical ex-
Anesthetics that are most likely to produce bradycardia
 amination. This allows the team member to appreciate the
are
patient's cardiovascular and other body systems prior to pre-
anesthetic medications or anesthesia. Furthermore, if an ab-
Alphaz agonists: xylazine/medetomidine
normality is detected (i.e., pulse deficit) by the team mem-
 Opioids: morphine, oxymorphone, hydromorphone
ber, the veterinarian can reassess the patient as an anesthetic
 Short-term induction anesthetics: thiamylal (Biotal),
candidate. The preanesthetic examination (see Chapter 6)
propofol (Rapinovet)
should include:
Gas anesthesia: isoflurane, sevoflurane
 Dissociative anesthetics: for example, ketamine, which
auscultation of the cardiovascular and respiratory system,
+
can increase salivation.
 appreciation of pulse quality,
temperature,
Side Effects/Contraindications
 appreciation of mucous membrane color and capillary re-
Due to the pharmacological effects of anticholinergic med-
fill time, and
ications, the following concerns should be noted.
●hydration status.
● Tachycardia: These drugs can produce a profound
Step V: Understand the Induction and Maintenance
tachycardia. Patients with underlying heart disease, espe-
Anesthetics and Their Effect on the Patient
cially those prone to arrhythmia, should be treated cau-
Specific medications can affect mucous membrane color,
tiously with anticholinergic medications. The reflex
heart rate, respiratory rate, and other physiological factors of
tachycardia that is produced can stress the cardiovascular
the patient. In order to properly monitor anesthesia, the team
system and potentiate shock and collapse.
424
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
● Ieus: Anticholinergic drugs should also be used with
use of transdermal fentanyl, patches need to be applied 12 or
caution with patients with intestinal diseases (i.e., intes-
a a a o s araq s ao
tinal obstruction, gastric dilatation and volvulus syn-
Caution should be used with patients that have a predisposi-
drome, etc.) that produce gastrointestinal stasis (ileus).
tion to cardiac or respiratory disease. When using a fentanyl
patch that does not take affect for 12-18 hours, other anal-
Tranguilizers
gesics (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or other opi-
 These drugs are used to depress the central nervous system,
d  g d m so  a s (
aid in restraint, and reduce struggling of the patient. They
also reduce the dose requirement of induction and mainte-
Induction Agents
 a po sis xa a an  sp a
The goal of induction agents is to bypass stage II anesthesia
thesia.
(excitatory phase) so the patient can be intubated, gaining
rapid control of the airway, and maintained on gas or in-
● Phenothiazines: The phenothiazines (i.e., acepro-
 jectable anesthesia.
mazine) are long-term medications (usually lasting 8-12
hours in duration) used more for sedation. The drug is
Examples
more effectively used in combination with other sedatives
Dissociative agents: Drugs such as ketamine, in con-
(i.e., butorphanol). Phenothiazines should be used with
junction with benzodiazepines (i.e., Valium), can be used
caution in liver and kidney patients, geriatric and debili-
for induction of anesthesia. These combinations have few
tated animals, patients in shock, and animals with
contraindications and can be used in geriatric and ill pa-
seizures. Furthermore, excited or stressed patients may
tients.
not become sedate when acepromazine is used alone.
Short-acting barbiturates: Drugs such as thiamylal,
Benzodinepines: Drugs such as Diazepam and midozo-
 propofol, and thiopental can be used for induction to get
lam can produce mild to moderate sedation more safely
the animal on anesthesia and then quickly inactivated.
a m ps a u sp as d  an n
These drugs must be used with caution in patients with
control seizures and can be combined with other anes-
cardiac disease (especially arrhythmia); they often cause
thetics as induction agents (see below). When used alone,
a short-term cessation in respiration (apnea).
benzodinepines can cause unruliness in dogs and cats be-
cause the drug can cause loss of inhibition.
Side Effects
 Alphaz agonists: Drugs such as xylazine (Rompun) and
An anesthetic overdose leads to significant cardiac and respi-
medetomidine (Domitor) can produce excellent calming,
 ratory depression, which can result in the death of the patient.
muscle relaxation, and short-duration analgesia. These
drugs are generally combined with opioids or ben-
Maintenance Anesthesia Agents
zodinepines to produce more reliable sedation. These
 This category refers to inhalant (gas) or injectable anesthe-
drugs can produce serious hypotension, bradycardia, and
 sia that produces unconsciousness, muscle relaxation, and
arrhythmias and should be used only in healthy cats and
 analgesia.
dogs. Furthermore, excited or stressed patients may not
become sedate when alphaz agonists are used alone.
Examples
+
Opioid agonist/antagonist: Drugs such as butorphanol
 In most hospitals, long-term anesthesia is maintained with gas
(Torbutrol) and buprenorphine (Buprenex) help reduce
anesthesia (i.e., isoflurane, sevoflurane) (see Figure 29.2).
the patient's response to pain.
Function
Side Effects
Gas anesthesia allows for rapid changes in the depth of anes-
 Besides the specific side effects listed above, this category
 thesia and more rapid recovery. Inhalant anesthesia, like in-
of drugs can lead to oversedation, which may be dangerous 
jectable anesthetics, can produce severe cardiopulmonary
for the anesthetized animal.
a suaudnba jo daardn pue asuadxa sanbau pue saa
most common anesthetics are:
Analgesics
 This class of medication helps decrease pain sensitivity prior
 Isoflurane: This newer generation anesthetic has low
to, during, and after surgery. By including analgesics in pre-
solubility with 97.4% of the gas exhaled. It produces a
anesthetic drug combinations, the amount of pain the patient
variable amount of cardiac and respiratory depression de-
experiences and the amount of subsequent analgesics
pending on the dose and depth of anesthesia.
needed after surgery is reduced.
 Sevoflurane: This is the newest gas anesthesia available.
 It is the least soluble, producing quick induction and re-
Example—Opioids
covery. Patients on sevoflurane must be monitored
Drugs such as oxymorphone, morphine, and fentanyl are
closely because they can begin to wake up from mainte-
commonly used to produce analgesia and sedation. With the
nance at a slightly more rapid rate.
(a)
d
Figure 29.2. Intubation and maintenance. Once the patient is
induced, a laryngoscope is positioned to depress the tongue and
visualize the larynx, and the endotracheal tube is placed in the 
trachea (a). The tube is then tied in place (b). The cuff is inflated.
Care should be taken not to overinflate the cuff and damage the
trachea (c). The animal is placed on a circle circuit (d). A petro-
(e)
leum eye ointment is applied to the eye (e).
425
426
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Side Effects
Step VI: Monitoring Anesthesia
Potential side effects depend on the patients and their health
Monitoring anesthesia is the most important technical re-
status (i.e., heart disease), the length of the procedure, the pre-
sponsibility associated with surgical procedures. The anes-
anesthetic medication, and the level of gas anesthesia on
thetized patient can succumb to anesthesia and die within 5
which a patient is maintained. Specific side effects are listed
minutes. The team member must be able to constantly eval-
next.
uate the cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurologic systems
for changes that could signal a change in status.
●  Increased depression of heart and respiratory func-
tion: Slowing of the heart and respiratory rates, hy-
Anesthetic Record
poxia, and decreased cardiac output can be observed as
Although state requirerments for an anesthetic record can
the patient enters deeper anesthesia. In some cases re-
vary, the team member is also responsible for maintaining a
 a  s o a  s 
concise record, which carries physiological data measured
may need assisted ventilation by hand or mechanical
throughout the anesthetic period. Team members should
ventilation.
record the patient's vital signs every 5 minutes to locate
●Cardiac arrhythmias: With decreased cardiac and respi-
trends that may signal a change in status. This document is
ratory function, tissue can be hypoxic. Decreased oxy-
 a legal record of the anesthetic procedure and should contain
genation of cardiac muscle can produce arrhythmias that
documentation of the following.
further decrease cardiac output.
● Hypotension: With decreased cardiac output and a de-
 Preanesthetic exam and pertinent lab values
pressed central nervous system, the patient's ability to
 Drugs used for premedication, induction, and mainte-
perfuse and maintain blood pressure decreases. In an
nance of anesthesia
emergency situation the patient can succumb because the
 Periodic physical examination of the patient's physical at-
decreased blood pressure cannot maintain adequate per-
tributes, including
fusion and the body cannot compensate.
temperature/pulse/respiration,
Hypothermia: The temperature of the patient must be
 muscle tone,
- a a  p  p
eye reflexes,
mia. Heat is lost to the environment in several ways:
 capillary refill time, and
Surgical scrub, especially alcohol, increases heat loss
cardiac and respiratory auscultation (if possible).
through evaporation.
●Anesthetic gas level (the vaporizer setting at each evalu-
- An open surgical site can increase heat loss into the
ation period)
environment.
- A cold surgical table can absorb a great deal of
Any clinical data should also be recorded during the pe-
warmth from the patient.
riodic physical examinations, depending on the type and
 Inspired anesthetic can lower core temperature.
length of procedure and the availability of monitoring equip-
- The patient loses the ability to shiver and vasocon-
ment. These parameters may include
strict its vessels to produce and maintain heat.
Hyperthermia (rare): Anesthetic reactions producing
fever are most common in the following:
blood pressure,
percent oxygenation of blood (SPO2),
 Malignant hyperthermia: In this syndrome patients
blood gas,
may have metabolic reactions to the gas itself, produc-
 ing significant fevers (>105° Fahrenheit) and increas-
 packed cell volume/total solids, and
EKG monitoring.
ing carbon dioxide to greater then 80-100 mm Hg,
producing death.
- Nordic breed dogs: The husky, malamute, etc., have
Other data that should be recorded include
 o a e p o s  e
ture, producing higher than normal body temperatures
 the rate per hour and total amount of fluids administered,
while under anesthesia.
and 
 Inhalant anesthesia: Although more commonly re-
 how the patient recovers and the time of endotracheal ex-
tubation.
ported in patients undergoing halothane anesthesia, it
has been rarely reported in patients anesthetized with
isoflurane.
Physical Monitoring of the Anesthetic Patient
- Injectable anesthesia: Certain drugs (i.e., ketamine
The monitoring team member must be able to do a quick
and alphaz agonists) can reset the body's thermoregu-
and thorough physical examination of the patient prior
latory center for up to 8-12 hours, and as a result
d aa  a    
fever can be seen.
ters until the animal is fully recovered. (The triage exami-
Chapter 29: Anesthesia
427
(b)
Figure 29.3.  Evaluating anesthetic depth. Good monitors of anesthetic depth are palpebral reflex (a), muscular jaw tone (b), mucous
 membrane color and capillary refill time (c), and the pinch-withdrawal reflex (d).
nation is discussed in Chapter 6.) This process may take a
Furthermore, the animal's lungs should be auscultated for
considerable amount of time, even after the endotracheal 
crackles suggestive of fluid overload, pulmonary edema sec-
tube is removed. The following parameters should be
ondary to heart disease, or other pathology.
carefully monitored during the anesthetic period (see
Figure 29.3).
Mucous Membrane Color and Capillary Refill Time
son a jo ud pu a lan An  ssa
Pulse Quality and Auscultation of the Heart
 membrane color can suggest decreased cardiac output, bleed-
The team members should both auscultate the heart rhythm
ing, or early shock. In emergency surgery, spontaneous bruis-
 and evaluate pulse quality. Any pulse deficits, decreased
 ing can suggest bleeding coagulopathy or disseminated in-
pulse quality, severe bradycardia, or tachycardia should be
travascular coagulopathy. Any significant changes should be
reported to the veterinarian immediately.
reported to the veterinarian immediately.
Respiratory Rate and Auscultation
Temperature
The patient respiratory rate and character should be ob-
Hypothermia can challenge the patient and challenge the
      f a n sd 
cardiovascular system. Patients having significant hypother-
a  sd  (a) sa   psa
 mia (temperature <96° Fahrenheit) should be warmed up
to be ventilated until the animal begins to breathe on its own.
with a warm water bottle, surgical warm water heating pads,
428
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
or blankets. Rewarming requires that 60% of the patient's
Blood Pressure
body surface area be in contact with an active rewarming de-
Blood pressure is the most important indicator of physiol-
vice. Covering the legs, tail, and head reduces significant
ogy. Blood pressure monitoring allows the medical team
heat loss.
    assa  s a  
change in status. During anesthesia, the primary concerm is
Central Nervous System Evaluation
decreasing blood pressure, suggesting hypotension, de-
The patient's anesthetic depth can be evaluated by ocular re-
creased cardiac output, and shock. Decreasing blood pres-
flexes, anal and jaw tone, and muscle relaxation.
sure may be the first indication of a patient's instability and
may need to be aggressively handled by the medical team.
Ocular Reflexes
Eye Position
Capnography
As the patient begins light anesthesia, the eyes are generally
The carbon dioxide in expired gas is measured by infra-red
centered. As the pet begins to enter the surgical anesthetic
spectrophotometry. The measurement of the expired carbon
plane, the eyeballs move downward and medially. If the pa-
dioxide correlates to the arterial carbon dioxide levels. In-
tient progresses deeper, the eyes can come back to the cen-
creased carbon dioxide levels in the patients can inhibit the
ter position and pupils are usually dilated.
respiratory center of the brain and slow or stop respiration.
Palpebral Reflex
Temperature
By placing light pressure on the medial or lateral skin
As discussed previously, hypothermia and, rarely, hyperther-
around the eyes, a blink reflex is produced (palpebral re-
mia can be side effects of the anesthesia procedure.
flex). In early anesthesia, the reflex is brisk; as the patient.
progresses deeper, the reflex slows until it disappears com-
Electrocardiogram
pletely in deep anesthesia. It should be noted that if done too
The electrocardiogram evaluates the normal EKG rhythm
 often, the reflex can exhaust itself.
and helps the medical team mermber detect any cardiac ar-
Corneal Reflex
        
Chapter 24).
By placing light pressure on the cornea, the eye should re-
tract and the patient blinks. Care should be taken when eval-
Pulse Oximetry
uating the corneal reflex, since increased digital pressure
 The pulse oximeter evaluates the percentage of oxygenation
may produce comeal injury (i.e., comeal ulcer). As the pa-
tient enters deeper levels of anesthesia, the cormeal reflexes
saturation within the hemoglobin. The sensors are attached
decrease until it disappears completely. This disappears
to a region of the patient's body where the device can evalu-
close to death and should always be present unless patient is
 ate Oxygenation values within the smaller capillaries of the
body. Common locations for placement of the probe are the
maintained at a deep plane of anesthesia (i.e., plane 4, deep
anesthesia) due to a major orthopedic procedure.
tongue, the interdigital region, the ventral aspect of the tail
(with hair shaved, using the rectal probe), or the large mus-
Anal Tone
cle masses of the hind legs (tendon probe needed).
As the patient enters deeper levels of anesthesia, its normal
anal tone relaxes until the anus is fully dilated.
Step VIl: Recovery
The goal of recovery is to discontinue anesthesia, extubate
Degree of Muscle Relaxation
the patient, retum the patient to normal body temperature,
As the patient enters a deeper level of anesthesia, muscle
and monitor and treat the patient for pain. A suggested pro-
tone also decreases. There is absence of voluntary move-
tocol for recovery is as follows.
ment, shivering, or withdrawal of the paw when it is pinched
(the pinch reflex).
1. Turn off vaporizer and increase the oxygen flow for
3-4 l/min for 3-5 min: This will allow the patient to
Electronic Anesthetic Monitoring Devices
o a p s san   pa
There are a variety of electronic monitors that aid the med-
genation until the patient is fully recovered.
ical team in observing body temperature, EKG, pulse oxi-
2. Deflate endotracheal cuff: This cuff is deflated only
metry, carbon dioxide levels (capnography), respiration,
when the patient can once again guard its airway (i.e.,
and blood pressure. Each hospital evaluates its needs and de-
swallow); 30-50% of patients experience silent regur-
cides which monitoring modality best suits its medical team.
 gitation. Removal of the tube with the cuff inflated can
However it is important to understand that no monitoring
produce tracheal and larymgeal irritation, causing postop-
system can replace the monitoring team members evalua-
erative coughing, gagging, and possible anorexia.
tion of the anesthetized patient. Examples of monitoring de-
3. Change the animal's position and rub the chest:
vices are discussed next.
Changing the patient's position from lateral to sternal re-
Chapter 29: Anesthesia
429
cumbency and rubbing the chest gently helps the patient
● Oscillometric arterial blood pressure readings are auto-
wake.
matically measured by machine. The cuff width must be
 4. Reevaluate patient until extubated: The patient's tem-
40% of the limb circumference for accurate measure-
perature, pulse, and respiration should be reevaluated pe.
ments. It may not be reliable in small patients (<5-7 kg).
riodically and recorded until extubation. If the patient is
 Motion will interfere with measurements and oscillomet-
still hypothermic, warm water blankets, warm towels,
ric readings are inaccurate at low blood pressures. The
and other warming devices covering at least 60% of the
machines can be relatively expensive.
patient's surface area should be used until normal body
● Doppler devices used for arterial blood pressure meas-
temperature is obtained.
urement emit an audible noise with every pulse, enabling
 5. Draw clinical diagnostics: If postsurgical diagnostics
pulse rate and rhythm to be assessed in addition to arte-
(packed cell volume, blood pressure, etc.) are needed,
rial blood pressure. Again, cuff width is 40% of the limb
samples should be obtained at this time.
circumference for accurate measurement. This method is
 6. Monitor for pain: Depending on the procedure, the pa-
reliable in all patients, including small patients (<5-7
tient should be closely monitored for evidence of pain.
kg). Doppler is technically more difficult than oscillom-
Tachycardia, increased respiratory effort, or unusual pos-
etry, but can be mastered easily. Devices are relatively in-
h ad an nn ssas A uissadxa pong no a
expensive to acquire.
 feeling pain. Any changes within these parameters should
 Direct arterial blood pressure measurement is the most
be discussed with the veterinarian.
accurate method. Technically, it is the most difficult
7. Extubate the patient: When the patient is sitting ster-
method to master, and the monitors are expensive. Risks
nally and swallowing, the endotracheal tube with the cuff
 associated with placing an arterial catheter are small but
deflated should be carefully removed. Care should be
include infection, arteritis, and hemorrhage. Arterial
taken to keep the patient sitting stemally when extubating
catheters also provide access for arterial blood sampling
in case the patient begins to vomit. If vomiting is noted,
and blood gas analysis.
the animal should be immediately positioned with its
head lower than its body so that no particles of debris can
Causes of Hypotension
be aspirated into the trachea or lungs.
Causes of hypotension include relative or absolute hypo-
volemia, shock, sepsis, and drug effects: propofol, inhalant
Handling Anesthetic Complications
anesthetics, and barbiturates.
Anesthesia causes stress to the homeostatic processes of the
Concerns of Hypotension
body, causing respiratory and cardiac depression, especially
 The most serious adverse effect of hypotension is decreased
in high-risk patients. Hypotension, cessation of respiration,
oxygen delivery to tissues. Anaerobic metabolism is precip-
hypothermia, arrhythmias, and cardiopulmonary arrest can
itated and acidemia and acidosis will develop. Ischemic
occur in any patient without warning (see Anesthetic Flow.
organ damage will occur within minutes (less than 20-30) in
chart on p. 432). However, if the team member is observant
the kidneys, liver, and brain.
and monitors vigilantly, certain anesthetic emergencies can
be treated in the early phases and the emergency controlled.
Treatment
Inter vention is necessary if the systolic pressure falls below:
Hypotension
Canine: 60 mm Hg (mean blood pressure)
tient, regardless of health status. It is the only method to as-
Feline: 100 mm Hg (systolic blood pressure)
poxic tissue damage. Indirect (noninvasive) methods include
Therapies
oscillometric techniques and Doppler ultrasound. Direct (in-
Therapies for hypotension include the following:
vasive) methods require arterial catheterization.
 Normal values for arterial blood pressure in dogs and cats
Decrease the depth of anesthesia.
are as follows.
 Bolus IV fluids in 10 ml/kg intervals (checking pressures
between boluses).
 Use colloid fluids (i.e., hetastarch) in a rapid infusion to
Systolic
110-160 mm Hg
help increase central perfusion.
Use medications to help increase blood pressure (i.e.,
Diastolic
70-90 mm Hg
70-90 mm Hg
 dopamine or dobutamine) by intravenous infusion.
Mean 
Caution
Hypertension may occasionally be seen in anesthetized pa-
Methods for measuring blood pressure are listed here.
tients. Hypertension associated with chronic renal failure
430
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
may diminish, or completely resolve, while patients are
complished by squeezing the reservoir bag when the pa-
anesthetized. This is due to the potent vasodilatory actions
tient starts to inspire. Peak inspiratory pressures (PIP)
of the anesthetic drugs. Anesthetic-associated causes of hy-
 u oe   p o ua m a aa inus
pertension (systolic >150 mm Hg) include pain, increased
patients. PIP may need to be increased up to 60 cm HO
carbon dioxide concentration in the body (hypercarbia),
for patients with restrictive thoracic disease: pleural effu-
fever, catecholamine release, and drug effects from keta-
sion, pneumothorax, thoracic mass, etc. Disease of the
mine or alphaz agonists.
lung tissue makes it very fragile, and positive pressure
ventilation may easily lead to pneumothorax, even at very
Hypoventilation
low PIP.
Hypoventilation is one of the most common anesthesia com-
●A mechanical ventilator may also take over the duty of
plications encountered in veterinary practice. A reservoir
moving gas into and out of the lungs. There are many
bag that is the correct volume for the patient will give some
types of mechanical ventilators; however, the concepts
indication regarding depth of ventilation (tidal volume).
are the same: ensuring an adequate tidal volume (10-15
 Monitoring blood carbon dioxide levels by arterial blood gas
is the most accurate way of monitoring adequacy of ventila-
 minute (8-16), and avoiding pressure trauma to the lungs
tion. A second choice is monitoring end-tidal carbon diox-
(barotraumas) (PIP less than 30 cm H2O).
ide. The pulse oximeter is actually a very poor way to assess
 Improving cireulation by administering IV fluids and
ventilation until a patient is already in a crisis.
supporting blood pressure will improve circulation to all
tissues.
Normal Physiologic Response
 An appropriately sized reservoir bag empties by one-third if
Inadvertent Hypothermia
the patient is moving the normal tidal volume of gas (10-15
Of the three most common anesthetic complications (hy-
ml/kg). Normal arterial carbon dioxide measured by blood
pothermia, hypotension, hypoventilation), hypothermia is
gas analysis is 35-45 mm Hg. Normal end-tidal carbon diox-
 the easiest to document without the aid of expensive equip-
ide under anesthesia is 35-55 mm Hg. Use the following val-
ment. All that is needed is a hand-held thermometer. Rectal
ues to troubleshoot the end-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring:
 temperature is usually 1° to 2° F lower than core temperature
due to loss of muscle tone. It may be lower during proce-
● Carbon dioxide values in excess of 55 mm Hg suggest
dures that expose the perirectal tissues: caudal abdominal,
that assisted or controlled ventilation should be initiated.
perineal, etc. Tympanic membrane temperatures can be very
●Carbon dioxide values less than 35 mm Hg suggest that
accurate because the middle ear shares the same vascular
the patient's breathing should be checked. If the patient is
supply as the hypothalamus. However, ear thermometers can
ventilating, rule out hyper ventilation.
Esophageal readings reflect the temperature of the great ves-
Cause
sels. Other methods of monitoring temperature, oral, axil-
-Ay aq on sadde 1o iou suua si juaed aun 1l
lary, and skin surface, are not accurate.
poventilating, and endotracheal tube carbon dioxide is low,
then circulation to the lungs must be questioned. At this
Normal Physiologic Response
point, assess APB. If APB is adequate, then there may be a
The skin surface temperature rises and falls with the envi-
 profound ventilation/perfusion mismatch. This occurs when
ronmental temperature. Core body temperature is closely
gas is not reaching the alveoli in large areas of the lung that
regulated by the hypothalamus.
are still receiving normal blood flow, or large areas are re-
There are three tissue layers designed to insulate the body
ceiving a normal amount of gas in the alveoli but have lost
and prevent heat loss. These consist of the skin, subcuta-
their blood supply. In either case, it may be difficult to re-
neous fat, and hair. These layers are more or less efficient in
 establish a normal ventilation/perfusion pattem.
Heat transfer through the insulating layers and to the envi-
Concerns
ronment occurs in two stages. In stage one, heat is trans-
 Prolonged hypoventilation produces hypoxia (low tissue
ferred from the core to the skin. In stage two, heat is lost to
 oxygen concentration), which can produce cardiac arrhyth-
the environment by radiation, conduction, convection, and 
mias, bradycardia, and cardiorespiratory collapse.
evaporat1on.
In awake animals, there are several reactions to cold.
Prevention
Behavioral reactions include seeking shelter and curling up.
 Therapy for hypoventilation is very simple: assisted or con-
Physiologic reactions also occur. These include elevation of
trolled ventilation.
the hair (piloerection), vasoconstriction, and shivering.
Piloerection increases the depth of insulation by forming a
● Long, deep breaths that are held for 2-3 seconds may
stagnant layer of air around the animal. Vasoconstriction of
help open collapsed alveoli. Assisted ventilation is ac-
the skin arterioles and arteriovenous anastarmoses limits heat
Chapter 29: Anesthesia
431
loss from the extrermities. Shivering increases heat produc-
rewarming cannot happen unless 60% of body surface area
tion in all muscle groups. There is also a chemical excitation
is in contact with an external heat source. Desirable meth-
for heat production. This includes the release of epinephrine,
ods for preventing inadvertent hypothermia include
norepinephrine, and thyroxin. The anesthetic drugs affect
the thermoregulatory center and all compensatory reactions 
● controlling ambient temperature and keeping the OR
 are abolished during sedation and anesthesia.
temperature at least 75° F.
● insulating patients using bubble wrap, plastic wrap, or
Causes
warm blankets.
All anesthetics can produce systemic hypothermia. The in-
 warming skin prep and irrigation solutions.
halant gases decrease the thermoregulatory vasoconstric-
warming all intravenous fluids.
tion. The basal metabolic rate is decreased as muscle tone
, ue susn Aq sasses pauidsui suneay pue Suyiuny
is decreased in the anesthesia. The operating room temper-
tificial nose" such as the HumidVent
 ature is often well below body temperature and skin prep
using circulating hot water blankets at 105-107° F
 Using forced air heat-exchange blankets such as the Bair
through evaporation. Furthermore, IV fluids at room tem-
Hugger
perature and prolonged surgical procedures lower core tem-
 keeping postoperative patients dry or actively drying
+
peratures.
them using a hand-held blow dryer, taking care to not
bum the skin or eyes.
Concerns
Almost all patients that are sedated or anesthetized will lose
Caution
 body temperature. The exceptions are the Nordic breeds of
Using Incorrect Heating Pads
There are other available methods for providing an external
come hyperthermic under general anesthesia. Some patients
heat source, but they are not desirable due to the potential
develop hypothermia so severe that normal physiology is
for thermal injury or electrocution. Radiant heaters or heat
wrecked. The adverse effects of inadvertent hypothermia
lamps ("French fry” lamps) cannot be easily regulated and
include
can cause severe thermal injury to the skin. Electric heating
 pads and electric heating boards can develop hot spots or be-
 immune system depression, including impaired leuko-
come wet and shock or electrocute a patient. Hot water bot-
cyte mobility and phagocytosis, decreased T-cell anti-
tles can be used provided that they are not above 107° F and
body production, depressed nonspecific host defenses.
are removed when they become cool.
Postoperative infection rate is increased to three times the
Producing Hyperthermia
hypothermia.
It is important to monitor a patient's temperature closely be-
coagulopathy, which is independent of clotting factor
levels (more severe in factor deficient patients). Blood
 surgery or rewarming can occur because the blood vessels
viscosity is increased and sludging can occur.
'sanp onausaue aun mi anp paeposa ae Araudad au u
systemic vascular resistance and increased after load.
Heat is easily transferred to the core when peripheral ves-
Myocardium is depressed and more prone to arrhythmias
sels are vasodilated. The adverse effects of hyperthermia
and hypoxia.
are also numerous and can be detrimental to a patient's well
 respiratory drive that is diminished, and physiologic re-
being.
u si eaady un axoy on asuos
central nervous system that is depressed, with a delayed
Cardiac Arrhythmias
 recovery from anesthesia, confusion, stupor, or coma.
 Changes in the electrocardiogram can imply derangements
 hyperglycemia due to catecholamine release (epineph-
in oxygenation (i.e. hypoxia or ischemia) or an electrolyte
rine).
imbalance (i.e., hyperkalemia) (see Chapter 24). Noted car-
hypovolemia due to cold diuresis (may be seen as pro-
 diac arrhythmias (premature ventricular contractions, heart
found hypotension after rewarming)
block, or other changes) should be reported to the veterinar.
 drug and liver metabolism significantly decreased
ian immediately. Anesthetic levels should be reduced and
leading to drug toxicity.
 Oxygen flow should be increased to reduce the effect of hy-
poxia on the cardiac tissue. Further medication (i.e., lido-
Prevention
caine) may be recommended based on repeated arrhythmic
It is in the best interest of all patients (except those needing
events.
tively, during anesthesia, and postoperatively. The preven-
Cardiopulmonary Arrest
- s as a si y pn jo o
If a patient enters cardiopulmonary arrest (see Chapter 31),
    o    
the veterinarian should be notified immediately, anesthesia
Flowchart for Monitoring for Anesthetic Emergency
Therapies for arrhythmia
include:
 Abnormal EKG
Monitor heart and respiratory rates,
Pattern:
mucous membrane color, EKG, CO,
1.
 Notify veterinarian.
levels, pulse quality / blood pressure
VPC
 Decrease ane sthesia.
 constantly - record finding every 5
3.
Increase oxygen.
Heart Block
minutes.
Abnormal Rhythm
4.
 Have anti-arrhythmic
medication ready (i.e.,
lidocaine).
 Hypotension noted: Decrease in
Hypoventilation noted:
Hypothermia noted:
pulse quality, mucous
Decreased respiratory rate, lack
Decreased body temperature
membrane color / CRT, and
of respiration (apnea), or
decreased systolic pressure:
increased CO, levels:
Canine: 60 mm Hg
Arterial CO, > 45 mm Hg
Below 98.5 degrees Fahrenheit
Feline: 100 mm Hg
End-tidal CO> SS mm Hg
4
Therapies for hypote nsion include:
Therapies for hypoventilation include:
Therapies for hypothermia include:
1.
 Notify veterinarian.
1.
 Notify veterinarian.
1.
Notify veterinarian.
2.
Decrease the depth of anesthesia.
2. Long, deep breaths that are held for 2
2.
 Controlling ambient temperature: keep the OR
3.
 Bolusing IV fluids in 10 ml/kg
to 3 seconds may help open collapsed
temperature at least 75° F.
 intervals (checking pressures between 
alveoli.
 Insulate patients using bubble wrap, plastic wrap,
boluses).
3. Mechanical ventilator can also take
or warm blankets.
4.
Use Colloid Fluids: The use of a rapid
over the duty of moving gas into and
4.
Warm skin prep and irrigation solutions.
 infusion of a colloid (i.e., Hetastarch).
out of the lungs.
5.
Warm all intravenous fluids.
 can help to increase ce ntral perfusion.
4.
 Improving circulation by
6.
 Humidify and heat inspired gasses.
5.
Use of medications: to help increase
administering IV fluids and supporting
7.
Use circulating hot water blankets at 10s° to 1070 F.
blood pressure (i.e., dopamine or
 blood pressure will improve
8.
Forced air heat exchange blanket.
Dobutamine) by intravenous infusion.
circulation to all tissues.
9.
 Keep patients dry or actively dry them post
operatively: hand-held blow dryer.
Avoid HYPERTENSION.
Avoid ventilating patient above 20-25
mm Hg water pressure.
Avoid bur ning the patient.
Chapter 29: Anesthesia
433
should be turned off, oxygen flow should be increased, and
the patient should be manually ventilated. The medical team
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of Understanding the
should be advised and cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscita-
Concepts of Disease and Treatment. The exercises can be
tion should commence.
done individually or as case rounds as they explore specific
topics in veterinary medicine that discuss clinical diagnos-
tics and treatment.
Discussing Anesthesia with Clients
The veterinarian is responsible for discussing the
 overall anesthetic process and concerns with the
client; however, the medical team should have a basic
understanding of the procedure and be able to discuss
basic concerms with the client.
● There is no such thing as a risk-free procedure, but
 risk is reduced by the veterinarian choosing the ap-
monitoring by the medical team.
 Prior to anesthesia, the patient has a full evaluation
to assess their anesthetic risk.
The patient will be carefully monitored while
under anesthesia and during recovery.
433
Chapter 30
Shock
The following section outlines the basic concepts of shock
Early Shock
and how it affects the physical parameters, diagnostic tests,
Pulse
 i r s d a  so  p
● Rapid, bounding pulse (canine): Rapid, bounding
signed to help the medical team member understand the syn-
pulses occur as the body tries to compensate for the acute
drome of shock, how to identify early signs of the process,
 demands placed upon it. A bounding rapid pulse in a
how to anticipate diagnostics and treatment options, and
nervous or happy pet does not suggest a shocky state.
how to discuss shock with the client. Emergency medical
However, in pets with other changes in mentation, respi-
treatment is always initiated by the veterinarian
ration, mucous membrane color, and hydration, this pulse
 p as e inq  ass e nou si y
may suggest a serious to life-threatening condition.
arise from many possible disease situations. Simply defined,
Bradycardia (feline): Cats tend to be bradycardic in
shock is the inability of the body to oxygenate blood or per-
early shock.
fuse tissue at an acceptable level to keep up with the oxygen
Pulse deficit: In some cases (i.e., cardiovascular shock),
demands. If shock is not reversed quickly and efficiently, the
 the patient may also have pulse deficits because the heart
animal can die. There are multiple types of shock, and each
cannot produce a pulse for each heart contraction. A team
syndrome has different treatment components. The forms of
member should always auscult the heart while palpating
shock are as follows.
the pulse in any animal suspected of being in a shocky
state. If there is not a pulse with each heart beat, the pa
 Hypovolemic shock
tient requires attention immediately.
Cardiovascular shock
 Obstructive shock (obstruction of vessels)
Mentation
Thromboembolism
 In early shock, these pets may be dull to depressed because
 Tumor involving a large vessel
these patients are trying to put all their energy into restoring
Torsion
normal body function. These patients may also show gener-
●Distributive Shock (massive vasodilatation)
alized weakness.
Each team member should be able to identify signs of
Respiration
early to moderate shock, obtain a history from the owner to
 Pets may have altered respiratory patterms that range from a
 a  d a s  q  d
rapid to a slow rate. There may also be an abdominal com-
fected, and be ready with diagnostic and treatment compo-
ponent.
nents. The key to success in treatment is early detection and
effective and efficient treatment.
Body Temperature
Depending on the type of shock evident, the patients may
have extreme aberrations in body temperature. Patients suf-
Obtaining a History with a Patient in Shock
fering from heatstroke, protracted seizures, or severe infec-
Because shock can result from many possible disease enti-
tious disease may have highly elevated body temperature
ties, a thorough medical history, as outlined by Chapter 5,
(>1059 Fahrenheit). As the animal becomes more shocky,
 should be obtained.
body temperature can become subnormal.
Mucous Membrane Color/Capillary Refill Time
Physical Assessment for an Animal in Shock
One of the early indicators of shock, mucous membrane
Signs of shock can vary depending on the primary cause of
color, can become
the disease and which syndrome of shock is occurring.
 Furthermore, symptoms can vary in early to severe shock.
pale due to blood loss, pain, dehydration, heatstroke, and
 Some basic changes suggestive of shock (see Table 30.1) are
other causes;
discussed next.
 injected/red due to toxin or increased bacterial load; and
435
436
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Table 30.1. Physical changes in early/severe shock.
System Examined
Early Shock
Severe Shock
 Disposition 
Depressed 
Nonresponsive 
 Sternal recumbent 
Comatose
Weak
Lateral recumbent
Breathing
Increased rate >45
Abdominal breathing
Altered breathing rates
Decreased rate
Abdominal breathing
Shallow
 Open mouth breathing
 Pulses/heart beating
 Rapid, bounding pulses
Slow weak pulses
Tachycardia (canines)
Bradycardic
Bradycardia (felines)
± Pulse deficits
± Pulse deficits
Gum color
Pale
Pale to white
 Purple
Purple/gray
Yellow
Yellow
Capillary refill time
CRT >2-3 seconds
CRT >3 seconds
Body temperature
Normal temp.
Temp. <98° or >106°
Temp >106°
Hypothermia (felines)
 Pupils
Slow to respond to light 
 Slow to nonresponsive to light
Anisocoria
Dilated
 Anisocoria
●blue/gray/purple (cyanotic) secondary to heart and lung
pulses become weak to unapparent and eventually the heart-
disease.
beat stops.
Capillary Refill Time
Mentafion
Capillary refill time (CRT) begins to become prolonged
Pets become more depressed, nonresponsive, and even
   o    q (s )
comatose.
Respiration
Dehydration
 Respiration becomes shallower and slower.
 Depending on the syndrome, pets can start showing mild to
moderate dehydration.
Mucous Membrane Color/Capillary Refill Time
Mucous membrane color can worsen and CRT can be pro-
Pupils
longed. Changes in mucous membrane color depend on the
 Pupils should be even and responsive to light. In some cases,
 disease entity producing shock (see above).
 response to a bright light may be slowed. Furthermore, with
 head trauma, the pupil size may be different sizes (anisoco-
Dehydration
ria). If noted, anisocoria should be brought to the attention
In specific types of shock, as circulation fails, the patient
of the medical team immediately (see Figure 30.1).
may become more significantly hypovolemic, decreasing
blood flow to the peripheral tissue. This will decrease skin
Severe Shock
turgor.
As the type of shock worsens, the patient's signs can be
more severe. The time it takes to move from early shock to
Pupils
severe shock can sometimes be within minutes. A potential
Pupils become slower to respond to a bright light source. As
critical care patient must be reevaluated constantly until the
aa r snd  a sa d a
 patient is stabilized. Symptoms of severe shock are dis-
fixed and nonresponsive. Anisocoria is still possible.
cussed next.
Clinical Diagnostics of Shock
Puises
 Because the patient cannot adequately maintain perfusion,
Because shock can affect the entire body, full diagnostics
the cardiovascular system begins to fail. Pulses become
 may be required to both identify the cause of shock and the
weaker, and the heart rate slows. As the patient deteriorates,
 organs being affected. However, when faced with a patient
Chapter 30: Shock
437
in some form of shock, establishing a quick diagnostic base-
line (minimal clinical database) is very important. Some
diagnostic tests (see Table 30.2) may be the following.
●Pac ked cell volume (PCV)/total protein (TP): Changes
in packed cell volume and protein in shock situations can
help the medical team evaluate significant blood loss,
anemia, or dehydration.
 Glucose: Glucose is a very important factor to monitor in
any shocky patient. The patient must have blood sugar for 
a normal central nervous system and muscle function.
With blood glucose <40-50 mg/dl, patients can become
weak, comatose, and have seizures.
● Electrolytes: Although not always as easily assessed
aberrant changes in sodium and potassium can produce
irregular heart rhythms, weakness, muscle fasciculations,
Figure 30.1. Image of a cat after a trauma. Notice the uneven
collapse, a slowed heart rate, and death.
 pupil size suggestive of head trauma or neurologic disease.
 Clotting times: Prolonged clotting
g times producing
 bleeding can both produce shock and be secondary to the
syndrome. If the animal's ability to clot blood is compro-
mised, intemal bleeding and severe shock can occur.
Tabfe 30.2.
 Changes in clinical diagnostics that could suggest shock.
Parameter
Measurement
Observations
Increased PCV/TP
PCV:
Packed cell volume and total proteins above normal are secondary to 
Canines >50% +
dehydration.
 Felines >40% +
Total protein
Eevation of the cell populations and total protein occur as the fluid 
 Canines >8.5 mg/dl
portion of blood decreases. (See Chapter 21.)
 Felines >8.5 mg/dl
 Decreased PCV
PCV:
 Decreasing packed cell volume with normal total protein suggests
Canines < 25% +
chronic disease or increased red blood cell destruction (hemolysis).
Felines < 20 % +
In animals with chronic disease, their resources to produce red
 blood cells and energy may be significantly diminished, lowering 
the packed cell volume over time.
Normal TP
Total protein may be lower, but tends to remain in the normal limits.
 Decreased PCV
PCV:
With acute blood loss, animals can both loose red blood cells and 
Canines <25% +
protein.
Felines <20% +
 Decreased TP
Total protein:
 Canines <5 mg/dl
hence decreasing as significantly as the packed cell volume.
Felines <5 mg/ dl
Glucose
Glucose <40-60 mg/dl
Hypoglycemia can slow the response of the central nervous system
 and if prolonged can produce severe shock, seizures, coma and
death.
Eectrolytes
Potassium (K+) >6.0 mg/dl
 Potassium is one of three electrolytes of the body to help produce
Potassium (K+)<3.0 mg/dl
cardiac contraction, muscle movement, nerve firing, and many
other basic body functions.
 Significant alterations of this electrolyte can produce
+weakness,
+ abnormal heart rhythms,
muscular tremors,
● coma, and
death.
Clotting times
Activated clotting time >120 seconds
 Increases in clotting times can lead to internal bleeding, shock, and
Activated prothrombin time >120 seconds
death.
Prothrombin time >11 seconds
 If increasing clotting times are noted, packed cell volume and total
protein should be monitored closely.
438
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Tabfe 30.3.
 Emergency drug table.
Common Points on Medical History
As discussed previously, a complete medical history should
be taken. With concerns of hypovolemic shock, special
Drug
Indication
focus on any possible history of trauma (i.e., hit by car, etc.)
50%Dextrose
Significant hypoglycemia (blood glucose 
or serious underlying disease should be discussed with the
(1p/bu 09-0>
client.
 Atropine
 Bradycardia (heart rate <60 beats/min)
 Epinephrine
 Cardiac arrest/severe allergic or anaphylactic
Common Points in Initial Assessment
reaction
Used to help counteract anaphylactic shock,
Hypovolemic shock is the inability to perfuse blood to the
Dexamethasone
 concerns of spinal injury, or as a general
 tissue due to decreased blood volume. As the syndrome pro-
Prednisone
anti-inflammatory medication.
 gresses, the animal cannot adequately oxygenate tissue and
Furosemide
 A diuretic that helps increase fluid excretion
becomes weak, collapsed, and nonresponsive, and the sym-
through the kidneys, removing excess
drome ends in cardiac failure.
water from the tissues (especially the
Common initial clinical signs are
lungs). Used in the treatment of cardio-
vascular shock and traumatic brain injury.
Mannitol
A large inert sugar that, when introduced 
 bounding/hyperdynamic pulses (canine),
 into the bloodstream, helps pull fluids into
bradycardia (feline),
the vessels. This drug is used primarily to
 decreased mentation/depression,
prevent cerebral swelling in the case of a
 increased respiration (tachypnea),
head concussion.
Antihistamines
Antihistamines (i.e., diphenhydramine) are
hypothermia (unless heatstroke),
 drugs that help slow the allergic response
 poor CRT/poor mucous membrane color (pale), and
of the body. when the patient is exposed
 generalized weakness.
to a foreign allergen, a white blood cell
 called a mast cell can release histamines,
As the syndrome worsens, signs are
producing signs of an allergic or anaphy-
lactic reaction. Antihistamines help block
the process and are used in the treatment
weak/decreased pulse quality,
of anaphylactic shock.
depression progressing to coma (obtund),
altered respiration (can be bradyneic to tachypnic),
 poor to no mucous membrane color,
Emergency Medications for Shock
 prolonged CRT, and
 severe weakness to borderline coma,
Although covered in Chapter 26, the team member should
have an understanding of what drugs are indicated in an
Clinical Diagnostics
emergency situation. Although this list may not apply to all
As discussed above, a minimal diagnostic database should
emergency situations for all medical teams, the drugs listed
be obtained to help define the type of shock. In general, hy-
in Table 30.3 should be available.
povolemic shock can demonstrate the changes in clinical di-
agnostics listed in Table 30.4.
Types of Shock
Treatment
Hypovolemic Shock
The treatment protocol below (see Hypovolemic Shock
Hypovolemic shock occurs when an animal cannot maintain
 Flowchart) is a suggestion of how some medical teams
normal blood volume (red blood cells and fluid) or blood
would handle a hypovolemic patient. It is meant to give the
pressure.
 a on au  ss  jo  e  
with a shock patient in order to better anticipate the doctor.
Etiology
This protocol is meant to help the team member assist the
Hypovolemic shock occurs when there is a rapid loss of red
 veterinarian treat an emergency patient.
blood cells, fluid or blood pressure. This loss occurs so
The goal of treating hypovolemic shock is to rehydrate
     n   
 the patient and restore normal blood pressure and perfusion.
begin to fail. Possible causes of hypovolemic shock are
A sample treatment protocol is presented here.
acute bleeding: red blood cell loss, and
1. Oxygen therapy: Have an oxygen environment set up
● dehydration: acute severe loss of fluid from infectious
(i.e., cage, mask, nasal oxygen catheter) so that if needed,
disease, heatstroke, organ failure, and other causes.
the pet can be placed on oxygen. Oxygen is never con-
traindicated, and by simply increasing the oxygen con-
Signalment
centration in the blood, the patient may become less
Hypovolemic shock can occur in any species, sex, and age.
stressed and shocky.
Chapter 30: Shock
439
Table 30.4.  Changes noted in clinical diagnostics with
Signalment
hypovolemic shock.
Any patient can develop septic shock. However, very young
 Or old animals can be more predisposed, secondary to a less-
responsive immune system.
Parameter
Finding
PCV/TP
Etiology
With dehydration, PCV/TP are elevated.
With blood loss, PCv/TP are decreased.
 Although any infectious disease can develop into septic
Glucose
WNL
shock, the following diseases are more commonly associ-
Electrolytes
Potassium can be elevated, normal, or low.
ated with sepsis.
Clotting times
If bleeding is occuring, cloting times can be 
elevated.
 Canine parvoviral infection
+
 Canine distemper virus infection
 Bacterial pyometra
 Bacterial pneumonia
 Bacterial hepatitis
2. Catheter: Have catheter set up, and if needed set an IV
 Bacterial kidney disease
catheter. With a patient in shock, the ability to set a
 Other bacterial infections especially in the geriatric and
catheter may change within a very small time range. Hav-
neonate pet
ing a catheter and supplies readily available, and being
able to effectively set a catheter, can make the difference
Common Points on Medical History
in stabilizing the patient.
As discussed previously, a complete medical history should
 3. Fluids: Be ready to begin fluid administration per the
be taken. With concerms of septic shock, special focus on
veterinarian recommendations. With life-threatening
any possible history of acute or chronic infectious disease
shock, emergency doses of fluids or bolusing fluids may
should be discussed with the client.
be requested by the veterinarian.
4. Minimal clinical database: Have the supplies ready to
Common Points in Initial Assessment
 Septic shock initially presents with signs of infection, dehy-
run a minimal clinical database. These tests can help the
dration, and depression. As the disease worsens, shock and
-o   a n    
ring.
neurologic signs occur secondarily as blood sugar and per-
 5. Medications: Have emergency drugs available.
fusion to the brain decreases.
 6. Reevaluation: Within 5-10 minutes of fluid administra-
Common clinical signs of early shock are
tion, reevaluate the patient for
 bounding/hyperdynamic pulses,
temperature,
decreased mentation/depression,
 pulse quality,
increased respiration (tachypnea),
- respiration, and
 hyperthermia, secondary to infection,
 mucous membrane/CRT.
 poor CRT/poor mucous membranes (pale), and
A uenualan au uoezieis isasns jou op susis jl
 generalized weakness.
 suggest rechecking the minimal clinical database or other
-sip pue saops rauo ysnunsip diay on sosoue
Clinical signs of severe shock are
ease that may be occurring.
7. Colloids: Synthetic colloids are large inert sugar mole-
●weak/decreased pulse quality,
cules (i.e., hetastarch) that help increase fluid absorption
 depression to coma (obtund),
from the tissue into the vessels, producing increased
争
 unable to see/blind,
blood pressure.
seizures,
 head pressing/circling, and
Septic Shock
 dementia.
A pet with septic shock, a form of distributive shock, has
 lost its ability to maintain normal tissue perfusion due to
Diagnostics
massive dilation of all the blood vessels secondary to a mas-
As discussed above, a minimal clinical database should be
sive infection in the body. This causes the blood to pool and
 obtained to help define the type of shock the pet presents
not circulate in the normal fashion. In many cases, blood
with. In general, septic shock can show the changes in clin-
sugar levels are consumed as the body exhausts most of its
ical diagnostics presented in Table 30.5.
glucose supplies fighting off the infection. Since the brain
and muscle must have blood sugar to function normally, an-
Treatment
imals in septic shock will show both signs of generalized
The treatment protocol below is a suggestion of how some
 shock and central nervous system signs.
medical teams would handle a septic shock patient (see Septic
440
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Hypovolemic Shock Flowchart
 Is the pet in hypovolemic shock?
Hyperdynamic or poor pul se quality
 Elongated CRT
 Poor to no MM color 
YES
 Depressed —> Obtund
No
1)  Have oxygen environment
available
1. Oxygen cage
 2. Oxygen mask 
 Set IV catheter and begin regular
3. Nasal oxygen
fluid maintenance
2) Have catheter ready and if needed,
set IV catheter
 3)  Have fluid set-up ready and help
administer
 4) Minimal clinical database
Yes
Is the pet stabilizing?
NO
YES
5) Have colloids ready
6) Continue to have emergency
medications ready in case veterinarian
needs to redose medications.
 Is the pet stabilizing?
NO
Continue emergency care and diagnostics as
outlined by veterinarian. Medical team will
examine other causes of shock.
Shock Flowchart). It is meant to give the team member a con-
 2. Oxygen: Prepare an oxygen environment if needed.
 cept of treatment concerns to better anticipate the doctor.
 3. Catheter: Set up for IV catheter and place in the patient,
if needed.
1. Treatment: The most important goal is to identify and
 4. Minimal clinical database: Get a minimal clinical data-
  s am as  an 
base. If blood sugar is less than 60 mg/dl administer dex-
ing blood sugar levels and reperfusing the patient.
trose infusion.
Chapter 30: Shock
441
Tabfe 30.5.
 Changes noted in clinical diagnostics with septic
Table 30.6.
 Changes noted in clinical diagnostics with
shock.
anaphylactic shock.
Parameter
Finding
 Parameter
PCV/TP
With dehydration, PCV/TP are elevated.
PCV/TP
With dehydration, PCV/TP are elevated
Glucose
Low blood sugar <60 mg/dl, but it can be
Glucose
Low blood sugar <60 mg/dl can be evident or
normal.
can be normal
Electrolytes
 Electrolytes are generally within nommal limits.
Eectrolytes
Electrolytes are generally within normal limits.
Clotting times
 Clotting times are generally within normal limits.
Clotting times
 Clotting times are generally within normal limits
 but can be elevated.
Administer Crystalloids
Common Points in Inifial Assessment
Within 5 minutes of fluid administration, evaluate,
The pet usually presents with a respiratory wheeze, severe
depression, weakness, collapse, low blood pressure, and oc-
temperature,
casionally a stinger in the tongue region. Common clinical
 pulse quality,
signs of disease are
respiration, and
 mucous mem brane/CRT
weakness, sometimes comatose,
 poor mucous membrane color,
 If there is no improvement, have colloids and emergency
increased CRT,
medication available.
 dehydrated,
Within 5-10 minutes of fluid administration, reevaluate
 poor pulse quality,
the pet. If signs do not suggest stabilization, the veterinarian
tachypnea,
 may suggest rechecking the minimal clinical database or
facial swelling,
other diagnostics to help distinguish other syndromes or dis-
hives on the body,
ease states that are occurring.
 bronchoconstriction, wheezes in respiratory tract,
 stinger on tongue or other body part (occasionally),
Anaphylactic Shock
 focal swelling and inflammation consistent with insect
Anaphylactic shock (another form of distributive shock) is a
sting, and
massive allergic reaction to a foreign venom, protein, or
collapse.
drug causing massive systemic vasodilatation (hypoten-
sion), bronchoconstriction, collapse, and shock.
Diagnostics
As discussed above, a minimal clinical database should be
Signaiment
obtained to help define the type of shock. In general anaphy-
Anaphylactic shock can occur in any species, sex, and age.
lactic shock can show the changes in clinical diagnostics
listed in Table 30.6.
Etiology
When the pet encounters a sting, insect bite, or exposure to
Treatment
 a drug or medication, a massive allergic reaction can occur
 The treatment protocol below (see Anaphylactic Shock Flow-
produced from the release of histamines from a type of
chart) is a suggestion of how some medical teams would han-
white blood cell called a mast cell. Unlike an allergic reac-
 an a a on s si nl d   a
tion, the pet may not show obvious signs of facial swelling.
       ss  o n  
hives, and redness of the skin (erythema). The massive re-
shock patient to better anticipate the doctor. This protocol is
 lease of histamine overwhelms the patient and causes weak-
 meant to help the team member assist the veterinarian treat
ness, hypotension and shock.
 an emergency patient. The goal of treatment of anaphylactic
shock is to stop the allergic reaction, restore and maintain
Common Points on Medical History
blood sugar levels if necessary, and rehydrate the patient.
As discussed previously, a complete medical history should
be taken. With concerms of anaphylactic shock, special focus
Emergency Medications
on any possible history of exposure to insects or reptiles
1. With anaphylactic shock, the following medications
(i.e., snake) and new medication or vaccine should be dis-
 should be available to help stop the allergic process and
cussed with the client.
stabilize the patient.
Septic Shock Flowchart
Is the pet in septic shock?
● History of infectious disease
· Weak
Comatose
● Changes in pulse quality
● Neu rologic signs - seizu res
NO
YES
1)
Have oxygen environment ready.
2）
 Have catheter set-up ready and if
needed, set IV catheter.
· Prepare:
3)1
 Have fluid set-up ready and if
necessary, administer fluids.
· Be ready to set IV catheter.
4)
Have emergency medication available.
● Be ready to administer IV
5）1
 Minimal clinical database - If
fluids.
hypoglycemic (blood glucose < 60) -
● Be ready with emergency drugs.
 prepare dextrose solution.
1 cc of 25% dextrose IV /pound/hour
● Be ready to run minimal clinical
database.
YES
Is the pet stabilizing?
NO
6) Have colloids ready.
7) Continue to have emergency
medications ready in case veterinarian
needs to redose medications.
YES
Is the pet stabilizing?
NO
Adj ust fluid need as per veterinarian
rec ommendation. Continue diagnostics, care
 and evaluation of animal.
442
Chapter 30: Shock
443
●Steroid medication: Steroidal medication (i.e., dexam-
heart to properly pump and maintain cardiac output. Pets in
ethasone, prednisone) is focused on reducing the symp
cardiogenic shock cannot maintain normal perfusion to the
toms of the allergic response and stabilizing the patient.
lung fields and oxygenation of tissue.
● Epinephrine: In extreme anaphylaxis, epinephrine is
used to reverse slow heart rate, low blood pressure,
Signalment
bronchoconstriction, and other physical symptoms.
Each type of heart disease has specific breed, sex, and species
●Antihistamines: Antihistamines (i.e., diphenhydramine)
predispositions (see Chapter 12) for cardiogenic shock.
may be recommended to stop the histamine's degranu.
 lation, which is producing the anaphylactic reaction.
Etiology
Cardiovascular shock is a syndrome produced by an under-
2. Oxygen: Prepare oxygen environment if needed
lying heart disease, trauma, or congenital defect that chal-
 3. Catheter: Set up for IV catheter and place if instructed
lenges the cardiovascular system until the heart is no longer
to do so.
able to maintain normal perfusion and oxygenation of tis-
4. Minimal clinical database: Get a minimal clinical data-
sues. Once the heart begins to fail, decreased blood perfu-
base. If blood sugar is less than 60 mg/dl administer dex-
sion through the lung fields and heart produces an inability
trose infusion.
to absorb oxygen into the bloodstream and perfuse the body.
Prepare IV Infusion with Dextrose
Common Points on Medical History
 In some cases of severe hypoglycemia, the veterinarian may
As discussed previously, a complete medical history should be
request 25% dextrose solution. To prepare infusion take
taken. With concerms of cardiovascular shock, special focus
50% dextrose and mix it with equal parts sterile fluid in a
should be on any previous history of cardiac disease, current
1:1 ratio. The general dose is 1 cc/lb 25% dextrose IV
 heart medications, and increase in exercise intolerance.
 Prepare IV Fluids with Dextrose
Common Points in Initial Assessment
 In many cases of persistent hypoglycemia, the veterinarian
The pet usually presents with dyspnea (see Figure 30.2),
may request adding 50% dextrose to fluids to help maintain
open mouth breathing with an abdominal push, weakness,
blood glucose levels. The fluids with dextrose component
 a o   (s)  so
 are prepared as follows.
 blue, or gray), and poor capillary refill time. General com-
mon clinical signs of disease are listed in Table 30.7. Gen-
●2.5% Dextrose solution: Take a liter of crystalloid fluids
eral common clinical signs of disease are as follows.:
(i.e., 0.9% NaCl, lactated Ringer's solution, Normosol,
etc.) and remove 50 cc of sterile fluid. Add 50 cc of 50%
 Dyspnea: Pets will present with severe trouble breathing,
dextrose to the fluid, which will produce a 2.5% dextrose
with increased rate. Their head and neck can be extended
solution for long-term maintenance.
upward with their ears pinned back (see Figure 30.2).
 5% Dextrose solution: Take a liter of crystalloid fluids
Color of gums: Blue or purple coloration suggests poor
(i.e., 0.9% NaCl, lactated Ringer's solution, Normosol,
 oxygenation of tissue (cyanosis).
etc.) and remove 100 cc of sterile fluid. Add 100 cc of
Jo adi aun uo suuadap Ara uo Ainb asind isasind 
50% dextrose to the fluid, which will produce a 5% dex-
cardiac disease (see Chapter 12). Changes in pulse rate
trose solution for long-term maintenance.
and quality can be, in early heart failure (tachycardia)
 Cat: >220 beats/min
Within 5 minutes of fluid administration, evaluate
 Dog: >200 beats/min
temperature,
 In later failure (bradycardia)
 pulse quality,
Cat: <80 beats/min
respiration, and
 Dog: <60 beats/min
 mucous mem branes/CRT.
Quality for pulses can be
weak pulses,
If there is no improvement, have colloids and emergency
 paradoxical pulses,
medication available. Within 5-10 minutes of fluid adminis-
 pulse deficit, and
tration, reevaluate the pet. If signs do not suggest stabiliza-
- no pulses.
tion, the veterinarian may suggest rechecking the minimal
s r  ss o   
Auscultation
 other syndromes or diseases that are occurring.
Changes in heart and lung sounds can also vary depending
 on disease. Some notable changes can be the following:
Cardiogenic Shock
Cardiogenic shock occurs when normal blood flow and per-
Cardiac auscultation: The cardiac sounds can be muf-
fusion is unable to be maintained due to an inability of the
fled and decreased with increased respiratory effort, fluid
Anaphylactic Shock Flowchart
Is the pet in anaphylactic shock?
o Sudden history of acute collapse.
oWeakness.
0 Bronchoconstriction -- Rasps.
o Facial swelling / hives.
o Stinger in tongue.
o Poor pulses.
o Poor CRT < MM color.
NO
YES
Have oxygen environment ready.
2)
 Have catheter set-up ready and if
needed, set IV catheter.
Prepare:
 Have fluid set-up ready and if
necessary, administer fluids.
4）
Have emergency medication available
*Be ready to set IV catheter.
 steroid, antihistamine, epinephrine.
*Be ready to administer IV fluids.
5)  Clinical diagnostics -- If hypoglycemic
· Be ready with emergency drugs.
(blood glucose < 60) - prepare 
*Be ready to run minimal clinical
dextrose solution.
database.
Is the pet stabilizing?
YES
NO
6) Have colloids ready.
7)  Continue to have emergency medications
 ready in case veterinarian needs to redose
medications
 Is the pet stabilizing?
YES
NO
Adjust fluid need as per veterinarian
recommendation. Continue diagnostics, care
and evaluation of animal.
Chapter 30: Shock
445
Table 30. 7.   Changes noted in clinical diagnostics with
cardiogenic shock.
 Parameter
PCV/TP
Generally within normal limits.
Glucose
Generally within normal limits.
Eectrolytes
Electrolytes are generally within normal limits.
However, derangements in the sodium and 
potassium levels can be affected by cardiac
medications. Abnormalities in the electrolytes
 can produce significant cardiac arrhythmias.
Clotting times
 Clotting times are generally within normal limits,
 but can be elevated.
EKG
 Although not discussed with other types of 
shock, electrocardiograms should be evalu-
ated for abnormal rhythm once the pet is 
stabilized. Significant arrhythmias must be
Figure 30.2. An illustration of a patient with severe cardiac dis-
corrected to stabilize the patient (see
tress, note the extension of the neck and placement of the ears.
Chapter 24).
This patient is struggling to bring in every possible breath.
in the chest or pericardium, or space occupying masses.
With valvular disease, heart murmurs may also be noted.
nasal catheter is very important. The only limitation in
Finally if there is an arrhythmia, abnormal extra heart-
administering oxygen is not to stress the patient during
beats may be heard intermittently with normal beats.
administration.
 Respiratory noise: With cardiac failure, fluid can accu-
2. Catheter: Set up for IV catheter and place it if instructed
mulate within the lung fields due to pulmonary conges-
to do so. Setting the catheter may need to occur after the
tion. As this progress, crackles can be auscultated.
pet is stabilized. If the pet becomes too stressed it may
die; caution should always be practiced in any treatment
Diagnostics
protocol with this type of patient.
As discussed above, a minimal clinical database should be
3. Emergency medications: With cardiogenic shock, the
obtained to help define the type of shock. In general cardio-
following medications may be needed to help reduce
 genic shock, all test parameters can show the changes in
stress and returm to normal cardiac function.
clinical diagnostics presented in Table 30.7.
+
 Sedatives: Sedatives, such as morphine and butor-
phanol, are used to reduce the amount of stress for the
Treatment
 patient and decrease hyperventilation that can worsen
The treatment protocol below (see the Cardiogenic Shock
pulmonary edema. The goal of these medications is
Flowchart) is a suggestion of how some medical teams
 not to anesthetize but to reduce the stress enough to let
would handle an cardiogenic patient. It is meant to give the 
the animal breathe slower and more deeply.
     ss      n
Furosemide (Lasix): This diuretic is usually given at
 shock patient to better anticipate the doctor. This protocol is
high doses hourly to help pull fluid from the tissue
   ns   n d  
(i.e., lungs) into the urine and decrease the amount of 
an emergency patient. Unlike the other treatments of shock.
 pulmonary edema.
cardiogenic shock is not usually treated with large amounts
 Nitroglycerin ointment: This transdermal paste is
usually placed in the ear of the affected patient. It is a
because of fluid pooling within the lung tissue (pulmonary
potent vasodilator that reduces the amount of pressure
edema) due to poor perfusion and cardiac circulation. In this
the heart must push against to produce a pulse.
situation, fluids are contraindicated because intravenous flu-
Other medications: Medications such as bron-
ids can dramatically increase pulmonary edema. The goals
chodilators, atropine, and epinephrine may be recom-
of treatment in these cases are to reduce the stress of the an-
mended by the veterinarian.
imal, increase oxygen concentration in the body, reduce pul-
4. Reevaluation: Completing a physical assessment of the
monary edema, and restore normal cardiac output. Possible
patient depends on how well the patient is responding to
treatment protocols may be as follows.
initial therapy. If the patient is easily stressed, visual
reevaluation may be the only way to assess the patient.
1. Oxygen: Placing the pet in an oxygen environment,
If the patient cannot be stressed, perform a visual eval.
whether it is a mask, oxygen cage, oxygen E-collar, or
uation of
446
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
 mentation,
Etiology
 respiration, and
 Heatstroke (hyperthermia) can be caused by many possible
 gum/tongue color.
conditions.
If the patient can be more fully evaluated, check
Infection: High fever can occur in response to over-
whelming infection.
● pulse,
Heatstroke: Animals begin to overheat in a humid, hot
respiration,
environment and become overwhelmed and unable to
mucous membrane/CRT,
cope with the heat.
 hydration, and
 Seizures: Animals who have multiple clusters of seizures
temperature.
(status epilepticus) can have their body temperature in-
 5. Evaluation of medications: Once the patient is initially
crease due to constant muscular contractions and tetany.
placed on medication and in an oxygen environment, the
Toad poisoning: Animals exposed to toxins of specific
pad an pun paada uonpa pue pao uan si pad
toads can have a severe chemical reaction in which one
either stabilizes or succumbs. Often the medical team can
 only visually monitor the pet as discussed above and med-
 Toxin: Certain types of toxins, such as plant food/pesti-
icate at regular intervals. Some patients will not be able to
cides (organophosphates), snail bait (metaldehyde), and
be stabilized even with all treatment options completed.
poisons (strychnine), can cause severe muscular convul-
6. Clinical diagnostics: Clinical diagnostics should not be
sions that can raise body temperature into dangerous ter-
collected until the pet is more stable. The increased stress
ritory (see Chapter 27).
of a blood draw can lead to cardiovascular failure.
Clinical diagnostics on the stabilized patient can include
Common Points on Medical History
the following:
As discussed previously, a complete medical history should
●Minimal clinical database
be taken, with a special focus on causes that may produce
PCV/TP
heatstroke, for example
Electrolytes
-Kidney function (BUN/creatinine)
environmental exposure,
●Electrocardiogram (EKG)
history of seizures,
 Thoracic radiographs
 ingestion of toxin / poison, and
●Cardiac ultrasound
exposure to poisonous toad.
Heatstroke/Hyperthermia
Common Points in Initial Assessment
Heatstroke is defined as a severe elevation in body temper-
Careful attention should be paid to any spontaneous bruising
ature above 106° Fahrenheit. At this temperature, there can
of the gums, skin, or mucous membranes, which could sug-
be severe damage to organs and systems.
gest the beginning of intermal bleeding (DIC). General com-
mon clinical signs of disease are
+
Abdominal organs (liver, kidney, etc.): Increased tem-
peratures can damage the kidney and liver, producing
 panting,
 acute organ failure.
salivating,
● Central nervous system: Increased heat can cause ther-
skin that is hot to the touch,
mal injury that can produce seizures and other neurologic
 dry, red-injected mucous membranes,
signs.
 nervous behavior, possibly accelerating to seizure activity,
● Coagulopathy: With extreme increases in body temper-
weak to collapsed,
ature, the blood can be stimulated to clot spontaneously
bloody vomiting/diarrhea,
in the vessels, exhausting the normal clotting factors.
 bruising or small hemorrhages on gums and skin (DIC),
a  ad a asxa a s  a a
shock,
to bleed intermally. This is called disseminated intravas-
rapid heart rate,
cular coagulopathy (DIC), and it is potentially the most
coma, and
 life-threatening complication to heatstroke.
death.
Signalment
Diagnostics
       s    
As discussed above, a minimal clinical database should be
more common in short-faced breeds that have a harder time
 obtained to help define the type of shock the animal has. In
 panting to regulate body temperature (e.g., bulldogs, pugs,
general heatstroke shock, all minimal clinical database pa-
Lhasa apso, etc.) and long, thick-coated breeds (e.g., Arctic
rameters can show the changes in clinical diagnostics as
breeds such as malamute, American Eskimo, etc.).
listed in Table 30.8).
Cardiogenic Shock Flowchart
 Is the pet in cardiogenic shock?
0 Weak
o Open mouth breathing
 o Abdominal breathing
0 Purple  blue  gray MM
0 Prolonged CRT
 o Increase respiratory rate
o Poor pulses
NO
YES
o Pulse deficits
1)Low STRESS
0 Prepare:
2) Have oxygen environment ready.
 0 Be ready to set IV catheter.
3)  Have catheter set-up ready and if
 0 Be ready to administer IV
needed, set IV catheter - low stress.
fluids.
 0 Be ready with emergency
4
NO FLUIDS.
drugs.
5）
Have emergency medication ready:
 0 Be ready to run minimal clinical
a.
Furosemide
database.
b.
 Nitroglycerin ointment
C.
Sedation
d.
Atropine / epinephrine (in case of 
(apo3
YES
Is the pet stabilizing?
Visual vs. Normal
Evaluation
NO
Continue evaluation and medication as
 directed by the veterinarian. Pet may
still succumb despite all medical
treatment.
8
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Table 30.8.
 Changes noted in clinical diagnostics with
5. Monitor:
heatstroke.
 for ongoing complications of heatstroke.
for hypothermia secondary to cool down.
diagnostics for complications and be prepared to treat
Parameter
Finding
as needed-GET A CLOTTING TIME!
PCV/TP
 Elevated secondary to dehydration, initially.
+
 oxygen needed.
 Can become decreased if pet begins to have
 internal bleeding problems.
Traumatic Brain Injury/Head Trauma
Glucose
Generally within nommal limits.
Traumatic brain injury is an acute syndrome brought on by
Eectrolytes
Electrolytes are generally within normal limits.
 Clotting times
 Clotting times can be elevated secondary to
a sharp blow to the head or a fall (such as from a moving ve-
 prolonged hyperthermia. Elevations in 
hicle) that causes blunt injury to the brain.
 clotting time can be severe, suggesting the
 patient is beginning to bleed internally.
Etiology
A sharp blow to the head causes the brain to swell within the
 cranium bone around it. The swelling can place increasing
intracranial pressure on the brain and early central nervous
system, impeding normal brain function. If the swelling is
Treatment
severe enough, damage can be permanent. Depending on the
The treatment protocol below (see Heatstroke Flowchart) is
u sisouond qaan mn asuosan pue unsad siadn
a suggestion of how some medical teams would handle a
be fair to extremely poor.
  n n     l  
concept of what steps may need to be taken with a shock pa-
Signalment
tient to better anticipate the doctor. This protocol is meant to
Head trauma can affect any breed, sex, or age of patient.
 help the team member assist the veterinarian in treating an
emergency patient. When treating for heatstroke, the team
Common Points on Medical History
member may face the challenges of hyperthermia, shock,
As discussed previously, a complete medical history should
and DIC all encompassed in one event. Even when stabi-
be taken. With concerms of head trauma, special focus on
lized, the patient must be carefully monitored for complica-
any history of acute trauma, animal attack, fall, or injury
tions such as organ disease, central nervous system damage,
should be discussed with the client.
and DIC. The goal of treatment is to cool the animal down,
Common Points in Initial Assessment
effects.
These patients can be extremely fragile and could become
comatose and die suddenly. Common signs of a traumatic
1. Cool down: If the patient's temperature is more than
brain injury are
106° Fahrenheit, a cool down should be initiated imme-
diately, using
 pupils that are different sizes (anisocoria; see Figure 30.3),
●cool water bath (not an ice bath),
 depression,
鲁
fan,
vomiting (usually excessive),
 alcohol bath on lower limbs, and
not aware of surroundings,
●ice water enema (last resort).
seizures,
The animal's temperature should be monitored until
rigidity,
temperature falls between 103° and 103.5° Fahrenheit.
coma, and
Then stop the cool down and dry pet off to prevent hy-
 abnormally low or high body temperature.
pothermia. Temperature should still be monitored for
hypothermia.
Diagnostics
2. Catheter: Be ready to set IV catheter.
As discussed above, a minimal clinical database should be
 3. Treatment: Begin treating for shock.
 obtained to help define the type of shock. In general, with
●Be ready to administer IV fluids.
head concussions, all test parameters can show the changes
 Be ready to collect blood samples and run minimal
listed in Table 30.9.
clinical databases.
●Be ready with emergency medications, such as
-dextrose,
Practice Tip: If a traumatic brain injury is suspected,
-atropine, and
a jugular draw should not be attempted because plac-
epinephrine.
ing pressure on the jugular vein can increase intracere-
4. Evaluation: If stability is still questionable, have colloids
bral pressure.
ready.
Heatstroke Flowchart
Is the pet in heatstroke?
0 TEMPERATURE > 106 degrees
o Panting
0 Nervous
0 Weak
 0 Bloody vomiting / diarrhea
0 BRUISING
0 Collapse
NO
YES
o Coma
1) Cool down bath
0 Prepare:
a. COOL WATER BATH
0 Be ready to set IV catheter.
b. Fan
 0 Be ready to administer IV
c. Alcohol lower extremities 
fluids.
d. DO NOT COOL DOWN BELOW
 0 Be ready with emergency drugs.
103.5 DEGRESS
 0 Be ready to run minimal clinical
2) Have catheter set-up ready and prepare
database.
to set IV catheter
3) Begin treating for shock
(See hypovolemic shock protocol)
a. IV fluid administration
b. Emergency drugs
c. Colloids
YES
Is the pet stabilizing?
Visual vs. Normal
Evaluation
NO
Continue close evaluation and
monitoring of patient. Monitor for
concerns of acute organ disease, CNS
 disease or disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy (DIC).
449
Traumatic Brain Injury Flowchart
 Is the patient at risk for a
traumatic brain injury?
● History of trauma
· ANISOCORIA
●Vomiting
● Depression
● Seizu res
● Coma
NO
YES
1)
 Oxygen dark quiet environment.
2)
Have catheter ready and set if
instructed.
· Prepare:
3) Have emergency medications ready
a. Mannitol
● Be ready to set IV catheter.
b. Furosemide
● Be ready to administer IV fluids.
4) Have fluid / colloids ready and
 administer if instructed to do so
● Be ready with emergency drugs.
hypertonic saline is the fluid of
● Be ready to run minimal clinical
choice.
database.
YES
Is the pet stabilizing?
Visual vs. Normal
Evaluation
NO
Continue evaluation and medication as
directed by the veterinarian. Pet may
still sucumb despite all medical
treatment.
450
Chapter 30: Shock
451
Table 30.9.
 Changes noted in clinical diagnostics with
concussion.
Parameter
Finding
PCV/TP
n  ssn sl eou m nm
has also triggered internal bleeding.
Glucose
 With cerebral swelling and edema, these 
 patients may have a hard time regulating
 blood sugar and may alternate between 
hyper- and hypoglycemia.
Eectrolytes
Electrolytes are generally within normal limits.
Clotting times
 Clotting times are generally within nomal limits 
unless the initiating trauma has produced 
 internal bleeding.
Figure 30.3.  Note the different pupil sizes in this pet that was
kicked by a horse. With a history of trauma, anisocoria is a strong
suggestion of a traumatic brain injury.
Treafment
 The goal of treatment is to try to reduce swelling of the brain
Discussing Shock and Emergency Syndromes with
the Client
while supporting the animal through possible shock and coma
 Shock is a life-threatening symdrome that is caused
(see Traumatic Brain Injury Flowchart). The animal must be
by a primary trauma, disease, or condition that
handled in a quiet, dark, warm environment because traumatic
pue sasiou pnol oi aasuas Aia aue suaned Xinfu ueq
overwhelms the patient such that its body cannot
keep up with demands placed upon it.
bright stimuli.
Shock is an emergency condition, and if not re-
1. Oxygen: Increasing oxygen concentration in the blood-
versed and stabilized quickly, the patient can die.
 The initial signs of shock can be weakness, rapid
in tissue perfusion.
pulses, changes in the breathing patterms, and de-
 2. Position: Keep animal immobile and quiet with the pa-
pression.
tient's head slightly elevated.
 Although signs can be mild at first, the patient can
 deteriorate rapidly, showing signs of collapse, weak
3. Catheter: Have IV catheter ready and set it if instructed
thready pulses, shallow breathing, coma, and
to do so.
 4. Emergency drugs: Emergency medications are focused
death.
 on stabilizing the pet and reducing cerebral swelling.
The patient requires critical care treatment and
Some indicated medications to have ready are as follows.
often must be hospitalized for long periods of time.
● Mannitol: Mannitol is a large, inert sugar molecule
 Treatment is focused on reestablishing normal
 blood pressure, heart and breathing rates, and treat-
that is given slowly intravenously over 20-30 minutes
 ing the underlying condition producing this syn-
to help pull fluid out of the brain tissue and back into
drome.
 the blood vasculature.
●Furosemide (Lasix): Lasix is usually given after the
 Often patients require intravenous fluids, emer-
 gency medications, oxygen therapy, and monitor-
d  ps aa  d n p
 ing of clinical diagnostics.
duction and lower intracranial pressure.
●Sedation: If pet is thrashing, seizuring, or having un-
 If not treated, patients have a poor prognosis and
can die.
  s    n
 used as needed.
 4. Have intravenous fluids/colloids: Fluid requirements
and types depend on the stability of the patient and its
metabolic needs.
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of Understanding the
 5. Reevaluation/minimal clinical database: The patient
Concepts of Disease and Treatment. The exercises can be
should be monitored closely for overall changes in stabil-
done individually or as case rounds as they explore specific
ity and clinical diagnostics. Many comatose patients may
topics in veterinary medicine that discuss clinical diagnos-
    i s g   
tics and treatment.
 tain normal cardiac and respiratory function.
Chapter 31
Cardiopulmonary Cerebral Resuscitation (CPCR)
CPCR is the combined techniques of chest compressions/de-
epinephrine,
fibrillation and mechanical ventilation. The goal of CPCR is
dopram,
to provide adequate circulatory and ventilatory support to
 dopamine/dobutamine, and
sun Ad pu o iun u p a aun
dextrose (50%), and
can retum. It is used when the patient codes or when the
resuscitation (Ambu) bag.
n    s  
can occur in patients undergoing anesthesia, suffering from
When choosing an area in which to perform CPCR, it
an acute or chronic systemic disease, after a severe trauma
should be large enough to allow the medical team and their
(i.e., hit by car), or any other process that places the pet into
equipment easy access to all sides of the patient. The light-
a shock syndrome.
ing should be bright enough for the medical team to intubate
This chapter discusses the preparations the veterinary
 and catheterize the patient. If possible, an oxygen source
medical team must make in case of cardiovascular failure.
should be available. The table should be flat and hard
CPCR is always initiated and led by the veterinarian, how-
enough to allow good chest compressions. The height of the
ever, for CPCR to have the highest likelihood of success, it
table should allow the team member to stand over the patient
must be handled by the veterinary medical team. The team
and effectively compress the chest (see below).
approach to managing cardiopulmonary arrest is essential.
Each member of the hospital staff (including the reception-
Beginning CPCR
ist and kennel help) should be trained in every aspect of
CPCR.
When faced with a patient that has coded, a team mermber
Before CPCR can be initiated, the status of the code must
should perform the following steps.
be determined to facilitate the necessary action. In some
 acutely or chronically ill patients with an overall poor prog-
 Step 1: Double check.
nosis, the clients may elect not to have any treatment initiated
 Step 2: Don't panic: Call for help in no uncertain terms.
if the animal codes. In other patients, the clients may elect to
 Step 3: Begin CPCR!
have full or advanced care initiated. Code statuses are set up
by the veterinarian after discussing their concerms with
Once the heart stops, the team has 5 minutes to restore
clients whose pets are severely ill and may code. If a patient
normal circulation before permanent brain damage occurs.
codes and their code status is unknown, CPCR should always
If the medical team is not right there to react immediately
be initiated. Table 31.1 outlines the type of code status.
within the first 30 seconds as cardiopulmonary arrest oc
Before faced with a code, the veterinary medical team
curs, overall prognosis is very poor.
should assemble a moveable compact crash kit. Crash kits
Each team member must assume specific responsibilities
can vary from as simple as a tackle box to as elaborate as a
when first approaching a code (see Table 31.2). In smaller 
mechanic's chest and should allow all necessary supplies to
hospitals, where there may be fewer than 2-3 team members
be readily available. Necessary supplies include
available, these responsibilities can be combined. Com-
ponents of CPCR (i.e., chest compressions) can be physi-
endotracheal tubes,
cally demanding and exhausting; each team member should
larymgoscope ,
be able assume new responsibilities as another team mem-
intravenous catheters,
ber tires. Practice drills are essential and allow the staff to
fluids and administration sets,
respond quickly and efficiently.
 tape and bandage supplies,
The primary objective of basic life support is to tem-
syringes and needles,
porarily support the patient's ventilation, oxygenation, and
tourmiquet,
circulation by administering artificial respiration and chest
l ay ui sanup le noy jeuo aesop pue sanup 
compressions. The following is a step-by-step discussion of
atropine,
how a medical team could respond to a code. Overall, the
lidocaine,
code is always overseen by the veterinarian and can vary
453
454
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Table 31.1. Code status.
Code Status
 Medical Treatment
Reason
No code—Do not resuscitate (DNR)
No medical treatment is pursued if the 
Clients may decide that their pet may be a “no
 patient codes. This does not mean the
 code" based on personal reasons or experiences
medical team does not treat the patient
with other animals, the severity and prognosis of
 aggressively until that point.
 the underlying disease, or financial concerns.
Closed chest
 Closed chest massage refers to CPCR
Closed chest massage is the first response when
with respiratory and cardiac support.
the patient codes.
The cardiac compression occurs by
external chest compression 
Open chest
Open chest massage is an advanced
Open chest massage requires advanced critical
treatment option in which the thoracic
care support if the patient is revived. Clients 
cavity is opened and the heart is
must be aware of the complications and ad-
directly massaged.
vanced treatment concerns for when a patient 
goes through an open-chest CPCR.
Table 31.2.
 CPCR responsibilities.
 Responsibility
Tasks
Airway management
 Establish airway and ventilate the patient.
Cardiovascular
 Chest compressions.
management
Venous access
Place IV lines and start fluids as directed.
Monitoring
Check for pulse.
Check mucous membrane color/CRT.
 Auscultate heart and lungs.
Attach EKG.
 Drug administration
Administer drugs.
 Record time and drugs given.
depending on the patient, the patient's disease, and the hos-
pital 's experience and equipment. The steps to take follow-
ing a code are as follows.
Step I: Determine If the Patient Has Coded
A team member should assess the patient for respiration,
Figure 31.1. If concerned about the status of a patient, the
heart rate, and pulse (see Figure 31.1). If the patient shows
technical team member should evaluate for heart rate, pulse, and
signs of cardiovascular failure, the medical team must be no-
respiration. If the patient is in a code status, the veterinarian and 
tified immediately.
team should be notified immediately.
Step II: Begin Cardiac Compression
p m u as  saq si an ppa a a
oxygen source, one team member should begin chest compres-
see Figure 31.2]). Chest compressions should be adminis-
sion. This will maintain cardiac output and perfusion while also
tered at a rate of 160-200 per minute.
producing moderate expansion and contraction of the lungs.
The effectiveness of cardiac compressions depends entirely
Patients More than 10 Pounds
upon the force (strength) with which the compressions are ad-
Place both hands on the chest over the heart. The heart area
ministered. Place the animal in right lateral recumbency.
can be located by counting four to six rib spaces or use the
point of the left elbow against the chest. Keep arms extended
Patients Less than 10 Pounds
and locked. Place the heel of the lower hand over the area of
 The thumb and first two fingers can be used to compress the
the heart and compress the chest by bending at the waist. Do
chest (thumb placed on left side of chest and fingers below;
 not bend the elbows because this will not create an appropri-
Chapter 31: Cardiopulmonary Cerebral Resuscitation (CPCR)
455
Figure31.2
Figure31.3
ate force to effect circulation. Chest compressions should be
tain focus on the effectiveness of the compression (quality
administered at a rate of 80-I00 per minute. The rate of
vs. quantity). It may also be necessary to stand on a stool to
chest compressions suggested above is simply a guide.
get the proper height to perform an adequate compression
Although the number of compressions is important, main-
(see Figure 31.3).
456
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
Figure 31.4
Practice Tip: The goal of a good compression is to
Administer two quick breaths, initially, then ventilate
compress the chest 30-50% of normal volume and
once every 2-3 seconds.
produce a palpable pulse.
 If using an anesthetic machine as an oxygen source, the
Step IMI: Establish an Airway
outflow valve should be tightened down and the oxygen
reservoir bag compressed to deliver positive pressure
The use of a laryngoscope is recommended because some
ventilation (see Figure 31.6).
patients can aspirate food and saliva that can be obstructive
Administer no more than 20 cm of HzO pressure, and
if not removed first (see Figure 31.4). Once intubated, the
when the breath is completed, open up the outflow valve,
cuff should be inflated and the tube tied in. It is recom-
 flush oxygen into the system, and repeat the procedure
mended that only new endotracheal tubes be used in the
for the next breath (see Figure 31.7.)
crash kit to prevent using a leaky or damaged cuff that would
require a new tube to be placed.
It is important to remember that when cardiopulmonary
Step V: Have Drugs Ready and Administer Them as
arrest occurs in anesthetized animals, anesthetic gases
Instructed
 Understanding the pharmacology of the drugs used during
should be tumed off immediately (see Figure 31.5). Flush
the system with 100% oxygen. Always disconnect hoses at-
CPCR is important. The drugs used in CPCR are focused on
tached to endotracheal tubes before flushing.
increasing heart rate and blood pressure, blocking normal
control mechanisms of the body to slow heart and respira-
Step IV: Breathing
tory rates, and restoring perfusion. The most common drugs
Administer artificial respiration by connecting the endotra-
used in CPCR are as follows:
 cheal tube to an Ambu bag (connected to oxygen supply) or
anesthesia machine. If there is no Ambu bag or oxygen
 n    si  das
source, mouth to endotracheal tube can also be attempted.
 nervous system that elevates heart rate, increases blood
Chapter 31: Cardiopulmonary Cerebral Resuscitation (CPCR)
457
pressure, and dilates airways. Epinephrine can be given
either intravenously or through the tracheal tube.
● Atropine: Atropine blocks the body's normal response to
slow the heart rate and respiratory rate when they become
too rapid. This drug is mainly used to increase a slowed
heart rate. Atropine can be given either intravenously or
through the tracheal tube.
● Doxapram (Dopram): Doxapram is used to stimulate
respiration within the central nervous system. Doxapram
is given intravenously. The beneficial effects of the drug
are controversial.
● Dextrose (50%): Dextrose is used to maintain normal
blood sugar levels if the patient is hypoglycemic. The 
brain and muscle must have sugar to maintain normal
function. Without this the patient can become comatose,
seizure, and die. Dextrose is mixed 1:1 with sterile water
or IV fluids to make a 25% dextrose solution. It is then
given intravenously (see Chapter 30).
Arrane
When handling a code, the medical team should have the
drugs available, drawn up, and ready to administer. The two
BBUTLER
most important drugs to have ready for intratracheal or in-
travenous administration are epinephrine and atropine. See
Table 30.3 for doses that should be used as the veterinarian
recommendations. The amount, route, and time a drug is ad-
ministered must be recorded for the medical record.
Figure 31.5
OPEN
Figure 31.6
458
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
BUm
40
60
9
60
Figure 31.7
Step VI: Have Catheter Ready and Set Catheter
changes in the patient and the effectiveness of CPCR (see
A catheter is extremely important for the administration of
Figure 31.9).
drugs and fluids to help maintain circulation. Setting a
CPCR is then maintained over the next 5-10 minutes.
catheter on a coded patient often is extremely difficult and
Especially with CPCR in the larger patient, team members
sometimes impossible. If an animal presents in an emer-
will have to switch responsibilities because compressing the
gency situation, it is recommended to set a catheter before 
chest compression becomes exhausting. Compressions, ven-
the patient's condition worsens. Even if the owner does not
tilation, and drug and fluid administration are maintained
-xa si jod e 'isuuna noy ido Aeu pue iad aun ean on juea
umtil the veterinarian calls the code or the animal responds
tremely helpful in giving any type of medication. The cost
and stabilizes.
factor is minimal for one catheter in comparison with re-
Overall, the prognosis once an animal codes is poor
peated venipuncture. An indwelling catheter can minimize
to guarded, usually because there is some underlying dis-
stress, and maximize efficiency. Once a patent catheter is
ease that produced the cardiac arrest. Many animals will
set, begin the fluid and drug administration that the veteri-
never regain consciousness and code again once the emer-
narian outlines. (See Figure 31.8.)
gency medication wears off due to permanent damage to
the central nervous system. The owner must be made aware
Step VIl: Evaluate the Patient
of this from the start so they can begin to prepare in case
Once CPCR is initiated, the patient should be evaluated
 CPCR is not successful. There can also be permanent brain
every 15-30 seconds for response. Initially, the patient
damage.
should have its temperature monitored, the heart and lungs
 In an emergency, every minute counts. Team members
should be ausculted, the gum color and capillary refill time
recognizing likely problems initially and preparing for antic-
evaluated, and the pulse examined. If chest compressions are
ipated treatments greatly facilitate success of stabilization
being done effectively, there should be a pulse observed with
and outcome for the patient. Practicing cardiac arrest situa-
each cardiac compression. Once initially evaluated, place-
tions with the medical team at regular intervals can make the
ment of advanced monitoring devices (i.e., EKG, pulse
sa su-al on puodsa on pea ds
oximeter, esophageal stethoscope) can be useful to detect
quickly and more effectively.
Chapter 31: Cardiopulmonary Cerebral Resuscitation (CPCR)
459
Tabfe 31.3.
Emergency dose table—canine.
Epinephrine
Epinephrine-
Intertracheal*
Weight
Intravenous
or Sublingual
Atropine
Dopram
Dextrose50%**
(pounds)
(1:1000)
(1:1000)
(0.54 mg/ml)
(20 mg/ml)
(25% /ml)
Common Dose
1 cc/10 pounds
1 cc/20 pounds
1 cc/20 pounds
1 cc/20 pounds
1 cc/pound
0.1 ml
0.2 ml
0.05 ml
0.02-0.10 ml
1cC
2
0.2 ml
0.4 ml
0.1 ml
0.04-0.2 ml
2 cc
3
0.3 ml
0.6 ml
0.15 ml
0.06-0.3 ml
3 cc
4
0.4 ml
0.8 ml
0.20 ml
0.08-0.4 ml
4 CC
5
0.5 ml
1.0 ml
0.25 ml
0.1-00.5 ml
5 cc
6
0.6 ml
1.2 ml
0.30 ml
0.12-0.6 ml
6 cc
0.7 ml
1.4 ml
0.35 ml
0.14-0.7ml
7cc
0.8ml
1.6ml
0.40 ml
0.16-0.8 ml
8cc
9
0.9 ml
1.8 ml
0.45 ml
0.18-0.9 ml
9 cc
10
1.0 ml 
2.0 ml
0.5 ml
0.2-1.0 ml
10 cc
15
1.5 ml 
3.0 ml
0.75 ml
0.3-10.5 ml
15 cc
20
2.0 ml
4.0ml
1.0 ml
0.4-2.0 ml
20 cc
25
2.5 ml
5.0 ml
1.25 ml
0.5-20.5 ml
25 cc
30
3.0 ml
6.0 ml
1.5 ml 
0.6-3.0 ml
30 cc
35
3.5 ml
7.0 ml
1.75 ml
0.7-30.5 ml
35 cc
40
4.0 ml
8.0 ml
2.0 ml
0.8-4.0 ml
40 cc
45
4.5 ml
9.0 ml
2.25 ml
0.9-40.5 ml
45 cc
50
5.0 ml
10.0 ml
2.5 ml 
1.0-5.0 ml
50 cc
55
5.5 ml
11.0 ml
2.75 ml
1.1-50.5 ml
55 cc
60
6.0 ml
12.0 ml
3.0 ml
1.2-6.0 ml 
60 cc
65
6.5 ml
13.0 ml
3.25 ml
1.3-60.5 ml
65 cc
70
7.0 ml
14.0 ml
3.5 ml
1.47.0 ml
70 cc
75
7.5 ml
15.0 ml
3.75 ml
1.5-70.5 ml
75 cc
80
8.0 ml
16.0 ml
4.0 ml
1.6-8.0 ml
80 cc
85
8.5 ml
17.0 ml 
4.25 ml
1.7-80.5 ml
85 cc
90
9.0 ml
18.0 ml 
4.5 ml 
1.8-9.0 ml
90 cc
95
9.5 ml
19.0 ml 
4.75 ml
1.9-90.5 ml
95 cc
100
10.0 ml
20.0 ml
5.0 ml
2.0-10.0 ml
100 cc
*For intratracheal treatment dilute with sterile water and administer: 3 ml with a cat or small dog, 5 ml with a medium-sized dog, and 10
ml with a large breed dog.
*Dextrose mixed in equal portions with sterile fluids.
Figure 31.8
460
Section 4: Understanding the Concepts of Disease and Treatment
PI
TB4.0
CAL
1
Figure 31.9
Talking to the Client about CPCR
CD-ROM 2 will focus on concepts of Understanding the
 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation is initiated when a
Concepts of Disease and Treatment. The exercises can be
 patient's heart and respiratory systems fail.
done individually or as case rounds as they explore specific
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation is a combination of
topics in veterinary medicine that discuss clinical diagnos-
manual chest compressions, emergency drugs, and
tics and treatment.
ventilation for support until the animal's heart and
lungs can be restarted.
The medical team has 5 minutes to successfully
age occurs.
 If the patient presents in a full code, there is a de-
creased chance that it will respond and stabilize.
 Some patients that do respond will never gain con-
 sciousness and will code again once emergency
drugs wear off.
 For the patients that do continue to support them-
selves, it may take days to weeks to fully evaluate
if the pet has suffered permanent brain damage.
sp g pa a on ay  sd A
in a critical care facility to help them fully recover
after an arrest episode.
Appendix
App. A.1 Flowchart for Cardiac Auscultation
Can be a result of a deep chested animal (heart more
caudal in the chest), fluid around the heart, fluid in the
chest or increased lung sounds making the heart hard to
Are heart
auscultate.
sounds
 If no heart sound is auscultatable, get the veterinarian
present?
No
immediately.
Yes
Abnormal heart rate can be described as a tachycardia or
bradycardia and should be of great concern:
Is the heart
 Bradycardia: Canines < 60 bpm, Felines < 80 bpm
rate
normal?
Tachycardia: Canines > 160 bpm, Feline > 240 bpm
No
Yes
GET VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
Alterations in rhythm, called a sinus arrhythmia can be
Is the heart
normal in the canine, but not in the feline. Severe pauses
rhythm
between heart rhythms are abnormal.
normal?
No
Sinus arrhythmia in the feline or any other severe
Yes
pause in the heart rhythm (canine or feline) - GET
VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
Is there a
pulse
A heart rate that does not coincide with the pulse rate can
deficit?
Yes
 suggest a pulse deficit which can suggest abnormal heart
No
rhythms or shock.
GET VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
Heart auscultates
normally
461
462
Appendix
App.A.2
2You know you are in trouble based on physical exam when .. .
System Examined
Canine
Feline
Disposition
 Nonresponsive
 Nonresponsive
Comatose
Comatose
 Lateral recumbent 
 Lateral recumbent
 Breathing
Increased rate >45
Increase rate >45-60
 Abdominal breathing
Abdominal breathing 
Open mouth breathing (panting)
Pulses/heart
Increased rate >150
Increased rate >200
beating
Pulse quality:
Pulse quality:
None
None
 Hyperdynamic
Hyperdynamic
Weak
Weak
Gum color
White
White
 Purple/gray
 Purple/gray
Yellow
Yellow
 Capillary refill time 
CRT >2 seconds
CRT >2 seconds
Bruising
Any bruising should be monitored
Any bruising should be monitored
 Increased bruising
 Increased bruising
Body temperature
Temp <98° or Temp >106°
Temp <98° or Temp >106
Body confirmation
Bloated in abdomen
Bloated in abdomen 
Bloated in chest
Bloated in chest
Shift-Sherrington 
Shift-Sherrington 
App.A.3
 Outline of azotemia.
Type of Azotemia
Urine Specific Gravity
Cause
 Other Concerns
 Pre-Renal 
High
Dehydration
Kidney chemistry values usually
return to normal when patient 
is rehydrated
 Azotemia
Dilute
 Primary renal 
Can be poor due to underlying
Hypokalemia
disease
renal disease
Proteinuria
 Post-renal azotemia 
High (but can become
 Urinary obstruction
Can be poor if obstruction is 
 Hyperkalemia 
dilute with long-term
(FLUTD)
prolonged, which can produce
urinary obstruction)
primary renal disease
Appendix
463
App. A.4Diagnostic Tree for Hyperadrenocorticism
Cushing's disease is suspected
based on
Signalment
History
Physical Exam
 Initial Blood work
I uogdo
1I uodo
Option III
Urine Cortisol
Low Dose Dex
Creatinine Ratio
ACTH STIM
 Suppression
Abnormal
Abnormal
Abnormal
Low Dose Dex or
Ultrasound
ACTH STIM
High Dose Dex
Suppression
Abnormal
Abnormal
 Bilateral Enlarged
Unilateral Enlarged
Cortisol Suppresses →
No Suppression →
Ultrasound
Adrenals →
 Adrenal and smaller
 euaipe Arepuoas
Pituitary-Dependent
Adrenal Tumor
Pituit ary-Depen dent
Adrenal Tumor
Cushing's Disease
Cushing's Disease
 Cushing's Disease
Cushing's Disease
 Bilateral Enlarged
Unilateral Enlarged
Adrenals →
Adrenal and smaller
secondary adrenal →
Pituitary Dependent
Cushing's Disease
Adrenal Tumor
Cushing's Disease
464
Appendix
-—- Heartworm disease,
 Decreased hemoglobin production
spleen, liver, kidney disease or iron
Echinocytes — Altered fat 
CONSULT DOCTOR
 metabolism, tumor, toxin
-AIHA
 Intracellular Changes -
CONSULT DOCTOR
 Regenerative anemia
 spleen and liver disease
Redraw sample and start over
deficiency
 Spherocytes -
Schistocytes-
 Polychromasia
0
208
Hypochromasia
000
 Blood Clot
DOCTOR
00
ON
ON
Draw EDTA blood sample
s
evaluate the red blood cells
 Go on to WBC evaluation
 and check tube
  e 
Yes
Is the cel normal?
 Is central pallor
normal?
s
White Blood Cell Population: Count 100 Cells
App. A.5 CBC Differential Flowchart: Red Blood Cell Evaluation
Roleaux
Agglutination
Agglutination
roy daid aus yo
Concerns of autoimmune-
CONSULT DOCTOR
mediated hemolytic
agglutination
or roleaux?
anemias
PCV:
Appendix
465
 Number Seen
Normal
Values
 and purple-staining cytoplasm. They are responsible
 Yud e ym nlonu pauauaes ay sdonnan 
Description
 producing immunoglobulin.
 staining cytoplasm.
 or allergic reactions.
Neutrophils
Eosinophils
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Cell type'
Bands
App. A.6 Blood film evaluation.
466
Appendix
At this point there are no concerns
of primary renal disease.
No
ON
Yes
Is there true proteinuria?
Urine / Protein Quant
Obtain a urinalysis
Abnormal Sediment?
Other signs
 Run advanced diagnostics:
Sediment to lab
ON
    ' d
Yes
No
Creatinine
 Obtain a urinalysis
Is the USG low?
potassiun
present?
functions - ie., Blood
00
Azotemia
AO
Evaluate other
pressure
S
Appendix
467
according to blood work can still be
 May require further testing
 No obvious liver problems 
At this point there are no concerns
chronic disease.
of hepatic disease.
N
T
N
Evaluate other functions - i.e., Bile acids,
 Recommend Fasting Bile Acids
dysfunction? Low body:
Yes
Yes
Are the Bile Acids
abdominal ultrasound 
Glucose
Elevated?
0
。
LiverDisease
No
functions - i.e., Bile
acids, abdominal
Liver Disease
Evaluate other
Elevated AST, ALT, GGT,
ultrasound
Is there evidence of acute
 Reevaluate a blood smear
Yes
No
Liver trauma?
LDH
May
Yes
468
Appendix
 Abdominal Ultrasound
ITL
:papaau
ON
a diau o peneaa aa pinous sonsouip raun
Intracellular Bacteria
Yes
Toxic Neutrophils
Radiographs
Bands
Ultrasound
there:
diagnostics:
11L
App. A.9  Algorithm for Exocrine Pancreatic Disease (i.e. Pancreatitis)i
Continue diagnostic protocols
No
ON
Examine a WBC smear. Are
Are there elevations of:
Yes
(CANINES ONLY)
Intracellular Bacteria
Toxic Neutrophils
Amylase
Lipase
Count
Fulminating Acute
Severe concern
Bands
Pancreatitis
there:
Yes
Appendix
469
At this point there are no concerns
 At this point there are no concerns
for diabetes mellitus.
 for diabetes mellitus.
2
No
At risk patient
Other signs
 Obtain a urinalysis
Yes
PU / PD
Fructosamine
Is there:
No
 Obtain a urinalysis
hyperglycemia?
Is there glucose in
Canine > 200
Feline > 300
the urine?
Diabetes mellitus
470
Appendix
App.11.
 Normal values for canine/feline chermistry.
App.12.
Guidelines for subcutaneous fluid therapy.
Test
 Canine Normal Range
Feline Normal Range
Animal's Weight
Approximate Subcutaneous Fluid Amount*
ALP
10-150 U/1
0-62 U/I
<10 pounds
50-200 ml
ALT (SGPT)
5-60 U/I
27-76 U/I
11-40 pounds
200-500 ml
AST (SGOT)
 5-55 U/I
5-55 U/I
41-70 pounds
500-700 ml
GGT
 0-14 U/I
0-6 U/I
>70 pounds +
>700-1000 ml +
 Albumin
2.5-3.6 g/dl
2.3-3.3 g/l
TP
5.1-7.8 g/dl
5.9-8.5 g/l
*These fluids are suggested fuid ranges based on pet weights.
 Globulin
2.8-4.5 g/dl
3.6-5.6 g/l
Total bilirubin
0-0.4 mg/dl
0-0.4 mg/dl
could produce pulmonary edema and congestion (ie., congestive
BUN
7-27 mg/dl
15-34 mg/dl
heart failure, electric cord injury, etc.).
Creatinine
0.4-1.8 mg/dl
0.8-2.3 mg/dl
Glucose
60-125 mg/dl
70-150 mg/dl 
 Calcium
8.2-12.4 mg/dl
8.2-11.8 mg/dl
Phosphorus
2.1-6.3 mg/dl
3.0-7.0 mg/dl
Chloride (Cl)
105-115 mEq/l
111-125 mEq/l
Sodium (Na)
141-156 mEq/l
147-156 mEq/l
 Potassium (K)
4.0-5.6 mEq/l
3.9-5.3 mEq/l
Appendix
Observe urine bilirubin, blood serum color, liver enzymes and red blood
Observe Urine Sediment, PCV / TP,
Observe -Chemistry (Renal Function: BUN, Creatinine, Phosphorus, Potassium...) / Urine
Concerns of UTI, Bleeding Mass,
Hematuria - Supernatant Clear
It can be associated with animal on IV fluids or an animal that has adequate
Observe PCV /TP, CBC, Blood
 2.  However, can be concerns of early renal disease or other systemic diseases.
Concerns of Red Blood Cell
Film. Consult Veterinarian
Destruction.
USG < 1.015 (Canine) / USG < 1.025 (Feline)
cell count - Consult Veterinarian
blood cell breakdown 
 Suggests inability to concentrate urine -
 RED - Spin down and determine if
e - re dn H
Sediment -Consult Veterinarian
hematuria or hemoglobinuria
hydration.
?
1.
1
ON
ON
Continue on to Flowchart B
ON
 Is urine color
concentrated?
normal?
 Is the urine
appearance
Is the urine
S
YES
YES
472
Appendix
urinary tract infection, mass or inflammatory disease), however, renal
Protein in the urine can also be artifactual secondary to alkaline urine.
Protein in the urine can suggest urinary tract infection, renal disease,
Observe Urine Protein, Leucocytes, Urine pH, and Urine Sediment
Sugar in the urine can be strongly suggestive of Diabetes mellitus.
sas e aq us pue ll aan d an ae us uxn s d
Observe Urine Glucose, Blood Sugar, Chemistry... NOTIFY
chronic inflammatory disease, neoplasia and other causes.
Observe Urine pH, Blood, Sediment, Renal Enzymes...
Observe Urine Ketones, Blood Sugar, Chemistry...
to clot is also possible.
VETERINARIAN
Agglutination)
emergency.
stress.
YES
S
YES
YES
YES
Continue on to Flowchart C
Is there protein in
Are there ketones in
 Is there blood in
Is there bilirubin
 the urine?
 in the urine?
the urine?
 the urine?
No
ON
ON
ON
Appendix
 Single Abnormal Cell types (more then 1 per low power field) can suggest possible Humor or mass within
 If the process occurs over a long term, bladder stone formation is possible. It is important to determine
Casts are aggregates of protein or cells that form inside the kidneys tubules. They can suggest acute or 
 inflammatory disease) or renal disease (pyelonephritis) or hurmor or other systemic disease.
Observe Urine pH, Urine Blood & Urine Protein.. NOTIFY VETERINARIAN
 NOTIFY VETERINARIAN
Observe Complete Blood Count and Chemistry -
Observe Urine Protein, Leucocytes, Urine pH
 chronic renal disease, infection, or neoplasia.
 ability to clot is also possible.
the type of crystal - see above.
the bladder.
App. A.15  Flowchart C: Evaluating Urine Sediment 
 Finish U/A - Discuss Abnormal with Veterinarian
YES
YES
SH人
YES
YES
types in the urine?
blood cells in the
Are there white
blood cells in the 
Are there red
 abnormal cell
Arethere
urine?
urre?
2
No
ON
ON
Appendix
Small or isoelectric leads - Can be normal - change leads and evaluate if
Evaluate heart rate for tachycardia; p-waves may be lost in QRS
Metabolic Disease: Can be electrolyte abnormality or metabolic
Concerns of Heart Disease, Shock, Metabolic, Infectious Diseases ...
Concerns of Heart Disease, Shock, Metabolic, Infectious Diseases ...
S-A Node Disease: Slow significant Bradycardia -
Tachycardia - HR > 200 Canine / HR > 240 Feline
NOTIFY VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
Bradycardia - HR < 60 Canine / HR < 80 Feline 
Bradycardia - HR < 60 Canine / HR < 80 Feline
NOTIFY VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
NOTIFY VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
NOTIFY VETERINARIAN IMMEDIATELY
complex. See Tachycardlia Above
disease.
No P-waves:
1
2
3
2
 No Obvious Arrhythmias Observed
NO
NO
ON
NO
App. A.16Algorithm: Evaluating the EKG
Is the QRS normal
Is the heart rate
Is there a p-wave
for every QRS?
 interval normal?
Is the R-R'
Yes
Appendix
475
2
estigate other
 due to the concerns of aspiration.
 Obtain a full
history.
concerns.
1
Treat by Outlined Protocol
L
2
L23
ingestion or show signs of toxicity?
Stabilize Patient: BE READY WITH
Common Signs of Toxicity:
L
 Catheter and fluids
OXYGEN
CONTROL - 800-548-2423
Manufacturer information
 Research the Toxin
2
-General
23
YES
 Triage the animal and
make sure the patient is
Is it stable?
Any human medicati ons?
Over-the-counter drugs?
BE SPECIFIC!!!
Any toxins possible?
Obtain a Full History
YES
476
Appendix
App. A.18IV Fluid Administration Algorithm
Step I: Maintenance Fluids:
Step II: Dehydration:
Wt (kg）× 66 cc/kg/day 
cc/day
Wt (kg)×
% Dehyd × 1000 ml/ =
cc/day
Note: Maintenance fluid may be I'/z - 2 X
Dehydration is expressed in decimal form: (i.e., 5%
maintenance (99 - [32 cc/kg/day) due to fluid
dehydrated = 0.05, or I0% dehydrated = 0.1)
losses or diuresis.
Step III: Total Fluid Need (TFN)
With Fluid
TFN = Maintenance = Dehydration
Bolus
TFN
cc/day
Step IIIa: Bolus:
Step V: Drops / Second
Bolus = TFN X 0.2
Without Fluid
M1/ Sec = hr/3600 sec
Bolus =
×02 =
Bolus
Sec =
/3600 =
Drops / Sec
Step IIIb: Recalculate TFN
Step IV: Hourly Rate (hr)
 Identify IV set drops/m]
New TFN = TFN - Bolus
Hourly Rate = TFN / 24 hrs
Usually 15 or 60 dr/ml
New TFN =
hr =
/24 =
cc/hr
Drops/Sec = ml/s × dr/m1
Dr/sec =
× 15 or 60
drops / sec
App. A.19  Canine Endotracheal Size Based on Weight
 App. A.20  Endotracheal Size Based on Weight
Endotracheal Tube Size
Canine Patient's Weight
Endotracheal Tube Size
 Feline Patient's Weight
5mm
4-6 Ib (1.8-2.7 kg)
3mm
2-3 Ib (0.9-1.4 kg)
5.5 mm
7-8 Ib (3.2-3.6 kg)
3.5 mm
4-6 Ib (1.8-2.7 kg)
6 mm
9-11 Ib (4-5 kg)
4 mm
7-10 Ib (3.2-4.5 kg)
6.5mm
12-14 Ib (5.5-6.4 kg)
5 mm
11 Ib or more (5 kg +)14-16
7mm
15-20 Ib (6.8-9 kg)
7.5 mm
17-20 Ib (7.7-9 kg)
8mm
21-26 1b (9.5-11.8 kg)
8.5 mm
27-28 Ib (12.3-12.7 kg)
9.0 mm
29-31 Ib (13-14 kg)
9.5 mm
32-33 Ib (14.5-15 kg)
10 mm
31-40 Ib (14-18 kg)
11 mm
41-65 Ib (18.6-29.5 kg)
12 mm
66-85 Ib (30-38.6 kg)
14-16 mm
86-120 Ib (39-55 kg)
Appendix
477
e  s
Decrease ane sthesia.
Have anti-arrhythmic
medication ready (i.e..
Notify veterinarian.
Increase oxygen.
 Insulate patients using bubble wrap, plastic wrap,
 Controlling ambient temperature: keep the OR
Keep patients dry or actively dry them post 
lidocaine).
include:
Humidify and heat inspired gasses.
Forced air heat exchange blanket.
 operatively: hand-held blow dryer.
Warm all intravenous fluids.
3
Avoid burning the patient.
Notify veterinarian.
Decreased body temperature
or warm blankets.
 Abnormal Rhythm
Abnormal EKG
Heart Block 
Pattern:
寸s
6r
&
VPC
9
T
Therapies for hypoventilation include:
 Mechanical ventilator can also take
over the duty of moving gas into and
mucous membrane color, EKG, CO
Monitor heart and respiratory rates,
levels, pulse quality /blood pressure
blood pressure will improve 
Hg
End-tidal CO,> 5S mm Hg
circulation to all tissues.
Hypoventilation noted:
Arterial CO,> 45 mm F
of respiration (apnea), or
Notify veterinarian.
mm Hg water pressure.
minutes.
out of the lungs.
alveoli.
2i
Use Colloid Fluids: The use of a rapid
intervals (checking pressures between
infusion of a colloid (i.e., Hetastarch).
Dobutamine) by intravenous infusion.
Decrease the depth of anesthesia.
Therapies for hypotension include:
Bolusing IV fluids in 10 ml/kg
blood pressure (ie., dopamine or
Hypotension noted: Decrease in
membrane color / CRT, and
decreased systolic pressure:
Avoid HYPERTENSION.
pulse quality, mucous
Notify veterinarian.
Canine: 60 mm Hg
boluses).
App.A.21
2
3
Appendix
App.A.22
 Estimate of fluid need based on hydration and fluid loss status.
 Species
Condition
Significant V/D
Suggested Fluid Administration Level
Feline & canine
 0-5% dehydrated/stable
N
Maintenance→ 1.5 × maintenance
Feline & canine
 0-5% dehydrated/stable
Y
Bolus + 1.5-2×/maintenance
Feline & canine
7-9% dehydrated/stable
N
Bolus + maintenance→ 1.5× maintenance
Feline & canine
7-9 % dehydrated/stable
Y
Bolus + 2× maintenance
Feline & canine
 9-12 % dehydrated/stable
N
Bolus + 2X maintenance
 Feline & canine
 9-12% dehydrated/stable
Y
Bolus + 2×/maintenance
Feline
 Unstable
Yor N
Shock fluid doses (45 ml/kg/h)
Canine
Unstable
Yor N
Shock fluid doses (90 ml/kg/h)
*This table is a rough estimate of fluid need and should be used only as a reference for the medical team member to ascertain the
relative fluid level needed for a sick patient. All fluid administration rates are based solely on the veterinarian recommendations.
App.A.23
Physical changes in early/severe shock.
Sy stem Examined
Early Shock
Severe Shock
 Disposition 
Depressed 
Nonresponsive
 Sternal recumbent
Comatose
Weak
Lateral recumbent 
Breathing
Increased rate >45
Abdominal breathing
 Altered breathing rates
Decreased rate
 Abdominal breathing
Shallow
 Open mouth breathing
Pulses/heart beating
 Rapid, bounding pulses 
Slow weak pulses
Tachycardia (canines)
Bradycardic
 Bradycardia (felines)
+ Pulse deficits
± Pulse deficits
Gum color
Pale
Pale to white
Purple
Purple/gray
Yellow
Yellow
 Capillary refill time 
CRT >2-3 seconds
CRT >3 seconds
Body temperature
Normal temp.
Temp. <98° or >106°
Temp >106
Hypothermia (felines)
 Pupils
Sow to respond to light 
 Slow to nonresponsive to light
Anisocoria
Dilated
 Anisocoria
Appendix
479
App.A.24
 Changes in clinical diagnostics that could suggest shock.
Parameter
Measurement
Observations
Increased PCV/TP
PCV:
 Packed cell volume and total proteins above normal are secondary to 
 Canines >50% +
dehydration.
 Felines >40% +
Total protein
Eevation of the cell populations and total protein occur as the fluid 
 Canines >8.5 mg/dl
portion of blood decreases. (See Chapter 21.)
 Felines >8.5 mg/dl
Decreased PCV
PCV:
 Decreasing packed cell volume with normal total protein suggests
Canines < 25% +
chronic disease or increased red blood cell destruction (hemolysis).
Felines < 20 % +
In animals with chronic disease, their resources to produce red
blood cells and energy may be significantly diminished, lowering 
the packed cell volume over time.
Normal TP
 Total protein may be lower, but tends to remain in the normal limits.
 Decreased PCV
PCV:
With acute blood loss, animals can both loose red blood cells and 
Canines <25% +
protein.
Felines <20% +
Decreased TP
Total protein:
 Protein leaks out of the vessels with the fluid component of blood,
 Canines <5 mg/dl
hence decreasing as significantly as the packed cell volume.
 Felines <5 mg/ dl
Glucose
Glucose <40-60 mg/dl
Hypoglycemia can slow the response of the central nervous system
 and if prolonged can produce severe shock, seizures, coma and 
death.
Eectrolytes
 Potassium (K+) >6.0 mg/dl
 Potassium is one of three electrolytes of the body to help produce
Potassium (K+)<3.0 mg/dl 
cardiac contraction, muscle movement, nerve firing, and many
other basic body functions.
 Significant alterations of this electrolyte can produce
weakness,
+ abnormal heart rhythms,
● muscular tremors,
● coma, and
 death.
Clotting times
Activated clotting time >120 seconds
Increases in cloting times can lead to internal bleeding, shock, and
Activated prothrombin time >120 seconds
death.
Prothrombin time >11 seconds
 protein should be monitored closely.
App.A.25
 Emergency drug table.
Drug
Indication
50% Dextrose
Significant hypoglycemia (blood glucose <40-60 mg/d)
 Atropine
Bradycardia (heart rate <60 beats/min)
 Epinephrine
Cardiac arrest/severe allergic or anaphylactic reaction
Dexamethasone
Used to help counteract anaphylactic shock,
Prednisone
Furosemide
 the lungs). Used in the treatment of cardiovascular shock and traumatic brain injury.
Mannitol 
Antihistamines
 Antihistamines (i.e., diphenhydramine) are drugs that help slow the allergic response of the body. When the patient
 is exposed to a foreign allergen, a white blood cell called a mast cell can release histamines, producing signs
anaphylactic shock.
480
Appendix
App. A.26 Hypovolemic Shock Flowchart
 Is the pet in hypovolemic shock?
Hyperdynamic or poor pulse quality
 Elongated CRT
 Poor to no MM color
YES
 Depressed —> Obtund
No
1) Have oxygen environment 
available
1. Oxygen cage
 2. Oxygen mask 
 Set IV catheter and begin regular
3. Nasal oxygen
fluid maintenance
2) Have catheter ready and if needed,
set IV catheter
 3) Have fluid set-up ready and help
administer
4) Minimal clinical database
Yes
 Is the pet stabilizing?
NO
YES
5)  Have colloids ready
6) Continue to have emergency
medications ready in case veterinarian
needs to redose medications.
Is the pet stabilizing?
NO
Continue emergency care and diagnostics as
outlined by veterinarian. Medical team will
examine other causes of shock.
Appendix
App. A.27Septic Shock Flowchart
Is the pet in septic shock?
● History of infectious disease
· Weak
● Comatose
● Changes in pulse quality
● Neu rologic signs - seizu res 
NO
YES
1) Have oxygen environment ready.
2) Have catheter set-up ready and if
needed, set IV catheter.
· Prepare:
3）1
Have fluid set-up ready and if 
 necessary, administer fluids.
● Be ready to set IV catheter.
4）1
Have emergency medication available.
● Be ready to administer IV
5) Minimal clinical database - If
fluids.
hypoglycemic (blood glucose < 60) -
● Be ready with emergency drugs.
prepare dextrose solution.
● Be ready to run minimal clinical
1 cc of 25% dextrose IV /pound/hour
database.
YES
Is the pet stabilizing?
NO
6) Have colloids ready.
 7) Continue to have emergency
medications ready in case veterinarian
needs to redose medications.
YES
Is the pet stabilizing?
NO
Adjust fluid need as per veterinarian
recommendation. Continue diagnostics, care
 and evaluation of animal.
482
Appendix
App. A.28 Anaphylactic Shock Flowchart
 Is the pet in anaphylactic shock?
o Sudden history of acute collapse.
o Weakness.
o Bronchoconstriction - Rasps.
o Facial swelling / hives.
o Stinger in tongue.
o Poor pulses.
o Poor CRT < MM color.
NO
YES
1)
Have oxygen environment ready.
2
 Have catheter set-up ready and if
needed, set IV catheter.
Have fluid set-up ready and if
* Prepare:
3)
necessary, administer fluids.
Have emergency medication available
*Be ready to set IV catheter.
steroid, antihistamine, epinephrine.
* Be ready to administer IV fluids.
5
Clinical diagnostics -- If hypoglycemic
* Be ready with emergency drugs.
(blood glucose < 60) - prepare 
* Be ready to run minimal clinical
dextrose solution.
database.
 Is the pet stabilizing?
YES
NO
6) Have colloids ready.
7
 Continue to have emergency medications
ready in case veterinarian needs to redose
medications
Is the pet stabilizing?
YES
NO
 Adjust fluid need as per veterinarian 
recommendation. Continue diagnostics, care
 and evaluation of animal.
Appendix
483
App. A.29  Flowchart for Caridogenic Shock
 Is the pet in cardiogenic shock?
0 Weak
0 Open mouth breathing
 o Abdominal breathing
o Purple → blue  gray MM
0 Prolonged CRT
 0 Increase respiratory rate
o Poor pulses
NO
YES
 Pulse deficits
1)Low STRESS
o Prepare:
2)
Have oxygen environment ready.
 0 Be ready to set IV catheter.
3) Have catheter set-up ready and if
 0 Be ready to administer IV
needed, set IV catheter - low stress.
fluids.
 0 Be ready with emergency
4
NO FLUIDS.
drugs.
 5) Have emergency medication ready:
 0 Be ready to run minimal clinical
Furosemide
database.
a.
b.
 Nitroglycerin ointment
C.
Sedation
d.
 Atropine / epinephrine (in case of
(apo3
YES
 Is the pet stabilizing?
Visual vs. Normal
Evaluation
NO
 Continue evaluation and medication as
 directed by the veterinarian. Pet may
still succumb despite all medical
treatment.
484
Appendix
App. A.30 Flowchart for Heatstroke
Is the pet in heatstroke?
0 TEMPERATURE > 106 degrees
o Panting
0 Nervous
0 Weak
 0 Bloody vomiting / diarrhea
0 BRUISING
0 Collapse
NO
YES
0 Coma
1) Cool down bath
0 Prepare:
a. COOL WATER BATH
0 Be ready to set IV catheter.
b. Fan
 0 Be ready to administer IV
c. Alcohol lower extremities
fluids.
d. DO NOT COOL DOWN BELOW
103.5 DEGRESS
 0 Be ready with emergency drugs.
 o Be ready to run minimal clinical
 2) Have catheter set-up ready and prepare
database.
 to set IV catheter
3) Begin treating for shock
(See hypovolemic shock protocol)
a. IV fluid administration
b. Emergeney drugs
c. Colloids
YES
 Is the pet stabilizing?
Visual vs. Normal
Evaluation
NO
Con tinue close evaluation and
monitoring of patient. Monitor for
 concerns of acute organ disease, CNS
 disease or disseminated in travascular
coagulopathy (DIC).
Appendix
485
App. A.31  Flowchart for Traumatic Brain Injury
 Is the patient at risk for a
traumatic brain injury?
● History of trauma
· ANISOCORIA
· Vomiting
● Depression
● Seizures
● Coma
NO
YES
1) Oxygen dark quiet environment.
2) Have catheter ready and set if
instructed.
+ Prepare:
3) Have emergency medications ready
a. Mannitol
● Be ready to set IV catheter.
b. Furosemide
● Be ready to administer IV fluids.
4) Have fluid / colloids ready and
administer if instructed to do so -
● Be ready with emergency drugs.
hypertonic saline is the fluid of
● Be ready to run minimal clinical
choice.
database.
Is the pet stabilizing?
YES
Visual vs. Normal
Evaluation
NO
Continue evaluation and medication as
directed by the veterinarian. Pet may
still sucumb despite all medical
treatment.
486
Appendix
App.A.32
Emergency dose table.
Epinephrine
Epinephrine
Intertracheal*
Weight
Intravenous
or Sublingual
Atropine
Dopram
Dextrose-50% **
(pounds)
(1:1000)
(1:1000)
(0.54 mg/ml)
(20 mg/ml)
(25% /ml)
Common Dose
1 cc/10 pounds
1 cc/20 pounds
1 cc/20 pounds
1 cc/20 pounds
1 cc/pound
7
0.1 ml
0.2 ml
0.05 ml
0.02-0.10 ml
1 cc
2
0.2 ml
0.4 ml
0.1 ml
0.04-0.2 ml
2cc
3
0.3 ml
0.6 ml
0.15 ml
0.06-0.3 ml
3 cc
0.4 ml
0.8 ml
0.20 ml
0.08-0.4 ml
4 cc
5
0.5 ml
1.0 ml
0.25 ml
0.1-00.5 ml
5 cc
0.6 ml
1.2 ml
0.30 ml
0.12-0.6 ml
6 cc
0.7 ml
1.4 ml
0.35 ml
0.14-0.7ml
7 cc
8
0.8ml
1.6ml
0.40 ml
0.16-0.8 ml
8 cc
9
0.9 ml
1.8 ml
0.45 ml
0.18-0.9 ml
9 cc
10
1.0 ml
2.0 ml
0.5 ml
0.2-1.0 ml
10 cc
15
1.5 ml
3.0 ml
0.75 ml
0.3-10.5 ml
15 cc
20
2.0 ml
4.0ml
1.0 ml
0.4-2.0 ml
20 cc
25
2.5 ml
5.0 ml
1.25 ml
0.5-20.5 ml
25 cc
30
3.0 ml
6.0 ml
1.5 ml
0.6-3.0 ml
30 cc
35
3.5 ml
7.0 ml
1.75 ml
0.7-30.5 ml
35 cc
40
4.0 ml
8.0 ml
2.0 ml
0.8-4.0 ml
40 cc
45
4.5 ml
9.0 ml
2.25 ml
0.9-40.5 ml
45 cc
50
5.0 ml
10.0 ml
2.5 ml
1.0-5.0 ml
50 cc
55
5.5 ml
11.0 ml 
2.75 ml
1.1-50.5 ml
55 cc
60
6.0 ml
12.0 ml 
3.0 ml
1.2-6.0 ml
60 cc
65
6.5 ml
13.0 ml
3.25 ml
1.3-60.5 ml
65 cc
70
7.0 ml
14.0 ml 
3.5 ml
1.4-7.0 ml
70 cc
75
7.5 ml
15.0 ml
3.75 ml
1.5-70.5 ml
75 cC
80
8.0 ml
16.0 ml 
4.0 ml 
1.6-8.0 ml
80 cc
85
8.5 ml
17.0 ml
4.25 ml
1.7-80.5 ml
85 cc
90
9.0 ml
18.0 ml
4.5 ml
1.8-9.0 ml 
90 cc
95
9.5 ml
19.0 ml
4.75 ml
1.9-90.5 ml
95 cc
100
10.0 ml
20.0 ml
5.0 ml
2.0-10.0 ml
100 cc
*For intratracheal treatment dilute with sterile water and administer: 3 ml with a cat or small dog, 5 ml with a medium-sized dog, and 10
ml with a large breed dog.
*Dextrose mixed in equal portions with sterile fluids.
Glossary
Term
First Reference
Definition
Accommodation
Chapter 20
The lens is located behind the iris and is supported by fibrous ligaments within
    a  s  o n   
 far field to the near field. This process is called accommodation.
Acetabulum
Chapter &
A rounded cavity in the hip bone that articulates with the femur as the hip joint.
Acetaminophen
Chapter 27
 A non-narcotic analgesic drug with a very small margin of safety in animals: it can
cause severe effects on the liver and blood.
Acetone
Chapter 15 
Acetylcholine
Chapter 27
In normal muscle activation, an activated neuron releases a chemical called
acetylcholine. This chemical diffuses away from the nerve toward the muscle in
 a space called the neuromuscular junction. The contact of acetylcholine with 
specific proteins (acetylcholine receptors) on the muscle stimulates muscular
contraction.
ACTH
Chapter 17
 A hormone produced from the pituitary gland, ACTH stimulates the adrenal gland 
 to produce cortisol.
ACTH stimulation test
Chapter 17
 A clinical diagnostic test that evaluates a patient's response to ACTH.
 Addisonian crisis
Chapter 27
A disease condition in which a patient cannot respond with normal levels of
cortisol and/or aldosterone, and the patient enters a shock-like state.
Adenovirus
Chapter 2 
 A virus that produces a life-threatening infection of the liver, causing depression,
anorexia, icterus, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Adjuvant
Chapter 2
Chemicals or portions of microscopic metal in a vaccine that are attached to
weakened or killed pathogenic bacteria or viruses to stimulate an immune
response
Adrenal cortex
Chapter 17
 The outer layer of the adrenal gland that is responsible for producing cortisol,
aldosterone, and some sex hormones.
 Agglutination
Chapter 21 
A process where the red blood cells precipitate out of the blood like snow in a
snow globe due to an immune-mediated process.
 Albumin
 Chapter 22
Albumin is a small carrier protein that binds to hormones and other components
 in the bloodstream to maintain and move necessary elements throughout the
body.
Aldosterone
Chapter 17
expulsion of potassium in the body.
 Alkaline phosphatase
 Chapter 22
 Alkaline phosphatase refers to a large number of intracellular enzymes that are
(SALP or ALP)
 present within the liver, intestine, bone, kidneys, and placenta.
Alopecia
 Chapter 19 
Hair loss that can be localized or generalized.
 Alpha 2 agonists 
 Chapter 29 
An anesthetic medication that can produce excellent calming effects, muscle
 relaxation, and short-duration analgesia.
ALT (alanine aminotransferase)
 Chapter 22
 2-oxoglutarate to pyruvate and glutamate in the liver cells (hepatocytes).
Alveolarbone
Chapter 9 
The bone that forms tooth sockets.
Amylase
 Chapter 22
  i sns x     s   
 Sugars for absorption.
 Amyloidosis
Chapter 14
 A metabolic disease where an inert protein (amyloid) builds up in the tissue and 
organs.
 Anal sac aprocrine gland 
 Chapter 22
 A malignant tumor of the anal gland 
adenocarcinoma
 Analgesics
 Chapter 29 
 This class of medication helps decrease pain sensitivity prior to, during, and
 after surgery. By including analgesics in pre-anesthetic drug combinations,
the amount of pain the patient experiences and the amount of subsequent
analgesics needed postsurgically is reduced.
Ancylostoma
Chapter 10
A species of hookworm.
Anemia
Chapter 7
A low red blood cell count.
487
Glossary
Term
 First Reference
Definition
Anisocoria
Chapter 7, 20 
 Patients with an uneven pupil size.
 Anterior chamber
Chapter 20 
Occupies the space cranial to the lens; it is filled with aqueous fluid that helps to
 maintain the shape and nutrition of the cranial aspect of the eye.
 Anterior cruciate ligament 
Chapter 13
(cranial)
movement of the femur on the tibia.
 Anticholinergic drugs
Chapter 29 
 This category of drug blocks the part of the autonomic nervous system that
reflexively slows the heart, increases production of secretions from the respira-
tory and gastrointestinal systems, produces movement of the intestines, and 
constricts the iris of the eye.
 Antigen
Chapter 10
Specific surface molecules or proteins on pathogenic organisms (i.e., bacteria).
Antigen
 Chapter 12
Specific proteins on the surface of the pathogen that stimulate an immune
response.
Anuria
Chapter 13 
Aortic valve
Chapter 12
 The valve that separates the left ventricle from the aorta and opens to push oxy-
 genated blood into the entire body.
Apnea
Chapter 27
 An absence of breathing.
Aqueous humor
Chapter 20
 The eye produces a fluid called aqueous humor, which is produced in a region
behind the iris called the ciliary body.
Articular
Chapter 8
A place or union of two or more bones; a joint.
 Articular surface
Chapter &
The region of a joint where bone interdigitates with bone.
Ascariasis
 Chapter 10 
Roundworm infection.
Ascites
Chapter 12
A clear fluid that begins to collect in the abdominal cavity secondary to liver
 disease, low blood protein levels, and other metabolic concerns.
Ascites
Chapter 14 
The buildup of a low protein-low cellularity abdominal fluid (transudate or a
modified transudate) in the abdomen.
 Aspartate aminotransferase
 Chapter 22
An intracellular enzyme in all cells, but predominantly in muscle and liver cell
(AST or SGOT)
 damage. AsT transfers a-amino groups between specific amino acids as a part
 of normal protein metabolism.
Aspiration
Chapter 27
'pi buni eu oui son eun buissed pue buuon
Atopy
Chapter 19 
Allergies to airborne material, such as pollen, dust, mites, cat dander, and rag-
weed.
ATP
 Chapter 11 
A cellular energy source.
Atrial-ventricular node (A-V node)
 Chapter 24 
 A collection of fibers within the heart that focuses the signal from the S-A node to
 fire a wave of depolarization down to the ventricle.
Atrophy
Chapter 7
 A wasting or decrease in size in an organ or tissue.
Aural hematoma
Chapter 20
 An aural hematoma is an accumulation of blood between the cartilage of the
 earflap and the skin causing a firm, enlarging pocket of fluid to build.
Azotemia
Chapter 13
An increase in renal toxins in the blood (i.e., BUN, creatinine).
Babesia
Chapter 21
 An intracellular red blood cell parasite.
Bacteruria
Chapter 22
 Bacteria in the urine.
Barotraumas
Chapter 29
 Pressure trauma to the lungs.
 Basal metabolic rate (BMR)
Chapter 16
The rate at which the cells of the body burn energy.
Basophil
Chapter 21 
A white blood cell; medium sized cells 1-2 times the size of a red blood cell and
 having a segmented nucleus, they are thought to function in allergic reactions.
Basophilia
Chapter 21
 An increased basophilia level.
Benzodinepines
Chapter 29
Drugs such as Valium and midozolam can produce mild to moderate sedation 
 more safely in the geriatric patient.
 Bile acids
Chapter 24 
Hepatocytes also produce chemicals called bile acids that help to emulsify fat
within the small intestine.
 Bilirubin 
Chapter 21 
A breakdown pigment of hemoglobin from the red blood cell.
Bilirubin
Chapter 22
 A potentially toxic metabolite produced from the breakdown of hemoglobin and
other pigments in the body.
 Bilirubin 
Chapter 24 
The normal liver de-activates this toxin produced from the breakdown of
hemoglobin and other pigments in the body.
 Bilirubinuria
 Chapter 23
Bilirubin in the urine.
Blastomycosis
Chapter 11 
and other systems of the body.
018
Chapter 10 
 Refering to a disease condition where the canine stomach distends with gas and
expands.
Blood dialysis
Chapter 13
 This process is the continuous filtering of toxins from the blood using specialized
 machinery.
 Bood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Chapter 13
 A form of conjugated ammonia produced within the liver to be excreted by the
kidney.
Glossary
489
Term
 First Reference
Definition
Bone marrow
 Chapter &
and platelets
 Borborgymi
Chapter 15
 Increased intestinal sounds.
Brachiocephalic
Chapter 19
 Short faced, referring to brachiocephalic breeds (i.e., pug, bull dog, etc).
Bradycardia
Chapter 6 
An abnormally slow heart rate.
 Bronchoconstriction
Chapter 11 
Constriction of the bronchial tissue.
Brucellosis
Chapter 18
A sexually transmitted disease producing infertility in the male and abortion and
fetal death in the female.
Buccal mucosa
Chapter 7
The mucosal lining inside the oral cavity lateral to the teeth and tongue.
Calculus
Chapter 9
A mineralized plaque deposit that is often yellow to brown in color.
 Calici virus
Chapter 7
ulcerations.
Cancellous bone
Chapter & 
 Soft, spongy bone with a reticular or lattice-like network.
 Canine distemper
Chapter 11
A viral infection that attacks the respiratory, gastrointestinal (rare), and central 
nervous system of canines.
 Canine hepatitis virus
 Chapter 2 
An adenovirus that produces a life-threatening infection of the liver, causing 
depression, anorexia, icterus, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Canniculi
 Chapter 14
 Channels running through the layers of hepatocytes that remove de-activated
toxins from the liver and pass them into the bile ducts and gall bladder for
excretion in the feces.
Cardiac arrhythmia
 Chapter 24 
An abnormal rhythm of the heart.
Cardiac sphincter
 Chapter 10 
 A thick, circular muscle that separates the esophagus from the stomach,
 preventing reflux of ingesta back into esophagus.
Cardiovascular shock
 Chapter 12
 A condition in which there is still an evident heartbeat, but the heart is unable to
 maintain any cardiac output, producing collapse, weakness, and, potentially.
death.
Cardiovascular shock
Chapter 30
Occurs when a pet is unable to maintain normal blood flow and perfusion due to
 an inability of the heart to properly pump and maintain cardiac output.
Carnassial teeth
Chapter 9
 The upper fourth premolars and lower first molars; the largest teeth in an animal's
mouth.
Carnivores
Chapter 9
Animals whose diets consist only of meat.
Caudal
 Chapter 1
 An object or lesion on the body that is behind another object.
Cecum
Chapter 10
 The ileum empties into this small vestigial region of the intestines.
 Cellular respiration
Chapter 11
process called cellular respiration, convert sugar into energy (ATP), water, and 
carbon dioxide.
Chief complaint (CC)
Chapter 7
The client's primary reason for bringing the pet to the hospital.
Cholelithe
Chapter 14 
A gall bladder stone.
Cholestasis
Chapter 14 
Decreased bile flow through the gall bladder.
 Cholestatic disease
 Chapter 14 
Causes an obstruction of the gall bladder.
 Cholinesterase
Chapter 17
A chemical enzyme that inactivates the acetylcholine, giving the muscle time to 
reset and be stimulated again.
 Chronic interstitial nephritis
Chapter 13
 An inflammatory disease of the kidneys.
Ciliary body
 Chapter 20
 A region behind the iris that produces aqueous humor.
Cirrhosis
 Chapter 14 
An end-stage liver disease where the normal liver tissue is replaced with scar
 tissue and fibrosis.
 Class 2 malocclusion
Chapter 9
In this deformity, the upper jaw is much longer than the lower, causing misalign-
ment of the teeth.
Class 3 malocclusion
 Chapter 9 
ment of the teeth.
 Class O malocclusion
 Chapter 9
This is a normal bite and occlusion of the incisor and canine teeth; also called a
scissors bite.
 Clotting factors
Chapter 10
 Enzymes produced by the liver to begin the clotting cascade when a patient 
 begins to bleed.
Coagulopathy
Chapter 6 
An inability of the body to clot blood.
Coagulopathy
Chapter 14
Refers to the body having altered ability to clot blood.
Coccidiomycosis
 Chapter 11 
 integumentary (skin), central nervous system, and other systems of the 
body.
Colloids
Chapter 28
-ledu) Aisuep peseaoui ue saeu reun sedi pini to dn epe si Aobeteo sl
tonic) as compared to blood.
Colon
Chapter 10
The large intestine, which is broken into the ascending loop, the transverse loop.
and the descending loop.
490
Glossary
Term
 First Reference
Definition
Colostrum
Chapter 18 
 The first maternal milk, which is rich in immunoglobulins and helps produce
 immunity in the newborn.
Concussion
Chapter 30
 An acute syndrome brought on by a sharp blow to the head or a fall(such as
 from a moving vehicle) that causes blunt injury to the brain.
Cone cells
Chapter 20
 Specialized cells that process bright light and colors in the retina.
 Congenital patellar disease
Chapter 13 
 A disease of the young patient where the patella does not sit normally in the
 patellar grove due to architectural abnormalities in the leg.
 Congestion
Chapter 12
 As there is decreased flow through major body organs (ie. lungs, liver . . .)
secondary to decreased perfusion, the fluid component of blood begins to
move out of the vessels and collect within the organs and/or the body cavity.
Conjunctiva
Chapter 6 
 Mucus membrane that lines eyelids and is reflected onto the eyeball
 Consensual PLR
Chapter 20
as well.
Continuous rate of infusion (CRI)
Chapter 28
 A medication added to a fluid to create a continuous rate of infusion (CRl) of the
needed drug.
Cornea
Chapter 20 
The clear outermost section of the eye.
 Corneal reflex 
Chapter 29 
By placing light pressure on the cornea, the eye should retract and the patient 
blinks.
Cortical bone
Chapter 8
 The densely packed outer column of a long bone.
 Cortisol
Chapter 17
time of stress or emergency.
Coumadin
 Chapter 27
Cranial
Chapter 1 
An object or lesion on the body that is in front of another object.
Cranial draw sign
Chapter &
An abnormal increased forward movement in the tibia when the bone is pulled
cranially while the femur is held in place; suggestive of an anterior cruciate
ligament rupture.
 Cryptorchid
Chapter 3, 18 
 Male patients that do not have their testicles descend normally in utero or shortly
 after birth; the testes may sit within the inguinal canal or anywhere within the
abdominal cavity.
Cryptosporidium
 Chapter 10
A very small parasite that produces severe diarrhea in young animals.
Crystalloids
Chapter 27 
 Types of fluid that have a similar concentration (isotonic) density to blood.
 Cutaneous larval migrans
Chapter 10
A parasitic infection of humans where the larval form burrows through the skin 
 causing erosive paths usually seen in the feet or legs.
Cyanotic
Chapter 12
 A bluish gray hue to the skin due to lack of oxygen within the bloodstream.
Cylinduria
Chapter 23
Increased numbers of casts in the urine.
Cystocentesis
Chapter 13
A needle aspirate of the bladder.
Cystotomy
Chapter 13
A surgical opening of the bladder. 
Cytauxoan
Chapter 21
An intracellular red blood cell parasite.
Deciduous teeth
Chapter 9 
Baby teeth.
 Demodecosis (demodectic mange)
 Chapter 19
 Demodecosis is a parasitic mite infection of the hair follicle.
Dermatophytes
Chapter 19 
 Skin fungal agents that produce ringworm infections.
 Diabetes mellitus
Chapter 15
A disease process where insulin production is not sufficient to adequately control
 nommal blood sugar levels.
Diaphragm
Chapter 11
 The musculoskeletal partition that completely separates the thoracic cavity from
the abdomen.
Diaphysis
Chapter &
 Area of dense cortical bone in the middle of the bone shaft, also called the bone
shaft.
 Diarthrosis
Chapter 8
 A synovial joint, these joints are freely movable and are united by a fluid-filled
cavity.
Diasystole
Chapter 11 
The phase of contraction of the atriums of the heart.
 Diplydium 
Chapter 10 
 A species of tapeworms found in dogs and cats.
Direct PLR
Chapter 20 
An ocular reflex whereby a light shines into one iris and it constricts.
Diroflania immitis
Chapter 12
A bloodborne parasite responsible for heartworm disease.
 Disseminated intravascular
Chapter 30
A syndrome produced by severe metabolic upset, which stimulates the blood
coagulopathy (DIC)
internally.
Distal
Chapter 1
An object or lesion on a limb that is farther from the body than another object.
Distributive shock (massive
 Chapter 30
 This syndrome refers to a pet that has lost its ability to maintain normal tissue
vasodilatation)
 perfusion due to massive dilation of all the blood vessels.
Diuresis
Chapter 13, 27
Using large amounts of intraveous, subcutaneous, or oral fluids to increase
Dorsal
Chapter 1
Draped
Chapter 3 
 The process by which surgical boundaries are covered with sterile towels.
Glossary
491
First Reference
Definition
Ductus venuses
 Chapter 14 
A small vessel in the embryo that bypasses blood around the animal's liver.
Duodenum
Chapter 10
The first section of the smallintestine.
 Dypsnea 
Chapter 12
Trouble breathing.
 Dypsnic
Chapter 11 
Labored or difficult breathing.
Dystocia
Chapter 18
Trouble giving birth, an abnormal labor.
 Ear pinna 
Chapter 7
The ear flap.
Ecchymosis
Chapter 14 
Echinocytes
Chapter 21 
Red blood cells with club-like projections from the cell surface.
 Echogenicity
Chapter 25
Refers to the strength or amplitude of the returning echo image on an ultrasound
examination.
Eclampsia
Chapter 18
 A serious condition affecting the canine shortly after pregnancy. when the female
Calcium is needed by almost every cell in the body to control cellular activity.
 aid in muscular contraction, help heart function, and aid nerve conduction, as
well as other body functions. with the demands of lactation, calcium levels fall
so rapidly that the patient cannot compensate, and the muscular, cardiac, and 
neurologic systems are severely affected.
 EDTA (ethylene diamine tetra
 Chapter 21
A blood-cloting tube that prevents the clotting of blood, used in performing 
acetic acid)
complete blood counts.
 Ebow dysplasia
Chapter &
 Congenital misalignment of the elbow joints, potentially producing an arthritic joint.
Emaciated
Chapter7
To become excessively lean.
Embolism 
Chapter 12
Due to abnormal blood flow, small clots can form in the ventricles in cats. These 
clots can be pushed into the aorta as the ventricle contracts and are then
called embolisms or thromboembolisms.
Endemic
Chapter 2 
Endocrine glands 
 Chapter 15
 Glands that secrete hormones or other chemicals directly into the bloodstream,
which influence metabolism and other body processes (i.e., pituitary, thyroid,
sex organs, etc.).
Endometritis
 Chapter 18 
An infection of the lining of the uterus.
 Entropion 
Chapter 20
An abnormal turning of the lid with resulting iritation of the cornea by hair and
lashes.
Enucleation
Chapter 20
Surgical removal of the eye.
Enzymes
Chapter 9
Chemicals that begin breaking down food.
Eosinopenia
Chapter 21
A decreased eosinophil level.
Eosinophilia
Chapter 21
An increased eosinophil level.
 Eosinophils
Chapter 21 
White blood cells with segmented nuclei, pink cytoplasm, and dark red granules 
 in the cytoplasm. Eosinophils respond to fungal infections or allergic reactions.
Epinephrine
Chapter 17
i pog an sisse ci spuodsan eun enpaw peuape au Aa paonpad peouauo 
Epiphora
Chapter 20
 Increased tearing.
 Epiphysis
Chapter &
An active area of bone growth where soft, spongy bone (cancellous bone) is
produced.
Epiphysitis
Chapter 8
 An inflammation of the growth plate.
Epistaxis
Chapter 2 
A nosebleed.
 Epithelium 
Chapter 11 
A layer of skin.
Erythema
 Chapter 29 
Reddening of the skin.
 Erythropoietin
Chapter 13
 A hormone produced by the kidney that stimulates red blood cell production in 
the bone marrow.
Estrogen
Chapter 18
Female hormone produced by the ovary to stimulate the signs of heat.
Ethylene glycol 
Chapter 13, 27
Most antifreeze contains ethylene glycol; this toxin begins to crystallize in the
Etiology
Chapter &
The study of the causes of the disease.
Euthyroid sick
 Chapter 16
 production even though the thyroid gland is not diseased.
Excoriation
Chapter 29
Skin damaged into its deeper layers, producing a red, inflamed, moist lesion.
 Exercise intolerance
Chapter 5, 11, 12 
 Inability to exercise at a nommal level; decreasing ability to exercise.
Exocrine glands
Chapter 15
Glands that discharge their secretions outwardly through a duct. Their secretions
control many important body functions (i.e., salivary gland, sweat gland,
mammary gland, etc.).
External acoustic meatus
Chapter 20
The canal that leads outward from the eardrum.
Favoring
Chapter7
To avoid bearing weight upon.
Feathered edge
Chapter 21
pou ae sllao aui aeum wl poa e to pue au re buadel e si ape paeeat au
touching.
492
Glossary
Term
 First Reference
Definition
Feline lower urinary tract disease
Chapter 13 
 An infectious, nutritional, or inflammatory disease of the lower urinary tract,
(FLUTD)
 producing obstruction of the urinary bladder.
 Femoral head and neck excision
Chapter 8
(FHO)
 out of the acetabulum and then severs the femoral head from the femur.
Fenestration
Chapter 13
Opening.
Fibrosarcoma
Chapter 22
 A spindle cell tumor containing increased connective tissue.
Flight or fight response
Chapter 27
 A behavior in an animal. The animal will either prepare its body to stand and fight 
or run.
Fluid overload
Chapter 28 
quickly.
Fossa
Chapter 14
A furrow or shallow depression.
Gastrin
Chapter 13
 The hormone that produces stomach acid; it is eliminated in the kidneys.
Gastro-distention volvulus
Chapter 6
bloats and rotates on its own axis, cutting off the blood to the stomach and 
spleen.
Gastropexy
Chapter 10 
 A permanent surgical attachment of the stomach to the abdominal wall.
 Giardia (giardiasis)
Chapter 10 
 A microscopic protozoal parasite that causes mild to moderate gastrointestinal
infection.
Gingiva
Chapter 9
The gums.
 Gingivitis
Chapter 3, 9
Swelling and infection of the gums; an inflammation of gums.
Glans penis
Chapter 18 
 A region of specialization located in the middle of the canine penis. It will swell 
 ike a balloon prior to and during sexual contact. It prevents premature separa-
tion from the female during coitus and increases the chances of fertilization.
Glaucoma
 Chapter 20 
 A disease of the neural tissue involving the optic nerve and the retina. The major
 precipitating cause of glaucoma is an increase in intraocular pressure.
 Glomerular filtration 
Chapter 13
The rate at which the kidneys filter toxins from the blood.
Glucagon
 Chapter 25
hyperglycemia to decrease blood sugar levels.
Gluconeogenesis
Chapter 25 
sens jo uonpad aut dot pet dn syeang Apog eu Aaeum sseoaud a
Glucosuria
Chapter 23
Glucose in the urine.
Granuloma
Chapter 2
 Small, nonpainful mass or nodule of chronically inflamed tissue.
Halitosis
Chapter 9 
Mild to severe bad breath.
Heart block
 Chapter 24
An arrhythmia produced by a blockage of the conduction of the electrical signal
through the atrial-ventricular node and the bundle of His. The obstruction pre-
 vents the normal transmission of the signal from the S-A node to the ventricle.
Heinz bodies
Chapter 21
Denatured hemoglobin fused to the cell membrane.
Heinz body anemia
Chapter 27
Exposure to onions and garlic (wild onions and store purchased) that produces
blood cell and foming Heinz bodies, which produce a serious to life-
threatening anemia.
Hematemesis
 Chapter 2
Vomiting frank red blood.
Hematochezia
Chapter 2 
Frank red blood in the stool.
Hematocrit
Chapter 21
 Many blood cell counters do a calculated hematocrit (HCT), which is an evalua-
 the total red blood cell count and the size of the red blood cells.
Hematuria
Chapter 23
Blood in the urine.
Hemoglobin
 Chapter 11 
dioxide throughout the body.
Hemoglobinuria
Chapter 23
Hemoglobin in the urine.
Hemolysis
Chapter 22
Red blood cell breakdown with release of hemoglobin in the serum.
 Hepatic artery
 Chapter 24 
The major arterial blood supply for the liver.
Hepatic congestion
 Chapter 22
 A pooling of fluid in liver tissue due to decreasing blood flow through the right 
 heart due to heart disease.
Hepatic encephalopathy
Chapter 14 
 A neurologic syndrome caused by the improper hepatic detoxification of toxins.
 The toxins build up within the bloodstream and directly affect the central
nervous system.
Hepatic lipidosis
Chapter 14
becomes infitrated with large amounts of body fat, shutting down the liver and 
 lading to a build up of hepatic toxins in the bloodstream.
Hepatic vein
Chapter 14
The major venous blood supply for the liver.
Hepatocyte
Chapter 14, 22
A liver cell.
 Hepatomegally
Chapter 14
 Liver enlargement.
 High-dose dexamethasone
Chapter 17
 A clinical diagnostic test to differentiate adrenal or pituitary forms of Cushing's
suppression test
disease.
Glossary
493
Term
 First Reference
Definition
 Hip dysplasia
 Chapter &
 Congenital misalignment of the hip joints potentially producing an arthritic joint.
Histamine
Chapter 2
 produce an allergic reaction.
 Howell-Jowell bodies 
Chapter 21
 Nuclear remnants seen within the cytoplasm as dark-staining bodies.
 Hyperadrenocorticism
Chapter 27
A hormonal imbalance caused by overproduction of a prednisone-like steroid
(Cushing's disease)
called cortisol in the adrenal glands of the body.
 Hyperbilirubinemia
Chapter 22,23
 Increased levels of bilirubin in the blood.
Hypercalcemia
Chapter 22
Increased calcium levels in the bloodstream.
Hypercarbia
Chapter 29
Increased carbon dioxide in the blood.
 Hyperdynamic pulse
Chapter 6 
A bounding strong pulse that lifts the finger of the skin.
Hyperechoic
Chapter 25
A structure in the ultrasound exam that is brighter than the surrounding tissue.
Hyperglycemia
Chapter 22
 Increased blood sugar levels.
 Hyperkalemia 
 Chapter 13
Increased blood levels of potassium.
 Hyperpigmentation
Chapter 19 
Increased pigment laid down in the skin secondary to chronic inflammation or
infection.
 Hyperthermia
Chapter 6 
Higher than normal body temperature.
Hyperthyroid
Chapter 16
 Hypertonic 
Chapter 28
Fluid types that have an increased density as compared with blood.
Hyphema
Chapter 7
The presence of blood in the eye.
 Hypoadrenocorticism
Chapter 17
A lack of production of the hormone aldosterone.
(Addison's disease)
 Hypoalbuminemia
Chapter 22
Decreased blood albumen levels.
Hypocalcemia
Chapter 18
Low blood calcium level.
Hypochromasia
 Chapter 21 
 An increase in the size of the area of central pallor and most often due to a
decrease in the concentration of hemoglobin within the red blood cell.
Hypoechoic
 Chapter 25
 When performing an ultrasound, hypoechoic structures are those that are less 
bright than the surrounding tissue.
Hypokalemia
Chapter 13
Decreased blood levels of potassium.
Hyposthenuria
Chapter 27, 28
Urine that is a more dilute specific gravity than plasma or serum. UsG < 1.008;
 the inability to concentrate urine.
Hypothermia
Chapter 6
 Lower than normal body temperature.
Hypothyroid
Chapter 26 
An underproduction of thyroid gland caused by pituitary or idiopathic/immune-
mediated disease of the thyroid.
 Hypovolemic shock
Chapter 30
Inability to maintain normal blood volume (red blood cells and fluid) or blood
pressure.
latrogenic
Chapter 17
lcterus
Chapter 2, 14, 22 
 The yellw coloration of the skin, mucous membranes, and conjunctiva of the eye 
 caused by the buildup of bile pigments in the tissue. Commonly secondary to
 liver disease, gall bladder obstruction, or immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
See biirubin.
lleum
Chapter 10
The last section of the small intestine.
 Immune-mediated disease
Chapter &
 A disease in which the white blood cells attack other body cells or tisues as if
 they were foreign invaders or pathogens (i.e., immune mediated hemolytic
anemia).
Immune-mediated hemolytic
Chapter 15
Massive destruction of the red blood cells by the patient's white blood cells
anemia
within the blood vessels of the body.
 Immune-mediated hemolytic
Chapter 23
 A disease condition whereby red blood cells are lysed by the white blood cells
anemia
and the immune system as the red blood cells are being attacked as if foreign 
 bacteria.
 Immune-mediated thyroiditis
 Chapter 16 
An inflammatory disease in which the white blood cells of the body attack the
 thyroid cells as foreign bacteria.
 Immunoglobulins
 Chapter 21 
Specific blood proteins produced by lymphocytes to fight off infection.
Inclusion bodies
Chapter 21
Intracellular remnants from a viral infection.
 Induced ovulators
Chapter 18
Induced ovulators will go into heat and become sexually active, but will not ovu-
 late unless sexual contact occurs. The sexual act stimulates a neuroendocrine
response that stimulates ovulation.
 Induction agents
Chapter 29
The role of an induction agent is to bypass stage ll anesthesia (excitatory phase)
so the patient can be intubated to gain rapid control of the airway and allow
maintenance on gas or injectable anesthesia
 Induction chamber
Chapter 4
 A large glass or plastic aquarium-like structure with a locking airtight lid used to
anesthetize small patients.
 Inguinal canal
Chapter 3 
 A slit in the abdominal muscles that allows the abdomen to communicate with 
 the subcutaneous tissue and scrotum.
494
Glossary
Term
 First Reference
Definition
Inspiratory/expiratory study
 Chapter 11 
 A specific thoracic radiographic study to evaluate the patient for tracheal col-
lapse.
Insulin
Chapter 15
 A hormone produced by the endocrine pancreas that is released in times of
hyperglycemia to decrease blood sugar levels.
Insulinoma
Chapter 15 
insulin.
Intercostal muscles
Chapter 11
The muscles between the ribs.
Intussusception
Chapter 10 
 An invagination of a section of small intestine into another adjoining section
 causing an obstruction.
Iris
Chapter 20
 A color contractile membrane suspended between the lens and the cornea.
Islets of Langerhans
Chapter 15 
 A region of specialized cells within the pancreas that produce insulin and 
glucagon.
Isochoic
Chapter 25
 Substances of a different medium are isochoic if waves travel through them at 
the same speed.
 Chapter 10
 A microscopic parasite that causes mild to moderate gastrointestinal infection in 
the canine and feline.
Isosthenuria
Chapter 23
Refers to urine that has the same specific gravity as plasma or serum. USG
1.010-1.015.
Isotonic
Chapter 28
 Fluid types that have the same density as compared to blood.
Jaundice
Chapter 2
The yellow coloration of the skin, mucous membranes, and conjunctiva of the eye
from the buildup of bile pigments in the tissue. Commonly secondary to liver
disease, gall bladder obstruction, or immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
 Jejunum
Chapter 10
The middle section of the smallintestine.
Joint capsule
Chapter &
A thick connective band of fibrous tissue that surrounds the joint and keeps the
bone aligned.
 Joint cavity
Chapter &
Area within the joint capsule filled with the lubricating synovial fluid.
Joint effusion
Chapter 8
When the joint is inflamed from injury or disease, the joint capsule begins to swell 
outward as joint fluid production increases secondary to inflammation.
Joint mouse
Chapter 8
A small iregular piece of articulate cartilage that has broken off a boney surface.
Joint tap
Chapter 8
 With a patient under sedation, a needle is placed into the joint capsule and joint 
luio ui sebueuo uoenieaa lot paedaud ueui s! pin sul peiseneu s! piny
fuid can suggest inflammatory joint disease (ie. arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis),
 infection (septic joint), or cancer.
Joints
Chapter &
 Joints are the intersections of bones or other articulations that serve to unite the
bones firmly or allow free movement.
 Juxtomglomerular cells
Chapter 13
 Specialized cells present within the arterioles of the glomeruli that aid in the
 maintenance of blood pressure.
 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Chapter 16, 20
 A disease producing a lack of normal tear production in the eye that leads to
 irritation of the outer segment of the eye, inflammation of the cornea, and 
 chronic mucoid discharge.
Ketoacidosis
 Chapter 25
The body metabolizes excess sugar by converting it to acetone, a ketone.
 Acetone is a toxin that acidifies the blood, making the pet anorexic, ill, and
weak.
Ketonuria
Chapter 23
 Ketone in the urine.
Kilovoltage (Kv)
Chapter 25 
The amount of energy applied to tungsten filaments to produce a stream of
 electrons that produces x-ray radiation.
Lateral
 Chapter 1
 An object or lesion that is farther away from the median plane in respect to
another object.
Lavage
Chapter 10 
 Rinsing the abdomen copiously with sterile fluids.
Left atrioventricular valve
Chapter 12 
 The valve that separates the left atrium from the left ventricle.
(mitral valve)
Lens
Chapter 20 
 A transparent refracting media.
Lenticular sclerosis
Chapter 20
The nomal aging of the lens in animals produces a chronic thickening that is
perceived as a bluing of the lens.
Ligated
Chapter 3
The surgical process in which a blood vessel is tied off with sterile suture.
Lipemia 
Chapter 15, 22
 Increased fat in the bloodstream; a white coloration of serum from the presence
Of fat.
Loops of Henle
Chapter 13 
 Specialized structures in the renal medulla that re-absorb the fluid component of
the urine.
Low-dose dexamethasone
Chapter 17
suppression test
cortisol (Cushing's disease.).
Lymphocytes
Chapter 21
responsible for producing immunoglobulin.
Glossary
495
Term
First Reference
Definition
Lymphocytosis
 Chapter 21
Increased lymphocyte count.
Lymphoma
Chapter 22
A cancer of the immune system.
Lymphopenia
Chapter 21
A decreased lymphocyte count.
Lysosomes
Chapter 21
Intracellular vacuoles that contain chemicals to help kill bacteria and foreign
material.
 Macroconidia
Chapter 29
Fungal hyphae and fruiting fungal bodies.
 Maldigestion syndrome 
Chapter 14 
The body is unable to break down nutrients in the small intestine.
Mange
Chapter 7
A cutaneous mite infection. The type of mange is dependent on the infectious 
mite (ie., sarcoptes, demodex).
Mastectomy
Chapter 18
 A surgical removal of part of or all the mammary chain.
 Medial
Chapter 1
An object or lesion that is closest to the median plane in respect to another
object.
Median plane
Chapter 1 
 directional temminology.
Mediastinum
Chapter 11
 Medullary canal 
Chapter &
Inside the column of bone. This is where the blood precursor cells (red blood
cells, white blood cells, and platelets) develop.
Megacolon
Chapter 10
The loss of nervous control to the large colon, producing a dilation and immotility
 of the descending colon.
Megaesophagus
Chapter 10
The loss of nervous control to the esophagus, producing a dilation and immotility.
Megakaryocyte
Chapter 21 
Large cells within the bone marrow that are the parent cell of platelets.
Melena
 Chapter 14 
Blood in the stool.
Menisci
Chapter &
These structures are formed from hyaline cartilage, fibrocartilage, and fibrous 
 tissue. They sit within the joint surface to add stability and absorb shock to the
joint.
 Mentation
Chapter 6 
 The mental status or attitude of the pet.
Mesentery
Chapter 10
A sheet of connective tissue that suspends the entire small intestine.
 Metaldehyde toxicity
 Chapter 27
A key poison in slug and snail bait as well as a fuel used in camp stoves. when 
 ingested, it produces a severe excitatory effect on the central nervous system.
 Metaphysis
Chapter 8
 Area of primary (trabecular) soft bone located on the farthest ends of the bone.
This area of bone flares out to increase the articular surface of the joint,
Metarubricytes
 Chapter 21
 Large cells within the bone marow that are precursor cells of the red blood 
cells.
 Metastatic chest protocol
 Chapter 11 
 A specific thoracic radiographic study to evaluate the patient for possible masses
in the chest.
 Methoxyhemoglobin 
Chapter 27
 An altered form of hemoglobin that is unable to carry oxygen into the body; thus,
 the animal slowly begins to suffocate.
 Milliamperage seconds (MaS)
 Chapter 25
The length of time electrons are exposed to tissue.
 Minimal clinical database
 Chapter 30
 blood glucose, and other possible diagnostics.
 Mitral insufficiency (cardiac)
Chapter 12 
 A disease of improper blood flow through the mitral valve (left atrial/ventricular
valve).
Monocyte
 Chapter 21 
Monocytes have unsegmented nuclei with a purple-staining cytoplasm. They are
 seen with chronic infections.
Monocytosis
Chapter 21 
An increased monocyte level.
 Mucocutaneous junctions 
Chapter 29
Regions where the hair coat meets the skin (ie., nail bed, lips, around the eye,
the nasal planum, and areas around the genitals).
 Mucous membranes
Chapter 6 
Membrane lining of a passage or cavity that communicates with the air.
Murmur
Chapter 7
Mycopiasma (fomerly
Chapter 21 
 An intracellular blood parasite.
hemobartonella)
Myelogram
 Chapter 25
A dye study that uses a water-soluble iodine-based solution, called lohexol, to 
check for strictures and pressures in the spinal cord caused by intervertebral
disc extrusion or spinal masses.
 Myoglobin
Chapter 23
An oxygen-carrying compound within muscle tissue.
 Myoglobinuria
Chapter 23
Myoglobin in the urine.
Necrosis
Chapter 24
Death of areas of tissue or bone.
 Negative feedback loop
Chapter 27
When the production of a specific chemical inhibits further production of the
same compound.
Neoplasia
Chapter 6 
An abnormal formation of tissue or growth as in a cancer.
 Neoplastic
Chapter & 
 Pertaining to the fommation of abnormal tissue (cancer).
Nephron
Chapter & 
 The glomeruli, the convoluted tubules, and the nephrotic loops are called a
496
Glossary
Term
 First Reference
Definition
Neutropenia
Chapter 21
A decreased neutrophil level.
Neutrophilia
Chapter 21
 An increased neutrophil level.
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
 Chapter 26 
A group of drugs that reduces pain and inflammation caused by trauma, fever.
drugs (NSAIDs)
wear and tear, and athletic injury.
Nothing per os (NPO)
Chapter 15
 Nystagmus
Chapter 5
Constant, involuntary, cyclic movement of the eyeball.
 Obstructive shock; obstruction
Chapter 30 
A shock syndrome brought on by obstruction of vessels; for example, thrombo-
of vessels
 embolism, tumor involving a large vessel, or torsion (GDV).
Omnivores
Chapter 9
Animals whose diets consist of meats and vegetables.
Onchyectomy
Chapter 3
The surgical removal of the fingertip and nail bed of the pet's digits.
Open fracture
Chapter 8
A fracture that has punctured through the skin, increasing the chance of infection
in the bone.
 Opioid agonist/antagonist
 Chapter 29 
 Drugs such as butorphanol (Torbutrol) and buprenorphine (Buprenex) that help
 reduce the patient's response to pain.
 Opisthotonus
Chapter 7, 27
A spasm or seizure in which the patient becomes lateral recumbent, with the 
'auids aut on enoiuadad pibu peau aut pue piy sha soy
Optic nerve
Chapter 20 
A cranial nerve that transmits visual images to the brain.
Orchidectomy
Chapter 3
 A complete removal of both the testicles of a male animal, rendering the pet 
aggression, voice change, marking territory, etc.).
 Organophosphate/carbamate
Chapter 27
Common ingredients in pet flea and tick control, household insecticides, and 
toxicosis
agriculture products. when the pet is exposed to high levels of these drugs, it 
interferes with the normal muscle and nervous function.
Os penis
Chapter 28 
The male canine penis contains a bone called the os penis.
OSHA
Chapter 4 
 issues within the workplace.
 Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)
Chapter 8
With this disease, there is change in the normal lay down of cartilage lining the
become injured and break loose. When this happens, a nonhealing ulcer
 occurs, which produces chronic pain upon movement of the joint.
Osteomyelitis
Chapter 25 
 An infection of the bone.
Osteosarcoma
 Chapter 22
A cancer of the bone.
Otitis
Chapter 20
An inflammation or infection of the ear.
Otitis externa
Chapter 20
An inflammation or infection of the external ear canal.
Otitis interna
Chapter 20
An inflammation or infection of the inner ear.
Otitis media
Chapter 20
An inflammation or infection of the middle ear.
Ova
Chapter 18
The female gamete, the egg.
 Ovariohysterectomy (spay)
Chapter 3
 Complete removal of both ovaries and the uterus to the cervix, rendering the
female unable to reproduce or show signs of heat.
Overbite
Chapter 9
A syndrome where the upper jaw is much longer than the lower, causing mis-
 alignment of the teeth.
Oxidative injury
Chapter 27
See Heinz body anemia.
Pacemaker of the heart
Chapter 24
 of automaticity of the heart fibers, it can stimulate a wave of depolarization on
its own without outside stimulation.
 Packed cell volume (PCV/total
 Chapter 21 
 The most reliable measurement of red blood cell level in a patient. It is the
protein)
 percentage of red blood cells present in a peripheral blood sample.
 Palpebral reflex
Chapter 29 
 By placing light pressure on the medial or lateral skin around the eyes, a blink 
reflex is produced.
 Pancreatic adenoma/
Chapter 15
 Benign and malignant tumors of pancreatic tissue.
adenocarcinoma
Pancreatic duct
Chapter 10 
Empties into the duodenum.
 Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
Chapter 22
A diagnostic test for pancreatitis (especially in the feline).
Pancreatitis
 Chapter 15
An acute or chronic inflammatory condition of the pancreas 
Panosteitis
Chapter &
 An inflammation of the medullary canal on the long bones in rapidly growing large
to giant dog breeds
 Panosteitis
Chapter 25 
 An inflammation of the bone.
 Paradoxical pulses 
Chapter 12 
A syndrome whereby the pulse weakens and strengthens as the patient inhales
e 'heeu eut punaue uoeinunooe pin e sisebhns ebueuo sul seeuxe pue 
 pericardial effusion.
 Parathyroid gland 
Chapter 16 
Secretes hormones to control the level of calcium within the bloodstream.
Parenteral
Chapter 28
Administration of medication that is other than oral route.
 Parotid gland 
Chapter 9 
 A salivary gland.
Glossary
497
Term
 First Reference
Definition
 Pathologic fracture
 Chapter &
 A disease process or cancer that produces severe decalcification of the bone so
 that a bone can break without any trauma.
Perfusion
Chapter7
Ability to maintain normal blood flow to the tissue.
 Pericardial effusion
Chapter 7
Accumulation of fluid around the heart within the pericardial sac.
Pericardium
Chapter 12
 A sheet of clear tissue than surrounds the heart.
Perineal urethrostomy
Chapter 13
A surgery to create a new opening above the penis
 Periodontal disease
Chapter 9
A process that causes destruction of the supporting structures around the teeth.
These supporting structures include the gums (gingiva), the bone that forms
the tooth socket (alveolar bone), and the connective tissue that attaches the
 Periodontal ligament 
Chapter 9
The connective tissue that attaches the tooth into the tooth socket.
 Peripheral edema
Chapter 22
Fluid that pools within the tissue causing swelling of the limbs.
Perisoteum
Chapter &
protection and nutrition of the bone.
 Peristalsis
Chapter 10
The normal movement of the intestines to churn food and move it forward 
 through the intestinal tract.
Peritoneal lavage
 Chapter 13
Administration of specialized fluids directly into the abdomen; can sometimes
help decrease the toxin load.
Peritoneum
Chapter 14 
A thin layer of tissue that covers the interior of the abdomen and secretes a clear
sterile fluid to prevent attachment of bacteria to help resist infection.
 Peritonitis
Chapter 10
A massive infection of the abdomen.
Petechiation
 Chapter 14 
Small pinpoint hemorhages noticed in the skin or mucous membranes.
 Phagocytosis
 Chapter 21 
The absorption and digestion of foreign material and bacteria by the white blood 
cell through the extension of its cell wall around the foreign invader.
Pharynx
Chapter 11 
The common region of the nose and mouth.
Phenothiazines
Chapter 29 
A long-term medication (usually lasting 8-12 hours in duration) used more for
sedation.
 Pheochromocytoma
Chapter 17
A metabolically active tumor of the adrenal medulla that secretes epinephrine.
 Photophobia
Chapter 20
 Sensitivity to light.
Photoreceptors
Chapter 20
The cells of the retina that process light into an electrical signal.
Piloerection
Chapter 29
Elevation of the hair.
Pinna
 Chapter 20 
The ear flap.
 Pituitary-dependent 
Chapter 27
 A disease syndrome produced by small microscopic pituitary tumors that over-
hyperadrenocorticism (PDH)
produce ACTH, stimulating the adrenal glands to constantly produce cortisol.
 Pituitary gland
Chapter 17
different types of hormones to control other hormone release in the body.
Plantograde gait
Chapter 15
Patients that present walking flat on back legs at the level of the ankle.
Plaque
Chapter 9
The soft “slime" layer of material found on tooth surfaces composed of salivary
 proteins, decayed food materials, and bacteria.
Platelets
Chapter 21
 Small cell components of blood that are several times smaller than normal red
 blood cells. They function in clot formation.
 Pleural effusion
Chapter 11 
An accumulation of fluid within the chest, surrounding the lungs and heart.
 Pleuritis
 Chapter 11
A viral, bacterial, fungal, or rickettsial infection of the lining of the chest (pleura).
Pneumonia
Chapter 11 
 A bacterial, fungal, or viral infection involving the lung fields, the bronchi, and the
trachea.
Pneumothorax
Chapter 11
An injury to the chest or lung fields that allows the introduction of air into the
 thorax, collapsing the lungs.
Polychromasia
Chapter 21
A bluish coloration in the red blood cells due to remnants of nuclear material.
 Polychromatophilic red blood cell
 Chapter 21 
 An immature red blood cell seen on a blood smear that indicates a regenerative
response to anemia.
 Polydipsia
Chapter 4 
Refers to patients with increased consumption of water.
 Polyphagic
Chapter 25 
With increased appetites.
 Polyuria
Chapter 4 
With increased urination.
 Portal vein 
Chapter 14
Large venous system that drains the intestines, taking the absorbed nutrients,
microbes, and toxins to the liver for detoxification.
 Porto-caval shunt
Chapter 14
 A disease process in which the blood supply from the portal system, which
 carries toxins that are normally metabolized by the liver, bypasses the organ
and goes directly into the general circulation and central nervous system, 
causing severe metabolic and toxic reactions.
 Postparturient hypocalcemia
Chapter 18
See eclampsia.
 Posterior chamber
Chapter 20
The region of the eye that lies between the caudal aspect of the iris and the cra-
 nial aspect of the lens.
 Postprandial
Chapter 14, 22
After a meal.
498
Glossary
Term
 First Reference
Definition
 Premature ventricular contraction 
 Chapter 24 
 In this situation a region of ventricular muscle becomes irritated by trauma,
(PVC)
wave that stimulates a ventricular contraction independent of the S-A node.
 Preprandial 
Chapter 13
Prior to a meal.
Progesterone
Chapter 18
A female hormone produced by the ovary to sustain pregnancy.
 Prophylaxis
 Chapter 9 
 Describes the process of cleaning a patient's teeth under anesthesia in the veteri-
nary hospital.
 Prostate gland
Chapter 18
 A single gland located around and along the urethra, just behind the excretory
ducts of the vesicular gland, producing a small amount of fluids for the ejacu-
 late and producing necessary electrolytes to help sperm motility and fertility.
 Prosthesis
Chapter 8
 Replacement of a missing part with an artificial substitute.
 Protein-losing enteropathy
 Chapter 22
 A disease affecting the intestine's ability to absorb protein.
 Protein-losing nephropathy
 Chapter 22
 A disease affecting the kidneys, producing an abnormal excretion of protein out 
of the glomeruli.
 Proteins induced by vitamin K
Chapter 27
 A highly suggestive clinical diagnostic blood test that detects proteins produced 
antagonism (PIVKA)
when drugs that interfere with vitamin K are present in the body.
Proteinuria
Chapter 23
Protein in the urine.
 Protruding third eyelid (chery eye)
Chapter 20 
The swelling and inflammation of the gland on the back side of the third eyelid,
 producing a protrusion and elevation.
Proximal
 Chapter 1
 Proximal convoluted tubules
Chapter 13
 A region within the nephron that functions to actively re-absorb all of the neces-
 sary nutrients back into the bloodstream.
 Pruritic
Chapter 19
 Severe itchiness.
 Pruritus
Chapter 7
Severe itchiness.
Pseudoarthrosis
Chapter &
A false joint formation.
 Pulmonary edema 
Chapter 11
A filing of the airways with fluid.
Pulmonic valve
Chapter 12 
The valve that separates the right ventricle from the right outflow tract taking 
 de-oxygenated blood to the lungs.
Pulse deficit
Chapter 7
 A lack of pulse associated with a heartbeat. Can be suggestive of a cardiac
arrhythmia or shock.
Pulse oximetry
 Chapter 12
The percent of oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood.
 Pupillary light response (PLR)
Chapter 20
An ocular reflex whereby a light shines into one iris and it constricts.
Purkinje fibers (Bundle of His)
 Chapter 24 
Specific conductive fibers in the intraventricular septum that carry a wave of
 depolarization from the atrium to the ventricles.
Purulence
Chapter 7
Containing pus.
Pustules
Chapter 29
Small elevation in the skin filled with lymph or pus.
p-wave
 Chapter 24 
The electrical wave that spreads over the atrium away from the EKG sensor and
then returns to baseline. After the p-wave is produced, both atria contract,
 producing diasystole.
Pyelonephritis
Chapter 8
Infection or inflammation of the glomeruli.
Pyometra
Chapter 28
A massive infection of the uterus.
 Pyuria
Chapter 23
White blood cells in the urine.
QRS wave
Chapter 24
 The electrical wave denoted on the EKG after the p-wave, which denotes a wave
 of depolarization that stimulates ventricular contraction.
Radio-dense
Chapter 10
'ydeboipen e uo dn mous on sseu so anss e to Age aul
Refractometer
Chapter 13, 23
Measures the specific gravity or the measure of concentration of a fluid.
Renal cortex
Chapter 13 
The outermost tissue region of the kidney, which houses hundreds of thousands
of specialized structures called glomeruli (Bowman's capsules).
Renal glomeruli (Bowman's 
Chapter 13 
 A set of tubules closely interdigitated with small arterioles, which serves as a
capsules)
filter for the body.
 Renal medulla
 Chapter 13
the urine.
 Renin-angiotensin system
Chapter 13
 duce vasoconstriction, producing increased blood pressure.
Renolithiasis
Chapter 13
A kidney stone.
 Respiration rate
 Chapter 11 
The rate at which the animal breathes normally while at rest.
Retina
Chapter 20 
The innermost tunic of the eye that receives visual images from the lens and 
 transmits them via the optic nerve to the brain.
 Right atrioventricular valve
Chapter 12
The valve that separates the right atrium from the right ventricle.
(tricuspid)
Rod cells
 Chapter 20
Detect light in dim and dark environments.
Roleaux formation
 Chapter 21
 Roleaux formation is a stacking of red blood cells, similar to coins, on a saline
blood film.
Glossary
499
Term
First Reference
Definition
Rubriblast
 Chapter 21 
 An immature red blood cell seen on a blood smear that indicates a regenerative
 response to anemia.
Rubricyte
Chapter 21
 response to anemia.
Salivary glands
Chapter 9 
These glands secrete saliva that helps emulsify food into a liquid solution.
 Sanguineous
Chapter 28
Bloody fluid.
 Scatter radiation
Chapter 25
Radiation that scatters off in all directions from the x-ray table.
 Schirmer tear test
Chapter 20
 A test that checks for normal tear production in an eye.
Schistocyte
Chapter 21
 intravascular fibrin strands as the body attempts to form clots within the blood
vessels.
 Sclera
Chapter 7
Seborrhea
Chapter 19
excessive greasiness of the skin and coat, and often secondary inflammation.
 Sebomhea oleosa
Chapter 19 
 Oily seborrhea.
 Seborrhea sicca
Chapter 19 
 Dry seborrhea.
Sepsis
Chapter 10
A massive infection of the body.
 Serosanguineous
Chapter 18
Bloody/serum fuid.
Sesamoids
Chapter &
These small bones formed in muscle tendons function to protect tendons at the
points of greatest friction.
 Shift-Sherrington syndrome
Chapter6
A syndrome associated with a trauma (usually from being hit by a car) that pro-
duces a patient with rigid nonmoveable forelegs and neck, while its hind end is
 fracture in the lower back, and the spinal cord may be damaged or severed.
Shiotz tonimetry
Chapter 20
A device that measures pressure within the eye.
 Signalment 
Chapter 6 
A legal description of the patient.
 Sino-atrial node (S-A node)
 Chapter 24 
 The initiator of the conduction signal is high in the right atrium in a region called 
the sino-atrial node (S-A node). Because the S-A node has the highest amount
 of automaticity of the heart fibers, it can stimulate a wave of depolarization on 
its own without outside stimulation.
SOAP method
Chapter 6
The SOAP method is a set protocol of recording a physical examination made up
 of subjective, objective, assessment, and plan components.
 Spastic entropion
Chapter 20
Process whereby entropion can occur secondary to chronically inflamed and 
irritated eyes.
Spherocytes
Chapter 21
Small, dense, red blood cells without the normal central pallor. Usually seen with
 immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. When serum antibodies adhere to the
nize the damaged portion of the red cell membrane and pinch it off. The loss 
of cell membrane changes the shape of the red blood cell to a sphere.
 Spherocytes should be suspected when there is large variability in red blood
cell size.
Spontaneous ovulators
Chapter 18
Animals that ovulate independently of any neuroendocrine stimulation.
 Status epilepticus
Chapter 30
Patients present with constant seizures.
Stenosis
Chapter 12
 A narowing of the area in front, at the valve level, or above the pulmonary or
aortic valves of the heart valve that impedes blood flow.
 Stridor
 Chapter 11
A respiratory noise.
 Stump pyometra
Chapter 18
An infection of the uterine stump in a spayed female.
 Subcutaneous emphysema
Chapter 11 
Air under the skin.
 Sublingual gland
Chapter 9 
A salivary gland.
Subluxation
Chapter 25 
Dislocation of the bones in a joint.
 Submandibular gland 
Chapter 9
A salivary gland.
 Supernatant 
Chapter 23
The liquid portion that is poured off after urine has been spun down.
 Sutures
Chapter 8
Dense connective tissue that connect bones to form a nonmoveable joint.
 Symmetrical flank alopecia
Chapter 19
 Synarthrosis
Chapter8
A joint formed by bones connected by dense connective tissue sutures.
Synchondrosis
Chapter &
Cartilaginous joints that contain bones connected by dense cartilage; this
includes the joints formed between the epiphysis and diaphysis of young
animals' long bones.
 Synovial fluid 
Chapter &
 Fluid secreted by the synovial membrane of the joint that helps lubricate and aid
 in the nutrition of the joint.
Synovial joint
Chapter 8
These joints are freely movable and are united by a fluid-filled cavity.
 Synovial membrane
Chapter & 
A thin layer of connective tissue that stretches out over the entire articular
 surface.
Systole
Chapter 12
The phase of contraction of the ventricles of the heart.
500
Glossary
Term
 First Reference
Definition
 Tachycardia
 Chapter 6
An abnormally rapid heart rate.
Tachypnea
Chapter7
Elevated respiratory rate.
Tachypnic
Chapter 11
 An increased respiratory rate.
Taenia
Chapter 10
A species of tapeworms found in dogs and cats.
Tartar
Chapter 9
Calculus that is mineralized plaque deposits; often yellow to brown in color.
Tendonectomy
Chapter 3
A surgical procedure that removes a small section of tendon in each toe to
 prevent the extension of the cat's claws.
The nephrotic loops
Chapter 13
 Specialized structures in the renal medulla that function to re-absorb the fluid
(Loops of Henle)
component of the urine.
Theobromine
Chapter 27
A toxin found in chocolate.
Third phalanx
Chapter 3 
Refers to the distal third bone of the finger or toe that produces nail or hoof.
Thoracentesis
Chapter 11
A chest tap.
Thoracotomy
Chapter 10, 25
A surgical opening of the chest.
 Thrombocytopenia
Chapter 21
 A low platelet count.
Thrombocytosis
Chapter 21
A increased platelet count.
Thromboembolism
Chapter 12
Due to abnommal blood flow, small clots can form in the ventricles of cats; these
clots can be pushed into the aorta as the ventricle contracts. They are then 
 called embolisms or thromboembolisms.
 Thyroid-stimulating hormone
Chapter 16 
 A hormone produced by the pituitary to stimulate thyroxine release from the 
thyroid gland.
Thyroidectomy
Chapter 16 
Surgical removal of the thyroid gland.
Thyroxine
Chapter 16 
 A hormone produced by the adrenal gland that sets the rate the cells of the body
burn energy.
Toxocara
Chapter 10
 A species of roundworms in the canine and feline.
Trabecular bone
Chapter &
Soft bone located on the farthest ends of a long bone.
Tracheobronchitis
 Chapter 11
 A highly infectious upper respiratory and bronchial infection that is a combination
 of a viral and bacterial or fungal infection; it affects most dogs and cats.
 especially in a shelter environment.
Tracheoscopy/bronchoscopy
Chapter 11
A noninvasive anesthetic procedure performed by passing a fiber optic camera 
 down the trachea into the lung fields.
Transdermal
Chapter 19 
 Refers to medication that can be absorbed through the skin.
 Transtracheal wash
Chapter 11
 A sterile catheter or red rubber feeding tube placed between the tracheal rings of
 a sedated animal. The catheter is run down the trachea as far as possible, and
a small amount of sterile fluid is flushed into the trachea and lower airways.
This stimulates the animal to cough and bring up debris. The sterile fluid and
 debris are then aspirated for culture and cytology.
Transudate
Chapter 14
A low protein-low cellular fluid.
Triage
Chapter 6
Trichuris
Chapter 10
A species of whipworms in the canine and feline.
Trigone
Chapter 13 
A region of the caudal bladder where the ureters from the kidneys empty into the
bladder.
Triple pelvic osteotomy
Chapter &
 This procedure is done prophylactically in young animals with evidence of early
 seated within the hip.
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI)
 Chapter 21
 A diagnostic test for pancreatic exocrine insufficiency and chronic pancreatitis
(canine).
Tunic
 Chapter 20 
 An investing membrane.
t-wave
Chapter 24
After the full heartbeat occurs, the muscle goes through a wave of repolarization
where the electrolytes of the body are rebalanced to make the heart ready for
the next beat.
Uncinaria
Chapter 10
 A species of hookworm found in the canine and feline.
Underbite
Chapter 9
An abnormal architecture of the jaw where the lower jaw is much longer than the
upper, causing misalignment of the teeth.
Upper Gl (barium series)
Chapter 25
An upper Gl is a radiographic study in which the patient ingests barium, and 
 x-rays are taken at set intervals to evaluate possible obstruction, mass, or
ulceration of the esophagus, stomach, and intestines.
 Urine cortisol creatinine ratio
Chapter 17
 A clinical diagnostic test that evaluates the patient's urine cortisol levels in 
relation to the urine creatinine levels.
 Urine protein/creatinine ratio
Chapter 13 
 This test is usually run when there is a persistent urine protein presence without
 evidence of urinary tract disease. Nommally, the protein molecules are too large
to pass through the glomerular filters. The smaller amino acid creatinine is
released in the urine in large amounts. when there is glomerular damage,
protein can leak through the filters, increasing the amount of protein in the 
urine and increasing the protein/creatinine ratio.
Glossary
501
Term
 First Reference
Definition
 Urine specific gravity
Chapter 23
The concentrating ability of urine.
Urolithes
Chapter 13
Bladder stones.
 Urolithiasis
Chapter 23
A bladder stone.
Uveal
Chapter 20
The second tunic of the eye, which supplies nutrients and oxygen to the ocular
tissue.
Uveitis
Chapter 20
An inflammation of the uveal coat of the eye; the anterior uveal coat is the iris,
and the posterior uveal coat is the blood vessels supplying the blood to the
retina.
Ventral
Chapter 1
An object or region on the body that is closer to the sternum than another
object.
Ventroflexionof theneck
Chapter 13
 Patients that are unable to lift their necks into a nomal position secondary to
 severe hypokalemia.
Virulence
 Chapter 2
 Ability of a pathogenic organism (bacteria, fungus, virus, or protozoa) to cause a
disease.
Visceral larval migrans
Chapter 10
A parasitic infection of humans where the larval form burrows through the internal
 architecture of the body.
 Vitreous chamber
Chapter 20
A region in the eye that lies between the caudal aspect of the lens and the retina.
Warfarin
Chapter 27
 A poison that interferes with the normal clotting agents that clot blood and stop
bleeding.
Zona fasciculata
Chapter 17
 Inner regions of the adrenal cortex that produces a prednisone-like steroid called
cortisol.
 Zona granulosa 
Chapter 17
 Outermost area of the cortex that is responsible for producing a steroid hormone
called aldosterone, also called a mineralocorticoid.
 Zona reticularis
Chapter 17
 Inner regions of the adrenal cortex that produces a prednisone-like steroid called
cortisol.
 Zoonotic disease
 Chapter 6
 Diseases that are communicable from animal to human.
Zygomatic gland
Chapter 9
A salivary gland.
Resources
The following sources are recommended as good referral
Textbooks
 sources for the veterinary team. They all have strengths in
Tilley, Larry, and Smith, Francis, 5-Minute Consult:
their own field and can be a part of an excellent referral
library:
Canine and Feline, 3rd ed. Blackwell Publishing, Ames,
Iowa. 2005.
●Colville, Thomas, and Bassert, Joanna. Clinical Anatomy
On-Line Sources
and Physiology for Veterinary Technicians. Mosby, Phila-
●CET University (a Virbac site): www.cetuniversity.com--
delphia. 2001.
 An online interactive continuing education site on veteri-
nary dentistry.
Dermatology University (a Virbac site): www.virbac-
dermu.com—-An online interactive continuing education
site on veterinary dermatology.
503
Index
 Page references followed by f denote figures. References followed by t denote tables.
Abdomen
Adrenal gland, 223-233
history, 226, 232
bloated, 45
anatomy,223,224f
prevention, 232
fluid in, 55
assessment of disease, 226-227, 227f
signalment, 232
palpation, 55
 client discussions
treatment,232
physical examination, 55
diagnostics, 230
mineralocorticoid production, 223
radiography studies, 367, 369f, 370f
hyperadrenocorticism, 231
 neoplasia
Abdominal pain, 108, 211
hypoadrenocorticism, 233
of adrenal cortex, 224, 225f, 229,
Abdominal palpation, in renal disease,
cortisol production, 223, 224f
230, 231
180, 184
diagnostics
of adrenal medulla, 225,230, 232
Abdominal tap, 110
ACTH stimulation test, 228, 230,
Adrenal medulla, 223, 225, 230, 232
Abscess, dental, 89, 91, 92f, 93f, 98-100
325-326
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH),
Accessory pancreatic duct, 103, 207
chemistry,228, 230
223, 224, 224f, 225f, 231,325f,
Accommodation, 273,487
complete blood count, 228
487
ACE inhibitors, 160, 163, 168
decision tree, 229f
Agglutination, 293, 294f, 298, 298f, 487
Acepromazine, 424
discussing with clients, 230
Aggressive behaviors, 28
Acetabulum, 78, 487
 high-dose dexamethasone suppres-
Agranulocytes, 307-308. See also
Acetaminophen,398-399,399t,487
sion test, 229-230, 237-328
 Lymphocytes; Monocytes
Acetone, 213, 487
low-dose dexamethasone suppression
Airway, establishing, 456, 456f
Acetylcholine, 404, 487
test, 228-229, 326-327
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT or SGPT)
Acetylcysteine, 399
radiology, 228
abnormalities, 309-310
Acinar cells, 330
ultrasound, 230
defined, 487
ACTH.SeeAdrenocorticotropic hormone
urinalysis, 228, 230
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 310-311
(ACTH)
urine cortisol/creatinine ratio, 228
discussing with clients, 311
ACTH stimulation test
epinephrine production, 224
function, 309
defined, 487
history of disease, 226
in liver disease, 199, 309-310
discussing with clients, 326
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's
location of production, 309
evaluation of test, 325
disease)
organ system correlations, 310t
function, 325
assessment of disease, 226-227, 227,
 symptoms associated with elevation,
hyperadrenocorticism, 228, 326
231
310
hypoadrenocorticism, 230, 326
complications, 231
ALBON. See Sulfadimethoxine
 performance of, 325
diagnostics, 228-230, 229f, 231
Albumin
Activated charcoal, 399, 400, 402,
diagnostic tree, 463
abnormalities, 311
403-404, 405, 406, 408
discussing with clients, 231
defined, 487
Acute disease, defined, 5
etiology, 231
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 312
AD (right ear), 6
forms of disease, 224-225, 225f,
discussing with clients, 312
Addisonian crisis, 223, 226, 226t, 487
231-232
function, 311
Addison's disease. See
history, 226, 231
hyperalbuminemia, 311, 312
Hypoadrenocorticism
prevention, 232
hypoalbuminemia, 311-312
Adenocarcinoma
signalment, 231
in blood loss, 311
pancreatic, 207,496
treatment, 231-232
in intestinal disease, 311
renal, 175
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's
in kidney disease, 311
Adenovirus, 487
disease)
in liver disease, 196, 199, 311
Adjuvant, 11, 487
Addisonian crisis, 223, 226, 226t
location of production, 196, 311
Administration routes
assessment of disease, 227, 232
symptoms associated with changes,
intramuscular route, 379
complications, 232
311-312
intravenous route, 379
diagnostics, 230, 232
Aldosterone
subcutaneous route, 379
discussing with clients, 233
defined, 487
terminology, 6
etiology, 232
functions, 223, 225f
Adrenal cortex, 223, 487
forms of disease, 225, 232
production, 223, 232
505
506
Index
Algorithm
Amylase
step 1: medical history, 422
for diabetes, 334
abnormalities, 313-314
step 2: presurgery clinical diagnos-
EKG evaluation, 356, 474
defined, 487
tics, 422-423
 IV fluid administration, 476
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 314
step 3: catheterization and IV fluid,
for kidney disease, 331, 466
discussing with clients, 314
423
for liver disease, 332, 467
function, 103, 207, 313
step 3: presurgery clinical diagnos-
for pancreatitis, 333
location of production, 207, 313
tics, 422-423
of stability, 47f
Amyloidosis, 195, 487
step 4: patient evaluation, 423
Alkaline phosphatase (SALP or ALP)
Analgesics, 424, 487
step 5: induction and maintenance
abnormalities, 312-313
Anal sac aprocrine gland adenocarcinoma,
anesthetics, 423-424, 425f, 426
defined, 487
487
step 6: monitoring anesthesia,
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 313
Anal tone, 428
426-428, 427f
discussing with clients, 313
Anaphylactic reactions, 11-12
step 7: recovery, 428-429
function, 312
Anaphylactic shock
record, 426
in hyperadrenocorticism, 228, 312
diagnostics, 441, 441t
stages of, 419
in liver disease, 199, 312
etiology, 441
Anesthetic chamber, 31, 32f
location of production, 312
flowchart, 444, 482
 Angiotensin I, 174 
symptoms associated with elevations,
 history points, 441
Angiotensin I1, 174
313
observations on initial assessment, 441
Anisocoria, 274f, 275,436,437f, 451f,
Allergic reactions to vaccines, 10-12, 11f
signalment, 441
488
canine allergic reaction, 11-12, 11f
treatment, 441, 443
Anorexia
discussing with client, 11
Ancylostoma, 487. See also Hookworms
defined, 4
feline allergic reaction, 12
Anemia
dental disease and, 89
handling reactions, 12
of chronic disease, 295
Anterior chamber, 273, 274f, 276, 276f,
history of past reactions, 12
defined, 298, 487
488
Allergies
dental disease and, 92-93
 Anterior cruciate ligament. See Cranial
anesthesia and, 422
Heinz body, 401-402, 401f, 492
(anterior) cruciate ligament
complications, 267
immune-mediated hemolytic, 293,
Antiarrhytmics, 160, 163, 362
contact, 267
294f, 295, 315-316, 339, 493
Antibiotics
diagnosis, 267
in liver disease, 198
for bacterial pneumonia, 141
discussing with clients, 268
 physical examination, 56
bactericidal, 381, 383
etiology, 267
regenerative, 298, 299
bacteriostatic, 381
flea, 267
Anesthesia, 419-433
cephalosporin family, 382
food, 267, 268
complications, 429-433
for dental disease, 95, 97, 97f, 100
history points, 267
cardiopulmonary arrest, 431, 433
fluoroquinolone family, 382-383
 observations on initial assessment,
hypotension, 429-430
for kidney disease, 185
267
hypothermia, 430-431
kidney toxicity, 184
signalment, 267
hypoventilation, 430
for liver disease, 202, 203, 205
testing, 268
for dental prophylaxis, 94
metronidazole, 384
blood, 265-266
depth,419,427f
in pancreatitis, 211
skin, 265
discussing with clients, 433
penicillin family, 381-382
treatment, 267-268
flowchart for monitoring anesthetic
 periceutic treatments, 95, 97, 97f
Alopecia
emergency, 432, 477
tetracycline family, 383
assessment of, 250, 251, 251f
 induction agents, 424
trimethoprim-sulfa family, 383-384
defined, 487
 machinery
Antibodies. See Immunoglobulins
in hyperadrenocorticism, 227, 227f,
 active scavenger systems, 420
Anticholinergic drugs, 423-424, 488
231
breathing circuits, 420
Anticonvulsants, 197
symmetrical flank, 218, 222
endotracheal tubes, 419
Antiemetics, 185, 202, 391-392
in thyroid disease, 218, 222
image of system, 420f
Antifreeze poisoning, 186-187, 400-401
Alpha 2 agonists, 423, 424, 487
laryngoscopes, 419
complications, 186, 401
ALT. See Alanine aminotransferase (ALT
maintenance, 420-422
diagnostics, 186, 401
or SGPT)
pop-off valve, 421
discussing with clients, 187
Alveolar bone, 96, 487
reservoir bag size, 421t
etiology, 186, 400
Alveoli, 129, 130f
vaporizer,420
history points, 186, 400
Ambu bag, 456
maintenance anesthetic agents, 424,
minimum lethal dose, 186t, 400t
Amino acid deficiency, 164
426
monitoring, 187
Amino acid supplements, 163
 preanesthetic medications
observations on initial assessment, 186,
Aminoglycoside antibiotics, kidney
analgesics, 424
400
toxicity of, 184
anticholinergic drugs, 423-424
prevention, 187
 Ammonium biurate crystals, 344
tranquilizers, 424
signalment, 186, 400
Amphotericin B, kidney toxicity of, 184
procedure overview, 422-429
treatment, 186-187, 401
Index
507
Antifungals
Ascariasis, 488. See also Roundworms
Atropine
kidney toxicity, 184
Ascites, 162, 195-196, 197, 488
drug interactions, 393
for pneumonia, 141
Ascriptin, 78
emergency dose, 459t, 486t
Antigens
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST or
form of drug, 393
defined, 108, 488
SGOT)
precautions, 393
screening for in heartworm disease,
 abnormalities, 314
route of administration, 393
169
defined, 488
side effects, 393
Antihistamines, 140, 168, 384-385,443
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 314-315
use in cardiopulmonary cerebral
Anti-inflammatory medications. See also
discussing with clients, 315
resuscitation (CPCR), 457
specific medications
function, 314
AU (each ear), 6
for arthritis, 78
in liver disease, 199, 314-315
Aural hematoma
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 387
location of production, 314
complications, 289
glucosamine, 387-388
 symptoms associated with elevations,
defined, 488
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medi ca-
314
diagnosis, 289
tions (NSAIDs), 385-386
ASPCA-University of Illinois Poison
discussing with clients, 289
steroida1 medication, 386-387
Control, 398
history points, 289
tramado1, 388
Aspiration, 488
observations on initial assessment, 289,
Antiparasitic agents
Aspiration pneumonia, 106, 422
289f
fendbendazole, 389
Aspirin, 78, 167
prevention, 290
ivermectin/avermectin, 388
Assessment
signalment, 289
praziquantel, 389
adrenal disease, 226-227, 227f
treatment, 289-290
pyrantel pamoate, 388-389
cardiac disease, 151-154, 152t, 153f
Auscultation
sulfadimethoxine, 389-390
dental disease, 90-91, 90f, 91f, 92f, 93f
heart, 54-55, 54f, 154, 159, 427, 443,
tylosin tartrate, 390
ears, 286, 286f
445, 461
Anuria, 185, 488
endocrine pancreas disease, 213, 213f,
respiratory system, 55, 55f, 133, 134f,
Aortic valve, 147, 148f-151f, 154, 488
214f
135f, 154, 427, 445
Apnea, 406, 424, 488
exocrine pancreas disease,209
Automaticity, 353
Appetite
gastrointestinal system, 107-108, 107t
Autonomic nervous system, 423
 in dental disease, 89
liver disease, 197-198, 198f, 198t
Avoidance behavior, 27
history, 36
ocular disease, 275-276, 275f, 276f
Axillary artery pulse, 41, 42f
in hyperthyroidism, 221
orthopedic cases, 70-72, 71f, 72f, 73f
Azotemia
in liver disease, 197
reproductive disease, 241, 241t, 242f
defined, 175, 178, 488
in pancreatic disease, 208
respiratory disease, 132-133, 133f, 133t
post-renal, 179, 179t, 318, 462t
Approaching an animal, 27-28, 27f
skin (integument), 250-252, 250f-252f
pre-renal, 178, 178t, 318, 462t
cat behavior under stress, 28
in SOAP method, 46
renal, 178-179, 179t, 318, 462t
dog behavior under stress, 27-28
thyroid disease, 218-219, 219f, 220f
signs of, 316-317, 319
Aqueous humor, 282, 488
urogenital system, 180, 180f, 180t
Arrhythmia
AST. See Aspartate aminotransferase
Babesia, 299, 303f,488
causes, 355, 426, 431
(AST or SGOT)
Bacteria, in urine sediment, 344
defined, 489
Asthma. See Feline asthma
Bactericidal antibiotics, 381, 383
in GDV, 126
Atopy, 267, 488
Bacteriostatic antibiotics, 381
sinus arrhythmia, 359
ATP, 129, 488
Bacteriuria, 342, 488
Arthritis
Atrial septal defect, 155f
Bad breath. See Halitosis 
age of onset/incubation, 76
Atrial-ventricular node (A-V node), 354,
Bands, 301, 304f, 306-307, 465
breeds commonly affected, 76
355f, 488
BAR (bright, alert, and responsive), 4, 51
complications, 77
Atrioventricular block (heart block)
Barbiturates, 424
defined, 75
complications, 363
Barium
diagnosis, 77, 77f
degrees, 363
swallow, 117
discussing with clients, 79
diagnostics, 363-364, 363f
upper GI series, 109, 110f, 371f
history points, 76-77
discussing with clients, 364
Barotraumas, 430, 488
observations on initial assessment, 77
etiology, 363
Basal metabolic rate (BMR)
overview, 75, 77f
history points, 363
defined, 488
prevention, 78
observations on initial assessment, 363
thyroid hormone regulation of, 217,
signalment, 75-76
prevention, 364
220,222,330
treatment, 78
signalment, 363
Basophilia, 307, 488
Articular, 63, 488
treatment, 364
Basophils, 307, 488
Articular bone surface, 63
Atrophy
Behavior changes, in hyperthyroidism,
Articular cartilage, 65f, 66, 75
in arthritis, 77
221
Articular surface, 66, 488
defined, 488
Benzodinepines, 424, 488
Artificial respiration, 456
disuse, 77
Beta-blockers, 165
AS (left ear), 6
in OCD, 85
BID (twice per day), 5
507
508
Index
Bile acids
 in hookworm infection, 112
 Breathing circuits, anesthesia machine,
abnormalities, 329
for ibuprofen toxicosis, 403
420
defined, 488
IV administration, 415-416
Bronchioles, 129, 130f
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 329
in liver disease, 202
Bronchoconstriction, 140, 489
discussing with clients, 329
for rodenticide intoxication, 406
Bronchodilators, 139, 140, 141, 163
evaluation of test, 329
Blood sugar. See also Blood glucose
Bronchosopy, 138
function, 329
in diabetes mellitus, 214
Brucellosis, 340, 489
liver disease, 194, 199, 200
in hyperadrenocorticism, 228
Bruising
location of production, 329
Blood titers, 71
eye, 56
 performance of test, 329
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
gum, 44, 44f, 52
Bile duct, 193, 194, 194f
 abnormalities, 316
in liver disease, 197, 198f
Bilirubin
defined, 488
Buccal mucosa, 59, 489
abnormalities, 315
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 317
Buffy coat, 294, 294f, 295, 296t
crystals, 344
discussing with clients, 317
 BUN. See Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
defined, 488
function, 316
Bundle of His, 354, 355f, 498
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 315-316
in liver disease, 199-200
Buprenorphine, 95, 424
discussing with clients, 316
location of production, 316
Butorphanol, 424
function,315
in renal disease, 176
in liver disease, 193, 200, 315
symptoms associated with changes in,
 C (coughing) abbreviation, 4
location of production, 315
316-317
Caffeine, 399-400
plasma color and, 295
Blood work. See also specific tests
Calcium
symptoms associated with increase, 315
in dental disease, 92-93
 abnormalities, 317
discussing with clients, 71, 93
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 318
Bilirubinuria, 339,488
respiratory system, 133, 135
discussing with clients, 318
Biopsy
Bloody discharge, 132
function, 317
bone, 72
BM (bowel movement) abbreviation, 4
location of production, 317
in constipation, 124
BMR (basal metabolic rate)
symptoms associated with changes,
endoscopy for, 374-375
defined, 488
318
in gingival hyperplasia, 100
thyroid hormone regulation of, 217,
 Calcium channel blockers, 165
in inflammatory bowel disease, 125
220,222,330
Calcium oxalate crystals, 188, 344
mammary tumor, 246
Body condition, descriptors of, 51
Calculus, 88-89, 90, 90f, 91f, 92f, 489
 Bite wounds, response to, 26
Body score, 212
 Calici virus
Black light, 253, 255
Bone density, 366, 367f
defined, 489
 Bladder infection, 341
Bone marrow, 63, 489
symptoms/signs, 9, 59
Bladder stones, 181
 Bone marrow aspirate, 72
vaccine, 9
Blastomycosis, 142-143
Bone neoplasia, 86
Cancellous bone, 63, 65f, 489
complications, 142
Bones. See also Skeletal system
Cancer. See Neoplasia
defined, 488
anatomy, 63, 65f
 Canine distemper virus (CDV), 143-144
diagnosis, 143
biopsy, 72
complications, 143
discussing with clients, 142
classification, 63
defined, 489
etiology, 142
fracture nomenclature, 66-67, 68f, 69f
diagnosis, 143-144
history points, 142
functions, 63
discussing with clients, 7, 144
observations on initial assessment, 142
Bones, dietary exposure to, 105
environmental contamination, 144
signalment, 142
Borborgymi, 212, 489
etiology, 143
treatment, 143
Bordetella vaccine, 8
history points, 143
Bloat, 45, 126-127, 488
Borrelia burgdorferi, 8
incubation period, 143
Blood
Bowel movement (BM), abbreviation for,
 observations on initial assessment, 143
safe handling, 26
4
prevention, 144
Bowman's capsule. See Glomerulus
signalment, 143
 Blood chemistry. See Chemistry
Brachiocephalic, defined, 489
 symptoms/signs, 7
Blood dialysis, 185, 488
Brachiocephalic breeds, dental disease in,
treatment, 144
Blood film preparation, 295-296, 297f
93
vaccine, 7
Blood gases, 340
Bradycardia
 Canine hepatitis virus
Blood glucose, 215, 340
in cardiac disease, 152, 159
defined, 489
Blood pressure
defined,489
symptoms/signs, 8
in cardiovascular disease, 158
EKG evaluation, 355
vaccine, 8
discussing with clients, 158
in hypothyroidism, 219
Canine parvovirus. See Parvo virus (CPV)
monitoring in anesthesia, 158
pulse evaluation, 42, 52
Canine restraint methods, 28-30, 29f
in renal disease, 183, 190-191, 190t
in shock, 435,436t, 443
Canine teeth, 87-88, 87f, 88t
 Blood products
Brain injury, traumatic, 448, 450-451, 485
Canine vaccines, 7-9 
for Heinz body anemia, 402
Breathing. See Respiration
Canniculi, 193, 194f, 489
Index
509
Capillary refill time (CRT)
history points, 166
blood pressure, 158
in cardiac disease, 154
obser vations on initial assessment,
chemistry, 156
defined, 4
166, 166f
complete blood count, 156
in gastrointestinal disease, 108
prevention, 167
electrocardiogram (EKG), 157, 158
monitoring anesthesia, 427
signalment, 166
pulse oximetry, 157-158
normal, 52
supportive care, 167
radiography, 156, 157f
physical examination, 52-53, 53f
treatment, 166-167
ultrasound, 156-157, 157f
in respiratory disease, 133
Cardiopulmonary arrest, as anesthesia
urinalysis, 156
in shock, 436, 436t
complication, 431, 433
diseases, 158-171
triage examination, 30-second, 43, 43f
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation
canine dilatative cardiomyopathy,
Capnography, 428
(CPCR), 453-460
162-163,162f
Carafate,390,391
airway, establishing, 456, 456f
canine hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
Carbamate toxicosis, 404-405, 496
breathing, 456, 457f, 458f
164-165, 164f
Carbon dioxide canisters, 420
cardiac compression, 454-456, 455f
feline dilatative cardiomyopathy, 164
Cardiac arrhythmia. See Arrhythmia
catheterization, 458
feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
Cardiac compression, 454-456, 455f
code status, 453, 454f, 454t
165-167, 166f
Cardiac sphincter, 103, 489
crash kit, 453
heartworm disease, 169-171, 170f
Cardiac system. See also Cardiovascular
discussing with clients, 460
left-sided heart failure, 158-160
system
drug use, 456-457, 459t
mitral insufficiency, 150f, 167-169,
auscultation, 54, 54f
overview, 453
168f
murmur, 54-55, 91
patient evaluation, 458, 460f
right-sided heart failure, 160-162
physical examination, 54-55, 54f, 55f
responsibilities, 454t
history of disease, 36, 149-151
rhythms, 55
steps, 453-458
collapse or fainting, 151
Cardiogenic shock
Cardiovascular collapse, 153
cough, 150
diagnostics, 445, 445t
Cardiovascular shock, 153, 161, 489
exercise intolerance, 150
etiology, 443
Cardiovascular system, 147-171
 heartworm prevention, 151
flowchart, 447, 483
anatomy, 147-149, 148f-151f
respiratory effort, increase in, 151,
history points, 443
in heart disease, 148-149, 149f-151f
152f
observations on initial assessment, 443,
left heart, 147
in hypoadrenocorticism, 226
443f, 445
pericardium, 147
triage examination, 30-second, 41-42,
signalment, 443
right heart, 147
41f, 42f
treatment, 445-446
assessment, 151-154,152t,153f
Cardizem, 165
Cardiomyopathy
auscultation of the heart, 154, 154f
Carnassial teeth
canine dilatative, 162-163, 162f
auscultation of the lung fields, 154
defined, 98, 489
complications, 163
breathing, 153-154
root abcess, 98-100
diagnosis, 163
gum color/capillary refill time, 154
complications, 99
discussing with clients, 163
pulse quality, 152-153, 153f
diagnosis, 99
etiology, 162
pulse rate, 152
discussing with clients, 99
history points, 162-163
auscultation flowchart, 461
etiology, 99
obser vations on initial assessment,
cardiac cycle, 147-148, 148f
history points, 99
163
 client discussions
obser vations on initial assessment,
prevention, 163
 blood and urine evaluation, need for,
99
signalment, 162
156
signalment, 99
treatment, 163
blood pressure, 158
treatment, 99-100
canine hypertrophic, 164-165,164f
canine dilatative cardiomyopathy,
Carnivores, 87, 489
complications, 165
163
Carprofen, 78, 79, 95, 197,385
diagnosis, 165
canine hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
Carrier, 26
discussing with clients, 165
165
Cartilaginous joints, 65
etiology, 164
cardiovascular shock/congestive
Cast, 73-74
history points, 164
heart failure, 161
Castration. See Orchidectomy/castration
observations on initial assessment,
EKG, 158
Casts, in urine sediment, 343-344
164-165
feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
Cataracts
prevention, 165
167
defined, 273, 274f
signalment, 164
heartworm disease, 1670
in diabetes mellitus, 213, 213f
treatment, 165
 mitral val ve insufficiency, 169
Cat bag, 30, 32f
feline dilatative, 164
pulse oximetry, 158
Catheter
feline hypertrophic, 165-167, 166f
radiographic evaluation, need for,
use in cardiopulmonary cerebral
complications, 166
156
resuscitation (CPCR), 458
diagnosis, 166
ultrasound evaluation, need for, 157
use in shock, 439, 440, 443, 445, 451
discussing with clients, 167
CV abbreviation for, 4
CAT (computeraxial tomography) scan,
etiology, 165
diagnostics, 154-158, 157f
138
510
Index
Caudal (directional term), 3, 5f, 6f, 489
Chronic active hepatitis
diagnosis, 137f, 139
Caudal vena cava, 147. See also Vena
di agnostics, 202
discussing with clients, 139
cava
discussing with clients, 203
etiology, 138-139
CBC. See Complete blood count (CBC)
etiology, 202
history points, 139
 CDV. See Canine distemper virus (CDV)
history points, 202
 observations on initial assessment, 139
Cecum
observations on initial assessment, 202
prevention, 139
anatomy, 104, 105f
prevention, 203
signalment, 139
defined,489
signalment, 202
treatment, 139
Cellular elements, in urine sediment,
treatment, 203
Colloids
342-343
Chronic disease
administration, 416-417
Cellular respiration, 129, 489
anemia of, 295
calculation of fluid need, 416
Cephalosporins, 382
defined, 5
complication, 416
Cerclage wire, 76f
Chronic interstitial nephritis, 175, 489
contraindications, 416
Charcoal, activated, 399, 400, 402,
Chyme, 87
defined,489
403-404, 405, 406, 408
Ciliary body, 282, 489
description, 410, 415
Chemistry. See also individual tests
Cimetidine, 185, 390
discussing with clients, 417
in adrenal disease, 228, 230
Circle circuit, 420
indications, 416
in cardiac disease, 156
Cirrhosis,489
natural, 410,415
in cardiovascular disease, 156
Class 0 malocclusion, 91f, 489
in shock,439
in constipation, 124
Class 2 malocclusion, 91f, 489
synthetic,410,415
in dental disease, 93
Class 3 malocclusion, 91f, 489
Colon
in diabetes mellitus, 214
Clear (serous) discharge, 132
anatomy, 104, 105f
in inflammatory bowel disease, 125
Cleft palate, 240, 240f
defined, 489
in liver disease, 198-200
Clemastine, 384
Colonoscopy, 374
normal values, 335t, 470t
Clinical chemistry See Chemistry
Colostrum, 238, 490
in pancreatic disease, 209
Clostridium, 350, 351
Comatose/obtund, defined, 4
in renal disease, 181, 186
Clotting factors, 489
Comminuted fracture, 67, 70f
in reproductive disease, 241
Clotting time, 406, 437, 437t
Common bile duct, 103, 193, 194
sample handling, 309
Clot tube, 309
Complete blood count (CBC), 293-308
in skin diseases, 266
Coagulopathy
in adrenal disease, 228
Chemotherapy
defined, 489
in cardiac disease, 156
kidney toxicity, 184
gum bruising as sign of, 44, 52
in cardiovascular disease, 156
osteosarcoma, 86
in heatstroke, 446
components, 293
Cherry eye (protruding third eyelid),
hypothermia and, 431
in constipation, 124
277-278, 277f
in liver disease, 196, 197, 198f
in dental disease, 92-93
complications, 277
Coccidia, 115-116, 117f
in diabetes mellitus, 214
defined, 498
complications, 116
differential flowchart, 464
diagnosis, 277
diagnosis, 116
in inflammatory bowel disease, 125
discussing with clients, 278
etiology, 116
in liver disease, 198
etiology, 277
history points, 116
obtaining the blood sample, 293, 293,
history points, 277
life cycle, 115
293
observations on initial assessment, 277,
observations on initial assessment, 116
in pancreatic disease, 209
277f
prevention, 116
RBC evaluation, 464
prevention, 277-278
treatment, 116
in renal disease, 181, 186
signalment, 277
Coccidiomycosis (valley fever), 141-142
in reproductive disease, 241, 242, 246
treatment, 277-278
complications, 142
sample preparation and evaluation,
Chest compression, 454-456, 455f
defined,489
293-295
Chest tap, 136, 137f, 138
diagnosis, 142
blood film preparation, 295-296, 297f
Chest tube, 146
etiology, 141
flowcharts, 300, 464
Chief complaint, 33,35, 51,489
history points, 141-142
packed cell volume (PCV), 293-295,
Chloramphenicol, 383
observations on initial assessment, 142
294f, 295t, 296t
Chlorpheniramine, 268, 384
signalment, 141
red blood cells, 296-299, 297f, 298f,
Chlorpromazine, 391-392
treatment, 142
302f, 303f
Chocolate toxicosis, 399-400, 399t
Coitus, 236
white blood ce1ls, 299, 300f, 301f,
Choleliths, 200, 489
Colitis, 107, 208
304f, 305f, 306-308
Cholestasis, 319, 489
Collapse
 Computeraxial tomography (CAT) scan,
 Cholesterol, in hyperadrenocorticism,
cardiac disease, 151
138
228
history of, 37, 131
Concussion, 451t, 490
Cholinesterase, 404, 405, 489
respiratory system and, 131
Cone cells, 273, 490
Chondroitin, 387
Collapsing trachea, 138-139
 Conformation, in 30-second triage
Chrondroprotective agents, 78
complications, 139
examination, 45, 45f
Index
511
Congenital patellar disease, 490
Cortical bone, 63, 490
chronicity strip, 413, 414f
Congestion
Cortisol
complications, 414
defined, 149, 490
defined, 490
defined, 490
hepatic, 149, 149f, 150f
 overproduction in hyperadrenocorticism,
dehydration, 412-413
pulmonary, 130, 411
231
description, 410-411, 412f
right-sided heart, 149, 149f
production, 223, 224f
hourly fluid rate, 413
 Congestive heart failure, 161
urine cortisol/creatinine ratio, 228, 500
indications, 411
Conjunctiva
Coughing
maintenance, 411-412
anatomy, 273
abbreviation for, 4
for shock, 413-414, 415f, 441
color, 43
in cardiac disease, 150
Crystalluria, 342
cytology, 279
history of, 36, 131
Crystals, in urine sediment, 344
defined, 490
safe handling of animals with, 27
Culture
Conjunctival smear, for canine distemper 
types, 131
ear, 352
virus, 143-144
Cough suppressants, 139
fungal, 254-255, 255f, 257f
Conjunctivitis, 275f, 278-279, 278f
Coumadin, 405-406, 490
urine, 183, 341, 342, 345
complications, 278
CPCR. See Cardiopulmonary cerebral
Cushing's disease. See
diagnosis, 278-279
resuscitation (CPCR)
Hyperadrenocorticism
discussing with clients, 279
CPV. See Parvo virus (CPV)
Cutaneous larval migrans, 112, 490
etiology, 278
Crackles, 55, 55f, 133, 154
 CV (cardiovascular system) abbreviation, 4
history points, 278
Cranial (directional term), 3, 5f, 6f, 490
Cyanotic, defined, 490
observations on initial assessment, 278,
 Cranial (anterior) cruciate ligament
Cyanotic mucus membranes, 130,
278f
anatomy, 66, 66f
132-133, 436
signalment, 278
defined, 488
Cyclosporine, 268
Consensual PLR, 273, 490
rupture, 80-82, 81f
Cylinduria, 342, 490
Constipation/obstipation, 123-124
complications, 81
Cystocentesis, 183, 490
complications, 124
diagnosis, 81
Cystotomy, 189, 490
diagnosis, 124
discussing with clients, 82
Cysts, Giardia, 114
discussing with clients, 125
history of points, 81
Cytauxoon, 299, 303f, 490
etiology, 123-124
observations on initial assessment,
Cytology
dietary changes, 123
81
conjunctiva, 279
drugs, 123
prevention, 82
ear, 286, 287, 351-352
environmental changes, 123
signalment, 81
fecal, 108, 350-351
hormonal disease, 123-124
treatment, 81
in reproductive disease, 241, 242
 neurologic disease, 123
Cranial draw sign, 81, 490
skin
obstructive disease, 123
Cranial vena cava, 147. See also Vena
direct smear, 260, 262f-263f
rectal disease, 123
cava
discussing with clients, 263
history points, 124
Crash kit, 453
impression smear, 260, 264f
observations on initial assessment, 124
Creatinine
scotch tape preparation, 260,
prevention, 124
abnormalities, 318
260f-262f
signalment, 124
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 319
swap method, 261, 264f-265f
treatment, 124
discussing with clients, 319
usefulness of, 255
Contact allergy, 267
function, 318
Continuous rate of infusion (CRI), 409,
location of production, 318
D (diarrhea) abbreviation, 4
490
in renal disease, 176
Deciduous, defined, 490
Contraindications, drug, 381
symptoms associated with changes in,
Deciduous teeth, retained, 91f, 98, 98f, 99
Contrast studies, 368, 371f 
319
Decision tree, for adrenal disease, 229f
Cornea, 273, 274f, 490
urine cortisol/creatinine ratio,228,500
 Declawing. See Tendonectomy
Corneal disease, 57f, 280-281
Crenation, 299
Dehydration
complications, 280
CRI (continuous rate of infusion), 409,
crystalloid fluid therapy, 412-413
diagnosis, 280
490
in gastrointestinal disease, 108
etiology, 280
Crown restoration, 100-102, 102f
in hypoadrenocorticism, 227
history points, 280
CRT. See Capillary refill time (CRT)
measuring, 44-45, 44f, 53
observations on initial assessment, 280
Cruciate ligament. See Cranial (anterior)
 in pancreatitis, 211
signalment, 280
cruciate ligament
PCV, increased, 295
treatment, 280
Cryptococcus, 351
physical examination, 53, 53f
Corneal edema, 274f
Cryptorchid, 19, 235, 490
in reproductive disease, 241
Corneal injury, 280-281
Cryptosporidium, 490. See also Coccidia
in shock, 436, 438
Corneal reflex, 428, 490
Crystalloids
triage examination, 30-second, 44-45,
Corneal staining, 276, 278, 279, 283
administering, 413, 415
44f
Corneal ulceration, 280-281
bolusing fluids, 413
Demodecosis (demodectic mange), 59f
Corona virus (CV) vaccine, 8
 calculation of fluid need, 411
complications, 269
512
Index
Demodecosis (continued)
physical examination, 59
prevention, 271
defined, 490
predisposing factors, 93-94
si gnalment, 270
diagnosis, 269
age of animal, 93
treatment, 271
discussing with clients, 269
diet, 94
Descemet's membrane, 280
etiology, 268, 269f
health status of animal, 94
 Desensitization, allergy, 268
history points, 268
signalment, 93
 Detoxification, by the liver, 193-194
observations on initial assessment,
retained deciduous teeth, 91f, 98, 98f,
Deworming
268-269
99
hookworms, 112
prevention, 269
root canal treatment and crown restora-
roundworms, 113
signalment, 268
tion, 100-102, 101f, 102f
tapeworms, 115
treatment, 269
 systemic manifestations, 89
whipworms, 114
Dental chart, 95
terminology
 Dexamethasone suppression test
Dental disease
cal culus, 88-89
high-dose, 229-230, 326, 327-328, 492
 in canine distemper virus, 143
gingiva, 89
low-dose, 228-229, 326-327, 494
carnassial tooth root abcess
gingivitis, 89
Dextrose (50%)
complications, 99
plague, 88
emergency dose, 459t, 486t
diagnosis, 99
prophylaxis,89
form of drug, 394
discussing with clients, 99
tartar, 89
 precautions/contraindications, 394
etiology,99
Dental formulas, 87-88
route of administration, 394
history points, 99
 Dental prophylaxis (cleaning)
side effects, 394
 observations on initial assessment, 99
in carnassial tooth root abscess, 99
 use in cardiopulmonary cerebral
signalment, 99
defined, 15, 89
resuscitation (CPCR), 457
treatment, 99-100
 dental examination components
 Dextrose solutions, preparing dilutions of,
client discussions, 92
anesthesia, 94
443
baseline diagnostics, need for, 93
antibiotic medications, 95
DHPP vaccine, 7-8
carnassial tooth root abscess, 99
dental aftercare, 95
 Diabetes mellitus
dental X-rays, 93
dental charting, 95
algorithm,334,469
 gingival hyperplasia, 100
pain medications, 95
assessment, 213, 213f, 214f, 215
 periodontal disease, 97
periceutic treatment, 94-95
complications, 215
retained deciduous teeth, 99
polishing, 94, 95f
defined, 490
root canal treatment, 102
preventative care, 95
diagnostics, 214, 215
diagnostics, 92-93
probing, 94, 95f
discussing with clients, 216
clinical chemistry, 93
protective gear, 94, 95f
etiology, 214
 complete blood count, 92-93
radiography, 94
history, 213, 215
discussing with clients, 93
rinsing, 94
ketoacidotic, 213, 215, 216
radiography, 93
tooth extraction, 95
overview, 212-213
urinalysis, 93
ultrasonic cleaning and hand scaling,
prevention, 215
discussing with clients, 92
94
signalment, 215
gingival hyperplasia, 100, 101f
discussing with client after surgery, 23
treatment, 215, 216
gingivitis, 89, 92f
discussing with client before surgery,
Diagnosis of exclusion, 125, 140
history, obtaining, 89-90
23
 Diagnostic tree, for hyperadrenocorticism,
 observation on initial assessment,
 in periodontal disease, 97
463
90-91, 90f
procedures, 22-23, 22f-23f
Dialysis, 185
broken teeth, 92f
when to recommend, 93-94
Diaphragm, 129, 490
gingivitis, 92f
Dental radiography, 93, 94, 94f, 96, 97f,
Diaphysis, 63, 65f, 490
normal bite, 91f
100,102f
Diarrhea
oral masses, 92f
Depressed, defined, 4
abbreviation for, 4
overbite, 91f
Deracoxib, 385
history of, 36
 retained deciduous teeth, 91f
Dermatophytes
in hyperthyroidism, 221
underbite, 91f
black light diagnosis, 253, 255
in hypoadrenocorticism, 226
periodontal disease
defined, 490
large bowel, 107, 107t
complications, 96
fungal culture, 254-255, 255f, 257f,
safe handling of animals with, 27
diagnosis, 96-97, 97f
2554f
small bowel, 107, 107t, 208
discussing with clients, 97
ringworm (dermatomycosis), 270-271
Diarthrosis, 65, 65f, 490, 499
etiology, 96
complications, 271
Diastole, 147, 148f, 490
history points, 96, 96f
diagnosis, 271
Diazepam, 424
 observations on initial assessment,
discussing with clients, 271
 DIC. See Disseminated intravascular
92f, 96
etiology, 270
coagulopathy (DIC)
prevention, 98
history points, 270
Diet
signalment, 96
 obser vations on initial assessment,
amino acid supplements, 163
treatment, 97
270
changes in, 105
Index
513
in diabetes mellitus, 214
Drooling, dental disease and, 89, 90
signalment, 243
disease conditions associated with
Drug deliver systems
treatment, 243
arthritis, 78
intramuscular route, 379
Edema
dental disease, 94
intravenous route, 379
corneal, 274f
gastrointestinal disease, 105
subcutaneous route, 379
peripheral, 311, 497
patellar luxation, 83
 Drug interactions, 381
pulmonary, 130, 149, 150f, 154, 311,
for heart disease, 163
Drugs. See also Medications;
410, 411, 445
human food, 105
Pharmacology
EDTA (ethylene diamine tetra acetic
hypoallergenic for inflammatory bowel
acute renal disease and, 184
acid), 293, 491
disease, 125
emergency drug table, 479t
E-E-N-T (eyes, ears, nose, and throat), 4,
for kidney disease, 185, 190
 monitoring therapeutic levels, 328-329
56-59, 57f, 58f, 59f
for liver disease, 205
DSH (domestic short hair) abbreviation, 4
EFA (essential fatty acid), 268
low-salt, 163, 165, 169, 190
Ductus venosus, 203, 491
Effusion
for porto-systemic shunt patients, 204
Duodenal papilla, 207
pericardial, 153
prescription, 105
Duodenum, 103, 105f, 491
pleural, 149, 151f, 360f
Diff-Quik stain, 296, 298
Dypsnic, 491
Elbow dysplasia. See also Arthritis
 Digital pulse, 41, 42f
Dyspmea, 132, 140, 154, 443,491
breeds commonly affected, 76
Digit terminology, 3, 5f
Dystocia, 237, 491
defined, 68,491
Dihydrate calcium oxalate crystals, 344
Elbow OCD, 85
 Dilatative cardiomyopathy. See
Ear culture, 352
Elective procedures, 15-23
Cardiomyopathy
Ear cytology, 286, 287, 351-352
dental prophylaxis, 22-23, 22f-23f
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 387
Ear mites, 288-289
incision site, monitoring, 15
Diphenhydramine, 268, 384
complications, 288
onchyectomy, 19-21, 20f
Diplydium, 490. See also Tapeworms
cytology, 286, 287, 289
orchidectomy/castration, 18-19, 18f,
Directional terminology, 3, 4f, 5f, 6f
diagnosis, 289
19f, 20f
Direct PLR, 57, 273,490
discussing with clients, 288
ovariohysterectomy (OHE), 15-16,
Dirofilaria immitis, 13, 169, 388, 490. See
etiology, 288
16f-17f
also Heartworm disease
history points, 288
tendonectomy, feline, 21-22
Disease terminology, 5
obser vations on initial assessment,
Electrocardiogram (EKG), 353-364
 Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
288
algorithm, 356, 474
(DIC)
treatment, 289
atrioventricular block (heart block),
defined, 490
Ears, 285-290
363-364, 363f
in GDV, 126
anatomical abbreviations, 5-6
conduction anatomy, 353-355, 355f
in heatstroke, 446, 448
anatomy, 285,285f
discussing with clients, 158, 361
Dissociative anesthetics, 423, 424
assessment, initial, 286, 286f
evaluating, 355-360, 355t, 357f-360f
Distal (directional term), 3, 6f, 490
client discussions
indications for use
 Distemper. See Canine distemper virus
aural hematomas, 289
anoxia/surgical monitoring, 360
(CDV)
ear infections, 288
in cardiovascular disease, 157, 158,
Distributive shock (massive vasodilata-
ear mites, 288
160, 360,361-364
tion), 435, 490
diagnostics, 286-287, 351-352
metabolic disease, 360
Disuse muscle atrophy, 77
diseases
 preanesthetic evaluation, 361
Diuresis, 177, 185, 202, 404, 409, 490
aural hematoma, 289-290, 289f
trauma, 360
Diuretics, in heart disease, 159-160, 163,
ear mites, 288-289
wellness evaluation, 361
165, 168
infection, 285, 286f, 287-288
 monitoring in anesthesia, 158
DLH (domestic long hair) abbreviation, 4
history of disease, 285-286
overview, 353, 354f
 DMH (domestic medium hair) abbrevia-
physical examination, 57, 58f
performing, 353, 354f
tion, 4
Eating abnormalities, in dental disease, 90
premature ventricular contraction, 126,
DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide), 387
Ecchymosis, 197, 198f, 491
361-362,498
Documentation
Echinocytes, 299, 302f, 491
Electrolytes
physical examination, 61-62
Echogenicity, 372, 372f, 491
in heart disease, 160
triage examination, 46
Eclampsia
in renal disease, 188
Dopamine, 185
calcium levels, 317-318
in shock, 437, 437t
 Dopram, emergency dose of, 459t, 486t
complications, 243
 ELISA (enzyme-linked immunoassay)
Dorsal (directional term), 3, 5f, 6f, 490
defined, 491
tests, on feces, 108-109, 122-123,
Dosing
diagnosis, 243
351
abbreviations, 5, 379-380
discussing with clients, 244
Elizabethan collar, 277, 279
calculation, 380
etiology, 243
Emaciated, 51, 491
Doxapram, use in cardiopulmonary
history points, 243
Embolism, 165, 491. See also
cerebral resuscitation (CPCR), 457
observations on initial assessment, 243,
Thromboembolism
Draped, 16, 490
244f, 318f
Emergency
Draw sign, cranial, 81
prevention, 243-244
dose table, 459t, 486t
514
Index
Emergency (continued)
EOD (every other day), 5
etiology, 186,400
drug table, 479t
 Eosinopenia, 491
history points, 186, 400
flowchart for monitoring anesthetic
Eosinophilia, 307, 491
minimum lethal dose, 186t, 400t
emergency, 477
Eosinophils
monitoring, 187
 heatstroke/hyperthermia, 446, 448, 449
appearance, 304f, 307
observations on initial assessment, 186,
medications in shock, 438,438t, 445
defined,491
400
shock, 435-446
description, 301, 465
prevention, 187
 traumatic brain injury/head trauma,
eosinopenia, 491
signalment, 186, 400
448, 450-451
eosinophilia, 307, 491
treatment, 186-187, 401
triage examination, 30-second, 39-48
normal valves, 307
Etiology, defined, 491
Emergency drugs
EPI. See Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Etodolac, 385
atropine,393
(EPI)
Euthyroid sick condition, 220, 491
epinephrine,393-394
Epinephrine
Excitement phase of anesthesia, 419 
furosemide, 392,451
defined, 491
Excoriation, 250, 251f, 491
mannitol, 451
drug interactions, 393
Exercise intolerance
Emollients, 124
effects,223,224
cardiac disease, 150
Encephalopathy, hepatic, 196
emergency dose, 459t, 486t
in cardiac disease, 149, 150
Endemic,8,491
form of the drug, 393
defined, 491
Endocrine glands, 491. See also specific
indications, 393
history of, 37, 131
glands
pheochromocytoma and, 225
respiratory system and, 131
Endodontics, 100-102
precautions, 393
Exocrine glands, defined, 491
Endometritis, 242, 491
production, 224
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI),
Endoparasites. See Intestinal parasites
route of administration, 393
207-210, 212
Endoscopy, 373-375
for shock, 443
assessment, 209, 212
in constipation, 124
side effects, 393
complications, 212
discussing with clients, 375
use in cardiopulmonary cerebral
diagnostics, 209-210, 212
gastrointestinal foreign body, 118-119
resuscitation (CPCR), 456-457
discussing with client, 212
gastrointestinal system, 109-110
Epiphora, 277,491
etiology, 212
in inflammatory bowel disease, 125
Epiphysis, 63, 65f, 491
history, 207-208, 212
limitations of, 374-375
Epiphysitis, 69, 491
overview,207
safety, 374
Epistaxis, 8, 491
prevention, 212
technology, 374, 374f
Epithelial casts, 343
signalment, 212
types of studies, 374
Epithelium, 140,491
treatment, 212
Endotracheal tube
Erythema, 250, 250f, 251, 491
Exploratory/laproscopic surgery, in liver
airway, establishing, 456, 456f
Erythropoietin, 174, 188, 491
disease, 200
description, 419
Esophageal foreign body, 116-118, 117f
 External acoustic meatus
extubation, 429
complications, 117
anatomy, 285, 285f
intubation, 419, 425f, 426
diagnosis, 117
defined, 491
size based on weight, 421t, 476t
etiology, 116, 117f
External genitalia, 235
Enema, for constipation, 124
history points, 116-117
Extrahepatic, 195
 Energy level, in thyroid disease, 218
observations on initial assessment, 117
Eye position, 428
Enteritis, 120
prevention, 118
Eyes, 273-285
Entropion, 275, 275f, 284-285
signalment, 116
anatomical abbreviations, 5-6
complications, 284
treatment, 118
anatomy, 273,274f
defined, 491
Esophageal stricture, 117
anisocoria, 274f, 275, 436, 437f, 451f
diagnosis, 284-285
Esophagus
assessment, 275-276, 275f, 276f
discussing with clients, 284
anatomy, 103,104f
client discussions
etiology, 284
 megaesophagus, 106, 106f, 218
clinical diagnostics, 276
history points, 284
Essential fatty acid (EFA), 268
conjunctivitis, 279
observations on initial assessment, 284
Estrogen, 235, 491
corneal ulceration, 281
prevention, 285
Estrus, 235, 236
entropion, 284
signalment, 284
ETD (every third day), 5
glaucoma, 283
treatment,285
Ethanol, for antifreeze poisoning, 187,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 280
Enucleation, 284,491
401
third eyelid elevation, 278
Environmental contamination, with par-
 Ethylene glycol, defined, 491
uveitis, 282
vovirus, 121, 122
Ethylene glycol test, 183, 186, 401
dehydration assessment, 44, 53
Environmental phase, life cycle, 110-111
Ethylene glycol toxicity, 186-187,
diagnostics, 276
Enzymes
400-401
diseases
defined, 491
complications, 186, 401
cataracts, 213, 213f, 273, 274f
glucoronidation, 194
diagnostics, 186, 401
cherry eye (protruding third eyelid),
in saliva, 87
discussing with clients, 187
277-278, 277f
Index
515
conjunctivitis,275f, 278-279,278f
Feline panleukopenia virus (FPV)
toxicity treatment, 407, 475
corneal injury, 280-281
complications, 122
traumatic brain injury, 450, 485
entropion, 275,275f, 284-285
diagnosis, 122-123
urinalysis, 346, 471
glaucoma, 275,282-284,283f
discussing with clients, 123
urine chemistry, 347, 472
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS),
etiology, 122
urine sediment, 347, 473
219, 220f, 279-280
history points, 122
Fluid overload, 414, 492
uveitis, 281-282, 281f
incubation period, 122
 Fluid support/therapy
enucleation, 284
physical exam points, 122
colloids
history for ocular diseases, 274-275
prevention, 123
administration, 416-417
physical examination, 56-57, 57f
signalment, 122
calculation of fluid need, 416
proptosed, 46f
treatment, 123
complication, 416
Eyes/ears/nose/mouth (E-E-N-M) physical
vaccine, 9, 123
contraindications, 416
examination, 4, 56-59, 57f, 58f, 59f
 Feline restraint methods, 29-31, 29f-32f
description, 410, 415
 Eyeware, for dental prophylaxis
 Feline vaccines, 8-10, 13t
discussing with clients, 417
(cleaning), 94, 95f
Feline viral rhinotracheitis (FVR)
indications, 416
symptoms/signs, 9
natural, 410, 415
Facial expression, in thyroid disease, 218
vaccine, 9, 13t
synthetic, 410,415
Facial swelling, 89, 90, 91, 93f 
Felv. See Feline leukemia virus (Felv)
in constipation, 124
Fainting
 Female reproductive tract, 235, 236f
crystalloids
cardiac disease, 151
Femoral artery pulse, 41, 41f
administering, 413, 415
history of, 37, 131
 Femoral head and neck excision (FHO),
bolusing fluids, 413
 respiratory system and, 131
78, 492
calculation of fluid need, 411
Famotidine, 185, 211,390
 Fendbendazole, 389
chronicity strip, 413, 414f
Favoring, 55, 491
Fenestration, 173, 492
complications, 414
FCV. See Feline calici virus (FCV)
Fentanyl, 424
dehydration, 412-413
Feathered edge, 297f, 491
Fever, 44, 52, 107, 241
description, 410-411, 412f
Fecal culture, 108
 FHO (femoral head and neck excision),
hourly fluid rate, 413
Fecal cytology, 108, 350-351
78, 492
indications, 411
Fecal floatation, 108, 270, 349, 350f
Fibrosarcoma, 492
maintenance, 411-412
Fecal smear, 108, 349-350, 350f
Fibrous joint (synarthosis), 63, 65
for shock, 413-414, 415f
Feeding tube, 205
Fight or flight, 27-28, 223, 224, 492
in diabetes mellitus, 211
Feline asthma, 139-140
 Fine-needle aspirate
estimating need based on hydration and
complications, 140
mammary tumor, 246
fluid 1oss status, 415t, 478t
defined, 139
skin (integument), 258f, 259f, 261, 263,
fluid overload, 414
diagnosis, 140
265f-266f
in heart disease, 159, 160
discussing with clients, 140
FIP See Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
in hookworm infection, 112
etiology, 140
 FIV. See Feline immunodeficiency virus
intravenous fluids, 410-417
history points, 140
(FIV)
administering, 413, 415
observations on initial assessment, 140
Fixation, fracture, 73-75, 76f
administration algorithm, 417, 476
prevention, 140
Flaccid, 56
colloids, 410, 415-417
signalment, 140
Flagyl. See Metronidazole
crystalloids, 410-415
treatment, 140
Flank alopecia, 218, 222, 227, 227f, 499
discussing with clients, 415
 Feline calici virus (FCV)
Flat bones, 63, 64f
surgical fluids, 423
symptoms/signs, 9, 59
 Flea allergy, 267
in liver disease, 202, 203, 204, 205
vaccine, 9
Flight or fight response, 27-28, 223, 224,
in pancreatitis, 211
 Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
492
in renal disease, 186, 187-188
discussing with clients, 10
Flowcharts
in shock, 439, 441, 443
symptoms/signs, 10
anaphylactic shock, 444, 482
subcutaneous fluids, 409-410
vaccine, 10,13t
anesthetic emergency, monitoring, 432,
in acute disease, 409
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
477
administration, 410, 411f
 discussing with clients, 10
cardiac auscultation, 461
calculation of fluid need, 410
symptoms/signs, 10
cardiogenic shock, 447, 483
in chronic disease, 409
vaccine, 10, 13t
complete blood count, 300, 464
contraindications, 409-410
Feline leukemia virus (Felv)
heatstroke, 449, 484
discussing with clients, 410
acute, 9-10
hypovolemic shock, 440, 480
in emergency conditions, 409
chronic, 10
microscopic examination
guidelines, 410f, 470t
discussing with client, 9
macroconidia/fungal spores, 257f
indications, 409
vaccine, 9-10, 13t
malazezzia, 258f
Fluid wave, 55
Feline lower urinary tract disease
skin scrapping, 256f
Fluorescein stain, 276
(FLUTD), 179, 492. See also Lower
white blood cells, 259f
Fluoroquinolones, 382-383
urinary tract disease
septic shock, 442, 481
FLUTD. See Lower urinary tract disease
516
Index
Food allergies, 267, 268
Gas anesthesia, 424
diarrhea, 107, 107t
 Food trial, for allergies, 268
Gas leaks, anesthesia machine, 421
diet, 105
 Force feeding, in pancreatitis, 211
Gastric dilation-volvulus (GDV)
duration of illness, 104-105
 Forei gn body
complications, 126
foreign body exposure, 105
discussing with clients, 121
defined, 492
pain, 106
endloscopy for removal, 374
diagnosis, 126, 127f
poisons, exposure to, 105-106
esophageal, 116-118, 117f
discussing with clients, 127
regurgitation, 106, 106f
gastrointestinal, 118-120, 118f, 119f
etiology, 126
vaccination status, 107
history of ingestion, 37
history points, 126
vomiting, 106-107
Fossa, 193, 492
observations on initial assessment, 126
obser vations on initial assessment,
 FPV. See Feline panleukopenia virus (FPV)
prevention, 127
107-108, 107t
Fracture
signalment, 126
abdominal pain/palpation, 108
complications,72-73
treatment, 126-127
dehydration, 108
defined, 72
triage examination, 45
gum color/ capillary refilltime, 108
diagnosis, 73
Gastric lavage, 186, 401
mentation, 107
discussing with client, 74-75
Gastrin, 179, 188, 492
temperature, 107-108
history points, 72
Gastrointestinal drugs
triage, 107t
nomenclature, 66-67, 68f, 69f
decreased acid producers, 390-391
overview,103
closed, 67, 69f
protectants, 391
Gastropexy, 127, 492
comminuted, 67, 70f
sucrafate, 391
GDV. See Gastric dilation-vol vulus (GDV)
greenstick fracture, 66, 68f
 Gastrointestinal foreign body
Genitourinary system. See Urogenital
location of fracture, 66
complications, 118
system
oblique fracture, 67, 68f
diagnosis, 118
GGT. See Gamma-glutamyl transferase
open, 67
etiology, 118, 118f
(GGT)
spiral fracture, 67, 69f
history points, 118
Giardia (giardiasis)
transverse fracture, 66, 68f, 69f
 observations on initial assessment, 118
complications, 115
observations on initial assessment, 72,
prevention, 120
defined, 492
73f
signalment, 118
diagnosis, 115, 115f, 350f, 351
pathological, 86
treatment, 118-119, 119f, 120f
etiology, 114
prevention, 75
Gastrointestinal system, 103-127
history points, 114-115
prognosis, 75
anatomy, 103-104, 104f
life cycle, 114
radiography, 366, 367f
client discussions
observations on initial assessment, 115
treatment, 73-75, 76f
chronic intestinal disease, 125
prevention, 115
Fructosamine, 214, 340
fecal exam, need for, 108
treatment, 115
Fundic examination, 276
foreign body obstruction, 121
Gingiva, 89, 96, 492
 Fungal culture
GDV/bloat, 127
Gingival hyperplasia, 100, 101
discussing with clients, 255
intestinal parasites, 116
Gingivitis, 22, 89, 492
procedure, 254-255,255f, 257f
panleukopenia viral infection, 123
Glans penis, 235, 492
 Fungal elements, in urine sediment, 344
parvoviral infection, 122
Glaucoma, 282-284, 283f
Furosemide, 159-160, 392, 445, 451
radiographic exam, need for, 109
complications, 283
 FVR. See Feline viral rhinotracheitis
diagnostics, 108-110
defined, 273,492
(FVR)
abdominal tap, 110
diagnosis, 283
FVRCP vaccine, 9, 13t 
ELISA (enzyme-linked immuno-
discussing with clients, 283
assay), 108-109
etiology, 282
Gall bladder
endoscopy, 109-110
history points, 282
alkaline phosphatase increase in, 312
fecal culture, 108
obser vations on initial assessment,
anatomy and function, 193, 194
fecal cytology, 108
282-283,283f
bilirubin elevation with obstruction,
fecal floatation, 108
prevention, 284
315-316
fecal smear, 108
signalment, 282
gamma-glutamyltransferase elevation
radiography, 109, 109f, 110f
treatment, 283-284
with obstruction, 319-320
ultrasound examination, 109, 111f
Glomerular filtration, 174, 492
stones,200,201
disease, 110-127
Glomerulus, 173, 175f, 176f
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT)
chronic, 105, 123-125
Gloves, for dental prophylaxis (cleaning),
abnormalities, 319
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
94, 95f
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 319-320
and, 212
Glucagon, 212, 492
discussing with clients, 319-320
infectious disease, 121-123
Glucometer, 320
function, 319
intestinal parasites, 110-116,
Gluconeogenesis, 212, 492
liver disease, 199, 319-320
112f-117f
Glucoronidation enzymes, 194
location of production, 319
obstructive disease, 116-121,
Glucosamine, 387-388
symptoms associated with changes in,
117f-120f
Glucose
319
history of disease, 36, 104-107
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 321
Index
517
discussing with clients, 321
discussing with clients, 163
oxygen administration, 159
function, 320
etiology, 162
pathology, 158
hyperglycemia, 320-321
history points, 162-163
prevention, 160
hypoglycemia, 320-321
observations on initial assessment,
pulse, 159
location of production, 320
163
signalment, 158
in shock, 437, 437t
prevention, 163
treatment, 159-160
symptoms associated with changes in,
signalment, 162
mitral insufficiency, 150f, 167-169,
320-321
treatment, 163
168f
urinary, 340
 canine hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
complications, 168
Glucosuria, 340, 492
164-165, 164f
diagnosis, 168
Glycogen, 193
complications, 165
etiology, 167, 168f
Golytely, 374
diagnosis, 165
history points, 167-168
Granular casts, 343
discussing with clients, 165
obser vations on initial assessment,
Granulocytes, 306-307. See also
etiology, 164
168
 Basophils; Eosinophils; Neutrophils
history points, 164
prevention, 169
Granuloma, 12, 492
observations on initial assessment,
signalment, 167
Granulomatous disease, 225, 232
164-165
treatment, 168-169
Greenstick fracture, 66, 68f
prevention, 165
right-sided heart failure, 160-162
Growth plate, 63, 65f
signalment, 164
complications, 161
Gums. See also Gingiva
treatment, 165
diagnosis, 161
bleeding fom, 96, 96f
dental disease and, 89, 91
etiology, 160-161
bruising, 44, 44f, 52
EKG, indication for, 360
history points, 161
capillary refill time (CRT), 43, 43f,
feline dilatative cardiomyopathy, 164
observations on initial assessment,
108, 154, 427
feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
161
color, 43, 52, 52f, 130, 132-133, 154,
165-167, 166f
prevention, 162
159, 427, 435-436, 436t, 443
complications, 166
signalment, 161
dehydration assessment, 44, 45, 53
diagnosis, 166
treatment, 162
lacerations/ulcers, 58-59
discussing with clients, 167
Heart failure. See Heart disease, left-sided
Gutta percha, 101f
etiology, 165
 heart failure; Heart disease, right-
history points, 166
 sided heart failure
Hair loss
 observations on initial assessment,
Heart rate
in hyperadrenocorticism, 227, 227f, 231
166, 166f
EKG evaluation, 355, 357f
in hyperthyroidism, 221
prevention, 167
normal values, 355t
physical examination, 59, 59f
signalment, 166
in thyroid disease, 219
in thyroid disease, 218
supportive care, 167
Heart sounds, 147
Halitosis, 58, 89, 90, 492
treatment, 166-167
Heartworm disease, 169-171, 170f
Handling an animal, 27-28, 27f
heartworm disease, 169-171, 170f
complications, 169
cat behavior under stress, 28
complications, 169
diagnosis, 14, 169
dog behavior under stress, 27-28
diagnosis, 169
discussing with clients, 14, 170
restraint, 28-32, 29f-32f
discussing with clients, 170
etiology, 169
Hard pad, 143
etiology, 169
history points, 169
Hard palate, 43
history points, 169
observations on initial assessment, 169
Head tilt, 286
obser vations on initial assessment,
overview, 13, 14f
Head trauma, 448, 450-451
169
prevention, 14, 171
Heart block, 358, 359f, 492
prevention, 171
schistocytes in, 299, 302f
complications, 363
signalment, 169
signalment, 169
degrees, 363
treatment, 169-171
signs in medical history, 13
diagnostics, 363-364, 363f
left-sided heart failure, 158-160
signs in physical examination, 13-14
discussing with clients, 364
auscultation, 159
treatment, 169-171
etiology, 363
catheter placement, 159
Heat cycle, 235, 236
history points, 363
complications, 159
Heating pads, 431
observations on initial assessment, 363
diagnosis, 159, 160
Heatstroke
prevention, 364
dyspnea, 159
diagnostics, 446, 448, 448t
signalment, 363
etiology, 158
etiology, 52, 446
treatment, 364
fluid therapy, 159, 160
flowchart, 449, 484
Heart disease, 158-171
gum color, 159
history points, 446
ascites in, 196
history points, 159
kidney damage and, 184
canine dilatative cardiomyopathy,
medications for, 159-160
observations on initial assessment, 446
162-163,162f
monitoring, 160
signalment, 446
complications, 163
 observations on initial assessment,
treatment, 448
diagnosis, 163
159
triage examination, 44
518
Index
Heinz bodies, 299, 303f, 401-402, 401f,
cough, 150
in orthopedic cases, 67-70
492
exercise intolerance, 150
lameness, 69-70
Hemangiosarcoma, 299
heartworm prevention, 151
medication history, 70
Hematemesis, 8, 492
respiratory effort, increase in, 151,
onset of disease, 69
Hematochezia, 8, 492
152f
questions, 69-70
Hematocrit (HCT), 293, 294, 295t, 492
in dental disease, 89-90
signalment, 67-68
Hematoma, aural, 289-290
in endocrine pancreas disease, 213
travel history, 70
Hematuria, 338, 342,492
in exocrine pancreas disease, 207-208
in otic disease, 285-286
Hemoglobin, 129, 193, 398, 492
in gastrointestinal disease, 104-107
 preanesthesia, 422
Hemoglobinuria, 338, 402, 492
diarrhea, 107, 107t
in reproductive disease, 240-241
Hemolysis
diet, 105
respiratory system, 36, 131-132
cause, 309, 310t
duration of illness, 104-105
cough, 131
defined, 492
foreign body exposure, 105
duration of illness, 131
plasma color, 295
pain, 106
exercise intolerance, 131-132
Heparin, 167
poisons, exposure to, 105-106
heartworm prevention, 132
Hepatic artery, 193, 194f, 492
regurgitation, 106, 106f
nasal discharge, 132
Hepatic congestion, 149, 149f, 150f, 492
vaccination status, 107
sneezing, 132
Hepatic disease. See Liver disease
vomiting, 106-107
vaccination status, 132
Hepatic encephalopathy, 196, 492
in liver disease, 196-197
in skin (integument) disease, 249-250
Hepatic lipidosis, 205-206, 205f
age of animal, 196
diet, 250
complications, 205
appetite,197
ectoparasites, 249
defined, 492
breed predispositions, 196
inside or outside pet, 249
diagnosis, 205
diarrhea, 197
 medication history, 249
discussing with clients, 205
 medication exposure, 197
onset of signs, 249
etiology, 205, 205f
neurologic signs, 197
other household pets, 250
history points, 205
polyuria/polydipsia, 196-197
previous treatments, 249
observations on initial assessment, 205
progression of disease, 196
seasonality, 249
prevention, 205
toxin/poison exposure, 197
systemic disease, 250
signalment, 205
travel history, 197
weight, 250
treatment, 205
vaccination status, 197
terminology, 3-4
Hepatic vein, 193, 492
vomiting, 197
in thyroid disease, 217-218
Hepatitis
weight loss, 197
age of animal, 217
chronic active, 202-203
obtaining adequate and precise, 33-38
breed, 217-218
defined, 89
from phone call, 33-34
ear infections, 218
Hepatitis virus. See Canine hepatitis virus
chief complaint, 33-34
energy level,218
Hepatocytes, 193-194, 492
client questions, 35
facial expression, 218
Hepatomegaly, 200, 200f, 492
duration of illness, 34
reproductive problems, 218
Hetastarch, 415-417, 416f
patient signalment, 33
shedding, 218
 High-dose dexamethasone suppression
signs/symptoms of illness, 34
vomiting or regurgitation, 218
test, 229-230, 326, 327-328, 492
 prior to physical examination,
weight, 218
Hip dysplasia. See also Arthritis
34-38
toxins, exposure to, 397
age of onset/incubation, 76
appetite, 36
in urogenital disease, 179-180
breeds commonly affected, 76
chief complaint, 35
age of animal, 179
complications, 77
C/S/V/D/PU/PD, 36
appetite, 179
defined, 68,493
duration of illness, 35
breed of animal, 179
diagnosis, 77, 77f
fainting, exercise intolerance, or
constipated 179
discussing with clients, 79
collapse, 37
diarrhea, 179
history points, 76-77
foreign body ingestion, 37, 37f
polyuria/polydipsia, 179
 observations on initial assessment, 77
gastrointestinal system, 36
progression of disease, 179
prevention, 78
medication, poison, or toxin
toxin/poison exposure, 180
treatment, 78
exposure, 35-36
urination difficulty, 180
complete hip replacement, 78
neurologic behaviors, 37
vomiting, 179
femoral head and neck excision
other household animals, 38
weight 1oss, 179
(FHO), 78
polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD),
Hock (talus) OCD, 85
medical, 78
36-37
Homeopathic medications, 397
triple pelvic osteotomy, 78
previous disease, 36
Hookworms, 111-112, 112f
Histamine, 11, 493
respiratory/cardiovascular system,
diagnosis, 112, 112f
History
36
etiology,111 
in adrenal disease, 226
trauma, 36
history points, 112
in cardiac disease, 36, 149-151
travel history, 37
life cycle, 111
collapse or fainting, 151
in ocular disease, 274-275
observations on initial assessment, 112
Index
519
prevention, 112
prevention, 190
 Identification of animals in hospital, 27
signalment, 112
signalment, 190
Idiopathic disease, 120
treatment, 112
treatment, 190
 Ileum
zoonotic disease, 112
Hyperthermia, 44, 52, 91, 107, 426, 431,
anatomy, 103-104, 105f
Hormonal disease. See also specific
446, 448, 449, 493. See also
defined, 493
diseases; specific glands
Heatstroke
Ileus, 123, 126,424
constipation/obstipation and, 123-124
Hyperthyroidism, 217-222, 493
IM (intramuscular), 6
Host specific, 110
Hypertonic, 410, 493
 Immune-mediated disease
Howell-Jowell bodies, 298, 299, 303f, 493
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. See
chronic active hepatitis, 202
Hyaline cartilage, 84
Cardiomyopathy
defined, 493
Hyaline casts, 343
Hyphema, 57, 57f, 276, 276f, 282,493
hypoadrenocorticism, 225, 232
Hyaluronic acid, 84
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
hypothyroidism (immune-mediated
Hydration
Addisonian crisis, 223, 226, 226t
thyroiditis), 217, 220, 493
 in kidney disease, 184
assessment of disease, 227, 232
uveitis, 282
in liver disease, 197, 201
breed predisposition, 226
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, 293,
in renal disease, 180
complications, 232
294f, 295, 315-316, 339, 493
Hydrochloric acid, 103
defined, 493
Immune-mediated thyroiditis, 217, 220,
Hydroxyzine, 268, 384
diagnostics, 230, 232
493
Hyperactivity, in hyperthyroidism, 221
discussing with clients, 233
 Immune system
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease)
etiology, 232
cells, 306-308
assessment of disease, 226-227, 227,
forms of disease, 225, 232
components, 306
231
history, 226, 232
Immunoglobulins, 306, 307-308, 493
breed predi sposition, 226
potassium levels, 322-324
Immunosuppression, 121, 324, 386
complications, 231
prevention, 232
Immunosuppressive drugs, for chronic ac-
defined, 493
signalment, 232
tive hepatitis, 203
diagnostics, 228-230, 229f, 231
treatment, 232
IM pin, 74, 75, 76f
diagnostic tree, 463
Hypoalbuminemia, 311-312, 493
Impression smear, 260, 264f
discussing with clients, 231
Hypocalcemia, 317-318, 493
IN (intranasal), 6
etiology, 231
Hypochromasia, 298-299, 302f, 403f, 493
 Incident report, 26
forms of disease, 224-225, 225f,
Hypoechoic, 372, 493
 Incision site, monitoring, 15
231-232
Hypoglycemia, 215, 320-321
Incisors, 87-88, 87f, 88t
history, 226, 231
Hypokalemia, 177, 322-324, 323f, 493
Inclusion bodies
prevention, 232
Hypophosphatemia, 322
 in canine distemper virus, 143-144
signalment, 231
Hyposthenuria, 228, 338,493
defined, 493
treatment, 231-232
Hypotension, as anesthesia complication,
 Incubation period, of parvovirus, 121
Hyperbilirubinemia, 315, 493
426,429-430
Indirect PLR, 57
Hypercalcemia, 317-318,493
Hypothermia
Induced ovulators, 236, 493
Hypercarbia, 430, 493
anesthesia complication, 426, 427-428,
Induction agents, 423, 424, 493
Hyperdynamic pulse, 42, 52, 493
430-431
Induction chamber,31,32f,493
Hyperechoic, 372,493
causes, 52, 108
Infectious disease. See also specific
Hyperesthesia, 143
defined, 493
etiological agents
Hyperglycemia, 320-321
triage examination, 44
ear, 285, 286f, 287-288
defined,493
Hypothyroidism, 217-220, 222, 330
intestinal, 121-123
diabetes mellitus, 213, 214, 215
 Hypoventilation, as anesthesia complica-
safe handling of animals with, 26-27
in hyperadrenocorticism, 228
tion, 430
 Inflammatory bowel disease, 124-125
from hypothermia, 431
Hypovolemia, from hypothermia, 431
complications, 125
Hyperkalemia, 322-324,493
Hypovolemic shock
diagnosis, 125
Hyperphosphatemia, 322
defined, 493
discussing with clients, 125
 Hyperpigmentation
diagnostics, 438, 439t
etiology, 124
assessment, 250, 251f
etiology, 438
history points, 125
defined, 493
flowchart, 440, 480
 observations on initial assessment, 125
in hyperadrenocorticism, 227, 227f
history points, 438
prevention, 125
Hyperplasia, gingival, 100, 101
 observations on initial assessment, 438
signalment, 125
Hypertension, renal secondary, 190-191,
signalment, 438
treatment, 125
190t
treatment, 438-439
Inguinal canal, 18, 493
complications, 190
Hypoxia, 426
 Inhaler therapy, 140
diagnostics, 190
Insecticide, history of exposure to, 36
discussing with clients, 191
Iatrogenic, defined, 493
Inspiratory/expiratory study, 135, 494
etiology, 190
Ibuprofen, 402-403
Insulin
history points, 190
IC (intracardiac), 6
defined, 494
observations on initial assessment, 190
Icterus, 43, 493
diabetes mellitus, 212-216
520
Index
 Insulin (continued)
diagnosis, 115, 116f
Iris, 273, 274f, 494
function of, 212
etiology, 115
Irregular bones, 63, 64f
therapy, 215, 216
history points, 115
 Islets of Langerhans, 207, 208f, 494
Insulinoma, 213, 494
life cycle, 115
Isochoic, 372, 494
 Integument. See Skin (integument)
 observations on initial assessment,
Isoflurane, 424
 Intercostal muscles, 129, 494
115
Isospora, 494. See also Coccidia
 Interdigital pulse, 41, 42f
prevention, 115
Isosthenuria, 338,494
Intestinal disease
treatment, 115
Isotonic, 410, 494
infectious, 121-123
vectors, 111
IT (intratracheal), 6
feline panleukopenia (feline
whipworms, 113-114, 114f
IV (intravenous), 6
distemper), 122-123
complications, 114
 Ivermectin/avermectin, 388
parvovirus, 121-122
diagnosis, 114, 114f
obstructive, 116-121, 117f-120f
etiology, 114
Jaundice, 8,43, 56, 195, 196f, 197, 201,
parasitic, 110-116,112f-11
history points, 114
211, 286, 286f, 295, 494
Intestinal parasites, 110-116, 112f-117f
life cycle, 113-114
Jejunum
coccidia, 115-116, 117f
observations on initial assessment,
anatomy, 103,105f
complications, 116
114
defined, 494
diagnosis, 116
prevention, 114
Joint capsule, 65, 65f, 494
etiology, 116
treatment, 114
Joint cavity, 65, 65f, 494
history points, 116
Intrahepatic, 195
Joint effusion, 66, 72, 494
life cycle, 115
 Intramuscular route, 379
Joint mouse, 84, 84f, 494
 obser vations on initial assessment,
Intravenous fluid therapy, 410-417
Joints, 63-66
116
administering, 413, 415
categories of, 63-64
prevention, 116
administration algorithm, 417, 476
defined, 63,494
treatment, 116
colloids, 410, 415-417
dislocation (luxation), 67, 69f
discussing with clients, 116
 administration, 416-417
radiographic evaluation, 366-367, 368f
expression of disease, 111
calculation of fluid need, 416
swelling, 71-72, 72f
Giardia, 114-115, 115f
complication, 416
 Joint tap
complications, 115
contraindications, 416
defined, 494
diagnosis, 115, 115f
description, 410, 415
surgical, 71-72
etiology, 114
discussing with clients, 417
Jugular venipuncture, restraint for, 30,
history points, 114-115
indications, 416
30f, 31f
life cycle, 114
natural, 410, 415
Juxtoglomerular cells, 174, 494
 observations on initial assessment,
synthetic, 410, 415
115
crystalloids, 410-415
 Kennel, removing an animal from, 28
prevention, 115
administering, 413,415
Kennel cough
treatment, 115
bolusing fluids, 413
complications, 144
hookworms, 111-112, 112f
calculation of fluid need, 411
defined, 144
diagnosis, 112, 112f
chronicity strip, 413, 414f
discussing with clients, 145
etiology, 111
complications, 414
etiology, 144
history points, 112
dehydration, 412-413
history points, 144
life cycle, 111
description, 410-411, 412f
 observations on initial assessment,
 obser vations on initial assessment,
hourly fluid rate, 413
144
112
indications, 411
prevention, 144-145
prevention, 112
 maintenance, 411-412
signalment, 144
signalment, 112
for shock, 413-414, 415f
treatment, 144
treatment, 112
discussing with clients, 415
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), 219,
zoonotic disease, 112
surgical fluids, 423
220f,279-280
life cycle, 110-111
Intravenous route, 379
complications, 279
roundworms, 112-113, 113f
Intubation, 419, 425f, 426
defined, 494
diagnosis, 113, 113f
Intussusception, 120, 120f
diagnosis, 279
etiology, 113
complications, 120
discussing with clients, 280
history points, 113
defined, 494
etiology,279
life cycle, 112-113
diagnosis, 120
history points, 279
 obser vations on initial assessment,
etiology, 120
observation on initial assessment, 279
113
history points, 120
prevention, 280
prevention, 113
observations on initial assessment, 120
signalment, 279
treatment, 113
prevention, 120
from sulfonamide therapy, 383
zoonotic disease, 113
signalment, 120
treatment, 279
tapeworms, 115
treatment, 120
Ketamine, 424
complications, 115
Iodine, radioactive, 221-222
Ketoacidosis, 340, 494
Index
521
Ketones, urinary, 340
blood pressure monitoring, 183
Labor, 237-238
Ketonuria, 340, 494
blood work, 180
Laceration, 45, 46f
Kidney
chemistry, 181
Lactation, 243
anatomy, 173-174, 174f, 175f, 176f,
complete blood count, 181
Lactophenol Cotton Blue dye, 255
177f
ethylene glycol test, 183
Lactulose, 202, 203, 205
functions, 173-174, 176f, 177f
radiography, 181, 182, 182f, 183f
L-adenosyl methionine (SAM-E), 203
transplants, 185
ultrasound, 181, 183f
Lameness
Kidney disease
urinalysis, 181
assessment, 70-71, 71f
acute renal disease, 184-185
urine culture and sensitivity, 183
history questions, 69-70
complications, 185
urine protein/creatinine ratio, 182,
Large bowel diarrhea, 107, 107t
diagnosis, 185
183
Large intestine
discussing with clients, 185
functions, 173-174, 176f, 177f
anatomy, 104,105f
emergency conditions, 184
glomerular disease, 175-177
disease (see Gastrointestinal system,
etiology, 184
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 176
disease)
history points, 184
causes, 175
Laryngoscopes, 419
 observations on initial assessment,
creatinine, 176
Lasix. See Furosemide
184-185
phosphorus, 176
Lateral (directional term), 3, 6f, 494
prevention, 185
potassium, 177,178f
Lateral recumbency, 40, 40f, 353, 354f
signalment, 184
proteinuria, 176-177
Lavage, 119, 186, 401, 494
treatment, 185
heart disease and, 160
Lead, 403-404, 403f
algorithm, 331,466
history, 179-180
Leads, EKG, 353, 354f
antifreeze poisoning, 186-187
age of animal, 179
Leash, 26, 29
complications, 186
appetite, 179
 Left atrioventricular val ve (mitral valve),
diagnostics, 186
breed of animal, 179
147, 148f-151f, 494
discussing with clients, 187
constipated, 179
Left shift, 307
etiology, 186
diarrhea, 179
 Left-sided heart failure. See Heart
history points, 186
polyuria/polydipsia,179
disease, left-sided heart failure
 minimum lethal dose, 186t
progression of disease, 179 
Lens, 273, 274f, 494
monitoring, 187
toxin/poison exposure, 180
Lenticular sclerosis, 273, 494
 observations on initial assessment,
urination difficulty, 180
 Leptospirosis, 8, 184
186
vomiting, 179
 Lethary, defined, 4
prevention, 187
weight loss, 179
Leucopenia, 306
signalment, 186
lower urinary tract disease, 188-190
Leukocytosis, 306
treatment, 186-187
complications, 189
Leukogram, stress, 228
assessment, 180, 180f, 180t
diagnosis, 189
Levothyroxine sodium/L-thyroxine
abdominal palpation, 180
discussing with clients, 189
sodium, 394
triage, 180t
etiology, 188
Life cycle, parasite, 110-111
chronic renal disease, 187-188
forms of disease, 188
Ligament, 66, 66f
complications, 187
history points, 189
Ligated, 16,494
diagnostics, 187
physical examination, 189
Limb amputation, in osteosarcoma, 86
discussing with clients, 188
prevention, 190
Lipase
etiology, 187
signalment, 189
abnormalities, 321
history points, 187
treatment, 189-190
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 321-322
 obser vations on initial assessment,
medullary disease, 177-179
discussing with clients, 321
187
assessment, 177-179, 178t
function, 103,207,321
prevention, 188
azotemia, 178-179, 178t, 462t
location of production, 207, 321
signalment, 187
causes, 177
symptoms associated with increases in,
treatment, 187-188
 renal secondary hypertension, 190-191,
321
client discussions
190t
Lipemia
acute renal disease, 185
complications, 190
cause, 309, 310t
advanced diagnostics, need for, 183
diagnostics, 190
causes, 214
blood and urine evaluation, 181
discussing with clients, 191
defined, 494
chronic renal disease, 188
etiology, 190
plasma color, 295
ethylene glycol intoxication, 187
history points, 190
Lipidosis. See Hepatic lipidosis
radiographic and ultrasounic
 observations on initial assessment,
Liver, 193-206
evaluation, 182
190
anatomy, 104f, 193-194, 194f
secondary renal hypertension, 191
prevention, 190
functions, 103, 193-194
urinary tract disease and urinary
signalment, 190
Liver disease
obstruction, 189
treatment, 190
acute disease
dental disease and, 89
 stones, 181, 182f, 188-190
complications, 201
diagnostics, 180-183
Kilovoltage (Kv), 365, 494
diagnostics, 201
522
Index
Liver disease (continued)
history of disease, 196-197
 Lymph nodes
discussing with clients, 202
age of animal, 196
description, 306
etiology, 201
appetite,197
LN abbreviation for, 4
history points, 201
breed predispositions, 196
physical examination, 59
observations on initial assessment,
diarrhea, 197
Lymphocytes
201
 medication exposure, 197
appearance, 305f, 307
 prevention, 202
neurologic signs, 197
defined, 494
signalment, 201
polyuria/polydipsia, 196-197
description, 301, 465
treatment, 202
progression of disease, 196
function, 307-308
algorithm, 332,467
toxin/poison exposure, 197
normal values, 308
assessment, 197-198,198f, 198t
travel history, 197
Lymphocytosis, 308, 495
 chronic active hepatitis
vaccination status, 197
 Lymphoma
diagnostics, 202
vomiting, 197
defined, 495
discussing with clients, 203
weight 1oss, 197
hypoalbuminemia in, 311
etiology, 202
infectious, 195
intestinal, 311
history points, 202
inflammatory, 195
renal, 175
observations on initial assessment, 202
metabolic, 195
Lymphopenia, 308, 495
prevention, 203
neoplasia, 195, 195f
Lysodren, 232
signalment, 202
porto-systemic shunt
Lysosomes, 306, 495
treatment, 203
complications, 203
client discussions
diagnosis, 204
Macroconidia, 255, 257f,495
active hepatic disease, 202
discussing with clients, 204
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 138
chronic hepatic disease, 203
etiology, 203, 204f
 Maintenance anesthetic agents, 424, 426
diagnostics, 199
history points, 203
Malabsorption syndrome, 111, 114, 208
exploratory/laproscopic procedures,
observations on initial assessment,
Malasezzia, 258f
200
203
Maldigestion syndrome, 208, 495
hepatic lipidosis, 206
overview, 195
Male reproductive tract, 235, 236f
 porto-systemic shunt, 204
prevention, 204
Malignancy, hypercalcemia of, 317
radiography, 200
signalment, 203
 Malignant hyperthermia, 426
ultrasound, 200
treatment, 204
Malocclusion, 489
clinical expressions of, 195
schistocytes in, 299, 302f
Mammary tumors
dental disease and, 89
signs/symptoms, 195-196, 196f
complications, 245
diagnostics, 198-200, 200f
ascites, 195-196
diagnosis, 246
alanine aminotransferase (ALT,
coagulopathy, 196
discussing with clients, 246
SGPT), 199
hepatic encephalopathy, 196
etiology, 245
alkaline phosphatase, 199
jaundice, 195, 196f
history points, 245
aspartate aminotransferase (AST,
toxic, 195
observations on initial assessment, 245
SGOT), 199
Liver enzymes, in diabetes mellitus, 214
physical examination, 60, 60f
bile acids, 200, 329
LN (lymph node) abbreviation, 4
prevention, 246
bilirubin, 200
Long bones, 63, 65f
signalment, 245
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 199-200
Loops of Henle, 173, 175f, 176f, 494, 500
treatment, 246, 247f
chemistry, 198-200
 Low-dose dexamethasone suppression
Mange
complete blood count, 198
test, 228-229, 326-327, 494
defined, 495
discussing with clients, 199, 200
Lower urinary tract disease, 188-190
demodectic (demodex)
exploratory/laproscopic surgery, 200
complications, 189
complications, 269
gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT),
diagnosis, 189
defined, 490
199
discussing with clients, 189
diagnosis, 269
radiology, 200, 200f
etiology, 188
discussing with clients, 269
total protein/albumin, 199
forms of disease, 188
etiology, 268, 269f
ultrasound, 200, 201f
history points, 189
history points, 268
hepatic lipidosis, 205-206, 205f
hyperkalemia, 190
observations on initial assessment,
complications, 205
physical examination, 189
268-269
diagnosis, 205
prevention, 190
prevention, 269
discussing with clients, 205
signalment, 189
signalment, 268
etiology, 205, 205f
treatment, 189-190
treatment, 269
history points, 205
Lubricants, 124
sarcoptic (scabies)
observations on initial assessment,
Lungs. See Respiration; Respiratory sys-
complications, 270
205
tem
diagnosis, 270
prevention, 205
anatomy, 129, 130f
discussing with clients, 270
signalment, 205
sounds, 55
etiology, 269, 269f
treatment, 205
Lyme disease vaccine, 8
history points, 269
Index
523
 observations on initial assessment, 
Metacarpal artery pulse, 41, 42f
MS (musculoskeletal system)
269
Metaldehyde toxicity, 404, 495
abbreviation, 4
signalment, 269
Metaphysis, 63, 65f, 495
Mucocutaneous junctions, 251, 495
treatment, 270
Metarubricytes, 297, 297f, 298, 495
Mucomyst, 399
Mannitol, 451
Metastasis, 86
Mucopurulent (pus) discharge, 132
Mask, for dental prophylaxis (cleaning),
Metastasis protocol/screen, 241, 246, 495
Mucosa, 103
94,95f
Methimazole, 221
Mucous membrane
Mass/tumor, of respiratory system, 130,
Methoxyhemoglobin, 398, 399, 495
bruising, 44, 44f, 52
131
4-methylpyrazole, 186-187, 401
capillary refill time (CRT), 43, 43f,
Mastectomy, 246, 247f, 495
Metoclopramide, 392
52-53, 53f, 427
Mastitis
Metronidazole, 384
color, 43, 52, 52f, 130, 132-133, 427,
assessment, 241
Microhematocrit tube, 294
435-436, 436t, 443
complications, 245
Midozolam, 424
defined,495
diagnosis, 245
Milliamperage seconds (MaS), 365, 495
MM abbreviation for, 4
discussing with clients, 245
Mineralocorticoid, 223
physical examination, 52-53,52f, 53f
etiology, 244
Minimal clinical database, 437, 439, 440,
triage examination, 30-second, 43-44,
history points, 244
443, 495
43f, 44f
observations on initial assessment, 244,
Mites
Murmur, 54-55, 91, 154, 495
244f
demodectic mange, 268-269, 269f
Muscle atrophy
prevention, 245
ear, 288-289
in arthritis, 77
signalment, 244
complications, 288
disuse, 77
treatment, 245
diagnosis, 289
in OCD,85
Maxillary sinus, 98
discussing with clients, 288
Muscle spasm/rigidity, in reproductive
Medetomidine, 424
etiology, 288
disease, 241
Medial (directional term), 3, 6f, 495
history points, 288
Muscle weakness, in adrenal disease, 226
Median plane, 3, 495
 obser vations on initial assessment,
Musculoskeletal system. See also Skeletal
Mediastinum, 131, 372, 495
288
 system
Medical records, 39-40, 46, 366
treatment, 289
 in hypoadrenocorticism, 226
Medications. See also Pharmacology
sarcoptic mange, 269-270, 270f
 MS abbreviation for, 4
gastrointestinal signs, 106
Mitral insufficiency, 150f, 162, 167-169,
 physical examination, 55, 56f
history of effectiveness, 70
168f
Muzzle, 29
history of exposure, 35-36, 106, 197,
blood flow, 155f
Mycoplasma (formerly hemobartonella),
397
complications, 168
299, 303f, 495
liver disease and, 197, 201, 202
defined, 495
Myelogram, 368, 371f, 495
safe handling of, 25
diagnosis, 168
Myoglobin, 338, 495
Medullary canal, 63, 65f, 495
etiology, 167, 168f
Myoglobinuria, 338, 495
Megacolon, 123, 495
history points, 167-168
Megaesophagus, 106, 106f, 218, 495
observations on initial assessment, 168
Naproxen, 385
Megakaryocyte, 308,495
prevention, 169
Nasal discharge
Melanoma,275
signalment, 167
dental disease and, 89, 90
Melena, 197, 495
treatment, 168-169
physical examination, 57-58, 58f
Meloxicam, 78, 95, 385
Mitral regurgitation, 89, 91
 respiratory disease and, 132
Memory cells, 308
Mitral valve anatomy, 147, 148f-151f
type of discharge, 132
Menisci, 66, 66f, 495
MM (mucous membrane) abbreviation, 4
Neck and head extension, 132, 133f, 154
Mentation
Modified transudate, 195
Neck ventroflexion, 177, 323f, 501
abbreviations for, 4
Molars, 87-88, 87f, 88t
Necrosis, 201, 495
defined, 40, 495
Monocytes
Needles, disposal of, 25-26
descriptors for, 51
appearance, 304f, 305f, 307
Negative feedback 1oop, 223, 224f, 495
in diabetes mellitus, 213
defined, 495
Neonatal care, 238, 238f
in hypoadrenocorticism, 226
description, 301, 465
 Neoplasia
in liver disease, 201
function, 307
adrenal cortex, 224, 225f, 229, 230,
physical examination, 51
normal values, 307
231
in renal disease, 180, 185
Monocytosis, 307, 495
adrenal medulla, 225, 230, 232
in shock,435,436
Morphine, 424
bone-osteosarcoma, 86
triage examination, 40, 40f
Motility modifiers, 124
defined, 495
Mesentery
Mouth
hyperthermia and, 44
anatomy, 104,105f
dental anatomy, 87-88, 88f, 88t
liver, 195, 195f
defined, 495
function in digestion, 87, 103
mammary tumors, 245-246, 247f
 Metabolic disease
halitosis, 58, 89, 90
ocular, 281
EKG, effect on, 358
physical examination, 58-59, 59f
pancreatic, 207, 209
EKG, indication for, 360
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), 138
pituitary gland, 217
524
Index
Neoplasia (continued)
Obstruction of vessels, 435, 496
Orthopedic cases
renal, 175, 177
Obstructive shock, 435, 496
assessment, 70-72, 71f, 72f, 73f
schistocytes in, 299, 302f
OCD. See Osteochondritis dissecans
client discussions
thyroid gland, 217
(OCD)
arthritis, 79
Neoplastic, 495
Ocular diseases
blood work, necessity of, 71
Nephron, 173, 174f, 176f, 495
assessment, 275-276, 275f, 276f
bone marrow aspirate, 72
Nephrotic loops, 173, 175f, 176f, 494,
cataracts, 213, 213f, 273, 274f
cranial cruciate ligament rupture, 82
500
cherry eye (protruding third eyelid),
fracture, 74-75
 Neurologic behavior
277-278, 277f
joint tap, necessity of, 72
in diabetes mellitus, 213, 214f
client discussions
osteochondritis dissecans, 85
history of, 37
clinical diagnostics, 276
osteosarcoma, 86
in renal disease, 185
conjunctivitis, 279
panosteitis, 80
Neurologic system
corneal ulceration, 281
patellar luxation, 84
disease
entropion, 284
diagnostics, 70-72, 73f
 constipation/obstipation, 123
glaucoma, 283
diseases
liver disease and, 196, 197, 201
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 280
arthritis, 75-79, 77f
physical examination, 55-56, 56f
third eyelid elevation, 278
bone neoplasia-osteosarcoma, 86
 Neuromuscular changes, in thyroid
uveitis, 282
cranial cruciate ligament rupture,
disease, 219
conjunctivitis, 275f, 278-279, 278f
80-82, 81f
Neuter. See Orchidectomy/castration
corneal injury, 280-281
elbow dysplasia, 76
Neutropenia, 306, 496
entropion,275,275f,284-285
fractures, 72-75, 73f, 74f, 76f
Neutrophilia, 306, 496
glaucoma, 273,282-284,283f
osteochondritis dissecans, 84-86, 84f
 Neutrophils
history, 274-275
panosteitis, 79-80, 80f
appearance, 303f, 304f, 306
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), 219,
patellar luxation, 82-84, 83f
bands, 301, 304f, 306-307, 465
220f, 279-280
history in, 67-70
description, 301, 465
uveitis, 275, 281-282, 281f
radiology, 366-367, 367f, 368f
functions, 306
Ocular reflexes, 428
OS (left eye), 6
left shift, 307
OD (right eye), 6
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health
neutropenia, 306, 496
OFA hip radiographs, 78
Administration Requirements)
neutrophilia, 306, 496
OHE. See Ovariohysterectomy (OHE)
handbook, 26, 496
normal valves, 306
Omnivores, 87, 496
Os penis, 235, 496
New methylene blue, 298
Onchyectomy
 Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)
Nitroglycerine, 160, 445
defined, 15,496
causes, 84-85
Noise, respiratory, 132, 154, 445
discussing with client after surgery, 21
complications, 85
 Nonarticular bone surface, 63
discussing with client before surgery,
defined,69,496
Non-rebreathing circuit, 420
21
diagnosis, 85
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
procedure, 19-21, 20f
discussing with clients, 85
(NSAIDs), 385-386
Oncotic pressure, 311
history points, 85
for arthritis, 78
Onion toxicosis, 401-402, 401f
joints affected, 85
contraindications, 385, 385f
Op'DDD, 232
observations in initial assessment, 85
defined, 496
Open fracture, 67, 496
overview, 84, 84f
drug interactions, 386
Open mouth breathing, 40, 41f
signalment, 85
form of drug, 385
Opioids, 423, 424, 496
treatment, 85-86
kidney toxicity, 184, 385
Opisthotonus, 55, 406, 408f, 496
Osteomyelitis, 496
liver disease and, 197
Optic nerve, 273, 274f, 496
Osteosarcoma, 86, 496
route of administration, 385
Oral cavity anatomy
Otitis
side effects, 385
mouth, 87
assessment, initial, 286, 286f
Nose, physical examination of, 57-58, 58f
teeth, 87-88, 88f, 88t
defined, 285, 496
 Nothing per os (NPO)
Oral mass, 92f
ear mites, 288-289
defined, 496
Oral ulceration, in renal disease, 180, 184
complications, 288
in pancreatitis, 211
 Orchidectomy/castration
diagnosis, 289
Nucleated red blood cell (NRBC), 297,
canine neuter, 18-19, 18f
discussing with clients, 288
297f, 298
defined, 15, 496
etiology, 288
Nystagmus, 57, 186, 286, 287, 400, 496
discussing with client after surgery, 19
history points, 288
discussing with client before surgery,
observations on initial assessment,
Obesity
19
288
pancreatitis and, 208
feline neuter, 19, 20f
treatment, 289
in thyroid disease, 218, 222
procedures, 18-19, 18f
history, 285-286
Objective statement (O), 46, 51
for prostatic disease, 248
infection, bacterial and fungal, 287-288
Oblique fracture, 67, 68f
Organophosphate/carbamate toxicosis,
complications, 287
 Obstipation. See Constipation/obstipation
404-405, 496
diagnosis, 287
Index
525
discussing with clients, 288
history, 207-208
history points, 82
etiology, 287
overview, 207
observations on initial assessment,
history points, 287
pancreatitis, 207-212
82-83
 observations on initial assessment,
function, 103, 330
overview, 82
287
Pancreatic adenoma/adenocarcinoma,
 prevention, 84
prevention,288
207, 496
signalment, 82
signalment, 287
Pancreatic duct, 103, 207, 496
treatment, 83
in thyroid disease, 218, 219, 219f
 Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity, 496
Pathologic fracture, 86, 497
treatment, 287-288
Pancreatitis, 207-212
PD (polydipsia) abbreviation, 4
Otitis externa, 285, 287-288, 496
algorithm, 333,468
PDH (pituitar y-dependent hyperadreno-
Otitis interna, 287, 496
amylase in, 313-314
corticism), 224, 225f, 229, 230
Otitis media, 287, 496
assessment, 209-210
 Pendulous abdomen, in hyperadreno-
Otodectes cynotis, 288. See also Ear mites
complications, 211
corticism, 227, 227f, 231
OU (both eyes), 6
defined, 496
Penicillins, 381-382
Ova,235,496
diagnostics, 211
Penis
Ovaries, 235, 236f
discussing with clients, 211
anatomy, 235
Ovariohysterectomy (OHE)
etiology, 210
entrapment, 61f
defined, 15,496
history, 207-208, 210-211
 physical examination, 60, 61f
discussing with client after surgery, 18
observations on initial assessment, 211
PennHIP, 78
discussing with client before surgery,
overview, 207, 210
Pentastarch, 415, 416
18
prevention, 212
 Perfusion
procedure, 15-16, 16f-17f
signalment, 210
CRT and, 53
Overbite, 91f, 496
treatment, 211-212
defined, 497
Ovulation, 236
 Panleukopenia. See Feline panleukopenia
Pericardial effusion, 52, 153, 497
Oxidative injury, 401, 496
virus (FPV)
Pericardium, 147, 148f, 497
Oxygen administration/therapy
 Panosteitis
Periceutic treatments, 94-95, 97, 97f
in acetaminophen toxicosis, 399
complications, 79
Perineal urethrostomy, 189, 497
in heart block, 364
defined, 68, 79, 496
Periodontal disease
in Heinz body anemia, 402
diagnosis, 79, 80f
complications, 96
 in left-sided heart failure, 159
discussing with clients, 80
defined, 497
in organophosphate/carbamate, 405
history points, 79
diagnosis, 96-97, 97f
in premature ventricular contractions,
obser vations on initial assessment, 79
discussing with clients, 97
362
prevention, 79
etiology, 96
in shock, 438, 440, 443, 445,451
signalment, 79
history points, 96, 96f
Oxymorphone, 424
treatment, 79
observations on initial assessment, 92f,
 Panting, 40
96
P (pulse) abbreviation, 4
Paradoxical pulse, 52, 153,496
prevention, 98
Pacemaker of the heart, 353, 496
Parainfluenza vaccine, 8
signalment, 96
Packed cell volume (PCV), 293-295,
 Parasites. See Intestinal parasites; Mites
treatment, 97
294f, 295t, 296t, 437, 437t, 496
Parasympatholytic drugs, 364
Periodontal ligament, 96, 497
Pain
 Parathyroid gland, 221, 496
Periodontal probe, 96-97, 97f
abdominal, 108, 211
Parenteral, 411, 496
Periosteum, 63, 65f, 497
dental, 89, 90, 95, 106
Parotid salivary glands, 87, 496
Peripheral edema, 311, 497
Palpebral reflex, 419, 428, 496
Parvo virus (CPV)
Peristalsis, 103, 497
Pancreas
 complications, 121
Peritoneal lavage, 185, 497
anatomy, 104f, 207, 208f
diagnosis, 122, 351
Peritoneum, 193, 497
endocrine disease
discussing with clients, 8, 122
Peritonitis, 118, 126, 211, 242, 497
al gorithm, 469
etiology, 121
Petechiation, 197, 497
assessment, 213,213f, 214f
history points, 121
PH, urinary, 341-342
diabetes mellitus, 214-216
observations on initial assessment, 121
Phagocytosis, 497
diagnostics, 214
prevention, 122
 Pharmacological terminology, 5-6
history, 213
signalment, 121
Pharmacology, 379-395
overview, 212-213
symptoms/signs, 8, 121
antibiotics
exocrine disease
treatment, 122
bactericidal, 381
algorithm, 468
vaccine, 8, 122
bacteriostatic, 381
assessment, 209, 209t
 Patellar groove, 82, 84
cephalosporin family, 382
cancer, 207, 209
Patellar luxation
fluoroquinolone family, 382-383
client discussions, 210, 211, 212
complications, 83
metronidazole, 384
diagnostics, 209-210
diagnosis, 83
penicillin family, 381-382
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
discussing with clients, 84
tetracycline family, 383
(EPI), 207-210, 212
grades, 82, 83f
trimethoprim-sulfa family, 383-384
526
Index
Pharmacology (continued)
Photoreceptors, 273, 497
evaluating, 308
antiemetics
 Physical examination
normal values, 308
chlorpromazine, 391-392
abdomen, 55
 Pleura, 131
metoclopramide, 392
assessment, 60-61
Pleural effusion
antihistamines, 384-385
bruising of the gums, 52
chest tap for, 136, 137f, 138
anti-inflammatory medications
capillary refilltime (CRT), 52-53, 53f
defined, 497
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 387
cardiac system, 54-55, 54f, 55f
EKG, effect on, 360f
glucosamine, 387-388
dehydration, 53, 53f
in left-sided heart failure, 149, 151f
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
documentation of, 61-62
pathology, 131
medications (NSAIDs),
ears, 57, 58f
 Pleuritis
385-386
eyes, 56-57, 57f
defined, 497
steroidal medication, 386-387
genitourinary systems, 60, 60f, 61f
pathology, 131
tramadol, 388
history prior to, 34-38
Pneumonia
antiparasitic agents
lymph nodes, 59
aspiration, 106,422
fendbendazole, 389
mouth, 58-59, 59f
complications, 141
ivermectin/avermectin, 388
mucous membrane color, 52, 52f
course of disease, 141
praziquantel, 389
musculoskeletal system, 55, 56f
defined, 140-141, 497
pyrantel pamoate, 388-389
neurologic system, 55-56, 56f
diagnosis, 141
sulfadimethoxine, 389-390
nose, 57-58, 58f
discussing with clients, 141, 142
tylosin tartrate, 390
plan, 61
history points, 141
contraindications, 381
prognosis, 61
 observations on initial assessment, 141
dosing calculation, 380
pulse, 52
pathology, 130
drug deliver systems, 379
respiration, 52,55, 55f
prevention, 141
intramuscular route, 379
signs of trouble, 462t
signalment, 141
intravenous route, 379
skin (integument), 59-60, 59f, 60f
treatment, 141
subcutaneous route, 379
 SOAP (subjective, objective, assess-
 Pneumothorax
drug interactions, 381
ment, plan) method, 46, 51, 62
complications, 145
emergency drugs
temperature, 52
defined, 497
atropine,393
tenets of stability, 52-60
diagnosis, 145, 145f
epinephrine,393-394
terminology, 4
discussing with clients, 146
furosemide,392
triage examination, 30-second, 39-48
etiology, 145
expiration date, 381
troubling findings, 48t
history points, 145
 gastrointestinal drugs
Piloerection, 430, 497
overview,145
decreased acid producers, 390-391
Pinch reflex, 428
pathology, 131
protectants, 391
 Pinna
physical examination, 145
sucrafate, 391
anatomy, 285,285f
prevention, 146
levothyroxine sodium/L-thyroxine
defined, 491,497
signalment, 145
sodium, 394
jaundiced, 43
treatment, 146
phenobarbital, 394-395
 physical examination, 57
 PO (per os-by mouth), 6
responsibilities of medical team,
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
 Poison. See also Toxins
380-381
(PDH), 224, 225f, 229, 230, 497
ASPCA-University of Illinois Poison
route of administration, 381
Pituitary gland
Control hotline, 398
side effects, 381
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
common poisons, 398-408
Pharynx,129,497
release, 223, 224, 224f, 225f
gastrointestinal signs, 106
Phenobarbital
defined, 497
history of exposure, 36, 105-106, 197
monitoring therapeutic levels, 328-329
neoplasia, 217
liver disease and, 197
pharmacology, 394-395
PIVKA (proteins induced by vitamin K
seeking help for poisoned pet, 397-398
 Phenothiazines, 424, 497
antagonism ), 406, 498
 Polishing teeth, 94, 95f
 Phenylbutazone, 385
Plan (P), 46
Pollakiuria, 497
Pheochromocytoma, 225, 230, 497
 Plantigrade gait
Polychromasia, 299, 302f, 403f, 497
Phosphate binders, 185, 188
defined, 497
 Polychromatophilic red blood cell, 297,
Phosphorus
in diabetes mellitus, 213, 214f
298, 497
abnormalities, 322
Plants, toxic, 36, 106
Polydipsia (PD)
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 322
Plaque,88,497
abbreviation for, 4
discussing with clients, 322
Plasma
defined, 36,497
function, 322
color, 295, 310t
history of, 36-37
location of production, 322
 IV administration, 415, 416
in hyperadrenocorticism, 226, 231
in renal disease, 176
Platelet plug, 308
in hyperthyroidism, 221
symptoms associated with increases in,
 Platelets
in liver disease, 196-197
322
appearance, 305f
urine specific gravity, 338
Photophobia, 280, 497
defined, 497
Polyphagia, 217, 497
Index
527
 Polyuria (PU)
discussing with clients, 362
PU (polyuria) abbreviation, 4
abbreviation for, 4
EKG pattern, 361, 362f
Puberty, 235-236
defined, 36,497
etiology, 361
Pulmonary artery, 147, 148f-151f
history of, 36-37
history points, 361
Pulmonary congestion, 130, 411
in hyperadrenocorticism, 226, 231
observations on initial assessment, 361
Pulmonary edema, 130, 149, 150f, 154,
in hyperthyroidism, 221
prevention, 362
311, 410, 411, 445, 498
in liver disease, 196-197
signalment, 361
Pulmonic valve, 147, 148f-151f, 154, 498
urine specific gravity, 338
treatment, 362
Pulse
 Pop-off valve, 421
Premolars, 87-88, 87f, 88t
axillary artery, 41, 42f
Portal vein, 193, 194f, 497
Preprandial, 200, 498
evaluating, 42
Porto-caval shunt, 497
PRN (as needed), 5
femoral artery, 41, 41f
Porto-systemic shunt (PSS)
Probe, dental, 94, 95f,96-97,97f
hyperdynamic, 42, 52
complications, 203
 Problem oriented medical record, 39-40
interdigital, 41, 42f
diagnosis, 204
Progesterone, 235, 498
lack of, 153
discussing with clients, 204
Progressive disease, 5
 metacarpal artery, 41, 42f
etiology, 203, 204f
Prophylaxis, defined, 498
normal, 52
history points, 203
Propofol, 424
P abbreviation for, 4
 observations on initial assessment,
 Prostate disease
paradoxical, 52, 153
203
complications, 247
physical examination, 52
overview,195
diagnosis, 247, 247f
quality, 42, 152-153, 159, 427, 443
prevention, 204
discussing with clients, 248
rate, 42, 152,159
signalment, 203
etiology, 246
in shock, 435,436,436t, 443
treatment, 204
history points, 246
triage examination, 30-second, 41-42,
Posterior chamber, 273, 274f, 497
observations on initial assessment, 247
41f, 42f
Postparturient hypocalcemia, 497. See
signalment, 246
weak, 152
also Eclampsia
treatment, 248
Pulse deficit, 52, 55, 152-153, 358, 361,
Postprandial, 200, 497
 Prostate gland 
435, 498
Potassium
anatomy, 235
Pulse oximetry
abnormalities, 322-323
defined, 498
in cardiovascular disease, 157-158, 160
aldosterone effect on levels of, 223
Prosthesis
defined, 498
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 323-324
cranial cruciate ligament repair, 81
discussing with clients, 158
discussing with clients, 323
defined, 498
 monitoring in anesthesia, 428
function, 322
Protective gear
Pupillary light response (PLR), 57, 273,
in gastrointestinal disease, 323
for dental prophylaxis (cleaning), 94,
498
in hypoadrenocorticism, 230, 322-323
95f
Pupils
location of production, 322
radiology, 365
in shock, 436, 436t
in renal disease, 177, 178f, 323
Protein
size, 57, 57f
supplementation, 188
total
 Purkinje fibers (Bundle of His), 354,
symptoms associated with increases in,
abnormalities,295, 296t,324
355f, 498
323
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 324-325
Purple-topped tube, 293, 294f
Potassium bromide, monitoring
discussing with clients, 325
 Purulence, defined, 498
therapeutic levels, 328-329
etiology of elevation, 324
Pustules, 250, 251f, 498
Praziquantel, 389
function, 324
P wave, 353-354, 355f, 357, 358, 498
 Preanesthetic medications
in liver disease, 199
Pyelonephritis, 175, 498
analgesics, 424
location of production, 324
Pyloric sphincter, 103
anticholinergic drugs, 423 -424
in shock,437, 437t
Pylorus, 126, 127f
tranquilizers, 424
symptoms associated with changes,
Pyometra
Prednisone, 226, 232, 268
324
complications, 242
Pregnancy
urinary, 340-341
defined, 15, 498
diagnosis with ultrasound, 372
Protein-losing enteropathy, 311, 498
diagnosis, 242-243, 242f
discussing with clients, 237
Protein-losing nephropathy, 311, 498
discussing with clients, 243
labor, 237-238
 Proteins induced by vitamin K
etiology, 242
length, 237
antagonism (PIVKA), 406, 498
history points, 242
wellness
Proteinuria, 176-177, 311, 341,498
medical history and, 240, 241
newborn interval, 240,240f
Protruding third eyelid. See Cherry eye
observations on initial assessment,
prebreeding, 238-239
 Proximal (directional term), 3, 6f, 498
242
pregnancy interval, 239, 239f
Proximal convoluted tubules, 173, 175f,
prevention, 243
Premature ventricular contraction (PVC),
176f, 498
signalment, 242
126, 357-358, 358f, 361-362, 498
Pruritic, 498
treatment, 243
complications, 361
Pruritus, 60, 249, 250, 250f, 251, 498
Pyrantel pamoate, 388-389
diagnostics, 361-362, 362f
Pseudoarthrosis, 78, 498
Pyuria, 342, 498
528
Index
Q abbreviation (every), 5
Rat poison. See Rodenticide
problems in thyroid disease, 218, 222
QAR (quiet, alert, and responsive), 4, 51
Rectal disease, 123
reproductive cycle, 235-236
QID (four times per day), 5
Rectal palpation, for prostatic disease,
wellness for pregnant animals
QRS complex, 355, 355f, 357-359, 357f,
247
newborn interval, 240, 240f
359f, 498
Red blood cell casts, 343
prebreeding, 238-239
Questions
Red blood cell count
pregnancy interval,239,239f
from clients, 35
changes in n umber, 298
Reproductive cycle, 235-236
history, obtaining, 33-38
in renal disease, 181
 Respiration
history in orthopedic cases, 69-70
Red blood cells
abdominal, 132, 154
Q wave, 354, 355f
agglutination, 293, 294f, 298, 298f, 487
artificial, 456
evaluation
depth, 132
 R (respiration) abbreviation, 4
central pallor, 298
increase effort in cardiac disease, 151,
Rabies
echinocytes, 299, 302f
152f, 154
canine vaccine, 8
flowchart, 300, 464
lung sounds, 55, 154
feline vaccine, 9, 13t
Heinz bodies, 299, 303f, 492
physical examination, 52, 55, 55f
Rabies pole, 29
Howell-Jowell bodies, 298, 299,
R abbreviation for, 4
Radio-dense, defined, 498
303f, 493
rate, 40, 52, 129, 132, 153-154,427,
Radiography, 365-371
hypochromasia, 298-299, 302f
498
in adrenal disease, 228, 326
normal blood films, 298
shallow, 154
in cardiac disease, 156, 157f
polychromasia, 299, 302f
in shock, 435, 436, 436t
in cardiovascular disease, 156, 157f
schistocytes, 299, 302f
 Respiratory system, 129-146
dental, 93,94, 94f, 96, 97f, 100, 102
spherocytes, 299, 303f
anatomy, 129,130f
discussing with clients, 93, 136, 370
function, 296
assessment, initial, 132-133, 133f, 133t
 gastrointestinal system
life cycle, 296-298, 297f
auscultation, 133, 134f, 135f, 445
barium swallow, 117
packed, 416
breathing pattern, 132, 133f
in constipation, 124
 roleaux formation, 298, 298f
gum color and capillary refill time,
in inflammatory bowel disease, 125
in urine sediment, 342-343
132-133
plain film, 109, 109f, 117, 117f,
Red-topped tube, 309
respiratory rate, 132
118f
Referred sounds, 55, 133
triage, 133t
upper GI series, 109, 110f,368, 371f
Refractometer, 177-178, 498
client discussions
limitations of, 368, 370, 371
Regenerative anemia, 298, 299
blood and urine evaluation, need for,
in liver disease, 200, 200f
Regurgitation, 106, 106f, 218, 428
135
in medical record, 366
Renal cortex, 173, 174f, 498
canine distemper virus (CDV), 144
in pancreatic disease, 210
Renal disease. See Kidney disease
chest tap, 138
pregnancy detection, 239, 239f
Renal glomeruli, 173, 175f, 176f, 498
collapsing trachea, 139
in prostatic disease, 247
Renal medulla, 173, 174f, 498
feline asthma, 140
in renal disease, 181, 182, 182f, 183f
Renal pelvis, 173, 174f
kennel cough, 145
in reproductive disease, 241, 242, 242f,
Renin, 174 
MRI/CRT scan, 138
246
Renin-angiotensin system, 173, 174, 177f,
pneumonia, bacterial, 141
respiratory system, 135-136, 136f, 137f
498
pneumonia, fungal, 142
discussing with clients, 136
Renolithiasis, 181, 182f, 498
pneumothorax, 146
 in feline asthma, 140
Reproduction, 235-248
radiography, 136
inspiratory/expiratory study, 135
assessment of disease, 241, 241t, 242f
tracheoscopy/bronchoscopy, 138
 metastatic chest protocol, 135
 client discussions
transtracheal wash, 138
in rodenticide intoxication, 406
eclampsia, 244
diagnostics, 133-138
safety, 365-366
mammary tumors, 246
blood work, 133, 135
skeletal system, 64f-65f, 68f-71f, 71,
mastitis, 245
chest tap, 136, 137f, 138
73f-74f, 76f-77f, 80f, 84f
prostate disease, 248
computeraxial tomography (CAT)
technology, 365, 366f
pyometra, 243
scan, 138
types of studies, 366-371
diagnostics, 241
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
abdominal studies, 367, 369f, 370f
 diseases of reproductive tract
138
contrast studies, 368, 371f
eclampsia, 243-244, 244f
radiography, 135-136, 136f, 137f
myelogram, 368, 371f
mammary tumors, 245-246, 247f
tracheoscopy/bronchosopy, 138
orthopedic films, 366-367, 367f,
mastitis, 244-245, 244f
transtracheal wash, 138
368f
prostate disease, 246-248, 247f
ultrasound, 136
soft tissue studies, 367, 369f, 370f
pyometra,242-243,242f
diseases/disorders, 138-146
thoracic (chest) studies, 367, 369f
female reproductive tract, 235, 236f
blastomycosis, 142-143
upper GI studies, 109, 110f,368,
history of disease, 240-241
canine distemper virus (CDV),
371f
 male reproductive tract, 235, 236f
143-144
Ranitidine, 390
neonatal care, 238
coccidiomycosis (valley fever),
Rasps, 55, 133
pregnancy and labor, 237-238
141-142
Index
529
collapsing trachea, 138-139
sigmalment, 270
Schistocytes, 299, 302f, 499
feline asthma, 139-140
treatment, 271
Sclera, 275, 499
kennel cough-tracheobronchitis,
Robert Jones Bandage, 73, 74f
Seruffing the neck, 29, 29f
144-145
Rod cells, 273, 498
Seborrhea,250,252f,499
pneumonia, 140-141
Rodenticide, 397, 405-406
Seborrhea oleosa, 250, 252f, 499
pneumothorax, 145-146, 145f
Roleaux formation, 298, 298f, 498
Seborrhea sicca, 250, 252f, 499
history of disease, 36, 131-132
Root canal, 100-102, 101f, 102f
Sedatives, 445
cough,131
Roundworms, 112-113, 113f
Seizures
duration of illness, 131
diagnosis, 113, 113f
canine distemper virus (CDV), 144
exercise intolerance, 131-132
etiology, 113
in heatstroke, 446
 heartworm prevention, 132
history points, 113
physical examination, 55, 56f
nasal discharge, 132
life cycle, 112-113
Self, recognition of, 306
sneezing, 132
observations on initial assessment, 113
Sepsis, 107, 184, 207, 242, 499
vaccination status, 132
prevention, 113
Septic shock
pathology, 130-131
treatment, 113
diagnostics, 439, 441t
mass/tumor, 130, 131
zoonotic disease, 113
etiology, 439
 pleural effusion, 131
R-R' interval, 359, 360f
flowchart, 442, 481
pleuritis, 131
Rubriblast, 297, 499
history points, 439
pneumonia, 130
Rubricyte, 297, 499
observations on initial assessment, 439
pneumothorax, 131
Rubs, 133
signalment, 439
 pulmonary edema/congestion, 130
R wave, 354, 355f
treatment, 439-441
tracheal/bronchiole narrowing,
Serosanguineous, defined, 499
130-131
S (sneezing) abbreviation, 4
Serum color, 295, 310t
triage examination, 30-second, 40-41,
Safety
Serum-separator tube, 309
41f
approaching and handling an animal,
Sesamoids, 63, 64f
Restraint
27-28, 27f
defined, 499
canine methods, 28-30, 29f
cat behavior under stress, 28
patella, 82-84, 83f
removing an animal from a kennel,
dog behavior under stress, 27-28
Sevoflurane, 424
28
OSHA (Occupational Safety and
SGOT. See Aspartate aminotransferase
restraint devices, 29
Health Administration
(AST or SGOT)
side restraint, 28
Requirements) handbook, 26
SGPT. See Alanine aminotransferase
vice grip restraint, 28, 29f
personal, 25-26
(ALT or SGPT)
discussing and rationalizing with
bite wounds, 26
Shedding, in thyroid disease, 218, 221,
clients, 31-32
blood contact, 26
222
feline methods, 29-31, 29f-32f
overview, 25-26
Shift-Sherrington syndrome, 45, 45f, 499
anesthetic chamber, 31, 32f
pet, 26-27
Shock,435-446
cat bag, 30, 32f
identification of animal, 27
acute liver disease and, 201
for jugular venipuncture, 30, 30f, 31f
infectious diseases, 26-27
acute renal disease and, 184
restraint devices, 30-31, 32f
restraint in lobby, 26
anaphylactic shock
scruffing the neck, 29, 29f
 restraining and handling animals,
diagnostics, 441, 441t
stretching and scruffing, 29-30, 30f
28-32,29f-32f
etiology, 441
towel/blanket technique, 30, 31f
 steps for emergency situation, 25
flowchart, 444, 482
in the lobby, 26
Saliva, 87
history points, 441
overview, 28
Salivary glands, 87, 103, 499
 obser vations on initial assessment,
Retained deciduous teeth, 91f, 98, 98f, 99
SAM-E (L-adenosyl methionine), 203
441
Retina, 273, 274f, 498
Sanguineous, defined, 499
signalment, 441
 Rheumatoid arthritis, 70
Sarcoptic mange (scabies)
treatment, 441, 443
 Rhinotracheitis. See Feline viral rhinotra-
complications, 270
assessment of patient, 435-436, 436t
cheitis (FVR)
diagnosis, 270
body temperature, 435, 436t
Right atrioventricular valve (tricuspid),
discussing with clients, 270
capillary refill time, 436, 436t
147, 148f-151f, 498
etiology,269, 269f
dehydration, 436
Right-sided heart failure. See Heart
history points, 269
mentation, 435, 436
disease, right-sided heart failure
observations on initial assessment, 269
mucous membrane color, 435-436,
Ringworm (dermatomycosis), 270-271
signalment, 269
436t
complications, 271
treatment, 270
pulse, 435, 436, 436t
diagnosis, 271
Scaling teeth, 94
pupils, 436, 436t
discussing with clients, 271
Scatter radiation, 365, 499
respiration, 435,436, 436t
etiology, 270
Scavenger systems, 420
cardiogenic shock
history points, 270
Schiotz tonometry, 276, 499
diagnostics, 445, 445t
observations on initial assessment, 270
Schirmer tear test, 219, 276, 278, 279,
etiology, 443
prevention, 271
280,283,499
flowchart, 447,483
530
Index
Shock (continued)
osteochondritis dissecans, 84-86, 84f
history of disease, 249-250
history points, 443
panosteitis, 79-80, 80f
diet, 250
 obser vations on initial assessment,
patellar luxation, 82-84, 83f
ectoparasites, 249
443, 443f, 445
fracture nomenclature, 66-67, 68f, 69f
inside or outside pet, 249
signalment, 443
orthopedic cases
medication history, 249
treatment, 445-446
assessment, 70-72, 71f, 72f, 73f
onset of signs, 249
clinical diagnostic changes suggesting,
diagnostics, 70-72, 73f
other household pets, 250
479t
history in, 67-70
 previous treatments, 249
crystalloid fluid therapy, 413-414, 415f
Skeleton, canine, 67f
seasonality, 249
diagnostics, 436-437, 437t
Skin (integument), 249-271
systemic disease, 250
discussing with clients, 451
assessment, 250-252, 250f-252f
weight, 250
distributive shock (massive vasodilata-
alopecia, 250, 251f
overview,249
tion), 435, 490
erythema,250,250f
physical examination, 59-60, 59f, 60f
emergency medications, 438, 438t
excoriation, 250, 251f
Skin biopsy
history, obtaining, 435
hyperpigmentation, 250, 251f
discussing with clients, 267
hypovolemic shock
pruritus, 250, 250f
procedure, 265
diagnostics, 438, 439t
pustules, 250, 251f
Skin cytology
etiology, 438
seborrhea, 250, 252f
direct smear, 260, 262f-263f
fowchart, 440, 480
 client discussions
discussing with clients, 263
history points, 438
allergies, 268
impression smear, 260, 264f
 observations on initial assessment,
blood work, 267
scotch tape preparation, 260,
438
demodectic mange, 269 
260f-262f
signalment, 438
fungal culture, 255
swap method, 261, 264f-265f
treatment, 438-439
ringworm, 271
usefulness of, 255
physical changes in, 478t
sarcoptic mange, 270
Skin scraping
septic shock
skin biopsy, 267
discussing with clients, 254
diagnostics, 439, 441t
skin scraping, 254
flowchart of microscopic examination,
etiology, 439
conditions
256f
flowchart, 442, 481
hair loss, 59, 59f, 250, 251f
procedure, 252-253, 252f, 253f, 254f
history points, 439
in hyperadrenocorticism,227,227f
Skin turgor, 44-45, 44f, 53
 observations on initial assessment,
in hypothyroidism, 222
Skull, feline, 89f
439
inflammation, 59-60, 60f
Small bowel diarrhea, 107, 107t
signalment,439
pruritus, 60, 250, 250f
Small intestine
treatment, 439-441
safe handling of animals with, 27
anatomy, 103,105f
Short bones, 63, 64f
diagnostics, 252-267
disease (see Gastrointestinal system,
Shoulder OCD, 84f, 85
black light, 253, 255
disease)
Shunts, 195. See also Porto-systemic
blood allergy testing, 265-266
 Snail and slug bait. See Metaldehyde
shunt (PSS)
chemistry, 266
toxicity
Sick sinus syndrome, 360
fine-needle aspirate, 258f, 259f, 261,
Snake bites, 299
SID (once per day), 5
263,265f-266f
Sneezing
Side effects, drug, 381
fungal culture, 254-255, 254f-255f,
abbreviation for, 4
Side restraint, 28
257f
dental disease and, 89, 90
Signalment, 33, 34f, 46, 51,499
skin allergy testing, 265
history of, 36, 132
Sino-atrial node (S-A node), 353, 355f,
skin biopsy, 265
 respiratory disease and, 132
360, 499
skin cytology, 255, 260-261,
safe handling of animals with, 27
Sinus arrhythmia, 359
260f-262f
 SOAP (subjective, objective, assessment,
Sinusitis, 89
skin scrapings, 252-254, 252f, 253f,
plan) method, 46, 51, 62, 499
Skeletal alkaline phosphatase. See
254f, 256f
Sodium
Alkaline phosphatase (SALP or
diseases, 266-271
aldosterone effect on levels of, 223
ALP)
allergies, 267-268
hypoadrenocorticism, 230
Skeletal system
demodecosis (demodectic mange),
low-salt diet, 163, 165, 169, 190
canine skeleton, 67f
268-269, 269
Spastic entropion, 284, 499
classification of elements, 63-66,
dermatomycosis (ringworm),
Spay. See Ovariohysterectomy (OHE)
64f-66f
270-271
Specific gravity, urine, 177-178, 181, 338,
diseases
scabies (sarcoptic mange), 269-270,
471, 501
arthritis, 75-79, 77f
270f
Sperm, 235
bone neoplasia-osteosarcoma, 86
flowcharts for microscopic examination
Spherocytes, 299, 499
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture,
macroconidia/fungal spores, 257f
Spiral fracture, 67, 69f
80-82, 81f
malazezzia, 258f
Splenic disease, schistocytes in, 299,
elbow dysplasia, 76
skin scrapping, 256f
302f
fractures, 72-75, 73f, 74f, 76f
white blood cells, 259f
Splint, 73-74, 74f
Index
531
Spontaneous ovulators, 236, 499
gastrointestinal foreign body, 119, 119f,
disease, 5
SQ (subcutaneous), 6
120f
history, 3-4
Squamous epithelial cells, 342, 343
incision site, monitoring, 15
pharmacological, 5-6
Stability
Surgical anesthesia, 419
administration routes, 6
algorithm of, 47f
Surgical joint tap, 71-72
dosing, 5, 379-380
tenets of, 52-60
Sutures, 65, 499
ear and eye, 5-6
 Status epilepticus, 446, 499
S wave, 355, 355f
physical exam, 4
Stenosis, 154, 499
Symmetrical flank alopecia, 218, 222,
Testicles, 60, 61f, 235, 236f
 Sternal recumbency, 40
227, 227f, 499
Tetracyclines, 383
Steroids, 386-387
Synarthrosis, 63, 65, 499
Theobromine, 399-400, 399t, 500
for allergies, 268
Synchondrosis, 65, 499
Theophylline, 383
anti-inflammatory doses, 386
Synovial fluid, 65, 66, 499
Thiamylal, 424
for collapsing trachea, 139
Synovial joints (diarthrosis), 65, 65f, 66,
Thiopental, 424
contraindications, 386-387
499
Third phalanx, 15, 500
drug interactions, 387
Synovial membrane, 65f, 66, 499
Thoracentesis, 136, 500
for feline asthma, 140
Syringes, disposal of, 25-26
Thoracic duct, 138
form of drugs, 386
 Systemic vascular resistance, 431
Thoracotomy, 118, 375, 500
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
Systole, 147, 148f, 499
Thrombocytopenia, 308, 500
(Cushing's disease), 224, 226
Thrombocytosis, 308, 500
immunosuppression, 386
T (temperature) abbreviation, 4
Thromboembolism, 153, 153f, 165, 166f,
for liver disease, 197
Table scraps, 105
500
routes of administration, 386
Tachycardia
Thyroglobulin autoantibodies, 220
for shock,386
from anticholinergics, 423
Thyroidectomy, 221, 500
side effects, 386
in cardiac disease,152,159
Thyroid gland, 217-222
Stifle OCD,85
defined, 500
anatomy, 217, 218f
 Stomach acid blockers, 202
EKG evaluation, 355, 357, 357f
assessment in thyroid disease
Stomach anatomy, 103, 104f
in hyperthyroidism, 219, 221
ears,219,219f
Stomach tube, 205
pulse evaluation, 42, 52
gland enlargement, 219, 219f
Stones, renal, 181, 182f, 188-190
in shock, 435,436t, 443
hair coat and appearance, 218
Stress
Tachypnea, 52, 132, 153-154, 500
heart rate, 219
cat behavior under stress, 28
Tachypnic, 500
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS),
dog behavior under stress, 27-28
Taenia, 500. See also Tapeworms
219, 220f
 Stress leukogram, 228
Tapeworms
 neuromuscular changes, 219
Stretching and scruffing, 29-30, 30f
complications, 115
client discussions
Stridor, 132, 154,499
diagnosis, 115, 116f
diagnostic testing, 220
 Struvite (magnesium ammonium
etiology, 115
hyperthyroidism, 221
 phosphate) crystals, 188
history points, 115
hypothyroidism, 222
Strychnine, 397, 406, 408
life cycle, 115
diagnostic testing of function, 220, 330,
Stump pyometra, 242, 499
observations on initial assessment, 115
335
Subcutaneous emphysema, 499
prevention, 115
diseases
 Subcutaneous fluid therapy, 409-410
treatment, 115
hyperthyroidism, 217-222, 330
in acute disease, 409
Tartar, 89, 90f, 500
hypothyroidism, 217-220, 222, 330
administration, 410, 411f 
Taurine deficiency, 164
enlargement, 219, 219f
calculation of fluid need, 410
Teeth
euthyroid sick condition, 220
in chronic disease, 409
anatomy, 87-88,88f
function, 217
contraindications, 409-410
cleaning (see Dental prophylaxis)
history of thyroid disease, 217-218
discussing with clients, 410
dental formulas, 87-88
age of anmimal, 217
in emergency conditions, 409
disorders (see Dental disease)
breed, 217-218
guidelines, 410f, 470t
eruption schedule, 88t
ear infections, 218
indications, 409
extraction, 95, 98, 98f, 100
energy level, 218
Subcutaneous route, 379
retained deciduous, 91f, 98, 98f, 99
facial expression, 218
Subjective statement (S), 46, 51
types and functions, 87
reproductive problems, 218
Sublingual salivary glands, 87, 499
Temperature
shedding, 218
Subluxation, 499
in dental disease, 91
vomiting or regurgitation, 218
Submandibular lymph nodes, 91
physical examination, 52
weight, 218
Submandibular salivary glands, 87, 499
in shock, 435, 436t
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 217,
Sucrafate, 391
T abbreviation for, 4
500
Sul fadimethoxine, 389-390
triage examination, 30-second, 44
Thyroxine, 217,220, 222,500
Supernatant, 338, 499
Tendonectomy, 15, 21-22, 500
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO),
Surgery
Terminology, 3-6
81
elective procedures, 15-23
directional, 3, 4f, 5f, 6f
TID (three times per day), 5
532
Index
TLI (trypsin-like immunoreactivity),
Travel, history of, 37, 70, 197
Uncinaria, 500. See also Hookworms
209-210, 330, 500
Triage, defined, 500
Underbite, 91f, 500
 Toad poisoning, 446
Triage examination, 30-second, 40-48
Upper G1 (barium series), 109, 110f, 368,
Tonometry, 276
capillary refil1 time (CRT), 43, 43f
371f, 500
Total protein
cardiovascular system, 41-42, 41f, 42f
Ureter, 173, 174f, 177f
abnormalities, 295, 296t, 324
conformation, 45, 45f
Urinalysis
diagnostic tests to evaluate, 324-325
dehydration, 44-45, 44f
in adrenal disease, 228, 230
discussing with clients, 325
eye injuries, 45, 46f
in cardiac disease, 156
etiology of elevation, 324
flowchart, 45, 47f
in cardiovascular disease, 156
function, 324
lacerations, 45, 46f
in dental disease, 93
in liver disease, 199
mentation, 40
in diabetes mellitus, 214
location of production, 324
mucous membrane bruising, 44, 44f
discussing with clients, 345
in shock, 437, 437t
mucous membrane color, 43, 43f
evaluating, 338-339
symptoms associated with changes, 324
respiratory system, 40-41, 41f
overview of evaluation, 344-349
Towel/blanket technique, 30, 31f
superficial injuries, 45
urine appearance, 338
Toxins, 397-408. See also specific toxins
temperature, 44
urine chemistry, 339-342
acute renal disease and, 184
troubling findings, 48t
urine color, 338
common, 398-408
Trichuris, 350f, 500. See also Whipworms
urine sediment, 342-344
acetaminophen, 398-399, 399t, 487
Tricuspid insufficiency, 162
urine specific gravity, 338
chocolate, 399-400, 399t
Tricuspid valve, 147. See also Right
flowchart for evaluating, 346, 472
ethylene glycol, 400-401
atrioventricular valve (tricuspid)
in prostatic disease, 247
 Heinz body anemia (Onion
Trigone, bladder, 173, 177f, 500
in renal disease, 181, 186, 190
toxicosis), 401-402, 401f
Trimethoprim-sulfa, 383-384
in reproductive disease, 241
ibuprofen, 402-403
Triple pelvic osteotomy, 78, 500
sample collection, 337
lead, 403-404, 403f
Triple phosphate crystals, 344
catheterization, 337
 metaldehyde, 404
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI),
cystocentesis, 337
organophosphate/carbamate, 404-405
209-210, 330, 500
free catch, 337
rodenticide (warfarin or coumadin),
Trypsinogen, 330
sample handling, 337-338
405-406
TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone), 217,
reffactometer, 338
strychnine, 406, 408
500
urinary chemical strip, 337
detoxification by the liver, 193-194
Tunic, 273, 500
urine sediment, 338
flowchart of treatment, 407, 475
T wave, 355, 355f, 500
Urinary bladder, 173, 174f, 177f
history of exposure, 36
Tylenol. See Acetaminophen
Urinary pH, 341-342, 341t, 342t
history questions, 397
Tylosin tartrate, 390
Urinary tract disease. See Lower urinary
in liver disease, 197, 201, 202
tract disease
seeking help for poisoned pet, 397-398
Ulceration
Urine chemistry, 339-342
Toxocara, 350f, 500. See also
corneal, 280-281
bilirubin, 339
Roundworms
gastric, 385
blood, 339-340
 TPLO (tibial plateau leveling osteotomy),
oral, 58-59, 180, 184
flowchart, 347, 472
81
Ultrasonic cleaning of teeth, 94
glucose, 340
Trabecular bone, 63, 500
Ultrasound, 371-373
ketones, 340
Trachea, collapsing, 138-139
adrenal disease, 230, 326
pH, 341-342
Tracheal/bronchiole narrowing, 130-131
in cardiac disease, 156-157, 157f
protein, 340-341
Tracheobronchitis, 500. See also Kennel
in cardiovascular disease, 156-157, 157f
Urine cortisol/creatinine ratio
cough
discussing with clients, 373
adrenal disease, 228
Tracheoscopy/bronchoscopy, 138, 500
gastrointestinal system, 109, 111f
defined, 500
Tramadol, 388
for large animals, 372
Urine culture and sensitivity, 183, 341,
Tranquilizers, 424
limitations, 373
342, 345
Transdermal, 267, 500
liver disease, 200, 201f
Urine protein/creatinine ratio
Transitional epithelial cells, 342, 343
 in pancreatic disease, 210
defined, 500
Transplant, kidney, 185
pregnancy detection, 239
discussing with clients, 349
Transtracheal wash, 138, 500
preparation of animal, 372
evaluation of test, 341, 345, 349
Transudate, 195, 500
in prostatic disease, 247
function, 345
Transverse fracture, 66, 68f, 69f
in renal disease, 181, 183f
performance of test, 345
Trash, exposure to, 105
in reproductive disease, 241, 243
in renal disease, 182, 183
respiratory system, 136
Urine sediment, 341, 342-344
anisocoria after, 437f
in rodenticide intoxication, 406
bacteria, 344
brain injury, 448, 450-451, 485
safety, 372
casts, 343-344
EKG, indication for, 360
for small animals, 372-373
cellular elements, 342-343
history of, 36
technology, 372
crystals, 344
ocular, 281
terminology, 372
flowchart, 348, 473
Index
533
fungal elements, 344
signalment, 281
Vitreous chamber, 273, 274f, 501
normal values, 342t
treatment, 282
Vomiting
performance of analysis, 342
abbreviation for, 4
terminology, 342
V (vomiting) abbreviation, 4
dental disease and, 89, 90
Urine specific gravity, 338, 471, 501
Vaccines
documenting, 106-107
Urogenital system, 173-191
canine, 7-9
history of, 36
anatomy, 173-174,174f, 175f, 176f,
bordetella, 8
in hyperthyroidism, 221
177f
canine distemper virus (CDV), 7
in hypoadrenocorticism, 226
assessment, 180, 180f, 180t
canine hepatitis virus, 8
inducing, 118, 186, 399, 400, 401, 402,
diagnostics, 180-183
corona virus (CV), 8
403, 404, 405,406, 408
blood pressure monitoring, 183
DHPP, 7-8
in liver disease, 197
blood work, 180
leptospirosis, 8
in pancreatic disease, 208
chemistry, 181
Lyme disease, 8
safe handling of animals with, 27
complete blood count, 181
parainfluenza, 8
in thyroid disease, 218
ethylene glycol test, 183
parvo virus (CPV), 8, 122
in toxin exposure, 397
radiography, 181, 182, 182f, 183f
rabies, 8
Vulva,60,235
ultrasound, 181, 183f
discussing with clients, 7
urinalysis, 181
feline, 8-10,13t
Warfarin, 405-406, 501
urine culture and sensitivity, 183,
feline calici virus (FCV), 9
Waxy casts, 343
345
feline immunodeficiency virus
Weakness, in reproductive disease, 241
urine protein/creatinine ratio, 182,
(FIV), 10
Weight loss
183
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), 10
for colapsing trachea, 139
diseases, 183-191
feline leukemia virus (Felv), 9-10
dental disease and, 89
acute renal disease, 184-185
feline panleukopenia virus (FPV), 9,
in liver disease, 197
antifreeze poisoning, 186-187
123
in thyroid disease, 218, 221
chronic renal disease, 187-188
feline viral rhinotracheitis (FVR), 9
Whipworms, 113-114, 114f
lower urinary tract disease, 188-190
FVRCP, 9
complications, 114
 renal secondary hypertension,
rabies, 9
diagnosis, 114, 114f
190-191
schedule, 13t
etiology, 114
expression of renal disease, 174-179
side effects, potential, 10-13, 11f
history points, 114
glomerular disease, 175-177
canine allergic reaction, 11-12, 11f
life cycle, 113-114
medullary disease, 177-179
discussing with client, 11, 13
observations on initial assessment, 114
functions, 173-174, 176f, 177f
feline allergic reaction, 12
prevention, 114
history, 179-180
handling reactions, 12
treatment, 114
age of animal, 179
history of past reactions, 12
White blood cell casts, 343-344
appetite, 179
long-term, 12-13
White blood cell count
breed of animal, 179
overview, 10-11
dental disease and, 93
constipated, 179
short-term, 10-12
leucopenia, 306
diarrhea, 179
Valley fever. See Coccidiomycosis (valley
leukocytosis, 306
polyuria/polydipsia, 179
fever)
in renal disease, 181
progression of disease, 179
Valvular murmur, 154
White blood cells
toxin/poison exposure, 180
Vaporizer,420
differential, 301, 465
urination difficulty, 180
Vascular tumor, 299
microscopic examination of skin
vomiting, 179
Vectors, 111, 115
scrapping, 259f
weight 1oss, 179
Vena cava, 147, 148f-151f
types, 303f-305f, 306-308
physical examination, 60, 60f, 61f
Venipuncture, restraint for jugular, 30,
in urine sediment, 343
Urolithes, 188, 501
30f, 31f
Wright-Giemsa stain, 296, 298
Urolithiasis, 181, 188, 190, 339, 501
Venodilators, 160
Urosidiol, 203
Ventilation, assisted/controlled, 430
X-rays. See Radiography
Uveal, 273, 501
Ventilator, mechanical, 430
Xylazine, 424
Uveal coat, 273, 274f
Ventral (directional term), 3, 5f, 6f, 501
Uveitis, 275, 281-282, 281f, 282
Ventricular septal defect, 155f
Zona fasciculata, 223, 501
 complications, 281
Ventroflexion of the neck, 177, 323f, 501
Zona granulosa, 223, 501
defined, 501
Verapamil, 165
Zona reticularis, 223, 501
diagnosis, 282
Vice grip restraint, 28, 29f
Zoonotic diseases, 45-46
discussing with clients, 282
Viral serology, 278, 280, 282, 283
defined, 39, 501
etiology, 281
Virulence, 7, 501
hookworm, 112, 116
history observations on initial
Visceral larval migrans, 113, 501
roundworm, 113, 116
assessment, 281
Vitamin K, 405-406
Zygomatic salivary glands, 87, 501
history points, 281
Vitamin supplements, 163
prevention, 282
Vitreous,273