GEORGIS'
PARASITOLOGY
FOR VETERINARIANS
NTHEDITION
DwightD.Bowman
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Derivations of Some Scientific Names and Ierms
ARTHROPODA
jointed foot
Ornithodoros
bird gift
INSECTA
plural of Latin insectum (i.e., things
Otobius
ear way of life
 cut into sections)
Amblyomma
dull eye
Diptera
two wings
Boophilus
cattle lover
Nematocera
thread-horn
Dermacentor
skin puncturer
Ceratopogonidae
horn beard
Haemaphysalis
blood bladder
Culicidae
family of mosquitoes
Ixodes
sticky, like bird lime
Culicoides
mosquito-like
Rhipicephalus
fan head
Phlebotomus
vein cutting
Mesostigmata
punctures in the middle
Simuliidae
family of things put together
Dermanyssus
skin piercer
Brachycera
short-horn
Halarachne
salt spider
Chrysops
golden eye
Liponyssoides
fat piercer
Haematopota
drinking blood
Ophionyssus
snake piercer
Silvius
of woods or forests
Ornithonyssus
bird piercer
Tabanus
gadfly
Pneumonyssys
lung piercer
Cyclorrhapha
round suture
Raillietia
Railliet—famous parasitologist
Auchmeromyia
unwashed or squalid fly
Astigmata
no punctures
calcitrans
kicking with the heels
mange
from manger (French)—to eat 
 Calliphoridae
family beauty bearing
Chorioptes
 membrane visible
Chrysomyia
gold fly
Notoedres
back seat, referring to dorsal anus
Cochliomyia
screw fly
Otodectes
ear receiver
Cordylobia
lifelike swelling
Psoroptes
scab visible
Cuterebra
skin borer
Sarcoptes
fesh visible
Gasterophilus
stomach loving
 Prostigmata
punctures in front
Haematobia
bloody life
Cheyletiella
small lip
Hippoboscidae
family of horse feeders
Demodex
tallow receiver
Hypoderma
under skin
Lynxacarus
lynx mite
Melophagus
sheep eater
Neotrombicula
 new small twisted vein
Musca
housefly
Oestrus
gadfly
PENTASTOMIDA
five mouths
Sarcophaga
meat eater
Armillifer
bearing bracelet
Stomoxys
mouth sharp
Linguatula
small tongue
Anoplura
no ribs
Haematopinus
blood pine-tree
PROTOZOA
first animal
Linognathus
thread jaw
Acanthamoeba
spiny amoeba
Pediculus
little feet
Apicomplexa
referring to the apical complex
Polyplax
 many plates
Babesia
Babes—famous protozoologist
P(h)thirus
louse
Balantidium
small bag
Solenopotes
 pipe drink
Besnoitia
Besnoit—famous protozoologist
Mallophaga
wool eaters
Bradyzoite
slow animal
Damalinia
deer streak
Cryptosporidium
hidden small seeds
Felicola
inhabiting cats
Cytauxzoon
hollow vessel (cell) increasing
Heterodoxus
accepting the other
 animal
Trichodectes
hair receiver
Entamoeba
internal amoeba
 Siphonaptera
tube no wing—wingless suckers 
Giardia
sgo[oozooid snouey—pie5
Ctenocephalides
cockle-like head
Hepatozoon
liver animal
Echidnophaga
monster eater
Histomonas
tissue unit
Pulex
flea [in Latin]
Isospora
equal seeds
Xenopsylla
host flea [in Greek]
Leishmania
Leishman—famous protozoologist
Hemiptera
half-wing
Meront
led
Cimex lectularius
bug of little bed
Neospora
new seed
Triatoma
cut into three
Sarcocystis
flesh cyst
Schizont
something splitting
ARACHNIDA
spiders, family of
Tachyzoite
swift animal
Metastigmata
 punctures behind
Toxoplasma
bow body (thing that is molded)
Argas (= Argos)
named for the host, a pheasant
Trichomonas
hair unit
(named for the 100-eyed monster,
Trypanosoma
auger body
Argus, killed by Hermes, whose
eyes were put on the peacock tail)
Continued on back inside cover
GEORGIS'
PARASITOLOGY
FOR VETERINARIANS
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
GEORGIS'
PARASITOLOGV
FORVETERINARIANS
NINTH
EDITION
DWIGHT D. BOWMAN, MS, Phd
 Professor of Parasitology
 Department of Microbiology and Immunology
College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York
 SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
11830 Westline Industrial Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
GEORGIS' PARASITOLOGY FOR VETERINARIANS, Ninth Edition
ISBN: 978-1-4160-4412-3
Copyright @ 2009, 2003, 1999, 1995, 1990, 1985, 1980, 1974, 1969 by Saunders, an imprint
of Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval
Elsevier's Rights Department: phone: (+1) 215 239 3804 (US) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK); fax: (+44)
1865 853333; e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via the
Elsevier website at http://www.elsevier.com/permissions.
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing As new research and experience
broaden our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment, and drug therapy may become necessary or
appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current information provided (i) on procedures
featured or (ji) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended
dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the
responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own experience and knowledge of the patient, to make
diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all
appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Author
assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to
any use of the material contained in this book.
The Publisher
ISBN: 978-1-4160-4412-3
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bowman, Dwight D.
Georgis parasitology for veterinarians. - 9th ed. / Dwight D. Bowman.
p.; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4160-4412-3 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary parasitology. 1. Georgi, Jay R., 1928- 11. Title.
III. Title: Parasitology for veterinarians.
SF810.A3B74 2009
636.089'696-dc22
2008031763
Vice President: Linda Duncan
Publisher: Penny Rudolph
Managing Editor: Jolynn Gower
Publishing Services Manager: Patricia Tannian
Senior Project Manager: Anne Altepeter
Design Manager: Amy Buxton
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.con|www.bookaid.org|www.sabre.org
 Printed in China
ELSEVIER
BOOK AID
Last digit is the print number:  9  8  7  6  5
international
Sabre Foundation
Contributors
Mark L. Eberhard, PhD
Susan E. Little, DVM, PhD
Chief, Biology and Diagnostics Branch
Endowed Chair Professor
 Division of Parasitic Diseases
 Krull- Ewing Chair in Veterinary Parasitology
 National Center for Infectious Diseases
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology
Centers for Disease Control
Center for Veterinary Health Sciences
Atlanta, Georgia
Oklahoma State University
Histopathologic Diagnosis
 Stillwater, Oklahoma
Vector-Borne Diseases
 Marshall W. Lightowlers, BSc Hons, PhD
Professor
Randy C. Lynn, MS, DVM, DACVCP
Veterinary Science
 Director, Professional Services Group
The University of Melbourne
IDEXX Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Werribee, Victoria, Australia
Greensboro, North Carolina
Commercial Antiparasite Vaccines (Table A-7)
Antiparasitic Drugs
This page intentionally left blank
Preface
n the ninth edition of Georgis’ Parasitology for
Dr. Susan E. Little, who holds the endowed Krull-Ewing
Veterinarians, the text begun by Jay and Marion
Chair in Veterinary Parasitology at Oklahoma State
 Georgi, I have worked to change most of the images
University, to add a chapter on these diseases for this edi-
to a color format. Fortunately, many of the images that
tion. We parasitologists never could figure out the best way
were originally captured by the Georgis in black and
to fit into a text the various microbes that do not usually
white were also photographed in color, making it possible
fall under the umbrella of animal parasitology but yet are
se uoa siu u ieadde seu ses au jo au au ol
pathogens that we believe need to be discussed. I think 
they were originally viewed. At the same time, not every
readers will find the chapter very helpful.
single image was available in color, and some would not
In his chapter and throughout the text, Dr. Randy C.
 benefit much by a color presentation. The various images
Lynn, of IDEXX Pharmaceuticals, worked to update infor-
that were captured using differential interference contrast,
mation on all the antiparasitics currently in use. We have
especially the unstained nematodes, appear basically gray
also worked to upgrade the tables of antiparasitics in the 
under the microscope and remain just as crisp in a black
and white format as they would in color. Also, some of the
list up to date—an indication of how great an effort is
 black and white images have been retained because they are
expended by our industrial colleagues to continuously
historical and represent prior work that was done at a time
supply better products for parasite control and treatment.
when black and white art was the major form of presenting
To Dr. Lynn's chapter on antiparasitics has also been added
illustrations in publications, as in the images originally col-
a table by Dr. Marshall W. Lightowlers, associate professor
-qnd anam ie s pue yom h uf i aq pa
in the Faculty of Veterinary Science of the University of
lished elsewhere in black and white. In some cases, color
Melbourne, on vaccines against parasites. Not all of these
images were not available for every single parasite in a plate,
vaccines may be available in the United States, but they are
and in those cases the black and white plates were main-
out there, have been used in some regions for years, and
tained, giving us something to strive for in the next edition.
still show great promise in some areas for parasite control.
The American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists
It seemed time to try and summarize them for
(AAVP) has worked hard, through the donated time of Drs.
practitioners.
Anne M. Zajac of Virginia Tech and Gary A. Conboy of the
Dr. Mark L. Eberhard, of the Division of Parasitic
 University of Prince Edward Island, to generate a color
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, has
 e si s    yo uoa
reworked the chapter on parasites in tissue sections. This
book, and I consider it an excellent ancillary text for anyone
chapter could be a book in its own right, but as it is serves
routinely working on parasite diagnosis. The funds gener-
as a very good introduction to how to identify the parasites
ated by their text support the continued efforts of the
that pathologists see. It is hoped that the color images help
AAVP, and I strongly support use of the text.
 in presentation of this material.
I have had a good deal of help in preparing this edition.
Dr. Hanna M. Roisman, of the Classics Department of
Dr. Hanni Lee, now in a residency in Comparative
Colby College, has helped me again with the various deri-
Medicine, University of Missouri-Columbia, helped with
vations of many of the parasitology terms that appear on
 preparing many of the color images of arthropods, proto-
the front and back inside covers of the text. She also pro-
 zoa, and platyhelminths for the text, and her help is greatly
vided assistance as I worked through the terminology that
appreciated. Dr. Danielle Armato, now practicing veterin-
appears in Chapter 1 in which I attempt to define zoonosis
ary medicine in Manhattan, assisted with a rewrite of the
as it relates to disease transmission among animals.
 section regarding annotated parasite lists in the chapter on
Veterinarians need to remain highly active in this field,
diagnostics to make them more informative. Dr. Araceli
because many diseases found in wildlife are highly devas-
tating to domestic animals and also because of animal dis-
in diagnostic instruction of third- and fourth-year veterin-
eases that can be transmitted to humans. I really think that
ary students helped find many of the additional parasites,
words are useful although they may not enter common
 eggs, and cysts that have been added new in color format.
usage. It has also been great fun to periodically delve into
Overall, this has been labor intensive, but great fun. Drs.
maters outside the world of parasitology, such as the rela-
Lee, Armato, and Lucio-Forster have worked hard to help
tionship of Odysseus to The Usual Suspects and Greek pre-
give the new edition its new look.
destination within the Terminator.
I have tried to update the text while also keeping basi-
 a i  s   a
cally the same structure of the older editions. Because of
Barr, Simpson, Hornbuckle, Smith, Nydam, Ducharme,
the current interest in vector-transmitted disease, I asked
Miller, Scott, and McDonough, who keep me refocused
vi
vili
PREFACE
on matters veterinary all the colleagues in AAVP and
industry who are always there to help when needed; and,
of course, all my students, past, present, and future, who
make the whole thing worthwhile.
Finally, I thank Don O'Connor for his help with the new
color drawings for the text. I really also want to thank the
 staff at Elsevier—Jolynn Gower, managing editor, Anne
XenOdOChA
Altepeter, senior project manager, and Amy Buxton,
STOCK
R M
design manager-for helping me work through this edition,
which underwent significant reorganization and to which
many new images were added. They have given much time
to making the book look great and to seeing to it that the
text was carefully edited throughout. The effort was con-
siderable, and they made what could have been a highly
strenuous and taxing project something that was fun and
 productive. I hope that you the reader will find the new
edition a marked improvement over the eighth edition and
 a useful resource in your study of veterinary parasitology.
to my great enjoyment when out looking into a system
On a final note, for years now I have been using the term
that can produce hydroponic lettuce without white fly con-
“"xenodochology” for the study of the host in opposition
taminants that I drove down a country road past a barn
to the word “parasitology” for the study of the parasite.
(see figure) emblazoned with the words “Xenodocha Stock
I have read about the word and the various hostels, or
Farm." The owner did not know from whence the name
 sialan ry adong un dn suids peu 'louoopoux,
derived, but had kept the name on the barn. So, there was a
the Middle Ages. I even garnered at one point while work-
hostel for bovine hosts for many of the parasites that have
been of such critical importance in the development of
tory of Dr. Robert Grieve (where I spent three wonderful
veterinary parasitology. You can often stumble upon great
years working with Marsha Mika-Grieve, David Abraham,
and simple pleasures in places where you least expect them.
Jim Parsons, Glen Frank, and Meisen Mok) a T-shirt
inscribed with the word “Xenodochologist." Thus it was
 Dwight D. Bowman
Contents
1
 INTrODUCTION, 1
APPENDIX
Table A-1 Ovine Parasiticides, 407
2
ARTHROPODS, 5
Table A-2 Porcine Parasiticides, 408
3
PR0T0Z0ANS, 84
Table A-3 Bovine Parasiticides, 409
Table A-4 Feline Parasiticides, 410
4 HELMINTHS, 115
Table A-5 Canine Parasiticides, 411
Table A-6 Equine Parasiticides, 412
5
VECT0R-B0RNE DISEASES, 240
Table A-7 Commercial Antiparasite
Susan E. Little
Vaccines, 413
6
ANTIPARASITIC DRUGS, 254
Randy C. Lynn
DIAGN0STIC PARASITOL0GY, 295
8 HISTOPATHOL0GIC DIAGN0SIS, 372
Mark L. Eberhard
ix
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER
Introduction
COMmON TermS IN PaRASItOLOGY
classification scheme to the true history of evolution, there
is very little objective evidence of the kinship of parasites.
A parasite is a smaller organism that lives on or in and at
The progenitors of the horse (Equus cabalus) left a clear
the expense of a larger organism called the host. A louse is a
fossil record of equine evolution, but the ancestors of our
parasite and so is a virus. The host's expenses in supporting
 parasites merely rotted and withered away, leaving only an
its parasites may be trivial, or they may be substantial or
occasional trace. The entire hierarchy of taxonomic cate-
even unbearable. This depends on the number of parasites,
gories above that of species (genus, subfamily, family, super-
the kind and degree of injury they inflict, and the vigor and
family, suborder, order, class, and phylum) is built of
nourishment of the host. A series of terms (e.g-, mutualism,
subjective inductions based on degrees of similarity and dis-
commensalism, and parasitism) have been defined to express
similarity among the various groups of organisms.
the degree of unilateral or mutual injury or benefit that is
Fortunately, the result is nonetheless useful to us in organiz-
characteristic of particular symbiotic relationships. As a
ing our information about parasites in an orderly and logical
 matter of convention, however, if the smaller organism is
way. In short, any particular zoologic classification scheme is
found in association with humans or with animals or plants
no more than an opinion about how the relationships
that humans esteem, it is called a parasite, whether its pres-
among various groups of organisms may best be expressed.
ence is detrimental, indifferent, or beneficial. This conven-
It is helpful to be acquainted with a few nomenclatural
tion is adopted in this book and is harmless enough
conventions. The full zoologic name of an animal is a bino-
 provided we remember that parasites vary in pathogenicity.
men consisting of the genus name followed by the species
 A species of animal is an interbreeding natural popula-
name. The genus name is capitalized and both genus and
 tion that is reproductively isolated from other such popula-
species names are italicized in print or underlined in manu-
 tions. For example, there are two species of rather distantly
script, e.g., Filaroides milksi. In taxonomic publications and
related ascarid parasites of dogs, Toxocara canis and
in other scientific and professional journals, the zoologic
Toxascaris leonina. These two species are sufficiently similar
name is followed by the name of the person(s) who
in size and appearance to present some difficulty in their
described the species in question and the date that the
differentiation, but although they may share the small
description was first published, e.g-, Filaroides milksi
intestine of the same dog, they never interbreed. The con-
Whitlock, 1956. If, at a later date, another taxonomist de-
sequent distinctness of their genetic material is expressed in
cides for one reason or another that this particular species
modest differences in structure and in very substantial dif-
really ought to belong to a different genus, the original
ferences in life history. T. canis and T. leonina, however,
 describer's name is now placed in parentheses and the
share enough similarities to make their kinship obvious.
name of the taxonomist that moved the species may
We assume that these similarities stem from the evolution
follow outside the parentheses, e.g., Andersonstrongylhus
of both species from common ancestral stock (divergent
milksi (Whitlock, 1956) Webster, 1981. We are not forced
evolution) because the number and nature of the similari-
to accept Webster's opinion and may continue to call this
tfies induce us to reject the alternative explanation—i.e.,
species by its original name, Filaroides milksi, if we believe
that they represent the adaptations of unrelated forms to
that we have good enough reason to do so. The species
the same selection pressures (convergent evolution). We
milksi is objective in that it is based on real and tangible
 recognize kinship of T. canis and T. leonina by considering
 specimens that Whitlock studied and described in 1956.
them both to be members of the same zoologic order
Assigning rmilksi to any particular genus is, however, largely
(Ascaridida); each is a leaf, if you will, on the same evolu-
subjective and based on taxonomic judgment. That is why
tionary branch.
we frequently come across the same species relegated to
two or even more genera.
CONVENTIONS OF TAXONOMIC
Certain categories have characteristic suffixes that help to
identify them. For example, the genus Strongylus belongs to
CLASSIFICATION
the following hierarchy of higher taxa: subfamily Strongy-
Classification is an inductive process. Unfortunately, for
linae, family Strongylidae, superfamily Strongyloidea, order
those who seek perfection in the correspondence of the
Strongylida. In this text the suffixes -inae, -idae, -oidea,
：
CHA P TER 1 Introduction
2
and -ida are applied to all subfamily, family, superfamily, and
to include exotic pets and captive and wild mammals and
order names.
birds, such a detailed approach would inevitably lead to a
The principal objectives of zoologic nomenclature are to
shelf full of books. Fortunately, many shelves full of books
 promote stability and universality of zoologic names and to
are already to be found in the better academic and
ensure that each name is unique and distinct. Not every
municipal libraries, and that is where we must go to get
taxonomist is hard at work changing the names to confuse
the necessary information. The first step is to determine the
 others, as students are prone to suspect.
scientific name of the host species; if we don't already know
it, Webster's International Dictionary is the best readily
available general source of this information.
IDENTIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Finally, it should be remembered that when we find
 Identification is determining which taxonomic groups a spe-
worms or various diagnostic stages of parasites, our goal
cies belongs to, whereas diagnosis is determining the cause and
is typically to determine the species group to which the indi-
 nature of a case of disease. Both are deductive processes. The
vidual specimens belong. However, we do not “speciate""
diagnosis of parasitism per se requires only that some life stage
parasites, we simply identify them. Speciation refers to
of the particular species of parasite be identified. Diagnosis of
something done by a creature as it evolves from one species
 parasitic disease requires much more. In fact, interpretation of
type to another. Therefore the only thing that can speciate
the significance of the information regarding the parasite or
is the creature itself. The term speciation should be
a ssssp jo sio red e u pi sd
restricted in its usage to discussions that deal with how
taxes our knowledge and interpretive skill to the utmost. In a
species originated, such as discussions about new species
very few cases, we have a direct cause-and-effect relationship to
 and beak shapes on the various finches of the Galapagos.
make it easy. For example, Haermonchus contortus, a nematode
parasite of sheep, causes disease when the mass of worms pre-
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PARASITES
sent in the abomasum sucks more blood than the sheep can
AND HOSTS
replace, and the disease haemonchosis, manifested as clinical
anemia, results. If too few H. contortus worms are present to
A number of terms are useful relative to the study of par-
overtax the hematopoietic capacity of the sheep or if a partic-
 asitology in general. Animals that live in close association
ular sheep manages to make restitution for blood loss that
    ss  a   
might lay another low, the case is one of subclinical H. con-
 process of symbiosis. This has been further characterized
tortus infection. Simply put: no anemia, no haemonchosis.
for certain specific types of relationships. In the case of
One makes the diagnosis of haemonchosis by examining the
mutualism, one of the hosts benefits while the other just
visible mucous membranes or a sample of blood for evidence
exists; this is what occurs with the various ciliates and
of anemia.
bacteria that live within the rumen of a ruminant. When
Diagnosing haemonchosis is easy. It is very much more
Do (sasol, iauau pue aaaoi aa isf susueio omi al
difficult to evaluate the clinical significance of most other
"wins," the condition is called commensalism, and the
parasitic infections. For example, when the veterinarian is
organisms living in this way are called commensals. An
confronted with a case of chronic diarrhea, finding a few
example might be the various amoeba that live within the
coccidian oocysts in the animal's stool may mislead the
cecum and colon of cattle and sheep for which no disease
veterinarian to neglect other possible causes and jump to
has ever been recorded. In the case of phoresis, one organ-
the conclusion that the animal has the disease coccidiosis
ism serves to carry the other organism from place to place.
when in fact the coccidian infection is incidental. The spe-
This is what takes place in the live history of the fly
cific identity of the cysts in the feces supplies the diagnos-
Dermatobia hominis, which uses other flies to carry the
tician with a concrete fact that may, in the midst of
larvated eggs to the vertebrate host that becomes infected.
uncertainty, prove nearly irresistible. A difficult situation
Finally, in the case of parasitism (quoting Dr. James Law)
am ooq si u ll ll ao  ae ana pe p
"one of the two draws its subsistence from the other to the
have tried to present information helpful in deciding when
 parasites are responsible for clinical disease and when they
has negative effects on its host.
 are not. In truth, there is much still to be learned.
There are some terms relative to parasites in specific that
 Identification of the common parasites of domestic cats,
are used in certain ways by convention. Thus, endopara-
dogs, cattle, sheep, goats, horses, and pigs is a relatively
sites, parasites within the bodies of hosts, are considered to
simple matter. It requires only one semester of study to
produce infections, whereas ectoparasites, those that live
get fairly good at it. By restricting the scope of the problem
on the external surface of a host or in the skin, are said to
to particular host species, it is possible to simplify identifi-
cause infestations. Some parasites are considered to be
cation criteria, accommodate reasonably complete sets of
obligate parasites: they always require a host. Other organ-
illustrations in the available space, and make helpful lists of
isms are parasites only if given the opportunity, and they
the kinds of parasites likely to be encountered in particular
are termed facultative parasites (e.g-, Balamuthia mandril.
organs. Chapter 7 is devoted to such criteria, illustrations,
laris and Halicephalobus gingivalis). Hosts that live only on
and lists. However, when the scope of interest is broadened
or in a single host are considered to be host-specific,
CH A P TER 1 Introduction
3
with classic examples being the various lice of birds and
Other terms presented included euzoonosis for infections
mammals. The host in which the adult or sexually repro-
common to humans and reservoir hosts (probably the same
ductive processes of the parasite occur is called a definitive
as amphixenosis), e.g., S. japonicum in humans and various
host. A host in which there is required development of
mammals, and parazoorosis, in which humans are infected
intermediate or larval stages is called an intermediate
with a zoonotic agent only rarely, e.g-, canine heartworm.
host. In the case of a paratenic host, the host is infected
The biology of agents has also been defined relative to zoo
with a parasite that does not undergo any required devel.
nosis. Cyclozoonosis describes zoonotic agents restricted to
opment, although the parasite sometimes can grow very
vertebrates, e.g., Taenia solium. Metazoonosis describes agents
large in the chain of paratenic hosts that are used (as in
that cycle between vertebrates and invertebrates, e.g., malaria.
the piscine hosts of the larvae of Diphyllobothrium latum).
Saprozoonosis is for agents cycling between a vertebrates and
Organisms that transmit parasites from host to host are
nonanimal hosts, e.g., Fasciola hepatica with metacercariae on
 termed vectors. Mechanical vectors are basically living
vegetation.
contaminated syringes, i.e., they are not essential in the
 No words are apparently in existence to address the
normal life cycle of the organism being moved from host
transmission of agents from wild to domestic animals and
to host. In the case of a biologic vector, the vector is
the opposite, the transmission of pathogens from domestic
 required in the life cycle of the parasite.
animals to domestic or wild animals. Infections of animals
Parasites may cycle in different animals than those we
with agents for which they are atypical hosts are herein
consider the host of interest, and these hosts are considered
 divided into three groups (ignoring the infections shared
reservoir hosts. When parasites are present at some stable
between different wild animals): (1) infection of domestic
rate in a population, they are said to be endermic (although
animals with pathogens from wildlife, (2) infection of
for animals the more appropriate term is really enzootic). If
domestic animals with pathogens of domestic animals,
the disease is present at a very high level in a population, it
and (3) infection of wild animals with pathogens of domes-
is said to be hyperendemic. Endemicity is often measured
tic animals. I have worked with Dr. Hanna Roisman, the
 in terms of prevalence, the percentage of infected indivi-
Francis F. Bartlett and Ruth K. Bartlett Professor of Classics,
 duals in an area at any given time. Incidence refers to the
Classics Department of Colby College, Waterville, Maine,
rate at which new infections are occurring within a popula-
to develop terms that aid in defining these conditions.
tion, e.g., new cases of heartworm in California in the past
Zootherionosis ( zoor, animal + therior, wild animal + o +
6 months. When there is a sharp increase in incidence with
nosos, disease) is used to define diseases of domestic animals
 a concomitant rise in the prevalence, the term that is used is
infected with pathogens of wildlife. The classic example is the
epidemic. There are similar terms that are used specifically
infection of imported domestic animals with African wildlife
for animals—enzootic, hyperenzootic, epizootic—but
trypanosomes. Other examples include infections with
these are unfamiliar to many, so often the human-related
Leishmania, plague, Lyme disease, and rickettsiae from
terms are used instead.
rodent reservoirs; the viruses of foot and mouth disease and
The term zoonosis means literally a disease of animals,
avian influenza, and Hendra and Nipah viruses; larval infec-
but the word has come to mean a disease of animals trans-
tions with Alaria species, spargana, tetrathyridia, larval
mitted to people. Hoare (1962) cited four terms to describe
Baylisascaris procyonis and Armillifer armillata, and bots of
 pathogen transmission between humans and animals.
Cuterebra; and horses and cats, which serve as hosts of the
1. Anthropozoonosis (etymologicall, simply a disease
asexual stages of the equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
 of humans and animals) defines a disease of humans
agent, Sarcocystis neurona. Cats are lethally infected with
acquired from animals, eg., rabies, plague, brucellosis,
Cytauxzoon felis of the bobcat. Infections with sexually
leptospirosis, Rhodesian sleeping sickness, tick-borne
mature pathogens include the trematodes Paragonirmus kelli
encephalitis or relapsing fever, babesiosis, ehrlichiosis,
cotti in dogs and cats, Fascioloides magna in cattle and sheep,
Chagas' disease, and trichinosis.
Alaria marchianae and Patynosomum fastosum in cats, and
2. Zooanthroponosis, considered by some as “reverse
Heterobilharzia americarum in dogs; the cestodes Spirometra
zoonosis," defines a disease of animals acquired
marsonoides in dogs and cats and Thysanosoma and Wyominia
from people—e.g., transmission of Entamoeba
in domestic ruminants; and the nematodes Parelapho-
histolytica to cats, Giardia lamblia to dogs,
strongylus tenuis in ruminants, B. procyonis, Dracunculus
tuberculosis to cattle, or Schistosoma mansoni
insigris, Onchocerca, and Dioctophyme renale in dogs and
to baboons.
Lagochilascaris minor in cats.
 3. Amphixenosis (etymologically, disease of both
Zootithasonosis (zoon, animal + tithas, tamed + o + nosos,
hosts) defines an infection interchangeable between
disease) is used for those cases in which a pathogen from one
people and other vertebrates, e.g., Chagas disease,
type of domestic animal infects other domestic animals. Feline
Schistosoma japonicum, or Staphylococus species.
panleukopenia virus adapted to dogs, causing a global out-
4. Anthroponoses (etymologically, disease of humans)
break of canine morbidity and mortality. Bovine diarrhea
defines infections restricted to humans that evolved
virus infects sheep and goats, causing border disease. Cats
from infections of lower animalse.g., malaria,
infect dogs with ringworm, Microsporum canis. Cats and
typhus, and relapsing fever.
ferrets are parasitized with adult canine heartworms,
CH A P TER 1 Introduction
Dirofilaria immitis. Trichostrongylus axei of ruminants infects
Domestic goats infect wild goats with infectious keratocon-
the domestic horse. Cats and rabbits develop visceral larval
junctivitis (Mycoplasma conjurctivae). Domestic cattle with
migrans from infections with the dog roundworm, T. canis.
The cat roundworm, Toxocara cati, causes white spot disease
subspecies rnycoides [small colony type]) have infected African 
in the livers of pigs. Ruminants are infected with taenid tape-
water buffaloes and zebu cattle. T. caris routinely infects
worms of dogs and large cats. The cat can be a host of the
rodents and birds and can infect tortoises. Toxoplasma
coenurus of Taenia serialis, which uses dogs as final hosts.
 gondi causes infections in numerous wild animals and has
Theriotithasonosis* is used for those cases in which wild
now been reported to cause disease in aquatic mammals.
animals can be infected with pathogens from domestic
Adult heartworms cause disease in sea lions, and Dicrocoeli-
animals. Lions in the Serengeti and in captivity have suc-
um dendriticum causes infections in deer, rabbits, and
cumbed to a variant of the distemper virus from dogs.
woodchucks.
Wolves, coyotes, and African wild dogs have been infected
with canine parvovirus from domestic dogs. Macropodid
REFERENCE
marsupials sometimes are infected with ovine Johne's disease
Hoare CA: Reservoir hosts and natural foci of human protozoal infections,
bacteria (Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis).
Acta Tropica 19:281, 1962.
*Because there is no one word in Greek for domesticated ani-
mals (unlike therio for wild animals), the full words should have
been tithasozootherionosis, tithasozootithasozoonosis, and theriotithaso-
for infection of wild animals with agents from other wild animals
would be theriotherionosis, abbreviated to therionosis, simply, a dis-
ease of wild animals.
CHAPTER
rthropods are a group of organisms composed
veterinarians are the kinds of parasitic arthropods that
 of the familiar insects, spiders, crustaceans (e.g-
live in more prolonged and intimate association with
 shrimp), and a few other types of organisms. The
domestic animals. In this book, considerably more atten-
body of a typical arthropod is composed of a series of
tion is therefore devoted to lice, fleas, ticks, and mites than
 segments, some of which bear jointed legs. Not all arthro-
to mosquitoes.
 pods display these characteristics. Body segmentation has
The arthropods of veterinary importance belong to the
all but disappeared with the evolution of the mites and
classes Insecta, Arachnida, Crustacea, and Diplopoda.
ticks, and many insect larvae have no legs. Adaptation to
Insects and arachnids compose the bulk of this chapter.
 parasitism has led to extreme deviation in body form in
The Crustacea class contains many taxa that serve as inter-
certain cases. For example, mites of the genus Dermodex
 mediate hosts of helminth parasites (copepods, crabs, cray-
have evolved into tiny cigar-shaped organisms that fit com-
fish, and sow bugs), but only the copepods are discussed
fortably into the hair follicles and sebaceous glands of the
because they tend to be a little less familiar to the average
skin. An even more extreme example is provided by
 person. One group of crustaceans, the Pentastomida or
Sacculina, a relative of barnacles that grows like a plant's
tongue worms, are parasites in their own right of the respi-
root system in the body of its crab host. However, most
ratory system of terrestrial vertebrates, reptiles, birds, and
parasitic arthropods resemble their free-living relatives
mammals and are considered briefly in their own section.
morphologically but differ from them in quite remarkable
The class Diplopoda (millipedes), which contains at least
physiologic and behavioral adaptations to the parasitic
 one genus, Narceus, that serves as the intermediate host of
mode of life. For example, the bloodsucking stable fly,
Macracanthorhynchus ingens, a very large acanthocephalan
horn fly, and tsetse strongly resemble their scavenging
 parasite of the raccoon and domestic dog, is mentioned
cousin the common housefly, and there is no obvious mor-
only in passing in this book.
phologic difference among the many species of maggots
that thrive in decaying plant and animal matter and the
CLASS INSECTA
"screwworm" that completes its larval development in
living flesh. The resemblance of certain parasites to their
Structure
free-living relatives creates a diagnostic pitfall. Even their
The body of adult insects consists of the head, thorax, and
 presence at the scene of the crime is not sufficient proof of
abdomen. The head consists of a variable number of fused
 guilt. Fly maggots and coprophilic beetles are frequently
segments and bears two eyes, two antennae, and a complex
found in fecal specimens. In almost every such case, these 
set of mouthparts. The thorax consists of three segments,
insects have invaded the fecal mass after defecation and
the prothorax, mesothorax, and metathorax, and bears six
 never were parasites at all.
jointed legs and four, two, or no wings, depending on the
Unfortunately, even when we restrict our consideration
zoologic order to which the insect in question belongs.
to unambiguously parasitic arthropods, we still have too
Thus roaches (Dictyoptera), caddisflies (Trichoptera), bee-
big a chore on our hands. Medical entomology is a formi-
tles (Coleoptera), and certain bugs (Hemiptera) have four
dable subject, and the selection of appropriate information
wings, most flies (Diptera) have two, and the lice
is not always an easy task because certain topics that at first
(Mallophaga and Anoplura) and fleas (Siphonaptera) are
appear to bear directly on current problems of veterinary
wingless. When four wings are present, one pair arises from
practice actually lie within the responsibilities of very few
the mesothorax and the second pair from the metathorax.
veterinarians. For example, information on mosquitoes
The functional wings of Diptera arise from the mesothorax.
may occupy half of a textbook of medical entomology,
The abdomen consists of 1l or fewer segments, of which
 and mosquitoes serve as vectors of such important diseases
the terminal ones are modified for copulation or egg laying.
 as equine encephalomyelitis and canine heartworm infec-
As
typical arthropods, insects have a chitinous cuticle
fion. However, few veterinarians invest the time and effort
necessary to acquire a detailed knowledge of mosquitoes
thelial cells of ectodermal origin, which is cast off or molted
because control of these pests is usually the responsibility
 at intervals to permit growth and metamorphosis. The chi-
of the medical entomologist. Of more direct interest to
tinous cuticle serves as an exoskeleton, thus as both a body
5
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
covering and a place for attachment of muscles. Heavily
a portable case in which they live, with only their legs
chitinized areas or plates of cuticle are connected by thin-
 and head protruding. Ultimately the larva will form a
ner, lightly chitinized areas, thus permitting movement and
 cocoon from which the adult emerges. The males swarm
some degree of expansion as, for example, when the abdo-
over bodies of water, and females fly into the swarms to
men of a feeding female mosquito fills with blood. Insect
 os r r sia      
muscles are striated and often capable of extraordinarily
larvae that hatch can make their way into this environ-
rapid contraction. The cuticle is overlain by a thin lipoidal
ment. A good guide to the species of caddisflies has
surface layer, the epicuticle, which is impermeable to water
been produced for the fly-fishing enthusiast (Pobst and
but freely permeable to lipids and lipid-soluble substances.
Richards, 1999).
When a developing insect has grown too large for its
Caddisflies became important in veterinary medicine
cuticle, the hypodermis lays down a new, thin, elastic cuti-
only recently. Work by Madigan and others at the
cle under the old one. The old cuticle then splits, and the
University of California-Davis has shown that they serve
insect emerges from it. This proces, termed molting or
as vectors of Potomac horse fever's causative agent,
ecdysis, divides the life of the individual insect into a
Neorickettsia risticii. It seems that the caddisflies are inter-
series of stages, or instars. All instars of cockroaches,
mediate hosts of the metacercarial stage of trematode para-
bugs, and lice resemble their parents except for being smal-
sites of bats (trematodes of the family Lecithodendriidae)
ler, whereas a newly hatched fly, beetle, or flea looks more
or trout, Deropegus species, Crepidostormurm species, and
like a worm than an insect. The former situation is called
Creptotrema species (Pusterla et al, 2000). Unfortunately,
simple metamorphosis (hemimetabolous metamorpho-
these trematodes are often, as in the case of the rickettsial
sis) and the series of juvenile instars are called nymphs,
 disease of salmon poisoning in dogs, infected with a rick-
whereas the latter situation is called cormplex metamorpho-
ettsia, N. ristici. Horses fed mature caddisflies (Dicosmoecus
sis (holometabolous metamorphosis) and the juvenile
gilvipes) developed the clinical and hematologic disease
wormlike stages are called larvae. In complex metamorpho-
of Potomac horse fever (Madigan et al, 2000). Thus
sis, the complete restructuring necessary for the transfor-
when the horse digests the caddisfly containing the trema-
mation of the wormlike larva into the adult insect takes
tode metacercaria, the action releases the N. risticii that
place during the pupal stage, and all related events are
 causes the disease in the horse. The finding is important
referred to as pupation. The exiting of an adult insect
 because control can be as simple as providing horses with
from its pupal case is termed eclosion for the purpose of
waterers that are covered in some fashion to prevent
distinguishing adult emergence from the pupal case from
the bodies of these flies from contaminating the horse's
 the hatching of a larva from an egg.
 drinking water.
Order Trichoptera, Caddisflies
Order Diptera, Flies
Trichoptera is a very large group of flies (some 7000+
 Adult dipteran flies, except certain specialized groups such
 species) that is better known to fly fishermen than to med-
as the parasites of the family Hippoboscidae, have one pair
ical entomologists. These flies have four wings and short
of functional mesothoracic wings. The metathoracic pair
mouth parts that are used for consuming water and nectar
- pa sl a paders-ani a pasaaa a
(Figure 2-1). In species that occur in temperate climates,
teres (Figure 2-2), which are present even in the wingless
the adult population is often limited to one generation per
hippoboscids. Metamorphosis is complex. Although most
year, and they may occur in large blooms. The larvae are
dp e  esd s
aquatic in fresh water and feed on microorganisms or as
 that have already hatched, and the females producing larvae
predators on other insects. The larvae will often construct
in this manner are said to be ovoviviparous. Hippoboscids
and tsetses retain their larvae within their abdomens
through the third larval instar, and these larvae pupate
almost immediately on being born.
There are three main groups of flies: the gnats and mos-
quitoes of the Nematocera, the horseflies and deerflies of the
Brachycera, and the houseflies, flesh flies and blowflies, bot-
flies, tsetse flies, and keds of the Cyclorrhapha (Table 2-1).
 All three major groups contain bloodsucking species, many
of which serve as disease vectors. In the Nematocera and
Brachycera, only the females take blood meals, and, usually,
larval development occurs in aquatic environments. Larvae
FIGURE 2-1. Caddisfly adult. The larvae of these flies become
of muscid, sarcophagid, calliphorid, and oestrid cyclorrha-
infected with the metacercariae of trematodes harboring the
phans can invade living tissues to produce a pathologic
causative agent of Potomac horse fever. (Courtesy Dr. John E.
condition called myiasis. The developmental times of
Madigan, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California,
various flies, along with those of some fleas and lice, are
Davis, California.)
presented in Table 2-2.
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
distinguish the taxon that we recognize as mosquitoes
from other insects with which they might be confused.
Life history
 Mosquitoes lay their eggs on water or in dry places that
 tend to flood seasonally. Eggs laid on water hatch in less
than a week. Larvae (Figure 2-4) are air breathers and die
within hours if their air supply is shut off by an oil film on
the water's surface. The larvae molt four times, usually
Halter
within the space of 2 weeks, and then pupate. As is char-
Antenna
acteristic of all nematocerans and brachycerans, the adult
emerges through a T-shaped hole in the back of the last
larval skin. Culicid pupae are elaborate, free-swimming
organisms with a large cephalothorax. As development pro-
ceeds, the structures of the adult mosquito become appar-
ent (Figure 2-5). The pupal stage ordinarily lasts from
2 days to a week, but a few hours suffice for certain dry
 climate species. The adult mosquito emerges through a
Palp
I-shaped hole in the back of the pupal case as it floats at
the water's surface. After about 24 hours, the wings have
expanded and hardened, and the mosquito is able to fly.
FGURE 2-2. Simulium (Nematocera: Simulidae), a blackfly. The
Only female mosquitoes suck blood, the protein of which is
halteres (singular, haltere) are balancing organs that have
necessary for the maturation of the ovaries. The female
evolved in Diptera in place of the metathoracic wings. The
mosquito will very typically feed every few days, with
maxillary palpi are sensory structures associated with the
 each blood meal being used to nourish the next batch of
mouthparts. The antennae of blackflies consist of 11 similar
eggs to be produced and laid; after the eggs are laid, the
segments.
female will then seek out another host. It is the repeated
feeding of female mosquitoes on different hosts that makes
them such efficient vectors of disease. Males and nonrepro-
Nematocera
ductive females get by on nectar and plant juices. The
Nematocerans are typically small and relatively delicate.
females of some species that normally feed on blood are
 The antennae are long and many-segmented, and the indi-
sometimes capable of ovarian maturation without a blood
vidual segments resemble one another like beads on a
meal (i.e., the females are autogenous). Other species of
string. Nematocerans generally breed in aquatic or semia-
 mosquitoes feed only on plants, and therefore these species
quatic habitats, and their larvae are suitably endowed with
are of little interest as pests or disease vectors. Mammals
 appendages for swimming, breathing, and gathering food in
and birds are preferred hosts (or victims), both of blood-
water. Only female nematocerans suck blood; the males
feeding mosquitoes and of the various disease organisms
never do and subsist instead on nectar.
that they transmit.
Family Culicidae, mosquitoes
Injury
Identification
Under ordinary circumstances the amount of blood lost
Mosquitoes have long, 14- or 15-segmented antennae,
to mosquito attack is entirely trivial. Sometimes, however,
an elongated proboscis consisting of a bundle of stylets
 circumstances favor the simultaneous emergence of enor-
loosely encased in a sheath formed by the labium, and
mous swarms of mosquitoes that by their concerted attacks
 fringes of scales on the wings (Figure 2-3). These anatomic
can actually bleed cattle to death. For example, 7 days after
details are sufficient taxonomic characteristics to reliably
Hurricane Allen (August 10, 1980) brought a prolonged
TABLE 2-1
 Classification of the Diptera
Nematocera
Brachycera
Cyclorrhapha
Culicidae, mosquitoes
Horseflies and deerflies
Muscidae, houseflies
Simulidae, blackflies
Hippoboscidae, keds
Ceratopogonidae, midges
Sarcophagidae, flesh flies
 Psychodidae, sandflies
Calliphoridae, blowflies
Oestridae and other botflies
8
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
TABLE 2-2
xaoll pue 'seale 'eaidia snoea jo saeeis aloso all aun noy panbay sawll aun uo seiaa awos
Egg (perslstence
and tlme to
Adult Life Span
Group
hatchlng)
Larva
Pupa
Male
Female
NEMATOCERA
Mosquito
 Days to years
7 days
2-3 days
1wk
4-5 mo; can hibernate
Blackfly
3-7 days diapause
 7-12 days
 2-6 days
2-10 wk
Weeks to months
BRACHYCERA
Tabanid
5-7 days
1 yr 6 mo-3 yr
1-3 wk 
Few days
Months
 1 generation/year in temperate climates 
CYCLORRHAPHA
Musca
8-12 hr
5 days
4-5 days
<Females
2-10 wk; can hibernate
10-12 generations/summer
Stomoxys
1-3 days
9-60 days
4-9 days
Weeks
Haematobia
1 day
4-8 days
6-8 days
Weeks
(overwintering
stage)
Calliphorid
6-48 hr
3-9 days
5-10 days
35 days
Cochliomyia
11-21 hr
3.5-4.5 days
7 days
Weeks
 Sarcophagid
Often skipped
14 days
Weeks
Melophagus
Skipped
Hours (10-12/female)
3 wk
(aeu o ou I) ou 
Gasterophilus
5 days
9-11 mo
3-5 wk
Weeks (early spring)
Hypoderma
5-7 days
8-11 mo
4-5 wk
Weeks
Oestrus
 Skipped
25-35 days or 8-10 mo
Hibernation
4 wk
or 3-6 wk
FLEAS: SIPHONAPTERA
Ctenocephalides
2-21 days
9-15 days
7 days-1 yr
Weeks (can be kept alive
 a long time in laboratory)
LICE: PHTHIRAPTERA (SIMPLE METAMORPHOSIS)
Nymph (no larvae
Group
Egg
or pupae)
Adult
Pediculus
7-9 days
 9-11 days
 30 days
Haematopinus
11 days
11-22 days
14 days
Felicola
10-20 days
14-21 days
14-21 days
Trichodectes
 7-14 days
14 days
20 days
*These represent generalities.
drought to an abrupt end and flooded 5000 acres of a Texas
been ended by high water. The flood led to the synchronous
ranch, cattle were observed to be visibly distressed by
development of vast numbers of eggs that had accumulated
swarms of Aedes sollcitans mosquitoes. The next morning,
during the prolonged drought, thus producing the enor-
15 cattle were found dead of exsanguination manifested by
mous swarms of mosquitoes capable of exsanguinating
extreme pallor of the mucous membranes and postmortal
mature cattle overnight. Abbitt and Abbitt, who obtained
evidence of severe anemia. The interval of 7 days between
and thoughtfully analyzed the evidence in this outbreak,
flooding of the pastures and the sudden death of the cattle
estimated that 3.8 million mosquito bites (5300 bites per
corresponded exactly to the time required for A. sollicitans
minute for 12 hours) would be required to remove half of
to develop from egg to biting adult once its dormancy had
the total blood volume from a 366-kg cow, assuming that
CHA P TER 2 Arthropods
Trumpet -
Proboscis
FGURE 2-3. A mosquito (Nematocera: Culicidae). Note the long
FIGURE 2-5. Mosquito pupa. The "trumpets" on the cepha-
antennae and long mouthparts (proboscis).
lothorax are pupal respiratory structures. The eyes, legs,
thorax, and abdomen of the developing adult mosquito can be
seen through the pupal cuticle.
Abbitt, 1981). Cats will sometimes develop allergies to mos-
 quito bites that will manifest as large pruritic and erythemic
lesions on the nose or other parts of the face (Clare and
Medleau, 1997).
Disease transmission
A vector is an animal, often an arthropod, that transmits
an infective organism from one host to another. (An inan-
imate object that serves to transmit infections, such as a
doorknob or dirty tissue, is called a fomite.) A vector that
transmits infective organisms directly (and, necessarily,
 promptly) to a recipient host without development or mul-
tiplication of the organisms having occurred is called a
mechanical vector. A biologic vector, by contrast, is one
in which the infective organisms either undergo develop-
o pu q aq q o no k o ju
the recipient host. Thus a biologic vector is a true host of
the disease organism. In the case of sexually reproducing
 disease organisms such as protozoans and helminths, vec-
tors that host developing or asexually reproducing stages
of the organism are termed intermediate hosts, whereas
vectors that host sexually mature stages are termed defin-
itive hosts. Mosquitoes are vectors of many pathogens
(Table 2-3). Culex, Aedes, Anopheles, and other genera of
mosquitos serve as biologic vectors (intermediate hosts) of
filariid worms such as Dirofilaria irmmitis, the canine heart-
worm, and Wuchereria bancrofti, the cause of human lym-
phatic filariasis. Mosquitoes of the genus Aropheles serve as
biologic vectors (definitive hosts) of the blood-inhabiting
protozoon genus Plasmodium, which causes malaria in
FGURE 2-4. Mosquito larva.
birds, rodents, and primates. Mosquitoes also serve as
10
CH A P T E R 2 Arthropods
TABLE 2-3
 Some Pathogens Vectored by Nematoceran Flies
Vector
Some Transmltted Pathogens
Antenna
Culicidae
 Filarids
(mosquitos)
 Setaria: horses, cattle, deer
Heartworm: dogs and cats
Wuchereria and Brugia: humans and cats
Protozoa
Malaria (Plasmodium): birds and primates
Viruses
 Equine encephalitis
Palp
West Nile virus
Rift Valley fever
Simuliidae
Filariids
(blackflies)
Onchocerca: horses, cattle, sheep, humans
FIGURE 2-6. Head of a blackfly (Nematocera: Simulidae).
Protozoa
water's surface or on partly submerged stones, twigs, or
Malaria (Leucocytozoon): birds
Filarids
   d  s  r
Ceratopogonidae
 year (multivoltine species), larvae hatch from these eggs
(biting midges)
Onchocerca: horses
a few days later, but in species that produce only one
Dipetalonema: primates
brood per year (univoltine species), the eggs remain in a
Protozoa
 protracted state of metabolic quiescence, or diapause, and
Malaria {Leucocytozoon): birds
do not hatch until the following year. Blackfly larvae
Viruses
manage to cling to the surfaces of stones in rapidly
Blue tongue
 l o s aq d sas n 
African horse sickness
on their posteriors and on a short proleg near the anterior
Psychodidae
Protozoa
end of their bodies (Figure 2-7). By flexing their bodies, the
(sandflies)
Leishmania species
larvae are able to move from place to place like inchworms.
Rickettsia
Blackfly larvae also spin silken strands to help anchor them-
Bartonella
selves and later to form cocoons, by means of which the
Viruses
pupae continue to cling to the rocks. Adults emerge from
these pupae and are carried to the surface in a bubble of air.
 3-day fever virus
Injury
The female blackfly is a vicious biter. Her mouthparts
biologic vectors of viral encephalitides (e.g-, equine ence-
consist of a bundle of flattened, serrated, bladelike stylets
phalomyelitis), West Nile virus, and the viruses of rabbit
loosely ensheathed by the labium, which itself terminates in
myxomatosis, fowl pox, and yellow, dengue, and Rift Valley
a pair of labella. Instead of piercing a blood vessel and
fevers. In the case of viruses, bacteria, and the like, the
feeding from the lumen as a mosquito, bedbug, or sucking
terms intermediate and definitive are redundant inasmuch
louse does, the female blackfly lacerates tissues until a pool
 as sexual reproduction does not occur in these groups.
of blood forms, and then she imbibes the blood from
the pool.
Family Simulidae, blackflies
Susceptibility to and severity of host reaction to the bites
Identification
of many arthropods vary remarkably among individuals.
Blackflies (see Figure 2-2) are small, stout-bodied, black,
With continued exposure to bites, initially susceptible indi-
 gray, or yellowish-brown flies with relatively short antennae
viduals may become relatively immune so that they are less
consisting of nine to 12 (usually 1l) similar segments,
frequently bitten or suffer less reaction to the bites. Or, less
and short mouthparts with prominent maxillary palps
- p o  q  a 
(Figure 2-6).
tinued aftack excites a more severe and sometimes even
fatal reaction. Sensitivity to the bites of blackflies is a
Life history
common phenomenon, and the reactive wheal may con-
 Blackflies breed only in running water. Although moun-
tinue to itch for many days and tends to be aggravated
tain torrents and temporary upland streams are favored
by scratching. In a hypersensitive person a single bite
 breeding sites of many species, some particularly important
may evoke sufficient edematous reaction to force the eye-
species breed in large rivers. Eggs are deposited on the
lids shut. Burghardt, Whitlock, and McEnerney (1951)
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
11
FIGURE 2-7. Life history of a blackfly
(family Simulidae). The female blackfly
 deposits her eggs on partly submerged
 objects in rapidly flowing streams. The
larvae that hatch from these eggs cling
to the stones and feed on organic
matter carried by the current. when
ready to pupate, the larvae spin
silken cocoons that secure them to
the substrate. Adults that emerge
from these pupal cases are carried to
the surface in a bubble of air and fly off 
in search of a blood meal.
Under water
described a dermatitis in catle due to Simulium. The
leucocytozoonosis, a disease of poultry and wild birds
lesions consisted of blisters, welts, and scabs affecting the
caused by several species of the haemosporidian protozoan
 head, thorax, and ears, and acute exudative lesions along
genus Leucocytozoor. Blackflies also serve as obligate inter-
the midabdominal line. Heavy swarms of blackflies have
mediate hosts of the filarid nematode Onchocerca guttur-
been known to kill grazing livestock by the thousands.
 osa, an apparently innocuous parasite of cattle. In the
However, the exact cause of death, whether it be anemia,
blackfly the worm develops from the skin-dwelling micro-
hypersensitivity reactions, or toxin absorbed from fly saliva
filarial stage ingested by the fly to the third-stage larval
injected into the bite, remains problematic. During blackfly
nematode that is infective to the next host. Blackflies
season, dogs and cats can manifest small pruritic bloody
(e.g-,Simulium damnosum and Simulium ochraceum) also
 spots on the ears, face, or body. Prevention of such bites is
serve as vectors of the related nematode parasite Onchocerca
best accomplished using repellents.
volvulus, which causes human onchocerciasis, manifested
by the formation of dermal nodules and which leads, pre-
Disease transmission
dominantly in the African form of the disease, to blindness.
 Blackflies transmit a number of pathogens (see Table
Because some of these vectors are riverine breeders, the
2-3). Blackflies (e.g., Simulium aureum, Simulium jenningsi,
disease tends to be concentrated along valleys, and the 
Simulium vittatum, and Simulium pictipes) transmit
ensuing blindness is therefore called “river blindness."
12
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
Control
pass through standard window screening and make them-
Blackflies attack in swarms during daylight hours and
selves obnoxious to sleepers. In sensitized individuals the
when the air is relatively still. Smoke repels them, and,
reaction to the bites lasts longer and is more painful than
although chemical repellents afford a degree of protection,
that to mosquito bites.
campers, gardeners, and livestock usually find their surest
“Queensland itch," demonstrated by Riek (1953b) as
relief in the lee of a smudge pot. Livestock should be stabled
representing allergic dermatitis caused by the development
until sundown during seasons of particularly heavy blackfly
of hypersensitivity to the bites of Culicoides robertsi, affect
attack. Blackflies can be discouraged from attacking horses'
only certain horses. Other horses pastured with the affected
 ears by applying petroleum jelly to the inner surface of the
ones never show any signs of disease. Initial lesions are
pinna.
 discrete papules confined to the dorsal surfaces. Later, the
 hair mats and crusts form and eventually fall off, leaving
Family Ceratopogonidae (Heleidae), biting midges,
hairless areas that in severe cases become confluent.
"no-see-ums"
 Pruritus is intense, and horses may injure themselves by
Identification
scratching and rolling to relieve the itching. Antihistamine
 Ceratopogonids are tiny (less than 2 mm), relatively gla-
therapy accelerates regression of the lesions (Riek, 1953a).
brous flies. Their antennae are long and slender, and their
mouthparts are relatively short (Figure 2-8).
Disease transmission
Culicoides species transmit the viruses of bluetongue and
Life history
African horse sickness (see Table 2-3). Onchocerca cervicalis of
 Life histories of various species differ in detail; some
horses, Onchocerca gibsoni of cattle, and three relatively innoc-
species require freshwater and others saltwater habitats.
uous filarid parasites of humans (Dipetalonema perstans,
Some breed in water-filled holes in trees, others in decaying
Dipetalonema streptocerca, and Mansonella ozzardi) all
vegetation, sandy and silt soils, and the like. Adults are
 develop from microfilaria to infective third-stage larva in
crepuscular and nocturnal. Only females suck blood, and,
the bodies of Culicoides organisms. Protozoans transmitted
although they are fairly strong flyers, they tend to remain
by Culicoides include Hepatocystis of Old World monkeys and
 close to their breeding grounds. A few, however, may ven-
Haemoproteus and Leucocytozoon of wild and domestic birds.
ture forth as far as a half mile when the air is still. Most
important species belong to the genera Culicoides and
Family Psychodidae, sandflies
Leptoconops.
Identification
Psychodids are small, dull-colored, slender flies with
Injury
long antennae. The wing veins radiate in nearly straight
The bites of Culicoides inflict pain far out of proportion
lines from the base to the tip of the wing (Figure 2-9).
to the size of the fly. In fact, people victimized by these tiny
terrors frequently do not realize that they are being tormen-
Life history
ted by insects, sometimes mistaking them for a bit of
 Psychodids lay their eggs in cracks, crevices, or burrows
cigarette ash because of their small size. Culicoides easily
in which moderate temperatures, darkness, and nearly
100% humidity prevail. They spend at least 2 months as
egg, larvae, and pupae but are short-lived as adults. Adult
psychodids are weak flyers and nocturnal in habit.
Important species belong to the genera Phlebotomus and
Lutzomyia. Phlebotomus occurs in the Old World and
Lutzomyia in the New World; all species are tropical or
relatively subtropical in distribution. Species of Lutzomyia
are found in the United States, including Lutzomyia vexa-
tor, Lutzomyia apache, Lutzomyia shannoni, and others, but
it is not clear how many of these species serve as successful
vectors of Leishrmania species in the wild.
Disease transmission
Psychodids transmit Leishmaria species, hemoflagellate
parasites of dogs, rodents, and primates, including humans
(see Table 2-3). It appears that molecules in the salivary
gland secretions of the phlebotomine vector modulate to
some extent the course of Leishmania development in the
FIGURE 2-8. Culicoides (Nematocera: Heleidae), a "no-see-um."
host that is bitten (Warburg et al, 1994). Also transmitted
Culicoides differs from Culicidae mosquitoes in being smaller and
by phlebotomines are the 3-day fever virus and Bartonella
having a shorter proboscis.
baciliformis infection of humans.
CHA P TER 2 Arthropods
13
Deltamethrin-impregnated collars for the control of canine
leishmaniasis (Manzillo et al, 2006) and the spot-on formu-
lation provide excellent protection between monthly appli-
cations (Mencke et al, 2003).
Brachycera
Family Tabanidae, horseflies and deerflies
Identification
Tabanids are stout-bodied flies varying from about the
size of a housefly to as large as a hummingbird. The short,
stout, anteriorly projecting antennae consist of three mark-
edly different segments (Figures 2-10 and 2-11). The first
segment is small, the second may be expanded, and the 
third is marked by annulations that make tabanid antennae
appear to have many more than three units.
Life history
Female tabanids require a blood meal for maturation of
their eggs and obtain it from mammals, reptiles, and occa-
sionally, birds. Male tabanids are not blood feeders but
subsist on nectar, sap, and aphid feces; the females also
require these sources of carbohydrate in addition to
blood (Mally and Kutzer, 1984). Except for a few xerophilic
species, tabanids tend to be concentrated along water-
0 0i 0 0t jo sss u pia keu ane sg ss1o
foliage overhanging water. Larvae hatch in a week or so,
FGURE 2-9. Phlebotomus (Nematocera: Psychodidae). The wing
depending on temperature and relative humidity, and drop
veins radiate in nearly straight lines from the base to the tip of
into the water. First- and second-stage larvae do not feed,
the wing.
but the third and later stages are aggressively carnivorous or
saprophagic and feed on insect larvae, crustaceans, snails,
Control
earthworms, young frogs, plant tissues, and dead organic
 Sandflies can be prevented from biting dogs by the use of
 matter, depending on the species of tabanid and the avail-
 deltamethrin-impregnated collars and a combination of
ability of food (Mally and Kutzer, 1984). In temperate
 permethrin and imidacloprid in a spot-on formulation.
regions, larvae overwinter 1
by  burying  themselves  in
The collar can provide up to 6 months of protection.
 soil or dead vegetation and pupate the following spring.
Palp -
Labium
Stylet-
abellum
FIGURE 2-10. Chrysops (Brachycera: Tabanidae), a deerfly. Because the distal segment of the
tabanid antenna is annulated, it gives the impression that the antenna consists of many seg-
ments; however, there are only three. The wings often have dark markings.
14
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FIGURE 2-11. Tabanus (Brachycera: Tabanidae),
a horsefly. The wings are typically without
markings.
Thus usually only one generation is produced each year.
After a tabanid has finished feeding, the bite wound tends
Adult tabanids are strong flyers and very difficult to dis-
 to bleed for many minutes, thus attracting opportunists
courage. In Michigan, Hybomitra species were found to
such as Musca. In fact, Musca and other flies can often be
reach maximum abundance in early summer (May to
seen clustered about a feeding tabanid, exploiting the
June), whereas Chrysops and Tabanus species were most
Teu e Suyei jo iouuu Addors si Aq papioe kunoq
abundant in late summer (early to late July, Strickler
Vicious daylight bloodsuckers, tabanids do not usually
and Walker, 1993). In the salt marshes of Cape Cod,
attack indoors, but if already feeding when the host
Massachusetts, the greenhead flies Tabanus nigrovittatus
enters a building, they will continue to feed until replete.
and Tabarus contermirus were found to be most active
The most efficient solution to tabanid attack is to stable the
in the afternoon (Hayes et al, 1993). In Florida, peak
animals during the hours of peak fly activity.
Chrysops activity occured in the morning and evening,
with a correlation to relative humidity rather than to tem-
Disease transmission
perature and light intensity (Cilek and Schreiber, 1996).
 The pain that a tabanid inflicts when it bites tends to
Konstantinov (1993) showed that masking the visibility of
increase its efficiency as a mechanical vector of disease
a cow by placing it in a wooded area did not reduce the
 organisms. The fly, driven away by its victim's defenses 
 number of Hybomitra fies that found the cow when they
before it has had time to feed to repletion, soon alights
were released 150 meters from the host animal.
on a second host to finish its meal and perhaps to contam-
inate the wound with fresh, mechanically borne bacteria
Injury
(e.g-, anthrax), viruses (e.g-, equine infectious anemia),
All arthropod attacks cause some annoyance to the host
and the like. The large volume of blood imbibed by each
and exact some expenditure of energy in efforts to avoid or
tabanid (up to four times the weight of the fly, Krinsky,
relieve their effects. When flies are particularly numerous,
1976) also contributes to its efficiency as a mechanical
 pastured livestock may be driven frantic by incessant
vector by helping to compensate for the low concentration
attacks and can spend so much time and energy combating
of microorganisms usually found in blood, and for their
the onslaught that they cannot rest or graze adequately. The
failure to multiply in the body of the intermediate host.
resultant exhaustion always interferes with production and
Tabanids have been incriminated in the mechanical
transmission of anaplasmosis (Araplasma species), anthrax
feared by livestock. Some horseflies are as large as hum-
(Bacillus anthracis), tularemia ("deerfly fever,” Francisella
mingbirds and inflict an excruciating bite. When one of
tularensis), and equine infectious anemia virus. Mechanical
these monsters attacks, horses are likely to bolt, and it
transmission of equine infectious anemia virus from acutely
behooves the rider or driver to come promptly to their
infected ponies to susceptible ponies occurred affer as few
aid. In biting, the mandibles and maxillae of tabanids lac-
as 10 bites by contaminated Tabarus fuscicostatus, but all
erate the blood vessels and the labella lap up the blood that
attempts at transmission from a chronically infected pony
flows freely from the wound. Repeated aftacks in the skin-
failed (Hawkins et al, 1973). Mammalian trypanosomes
folds about a cow's udder and in the groove between the
(hemoflagellate protozoans) may be transmitted mechani-
udder halves lead to extensive weeping eczematous lesions
cally or biologically by tabanids, depending on the species
that may become secondarily infected with bacteria.
involved. Surra (Trypanosoma evansi), a fatal disease of
CHA P TE R 2 Arthropods
15
called spiracles or stigmata at the base. Slender larvae of
TABLE 2-4
 Some Pathogens Vectored by Brachyceran Flies
the families Muscidae, Sarcophagidae, and Calliphoridae
are usually referred to as maggots (Figure 2-12), whereas
Mechanlcally Vectored
Blologlcally Vectored
the rather stout larvae of the family Oestridae and its rela-
Filarids: Elaeophora—elk,
tives are called bots or grubs (compare with Figure 2-25).
Anthrax
T'ularemia
sheep
When the third instar larva enters the pupal stage, its integ-
Protozoa: Trypanosoma evansi
Protozoa: Trypanosoma
ument hardens to form a puparium, or pupal case. Pupae
theileri—cattle
 of most cyclorrhaphan flies are found in decaying organic
material or soil. A few species have specialized pupation
sites. For example, pupae of the sheep ked Melophagus
ovinus are found attached to the wool of their host. The
horses, camels, elephants, and dogs in Asia, is transmitted
adult fly emerges (ecloses) through a circular hole in the
mechanically, and the flies lose their ability to transmit the
anterior end of the puparium. Cyclorrhaphan antennae
infection a few hours after feeding on an animal infected
consist of three dissimilar segments, the third and largest
with surra (Table 2-4). Trypanosoma theileri, on the other
of which bears a frondlike structure called an arista near its
hand, must multiply in the body of the tabanid because it is
 proximal end. The antennae are directed ventrally, but the
so scarce in the blood of cattle that one must usually resort
aristae project anteriorly (Figure 2-13). Parasitic specializa-
to culture techniques to demonstrate its presence there.
tion has proceeded in two directions in the Cyclorrhapha.
Otherwise, T. theileri would not be distributed throughout
In the families Muscidae and Hippoboscidae there has been
the world as a parasite of cattle and their near relatives.
specialization from a type adapted to lapping up liquids
A vector in which such parasitic organisms multiply is
(e.g-, Musca) (see Figure 2-13) toward a bayonet-like
sometimes referred to as a cyclopropagative host to distin-
proboscis for piercing the skin and sucking blood (e.g--
guish it from a cyclodevelopmental host, in which the
Storoxys) and thus toward parasitism in the adult stage.
 parasite actually undergoes ontogenetic development. An
In the families Calliphoridae and Sarcophagidae and certain
example of the latter is Elaeophora schneideri, the arterial
members of the family Muscidae, the adult flies have
worm of deer, elk, and domestic sheep in the southwestern
retained their lapping mouthparts and remained scaven-
 United States, which develops from the microfilarial stage
gers; instead, it is in the larval stages that parasitism has
in the blood to the infective third stage within the body of
evolved. The botflies (e.g-, Hypoderma and Gasterophilus)
the tabanid (Hibler and Adcock, 1971). More details con-
have proceeded even further in this direction. Their larvae
cerning disease transmission by tabanids are to be found in
have become highly specialized host- and site-specific
the review by Krinsky (1976).
parasites, whereas the mouthparts of the adult flies have
become vestigial and nonfunctional. Parasitism by fly
Control
larvae is termed myiasis and is of worldwide economic
Horseflies and deerflies are very difficult to kill or repel;
importance.
often the best solution is to stable livestock during the
hours of peak fly activity. These flies can use blood from
Family Muscidae
wild animals as food and have larval habitats independent of
Musca
 domestic livestock. Thus unlike flies more directly depen-
 Identification. The genus Musca contains 26 species of
dent on their hosts, such as Stomoxys and Haematobia,
which three, M. domestica, the common housefly, Musca
these flies can be controlled chemically by repellents alone
autumnalis, the face fly, and Musca vetustissima, the
(Foil and Hogsette, 1994). Konstantinov (1992) showed
Australian bush fly, may serve as examples. These three
that only 3% of flies attacking a cow are killed by the
 species resemble one another closely enough to require an
cows during their attacks. McMahon and Gaugler (1993)
expert to distinguish specimens on morphologic grounds
suggested that the draining of salt marsh areas to decrease
but differ sufficiently in behavior to make their identities
mosquito populations may inadvertently have actually
obvious to anyone familiar with their habits. The mouth-
increased habitats preferred by larval tabanids and hence
 parts of these all too familiar flies consist of a fleshy, retract-
 increased the numbers of these biting flies.
able proboscis terminating in a pair of corrugated spongy
organs, the labella (see Figure 2-13).
Cyclorrhapha
Life history and disease transmission. M. dormestica lays
The Cyclorrhapha group represents the apex of dipteran
its eggs on animal manure or almost any kind of decaying
evolution, and the common housefly, Musca domestica, is
 organic material. A female M. domestica may deposit 2000
a typical example. Instead of the aquatic habitats favored by
eggs in an average lifetime of 6 to 8 weeks. A tiny, white,
nematocerans and brachycerans, cyclorrhaphans tend to
first-stage larva (maggot) hatches from the egg in a day or
breed in decaying plant and animal tissues, manure, car-
less at summer temperatures. This larva grows, molts twice,
rion, and the like. The three larval instars are more or less
and in a few days becomes a fully developed third-stage
conical animals with a mouth, usually armed with hooks, at
larva. When ready to pupate, the third-stage larva migrates
the apex and a pair of prominent respiratory openings
into a drier medium, shortens, thickens, and becomes
16
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
Irachea
Spiracle
tracheal trunks leading from the posterior spiracles. Pigmented tracheae are a specific character
of Cochliomyia hominivorax, the American screwworm. (Specimens courtesy R.J. Gagne.)
darker in color as a result of hardening and tanning of the
M. autumnalis (the face fly) was introduced into North
third-stage cuticle in forming the puparium. The adult fly
America from Europe, Asia, or Africa in the early 1950s.
emerges in 2 or 3 weeks by forcing off the end of the
These flies crawl about the faces of horses and cattle, feed-
 puparium with its ptilinum, a bladderlike structure inflated
ing on the ocular and nasal discharges induced by their
with hemolymph. The ptilinum projects from the frontal
presence, and are extremely annoying to pastured animals.
suture and is withdrawn into the head after the fly has
Eggs are deposited in fresh catle dung, and the larvae
emerged from the puparium. Like the umbilicus of mam-
pupate in the dried dung or nearby soil. The adult flies
mals, it is of no further service to the animal. The adult fly
overwinter in buildings. These hibernating adults, like
then makes its way to the surface of the medium in which
those of the cluster fly, Pollenia rudis (a calliphorid fly
the pupa lies buried, expands its wings by pumping hemo-
that as a maggot parasitizes earthworms and whose adults
lymph into the wing veins, and flies away in search of food.
cluster together inside dwellings in winter to hibernate),
The housefly feeds on feces, syrup, milk, decaying fruit, and
cause considerable annoyance to the human occupants
other dissolved and soluble materials. Houseflies will feed
when, aroused by a spell of warmish weather, they go buzz-
on secretions around the eyes, nostrils, and mouth and on
ing and blundering about the house, falling into drinks and
blood that continues to ooze from wounds made by taba-
 making themselves generally disagreeable. Curiously, the
nids. Musca species annoy horses and cattle to distraction
active adult face fly of summer appears loath to enter build-
on warm, sunny days. Bacteria, protozoan cysts, helminth
ings and may be observed to swarm off dairy cows as they
eggs, and other disease organisms may be transported from
enter the stable to be milked. They wait outside during
filth to food, body openings, and wounds by way of the
milking and swarm back on the cows as they emerge
feces, vomit spots, sticky feet, and body hairs of houseflies.
from the stable. This, of course, contrasts with the behavior
The housefly also serves as a biologic vector of Draschia
of M. dormestica, so appropriately called the housefly.
 megastoma and Habronema muscae, nematode parasites of
 Grazing cattle afficted with face fly infestations have been
the stomach of the horse (Table 2-5).
shown to increase their herbage dry matter intake as they
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
17
“"Infection first began to spread from herd to herd after
face fly populations exceeded 10/animal for 1 month"
(Gerhardt et al, 1981).
M. vetustissira, the Australian bush fly, resembles
Arista
M. autumnalis in preferring to remain outdoors, by breed-
ing in livestock manures, and in crawling about on the faces
of livestock. However, M. vetustissima differs in displaying
an exasperating affnity for the faces of human beings as
well as livestock, by involvement of its larvae in wound
myiasis, and by an inability to hibernate. Instead of hiber-
nating, M. vetustissima reinvades southeastern Australia
each spring from the more tropical regions to the north.
In South Africa, Musca lusoria, Musca fasciata, and
Musca nevilli have been identified as vectors of a filarid
worm, Parafilaria bovicola, that lives in the subcutis, bores a
hole to the surface, and discharges its eggs in the bloody
fluid that weeps from the lesion (Nevill, 1975, 1985;
Kleynhans, 1987).
Fannia canicularis (the lesser or little housefly) breeds in
Palp
ground contaminated with septage drainage and is com-
monly found associated with large concentrations of chicken
manure. These flies can reach impressive numbers as pests
Labellum
 h n ss  d   
California are capable of the transmission of the canine eye
FGURE 2-13. Head of Musca domestica (Cyclorrhapha: Muscidae),
worm, Thelazia californiensis.
the common housefly. The proboscis is retractable into the head.
Control of filth flies. Selection and manner of applying
insecticide must conform to regulations that are subject to
change. Read the label carefully before applying any insec-
 graze deeper in the sward by taking heavier bites as they try
ticide to premises or to domestic animals. Regular spraying
to dislodge the flies from their muzzles (Dougherty et al,
of animal sheds, stables, and kennels with residual insecti-
1993). Face flies serve as biologic vectors of Thelazia species
cides should provide good control of flies and other fly-
(eyeworm), a genus of nematode worms that infect the
ing insects if reasonable effort is expended to minimize the
conjunctival sacs of horses and catle (Chitwood and
extent of breeding sites available to these insects. Space
Stoffolano, 1971). M. autumnalis also serves as mechanical
 sprays, insecticidal baits, and insecticidal resin strips offer
vector of infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis organisms
additional control. Diazinon, tetrachlorvinphos, and di-
(Moraxella bovis), which can survive for up to 3 days on the
chlorvos have excellent residual activity against houseflies,
legs of the fly (Steve and Lilly, 1965). Cattle protected from
face flies, horn flies, stable flies, and mosquitoes for 1 to
face flies had less keratoconjunctivitis and yielded fewer
4 weeks after application. Spraying resting and breed-
isolates of hemolytic M. bovis than did unprotected cattle.
ing areas is often effective. Dichlorvos, pyrethrins, and
TABLE 2-5
Some Pathogens Vectored by Flies of the Family Muscidae
Fly
Mechanlcally Vectored
Blologlcally Vectored
Musca domestica
 Suspected of transmitting many
 Spirurid nematodes
agents but seldom shown conclusively
Draschia megastoma: horses
Habronema muscae: horses
Musca autumnalis
Keratoconjunctivitis
Spirurid nematodes
Thelazia species: cattle
Fannia
Unknown
Spirurid nematode
Thelazia species: dogs
Stomoxys
Suspected
 Spirurid nematodes 
Habronema microstoma: horses
Haematobia
Filarid nematodes
Stephanofilaria: cattle
18
CH A P T E R 2 Arthropods
 pyrethroids are used as space sprays for feedlots and sheds.
These insecticides may be misted over the backs of animals
every 3 to 7 days. Fly baits containing dichlorvos may be
sprayed or sprinkled on fly-roosting areas. The sugar fly
bait New Improved Golden Malrin contains methomyl
and muscalure, a fly-attracting pheromone. The bait is
sprinkled around barns. Muscalure attracts and keeps the
flies around the bait, thus achieving an increased kill by the
insecticide.
Fly control in dairy barns and milk rooms may be
achieved with dichlorvos baits, foggers, and sprays. Tetra-
chlorvinphos and coumaphos are used as sprays or in dust
 bags and may be applied after milking.
The application of insecticides to lactating cows produ-
cing milk for human consumption demands extreme cau-
tion because there must not be any pesticide in the milk.
Read the label before using any pesticide. It is against the law
to use a pesticide in any manner not specified on the label,
and violations with respect to dairy cows are particularly
serious.
The control of face flies and houseflies on beef cattle and
dry dairy cattle may be achieved by regular application of
insecticides to animals and fly- breeding sites. Dichlorvos in
mineral oil may be smeared daily on the faces of cattle for
face fly control. Coumaphos or tetrachlorvinphos may be
Proboscis
applied to cattle as a free-flowing dust two or three times a
 p s jo s a pde-s  r
Pyrethrin or pyrethroid sprays may also be used.
Pyrethroid-containing ear tags and similar devices that
can be attached to animals allow a continuous, controlled
HGURE 2-14. Head of Stomoxys calcitrans (Cyclomhapha:
release of insecticides to aid in the control of flies attacking
Muscidae), the stable fly. In feeding. the entire proboscis is
cattle. Tetrachlorvinphos, a larvicidal organophosphate,
thrust into the skin of the host.
prevents the growth of larvae of coprophilic flies in the
manure of cattle fed this compound and may be given to
The palpi of Stomoxys are shorter than the proboscis (Figure
lactating dairy cows.
2-14; compare with Haermatobia, Figure 2-15). The third-
Face fly control on horses may be attempted by appli-
stage larvae resemble those of Musca and have posterior
cation of coumaphos, pyrethrins, or pyrethroids to the
spiracles with sinuous slits, but the spiracles are set farther
entire horse, and elimination or insecticidal treatment of
apart than those of Musca (see Figure 2-19).
breeding sites (i.e., cow manure) when feasible. Face flies do
not pursue their victims indoors, so stabling horses during
hours of peak fly activity often proves to be the best
solution.
 Biologic control methods using parasitoid wasps have
been developed and commercialized for the control of
Musca species. The larvae of the wasps develop in the mag-
gots of these flies, causing their death. It is possible to pur-
chase parasitized fly pupae from which the adult wasps will
emerge, and these can be used to release the wasps on
farms. The use of these wasps has proved to be of some
benefit when incorporated into integrated fly management
programs (Geden et al, 1992).
Stomoxys
Identification. The stable fly, Stomoxys calcitrans, resem-
HGURE 2-15. Head of Haematobia irritans (Cyclorhapha:
bles Musca species but has a long, pointed proboscis with
Muscidae), the horn fly. Haematobia somewhat resembles
which it inflicts painful bites instead of the vacuum cleaner
Stomoxys but is only half as large and has palps almost as long
affair with which Musca sucks up liquids from little puddles.
as its proboscis (compare with Figure 2-14).
CHA PTER 2 Arthropods
19
Life history. Stable flies have a life history similar to that
less than a day and crawl into the dropping to feed.
of face flies but differ in preferring decaying organic mate-
Pupation occurs in 4 days, and emergence of the adult
rials, such as piles of lawn clippings, damp hay, grain, or
follows in 6 more days. In ideal warm, humid weather,
 animal manure for egg laying. Stable flies of both sexes feed
the entire cycle from egg to egg requires 2 weeks or less 
 on blood once or twice a day, depending on the ambient
but may require a month or longer in dryer, cooler weather.
temperature, and suspend operations entirely during cold
In temperate climates, the horn fly overwinters in the
spells.
pupal stage, with diapause occurring principally during
 Injury and disease transmission. The presence 
of
September (Thomas, Hall, and Berry, 1987).
Stornoxys on grazing cattle will cause increased head and
Injury  and disease  transmission.  When  sufficiently
ear movement, skin twitches, and tail swishes. It is inter-
numerous, horn flies can impair milk production and
esting to note that the annoyed cattle will increase their
weight gains. Cattle protected from horn fly attack by ear
herbage dry matter intake and bite masses (Dougherty
tags impregnated with fenvalerate achieved 18% greater live
et al, 1994). The bite of the stable fly is painful and results
weight gains than did untreated controls (Foil, DeRoven,
in the interrupted feeding patterns observed with tabanids.
and Morrison, 1996; Haufe, 1982). H. irritans serves as a
The stable fly serves as biologic vector of Habronema micro-
biologic vector of Stephanofilaria stilesi, a filarioid nema-
stoma, a nematode parasite of the stomach of the horse (see
 tode parasite of North American cattle and etiologic agent
Table 2-5).
of stephanofilariasis, a dermatitis usually confined to the
Control of stable flies. Stable flies attack cattle, horses,
midventral region of the abdomen.
most other domestic animals, and humans on warm days
Control of horn flies. Because they remain on the host
throughout the summer. Regular application of pyrethrins,
most of their lives, adult horn flies are vulnerable to effec-
synergized pyrethrins, pyrethroids, coumaphos, or dichlor-
tive insecticides applied to cattle by means of sprays, dusts,
vos is indicated. Efforts to control S. calcitrans should
backrubbers, stock oilers, and insecticide-impregnated
 include elimination of breeding sites (e.g., lawn clippings,
plastic ear tags. In fact, horn fly control has depended
 green chop, damp bedding) and application of insecticides
almost exclusively on insecticides, with the unfortunate
to areas where they habitually rest. Repellents in the form
development of resistance on the part of the fly to many
 of sprays or smears may afford relief for several hours.
of them (e.g., DDT, methoxychlor, toxaphene, fenchlor-
These fies, with their piercing mouthparts, can theoreti-
phos, stirofos, permethrin, and fenvalerate) (Marchionado,
cally be controlled with systemic and topical insecticides.
1987). The insecticide tetrachlorvinphos or the synthetic
Chlorpyrifos, coumaphos, phosmet, or tetrachlorvinphos is
juvenile hormone methoprene may be fed to cattle to
applied either by spray or with self-treatment dust bags or
render the manure unfit for development and pupation,
backrubbers. The biologic control of S. calcitrars by the
thus interrupting the life history of H. irritans. Treatment
release of parasitoid wasps seems to require further refine-
of cattle with eprinomectin produced efficacy against
ment before routine success occurs in the field (Andress
horn flies for at least 2 weeks with good efficacy for
and Campbell, 1994).
longer periods, whereas ivermectin in a pour-on form is
effective for at least 4 weeks (Arrioja-Dechert, 1997;
Haematobia
Shoop et al, 1996).
Identification. The horn fly, Haematobia irritans, found
The Bruce walk-through horn fly trap affords 50%
on the backs of cattle and to a lesser extent on horses,
reduction in horn fly numbers mechanically. Cattle walking
is about half the size of Stomoxys and has a relatively
through the 10-foot trap contact strips of canvas or carpet-
shorter proboscis. The palps are nearly long enough to
ing, which dislodge the horn flies on their backs and sides.
reach the tip of the proboscis, in contrast to those of
The host leaves some of its flies behind in the trap, and,
Stormoxys (compare Figures 2-14 and 2-15). Horn flies
provided the process is repeated often enough, the popu-
were first reported in the United States in the fall of
lation of horn flies in the herd is significantly reduced (Hall,
1887 when they were found in Camden, New Jersey. They
Doisy, and Teasley, 1987).
spread rapidly throughout the United States, appeared in
Hawai in 1897, and have spread though Mexico, Central
Glossina
America, and northern South America (e.g., Guyana)
Identification. Tsetses (Glossina species) are localized to
(Craig, 1976). The horn fly was also discovered in
Africa and are of significant importance to human and
Argentina, and it has rapidly spread throughout that coun-
animal health, to the preservation of African wildlife, and
try (Anziani et al, 1993).
to the economy of Africa and the world at large. Each
Life history. Horn flies remain on cattle during the
antenna of Glossina has a long arista that is “feathered"
warmer seasons of the year, periodically biting their hosts
along one edge. The palps and long slender proboscis are
 and sucking blood. They are most obvious on the backs of
equal in length, the palps forming a sheath for the proboscis
their hosts but take refuge on the ventral abdomen during
at rest (Figure 2-16).
rain or on particularly hot, sunny days. When a cow defe-
Life history. The female tsetse bears only one larva at a
 cates, a number of her horn flies swarm to the dropping to
time. Larval development is completed in the abdomen of
lay their eggs and then return to the cow. Larvae hatch in
the mother, with all three stages feeding on fluids from
20
CH A P T E R 2Arthropods
Arista
Antenna
Palp
Proboscis
FIGURE 2-16. Head of Glossina (Cyclorrhapha: Muscidae), the tsetse that transmits many
important species of African trypanosomes.
special uterine glands. It is interesting that milk secretion
(trypanosomes and their tsetse vectors have protected the
has evolved independently among both the highest verte-
game of Africa through the prevention of successful colo-
brates and the highest invertebrates. Several blood meals at
nization by nonindigenous species) may have colossal long-
regular intervals are required to support the larva during its
term impacts on the environment of the African continent
developmental period of roughly 1 to 4 weeks. When
if imported species can be allowed to compete for the same
extruded by the female tsetse, the fully developed third-
geographic regions as the long-protected indigenous wild-
stage larva almost immediately burrows into the soil and
life. This potential eradication of the tsetse can be viewed
prepares to enter the pupal stage. A fourth larval stage
as a major ethical dilemma for veterinarians weighing
occurs within the puparium before metamorphosis to the
the advantages of disease eradication, wildlife protection,
adult stage at last takes place.
improved nutrition for the African continent, and ecologic
 Disease transmission. The great importance of the tsetse
protection.
 is its role as biologic vector of various trypanosomiases of
humans and their domestic animals. African sleeping sick-
Family Hippoboscidae, keds
ness of humans and “nagana" and related diseases of
Identification
 domestic animals are considered in Chapter 3.
Hippoboscids are dorsoventrally flattened, sometimes
Eradication. The tsetse has been eradicated from
wingless flies with piercing mouthparts. The antennae are
Zanzibar, the island next to the African continent
embedded in pits in the sides of the head. M. ovirus, the
(Vreysen et al, 2000). Thought has now been given to a
sheep ked; Hippobosca equina, the horse louse fly, and
major sterile release campaign program as was used in
Lipoptena cervi, the deer ked, are examples (Figure 2-17).
the control of Cochliomyia hominivorax (discussed later)
Melophagus is wingless; the wings of Hippobosca remain
throughout the rest of the African continent (Kabayo,
2002). Some think the entire plan too mammoth
1 and
Lipoptena have wings when they emerge from the pupal
unworkable
(Rogers
and
Randolph,
2002).
The
case. However, the wings of Lipoptena break off near the
International Atomic Energy Agency continues to support
base (see Figure 2-17) once the fly has alighted on a host.
the plan, and the first releases of sterile males occurred in
Lipoptena may attack horses and other domestic animals in
Ethiopia in June of 2007. There is concern that the com-
addition to deer, and casual observation suggests that their
plete removal of these great protectors of African wildlife
aftacks are particularly obnoxious to horses.
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
21
FIGURE 2-17. Examples of family Hippoboscidae. Left, Melophagus ovinus, the sheep ked; center,
Lipoptena cervi, the deer ked recovered from a horse; right, a Pseudolynchia from a bird.
Life history
enough left for one person to move among them.
Like tsetses, hippoboscids retain their larvae in their
Waterproof overalls and boots should be worn while sprin-
abdomens until they are ready to pupate, nourishing
kling the insecticide over the backs of the sheep. Ivermectin
them during development with uterine gland secretions.
 at 200 mg/kg given subcutaneously in sheep controls M.
 In the case of M. ovinus, larval development requires
ovinus (Molina and Euzeby, 1982). L. cervi has been con-
about a week, and the extruded larva pupates within a
trolled also in red deer and roe deer by the administration
few hours. The chestnut-brown pupal cases remain glued
of ivermectin (Kutzer, 1988).
to the wool of the host sheep throughout metamorphosis of
What to do about attacks of L. cervi on horses short of
the adult fly, which emerges in 3 to 6 weeks, depending on
keeping them indoors until the alate hippoboscids find
the ambient temperature. The entire life of the sheep ked is
their proper hosts is problematic.
thus spent on the host. Shearing and organophosphorus
insecticides make life very uncertain for these parasites.
Family Sarcophagidae, flesh flies
Dealate L. cervi males and females remain on their
An adult sarcophagid is about twice as large as a house-
normal North
American  hosts,
 white-tailed  deer
fly. The thorax is gray with dark, longitudinal stripes, and
(Odocoileus virginianus) and wapiti (Cervus canadensis),
the abdomen is checkered gray and black (Figure 2-18).
through most of the year. In spring, larvae are deposited
 in the haircoat, where they pupate and fall to the ground.
Adult L. cervi fies emerge from the puparia from
 September to early December and fly off in search of a
host. As soon as the ked alights on a deer, its wings break
off and the ked begins to feed. The bite of L. cervi is rela-
tively painless to humans but may be followed in several
iuu u A j hm snoud e aq sae
pruritic for 2 to 3 weeks (Bequaert, 1942).
Disease transmission
M. ovinus is host to Trypanosoma melophagium, which it
transmits to sheep. If all keds are removed, the trypano-
ai si li os ooq sdaaus au uo ieaddes aidei sos
ked and not the sheep that represents the true reservoir of
 infection. Like T. theileri of cattle, T. melophagiurm appears
 to be totally nonpathogenic to its vertebrate host.
Control of hippoboscids
Coumaphos and diazinon as dips or sprays provide
excellent control of M. ovinus when applied affer shearing.
FIGURE 2-18. Sarcophaga (Cyclorrhapha: Sarcophagidae), a flesh
 In small flocks, diazinon can be applied most conveniently
fly. About twice as large as a housefly, Sarcophaga is gray, with
with a garden sprinkling can. Groups of about 20 sheep
pue keia panayoauo e pue xeioul aun uo saduns yiep jeuipmniauol
should be crowded in a small pen so there is just room
black abdomen.
22
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
Musca
Sarcophagidae
Stomoxys
FIGURE 2-19. Muscoid spiracles.
Third-stage sarcophagid larvae resemble housefly maggots
Third-stage larvae of Calliphoridae are muscoid maggots
  us aidaap aie sas rd  ae ae i
that differ from those of Sarcophagidae in having posterior
rounded concavity, the inner slit of each spiracle is directed
spiracles that lie flush with the posterior face of the larva
(- ) u  a  mn p mo
(or, less commonly, are sunken in a shallow, slitlike con-
Differentiation of  Sarcophaga and  Wohifahrtia  larvae
cavity); the inner slits of the spiracles are directed obliquely
requires that adult flies be reared from them. Place the
downward and toward the median line (see Figure 2-19).
larvae in question and a piece of liver on 3 to 5 cm of
Larvae of the very important species C. hominivorax may be
sand or loamy soil in a canning jar. When, affer a day or
identified by the dark pigmentation of their tracheal trunks
so, the larvae have entered the substrate to pupate, remove
through the last three or four segments (see Figure 2-12).
the liver to avoid obnoxious odors and cover the mouth of
the jar with a layer of cheesecloth secured with a rubber
Life history and injury (myiasis)
band to provide air yet prevent the escape of flies after they
Myiasis can be defined and described in different ways.
have emerged from the pupal cases. The arista of
 Relative to the biology of the flies, primary myiasis typi-
Wohlfahrtia bears only very short hairs, whereas the arista
cally refers to myiasis in cases in which the insect requires a
of Sarcophaga is covered nearly to its tip with long hairs.
living host for the larvae to feed on. Secondary myiasis is
These rearing instructions serve equally well for calliphor-
then said to represent cases due to flies that usually feed on
ids, but best results are obtained with larvae that are almost
dead and decaying flesh sometimes developing in weak,
ready to pupate, especially when obligate parasitic species
debilitated, wounded, soiled, or immobilized animals.
are involved.
Myiasis can also be described by the site of the lesion,
e.g., aural myiasis, nasal myiasis, and so on.
Family Calliphoridae, blowflies
 Facultatively parasitic calliphorids are drawn to such
Identification
 attractions as suppurating wounds; skin soiled with urine,
Adult calliphorids (Gr. kallos, beauty + phoros, bearing)
vomitus, or feces; and bacterial decomposition products
are usually intermediate in size between Musca and
that tend to accumulate in the fleece of a wet sheep.
'a o pq aeds iid pe rdos
Once established in exudate or necrotic tissue, some
green, copper, or black hues (Figure 2-20). The common
kinds of these facultative parasites may later invade living
names “bluebottle" and “greenbottle" fly refer to the col-
tissue, whereas others do not. For example, the “surgical.
oration of these flies, which are also called “blowflies"
maggots" of Phaenicia sericata and Phormia regina are still
 aeaiel io sa iiau (sodap (a!) moa, Aaui seoaq
used occasionally in the treatment of osteomyelitis and
meat. Particular species differ in their preferences regarding
other refractory suppurative lesions to clear away necrotic
the freshness of the meat, from living flesh to carrion in an
debris and promote healing. Ideally the surgical maggots do
advanced state of decomposition. Most calliphorids are
not invade healthy tissue, but strains vary and some of
scavengers or facultative parasites, but a few (e.g., C. homi-
them do not know where to stop. A brave and resourceful
nivorax, the American screwworm) are obligate parasites.
gentleman of Dr. Georgi's acquaintance applied this
CH A P T E R 2 Arthropods
23
FIGURE 2-20. Calliphorid flies. Jop left, The mouth-
parts and head, similar to Musca. op right, A large
shiny calliphorid, Lrcilia cuprina, with another fly that
is about the size of the housefly. Bottom, Maggots of
Lucilia cuprina in the fleece of a sheep with wool
strike.
technique in treating his own wounds when a prisoner of
until night to leave the carcass (Smith et al, 1981). In this
war in Vietnam. Once the maggots had done their work to
way the pupae and emerging adults of this highly special-
his satisfaction, he flushed them away with his urine.
ized parasite tend to become concentrated around the pre-
Wool strike is a common and serious problem in many
ferred resting sites, or camps, of their host species. Once
sheep-raising regions of the world (Figure 2-21). Adult
L. cuprina has initiated a strike, other species of flies are
calliphorids are attracted to areas of fleece that have
attracted to feed and lay their eggs in the developing
 d ida arm i sn io sa a ps aoia
lesions. As the morbid process advances, these less-
enough for bacterial growth to occur and generate odors
 specialized newcomers tend to replace L. cuprina. Toxins
that lure flies to feed and lay their eggs. The areas involved
absorbed from the myiasis lesion rapidly incapacitate the
in wool strike thus include the perineum, prepuce, and,
sheep and lead to its death in a matter of days. Eventually,
during periods of considerable rainfall, water-soaked wool
scavenger species take over the carcass and reduce it to hair
of the flanks, withers, and ventral neck region. Fleece rot,
and bone. Financial loss caused by wool strike is reckoned
caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and dermatophilosis,
in terms of outright death losses, loss of wool, decreased
caused by Dermatophilus congolense, predispose sheep to
quality of wool, loss of weight, and costs of treatment and
wool strike by Lucilia cuprina, and a significantly greater
preventive measures.
incidence of body strikes was observed in lambs infected
Old, weakened, or paretic dogs with urine-soaked hair-
with both of these bacteria than with either bacterium alone
coats sometimes develop a form of myiasis analogous to
(Gherardi et al, 1983). Several genera of calliphorid flies are
wool strike. As such an unfortunate animal lies in the
commonly involved, and each geographic region has its
"healing rays of the sun,’ the blowflies are busy laying
 particular scourge among the general assemblage of facul-
eggs in its haircoat, and in a few days maggots will be
tative parasites and scavengers. In Australia, one species,
skinning it alive. Frequently owners who present long-
L. cuprina, stands out as a specialist in wool strike. This
haired dogs with advanced cases of cutaneous myiasis are
fly, although still a facultative parasite in that it is able to
totally unaware of the mayhem taking place underneath
develop in carrion, has become so adept at locating suitable
the haircoat. The condition of the patient can be evaluated
 sheep on which to deposit its eggs that it has become the
accurately and effective treatment undertaken only after the
culprit responsible for initiating most cases of wool strike in
hair has been clipped away and all affected areas bathed.
Australia. The maggots feed on scales and exudate at the
Most of the maggots will be removed in the process;
surface of the skin, occasionally penetrating the underlying
any remaining may be routed by judicious local applica-
tissues. When ready to pupate, the larvae of L. cuprina wait
tion of an insecticidal solution such as a pyrethroid or an
24
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FIGURE 2-21. Life history of the wool strike
fly, Lucilia cuprina. Adult female L cuprina flies
deposit their eggs in moist and soiled wool.
Larvae hatch from these eggs, feed on scales
and exudate at the surface of the skin, and
undergo two molts before falling to the
ground to pupate. The adult fly pushes off
the end of the puparium by inflating its baglike 
ptilinum with hemolymph. Having emerged 
from the puparium, the fly inflates its wings
by pumping hemolymph into the wing veins,
retracts its ptilinum into the head once
 and for all, and flies off in search of suitably
Smelly sheep. The Australian Merino wether
in the picture has suffered fly-strike in three 
 stages. The flies first attacked a spot be-
tween his shoulders that had collected rain-
water and supported bacterial growth. The
exudate from this lesion flowed over the
wether's shoulders and brisket and greatly
extended the area susceptible to fly attack.
The shepherd has clipped all of the wool
from both shoulders and brisket and treated
the lesions with an insecticide, but now the
flies are attracted to the breech area, which is
soiled with feces, so this area too must be
clipped and medicated or the wether will
likely die of "'crutch strike.""
organophosphate. A really vigorous application of insecti-
lethal myiasis in ground squirrels (Spermophilus columbia-
cide might easily kill the debilitated and denuded host.
rus) in Canada (Michener, 1993). Arendt (1985) estimated
Weakened or defective calves born at pasture are also
that infection with larvae of Philornis deceptivus (family
fair game for members of the family Calliphoridae. It is
Muscidae) were responsible for 97% of the mortality
amazing how quickly the shiny flies appear seemingly out
observed among pearly-eyed thrasher nestlings (Margarops
of nowhere and how rapidly their egg masses accumulate
fuscatus) in Puerto Rico. In North America, major causes
about the umbilicus of a newborn calf with cerebellar
of avian myiasis are bloodsucking maggots of the genus
 hypoplasia or muscle contracture. The possibility of myiasis
Protocalliphora (Sabrosky, Bennett, and Whitworth, 1989).
must always be considered in the case of animals incapaci-
Larvae of sarcophagid flies, genus Cistudinomyia, are capa-
tated during warm weather, especially if they are forced to
ble of causing lethal myiasis in geckos (DeMarmels, 1994).
remain outdoors.
The American screwworm fly, C. hominivorax, is an
Rabbits, wild animals, and birds may suffer serious losses
example of a primary myiasis producing fly. Females lay
to myiasis. Domestic rabbits are often victims of myiasis.
 their eggs on fresh, uninfected wounds of all kinds. About
Flies attracted to lay their eggs on rabbits can cause horrible
200 eggs are deposited in tidy rows. The eggs hatch within a
lesions in rabbits that are housed outdoors even in rela-
day, and the obligate parasitic maggots commence feeding
tively good conditions for short periods of time. The lesions
on living flesh and in so doing produce a foul-smelling,
are horrible and can be fatal to the rabbit, along with caus-
brownish-red discharge. The larvae leave the host in 5 to
ing severe distress to the owners. This is unfortunately
7 days and enter the soil to pupate. Adult flies emerge from
not an uncommon event, and rabbits need to be protected
the pupal cases one to several weeks later. Wherever it
from such infestations (Anderson and Huitson, 2004).
occurs, C. hominivorax is a serious menace to man and
Larvae of the sarcophagid fly Neobellieria citellivora cause
beast alike. Unconscious victims of accidents or alcohol
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
25
intoxication lying helplessly exposed have been fatally
pair of sharp dagging shears. When the resultant wounds
infected or have had their facial bones completely eaten
heal, the skin of the breech is drawn taut, thus extending
away by screwworm maggots. Docking and castrating
the relatively hairless area immediately surrounding the
wounds, wire cuts, the navels of newborn animals, tick-
anus and vulva and thereby reducing the moisture- and
bite wounds, shear cuts, needle grass wounds, and even
flth-carrying capacity of the brech. This operation, carried
 fresh brands may attract the attentions of C. horminivorax.
out in a minute or so without surgical preparation, anesthe-
A nationwide control program based on treating wounds of
 sia, or aftercare, seems brutal until one has had an oppor-
 all infected animals with insecticidal smears and releasing
tunity to compare its effects on the patient with those
billions of sterilized flies has succeeded in eliminating
inflicted by L. cuprina.
screwworm myiasis from the United States. The adult
fies are sterilized by gamma radiation, which induces dom-
Families Oestridae, Hypodermatidae, Gasterophilidae, and 
inant lethal mutations in the sperm. Because the female
Cuterebridae; the botflies
 screwworm mates only once and because the wild popula-
The botflies are highly host-specific and site-specific
 tion of the fly is relatively small, adding hordes of sexually
parasites in the larval (ie., bot) stage and total slaves to
competent but sterile males reduces the probability of
reproduction in the adult stage. The adults have vestigial
successful fertilization to nil. By the use of sterile males
mouthparts and must carry on their courtship rituals and
 produced in Mexico, the American screwworm was eradi-
egg laying on energy stored away when they were larvae.
cated from Libya where it had been accidentally intro-
Fully developed bots are larger and stouter than are muscid,
duced, probably on imported livestock, in 1988 (Linquist,
sarcophagid, and calliphorid maggots, from which they
Abusowa, and Hall, 1992).
 d  a  a  
(Figure 2-22; see also Figure 2-19). In fact, when found
Treatment of myiasis
in their accustomed locations in their normal hosts, bots
 Coumaphos is widely employed in the treatment of cuta-
 present very litle in the way of a diagnostic challenge; a bot
 neous myiasis. This agent may be applied to the catle by
in a sheep's nasal passages is an Oestrus; a bot in a cow's
dipping, but most commonly it is sprayed or smeared
dorsal subcutis is a Hypoderma; a bot in a horse's stomach
directly on the maggot-infested lesions. Ivermectin and
is a Gasterophilus; and there is hardly any sense in making
doramectin  administered  subcutaneously  to  cattle
ecan
more an exercise of it than that. However, the earlier stages
serve as a prophylactic against infestation by larvae of
of bots are more difficult to distinguish from maggots and,
C. hominivorax and appear to be useful aids in the preven-
if found migrating in other than its normal host, will
tion of umbilical myiasis and fly-strike associated with
require the services of an expert entomologist for identifi-
castration (Anziani and Loreficce, 1993; Muniz et al, 1995).
cation. First-stage H
Hypoderma larvae have been found
 For treatment of wool strike in sheep, coumaphos and
migrating aberrantly through the brain of horses, and
 diazinon are recommended as sprays, dips, or local appli-
Cuterebra larvae, normally parasites of rodents and lago-
cations to affected areas. All wool soiled or underrun by
 morphs, have been found in the brains of cats and dogs and
maggots should first be clipped away. Ivermectin when
much more commonly in their subcutaneous tissues.
applied as a jetting fluid appears to aid against blowfly.
Hypoderma and Cuterebra also occasionally invade humans
strike of sheep in Australia (Eagleson et al, 1993).
and migrate subcutaneously. Oestrus ovis may larviposit
Subcutaneous injections of infested sheep in Hungary
in the eyes of shepherds and thus cause a temporary but
with either ivermectin or moxidectin failed to cause
painful ocular myiasis.
rapid-acting treatment of the infested sheep, and 7 days
after treatment the majority of treated sheep were still
Oestrus ovis
severely infested (Farkas et al, 1996). Also used in
O. ovis, the sheep nasal botfly, somewhat resembles a
Australia with good success is a jetting fluid with cyroma-
honeybee (Figure 2-23). It is a stout, grayish-brown fly,
zine, an insect growth regulator, that can be mixed with
about 1 cm long and covered with short hairs; the mouth-
diazinon (Levot and Sales, 1998).
parts are vestigial. The flies are most active during the
 The extent of measures taken to prevent fly-strike in
warmer hours of the day, especially during intervals of
sheep should be proportional to the degree of risk.
bright sunshine. In early morning and late afternoon, they
Clipping the wool of the breech and area around the pre-
are more likely to be found resting on buildings, tree trunks,
puce greatly reduces the amount of moisture and filth that
water tanks, and the like. It is interesting to watch a mob of
 can be retained in those regions of the fleece. Amputating
Australian Merino sheep on a warm, sunny day with a few
the tails of lambs represents about the minimum of effort
scattered clouds. While in the shadow of a cloud, the sheep
that ought to be expended on fly-strike control, but in some
tend to distribute themselves more or less at random over
parts of the world lambs manage to grow up with their tails
the paddock, but as the sun emerges from behind the cloud,
intact. In the Mules' operation, widely practiced in
the sheep immediately huddle together and continue to
Australia, with perhaps up to 30 million lambs treated
graze with their heads toward the center of the huddle,
each year, redundant folds of skin from the posterior
 only to disperse again with the arrival of the next cloud.
aspects of the thighs and the tail head are removed with a
This behavior may represent a defensive adaptation to the
26
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
Gasterophifus
Oestrus
Hypoderma
Cuterebra
FGURE 2-22. Bot spiracles (Gasterophilus and Oestrus x27; Hypoderma ×55; Cuterebra x65).
attack of the larvipositing female O. ovis; it seems plausible,
Pathologic significance. Although moderate numbers of
at least. While O. ovis females are actively depositing their
O. ovis larvae in the nasal and paranasal sinuses do no
larvae in sheep's nostrils, the sheep hold their noses close to
apparent harm, heavy infections cause sneezing, nasal dis-
the ground or in each other's fleeces, stamp their feet as if
charge, and partial blockage of the nasal passages.
annoyed, and occasionally bolt away. The tiny first-stage
Treatment of nasal bots. The larva of O. ovis is very
larvae may be demonstrated postmortem by sawing the
susceptible to ivermectin at the standard dosage rate
skull in half longitudinally, rinsing the nasoturbinates and
nasal sinuses with water, and examining the collected rin-
sings with a hand lens or stereoscopic microscope. The fully
frontal sinuses.
Life history. On being deposited in the nostril of a sheep,
the larva crawls onto the mucous membrane of the nasal
passage, where it will remain for at least 2 weeks anchored
to the mucous membrane by its mouth hooks. Larvae arriv-
ing late in the season remain arrested in the first stage
throughout the winter, and development proceeds only
with the return of warm weather. After a sojourn in the
nasal cavity, the larvae proceed to the frontal sinuses,
where development to the third stage is completed (see
Figure 2-23). On reaching full development, the third-
stage larvae crawl down into the nasal passages, are
expelled by the sheep's sneezing, and enter the soil to
pupate. Adults may emerge in about 4 weeks in summer
but require considerably longer in cool weather. When
pupation occurs in autumn, adult flies do not emerge until
the following spring. Thus O. ovis overwinters both as
arrested first-stage larvae in the nasal cavities of sheep and
FGURE 2-23. Oestrus ovis. Top, The adult female fly. Bottom, Bots in
as pupae in soil.
the nasal sinuses of sheep at necropsy.
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
27
Hypoderma
 Identification. Hypoderma bovis and Hypoderma linea-
tum, the heel flies or gadflies, occur in cattle-raising areas of
the Northern Hemisphere between 25° and 60° North lat-
itude. The adult fly is about 15 mm long and looks rather
like a bumblebee (Figure 2-25). Although these flies have
no functional mouthparts for biting, and the process of
oviposition on the hairs is presumably painless, cattle
tend to become apprehensive and excited at their approach
and gallop off aimlessly with their tails held high over their
backs. Such behavior, termed “gadding about,” tends to
involve the whole herd simultaneously in needless, hyster-
ical exertion and distracts it from the more profitable busi-
ness of grazing. (Agricultural research administrators,
practiced in the art of extracting financial support for
their institutions from legislative bodies, can tell you exactly
how much this form of bovine entomophobia costs the
American stockman each year.) The fully developed
Ul punoy s! cqnia ajes, 1o eaiel puapod aaeis-piu
walnut-sized lumps, or warbles, on the backs of catle in
 spring. Each warble has a small hole at its summit to which
the posterior spiracles of the larva are pressed to obtain air.
FGURE 2-24. Cephenemyia bots in the retropharyngeal pouch of
When it emerges or is extracted from the warble, the larva
a deer.
(sometimes also called a warble) is about 25 mm long and
whitish to light brown.
of 0.2 mg/kg (Roncalli, 1984). Nasal bots in sheep have
Life history and pathogenesis. H. lineaturm and H. bovis
been treated with eprinomectin at both 0.5 mg/kg and
females glue their eggs to the hairs on the legs of cattle.
1 mg/kg body weight with efficacies ranging from 83.5%
H. lineatum appears with the advent of warm weather and
to 100% (Habela et al, 2006; Hoste et al, 2004). Dichlorvos
remains active for about 2 months. Then H. bovis takes over
 may be sprayed directly into the nostrils for the control of
and persists into summer. The eggs hatch spontaneously in
nasal bots.
less than a week, and the larvae burrow through the skin
and set off on prolonged migrations through the connective
Other nasal bots 
tissues of their host. Larvae of H. lineatum accumulate in
ng jo sed ui ssiu sioau sundand ss
the tissues of the esophagus 5 months later and remain
Asia, and Africa; Cephalopsis titillator infects camels and
there for about 3 months. Finally, they migrate to the sub-
dromedaries in Africa; and Cephenomyia species infect
cutaneous tissues of the back, cut breathing holes in the
deer, elk, caribou, and other cervids in the Northern
skin to which they appose their spiracles, and, molting
Hemisphere. Their life histories generally resemble that of
twice, grow larger. The larvae spend about 2 months in
O. ovis. However, the third-stage larvae of R. purpureus and
warbles in the backs of the infested cows (Pruett and
C. titillator are found in the nasal and paranasal sinuses,
Kunz, 1996). When fully developed (see Figure 2-25) the
pharynx, and even larynx, and those of Cephenomyia spe-
larvae enlarge their breathing holes, emerge through them,
cies are found in the pharyngeal pouches (Figure 2-24).
and fall to the ground to pupate. Adult flies emerge from
FGURE 2-25. Hypoderma bovis. Left, Adult fly. Right,
Mature bot removed from a warble.
28
CHA P TER 2Arthropods
pupal cases about 1 month later and immediately set about
Surveillance against reintroduction of Hypoderma species in
their reproductive duties. H. bovis larvae tend to accumu-
imported cattle is critical as evidenced by 19% of tested cattle
late in the spinal canal instead of the esophagus and appear
entering Great Britain in 1993 being seropositive for
in the subcutaneous tissues of the back about 2 months
Hypoderma (Sinclair, 1995). In parts of Great Britain where
later than those of H. lineatum.
the ox warble has persisted or reappeared, all catle over
Hypoderma larvae occasionally invade horses and render
12 weeks old are required to undergo treatment within spe-
them useless for equitation by warble formation in the
cific dates, and cattle are routinely inspected at livestock sales
saddle area or even cause fatal neurologic disease by migrat-
and on farms.
ing into the brain (Olander, 1967). In humans, Hypoderma
Related species. Hypoderma diara occurs in deer and
larvae tend to produce bouts of creeping subcutaneous
occasionally in man in Europe. Other species of Hypo-
myiasis (“migrating lumps") as the confused larvae try to
derrna and genera of warble flies parasitize sheep, goats,
a ha y, h ym u moo au jo do au p
and deer in Mediterranean countries and India. Oede-
migrating. Local paralysis may result from invasion of the
magena tarandi is a serious enough pest of reinder, musk 
spinal cord, and blindness may result from invasion of the
oxen, and caribou in the subarctic regions to require prophy-
eye. These fortunately are rare accidents.
lactic medication of these wild or semiwild hosts. In one
Treatment and control of Hypoderma. Hypoderma
study 70% of untreated reindeer harbored more than 100
infection is treated most commonly these days with systemic
O. tarardi larvae (Washburn et al, 1980). Both ivermectin
macrocyclic lactones ivermectin, doramectin, eprinomectin,
and doramectin have proven highly effective in the treatment
or moxidectin. Eprinomectin and moxidectin pour-on can
of infections with this parasite.
be used for treating both beef and dairy cattle. The ‘safe
periods" for applying these insecticides vary for different
Gasterophilus
localities because of differences in fly activity. The insecti-
 Identification. The adult fly superficially resembles a
cides must be applied immediately after adult Hypoderma
honeybee, with a long, curved ovipositor carried beneath
activity ceases for the season. Host-parasite reactions man-
the abdomen (Figure 2-26). The females may be observed
ifested clinically by bloat, salivation, ataxia, and posterior
on warm, sunny days hovering near horses and darting very
paralysis may occur when cattle are treated with larvicidal
rapidly to attach an egg to a hair.
insecticides while H. lineaturm larvae are in the esophagus or
Eggs are deposited by Gasterophilus rasalis females on
while H. bovis larvae are in the spinal canal. The host-
the hairs of the intermandibular space, by Gasterophilus
 parasite reaction was once thought to be an anaphylactoid
hemorrhoidalis on the short hairs that adjoin the lips, and
reaction caused by antibodies produced by catle in response
by Gasterophilus intestinalis on the hairs of the forelegs and
to1
 Hypoderma larval antigens. However, experimental
shoulders (Figure 2-27). An illustrated key for identifying
evidence indicates that this reaction is caused by a toxin
the eggs of the eight species of Gasterophilus that occur
liberated from the dead Hypoderma larvae. Injection of
around the world has been prepared by Cogley (1991).
phenylbutazone at a dosage rate of 20 mg/kg body weight
First-stage larvae of G. intestinalis can be found in tun-
20 minutes before injection of larval toxin protected calves
nels in the epithelium covering the dorsal surface of the
against both systemic shock and local inflammatory reac.
rostral two thirds of the tongue and in pockets between
tions (Eyre, Boulard, and Deline, 1981). The host-parasite
the molar teeth. Second-stage larvae are found in interden-
reaction is best treated with sympathomimetic drugs (e.g--
tal pockets, attached to the root of the tongue, and attached
adrenaline) and steroids to alleviate local inflammatory reac-
to the wall of the stomach (Cogley, Anderson, and Cogley,
tions. Atropine, the antidote for cholinesterase-inhibiting
1982). Less is known regarding the initial migrations of
agents, is contraindicated; host-parasite reaction is not a
other species of Gasterophilus. First- and second-stage
manifestation of organophosphate toxicity even though it
larvae of G. rasalis are usually completely hidden well
 may be precipitated by organophosphate medication.
In cases in which preventive treatment has been
neglected, late second-stage and third-stage Hypoderrma
larvae can be safely and quickly removed from the backs
of cattle by slowly injecting 1 mL of 3% hydrogen peroxide
solution into the breathing hole using a blunt canula or
needle shank of the syringe and taking care not to pierce
the grub. Most grubs will emerge within 15 seconds after
the foaming action of the hydrogen peroxide begins and
leaves behind a cleansed cavity (Scholl and Barrett, 1986).
 National eradication efforts directed against Hypoderma
species have met with success in Denmark, the Federal
Republic of Germany, the Netherlands, and the Republic of
Ireland, and the incidence in Great Britain has been reduced
FGURE 2-26. Adult female Gasterophilus intestinalis; the ovipositor
from 38% in 1978 to 0.01% in 1985 (Wilson, 1986).
is curved around and under the body.
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
29
HD
FIGURE 2-27. Gasterophilus intestinalis. Left, Eggs of G.
intestinalis (Cyclorrhapha: Gasterophilidae) on horse
hairs; on the bottom images the operculum has
become dislodged and the maggot is partially out 
of the shell. Right, Eggs attached to the hairs on the
leg of a horse.
below the gum line in interdental pus pockets extending
 Life history. G. rasalis females deposit their egs on the
into the root sockets of molar teeth (Schroeder, 1940).
 hairs of the intermandibular space. These eggs hatch spon-
The third-stage larva of G. nasalis is yellowish and has
taneously in 5 or 6 days, and the larvae crawl downward
one row of spines on each segment (see Figure 2-23); it is
toward the chin until they arrive at a point opposite the
usually found in the first ampulla of the duodenum. The
commissures of the lips, whereupon they proceed directly
following three species of Gasterophius have two rows of
toward the mouth and passbetween the lips. The black eggs
spines per segment. The G. intestinalis third-stage larva is
 of G. hernorrhoidalis on the hairs adjoining the lips hatch
red, has coarse spines that are blunted at their tips, and
after 2 to 4 days on contact with moisture, penetrate the
attaches in clusters in the nonglandular part of the stomach
epidermis of the lips, and burrow toward the mucous
either near the margo plicatus or in the saccus cecus. The
membrane of the mouth (Wells and Knipling, 1938).
following species have small spines that taper to a fine
 The eggs of G. intestinalis on the hairs of the front legs
point: G. hemorrhoidalis, which is reddish and found in
are far removed from their destination and depend on
the duodenum and rectum of horses in the North-Central
direct assistance from the horse to find their way into the
United States and Canada, and Gasterophilus inermis, which
mouth (Figures 2-28 and 2-29). Five days after being laid,
is light yellow and found in the rectum of European horses.
these eggs contain first-stage larvae that are prepared to
 Individual larvae of all species may occasionally be found in
hatch rapidly in response to the sudden rise in ambient
 atypical locations in the alimentary tract.
temperature that occurs when the horse brings its warm
10:
SEX
AGE
VCR
HCPY
DISK
+31
FGURE 2-28. Gasterophilus bots.Left, Endoscopy of the bots of Gasterophilus intestinalis; right, stomach of a horse with the bots of G. intestinalis
'wnuaponp au jo elndwe isiy aun u sheseu snydoaisey jo siog aun yhm pue smeod oaiew aul jeau ans uonapaid jeoidht si! u!
30
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FIGURE 2-29. Life history of the equine stomach bot Gasterophilus intestinalis. The female botfly
attaches fertilized eggs on the hair shafts of the forelegs and shoulders of horses. First-stage
larvae develop in 5 days and stand ready to literally pop out of their shells in response to the warm
breath of the horse. Having landed on the horse's face and entered its mouth, the larvae first
tunnel quite extensively in the mucous epithelium of the dorsum and sides of the tongue, then
enter pockets between the upper molar teeth, where they molt to the second stage. One month
after infection, the larvae emerge from the interdental spaces, attach temporarily to the wall of the
pharynx, then pass to the stomach, where they molt to the third stage. The third-stage larvae
remain attached in the saccus cecus or along the margo plicatus for almost a year. From late
spring onward, they let go, pass out in the feces, and pupate in the soil. Adult G. intestinalis flies 
emerge from their pupal cases 3 to 9 weeks later and fly off in search of a horse.
muzzle and breath in contact with them; they do not
the upper molar teeth, where they molt from first to
respond to gradual warming (Knipling and Wels, 1935).
second stage. The second-stage larvae develop a red color
The larvae then enter the horse's mouth and burrow into
as a result of synthesis of the insect's own hemoglobin, an
the stratified squamous epithelium on the dorsal surface of
adaptation to the low oxygen tension environment they will
the tongue. The first- and second-stage larvae of G. intes-
 presently encounter in the stomach. At last, the second-
tinalis spend about 1 month in the oral cavity. The white
stage larvae leave the interdental spaces, attach briefly to
first-stage larvae drill burrows up to 13 cm long in the
the root of the tongue, and then proceed to the stomach
-iui eiae ue ie saoy ie, ym anuoi al jo esonu
where they molt to the third larval stage, or full-grown bot
val of 4.2 mm to which they apply their caudal spiracles to
(Cogley, Anderson, and Cogley, 1982). The oral migrations
breathe (Cogley, Anderson, and Cogley, 1982). The bur-
of other species of Gasterophilus have not yet been eluci-
rows typically extend in a rostral to caudal direction,
dated in such detail as they have been for G. intestinalis.
but all terminate several centimeters rostral to the vallate
However, migration  within tissues affords protection
papillae. Having approximately doubled in size during
from the host's teeth and a source of nourishment and is
their sojourn in the tongue, the first-stage larvae now
probably a key feature of the oral migrations of other
enter pockets in the interdental spaces predominantly of
Gasterophilus species as well.
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
31
Dorsal
Predilection sites
(Gasterophilus intestinalis)
 Nonglandular region
Esophagus
Predilection sites
(Gasterophilus nasatis)
Fuid level
FlGURE 2-30. Predilection sites of
Gasterophilus intestinalis and Gastero-
philus nasalis in the stomach and
Fluid level 
duodenum of the horse. (From Price
RE, Stromberg PC: American Jourmal
First ampulla
ofveterinary Research 48:1225,
Margo plicatus 
of duodenum
1987, American Veterinary Medical
Association.)
Pylorus
Glandular region·
Ventral
The third-stage larvae remain attached by their mouth
activity has ceased. The eggs may be removed from the
hooks to the wall of the stomach (G. intestinalis) or duo-
haircoat with a special fine-tooth comb available from
denum (G. rasalis) for up to 12 months (farthest from the
saddlery shops, but the process is rather slow and laborious.
intestine—-intestinalis; farthest from the nose—rasalis). The
If more than a very few horses are involved, the larvae
 predilection sites of both species are located above the fluid
Suuods snoidoo Aq saseo sa niaul jo ino paini aq ue
level in the alimentary tract. In these locations the bots are
with water at 40° to 48° C (104° to 118° F) (Knipling
and Wells, 1935); the addition of 0.06% coumaphos
breathing animals with sufficient oxygen (Figure 2-30; Price
 ensures rapid destruction of these larvae as they emerge.
and Stromberg, 1987). From late spring onward, the larvae
The eggs of G. nasalis and G. hermorrhoidalis hatch sponta-
release their grip on the mucosa and pass out with the feces
neously when development of the larva is complete.
to pupate in the soil. Adult botflies emerge from the pupal
cases in 3 to 9 weeks, depending on the ambient tempera-
Cuterebra
ture. Botfly activity continues through summer and fall but
Identification. The rarely seen (or noticed) adult fly
ceases completely when cold weather sets in.
somewhat resembles a bumblebee and has vestigial mouth-
Importance. Despite the rather impressive oral lesions
parts (Figure 2-31). The fully developed third-stage larva is
 produced by first- and second-stage larvae and the chronic
large (up to 45 mm) and dark-brown to black,the color being
lesions in gastric and intestinal mucosae caused by attach-
due to the stout black spines that cover the body (Figure
ment of the second and third stages, there is remarkably
2-32). The posterior spiracles consist of groups of elegantly
little pathologic or experimental evidence a
associating
curved openings (see Figure 2-22). Earlier stages are much
Gasterophilus infection with clinical illness. In fact, many
paler or even white and the posterior spiracles are quite dif-
horses support substantial populations of these parasites
ferent from those of the third stage, but the dark spines cov-
without apparent ill effect. However, disease is not a
 ering the body furnish evidence of the larva’s identity as
simple subject, and Gasterophilus infection has been held
Cuterebra. At the present state of knowledge, it is impossible
to etiologic account in cases of stomach rupture, subserosal
to differentiate species of even fully developed third-stage
abscess, splenic abscess, ulceration, and peritonitis (Rainey,
larvae of Cuterebra, except in the few cases in which their
1948; Rooney, 1964; Underwood and Dikmans, 1943;
life histories have been worked out in detail.
Waddell, 1972). Principato (1988) described, classified,
 Life history and pathogenesis. Cuterebra species infect
and superbly illustrated the main macroscopic lesions pro-
rabbits, squirrels, chipmunks, mice, cats, dogs, and occa-
duced by larvae of G. intestinalis, G. nasalis, G. hemorrhoi-
sionally humans (Baird, Podgore, and Sabrosky, 1982).
dalis, G. inermis, and Gasterophilus pecorum in freely
 Female Cuterebra flies lay their eggs along rabbit runs and
ranging horses in Italy.
-s a isd susq isou n s snnq jupi r
Treatment of Gasterophilus infection. The common
stage larvae hatch instantaneously and crawl immediately
treatment is now a macrocyclic lactone. In the southern
into the host's fur. These larvae enter the host through its
 United States, botflies are active most of the year (Craig.
natural body openings (Baird, 1971, 1972; Timm and
1984), and in the case of G. intestinalis, the eggs glued to the
Lee, 1981). Cuterebra larvae are usually found in the cervi-
hairs of the forelegs remain infective long after adult fly
cal subcutaneous connective tissue of cats and dogs during
32
CHA P TER 2Arthropods
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 2-31. Cuterebra jellisoni (Cyclomhapha: Cuterebridae), a botfly. The mouthparts of botflies
are vestigial. (From Baird CR: J Med Entomol 8:615, 1971.)
August, September, and October. Cuterebra larvae may
facilitates restraint but is rarely necessary. The wound
also locate in the nasal and oral regions and sometimes
heals rather slowly and sometimes suppurates or even
migrate through the brains of cats and dogs, with fatal
sloughs; this may be a result of secondary bacterial infection
results. The migration of the larva in the brain of cats is
or leakage of Cuterebra antigens into the surrounding tis-
believed to cause infarction and be responsible for feline
sues during extraction. When the worms are in ectopic
ischemic encephalopathy (Williams, Summers, and de
 sites, they may be removed.
Lahunta, 1998).
The topically applied flea and tick products, imidaclo-
Treatment of cuterebriasis. A Cuterebra larva that has
 prid and fipronil, may kill the young maggots on the hair-
 made its way into a warble can be removed by enlarging its 
coats of cats. Also, although no data are available, cats on
breathing hole in the skin sufficiently to allow it to be
avermectin heartworm preventatives, such as ivermectin,
extracted with forceps, with care being taken not to crush
milbemycin, or selamectin, might be protected from
the larva in the process. Tranquilization or sedation
Cuterebra infection through the killing of larvae during
SPEE.S2S54
FIGURE 2-32. Cuterebridae. Left, A mature bot as it would appear when it is ready to leave the
warble and drop to the ground to pupate. Right, The brain of a cat that died from the migration of a
 misguided Cuterebra larva.
CHA P TER 2 Arthropods
33
cases requires rearing the adult fly; instructions are pro-
vided under Sarcophagidae in an earlier section. Living
larvae also may be submitted for expert identification in
addition to but not in lieu of fixed specimens; include these
in a separate jar loosely packed in moist cotton.
Order Phthiraptera, Lice
 There are two main kinds of lice, represented by the sub-
orders Anoplura, or bloodsucking lice, and three suborders,
the Ischnocera, Amblycera, and Rhychophthirina that
are for simplicity grouped here under the heading
Mallophaga, or chewing lice (Table 2-6). Anoplurans have
 piercing mouthparts consisting of three stylets that, in fixed
specimens, are usually concealed within the relatively
narrow head (Figure 2-34). Anoplurans are parasites of pla-
cental animals only. Mallophagans have stout mandibles
on the ventral side of their relatively broad heads (Figure
FGURE 2-33. Dermatobia hominis. Top, The adult female fly. Bottom,
2-35), and these lice feed on epidermal scales, feathers, and
The maggot that crawled out of the arm of an infected human.
sebaceous secretions of birds and mammals. Both anoplur-
ans and mallophagans spend their entire lives among the
the initial phases of their migration in the cat. None of
hairs or feathers of their hosts and display a high order of
these products are, however, approved for preventing
cuterebriasis.
TABLE 2-6
Lice Found on Domestic Animals and Humans 
Dernatobia
Identification. The adult of Dermatobia hominis, another
Host
Anoplura
Mallophaga
member of the family Cuterebridae, somewhat resembles
Dog
Linognathus setosus
Trichodectes canis
a brilliant blue calliphorid fly but, like all botflies, has ves-
Heterodoxus spiniger
tigial mouthparts (Figure 2-33). The fully developed third-
stage larva is pear-shaped and has posterior spiracles with
Cat
None
Felicola subrostratus
Cow
straight slits deeply sunken in a concavity (see Figure 2-33).
Haematopinus eurysternus
Damalinia bovis
Life history and pathogenesis. The D. horinis female
Haematopinus
uses a slave to carry her eggs to a prospective host. She
quadripertusus
captures another fly, usually a bloodsucker such as a mos-
Haematopinus
tuberculatus
quito or a stable fly, and glues her eggs to its abdomen. The
eggs develop in a week or two, and the larvae inside them
Linognathus vituli
stand ready to disembark when the slave fly alights on the
Solenopotes capillatus
 skin of a warm-blooded animal to feed. Each D. horinis
Horse
Haematopinus asini
Damalinia equi
larva that succeeds in penetrating the skin develops at or
Pig
Haematopinus suis
None
near the site of penetration in a separate warble. The larva
Sheep
Linognathus ovillus
Damalinia ovis
emerges through the breathing hole to pupate about
Linognathus pedalis
 isd s e si ie su    sm 9
Linognathus africanus
humans, catle, sheep, dogs, and other mammals in
Goat
Linognathus africanus
Damalinia caprae
Central and South America. The adult flies tend to concen-
Linognathus stenopsis
Damalinia crassipes
trate at the edges of large forests.
Damalinia limbata
Rat
Polyplax spinulosa
None
Expert identification of myiasis larvae
The major taxa of fully developed myiasis larvae can be
Mouse
Polyplax serrata
None
identified by means of the criteria set forth earlier. More
Guinea pig
None
Gliricola porcelli
detailed information can be found in James (1948).
Gyropus ovalis
 However, identification of all three larval stages of even
Trimenopon hisidum
the more common species is a chore for a taxonomic spe-
Human
Pediculus humanus
None
cialist. If preliminary findings are inconclusive, intriguing.
capitus
or of great practical importance, larvae can be cleaned by
Pediculus humanus
shaking them vigorously in water, fixing them in 70% ethyl
humanus
 alcohol or 10% formalin, and submitting these specimens 
Pthirus pubis
for expert identification. Precise identification in certain
34
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
Because of the sedentary habits of lice, one searches for
them by carefully examining the haircoat or plumage of the
host. The one exception to this generalization, the human
body louse Pediculus humanus humanus, clings to the fibers
of the clothing instead of body hairs while it feeds on its
host. With a little practice, bloodsucking lice and chewing
lice can be distinguished by inspection. This plus high host
specificity simplifies identification, especially for hosts that
have only one species of louse (e.g., Haematopinus suis on
Sus scrofa and Felicola subrostratus on Felis catus). The next
simplest case involves one anopluran and one mallophagan
species per host species (e.g., Haermatopinus asini plus
Damalinia equi on Equus caballus and Linognathus setosus
plus Trichodectes canis on Canis familiaris). Cattle (Bos
taurus) present a more complex case; they are infested by
three anoplurans and one mallophagan, and attention to
 generic morphologic characteristics is required for their
differentiation. Occasionally a few lice are collected from
sources other than their normal host. For example, Pthirus
pubis, the human crab louse, has been reported now and
again on dogs. In such cases it is necessary to note the
FIGURE 2-34. Head and thorax of an anopluran louse. The blood-
obvious morphologic differences displayed by L. setosus,
sucking stylets occupy the median plane of the head; mouth at
the anopluran normally found on dogs, and P. pubis, den-
arrow.
izen of the human pubic hairs, to avoid misdiagnosis.
 Lice are well-adapted parasites and are usually more a
 host specificity. Even the eggs are securely attached to the
nuisance than a threat to their hosts. The role of the human
hairs or feathers of the host (see Figure 2-37). The lice that
body louse in the spread of Rickettsia prowazeki, the caus-
hatch from these eggs are tiny replicas of the adults; they
ative agent of epidemic typhus, is an outstanding exception,
molt several times but undergo only minor changes in
and a few other examples of lice serving in the role of
appearance (i.e., simple metamorphosis). The cycle from
vectors and intermediate hosts can be cited. However, it
egg to egg requires several weeks, and only one or two eggs
takes a large population of lice to drain the vitality of
 may be found developing within the abdomen of a female
their host directly, and usually contributory conditions
louse at any one time, but enormous populations may
such as stress of inclement weather, crowding, poor nutri-
develop notwithstanding. The hatching process itself is of
tion, and individual diathesis can be demonstrated in cases
passing interest. The young louse swallows air and ejects it
of clinical illness related to louse infestation. If a very large
through its anus to form a cushion of compressed air that
 number of lice is found on cattle, on a puppy, or on a stock
forces the animal against the operculum (i.e., lid) of the
of laboratory rats, there is something wrong in the way the
eggshell until it pops open. Thus it may be said (with due
animals are kept, and merely spraying insecticide to kill the
application of etymology and low humor) that “every louse
lice falls far short of full clinical management of the case.
is hoisted by its own petard."
Suborder Anoplura
Anoplurans, about 400 some species, have pincerlike tarsal
claws for clinging to the hairs of their hosts. The size of
these claws is related to the diameter of the hair shaft and is
probably an important factor in establishing host specificity
and site specificity. Without hair, these lice are helpless;
they pass from host to host most efficiently when a
"bridge" of hair exists between host individuals. This is
why P. pubis is frequently transmitted during sexual inter-
course. According to Chandler and Read (1961), the French
call this parasite “papillon d'amour."
Haeimatopinus
All tarsal claws are of equal size, and the lateral margins
of the abdomen are heavily sclerotized (Figure 2-36). The
FIGURE 2-35. Mandibles of a mallophagan louse, Felicola subros-
two other anopluran genera found on cattle, Linognathus
tratus, grasping a cat hair.
and Solenopotes, differ in having smaller claws on their first
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
35
(B. taurus) in North America and tends to concentrate on
the neck, poll, brisket, and tail, but in heavy infestation it
may be generally distributed over the body. H. quadriper-
tusus, normally a tropical and subtropical parasite of Bos
indicus and B. indicus-B. taurus hybrids, lays its eggs in the
tail switch but may be found around the eyes and long hairs
of the ears (Roberts, 1952). H. tuberculatus is an Old World
 parasite of water buffalo ( Bubalus bubalus) and of domestic
cattle associated with them (Meleney and Kim, 1974).
Heavy infestations of H. eurysterrus are capable of caus-
ing severe anemia in adult range cattle (Peterson et al,
1953). Certain individuals are predisposed to the growth
 of large populations of lice, whereas other members of the
same herd support only light infestations. These “louse
breeders," as they are called, are likely to perish during
winter storms, weakened as they are by their louse burdens.
Such animals may be saved by insecticide applications. The
rate of increase in hematocrit is, however, considerably
slower than one would expect in a simple blood loss
anemia.
Linognathus
HGURE 2-36. Haematopinus eurystermus (Anoplura) of cattle.
Unlike Haermatopinus, the first pair of tarsal claws of
 All tarsal claws are of equal size.
Linognathus is smaller than the second and third pairs,
 pair of legs. Species of Haematopinus that infest domestic
and the lateral margins of the abdomen are not heavily
animals include H. asini of horses, H. suis of swine (Figure
sclerotized (Figure 2-38). Linognathus differs from
2-37), and Haematopinus eurysternus, Haematopinus
 Solenopotes in having more than one row of setae per
quadripertusus, and Haematopinus tuberculatus of cattle.
 abdominal segment and in lacking a sternal plate and pro-
H. eurystermus is a common parasite of domestic cattle
tuberant abdominal  spiracles. Species of  Linognathus
horse hairs, and several operculate eggs glued to the hair of the equine host.
36
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FGURE 2-39. Linognathus setosus (Anoplura) of dogs and foxes.
FIGURE 2-38. Linognathus vitufi (Anoplura) of cattle. The first pair of
 tarsal claws is smaller than the second and third pairs. Spiracles
two furnishing the nearest approximation to a pubic hair
ueu anow sl aneyl pue 'uawopqe auljo aneyns au yhm ysny ane
that a child has to offer. Pruritus is intense, and a papular
one row of setae per abdominal segment.
 dermatitis with discoloration of the skin develops. Once
feeding, these lice display a marked disinclination to move
infesting domestic animals include Linognathus viuli of
and tend to remain fixed at one point for days while their
cattle; Linognathus ovillus, Linognathus pedalis, and
feces accumulate about them. The life cycle requires about
Linognathus africanus of sheep; Linognathus stenopsis and
1 month from egg to egg, so that considerable time may
L. africarus of goats; and L. setosus of dogs and foxes
(Figure 2-39).
Solenopotes
 ses o asno q a, au sdes saodos
distinguished from Linognathus in having only one row of
setae per abdominal segment, a sternal plate at least half as
wide as it is long, and protuberant abdominal spiracles
(Figure 2-40).
Polyplax
Polyplax spinulosa is a parasite of the rat, and Polyplax
serrata is a parasite of the mouse (Figure 2-41). Both of
these anoplurans may develop into serious nuisances in
laboratory animal colonies and, when sufficiently abun-
dant, may even bleed animals to death (Figure 2-42).
Treatment of infested rats has been performed with the
Pthirus
The large tarsal claws of P. pubis (Figure 2-43) are
FGURE 2-40. Sorenopotes capillatus (Anoplura) of cattle. The first
adapted to the coarse hairs of the pubic and perianal
pair of tarsal claws is smaller than the second and third pairs.
regions, armpits, mustache, beard, and, particularly in
Spiracles protrude above the surface of the abdomen, and there
young children, the eyebrows and eyelashes, these latter
is only one row of setae per abdominal segment.
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
37
FGURE 2-41. Polyplax serrata (Anoplura) of the mouse. Left, Male. Center, Female. Right, Nymph.
elapse between acquisition and awareness of infestation.
pestilence. Dealing with a family outbreak of crab lice and
Although sexual contact is the principal means of transmis-
falsely incriminated dog requires considerable tact.
sion between individuals, towels, clothing, and bedding used
by an infested person are to be avoided. Entire families, chil-
Pediculus
dren and family dog included, may become infested through
The human head louse, Pediculus humanus capitis, stays
fomites such as these. During crises of this sort, the dog may
mainly on the human head, especially around the ears and
be presented to the veterinarian for euthanasia in the mis-
nape of the neck (Figure 2-44). Dogs are rarely infested.
taken belief that the dog is the culprit and reservoir of
Eggs are attached firmly to the hairs and hatch within a
FIGURE 2-42. Polyplax spinulosa leaving a rat that died of the effects of its louse population. Urged
on by the heat of an incandescent bulb, these lice are emulating their host's legendary tendency
to flee from unpromising situations. This is a general phenomenon among the more mobile
ectoparasites and can be exploited to advantage in diagnosis. However, if it is necessary to
euthanize the host, do not use chloroform, ether, or other agents that will surely kill the parasites
as well as their hosts.
38
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FIGURE 2-43. Pthirus pubis (Anoplura). Left, An adult
female human crab louse. Right, A louse and two
eggs on a pubic hair. Dogs occasionally acquire P
pubis by contact with infested humans or their
clothing.
week. Infestation spreads rapidly because of the ease with
wars and natural disasters, body louse populations are
which hairs are shed and wafted about. Outbreaks of head
likely to expand rapidly. Under such circumstances, epi-
lice may occur under the best conditions of sanitation and
 demic typhus (R. prowazeki), which is transmitted by the
 personal deportment. The human body louse, Pediculus
body louse, is likely to break out, and it is not for mere
humanus humanus, does not cling to hair. Instead, this
 comforts sake that vigorous delousing measures must be
louse clings to the fibers and deposits its eggs in the
adopted.
 ss  ia u ndxi  jo ss 
Humans and gorillas share species of pubic lice (P. pubis
 u oi s  apoq jo p aq o op pu aldod
 on people and Pthirus gorillae on gorillas), but there are
clothing. When people are unable to bathe and change
none found on chimpanzees (Reed et al, 2007). At the same
clothing for extended periods, as, for example, during
time, chimpanzees are host to Pediculus schaeff, humans
are host to P. humanus, and gorillas are not parasitized by
species in this genus.
The Mallophaga
Some 4000 species of mallophagans, or chewing lice, are
 parasites of birds and mammals. All bird lice are biting lice,
and there are many species of them. Mallophagans ingest a
variety of epidermal materials. Some readily ingest feather
keratin and can be cultured on this substance in vitro. A
few, such as Heterodoxus spiriger of the dog and related
amblyceran parasites of birds, are blood feeders (Agarwal,
Chandra, and Saxena, 1982).
Because their hosts are insectivorous and very fastidious,
bird lice are in constant danger of being eaten by their host
instead of vice versa. However, they tend to be far less
sluggish than their relatives that parasitize mammals;
many have long legs to help them keep “one step ahead,*"
and they frequently develop enormous populations.
Mallophagans may cause their hosts considerable irritation
when present in large numbers, especially in situations in
which it is difficult for the animals to groom themselves,
as in the case of stanchioned cattle. There are three sub-
orders of chewing lice: Ischnocera, Amblycera, and
Rhynchophthirina.
Suborder Ischnocera
Ischnocerans have salient antennae that are three-jointed
FIGURE 2-44. Pediculus humanus capitis (Anoplura), the human
in species infesting mammals (Figure 2-45) and five-
head louse collected from a child attending public school in
 jointed in species infesting birds; all lack maxillary palps
Ithaca, New York.
(Figure 2-46).
CHA P TER 2 Arthropods
39
the genus Ctenocephalides are far more important in
this respect. T. canis must be differentiated from the ano-
pluran L. setosus and from the warm-climate amblyceran,
H.spiniger.
Felicola
F. subrostratus is the only louse found on cats (Figure
2-48). This louse is characterized by the triangular shape of
the anterior portion of the head.
Suborder Amblycera
Amblycerans have club-shaped antennae that lie in
grooves in the head and four-segmented maxillary palpi
(Figure 2-49). Many amblycerans are parasites of birds,
but one species, H. spiniger, is a parasite of dogs in warm
climates, and three species, Gliricola porcelli, Gyropus ovalis,
and Trimenopon hispidum, are parasites of the guinea pig
(Figure 2-50 and see Figure 7-103).
Suborder Rhynchophthirina
Haermatomyzus species are parasites of both Asian and
African elephants and of wart hogs (Figure 2-51). The pre-
ferred location on elephants is the posterior aspect of the
HGURE 2-45. Damalinia (Holokartikos) crassipes (Mallophaga:
ears and adjacent areas of the head and neck.
Ischnocera) of the goat. Typical of ischnocerans parasitizing
mammals, D. crassipes has three-segmented antennae.
Treatment of Louse Infestations
Dogs and Cats
Damalinia (Bovicola)
Topical monthly application products have been found to
Species infesting domestic mammals include Damalinia
be very efficacious in treating mallophagan infestations in
a a aq saol os) inaa  sns uo sia
dogs and cats. Selamectin has been shown to have high
Werneckiella equi) on horses (see Figure 2-45), Damalinia
efficacy in the treatment of lice on dogs and cats (Shanks
ovis on sheep, and Damalinia caprae, Damalinia limbata,
et al, 2003). T. caris has been shown to be treated with both
and Damalinia (Holokartikos) crassipes on goats.
fipronil and imidacloprid (Hanssen et al, 1999; Pollmeier
et al, 2002). Fipronil has also been shown to be highly
Trichodectes
efficacious against F. subrostratus (Pollmeier et al, 2004).
T. canis, the canine chewing louse (Figure 2-47), may
Lice are readily controlled with carbaryl-containing sham-
serve as intermediate host (cyclodevelopmental vector)
poo, spray, or dip. Usually two treatments are adequate
of the tapeworm Dipylidium caninrum, although fleas of
when applied at an interval of 1 week.
In the case of dogs, the anopluran Lirognathus setosus
has been very successfully treated with both imidacloprid
and selamectin (Gunnarsson, Christensson, and Palmer,
2005; Hanssen et al, 1999).
Beef and Nonlactatlng Dalry Cattle
Most cases of louse infestation in cattle are mild and man-
ifested only by occasional scratching and restlessness on the
part of the animals. However, as populations increase
through the winter and early spring, the degree of irritation
to the animals (and to any sympathetic observer) verges
on the unbearable, and treatment must be carried out.
Coumaphos, chlorpyrifos, and tetrachlorvinphos as sprays,
 dips, or pour-ons provide excellent control of lice. The mac-
rocyclic lactones administered subcutaneously are highly
effective against anopluran infestations in cattle. The pour-
FGURE 2-46. Goniocotes sp. (Mallophaga: Ischnocera) of the
on formulations of the macrocyclic lactones also provide
chicken. Typical of ischnocerans parasitizing birds, Goniocotes
good efficacy against D. bovis. It has been shown in New
has five-segmented antennae.
York State that calves housed in outdoor hutches have
40
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FGURE 2-47. Fichodectes canis (Mallophaga: Ischnocera) of the dog: male on left, female on right.
markedly lower louse infestation rates than calves held in
collective stalls or pens in barns (Geden, Rutz, and
Bishop, 1990).
Dalry Cattle
Tetrachlorvinphos, synergized pyrethrins, and coumaphos 
are applied to lactating dairy cows as sprays, in dust bags, in
backrubbers, and as sprinkle-on dusts. Two applications
should provide good control. Eprinomectin is efficacious 
against louse infestations of lactating cows.
Palp.
Mandibles
Antenna
FIGURE 2-48. Felicola subrostratus (Mallophaga: Ischnocera) of
FGURE 2-49.Menopon sp. (Mallophaga: Amblycera) of the
the cat.
chicken.
CHA PTER 2 Arthropods
41
Horses
Lice are found on horses principally during winter and
spring. Two spray applications of coumaphos 2 weeks
apart should provide adequate control. In cold weather,
dusting horses with a mixture of rotenone and synergized
pyrethrins is a less stressful procedure.
Elephants
Treatment of Haematormyzus elephantis infestations with
oral administration of ivermectin at doses in the range
0.059 to 0.087 mg/kg body weight was found to be highly
effective (Karesh and Robinson, 1985).
Humans
The treatment for lousy people is to be done under the
supervision of a human physician. However, the veterinar-
ian has a role in protecting pets from the all too common
implication that they are the source of the human infesta-
tion. People get their lice from other people. Treatments for
people containing various insecticides are typically in the
form of creams, lotions, or shampoos; and in the United
States, these products can usually be procured as over-the-
FGURE 2-50. Gliricola porcelli (Mallophaga: Amblycera) of the
counter products. Usually one application suffices, but
guinea pig.
ss   a q n p  
Lice and their eggs are killed by exposure to a temperature
Swlne
 sn as os s ne r  os gon
Coumaphos and tetrachlorvinphos provide good control of
 can be an effective adjunet in control (Kraus and Glassman,
lice when applied as sprays or poured on the topline from
1976). If a home has an infestation of some of the family
 shoulders to hips. It is good practice when treating swine to
members, toys, brushes, combs, and so on can be placed in
apply insecticide also to the bedding of the holding pens.
ai aue aosp oi pap pue asmod e u nap sao 
 Usually two applications are adequate. Ivermectin, dora-
 or eggs that might be present on these items.
mectin, and moxidectin all have excellent efficacy against
H. suis.
Order Siphonaptera, Fleas
Adult fleas are wingless, laterally flattened insects that have
long legs for jumping and a large abdomen (Figure 2-52).
 Fleas feed on the blood of such animals as dogs, cats, pigs,
humans, rodents, and birds. Metamorphosis is complex,
with three caterpillar-like larval stages and an enduring
pupal stage enclosed in a silken cocoon. Certain hosts
develop hypersensitive reactions to flea bites characterized
by intense pruritus. A hypersensitive dog or human suffers
intolerably from the bites of a small number of fleas that a
normal individual would scarcely notice. Various species of
fleas transmit plague (Yersinia pestis), murine typhus
(Ricketsia typhi), rabbit myxomatosis virus, and feline par-
vovirus (Torres, 1941) and serve as intermediate hosts of
the tapeworm D. carinum and the filarid nematode
Dipetalonema reconditum.
Ctenocephalides
Identification
The ubiquitous Ctenocephalides felis and the relatively
rare Ctenocephalides canis are parasites of a very wide
range of domestic and wild mammals, including cats,
dogs, cattle, and humans. Ctenocephalides have both genal
FGURE 2-51. Haematomyzus elephantis (Mallophaga: Rhyncho-
and pronotal combs (Figure 2-53), which easily distin-
phthirina) of the elephant.
guishes them from Echidnophaga (Figure 2-54), Xenopsylla
42
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FIGURE 2-52. Adult male Pulex irritans (Siphonaptera), lateral view,
FGURE 2-54. Echidnophaga (Siphonaptera). Echidnophaga gallinacea,
showing the six long legs, the head, three thoracic segments,
the poultry sticktight flea, may be found firmly attached in clus-
and the abdomen.
 ters on chickens' heads and on the eyelids or in the ear canals of
dogs, cats, and other animals.
(Figure 2-55), and Pulex (Figure 2-56; see also Figure 2-52),
which have neither genal nor pronotal combs, and from
 eggs and larvae of Ctenocephalides are found in the haircoat
certain rodent fleas that have only pronotal combs.
 of infested dogs and cats.
Cediopsylla (Figure 2-57), a rabbit flea, resembles Cte-
 Diagnosis of dog and cat flea infestation is sometimes
nocephalides in having both genal and pronotal combs but
difficult because only a few fleas are required to cause great
can be distinguished as follows. If a line drawn along the
 misery, especially in a sensitized individual. Flea feces are
bases of the genal teeth runs parallel to the long axis of the
head, the specimen is Ctenocephalides, whereas if it runs at an
 appreciable angle, it is Cediopsylla. Do not fail to recognize
the eggs and larvae of fleas as such (Figures 2-58 and 2-59).
 Cterocephalides lay their eggs on the host. Especially in the
case of dogs with thick and soiled haircoats, many of these
0.5-mm-long, glistening, white eggs may remain on the host
long enough to hatch; so sometimes, not only adults but
Pronotal comb-
Rod
comb
FIGURE 2-53. Ctenocephalides (Siphonaptera) of the cat and dog.
 The bases of the genal teeth of Ctenocephalides lie on a line run-
FGURE 2-55. Xenopsylla (Siphonaptera), a rat flea and biologic
ning parallel to the long axis of the head, thus serving to distin-
vector of plague (Yersinia pestis) and endemic typhus (Rickettsia
guish this genus from certain rodent and leporid fleas that have
typhi). The vertical rod on the mesothorax distinguishes this
both genal and pronotal combs.
genus from Purex.
CHA P TER 2 Arthropods
43
FIGURE 2-59. Larva of Ctenocephalides. Fea larvae are frequently
overlooked or misidentified.
essentially tiny particles of dried blood. The larval fleas eat
their parents' feces, as well as other organic debris. Flea
feces may be detected in the haircoat of a dog or cat by a
HGURE 2-56. Pulex (Siphonaptera). Pulex irritans, the human flea,
sort of paper chromatography. Suspect detritus may be
attacks a wide range of hosts.
 placed on filter paper or other absorbent material that
has been dampened with dilute soap or detergent solution.
Hemoglobin will diffuse out of flea feces in a few minutes
 and form a red halo around the speck of debris, or a sim-
ilarly dampened pledget of absorbent cotton may be rubbed
 over the haircoat and skin to pick up particles of flea feces;
little red spots appear on the cotton.
Life history
 Metamorphosis of fleas is complex, with life stages con-
sisting of egg, larval stages one, two, and three, pupa, and
adult (Figure 2-60). The adult Ctenocephalides displays little
tendency to leave its dog or cat host unless the population
approaches about 200. Then a few fleas may get off occa-
 sionally, especially when their host comes in contact with
another, possibly less parasitized individual. A common
misconception exists that Ctenocephalides fleas constantly
 jump on and off their hosts and find new hosts in this
manner. In fact, most of the fleas a dog or cat acquires
are brand new ones straight out of their pupal cases, and
FGURE 2-57. Cediopsylla (Siphonaptera) of the rabbit. The bases of
it is most important to remember this fact in connection
the genal teeth lie on a line running at an angle to the long axis of the 
with control efforts (Figure 2-61). For every flea on the
head , thus serving to distinguish this genus from Ctenocephalides.
host, there are many eggs, larvae, pupae, and newly
emerged adults in the environment, and these tend to be
concentrated wherever the host habitually rests. The longer
the host stays in one place, the more eggs and adult flea
feces will be deposited there. Flea feces serve as the principal
food of the three larval stages. Development of C. felis from
egg to adult occurs within the ranges 13° to 32° C and 50%
to 92% relative humidity and requires from 14 to 140 days
at the extremes of temperature. Temperatures above 35° C
are lethal to larvae and pupae. Unfed adults may survive for
many weeks under cool, humid conditions but probably
cannot long withstand the low relative humidities associat-
HGURE 2-58. Egg of Ctenocephalides and two masses of flea feces.
ed with subfreezing conditions (Silverman, Rust, and
Hea feces consists essentially of dried host's blood and serves as
Reierson, 1981). Unfed Ctenocephalides adults can survive
food for the flea larvae, which have chewing mouthparts.
kq uddeu on iso e ioy Sum suou 7 inoqe 1o
44
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FIGURE 2-60. Life history of Ctenocephalides felis.
Eggs appear 2 days after male and female fleas
Fleaeggs
arrive on a cat or dog. Most eggs fall out of the
and feces
pelage and tend to accumulate where the host
habitually rests, and first-stage larvae (L1) begin
to hatch out of them on day 4. Larvae feed on
adult flea feces, which, like the eggs, continu-
 ously rain down from the coat of an infested dog
or cat, and pass through two molts. In about
 2 weeks of wamm, moist conditions, the third-
 stage larvae begin to spin cocoons and meta-
L1
morphose into adult fleas (ie., pupate). The
cocoons are sticky so that fine debris, such as
the sand grains in the picture, tends to accumu-
late on their surfaces. Adults begin to emerge
from cocoons at 3 to 4 weeks, females preced-
R
ing males by several days. Having found a dog or
cat, the adult C. felis remains aboard, feeding
L2
repeatedly and reproducing until it is exhausted 
and dies or is nipped and swallowed by the host.
C. felis rarely leaves a suitable host of its own
accord.
3
People returning home after an absence of several weeks
may be greeted by hordes of bloodthirsty fleas that,
although preferring to feed on dogs, are quite willing to
make do with humans when no dog is available. One of
Dr. Georgi's mentors used to deal with this situation as
follows. On arriving back in town, he would go directly
to the kennel where his dog had been housed during his
absence and take the dog home to collect the hungry fleas
that were sure to be lying in wait there. After a brief tour of
the house, the dog was immediately taken back to the
kennel for a flea bath while the rest of the family retook
possession of the house.
Disease transmission
C. carnis and C. felis are true intermediate hosts (biologic
vectors) of the tapeworm D. caninum and the filariid nem-
FIGURE 2-61. Cocoons of Ctenocephalides felis. Left, The cocoon
atode D. reconditum. Fleas acquire D. caninum infection as
has been opened to reveal the larva within. Bottom right, The
larvae, because these are the stages with chewing mouth-
cocoon shows a flea that has almost completed metamorphosis.
 parts suitable for ingesting solid material such as the eggs of
CH A P T E R 2 Arthropods
45
this tapeworm. The cysticercoid that develops from the egg
tetrachlorvinphos, diazinon, amitraz. Some also are impreg-
is passed along through metamorphosis to the adult flea
nated with the insect growth regulator, methoprene. These
and infects the dog or cat that chances to ingest that par-
products do produce a certain level of control, and when
ficular flea. Microfilariae of D. reconditum are ingested by
 combined with careful premise management can produce
the blood-feeding adult flea and develop into third-stage 
rather successful treatment programs.
larvae capable of infecting a dog. Feline parvovirus, the
There are other available methods for the control of fleas
causative agent of feline panleukopenia, can be transmitted
that differ widely in their apparent effect on flea popula-
from infected to susceptible cats by C. felis (Torres, 1941).
 tions under various conditions. There are several traps com-
mercially available for the capture of adult fleas. Some of
Treatment of infestations with Ctenocephalides
these traps will collect more than 85% of released fleas,
Flea control has changed dramatically over the past few
whereas others collect only slightly more than 10%
years because of the introduction of several products
(Dryden and Bruce, 1993). Brewer's yeast failed as a repel-
designed to be administered monthly to dogs and cats.
lent to fleas on dogs when fed as a dietary supplement at
The impact of these products has been so dramatic that
the rate of 14 g/day (Baker and Farver, 1983). Ultrasonic
pest control operatives in the United States are seeing a
flea collars also do not repel fleas from dogs, at least
decline in their flea-control contracts. It has been recom-
under certain laboratory conditions (Dryden, Long, and
mended that for fiscal reasons they should enter into local
Gaafar, 1989).
 agreements with veterinarians over the sale of flea-control
 Fipronil, both the spray and the spot-on formulations,
products (Fehrenbach, 1996). Pets, clients, and veterinar-
has been found to cause severe toxic reactions in rabbits
ians have gained remarkably in their ability to control flea
treated for flea control. Thus the nonapproved use of fipro-
 infestations with the new products that have come on the
 nil on rabbits should be suspended for the time being.
market in the last 10 years.
It is important to remember that all insecticides are
Environmental control is still a major means of control.
toxicants, not only to the insects but to the animal on
ling fleas, and it does not necessarily require chemicals. The
which they are applied and to the person who applies
vacuum cleaner is virtually indispensable in reducing
them. Frequently the chore of treating dogs and cats
the number of eggs, larvae, pupae, and unfed adult fleas
falls on one or two members of a veterinary hospital staff,
in the environment. Remove, close, and dispose of the bag
 s        
after vacuuming to prevent fleas from escaping back into
come into contact with these insecticides. It is the respon-
the cleaned areas. Efforts to control fleas should be concen-
sibility of veterinarians in charge to enforce procedures
trated on the places where the dog or cat habitually rests,
designed to minimize exposure of their employees to
because here is where eggs and flea feces, the provender of
toxic chemicals.
larvae, are most likely to be deposited, and the development
of adults fleas is likely to follow. One simple measure that
Echidnophaga
 affords 100% control of flas is to keep the dogs or cats in
Echidnophaga gallinacea, the sticktight flea of poultry,
wire-boftom cages elevated at least 13 inches (33 cm) above
attacks all kinds of domestic birds, as well as dogs, cats,
the ground or floor. In a commercial beagle-breeding estab-
rabbits, horses, and humans, in subtropical America.
lishment housing several thousand dogs and employing no
Dr. Georgi once found several embedded in the eyelids of
chemical flea control, there were no fleas at all because the
a cat recently arrived in New York from Alabama. On birds,
 dogs in the colony were beyond the range of the staunchest
E. gallinacea embeds itself in the skin around the eyes and
jump that C. felis, champion jumper of the universe, can
cloaca and on the combs, wattles, and other glabrous areas.
put forth (i.e., 33 cm) (Rothschild et al, 1973). Application
These are small fleas with angular heads devoid of genal and
of this latter environmental control method is clearly lim-
pronotal combs; the thoracic tergites (dorsal sclerites of the
ited to strictly confined animals.
thorax) are very narrow (see Figure 2-54).
 There are still numerous products designed for topical
application to both animals and premises that will continue
Tunga
to be useful in flea control. Products that contain pyrethrins,
s e s! 'souo, io iaaan, au ‘suuauad vhun
carbaryl, phosmet, tetrachlorvinphos, and methoprene are
(1 mm) flea of tropical America and Africa that somewhat
usually effective and suitable for application to both animals
resembles Echidnophaga in having an angular head and
and their surroundings. Resistance to carbaryl and some
narrow thoracic segments and in lacking combs. The
 organophosphates is on the rise, however, and this possibil-
impregnated Turga female embeds in the skin of the
 ity must be taken into account in cases of apparent insecti-
ankles, instep, and between the toes, with only the last few
cide failure. Clients may treat pets with several different
abdominal segments protruding (Figure 2-62). Eggs are
preparations and the premises with additional preparations,
retained in the abdomen, and the flea swells to the
but if the labels are examined, it might be discovered
size of a pea. Lesions caused by this flea are painful and
that all preparations contain the same active ingredient.
subject to secondary infection and are supposedly the inspi
On the market are various dog and cat flea collars impreg-
ration for the sailor's oath, “I'll be jiggered" (Chandler and
 nated with various insecticidal compounds: chlorpyrifos,
Read, 1961).
46
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FGURE 2-63. Triatomin bug (Hemiptera: Reduvidae), an assas-
sin bug. Vector of Frypanosoma cruzi in North America. Right, The
proboscis of the bug that is partially inserted into the host when 
the bug feeds.
FIGURE 2-62. Tunga penetrans. Top, Tunga specimens from a goat
Development is by means of simple metamorphosis.
and a pig in Ecuador. Let, The posterior end of the goat specimen
Some hemipterans feed on plants; some kill insects and
shows nommal terminal segments. Right, The anterior of the pig
suck their juices; and some are bloodsuckers and pests of
specimen has three large sacculations with the head within
rodents and humans, occasionally attacking other animals.
enclosed in the space between them. Bottom, The paw of a dog
Predacious reduviids (assassin bugs) inflict painful bites, and
with several of these fleas embedded in the skin.
many such species have been reported to attack humans,
but the bites of the more specialized parasitic reduviids
Xenopsylla
(cone-nose bugs) and cimicids (bedbugs) are painless.
Xenopsylla is a widely distributed genus of rat fleas that
also attack humans and are an important vector of plague
Famlly Reduvlldae, Assassln Bugs, and Klsslng
(Y. pestis) and murine (endemic) typhus (R. typhi). Combs
or Cone-Nose Bugs
are absent, and the head is smoothly rounded, thus distin-
The reduviids (see Figure 2-63) have wings and a charac-
guishing Xenopsylla from the foregoing genera; it differs
teristic three-segmented beak. The parasitic species of the
from Pulex in having a vertical rod on the mesothorax
subfamily Triatominae, which feed exclusively on the blood
(see Figure 2-55).
 Disease transmission
Plague is normally a disease of rodents caused by the bac-
terium Y. pestis and transmitted by various fleas, of which
Xenopsylla cheopis stands out, especially in relation to human
infection. The great plague pandemics that decimated civiliza-
tion during the Middle Ages may have been precipitated by
large-scale plague mortality among humans' rodent cohabi-
tants, resulting in the vector turning to humans for its blood
meals and communicating Y. pestis to them in the process.
Pulex
Pulex irritans, the human flea, is widely distributed and
attacks a wide range of hosts, including humans, swine,
and dogs. Pulex resembles Xenopsylla but lacks the meso-
thoracic rod (see Figures 2-52 and 2-56).
Order Hemiptera, Bugs
 Hemipterans have two pairs of wings (which may be vesti-
gial), a triangular shield between the wing bases, four-
segmented antennae, and a three-segmented beak that is
directed caudally beneath the head when not in use
(Figures 2-63 and 2-64).
FGURE 2-64. Cimex lectularius (Hemiptera: Cimicidae), the bedbug.
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
47
of vertebrates, have a more slender beak than the predatory
 species and are able to feed painlessly enough so as not to
awaken a sleeping host. They hide in crevices by day and
attack their sleeping hosts by night in the manner of bed-
bugs, argasid ticks, and some species of mesostigmatid
mites. Triatominae of the genera Triatoma, Rhodnius,
     n
Chagas disease (Trypanosoma cruzi). The transmission of
T. cruzi is in the feces of the bug, and therefore this is
defined as transmission via the posterior station. This is
for the purposes of distinguishing this type of transmission
from the anterior station transmission (via mouthparts
and bite) of trypanosomes by tsetses and a few trypano-
the bites of triatomin bugs. The bug Triatorna sanguisuga
may play a minor role in the transmission of equine
 encephalomyelitis.
Famlly Clmlcldae, Bedbugs
Bedbugs (see Figure 2-64) have oval, dorsoventrally flattened
bodies, vestigial wings, three-segmented beaks, and a dis-
agreeable odor. They are nocturnal and secretive bloodsuck-
 ing parasites of humans, chickens, bats, and nesting birds.
 Like triatomids, bedbugs hide in crevices by day and attack
their sleeping host at night. They lay their eggs in their hiding
 places and molt five times at approximately weekly intervals,
FGURE 2-65. A cockroach, Periplaneta americana (Blattaria).
taking one blood meal between each molt and another
before egg laying. Bedbugs can endure starvation for several
months. Although such a blood-feeding pattern as this
Some species of beetles are also extremely toxic. For
would seem ideally suited to the transmission of disease
example, blister beetles (Epicauta species) (Figure 2-67)
 organisms, bedbugs, though frequently indicted, have yet
release an irritant and vesicant chemical (cantharidin)
to be convicted on any such counts.
when crushed during single-operation mowing and crimp-
ing of alfalfa hay. Hay containing these crushed beetles is
Order Blattaria, Cockroaches
lethal for horses and may remain so even after years of
Cockroaches are important as intermediate hosts of certain
storage. Clinical signs of cantharidin toxicosis include
parasitic worms such as the spirurid nematodes Spirura,
abdominal pain, fever, depression, frequent urination,
Oxyspirura, and Gongylonema; the acanthocephalans
shock, and, 
 occasionally, synchronous diaphragmatic
Moniliformis, Prosthenorchis, and Homorhynchus; and the
flutter, and mortality may exceed 70% of affected indivi-
 pentastomid Raillitiella. They also serve as mechanical vec-
duals. Hematologic findings included hemoconcentration,
tors of filth-borne diseases of humans. Inspection of
neutrophilic leukocytosis, and hypocalcemia. As in all
premises where food is prepared is often a veterinary func-
clinical poisonings, locating the source of the toxic agent
tion. Presence or absence of cockroaches is an important
is essential both to reaching a definitive diagnosis and
criterion of the adequacy of food sanitation (Figure 2-65).
to preventing further losses; the beetles should be sought
in hay fed to the affected horses (Schoeb and Panciera,
Order Coleoptera, Beetles
1978, 1979). The lethal dose of cantharidin for the
 Beetles have hard, shell-like outer wing covers called elytra
horse is probably less than 1 mg/kg body weight
that lack venation (Figure 2-66). Development is via com-
(Beasley et al, 1983).
plete metamorphosis; the larvae are grubs.
Dung beetles (some 14,000 species of the family
Beetles, like cockroaches, are important as intermediate
Scarabaeidae) are very important in the grazing ecology
hosts of parasitic worms that infect domestic animals
a au nq pue san dn eaq a aa
and humans. The spirurid nematodes Gongylonema and
2-68). Without their services, ruminant and horse dung
Physocephalus, the acanthocephalans Macracanthorhynchus
tends to accumulate on the pasture, where it breeds flies,
and Moniliformis, and the cestodes Hymenolepis 
and
physically interferes with the growth of grass, and dis-
Raillietina (not to be confused with the pentastomid
courages grazing in the immediate vicinity. Besides simply
Raillietiella or, for that matter, with the mesostigmatid
clearing the surface of pastures, dung beetles enhance fer-
Raillietia), all develop in beetles to the stage infective for
tility and filth by burrowing in the soil and carrying their
the vertebrate host.
little balls of dung down into the burrows, where it is
48
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FGURE 2-67. Epicauta sp. striped blister beetles. Consumption of
alfalfa hay containing dead striped blister beetles causes acute
cantharidin toxicosis in horses. (Courtesy Dr. R.J. Panciera.)
FIGURE 2-66. A beetle, Aeochara bimaculata (Coleoptera;
Staphylinidae). This beetle is an ectoparasite on horn fly and
CLASS ARACHNIDA
face fly pupae as a larva and feeds on fly eggs as an adult.
Although the class Arachnida includes spiders, scorpions,
The elytra of this beetle cover only the anterior portion of the
whip scorpions, and other forms that are of occasional
abdomen.
interest to veterinarians, the following exposition is
restricted to the ticks and mites. Larval stages of both
attacked by bacteria and fungi and the nutrients therein
ticks and mites normally have three pairs of legs, and the
are made available to plants. Australia has gone so far
nymphs and adults have four pairs. The head, thorax, and
as to import dung beetles from Africa in a successful
abdomen are fused; antennae and mandibles are absent.
effort to reduce accumulations of cattle dung on pasture
The mouthparts (palps, chelicerae, and hypostome) tog-
and the fly populations that breed therein. Administration
ether with the basis capituli, form a capitulum, or gnatho-
of ivermectin to grazing cattle suppressed not only target
some (Figure 2-69).
 m se suod aaaq sup nq ssuos
unforeseen effect of anthelmintic medication may have
potentially disastrous effects on dung removal and soil
nutrient cycling, at least under some environmental
conditions and dosage regimens (Coe, 1987; Wall and
Strong, 1987).
The small hive beetle, Aethina tumida, was introduced
into the United States sometime around 1998 (Elzen et al,
1999). The beetle is now known to be in Florida, Georgia,
South
Carolina,
Pennsylvania,
Ohio，
Minnesota,
and Michigan. The beetles enter the hives of the
European honeybee (Apis mellifera), and the beetle larvae
feed on honey in the combs and cause the bees to flee
the hive. This is one of several recently introduced arthro-
pod pathogens of honeybees that have caused severe
damage to these important pollinators throughout the
FGURE 2-68. Dung beetle from Canton, Ohio, rolling a ball of dung
United States.
to burial.
CHA PTER 2 Arthropods
49
the Nuttalliellidae, represented by a single species in the
Hypo
genus Nuttalliella, which are of real importance only to
Chelicera
soft and hard ticks vary greatly in their behavior. The
Argasidae family tends to be composed of species that
 n       
Palp
feed quickly on unsuspecting hosts. Ixodid ticks tend to
spend most of their lives in fields or scrub areas where
they await passing hosts. These ixodid ticks then attach
Basis
and remain attached to their hosts for up to several days
capituli
 before they release and drop to the ground.
Famlly Argasldae
The family Argasidae, or soff ticks, is small, consisting of
140 species belonging to four genera, Argas, Ormithodoros,
FIGURE 2-69. Capitulum of Amblyomma.
Otobius, and Carios. Carios species are limited to bats and
will not be considered further here. Argasids live in nests,
Suborder Metastigmata, Ticks
burrows, buildings, and sleeping places of their host ani-
All ticks are bloodsucking parasites. The hypostome is
mals and are distributed mostly in arid regions or in drier
armed with backward-projecting teeth, and the chelicerae
habitats in moist regions. The life stages consist of the egg
are armed with movable denticles (see Figure 2-69).
(laid in several batches of hundreds), larva, two or more
The lateral stigmata are caudodorsal to the fourth coxae
nymphal stages, and adult male and female. Unlike ixodid
(Figure 2-70) and lack the sinuous peritremes characteristic
nymphs and adults, which require several days to complete
 of the somewhat similar suborder Mesostigmata.
engorgement and feed only once during each stage, argasid
The greatest importance of ticks attaches to the large
nymphs and adults feed to repletion on their sleeping hosts
number and variety of microbial diseases that they transmit
in minutes or hours and feed repeatedly. Female argasids
among domestic animals. These diseases are listed later
lay a clutch of eggs after each blood meal. Argasid larvae, on
in the discussion on the particular genera involved as
the other hand, feed for several days, and Otobius nymphs
vectors. Other injuries inflicted by ticks include toxicosis,
may remain in the external ear canal of cattle for several
the bite wound, worry, and blood loss. There are two major
weeks.
families of ticks, the Argasidae, or soft ticks, and the
Ixodidae, or hard ticks. (There is a third family of ticks,
Argas
Identification
Genital
Argas species are 5- to 10-mm, flattened, ovoid, and
orifice
yellow to reddish-brown ticks with leathery, mammillated,
Spiracle
and wrinkled dorsal and ventral surfaces meeting at a sharp
lateral margin. The mouthparts are on the ventral surface
and thus hidden when the tick is viewed from above
(Figure 2-71). Argas is rarely found on the host; to find
these ticks, search cracks and crannies in the hen house
for this parasite. In the United States, Argas is restricted
 to areas along the Gulf of Mexico and the Mexican border.
Life history
Female Argas ticks deposit their eggs in clutches of 25 to
100 in the crevices that serve as hiding places during the
day. Several clutches are laid, each preceded by a blood
meal lasting 45 minutes or less. The six-legged larva hatches
Anus
in 1 to 4 weeks, attaches to a host, and feeds for about
5 days; the larva is thus active day and night. When replete,
the larva leaves the host and finds a hiding place in which to
Anal
spend a week or so molting into a nymph. The eight-legged
groove
nymph feeds at night and undergoes a second molt to a
second nymphal stage, which again feeds and undergoes
a third molt into an adult male or female. Although devel-
FGURE 2-70. Ventral aspect of xodes. The anal groove of xodes
 opment from egg to adult may be completed in as few as
curves anteriorly around the anus.
 30 days, lack of suitable hosts may prolong the process.
50
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
Capitulum
Genital
orifice
Anus
FGURE 2-71. Argas. Left, Dorsal aspect. Center, Ventral aspect. Right, Lateral aspect.
Larvae and nymphs may survive for months and adults for
rodent-infested buildings, whereas Ornithodoros coriaceus
more than 2 years without a blood meal. Trying to starve
of California and Oregon attacks deer and cattle from the
them out does not pay.
soil of their bedding areas. As typical argasids, Ormithodoros
can survive unfed for months or even years.
 Disease transmission
 In South America, Argas species transmit fowl or avian
 Disease transmission 
spirochetosis (Borrelia anserina), via tick fecal contamina-
Orrithodoros are most important as vectors and reser-
tion, to domestic poultry, grouse, canaries, guinea fowl, and
 voirs of relapsing fever spirochetes (Borrelia recurrentis) of
pigeons. Ticks may remain infective for 6 months or more
humans. Infection may be maintained in tick populations
and transmit the spirochetes to their offspring via the ovar-
a Jo uoisss josu Aq Sieak Au 1o
ies (transovarial transmission). Argas species also transmit a
rickettsial agent, Aegyptianella pullorum, to chickens and
 geese in the tropics and subtropics of the Old World.
Tick paralysis. Infestation with larvae of Argas persicus
can result in fatal flaccid paralysis of young chickens
(Rosenstein, 1976).
Omithodoros
Identification
 Ornithodoros differs from Argas in being more globular,
 in lacking a sharp lateral margin, and in not appearing
distinctly ovoid when viewed from above. The body is flat-
tened in unfed specimens but strongly convex dorsally
when distended with blood. These ticks (Figure 2-72) are
found in cracks and crannies of avian roosts and nests,
rodent burrows, and the resting places of large mammals.
Life history
 Species of Orrithodoros differ with respect to whether
the larvae feed, to the number of nymphal instars (three
to five), and to host and lair preferences. Ormithodoros
herrmsi is a rodent parasite in the Rocky Mountain and
Pacific Coast states, breeding in rodent burrows and
FGURE 2-72. Ormithodoros.
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
51
FGURE 2-73. Otobirus megnini. Left, First
 nymph. Right, Second nymph.
spirochetes from female ticks to their offspring and tends to
 a progressively smaller proportion of her dorsum. A tick's
remain endemic in wild rodent populations. Tick-borne
eye, if present, is a mere roundish lucent area at the margin
 relapsing fever typically involves an individual or small
of the scutum about opposite the second coxa. The scutum
group of campers who have slept in a tick-infested cabin
and the posterior edge of the body may bear a series of
out in the wilderness. Because the Ornithodoros ticks
indentations or folds along the margin; these are called
 involved in transmission are nocturnal and surreptitious,
festoons. Also, the scutum may have colored patterns on
 relapsing fever victims are frequently unaware of recent tick
the surface (an ornate scutum) or it may be without
coloration (an inornate scutum). The large stigmata
exposure.
(respiratory openings attached to the tracheal system) are
Otobius
behind the last pair of legs on the sides of the body. The
Identification
anterior end of the tick houses the feeding apparatus, which
Larvae and two nymphal stages of Otobius megnini, the
consists of a basis capituli that is adjacent ot the body. On
 spinose ear tick, parasitize the ear canals of cattle, remain-
the anterior portion of the basis capituli are the palps, one
ing in a particular host for as long as 4 months. Other
 on each side of the paired chelicerae and the central hypo-
domestic animals and humans also sometimes serve as
stome. The palps consist of four segments, with the distal
hosts. One of Dr. Georgi's former students reported that
fourth pretty well buried in the third. Each chelicera has
s so a se d ras pras pu au
large cutting blades on the distal end, and the hypostome
implied by the common name, the cuticle of Otobius is
has numerous small teeth or denticles.
covered by spines. The second nymphal stage is particularly
 Eggs are laid in a single clutch of thousands. Ixodid larvae,
distinctive (Figure 2-73).
 nymphs, and adults each feed only once, and several days are
usually required for complete engorgement. Ixodids usually
Life history
live outdoors and attach to passing host animals. There are
Larvae feed in the ear canal and molt into the first nym-
two molts: the first from larva to nymph and the second
 phal stage, which in turn feeds in the same host's ear canal
from nymph to adult. Species that complete both molts
and molts into the second nymphal stage, which again feds
without leaving the host are called one-host ticks; species
 but leaves the ear canal and drops to the ground to molt to
whose engorged nymphs drop off to molt are called two-
the adult stage. Adult Otobius have vestigial hypostomes
host ticks; and those whose nymphs and larvae drop off to
and do not fed; they copulate within a day or two after
molt are called three-host ticks. Dermacentor variabilis is a
emergence, and the females oviposit in the soil. Larvae sur-
three-host tick whose larvae and nymphs engorge on small
vive unfed for as long as 2 months. Thus, Otobius differs
from Argas and Orrithodorus in being a one-host tick and
sarguineus is a three-host tick whose larvae, nymphs, and
 in laying only one clutch of eggs.
adults all engorge on dogs. The individual or species identity
of the host has no bearing on the use of these terms.
Famlly Ixodldae
What is important relative to these terms is that a one-
Members of the family Ixodidae, or hard ticks, have a
host tick or a three-host tick that feeds on only one host is
shield, or scutum, that covers the entire dorsal surface of
often easier to control through the management of the sin-
the male but only part of the dorsal surface of the female
gle host than a three-host tick that has different hosts
(Figure 2-74). The size of the scutum remains constant
throughout the environment. For example, if cattle are
 during engorgement of a female and consequently covers 
hosts to a one-host tick, dipping and other applications of
52
CHA P TER 2Arthropods
FIGURE 2-74. Amblyomma maculatum. The male (left) has an omamented scutum that covers the
entire body. In the case of the female (right), the scutum is also ornate but covers only a portion of
the dorsal surface of the tick. As the female engorges, the scutum remains constant in size and,
 chemotherapeutic agents or vaccination of the cattle will
mechanism that allows one-host ticks, such as Rhipicephalus
have effects on all life stages of the tick. If three hosts
anrulatus, to serve as vectors.
were involved, the first host might be a rodent, the second
Ixodid ticks found attached to domestic animals may
a rabbit or bird, and the third cattle. Thus it would be more
be removed individually by cautious traction with thumb
difficult to manage these two- or three-host systems be-
forceps. The long hypostomes of Ixodes, Amblyormma,
cause it would be difficult to manage or treat all three
and
1 Hyalomma are effective anchors. Dermacentor,
hosts involved. That three-host ticks may feed on several
Rhipicephalus, and Haemaphysalis compensate for their
different hosts during their lives, from small rodents to
shorter hypostomes by secreting a cement in which the
large mammals, make them perfect vectors for the transmis-
 mouthparts are embedded and that attaches them securely
sion of zoonotic agents to humans, e.g., the larva feeds on a
to the skin (Moorhouse, 1973; Moorhouse and Tatchell,
rodent, and the nymph or adult will feed on humans; thus
1966). Therefore unless reasonable care is exercised, the
transmission from rodents to humans becomes a real possi-
capitulum may be torn away and remain embedded as a
bility. This is exactly what occurs in the case of Lyme
foreign body in the skin of the host. Outdoor areas sus-
borreliosis.
pected as sources of ixodid tick infestation may be surveyed
Two- and three-host ticks can transmit disease organisms
with a drag made by attaching one edge of a square yard of
via interstadial transmission; that is, infection acquired by
flannel to a stick and drawing it slowly over the vegetation.
a larval tick is carried through the molt to the nymphal
 Hungry ticks will climb aboard the passing drag and can
stage and then conveyed to the host on which the nymph
then be removed at intervals and placed in specimen
 feeds, or infection acquired by a nymph is carried through
bottles.
the molt and conveyed to the host on which the adult tick
Veterinarians should carefully examine the ticks they
feeds. Thus three-host ticks can transmit disease organisms
encounter in practice. If a specimen is found that looks
interstadially through both larva to nymph and nymph to
 different from normal ticks, it should be sent to a diagnos-
adult transitions, whereas two-host ticks are limited to the
tic laboratory for expert identification. However, many
latter. In transovarial transmission, the disease organisms
practical problems can be solved by generic identification
 are passed from the adult female tick to her larvae through
of adult ixodid ticks, and criteria for accomplishing that
infection of her ovaries. Babesia bigemina is transmitted
goal are presented here. No attempt is made here to identify
from the adult female Rhipicephalus (fomerly Boophilus,
 aa  a a q su  a
this genus has now been subsumed within the genus
six legs (Figure 2-75) and nymphs have eight legs and a
Rhipicephalus) tick to her progeny by way of her ovaries.
 scutum of the female type, but the genital aperture is absent
Transovarial transmission of disease organisms is the only
(Figure 2-76). A key to the nymphs of ixodid ticks that may
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
53
Approximately 700 species of hard ticks are included
in a total of 12 genera. The currently recognized genera
are Amblyomma, Anomalohimalaya,Bothriocroton, Cos-
miomma, Dermacentor, Haemaphysalis, Hyalomma, Ixodes,
Margaropus, Nosomma, Rhipicentor, and Rhipicephalus,
with the genus Boophilus becoming a subgenus of the
genus Rhipicephalus (Horak, Camicas, and Keirans, 2002).
The five genera that are found in North America include
Ixodes, Haemaphysalis, Rhipicephalus, Dermacentor, and
Amblyomma. The other genera from outside North
America are sometimes found here on imported animals.
Genera Found In North Amerlca
lxodes
Identification
 The anal groove forms an arch anterior to the anus; this
can be seen with oblique illumination of uncleared speci-
 mens (Figure 2-77). Other genera have a groove posterior
to the anus or no groove at all. Ixodes species have no eyes,
festoons, or scutal ornamentation; their palpi are broadest
FIGURE 2-75. Six-legged xodes larva.
at the junction of segments two and three (Figure 2-78).
a d a s s  ri 
Life history and disease transmission
(Bowman and Giovengo, 1991).
 In Europe, species of Ixodes are vectors of bovine piro-
 In the following outline of genera of ixodid ticks, the
plasmosis and various viral diseases, including louping ill.
character in bold type is either sufficient or nearly suffi-
Ixodes holocyclus of Australia is the most virulent tick
cient to represent the genus alone, provided, of course, that
paralysis producer known. Ixodes pacificus is known to
the corresponding morphologic feature of the specimen is
cause tick paralysis in North America. Species of Ixodes
  t po a aa a p 
are the major vectors of Lyme disease in North America
one or another of these characters, and they serve as con-
and Europe.
venient starting points for identifying specimens; however,
to be on the safe side, check each subsidiary character as
well. Further details may be found in Ticks of Veterinary
Importarce, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
(APHIS), United States Department
of Agriculture
(USDA), Agriculture Handbook No. 485.
FGURE 2-76. Eight-legged Ixodes nymph. Although difficult to dis-
FIGURE 2-77. The anus and the anterior anal groove present on
aul u! punoj aq uen anoog jeue jojalue ue 'ainay siyl ul wan
the posterior ventral surface of all stages of ticks in the genus
nymphal and larval stages of ticks of the genus kodes.
Ixodes.
54
CH A P TE R 2Arthropods
FGURE 2-79. Haemaphysalis. The second palpal segment (arrow) is
flared laterally.
neither eyes nor scutal ornamentation, but they differ in
having festoons and a posterior anal groove.
Life history
Larvae and nymphs of Haemaphysalis leporispalustris,
FIGURE 2-78. Capitulum of Ixodes. The palps of xodes are broad-
 the rabbit tick, feed on ground-nesting birds and small
est at the junction of the second and third segments (arrow).
mammals, and the adults attach to rabbits, especially to
the ears and around the eyes. Occasional specimens are
Nymphs of Ixodes scapularis, a three-host tick that nor-
collected from cats.
 mally feeds on mice and voles as larva and nymph and on
deer as adult, transmits microtine piroplasmosis (Babesia
Rhipicephalus
microti), Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi), and human
Identification
granulocytic ehrlichiosis to humans (Burgdorfer et al,
The basis capituli is hexagonal (Figure 2-80); eyes and
1982; Spielman, 1976), dogs (Hinrichsen et al, 2001;
festoons are present, but the scutum is unornamented
Lissman et al, 1984), and other animals. In the northeastern
(Figure 2-81); males have salient adanal and accessory
United States, the white-footed mouse, Peromyscus leuco-
shields (Figure 2-82).
pus, is the principle reservoir host for B. burgdorferi and
serves as host for larvae and nymphs of I. scapularis, and the
Life history and disease transmission
white-tailed deer, O. virginianus, serves as host to the adult
Larvae, nymphs, and adults of R. sanguineus, the brown 
tick, transmitting the spirochete both transovarially and
dog tick, all feed on dogs and sometimes on humans
transstadially (Lane and Burgdorfer, 1987). Amblyomma
(Figure 2-83). Originally a tropical species, R. sanguineus
americarun may also occasionally transmit Lyme disease
 to humans (Matushka and Spielman, 1986). I. pacificus is a
major vector of Lyme disease and human granulocytic
ehrlichiosis in the western United States (Piesman, 1991).
The incidence of human Lyme disease in May and June
coincides with the activity of nymphs that were infected
as larvae the previous summer. Thus nymphs feed in each
transmission season before the larvae do. The white-tailed
deer plays a dominant role as principal host of the adult
I. scapularis ticks, which feed on this host from late fall
through winter (Matushka and Spielman, 1986).
Haeimaphysalis
Identification
 The palpi have laterally flared second segments (Figure
2-79). Avoid confusing these structures with the hexagonal 
FGURE 2-80. Capitulum of Rhipicephalus. The basis capituli is
basis capituli of Rhipicephalus. Like Ixodes, these ticks have
hexagonal.
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
55
FIGURE 2-81. Rhipicepharus sanguineus male (let) and female (right). The posterior of the scutum on
the male bears indentations, festoons, along the posterior margin (arrow). The eyes are the rela-
tively lighter areas on the sides of the scutum of the male and the female that are at about the
level of where the second pair of legs extend from the ventral surface.
has taken advantage of central heating to spread into the
 a professional exterminator. Development from egg to egg
 temperate zones, where it often generates enormous popu-
may be completed in slightly more than 2 months under
lations in homes, kennels, and veterinary hospitals; it
favorable conditions; unfed adults may survive for well over
 cannot survive the winter outdoors in the North. Dogs
a year. A household, including two dogs and the client's
living in temperate regions frequently acquire their
wife and mother-in-law who never left England, apparently
 R. sanguineus ticks in such infested premises, but during
acquired infestations with R. sanguineus through the intro-
summer, infestation may occur outdoors. Therefore if
duction of the ticks into the client's car when he gave rides
enduring results are to be achieved, elimination of these
to a neighbor's dogs while at his summer home in France
ticks must include acaricidal treatment of both the dog
(Jagger, Banks, and Walker, 1996). He brought the ticks
and the home or kennel. The latter procedure is a job for
home to England from France in his car, thus indicating
FIGURE 2-82. Ventral aspects of a male Rhipicephalus (left) and a male Dermacentor (right). Coxae of
 male Dermacentor progress in size from the first to fourth coxa (1 to 4). On the posterior of the male
Rhipicephalus can be seen the large and pronounced adanal shields on each side of the anus.
56
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
Engorged female
Unfed larva
Fed nymph
Unfed nymph
FIGURE 2-83. Life history of the brown dog tick,Rhipicephalus sanguineus.Six-legged larvae feed on the
dog for a few days, drop off, and molt to the eight-legged nymphal stage. Nymphs feed on the dog for
about a week, drop off, and molt into male and female adults. Females are fertilized on the dog, feed 
for 1 to 3 weeks, and become greatly engorged with blood before dropping to the floor to lay their
2le auo suuado jeuaa aui wa aalawe saag 'jalel syaam elanas saa ooot ot oooz jo sayoin
 time and accumulate in front of the female tick over a period of several more weeks. The complete
 cycle requires 2 to 3 months, which is fast compared with that of most tick species.
just how mobile are the ticks of this species. R. sarguineus
transmits canine piroplasmosis (Babesia canis) transova-
rially and canine monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrlichia canis)
interstadially.
Rhipicephalus (formerly Boophilus) annulatus, the
transovarial vector of bovine piroplasmosis, was brought to
the Americas on cattle from Africa or the Mediterranean
coast of Europe. This species and a few others were placed
until recently in their own genus, Boophilus, but this is
now considered a synonym of Rhipicephalus (Barker and
Murrell, 2004). Other African species of Rhipicephalus serve
as vectors of the devastating East Coast fever ( Theileria parva)
and other forms of bovine theileriosis, bovine piroplasmosis
(B. bigemina), and the virus of Nairobi sheep disease.
R. annulatus (Figure 2-84) is similar to R. sanguineus in
that the adults have a hexagonal basis capituli, eyes, and
an unornamented scutum, and the males have adanal
and accessory shields. However, R. arrulatus differs from
FGURE 2-84. Capitulum of Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) annulatus. The
R. sarguineus in that it has palpi that are ridged dorsally
 pue Allesiop paapu ane idjed ayl pue 'jeuoaexay s! lmiden siseq
and laterally, and the adults of R. arrulatus lack festoons.
laterally (arrows).
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
57
FGURE 2-85. Cow with a fairly large number of attached
Rhipicephalus (Boophitus) annulatus ticks.
R. arnulatus was eradicated from the United States
through 40 long years of dipping cattle that began in
 1906. Losses from piroplasmosis were estimated then at 40
to 100 million dollars per year at a time when cattle were
selling at 2 to 4 cents a pound. Eradication was favored by
the affinity of this tick species for cattle and by its one-host
FIGURE 2-86. Capitulum of Dermacentor. The basis capituli
is rectangular.
life history, which made it possible to destroy a substantial
 proportion of the tick population each time the cattle were
dipped (Figure 2-85). Comparable efforts to eradicate any
species with broader host preferences, especially those feed-
ing on wildlife, would have been much more difficult.
Rhipicephalus microplus, also a piroplasmosis vector, has a
broader host range that includes horses, goats, sheep, and
deer. Rhipicephalus specimens encountered in the field in
 North America should be immediately reported to state or
federal authorities because of the one-host (cattle) nature of
 R. anmulatus and its great vector potential for transmitting
 bovine piroplasmosis.
Dermacentor
Identification
The basis capituli is rectangular as viewed from above
(Figure 2-86). Coxae of males progress in size from the first
to the fourth (see Figure 2-82). Dermacentor resembles
 Rhipicephalus in having eyes and 11 festoons, but the
basis capituli is rectangular, the scutum is ornamented
(Figure 2-87), and the males lack adanal shields.
Dermacentor (Anocentor) nitens, the tropical horse tick,
has only seven festoons.
FIGURE 2-87. Dermacentor male. Notice the ornamented scutum.
Life history and disease transmission
D. variabilis, the American dog tick, is widely but dis-
continuously distributed over the eastern half and West
Coast of the United States and parts of Canada and
Mexico. Larvae and nymphs engorge on small rodents;
adults engorge on humans, dogs, horses, cale, and wildlife.
D. variabilis transmits Rocky Mountain spotted fever
(Rickettsia rickettsi) and tularemia (F. tularensis) and
causes tick paralysis. Adult females feed to repletion over
FIGURE 2-88. Dermacentor female ticks that have engorged for
several days, becoming larger each day (Figure 2-88).
different numbers of days from 1 to 5.
58
CHA P TER 2Arthropods
FIGURE
2-89. Amblyomma  ameri-
canum. The male has an ornamented
scutum with festoons. The scutum of
the female bears a single large light-
colored dot, hence the name lone-star
tick.The mouthparts of Amblyomma
are relatively proportionately longer
than those of other ticks commonly
found in the United States.
Derrmacentor andersoni, the Rocky Mountain wood tick,
been incriminated in the transmission of Rocky Mountain
requires 1 to 3 years to complete its life history, depending
spotted fever, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, Ehrlichia ewingi, and
on the latitude, altitude, and abundance of small mammals
tularemia and in the causation of tick paralysis. African
on which it feeds as larva and as nymph. D. andersoni
species of Amblyomma transmit heartwater (Ehrlichia rumi-
transmits Rocky Mountain spotted fever, tularemia,
nantium) of cattle, sheep, and goats, as well as the virus of
Colorado tick fever, and Q fever and causes tick paralysis.
Nairobi sheep disease. Amblyomma dissimile, the iguana
D. ritens, the tropical horse tick, is limited, in the United
tick, and Amblyomma tuberculatum, the gopher tortoise
States, to the southern portions of Florida and Texas.
fick, are parasites of reptiles and amphibians the latter is
Preferring the external ear canals of horses but also found
the largest ixodid tick found in North America, with en-
 on other sites and other hosts such as cattle, sheep, goats,
 gorged females reaching a length of 25 mm (Figure 2-90).
and deer, D. riters is the vector of equine piroplasmosis
The largest tick, Amblyorma varium, is a parasite of sloths
(Babesia caballi). Other North American species of
in South America.
Dermacentor include Dermacentor albipictus, the winter
tick that causes heavy losses among deer, elk, and moose;
Genera Not Found In North Amerlca
Dermacentor rigrolineatus, the brown winter tick; and
Hyajomma
Dermacentor occidentalis, the Pacific Coast tick.
Hyalomma resembles Amblyomma in having mouthparts
 In moose Alces alces, infestation with D. albipictus causes
much larger than the basis capituli but differs in that the
 hair loss, which progresses rapidly from February to April
second and third palpal segments are approximately the
       n   
same length (Figure 2-91). Eyes are present, festoons are
McLaughlin and Addison (1986) estimated that loss of
 irregularly coalesced; the male has adanal and accessory
30% of its hair in a winter environment of -20° C would
shields.
double the daily energy requirements of an otherwise normal
230-kg yearling moose. The increased catabolic rate imposed
Margaropus
by hair loss then leads to reduction in body fat stores and to
Margaropus resembles Rhipicephalus, but the palps are
lowered resistance to disease and predation.
 not ridged and the legs of the male progress in size from the
first to the fourth.
Amblyomna
Identification
Ahipicentor
The mouthparts are much longer than the basis capituli;
Rhipicentor
resembles
Rhipicephalus dorsally and
the second palpal segment is at least twice as long as the
 Dermacentor ventrally, eyes and festoons are present,
third (see Figure 2-69). Eyes and festoons are present,
adanal and accessory shields are absent, and fourth coxae
scutum is ornamented, and adanal shields are absent.
 are greatly enlarged.
Aponomma elaphensis resembles Amblyomma but is smaller
and lacks eyes; it is a parasite of a rat snake in Texas.
Disease transmission
 In the United States, species of Amblyormma that attack
humans, livestock, dogs, and cats (e.g-, A. americanum
[Figure 2-89], Amblyomma maculatum [see Figure 2-74],
Amblyomma cajennense, and Amblyomma imitator) are dis-
tributed mainly in the southeastern coastal states, Missouri,
Oklahoma, and Texas, but specimens may occasionally be
FGURE 2-90. An engorged Amblyomma female next to a U.S.
found as far north as Ithaca, New York. These species have
quarter for size comparison purposes.
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
59
I. holocyclus is usually responsible. The surest prevention of
tick paralysis lies in careful daily examination of exposed
animals and removal of ticks. Because clinical signs of
paralysis do not begin to appear until the ticks have been
feeding for at least 4 days, they should be large enough to be
found relatively easily before clinical signs develop. In areas
of heavy exposure, weekly acaricidal dipping is necessary. It
is sometimes difficult to know if a dog has an aftached tick;
a case of tick toxicosis due to an I. holocyclus occurred in
the United Kingdom in a dog very recently brought from
Australia that appeared to have been infected while with the
transport agency. In this case the owner noticed the signs of
ataxia and found the tick attached to the pinna of the ear,
and the dog made a full recovery (Adamantos, Boag, and
Church, 2005).
The bite wound
Ixodes, Amblyomma, and other genera with long mouth-
parts produce deep, painful bite wounds that tend to
become inflamed, secondarily infected with bacteria, and
flyblown. In Great Britain, secondary infection of Ixodes
FGURE 2-91. Capitulum of Hyalomma. Palpal segments two and
ricinus bites with Staphylococcus results in both local and
three of Hyalomma are approximately the same length, whereas
metastatic abscessation (tick pyemia) in lambs. In the Gulf
the second palpal segment of Amblyomma is about twice as long
Coast states, A. maculatum, which prefers to attach to the
as the third.
ears of larger mammals, causes such pain and swelling that
cattle are unable or at least reluctant to flick their ears and
Dlrect Effects of Ixodld Tlcks on the Host
thus ward off flies. Before screwworm control, such ears
Tick toxicosis
were prone to invasion by larvae of C. hominivorax,
In North America the species most frequently involved
frequently with the loss of the external ear or death.
in tick paralysis are D. andersoni, D. variabilis, A. ameri-
 canum, and A. maculatum. Tick paralysis is an ascending
Blood loss and worry
 paralysis caused by absorption of toxins from the saliva of
engorging female ticks. The tick injects a considerable
Rhipicephalus decoloratus ticks from a horse that had died
-saaip oi pie ue se Ared punom au ojui eaes jo sunjon
of acute anemia. His collection weighed 14 lb (Theiler,
fion and partly as a means of disposing of surplus water
1911). That horse's tick burden must have contained
extracted from the blood meal. A single female tick can
about 13 L of blood. This example may appear extreme
 produce paralysis in humans, dogs, or cats, especially if
to those of us who dwell in temperate zones and experience
the site of attachment is near or on the head, but paralysis
only an occasional mosquito or blackfly bite, but there are
does not invariably occur even if many ticks of a suitable
 places in the tropics where light-colored cattle are so totally
 species are present. Usually, heavy infestations are required
covered by the dark bodies of engorging ticks that they
to produce tick paralysis in cattle. The first clinical sign is
appear from a distance to be black. Loss of blood, pain
incoordination of the hindquarters that rapidly proceeds to
from and swelling of bite wounds, secondary infection,
complete paralysis and spreads to the forequarters, the
myiasis, and absorption of toxins, in moderate and varying
neck, and finally the respiratory muscles, with fatal conse-
 proportions, result in a form of ill thrift referred to as “tick
quences. Removal of engorging ticks usually leads to grat-
worry." Because tick worry is the most common practical
ifyingly rapid recovery. In Australia, I. holocyclus, a parasite
consequence of tick infestation, it may be even more
of the bandicoot and other marsupials, causes a particularly
important than the more dramatic ones.
severe form of tick paralysis in domestic animals. Of 577
Australian dogs affected and seen by veterinarians in 1998,
Treatment and Control of Tlck Infestatlons
5% of the dogs died from the disease (Atwell, Campbell,
Dogs and cats
and Evans, 2001). Effective treatment of paralysis caused by
Aq paiea aea isou mou aie sies pue ssop uo syi
I. holocyclus requires administration of specific antitoxin
prevention with the topical application of fipronil. The
 and general supportive treatment as well as removal of all
application of this pesticide has been found to be an excel-
ticks from the victim. Even larvae and nymphs of I. holo.
lent means of preventing tick infestations of dogs and cats.
cyclus are potentially capable of inducing paralysis when
Other topical products include pyrethrin and permethrin
present in sufficient numbers. However, as is the case
(permethrin should not be used on cats). One such product
with other tick paralysis species, the engorging female of
that has received widespread use is a combination of
60
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
imidacloprid and permethrin for use on dogs. Another
Suborder Mesostigmata, Mesostigmatid Mites
approach is to use collars containing amitraz, chlorpyrifos,
Mesostigmatids, as the name implies, have their stigmata
diazinon, or tetrachlorvinphos. Amitraz has now been for-
(respiratory pores) in the middle of their bodies. A stigma
mulated for the prevention and treatment of ticks in dogs
lies between the third and fourth coxae on each side of the
in a topical application format where it is applied with
body and is connected to a sinuous peritreme. The coxae
metaflumizone, which provides flea control. Control of
are evenly spaced and crowded into the anterior half of the
ns aq paue aq eu shupiq u snunus d
body; the tarsi are generally armed with claws; and the
with diazinon and could require the use of professional
ventrum is armored with sclerotized plates (Figure 2-92).
exterminators.
Famllles Dermanyssldae and Macronyssldae
Lactating dairy cattle
Bloodsucking mesostigmatid mites that parasitize birds
For lactating dairy cattle, coumaphos and dichlorvos are
(e.g,Dermanyssus gallinae, Ornithonyssus sylviarum) and
applied as sprays or in backrubbers for the control of ticks.
rodents (e.g, Ormithoryssus bacoti, Liponyssoides sanguineus)
There are no restrictions when used as recommended.
frequently turn on the human inhabitants of a building when
deprived of their normal hosts, as may occur when fledglings
Beef and nonlactating dairy cattle
leave their nests or after rodents have been exterminated.
For beef cattle and nonlactating dairy cattle, coumaphos
Generic or even familial identification of these mites is suf-
and dichlorvos may be used as dips and sprays in the con-
ficient to establish the general nature of the epidemiologic
trol of ticks. O. megnini ear ticks are treated with insecti-
situation, but specific identification sometimes provides a
cidal dusts or emulsion concentrates instilled into the ear
very helpful lead in the search for nests. For example, a hos-
canal from squeeze bottles or an oil can. Ivermectin, dor-
pital administrator submitted a specimen of a mite that was
amectin, and moxidectin all provide some level of protec-
causing great consternation by its abundance in the hospi-
tion against ticks, but none of these products is currently
tal's linens. Dr. Georgi identified the specimen as a derma-
labeled for tick control.
nyssid mite and advised the gentleman to hunt for bird or
rodent nests. A few days later, he reported no success in
Horses
finding nests of either kind. However, by that time the spec-
 In horses particularly, tick-attachment sites may become
imen had been shown to an expert acarologist who identified
markedly irritated and lead to an itch-scratch cycle marked
it as Dermanyssus hirundinis, a relatively host-specific para-
by serious self-mutilation. Coumaphos is effective as a
site of swallows. Thus advised, the hospital administrator
spray or dust when applied to the horse's entire body.
knew just where to look, and the problem was quickly solved.
Always wear rubber gloves and wash skin thoroughly after
Dermanyssids and macronyssids all look very much alike
handling organophosphate and carbamate insecticides.
on casual inspection, but because they vary significantly in
habits and host preferences, accurate identification is a pre-
Environment
requisite to effective control. The chelicerae (piercing
 There are attempts, mainly driven by the fear people
mouthparts), chelae (scissorlike structures on the end of
have of becoming infected with Lyme disease by tick bite,
the chelicerae), and form and septation of various sclero-
to develop means of controlling ticks within the environ-
tized plates provide the main taxonomic characters used in
ment. One means used is removal of an essential host. This
differentiating these mites.
has been tried for I. scapularis by eliminating all deer in an
area (Wilson et al, 1988). Such a drastic method may pro-
Derinanyssus (Dermanyssidae)
duce significant tick reductions, although alternative hosts
The chelicerae are long and slender and the chelae
may be found that allow the ticks to persist in the environ-
minute (Figure 2-93). There is a single dorsal plate; the
ment at lower numbers. Methods also have been examined
sternal plate has two pairs of setae; and the anus is in the
for reducing the numbers of ticks on deer by the use of
 posterior half of the anal plate. Dermanyssus mites are infre-
ivermectin-treated feed bait (Pound et al, 1996); this
quently found on the bird because these mites hide in nests,
method also shows some potential for control. Another
roosts, and the like during the day and attack the sleeping
approach has been to attack the larvae of ticks by using
bird at night. Life stages include the egg, which is deposited
acaricidal-impregnated baits or nesting material containing
in the diurnal hiding places of the mites; the six-legged,
 ectoparasiticides, which mice and rats carry to their nesting
nonfeeding larva; and the blood-feeding protonymph, deu-
areas (Mather, Ribiero, and Spielman, 1987); again, this
tonymph, and adult male or female. A generation can be
method can be quite successful in controlling ticks in iso-
 completed in as little as a week, and large populations may
lated areas. Work is also underway to produce vaccines
build up in chicken houses or birds' nests. The adults can
against ticks causing the host to produce antibodies that
survive starvation for months. Dermaryssus mites remove
the tick ingests while feeding and that damage the gut of the
enough blood to kill nestlings and reduce egg production.
feeding tick (Willadsen et al, 1995); such vaccines are likely
Ramsay and Mason (1975) reported a case in a dog that
to be used more and more widely as they become available
was so severe that the mites crawling through the hair
for use in cattle, dogs, and cats.
resembled the “walking dandruff’ usually associated with
CHA P TER 2 Arthropods
61
Chelae
Chelicerae
Palr
Tarsal
claws
Peritreme
Sternal plate
Stigma
Genitoventral
plate
Dorsalplate
Anal plate
FIGURE 2-92. Ornithonyssus sylviarum, a bloodsucking mesostigmatid mite. The legs are confined to
the anterior half of the body of mesostigmatid mites; the stigma is located between the third and
fourth coxae and has a peritreme. The chelae of Ornithonyssus are much larger than those of
Dermanyssus.
Cheyletiella infestations. Their importance as disease vectors
ordinary magnification. There is a single dorsal plate, and
is unclear.
the anus is in the anterior half of the anal plate (see Figure
2-92). When the mite is alive, the gut often appears black or
Liponyssoides (Dermanyssidae)
dark red (Figure 2-94). Common species include O. syl-
The chelicerae are long and slender and the chelae
viarum, the northern fowl mite; Ornithonyssus bursa, the
minute. There are two dorsal plates, the anterior plate 10
tropical fowl mite; and O. bacoti, the tropical rat mite.
times as large as the posterior; the sternal plate has three
Ormithoryssus species. remain on the host much of the
pairs of setae. Liponyssoides (Allodermanyssus) sanguineus, a
time and cause considerable loss of blood. Persons handling
 parasite of the house mouse, Mus musculus, and other small 
eggs from laying flocks heavily infested with O. sylviarum
rodents, is the vector of rickettsial pox (Rickettsia akari) of
may experience annoyance and serious discomfort from the
humans.
bites of these mites. O. bacoti is an important pest in lab-
oratory rodent stocks and serves as intermediate host for
Omithonyssus (Macronyssidae)
Litomosoides carinii, a filarid parasite of the cotton rat,
The chelicerae are much stouter than those of
Sigmodon hispidus. L. carinii is a favorite laboratory
Derrmanyssus, and the chelae are easily visible under
model for testing antifilarial drugs.
62
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FIGURE 2-95. Gnathosome of Ophionyssus.
Famlly Rallletldae
Raillietia
Raillietia auris (Figure 2-96), long considered a harmless
FIGURE 2-93. Gnathosome of Dermanyssus gallinae. The chelicerae
parasite of the ears of cattle, has been shown to cause ulcer-
of Dermanyssus are slender and whiplike, and the chelae are very
ation and blockage of the auditory canals by pus with resul-
small.
tant loss of hearing (Heffner and Heffner, 1983). Jubb,
Vasallo, and Wroth (1993) reported that infestations with
Ophionyssus (Macronyssidae)
this mite were associated with calves circling, ataxia, and
Ophioryssus natricis, the snake mite, is a formidable
unilateral facial paralysis. In their work, calves were cleared
 bloodsucking pest that tends to thrive on captive snakes
 of their infestations with the application of flumethrin to
(Figure 2-95). Treatment of snakes has been performed
the ear canal, whereas the topical application of flumethrin
using injectable ivermectin (Stanchi and Grisolia, 1986).
 or subcutaneous ivermectin was unsuccessful.
 FGURE 2-96. Railletia auris, a mesostigmatid parasite of the ear
canal of cattle. In this reflected light photomacrograph, the spec-
FIGURE 2-94. Living Ornithonyssus sylviarum crawling on a chicken
imen appears as it would under a stereoscopic microscope or
feather collected from litter. Note the dark X-shaped gut.
 powerful hand lens.
CHA P TE R 2 Arthropods
63
FGURE 2-97. Pneumonyssus simicola lesions in the lungs of a
macaque.
Famlly Halarachnldae
Pneumonyssus
Groups of Preumoryssus simicola mites may be found in
FGURE 2-99. Stermostoma mite in the trachea of a bird.
the lung parenchyma of most if not all Macaca mulatta
monkeys. The lesions are pinhead or larger, whitish or
 chronic sneezing and epistaxis. Occasionally, nasal discharge
 yellow foci (Figure 2-97) that have soft or empty centers
has been reported in dogs with this infestation (King, 1988).
and contain mites and a black pigment. These lesions are
Rhinoscopy and nasal swabbing are aids to diagnosis.
 scattered throughout the lungs and may be mistaken for
Treatment of P. caninum is easily induced by the subcutane-
those of tuberculosis. It is difficult to correlate clinical signs 
ous administration of ivermectin (Mundell and Ihrke, 1990).
of pulmonary acariasis with the degree of pathologic
change in the lungs, and antemortem diagnosis is difficult.
Famlly Rhlnonyssldae
 Monkeys can be reared free of Pneumonyssus infection if
Stermostoma
 they are separated from their mothers at birth and reared in
Sternostoma tracheacolum is a bloodsucking mite of the
isolation from adult monkeys. The histopathologic diagno-
respiratory passages, including the abdominal air sacs, of
sis of P. sirmicola infection is discussed in Chapter 8.
canaries, finches, and a wide range of other wild and domes-
tic birds (Figure 2-99; see also Figure 7-48). S. tracheacolum
Pneumonyssoides
infection may not be apparent clinically or may cause
A parasite of the nasal and paranasal sinuses of dogs 
chronic respiratory illness manifested by loss of voice, shak-
(Figure 2-98), Pneumonyssoides caninum sometimes causes
ing of the head, and sneezing. Diagnosis in the living bird
is facilitated by moistening and parting the feathers in
the neck region and transilluminating the trachea with a
strong light; the mites appear as shadowy spots in the tra-
chea. On necropsy examination, these mites appear to the
unaided eye as black spots in the posterior nares, trachea, air
 sacs, lung tissues, and abdominal cavity (Kummerfeld and
Hinz, 1982).
FamllyVarroldae
Varroa
Varroa destructor (formerly known as Varroa jacobsoni) is
a parasite of honeybees that was introduced into the United
States sometime in the 1980s. Mites and other parasites of
bees are a serious threat to U.S. agriculture. All one has to do
is visit a local lawn with clover and notice that there are
either no honeybees or very few honeybees present; some
have estimated that greater than 95% of the wild honeybees
in the United States have been eliminated by these parasites.
Wild honeybees are no longer considered effective as pro-
viders of pollination for farmers. Within commercial hives,
in the winter of 1995, losses ranged from 40% in Delaware
to 80% in Maine. Although bees produce honey valued at
FGURE 2-98. Pneumonyssoides caninum. Top, A view into the nasal
some $125 million, more important, they are responsible
sinuses of a dog at necropsy showing the mites in situ. Bottom,
for pollinating nearly $15 billion worth of crops in the
A closer view of three adult mites.
United States each year (Doebler, 2000). V. destructor is an
64
CH A P T E R 2 Arthropods
external parasite of honeybees and is very large; females are
the abrasion. Much of the detritus will adhere to the layer
1 to 1.5 mm in diameter, reddish to dark brown, and easy to
of mineral oil on the scalpel blade and may be transferred
observe on bees with the naked eye. The mites suck hemo-
to a microscope slide and searched for mites. For lesions
lymph from both adult bees and the brood, preferring the
with marked epidermal hyperplasia and exfoliation and
blood of drones. A female mite enters a brood cell about
(a) su ump adns aa sn su
1 day before capping and becomes sealed in the brood cap-
Chorioptes) and lice, scrape the detritus into an ointment
sule with the larval bee. The female then lays eggs, and the
tin using the cover as a scraper. Examine the scrapings
developing larval mites feed off the developing bee. When
under a stereomicroscope or hand lens to find the mites
the adult bee emerges from the brood cell, the mites in the
crawling about. If no mites are observed directly, recourse
cell will have developed to adulthood and mated, and the
may be had to digestion of the skin scrapings in potassium
females will be ready to enter a new cell. The disease is spread
hydroxide as described in Chapter 7.
between hives by mites attached to worker bees. Untreated
Generic differentiation of mange mites likely to be
infestations of hives destroy colonies. Treatment of infested
encountered in routine veterinary practice requires little
colonies is performed using formulations that contain the
more than examination of their pretarsi (Figures 2-100
miticides flumethrin, fluvalinate, oxalic acid, formic acid, or
and 2-101). If the pretarsus has a long, unsegmented ped-
thymol. It should not be forgoten that bees are food ani-
icel (stalk), the specimen is most likely Sarcoptes or
mals, and the strips should not be used during honey flow or
Notoedres. If the pretarsus has a long, three-segmented ped-
when honey that may be removed for human consumption
icel, the mite is bound to be Psoroptes. Pretarsi with short
is present. Veterinarians need to be aware that pesticides may
pedicels are found on Chorioptes from ungulates and
be used in manners that can lead to honey contamination
Otodectes from dogs; the species identity of the host is a
(Harman, 1998). The development of resistance to these
sufficiently reliable differential criterion  in this case.
agents in mites is also problematic because the fact that
Krermidokoptes females lack pretarsi, but the males have
bees are also arthropods makes it difficult to increase treat-
 pretarsi resembling those of Sarcoptes. Certain particularly
ment levels because bees are usually killed through the same
destructive manges, such as psoroptic mange in sheep and
pharmacologic pathway.
cattle and sarcoptic mange in cattle, should be reported to
state animal disease control authorities.
Suborder Astigmata, Astigmatid Mites
In contrast to mesostigmatids, astigmatid mites lack stig-
Famlly Sarcoptldae
mata, and respiration is integumental; the first and second
Sarcoptes
coxae are widely separated from the third and fourth, the
The pretarsi have long, unsegmented pedicels, and the
ventrum is devoid of conspicuous plates, some tarsi are
anus is at the posterior edge of the body (Figure 2-102; see
equipped with sarcoptiform pretarsi, a sucker caruncle
also Figure 2-i00). Sarcoptes scabiei causes sarcoptic mange
that is supported on a thin terminal stalk, the pedicel.
 Astigmatids include the mange mites, certain hair-clasping
mites, two internal parasites of chickens, and the grain mites.
Mange mites (families Sarcoptidae, Knemidocoptidae,
and Psoroptidae) cause mange or scabies, a dermatitis char-
acterized by pruritus, alopecia, and epidermal hyperplasia
with desquamation. Rubbing and scratching by the host
blood. These coagulate, gluing hair, epidermal debris, and
foreign matter together to form crusts and scabs. Secondary
bacterial infection may complicate the situation.
The typical distribution and manner of spread of mange
lesions vary with the host and parasite species and are often
characteristic enough to permit accurate diagnosis by an
 experienced observer. However, recovery and identification
of mites are necessary for positive diagnosis. Negative
scrapings are inconclusive. Therefore typical mange lesions
should be subjected to persistent examination until mites
are found or until further scraping would do excessive
 injury to the patient. For lesions with minimal epidermal
hyperplasia and lesions caused by deeply burrowing mites
(e.g., Sarcoptes and Demodex), dip a scalpel blade into glyc-
erin or mineral oil, pinch a fold of skin firmly between
thumb and forefinger and, holding the blade at right
FGURE 2-100. Pretarsi of Sarcoptes (left) and Psoroptes (right). Both
angles to the skin, scrape until blood begins to seep from
have long pedicels; the pretarsus of Psoroptes is jointed.
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
65
of the tunnel, the mite may be found and lifted out with
the point of a needle. Hair obscures such lesions on domes-
tic animals, and it may be that many relatively mild cases of
sarcoptic mange are overlooked. As few as 10 to 15 mites 
constitute a case of ordinary (but nonetheless unendurable)
human scabies, but thousands to millions may be found on
a mangy pig or fox. Curiously, however, Sarcoptes mites are
frequently difficult to find on dogs, even those exhibiting
advanced lesions.
Sarcoptic mange of domestic animals usually starts on
relatively hairless areas of skin and may later generalize. In
dogs the lateral aspect of the elbow and pinna of the ear are
favorite starting places; the lesions consist of follicular
papules, areas of erythema, crusts of dried serum and
blood, and excoriations from scratching to relieve the
intense pruritus. Secondary bacterial infection is a frequent
HGURE 2-101. Pretarsi of Otodectes (left) and Chorioptes (right).
complication. In swine, sarcoptic mange usually starts
Both have short pedicels. Otodectes is a parasite of the ear
around the eyes and on the nose, back, sides, and inner
 canal of carnivorans; Chorioptes is a parasite of the epidermis of
 i sr     ss
ungulates.
and exfoliation of epidermal debris. The red fox, Vulpes
vulpes, is affected by a lethal form of sarcoptic mange in
or scabies of humans, dogs, foxes, horses, cattle, and others.
which the epidermis may undergo a tenfold increase in
Sarcoptic mange of cattle is reportable. Although S. scabiei
thickness and contain countless hordes of mites. Sarcoptic
infests a wide range of hosts, a considerable degree of host
mange in cattle is fortunately very rare in the United States.
specificity has arisen among populations of this parasite so
Infestations in cattle can often become a horrible general-
that scabies of pigs tends to spread more readily among
ized disease that requires treatment and quarantine; the
pigs, scabies of humans tends to spread more readily
  s d  su aa o a
among humans, and when interspecific transmission does
cause severe self-trauma. In an outbreak of sarcoptic mange
occur, the resulting dermatitis tends to be atypical and
in a herd of cattle in New York state, the prevalence of
transient. In fair-skinned human subjects with relatively
udder cleft dermatitis was determined both before and
mild infestations, it is possible to see the tiny serpentine
after treatment of the mite infestations with eprinomectin
tunnels that trace the wanderings of the egg-laying female
(Warnick et al, 2002). The control of the mange in the
mite as she burrows through the epidermis. Along the
cattle had only a moderate effect on the prevalence of
course of the burrow, dark areas representing eggs and
udder cleft dermatitis and did not eliminate the condition
accumulations of feces may be observed and, at the end
from the herd.
FGURE 2102. Sarcoptes male (let)
 and female (right).
66
CH A P TER 2Arthropods
FIGURE 2-103. Notoedres male (left)
and female (right).
Anus
Notoedres
owner had been suffering from a severe itch below her
A parasite of cats, rats, rabbits, and occasionally and
  s      
temporarily  of humans, 
Notoedres much resembles
 Ocelot's skin lesion. In this particular case, it was not at
Sarcoptes in that the pretarsi have long, unsegmented ped-
all clear who had harbored the mites first, but that, after
icels, but it is smaller and its anus is on the dorsal surface
 all, is an academic question. What is important is that cor-
instead of on the posterior margin of the body (Figures 2-
rect generic identification of the parasite led to effective
103 and 2-104). Face mange of cats caused by Notoedres cati
control through appropriate medication of both infested
starts on the medial edge of the pinna of the ears and then
individuals. Cases of sarcoptic mange have also been
spreads over the ears, face, paws, and hindquarters by con-
reported in domestic cats. Most recently, four cases of
tiguity and contact. The lesions of notoedric mange consist
crusted scabies were described, with two of the cats
principally of alopecia and marked hyperkeratosis with
being from areas frequented by foxes and two from
abundant epidermal flakes; mites are easily demonstrated
homes where a dog had or had been treated for sarcoptic
(Figure 2-105). An epizootic of notoedric mange has been
mange (Malik et al, 2006).
 reported in the Florida Keys, where more than 500 cats
were examined (Foley, 199la). Major signs included prur-
Cosarcoptes, Prosarcoptes, Pithesarcoptes, and
itus, self-mutilation dermatitis, gray crusts on the skin, sec.
Kutzerocoptes
ondary pyoderma, and hypertrophied skin. This is the
 The first three genera are parasites of Old World mon-
 typical causing of mange in cats.
keys (Cercopithecidae), and the last one is a parasite of New
Not all cases of feline mange are caused by Notoedres.
World monkeys (Cebidae). All resemble Sarcoptes morpho-
For example in the case of an exotic cat, a half dollar-sized
logically, biologically, and pathogenetically. Mange of mon-
area of dermatitis on the top of a pet ocelot's head was
keys, at least that caused by Cosarcoptes scanloni, may be
tentatively diagnosed as notoedric mange. However, a
 transmissible to humans (Smiley and O'Connor, 1980).
 scraping revealed that the villain was Sarcoptes and raised
the possibility of an infested human contact. In fact, the
FIGURE 2-104. Notoedres cati. Same as Figure 2-101, nght, but
FGURE 2105. A group of kittens with typical notoedric mange
with dorsal anus of female in focus.
lesions on the ear margins.
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
67
Trixacarus caviae
over topical acaricides: only one or in particularly serious
A parasite of the guinea pig, T. caviae closely resembles
cases two treatments are necessary. It does not mat down
Sarcoptes scabiei but is only half as large; the anus is on the
feathers or get in the birds' eyes and is apparently well tol-
dorsal surface of the female and on the posterior margin of
erated (Ryan, 1986).
the body of the male. Trixacarus causes pruritus so intense
Knemidokoptes galinae, the depluming mite of chickens,
that affected guinea pigs are subject to fits and seizures
pigeons, pheasants, and geese, is found at the base of the
brought on by vigorous scratching or manipulation of the
feathers on the back, on top of the wing, and on the vent,
 skin (Kummel et al, 1980). Mange in guinea pigs has been
breast, and thighs. It causes intense pruritus, leading in turn
successfully treated with ivermectin administered sub-
to feather pulling.
cutaneously.
Famlly Psoroptldae
Famlly Knemldocoptldae
Psoroptes
Knemidokoptes
The legs are long, and the pretarsi have long, three-
Knemidokoptes mutans causes scaly leg in chickens, tur-
segmented pedicels (Figure 2-107 and 2-108; see also
keys, pheasants, and other gallinaceous birds. The mites
Figure 2-100). Psoroptes ovis causes a very serious and
burrow in the epidermis of the legs, causing the scales to
( u (qss, no sss a e jo e aod
liff and become loosened and the legs to become thickened
sheep, and horses. Psoroptic mange is prevalent among
and deformed (Figure 2- 106). To demonstrate mites, simply
cattle herds in the southwestern United States but relatively
 remove a loose leg scale and examine the underside of it
rare elsewhere in North America. Psoroptes cuniculi is very
with a hand lens. The female K. mutars is about 0.5 mm
common and causes ear canker in rabbits and a less severe
 in diameter; the legs are very short and lack pretarsi (see
form of otic acariasis in goats and horses.
Figure 2-106). The males are much smaller and have
Psoroptes ovis does not burrow in the epidermis but
longer legs equipped with pretarsi resembling those of
remains at the base of the hairs and pierces the skin with
Sarcoptes.
its styletlike chelicerae. This manner of feeding results in
Knemidokoptes pilae and Knemidokoptes jamaicensis
exudation of serum, which hardens to form a scab. The
cause mange of the legs, base of the beak, vent area, and
mites are best demonstrated under the edges of these
back of parakeets and canaries, respectively. Lesions respond
scabs, so it is inefficient to submit great wads of wool to
well to daily applications of mineral oil to all areas where
the laboratory, especially if the scabs are not included in the
mites are likely to be found, including the vent area. The oil
shipment. Psoroptic scab is particularly devastating in
tends to loosen crusts, which should be carefully removed.
sheep, especially those maintained principally for the pro-
Rotenone-orthophenylphenol  (Goodwinol  ointment)
or
duction of high-quality wool. Pruritus is usually intense.
ivermectin mixed with a few drops of dimethyl sulfoxide
At first, tags of wool are observed projecting from the
(DMSO) and applied to lesions with a cofton swab is a
fleece and clinging to fence posts, door jambs, trees, and
suitable topical treatment. Ivermectin administered orally
other convenient objects against which an itchy sheep
or intramuscularly at 0.2 mg/kg presents several advantages
might obtain some measure of relief (see Figure 2-108).
Progressively more and more wool is shed or rubbed
away by the frantic sheep, and pustules appear on the
denuded, hardened, thickened, and excoriated skin. As
the pustules become confluent and overlain by a scab of
coagulated serum and foreign material, the area ceases to be
suitable for the mites, and they move on to fresh territory.
In this way the lesions tend to spread over the surface of the
body. The sheep become greatly debilitated by psoroptic
scab and may even die of it. Psoroptes ovis may survive
off the host for several days or weeks. Therefore effective
control requires both acaricidal treatment of all infested
livestock and either disinfection or 2- to 4-week vacating
of contaminated enclosures and vehicles (Wilson, Blachut,
and Roberts, 1977).
P. cuniculi is a ubiquitous parasite of the external ear
 canal and can frequently be demonstrated in apparently
normal rabbits. When infested rabbits are placed under
stress, as for example when a doe kindles, the population
of mites tends to explode and the ear canal is laid waste as a
result (see Figure 2-108). A full-blown case of ear canker
FGURE 2-106. Knemidokoptes male (let) and female (right) and
without secondary bacterial infection will respond amaz-
lesions caused to the leg of an infested chicken (bottom).
ingly well and heal in a dramatic fashion after the
68
CHA P TER 2Arthropods
FIGURE 2-107. Psoroptes male (left) and
female (right).
subcutaneous administration of ivermectin. Prevention is
Chorioptes bovis
possible by weekly instillation of a few drops of mineral oil
 Pretarsi of Chorioptes bovis have short, unsegmented ped-
into the ear canal of each rabbit in the colony. P. curiculi
icels on the first, second, and fourth pairs of legs of the
produces a less severe form of otic acariasis in goats and
female and on all legs of the male; the male has two turretlike
horses.
lobes on the posterior margin of the body (Figure 2-109).
FIGURE 2-108. Psoroptic mange on a
sheep (top lef) and ear canker in a
rabbit (bottom left). Right, An adult
male Psoroptes.
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
69
FIGURE 2-109. Chorioptes male (lef) and female (center); the female has pretarsi on the first,
second, and fourth pairs of legs, and the male has pretarsi on all four pairs. Right, Chorioptes
male and deutonymph; the deutonymph has pretarsi on the first and second pairs of legs.
d m as  e si sig 
characteristic of otodectic otitis. Aural pruritus sometimes
displaying a distinct preference for the tail, escutcheon,
causes the animal to rub and scratch its ears and shake its
and legs of catle, where it feeds on epithelial debris.
head violently enough to produce hematoma of the aural
Although cattle are the principle hosts, C. bovis also may
 pinna. The mites may be demonstrated by swabbing the ear
be found on the tail and legs of horses, sheep, and goats 
canal with a cotton applicator and then placing the appli-
and in the ear canal of rabbits. Asymptomatic infestation is
cator on a dark background under a lamp or on a sunny
far more common than obvious dermatitis.
Chorioptic mange in cattle usually appears during late
winter as a superficial, mildly pruritic, flaky dermatitis
involving the tail, escutcheon, and hind legs (Figure
2-110). Whereas stanchioned animals are made miserable
because they are unable to take appropriate action to relieve
the itching, for unconfined catle, chorioptic mange is 
o don e u upq e sons ao yn jou kiqond
chewing lice and, like a suit of woolen underwear, may
Chorioptic mange tends to disappear soon after the cattle
are turned out to pasture in spring. C. bovis, like the pin-
worm Oxyuris equi, is an identifiable cause of tail rubbing
in horses.
C. bovis causes exudative dermatitis on the lower legs
and scrota of rams. In extreme cases the crusts may be
5 cm thick. Deterioration of semen quality was associated
with chorioptic mange lesions covering more than one
third of the scrotum and was apparently related to elevation
of testicular temperature (Rhodes, 1975).
Otodectes cynotis
 Pretarsi of Otodectes cynotis have short, unsegmented
pedicels on the first and second pairs of legs of the
female and on all legs of the male; the body of the male
is only weakly bilobed posteriorly (Figure 2-11l; see also
Figure 2-101). O. cynotis infests the external ear canal and
adjacent skin of dogs, cats, foxes, and ferrets, causing
intense irritation. Copious production of dark cerumen is
FIGURE 2-110. Chorioptic mange on cows.
70
CHA P TER 2Arthropods
FIGURE 2-111. Otodectes male (lef) and female (right). The female has pretarsi on the first and
second pairs of legs; the male has pretarsi on all four pairs.
windowsill. The heat will drive the mites out of the debris,
and they will be seen as tiny white specks moving against
the dark background. The number of mites present in the
cat's ear can be quite remarkable. Preisler (1985) reported
 more than 8500 mites in the ear canal of a cat. When large
numbers of mites are present in the canal, the cat's ear
 tends to contain a dry, waxy, light-colored, parchmentlike
    s     i
each layer.
Other Astlgmatld Mltes
Hair-clasping mites of the superfamily Listrophoroidea
have one or more pairs of legs variously flattened, bowed,
 or otherwise modified for clasping a hair. Examples include
Chirodiscoides caviae, a parasite of guinea pigs (Figure
2-112) and Myocoptes musculinus, a parasite of rodents
(Figure 2-113). Lynxacarus radovskyi is a hair-clasping
mite of domestic cats in Florida, Puerto Rico, Hawaii,
Australia, and Fiji (Figure 2-114); hordes of these tiny
mites clinging to the hairs impart a scruffy appearance
(Greve and Gerrish, 1981). Not all hair-clasping mites
belong to the superfamily Listrophoroidea or even to the
suborder Astigmata. For examples of exceptions, see
Myobia and Radfordia later.
Feather mites occur in variety and abundance. Most are
members of several superfamilies of Astigmata. Feather
mites are usually external, but some live within the quills.
Others, such as members of the family Epidermoptidae,
 FIGURE 2-112. Chirodiscoides caviae female.
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
FIGURE 2-113. Myocoptes musculinus male (let) and female (right), an astigmatid hair-clasping par-
asite of laboratory rodents. Notice how the third pair of legs of the male and third and fourth pairs
odois aey sal jo shied om is aul auidse jey joy pao ae aleway au jo sal jo
pretarsi.
FIGURE 2-114. Lynxacarus radovskyi (Listrophoroidea), a hair-clasping mite of the cat. Left, Adult
mite. Right, Egg with larva. (Specimens courtesy Dr. Robert Foley.)
72
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
burrow in the skin and may cause a mangelike condition.
Astigmatid feather mites may be distinguished from pros-
tigmatid feather mites such as Syringophilus by their
 sarcoptiform pretarsi.
Two families of Astigmata have evolved as internal para-
sites of birds: Laminosioptes (Laminosioptidae) occur in
subcutaneous nodules in chickens, and several genera of
the family Cytoditidae are parasites of the air sacs and
 respiratory passages of chickens, canaries, and other birds.
Members of the families Acaridae and Glyciphagidae are
free-living mites that feed on organic matter. They may be
found in grain, cheeses, dried fruit, and other stored food
 products. Contact with these mites and their detritus may
cause urticaria and dermatitis in human beings. “Grain
mites" are frequently found as pseudoparasites in fecal
smears. They may be distinguished from parasitic astigma-
tids by the shape of the female genital opening, which is a
transverse or U-shaped slit in the parasites but a more or
less longitudinal slit in grain mites.
Suborder Cryptostigmata, Oribatid Mites
The Cryptostigmata, or oribatid mites, are free-living inha-
bitants of humus, some of which serve as intermediate
hosts to tapeworms of the family Anoplocephalidae.
When ingested by an oribatid mite, the larva in the egg
of the tapeworm Moniezia develops into a cysticercoid,
 the larval stage of which is infective for the ruminant defin-
itive host.
FIGURE 2115. Demodex canis (left) and Demodex cati (right)
Suborder Prostigmata, Prostigmatid Mites
The Prostigmata (with the stigmata if apparent located
anterior to the first pair of legs) is a polyphyletic amalgam-
pruritus. If the lesions remain thus localized, the prognosis
 ation including both free-living species and such diverse
for clinical recovery is excellent; the majority of such cases
obligate parasites as pilosebaceous mites (Derodex), hair-
are mild, and the animals recover spontaneously with the
clasping mites (Myobia), and “chiggers" (Trombiculidae).
attainment of sexual maturity. However, a few cases persist,
and these tend to become generalized and intractable
Famlly Demodlcldae
and may prove fatal. In generalized demodicosis, the
Demodex
hair becomes sparse over wider expanses and the skin
These tiny, wormlike mites with short, stubby legs
becomes coarse, dry, and erythematous ("red mange").
(Figure 2-l15) live in the hair follicles and sebaceous
 Concomitant staphylococcal pyoderma is the rule in gen-
 glands of mammals. Several distinct species of Demodex
eralized cases; pustules develop, break open, and ooze.
often parasitize the same host animal, but each species
Severe cases are associated with a disagreeable odor.
tends to be restricted to a particular habitat. For example,
Generalized canine demodicosis is difficult to ameliorate
two species, Demodex folliculorum and Demodex brevis, live
and probably impossible to cure. Two further mites of
in the skin of almost every human face, D. folliculorum in
the genus Demodex have been described from the dog
the hair follicles, and D. brevis in the sebaceous glands
(Desch and Hilier, 2003). D. injai is a species that also
(Desch and Nutting, 1972), where they eat the epithelial
lives in hair follicles and is about twice the length of
cells. Some important pest species are as follows.
D. canis. The third Demodex species found on the dog is
 Demodex canis is present in small numbers in the skin of
 as yet undescribed but appears to be shorter and stouter
most normal dogs (see Figure 2-115). Pups acquire D. caris
than D. canis and lives associated with the stratum corneum
 infection from their dams during the nursing period, and
rather than hair follicles.
most cases of demodectic mange occur between 3 and
Demodex bovis mites are part of the normal fauna
6 months of age. Affected dogs harbor much larger than
of bovine skin, but sometimes pinhead- to egg-sized
normal populations of D. canis, apparently as a result of
nodules appear, usually on the neck and forequarters (see
immunodeficiency, and display circumscribed areas of er-
Figure 8-7). Occasionally only the eyelids, vulva, or scro-
ythema and alopecia around the eyes and mouth and over
tum is involved. If a fresh nodule is nicked with a sharp
 bony projections on the extremities. There is no evidence of
scalpel, a thick, toothpaste-like pus that contains masses of
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
73
D. bovis mites can sometimes be expressed, but older
lesions consist only of scar tissue and are devoid of mites.
 Bovine demodectic mange is practically incurable, even
though individual lesions typically regress, because new
 nodules form to take their place. However, an unusual
case of bilateral lower palpebral demodicosis in a dairy
cow, characterized by chronic eosinophilic granulomatous
cellulitis but without appreciable pus formation, resolved
 spontaneously within 3 months (Gearhart, Crissman, and
Georgi, 1981).
Demodex ovis is rarely noticed but probably rather
common; mites infest the meibomian glands and the hair
follicles and sebaceous glands of primary hairs of the gen-
eral body skin but are most numerous on the neck, flanks,
and shoulders. A second species parasitizing sheep, Dem-
odex aries, appear to be confined to areas with very large
sebaceous glands such as the vulva, prepuce, and nostrils 
(Desch, 1986).
Demodex caprae causes a nodular dermatitis in milk
FIGURE 2-116. The anterior end of Cheyletiella yasguri; note the
formidable palpal claws (arrows).
goats.
Demodex caballi is a harmless parasite of the meibomian
glands of horses. The horse is also host to a second species,
Famlly Psorergatldae
Demodex equi, that is about half as long (190 to 232 m) as
 Psorobia ovis, the sheep itch mite, sporadically causes pru-
D. caballi (Desch and Nutting, 1978).
 a  dars un p aaa  sn
Demodex cati is rarely noticed (
(see Figure 2-94).
through chewing by the infested host. The course is very
 Dermatitis associated with D. cati is usually localized on
chronic. Lambs younger than 6 months appear unaffected,
the head and in the ear canals. A more superficially dwell-
and generalization may require 3 or 4 years. The mite is
ing Dermodex, Demodex gatoi, has been described from the
minute, almost discoidal, and has radially arranged legs.
stratum corneum of cats (Desch and Stewart, 1999); this
Psorobia bos is a nonpathogenic mite of cattle. Psorergates
mite is distinctly shorter and broader than D. cati. It
simplex, the subcutaneous mite of mice, may cause a man-
su ieu saisads piu e ioqie osie Aeu sies ien sieadde
 gelike condition. To demonstrate mites, skin an infested
been seen but not yet described in detail (Desch and
mouse and look for pockets of mites on the underside of
Stewart, 1999).
the dermis.
Demodex cuniculi is a relatively rare parasite of the
rabbit.
Famlly Myoblldae
 Demodex phylloides is found in nodules around the eyes
Myobid mites cause dermatitis in stocks of laboratory
and on the snouts of pigs. These lesions later spread over
rodents. In myobiids the first pair of legs is modified for
the underside of the body.
clasping hair (Figure 2-117), whereas in Myocoptes species 
the third pair of legs of the male and third and fourth pairs
Famlly Cheyletlelldae
of the female are so modified (see Figure 2-113). Myobia
Cheyletiella species are easily recognized by their big palpal
musculi attacks laboratory mice, and Radfordia ensifera
claws, M-shaped gnathosomal peritremes, and comblike
attacks laboratory rats. Alopecia and erythema of the
tarsal appendages (Figure 2-116). Cheyletiella yasguri
 dorsal neck region are typical; severe cases are characterized
occurs on dogs, Cheyletiella 
blakei
on  cats,
and
by self-inflicted excoriations. Stress of overcrowding is fre-
Cheyletiella parasitivorax on rabbits. Humans may serve
quently responsible for converting an asymptomatic infes-
as an accidental or transitory host. Pups infested with
tation of hair-clasping mites into an outbreak of serious
C. yasguri develop “walking dandruff" on their backs, a
skin disease.
dermatitis with branlike exfoliative debris that stirs with
the movements of these rather large mites. The Georgis
Famlly Harpyrhynchldae
observed a caged cat that passed C. blakei in its feces for
 Harpyrhynchids are rounded mites, resembling psorerga-
several weeks. Presumably this cat was ingesting these mites
tids, that cause mangelike conditions in birds. Several
while grooming itself, but there was no macroscopically
 s   m i s a 
visible skin lesion and they could find no mites in the
form large crusted cysts in the skin.
fur. Other genera of the family Cheyletiellidae are parasites
of birds. Cheyletiella species survive longer off the host than
Famlly Syrlngophllldae
other mange mites, and the premises may remain a source
 Syringophilids are nonpathogenic inhabitants of the lumen
of reinfestation after treatment of affected animals.
of feather quills.
74
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
and 2-120). Chiggers remain on the skin for several days
unless dislodged by the scratching host, and their saliva, in-
jected into the skin, disintegrates host cells and the resulting
material is taken into the mite as food. The surrounding skin
hardens, and a tube called a stylostome is formed in which
the mouthparts remain until the chigger is replete or dis-
lodged. The fully developed stylostome extends from the sur-
face of the epidermis into the dermis and is lined by necrotic
cells of the stratum germinativum (see Figure 8-9). Pruritus is
intense and may be protracted for many days after the chigger
has been removed. Twenty-four hours after infestation with
more than 2000 larvae of Neotrombicula autumnalis, two
male Yorkshire terriers developed paresis involving first the
hind legs, then the forelegs. The nervous signs disappeared
-dus pue (nxodod) epee paieadai ne shep g uum
tomatic therapy (Prosl, Rabitsch, and Brabenetz, 1985).
Recently a new syndrome, straelensiosis, was reported to
be affecting dogs in Europe. This is due to a trombiculid
mite. Some 22 dogs over a period of 5 years in the south of
France were found to have a chronic, painful, extensive-to-
generalized dermatitis that was associated with papular
crusts and suppurations (Bourdeau et al, 2001). The mite
was described as Straelensia cynotis by Fain and Le Net
(2001). This larval trombiculid enters the hair follicle,
where it stays for an extensive period with its stylostome
directed into the dermis (Figure 2-121). A case has since
been found in a dog in Portugal (Seixas et al, 2006).
Famlly Pyemotldae
Pyeimotes
"Hay itch mites” of the genus Pyernotes are parasites of
various insect larvae that are grain-destroying pests.
Pyemotes tritici is a tiny elongate mite that becomes enor-
mously distended when gravid; males and females are sex-
ually mature at birth. People and domestic animals that
come into contact with infested grains, straw, hay, and
the like may be attacked by these mites and develop an
erythematous and intensely pruritic papular and vesicular
FIGURE 2-117. Myobia musculi (top), a myobid hair-clasping para-
rash. An outbreak of dermatitis in 12 horses and many
site of laboratory rodents. The first pair of legs (arrows) is modified
 persons in Florida was attributed to P. triici received in a
for hair clasping. The mice (bottom) are suffering from an infesta-
shipment of alfalfa hay (Kunkle and Greiner, 1982).
tion with this mite.
Famlly Tarsonemldae
Famlly Tromblculldae
Acarapis woodi is the tracheal mite of honeybees. These mites
Larvae (chiggers) of the family Trombiculidae are parasitic,
entered the United States through Texas and Florida in 1984,
but the nymphs and adults are free-living. These bright red
coming from Mexico and Europe. These mites, along with
 or orange, six-legged larvae are likely to be found on the skin
Varroa and the beetle Aethira, have been responsible, in
or in the ears of cats or dogs, on the faces or pasterns of sheep
part—along with the currently unexplained “colony collapse
and other ungulates, and under the wings or around the
disorder"for the remarkable reduction of honeybee popu-
vents of chickens and other birds (Figure 2-ll8).
lations in the United States. These small mites live within the
Infestation is usually acquired in wild or semiwild land-
trachea of the honeybee. Female mites move from bee to bee,
scapes; the distribution of these nuisances is remarkably
entering the adult bee through the first thoracic spiracle.
spotty, but wherever they are found, chiggers are infamous.
Large numbers can build up in the tracheal tubes. The
Microscopically, the scutum is useful for recognizing a chig-
mites within the tubes cause problems with thermoregula-
ger as such and for generic and species identification with the
fion of hives in winter and cause bees to die outside of hives
help of keys. Focus on the dorsal surface (the surface oppo-
because they cannot elevate their metabolic rate high enough
site the one with the coxae) to see the scutum (Figures 2-119
to stay warm when they fly on cool days. Treatment has been
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
75
FIGURE 2-118. Living chigger from the ear
of a cat in Maryland. (Courtesy Dr. Craig
Greene, VCA Newark Animal Hospital,
Newark, Delaware.)
performed using the addition of menthol chips or oil of
moxidectin (2.5% w/v) has also been found to be highly
wintergreen to hives (Williams, 2000). Though this seems 
efficacious against sarcoptic mange in dogs (Fourie, Heine,
to afford some protection, it may be that most susceptible
and Horak, 2006). Subcutaneous ivermectin is also routinely
hives have already disappeared.
used to treat sarcoptic mange. Other effective acaricides
include amitraz, benzyl benzoate, lime sulfur, phosmet, and
Treatment of Mlte Infestatlons
rotenone. In most cases, with these other compounds, treat-
Dogs and cats
ment must be repeated several times over a period of weeks.
Sarcoptes
S. scabiei and other sarcoptiform parasites may tempo-
 Selamectin is probably the treatment of choice for
rarily infest people who come into intimate contact with
 sarcoptic mange in dogs and is labeled for this application
 mangy dogs and cats. In this case, acaricidal treatment
(Shanks et al, 2000). Topical imidacloprid (10% w/v)/
of the pet is the key to lasting success in curing the
FIGURE 2-119. Walbachia americana,a trombiculid mite (chigger). Left, The ventral surface is in focus.
Right, The dorsal surface. The scutum (arrow) with its two sensillae (large plumose setae) and four or
five setae is helpful in identifying chiggers; it is on the dorsal surface near the anteriorend of the body.
76
CHA PTER 2Arthropods
treated with the topical application of moxidectin/imidaclo
prid (Fourie, Kok, and Heine, 2003). Subcutaneous ivermec-
tin (0.2 to 0.225 mg/kg) injected on one or two occasions
with a 3-week interval between injections has proven highly
successful in treating ear mites in cats (Foley, 1991b).
Otodectes ear infestations also respond to pyrethrin- and
rotenone-containing compounds. With these products the
ear canal should be thoroughly cleaned before instillation of
the acaricidal solution. The application of 1 to 2 mL of min-
eral oil to the ear canal followed by 30 seconds of massage
repeated every 2 or 3 days will often cure dogs and cats of
their ear mite infestations.
Demodex
 Fortunately most dogs with lesions of demodectic mange
FlGURE 2-120. Scutum of Neotrombicula sp. {Trombiculidae:
have a localized D. canis infestation that will respond suc-
Prostigmata).
cessfully to topical treatment. The localized form of demo-
dectic mange may be controlled by applying rotenone
 people. On the other hand, proper scabies contracted from
 ointment or benzyl benzoate lotion. These drugs have very
another human being causes very persistent dermatitis and
little residual activity and therefore must be applied daily.
misery unless effectively treated and, of course, has little or
The treatment of generalized demodectic mange is a chal-
nothing to do with dogs and cats.
lenge and frequently proves to be a frustrating experience for
the clinician and client alike. Currently recommended thera-
Notoedres
pies include amitraz rinses every 7 to 14 days and oral daily
 Selamectin topically applied to cats will treat notoedric
ivermectin, milbemycin, or moxidectin (Mueller, 2004).
mange (Itoh et al, 2004). Ivermectin (0.3 mg/kg) has been
Amitraz, approved for the control of generalized demodico-
successfully used to treat numerous cats with notoedric
 sis, is applied topically as an aqueous suspension ( 10.6 mL of
mange (Foley, 1991a). The standard treatment previously
concentrate per 2 gal or 7.6 L of water) at 2-week intervals for
for N. cati infestations in cats was lime sulfur. With lime
a total of three to six applications (Folz et al, 1983). It is
sulfur the cat is first bathed and then dipped or washed
recommended that treatment be continued until no viable
with a l:40 solution of lime sulfur in warm water. This
mites can be found in skin scrapings at two successive treat-
treatment is applied weekly for at least 6 weeks.
ments. A brood bitch with asymptomatic D. canis infection
may be bred, but a bitch with demodectic mange or a history
Otodectes
 of demodectic mange should be spayed.
 Selamectin is approved for the treatment of ear mites in
cats. Ivermectin and milbemycin oxime have both been for-
Cheyletiella
mulated as otic suspensions that are approved for treating
Infections with C. yasguri in dogs have been successfully
ear mites in cats. Otodectes cynotis has also been successfully
treated with topical applications of imidacloprid/moxidectin
FGURE 2-121. Straelensia cynotis in a hair fol-
licle. (Courtesy Dr. Maja Suter, Institute of
Animal Pathology.
University of Berne,
Berne, Switzerland.)
CH A P T E R 2 Arthropods
77
(Loft and Willesen, 2007) or selamectin (Mueller and
under their supervision. Coumaphos, phosmet, and hot
Bettenay, 2002). Infestations also responded well to the appli-
lime sulfur are approved by the U.s. Department of
 cation of topical 65% permethrin, and all mites were gone
Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
within 1 week of treatment (Endris et al, 2000). Milbemycin
(APHIS) as official dips for psoroptic scabies in cattle, and
oxime has also been used to treat dogs with naturally occur-
injectable ivermectin is approved as a systemic acaricide
ring cheyletiellosis (White, Rosychuk, and Fieseler, 2001).
(Wright, 1986). Most of the macrocyclic lactones are
Canine cheyletiellosis has also been successfully treated
labeled for treating psoroptic mange in catle. Cattle treated
using fipronil (Chadwick, 1997). Cheyletiella is also suscep-
with ivermectin must be isolated from untreated cattle for
tible to amitraz. In cats, infestations with C. blakei have been
2 weeks after treatment and withheld from slaughter for the
successfully treated with the topical application of fipronil
required period. Ivermectin has not been approved for the
(Scarampella et al, 2005) or selamectin (Chailleux and
treatment of psoroptic mange in sheep in the United States.
 Paradis, 2002). The premises should be sprayed with a resid-
Holding facilities vacated by sheep or cattle with psoroptic
 ual organophosphate insecticide such as diazinon to destroy
mange should be leff vacant for at least 2 weeks to give
 these rather hardy mites.
the mites time to die off before new stock is housed
C. yasguri of dogs and C. blakei of cats also attack
(Wilson, Blachut, and Roberts, 1977).
 people, especially those who share their beds with their
 pets. Curiously, C. blakei rarely produces obvious lesions
Demodex
on cats, but the owner may be aware of frequent bites. If C.
Two goats with nodular demodicosis were treated suc-
 blakei infestation is suspected, one can attempt to collect
cessfully without any scarring or skin depigmentation
mites from the fur with a bit of Scotch tape. However, the
(Strabel et al, 2003). One of the goats was treated with
diagnosis is more often reached fortuitously when the mites
weekly oral ivermectin; the other was treated with selamec-
or their eggs are found in a routine fecal flotation. Because
cats so meticulously groom themselves, a fecal flotation
work in sheep and in cattle under most circumstances.
often affords a better sample of what is on the cat's exterior
than direct examination does.
Horses
Severe irritation caused by mange mites may lead to seri-
Ruminants
ous self-mutilation by affected horses. Treatment with mac-
Chorioptes
rocyclic lactones has proved efficacious (Osman, Hanafy,
 Eprinomectin can be applied topically to lactating dairy
and Amer, 2006). Mange is contagious and sometimes com-
cattle without withholding of milk and is approved for
municable. Isolate mangy horses and sterilize all water
the treatment of chorioptic mange. Alpacas and llamas
buckets, brushes, curry combs, and the like. Stalls should
have also been successfully treated with eprinomectin
be thoroughly disinfected or left vacant for 2 to 3 weeks.
applied topically (Plant, Kutzler, and Cebra, 2007). In a
 severe case of mange in a herd of alpacas involving infesta-
Swine
tions with Psoroptes, Sarcoptes, and Chorioptes, treatment
 Ivermectin is highly effective in treating sarcoptic mange
with injectable ivermectin rapidly cleared the animals of
in swine.
their Psoroptes and Sarcoptes mites, but the Chorioptes mites
-ri pe a m p r p
Ferrets, lagomorphs, and pocket pets
tin (Geurden, Deprez, and Vercruyse, 2002). Chorioptic
Notoedric mange (Notoedres douglasi) affecting two fox
mange usually responds to standard louse treatments.
squirrels (Sciurus niger) responded dramatically to a single
-uo dp io Aeds se uoisuadsns inyns au io soudeuno
subcutaneous injection of ivermectin at 0.5 mg/kg body
trols chorioptic mange mites on lactating dairy cows.
weight (Evans, 1984). A case of notoedric mange that devel-
oped in an African pygmy hedgehog (Atelerix albiventris)
Sarcoptes
was treated with injectable moxidectin (Pantchev and
Sarcoptic mange should be reported to state disease con-
Hofmann, 2006).
trol authorities and treatment carried out under their
O. cyrotis has been effectively treated in ferrets with
 supervision. Lactating dairy cows can now be treated with
topical selamectin (Miller et al, 2006).
 eprinomectin, which is labeled for Sarcoptes infestations of
M. musculinus and M. musculi infestations were elimi-
cattle. Sarcoptic mange of beef cattle and nonlactating dairy
nated from laboratory mice by subcutaneous injection of
cattle is treated with avermectins, ivermectin, moxidectin,
ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg body weight (Wing, Courtney,
 doramectin, or eprinomectin. It also can be treated with
and Young, 1985). More recently, a group of mutant
sprays or dips containing lime sulfur, phosmet, and
sickle-cell-anemia mice were cleared of their infections
tetrachlorvinphos.
by being cross-fostered on outbred mothers that were
treated with topical ivermectin (Huerkamp et al, 2005).
Psoroptes
Topical selamectin has been shown to eliminate infestations
Psoroptic scabies in cattle or sheep should be reported to
of mice with M. musculinus, M. musculi, and R. ensifera;
state disease control authorities and treatment carried out
this treatment also controlled the pinworms Syphacia
78
C H A P T E R 2 Arthropods
obvelata and Aspiculuris tetraptera (Gonenc et al, 2006).
copepods, the calanoids, cyclopoids, and harpacticoids;
Also, a single treatment with topical moxidectin has been
the cyclopoids comprise the group that typically has been
used successfully in the treatment of M. musculinus infesta-
found to be important intermediate hosts of the parasites of
tions (Pullium et al, 2005). Application of 0.5 mg active
domestic animals. Copepods have shrimp-shaped bodies
permethrin per mouse as 0.25% dust mixed with the
and five pairs of swimming legs (Figure 2-122). The
bedding was convenient and eliminated M. musculi infesta-
antenna on each side of the head usually branches into
tions in experimental mice (Bean-Knudsen, Wagner, and
two stalks. There may or may not be a single simple eye.
Hall, 1986).
Copepods reproduce sexually, and the males often have a
Guinea pigs infected with T. caviae have been shown to
modified antenna that is used in copulation. The females
respond well to treatment with ivermectin (Mandigers, van
typically carry egg sacks that contain developing eggs. Most
der Hage, and Dorrstein, 1993; McKellar et al, 1992).
 copepods are grazers of phytoplankton, but some can be
Treatment has been administered orally, subcutaneously,
carnivorous, and a few are parasites in their own right.
 or percutaneously. It seems highly likely that other aver-
There are 11 molts that occur, separating 12 larval stages.
 mectins would also be efficacious in the guinea pig.
The first five molts produce six larval forms of the naupliar
Ear canker in rabbits (P. curiculi) responds to two sub-
type, the next five molts produce the developmental stages
cutaneous injections of ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg adminis-
tered 14 days apart (Bowman, Fogelson, and Carbone,
1992). Rabbits can also be treated very successfully with
topical selamectin (McTier et al, 2003), topical imidaclo-
prid/moxidectin (Hansen et al, 2005), or topical eprino-
mectin (Ulutas et al, 2005). The mites C. parasitovorax
and Listrophorus gibbus along with the flea C. felis, have
been successfully treated in rabbits with a topical formula-
tion of imidacloprid and permethrin (Hansen et al, 2006).
When pesticides and anthelminthics are applied to rabbits,
it must be remembered that rabbits remain in the unusual
regulatory position of still being considered a minor species
food animal in the United States, and the reality is that they
are often still consumed as food.
CLASS CRUSTACEA
Copepods
FGURE 2-123. Stoma and hooks of a pentastomid nymph from a
 South American otter.
Copepods are crustaceans of importance to veterinary med-
icine because they serve as intermediate hosts of both ces-
todes and nematodes. There are three major groups of
FIGURE 2122. Copepods, male and female, stained. The female
bears the two large egg sacks that are typical of many of these
FGURE 2124. Egg of the pentastomid Rheighamia stermae from
free-living crustaceans.
the feces of a gull.
CH A P TE R 2 Arthropods
79
Siun jo sydwnu pallon aael Aan aun jo slaqwnu aaiel aujuieiuon jeay pue 'sauni 'janl aun aaeu
pentastomid parasite whose adults are found in pythonid snakes. (Courtesy Dr. Kevin R. Kazacos,
School of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana.)
called copepodites (typically a new body segment is added.
Linguatula serrata occurs in the nasal and paranasal
with each molt), and the final molt produces the adult male
sinuses of dogs and cats, where it causes bleeding, catarrhal
 or female. While grazing, the copepods will ingest either the
inflammation, and some impediment to respiration. Cattle,
coracidia of tapeworms or the hatched larvae of nematodes.
sheep, rabbits, and other animals serve as intermediate
They will then serve as either transport hosts or as required
hosts; fully developed nymphs, the form infective for car-
 intermediate hosts. Important parasites that use copepods
nivorans, are found encysted in the lymph nodes and serous
include Spirometra, Diphyllobothrium, and Dracunculus
membranes.
species.
 Kazacos et al (2000) reported on a Basenji-cross dog that
had been born and spent time in Cameroon, Africa. It
Pentastomida
seems that the dog must have ingested some quantity of
Pentastomids, or tongueworms, are highly specialized crus-
python feces containing the eggs of pentastomes of the
taceans, as unlikely as that may seem. The adult parasites live
genus Armilifer. The dog had been ill for several years,
 in the respiratory passages of predacious reptiles, birds, and
and when it became acutely ill 2 years after first admission,
mammals. The body is annulated, and the anterior, subter-
it was unresponsive to treatment and euthanized. It was
minal stoma is flanked by two pairs of retractable hollow
found to have a massive visceral infection with the
fangs or hooks (Figure 2-123). Eggs containing four- or
nymphs of this pentastomid (Figures 2-125 and 2-126).
six-legged larvae are discharged with the nasal secretions 
or
swallowed and passed in the feces (Figure 2-124).
 If ingested by an appropriate intermediate host, usually a
REFERENCES
 member of some species likely to fall prey to the predator in
Abbitt B, Abbitt LG: Fatal exsanguination of cattle attributed to an attack
 question, these larvae invade the tissues, develop, and encyst 
of salt marsh mosquitoes (Aedes sofficitans), J Am Vet Med Assoc
 in the viscera as nymphs that resemble the adults in all
179:1397, 1981.
Adamantos S, Boag A, Church D: Australian tick paralysis in a dog
 particulars except for mature reproductive organs.
imported into the UK, Vet Rec 156:327, 2005.
Agarwal GP, Chandra S, Saxena AK: Feeding habits of dog louse
Heterodoxus spiniger (End.) (Mallophaga, Amblycera), Z Angewandte
Entomol 94:134, 1982.
Anderson GS, Huitson NR: Myiasis in pet animals in British Columbia:
the potential of forensic entomology for determining duration of pos-
sible neglect, Can Vet J 45:993, 2004.
Andress ER, Campbell JB: Inundative release of pteromalid parasitoids
(Hymenoptera: Pteromalidae) for the control of stable flies, Stomoxys
 suoneeisut aes pauguon ie (aprsnn eiaidia) (i) sunm
west central Nebraska, I Econ Entommol 87:714, 1994.
Anziani OS, Guglielmone AA, Signorini AR, et al: Haematobia irritans in
Argentina, Vet Rec 132:588, 1993.
Anziani OS, Loreficce C: Prevention of cutaneous myiasis caused by screw
worm larvae (Cochliomyia homminivorax) using ivermectin, I Vet Med B
FGURE 2-126. Ammilifer armillatus. Nymphs of this pentastomid
Infect Dis Vet Public Health 40:287, 1993.
teased from the tissues of the dog in Figure 1-125. Several of
Arendt WJ: Philornis ectoparasitism of pearly-eyed thrashers. I. Impact on
the nymphs have been damaged during the teasing process.
 growth and development of nestlings, Auk 102:28l, 1985.
(Courtesy Dr. Kevin R. Kazacos, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Arrioja-Dechert A: Compendium of veterinary products, Port Huron, Mich,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana.)
1997, North American Compendiums.
80
CHA PTER 2Arthropods
Atwell RB, Campbell FE, Evans EA: Prospective survey of tick paralysis in
Desch CE, Nutting WB: Redescription of Demodex cabalfi (=D. follicu-
dogs, Aust Vet I 79:412, 2001.
lorum var.equiRailliet,1895)from thehorse,Equus caballus,Acarologia
Baird CR: Development of Cuterebra jelisoni (Diptera: Cuterebridae) in
20:235, 1978.
six species of rabbits and rodents, I Med Entomof 8:615, 1971.
Desch CE, Stewart TB: Demodex gatoc new species of hair follicle mite
Baird CR: Development of Cuterebra rufcrus (Diptera: Cuterebridae) in
(Acari: Demodecidae) from the domestic cat (Carnivora: Felidae),
 six species of rabbits and rodents with a comparison of C. rufcrus and
I Med Entormol 36:167, 1999.
C. jelisoni third instars, J Med Entomol 9:81, 1972.
Diaz SL: Effcacy of fipronil in the treatment of pediculosis in laboratory
Baird CR, Podgore JK, Sabrosky CW: Cuterebra myiasis in humans: six
rats, Lab Amim 39:331, 2005.
new case reports from the United States with a summary of known cases
Doebler SA: The rise and fall of the honeybee: mite infestations challenge
(Diptera: Cuterebridae), I Med Entomol 19:263, 1982.
the bee and the beekeeping industry, BioScience 50:738, 2000.
Baker NF, Farver TB: Failure of brewer's yeast as a repellent to fleas on
Dougherty CT, Knapp FW, Burrus PB, et al: Behavior of grazing cattle
dogs, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 183:212, 1983.
exposedto small populations of stableflies Stomoxys caltras .), App!
Barker SC, Murrell A: Systematics and evolution of ticks with a list of valid
Anim Behav Sci 42:231, 1994.
genus and species names, Parasitology 129:S15, 2004.
Dougherty CT, Knapp FW, Burrus PB, et al: Face flies (Musca autumnalis
Bean-Knudsen DE, Wagner JE, Hall RD: Evaluation of the control of
De Geer) and the behavior of grazing beef cattle, Appl Ani Behav Sci
Myobia musculi infestations on laboratory mice with permethrin, Lab
35:313, 1993.
Anim Sci 36:268, 1986.
Dryden MW, Bruce AB: Development of a trap for collecting newly
Beasley VR, Wolf GA, Fischer DC, et al: Cantharidin toxicosis in horses,
emerged Ctenocephalides felis (Siphonaptera: Pulicidae) in homes,
JAm Vet Med Assoc 182:283, 1983.
J Med Entomof 30:901, 1993.
Bequaert J: A monograph of the Melophaginae, or ked-flies, of sheep, goats,
Dryden MW, Long GR, Gaafar SM: Effects of ultrasonic collars on
deer, and antelopes (Diptera: Hippoboscidae), Entomol Am 22:1, 1942.
Ctenocephalides felis on cats, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 195:1717, 1989.
Bourdeau P, Degorce F, Poujade A, et al: Straelensiosis (Straelensia cyno-
Eagleson JS, Thompson DR, Scott PG, et al: Field trials to confirm the
tis), a new and severe parasitosis in dogs. In Proceedings of the
efficacy of ivermectin jetting fluid for control of blow fly strike in sheep,
Eighteenth Conference of the World Association for the Advancement
Vet Parasitol 51:107, 1993.
of Veterinary Parasitology, Stressa, Italy, 2001.
Elzen PJ, Baxter JR, Westervelt D, et al: Field control and biology studies of
Bowman DD, Fogelson ML, Carbone LG: Effect of ivermectin on the
a new pest species, Aethina tumida Murray (Coleoptera, Nitidulidae),
control of ear mites (Psoroptes cunicuri) in naturally infested rabbits,
attacking European honey bees in the Western Hemisphere, Apidologie
I Ar Vet Med Assoc 53:105, 1992.
30:361, 1999.
Bowman DD, Giovengo SL: Identification of adult and nymphal ticks, Vet
Endris RG, Reuter VE, Nelson JD, et al: Efficacy of 65% permethrin
Tech 12:505, 1991.
applied as a topical spot-on against walking dandruff caused by the
Burgdorfer W, Barbour AD, Hayes SF, et al: Lyme disease: a tick-borne
mite, Cheyletiella yasgur, in dogs, Vet Ther l:273-279, 2000.
spirochetosis? Science 216:1317, 1982.
Evans RH: Ivermectin treatment of notoedric mange in two fox squirrels,
Burghardt HF, Whitlock JH, McEnerney PJ: Dermatitis due to Sirmulium
JAm Vet Med Assoc 185:1437, 1984.
(black flies), Cornell Vet 4l:31l, 1951.
Eyre P, Boulard C, Deline T: Local and systemic reactions in cattle to
Chadwick AJ: Use of a 0.25% fipronil pump spray formulation to treat
Hypoderma fineatum larval toxin: protection by phenylbutazone,
canine cheyletiellosis, I Smafl Anim Pract 38:26l, 1997.
Am J Vet Res 42:25, 1981.
Chailleux N, Paradis M: Efficacy of selamectin in the treatment of natu-
Fain A, Le Net JL: A new larval mite of the genus Straelensiua Vercammen-
 rally acquired cheyletiellosis in cats, Can Vet J 43:767, 2002.
Granjean and Kolebinova, 1968 (Acari: Leuwenhoekidae) causing
Chandler AC, Read CP: Introduction to parasitology, ed 10, New York,
nodular dermatitis of dogs in France, Int J Acarof 26:339, 2001.
1961, John Wiley & Sons.
Chitwood MB, Stoffolano IG: First report of Thelaziu sp. (Nematoda) in the
d) m mm jo aal isue uau uo
face fly, Musca nutumnalis, in North America, I Parasitol 57:1363, 1971.
Sarcophagidae) in sheep, Parasitof Res 82:82, 1996.
Cilek JE, Schreiber ET: Diel host-seeking activity of Chrysops celatu5
Fehrenbach P: Where have all the flea dollars gone? Pest Control Technof
(Diptera: Tabanidae) in northwest Florida, Fla Entommol 79:520, 1996.
24:23, 1996.
Clare AC, Medleau L: Case management workshop (mosquito bite hyper-
Foglia Manzillo VF, Oliva G, Pagano A, et al: Deltamethrin-impregnated
sensitivity in a cat), Vet Med 92:728, 1997.
collars for the control of canine leishmaniasis: evaluation of the protec-
Coe M: Unforeseen effects of control, Nature 327:367, 1987.
tive effect and influence on the clinical outcome of Leishmania infection 
Cogley TP, Anderson JR, Cogley LJ: Migration of Gasterophilus intestinalis
in kennelled stray dogs, Vet Parasitof 142:142, 2006.
larvae (Diptera: Gasterophilidae) in the equine oral cavity, Int I Parasitol
Foil LD, Hogsette JA: Biology and control of tabanids, stable flies, and
12:473, 1982.
horn flies, Rev Sci Tech 13:1125, 1994.
Cogley TP: Key to the eggs of the equid stomach bot flies Gasterophilus
Leach, 1817 (Diptera: Gasterophilidae) utilizing scanning electron
trol for beef production: fall-calving cows and stocker cattle, La Agric
microscopy, Syst Entomol 16:125, 1991.
39:12, 1996.
Craig T: Horse parasites and their control, South Class 12-15, 1984.
Foley RH: A notoedric mange epizootic in an island's cat population,
Craig T: The prevalence of bovine parasites in various environments within
Feline Pract 19:8, 1991a.
the lowland tropical country of Guyana (dissertation), College Station,
Foley RH: Parasitic mites of dogs and cats, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
Texas A&M University, 1976.
13:783, 1991b.
DeMarmels I: Cistudinomyia (Diptera: Sarcophagidae) causing myiasis in a
Folz SD, Kratzer DD, Conklin RD, et al: Chemotherapeutic treatment of
Venezuelan gecko (Sauria, Geckonidae), Entomof Mon Mag 130:222, 1994.
naturally acquired generalied demodicosis, Vet Parasitof 13:85, 1983.
Desch CE: Demodex aries sp. nov., a sebaceous gland inhabitant of the
Fourie LJ, Heine J, Horak IG: The efficacy of an imidacloprid/moxidectin
 sheep, Ovis aries, and a redescription of Demodex ovis Hirst, 1919, N Z J
combination against naturally acquired Sarcoptes scabiei infestations on
Zoof 13:367, 1986.
dogs, Aust Vet J 84:17, 2006.
Desch CE, Hillier A: Demodex injai: a new species of hair follicle mite
Fourie LJ, Kok DJ, Heine J: Evaluation of the efficacy of an imidacloprid
(Acari: Demodecidae) from the domestic dog (Canidae), I Med Entomol
10%/moxidectin 1% spot-on against Otodectes cynotis in cats, Parasitof
40:146, 2003.
Res 90(suppl 3):S112, 2003.
Desch CE, Nutting WB: Demodex fofficulorurm (Simon) and D. brevis
Gearhart MS, Crissman JW, Georgi ME: Bilateral lower palpebral demo-
Akbulatova of man: redescription and reevaluation, I Parasitof 58:l69, 1972.
dicosis in a dairy cow, Cornefl Vet 7l:305, 1981.
CHA P TER 2 Arthropods
81
Geden CJ, Rutz DA, Bishop DR: Cattle lice (Anoplura, Mallophaga) in
Huerkamp MJ, Zitzow LA, Webb S, Pullium JK: Cross-fostering in com-
New York: seasonal population changes, effects of housing type on
bination with ivermectin therapy: a method to eradicate murine fur
infestations of calves, and sampling efficiency, J Econ Entomofl
mites, Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 44:12, 2005.
83:1435, 1990.
Itoh N, Muraoka N, Aoki M, Itagaki T: Treatment of Notoedres cati infes-
Geden CJ, Rutz DA, Miller RW, et al: Suppression of house flies (Diptera:
tation in cats with selamectin, Vet Rec 154:409, 2004.
Muscidae) on New York and Maryland dairies using releases of
Jagger T, Banks I, Walker A: Traveling ticks, Vet Rec 139:476, 1996.
paierhaur ue u (aepyeuoraid eraidouaukH) odt xpurmosny
James MT: The fies that cause myiasis in man, Misc Pub No 631,
management system, Environ Entofrmof 21:1419, 1992.
Washington, DC, 1948, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Gerhardt RR, Allen IW, Green WH, Smith PC: The role of face flies in an
Jubb TF, Vasallo RL, Wroth RH: Suppurative otitis in cattle associated
episode of infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis, J Am Vet Med AssoCc
with ear mites (Ralfietina auris), Aust Vet I 70:354, 1993.
180:156, 1982.
Kabayo JP: Aiming to eliminate tsetse from Africa, Trends Parasitol 18:473,
Geurden T, Deprez P, Vercruysse J: Treatment of sarcoptic, psoroptic and
2002.
 chorioptic mange in a Belgian alpaca herd, Vet Rec 153:331, 2003.
Karesh WB, Robinson PT: Ivermectin treatment of lice infestations in two
Gherardi SG, Sutherland SS, Monzu N, Johnson KG: Field observations on
elephant species, I Am Vet Med Assoc 187:1235, 1985.
body strike in sheep affected with dermatophilosis and fleece-rot, Aust
Kazacos KR, Kapke EJ, Widmer WR, et al: Out of Africa": massive visceral
Vet}60:27,1983.
pentastomiasis in a dog. In Proceedings of the Forty-Fifth Annual Meeting
Gonenc B, Sarimehmetoglu HO, Ica A, Kozan E: Efficacy of selamectin
of the American Association of Veterinary Parasitofogists, Salt Lake City,
againstmites (Myobia musculiMycoptes musculinusand Radfordia ensi-
2000, Utah.
fera) and nematodes (Aspiculuris tetraptera and Syphacia obvelata) in
King IM: Pneumonyssus caninum, Vet Med 83:1216, 1988.
mice, Lab Anim 40:210,2006.
Kleynhans KPN: Musca nevilli sp. nov. (Diptera: Muscidae), a dung-breed-
Greve JH, Gerish BS: Fur mites (Lynxacarus) from cats in Florida, Feline
ing fly from South Africa, Onderstepoort J Vet Res 54:l15, 1987.
Pract 11:28, 1981.
Knipling EF, Wells RW: Factors stimulating hatching of eggs of
Gunnarsson L, Christensson D, Palmer E: Clinical efficacy of selamectin in
Gasterophilus intestinalis de Geer and the application of warm water
the treatment of naturally acquired infection of sucking lice
as a practical method of destroying these eggs on the host, J Econ
(Linognathus setosus) in dogs, I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 41:388, 2005.
Entomol 28:1065, 1935.
Habela M, Moreno A, et al: Efficacy of eprinomectin pour-on in naturally
Konstantinov SA: Quantitative evaluation of the principal phases of horse-
Oestrus ovis infested merino sheep in Extremadura, South-West Spain,
fly (Tabanidae) attack on cattle in natural conditions, Parazitologicheskit
Parasitol Res 99:275, 2006.
Sbornik 37:73, 1992 (abstracted in CAB Abstracts AN# 950507013).
Hall RD, Doisy KE, Teasley CH: Walk-through trap to control horn fhes on
Konstantinov SA: The range of attack, distance, and character of daily
cattle, Agricultural Guide Gl195, Columbia, 1987, University of
flying of horse-flies of the genus Hybommitra (Diptera: Tabanidae),
Missouri-Columbia Extension Division.
Parazitologiia 27:419, 1993 (in Russian).
Hansen O, Gall Y, Pfister K, et al: Efficacy of a formulation containing
Kraus SJ, Glassman LH: The crab louse review of physiology and study of
imidacloprid and moxidectin against naturally acquired ear mite infesta-
anatomy as seen by the scanning electron microscope, J Am Venereal Dis
tions (Psoroptes cunicufi) in rabbits, Int J Appl Res Vet Med 3:281, 2005.
Assoc 2:12, 1976.
Hansen O, Mencke N, Pfister K, et al: Efficacy of a formulation containing
Krinsky WL: Animal disease agents transmitted by horse flies and deer flies
imidacloprid and permethrin against naturally acquired ectoparasite
(Diptera: Tabanidae), I Med Entomof 13:225, 1976 (review).
infestations (Ctenocephalides felis, Cheyletiella parasitovorax, and
Kummel BA, Estes SA, Arlian LG: Trixacarus caviae infestation of guinea
Listrophorus gibbus) in rabbits, Int I Appl Res Vet Med 4:320, 2006.
pigs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 177:903, 1980.
Hanssen I, Mencke N, Asskildt H, et al: Field study on the insecticidal
Kummerfeld N, Hinz KH: Diagnose und Terapie der durch die
efficacy of Advantage against natural infestations of dogs with lice,
Luftsackmilbe (Sternostomma tracheacorum) bei Finken (Fringillidae)
Parasitol Res 85:347, 1999.
and Prachtfinken (Estrilididae) verursachten Acariasis, Kleintierpraxis
Harman A: Honey bees: more than just honey, FDA Vet Newst 12:, 1998.
27:95, 1982.
Haufe WO: Growth of range cattle protected from horn flies (Haematobiud
Kunkle GA, Greiner EC: Dermatitis in horses and man caused by the straw
irritans) by ear tags impregnated with fenvalerate, Can I Anim Sci
itch mite, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 18l:467, 1982.
62:567, 1982.
Kutzer E: Ektoparasitenbekampfung mit jvermectin (Ivomec) bei
Hawkins JA, Adams WV, Cook L, et al: Role of horse fly (Tabanus fusci-
Schalenwild (Rothirsch, Reh, Widschwein), Mitteil Dtsch Gschft Alfg
costatus Hine) and stable fly (Stommoxys calcitrans L.) in transmission
Angwndt Entomol 6:217, 1988.
of equine infectious anemia to ponies in Louisiana, Am J Vet Res
Lane RS, Burgdorfer W: Transovarial and transstadial passage of Borrelid
34:1583, 1973.
burgdorferi in the western black-legged tick, Ixodes pacificus (Acari:
Hayes RO, Doane OW, Sakolsky G, Berrick S: Evaluation of attractants in
Ixodidae), Arm I Trop Med Hyg 37:188, 1987.
traps for greenhead fly (Diptera: Tabanidae) collections on a Cape Cod,
Levot GW, Sales N: Effectiveness of a mixture of cyromazine and diazinon
Massachusets, salt marsh, J Am Mosg Control Assoc 9:436, 1993.
for controlling flystrike on sheep, Aust Vet I 76:343, 1998.
Heffner RS, Heffner HE: Effect of cattle ear mite infestation on hearing in
Linquist DA, Abusowa M, Hall MIR: The new world screwworm fly in
a cow, I Am Vet Med Assoc 182:612, 1983.
Libya: a review of its introduction and eradication, Med Vet Entomofl
Hibler CP, Adcock JL: Elaeophorosis. In Davis JW, Anderson RC, editors:
6:2, 1992.
Parasitic diseases of wild marmmals, Ames, 197l, Iowa State University
 Lissman BA, Bosler EM, Camay H, et al: Spirochete-associated arthritis
Press.
(Lyme disease) in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 185:219, 1984.
Hinrichsen VL, Whitworth UG, Breitschwerdt EB, et al: Assessing the
Loft KE, Willesen JL: Efficacy of imidacloprid 10 percent/moxidectin 2.5
association between the geographic distribution of deer ticks and sero-
y sa 'ssop ut sisoaraayp jo juaieann ayl u! uo-jods juaniad
'ssop ur sursruesto aseas pausue-yrn snoiea oi saieu Aaisod
160:528, 2007.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1092, 2001.
Madigan JE, Pusterla N, Johnson E, et al: Transmission of Ehrlichia
Hoste H, Lespine A, Lemercier P, et al: Effcacy of eprinomectin pour-on
risticti, the agent of Potomac horse fever, using naturally infected
against gastrointestinal nematodes and the nasal bot fly (Oestrus ovis) in
aquatic insects and helminth vectors: preliminary report, Equine Vet J
sheep, Vet Rec 154:782, 2004.
32:275, 2000.
Horak IG, Camicas IL, Keirans JE: The Argasidae, Ixodidae and
Malik R, Stewart KM, Sousa CA, et al: Crusted scabies (sarcoptic mange)
Nuttalliellidae (Acari: Ixodida): a world list of valid tick names, Exp
in four cats due to Sarcoptes scabiei infestation, J Feline Med Surg
Appl Acarol 28:27, 2002.
8:327, 2006.
82
CHA PTER 2Arthropods
 Mally M, Kutzer E: Zur Tabanidenfauna Osterreichs und Betrachtungen
Piesman J: Field studies on Lyme disease in North America, Can J Infect
zu ihrer medizinischen Bedeutung, Mitt Osterr Ges Tropenmed Parasitol
Dis 2:55, 1991.
6:97, 1984.
Plant JID, Kutzler MA, Cebra CK: Efficacy of topical eprinomectin in the
 Mandigers PIJ, van der Hage MH, Dorrstein GM: Eee veldoderzoek naar
treatment of Chorioptes sp. infestation in alpacas and llamas, Vet
de effectiviteit van ivermectine in proyleenglycol bij de behandeling van
Dermatol 18:59, 2007.
schurft bij cavias, Tyjdschr Diergeneesk 118:42, 1993.
Pobst D, Richards C: The caddisfly handbook: an Orvis guide, New York,
Marchionado AA: Biology, economic effect, and control of the horn fly,
1999, Lyons.
Anim Health Nutr May/June:6, 1987.
Pollmeier M, Pengo G, Jeannin P, Soll M: Evaluation of the efficacy of 
Mather TN, Ribiero JMC, Spielman A: Lyme disease and babesiosis: acar-
fipronil formulations in the treatment and control of biting
icide focused on potentially infected ticks, Am J Trop Med Hyg 36:609,
lice, Trichodectes canis De Geer, 1778) on dogs, Vet Parasitof 107:127,
1987.
2002.
Matushka FR, Spielman A: The emergence of Lyme disease in a changing
 Pollmeier M, Pengo G, Longo M, Jeannin P: Effective treatment and con-
jouy jddy dxg 'adoung eua pue eay yon u juauoa
trol of biting lice, Felicola subrostratus(Nitzsch in Burmeister, 1838), on
2:337, 1986.
cats using fipronil formulations, Vet Parasitof 12l:157, 2004.
 McKellar QA, Midgley DM, Galbraith EA, et al: Clinical and pharmaco-
Pound JM, Miller JA, George IE, et al: Systemic treatment of whitetail
logical properties of ivermectin in rabbits and guinea pigs, Vet Rec
 deer with ivermectin-medicated bait to control free-living populations
130:71, 1992.
of lone star ticks (Acari: Ixodidae), I Med Entomof 33:385, 1996.
McLaughlin RF, Addison EM: Tick (Dermacentor albipictus)-induced
Preisler J: Incidence of ear mites, Otodectes cynotis, on some carnivores in
winter hair loss in captive moose (Alces alces), J Wildlije Dis 22:502, 1986.
the territory of CSR, Fofia Parasitol (Praha) 32:82, 1985.
McMahon MJ, Gaugler R: Effect of salt marsh drainage on the distribution
Price RE, Stromberg PC: Seasonal occurrence and distribution of
of Tabanus nigrovittatus (Diptera: Tabanidae), I Med Entomol 30:474,
Gasterophilus intestinalis and Gasterophius nasalis in the stomachs of
1993.
equids in Texas, Amm I Vet Res 48:1225, 1987.
McTier TL, Hair JA, Walstrom DJ, Thompson L: Efficacy and safety of
 Principato M: Classification of the main macroscopic lesions produced by
topical administration of selamectin for treatment of ear mite infesta-
larvae of Gasterophilus spp. (Diptera: Gasterophilidae) in free-ranging
tion in rabbits, I Am Vet Med Assoc 223:322, 2003.
horses in Umbria, Cornefl Vet 78:43, 1988.
Meleney WP, Kim KC: A comparative study of cattle-infesting
Prosl  H, Rabitsch 
A，
，Brabenetz
Zur
Bedeutung
iap
Haematopinus with redescription of H. quadripertusus Fahrenholz,
Herbstmilbe—Neotrombicuia autumnalis
(Shaw
1790)—in
der
1916 (Anoplura: Haematopinidae), I Parasitol 60:507, 1974.
Veterinarmedizin: Nervale Symptome bei Hunden nach massiver
Mencke N, Volf P, Volfova V, Stanneck D: Repellent efficacy of a combi-
Infestation, Tierarztl Prax 13:57, 1985.
nation containing imidacloprid and permethrin against sandflies
Pruett JH, Kunz SE: Warble stage development of third instars of
(Phlebotomus papatasi) on dogs, Parasitol Res 90(suppl 3):S108, 2003.
Hypoderma lineatum (Diptera: Oestridae), I Med Entomol 33:220, 1996.
Michener GR: Lethal myiasis of Richardson's ground squirrels by the
Pullium JK, Brooks WJ, Langley AD, Huerkamp MI: A single dose of
sarcophagid fly Neobillieria citellovora, J Mammol 74:148, 1993.
topical moxidectin as an effective treatment for murine acariasis due
Miller DS, Eagle RP, Zabel S, et al: Efficacy and safety of selamectin in the
to Myocoptes musculinus, Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 44:26, 2005.
treatment of Otodectes cynotis infestation in domestic ferrets, Vet Rec
 Pusterla N, Johnson E, Chae JS, et al: Infection rate of Ehrlichia risticii, the 
159:748, 2006.
agent of Potomac horse fever, in freshwater stream snails (Juga yrekaen-
Molina CG, Euzeby J: Activite de livermectine sur Melophagus ovinus, Sci
sis) from northern California, Vet Parasitof 92:15l, 2000.
Vet Med Comp 84:133, 1982.
Rainey IW: Equine mortality due to Gasterophius larvae (stomach bots),
Moorhouse DE: On the morphogenesis of the attachment cement of some
Aust Vet I 24:116, 1948.
jxodid ticks. Proceedings of the Third International Congress of Acarology,
Ramsay GW, Mason PC: Chicken mite (D. gallinae) infesting a dog, N Z
Prague, 1973, Czechoslovakia.
Vet I 62:701, 1975.
Moorhouse DE, Tatchell RJ: The feeding processes of the cattle tick
Boophius microplus (Canestrini): a study in host-parasite relations.
regained: the evolutionary history of anthropoid primate lice, BMC
Part I. Attachment to the host, Parasitology 56:623, 1966.
Biology 5:7, 2007. Available at: www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/5/7.
Mueller RS: Treatment protocols for demodicosis: an evidence-based
Rhodes AP: Seminal degeneration associated with chorioptic mange of the
review, Vet Dermatof 15:75, 2004.
scrotum of rams, Aust Vet I 5l:428, 1975.
Mueller RS, Bettenay SV: Efficacy of selamectin in the treatment of canine
Riek RF: Studies on allergic dermatitis of the horse. II. Treatment and
cheyletiellosis, Vet Rec 151:773, 2002.
control, Aust Vet J 29:185, 1953a.
Mundell AC, Ihrke PJ: Ivermectin in the treatment of Pneuonyssoides 
Riek RF: Studies on allergic dermatitis (Queensland itch) of the horse. I.
canirnum: a case report, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:393, 1990.
Description, distribution, symptoms, and pathology, Aust Vet J 29:177,
Muniz RA, Coronado A, Anziani OS, et al: Efficacy of injectable doramec-
1953b.
tin in the protection of castrated cattle against field infestations of
Roberts FHS: Insects affecting livestock, Sydney, 1952, Angus and
Cochliomyia hominivorax, Vet Parasitol 58:327, 1995.
Robertson.
omoq mnund jo uorssusuen ay uo jodau Aeuuid ia lan
Rogers DI, Randolph SE: A response to the aim of eradicating tsetse from
in South Africa, Onderstepoort J Vet Res 4l:41, 1975.
Africa, Trends Parasitol 18:534, 2002.
Nevill EM: The epidemiology of Parafiaria bovicola in the Transvaal
Roncalli RA: Effcacy of ivermectin against Oestrus ovis in sheep, Vet Med
Bushveld of South Africa, Onderstepoort J Vet Res 52:261, 1985.
Small Anim Clin 79:1095, 1984.
Olander HJ: The migration of Hypoderma lineatum in the brain of a horse:
Rooney IR: Gastric ulceration in foals, Pathol Vet l:497, 1964.
a case report and review, Pathot Vet 4:477, 1967.
Rosenstein M: Paralysis in chickens caused by larvae of the poultry tick
 Osman SA, Hanafy A, Amer SE: Clinical and therapeutic studies on mange
Argas persicus, Avian Dis 20:407, 1976.
in horses, Vet Parasitof 14l:191, 2006.
Rothschild M, Schlein Y, Parker K, et al: The flying leap of the flea, Sci Am 
Pantchev N, Hofmann T: Notoedric mange caused by Notoedres cati
229:92, 1973.
in a pet African Pygmy hedgehog (Atelerix albiventris), Vet Rec
Ryan T: Cnemidocoptic mite infestation in cage birds, Mod Vet Pract
158:59, 2006.
67:525, 1986.
Peterson HO, Roberts IH, Becklund WW, Kemper HE: Anemia in cattle
Sabrosky CW, Bennett GF, Whitworth TL: Bird blow fhies ( Protocalliphora)
caused by heavy infestation of the bloodsucking louse Haematopinus
in North America (Diptera: Calliphoridae) with notes on the palearctic
eurysternus, J Am Vet Med Assoc 122:373, 1953.
species, Washington DC, 1989, Smithsonian Institute Press.
CHA P TER 2 Arthropods
83
Scarampella F, Pollmeier M, Visser M, et al: Efficacy of fipronil in the
Torres S: Infectious gastroenteritis in wild cats, North Am Vet May:297,
treatment of feline cheyletiellosis, Vet Parasitof 129:333, 2005.
1941.
Schoeb TR, Panciera RJ: Blister beetle poisoning in horses, J Am Vet Med
Ulutas B, Voyvoda H, Bayraml G, Karagenc T: Efficacy of topical admin-
Assoc 173:75, 1978.
istration of eprinomectin for treatment of ear mite infestation in six
 Schoeb TR, Panciera RJ: Pathology of blister beetle poisoning in horses,
rabbits, Vet Dermatof 16:334, 2005.
Vet Pathof 16:18, 1979.
Underwood PC, Dikmans G: Gastralgia in a horse due to bot infestation,
Scholl PJ, Barrett CC: Technique to extract Hypoderma sp. (Diptera:
Vet Med 38:12, 1943.
Oestridae) larvae from the backs of cattle, J Econ Entormol 79:l125, 1986.
Vreysen MJB, Saleh KM, Ali MY, et al: Glossina austeni {Diptera:
Schroeder HO: Habits of the larvae of Gasterophius nasalis (L.) in the
Glossinidae) eradicated on the island of Unguja, Zanzibar, using the
mouth of the horse, J Econ Entommol 33:382, 1940.
sterile insect technique, J Econ Entomol 93:123, 2000.
Seixas F, Travassos PJ, Pinto ML, et al: Dermatitis in a dog induced by
Waddell AH: The pathogenicity of Gasterophius intestinalis in the stomach
Straelensia cynotis: a case report and review of the literature, Vet
of the horse, Aust Vet I 48:332, 1972.
Dermatol 17:81, 2006.
Wall R, Strong L: Environmental consequences of treating cattle with the
Shanks DJ, Gautier P, McTier TL: Efficacy of selamectin against biting lice
antiparasitic drug ivermectin, Nature 327:418, 1987.
on dogs and cats, Vet Rec 152:234, 2003.
Warburg A, Saraiva E, Lanzaro GC, et al: Saliva of Lutzomyia longipalpis
Shanks DJ, McTier TL, Behan S, et al: The efficacy of selamectin in the
sibling species differs in its composition and capacity to enhance leish-
'ssop uo gaqpos sadosuns jo suoeisaju panbse Aleuneu jo juauiea
maniasis, Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 345:223, 1994.
Vet Parasitof 91:269,2000.
Warnick LD, Nydam D, Maciel A, et al: Udder cleft dermatitis and sar-
Shoop WL, Egerton JR, Eary CH, et al: Eprinomectin: a novel avermectin
coptic mange in a dairy herd, I Am Vet Med Assoc 22l:273, 2002.
for use as a topical endectocide for cattle, Int I Parasitof 26:1237, 1996.
Washburn RH, Klebsadel LJ, Palmer JS, et al: The warble fly problem in
 Silverman J, Rust MK, Reierson DA: Influence of temperature and humid-
Alaska reindeer, Agroborealis 12:23, 1980.
ity on survival and development of the cat flea, Ctenocephalides felis
Wells RW, Knipling EF: A report of some recent studies on species of
(Siphonaptera: Pulicidae), I Med Entomol 18:78, 1981.
Gasterophilus occurring in horses in the United States, fowa State Coll J
Sinclair J: The reappearance of warble fly in Britain, 1993-1994, State Vet J
Sci 12:181, 1938.
5:9, 1995.
White SD, Rosychuk RAW, Fieseler KV: Clinicopathologic findings, sen-
Smiley RL, O'Connor BM: Mange in Macaca arctoides (Primates:
 sitivity to house dust mites and efficacy of milbemycin oxime treatment
Cercopithecidae) caused by Cosarcoptes scanloni (Acari: Sarcoptidae)
of dogs with Cheyletiella sp. infestation, Vet Dermatof 12:13, 2001.
with possible human involvement and descriptions of the adult male
Willadsen P, Bird P, Cobon GS, et al: Commercialization of a recombinant
and immature stages, Int I Acarol 6:283, 1980.
vaccine against Boophius microplus, Parasitoflogy ll0:543, 1995.
 Smith PH, Dallwitz R, Wardhaugh KG, et al: Timing of larval exodus from
Williams DF: A veterinary approach to the European honey bee (Apis
sheep and carrion in the sheep blow fly, Lucilua cuprina, Entomol Exptl
mellifera), Vet J 160:61, 2000.
Aplicata 30:157, 1981.
Williams KJ, Summers BA, de Lahunta A: Cerebrospinal cuterebriasis in
Spielman A: Human babesiosis in Nantucket Island: transmission by nym-
cats and its association with feline ischemic encephalopathy, Vet Pathor
phal Ixodes ticks, Amm J Trop Med Hyg 25:784, 1976.
35:330, 1998.
 Stanchi ND, Grisolia CS: Uso de ivermectina en el tratamiento de le ac-
Wilson GWC: Control of warble fly in Great Britain and the European
ariasis (Ophionyssus sp.) de ofidios, Vet Argent 3:578, 1986.
Community, Vet Rec l18:653, 1986.
 Steve PC, Lilly JH: Investigations on transmissibility of Moraxefla bovis by 
Wilson GI, Blachut K, Roberts IH: The infectivity of scabies (mange)
the face fly, I Econ Entomol 58:444, 1965.
mites, Psoroptes ovis (Acarina: Psoroptidae), to sheep in naturally con-
 Strabel D, Schweizer G, et al: Der Einsatz von Avermectinen bei zwei
taminated enclosures, Res Vet Sci 22:292, 1977.
Ziegen mit Demodikose, Schweiz Arch Tierheik 145:585, 2003.
Wilson ML, Telford SR, Piesman J, et al: Reduced abundance of immature
 Strickler JD, Walker ED: Seasonal abundance and species diversity of adult 
Ixodes dammini (Acari: Ixodidae) following elimination of deer, I Med
Tabanidae (Diptera) at Lake Lansing Park-North Michigan, Great Lakes
Entomol 25:224, 1988.
Entomol 26:107, 1993.
Wing SR, Courtney CH, Young MD: Effect of ivermectin on murine mites,
Theiler A: Diseases, ticks, and their eradication, Agr I S Afr l:491, 1911.
I Arn Vet Med Assoc 187:1191, 1985.
Thomas GD, Hall RD, Berry IL: Diapause of the horn fly (Diptera:
Wright FC: Control of psoroptic scabies of cattle with fenvalerate, Vet
Muscidae) in the field, Environ Entomol 60:1092, 1987.
Parasitol 21:37, 1986.
Timm RM, Lee RE Jr: Do bot flies, Cuterebra (Diptera: Cuterebridae),
emasculate their hosts? I Med Entomol 18:333, 1981.
CHAPTER3
Protozoans
Ost protozoans are free-living organisms, and of
The amastigote lacks a flagellum, whereas the other three
those that live as parasites in the bodies of mammals,
forms all have a flagellum but differ with respect to the
 only a small proportion is associated with disease.
location of the kinetoplast. The kinetoplast lies posterior to
Even then, their etiologic significance is sometimes unclear. For
the nucleus in the trypomastigote, immediately anterior
example, certain intestinal flagellates multiply when the host
to the nucleus in the epimastigote, and near the anterior
has diarrhea. In such cases the presence of large numbers of
end of the cell in the prormastigote. The flagellum lies in
flagellates in the fecal smear is the result rather than the cause of
the edge of an undulating membrane as it courses from
the diarrhea. On the other hand, there are protozoans that
kinetoplast to the anterior end of the cell body of the trypo-
indeed behave as primary pathogens, and these are responsible
mastigote. Infection of the arthropod host occurs when it
for some of the most important diseases of humans
 and
ingests the blood of an infected mammal. Infection of
domestic animals. These diseases are the malarias, piroplas
the mammalian host occurs by one of two mechanisms,
 moses, coccidioses caused by apicomplexans, and trypanoso-
depending on the species of trypanosome involved: either
miases caused by sarcomastigophoran hemoflagellates.
through the bite of the infected arthropod or by contamina-
tion of the host's mucous membranes or abraded skin by its
ZOOMASTIGINA
feces. The former are called salivarian, and the latter
stercorarian trypanosomes. Most salivarians are pathogenic
Flagellates
and most stercorarians are nonpathogenic, but the patho.
 Flagellates bear one or more long, slender flagella (sing--
 genic stercorarian T. cruzi is an important exception to this
flagellum) for locomotion. The flagellum is also called an
 generalization.
undulipodium by those engaged in protozoology to accen-
 Tsetse-transmitted trypanosomes are of major signifi-
tuate its structural differences from the flagellum of bacteria.
cance in sub-Saharan Africa (see Figure 3-1). Trypanosoma
Flagellates multiply asexually by binary fission, and certain
brucei and Trypanosoma congolense cause fatal nagana disease
species form resistant cysts. The parasitic flagellates can be
 in domestic ruminants but are only mildly pathogenic in the
indigenous wild ruminants. The wild ruminants thus serve as
the host's body and type of life history. The hemoflagellates
reservoirs of T. brucei and T. congolense, which are conveyed
(e.g-, Trypanosoma and Leishmania) live in the blood,
through the bites of tsetses (Glossina species) to domestic
lymph, and tissue spaces and are typically transmitted
livestock. These trypanosomes and tsetses defend vast areas
from host to host by bloodsucking insects. There is no
of African grazing lands against invasion by domestic
collective term for the others, so we will call them mucoso-
livestock. Humans have been striving to introduce their
flagellates. These mucosoflagellates live in the alimentary or
domestic animals into these areas for a long time without
 genital tract, usually in intimate association with the mucous
remarkable success, and where they have succeeded, they
membranes, and are transmitted from host to host in the
have often destroyed the grasslands by overgrazing and
feces or genital effluvia. Certain mucosoflagellates are
turned them into deserts.
transmitted as trophozoites (e.g-, Trichomonas), others as
T. brucei multiplies by longitudinal binary fission in the
cysts (e.g., Giardia).
blood, lymph, and cerebrospinal fluid of the mammalian
host. The trypomastigotes, the only stage in the mammalian
Klnetoplastlda (Hemoflagellates)
host, that are ingested by the tsetse when it feeds on the blood
Trypanosoima
of an infected mammal multiply in the insect's midgut,
A trypanosome is an elongated, spindle-shaped cell with a
undergo metamorphosis, and migrate to the salivary glands,
single nucleus lying near the middle of its length and a single
where they reach the infective metacyclic trypomastigote stage
flagellum that arises near a large mitochondrion with copious
and are then ready to be injected into the mammalian host at
DNA called a kinetoplast and passes out of the anterior end
the next feeding. Tryparosoma gambierse and Trypanosoma
of the cell (Figure 3-1). During development in both mam-
rhodesiense, the etiologic agents of African sleeping sickness
malian and arthropod hosts, trypanosomes can undergo
in human, are closely related to T. brucei.
 considerable morphologic change. Four morphologic forms
 Some trypanosomes are transmitted outside of Africa
are distinguished in the case of Trypanosoma cruzi.
by other dipteran vectors. Trypanosoma vivax is a form
84
CH A P T ER 3 Protozoans
85
then destroyed. Thus, within 16 years the disease had been
identified and eradicated from the Canadian provinces
(Derbyshire and Nielsen, 1997).
Nonpathogenic trypanosomes
Not all trypanosomes transmitted by the bites of arthropod
vectors are exotic and tropical, but most of them are
nonpathogenic. Tryparosoma cervi was identified in 29 of 45
Alaskan reindeer (Rargifer tarandus) examined over a 2-year
period and in 98% of white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginia-
rus) in southern Florida examined over a 5-year period
(Telford et al, 1991). Tryparosoma cervi also infects elk and
HGURE 3-1. Giemsa-stained trypomastigote of Trypanosoma
mule deer in the United States and is apparently without
brucei. With tsetse-transmitted trypanosomes, dividing forms,
pathogenic effect (Kingston, Morton, and Dietrich, 1982).
like the one in this image, can be observed in blood smears.
-q e si (aa-ia, pououd) uaniu vusudi
less parasite of cattle transmitted by tabanid flies, and
Trypanosoma melophagium is an equally harmless parasite of
of considerable importance to livestock in West Africa.
sheep transmitted by the sheep ked, Melophagus ovirus; both
The reservoir hosts are wild ungulates. The living trypano-
are distributed worldwide. Occasionally, T. theileri contami-
some is active in fresh blood films, hence the name vivax.
nates culture media that have been enriched with “sterile"
 In cattle the infection may be without signs, or there may
bovine serum, much to the surprise and confusion of the
be acute or chronic disease. In peracute disease there
microbiologist. It is interesting that M. ovinus, which is
may be a high parasitemia associated with extensive hemor-
first cousin to a tsetse, is almost universally infected with
rhages throughout the mucosal and serosal surfaces of the
a trypanosome, albeit fortunately a harmless one.
body. In chronic disease, cattle will become anemic and
T. cruzi (Figure 3-2), the etiologic agent of American try-
emaciated, with signs of severe wasting. Similar disease
 panosomiasis (Chagas' disease) of human and dog, is trans-
has been reported in goats and sheep. T. vivax has been
mitted by triatomin bugs of the genera Triatoma, Rhodnius,
exported from Africa to South America, where the reservoir
and Parstrongylus in South and Central America and in Texas,
appears to be deer. Outside of Africa, the disease is trans-
Arizona, New Mexico, California, and Oklahoma (Fox et al,
mitted mechanically by biting flies.
1986). Oposums, armadillos, rats, guinea pigs, cats,raccoons,
Trypanosoma evarsi occurs in Asia, tropical America,
and monkeys serve as reservoirs of infection in the wild. Five of
and Africa north of the Sahara and causes surra of all
400 raccoons (Procyor lotor) examined in Maryland were
 species of domestic animals. Flies of the family Tabanidae
infected (Walton et al, 1958); 104 of 221 raccoons (47%)
and vampire bats serve as vectors. In South American
horses, Trypanosoma equinum causes a disease called mal
de caderas, which is similar to surra.
Sexually transmitted trypanosomes
sauosouedan suoue anbun s unpuadnba puosoundi
 in not requiring an intermediate host. Transmission among
hosts occurs through direct sexual contact and results in the
equine venereal disease called dourine. The acute stage is
characterized by swelling of the genitalia and a mucoid dis-
charge in which T. equiperdum can usually be demonstrated.
As the acute signs subside, circular, flattened, “silver dollar"
plaques appear in the skin and then disappear within several
hours or days to be replaced by others. The chronic stage of
 dourine is marked by emaciation, paresis, intermittent fever,
and finally death. Dourine was eradicated from the United
States in 1920 and again in 1949 but has since reappeared at
least once. The eradication of T. equiperdum from North
America was made possible to a great extent by the work
of a Canadian veterinarian, Edward Watson, who worked
on the disease for some 15 years, was the first to identify
FIGURE 3-2. Trypanosoma cruzi. Top image is a trypomastigote in a
the trypanosome in horses in North America, and deve-
Wright's stained buffy coat preparation from a naturally infected
loped a complement fixation test that could be used to
dog. Bottom image shows the amastigote stages in heart
identify infected horses in the field. Identified horses were
muscle. (Top specimen courtesy Dr. Stephen C. Barr.)
86
CHA PTER 3Protozoans
were found to be seropositive in South Carolina and Georgia
(Yabsley and Noblet, 2002). T. cruzi has been observed in
hunting dogs in central Virginia that had lymphadenopathy
but did not yet have clinical signs of cardiomyopathy (Barr
et al, 1995). Autochthonous cases of T. cruzi continue to
occur in the United States from time to time in dogs
(Nabity et al, 2006).
 In the vertebrate host, T. cruzi amastigotes (cells that
contain a nucleus and a kinetoplast, but with either no or
fission in reticuloendothelial, neural, and glial cells, and,
most important, in cardiac and smooth muscle cells.
Amastigotes released by rupture of the host cell change
into trypomastigotes, which then appear in the circulating
blood to invade other cells or to be ingested by the bug as it
feeds. Trypomastigotes of T. cruzi are rarely, if ever, seen
dividing in blood smears prepared from circulating blood.
The trypanosomes muliply and undergo metamorphosis
in the bug's hindgut and are eventually passed in the
feces that the bug almost invariably passes while feeding
 on its sleeping victim. Trypanosomes enter the body by
going through the oral, nasal, and conjunctival mucosae
or by infectious bug feces being rubbed into abrasions in
the skin. Infection can also occur through the placenta
or by blood transfusion, and accidental self-injection
 presents a potential hazard of infection to persons handling
blood samples from infected animals, even those specimens
in which trypomastigotes cannot be demonstrated in blood
films. Trypomastigotes are difficult to demonstrate in the
blood of long-term carriers, and one must turn to serology,
culture, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), or xenodiagnosis 
bone marrow of an infected dog containing large numbers
of amastigotes. Bottom image is a dog from Brazil infected 
for recourse. In xenodiagnosis, uninfected bugs are allowed
with L infantum (L. chagasi) showing typical cutaneous manifesta-
to feed on the suspected individual, and their hindguts
tion of a long-standing infection.
p auosiqn e 'ssosoudn noy pauxa iail ane
inefficient procedure at best. In dogs, acute disease is
characterized by  lymphadenopathy and  clinical  signs
s d        
associated with acute myocarditis: pale mucous mem-
with the important genera being Phlebotormus in the
branes, lethargy, ascites, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and
Old World (Africa and Eurasia) and Lutzormyia in the New
tachyrhythmia (Barr, 1991). The signs during the chronic
World (the Americas). Europeans introduced visceral leishma-
stage of the disease are related to congestive myocardial
niases into the Americas during the period of colonization.
failure. Megaesophagus and other megasyndromes des-
The disease tends to be concentrated in areas around the
cribed in humans with chronic Chagas' disease have not
Caribbean, in parts of sub-Saharan Africa, and in Brazil.
 been reported in dogs.
Small pockets of the disease can be found in other parts
of the world also.
Leishimania
The stage in the macrophage of the vertebrate host is the
Leishmania donovani and Leishmania infantum are the
amastigote. When an amastigote in a macrophage is ingested.
major causes of visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar); L. infanturm
by the sandfly, which feeds on superficial tissues and juices of
is often called Leishmania chagasi by many workers when
a host, the amastigotes differentiate into promastigotes.
discussing it in hosts in the Americas. Leishmaria tropica
Within the fly the promastigotes multiply and produce very
and related species causes several clinical forms of cutaneous
large numbers. Promastigotes migrate to the pharynx of the
leishmaniasis in humans, dogs, rodents, and wild mammals in
fly, and a few days later they reach the hypostome of the fly,
Eurasia and Africa. Leishmania mexicana is a complex of spe-
where the promastigotes are often in sufficient numbers to
cies causing cutaneous lesions in the Americas that use various
block the feeding ability of the fly. The process of development
animal reservoir hosts. Leishmania braziliensis and related spe
in the fly from infection to being infective takes about a week.
cies cause mucocutaneous leishmaniasis in the Americas.
The next time the fly bites, it will prick the skin and inject
 Leishmanial organisms live as amastigotes within macro-
a number of promastigotes, and because the flies have diffi-
phages throughout the bodyofthe vertebrate host (Figure 3-3).
 culty feeding, they often remain hungry and feed more than
C H A P T E R 3Protozoans
87
when uninfected. The promastigotes will then be ingested by
Autochthonous cases of cutaneous leishmaniasis are
macrophages and carried throughout the body of the host.
reported on occasion in animals from the United States.
Within the human host the macrophages serve
A case of dermal leishmaniasis involving the ears of a domes-
to
provide a means by which the parasite is disseminated
fic cat was reported from south-central Texas. Radical pin-
throughout the body. The tissues most commonly found
 nectomy was performed before the cat was returned to
to harbor large numbers of parasites include the spleen,
its owners to prevent it from serving as a source of infec-
liver, bone marrow, intestinal mucosa, and mesenteric
tion to sand flies (Craig et al, 1986). For both cutaneous
lymph nodes. The large numbers of organisms that can
and visceral leishmaniasis, cases are not uncommonly
develop in the bone marrow can cause decreased red
imported with dogs that have vacationed in areas where
blood cell and platelet numbers. Dogs offen also develop
the diseases are enzootic. The only way to obtain the drugs
cutaneous lesions.
for treatment is through the Centers for Disease Control
Autochthonous visceral leishmaniasis was reported in a
and Prevention (CDC); therefore the CDC can maintain
colony of American foxhounds in Oklahoma (Anderson
some form of surveillance on cases that are being diagnosed
et al, 1982) and in a colony of English foxhounds in
in the United States.
Ohio (Swenson et al, 1988). The Ohio outbreak involved
one case of chronic illness and death, and positive serum
Parabasalla (Mucosoflagellates)
titers in eight of 25 other colony dogs. Because the dead dog
Trichomonads
had been born and raised in the research colony and
Trichomonads are members of the protozoan phylum
because more than a third of the other dogs in the
 Parabasalia that are characteristically pear-shaped, with a
colony carried titers, the authors concluded that transmis-
single nucleus, and have a rodlike axostyle that protrudes
sion of the disease must have occurred in Ohio, most likely
from the more pointed posterior end. There are three to five
through the agency of an insect vector. In 1999 additional
anterior flagella and an undulating membrane with a trailing
infections  were reported from a group of working
flagellum running along its free edge. Trichomonads do not
         
have a cyst stage involved in their transmission between
 The initial presentation involved signs including bleeding,
hosts. Special techniques are required for the differentiation
wasting, seizures, hair loss, and kidney failure. A number
of trichomonad genera on purely morphologic grounds,
of the dogs died, and Dr. Breitschwerdt and colleagues at
and currently the identification of species is aided by molec-
North Carolina State University recovered L. infantum
ular comparisons. Therefore, practical diagnosis is based
organisms from synovial fluid. Further testing of foxhounds
on host and site specificity and on the number of anterior
from around the United States revealed that of 11,000
and trailing flagella.
foxhounds in U.S. and Canadian hunt packs, some 12%
Tritrichormoras foetus (Figure 3-4) is found in the vagina,
had antibodies to Leishmania organisms, although most
uterus, macerated fetus, prepuce, penis, epididymis, and vas
were without signs (Enserink, 2000). Infected dogs were
deferens. The organism displays considerable pleomorphism,
found in 2l states in the United States and southern
varies from 10 to 25 μm in length, and has three anterior
Canada, with most cases in the eastern portion of North
flagella and a long, trailing flagellum that extends beyond the
America. It is unclear at this time how the infection is being
undulating membrane. In collecting samples to isolate
spread between dogs, although it is being guessed that
T. foetus, it is important to avoid fecal contamination and
 transmission is by means of sand flies when the dogs are
 consequent potential confusion with intestinal flagelates.
taken to southern states for hunts. There are also a few cases
Bovine genital trichomoniasis is a venereal disease
 of visceral leishmaniasis that have been reported to occur
manifested in cows and heifers by infertility, abortion up to
in dogs other than foxhounds that have never left the
5 months after breeding, pyometra, and occasional fetal
United States or Canada (Schantz et al, 2005).
mummification (Figure 3-5). Infection in beef cattle remains
Visceral leishmaniasis in dogs (see Figure 3-3) often is
relatively common in some parts of the United States;
 seen with cutaneous manifestations. Dogs are considered
16% of 57 herds sampled in California had at least one
major reservoirs for human infections with this parasite
infected bull (BonDurant et al, 1990). Although infection is
and have been the targets of eradication programs similar
-p aq u szoudon saf i ‘sq u juede
to rabies control programs (Oliveira-dos-Santos et al, 1993).
strated by direct microscopic examination or by culture of
 The need to develop a means of preventing canine infections
 preputial swabs or washings. The infected bull is usually
on a large scale has resulted in attempts to develop vaccines
responsible for spreading trichomoniasis in the herd, and
that will prevent canine infections (Mayrink et al, 1996).
artificial insemination is recommended as a control measure
Work has also shown that the routine monthly or biweekly
when feasible. The T. foetus trophozoites are transferred from
 spot-on application of imidacloprid and permethrin could
the penis to the vagina during copulation. However, semen is
prevent transmission in kenneled dogs in an area with a high
usually not infectious unless contaminated with preputial
prevalence in southern Italy (Otranto et al, 2007). Horses
fluid during artificial collection. Semen contaminated in
will also sometimes have cutaneous lesions, and horses in
this way will remain infectious despite the addition of dilu-
Puerto Rico have been found infected with this parasite
ents, antibiotics, and freezing (Fitzgerald, 1986). Infected
(Ramos-Vara et al, 1996).
bulls should be culled, and in those situations in which
88
C H A P T E R 3Protozoans
20 days after service by an infected bull. Infected cows should
be given at least 4 months of sexual rest, during which time
T. foetus trophozoites usually disappear from the reproduc-
tive tract. Whether inseminated naturally or artificially,
 cows and heifers must first be given sexual rest so their repro-
ductive tracts will be cleared of T. foetus before gestation
begins; otherwise the infection will be perpetuated in the
developing embryo (Fitzgerald, 1986). Diagnosis has been
aided by the use of the InPouch TF transport and culture
kit, available from Biomed Diagnostics, San Jose, California
(Parker, Campbell, and Gajadhar, 2003).
Romatowski (2000) described pentatrichomoniasis with
diarrhea in four kittens. Gookin et al (1999) examined the
    e   n 
and found most infections in cats younger than l year,
with the feces being pasty to semiformed. More recently,
Levy et al (2003) identified the agent causing diarrhea
in cats to be T. foetus and have gone on to state that
T. foetus, not Pentatrichomonas hominis, is the causative
agent of feline trichomonal diarrhea. These authors have
since shown (Gookin, Stauffer, and Levy, 2007) that a few
cats infected with T. foetus are also occasionally infected
with P. hominis that does not cause clinical signs. The diag-
nosis of this infection is also facilitated by the use of the
InPouch TF transport and culture kit (Gookin et al, 2003).
  m i sia s sa s
transmitted by sexual intercourse, with men playing the
FIGURE 3-4. Trtrichomonas foetus. Electronic flash, phase contrast
role of asymptomatic carriers. This is one of the more
micrograph of living organism from a culture provided by Dr. S.J.
common sexually transmitted diseases of people around
Shin. The three anterior flagella, undulating membrane, trailing
the world. Trichomonas gallinae causes necrotic ulcerations
flagellum, and axostyle are clearly visible.
in the esophagus, crop, and proventriculus of pigeons,
ae ie sme u issoo pue su pue sl
artificial insemination is impractical, they should be replaced
fed infected birds. Trichomonas species occur as oral
with younger, uninfected bulls. However, failure on the part
parasites on various hosts and tend to multiply in the
of the artificial insemination technician to observe effective
presence of pyorrhea, much as their intestinal counterparts
hygienic precautions in conducting vaginal examinations for
multiply in the presence of diarrhea. Nonpathogenic species
the detection of estrus may totally negate the benefits of arti-
of
Tritrichomonas, Trichomitus, Tetratrichomonas, and
ficial insemination as a control measure (Goodger 
and
Pentatrichomonas occur in the cecum and colon of various
Skirrow, 1986). T. foetus can usually be demonstrated
domestic animals. These organisms tend to multiply in fluid
in the vaginal secretions or washings of virgin heifers 14 to
feces, and many cases of diarrhea are mistakenly attributed
FIGURE 3-5. Fitrichomonas foetus. Left, Opened bovine uterus showing mild diffuse endometritis and
inflammatory exudate in the form of a cloudy exudate on the endometrial surface. Right, Bovine
chorioallantois. Cotyledons with placental edema; arrows indicate areas of adventitial placentation.
CH A P T ER 3 Protozoans
89
to them for this reason. Their abundance in fluid feces is
In most cases, when Giardia is isolated from a host and
often the effect of and not the cause of the diarrhea.
examined via molecular methods, the association is such
However, it is hard to ascertain whether they cause disease.
that assemblages A and B are considered to be mainly those
Monocercomonas species resemble Trichomonas but lack
found in human beings, assemblages C and D make up the
an undulating membrane. Morocercormonas species are
majority of organisms found in dogs, assemblage E makes up
 nonpathogenic; Monocercomonas ruminantium is found
the group most typically found in hoofed stock (cattle, sheep,
in the rumen of cattle.
goats, pigs, horses, and so on), assemblage F consists of the
Histormonas meleagridis is a cosmopolitan parasite of the
forms from cats, and assemblage G represents the form from
 cecum and liver of turkeys, chickens, pheasants, guinea
rats. Sometimes assemblage A may be found in a cat
fowl, and the like. The cecal nematode Heterakis gallinarum
(Vasilopulos et al, 2007) or a dog (Hopkins et al, 1997).
 serves as transport host for H. meleagridis. When a bird
This should be a simple and boring academic question, but
-uou e sainboe i saa ururunl H aanoaju ue sisaau
it unfortunately is currently a major point of confusion and
pathogenic nematode and a pathogenic protozoan parasite
discussion. A few years ago we considered almost all the
at one stroke. The protozoan, released from the nematode
isolates to be zoonotic, but we were not very good at detect-
larva, spends about a week as a flagellate resident of the cecal
ing the infection. Now, with improved diagnostics that detect
lumen before it loses its flagella and invades the sub-
cyst wall proteins as antigens in the feces and increased
epithelial tissues of the wall as an ameboid organism.
awareness of the fact that Giardia can cause disease, the ques-
Inflammation and necrosis of the cecal wall and the
 tion is very commonly whether or not to treat the asympto-
  i e sso   d a 
matic dog, cat, pony, calf, goat, and so on. Do you sell a
turkeys. H. meleagridis trophozoites discharged in bird
puppy if it is shedding Giardia cysts in its feces? Can a shelter
 un a  s m d so
adopt out an infected kitten? In a survey from around the
for years within the larvated eggs of H. gallinarum in soil.
 United States using the IDEXX SNAP test, some 15% of dogs
Earthworms serve as paratenic hosts for H. gallinarum
and 10% of cats were shedding antigen in their feces (Carlin
larvae, and because birds like to eat them, they actually
et al, 2006). Also, about 7% of the world's human population
facilitate infection with both this nematode and its proto-
harbors Giardia in the small intestines, but little is known
zoan guest. The disease is typically of little consequence
about the epidemiology of this organism, especially with
in chickens, but it can cause high mortalities in turkeys.
regard to the possible role of other mammals as sources of
human infection. It seems that animals can sometimes be
Treatment
shedding A and B and thus may be a source of zoonotic
For cattle, metronidazole administered intravenously at
 75 mg/kg three times at 12-hour intervals is indicated for
people get infected with Giardia from other people.
the treatment and control of T. foetus infections in cows.
 However, members of the public would prefer to blame ani-
Trichomonas infections in puppies may be controlled with
mals rather than their associates.
metronidazole administered orally at 66 mg/kg once daily
Giardia trophozoites are adapted for attachment to the
for 5 consecutive days (Buckner and Ewing, 1977).
mucous epithelial cells of the small intestine (Figure 3-6).
Romatowski (2000) treated cats with both metronidazole
The Giardia trophozoite is shaped like a teardrop
and enrofloxacin and suggested that the long-term daily
(see Figure 3-6), with one side pushed in to form a sucking
administration of enrofloxacin stopped the soft stools.
disc. Within the cell are two nuclei, each with a large
Gookin and colleagues (2006) showed ronidazole and
endosome (Feulgen-negative nucleolus) that makes the
tinidazole to be of significant benefit in the treatment of
 organism look like a tennis racket with eyes when viewed
intestinal trichomoniasis in cats. However, the drug should
bottom side up under the compound microscope. Other
be used with caution because there have been some neuro-
subcellular structures include two slender axonemes, four
logic signs developing in cats treated with ronidazole,
 pairs of flagella, and a pair of median bodies. All of the
although ultimately the infection and diarrhea were resolved
other intestinal flagellates are found in the cecum and
after treatment (Rosado, Specht, and Marks, 2007).
colon, but Giardia parasitizes the small intestine, in which
the trophozoites attach to the mucosal cells by their sucking
Dlplomonada (Giardia and relatlves)
discs. Trophozoites usually form infective cysts before
Giardia
passing out with the feces. The mature cyst containing
 The number of species of Giardia that exist is open to
two potential trophozoites is the form usually found
question, and the names of species in current usage are in a
in the feces of infected hosts (see Figure 3-6). Although
state of flux (Thompson et al, 2000; Bowman, 2005). The
trophozoites may also be passed, especially with diarrheal
 species in people currently has been called Giardia lamblia,
stools, they are incapable of causing infection and soon die;
Giardia duodenalis, Giardia intestinalis, or Giardia enterica.
if they go into fresh water they will lyse owing to their
There are some species that are recognized as distinct, e.g--
inability to osmoregulate.
Giardia muris in mice, Giardia agilis in amphibians, and Gi-
In dogs, diarrhea may begin as early as 5 days after
ardia psittaci in birds. Currently based on molecular biology,
exposure to infection (Abbitt et al, 1986); cysts first
the groups of Giardia are discussed in terms of assemblages.
appear in the feces after about a week or two. In cats,
90
C H A P TE R 3Protozoans
FIGURE 3-6. Giardia. Left, Cyst passed
in feces. Phase contrast micrograph
showing two of the four nuclei near
the top of the image. bp right, Giardia
trophozoite in trichrome-stained fecal
smear. Bottom right, Section through
intestinal  mucosa  of  an  infected
animal  with  detached  trophozoites
present within the lumen.
Giardia trophozoites are found in the jejunum and ileum
Giardia cysts are frequently found in the normal stools
instead of the duodenum. The principal clinical sign is
of asymptomatic hosts, but in occasional cases of clinical
persistent diarrhea resulting from intestinal malabsorption;
giardiosis neither cysts nor trophozoites can be found
the feces of infected cats are often mucoid, pale, soff,
in the feces. There are several antigen detection kits
and more than usually malodorous (Kirkpatrick, 1986).
that are designed for use on the feces of animals and
In calves, Giardia was associated with chronic diarrhea
people (Garcia and Shimizu, 1997), and the IDEXX
 e  i  ir  
 SNAP test is now used in-house routinely by veterinarians
response to electrolytes and antibiotics, and clinical and
(Carlin et al, 2006).
parasitologic response to dimetridazole within 48 hours
(St Jean et al, 1987). In lambs the careful examination of
Treatment
 production parameters in bottle-reared and experimentally
 Dogs may be treated for giardiasis with fenbendazole at
infected animals showed that neonatal giardiasis caused
the same dosage used for helminths (Barr, Bowman, and
extended times for lambs to reach slaughter weight and
Heller, 1994; Zajac et al, 1998). Dogs have also been
decreased carcass weight (Olson et al, 1995). The enumera-
treated with a combination febantel-pyrantel-praziquantel
tion of cysts in the feces of ewes around lambing time
(37.8 mg/kg, 7.56 mg/kg, 7.56 mg/kg, respectively) product
revealed that there was a periparturient increase in cyst pro-
for 3 days withsuccessful clearance of cysts from most dogs
duction by ewes that peaked between the time of lambing
(Payne et al, 2002). Treatment with albendazole (25 g/kg
and 4 weeks afterward (Xiao, Herd, and McClure, 1994).
every 12 hours for a total of four doses) has been shown to
In an outbreak in central Italy, lambs with naturally ac-
stop the shedding of Giardia cysts by infected dogs
quired giardiasis developed a malabsorption syndrome,
(Barr et al, 1993). Albendazole therapy has the potential
decreased weight gain, and impaired feed efficiency that
of inducing bone marrow toxicosis in dogs and cats;
responded to treatment with fenbendazole at 10 mg/kg for
therefore veterinarians should observe caution in using
3 days (Aloisio et al, 2006) Giardia infection in humans may
this drug for treating giardiasis (Stokol et al, 1997). Other
 be inapparent or may cause severe enteritis.
treatments that have been used for canine giardiasis
include quinacrine (6.6 mg/kg twice a day for 5 days),
Diagnosis
metronidazole (22 mg/kg orally twice a day for 5 days),
Trophozoites may be demonstrated in direct smears of
and tinidazole (44 mg/kg once daily for 3 days) (Zimmer
diarrheal feces (see Figure 3-6); trophozoites often cannot
and Burrington, 1986).
be demonstrated in formed stools. Cysts (see Figure 3-6)
Giardia infections in cats may be treated safely and effec-
may be concentrated by fecal flotation in zinc sulfate
tively with metronidazole, 22 to 25 mg, orally twice a day
of specific gravity 1.18 but tend to shrink and become
for 5 to 7 days (Scorza and Lappin, 2004; Zimmer, 1987).
 distorted beyond recognition in sucrose and other flota-
Cats have also been successfully treated with a combination
tion media. Phase contrast microscopy is helpful in iden-
of febantel (37.8 mg/kg), pyrantel (7.56 mg/kg), and
tifying Giardia trophozoites and cysts. If phase contrast
praziquantel (7.56 mg/kg) for 5 days (Scorza, Radecki,
microscopy is unavailable, a drop of Lugol's solution of
and Lappin, 2006).
iodine at the edge of the coverslip will stain the tropho-
There are vaccines for Giardia from Fort Dodge Animal
zoites and cysts and make them easier to identify
by
Health, the canine GiardiaVax and feline Fel-O-Vax Giardia
 increasing the contrast of the nuclei within the organisms.
that are approved for use in preventing giardiasis in dogs
CH A P T E R 3Protozoans
91
in the United States and for which prelaunch efficacy
diarrhea, and weight loss was reported in the silvered leaf
data were submitted to the U.S. Department of Agriculture
monkey (Presbytis cristatus; Palmieri, Dalgard, and Connor,
(00z Te 1a uosio) aeyoed peaoidde al jo jed se (vaSn)
1984). The normal high pH level (5.0 to 6.7) of the stomach
Unfortunately, the efficacy of these vaccines is questioned
of leaf monkeys and the stress of capture, shipment,
by many veterinarians in the field; the majority of veterinar-
and confinement were considered to have contributed to
ians find them of little value, but a number believe the
the extensive gastric involvement observed. Entamoeba
vaccines efficacious. Trials of the effects of the administra-
invadens causes severe disease and death in captive reptiles.
tion of these vaccines on the clearance of dogs and cats with
For example, 200 of 500 red-footed tortoises (Geochelone
existing infections have failed to eliminate the organisms
carbonaria) imported into southern Florida died over a
from the feces of these animals (Anderson et al, 2004;
period of 2 months, showing signs of anorexia, listlessness,
Payne et al, 2002; Stein et al, 2003).
and diarrhea. Necropsy examination revealed necrosis of
Fenbendazole and albendazole administered to calves
the duodenal mucosa and multifocal hepatic necrosis.
at varying doses for different periods have both been
Amebas were found in both duodenal and hepatic lesions
proved efficacious against Giardia (O'Handley et al, 1997;
histologically (Jacobson, Clubb, and Greiner, 1983).
Xiao, Saeed, and Herd, 1996). For fenbendazole, all treat-
The parasitic amebas reproduce asexually, usually by
ments with a single dose of 10 mg, with 10 or 20 mg
binary fission. Actively parasitic forms, called trophozoites,
administered daily for 3 days, or with 0.833 mg adminis-
display ameboid motion when recovered from fresh feces
tered daily for 6 days were effective. For albendazole, a dose
and kept at body temperature. Most species form cysts,
of 20 mg administered daily for 3 days was effective.
which in certain cases are multinuclear. Trophozoites are
Dimetridazole was administered orally to infected calves
more likely to be found in fluid feces, and cysts in formed
in 250 mL of water at a dosage of 50 mg/kg for 5 days.
feces.
The feces of calves administered dimetridazole were cleared
of cysts and their diarrhea stopped within 48 hours
Treatment of Entamoeba histolytica infections
(St Jean et al, 1987).
Little is known about the treatment of canine amebiasis.
For treatment of giardiasis in parakeets, three doses
 In humans, metronidazole is the drug of choice in the treat-
of dimetridazole at 1.5 mg/30 g of body weight at
ment of intestinal and hepatic amebiasis and is therefore
12-hour intervals by stomach tube were more effective
a logical choice for treating canine amebiasis. Roberson
than supplying drinking water containing 200 ppm of
(1977) suggests oral administration of 50 mg of metroni-
this chemical to the birds for 5 days. Metronidazole therapy
dazole per kilogram body weight daily for 5 days.
was not effective (Scholtens, New, and Johnson, 1982).
 Control of Giardia infection involves prevention of fecal
Facultatlve Ameblasls
contamination of feed and water supplies and sanitation and
Facultative amebas are free-living most of the time but
disinfection of the environment with Lysol (2% to 5%),
can cause serious disease if they enter human hosts.
Sterinol (1%), or chlorine bleach (sodium hypochlorite,
These pathogens are best known for causing disease in
1%) (Kirkpatrick, 1986).
humans (e.g-, fulminate primary amebic meningoencepha-
litis [Naegleria fowleri, mainly], chronic amebic encephalitis
Rhizopoda (Amebas)
[Acanthamoeba culbertsoni and other species; Figure 3-7],
Intestlnal Amebas
and acanthamoeba keratitis) (Barnett et al, 1996;
Entamoeba histolytica is principally a parasite of the large
 intestine and causes amebic dysentery in humans, an
endemic disease of the tropics that occurs sporadically
in the temperate regions. Amebic abscess of the liver is a
serious, frequently life-threatening sequela. Humans also
host a few nonpathogenic amebas (Entamoeba dispar,
Entamoeba hartmanni,Entamoeba coli, Iodamoeba buetschli,
and Endolimax nana), some of which are shared with
 domestic animals. E. histolytica and other amebas appear
to cause little if any harm to domestic animals. Amebic
trophozoites and cysts frequently appear in fresh fecal
smears of perfectly healthy cattle, sheep, goats, horses,
and swine but are usually overlooked. These have been
 described in the past as separate species (e.g., Entamoeba
ou iso paaiana aae inq (siao pqao pue siao
 attention in recent years.
However, special cases exist in which amebas are
FIGURE 3-7. Acanthamoeba trophozoites from culture. Note the
of clinical importance, notably in primates. For example,
flamentous pseucdopods and the large central karyosome
a case of gastric amebiasis characterized by anorexia,
within the nucleus.
92
C H A P T E R 3Protozoans
Schaumberg et al, 1998; Schuster and Visvesvara, 2004;
Sell et al, 1997). However, cases of amebic encephalitis
have been reported from other animals, including dogs,
gibbons, sheep, cattle, beavers, and tapirs (Kinde et al,
2007; Lozano Alarcon et al, 1997; Morales et al, 2006). The
ameba, Balamuthia mandrillaris, was found to cause disease
in a mandrill from the San Diego Zoo (Visvesvara et al,
1993). This parasite has also killed gorillas, an orangutan, a
horse, and dogs (Canfield et al, 1997; Finnin et al, 2007;
Foreman et al, 2004; Kinde et al, 1998, 2007; Rideout et al,
1997). Human cases have also been reported (Deol et al,
2000; Tavares et al, 2006).
CILIOPHORA (CILIATES)
Balantidium colfi
B. coli, a normal element of the intestinal fauna of the pig and
rat, is very large as single cells go, measuring up to 150 μm in
length (Figure 3-8). The cell surface is covered with cilia
(sing-, cilium) arranged in rows with a tuft of longer ones
organelles include a large macronucleus, a smaller micronu-
cleus, two contractile vacuoles, and a number of food
vacuoles in the cytoplasm. B. coli reproduces by transverse
fission and forms cysts up to 60 μm in diameter.
Although harmless to the pig and usually harmless to
 humans, B. coli occasionally causes ulceration of the human
large intestine, manifested clinically as diarrhea and
occasionally as dysentery (diarrhea with abdominal pain,
straining, and blood and mucus in the stools). Diagnosis
of B. coli infection is based on the demonstration of motile
trophozoites in direct smears of diarrheal feces or cysts in
flotation preparations of formed feces. Acute enteritis
four gorillas in the Los Angeles Zoo was attributed to
B. coli infection (Teare and Loomis, 1982). Lowland gorillas
HGURE 3-8. Balantidium coll. Top. Trophozoite (electronic flash
affected with balantidiasis did not accept metronidazole
photograph) of motile ciliate. Bottom, Cyst. Trophozoites abound 
well and were treated with intramuscular injections of
in the large intestine of normal swine, and cysts are passed
dehydroemetine dihydrochloride  (Gual-Sill and  Pulido-
Reyes, 1994).
disease ranging from mild colitis to an ailment resembling
amebic dysentery.
Symbiotic Ciliates
The forestomachs of ruminants and the ceca and colons
of horses abound with large, somewhat bizarre ciliates
that are neither pathogenic nor indispensable to their
hosts (Figure 3-9). Sometimes they are found in the lungs
 of ruminants at necropsy, the result of agonal inspiration of
ruminal contents and nothing more.
APICOMPLEXA
The Apicomplexa (Sporozoa) of interest to us are all obligate
intracellular parasites that cause disease by destroying their
 host cells. The most important members are the coccidians,
many of which develop in epithelial cells of the alimentary
canal and cause a form of enteritis called coccidiosis, and the
hemosporidians, which develop in erythrocytes and cause
FIGURE 3-9. Ciliates from the large intestine of a horse.
CH A P T E R 3Protozoans
93
Sexual multiplication culminates in the formation of oocysts,
which are discharged with the feces, and in the development,
within each of these oocysts, of eight infective organisms,
sporozoites. The life history of Eirneria should be learned
by heart because it serves as a basis for all of the other cocci-
dians. Figure 3-1l may prove helpful in mastering the
following details.
Schizogony (merogony)
-s e aq pasu s so pands sau a 
able host, the sporozoites emerge, and each may enter an
epithelial or lamina propria cell, round up as a trophozoite,
grow larger, and become a first-generation schizont
(pronounced “skiz ont,” [meront]). The trophozoite,
schizont, and all other intracellular stages of Eimeria are
surrounded by a membrane-lined parasitophorous vacuole
in the host cell cytoplasm or, in some cases, nucleoplasm.
This schizont produces first-generation merozoites
FGURE 3-10. Tachyzoite of Joxoplasma gondii from a mouse.
that burst the cell and invade fresh cells to become
(TEM courtesy of Dr. John F. Cummings.)
second-generation schizonts. There may be several more
schizogonic generations, but two or three are the limit for
hemolytic anemia. Coccidians are transmitted mainly by
many of the important species of Eirmeria. The number of
fecal contamination and reproduce by rigid sequences of
asexual generations, the type and location of the host cells
asexual and sexual phases of multiplication and develop-
 parasitized, and the number of merozoites formed at each
 ment that, in an important minority of cases, require an
 generation depend on the species of coccidium in question.
aq p are suos sis jo uoen
The salient aributes of schizogony are (1) an exponential
bloodsucking arthropods and include the piroplasms,
increase in the number of zoites arising from a single
which are transmitted by ixodid ticks, and the plasmodia,
sporozoite, (2) destruction of host cells in proportion to
which are transmitted by dipterans, in which they complete
the degree of infection, and (3) automatic suspension of the
the sexual phases of their life histories.
asexual process after a fixed number of repetitions.
Coccidians
Gametogony
The functional unit of coccidian ontogeny is the zoite,
A merozoite produced by the final schizogony (i.e., a telo-
a motile, banana- or cigar-shaped cell, rounded at one
merozoite) enters a fresh host cell and develops into either a
end and pointed at the other (apical) end (Figure 3-10).
male or a female (microgamont or macrogamont, respec-
It is the zoite that migrates in the host and invades cells,
tively) or developing sex cell. The female macrogamont
and it is the zoite that represents the beginning and end
enlarges, stores food materials, and induces hyperrophy of
 point of every coccidian life process. Relationship to a par-
both cytoplasm and nucleus of its host cell. When mature, it
ticular portion of the life history is denoted by a prefix.
is called a macrogarmete or female sex cel The male microgam-
Thus, sporozoites are infective forms found in sporulated
 ont undergoes repeated nuclear division and becomes multi-
a ane sahozoiods (sisis-uo.uo, paounouoid) sishooo
nucleate. Each nucleus is finally incorporated into a biflagellate
result of the reduction divisions that occur in the oocyst
microgamete or male sex cell Of the many microgametes
that is the result of fusion of gametes. Sporozoites
formed by the microgametocyte, only a small fraction finds
invade host cells, in which they form many merozoites
and fertilizes macrogametes to form zygotes. A wall forms
by a kind of multiple internal fission called schizogony
around the zygote by the coalescence of hyaline granules at
(pronounced “ski-zog o-ne"; synonym, merogony); tachy-
 its periphery to form an oocyst.
zoites divide rapidly, bradyzoites divide slowly, and so on.
The genera Eimeria, Cystoisospora, Hammondia, Sarcocystis,
Sporogony
and
Toxoplasma present  an orderly
 sequence
of
 The oocyst is released by rupture of the host celland passes
increasing biologic complexity and therefore are taken up
out with the feces to undergo sporulation. Within a day
in that order.
or two, if provided with adequate moisture, moderate
temperatures, and sufficient oxygen, the single cell (sporont)
Eimeria
in the oocyst divides into four sporoblasts. Each sporoblast
The general form of coccidian life history is represented by the
develops into a sporocyst, which contains two haploid
 genus Eireria, species of which are gastrointestinal parasites
 sporozoites, thus becoming an infective, sporulated oocyst
of a wide range of vertebrate hosts. This life history includes
and completing the cycle (Figure 3-12). The life history of
both   asexual  multiplication  and  sexual  multiplication.
Eimeria is presented again in schematic form in Figure 3- 13.
94
C H A P T E R 3Protozoans
Large intestine
®
Second-
generation
schizogony
Merozoites
Telamerozoites
External environment
First-
 generation
schizogony
(megaschizonts)
Small intestine
Trophozoites
 in lacteal
Oocyst with
 endothelial cells
sporont
Sporulated
?
Sporozoite
oocyst
ingested by calf
Sporulation
4 sporocysts
each with
2 sporozoites
 FIGURE 3-11. Life history of Emeria bovis. The detail of eimerian ontogeny are set forth in the text.
 E. bovis first-generation schizonts are megaschizonts and develop in central lacteal cells of the
 Small intestine. Second generation schizogony and gametogony occur in epithelial cells of the
Cystoisospora
as a final host (Figure 3-14). In the case of Cystoisospora, the
The common canine and feline coccidia used to be placed in a
sporont develops into two sporoblasts with two resulting
 genus called Isospora ("i-sos por-rah"). Recently, there was a
sporocysts that each contain four sporozoites. The life history
taxonomic revision of the names and species, and the genus
of Cystoisospora felis, for example, resembles that of Eirmeria
Isospora was shown to represent species in birds that are rela-
bovis except that its sporozoites may encyst (singly without
tives of the Eimeridae ( Barta et al, 2005). The species affecting
any muliplication) in the tissues of a mouse or bird.As Figure
dogs and cats, now called the Cystoisospora, are species para-
3-15 indicates, a cat may become infected with Cystoisospora
sitic in carnivores and related to other genera—-Hammondia,
felis by ingesting either sporulated oocysts or sporozoite-
Toxoplasma, Besnoitia, and Sarcocystis—that have similar
infected mice. In this case the mouse thus serves as a faculta-
 sporulated oocysts and typically use carnivores or omnivores
tive paratenic host for Cystoisospora felis.
CH A P T E R 3Protozoans
95
FIGURE 3-14. Cystoisospora felis unsporulated oocyst (left) and
sporulated oocyst (right).
vacuoles in the cytoplasm (or nucleus, in a few cases) of enter-
 Ocytes, lamina propria cells, or endothelial cells of the central
lacteal of the villus. Although these are most elegantly dis-
played by histologic techniques, direct smears or squash pre-
FGURE 3-12. Emeria magna oocysts, sporulated, from the feces
parations are just as dependable as hematoxylin and eosin
of a domestic rabbit.
(H&E) slides and are quicker and less expensive. Oocysts
and merozoites can often be demonstrated in smears or con-
 centrates of the intestinal contents. Contrast microscopy or 
Enteric coccidiosis
staining with Wright's or Giemsa stain is helpful in demon-
A particular species of Eimeria or Cystoisospora tends to be
strating sporozoites.
Ai siads s ua nq siu jo  mu e oi p
 It is important to understand that the mere identifica-
be parasitized by a number of different species of coccidians 
tion of coccidian oocysts in the feces of a host does not
simultaneously. Antemortem diagnosis of coccidian infection
justify a diagnosis of the disease coccidiosis unless the
(i.e., coccidiosis) is based on identification of oocysts in the
history and clinical signs are in accord. Large numbers 
host's feces. Host specificity and the form of the oocyst usually
of oocysts may be counted in the feces of perfectly healthy
suffice for identification to the species level, but micrometry
hosts, and surveys reveal prevalence rates on the order of
and sporulation of the oocysts must occasionally be resorted to
30% to 50% in a wide range of host species. On the other
 in order to distinguish among certain species (see Chapter 7).
hand, severe and even fatal coccidiosis sometimes occurs
 Postmortem diagnosis is based on gross and microscopic les-
 during the early asexual stages of infection before oocysts 
ions, which vary considerably with the host and parasite species 
have had time to develop. In such cases, disease is manifest,
involved, and on the demonstration of the sexual or asexual
but oocysts have not yet appeared in the feces. Chronic
stages of the parasites. Schizonts, gamonts, oocysts, and inter
diarrhea is the cardinal sign of coccidiosis and results
mediate stages lie surrounded by their parasitophorous
from the destruction of intestinal epithelium by hordes
of multiplying organisms.
Diarrhea has many causes,
only one of which is coccidian infection, so the diagnosis
Oocyst
Cont
Oocyst
of coccidiosis is always uncertain in individual cases.
(mucosal cell)
(feces)
QGamete
OGamete
Oocyst
(feces)
Sporulatior
OGam
neteOGamete
Sporulated
Schizont 
'oocyst
with many zoites
with 8 zoites
Schizont
(2-3 generations
with many zoites
 in mucosal or 
ingests
"Lamina propria cells"”
15000
3 generations
Zoite
Host ingests oocyst
Sporulated
oocyst
Cyst
Zoites invade cells 
with 8 zoites
Zoite
with 1zoite
(feces, soil dust
lymph nodes)
tmesenteric
"everywhere")
FGURE 3-13. Life history of a typical Emeria species.
FGURE 3-15. Life history of Cystoisospora felis.
96
C H A P T E R 3Protozoans
In other words, diarrhea plus oocyst shedding does not
Cystoisospora rivolta in cats are the species most commonly
 infallibly equal coccidiosis. However, as regularly recurring
involved in coccidian infection and disease in these hosts.
episodes of illness characterized by diarrhea in successive
Clinical signs may precede oocyst shedding in particularly
 populations of young puppies, kittens, calves, lambs, kids,
acute infections. Diarrhea is copious and watery and may
 piglets, chicks, ducklings, poults, or other domestic or wild
persist for several weeks. Response to treatment is seldom
animals, outbreaks of coccidiosis become predictable events
dramatic.
and leave the diagnostician in little doubt as to the cause.
Given a closed breeding colony with reasonably steady
Cattle
environmental conditions, clinical coccidiosis will regularly
 All calves experience infection with one or more spe-
appear in each new wave of young mammals or birds unless
cies of Eimeria during their first year of life, so finding a
effective prophylactic measures have been exercised.
few oocysts in the diarrheal feces of a sick calf does not
 It is offen repeated that coccidian infection is self-
itself justify a diagnosis of coccidiosis. However, authen-
limiting, implying that the population of infecting organ-
tic outbreaks of coccidiosis do occur, especially in cattle
isms grows to a maximum and then more or less abruptly
up to 2 years of age, and these outbreaks are most often
fades away to extinction or to a low level as the host deve-
attributed to either Eimeria zuernii or Eimeria bovis. Both
lops immunity. Small numbers of oocysts may be shed in
of these species undergo two asexual cycles the first
the feces for several weeks or even months, but infection
culminates in the formation of schizonts in the lamina
remains otherwise inapparent. Should the now relatively
propria cells (E. zuerni) or endothelial cells of the lac-
immune host be exposed to a different species of coccidian,
teals (Eirmeria bovis) of the villi of the lower ileum. The
the same pattern will be repeated. Thus immunity to coc-
megaschizonts of Eimeria bovis are macroscopically vis-
 cidian infection tends to be highly specific and reasonably
ible (about 250 μm) and contain more than 100,000
protective but incomplete. Some animals shed oocysts
merozoites. The schizonts of E. zuernii are unobtrusive
while remaining healthy for months or years. Such animals
because of their small size and deeper location. The
have sufficient protective immunity to limit but not ex-
second-generation schizonts are microscopic and occur
clude infection in the presence of continued exposure.
in the epithelial cells of the cecum and colon, which is
The disease coccidiosis results from either overwhelming
also the site of gametogony. The onset of clinical signs
infection or the interaction of moderate levels of infection
coincides with the beginning of gametogony and results
and stress. The level of environmental contamination with
from the mechanical disruption of mucosal cells by the
 0ocysts is best affected by removing all manure and getting
sexual stages. In severe cases, so few epithelial cells
all surfaces as clean as feasible. There is no reliable and
remain that serum and blood are lost from the capillaries
 practical disinfectant. Drying and direct sunlight are most
of the denuded lamina propria. The prepatent period
effective in destroying oocysts when these agents happen to
(time from infection until the diagnostic stages appear
be available. Administration of anticoccidial drugs (cocci-
in the feces) for Eimeria bovis is 16 to 21 days; the pre-
diostats) during exposure of young susceptible animals
 shp 1i o Z si   ro od d
permits infection to occur and immunity to develop but
alabamensis and Eimeria auburnensis are occasionally incri-
limits infection sufficiently to abort disease. Such drugs are
minated in outbreaks of clinical coccidiosis (Radostits and
virtually indispensable to intensive systems of poultry, goat,
Stockdale, 1980).
cattle, sheep, dog, and cat production.
Winter coccidiosis in calves characterized by bloody
diarrhea and tenesmus is a distinctive clinical entity.
Dogs and cats
Severe cold weather and other stresses may precipitate
True infection of dogs and cats with species of
clinical disease at infection levels that might otherwise
Cystoisospora must be distinguished from pseudoparasitism
not produce symptoms.
arising from the various gustatory habits of these hosts. A
Nervous coccidiosis may affect as many as one third
dog with a history of recurrent diarrhea and oocyst shed-
 of the cattle in some herd outbreaks of coccidiosis, espe-
ding seems like an “open-and-shut case” until the oocysts
cially in beef cattle in the northwestern United States
turn out to belong to a parasite of the squirrel Sciurus
and western Canada. In addition to acute diarrhea,
carolinensis. It would then seem that dietary indiscretion
affected animals display muscular tremors, convulsions,
and not protozoan infection is probably to blame for the
opisthotonus, nystagmus, blindness, and a mortality rate
 diarrhea. In fact, almost all puppies and kittens experience
of about 50%. The pathogenesis of nervous coccidiosis
infection with Cystoisospora at some time during the early
is unknown, but more than 90% of the cases occur
months of their lives. More than once I have observed
during the coldest months of the year, from January to
Cystoisospora oocysts in the feces of puppies and kittens
March. Canadian workers have reported the presence of
raised in elaborately controlled gnotobiotic colonies, and
a heat-labile toxin in the serum of calves with nervous
infection always occurs in well-managed colonies in which
coccidiosis that can transfer neurologic signs to inocu-
less stringent levels of sanitation are practiced.
lated mice (Isler, Bellamy, and Wobeser, 1987); of inter-
Cystoisospora
canis,
Cystoisospora
ohioensis,
and
 est, there has been no follow-up to this report in the
Cystoisospora burrowsi in dogs and Cystoisospora felis and
past 20 years.
CH A P T E R 3Protozoans
L6
Sheep and goats
Swine
At one time, sheep and goats were thought to share the
Pigs are host to eight species of Eirmeria and one
same species of Eirmeria; however, gradually two complete
of Cystoisospora, of which only the latter appears to be
 sets of species names are emerging to reflect the predomi-
of:
significant clinical importance (Vetterling, 1965).
nant opinion that sheep and goats harbor similar but
Cystoisospora suis causes neonatal coccidiosis in 1- to
distinct sets of coccidian species. Specific diagnosis is
2-week-old pigs. Clinical signs include diarrhea, dehydra-
based on morphologic identification of oocysts in sugar
tion, and weight loss; morbidity tends to be high, and mor-
flotation concentrates of feces. Micrometry and sporula-
tality low or moderate. Susceptibility to infection falls
tion of oocysts in 1% of potassium dichromate solution
rapidly with age. Although 400,000 oocysts of C. suis may
may be resorted to if necessary for differentiating similar
kill a l-day-old pig, only mild and transient diarrhea ensues
species.
if infection is postponed until the pig reaches 2 weeks
 In sheep, clinical coccidiosis is especially likely to
of age. The prepatent period is 5 days, and oocyst shed-
 occur after shipping and is probably precipitated by the
ding lasts 1 to 3 weeks. Pigs surviving infection with
associated stress. In lambs experimentally infected with
Cystoisospora suis are solidly immune to reinfection with
Eimeria ovinoidalis, oocysts appear in the feces about
this species. Porcine neonatal coccidiosis is to be differen-
14 days after infection, and if the infections are severe,
tiated from enteritides associated with Strongyloides
deaths will occur beginning about 3 weeks after infection.
ransomi, toxigenic Escherichia coli, transmissible gastroen-
Goats appear to be much more susceptible to their
 teritis virus, rotavirus, and Clostridiurn perfringens type
Eimeria infections, and coccidiosis is a serious problem
C. Cystoisospora suis infection is rarely observed in adult
in raising kids in many goat herds. Clinical signs typically
swine, and the epidemiology of porcine neonatal coccidio-
follow weaning by 2 to 3 weeks, but coccidiosis should
sis remains problematic (Lindsay Blagburn, and Powe,
be suspected whenever diarrhea is observed in kids older
1992; Stuart et al, 1980).
than 2 weeks. Weaker, heavily infected kids are likely
to die; the stronger and less heavily infected survive
Rabbits
but fail to grow normally. Pasty to watery diarrhea and
 Rabbits are host to a number of Eimeria species, and one,
dehydration are typical. Bloody stools and tenesmus,
Eimeria stiedae, can be highly pathogenic. This is a relatively
frequently observed in calves with coccidiosis, are not
unusual Eirmeria species in that it often will be found in the
typical of the disease in sheep and goats. Diarrhea may
epithelium of the biliary system, it can cause marked hyper-
precede oocyst shedding by several days. In such cases
 trophy of the epithelium and significant pathogenic changes
of suspected prepatent coccidiosis, examine direct fecal
on the surface of the liver as large white foci that may be
smears for merozoites. Necropsy examination reveals
visible on necropsy, and it often it is fatal.
many 3- to 6-mm irregular, whitish, raised lesions. Smears
 or squash preparations made from these lesions reveal
Llamas
 Eimeria in various stages of development.
Llamas and alpacas are host to a number of species
of Eimeria, and they can develop coccidiosis, especially as
Horses
Eimeria leuckarti is the only species of enteric coccidian
Eimeria punoensis, Eimeria macusaniensis, and Eimeria
 reported from North American horses. A survey of natu-
peruviana.
rally acquired E. leuckarti infection conducted on 13
Kentucky breeding farms revealed E. leuckarti in 67
Birds
(41%) of the foals on 11 of those farms. Oocysts, demon-
The subject of coccidiosis in domestic poultry forms too
strated by flotation in concentrated sucrose (SG 1.275),
large and complex a body of information to be accommo-
were first shed in the feces when the foals were 15 to 123
dated on these pages. The reader is referred to standard
 days old and continued to be shed sporadically for as long
texts on avian diseases.
as 4 months (Lyons, Drudge, and Tolliver, 1988); a similar
survey of three farms in Kentucky in 2004 revealed oocysts
Treatment and control
in 36%, 41%, and 85% of the 79 foals examined on the
Treatment of isolated cases of fully developed coccidiosis
farms (Lyons et al, 2007).
is a matter of supportive therapy because by the time
Oral administration of 50,000 to 2 million oocysts to
0ocysts are detected in the feces, no available drug will
yearling ponies led to patent infections in 33 to 37 days,
 have much effect on the population of coccidians infecting
and oocyst shedding continued for as long as 12 days.
that particular host. Controlling coccidiosis in populations
Schizonts were not observed; gametocytes developed
 of susceptible animals is a challenging proposition, and
 in lamina propria cells of the villi in the small intestine.
heavy reliance is placed on chemicals administered prophy-
No clinical signs of disease were observed in these artifi
lactically. The objective of anticoccidian prophylaxis is to
cially infected ponies (Barker and Remmler, 1972). E. leuck-
afford sufficient protection to the exposed animal to allow
arti infection therefore appears to be prevalent, at least
it to develop immunity without getting sick in the process.
in foals in Kentucky, but relatively harmless.
The chemicals reduce the magnitude of challenge and
98
CH A P TER 3Protozoans
thereby prevent coccidiosis; they do not prevent the infec.
10 mg/kg body weight per day. Usually it is better to
tion. However, do not expect the chemical to perform
administer medication individually to clinically ill animals
miracles. Too much contamination of the environment
because the sickest and neediest animals are the least likely
with oocysts and, even more important, too much stress
to receive their share with mass treatment methods.
placed on the hosts are conditions that cannot be overcome
Sulfamethazine is administered orally at a dosage rate of
by the best of chemicals.
140 mg/kg body weight daily for 3 days (Radostits and
Stockdale, 1980). Include amprolium (10 mg/kg/day for
Dogs and cats
 5 days) and sulfaquinoxaline. Sulfaquinoxaline (6 mg/lb/
Coccidiosis  outbreaks in dogs  and cats  involving
 day for 3 to 5 days) may also prove useful in treating
Cystoisospora species can be controlled with sulfonamide
cattle with clinical signs of coccidiosis.
drugs. Sulfadimethoxine is administered to dogs for the
For prophylaxis, amprolium is administered to calves
 treatment of coccidian enteritis according to the following
in the feed or drinking water for 21 days during natural
schedule: 55 mg/kg for the first day and 27.5 mg/kg for
exposure to oocysts at a concentration intended to deliver
the next 4 days or until the dog is symptom free for at
 5 mg/kg per day. Decoquinate is recommended as an aid
least 2 days. More recently, triazine-derivative drugs have
in the prevention of coccidiosis caused by Eimeria bovis
 been used off-label for the treatment of canine and feline
and E. zuernii in ruminating calves and older cattle.
coccidiosis (Daugschies et al, 2000; Lloyd and Smith 2001).
1e 1oy ay/ s'o Jo paaal aesop e 1e pay si aieumboo
Dosages that have been used for this class of drugs
least 28 days during periods when there is risk of exposure
include 10 to 30 mg of toltrazuril per kilogram for 1 to
to oocysts; it is ineffective in the treatment of already estab-
3 days in dogs; 25 mg of diclazuril per kilogram once in
lished infections. Lasalocid is sold as a feed additive and
cats; and 20 mg of ponazuril per kilogram daily for 1 to
administered at 1 mg/kg daily. Horses must not be allowed
3 days in dogs and cats. It must be remembered that in
to ingest feed that contains lasalocid. Monensin is sold as a
 all these cases this in an off-label use of these products.
feed additive for improved feed efficiency and the control
 of coccidiosis and is fed at the rate of 100 to 360 mg per
Ruminants
head per day. Horses must never be allowed access to feed
Whatever chemical agent is chosen, efficient control of
containing monensin because the toxic dose for this species
coccidiosis requires that exposure of ruminants to oocysts
is only about one tenth of that for cattle (Langston et al,
and stressful conditions be minimized. Adequate stall space,
1985). There are also several sulfa-based products available
clean mangers, plenty of clean air, and dry footing are as
for coccidiosis control.
 essential as they are rare. Never mix calves, sheep, or goats
of different ages or sizes in the same pen. As a matter of
Sheep
regular routine, all animals should be observed attentively
The animals most at risk are lambs at weaning in grazing
for several minutes a day at a time when neither the stock-
pens or when placed in feedlots; it is often important to
man nor his stock has other urgent business. If any sick
begin treatment before or immediately after moving the
animals are observed, they should be removed to a separate
animals into one of these environments. Decoquinate, lasa-
q  si a s   rn 
locid, and sulfaquinoxaline are approved for coccidiosis
ficial; it reduces exposure of the sick to unnecessary stress
control in sheep. Sulfaquinoxaline is to be administered
and of the healthy to extra oocysts. As soon as coccidiosis
in the water for 3 to 5 days. Decoquinate is administered
has been diagnosed in one or a few of the animals, all of the
as for cattle at 0.5 mg/kg for at least 28 days. Lasalocid
 other young ruminants on the premises should be treated
 is administered to sheep in feed so that they get between
prophylactically with an anticoccidial agent. Coccidial
15 and 70 mg per head per day. Again, do not let horses
infection (coccidiasis) is inevitable. Coccidial disease (coc-
get at feed containing lasalocid.
cidiosis) can be prevented or at least ameliorated by sound
husbandry and appropriate medication.
Goats
Decoquinate and monensin are approved for preventing
Cattle
coccidiosis in nonlactating goats. For prophylaxis, herd
Clinical coccidiosis in calves caused by Eimeria bovis
conditions may require that kids be medicated continu-
and E. zuerrii may be treated with amprolium (thiamine
ously from 2 weeks until they are several months of age.
antagonist), monensin (ionophore), or sulfa drugs (e.g--
Decoquinate may be mixed with the feed to supply 0.5 mg/
sulfamethazine, sulfadimethoxine, and sulfaquinoxaline).
kg per day or mixed with salt (4 1b of 6% decoquinate
Actually, once oocysts have appeared in the feces, it is too
premix with 100 lb of salt). Monensin is fed at the rate
 late in the course of infection for specific chemotherapy to
of 20 g of monensin sodium per ton on a 90% dry
benefit the animal appreciably. Chemotherapy is certainly
matter basis. This is offered as the sole ration. Do not let
horses get into feed containing monensin. Amprolium
that directed toward maintenance of fluid
I  balance.
is not approved for goat kids in the United States.
Amprolium may be administered for 5 days in the drinking
Experimentally, amprolium may be administered to goat
water at a concentration intended to deliver a dose of
kids with coccidiosis at a considerably higher dose rate
CH A P T ER 3 Protozoans
99
than is recommended for calves (25 to 50 mg/kg of body
these organisms and the mucosal cells that they parasitize
weight). Overdose with amprolium may lead to fatal polio-
and why almost all the anticoccidials and antimalarials have
encephalomalacia from thiamine deficiency. Sulfa drugs
proven inadequate in the control of infections with this
n  o sioo  o p q 
parasites. Of course, in 10 years we might change our
hydrated kids because sulfa drugs damage the kidneys if
minds again.
 insufficient water is available to keep them in solution.
 The genus Cryptosporidium has undergone a proliferation
Older goats, while remaining free of clinical signs, may
of species in the last few years at a fairly frantic clip (Fayer
 shed oocysts for extended periods and serve as the ultimate
 Santin, and Xiao, 2005). The important species in veterinary
source of infection for kids. In problem herds it may prove
medicine that are now recognized include the following as
necessary to isolate kids at birth from their dams, feed them
parasites of the small intestine: Cryptosporidium parvum in
artificially, and include a coccidiostat in the starter ration
calves less than 30 days of age, Cryptosporidium bovis in
for several months. In more favorable situations it may
older calves and adult cows, Cryptosporidium suis in swine,
suffice to provide a clean, disinfected stall and wash the
Cryptosporidium canis in dogs, Cryptosporidium felis in cats,
does' udders carefully before kids are allowed to nurse.
Cryptosporidium meleagridis and Cryptosporidium bayleyi in
Stress or exposure to a previously unencountered species
birds, and Cryptosporidium wrairi in guinea pigs. The parasites
of Eimeria may lead to temporary bouts of diarrhea in
 of the stomach include in the mouse, Cryptosporidium muris,
adult goats. Much of the information and perspectives
in the snake, Cryptosporidium serpentis and in the abomasum
on goat coccidiosis presented here are those of Smith and
 of the cow, Cryptosporidiurn andersoni. The important species
Sherman, 1994.
in people is Cryptosporidium hominis. The common zoonotic
species that infects people, and often veterinary students, is
Horses
C. parvum. The other species that show up in people as rare
 E. leuckarti appears to be nonpathogenic, which is fine 
zoonoses are Cryptosporidium canis, Cryptosporidium felis,
because no treatment is available for this infection.
C. meleagridis, C. muris, and Cryptosporidium suis. Sheep,
 goats, horses, and related animals seem to share C. parvum
Swine
with calves, at least right now. There are also a number
 Medication of piglets with neonatal coccidiosis appears
of species from cervids that will probably be described
to be futile. Rigorous sanitation probably represents the
sometime soon.
most effective investment. “The following sanitation pro-
 gram has been recommended: steam clean farrowing crates;
Life history
wet down the crates with an ammonia-orphenol-containing
The transmission stage is the infective oocysts (5 to 8 μm
disinfectant and let them stand overnight; and steam clean
 in diameter depending on the species (Figures 3-16 and
the following day” (Stuart and Lindsay, 1986). In Europe 
 3-17) containing four sporozoites that are discharged in
today and until 2005 in Canada, Baycox (ponazuril) from
the feces and serve to disseminate the infection. The oocysts
 Bayer HealthCare was approved for the treatment of coccid-
iosis in piglets. Use in Canada was discontinued at the
request of Health Canada based on the concern that
Canadian scientists could not rule out the possibility that
®
it might have health effects on consumers. In Europe,
 Baycox is also approved for the treatment of chickens and
cattle with coccidiosis.
Rabbits
In laboratory settings, rabbits are being treated with tol-
trazuril or ponazuril. Similarly, some pet rabbits are being
treated with ponazuril. It must be remembered that the
®
rabbit is considered a food animal by many people still in
the United States; therefore when treatment is adminis-
tered, there must be concern as to the ultimate fate of the
 animal being treated.
Cryptosporidium
The genus Cryptosporidium is currently considered by many
?
 parasitologists to be less closely related to the other coccidia
than to a group of the Apicomplexa known as the gregarines
rather than the coccidia and malarias (Carreno, Martin, and
 Barta, 1999). Again, this seems a purely academic exercise,
FIGURE 3-16. Oocysts of Cryptosporidium parvum in a sugar flota-
but it helps explain the superficial relationship between
tion preparation from calf feces.
100
CHA PTER 3Protozoans
Arabian foals with inherited combined immunodeficiency.
In the latter case, however, it was not possible to separate
the effects of Cryptosporidium and concurrent adenoviral
infection (Snyder, England, and McChesney, 1987).
Diagnosis
Cryptosporidium oocysts are difficult to see on fecal
slides because they are colorless, transparent, and small;
C. parvum is 5.0 by 4.5 μm (see Figure 3-16), and C. ander-
  ) (i a a  g  t s 
1985). Concentrated sucrose solution (specific gravity 1.33)
 is the flotation medium of choice for concentrating oocysts
 of Cryptosporidium. The coverslip variant of the flotation
concentration technique, which is described in Chapter 7 in
the section on qualitative fecal examination, can be used.
The oocysts appear as tiny subspheric objects that may be
FIGURE 3-17. Cryptosporidium andersoni oocysts in a sugar prepa-
 dented by osmotic extraction of water by the hypertonic
ration from infected cow feces.
medium. They tend to lie immediately below the coverslip,
[esoy isaq aui puy oi alqqnq ie ue jo doi au uo snooy os
plane for Cryptosporidium oocysts. The oocyst walls may
remain viable for months unless exposed to extremes of
have a pinkish hue that helps in finding them; the pinkish
temperature (below 0° C, above 65° C), desiccation, or
hue is caused by chromatic aberration and is best developed
impracticably concentrated disinfectants (5% ammonia,
by objective lenses of modest quality. The cyst walls are
10% formalin). When ingested by a suitable host, the
clear and colorless under a highly corrected objective lens.
oocyst opens along a preexisting suture line to release
Questionable objects may be examined under the highest
the four sporozoites that invade the microvillous border
magnification to demonstrate the sporozoites. Phase con-
of the gastric glands (C. muris; Tyzzer, 1907, 1910) or
trast microscopy is helpful, and a number of staining pro-
lower half of the small intestine (C. parvum; Tyzzer,
cedures (e.g-, methylene blue, Giemsa stain, iodine wet
1912). In parasitophorous vacuoles in the microvillous
mount, modified Kinyoun acid-fast smear) have been
border, the cryptosporidia undergo schizogony, gametog-
recommended to increase the optical contrast and stain-
 ony, fertilization, and sporogony. Some oocysts go through
confusing yeasts differentially. However, the most serious
excystation internally, providing the mechanism for auto-
obstacle to the correct microscopic diagnosis of cryptospo-
infection that accounts for the chronicity of certain cases in
ridiosis is inexperience and insecurity on the part of the
immune-sufficient  hosts  and  lethal  hyperinfection  in
microscopist. The best procedure is to keep examining feces
immune-deficient hosts.
from 1- to 3-week-old calves with the 40× objective and
suitably stopped brightfield illumination until you see
Clinical signs
Cryptosporidium oocysts. If in doubt, check for sporozoites
 Inapparent infection is common in many mammalian,
under higher power. Once you have seen the oocysts, you
reptilian,
and piscine hosts.
example,
will have acquired the most essential ingredient of accurate
 Cryptosporidium was found in the microvillous borders of
 diagnosis. Exacting microscopic technique pays dividends,
enterocytes of 5% (184 of 3491) of 1- to 30-week-old pigs
especially as one nears the resolution limits of the light
submitted for diagnostic necropsy, but according 
to
microscope. Kohler illumination, described in all micro-
Sanford, “"Only 26 per cent of the cryptosporidia-infected
scope manuals, is indispensable. Also useful for laboratories
pigs had diarrhea and most of those had other primary
are various fluorescently labeled antibodies that bind to the
diarrheagenic agents or lesions capable of causing their
oocyst, but these methods require the availability of a
diarrhea” (Sanford, 1987). On the other hand, debilitating
 microscope equipped with an ultraviolet light source and
diarrhea may be associated with infection (e.g, in calves
appropriate filter sets. Several assays designed for in-office
within the first 3 weeks of life). Although C. parvurn is
use are approved for the detection of the C. parvum antigen
usually the culprit in clinical cryptosporidiosis in mammals,
in human feces, and the test, although expensive, appears
C. andersoni may cause mild diarrhea in cattle of all ages,
to work well on bovine samples.
especially young adults. Immunocompromised hosts may
develop a life-threatening hyperinfective form of cryptos-
Treatment
poridiosis, as is the case with many human acquired im-
 There is no effective specific treatment for Cryptospori-
munodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients (Ma and Soave,
dium infection in animals. For people, the U.s. Food and
1983). Severe cryptosporidiosis has been reported to be as-
Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the use of nita-
sociated with immunocompromise induced by feline leu-
zoxanide in oral suspension for the treatment of diarrhea
kemia virus (FeLV) in a cat (Monticello et al, 1987) and in
caused by Cryptosporidium (and Giardia). Other drugs that
CH A P T E R 3 Protozoans
101
FGURE 3-18. Oocysts of Toxoplasma gondif, unsporulated (left) and
sporulated (right).
 have been used in dogs and cats include paromomycin 150
mg/kg once a day for 5 days for dogs and cats; tylosin at 10
to 15 mg/kg three times a day for 14 to 21 days for cats;
and azithromycin at 5 to 10 mg/kg twice a day for 5 to
7 days for cats.
FIGURE 3-20. Tachyzoites of Toxoplasma gondi and the pulmonary
Toxopiasima
Life history
 macrophage of a naturally infected cat (Giemsa stain).
 Toxoplasma gondis an enteric coccidian of the domestic
cat (Felis catus) and other members of the family Felidae.
On ingestion, sporulated oocysts rupture in the intestine
Cats are the only known definitive hosts (hosts in which
and release the sporozoites. These enter and multiply in
 microgametes and macrogametes are formed), and therefore
cells of the intestine and associated lymph nodes to form
only infected cats shed oocysts of this parasite in their feces.
rapidly multiplying stages, tachyzoites, which spread to all
The 0ocyst is small (11 to 13 μm; Figure 3-18), contains a
other tissues of the body; there they invade cells and con-
 single sporont, and is noninfective when passed in the feces.
tinue to multiply (Figure 3-20). Eventually, tissue cysts
Sporulation is completed in 1 to 5 days and results in
containing slowly dividing forms, bradyzoites, are formed
formation of two sporocysts, each of which contains four
in the brain, striated muscles, and liver and remain viable
 sporozoites. Fully sporulated oocysts are infective on inges-
for the life of the host (Figure 3-21). Bradyzoites are infec-
tion to essentially all warm-blooded animals including cats
five on ingestion to essentially all warm-blooded animals
(Figure 3-19). Therefore almost any warm-blooded animal
 may serve as a paratenic host of T. gondi (Dubey, 1986a,
1986b). A paratenic host is a host in which a parasite may
 grow or multiply, but the growth or development is not
 required by the parasite to complete its life cycle.
Oocyst
(feces)
QGamete
OGamete
 Sporulated
oocyst
with 8 zoites
Schizont
ntestinalcell)
Zoite
Tachyzoite
(tissue cells)
Tachyzoite
ocyst
"Group"
(tissue cells)
"Group"
Bradyzoites
Bradyzoites
in cyst
in cy st 
FIGURE 3-21. Toxoplasma gondii cyst in a mouse's brain. This is a
fresh temporary mount prepared by simply squashing the brain
FIGURE 3-19. Life history of Toxoplasma gondil.
tissue between the coverslip and slide.
102
C H A P T E R 3Protozoans
and behave in the manner similar to that just described for
Treatment
sporozoites. Historically, bradyzoites were differentiated
Humans may contract toxoplasmosis either by ingesting
from tachyzoites by the fact that they stained with the peri-
sporulated oocysts from the feces of an infected cat or by
odic acid-Schiffs reagent, indicating that they contain gly-
 eating uncooked meat of animals containing T. gondi cysts.
cogen and are able to withstand pepsin digestion fluids.
"Pregnant women should eat only adequately cooked meat
Thus, paratenic hosts become infected with T. gondi by
and either leave the cleaning of cat litter pans to someone
ingesting sporulated oocysts from cat feces or bradyzoites
ae   p) s a   
in the tissues of other paratenic hosts. Transplacental trans-
 They are also well advised to wash lettuce and other fresh
mission of tachyzoites from dam to fetus in utero also
vegetables carefully, avoid contact with newborn lambs,
occurs but varies in importance depending on the species
kids, and fetal membranes; and shun unpasteurized goat's
of host involved (Dubey, 1986a, 1986b).
milk. The meats that probably pose the greatest risk of
When a member of the cat family ingests tissue cysts
infection are lamb and range-fed chicken if eaten under-
of T. gondi (see Figures 3-19 and 3-21), the bradyzoites
 cooked. The risk of acquiring infection from most meat
penetrate the epithelial cells of the small intestine, undergo
purchased in the United States is fairly low. A survey by
a series of asexual cycles, and finally undergo the sexual
the USDA of meat from supermarkets in the United States
cycle, which culminates in the shedding of oocysts. Cats
(2094 samples each of commercially raised beef, chicken,
shed Toxoplasma oocysts in their feces 3 to 10 days after
 or pork from 698 retail meat stores) revealed no toxoplas-
eating mice infected with encysted bradyzoites but not until
mosis in the beef or chicken and toxoplasmosis in only
19 to 48 days after ingesting sporulated oocysts (Dubey and
seven pooled (six samples per pool) pork samples (Dubey
Frenkel, 1976). Apparently, the asexual reproduction pre-
et al, 2005b).
ceding formation of bradyzoites in the paratenic host satis-
A cat shedding oocysts of T. gondi should be hospita-
fies a major portion of the developmental requirements
lized to prevent exposure of its owner until it stops shed.
preceding sexual reproduction. Cats may also serve as para-
ding oocysts, usually in less than 2 weeks. Reinfection, if it
tenic hosts inasmuch as multiplication of tachyzoites and
occurs, results in low-grade shedding of oocysts of short
 cyst formation occur in their extraintestinal tissues ( Dubey,
 duration. Intercurrent Cystoisospora infection may also trig-
1986b); cats are also capable of developing systemic disease
ger a brief output of T. gondi oocysts. However, in general,
(Meier et al, 1957).
having once passed through a patent T. gondii infection, the
particular cat remains a relatively minor source of infec-
Importance
tion. Thus the cat that has a history of shedding T. gondi
 Like other coccidians, T. gondi destroys cells, and the
oocysts and/or is serologically positive is probably a safer
explosive multiplication of tachyzoites of this organism
-uo si ol pasodxa uaaq iaaau seu ieul ieo aul ueul id
is potentially devastating to the host. On first exposure to
ism (Dubey, 1986b).
T. gondii infection, adult humans with intact immune
According to Dr. S.C. Barr, cats clinically ill with toxo-
systems suffer a brief if unpleasant illness marked by vari-
plasmosis can be treated with clindamycin hydrochloride.
able combinations of fever, myalgia, lymphadenopathy,
The drug should be given orally with food. Start at
anorexia, and sore throat that is probably rarely diagnosed
25 mg/kg twice daily and work up to 50 mg/kg twice
as to exact cause. The situation is far more grave for hosts
daily. If the cat goes off its feed, withhold the drug for
with deficient immune responses such as fetuses, neonates,
24 hours and then start the clindamycin again at the level
older adults, and those with congenital or acquired immu-
of 25 mg/kg. Cats should be treated for a minimum of
nodeficiency diseases. The greatest concern attaches to
2 weeks. Cats can also be treated with clindamycin phos-
exposure of human fetuses to the hazard of death, congen-
phate intramuscularly at 12.5 to 25 mg/kg twice daily, pyri-
ital malformation, or mental retardation that may result
methamine orally at 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg with 30 mg of
from exposure of the nonimmune mother to T. gondii
sulfonamide per kilogram given twice daily, or trimetho-
infection during pregnancy. Although women with circu-
prim and sulfadiazine orally at 15 mg/kg twice daily, all
lating antibody to T. gondi need not worry about exposing
for 4 weeks (Lindsay et al, 1997). Pyrimethamine causes
their unborn babies to congenital toxoplasmosis, such
megaloblastic anemia or leukopenia, and therapy should
women account for only about 30% of the population at
be discontinued if there is no response in 30 days. Based
risk. The other 70% must be careful to avoid cat feces and
on the efficacy of treatment of toxoplasmosis in mice with
uncooked meat during pregnancy (Dubey, 1986a, 1986b).
ponazuril (Mitchell et al, 2004), this product may offer
Adult cattle appear to be resistant to toxoplasmosis,
a means of reducing the shedding of oocysts in the feces
whereas sheep and goats are susceptible, usually manifest-
of cats.
ing toxoplasmosis as abortion due to focal placentitis
(Dubey, 1986d, 1987). Aborting ewes and does need not
Neospora
be culled because they probably will not repeat the perfor-
 Neospora caninum was originally described as a parasite
mance. T. gondii infection is highly prevalent in pigs, and
of the domestic dog (Dubey et al, 1988). It was initially
uncooked pork may be an important source of human
identified in littermates dying of signs related to polyradic-
infection (Dubey, 1986a, 1986c).
ulitis (Bjerkas, Mohn, and Presthus, 1984; Core, Hoff, and
CH A P T E R 3Protozoans
103
serve as hosts of T. gondii, and there have been no cases of
neosporosis reported from humans. Thus, at this time, it
would appear that the ingestion of rare beef does not pose a
threat of human infection with either of these parasites.
Treatment of lactating dairy cows is especially problematic,
and no drug therapy is currently available. Intervet offers
a vaccine that aids in the prevention of infection with
bovine neosporosis.
Neospora hughesi was described in 1998 from material
collected from a horse (Marsh et al, 1998). The differenti-
ation was based on molecular differences among the
 equine, bovine, and canine isolates. The differences between 
N. hughesi and the bovine and canine isolates were later
 confirmed with material collected from a horse in Oregon
(Dubey et al, 200la).
Hammondia
FGURE 3-22. Neospora caninum cyst from a homogenate of the
The oocysts of species of Hammondia are morphologically
brain of a naturally infected dog. Note the thickness of the cyst 
virtually indistinguishable from one another and from
wall compared with that of Toxoplasma gondi.
those of Toxoplasma and Neospora. Hammondia ham-
mondi, a parasite of the cat that unlike Cystoisospora felis
Milton, 1983). The cysts seen in neural tissues (Figure 3-22)
multiplies in the tissues of an intermediate host, pigs, rats,
were characterized by the possession of a cyst wall thicker
mice, goats, hamsters, and dogs. Hammondia heydorni is a
than that of T. gondi, which is the apicomplexan it is
similar parasite that uses dogs, foxes, and coyotes as the
thought to most closely resemble. In transplacentally
final host and catle, sheep, goats, camels, water buffalo,
 infected puppies, the typical presentation is a flaccid hin-
guinea pigs, and dogs as intermediate hosts. The zoites
 dlimb paresis. In cases where there is adult onset of the
first multiply rapidly (tachyzoites); they then form cysts
disease, presentation includes neurologic signs, nodular
in which they multiply slowly (bradyzoites). The net
 dermatitis, pneumonia, urine and fecal incontinence, hepa-
result is the multiplication and storage of zoites in cysts
titis, myocarditis, and myositis. More recently, N. caninum
in the tissues of an animal that is likely to fall prey to a
was recognized as a major cause of bovine abortion among
cat or dog final host. As indicated in Figure 3-23 for H.
dairy cows around the world (Anderson et al, 1991; Barr
harmrmondi, only sporulated oocysts from cat feces are infec-
et al, 1997). Abortions due to this parasite are common,
tious for mice, and only bradyzoites from mouse tissues are
and between 10% and 20% of abortions in dairy cows
infectious for cats. Thus H. hammondi has an obligatory
probably are caused by N. caninun.Neospora abortions
two-host life history. Tachyzoites are neither infectious to
tend to peak at midgestation, and calves infected in utero
after this time tend to survive. Abortions may occur in
subsequent pregnancies, but more typically, future births
produce calves that are congenitally infected. It seems
Oocyst
Oocyst
that serologically positive calves will ultimately give birth
15-8 days
3 days
to calves that are infective and seropositive. It has been
Sporulated
 suggested that seropositive cows produce less milk than
oocyst
 seronegative cows and are more likely to be culled earlier
with 8 zoites
(Thurmond and Hietala, 1996 and 1997).
Mouse ingests
In 1998 the N. caninum of cattle was shown to use dogs
intestinal cells
as definitive hosts (McAllister et al, 1998). The oocysts shed
in the feces of dogs are indistinguishable from those of
Schizont
Tachyzoite 
T. gondii and Hammondia species, but they can be distin-
with many zoite.
guished by molecualr methods (Hill et al, 2001). Oocyst
shedding by dogs was confirmed (Lindsay, Dubey, and
group"
 anpo1d oi saop ia oi piey uaaq sey 1 1nq (6661 uesun
and lamina 
 propria me.
entric
large numbers of oocysts on a regular basis. This has made
lymph nodes)
it difficult to study means of prevention or to more fully
understand the importance of dogs relative to environmen-
Zoite
Bradyzoites
tal contamination. Several diagnostic assays, immunolog-
Bradyzoites invade
in cyst
(muscle)
ic and molecular, are now available for the detection of
 N. carinum infections. It appears that cattle do not typically
FlGURE 3-23. Life history of Hammondia hammondr.
104
CHA P TER 3Protozoans
herbivorous host, and the herbivorous host becomes
Sporulated oocyst
Sporocyst
infected by ingesting sporocysts from the feces of the
containing 2 sporocysts
with 4 zoites
carnivorous host. Schizogony and encystment occur exclu-
(feces)
Sporulation
Herbivore ingests
sively in the herbivorous host, and gametogony, fertiliza-
sporocyst;
 zoites invade
fion, and sporulation occur exclusively in the carnivorous
Oocyst
rascular endothelial
{intestinal cell)
cells
host. Sarcocystis usually causes no illness in the carnivore,
but schizogony in the endothelium of the herbivore may
Zoite
result in serious or fatal disease.
G
OGamete
Cattle become infected with Sarcocystis cruzi when they
Schizo
ingest its sporocysts discharged in dog feces. Two schizo-
gonic generations occur in the vascular endothelium, the
Zoites 
Bradyzoites
first generation principally in the endothelium of the mes-
(intestinal cell)
Zoites invade
in sarcocyst
intest
inal cells
enteric arteries and the second in the endothelium of
(skeletal muscle cells)
capillaries throughout the body. At least one more schizo-
 gonic generation occurs in circulating mononuclear cells.
 FIGURE 3-24. Life history of Sarcocystis species.
Merozoites released from second- or later-generation schi-
zonts enter striated muscle cells and, in certain cases, nerve
cells to form sarcocysts. Sarcocyst formation is a slow pro-
cats nor transmittable to the progeny of pregnant female
cess requiring several months. The dog becomes infected
mice via the placenta, as is true of T. gondii.
when it consumes uncooked beef containing sarcocysts of
S. cruzi. Thus the cycle of infection can be interrupted
Sarcocystis
 Aq 1o sp 0 p aq i sds yaaq o Aq a
Species of Sarcocystis, like H. hammondi, have an obligatory
venting canine fecal contamination of cattle feedstuffs.
odan jnxs kiuo pe un n nq kois  io-om
The economic importance of subclinical bovine sarcocys-
 duction occurs in the definitive host and that sporogony is
tosis remains to be assessed, but clinical disease and death
completed there. Fully sporulated oocysts and sporocysts
losses have occurred in cases in which 10,000 or more
are discharged in the host's feces, and no development
sporocytes were ingested over a short time period (Dubey
occurs in the external environment. Asexual reproduction,
and Fayer, 1983; Frelier, 1977). Clinical signs in cattle are
including schizogony and sarcocyst formation, occurs only
associated with release of the second wave of merozoites
in the intermediate host. The bradyzoites in sarcocysts
about 4 to 6 weeks after infection and consist of protracted
 differ from those in Hammondia cysts in that they develop
fever, anemia, lymphadenopathy, anorexia, 
diarrhea,
into gametocytes instead of schizonts when ingested by the
hypersalivation, weakness, and hair loss about the eyes,
definitive host. Bradyzoites represent a state of arrested
the neck, and, perhaps most noticeably, the tail switch.
development, or hypobiosis. Like sporozoites in a sporu-
 Infection of sheep with 10,000 to 50 million Sarcocystis
lated oocyst, bradyzoites in a sarcocyst must enter a defin-
 tenella sporocytes was studied experimentally. A total of
itive host to develop further. The life history of Sarcocystis is
25 to 50 million sporocysts led to death in 16 to 19 days
 portrayed diagrammatically in Figure 3-24.
from occlusion of the mesenteric arteries by first-generation
The host relationships of several species of Sarcocystis
schizonts. Sheep infected with 10 million and fewer
are summarized in Table 3-1. Normally the carnivorous
D pean sieno pue sda e peu sisoods
host becomes infected by eating the infected flesh of the
the second schizogonic generation. Neurologic signs and
TABLE 3-1
Host Relationships of Some Species of Sarcocystis
Deflnltlve Hosts
 Intermedlate Hosts
Dog
Cat
Human
Cattle
 Sarcocystis cruzi
Sarcocystis hirsuta
Sarcocystis hominis
Sheep
Sarcocystis tenella
Sarcocystis areticanis
Sarcocystis medusiformis
Goat
Sarcocystis capracanis
Swine
Sarcocystis miescheriana
Sarcocystis porcifelis
Sarcocystis suihominis
Horse
Sarcocystis bertrami
Sarcocystis fayeri
Sarcocystis equicanis
 Cottontail rabbit
Sarcocystis leporum
iu
Mouse
Sarcocystis muris
Mule deer
Sarcocystis hemionilatrantis
CH A P T E R 3Protozoans
105
lesions of encephalomyelitis were also observed in these artifi-
cial S. tenella infections in sheep (Dubey, 1988).
Sarcocystis neurona
S. neurora causes severe neurologic disease in horses of
 both sexes and all ages. Clinical signs include stumbling,
 paresis, lameness, ataxia, recumbency, constipation, urinary
incontinence, diaphoresis, muscle atrophy, and other man-
ifestations of neural degeneration depending on the loca-
tion of the lesions (Mayhew and Greiner, 1986; MacKay,
1997). The equine protozoal myeloencephalitis (EPM)
Aq paasap) rnu s se papi uaaq seq usn
 Dubey et al, 1991). Opossums are the host shedding spor-
ocysts into the environment (Figure 3-25). Recent work has
shown that opossums shed sporocysts of S. reurona and
four other distinct sporocysts in their feces as determined
FIGURE 3-26. Schizonts of Sarcocystis neurona in a culture of
morphologically and molecularly (Cheadle et al, 2001). One
bovine turbinate cells (Giemsa stained). Culture was initiated
characteristic of this infection is the formation of schizonts
with merozoites from the nervous tissue of a naturally infected
by the dividing cells in the equine tissues (Figures 3-26 and
horse.
3-27). It is also now known that cats, striped skunks, and
 nine-banded armadillos can be infected with muscle stages
of S. neurona (Cheadle et al, 200la and b; Tanhauser et al,
 2001). It has also been discovered that raccoons are capa-
 ble of having myocarditis and encephalitis that are due to
Treatment
 S. neurona infections (Hamir and Dubey, 2001). It seems
 There are several treatments now approved by the FDA
that sarcocysts may develop in some infected horses
for the treatment of EPM. These are ponazuril 5 mg/kg for
(Mullaney et al, 2005), but this still needs to be verified.
7 days (Marquis with 15% W/W ponazuril) and nitazoxa-
nide for 5 days at 11.36 mg/kg followed by 23 days at 22.72
Diagnosis
mg/kg (Navigator with 32% nitazoxanide). Also available
 An antemortem diagnosis is based solely on clinical signs
from Fort Dodge Animal Health is a killed protozoal
of neurologic disease, and none of these is pathognomonic.
S. neurona vaccine.
 Several laboratories provide diagnostic tests consisting of
Western blot analysis of serum or cerebrospinal fluid or
Protozoal Encephalomyelltls Organlsms
molecular methods using PCR to assist with a diagnosis.
Sheep
A positive diagnosis is based on histopathologic demonstra-
tion of the EPM organisms in association with lesions
be caused by S. tenella and other Sarcocystis species
in the central nervous system (see Figure 3-27).
(Dubey, 1988).
HGURE 325. Sporulated sporocysts of Sarcocystis neurona
FIGURE 3-27. Section of nervous tissue from a horse showing
passed in the feces of an opossum fed infected muscle from
the characteristic rosette of organisms that is not uncommonly
an experimentally infected cat. (Courtesy Dr. J.P. Dubey, USDA,
seen in infections with Sarcocystis neurona, the causative agent
Beltsville, Maryland.)
of equine protozoal myeloencephalitis (EPM).
106
C H A P T E R 3Protozoans
Cattle
Sexual replication in the gut of the tick results in the pro-
Dubey, Perry, and Kennedy (1987) described a case of
duction of oocysts containing infective sporozoites. After
encephalitis in an 18-month-old steer apparently caused by
dogs become infected by ingesting the tick, schizonts occur
a Sarcocystis-like organism.
 in various tissues, and finally, the gamonts occur in white
blood cells.
Toxoplasima and Sarcocystis In Sea Otters and Other
 H. canis typically seems to cause subclinical infections,
Aquatlc Mammals
and the diagnosis is typically made by finding gamonts in
pu rusdoxoi yo sodai jo qu e uaaq aau a
the peripheral blood. In the case of infection with H. ameri-
Sarcocystis inducing antibody responses or causing serious
canum, there is typically severe disease, with dogs having
disease in seals, walruses, ofters, dolphins, and sea lions
marked neutrophilic leukocytosis. Dogs with H. ameri
(Conrad et al, 2005; Dubey et al, 2001b, 2003, and 2005a;
canurn offen have significant joint pain associated with
Honnold et al, 2005. Infection is due to oocysts washing
myositis and periosteal bone proliferation, which can be
into the aquatic environment and perhaps being concen-
revealed in radiographs. Lesions occur primarily on the
trated by filter-feeding shellfish on which some of these
diaphysis of the more proximal long bones of the limbs;
animals feed. The challenge is how to minimize the expo-
however, flat and irregular bones are frequently involved
sure of these aquatic animals, some of which are on the
(Panciera et al, 2000). Lesions involving metacarpals, meta-
endangered species list, to the oocysts shed in the feces
tarsals, and digits are infrequent. The earliest observed peri-
of terrestrial carnivores that are then washed into various
 Osteal lesions in experimentally infected dogs were observed
tidal basins and estuaries.
32 days after exposure to sporulated oocysts of H. ameri
canum, with hypertrophy and hyperplasia of osteoprogeni-
Besnoitia
tor cells, and osteoblasts appearing in the cellular zone of
Large cysts (0.5 mm) containing bradyzoites occur in the
the periosteum. The osseous lesions are similar to those
skin of cattle, where they cause scleroderma, and in various
of hypertrophic osteopathy in domestic dogs and other
tissues of other animals. Oocysts resembling those of
mammalian species.
Toxoplasma are shed in the feces of cats.
Diagnosis of H. americarum infection typically requires
the examination of muscle tissue collected at biopsy or
Kossiella
during necropsy to reveal the schizonts. With H. ameri-
Klossiella equi is a parasite of the renal epithelium of the
canum infection there is a large cystic form of the organism
horse, and Klossiella rmuris is a parasite of the renal epithe-
that occurs in skeletal muscles that has not been observed in
lium of the mouse (see Fig. 5-165). The life histories of
 other parts of the world. Also, the meronts typically seen
these parasites have yet to be worked out in detail; neither
in multiple organs of the body with the occurrence of
H. canis infection in dogs from other parts of the world
stances. However, Anderson et al (1988) reported tubular
 are not seen in dogs infected in the United States.
necrosis and nonsuppurative interstitial nephritis in an
In a report of two cases of infection in the United States,
older, immune-compromised pony. Reinmeyer, Jacobs,
treatment with toltrazuril failed to prevent relapse in
and Spurlock (1983) were first to demonstrate the sporo-
most of the 1l treated dogs; treatment of three dogs with
cysts of K. equi in the urine of a 2-year-old standardbred
a combination of trimethoprim sulfate, pyrimethamine,
 gelding with immune deficiency. These transmission stages
and clindamycin also failed to prevent relapse (Macintire
are rarely observed; they, like the pathologic changes
et al, 1997). Macintire et al (1997) suggested that prima-
reported by Anderson et al (1988), were observed in
immunodeficient horses.
infected with H. canis in Africa. Of the 22 dogs reported
in the study by Macintire et al (1997), seven were humanely
Hepatozoon
killed because of chronic wasting, six died of the disease,
 The Hepatozoor species commonly causing disease in dogs
three were lost to follow-up, and six were alive at the time
in the United States is now recognized as Hepatozoon amer-
of the report. Three of the living dogs were free of clinical
icanum (Macintire et al, 1997; Panciera et al, 1997, Vincent-
signs, whereas the other three dogs had chronic wasting
Johnson et al, 1998). Throughout the rest of the world the
 disease with intermittent periods of remission and relapse.
disease seems to be caused by a different species,
Hepatozoor canis (Smith, 1996). The vector of H. ameri-
Hemosporldlans
canum is now known to be Amblyonma maculatum
Piroplasmoses
(Mathew et al, 1998, 1999); reservoirs are known to include
Babesia
the coyotes (Garrett et al, 2005). In the case of H. canis,
 Babesia species are apicomplexan parasites of the ery-
dogs acquire their infections by ingesting an infected tick,
throcytes of their vertebrate hosts (Figure 3-28); the eryth-
Rhipicephalus sanguineus.
rocyte is the only vertebrate host cell infected. For the
In the life cycle of this parasite, ticks become infected
members of the genus Babesia, sexual conjugation occurs
by ingesting a blood meal that contains neutrophils and
within the intestinal lumen of the tick, and sporogony
monocytes that harbor the gamonts of the parasite.
occurs within the epithelium of the tick's intestinal wall.
CH A P T ER 3 Protozoans
107
between cattle by Ixodes ricinus. Each species of Babesia
tends to use one or more different species of tick vectors.
Other species of Babesia infect sheep (Babesia ovis), horses
(Babesia caballi), and swine (Babesia trautmanni).
Canine babesiosis. This disease is cosmopolitan in
distribution (Lobetti, 1998). Dogs are infected with two spe-
cies of these parasites, Babesia canis and Babesia gibsoni. B.
canis is the larger form, with pear-shaped trophozoites,
4 to 5 μm long, typically being found in pairs in the
erythrocytes. B. gibsoni is smaller, 3 μm long, and
usually round to oval in shape. B. gibsori is transmitted
by R. sanguineus, Haemaphysalis bispinosa, and Haemaphys-
alis longicornis. The species B. canis has been divided into
three subspecies: B. caris caris of Europe, transmitted
by Dermacentor reticulatus; B. canis vogeli of northern
FGURE 3-28. Babesia bigemina in Giemsa-stained blood film from
Africa and North America, transmitted by R. sarguireus;
and B. caris rossi of southern Africa, transmitted by Hae-
a cow.
maphysalis leachi. Fortunately, the subspecies in North
America and Europe do not produce the fulminant form
Sporogony occurs within the hemocoel of the tick. The
of disease seen in southern Africa (Jacobson, 2006).
pue yn a a jo reo a u aidu szoos
A survey of greyhounds in Florida has shown that large
thereby infect the larvae that hatch from her eggs.
numbers (46% of 383 greyhounds) have antibodies to
Sporozoites are found in the salivary glands of the ticks
B. caris (Taboada et al, 1992), but most do not have clinical
 in high numbers and enter the next host when the tick bites.
signs. Clinical signs when present include depression, anor-
Texas fever. Babesia bigemina causes bovine piroplasmo-
exia, anemia, and splenomegaly. The strain of Babesia
 sis (Texas fever), a disease characterized in the acute phase
 in Florida appears mainly to cause disease in puppies, for
by pyrexia (up to 42° C), hemoglobinuria, anemia, icterus,
which the major diagnostic feature is anemia. The disease
and splenomegaly. The apple-seed-like piroplasms are
 an ss n n i s  sd 
found in pairs in the erythrocytes, which they destroy,
fests with anemia, anorexia, and lethargy. In a recent survey
 releasing hemoglobin in the process and giving rise to the
of 673 canine blood samples tested for Babesia DNA by
characteristic  clinical  manifestations.  Transmission
of
PCR, the 144 positive samples came from 29 states
infection among cattle occurs through the bite of the
and one Canadian province (Birkenheuer et al, 2005).
one-host ticks Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) annulatus and
Of these samples, 91% (131) were recognized as the small
Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) microplus; the piroplasms multi-
form Babesia, B. gibsori, and 10 were recognized as the
 ply in the ovary of the female tick and thereby infect the
larger Babesia form, B. canis vogeli (three samples did not
larvae that hatch from her eggs. Calves are much less sus-
match current recognized species). Almost all the samples
ceptible than older cattle. The greater susceptibility of older
representing B. gibsoni (122 of 131) were from American
hosts holds for all species of Babesia and is greatly increased
pit bull terriers. Six of the 10 B. carnis vogeli cases were in
by splenectomy.
greyhounds. We now also have a new species of small form
Texas fever was once endemic south of the thirty-fifth
of Babesia, Babesia conradae, that occurs in California
parallel in the United States, but a cattle-dipping campaign
in dogs and seems to be related to forms found in people
launched in 1906 to eradicate R. annulatus virtually elimi-
and wildlife (Kjemtrup et al, 2006). B. conradae seems to
nated the disease by 1940. This prodigious effort was suc-
dnu oi g u shop u snusod aou a
cessful mainly because of the high degree of specificity
and Conrad, 2006). Diagnosis is based on demonstrating
displayed by R. anrulatus for its bovine host. Other mam-
trophozoites of the parasites in the erythrocytes in Giemsa-
mals can serve as hosts, but most R. arnulatus ticks are
stained blood films or serology, of course, PCR is being
found on cattle. Therefore when the cattle were rounded
used more and more commonly for the diagnosis
up for dipping, most of the feeding tick population was
 of infections, especially with blood parasites.
rounded up with them. R. microplus, on the other hand,
infests a broad range of hosts. When R. microplus is
Theileria
involved, eradication of bovine piroplasmosis is virtually
The genus Theileria differs from Babesia in that there
impossible with contemporary methods.
are schizonts that occur in lymphocytes and induce the
infected lymphocytes to undergo division and proliferation.
Other Babesia species of livestock
Also, there is typically no transovarial transmission in the
Babesia bovis, Babesia divergens, and Babesia argentina
case of ticks infected with Theileria species. Theileria parva,
 cause bovine piroplasmosis in various parts of the world.
the causative agent of East Coast fever of African cattle,
 In the United Kingdom, piroplasmosis is transmitted
Occurs in the erythrocytes, lymphocytes, and endothelial
108
CH A PTER 3Protozoans
cells and is transmitted interstadially by Rhipicephalus and
Hyalomma species. East Coast fever is characterized by dys-
 pnea, emaciation, weakness, tarry feces, and exceptionally
heavy mortality. Theileria (formerly Babesia) equi of the
horse has been demonstrated to have schizont stages in lym-
phocytes. There are also species of Theileria in deer in the
United States, such as Theileria cervi, which is transmitted
by Amblyomma americanum (Reichard and Kocan, 2006)
Cytauxzoon
The genus Cytauxzoon is defined as distinct from
Theileria in that the schizonts that occur in the vertebrate
occur in macrophages rather than lymphocytes. There are
some who would prefer to combine the genus under
Theileria, and this might make good sense. However, the
name Cytauxzoon does such a marvelous job of describing
the disease and its effects on the feline host cell with the
 resulting pathogenesis that it would be sad to lose the name
to synonymy.
The disease cytauxzoonosis, caused by Cytauxzoon felis,
is a sporadic but rapidly and usually fatal disease of domes-
tic cats occurring predominantly in the south central
United States (Blouin et al, 1984; Bondy et al, 2005;
Jackson and Fisher, 2006). Clinical signs consist of pyrexia,
anemia, icterus, and dehydration; death occurs within a few
days. Wright's- or Giemsa-stained blood smears reveal 1- to
2-μm organisms with light blue cytoplasm and dark red
FGURE 3-29. Giemsa-stained blood film from a cat showing the
nucleus in the erythrocytes (Figure 3-29). Late in the
appearance of the Cytauxzoon felis organisms within the red blood 
course of cytauxzoonosis, enormous reticuloendothelial
cells. (Courtesy Dr. Tracy W. French.)
cels packed with schizonts appear in the peripheral
blood. Histologically, parasitized reticuloendothelial cells
of cases from the mid-Atlantic states, of 34 cats infected
nearly occlude the lumens of small- and medium-sized
with Cytauxzoor felis, 32 succumbed to the infection
veins in the lungs, spleen, and lymph nodes (Haber and
(Birkenheuer et al, 2006). The most common signs of the
Birkenheuer, 2005; Wightman, Kier, and Wagner, 1977).
 infection were pancytopenia and icterus.
The bobcat Lynx rufus has a parasitemia but no clinical
signs of disease and may be the natural reservoir host of
Treatment of piroplasmoses
Cytauxzoon felis (Glenn, Rolley, and Kocan, 1982; Kier,
 Dogs and cats. B. caris infection usually responds to a
Wagner, and Morehouse, 1982). Of interest, blood from
single intramuscular injection of 3.5 mg diminazene
 parasitemic bobcats injected intraperitoneally into domes-
(Berenil) per kilogram or to subcutaneous injections of
tic cats led to a persistent erythroparasitemia but no clinical
15 mg phenamidine (Ganaseg) per kilogram (Lewis and
signs of disease. However, when Dermacentor variabilis
Huxsoll, 1977; Roberson, 1977). B. gibsoni infections are
nymphs were fed on a splenectomized parasitemic bobcat,
not as readily curable with these drugs as is B. canis (Ruff
allowed to molt to the adult stage, and then fed on two
et al, 1973). In Okinawa, diminazene aceturate (3 mg/kg
splenectomized domestic cats, the later died in 13 and 17
injected intramuscularly on 2 consecutive days) and penta-
days with typical lesions of cytauxzoonosis (Blouin et al,
midine isethionate ( 16.5 mg/kg injected intramuscularly on
1984). Thus, experimentally at least, D. variabilis serves as
2 consecutive days) appeared to cure B. canis infection and
a transtadial vector of Cytauxzoon felis from the reser-
effected satisfactory clinical response in B. gibsori--infected
voir host L. rufus to the highly susceptible accidental host
dogs but did not clear their blood of parasites (Farwell,
 F. catus and leads to lethal infection with the schizogonic
 LeGrand, and Cobb, 1982). None of these drugs are avail-
stages of this piroplasm. Iatrogenic cytauxzoonosis has
able for routine clinical use in the United States. Trypan
been induced in a specific pathogen-free cat by the inocu-
blue and acridine derivatives (e.g., acriflavine) also have
lation of mononuclear cells from a Florida panther (Felis
been used in the treatment of babesiosis. A combination
concolor coryi), in an attempt to determine whether the
of atovaquone and azithromycin has been recently recomm-
panther was infected with feline immunodeficiency virus
ended as a treatment for dogs with B. gibsori (Birkenheuer,
(Butt et al, 1991). The cat died 12 days after inocula-
Levy, and Breitschwerdt, 2004).
tion with typical schizonts of Cytauxzoon felis occluding
For cytauxzoonosis, attempts to treat experimentally
the pulmonary veins (see Figure 8-39). In a recent survey
infected cats with parvaquone and buparvaquone, two
CH A P T E R 3 Protozoans
109
drugs used to treat bovine theileriosis, failed to prevent the
consequent erythrocyte destruction leading to cyclic bouts
death of the infected cats (Motzel and Wagner, 1990). A cat
of chilis and fever is typical of certain malarias, particularly
that had a 2-day history of lethargy and anorexia rapidly
those of humans. The terms quotidian, tertian, and quartan
 progressed to become seriously icteric with dark-brown
refer to recurrence of fever daily, on the third day (i.e., at 48
urine and began a 10-day course of enrofloxacin, followed
hours), and on the fourth day (i.e., at 72 hours), the anom-
by a 5-day course of tetracycline (Walker and Cowell,
aly in nomenclature arising from inconsistency in the inclu-
1995). Cytauxzoon felis organisms were present in the
sion of zero in the system of natural numbers as applied to
blood of the cat affer the i0-day course of enrofloxacin
the reckoning of time. Eventually some merozoites develop
but were not present in blood samples collected 6 and
into either microgametocytes or macrogametocytes, which
15 weeks after discharge. Greene et al (1999) successfully
are the stages infective for the mosquito. When a suitable
treated six of seven cats with two intramuscular injections
species of mosquito feeds on a malarious host, the micro-
(2 mg/kg body weight) of diminazene (five cats) or imido-
gametocytes and macrogametocytes in the blood meal
arb (one cat); one cat died after the first injection
mature, and the microgametes fertilize the macrogametes
of diminazene. More recently, cats have been identified
to form zygotes. The zygotes then elongate to form motile
surviving natural  infections  with 
Cytauxzoonfelis
ookinetes, which migrate to the hemocoel side of the
(Meinkoth et al, 2000). Eighteen cats from northwestern
mosquito's midgut, where each develops into an oocyst.
Arkansas and northeastern Oklahoma were initially identi-
Thousands of sporozoites develop within each oocyst by a
fied through piroplasms in blood smears. Clinical signs in
 budding process similar to schizogony and are released into
most cats were similar to those described for cytauxzoono-
the hemocoel when the oocyst ruptures. Those sporozoites
sis, but four did not have signs. The parasitemia was gen-
that reach the salivary glands are ready to infect another
11 o dn ioy (ai) dn-mo inouo jusisiad 
host next time the mosquito takes a blood meal and thus
days). Only one cat was treated with imidocarb, and all cats
complete the rather involved life history of Plasrmodiurm.
 survived. The authors postulate that they may be dealing
In humans the symptoms of malaria are extremely variable,
with a less virulent strain of this parasite.
and diagnosis depends on the demonstration of plasmodia
Horses. B. caballi and T. equi are susceptible to many
antiprotozoal drugs, but in the United States none are 
 attributed to cerebral involvement, renal failure, or pulmo-
approved for use in horses. Imidocarb dipropionate is
nary hemorrhage.
administered subcutaneously at 2 mg/kg repeated once
 Identification. Differentiation of species of Plasrmodium
after 24 hours for the treatment of B. caballi, and at
is based on study of Giemsa-stained thin blood smears and
 4 mg/kg repeated at 72-hour intervals for T. equi.
recognition of rather subtle morphologic features of the
early trophozoite ("ring form") (Figure 3-30), ameboid
Malarias
late trophozoite, schizont, and male and female gameto-
Plasmodium
cytes. The color and distribution of hematin in the cyto-
Plasmodium species are the causative agents of malarias
 plasm of the parasite, as well as cytoplasmic stippling and
of humans, nonhuman primates, rodents, birds, and rep-
other morphologic alterations of the infected erythrocyte,
tiles (mainly lizards). Mammalian malarias are transmitted
are also taken into account. The diagnosis of malaria is
by anopheline mosquitoes and avian malarias by culicine
clearly a job for an expert. For human malarias there are
mosquitoes; the vectors of reptilian malarias are largely
now also available antigen detection methods similar to
unknown.
those used in animal medicine for heartworm and viruses.
 Life history. Sporozoites injected into the host by the
Simian malaria. About 20 species of Plasmodium have
infected mosquito during feeding enter cells such as hepa
 been described from nonhuman primates, some of which
tocytes, become trophozoites, and undergo schizogony.
(e.g., Plasmodium knowlesi, Plasmodiun cynomolgi) are
This first multiplication of plasmodia in hepatocytes
1S
transmissible to humans through the bites of infected
termed preerythrocytic schizogony. Merozoites released
anopheline mosquitoes. The diagnosis of simian malaria
when the hepatocyte ruptures invade erythrocytes or reti-
is of particular interest to laboratories where imported pri-
culocytes of the circulating blood, pass through a tropho-
mates are experimental animals (Coatney et al, 1971).
 zoite phase, and then undergo erythrocytic schizogony. In
Old World monkeys may also be infected with Hepatocystis.
certain species of Plasmodium, some of these merozoites
Avian malaria. Avian malaria is a complex of diseases
reinvade hepatocytes to continue exoerythrocytic schizog-
caused by many species of Plasmodium (Figure 3-31).
ony, which is held accountable by some authorities for
Haemoproteus and Leucocytozoon, considered later, also
 relapses after therapeutic elimination of erythrocytic infec-
cause malaria-like infections in birds.
tion by chloroquine, quinine, and the like. Merozoites 
released when the infected erythrocytes rupture reinvade
Haeimoproteus
other erythrocytes and again undergo schizogony. Each
Haemoproteus species are parasites of birds, turtles, and
generation of erythrocytic merozoites occupies approxi-
lizards. Schizogony occurs in vascular endothelial cells of
mately 24, 48, or 72 hours, depending on the species of
 u rede s ao e so so
 Plasmodium involved. Synchronization of schizogony and
erythrocytes. In blood films fixed with methanol and
110
C H A P T E R 3Protozoans
FIGURE 3-30. Plasmodium falciparum, human malaria, ring-stage
HGURE 3-32. Haemoproteus sp. in avian red blood cells (Giemsa
trophozoites in red blood cells.
stain).
 stained with Giemsa, the gametocytes appear as elongated,
Leucocytozoon
sometimes horseshoe-shaped cells embracing the erythro-
Leucocytozoor species are parasites of domestic and wild
 cyte nucleus; the cytoplasm of the gametocyte contains pig-
birds; Leucocytozoon simondi causes acute, fatal disease in
ducks and geese, as do Leucocytozoon caulleryi in chickens
digestion of hemoglobin (Figure 3-32). Various species of
and Leucocytozoon smithi in turkeys. Schizogony occurs in
Haemoproteus are transmitted by Culicoides, Hippobo-
hepatocytes and vascular endothelial cells of various tissues,
scidae, or Chrysops, which become infected when they
producing merozoites that invade erythroblasts, erythro-
ingest erythrocytes containing gametocytes. Fertilization,
cytes, lymphocytes, and monocytes, and there develop
development of oocysts, and salivarian transmission of
into gametocytes. Leucocytozoon gametocytes differ from
sporozoites to the vertebrate host resemble the correspond-
 those of Plasmodium and Haemoproteus in not containing
 ing events in the life history of Plasmodiurn. Haermoproteus
 pigment granules and in greatly distoring the host cell
is essentially nonpathogenic.
(Figure 3-33). Some gametocytes are round and push the
FIGURE 3-31. Schizonts of Plasmodium galinarum in chicken red
blood cells (Specimen courtesy of Priscilla Maldonado, New 
FGURE 3-33. Leucocytozoon sp in a blood smear from a red-tailed
York University.)
hawk (Giemsa stain).
CHA P T ER 3 Protozoans
111
host cell nucleus to one side so that it forms a cap on
BonDurant RH, Anderson ML, Blanchard P, et al: Prevalence of trichomo-
the parasite. Others are oval or elliptic in cells that
niasis among California beef herds, I Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1590, 1990.
 become elongated and bizarre in appearance as the parasite 
Bondy PI Jr, Cohn LA, Kerl ME: Feline cytauxzoonosis, Compend Cont
 grows. Simulium species serve as intermediate hosts.
Educ Pract Vet 27:69, 2005.
Bowman DD: What's in a name? Trends Parasitof 2l:267, 2005.
Buckner RG, Ewing SA: Trichomoniasis. In Current Veterinary Therapy VI,
Hepatocystitis
Philadelphia, 1977, Saunders.
Hepatocystis species are parasites of the lower monkeys,
Butt MT, Bowman DD, Barr MC, Roelke ME: Iatrogenic transmission
fruit bats, and squirrels of the Old World. Schizogony
of Cytauxzoon felis from a Florida panther (Felis concolor coryi) to a
 occurs in hepatocytes, requires 2 months, and results in
domestic cat, J Widl Dis 27:342, 1991.
Canfield PJ, Vogelnest L, Cunningham ML, Visvesvara GS: Amoebic me-
large schizonts called merocysts. Merozoites released from
 merocysts invade erythrocytes and develop into gameto-
ningoencephalitis caused by Balamuthia mandrillaris in an orangutan,
Aust Vet I 75:97, 1997.
 Cytes. Culicoides species are the probable vectors.
Carlin EP, Bowman DD, Scarlett JM, et al: Prevalence of Giardia in symp-
tomatic dogs and cats throughout the United States as determined by
the IDEXX SNAP Giardia test, Vet Ther 7:199, 2006.
REFERENCES
Carreno RA, Martin DS, Barta JIR: Cryptosporidium is more closely related
Abbitt B, Huey RL, Eugster AK, Syler J: Treatment of giardiasis in adult
to the gregarines than to coccidia as shown by phylogenetic analysis
greyhounds, using ipronidazole-medicated water, I Am Vet Med Assoc
of apicomplexan parasites inferred using small-subunit ribosomal RNA
188:67, 1986.
gene sequences, Parasitof Res 85:899, 1999.
Aloisio F, Filippini G, Antenucci P, et al: Severe weight loss in lambs infected
Cheadle MA, Dame JB, Greiner EC: Sporocyst size of isolates of Sarcocystis
with Giardia duodenalis assemblage B, Vet Parasitol 142:154, 2006.
shed by the Virginia opossum (Dideiphis virginiana), Vet Parasitof
Anderson DC, Buckner RG, Glenn BL, et al: Endemic canine leishmaniasis,
95:305, 2001.
Vet Pathol 17:94, 1982.
Cheadle MA, Tanhauser SM, Dame JB, et al: The nine-banded armadillo
Anderson KA, Brooks AS, Morrison AL, et al: Impact of Giardia vaccina-
(Dasypus novemcinctus) is an intermediate host for Sarcocystis reurona,
tion on asymptomatic Giardia infections in dogs at a research facility.
Int J Parasitol 31:330, 2001a.
Can Vet J 45:924, 2004.
Cheadle MA, Yowell CA, Sellon DC, et al: The striped skunk (Mephitis
Anderson ML, Blanchard PC, Barr BC, et al: Neospora-like protozoan
mephitis) is an intermediate host for Sarcocystis neurona, Int J Parasitof
infection as a major cause of abortion in California dairy cattle, I Am
31:843, 2001b.
Vet Med Assoc 198:241, 1991.
Coatney GR, Collins WE, Warren McW, et al: The primate malarias,
Anderson WI, Picut CA, Georgi ME: Klossiella equi induced tubular
Washington, DC, 197l, U.S. Government Printing Office.
nephrosis and interstitial nephritis in a pony, J Comp Pathof 98:363, 1988.
Conrad PA, Miller MA, Kreuder C, et al: Transmission of Toxoplasma:
Barker IK, Remmler O: The endogenous development of Eimeria feuckarti
clues from the study of sea otters as sentinels of Toxoplasma gondi fow
in ponies, I Parasitol 58:122, 1972.
into the marine environment, Int J Parasitof 35:l155, 2005.
Barnott ND, Kaplan AN, Hopkin RJ, et al: Primary amoebic meningoen-
Core DM, Hoff EJ, Milton JL: Hindlimb hyperextension as a result of
cephalitis with Naegieria fowleri: clinical review, Pediatr Neurof 15:230,
Toxoplasma gondii polyradiculitis, I Am Hosp Assoc 19:713, 1983.
1996.
Craig TM, Barton CL, Mercer SH, et al: Dermal leishmaniasis in a Texas
Barr SC: American trypanosomiasis in dogs, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
cat, Arm I Trop Med Hyg 35:1100, 1986.
13:745, 1991.
Daugschies A, Mundt HC, Letkova V: Toltrazuril treatment of cystoisos-
Barr BC, Bjerkas I, Buxton D, et al: Neosporosis: report of an International
porosis in dogs under experimental and field conditions, Parasitol Res
Neospora workshop, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 19(Suppl):S120, 1997.
86:797, 2000.
Barr SC, Bowman DD, Heller RL: Efficacy of fenbendazole against giardi-
Deol I, Robledo L, Meza A, et al: Encephalitis due to a free-living amoeba
asis in dogs, Am I Vet Res 55:988, 1994.
Sns maat ama ym uodan as (suau mug)
Barr SC, Bowman DD, Heller RL, Erb HN: Efficacy of albendazole against
Neurof 53:611, 2000.
giardiasis in dogs, Amm I Vet Res 54:926, 1993.
Derbyshire JB, Nielsen NO: Edward Watson and the eradication of dour-
Barr SC, van Beek O, Carlisle-Nowak MS, et al: Trypanosoma cruzi infec-
ine in Canada, Can Vet I38:582, 1997.
tion in Walker hounds from Virginia, Amm I Vet Res 56:1037, 1995.
Dubey I: Toxoplasmosis in goats, Agri-Practice 8:43, 1987.
Barta IR, Schrenzel MD, Carreno R, Rideout BA: The genus Atoxoplasma
Dubey IP: A review of toxoplasmosis in cattle, Vet Parasitof 22:177, 1986d.
(Garnham 1950) as a junior objective synonym of the genus Isospora 
Dubey IP: A review of toxoplasmosis in pigs, Vet Parasitof 19:18l, 1986c.
(Schneider 188l) species infecting birds and resurrection of
Dubey IP: Lesions in sheep inoculated with Sarcocystis tenella sporocysts
Cystoisospora (Frenkel 1977) as the correct genus for Isospora species
from canine feces, Vet Parasitol 26:237, 1988.
infecting mammals, I Parasitol 91:726, 2005.
Dubey IP: Toxoplasmosis, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 189:166, 1986a.
Birkenheuer AJ, Correa MT, Levy MG, Breitschwerdt EB: Geographic
Dubey IP: Toxoplasmosis in cats, Feline Pract 16:12, 1986b.
distribution of babesiosis among dogs in the United States and associ-
 Dubey IP, Carpenter JL, Speer CA, et al: Newly recognized fatal protozoan
ation with dog bites: 150 cases (2000, 2003), I Am Vet Med Assoc
disease of dogs, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 192:1269, 1988.
227:942, 2005.
Dubey IP, Davis SW, Speer CA, et al: Sarcocystis neurona n. sp. (Protozoa:
Birkenheuer AJ, Le JA, Valenzisi AM, et al: Cytauxzoon felis infection in
Apicomplexa), the etiologic agent of equine protozoal myeloencephali-
cats in the mid Atlantic states: 34 cases (1998-2004, J Amm Vet Med Assoc
tis, J Parasitol 77:212-218, 1991.
228:568, 2006.
Dubey IP, Fair PA, Bossart GD, et al: A comparison of several serologic
Birkenheuer AJ, Levy MG, Breitschwerdt EB: Efficacy of combined atova-
tests to detect antibodies to Toxopiasma gondii in naturally exposed
quone and azithromycin for therapy of chronic Babesia gibsoni (Asian
bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus), J Parasitol 91:1074, 2005a.
genotype) infections in dogs, I Vet Intern Med 18:494, 2004.
Dubey IP, Fayer R: Sarcocystosis, Br Vet J 139:371, 1983.
Bierkas I,MohnSF,Presthus : Unidentifed cyst-forming sporozoon caus
Dubey IP, Frenkel JK: Feline toxoplasmosis from acutely infected mice and
ing encephalomyelitis and myositis in dogs, Z Parasitenkd 70:27l, 1984.
the development of Toxoplasma cysts, J Protozoof 23:537, 1976.
Blouin EF, Kocan AA, Glenn BL, et al: Transmission of Cytauxzoon felis
Dubey IP, Hill DE, Jones IL, et al: Prevalence of viable Toxoplasma gondi
Kier, 1979 from bobcats, Felis rufus (Schreber), to domestic cats by
in beef, chicken, and pork from retail meat stores in the United States:
Dermacentor variabiis (Say), J Wildl Dis 20:24l, 1984.
risk assessment to consumers, I Parasitof 9l:1082, 2005b.
112
CH A PTER 3Protozoans
Dubey JP, Liddell S, Mattson D, et al: Characterization of the Oregon
Honnold SP, Braun R, Scott DP, et al: Toxoplasmosis in a Hawaian monk
 jsolate of Neospora hughesi from a horse, I Parasitol 87:345, 2001a.
seal (Monachus schauinslandi), I Parasitol 9l:695, 2005.
Dubey IP, Perry A, Kennedy MJ: Encephalitis caused by a Sarcocystis-like
Hopkins RM, Meloni BP, Groth DM, et al: Ribosomal RNA sequencing
organism in a steer, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 191:231, 1987.
reveals differences between the genotypes of Giardiu isolates recovered
Dubey IP, Rosypal AC, Rosenthal BM, et al: Sarcocystis neurona infections
from humans and dogs living in the same locality, I Parasitof 83:44,
in sea otter (Enhydra futris): evidence for natural infections with sarco-
1997.
(mumuu sydap) sunssodo ot uonsaju jo uorssusuen pue sishs
Isler CM, Bellamy JEC, Wobeser GA: Labile neurotoxin in serum of calves
J Parasitol 87:1387, 2001b.
with "nervous" coccidiosis, Can I Vet Res 5l:253, 1987.
Dubey IP, Zarnke R, Thomas NJ, et al: Toxoplasma gondii, Neospora cani-
Jackson CB, Fisher T: Fatal cytauxzoonosis in a Kentucky cat (Felis domes-
num, Sarcocystis neurona, and Sarcocystis canislike infections in marine
ticus), Vet Parasitol 139:192, 2006.
mammals, Vet Parasitof 1ll6:275, 2003.
Jacobson E, Clubb S, Greiner E: Amebiasis in red-footed tortoises, J Am
Enserink M: Has leishmaniasis become endemic in the U.S.? Science
Vet Med Assoc 183:1192, 1983.
290:1881, 2000.
Jacobson LS: The South African form of severe and complicated canine
Farwell GE, LeGrand EK, Cobb CC: Clinical observations on Babesia gibsoni
babesiosis: clinical advances 1994-2004, Vet Parasitof 138:126, 2006.
and Babesa canis nfections in dogs, IAm Vet Med Assoc 180:507, 192.
Kier AB, Wagner JE, Morehouse LG: Experimental transmission
Fayer R, Santin M, Xiao LH: Cryptosporidiurm bovis n. sp. (Apicomplexa:
of Cytauxzoon felis from bobcats (Lynx rufus) to domestic cats (Felis
Cryptosporididae) in cattle (Bos taurus), I Parasitot 91:624, 2005.
domesticus), Am I Vet Res 43:97, 1982.
Finnin PJ, Visvesvara GS, Campbell BE, et al: Multifocal Balamuthia man-
Kinde H, Read DH, Daft BM, et al: Infections caused by pathogenic free-
drillaris infection in a dog in Australia, Parasitol Res 100:423, 2007.
living amebas (Balamuthia mandrilaris and Acanthamoeba sp.) in
Fitzgerald PR: Bovine trichomoniasis, Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
horses, I Vet Diagn Irnvest 19:317, 2007.
2:277, 1986.
Kinde H, Visvesvara GS, Barr BC, et al: Amebic meningoencephalitis
Foreman O, Sykes J, Ball L, et al: Disseminated infection with Balamuthia
caused by Balamuthia mandrillaris (leptomyxid ameba) in a horse, J
mandrillaris in a dog, Vet Pathof 4l:506, 2004.
Vet Diagn Invest 10:378, 1998.
Fox JC, Ewing SA, Buckner RG, et al: Trypanosoma cruzi infection in a dog
Kingston N, Morton JK, Dietrich R: Trypanosoma cervi from Alaskan
from Oklahoma, I Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1583, 1986.
reindeer Rangifer tarandus, J Protozool 29:588, 1982.
Frelier P: Sarcocystosis: a clinical outbreak in dairy calves, Science
Kirkpatrick CE: Feline giardiasis: a review, J Smalf Anim Pract 27:69, 1986.
195:1341, 1977.
Kjemtrup AM, Conrad PA: A review of the small canine piroplasms from
Frenkel JK, Dubey IP: Toxoplasmosis and its prevention in cats and man,
California: Babesia conradae in the literature, Vet Parasitof 138:ll2, 2006.
I Infect Dis 12:664, 1972.
Kjemtrup AM, Wainwright K, Miller M, et al: Babesia conradae, sp. nov., a
Garcia LS, Shimizu RY: Evaluation of nine immunoassay kits (enzyme
small canine Babesia identified in California, Vet Parasitof 138:103, 2006.
immunoassay and direct fluorescence) for detection of Giardia larmbfia
Langston VC, Galey F, Lovell R, et al: Toxicity and therapeutics of mon-
[Giardia duodenalis] and Cryptosporidium parvum in human fecal speci-
ensin: a review, Food Anim Pract 80:75, 1985.
mens, I Clin Microbiol 35:1526, 1997.
Levy MG, Gookin JL, Poore M, et al: Trichomonas foetus and not
Garrett JI, Kocan AA, Reichard MV, et al: Experimental infection of adult
 Pentatrichomonas hominis is the etiologic agent of feline trichomonal
and juvenile coyotes with domestic dog and wild coyote isolates
diarrhea, I Parasitof 89:99, 2003.
of Hepatozoon americanum (Apicomplexa: Adeleorina), J Wildf Dis
Lewis GE, Huxsoll DL: Canine babesiosis. In Kirk RW, ed: Current veter-
41:588, 2005.
inary therapy VT, Philadelphia, 1977, Saunders.
Glenn BT, Rolley RE, Kocan AA: Cytauxzoon-like piroplasms in erythro-
Lindsay DS, Blagburn BL, Dubey IP: Feline toxoplasmosis and the impor-
cytes of wild-trapped bobcats in Oklahoma, J Am Vet Med Assoc
tance of the Toxoplasma gondi oocyst, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
181:1251, 1982.
19:448, 1997.
Goodger WJ, Skirrow SZ: Epidemiologic and economic analyses of an
Lindsay DS, Blagburn BL, Powe TA: Enteric coccidial infections and coc-
unusually long epizootic of trichomoniasis in a large California dairy
cidiosis in swine, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 14:698, 1992.
herd, I Am Vet Med Assoc 189:772, 1986.
Lindsay DS, Current WL, Taylor JR: Effects of experimentally induced
Gookin JL, Breitschwerdt EB, Levy MG, et al: Diarrhea associated with
Isospora suis infection on morbidity, mortality, and weight gains
trichomonosis in cats, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 215:1450, 1999.
in nursing Pigs, Am I Vet Res 46:151l, 1985.
Gookin JL, Copple CN, Papich MG, et al: Efficacy of ronidazole for treatment
Lindsay DS, Dubey IP, Duncan RB: Confirmation that the dogs is a defin-
of feline Trichomonas foetus infection, J Vet Intern Med 20:536, 2006.
itive host for Neospoma caninum, Vet Parasitof 82:327, 1999.
Gookin IL, Foster DM, Poore MF, et al: Use of a commercially available
Loyd S, Smith J: Activity of toltrazuril and diclazuril against Isospora
culture system for diagnosis of Trichomonas foetus infection in cats,
species in kittens and puppies, Vet Rec 148:509, 2001.
IArm Vet Med Assoc 222:1376, 2003.
Lobetti RG: Canine babesiosis, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 20:418, 1998.
Gookin JL, Stauffer SH, Levy MG: Identification of Pentatrichomonas
Lozano-Alarcon F, Bradley GA, Houser BS, et al: Primary amebic menin-
homminis in feline fecal samples by polymerase chain reaction assay,
goencephalitis due to Naegleria fowileri in a South American tapir, Vet
Vet Parasitol 145:1l, 2007.
Pathol 34:239, 1997.
Greene CE, Latimer K, Hopper E, et al: Administration of diminazene
Lyons ET, Drudge JH, Tolliver SC: Natural infection with Eirmeria leuck-
aceturate or imidocarb dipropionate for treatment of cytauxzoonosis
urti: prevalence of oocysts in feces of horse foals on several farms in
in cats, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 215:497, 1999.
Kentucky during 1986, Am I Vet Res 49:96, 1988.
Gual-Sill F, Pulido-Reyes J: Tratamento de la balantidiasis en gorilas
Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Rathgeber, Collins SS: Parasite field study in
de tierras bajas en el Zoologica de Chupultepec, Ciudad de Mexico,
central Kentucky on thoroughbred foals (born in 2004) treated with
Vet Mexico 25:73, 1994.
pyrantel tartrate daily and other parasiticides periodically, Parasitof
Haber M, Birkenheuer A: Icterus and pancytopenia in a cat, NAVC
Res 100:473, 2007.
Clinician' s Brief 3:21, 2005.
Ma P, Soave R: Three-step stool examination for cryptosporidiosis in
Hamir AN, Dubey IP: Myocarditis and encephalitis associated with
10 homosexual men with protracted watery diarrhea, I Infect Dis
Sarcocystis neurona infection in raccoons (Procyon lotor), Vet Parasitol
147:824, 1983.
95:335, 2001.
Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson N, Dilon AR, et al: Hepatozoonosis in
Hill DE, Liddell S, Jenkins MC, Dubey JP: Specific detection of Neospora
dogs: 22 cases (1989-1994), JAmm Vet Med Assoc 210:916, 1997.
caninum oocysts in fecal samples from experimentally-infected dogs
MacKay RJ: Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis, Vet Clin North Am
using the polymerase chain reaction, J Parasitof 87:395, 2001.
Equine Pract 13:79, 1997.
CH A P T ER 3 Protozoans
113
Marsh AE, Barr BC, Packham AE, Conrad PA: Description of a new
Radostits OM, Stockdale PHG: A brief review of bovine coccidiosis
Neospora species (Protozoa: Apicomplexa: Sarcocystidae), I Parasitol
 in western Canada, Can Vet J 2l:227, 1980.
84:983, 1998.
Ramos-Vara JA, Ortiz-Santiago B, Segales J, Dunstan RW: Cutaneous
 Mathew JS, Ewing SA, Panciera RJ, Kocan KM: Sporogonic development
leishmaniasis in two horses, Vet Pathol 33:731, 1996.
of Hepatozoon americanum (Apicomplexa) in its definitive host,
Reichard MV, Kocan AA: Vector competency of genetically distinct popu-
Amblyomma maculatum (Acarina), I Parasitol 85:1023, 1999.
lations of Amblyomma americanum in the transmission of Theilerua
 Mathew JS, Ewing SA, Panciera RJ, Woods JP: Experimental transmission of
cervi, Comp Parasitol 73:214, 2006.
Hepatozoon armericanurm Vincent-Johnson et al, 1997 to dogs by the Gulf 
Reinmeyer CR, Jacobs RM, Spurlock GN: A coccidial oocyst in equine
Coast tick, Amblyomma maculatum Koch, Vet Parasitof 80:1, 1998.
urine, I Am Vet Med Assoc 182:1250, 1983.
Mayhew IG, Greiner EC: Protozoal diseases, Vet Clin North Am Eq Pract
Rideout BA, Gardiner CH, Stalis IH, et al: Fatal infections with Balamutha
2:439, 1986.
mandrilaris (a free-living amoeba) in gorillas and other old world pri-
 Mayrink W, Genaro O, Silva JCF, et al: Phase I and I open clinical trials of
mates, Vet Pathol 34:15, 1997.
a vaccine against Leishmania chagasi infections in dogs, Mem Inst
Roberson E: Antiprotozoal drugs. In Jones LM, Booth NH, McDonald LE,
Oswaldo Cruz 91:695, 1996.
editors: Veerinary pharmacology and therapeutics, Ames, 1997, Iowa
McAllister MM, Dubey JP, Lindsay DS, et al: Dogs are definitive hosts of
State University Press.
Neospora caninum, Int J Parasitol 28:1473, 1998.
Romatowski J: Pentatrichormonas hominis infection in four kittens, J Am
 Meier H, Holzworth J, Griffiths RC: Toxoplasmosis in the cat-fourteen
Vet Med Assoc 216:1270, 2000.
cases, I Am Vet Med Assoc 131:395, 1957.
Rosado TW, Specht A, Marks SL: Neurotoxicosis in 4 cats receiving
Meinkoth J, Kocan AA, Whitworth L, et al: Cats surviving natural infection
ronidazole, I Vet Intern Med 21:328, 2007.
with Cytauxzoon felis: 18 cases {1997-1998), J Vet Irntern Med 14:521, 2000.
Ruff MD, Fowler JL, Fernau RC, et al: Action of certain antiprotozoal
 Mitchell SM, Zajac AM, Davis WL, Lindsay DS: Efficacy of ponazuril in
compounds against Babesia gibsoni in dogs, Am I Vet Res 34:64l, 1973.
vitro and in preventing and treating Toxoplasma gondi infections
Sanford SE: Enteric cryptosporidial infection in pigs: 184 cases
in mice, I Parasitof 90:639, 2004.
(1981-1985), I Arm Vet Med Assoc 190:695, 1987.
Monticello TM, Levy MG, Bunch SE, Fairley RA: Cryptosporidiosis in a
Schantz PM, Steurer FJ, Duprey ZH, et al: Autochthonous visceral
feline leukemia virus-positive cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:705, 1987.
leishmaniasis in dogs in North America, J Am Vet Med Assoc 226:
Morales JA, Chaves AJ, Visvesvara GS, Dubey IP: Naegleria fowleri
1316, 2005.
-associated encephalitis in a cow from Costa Rica, Vet Parasitof
Schaumberg DA, Snow KK, Dana MR: The epidemic of Acanthamoeba
139:221, 2006.
keratitis: where do we stand? Cornea 17:3, 1998.
Motzel SL, Wagner JE: Treatment of experimentall induced cytauxzoonosis
Scholtens RG, New JC, Johnson S: The nature and treatment of giardiasis
in cats with parvaquone and buparvaquone, Vet Parasitof 35:131, 1990.
in parakeets, I Am Vet Med Assoc 180:170, 1982.
 Mullaney T, Murphy AJ, Kiupel M, et al: Evidence to support horses as
Schuster FL, Visvesvara GS: Free-living amoebae as opportunistic and
tei josu ia ouu ss r sisoy aeau geiu
non-opportunistic pathogens of humans and animals, Int J Parasitof
2005.
34:1001, 2004.
Nabity MB, Barnhart K, Logan KS, et al: An atypical case of Trypanosom
Scorza AV, Lappin MR: Metronidazole for the treatment of feline giardia-
cruzi infection in a young English mastiff, Vet Parasitol 140:356, 2006.
sis, I Fel Med Surg 6:157, 2004.
O'Handley RM, Olson ME, McAllister TA, et al: Efficacy of fenbendazole 
Scorza AV, Radecki SV, Lappin MR: Efficacy of a combination of febantel,
for treatment of giardiasis in calves, Arm I Vet Res 58:384, 1997.
pyrantel, and praziquantel for the treatment of kittens experimentally
O'Handley RM, Olson ME, Fraser D, et al: Prevalence and genotypic
infected with Giardia species, J Feline Med Surg 8:7, 2006.
characterisation of Giardia in dairy calves from Western Australia and
Sell JI, Rupp FW, Orrison WW Jr: Granulomatous amebic encephalitis
Western Canada, Vet Parasitol 90:193, 2000.
caused by Acanthamoeba, Neuroradialogy 39:434, 1997.
Oliveira-dos-Santos AJ, Nascimento EG, Silva MP, De Carvalho LC:
Smith MC, Sherman DM: Goat medicine, Philadelphia, 1994, Lea & Febiger.
Report on a visceral and cutaneous leishmaniasis focus in the town of
Smith TG: The genus Hepatozoon (Apicomplexa: Adeleina), J Parasitof
Jequie, State of Bahia, Brazil, Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Pauio 35:583, 1993.
82:565, 1996.
Oson ME, Ceri H, Morck DW: Giardia vaccination, Parasitof Today
Snyder SP, England JI, McChesney AE: Cryptosporidiosis in immunode-
16:213, 2000.
ficient Arabian foals, Vet Pathof 15:2, 1987.
Olson ME, McAllister TA, Deselliers L, et al: Effects of giardiasis on pro-
St Jean G, Couture Y, Dubreuil P, Fréchette JL: Diagnosis of Giardiua
'0/ti9s say saa f uy japou (quel yueuunu ssauo e ur uononp
infection in 14 calves, IAm Vet Med Assoc 191:831, 1987.
1995.
Stein JE, Radecki SV, Lappin MR: Efficacy of Giardia vaccination in the
Otranto D, Paradies P, Paola Lia R, et al: Efficacy of a combination of 10%
treatment of giardiasis in cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1548, 2003.
imidacloprid/50% permethrin for the prevention of leishmaniosis
Stokol T, Randolph JF, Nachbar S, et al: Development of bone marrow
in kennelled dogs in an endemic area. In Proceedings of the 21st
toxicosis after albendazole administration in a dog and cat, J Am Vet
International Conference of the Worid Association for the Advancement
Med Assoc 210:1753, 1997.
of Veterinary Parasitofogy, Gent, Belgium, August 19-23, 2007.
Stuart BP, Lindsay DS: Coccidiosis in swine, Vet Clin North Am Food Anim
Palmieri JIR, Dalgard DW, Connor DH: Gastric amebiasis in a silvered leaf
Pract 2:455, 1986.
monkey, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 185:1374, 1984.
'sId ut saua sns muodsos SH lasso 'Af isua 'sa XespuT 'dg ens
Panciera RJ, Gatto NT, Crystal MA, et al: Canine hepatozoonosis in
Vet Pathof 17:84, 1980.
Oklahoma, I Am Amim Hosp Assoc 33:221, 1997.
Swenson CL, Silverman J, Stromberg PC, et al: Visceral leishmaniasis in an
Panciera RJ, Mathew JS, Ewing SA, et al: Skeletal lesions of canine hepa-
English foxhound from an Ohio research colony, J Am Vet Med Assoc
tozoonosis caused by Hepatozoon amerianum, Vet Pathol 37:225, 2000.
193:1089, 1988.
Parker S, Campbell J, Gajadhar A: Comparison of the diagnostic sensitivity
Taboada J, Harvey JW, Levy MG, Breitschwerdt EB: Seroprevalence of
of a commercially available culture kit and a diagnostic culture test
babesiosis in greyhounds in Florida, I Am Vet Med Assoc 200:47, 1992.
using Diamond's media for diagnosing Tritrichomonas foetus in bulls,
Tanhauser SM, Cheadle MA, Massey ET, et al: The nine-banded armadillo
J Vet Diagn Invest 15:460, 2003.
(Dasypus novemcinctus) is naturally infected with Sarcocystis neurona,
 Payne PA, Ridley RK, Dryden MW, et al: Efficacy of a combination feban-
Int J Parasitol 3l:325, 2001.
tel-praziquantel-pyrantel product, with or without vaccination with a
Tavares M, Costa JMC da, Carpenter SS, et al: Diagnosis of first case of
commercial Giardia vaccine, for treatment of dogs with naturally occur-
Balamuthia amoebic encephalitis in Portugal by immunofluorescence
ring giardiasis, I Am Vet Med Assoc 220:330, 2002.
and PCR,J Clin Microbiof 44:2660, 2006.
114
C H A P T E R 3Protozoans
Teare JA, Loomis MR: Epizootic of balantidiasis in lowland gorillas,
Visvesvara GS, Schuster FL, Martinez AJ: Balamuthia mandrillaris, n. g,
I Amm Vet Med Assoc 18l:1345, 1982.
n. Sp., agent of amebic meningoencephalitis in humans and other ani-
Telford SR, Forrester DJ, Wright SD, et al: The identity and prevalence of
mals, I Eukaryot Microbiof 40:504, 1993.
trypanosomes in white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginiuana) in southern
Walker DB, Cowell RL: Survival of a domestic cat with naturally acquired
Florida, I Hel Soc Wash 58:19, 1991.
cytauxzoonosis, I Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1363, 1995.
Thompson RCA, Hopkins RM, Homan WL: Nomenclature and genetic
Walton BC, Bauman PM, Diamond LS, Herman CM: Isolation and iden-
groupings of Giardia infecting mammals, Parasitol Today 16:210, 2000.
tification of Trypanosoma cruzi from raccoons in Maryland, Am J Trop
Thurmond MC, Hietala SK: Culling associated with Neospora caninum
Med Hyg 7:603, 1958.
infection in dairy cows, Am J Vet Res 57:1559, 1996.
Wightman SR, Kier AB, Wagner JE: Feline cytauxzoonosis: clinical features
Thurmond MC, Hietala SK: Effect of Neosporum caninum infection on
of a newly described blood parasite disease, Feline Pract 7:23, 1977.
milk production in first-lactation dairy cows, I Am Vet Med Assoc
Xiao L, Herd RP, McClure KE: Periparturient rise in the excretion
210:672, 1997.
of Giardia sp. cysts and Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts as a source
Tyzzer EE: A sporozoan found in the peptic glands of the common mouse,
of infection for lambs, I Parasitof 80:55, 1994.
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 5:12, 1907.
Xiao L, Saeed K, Herd RP: Efficacy of albendazole and fenbendazole
Tyzzer EE: An extracellular coccidium, Cryptosporidium muris (gen.
against Giardia infection in cale, Vet Parasitol 6l:165, 1996.
et sp. nov.), of the common mouse, I Med Res 18:487, 1910.
Yabsley MJ, Noblet GP: Seroprevalence of Trypanosoma cruzi in raccoons
Tyzzer EE: Cryptosporidium parvum (sp. nov.), a coccidium found in the
from South Carolina and Georgia. J, Wildl Dis 38:75, 2002.
small intestine of the common mouse, Arch Protistenk 26:394, 1912.
Zajac AM, LaBranche TP, Donoghue AR, Chu TC: Efficacy of fenbenda-
Upton SJ, Current WL: The species of Cryptosporidium (Apicomplexa:
zole in the treatment of experimental Giardia infection in dogs,
Cryptosporididae) infecting mammals, I Parasitof 7l:625, 1985.
Arm I Vet Res 59:61, 1998.
Vasilopulos RJ, Rickard LG, Mackin AJ, et al: Genotypica analysis of
Zimmer JF: Treatment of feline giardiasis with metronidazole, Cornell Vet
Giardia duodenalis in domestic cats, I Vet Intern Med 21:352, 2007.
77:383, 1987.
Vetterling JM: Coccidia (Protozoa: Eimeridae) of swine, J Parasitol
51:897, 1965.
treatment of canine giardiasis, I Am Anir Hosp Assoc 22:168, 1986.
Vincent-Johnson NA, Macintire DK, Lindsay DS, et al: A new Hepatozoon
species from dogs: description of the causative agent of canine
hepatozoonosis in North America, I Parasitol 83:1165, 1998.
CHAPTER4
Helminths
The parasitic worms belong to the phyla Platyhelminthes
Order Dlgenea
(flat worms, flukes, and tapeworms), Nemathelminthes or
Life history
Nematoda (roundworms), Acanthocephala (thorny-headed
The order Digenea is so called because its members
worms), and Annelida (segmented worms, night-crawlers).
undergo indirect development with sexual and asexual
Tongueworms of the parasitic class Pentastomida are
generations parasitizing alternate hosts. All flukes infecting
also wormlike in appearance, but being of the phylum
dogs, cats, ruminants, horses, and swine are digeneans. The
Arthropoda, are discussed in Chapter 2. This list of hel-
life history of Fasciola hepatica, depicted in Figure 4-1,
minth taxa does not exhaust Nature's bounty of “small,
is typical of the order.
elongate, and slender, creeping or crawling animals, usually
Adult F. hepatica flukes (Figure 4-2) live in the bile ducts
soft-bodied, naked, and limbless or nearly so; any animal
 of ruminant and other mammalian hosts. Their eggs are
having a real or fancied resemblance to an angleworm or
carried first to the bowel lumen with the bile and then to
earthworm" ( Webster's New International Dictionary, ed 2,
the exterior with the feces. When deposited, each of these
Springfield, Mass, 1935, G & C Merriam Co). However, it
eggs consists of a fertilized ovum and a cluster of vitelline
 does include all of the worms in which veterinarians are
cells enclosed in an operculated capsule (Figure 4-3). Only
particularly interested.
if the egg falls into water will a ciliated larva called a mi-
racidium develop inside it (Figure 4-4). The miracidium is
PHYLUM PLATYHELMINTHES
completely covered with cilia and has a conical papilla at its
anterior end for boring into the snail intermediate host, a
The phylum Platyhelminthes contains three classes:
 pair of eye spots, a brain, a rudimentary excretory system,
Turbellaria, Trematoda, and Cestoda. All are typically
and a cluster of germinal cells, the progenitors of the next
soft-bodied, flattened dorsoventrally, and hermaphroditic.
generation of larvae (Figure 4-5). The miracidium, which is
The Turbellaria (planarians) are mostly free-living, carniv.
fully developed and ready to hatch after 2 to 4 weeks at
orous flatworms. Aquarists finding planarians in fish
aq asd ia a  sdsa an ra
tanks may mistake them for parasites, but otherwise
pushing aside the operculum and swims about in search
they are of only passing interest to veterinarians. The tre-
of a suitable species of snail (e.g-, Lymnaea truncatula). If it
matodes (flukes) of importance to veterinary medicine
fails to find such a snail within 24 hours, the miracidium
may be found as adults in the intestine, bile ducts, lungs.
exhausts its energy stores and dies.
blood vessels, or other organs of their vertebrate final hosts.
 If the miracidium is more fortunate, it bores into the
Adult cestodes (tapeworms) are parasites of the intestine
snail's body, loses its ciliated covering, migrates to the
of vertebrates, and their larvae are parasites of different
gonad or digestive gland (often referred to as the liver),
vertebrates or of invertebrates. The class Cestoda includes
and forms a sporocyst. Each germinal cell, by growth and
ai si pue si sns jo sd jud u
repeated divisions, becomes a germinal ball, and each
subject of the second portion of this section.
 germinal ball develops into a redia (Figure 4-6).
The rediae grow until they burst the sporocyst wall and
Class Trematoda
are thus liberated into the tissues of the snail. The redia has
The class Trematoda contains three orders: Monogenea,
a mouth and digestive organs and eats its way through the
Aspidogastrea, and Digenea. Monogeneans and most aspi-
snail's tissues. Like the sporocyst, the redia is packed with
dogastreans undergo direct development and are parasites
germinal balls, these being the progenitors of a second gen-
of aquatic and amphibious animals. Gyrodactylus and
eration of rediae. Each germinal ball of second-generation
Dactylogyrus, for example, are common and pathogenic
rediae develops into yet a third kind of larva, the cercaria
 monogenean parasites of the skin and gills of aquarium
(Figure 4-7).
fishes. These two orders of parasites are of interest to
The cercaria is a tadpolelike larva with a discoidal body
few veterinarians. The trematodes of importance to most
and a long tail for swimming. The cercaria displays cer-
veterinarians are the digenetic trematodes.
tain adult organs (e.g-, oral and ventral suckers, mouth,
115
116
CH A P TE R 4 Helminths
arcaria
Miracidium
Lymnaeid snail
FIGURE 41. Life history of Fasciola hepatica. The adult liver flukes produce fertile eggs that leave the
host by way of the common bile duct and intestinal tract. If these eggs are carried to water, a ciliated
miracidium develops within them over a period of several weeks or months, depending on the 
temperature of the water. On hatching, the miracidia seek certain species of lymnaeid snails, in
which they develop and multiply through one generation of sporocysts and two of rediae. The second 
generation of rediae produce free-swimming cercariae that leave the snail and encyst as metacer-
cariae on various submerged objects, including aquatic vegetation. Ruminants and other animals
become infected with F hepatica when they ingest aquatic plants contaminated with metacercariae.
pharynx, forked intestine, and excretory canals with flame
and encysts, losing its tail in the process to become a meta-
cells) and primordia of the reproductive organs. Special
cercaria, the stage that is infective to sheep and other graz-
secretory cells alongside the pharynx are purely larval struc-
ing mammals (Figure 4-8).
tures; they secrete a cyst wall within which the final larval
When ingested, the metacercarial cyst wall is digested in
stage will lie in wait for a grazing ruminant. When fully
the host's small intestine. The young fluke, now called a
developed in a month or two of summer temperatures, the
 marita, penetrates the wall of the intestine and crosses the
cercaria leaves the redia through a birth pore and makes its
peritoneal space to the liver, which it penetrates (see Figure
way out through the snail's tissues and into the surround-
 8-41). After several weeks of boring about in the hepatic
ing water. After a brief swim the cercaria migrates a short
 parenchyma, the maritas enter the bile ducts, mature into
distance above the water level on the surface of some plant
adult flukes, and begin laying eggs at about a month and a
CHAP T E R 4 Helminths
117
FIGURE 4-4. Egg of Fasciola hepatica containing a fully developed
miracidium.
half after infection. The complete life cycle of F. hepatica
thus encompasses 3 or 4 months under favorable condi-
tions. Therefore exposure to this parasite and patent infec-
h u  u pas aim ao si a in p 
the case of most ruminant parasitisms.
Digenean trematodes are very discriminating in their
choice of snail hosts, and the geographic distribution of
trematode species is therefore largely dictated by the
 geographic distribution of suitable species of snails. Adult
 trematodes, on the other hand, seem to be able to make do
FGURE 42. Adult Fasciola hepatica liver fluke. Left, An uncleared
with a rather broad range of definitive host species.
specimen. Right, A cleared, stained specimen.
 The metacercarial stage determines what food the
host must eat to obtain an infection with an adult fluke.
FGURE 4-3. Egg of Fasciola hepatica from feces.
 FIGURE 4-5. Miracidium of Fasciola hepatica swimming; electronic 
flash photomicrograph.
118
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
Pharynx
Gut
Developing 
cercariae
FIGURE 46. Redia of Fascioloides magna from a snail showing
developed cercariae inside. (Courtesy Dr. Gary A. Conboy.
Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island,
Canada.)
The strategies used by different trematodes vary (Figure 4-9).
 The metacercariae of fasciolids and paramphistomatids encyst
on vegetation and have a strategic advantage when it comes
to getting into grazing ruminants. For the troglotrematids,
 heterophyids, and opisthorchids, the metacercariae encyst
in intermediate hosts such as fish, crayfish, and crabs, and
fish-eating mammals tend to serve as the final hosts. The
FGURE 4-8. Metacercariae of Fasciola hepatica. Top, Free cyst.
 Bottom, Cysts on vegetation.
diplostomatids are found within amphibians or other verte-
brate paratenic hosts, whereas the dicrocoelids encyst in
arthropods. The schistosomatids differ from other trematodes
in that there is no metacercarial stage; rather, the cercariae
 penetrate the skin of the final host. Sometimes humans eat
foodstuffs that put them in contact with possible trematode
s o m sh pun s mu d 'a) su
by way of watercress, and Dicrocoelium dendriticum has
entered humans through the ingestion of ants containing
metacercariae).
Identification
An adult trematode is typically little more than a bag of
reproductive organs with both sexes represented. Typically
there are two testes and one ovary, the anatomic positions
of which provide diagnostic criteria. The genital pore
may be identified by the convergence of male and female
reproductive ducts. Usually the presence of a cirrus, or
intromittent organ, helps to identify the male duct, and a
procession of well-tanned eggs the female duct. The oral
sucker surrounds the mouth, which is connected by way of
B
the esophagus to a pair of blind ceca. The ceca are simple
tubular sacs in most species but are intricately branched in
FGURE 4-7. Cercariae of Fasciola hepatica.
the family Fasciolidae. The ventral sucker or acetabulum is
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
119
 Adults
Eggs
Miracidia
(suitable
(feces, urine,
(water)
definitive host)
or sputum),
Snail
Miracidia
eats
penetrates
s66a
 snail
Miracidia
(snaill)
Cercariae
skin of definitive
Asexual multiplicati on
(e.g., Schistosomatidae)
host
in body of snal
Metacercariae
Cercariae
(ency sted on vegetation,
e.g., Fasciolidae)
Metacercariae
Metacercariae
(encysted in fish, crayfish, etc.)
(ant)
Infected ant ingested by definitive host
(e.g., Dicrocoelidae)
FIGURE 49. Some life history variations followed by trematode parasites of domestic animals.
often but not always near the genital pore. In the family
(FAA) or shipped fresh and packed in plenty of ice in a
Heterophyidae, both the ventral sucker and the genital
well-insulated container.
pore are enclosed in an invagination, the ventrogenital
sac, and an extra genital sucker or gonotyl surrounds
A Few Representatlve Famlles of Trematodes
the genital opening.
The anatomic structures most
Information on the geographic distribution and biology of
used as taxonomic characters are labeled in Figure 4-10.
some trematodes of veterinary importance can be found in
Diagnostic  criteria  sufficient  for  identification  of these
Table 4-1.
families are presented in the following discussion. In gen-
eral, identification of trematodes to family level combined
Trematodes acquired by eating metacercariae encysted
with the host and organ listings provided in Chapter 7
on vegetation
will result in sufficiently precise diagnosis to serve practical
Family Fasciolidae
 needs. An excellent guide to the identification of families
Identification. The body is large and leaflike, with suckers
and genera of trematodes of North America north of
close together at the anterior end; the ceca have numerous
Mexico is S.C. Schell's Handbook of Trematodes of North
diverticula; and the ovary and testes are dendritic (Figure
America North of Mexico (Moscow, Idaho, 1985, University
 i e r    o as 1
Press of Idaho). Because only a limited set of trematode
are parasites of the liver and bile ducts of herbivorous mam-
 species is likely to be found in domestic animals in any
mals and man, with F. gigantica being more restricted to the
 particular locality, knowledge of the endemic species is
tropics. Fascioloides mnagna is a parasite of the liver of the
valuable. Sometimes the only way to acquire this informa-
white-tailed deer but also will infect other ruminants.
tion is to submit collections for expert identification.
Fasciolopsis buski is a parasite of the small intestine of pigs
 The specimens should be relaxed by overnight storage at
and humans in Asia; the ceca of this species do not have
5° C and fixed in formaldehyde and acetic acid in alcohol
diverticula. Antemortem diagnosis of chronic fascioliasis is
120
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
- Oral
the pasture season and reaches a peak during November
Pharynx-
sucker
(Hoover et al, 1984). Summer drought tends to interrupt
-Esophagus
the cycle on the Gulf Coast, whereas winter cold tends to do
Ceca
the same in the Northwest. However, special circumstances
may produce unexpected results. For example, outbreaks of
fascioliasis during periods of drought form an apparent
Genital
pore
Ventral
paradox that can be explained as follows. When drought
sucker
has laid waste to the rest of the pasture, green vegetation is
still to be found at the water hole, and livestock may be
Uterus-
forced to graze on aquatic plants, which they ordinarily
Vitellaria
eschew as unpalatable. Such plants are likely to be heavily
contaminated with the resistant metacercariae of F. hepatic,
and concentrated grazing on them may result in serious
levels of infection. Because metacercariae are extremely
resistant to drying, infection may follow feeding of hay
 grown on infested meadows far removed from the scene
of an outbreak.
 F. magna, one of the largest known trematodes, is widely
Ovary
scattered over North America. Adult F. magna organisms
are found in cysts that communicate with the bile ducts of
its normal definitive host, the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus 
virginiarus). In cattle, these cysts usually do not communi-
cate with the bile ducts, and in sheep and goats F. magna
Testes
maritas fail to mature and the juvenile flukes wander aim-
lessly and destructively in the liver tissue (see Figure 7-68).
Therefore F. rmagna infection is nonpatent in cattle, sheep,
and goats and cannot be diagnosed by fecal examination
in these hosts. Aimlessly migrating F. magna maritas are
likewise very destructive in llamas, Dama deer, sika deer,
FGURE 4-10. Clonomhis sinensis (Opisthorchiidae).
and other cervids in game farms and petting zoos
where white-tailed deer probably serve as the source of
by demonstration of the large operculate eggs (see Figure
infection.
4-3) in the feces. Saturated sucrose floats but distorts the
 Importance. Several clinical syndromes may be associat-
ed with liver fluke infection, depending on the numbers
tion techniques are preferred, however.
and stage of development of the parasite and on the pres-
Life history. The life history of F. hepatica as presented
ence or absence of Clostridium novyi. Acute fluke disease
in the preceding section is typical of the family. The geo-
occurs during invasion of the liver by recently ingested
 graphic distribution of F. hepatica is worldwide but discon-
metacercariae. In heavy invasions the trauma inflicted by
tinuous. In North America, F. hepatica is found in the Gulf
the maritas tunneling about in the liver and consequent
Coast States, the Pacific Northwest, the Caribbean, and
inflammatory reaction result in highly fatal clinical illness
eastern Canada. The lymnaeid snails that serve as interme-
characterized by abdominal pain with a disinclination to
diate hosts require neutral soils that remain reasonably
move. Postmortem examination reveals an abdominal
moist throughout the year and tend to flourish where win-
cavity containing blood-stained exudate and an enlarged,
ters are not so cold as to destroy the eggs and juvenile
friable liver covered with fibrin tags; large numbers of mar-
stages, thus permitting the parasite population to survive
itas can be recovered from the cut surfaces. Heavy invasions
 its season of hardship in both definitive host and environ-
of the sort associated with acute fluke disease may occur
ment. Because soil characteristics may vary dramatically
as  sd o p a sq u
within very short distances, it is not uncommon for one
 areas that were heavily contaminated the previous season.
“fluky pasture” to contain all of the F. hepatica snails and
 In certain cases all that is needed to precipitate rapidly
 metacercariae, whereas the rest of the farm may afford safe
fatal disease is a minor trauma that provides clostridial
grazing. Small streams, ponds, and marshy areas are obvi-
organisms with some damaged and poorly oxygenated
ous snail-breeding areas, but any depression (eg., rut, dead
tissue in which to multiply and secrete their deadly
furrow) that can hold a bit of water for a while can serve as
toxins. Even the minor trauma associated with the migra-
a source of infection during periods of adequate rainfall.
tions of a few F. hepatica (or Taenia hydatigena larvae)
Transmission of fascioliasis occurs between February
is enough to provide an appropriate environment for C.
and July in Louisiana (Malone et al, 1984), but in the
novyi. As is typical of clostridial infections, sheep die so
northwestern states transmission gradually builds through
fast that they hardly have time to be sick. Necropsy reveals
TABLE 4-1
Information on Some Trematodes of Veterinary Importance
Second
Genera and
Geographlc
Locatlon
Length of 
Length
Intermedlate 
 Prepatent 
Famlly
 Specles
 Dlstrlbutlon
Hosts
In Host
Dlsease
Adult
ofEgg
Host
Perlod
Fasciolidae
Fasciola
Tropics and U.S.
Herbivorus
 Bile ducts
Hepatic fbrosis
3 cm
120 μm
 Metacercariae on
60 days
hepatica
mammals and
vegetation
Fasciola
Africa
humans
Bile ducts
 Hepatic fibrosis
5 cm
120 μm
Metacercariae on 60 days
gigantica
vegetation
Fasciolopsis
Asia
 Pigs and humans
 Intestine
 Intestinal upset
U 8
120 μm
Metacercariae on
90 days
buskii
vegetation
Fascioloides
U.S. and Europe
White-tailed deer Liver (cysts)
Hepatitis, kills
10 cm
120 μm
Metacercariae on
270 days
magna
 other cervids
vegetation
 and small
ruminants,
nonpatent cysts
in cattle
Paramphistomidae
Paramphistomum
Worldwide
Ruminants
Rumen
 Intestinal damage
10 mm
120 μm
Metacercariae on
80 days
and
 by immature
aquatic
Cortylophoron
flukes
vegetation
Troglotrematidae
Nanophyetus
North Pacific rim Dogs and cats
Intestine
T'ransmits
1 mm
80 μm
Fish
7 days
salmincola
Neorickettsia
helminthoeca
Paragonimus
Eastern U.S.
Minks, dogs, cats
Lungs
 Cysts in lungs
6 mm
90 μm
Crayfish
30 days
kellicotti
Heterophyidae
Cryptocotyle
U.S.: East coast
Birds
 Intestine
Enteritis
2 mm
30 μm
Fish
14 days
Heterophyes
Middle East
Dogs and cats
 Intestine
Enteritis
2 mm
30 μm
Fish
14 days
Opisthorchidae
Opisthorchis
Asia and Europe
sies pue sgoa
Bile ducts
Very little
6 mm
30 μm
Fish
30 days
n
Metorchis
Foxes, pigs
Bile ducts
Very little
6 mm
30 μm
Fish
17 days
H
U.S.
Clonorchis
Asia
 Dogs and cat 
Bile ducts
Very little
6 mm
30 μm
Fish
60 days
d
Dicrocoelidae
Dicrocoelium
New York,
 Sheep, cattle, pigs,
Bile ducts
 Fibrosis with
10 mm
40 μm
Ants
80 days
E
dendriticum
Quebec, British
deer,
 chronic disease
Columbia,
woodchucks
Europe
Platynosum
Caribbean and
Cats
Bile ducts and Hepatitis, fibrosis, 7 mm
45 μm
Lizards
30 days
fastosum
southern U.S.
gall bladder
vomiting,
jaundice,
diarrhea
Continued
121
122
TABLE 4-1
Information on Some Trematodes of Veterinary Importance—cont'd
H
Second
Genera and
Geographlc
Locatlon
Length of
Length
Intermedlate
 Prepatent 
d
Famlly
 Specles
Dlstrlbutlon
Hosts
In Host
Dlsease
Adult
ofEgg
Host
Perlod
T
Diplostomatidae
Alaria canis
 Northern U.S.
 Dogs and foxes
Intestine
Very little
4 mm
100 μm
 Frogs, paratenic
35 days
R
and Canada
hosts
Southern U.S.
Raccoons and
Alariamarcianae
opossums
Fibricolatexensis
Schistosomatidae
Schistosoma
Worldwide
Humans
Mesenteric
 Hepatic fibrosis
10-20 mm;
55-145 μm;
 None, penetrate
60 days
mansoni
veins
sexes separate
 lateral spine
skin
Schistosoma
Africa
Humans
Veins of
Erosion of
10 mm; sexes
60 × 140 μm
None, penetrate
70-84 days
haematobium
urinary
 bladder wall
separate
terminal
skin
bladder
spine
Schistosoma
Asia
Humans, cats,
Mesenteric
Hepatic
10 mm; sexes
58 × 85 μm
 None, penetrate
35-42 days
japonicum
mammals
veins
fbrosis
separate
no spine
skin
Schistosoma
 Africa
Cattle
 Mesenteric
Hepatic
10 mm, sexes
62 × 207 μm
None, penetrate
42 days
bovis
veins
fbrosis
separate
terminal
skin
spine
Schistosoma
 Africa
Horses,
Mesenteric
Hepatic
10 mm; sexes
60 × 80 μm;
None, penetrate
38 days
margrebowiei
ruminants
veins
fbrosis
separate
 no spine
skin
Bivitellobilhania
Africa
Elephants
Mesenteric
Hepatic
10 mm; sexes
71 × 87 μm
 None, penetrate
Not known
loxodontae
veins
fbrosis
separate
no spine
skin
Heterobilharzia
U.S.
Raccoons, dogs.
 Mesenteric
Hepatic
10 mm; sexes
70 × 87 μm,
 None, penetrate
60 days
americana
sunssodo
veins
fbrosis
separate
 no spine
skin
Bird genera
Worldwide
Birds
Skin
 Dermatitis in
10 mm; sexes
Varied
 None, penetrate
mammals
separate
skin
CH A P T ER 4 Helminths
123
in Puerto Rico were condemned during the year ending in
Fasciola hepatica
October 1984. Following Puerto Rico, in order of percent-
age of livers condemned, were Florida, Nevada, Oregon,
Idaho, Utah, Washington, and California. Probably, liver
condemnations far outweigh losses caused by clinical fas-
cioliasis in economic importance. Briskey, Scroggs, and
Hurtig (1994) examined livers from seven slaughterhouses
in 17 of the western United States and found 368 of 1913
 F gigantica
livers positive for liver flukes. F. magna causes considerable
economic loss by producing wasted cattle livers condemned
 as unfit for human consumption, and its destructive migra-
tions in the livers of sheep and goats virtually preclude
small ruminant production in endemic areas.
Treatment and control. Clorsulon (Curatrem) is admi-
nistered to cattle orally as 8.5% suspension at a dosage rate
of 7 mg/kg for treatment of immature and adult F. hepatica
infections (Malone, Ramsey, and Loyacano,
1984;
Courtney, Shearer, and Plue, 1985; Yazwinski et al, 1985).
The dose of clorsulon (2 mg/kg) administered with iver-
mectin as Ivomec Plus is only fully efficacious against the
Fascioloides magna
adults of F. hepatica. Clorsulon is not licensed for use in
dairy cattle of breeding age, and cattle must not be treated
within 8 days of slaughter.
Albendazole is indicated for the removal of liver fluke
from cattle at a dosage rate of 10 mg/kg of body weight
FGURE 4-11. Liver flukes of ruminants. Fasciola hepatica, Fasciola
and from sheep at 7.5 mg/kg. Albendazole is not licensed
ggantica, and Fascioloides magna belong to the family Fasciolidae.
for use in dairy cattle of breeding ages, and cattle must not be
The smallflukes scattered about are Dicrocoelium dendriticum of the
 family Dicrocoelidae.
treated within 27 days of slaughter. Albendazole (15 mg/kg)
was effective in eliminating adult F. hepatica and in reducing
the death rate among naturally infected goats in Montana
focal liver necrosis and extensive subcutaneous hemor-
(Leathers et al, 1982).
 rhage; the latter is possibly responsible for the colloquial
Other effective flukicides (diamphenethide, nitroxynil,
name “black disease." C. novyi also causes a lethal condi-
oxyclozanide, rafoxanide, triclabendazole) are not available
-ioaid au aiau inq 'suei Sunok u .peay Biq, pas uon
in the United States.
pitating trauma results from contests of physical prowess
 F. magna presents a more difficult problem in domestic
instead of parasite migrations.
ruminants. Both clorsulon (24 mg/kg) and albendazole
Chronic fluke disease is associated with the presence of
(26 mg/kg) were reasonably effective against immature and
adult trematodes in the bile ducts and is characterized by
adult F. magna in its natural host, the white-tailed deer
the classical clinical signs of liver fluke infection. There is
(Foreyt and Drawe, 1985). However, a drug must kill essen-
 gradual loss of condition, progressive weakness, anemia,
tially all immature F. magna to benefit infected sheep and
 and hypoproteinemia with development of edematous
goats because survival of only a few maritas is potentially
subcutaneous swellings, especially in the intermandibular
lethal in these hosts. In sheep a single treatment with clor-
space and over the abdomen. Necropsy reveals distended,
sulon (15 mg/kg) 8 weeks after inoculation with meta-
thickened bile ducts packed with adult trematodes. In cattle
cercariae of F. rmagna was not sufficiently effective to be of
the fibrotic ducts later calcify to produce what looks like a
practical value (Conboy, Stromberg, and Schlotthauer,
branching system of clay pipes. Isseroff, Sawma, and Reino
1988), whereas closantel ( 15 mg/kg orally or 7.5 mg/kg intra-
(1977) demonstrated that the bile duct hyperplasia of fas-
muscularly) was considered to “meet the need" (Stromberg
cioliasis is related to the excretion of large amounts of the
et al, 1985). Unfortunately, closantel is unavailable to veter-
amino acid proline by F. hepatica. Isseroff, Spengler, and
 inarians in the United States.
Charnock (1979) have adduced evidence to the effect that
Theoretically, aquatic snails can be controlled by drain-
 proline synthesis and excretion by F. hepatica may account,
ing swamps or by broadcasting molluscicides on the snail-
at least in part, for the anemia that often accompanies
infested waters. However, the continued existence of flukes
infection with this fluke.
where they have always been indicates that snail control
The presence of one fluke leads to condemnation of
measures are impracticable in many cases. Areas connected
the liver in slaughtering establishments inspected by the
by streams with other snail-infested regions are generally
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Tindall (1985)
not amenable to snail control measures. Periodic anthel-
reported that almost one third of livers from cattle raised
mintic medication may help to reduce contamination of
124
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
 n prno yo s um s a  sas
In heavy infections, migration to the rumen tends to be
destroy F. hepatica eggs and snails weakened by infection
prolonged, and disease of several months’ duration may
with this parasite, control measures based on anthelmintic
result. Once arrived in the rumen and reticulum, the
medication alone may produce satisfactory results. On the
adult paramphistomes are relatively harmless (Rolfe and
 other hand, when large populations of eggs and infected
Boray, 1987).
snails are able to survive the year around, these must be
 Instead of encysting on aquatic vegetation as do other
attacked directly as well.
paramphistomatids, Megalodiscus cercariae encyst on the
skin of frogs and tadpoles. The frogs become infected
Family Paramphistomadtidae
when they eat pieces of molted epidermis or tadpoles bear-
 Identification. The ventral sucker is at the posterior end
ing metacercariae.
of the body, the ventral sucker of other trematodes is either
Treatment. Clorsulon at 2 mg/kg in combination with
on the ventral surface of the body or absent (Figure 4-12).
ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg was ineffective in treating immature
Genera and species include Paramphistomum, Calicopho-
rumen flukes (Rolfe and Boray, 1993). Hexachlorophene in a
ron, and Cotylophoron (rumen flukes), Gastrodiscoides
single dose of 20 mg/kg and oxyclozanide in two doses of
hominis (a parasite of the intestine of humans, monkeys,
19 mg/kg 3 days apart were both highly efficient against
and apes), and Megalodiscus species (parasites of the colon
juvenile and adult paramphistome flukes, predominantly
and cloaca of frogs).
Calicophoron calicophorum, in cattle (Rolfe and Boray, 1987).
Life histories. Eggs of Paramphistormum cervi are unde-
Unfortunately, neither of these chemicals is available for use in
veloped when passed in the feces of cattle, sheep, and goats.
domestic ruminants in the United States.
Miracidia develop in eggs deposited in water and hatch to
invade snails of the genera Physa, Bulinus, Galba, and
Trematodes acquired by eating fish, crayfish, crabs,
Pseudosuccinea, in which cercariae develop through one
and other intermediate hosts
sporocyst and two redial stages. On emergence from
Family Troglotrematidae
the snail, the cercaria swims away to encyst on aquatic
Identification. The genital pore is immediately posterior
vegetation. Thus the extramammalian portion of the life
to the ventral sucker; the genital pore of other trematodes is
history of a fluke in the genus Paramphistomurm is very
located elsewhere. The location of the genital pore and the
much like that of one in Fasciola. Metacercariae
of
fact that the testes lie opposite one another are the only
Paramphistomum species excyst in the upper small intestine
characteristics that unite the diverse assemblage of genera
and migrate through the abomasum back to the rumen.
thrown together in the family Troglotrematidae. Trog-
lotrematids of veterinary importance are parasites of the
intestines (Nanophyetus sp.,H
Figure 4-13)or lungs
(Paragonimus sp., Figures 4-14 and 4-15).
Oral sucker
Life histories. Nanophyetus salmincola adults parasitize
the small intestine of piscivorous carnivorans of the Pacific
Northwest. Eggs are undeveloped when passed in the host's
feces. Miracidia require about 3 months to develop in eggs
laid in water and hatch spontaneously still later. The mira-
cidia penetrate the freshwater snail Oxytrema silicula, in
Genital
which cercariae develop in rediae. After emergence from
pore
 the snail, these cercariae penetrate the skin of salmonid
fishes and encyst in various tissues. Eating salmon or trout
 infected with metacercariae of this trematode infects the dog.
cat, coyote, fox, bear, raccoon, or mink. N. salmincola is host
in turn to a ricketsial agent, Neorickettsia helminthoeca, the
causative agent of “salmon poisoning" in dogs. Salmon poi-
soning, characterized by hemorrhagic enteritis and lymph
node enlargement, is diagnosed by the presence of trematode
eggs in the patient's feces and is usually fatal unless treated
with broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Paragonimus kellicotti occurs, usually in pairs, in pulmo-
nary cysts (see Figure 8-44). Cats, dogs, and many species of
wild mammals in North America may become infected by
Ventral
eating crayfish containing the encysted cercariae or by eating
sucker
animals that have recently fed on crayfish. The large, vase-
shaped eggs (see Figures 7-36, B, and 8-45) are swept up the
tracheobronchial tree, swallowed, and passed out with the
FIGURE 412. A rumen fluke of the family Paramphistomatidae.
feces. Ifthe eggs arrive in water, miracidia develop and hatch
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
125
Ventral
sucker
Genital
pore
Ventral
sucker
Genital
pore
Testes
FGURE 415. Paragonimus kelficotti.
FIGURE 4-13. Nanophyetus salmincola (Troglotrematidae).
effective against these lung flukes (Dubey, Miller, and Sharma,
in about 2 weeks and enter an operculate snail, Pormatiopsis
1979), as is albendazole, at a dosage rate of 25 mg/kg twice
 lapidaria, in which cercariae develop through one sporocyst
 daily for 14 days. Praziquantel, 7 mg to 38 mg administered
and two redial stages. The cercariae leave the snail and encyst
subcutaneously or intramuscularly, has also been shown to be
as metacercariae in crayfish. Radiographically demonstrable
highly effective in the removal of N. salrmincola from dogs and.
cysts develop in the lungs of cats at 28 days, and eggs are
coyotes (Foreyt and Gorham, 1988).
first shed in the feces about a month after infection.
Signs of respiratory disease may be associated with P. kelli-
Family Heterophyidae
cotti infection.
Identification. The ventral sucker and genital pore are
Treatment. Praziquantel, 23 mg/kg three times a day for
withdrawn in a ventrogenital sac; one or more gonotyls 
 3 days, has been shown to be highly efficacious in removing
(muscular suckers surrounding the genital pore) may be
 P. kelicotti from the lungs of cats and dogs (Bowman et al,
present (Figure 4-16).
1991). Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg for 10 to 14 days, is also highly
Metagonimus yokogawai and Heterophyes heterophyes are
 parasites of cats, dogs, pigs, and humans in East Asia; infec-
tion is acquired by eating insufficiently cooked fish in
which metacercariae have encysted.
Cryptocotyle lingua, a parasite of gulls and terns, pro-
duces severe enteritis in dogs, foxes, and minks a few
days after they have eaten a small North Atlantic fish, the
cunner, in which metacercariae are found in the subcuta-
neous tissues surrounded by black host capsules. The
appearance of infected fish leads to the colloquial name
"black spot disease." A black host capsule is also observed.
surrounding various other species of trematode metacer-
cariae and is not peculiar to C. lingua. Cercariae of C.
  n    o 
marine snail.
Family Opisthorchiidae
FGURE 4-14. Paragonimus kelficotti. Living adult worm recovered at
Identification. The uterus and ovary are anterior to
necropsy from a cyst in the lung of a cat.
the testes. There is no cirrus sac, and the genital pore is
126
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
the ovary is posterior to the testes. Species include
Opisthorchis tenuicollis, Opisthorchis felineus, Metorchis
conjunctus, Metorchis albidus, Parametorchis complexus,
Clonorchis sinensis, and others.
Life history of opisthorchis tenuicollis. The adult tre-
Opening of 
matodes are parasites of the bile and pancreatic ducts and
ventrogenital
small intestine of dogs, cats, foxes, pigs, and humans. When
sac
 deposited in the host's feces, eggs containing miracidia are
Ventral
eaten by a snail Bithynia tentaculata, in which cercariae
sucker
 develop in rediae. The cercariae encyst as metacercariae in
carp, bream, and roach. The definitive host becomes
infected by eating these freshwater fish.
 Importance. Opisthorchids display a rather low order of
Gonotyl 
host specificity, and each species is capable of infecting
many species of fish-eating mammals. Uncomplicated
 infection with moderate numbers of opisthorchids is
 usually asymptomatic, but chronic infection with heavy
worm burdens may lead to severe hepatic insufficiency.
Treatment. Praziquantel at 100 mg/kg should be effica-
cious (Hong et al, 2003).
Trematodes acquired by eating arthropods or vertebrate
FIGURE 416. Heterophyes sp. From a dog in Lebanon.
paratenic hosts
Family Dicrocoelidae
immediately anterior to the ventral sucker of these flat,
 Identification. The body is translucent. The ovary is pos-
translucent, fusiform, or oval parasites of the bile and
terior to the testes of these parasites of the gallbladder and
 pancreatic ducts of mammals, birds, and reptiles (Figure
bile and pancreatic ducts of mammals, birds, and reptiles
4-17; see also Figure 4-10). Opisthorchiids might be
(Figures 4-18 and 4-19; see also Figure 8-47).
confused with dicrocoelids because they are similar in
size, shape, and location in the host, but in dicrocoelids,
Genital
/pore
Ventral
sucker
,Testes
Ovary
Vitellaria
Uterus
FGURE 417. Parametorchis sp. (Opisthorchidae).
FIGURE 4-18. Dicrocoelium dendriticum (Dicrocoelidae).
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
127
Platynosomum fastosum. This parasite of the bile and
pancreatic ducts of cats occurs in the southeastern United
States and the Caribbean (see Figure 4-19). Infection is
acquired by eating lizards, toads, geckos, and skinks con-
taining metacercariae (Chung, Miyahara, and Chung, 1977;
Eckerlin and Leigh, 1962). The infection has been taken to
Hawaii in introduced anoles (Goldberg and Bursey, 2000).
Treatment. Praziquantel, 20 mg/kg, markedly reduced
the number of Platynosomum eggs passed in the feces of
cats (Evans and Green, 1978). On the suggestion to a prac-
titioner in Florida that it might be possible to treat platy-
 nosomiasis with elevated doses of praziquantel, the reply
was that the last infected cat with hepatic dysfunction died
when so treated. Thus it was thought that surgical removal
 of the flukes was the best course of therapy. Albendazole is
another logical choice.
Eurytrema procyonis. This common parasite of the pan-
creatic duct of the raccoon was reported from a New York
State domestic cat with a 2-year history of weight loss and
vomiting probably resulting from pancreatic fibrosis and
atrophy (Anderson, Georgi, and Car, 1987). A cat infected
with E. procyonis stopped shedding eggs in its feces affer a
6-day course of 30 mg/kg of fenbendazole (Roudebush and
Schmidt, 1982).
Trematodes acquired by eating amphibia or vertebrate
FIGURE 419. Platynosomum fastosum (Dicrocoelidae).
paratenic hosts
Family Diplostomatidae
Life history of Dicrocoelium dendriticum. Whereas most
Identification. The body of these intestinal parasites of
trematode life histories involve water, this species is
birds and mammals is divided into a flattened or spoon-
adapted to a sequence of hosts that frequent dry habitats.
shaped forebody containing oral and ventral suckers and a
Adult D. dendriticum are parasites of the bile ducts of
 bulbous tribocytic organ, and a cylindric hindbody contain-
sheep, cattle, pigs, deer, woodchucks, and cottontail
ing the reproductive organs (Figure 4-20). The forebody
rabbits. Embryonated eggs deposited in the host's drop-
will wrap around the mucosa of the intestinal tract, forming
 pings are ingested by the terrestrial snail Cionella lubrica,
a firm attachment between the fluke and the host's
 in which long-tailed cercariae develop in daughter sporo-
intestinal epithelium (Figure 4-2l; see also Figure 8-49).
cysts. As the cercariae leave the sporocysts, the snail secretes
mucus around masses of them to form so-called slime
balls in which they are expelled from the snail. The slime
balls are apparently esteemed as food by the ant Forrmica
fusca, in which the cercariae encyst as metacercariae.
The definitive host becomes infected by inadvertently
ingesting infected ants while grazing; the metacercariae
excyst in the small intestine and migrate up the common
bile duct into the finer ramifications of the biliary tree.
Importance. D. dendriticum causes no clinical illness in
cattle, lambs, or yearling sheep, but these trematodes are
long-lived and the pathologic changes in the liver increase in
severity and extent with the duration of the infection. There-
fore in older sheep, D. dendriticum infection causes progressive
hepatic cirrhosis manifested clinically as cachexia, lowered
wool production, decreased lactation, and premature aging.
 In short, D. dendriticum makes sheep husbandry unprofitable
FIGURE 4-20. Aaria canis (Diplostomatidae). A, Living specimen
by curtailing the reproductive life of the ewe flock.
detached from mucosal epithelium showing the forebody and
Treatment. Albendazole administered orally to sheep at
hindbody, with the forebody having a ventral groove for wrapping
15 to 20 mg/kg is highly effective against adult D. dentriticum
around a bit of host mucosa. B, Hukes attached to the intestinal
(Theodorides, Freeman, and Georgi, 1982).
mucosa.
128
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Mice infected with mesocercariae transmit Alaria mar.
cianae to their sucklings through the milk, and when
mature these offspring can transmit the infection in the
same fashion. If a female cat becomes infected with A.
marcianae during lactation, the mesocercariae will not
  iq si   a o da
migrate to her mammary glands to infect her kittens. The
kittens then behave as definitive hosts and develop patent
infections (Shoop and Corkum, 1984).
Importance. Adult Alaria organisms are attached to the
mucous membrane of the small intestine but apparently do
their host little harm. However, because the mesocercariae
migrate through the lungs and sometimes wander into
 ss r  s e   ss 
example, a case of human infection with mesocercariae of
Alaria americana terminated fatally as a result of extensive
 pulmonary hemorrhage. The circumstances suggested that
the person had eaten inadequately cooked frogs' legs while
hiking (Freeman et al, 1976).
Treatment. Infections with the adult trematode within
the intestinal tract of dogs and cats can be treated with
praziquantel and probably epsiprantel. The typical cestoci-
dal dosage will be efficacious in most cases.
FIGURE 421. Alaria sp. (Diplostomatidae) attached to the muco-
sa of a dog's small intestine.
Families Allocreadidae, Hemiuridae, and
Lecithodendridae
In the case of Potomac horse fever caused by
Diplostomatids are most likely to be confused with
Neorickettsia ristici, it is thought that horses are becoming
members of the families Strigeidae, which have cup-shaped
infected by the ingestion of caddisflies or mayflies contain-
forebodies and leafike tribocytic organs, and Cyathocotyli-
ing the metacercariae of various trematodes (Madigan et al,
dae, which have bulbous tribocytic organs but undivided
2000); one of six horses fed pools of aquatic insects became
bodies.
infected with N. risticii after being fed pools of mature
 Life history of Alaria. The large, unembryonated egg
caddisflies (Dicosmoecus gilvipes).
. Operculate snails,
(see Figure 7-36, A) is passed in the feces of the infected
Elimia livescens of the family Pleuroceridae, that were shed-
canid (Figure 4-22). If the egg is deposited in water, a
ding virgulate cercariae (typically cercariae of the
miracidium develops and hatches in about 2 weeks to pen-
Lecithodendridae) were dissected, and the trematode cer-
etrate a snail of the genus Helisoma in which cercariae
 cariae and sporocysts were examined in pools for the pres-
develop in daughter sporocysts. Each cercaria that succeeds
ence of N. risti DNA by amplification using the
in penetrating the skin of a tadpole transforms into a
 polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Of 209 pools of trema-
 special larval stage called a mesocercaria, which is limited
 todes so examined, 50 were found to be positive for N.
to Alaria species and a few closely related genera. If the
risticii DNA with PCR (Kanter et al, 2000). Trematodes
tadpole is eaten by a frog, snake, or mouse, the mesocercar-
 py id ae aua a a jo
iae take up residence and wait for their new host to fall prey
bats, so it is suspected that the cercariae from the snails
to a dog or other suitable definitive host. The frog, snake,
 go on to form metacercariae (Figure 4-23) in the aquatic
or mouse that harbors these mesocercariae is called a para-
larvae of various flies (e.g-, caddisflies and mayflies) that are
tenic host or collector host, which, by definition, is a
infectious to the bats affter they become flying adults.
host in which immature stages may survive indefinitely
Horses become infected when the adult flies fall into and
but undergo no essential development. The paratenic
are consumed with feed or water.
host helps to distribute the parasite in space and time
Another bit of the puzzle showed that an Ehrlichia
and often bridges the gap of food preferences or overcomes
sp. very closely related to N. risticii could be isolated
some other obstacle to the union of parasite and definitive
from both the tissues and trematodes recovered from rain-
host. When a dog eats a paratenic host, the mesocercaria
bow trout (Orcorhynchus mykiss) from a creek in northern
migrates directly through the diaphragm to the lungs,
California (Pusterla et al, 2000). The trematodes in this case
where it transforms into a metacercaria. In a few weeks,
were members of the genera Deropegus (family Hemiuri-
the metacercaria migrates up the trachea, is swallowed,
dae) and Crepidostomum and Creptotrema (family Allocrea-
 and matures in the intestine. Eggs appear about 3 to 5
didae). These trematodes live in the intestine
eand
weeks after ingestion of mesocercariae (see Figure 4-22).
gallbladder of the trout as adults. The metacercarial stage
C H A P T E R 4Helminths
129
olostormulum
Adult
Miracidiur
Cercaria
FIGURE 422. Life history of Alaria marcianae (Diplostomatidae). Miracidia develop in eggs depos-
ited in water, hatch, and enter planorbid snails of the genus Helisoma where they develop into
forked-tailed cercariae. Cercariae penetrate the skin and enter the tissues of tadpoles of the
leopard frog Rana pipiens where, undergoing only minor changes, they remain as mesocercariae.
jo sanssll aut apeaui aelenanosaw aun 'jewwewi jo 'pg 'ayeus 'go e Ag uea sl alodpet au 
these paratenic hosts but again remain mesocercariae. However, when mesocercariae in tad-
poles or any of the paratenic hosts are ingested by a male or nonlactacting female cat, they
penetrate the diaphragm and develop into metacercariae of the diplostomulum type in the lungs.
Finally, diplostomula pass up the trachea and down the esophagus to mature and reproduce in the
small intestine. If mesocercariae are ingested by a lactating queen, they migrate to the mammary
glands and are shed in the milk to develop into adult worms in the kittens. Some mesocercariae
remain in the tissues of the queen to infect future litters. (Diagram and notes modified from 
Pearson [1956] and Shoop and Corkum [1984].)
130
C H A P TE R 4 Helminths
Male
FlGURE 423. Lecithodendrid metacercaria recovered from a
caddisfly in California incriminated as a vector of Potomac
horse fever. (Courtesy Dr. John E. Madigan， School of
HGURE 424. Schistosoma mansoni (Schistosomatidae). The body
Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, California.)
of the slender female can be seen protruding from the gyneco-
phoric groove of the stouter male.
is probably found in the larval stages of various aquatic flies
(e.g-, caddisflies and mayflies), although members of the
family Hemiuridae are thought to have larval stages
many cases of human schistosomiasis exist in North America
mainly in crustacea. If this agent infects horses, it is thought 
among immigrants from endemic localities, but human
that as with the trematodes of bats, the horses are infected
schistosomiasis is unlikely to become endemic in the United
by the ingestion of adult flies harboring the metacercarial
States because the snail intermediate hosts (Biomphalaria, Tro-
stages of this parasite.
picorbis, Oncomelania, and Bulinus species) do not occur here.
 Identification. Sexes are separate, with the slender
Trematodes acquired by skin penetration
female lying in the gynecophoric canal of the somewhat
Family Schistosomatidae
stouter male (Figure 4-24). Adult schistosomes are parasites
Schistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma marsoni, Schistoso-
of veins of the digestive and urinary tracts of birds and
ma haematobium, and Schistosorma japonicum is second only to
mammals. Other trematodes are hermaphroditic and para-
malaria as a scourge of mankind, especially in the Caribbean
sitize tissues other than blood vessels. Eggs lack an opercu-
area, South America, Africa, and Eastern Asia. Domestic ani-
lum and contain a fully developed miracidium when
mals in various tropical areas may be affected with Schistosoma
discharged in the feces (e.g-, Schistosoma marsoni, S. japo-
bovis (cattle and sheep), Schistosoma indicum (horses, cattle,
nicum) or urine (e.g., S. haermatobium); eggs of some spe-
goats, and, in India, buffalo), Schistosoma nasale (cattle in
cies are armed with a spine. Other trematode eggs have a
India), Schistosoma suis (swine and dogs in India), and
polar operculum and lack a spine. Schistosome eggs hatch
 Schistosoma matheei (sheep, southern Africa). In Japan and
on exposure to water, so feces must be suspended in 0.85%
 the Philippines, S. japonicum is a serious parasite of humans
sodium chloride (NaCl) solution when sedimenting eggs of 
and animals alike. In North America, schistosomes present
 these parasites. A miracidium hatching technique (Goff and
-d e   d posi oi ao
 Ronald, 1980) increases the probability of detecting patent
asite of raccoon, nutria, bobcat, rabbit, and dog in the area
H. americana infection in dogs. The eggs of H. americana
extending from Florida along the Gulf Coast into Texas and
are rather spheric and possess only a slight bump on one
north at least as far as Kansas, and “swimmer's itch," a der-
side rather than a spine as seen in Schistosoma marsoni and
matitis caused by cercariae of wild waterfowl schistosomes
S. haematobium.
(Trichobilharzia, Austrobitharzia, and Biharziella species) pen-
Life history of Heterobilharzia americana. The miracid-
etrating and abortively migrating in human skin. Of course,
ium hatches soon after the egg comes in contact with water
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
131
and then enters a freshwater snail, Lyrmnaea cubersis, in
to most veterinarians: Diphyllobothrium and Spirometra.
which cercariae develop in daughter sporocysts. On emer-
Both use copepods as the first intermediate host in which
 gence from the snail, the cercariae penetrate the skin of a
the oncosphere develops into a second larval stage called a
raccoon, nutria, bobcat, rabbit, or dog and migrate by way
 procercoid. The second intermediate host may be a fish,
of the lungs to the liver. After a period of development in
amphibian, or reptile and supports development of the
the liver, mature males and females make their way to the
procercoid into a third larval stage called a plerocercoid.
mesenteric veins and mate, the more or less cylindric
The definitive host becomes infected when it ingests a
female lying in the gynecophoric groove of the male (see
second intermediate host or any of a series of paratenic
Figure 8-50). The eggs, laid in the terminal branches of the
hosts containing plerocercoids. Pseudophyllideans are asso-
 mesenteric veins, passively work through the bowel wall to
ciated with aquatic food chains. The order Cyclophyllidea
the lumen and escape with the feces (see Figures 8-51 and
contains five families of veterinary importance: Taenidae,
 8-52). The eggs evoke a granulomatous reaction that even-
Mesocestoididae, Anoplocephalidae, Dipylidiidae, and Hy-
tually prevents their egress and favors their carriage to other
 menolepididae. Most cyclophylideans require only one
organs, with the consequent production of widely dissem-
intermediate host. Depending on the family of tapeworm,
inated granulomas. The life histories of other schistosomes
the intermediate host may be a mammal (Taenidae) or an
differ only in detail from that of H. americana.
arthropod (Anoplocephalidae, Dipylidiidae, Hymenolepi-
 For treatment of H. americana infection, fenbendazole
didae). Members of the Mesocestoididae are thought to
administered orally at 40 mg/kg for 10 days completely
require two intermediate hosts, the second of which may
removed H. americana from one artificially infected dog.
be a mammal, bird, or reptile, but so far the hypothesized
whereas an untreated control dog remained infected
second larval stage and first intermediate host have not
(Ronald and Craig, 1983). Praziquantel and epsiprantel
been identified. Cyclophyllideans produce oncospheres
are also logical choices for treating H. americana infection.
with a protective capsule of embryonic membrane origin
and are associated with terrestrial food chains.
Class Cestoda
Almost all tapeworms require at least two and some
 Information on the geographic distribution and biology of
require three hosts to complete their life histories.
some cestodes of veterinary importance can be found in
Table 4-2.
phyllidean parasite of mice and sometimes of humans, is
Tapeworms belong to the class Cestoda of the phylum
exceptional in being able to complete its life history within
 Platyhelminthes and resemble trematodes in having acoe-
the confines of a single individual.
lomate parenchymatous bodies and in having both sexes
Cestodes produce eggs that when fully developed con-
represented in the same individual. An adult tapeworm is
tain a first-stage larva called an oncosphere. Oncospheres
essentially a chain (strobila) of independent, progressively
develop into a second larval stage in the body cavities or
 maturing reproductive units, one end of which is capable of
tissues of an intermediate host. Usually the second larval
attachment to the wall of the host's intestine by a holdfast
stage is infective for the definitive host on ingestion.
organ or scolex. In a fully developed adult tapeworm, all
However, in certain prominent cases, the second larval
-s aee ru e ul pedsp ane juap jo sis
 stage must first develop into a third larval stage in a
 ing at the scolex and terminating at the distal end. Although
    i     
e aq oi sde maei e pdma ndai e 
definitive host. The oncosphere is the first larval stage
 colony instead of an individual, all segments are served by
and is infective for the first (or only) intermediate host.
common osmoregulatory and nervous systems, and the
The oncosphere consists of a hexacanth embryo sur-
 animal moves in a rhythmic and coordinated manner by
rounded by two embryonic membranes. The first larval
means of the concerted activity of two zones of muscle
 stage, or hexacanth embryo, is infective to the first inter-
fbers found in each segment. There are no organs of pre-
mediate host and develops in this host into a second larval
hension or digestion; all nutrients are absorbed through the
stage. In most cyclophyllideans of interest to us, there is
tapeworm's specialized integument. The body of an adult
only one intermediate host, and the second larval stage is
tapeworm is so flattened that for the purposes of argument
the stage infective to the definitive host in which it matures.
it can be said to have two surfaces and two edges. This
In the Mesocestoididae (in which the second larval stage is
shape affords maximum surface area per unit volume, a
still hypothetical) and in the Pseudophyllidea, the second
distinct asset for an animal that absorbs all of its nourish-
larval stage organisms are infective to the second interme-
ment through its skin. Some tapeworms grow to consider-
diate host, in which they develop into a third larval stage.
 able size. The strobila of Taenia saginata, for example, may
The third larval stage of mesocestoidids and pseudophylli-
 contain as many as 2000 segments and reach a length of
deans is the form infective for the definitive host. The
3.6 m (30 feet) in the human small intestine (Arundel, 1972).
second and third larval stages of these various tapeworms
Of the 14 orders within the class Cestoda, the two orders
have their own names, which are presented later in the
that are of typical interest to veterinarians are the
discussion of their respective life histories.
Pseudophyllidea and the Cyclophyllidea. The order Pseudo-
In a teleologic sense, the objective of larval development
phyllidea is represented by only two genera of importance
is to form a scolex in a kind of intermediate host that is
132
TABLE 4-2
Information on Some Tapeworms of Veterinary Importance
Geographlc
Intermedlate
Prepatent
L
Cestode
 Flnal Hosts
Dlstrlbutlon
Egg
Hosts
Larval Stage
Scolex
Segment
Perlod
Comments
 PSEUDOPHYLLIDEA
d
L
Diphyllobothridae
Diphyllobothrium
Dogs、 cats,
Cold climate,
Operculate
Copepod*; fisht
Plerocercoid
 Slitlike, no hooks
Square, medial 40 days
Humans can be
R
humans,
fresh water
66 × 44 μm
uterine pore
 infected with
4
bears, pigs,
adult form
Helr
seals
Spirometra
Dogs, cats,
US, Australia,
Operculate
*podado
 Plerocercoid
 Slitlike, no hooks
Square, medial
1 15-30 days
 Causes human
lynx,
Asia
66 × 44 μm
tadpoles, snakes,
unueseds,
uterine pore
sparganosis
raccoons
rodentst
CYCLOPHYLLIDEA
Taeniidae
Taenia pisiformis
Dogs
Worldwide
T'aenid egg.
Cottontail rabbits 
Cysticercus
Muscular, 4 suckers,
Square
56 days
30 μm
Hooks
segments,
claw hammer-
 single lateral
shaped
pore
Taenia hydatigena
Dogs
Worldwide
T'aenid egg.
Mainly sheep
Cysticercus
Muscular, 4 suckers,
Square
51 days
30μm
Hooks
segments,
claw hammer
 single lateral
shaped
pore
Taenia ovis
Dogs
Worldwide,
Taenid egg.
Mainly sheep
Cysticercus
Muscular, 4 suckers,
Square
42-63 days
 absent in US
30μm
Hooks
segments,
claw hammer-
 single lateral
shaped
pore
Humans
Taenid egg.
Taenia saginata
Worldwide
Cattle—muscle
Cysticercus
 No hooks on scolex
Square
70-84 days
Scolex without
30 μm
segments,
hooks
single lateral
pore
Taenia solium
Humans
Worldwide
Taenid egg.
Cysticercus
Muscular, 4 suckers,
Square
35-84 days
Causes human
30 μm
Hooks
segments,
cysticercosis
claw hammer-
 single lateral
shaped
pore
Taenia asiatica
Humans
Southeast Asia
Taenid egg.
 Pigs and
Cysticercus
 No hooks on adult
Square
70-84 days
Adult scolex
30 μm
cattle—liver
scolex
segments,
without hooks
 single lateral
pore
Taenia
Cats
Worldwide
Taenid egg,
Mice and rats
Strobilocercus
Muscular, 4 suckers, Square
40 days
taeniaeformis
30 μm
Hooks
segments,
clawhammer-
 single lateral
shaped
pore
Taenia serialis
Dogs
Worldwide
Taenid egg.
Cottontail rabbits
 Coenunus
Muscular, 4 suckers,
Square
1-2
Cats have had
30 μm
Hooks
segments,
months?
coenurosis
claw hammer-
single lateral
shaped
pore
Taenia multiceps
Dogs
Worldwide,
Taenid egg,
Mainly sheep
Coenunus
Muscular, 4 suckers,
Square
30 days
 absent in US
30 μm
Hooks
segments,
and New
claw hammer-
 single lateral
Zealand
shaped
pore
Echinococcus
 Dogs, canids
Sheep areas
Taenid egg.
Mainly sheep
Unilocular
Muscular, 4 suckers,
Worms and
45-60 days
 Causes human
granulosus
30 μm
hydatid cyst
Hooks
segments
unilocular
claw hammer-
very small,
hydatidosis
shaped
usually not 
seen
Echinococcus
Foxes, dogs
Holarctic
Taenid egg.
Mice and rats
Multilocular
Muscular, 4 suckers,
Worms and
28 days
Causes human
multilocularis
30 μm
hydatid cyst
Hooks
segments
alveolar
claw hammer
very small,
hydatidosis
shaped
usually not
seen
Anoplocephalidae
Moniezia benedeni
Cattle
Worldwide
Square
Oribatid mites
Cysticercoid
Unarmed
Much wider
40 days
than long
Moniezia expansa
Sheep
Worldwide
Square to round
Oribatid mites
Cysticercoid
Unarmed
Much wider
25-45 days
than long
Moniezia caprae
Goats
Worldwide
 Square to round
 Oribatid mites
Cysticercoid
Unarmed
Much wider
???
than long
Thysanosoma
Ruminants-
 Mountainous
 Elongate, small 
Book lice
Cysticercoid
Unarmed
Fringed
???
n
actinoides
not cattle
 North and
(Psocidae)
H
South
d
America
Oribatid mites
Anoplocephala
Equids
Worldwide
Round
Cysticercoid
Unarmed
Much wider
4-6 weeks
Eggs hard to find
than long
R
magna
in feces;
4
segments
Helmint
usually not seen
Anoplocephala
Equids
Worldwide
Round
 Oribatid mites 
Cysticercoid
 Unarmed with
Usually see
4-6 weeks
perfoliata
lappets
whole worm
Unarmed
Paranoplocephala
Equids
Worldwide
Round
Oribatid mites
Cysticercoid
Much wider
4-6 weeks
mammilana
than long
Continued
133
TABLE 4-2
134
Information on Some Tapeworms of Veterinary Importance-
-cont'd
Geographlc
Intermedlate
Prepatent
Cestode
Flnal Hosts
Dlstrlbutlon
333
Hosts
Larval Stage
Scolex
Segment
Perlod
Comments
L
Dipylidiidae
Dogs, cats,
4 suckers,
21 days
Occasionally,
Dipylidium
Worldwide
Eggs passed in
Fleas
Cysticercoid
 Pumpkin
caninum
other felids
egg packets
retractable
seed-
adult worms in
d
and canids
rostellum 
shaped
children
segments
R
with lateral
 pores on
both sides
Helr
Mesocestoididae
Mesocestoides spp.
Raecoons,
Worldwide
Eggs confined to First host still
Tetrathyridium
Muscular 4 suckers;
 Small, sesame
20-30 days
Dogs can be
dogs,cats
parauterine
unknown;
no hooks
seed-
infected with
organ
reptiles and
like, with
tetrathy-
mammals'
contained
nidia. Rare
parauterine
human
organ
infections.
*First intermediate host.
Second intermediate host.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
135
likely, for one reason or another, to be ingested by a suit-
able definitive host. Because this objective has been reached
in such diverse hosts as mites and cattle, there is consider-
ably more variation in size and form among larval cestodes
than among adults. It is at this point that uniformity of
structure and function gives way to diversity. Therefore
details of larval development are discussed in connection
with life histories in the following characterization of ces-
tode families.
When an infective tapeworm larva first arrives in the
intestine of its definitive host, most of the infective larva’s
body is digested away, leaving only the scolex and a bit of
undifferentiated tissue called the neck. The scolex attaches
to the intestinal wall, and the neck begins to bud off seg-
ments. These segments remain attached to one another to
form the chain mentioned previously. At first the segments
remain undifferentiated, but ovaries, testes, vitellaria, and
other reproductive organs gradually begin to take shape in
the segments some distance removed from the neck. These
reproductive organs gradually mature, eggs and sperm are
formed, and fertilization occurs. Depending on the kind of
FIGURE 425. Diphyllobothrium latum (Diphyllobothridae), scolex 0f
tapeworm, the fertilized eggs either are discharged through
Stained, pemmanent mount.
a uterine pore or accumulate in the segment. Therefore the
terminal segments of a mature tapeworm are found to be
empty in the former case and packed full of eggs like ripe
its ciliated inner membrane or embryophore, pops open
seedpods in the latter.
the operculum of the shell and swims away (Figure 4-28).
The anatomic details and nomenclature of the genitalia
The ciliated pseudophyllidean oncosphere is called a
are important in detailed taxonomic work but need not be
coracidium.
emphasized here because a reliable identification usually
can be made on the basis of host identity and somewhat
Family Diphyllobothridae
more accessible morphologic features as outlined later.
Identification
However, differences do exist between cyclophyllideans
The scolex of Diphyllobothrium latum and Spirometra
and pseudophyllideans that are important in diagnosis
mansoroides has two slitlike grooves (see Figure 4-25).
and in understanding their particular life histories.
Mature segments are broader than long (Figure 4-29; see
also Figure 4-26). The uterus consists of a spiral tube with
Pseudophyllldean Tapeworms
four to eight loops on each side and opens to the outside
The holdfast of pseudophyllideans has only two shallow,
through a midventral uterine pore behind the genital pore.
longitudinally grooved bothria for locomotion and attach-
The reproductive organs are concentrated at the centers of
ment (Figure 4-25). The two most important genera,
the segments (see Figure 4-29). Operculated eggs are dis-
Diphyllobothrium and Spirometra, have no hooks to assist
charged through the uterine pore.
the weak grip of the bothria. The considerable area of con-
tact between the long chain of broad segments and the
Life history
 intestinal mucosa apparently affords suffcient traction to
The two important genera of Diphyllobothriidae in vet-
maintain the tapeworm in place.
erinary medicine, Diphyllobothrium and Spirometra, differ
Pseudophylidean segments have a uterine pore that per-
mits the escape of eggs (Figure 4-26). Segments over a consid-
erable length of the strobila discharge their eggs until their
supply is exhausted. The terminal segments of pseudophyllid-
ean tapeworms become senile rather than gravid and are usu-
ally detached in short chains rather than individually. Thus the
 diagnosis of pseudophyllidean infection depends on distin-
 guishing the operculate eggs in fecal sediments from those of
 trematodes, which sometimes is not an easy matter.
The pseudophyllidean oncosphere and its two mem-
branes are surrounded in turn by an operculate shell
(Figure 4-27). The outermost membrane remains behind
 in the shell when the oncosphere, now surrounded only by
FIGURE 426. Mature Segment of Diphyllobothrium latum.
136
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
Operculum
Shel
Coracidium
FIGURE 427. Egg of Spirometra mansonoides (Diphyllobothridae).
The capsule of diphyllobothrid eggs is operculate; this one
HGURE 4-29. Spirometra mansonoides (Diphyllobothridae), entire
contains a fully developed coracidium.
specimen from a cat. Note how small the scolex is relative to
the mature segments and also the central location of the genita-
lia throughout the length of the tapeworm.
in that one exclusively uses aquatic intermediate hosts and
the other uses amphibious and terrestrial intermediate
hosts. Diphyllobothriurn species use copepods and fish.
develops into a solid wormlike procercoid within the
Spirometra species use copepods, amphibians, reptiles,
body cavity (Figure 4-30). When the infected copepod is
birds, and mammals.
ingested by a second intermediate host, the procercoid
D. latum has a life cycle similar to that of other pseu-
 enters its musculature or connective tissues and develops
dophyllidean tapeworms that requires two intermediate
into a plerocercoid (Figure 4-31). The plerocercoid is nota-
 hosts, of which the first is a copepod and the second is a
ble for its ability to parasitize a series of predatory paratenic
vertebrate, whereas cyclophyllidean development involves
hosts until a suitable definitive host is found. Thus when a
 only one intermediate host. When ingested by a copepod,
pike eats a minnow infected with the plerocercoids of D.
the coracidium (oncosphere with ciliated embryophore)
latum, these merely invade the flesh of the pike and remain
plerocercoids. However, when a human, a dog, or a cat eats
either the minnow or the pike, the plerocercoid matures
into an adult tapeworm, with the prepatent period (i.e., the
time between infection and the appearance of detectable
stages, which in this case are eggs found in the feces)
being about 5 or 6 weeks. D. latum procercoids develop
FIGURE 4-28. Coracidium of Spirometra mansonoides. Phase con-
HGURE 430. Copepod (Cyclops vermalis) with body cavity filled
trast electronic flash photomicrograph of the free-swimming
with three different procercoids (arrows) of Spirometra mansonoides;
organism. (Courtesy Dr. Justus Mueller.)
electronic flash photomicrograph of living organisms.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
137
causing human sparganosis, as Mueller and Coulston
(1941) demonstrated by experiments on themselves where
they inserted spargana into the tissues of their arms.
D. latum and S. marsonoides are usually less obtrusive
than other tapeworm parasites of dogs and cats because
 s  n iq ss  n o a
or less continuously through the uterine pores of their
mature segments. Therefore the client usually is unaware
of Diphyllobothrium and Spirometra infection unless a
whole tapeworm or a long chain of senile segments is dis-
charged at once. Diphyllobothrium infection is acquired by
eating uncooked predatory freshwater fish. S. marsonoides
o  a  aa ssd aq 
such diverse second intermediate hosts as frogs and mice.
In the type locality (Syracuse, New York), Natrix, a water
snake, is frequently found infected with S. mansonoides
plerocercoids.
Famllles of Cyclophylldean Cestodes
Compared with the rest of the mature worm, which may be
several meters long in the larger species, the scolex is
FGURE 431. Spirometra mansonoides plerocercoid larva in the sub
minute, frequently measuring less than a millimeter. The
cutaneous tissues of a white mouse. (Photograph [about twice
cyclophyllidean scolex has four radially disposed muscular
natural size] courtesy Dr. Robert Smith; culture courtesy Dr.
suckers that serve for attachment and locomotion (Figure
Justus Mueller.)
4-33). These suckers and the tissue immediately surround-
 ing them are quite mobile. Dr. Georgi described watching a
severed scolex of Taeria pisiformis “walk” with remarkable
 in copepods of the genus Diaptomus, and its plerocercoids
agility across the bottom of a Petri dish. Each sucker in turn
develop in fish. Definitive hosts of D. latum include
was advanced on a stalk of tissue and fixed to the bottom of
humans, dogs, mongooses, walruses, seals, sea lions,
the dish. Then the scolex was drawn toward the point of
bears, foxes, and minks (Wardle and McLeod, 1952).
fixation by contraction of the stalk of tissue, another sucker
Spirometra mansonoides procercoids develop in cope-
advanced, and so on. At the apex of most cyclophyllidean
pods of the genus Cyclops. Its plerocercoids develop in “any
scolices there is a dome-shaped projection, the rostellum,
class of vertebrates except fishes"'; even kittens fed procer-
which is sometimes retractable into the scolex and may
coids support development of plerocercoids, which appear
be armed with small hooks. In the family Taenidae a non-
in the flat muscles of the body wall and subcutaneous fascia
retractable rostellum is armed with two concentric rows
(Mueller, 1974). The natural intermediate host is probably
of hooks. Strong muscles operate these hooks in a con-
the water snake Natrix, and the natural definitive host
certed and rhythmic clawing motion. The points are pro-
is probably the bobcat Lynx rufus. Other definitive hosts
jected in a manner similar to a cat baring its claws, but in a
of S. marsonoides include the domestic cat and dog and the
centrifugal direction. This clawing motion ceases once
raccoon (Mueller, 1974). The life history is illustrated in
the scolex has found safe anchorage in the intestinal wall
 Figure 4-32; animals can begin shedding eggs in the feces as
(see Figure 7-45). Cyclophyllidean families that lack rostel-
 soon as 10 days after the ingestion of the larval plerocercoid
lar hooks (e.g., Anoplocephalidae, Mesocestoididae) tend
stage.
to have more strongly developed suckers to make up for it.
An Eastern Asian species, Spirometra mansoni, does use
Segments of cyclophyllidean strobila have genital pores
frogs, rabbits, and birds for development of the plerocer-
for fertilization but no opening to allow the eggs to escape
coid (see Figure 8-68). Not so very long ago, it was the
from the uterus. Therefore the eggs accumulate until the
custom in parts of the Eastern Asia to apply the incised
segment becomes packed full like a ripe seedpod. As they
body of a freshly caught frog as a poultice to wounds,
reach the end of the chain, these gravid segments are
sore eyes, and the like. (This behavior is not so unlike the
detached and pass out with the feces or crawl out the
au ana, on yes mi e jo uone uoo auo
anus onto the perianal skin. Therefore cyclophylidean
bruising’ associated with a black eye.) The plerocercoids
 infections are usually diagnosed by identifying gravid seg-
of Spirometra marsori, if present in the tissues of the frog,
ments on the host or in its environment.
would then transfer to the human host and migrate about
Cyclophyllidean oncospheres are fully developed when
in the subcutaneous connective tissues, a condition dubbed
 passed in the feces of the definitive host and are immedi-
 sparganosis in the human medical literature. The plerocer-
ately infective for the intermediate host. These oncospheres
coids (spargana) of S. marsonoides are also capable of
lack a true shell and technically should not be called eggs,
138
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
Adult tapeworm
Definitive host
FIGURE  432. Life history of
Spirometra mansonoides, a pseudo-
phyllidean   tapeworm.  Coracidia
Eggs in
develop and hatch from eggs
feces
deposited in  water and swim
about until they are ingested by
copepods of the genus Cyclops.
Shedding its ciliated coat, the hex-
acanth embryo develops into a pro-
cercoid larva in the body cavity of
Host 2
the copepod. If an infected cope-
pod is swallowed by any vertebrate
except a fish, the procercoids
Operculate
develop into plerocercoids, which
egg
tend to locate in the subcutaneous 
tissues and flat muscles of the
body wall. Plerocercoids survive
Host 1
predation of  their hosts and 
Plercerce
 remain plerocercoids in their new
hosts unless the new host hap-
 pens to be a cat. Plerocercoids
Coracidium
develop into adult S. mansonoides
Procercoid
tapewonms in the small intestine 
 of the domestic cat and bobcat.
but most authors call them this and so shall we. The outer
Teratologic development of cestode larvae is not at all
membrane of the cyclophyllidean oncosphere serves as a
uncommon, and occasionally cases are observed in which
protective capsule in some species. However, the outer
larval tapeworm tissue behaves much like a malignant neo-
membrane of taeniid oncospheres is delicate and usually
plasm. For example, Williams, Lindsay, and Engelkirk
' siso e un ieade aa su au Aq iso uq su
(1985) reported a fatal case of peritoneal cestodiasis in a
The inner embryonic membrane (embryophore) serves as
dog from which parasites actually passed out through a
 a protective coat for the taenid oncosphere. In anoploce-
phalids, the embryophore is a distinctive pear-shaped body
tissue was recovered from the peritoneal cavity at necropsy.
(pyriform apparatus), and in taeniids it consists of a rather
The parasites were too abnormal both grossly and histolo-
thick layer of prismatic blocks. The eggs of Dipylidium
gically to identify, even by careful comparison with speci-
sono a py sind u panas ane un 
mens of the most likely candidates, Mesocestoides corti,
of the uterine wall.
Taenia crassiceps, and Taenia multiceps.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
139
FIGURE 434. Benia taeniaeformis (Taenidae); scanning electron
micrograph by Dr. Ronald Minor. The rostellum of taenid tape-
worms is nonretractable and is anmed with a row of long hooks
and a concentric row of short hooks.
(Figure 4-34; see also Figure 4-33). The segments are
more or less rectangular, with unilateral genital pores alter-
FGURE 4-33. Holdfast and neck of Taenia sp., showing four suck-
nating irregularly from one side to the other along the stro-
ers and nonretractable rostellum with hooks.
bila (Figure 4-35). The eggs in gravid segments are typical
of the family (Figure 4-36). Differentiation of genera and
Family Taenidae
 species is based on number and sizes of rostellar hooks and
Benia
on morphology of mature segments and may require the
 Identification. Adult tapeworms of the genus Taenia
services of an expert (Verster, 1969). Taenid tapeworms of
measure from tens to hundreds of centimeters in length,
the genus Echinococcus are recognized by their very small
depending on the species in question and degree of matu-
bodies, millimeters in length, composed of only four or
rity of the specimen. The scolex has four suckers and a
five segments, along with hooks and eggs that are morpho-
nonretractable rostellum armed with two rows of hooks
logically similar to those of other taenid tapeworms.
Osmoregulatory
duct
Uterus
Vas
deferens
Cirrus
Testes
sac
Vagina
Ovary
Ootype
Vitellaria
FGURE 435. Mature Taenia segment.
140
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
 consists of a fluid-filled bladder with one or more scolices
Embryophore
(often called a bladderworm) and is surrounded by a
connective tissue capsule formed by the vertebrate interme-
diate host.
Until the middle of the nineteenth century, the relation-
ship of bladderworms to tapeworms was not recognized.
Therefore different stages of the same species were
 described and named as distinct species belonging to sep-
arate phyla. For example, Cysticercus cellulosae was placed
d s s  d p u  
T. soliurm, was referred to the defunct phylum Vermes.
The older names of the larval stages are still occasionally
used to identify the morphologically different larval stages
of tapeworms. Such usage is helpful in describing patho-
logic specimens because it eliminates the need for writing
Hexacanth
"the cysticercus of Taenia such-and-such." However,
 embryo
because the specific names of the adult and larval stages
FIGURE 4-36. Egg of Benia taeniaeformis (Taenidae) of the cat. The
often differ, these additional names can add to the confu-
capsule of taenid eggs is fragile; eggs in fecal smears have
sion that sometimes surrounds the events in the develop-
usually lost their capsules.
ment of different species of tapeworm. Therefore their use
has been minimized herein as much as possible.
When a second larval stage of a taenid tapeworm is
 Species of the genus Taenia are fairly restricted in their final
ingested by a suitable definitive host, the bladder is digested
host usage, where the adult worm is found in the small
away, the scolex embeds itself in the mucosa of the small
intestine. Taenia species commonly occurring as adults in
intestine, and the neck begins to bud off segments to form
o  uy  sd 1 u s
the strobila. Eggs of taenid tapeworms first appear in the
Taenia serialis, and T. multiceps. Taenia species occurring
feces 6 to 9 weeks after ingestion of the larva. Williams and
as adults in human beings include Taenia solium, T. sagi-
Shearer ( 1982) observed a prepatent period of 34 to 80 days
nata, and Taenia asiatica. The common Taenia species
for T. taeniaeformis in cats, and the infections remained
occurring in adult form in the domestic cat is Taenia tae-
 patent for 7 to 34 months.
niaeformis. Common species of Echinococcus in canids
 There are four basic kinds of taeniid second-stage larvae:
include Echinococcus granulosus and Echinococcus multilo-
the cysticercus, strobilocercus, coenurus, and hydatid.
cularis (also found on occasion in domestic cats). In South
Members of the genus Taenia typically form cysticerci,
America a species of Echinococcus in felids is Echinococcus
strobilocerci, and coenuri, depending on the species in ques-
oligarthus; Echinococcus vogeli is a species that cycles
tion. A cysticercus (Figures 4-38, 4-39, and 4-40; see also
between the bush dog, Speothos venaticus, and the paca,
Figure 8-60) consists of a single bladder with one scolex.
Cuniculus paca. In Tibet the species Echinococcus shiquicus
A strobilocercus (Figure 4-41; see also Figure 8-61) is a
cycles between the Tibetan fox, Vulpes ferrilata, and the
cysticercus that has already begun to elongate and segment
 plateau pika, Ochotona curzoniae.
 while still in the intermediate host, and a coenurus (Figure
 Life history. Gravid taenid segments (Figure 4-37) are
4-42) consists of a single bladder with many scolices, each
shed and exit from the carnivorous definitive host through
with the potential for developing into a mature tapeworm
the anus; the segments of Echirococcus species are so small
(see Figure 8-62). Hydatids are formed by members of
that they are never observed, and offen only free eggs
the genus Echinococus and are of two kinds, unilocular
are passed in the feces. The segments crawl about on the
hydatid cysts (see Figure 8-64) and alveolar hydatids
 pelage of the host or surface of the fecal mass, emptying
(see Figure 8-57), both of which often contain thousands
themselves of their eggs (oncospheres) in the process.
of scolices. Usually, one Taenia oncosphere develops into
Therefore any segment collected after it has been out for
 only one bladderworm. However, in the case of T. crassiceps.
 more than a few minutes may contain few if any eggs.
asexual multiplication (budding) results in many cysticerci
If ingested by a suitable vertebrate intermediate host
(g arii aas) asd ansssso as e a po
(usually a species normally taken as prey by the definitive
Such a structure may easily be mistaken for a hydatid cyst by
host), the egg hatches and the hexacanth embryo enters the
the unwary observer. Many coenuri branch and ramify
wall of the intestine and migrates to its organ of predilec-
extensively to form very complex structures, and terato-
tion, usually the liver and peritoneal membranes or the
logic malformations may result in diverse and complex
skeletal and cardiac muscles. Here the hexacanth embryo
structures.
 grows, cavitates, and differentiates to form the second larval
Cysticercosis. T. hydatigena is a canine taenid tape-
stage, which is infective to the definitive host. The fully
worm with a cysticercus (see Figure 4-38) that migrates
developed second larval stage of the family Taeniidae
through the liver tissue and encysts on the peritoneal
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
141
Oncosphere
Cysticerus
Hexacanth embryo 
FIGURE 437. Life history of Baenia pisiformis, a cyclophyllidean tapeworm. Oncospheres (eggs) of
hexacanth embryo hatches, invades the mucosa of the small intestine, and makes its way to the
liver. Tunneling through the liver, the hexacanth grows, cavitates to form a bladder, and develops a
holdfast organ complete with two rows of hooks and four suckers. Fully developed cysticerci may
remain in the liver, but they are more often found encapsulated on the peritoneal surfaces of the
mesentery. When a dog eats an infected rabbit, the bladder is digested, leaving only the holdfast 
and adjacent neck. The holdfast attaches to the wall of the small intestine, and segments begin to 
form at the neck.
membranes of cattle, sheep, swine, and certain wild ungu-
of C. rovyi. However, frank disease is rarely caused by this
lates. Massive invasions, such as when entire tapeworm
larval tapeworm, and the principal economic loss results 
segments are ingested, result in acute traumatic hepatitis,
from condemnation of infected livers by meat inspection
and even small numbers of migrating T. hydatigena larvae
authorities. Rare cases of human cysticercosis and coenu-
rosis are also caused by larvae of canine taenids.
142
C H A P TE R 4 Helminths
FGURE 4-41. Strobilocerci aenia taeniaeformis in the liver of two
FIGURE 438. Cysticercus of Benia hydatigena (Taenidae) from the
 experimentally infected rats.
 mesenteries of a sheep.
Taeria ovis is a second canine taenid tapeworm with a
cysticercus that infects the cardiac and skeletal muscles of
sheep and represents the most important pathologic lesion
found by United States inspectors in imported Australian
mutton. In one instance $1,540,000 worth of boneless
mutton (12.5% of the total shipment) had to be sold
as pet food or shipped back to Australia (Arundel, 1972).
This tapeworm is no longer found in the United States.
Vaccines for sheep have been developed with very good
efficacy against the development of the cysticercoid stage,
but unfortunately they have yet to be commercially
HGURE 439. Cysticerci of Benia crassiceps in the abdominal
employed to any great extent.
cavity of an albino mouse that was injected with 10 of these
T. pisiformis is a third canine taeniid tapeworm, with the
selfreplicating cysticerci.
cysticercus being found in the liver and peritoneal cavity
of rabbits. This tapeworm is the most common taeniid
 tapeworm of dogs in the United States. It also indicates
how well the process works, because every dog that is so
infected must have eaten a rabbit or parts of a rabbit, and
this means that many rabbits are infected by grazing near
where T. pisiformis segments have been shed.
FIGURE 440. Cysticerci of aenia crassiceps as they appear in a
FGURE 442. A coenurus of Benia serialis from the subcutaneous
petri dish.
axillary region of a chinchilla.
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
143
 T. saginata is a taenid tapeworm of human beings that
cysticerci localize, and sites may include most typically
has an “unarmed" scolex, i.e., the scolex has no hooks. The
muscle, but also, eye, brain, or spinal cord. Dogs can also
cysticercus of T. saginata encysts in the striated muscles
on rare occasions be infected with these cysticerci (see
of cattle, especially the heart and muscles of mastication.
Figure 8-60).
The cystericus, like the adult form, has an unarmed scolex.
Strobilocercus. T. taeniaeformis, the common taenid
Taeniid eggs survive the rigors of the septic tank, as well as
tapeworm of the domestic cats, has a larval stage that is
many contemporary municipal sewage treatment processes,
termed a strobilocercus (see Figure 4-4l; see also Figures
and because defecating out-of-doors is unavoidable when
8-54 to 8-56 and 8-61). This larval stage is not of any sig-
hunting or camping out (and because the segments can
nificant zoonotic potential.
Coenurosis. T. multiceps is a canine taenid tapeworm,
it is easy to see how cattle pastures become contaminated
with the larval stage being a coenurus that invades the cra-
with T. saginata eggs. The cysticerci that develop when
nial cavity of sheep, goats, and sometimes cattle. As the cyst
these eggs are ingested by cattle are relatively inconspicuous
grows over a period of 6 or 8 months, neurologic signs of
and easily overlooked by the lover of rare or raw (“cannibal
progressive space occupation slowly develop. There may be
sandwich") beef. Consequently, T. saginata is a common
blindness, incoordination, walking in circles, and pressing
parasite in the United States and would be far more
the head against walls, tree trunks, and the like. Finally, the
common but for the vigilance of our meat inspectors.
animal lies down and dies. The most common diseases
Condemnation of carcass meats for the presence of T. sagi-
that might be confused with cerebral coenurosis are bacte-
nata cysticerci can result in great economic loss. Sometimes
rial  encephalitis (listeriosis) and parelaphostrongylosis.
this loss is concentrated in a particular lot of cattle and
Intracranial surgery is the only cure for cerebral coenurosis
borne by a single producer. Under such circumstances the
but lies beyond economic reality for sheep unless the shep-
economic loss caused by T. saginata ceases to be an abstract
herd is very skillful with his jackknife. The location of the
number and becomes of immediate concern, not only
larva within the skull makes some people wonder how the
to the unlucky producer, but to his veterinarian, too.
scolices ever reach a dog's stomach, but they must not real-
The problem is that some person, most likely a farm or
ize that a good stout dog can crush a sheep's skull with one
feedlot employee, has a tapeworm and has defecated or
bite. As in the case of T. hydatigena and Taenia ovis, control
 shed segments in or near the cattle feed. People are gener-
can be based only on excluding dogs and other canids
ally uncooperative under such circumstances, and the
from sheep pastures. Unfortunately, this is often next to
culprit is rarely identified.
impossible.
T. asiatica is a taeniid tapeworm of human beings in
T. serialis is another taeniid tapeworm of canids with a
southeast Asia (e.g., Thailand, Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan,
larval stage that is a coenurus. In this case the larval stage
and the Philippines). The cysticercus has hooks and is
typically develops in the subcutaneous tissues or the viscera
found in the liver of pigs (occasionally cattle) and does
 of rabbits. Cerebral coenurosis in cats appears in isolated
not occur in muscle. When this form develops to the
cases (Georgi, de Lahunta, and Percy, 1969; Hayes and
adult stage in humans, the hooks are lost, and the tape-
Creighton, 1978; Kingston et al, 1984; Smith et al, 1988).
worm appears morphologically and molecularly very
Marked by severe neurologic disturbances, it is invariably
similar to T. saginata. This form has caused significant
fatal. The responsible species is probably T. serialis owing to
economic losses in pigs in the area where it occurs and
the disappearance of T. multriceps from the United States.
is thought to be maintained by the habit of humans
eating raw liver. This form may be considered a separate
Echinococcus
sadsans aerds e peuisp uaaq su iq sas
 Identification. The genus Echinococcus contains two spe-
with the name Taenia saginata asiatica (Fan et al, 1995;
cies of special importance to veterinary medicine, E. grarulosus
Hoberg et al, 2001).
and E. mulrilocularis, which are very small (2 to 8 mm long)
T. solium is the “armed" taeniid tapeworm of human
adult tapeworms having only four or five segments, of which
beings. The cysticercus of the human tapeworm T. solium,
only the terminal segment is gravid (Figure 4-43). In E. grar-
unlike those of T. saginata and T. asiatica, represents a
ulosus, 45 to 65 testes are generally distributed, and the genital
significant hazard to human health. People become infected
 pore is located at or posterior to the middle of the segment.
with T. soliur by ingesting the cysticerci in undercooked
In E. multilocularis, 17 to 26 testes are found posterior to
pork. After the tapeworm matures, the person's feces con-
the genital pore, which is located anterior to the middle of
tain a steady supply of eggs, which may be conveyed to the
the segment. Caution: Human hydatid infection may be
 mouth at any time by a lapse in personal hygiene. When
acquired by ingesting the eggs of Echinococus species;
the eggs reach the stomach, the oncospheres hatch out,
wear gloves and wash carefully when handling the feces of
enter the gut wall, and wander far and wide in the body,
potentially infected carnivores.
slowly developing into cysticerci. Apparently the milieu
 E. granulosus is endemic in North and South America,
interieur of humans resembles that of swine closely
England, Africa, the Middle East, Australia, and New
 enough to satisfy the development requirements of the
Zealand. E. multilocularis is endemic in north-central
cysticercus. In humans the signs depend on where the
Europe, Alaska, Canada, and the central United States as
144
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
and mules. The hydatid membrane may bud off daughter
cysts either internally or externally. The whole structure
Occupies progressively more space as it grows, but hydatid
cysts do not infiltrate, in contrast to alveolar hydatids.
Pathogenic effects of hydatid cysts include pressure atrophy
of surrounding organs and allergic reactions to hydatid fluid
Jo sq ias  isho pa a e jo a se
germinative membrane, scolices, and brood capsules
throughout the pleural or peritoneal cavity and result in
multiple hydatidosis. Pulmonary hydatid cysts may rupture
into a bronchus, the contents may be coughed up, and the
 eventually die and degenerate, but the course is protracted.
E. multilocularis is a parasite of canids, mainly foxes
and wolves in arctic regions. The larval stage, the alveolar
hydatid cyst, develops in the liver of voles and lemmings
(see Figures 8-57 and 8-58). The alveolar hydatid is char-
 nd Aisnonuuo ieu surppnq snoussoxa Aq pazuaoe
erates and infiltrates surrounding tissue. As with unilocular
hydatid cysts, the alveolar hydatid contains many small
scolices, each of which is termed a protoscolex (plural,
protoscolices). People become infected when they ingest
the egg of E. multilocularis.
Unilocular hydatid disease. The unilocular hydatid cyst
is the second-stage larva of E. grarulosus and is infective
to dogs and other canids that serve as definitive hosts
(Figure 4-44). Starting as an oncosphere less than 30 μm
in diameter, the larva grows very slowly and infrequently
exceeds more than a few centimeters in diameter in slaugh-
tered sheep and catle. Because humans live longer, a fertile
au pue aaiel Aiaa mona Aeu uu Suoau pepau
with the function of neighboring organs by pressing against
them. The hydatid membrane is surrounded by, but usually
not attached to, an inflammatory connective tissue capsule
(see Figure 8-64). The space between the host and the
parasite generally contains a small volume of clear, color-
less, or light-yellow liquid. Brood capsules, each containing
many scolices, develop from the germinal epithelium lining
the laminated hydatid membrane (Figure 4-45). Some of
these rupture, releasing scolices to form a sediment of
so-called “hydatid sand" in the hydatid fluid (Figure 4-46).
FIGURE 443. Echinococcus granurosus (Taenidae), entire worm.
far south as Illinois and Nebraska (Ballard and Vande
Vusse, 1983).
Life history. E. granulosus is a parasite as adults of the
dog, coyote, wolf, and dingo. Its larva is a unilocular hydatid
cyst in sheep, swine, cattle, humans, moose, caribou, kan-
 garoos, and others. Species vary in their suitability as inter-
mediate hosts. Hydatid cysts found in sheep are usually
fertile, whereas those in cattle tend to be sterile. Subspecies
of E. grarnulosus differ in their preferences for intermediate
hosts. For example, E. granulosus granulosus hydatids belong
FGURE 444. Ahydatid cyst (Echinococus granurlosus) in the liver of a
to the subspecies adapted to sheep and humans, whereas E.
horse. This horse displayed no clinical signs of hepatic involvement 
granulosus equinus is the subspecies found in horses, asses,
'paensnll auo au asll sisho oe ol o jo anuasaid au andsap
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
145
Alveolar hydatid disease. Alveolar hydatid cysts are the
Brood capsule
Scolices
second larval stage of E. multilocularis (the first being the
hexacanth embryo within the egg) and contain protosco-
lices that are infective to dogs, foxes, and cats, which serve
as definitive hosts (Figure 4-47). Alveolar hydatids may
develop in voles, lemmings, catfle, horses, swine,
and
humans. In humans the cysts are typically “sterile" and
become a proliferating germinal membrane that continu-
ously proliferates and infiltrates surrounding tissue like a
malignant neoplasm. Alveolar hydatid infection proves
 invariably fatal in a few years. In North America the largest
Laminating membrane
numbers of cases in human beings have occurred in areas
where the parasite has entered the peridomestic cycle by
infecting dogs and rodents in native American villages.
This occurred in St. Lawrence Island, Alaska, where a
large number of villagers were infected with this parasite.
Cases continue to be reported from Alaska; and there has
 Host tissue
been one case reported from the lower 48 United States, in
Minnesota. In central Europe, almost 600 cases have been
FGURE 4-45. Echinococcus granulosus hydatid cyst with three brood
reported in recent years, with most being from eastern
 France to western Switzerland. Often in people the entire
capsules, each containing three or more protoscolices.
cyst cannot be removed by surgical resection because of its
indiscrete boundaries, making it harder to treat than the
Endogenous daughter cysts may be found free in the fluid-
discrete cysts of unilocular hydatidosis. Patients are often
flled cyst cavity or attached to the germinal epithelium.
placed on long-term anthelmintic therapy with products
Exogenous daughter cysts are relatively unusual; they may be
such as albendazole. Of 408 patients who were alive in
found in the pericystic space between the hydatid membrane
2000 whose cases were reported to the central European
and the host connective tissue capsule. “Sterile" hydatids,
hydatid registry, only 4.9% were considered to have been
so-called because they lack protoscolices, often form in cattle
cured of their infection.
and swine, making the diagnosis sometimes difficult and
Control. Both E. granulosus and E. multilocularis tend
presumptive.
to establish sylvatic cycles when suitable predator-prey
FIGURE 446. Protoscolices of Echinococus granulosus from a hydatid cyst. The one on the left is
invaginated, whereas the one on the right is evaginated.
146
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
relationships exist in the wildlife population of a region.
 Therefore E. granulosus cycles are maintained among wild
ruminants and wolves in the Canadian north woods and
among wallabies and dingoes in Australia. Natural nidi of
E. multilocularis are maintained in various rodents and
foxes. The sylvatic cycle reaches humans through their
domesticated animals. Dogs that scavenge the entrails of
wild game infected with Echinococcus species become
direct sources of hydatid infection to humans and their
domestic animals. Contamination of pastures with the
feces of infected wild carnivorans also results in hydatid
infection of domestic ruminants and swine. The establish-
ment of a pastoral cycle may then result from the feeding of
uncooked offal from these domestic animals to dogs and,
in the case of E. multilocularis, to cats (Figure 4-48).
 The direct source of human infection is, in most instances,
the domestic dog or cat, and scrupulous hygiene is the first line
of defense. Periodic anthelmintic medication of dogs or cats,
depending on the species of tapeworm involved, carries the
threat one step further away. In the case of a well-established
 sylvatic cycle, this is about as far as it is practical to go.
Echinococcus infection may be reduced to insignificant inci-
dence in cases in which it is limited to a pastoral cycle and thus
FIGURE 447. Echinococcus multilocularis alveolar hydatid.
accessible to manipulation by humans. Destruction of all stray
Pastoral
Sylvatic
(domestic animals)
(endemic in wildlife)
Sheep
Moose, caribou, etc.
(pne pAu)
(hydatid)
Dog
Wolf
[E. granuiosus)
(E. granu/osus)
Wallaby
Man
(hydatid)
(hyd atid)
FIGURE 448. Pastoral and sylvatic cycles
of Echinococcus granulosus and Echinococcus
Dingo
multilocular's.
(E. granuiosus)
Domestic
herbivores
(alveolar hydatid)
Vole, lemming,
cotton rat, etc
Cat, dog
(alveolar hydatid)
(E. mu/tiocueris)
Fox
(E. multiocularis)
Man
(alveolar hydatid)
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
147
 dogs, regimented anthelmintic medication of the rest, and
prohibition against feeding uncooked offal to dogs and cats
are mandatory.
A campaign against hydatid disease was begun in Iceland
1864. At the outset, about one in six or seven people and
virtually all ages of slaughter sheep and cattle harbored
hydatid cysts, and about one fourth of the dogs were
 infected with the adult worm. By 1900 the human infection
rate had fallen dramatically and has basically reached
the point of nonexistence. The campaign, devised by
Dr. Harald Krabbe of the Royal Veterinary and Agricultural
 University of Copenhagen, consisted of alerting the public
Genitalia
to the need to observe strict hygiene in dealing with dogs,
 destroying all cysts and infected offal, and administering
FIGURE 449. Mature segments of Moniezia expansa (Anoplo-
mandatory anthelmintic medication to all dogs (Palsson,
cephalidae).
1976). Thus salutary results in Echinococcus control can
 be achieved in a century or so, provided there is no sylvatic
They are found in the small intestine of cattle, sheep, and
cycle to complicate the issue. In Australia, for example,
goats (Moniezia benedeni, Moniezia expansa, and Moniezia
a sylvatic cycle involving kangaroos and Canis dingo
caprae). Interproglottidal glands at the posterior margin of
would have to be considered in any eradication attempt.
each segment extend the full width of M. expansa but occupy
"Obviously the denial of sheep offal to domestic dogs will
only the midzone of the M. beredeni segment (Figure 4-49).
 not eliminate infection if dogs have access to macropods
The egg of M. benedeni found in cattle feces is one of the few
 in dingo-infested areas" (Herd and Coman, 1975). In the 
eggs that appears square, and internally the pear-shaped
 United States, E. granulosus appears to be most prevalent
(pyriform apparatus) characteristic of anoplocephalid eggs
 in sheep-raising areas of Utah (Loveless et al, 1978) and
can be seen (Figure 4-50).
California. In California the spread of echinococcosis
 Thysanosoma actinioides, the fringed tapeworm, is found
appears to be related to a quaint transhuman form of
in the common bile duct and duodenum of virtually all rumi-
husbandry in which bands of sheep migrate from place to
nant species except cattle. Ligature of the bile duct within
place under the control of contract Basque shepherds from
       s 
Spain and France. These shepherds, for the most part, are
probably found almost exclusively in the intestine of the
ignorant of the epidemiology of hydatid disease and feed
living animal (Boisvenue and Hendrix, 1987). The endemic
their dogs mostly on dead sheep (Araujo et al, 1975).
areas of T. actirioides are the western parts of North and
There have been vaccines for sheep produced that have
South America, especially mountainous areas. Wyominia
been successful in preventing the development of hydatid
tetoni is found in mountain sheep (Ovis caradersis).
 cysts in sheep. These vaccines are currently undergoing field
T. actinioides has wide segments with bilateral genitalia and a
trials in various parts of the world and may go a long way in
fringe of outgrowths at the posterior border of each segment.
 providing new means for the eradication of this parasite
 in certain locals.
Other Cyclophylldean Tapeworms
Capsule
The second larval stage of all of the following cyclophylidean
families are cysticercoids of one kind or another. A cysticer-
coid may be thought of as a cysticercus small enough to fit into
the body of an arthropod. It is small and solid rather than
cavitated (the cysticercoid is solid; the cysticercus has a
fluid-filled bladder) but has an inverted (or at least intro-
verted) scolex. The cysticercoids of Mesocestoides species
have yet to be identified, remarkable as that may seem in
this enlightened age. However, the specialists nevertheless
seem certain that a cysticercoid stage of Mesocestoides must
 precede the well-known tetrathyridium found in a wide
 range of mammals, birds, and reptiles.
Family Anoplocephalidae
Identification
FIGURE 4-50. Egg of Moniezia sp. (Anoplocephalidae) of numi-
Moniezia organisms have unarmed scolices with four
nants. The pear-shaped embryophore (arrows) is typical of anoplo-
 large suckers and very wide segments with bilateral genitalia.
cephalid eggs.
148
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Scolex
Genitalia maturing
Uterus beginning
to fill with eggs
FGURE 452. Anoplocephala perfoliata (Anoplocephalidae), scan-
ning electron micrograph. The scolex of A. perroliata is about 2
mm in diameter and has four large suckers and four projections
called lappets.
of the ileocecal valve (Barclay, Phillips, and Foerner, 1982;
Beroza et al, 1983). Proudman and Edwards (1993) pub-
lished work showing an association between infection
VYYYR
with A. perfoliata and ileocecal colic in horses. Diagnosis
of A. perfoliata infection is based on distinguishing the eggs
from those of A. magna and P. mamillana. A. perfoliata
eggs and segments frequently cannot be demonstrated,
either by flotation or sedimentation techniques, in the
Segments gravid
feces of horses known to be heavily infected with this para-
 site, a paradox for which we are unable to offer a satisfac-
tory explanation.
 For this reason, an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) has been used to examine
the immunoglobulin G (IgG) of horses to determine infec-
Segments about
to detach
tion with this parasite. In a case-controlled study with this
means of detection, horses with tapeworms had a 26 times
greater risk of developing spasmodic colic (Proudman,
French, and Trees, 1993). What is important is that
horses be treated occasionally with something other than
FIGURE 451. Paranoplocephala mamillana (Anoplocephalidae),
entire tapeworm.
ivermectin (i.e., something that will kill tapeworms).
Life history
 The life histories of only a few anoplocephalids have been
W. tetoni resembles T. actirioides, but its segments are not
documented, but those that have involve an arthropod inter-
fringed. Thysaniezia, Stilesia, and Avitellina species are exotic
mediate host in which the infective cysticercoid develops.
anoplocephalids of ruminants.
 Infection purportedly results from the incidental ingestion of
Anoplocephala magna and Paranoplocephala mamillana
these infected arthropods by the grazing animal. Free-living
(Figure 4-51) are relatively harmless parasites in the small
oribatid mites serve as hosts for cysticercoids of Moriezia
intestine of horses. Aroplocephala perfoliata (Figure 4-52) is
species of sheep and cattle, Bertiella species of primates, and
found mainly in the cecum but also tends to cluster in the
Cittotaenia species of the European wild rabbit. T. actinoides is
 ileum near the ileocecal valve, where it is associated with
 yo a, ro o, a p aee 
ulceration and reactive inflammation of the ileal wall. This
family Psocidae, order Psocoptera. Psocopterans resemble
clustering results in ulceration of the mucous membrane
mallophagan lice but are entirely free living and have no
and inflammation with thickening and induration of the
 other known relationship to parasite life histories.
deeper layers of the intestinal wall. These pathologic
 changes probably account for some cases of persistent diar-
Control
rhea and may predispose to intussusception of the ileum
The tapeworms of cattle, sheep, and goats all belong
into the cecum or rupture of the bowel wall in the vicinity
to the family Anoplocephalidae. Pasture renovation is
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
149
recommended to destroy the surface layer of humus
and thus the habitat of oribatid mites, which are the
intermediate host of at least some of these cestodes.
However, there seems to be little experimental basis to
support this recommendation. Fortunately, adult tape-
 ss s  ae a s
invade the bile ducts cause condemnation of the liver at
slaughter and in this way lead to considerable economic
loss. However, the most common reason for a veterinar-
ian's wish for a drug to remove adult tapeworms from
ruminants seems related to the difficulty of persuading
the average client that those big white worms are relatively
harmless. It is easier to worm the stock than to convince
the stockman.
FIGURE 4-54. Egg packet of Dipylidium caninum.
Family Dipylididae
Identification
In Dipylidium caninum, Diplopylidium species, and
Joyeuxiella species, the scolex has four suckers and a retractable
Life history
rostellum armed with several circles of thornlike hooks (Figure
Cysticercoidsof D. caninum develop in fleas ( Ctenocephalides
4-53). Segments are shaped like cucumber seeds and have
species) and biting lice (Trichodectes canis), and the dog ac-
bilateral genital pores. The genital apertures of D. caninum
quires this tapeworm while nipping its insects (Figure 4-55).
lie slightly behind the middle of the segment (ie., away
from the scolex), and each egg capsule may contain from
coids of Diplopylidium and Joyeuxiella develop in cop-
5 to 30 eggs (Figure 4-54). The genital apertures
of
rophagous beetles; reptiles and small mammals serve as
the Middle Eastern, African, and Australasian parasites
second intermediate hosts.
 Diplopylidium and Joyeuxiella lie before the middle of the
D. caninum requires only 2 to 3 weeks to develop from a
segment (ie., toward the scolex), and each capsule contains
cysticercoid into a segment-shedding tapeworm. Therefore
a single egg.
the benefits of anthelmintic therapy are particularly short-
lived unless fleas and biting lice also are brought under
control. It has been shown that the developing cysticercoids
require a day or so in a flea that has found a mammalian
host to be warm enough to finish their ultimate develop-
ment to the infective stage (Pugh, 1987).
Family Hymenolepididae
The family Hymenolepididae contains many species that
occur in birds and two mammalian parasites. Hymenole-
pis dirmiruta is a parasite of the small intestine principally
of rodents but occasionally also of dogs and even humans
(Ehrenford, 1977). The eggs of this tapeworm can be found
in the feces (Figure 4-56). The cysticercoid of H. diminuta
develops in fleas, flour beetles, and a rather wide range of
other insects (Figure 4-57). Vampirolepis (Hymenolepis,
Rodentolepis) nana is also a parasite of rodents and
humans, and its second larval stage is a cysticercoid in
fleas and flour beetles or in the intestinal mucosa of its
definitive host. V. nana can complete its life history
within the intestinal tract of a mouse or a human. Some
of the eggs hatch within the intestine, and the hexacanth
embryos burrow into the mucous membrane to form cysti-
cercoids that later reenter the lumen to complete their
 development as mature tapeworms. The rest of the eggs
FGURE 4-53. Dpylidium caninum (Dipylididae); scolex of fresh
pass out with the feces to await ingestion by flour beetles
Stained specimen. The scolex of D. caninum is less than 0.5 mm
or fleas, in which the cysticercoids develop. Thus H. dirmin-
in diameter; the rostellum is retractable and armed with small
uta requires fleas, flour beetles, or other insects as interme-
thomlike hooks.
diate hosts, whereas V. nana may or may not. Because the
150
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
FlGURE 455. Life history of Dpylidium caninum. Gravid
 segments discharge their egg packets as they move
about. Larvae of Ctenocephalides chew their way into
 egg packets and ingest the oncospheres of the tape-
worm. The hexacanth embryo enters the body cavity of 
the flea larva and remains there through its metamor-
phosis. After the adult flea emerges from the cocoon,
the hexacanth develops into a cysticercoid in 2 or 3
days. If such a flea is ingested by the definitive host
as during self-grooming, the cysticercoids develop into 
 adult tapeworms in the small intestine.
 eggs discharged in feces are infective to humans, V. nana
Family Mesocestoididae
 infection in laboratory rodent stocks constitutes something
Identification
of a health hazard to personnel. Because H. diminuta infec-
 The scolex of Mesocestoides species has four suckers but
tion requires ingestion of an infected insect, human infec-
 no hooks. Mature segments have a mediodorsal genital
tion with this tapeworm is less probable but does occur.
 pore, and eggs accumulate in a special, thick-walled para-
Hymenolepids have three testes and a single ovary, V. nana
uterine organ as the segments mature (Figure 4-58). Gravid
has a single circle of hooks on its scolex, whereas H. dimir-
 segments detach from the strobila and carry their relatively
uta has no hooks.
small burden of oncospheres to the outside world.
Capsule
Embryophore
Hexacanth
 embryo
FIGURE 4-56. Egg of Hymenolepis diminuta (Hymenolepidae), a
common parasite of rodents.
FIGURE 4-57. Cysticercoids of Hymenolepis diminuta.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
151
FIGURE 4-58. Mesocestoides sp.A, Scolex.
B, Mature segments. C, Gravid segments.
A
Life history
A tapeworm segment crawling about on a pet's tail or
The complete life history of the genus Mesocestoides has
freshly passed feces offends most clients, and the civilized
yet to be worked out. The larval form infective for the
world makes quite a business of poisoning tapeworms. For
definitive host is a third larval stage called a tetrathyridium
lasting results to be obtained, the source of infection must
 and is found in the peritoneal cavity of mammals and rep-
also be dealt with, or the segments will reappear and the
tiles and in the lungs of birds (see Figures 8-65 to 8-67).
client may not.
A cysticercoid larval stage is hypothesized to precede the
   d m s  ae a
tetrathyridium, possibly developing from the oncosphere
tapeworms affecting dogs and cats. Praziquantel and epsi-
 in a coprophagic insect (Loos-Frank, 1991).
prantel both show activity against one or more tapeworm
Mesocestoides infection of dogs and cats results from
 genera, but almost all fail against one or another genus.
 predation on snakes, birds, and small mammals. Some cli-
The cestocidal drug praziquantel, in a single 5-mg/kg
ents find it difficult to accept that their civilized pets are
oral or subcutaneous dose, eliminates 100% of both imma-
using their long, sharp teeth in an atavistic way, especially
ture and adult T. hydatigena, T. pisiformis, Taenia ovis, T.
sportsmen with expensive bird dogs and vegetarians with
taeniaeformis, E. granulosus, E. multilocularis, M. corti, and
cats. However, the carnivoran must be denied prey if
D. carirum from dogs and cats (Anderson, Conder, and
Mesocestoides infection is to be prevented. Most taenids
Marsland, 1978; Dey-Hazra, 1976; Rommel, Grelck, and
have about a 2-month prepatent period, but Mesocestoides
Horchner, 1976; Thomas and Gonnert, 1978). Prazi-
organisms may start discharging segments in hardly more
quantel at a dosage of 7.5 mg/kg for 2 consecutive days
 than 2 weeks after infection, thereby imparting the impres-
eliminated 100% of Diphyllobothrium erinacei, and a
sion that the anthelmintic has not worked at all. To make
single dose of 35 mg/kg eliminated all D. latum from
matters worse, M. corti tapeworms multiply asexually in the
infected cats (Sakamoto, 1977). Praziquantel in combina-
intestines of dogs. If this species is not totally eliminated by
tion with pyrantel pamoate and febantel also has been
anthelmintic medication, it will repopulate the intestine
 shown effcacious in removing infections with E. granulosus
 even without further exposure (Eckert, von Brand, and
and E. multilocularis. Epsiprantel at 2.75 mg/kg in cats
Voge, 1969).
and 5.5 mg/kg in dogs is efficacious against D. caninum,
T. pisiformis, and T. taeniaeformis. Doses of 7.5 mg/kg were
Treatment of Adult Tapeworm Infectlons
required to clear all dogs of infections from adult E. multi-
Dogs and cats
locularis (Arru, Garippa, and Manger, 1990).
Adult tapeworm infections cause little harm or inconve-
Fenbendazole administered for 3 days at 50 mg/kg is
nience to dogs and cats. It is true that infected dogs
effective against T. pisiformis.
frequently sit down and drag their bottoms, but so do
uninfected dogs. No doubt a tapeworm segment wandering
Ruminants
about the perineum tickles. Although this phenomenon
For Moniezia infection in the United States, fenbenda-
d  s jo l a u pp aq aus 
zole has been approved as a cattle anthelmintic at 5 mg/kg.
ani, distended anal sacs are more frequently to blame. The
Overseas, fenbendazole is marketed for Moniezia control
veterinarian who treats pruritus ani by expressing anal sacs
at a higher dose of 7.5 mg/kg. Albendazole also can be
will obtain beter results than another who prescribes
used in cattle in the United States for treatment of
anthelmintics for this condition.
 Moniezia infection at the approved dose of 10 mg/kg.
152
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
Oxfendazole is also approved for treating Moniezia infec.
tion in cattle at a dose of 4.5 mg/kg.
Albendazole is effective against Thysanosoma infection in
Bursal rays.
sheep at 7.5 mg/kg. Fenbendazole at 10 mg/kg also appears
to be effective (Bergstrom, Taylor, and Presgrove, 1988), as
also is praziquantel at 40 mg/kg (Martinez, 1984).
Stilesia (exotic) infections are difficult to treat. Praziquantel
at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg was extremely effective against Moriezia
infection in sheep, but doses of 8 to 15 mg/kg were required for
the treatment of Avitellina centripurctata, Stilesia globipunc-
tata, and Stilesia hepatica (Bankov, 1975, 1976; Thomas and
Spicules
Gonnert, 1978).
Horses
HGURE 459. Surficial (left) and sagittal (right) aspects of the
 Lyons et al (1992) found praziquantel at 1 mg/kg to be
copulatory bursa of Cyathostomum labiatum, a typical member of
highly effective in the removal of A. perfoliata from horses.
the order Strongylida, superfamily Strongyloidea.
 Slocombe (1979) found pyrantel at 13.2 to 19.8 mg base per
kilogram highly effective. The daily feeding of pyrantel
tartrate (2.64 mg/kg) to horses significantly reduces tape-
For the lumen of the intestine to be filled with food,
worms in both adult horses and yearlings, with most
some sort of pump is essential to overcome the tendency
treated animals becoming free of this parasite (Greiner
of the pseudocoelomic fluid pressure to collapse it, and
and Lane, 1994; Lyons et al, 1997).
most nematodes have a well-developed muscular esophagus
for this purpose. Defecation, on the other hand, is accom-
PHYLUM NEMATODA
plished by the contraction of a dilator ani muscle (there is
no sphincter) that opens the end of the digestive tube and
Body form is remarkably constant among nematodes, a fact
allows it to empty.
 p q s n a s  
 The basic excretory system consists of paired unicellular
aggravates the difficulties of identification and taxonomic
glands with a common midventral excretory pore in the
classification. It is helpful in understanding nematode
neck region (near the circumesophageal nerve ring) and
anatomy and physiology to appreciate the significance of
ducts that, in some forms, run nearly the full length of
the nematodes' unique high-turgor pressure method of
the body in the substance of the lateral chords. In the
maintaining sufficient corporeal rigidity to permit rapid
Ascaridoidea and related groups, the excretory system is
locomotion by sinusoidal undulation. Crofton (1966)
composed of a single very large cell with a very large
brilliantly expounded these relationships in his book
nucleus, with the pore being located near the nerve ring
Nematodes, and the following discussion represents a sum-
or anteriorly between the subventral lips.
mary of his exposition.
Male nematodes are smaller than the females of their
Nematodes have a relatively large body cavity (pseudo-
species. Their caudal ends may terminate in a cuticular
coelom) containing fluid under pressure that varies up to
expansion supported by muscular rays. This so-called copu-
one half atmosphere above that of the surrounding
medium (see Figures 8-78, 8-85, 8-96 to 8-98). The body
the strongylids and is used to grasp the female (Figure
cuticle contains inelastic collagen fibers so arranged that an
4-59). The Strongylida are therefore considered the
increase in internal pressure causes an increase in length
"bursate” nematodes, whereas the Oxyurida, Ascaridida,
but minimal change in diameter. This anisometric cuticle
and Spirurida comprise a group of nematodes considered
and high internal pressure thus maintain a relatively con-
to be the “abursate” nematodes. The copulatory spicules,
stant body diameter. Nematodes do not have a circular
used to dilate the vulva of the female, are cuticular structures
muscle layer. Rather, all of the somatic musculature is
that develop by sclerotization of folds of the dorsal wall of
oriented longitudinally and divided into dorsal and ventral
 the cloaca. Spicules are often paired, but some species have
fields by lateral expansions of the hypodermis, the lateral
only one (e.g., Trichuris species) or none (e.g-, Trichinella
chords. A muscle cell of either field is connected by a
species); they vary greatly in size and shape among species
cytoplasmic process to its respective (dorsal or ventral)
 and are often used as diagnostic characters. In many species,
median nerve. Thus dorsal and ventral flexion of the
accessory sclerotizations of the cloacal wall serve as
body are made possible by independent contraction of
guides for the spicules. A spicule guide in the dorsal wall
the corresponding muscle field, and longitudinal waves
is called a gubernaculum, and one located in the ventral
of contraction result in the sinusoidal pattern characteristic
wall is called a telamon. The primary male reproductive
of nematode locomotion.
organs consist of a single convoluted tube with regions
The high internal pressure also exerts its influence on
structurally and functionally differentiated as testis, seminal
the structure and organization of the internal organs.
vesicle, and vas deferens. The terminal portion of the vas
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
153
Fifth stage
Fourtr
[adult)"
Anus
Fourth stage
One-cell
Vulva
Third stage
Morula
Vagina
Vermiform
Becond stage
Sphincter
 embryo
Uterus
First
 First stage
FGURE 4-60. Ovijectors of a representative of the superfamily
FIGURE 461. Stages and transitions in the ontogenetic develop-
Trichostrongyloidea (let) and of the superfamily Strongyloidea
ment of a nematode.
(right) (x64).
deferens with its strong muscular coat is called the ejacula-
from the next by a molt marked by metamorphosis of the
tory duct, which empties into the cloaca. Some male nema-
larva and ecdysis or a casting off of the cuticle from the
todes have two reproductive ducts, but none of these are
 preceding stage.
animal parasites.
The nematode life history also can be generalized from
 The female reproductive system is also tubular and usu-
the standpoint of the important events related to diagnosis,
ally has two branches (i.e., didelphic) but may be mono-
 treatment, and control. Figure 4-62 represents these events 
delphic or even multidelphic. Regions structurally and
as four stages (adult, preinfective, infective, preadult) sepa-
functionally differentiated as ovary, oviduct, uterus, and
rated by four transitions (contamination, development,
vagina communicate through the vulva with the exterior.
infection, and maturation). In the mastering of the details
The vulva is ventral in position and may be located near
of any particular nematode life history, the process of
the oral end (opisthodelphic), caudal end (prodelphic), or 
integrating these two schemes is a profitable intellectual
the middle of the body (amphidelphic). The location and
exercise. The prepatent periods of the more important 
 special anatomic features of the vulva are useful in identi-
veterinary species of nematodes are presented in Table 4-3.
fication (Figure 4-60). In female strongylids, a muscular
 ovijector regulates the discharge of eggs from the uterus.
The eggs contained in the terminal portion of the uterus are
Stages parasitic in
Free-living stages or
thedefinitivehost
stages parasitic in
valuable aids in identifying nematodes. See Chapter 7 for
intermediate hosts
 illustrations of nematode eggs.
Adult stage
 Preinfective stage
All rational control efforts are based on an understand-
-ed pue jsou yoq jo ioeuaq pue kios a aul jo bu
asite. A general outline of the ontogenetic development of a
 nematode is shown in Figure 4-61. What appears to be a
 rich and confusing diversity of life histories among various
orders of nematodes can all be related and rationalized
according to this basic pattern. Embryonic development
is, of course, a continuous process, with change accompa-
nying every cell division. The “one-cell," “morula," and
Pread ult stage
Infective stage
"vermiform embryo" stages are arbitrarily chosen from
this continuum because they are the stages of egg develop
ment most frequently encountered in diagnostic proce-
FIGURE 4-62. A generalization of nematode life histories, empha-
 dures. The difference between a vermiform embryo and a
-aei ol aoueuodwi isaleaia jo suosuen pue saaeis aun auiis
nosis, treatment, and control. As used here, the term preaduft
first-stage larva is that the former contains only cell clusters
stage refers to all stages of parasitic larval development from
as organ primordia, whereas the latter displays clearly rec-
entry of the parasite into the host to the attainment of sexual
ognizable organs such as esophagus, intestine, and excre-
maturity. Maturation represents the length of time required for
 tory glands. A microfilaria is an example of a vermiform
this transition. Similarly. preinfective stage represents all devel-
 embryo, developing into a larva only after it has been
opmental stages leading up to the infective stage, and develop-
ingested by a mosquito. Each larval stage is separated
ment represents the time required for that transition.
154
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
TABLE 4-3
 Some Nematode Prepatent Periods*
Paraslte
Prepatent perlod
Comments
SECERNENTEA
STRONGYLIDA
Trichostrongyloidea
Trichostrongylus
 
Arrested larvae
Ostertagia
 
Arrested larvae
Haermonchus placet
1 month
Haemonchus contortus
 
Cooperia
% month
Nematodirus
Hyostrongylus
 %4-1 month
Dictyocaulus
1-1% month
Strongyloidea
Cyathostominae
2%-4 months
Arrested larvae
Strongylus vulgaris
6-7 months
Strongylus equinus
9 months
Strongylus edentatus
11 months
Triodontophorus
3-6 months
Chabertia
1% months
Arrested larvae
Oesophagostomum
1% months
Arrested larvae
Stephanurus dentatus
9-16 months
Ancylostomatoidea
Ancylostoma caninum
Arrested larve/transmammary infection
Ancylostoma tubaeforme
% month
 Arrested larvae
Uncinaria stenocephala
V month
Arrested larvae
Unicinaria levcas
 % month
Arrested larve/transmammary infection
Bunostomum
1/-2% months
 Metastrongyloidea
Crenosoma
 % month
Filaroides hirthi
1/4 months
 Potential autoinfection
Filaroides osleri
6 months
Potential autoinfection
Aelurostrongylusabstrusus
1%-1% months
Protostrongylus
1%-1% months
Metastrongylus
Muellerius
1% months
Parelaphostrongylus tenuis
2%-3 months
 Not patent in most domestic animal hosts
RHAMBDITIDA
Strongyloides stercoralis
V month
 T'ransmammary infection
Strongyloides papillosus
V4-% month
 Transmammray infection
OXYURIDA
Oxyuris equi
4-5 months
ASCARIDIDA
Ascaris suum
2 months
Parascaris equorum
2% months
Toxocara vitulorum
y4 month in calves
 T'ransmammary infection
CH A P T ER 4 Helminths
155
TABLE 4-3
 Some Nematode Prepatent Periods*—cont'd
Paraslte
Prepatent perlod
Comments
Toxascaris leonina
2 months
 Paratenic hosts
Toxocara canis
1-2 months
 T'ransplacental infection, paratenic hosts 
Toxocara cati
2 months
Paratenic hosts
SPIRURIDA
Gongylonena
2 months
 Intermediate host, dung beetle or cockroach
Draschia
2 months
Intermediate host, Musca
Habronema
2 months (?)
 Intermediate host, Musca/Stomoxys
Thelazia
%-1 month
 Intermediate host, Musca or fruit flies 
Setaria
8-10 months
Vector: mosquitoes
Onchocerca
10+ months
Vector: blackflies or ceratopogonids
Elaeophora
4/ months
Vector: tabanids
Dirofilaria
6/-7 months
Vector: mosquitoes
Dipetalonema reconditum
2-3 months
Vector: fleas
ADENOPHOREA
Trichinelloidea
Trichuris vulpis
2%-3 months
Trichinella spiralis
1/4-/ month
Find adults in diarrheic feces
Dioctophymatoidea
Dioctophyme renale
 4-5 months
Eggs in urine
*All periods are presented as months postinfection in a naive animal.
Order Strongylida
lungworms, falls within the Trichostrongyloidea rather
The order Strongylida is composed of four superfamilies:
than the Metastrongyloidea superfamily, but there are
(1) Strongyloidea, the large bowel strongyles of horses
always exceptions to be resolved.
and the nodular worms of ruminants, swine, and primates;
(2) Trichostrongyloidea, the abomasal and small intestinal
Morphology
hairworms of ruminants; (3) Ancylostomatoidea, the hook-
 The strongylid mouth, or stoma, presents important diagnos-
worms of diverse mammals; and (4) Metastrongyloidea,
tic characteristics that are the same for both male and female
the lungworms. One of the most important genera of
and usually sufficient for generic identification. Strongyloids
nematodes (Dictyocaulus) that live in the lungs, hence
have well-developed buccal capsules often armed, at the base,
Leaf crown
Ventral
groove
Buccal
Dorsal
capsule
 gutter
Teeth
FIGURE 463. Superfamily Strongyloidea. Left, Strongylus equinus. Right, Termidens deminutus.
156
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
FIGURE 464. Superfamily Ancylostomatoidea. Dorsal aspect of the buccal capsule of Ancylostoma
caninum, the common hookworm of the dog. The three pairs of pointed teeth are at the ventral
margin of the stoma.
with teeth (Figure 4-63). Ancylostomatoids also have well-
 in bloodsucking species (Figure 4-65). In the typical metas-
developed buccal capsules, but these are permanently flexed
trongyloid, the buccal capsule is absent.
dorsally and armed on their ventral (leading) edge with
Male nematodes of the order Strongylida have a caudal
formidable pointed teeth or rounded cutting plates (Figure
 copulatory bursa that consists of dorsal, lateral, and ventral
4-64). In the Trichostrongyloidea, the buccal capsule usually
expansions of the body cuticle (lobes) supported by mus-
is reduced in size but may be equipped with a tooth or lancet
cular processes called rays (Figure 4-66). The dorsal lobe
Spicules
Ventral lobe
FIGURE 4-65. Superfamily Trichostrongyloidea. En face view of
the stoma of Haemonchus contortus, the stomach worm of sheep.
Dorsal lobe 
Lateral lobe
This voracious bloodsucking nematode uses its lancet to punc-
ture the mucous membrane of the abomasum. (Courtesy Dr.
FGURE 466. Superfamily Trichostrongyloidea. Bursa and spi-
 Marguerite Frongillo, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.)
cules of Teladorsagia circumcincta, an abomasal parasite of sheep.
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
157
Spicules
Gubernaculum
FGURE 467. Superfamily Ancylostomatoidea. Bursa and spi-
cules of Pacoconus fotoris, a hookworm of the raccoon, Procyon lotor.
contains one ray that is usually median in position and
variously branched. The lateral lobes each contain an exter-
nodorsal ray adjacent to the dorsal lobe and three rays
FIGURE 4-68. Superfamily Metastrongyloidea. Bursa and spi-
arising in a group: the posterolateral, the mediolateral,
cules of Protostrongylus rufescens.
and the anterolateral. The ventral lobes each contain two
rays. The disposition and configuration of these rays are
with free-living microbivorous first and second larval stages
used in classification and identification of strongylids.
and an infective third larval stage (Figure 4-71). Females of
In typical members of the superfamilies Strongyloidea
all three superfamilies lay typical strongyle eggs (ie., eggs
and Ancylostomatoidea the dorsal and lateral lobes are
with smooth-surfaced, ellipsoidal shells that contain an
about equally developed (Figure 4-67; see also Figure 4-
embryo in the morula stage of development when laid
59); in Trichostrongyloidea the lateral lobes predominate
 and passed out with the feces). Such eggs are produced
(see Figure 4-66), and in Metastrongyloidea the bursa tends
to be reduced in size (Figure 4-68). In some metastrongy-
loids (e.g., Filaroides species), the bursa is completely absent
(Figure 4-69).
The spicules of males of the superfamilies Strongyloidea
and Ancylostomatoidea tend to be long, thin, and flexible
(see Figures 4-59 and 4-67), whereas those of the Trichostron-
gyloidea tend to be shorter and substantially stouter (Figure
4-70; see also Figure 4-66). In the Metastrongyloidea, spicules
vary so widely in size and shape that generalization is
unprofitable.
The strongylid uterus has two horns and is equipped
with a well-developed muscular ovijector  (see Figure
4-60). In typical trichostrongyloids and ancylostomatoids,
the vulva is located near the middle of the body, and the
two horns of the uterus extend in opposite directions
(amphidelphic).  In strongyloids  and  metastrongyloids,
the vulva is typically located close to the anus, and both
FIGURE 469. Superfamily Metastrongyloidea. Caudal ends of
horns of the uterus extend anteriorly (prodelphic)
male Flamides hirthi (left) and Flaroides milksi (right), showing reduc-
tion of bursal structures to mere papillae. The spicules of F. hirthi
Llfe Hlstory
are shorter, are broader in relation to their length, and have
The life histories of superfamilies Strongyloidea, Tricho-
broader knobs for the attachment of the retractor muscles than
strongyloidea, and Ancylostomatoidea are typically direct,
the spicules of F. milksi.
158
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
first-stage larva (e.g, Filaroides species). However, suffi-
cient development occurs within the host that the form
found in the feces is either a first-stage larva or an egg
containing a first-stage larva. Metastrongyloids typically
require a molluskan or annelid intermediate host for devel-
opment from the first stage to the infective third stage, and
infection of the definitive host occurs through ingestion of
snais, slugs, or earthworms containing infective third-stage
larvae. Filaroides osleri and Filaroides hirthi, both directly
infective to the dog in the first larval stage, are important
exceptions to this rule.
Superfamlly Trlchostrongyloldea
Trichostrongyloid nematodes are especially common and
pathogenic in grazing ruminants, but swine, horses, cats,
 and birds also host important species. The abomasum and
small intestine are the usual locations in ruminants, but one
aberrant genus, Dictyocaulus, reaches maturity in the air
passages. It is sufficient, for practical purposes of effective
treatment and control, to identify trichostrongyloids at the
 generic level of the older classfication schemes (Yorke and
Maplestone, 1926).
Trichostrongylus
Identification
FIGURE 4-70. Superfamily Trichostrongyloidea. Bursa and spi
 These are very small, hairlike worms less than 7 mm
cules of Frichostrongylus axei, a parasite of the abomasum of rumi-
nants and of the stomach of horses.
long, without cephalic inflations, and virtually without a
buccal capsule; spicules are short, twisted, and usually
pointed (Figure 4-72; see also Figure 4-70). Trichostrongylus
by all members of the order Strongylida, except certain
axei parasitizes the simple stomach or abomasum of a wide
genera in the superfamily Metastrongyloidea, and are there-
'sodal pue ssiou 'suun suniu sisou jo su
auo, raaamon a pus p adod ano
Other species are parasites of the small intestine of rumi-
conveys the same meaning to most and is commonly used.
nants and display a higher order of host specificity. Even
Often in ruminants, where eggs of the trichostrongyloids
heavy infections with Trichostrorgylus will be overlooked
predominate, such eggs are called “trichostrongyle eggs,""
on necropsy examination unless care is taken to thoroughly
even though it is clear that some of the eggs might be those
examine washings or scrapings of the stomach and the first
of the rarer strongyloids present in these hosts. Similarly, in
6 meters of the small intestine, preferably with a hand lens
 dogs and cats such eggs are often calle "hookworm eggs"
or stereoscopic microscope. Trichostrongylus species are
because these are the predominant strongylid worms pres-
most likely to be confused with Strongyloides species or
ent in these hosts.
with the smaller species of Cooperia.
Typically, in the developing eggs the morula develops into a
first-stage larva that hatches from the egg within a day or two.
Life history
After feeding, this larva undergoes its first molt to become a
The infective third-stage larvae of Trichostrongylus spe-
second-stage larva. Both first- and second-stage larvae remain
cies survive the winter on pasture, and ruminants are
in the feces, where they feed on bacteria. In the second molt the
exposed to infection when they are turned out to pasture
cuticle of the second stage is temporarily retained as a protec-
 in spring. As the weather becomes warmer, the infective
tive sheath about the infective third-stage larva and will not be
 larvae die off, and by summer the overwintering generation
shed until this larva enters a suitable host. In about a week
is essentially gone. However, egg production from new
 these sheathed third-stage larvae begin to migrate out of the
infections rapidly recontaminates the pasture and continues
fecal mass and into the water film covering the surrounding
well into fall to produce the next season's overwintering
soil particles and vegetation. Infection occurs when these
 population of Trichostrongylus organisms.
sheathed larvae are ingested by grazing animals. Variations
 on this basic life history pattern are discussed later in connec-
Importance
tion with the several genera.
Although Trichostrongylus infections are often asympto-
Various representatives of the superfamily Metastrongy-
matic, when present in large numbers (10,000 to 100,000
loidea lay eggs in all stages of development from a single
or more), these parasites are capable of producing
cell (e.g., Aelurostrongylus species) to an egg containing a
 protracted and debilitating watery diarrhea, especially in
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
159
FGURE 471. Life history of a typical strongylid nema-
tode, Haemonchus contortus. Eggs are shed in the feces in
the morula stage of development. First-stage larvae
 develop and hatch in a day or two to feed on microorgan-
isms in the feces. Ater a molt, the resulting second-
stage larva also feeds on microorganisms. The second
molt is started but not completed in the external envir-
onment, so the infective third-stage larva remains
encased in the cuticle of the second stage until it is
ingested by a sheep. The sheath is cast off in the ab-
omasum of the sheep, and the now parasitic third-stage
larva undergoes a molt to the fourth stage. The fourth
stage sooner or later molts to the fifth or adult stage,
depending on whether it enters a period of arrested
development.
14
L2
3
stressed or malnourished sheep, cattle, and goats. At first
illness in well-nourished, unstressed ruminants. Therefore
the feces remain semisolid but soon become watery and
it may be important to consider the quality of the environ-
dark green in color ("black scours"), staining the fleece
ment and animal husbandry in identifying the ultimate
 of the hindquarters. Some of the feces accumulate in pea-
causes of particular outbreaks.
to egg-sized masses ("dingleberries,’ “dags") that dangle
from the fleece and grow by accretion as fluid feces con-
Ostertagia and Teladorsagia
tinue to pour over and dry on their surfaces. The resulting
Identification
foul condition tends to attract blowflies such as Lucilia
Ostertagia and Teladorsagia are indistinguishable by the
cuprina and to result in myiasis. Egg counts rarely exceed
criteria outlined as follows; however, Teladorsagia are parasites
 5000 eggs per gram because Trichostrongylus organisms are
of sheep and goats (e.g., Teladorsagia circumcincta) whereas
very small worms that lay few eggs and because the feces
Ostertagia are parasites of cattle (e-g., Ostertagia ostertagi).
are greatly diluted with water. Necropsy examination
Usually less than 14 mm long and brownish in color, with a
reveals a wasted carcass without obvious lesions even
 short, broad buccal cavity (see Figure 4-72) and short, two- or
in the affected small intestine; the parasites themselves
three-pronged spicules (Figure 4-73; see also Figure 4-66),
   a      
parasites of these genera are found in the abomasum of rumi-
diarrhea is sufficient to account for the weakness and
nants. The tip of the mature female's tail is usually annulated
(Figure 4-74); the eggs in the amphidelphic ovijector are
is important to remember that less than massive burdens of
typical strongylid eggs; and the vulva is guarded by a cuticular
Trichostrorgylus organisms do not usually cause serious
expansion called a vulvar flap.
160
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
FGURE 472. Stomas of eight genera
Haemonchus
Ostertagia
Cooperia
Trichostrongyilus
of the superfamily  Trichostrongyloidea.
Amidostomum is a parasite of geese and 
ducks but not of mammals; its large,
toothed buccal capsule is not typical
of trichostrongyloids. (From whitlock JH:
Diagnosis of veterinary parasitisms, Phila-
delphia, 1960, Lea & Febiger.)
Hyostrongyius
Amidostomum
Nematodirus
Dictyocaulus
Life history
 Ostertagia- and Teladorsagia-infective third-stage larvae
resemble those of Trichostrongylhus in overwintering on
northern pastures and in thus infecting ruminants during
the early grazing season. However, arrested development of
 parasitic larvae is also very well developed in Ostertagia
 species, and this is of both epidemiologic and pathologic
importance. “"Type I" or “summer" ostertagiosis usually
occurs in pastured young cattle, the worms maturing
Anus
Annules
FGURE 4-73. Spicules of Ostertagia ostertagi.
FIGURE 474. Tail of female Ostertagia organism.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
161
without first passing through a developmental arrest
(ie., hypobiotic or latent phase). By contrast, “type II"
B  u so a  , 
when larvae that have remained in arrested development
Spicules -
since fall once again become metabolically active and pro-
ceed to develop into adults. Such behavior is part and
 parcel of the normal mechanism used by Ostertagia species
and certain other trichostrongyloids for overwintering.
However, when mistimed or overdone to such an extent
bernaculum
as to overcome the compensatory mechanisms of the host,
it leads to winter ostertagiosis.
Importance
O. ostertagi causes chronic abomasitis in young cattle, a
 disease marked by profuse watery diarrhea, anemia, and hy-
 poproteinemia manifested clinically as submaxillary edema.
The animal is typically hidebound and emaciated. The appetite
remains intact, which seems paradoxic in view of the advanced
pathologic changes taking place in the abomasum. The hydro-
 gen ion concentration of the gastric juice approaches neutral-
ity. Necropsy examination reveals a wasted carcass with
depletion of fat deposits typical of extreme malnutrition.
FIGURE 4-75. Spicules of Haemonchus contortus.
The rumen, reticulum, and omasum may be full of good
feed, but the alimentary tract from the cardia onward is vir-
 tually empty owing to malfunction of the abomasumsthe
contortus may remove one fifth of the circulating erythrocyte
animal has starved to death in the midst of plenty. The
 volume per day from lambs and may remove an average of one
“Morocco leather"’ appearance of the abomasal mucosa is
tenth of the circulating erythrocyte volume per day over the
pathognomonic; the whole mucosa is studded with grayish
course of nonfatal infections lasting 2 months. These are round
white, pinhead- to pea-sized nodules with a worm protruding
numbers drawn from observations of a flock of 100 to 175
from a small opening at the summit of each (see Figures 7-60,
lambs with erythrocyte loss estimated by the whole-body
8-76, and 8-77). O. ostertagi is the most important helminth
radioiron retention technique (Georgi, 1964; Georgi and
 parasite of cattle in the United States. Young cattle infected
Whitlock, 1965). The pathogenic effects of H. contortus
with large numbers of this parasite waste away and die in a
result from the inability of the host to compensate for blood
matter of weeks. Those infected with sublethal parasite
loss. If the amount of loss is small and restitution by the host
burdens fail to achieve their full potential for growth and devel-
complete, no measurable illness results. “It is doubtful, indeed,
opment or require substantially more time to do it. Either is
whether in such circumstances (ie., satisfactory nutrition)
 economically disadvantageous. Teladorsagia specie of sheep
infection with up to 500 worms has any effect on growth
and goats may also cause serious endemic disease in certain
or wool production" (Clunies Ross and Gordon, 1936).
localities.
However, if the rate of blood loss exceeds the host's hemato-
poietic capacity, because either the challenge is overwhelming
Haemonchus
or the response is handicapped by poor nutrition, defective
Identification
 d s e sd e sns  
Up to 30 mm in length, these parasites of the abomasum of
death. The cardinal sign of haemonchosis is pallor of the
 ruminants have a buccal cavity armed with a lancet (see Figure
skin and mucous membranes. A hematocrit reading of less
4-65). The male has an asymmetric dorsal ray in its bursa
than 15% is always accompanied by extreme weakness and
(Figure 4-75) and short, wedge-shaped spicules. The white,
shortness of breath and warrants a grave prognosis. A simple
egg-filled uterus of the female spirals around the blood-filled
means of measuring the amount of anemia in sheep and goats
 gut, giving rise to the so-called barber pole appearance. The
 due to haemonchosis along with an indication of which ani-
vulva is located about a quarter body length from the tail and
 mals require treatment is the use ofa FAMACHA chart, which
 pus Ainoa Aq pn aq pou k no k
shows images of eyes of animals with different hematocrit
 inflations (vulvar flaps). The prevalence of various vulvar
levels along with an indication of which to treat (Kaplan
flap configurations varies among species and subspecies of
et al, 2004). Loss of plasma protein results in anasarca
Haemonchus (Figure 4-76).
frequently  manifested externally as submaxillary edema
(bottle jaw). The appetite typically remains good, and in
Importance
acute outbreaks affected animals may not lose appreciable
The disease haemonchosis is characterized by anemia. At
weight. Feces are well formed, diarrhea occurring only in
 peak infection, naturally acquired populations of Haemonchus
infections complicated by the presence of such species as
162
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Gubernaculum
Vulvar
+Spine
Hyostrongylus
Haemonchus
Nematodirus
FIGURE 4-76. Three genera of the superfamily Trichostrongyloidea. (From whitlock JH: Diagnosis
of veterinary parasitisms, Philadelphia, 1960, Lea & Febiger.)
Trichostrorgylus and Cooperia. Lambs are often the most ser-
Cooperia
iously affected members of a flock, but older sheep under stress
Identification
also may have fatal anemia. Individual older ewes may suc-
Parasites of the small intestine of ruminants, species of
cumb in late spring to the overwhelming challenge imposed by
Cooperia are less than 9 mm long. The cuticle of the stomal
hordes of larvae simultaneously emerging from developmental
region is transversely striated and slightly inflated, the
arrest. High egg counts, 10,000 eggs per gram or higher, are
buccal cavity is very small, the spicules are short
 typical of haemonchosis.
and blunted at their tips, and the dorsal ray of the bursa
is lyre-shaped (Figures 4-78 and 4-79; see also Figure 4-72).
Mecistocirrus
Cooperia species are most likely to be confused with
Identification
Trichostrongylus or Strongyloides species because of similar-
Mecistocirrus species are parasites of the abomasum of
ity in size and location in the host.
ruminants and the stomach of pigs in Central America,
 India, and the Far East. They are similar in morphology
Importance
to Haemonchus species, except that the vulva is close to the
 The relationship of Cooperia species to disease produc-
anus and the spicules are long and thin (Figure 4-77).
tion is similar to that presented for Trichostrongyhus species
earlier.
Nematodirus
Vulva
Identification
Species of Nematodirus vary considerably in size; the
largest grows to a length of 25 mm. The cuticle of the
stomal region is transversely striated and may be inflated;
the stoma is armed with a dorsal, triangular tooth (see
Figure 4-72). The neck is usually coiled, the spicules are
long and thin, the uterus contains very large eggs, and the
(- ai a i ia no d an ie as e s a
Life history
 The life history and epidemiology of Nernatodirus species
FIGURE 477. Mecistocirus spp. (From Whitlock JH: Diagnosis of
infecting domestic ruminants are distinctly different from
veterinary parasitisms, Philadelphia, 1960, Lea & Febiger.)
those of most other trichostrongyloids. The larva develops
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
163
of infection and disease in late spring. As a result, the severity
of infection is typically directly proportional to the previous
year's pasture contamination, and timing of the outbreak
 depends on weather favorable for mass hatching of eggs.
However, a second wave of larvae on pasture and consequent
infection of sheep has been observed to occur in the fall
(Gibson and Everett, 1981; Rodger, 1983; McKellar et al,
1983; Hollands, 1984; Hosie, 1984). Development and
hatching of the infective larvae of Nematodirus spathiger
and Nermatodirus filicollis tend not to be seasonally con-
strained in this manner, and these species are common para-
sites of sheep.
Importance
Although Nernatodirus species infections usually are not
associated with clinical disease, N. battus causes a specific
strongylosis characterized by very restricted seasonal inci-
dence and by extremely severe and debilitating diarrhea.
Most of the lamb flock display a sudden loss of thrift
quickly followed by profuse diarrhea. Deaths begin from
2 days to 2 weeks after onset of clinical signs and continue
for several weeks, after which survivors gradually recover;
mortality may reach 30%. Egg counts average 600 and
rarely exceed 3000 eggs per gram of feces. Necropsy reveals
FIGURE 478. Stomal end of Cooperia.
a dehydrated carcass, enlarged pale edematous mesenteric
lymph glands, and mild catarrhal enteritis, but very little
else in the way of lesions. A count of 10,000 N. battus
to the infective third stage within the eggshell, and hatching
worms is considered significant (Thomas and Stevens,
depends on extrinsic stimuli, at least in certain species. For
1956). Originally described from Great Britain (Crofton
example, the infective larva of Nermatodirus battus must usu-
and Thomas, 1951, 1954), N. battus appeared in Oregon
ally be subjected to freezing followed by warmer weather
in 1985 (Hoberg, Zimmerman, and Lichtenfels, 1986)
before it will hatch. This property tends to concentrate
and has since been identified in sheep fecal samples
hatching of infective larvae in the spring, to limit reproduc-
from Washington, New York, Vermont, and Maryland
tion to one generation per year, and to generate a single wave
(Zimmerman et al, 1986).
Hyostrongylus
Identification
A parasite of the stomach of swine, Hyostrongylus rubi-
dus is less than 9 mm long and has a small, annular buccal
 collar, short spicules with two points, and a long narrow
gubernaculum (see Figures 4-72 and 4-76). Hyostrongylus
kigeziensis is a parasite of the mountain gorilla (Durette-
Desset et al, 1992).
Life history and pathogenesis
H. rubidus is a typical trichostrongyloid nematode some-
what resembling Ostertagia species in its habits. The adult
worms parasitize the stomach and produce typical strongy-
lid eggs that closely resemble those of the Oesophagostormum
species that infect swine. Ensheathed third-stage larvae
develop within a week under optimum conditions; these
larvae are infective when swallowed by swine. Like
Ostertagia species, H. rubidus invades the gastric glands,
where the third and fourth molts take place. H. rubidus
evokes a catarrhal, sometimes diphtheritic, gastritis with
ulceration and secretion of a tenacious mucus. Clinical
FIGURE 479. Spicules of Cooperia.
signs include anemia and inappetence with occasional
164
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
melena as evidence of gastric hemorrhage. Hyostrongylosis
Importance
is mainly a disease of adult pigs at pasture, but transmission
In cats these worms are capable of causing chronic gas-
 can be markedly reduced during dry summers (Roepstorff
tritis that can prove fatal (Hanichen and Hasslinger, 1977).
and Murrell, 1997). It has been shown, however, that trans-
Chronic gastritis also has been observed in a tiger (Breuer
mission can occur under confinement conditions (Bladt-
et al, 1993) and in captive cheetahs (Collett et al, 2000).
Knudsen et al, 1994).
In stomachs of infected cats, there is a significant increase
in mucosal fibrous tissue and mucosal lymphoid aggregates
Anthelmintic medications
(Hargis, Prieur, and Blanchard, 1983).
Fenbendazole, ivermectin, and doramectin are approved
for treatment of or have been shown to successfully treat
Anthelmintic medication
infections of pigs with H. rubidus.
It has been reported that tetramisole (a 2.5% formula-
tion administered at 5 mg/kg) has proved efficacious and
Olulanus
without side effects (Hasslinger, 1984).
Identification
 A parasite of the stomach of the pig, cat, and other felids
Dictyocaulus
including the cougar and tiger, Ollulanus tricuspis is
Identification
 minute (less than 1 mm long). The anterior end is rolled
Up to 80 mm long, white adult Dictyocaulus worms
up, the vulva is near the anus, the female tail terminates
are found in the respiratory passages of ruminants and
in three or more sharp points, and the spicules are
horses, Dictyocaulus viviparus in cattle, Dictyocaulus filaria
short, equal, and bifurcated (Figure 4-80). These worms
in sheep, and Dictyocaulus arnfieldi in equids. The buccal
can be diagnosed using endoscopy specimens (Cecchi
cavity is small; the bursa is somewhat reduced; the spicules
et al, 2006).
are short, dark, and granular in appearance; the vulva is
near the middle of the body, and the egg contains a first-
Life history
stage larva when laid (Figure 4-81; see also Figure 4-72).
O. tricuspis is ovoviviparous (the eggs develop and hatch
within the uterus of the female), and the larvae develop to
Life history
maturity in the stomach of the host. It is a rare example of a
Adult Dictyocaulus organisms live in the lumen of the
nematode capable of completing its life history within a
bronchial tree, where they cause chronic bronchitis and
single host. Ingestion of vomitus from an infected host is
localized occlusion of the bronchial tree with atelectasis.
the most likely means of transmission of O. tricuspis.
FIGURE 4-80. Olulanus tricuspis from a leopard. Diagnosis is usu-
ally based on finding adult specimens of this viviparous species
in vomitus.
FIGURE 481. Bursa and spicules of Dictyocaultus.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
165
Free living stages
Parasitic stages
Microbivorous stages
Adults
Morulate eggs
(lumen, alimentary canal)
(feces)
1st-stage larva
FGURE 482. A typical strongyloid life history.
(feces, soil)
Stages 1 through 4 are explained in the text.
Infective stage
4th-stage larva
3rd-stage larva
 2nd-stage larva
(mucosa, alimentary canal)
'sheathed larva'
(feces, soil)
(vegetation)
Dictyocaulus viviparus is the only nematode that reaches
associated with D. filaria are complicated by the presence
 maturity in the lungs of cattle. The freshly laid egg contains
of less obvious but more pathogenic parasites in the
a vermiform embryo that usually hatches before being
alimentary tract.
eliminated in the feces (see Figure 7-61). The free-living
D. arrfieldi is a relatively well-adapted parasite of don-
stages probably derive their energy from stored food mate-
keys (Equus asinus) but tends to be quite pathogenic in
rials instead of ingested bacteria because they can develop
 horses. Where this parasite is endemic, it is hazardous to
to the doubly ensheathed infective stage in aerated clean
pasture horses and donkeys together.
water and because the characteristic “food granules" in the
intestinal cells of the first-stage larva become less conspic-
Ecology and Epldemlology of Strongylld Infectlons
uous and finally disappear as development proceeds.
of Rumlnants
 Development to the infective stage requires about 5 days
The following discussion refers principally to ruminants
 under optimum conditions. When ingested, the infective 
 because the ecology and epidemiology of ruminant stron-
larvae migrate by way of the mesenteric lymph nodes and
gylids have been subjects of intensive research for the best
thoracic duct and arrive in the lungs about 5 days later
part of a century. The lessons learned from sheep can be
(Jarrett et al, 1957). Egg-laying starts about 4 weeks after
applied at least qualitatively to horses. The typical strongy-
infection.
lid life history as outlined in Figure 4-82 is generally appli-
cable to members of the superfamilies Trichostrongyloidea,
Importance
Strongyloidea, and Ancylostomatoidea. Important embel-
Light infections with D. viviparus are borne without
lishments on this scheme, such as the skin penetration of
obvious physiologic embarrassment; calves cough occasion-
 hookworm infective larvae and the atypical larval develop-
ally and may breathe slightly faster than normal. Heavier
ment of Dictyocaulus species, do not significantly alter
infections lead to partial or complete obstruction of the air
the qualitative ecologic and epidemiologic relationships
passages, and clinical disease develops in proportion to the
portrayed.
 degree of obstruction. A progressive increase in respiration
rate starts at about the fifth day after ingestion of several
is in direct proportion to the degree of infection of
thousand infective larvae, and the animal coughs occasion-
 the host population with adult worms.
ally. During the third week, respirations become forced and
2. Development and survival of the infective stage
reach a rate of 100 per minute. Auscultation reveals harsh
depend on the prevailing conditions of temperature
bronchial sounds and occasional crepitation. Until the
and moisture. Optimum requirements vary distinctly
fourth week, no larvae are shed in the feces, and the diag-
among worm species.
 nosis rests entirely on the history and clinical signs. During
3.
Host resistance varies as a function of age, vigor,
the fourth week, first-stage larvae appear in the feces, and
 genetic constitution, presence or absence of an already
the severity of the clinical signs reaches a maximum. The
established infection, and, in some instances, acquired
respiratory rate exceeds 100 per minute, coughing is fre-
immunity.
quent, crepitation and harsh bronchial sounds can be
4. The maturation of the fourth-stage larvae may be held
heard, and air hunger becomes acute. The calves do not
temporarily in abeyance by as yet poorly understood
feed because they cannot spare the time needed for breath-
influences. Populations of arrested larvae may be
 ing. Clinical improvement can be noted in survivors after
harbored for months before some unknown stimulus
the fifth week.
 restarts their final development.
 rs A l e s sio  das i r 
that of D. viviparus (Daubney, 1920). However, unless
Adult worm populations
unusually large infections are acquired, the clinical signs
Although some infective larvae may survive for weeks or
are usually mild. Most cases of severe clinical illness
months under suitable environmental conditions, it is the
166
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
carrier host that often perpetuates strongylid infections
in the alimentary mucosae of adult sheep (Herd et al, 1983).
from year to year. The infection may be maintained as a
"The production of a large number of eggs about two
small population of adult worms, as a latent population of
months after parturition ensures that infective stages will
histiotropic larvae, or as both. Strongylids, like cold viruses
be available in large numbers at a time when the sheep
and daffodils, display marked seasonal variations. The
population is not only enlarged by lambing but also has a
worm population normally is regulated in a way that
high proportion of susceptible individuals which have
spares the host and perpetuates the parasite. Only when
not been exposed to infection previously"” (Crofton,
this regulation breaks down do outbreaks of disease occur.
1963). The periparturient rise in fecal egg counts can be
 During their first season at pasture, calves, lambs, and
abrogated by protein supplementation of the ewe
kids acquire strongylid burdens rapidly by ingesting third.
(Donaldson, van Houtert, and Sykes, 1997).
stage larvae as they graze. If the vegetation is heavily
 In summary, calves, lambs, and kids tend to carry large
 contaminated with pathogenic species (e.g., O. ostertagi or
parasite burdens, whereas adult cattle, sheep, and goats
H. contortus), disease and deaths may occur among these
usually harbor lighter infections. One peak of strongylid
young and inexperienced hosts. The accumulation of infec-
reproductive activity is observed during the grazing
tion is manifested by a corresponding increase in fecal egg
season. This occurs in both mature and growing ruminants
output and by further contamination of the pasture.
but tends to be more marked and pathogenic in the latter.
Provided with sufficient warmth and moisture for larval
A second peak occurs in mature females a few weeks after
 development, the number of infective stages on vegetation
 s sod,  aq p si pn o
will tend to increase exponentially, at least during the early
 egg output. This increase is most marked in ewes lambing
 part of the grazing season. However, the hosts now begin to
in spring, at which season a modest spring rise also is
develop resistance to further infection. The principal com-
observed in wethers and barren ewes.
ponent of this developing resistance is a peculiar phenom-
The biotic potential or reproductive capacity of stron-
enon called premunition: “a state of resistance to infection
gylids depends jointly on the rate of production of fertile
which is established after an acute infection has become
eggs and on the generation time (i.e., the time required
chronic and which lasts as long as the infecting organisms
for these eggs to develop into egg-producing adults). The
remain in the body" (Dorland's Hllustrated Medical
normal degree of realization of the biotic potential tends
Dictionary, ed 27, Philadelphia, 1988, Saunders). The mech-
to maintain stable worm populations that display marked
anism of premunition is unknown, but the phenomenon
periodicity but neither explode nor fade away to extinction.
 can be readily demonstrated by a variety of simple experi-
Normally the probability of any individual strongylid
ments. For example, if we decide to impose a severe
egg reaching reproductive age is only one in thousands,
H. contortus burden on a sheep that is already harboring
so the worms must compensate by producing enormous
a moderate population of these parasites, we must first
numbers of eggs. Haemonchus species are the most
remove the already established population by anthelmintic
fecund, with Oesophagostomum, Chabertia, Bunostomum,
medication. Otherwise, part or all of the dose of larvae that
Ostertagia, Cooperia, Trichostrongylus, and Nematodirus
we administer experimentally will fail to take. As premuni-
species following roughly in that order. The species
tion and other forms of host resistance develop, individual
with low per-individual reproduction rates tend to com-
strongylid burdens reach a peak and then begin to decline.
pensate either by maintaining larger adult populations
Normally the calf, lamb, or kid enters its first winter with a
(Trichostrongylus and Cooperia species) or by producing
substantially reduced population of adult strongylids.
eggs more resistant to inclemencies of the external environ-
What becomes of the infective larvae that the now-
ment (Nermatodirus species).
premunized host continues to ingest as it grazes? There
are three possibilities: such larvae may be rejected, replace
Development and survival of the infective stage
established adult worms, or become arrested in their devel-
Most strongylids are capable of developing and main-
opment as fourth-stage larvae, but the total number of
taining significant populations of infective larvae over con-
adult worms tends to remain at a plateau. The arrested
siderable ranges of temperature and moisture. Minimum
larvae (also referred to as latent, inhibited, or hypobiotic
 conditions are of interest because they dictate the point at
 larvae) remain in the alimentary mucous membranes
which the environment ceases to harbor significant infec-
until some stimulus related to the coming of spring, to
tion, and optimum conditions are of interest because it is
the reproductive cycle of the host, or to both, restarts
 during periods favorable for the development and survival
their development. For example, in spring a substantial
of preparasitic stages that outbreaks of clinical strongylosis
increase in the output of strongylid eggs is observed in
usually occur.
the feces of ewes, rams, and wethers. A more pronounced.
 No strongylid life history can be completed in totally
rise also commonly occurs in lambing ewes from 2 weeks
arid environments, and parasitism with strongylids is
before until 8 weeks after parturition at any season. Both
correspondingly rare in desert regions. Even under
“spring rise” and “periparturient rise" (Crofton, 1954) in
apparently dry conditions, however, microhabitats may
fecal egg counts are related principally to the maturation of
exist that contain enough moisture to allow survival if
the larvae that have overwintered as arrested fourth stages
 not development of eggs and larvae.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
167
The temperature necessary for development varies with
The loss of premunition resulting from removal of the
the species, and in each case the rate of development varies
stable and established infection will permit rapid reinfec-
with the temperature. With the very significant exceptions
tion, perhaps with a heavier parasite load than before.
of N. filicollis, N. battus, and Ostertagia species, which
The following seeming paradox lends a measure of sym-
appear to be well adapted to cold climates, the egg and
metry to this argument. If sheep are removed during peak
larva populations of most strongylids experience marked
exposure from an H. contortus-infested pasture to a para-
reductions or even disappear from northern pastures
site-free environment, they will develop more serious infec-
during winter. Such pastures become recontaminated in
tions than if left on the pasture. Interrupting the flow of
 spring. Nematodirus-infective larvae develop and remain
larvae apparently throws the regulation out of balance in
viable in the eggshell during winter in climates about as
some way. The inhibition of larval development by adult
harsh as possible for the profitable practice of cattle,
worms is manifested as premunition. It appears that the
sheep, or goat husbandry. Ostertagia overwinters both as
larvae in turn exercise a measure of control over the
 infective larvae on pasture and as arrested larvae in the host
adults. At any rate, the practical advice to be gleaned
 population; the pasture larvae begin to die off as warmer
from this is as follows: Be sure to administer an anthelmin-
and dryer conditions supervene.
tic to H. contortus-infected sheep before transferring them
to an uncontaminated environment, at least during the
Host resistance
 parasites normal period of rapid population growth.
Age
Although host immunity is often credited for the state of
 A general increase in resistance to strongylid infection
premunition, it might also be due to interactions between
with age is well marked in cattle, slightly less so in sheep,
the parasites. An ecologic explanation of premunition
 and least in goats. Age resistance may break down in the
might be kin selection—that is, once established, worms
face of overwhelming challenge or as a secondary result of
exploit the chosen niche and somehow directly or with
malnutrition or disease. Old ewes may succumb to stron-
the manipulation of the host make the niche inhospitable
gylidosis when their teeth fail them, and limited milk
to other worms from different parental stocks. When sheep
are infected first with one group of worms and then
(Whitlock, 1951). Examination of the teeth and udders of
infected with brothers and sisters or cousins after the first
ewes should accompany any investigation of parasitic dis-
group has matured, there is some evidence that the genetic
ease in sheep (Love and Biddle, 2000).
relatedness of the existing and incoming populations have
an effect on the number of worms that will develop to
Phenotype
adulthood (Ketzis et al, 2001).
Whitlock (1955b, 1958) reported an inherited resistance
to trichostrongylidosis in sheep. The progeny of a ram
Self-cure
pue sum jo suondod raius paoqey ao pa
There are few examples showing immunity that protects
 suffered less reduction in hematocrit than did the progeny
the host against reinfection after the initial strongylid
of other rams. Unfortunately, one dark and stormy night
population is gone. Stoll (1929) reported an experiment
the electric transmission lines fell on Violet and blew him to
"in which two helminth-free lambs, upon fenced-in
glory. Years later, when he retired and turned over his Zeiss
 pasturage permitting natural repeated infection, during the
 photomicroscope, Dr. Whitlock had a brass plate engraved
summer developed, following an initial dose of Haemonchus
in Violet's memory and mounted on the microscope.
contortus larvae, first an accumulation of parasites and then a
 Currently the process has been used in Australia and New
self-cure which expelled the worms and protected the animals
Zealand, whereby the resistance status of rams is included
thereafter against any significant amount of further infestation
in their records. Thus this aspect of genetics is currently
with this stomach worm." Thus was born the celebrated
being applied on a regular basis to aid in preventing nema-
 phenomenon called self-cure.
tode-related disease in sheep.
Stewart (1950) observed
 seven periods of self-cure
within 18 months in a flock of grazing sheep, demonstrated.
Premunition
that an identical response could be elicited by giving large
The presence of a stable population of adult strongylids
doses of infective H. contortus larvae, and concluded
 in the alimentary canal tends to inhibit further infection or,
 that self-cure taking place after periods of rain could be
at least, further maturation of larvae. Removal of this stable
attributed to the intake of large numbers of H. contor-
adult population by anthelmintic medication vacates an
tus-infective larvae. He subsequently related the rejection
 ecologic niche that is promptly filled through maturation
of the previously established adult worm population to an
 of arrested larvae, uninterrupted development of recently
acute hypersensitivity reaction in the alimentary mucous
ingested infective larvae, or both. Whatever the underlying
membrane.
reason for premunition—that is, ecologic or immunolo
An edematous change was evident in the mucous mem-
gic—a ruminant with a subclinical strongylid infection
brane of the abomasum or small intestine, depending on
should not be treated with anthelmintics unless an uncon-
the site of attachment of the adults, on the day on which
taminated environment can be provided after treatment.
a rise of blood histamine occurred after the administration
168
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
of larvae. The intake of H. contortus larvae produced this
For purposes of observation and nursing, it is usually
change only in the abomasum of a sheep that had been
more convenient to confine the herd in a barn or drylot,
infested with H. contortus and only in the small intestine
and restriction of activity may help prevent losses precipi-
 of a sheep that had been infested with Trichostrongylus spp.
tated by exertion. Never hurry patients acutely ill with hae-
(Stewart, 1953).
monchosis; they may drop dead at your feet. Segregate all
The lack of permanent protection against reinfection
animals showing anemia, diarrhea, weakness, or depression
observed by Stewart does not necessarily invalidate Stoll's
to facilitate therapy and to prevent their being bullied
observations, but examples of functional acquired sterile
to death by their stronger fellows, but do not separate
immunity are rare where H. contortus is concerned.
nurslings from their dams unless the owner is willing and
Drs. Georgi and Whitlock had no difficulty reinfecting
able to cosset them.
lambs of the New York State Veterinary College flock
Administration of an anthelmintic may hasten the death
with H. contortus cayugensis after their naturally acquired
of very sick animals, and the owner should be forewarned
worm burdens had been removed by anthelmintic therapy.
of possible further losses precipitated by drenching.
Similar results are commonly observed in other parts of the
 However, the benefit of an effective anthelmintic drench
world with other subspecies of this parasite.
in primary haemonchosis is usually dramatic. Strongylid
There is at least one definite practical consequence of
 nematodes continue to infect our cattle, sheep, and goats
self-cure. Sheep or goats may die in the throes of evicting
despite the plethora of safe and efficacious anthelmintic
their worms and confuse the diagnosis by being found
drugs. The use of anthelmintic drugs should be based on
“"uninfected" at necropsy when the clinical signs and his-
thorough knowledge of the biology of the worms and the
tory correctly pointed to haemonchosis. Profound anemia
area's climatic conditions. The entire herd may be treated at
in grazing sheep or goats is haemonchosis unless positive
regular “^strategic" intervals in the hope of preventing the
evidence of another cause (e.g-, acute radiation sickness)
buildup of infective larvae in the pastures and thus prevent-
can be produced. The absence of H. contortus worms
ing outbreaks of clinical strongylosis. When contamination
from the abomasum of an anemic sheep or goat in no
is particularly severe, strategic treatments preceding partu-
way rules out the diagnosis of haemonchosis.
rition and turnout to pasture, at midsummer and in fall,
je sun oo, Aq pauaddns aq o pau keu
Active immunity
times when infection pressure may be particularly severe,
A durable sterile immunity is conferred in cattle by
for example, after a period of moist, warm weather partic-
infection with the lung nematode D. viviparus, and consid-
ularly favorable for larval development.
erable success has been achieved by means of artificial
immunization with irradiated larval vaccines (see the
Strongylids of the alimentary canal
review by Poynter, 1963). The practical application of vac-
Ruminant anthelmintics include fenbendazole, albenda-
cines is of course limited to areas of endemic dictyocaulosis,
zole, ivermectin, doramectin, moxidectin, eprinomectin,
and although D. viviparus infection is cosmopolitan in dis-
levamisole, and morantel. All of these drugs are available
tribution, clinical parasitic disease tends to be sporadic.
Clinical dictyocaulosis is common in the British Isles, and
and feedlot management systems.
that is where the vaccine has found ready acceptance and
Abomasal parasites such as Haemonchus species, Ostertagia
 effective application.
 species, and T. axei tend to be more susceptible to anthelmintic
medication than related parasites of the small intestine such
Delayed maturation of larvae
as
Trichostrongylus, Cooperia, and Nematodirus species.
Arrested development of larvae not only helps perpetu-
Normally, these latter genera tend to concentrate in the first
ate certain strongylids from year to year but spares the host
quarter of the small intestine, and only a few specimens are
during the period of winter (or dry season) stress, when
found lower down. It is thought that poisoned small intestinal
energy invested in the reproduction of worms with free-
 parasites have a greater opportunity to recover and reestablish
living larvae would be a losing proposition biologically.
infection lower down in the small intestine, whereas poisoned
s hm   n s an
abomasal parasites have left the abomasum before they have
However, outbreaks of severe strongylidosis may result
had a chance to recover. Therefore unless experiments
from the unseasonable maturation of arrested larvae
designed to evaluate the efficacy of anthelmintics against
during winter and early spring. It is important to recognize
parasites of the small intestine are based on postmortem
the parasitic cause of such outbreaks despite their unsea-
examination of the entire small intestine, the results
 sonable incidence.
e a jo ia u ps aq o aii are poa
(Bogan et al, 1988).
 Treatment and Control of Strongylld Infectlons In
Fall or early winter treatment ideally should be carried
Rumlnants
out with anthelmintic drugs active against the immature,
The first step in dealing with an outbreak of strongylidosis
arrested parasitic stages of Ostertagia species (Armour,
in a herd of cattle, sheep, or goats is to identify the
Duncan, and Reid, 1978; Duncan et al, 1976; Williams
source of infection and to separate the animals from it.
et al, 1977). In northern temperate, nonarid areas of the
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
169
United States, treatment of ewes with a larvicidal anthel
milk production (Michel et al, 1982). The authors thought
mintic at the time they are put indoors in fall prevents
that this was not a cost-effective increase, whereas others
 periparturient rise, at least in fall- and early spring-lambing
interpreted the gain as cost effective (Theodorides and
ewes (Herd et al, 1983).
Free, 1983).
In a New Zealand trial, half of 5556 cows on 47 dairies
Resistance
were treated twice with oxfendazole when dry (Bisset,
A population of parasites under more or less continuous
Marshal, and Morisson, 1987). During the next 251-day
 chemical attack must alter its genetic composition through
lactation, the treated cows produced an average of 2.24 kg
selection or mutation or be driven to extinction. Increased
more butterfat or 52.9 kg more milk. A positive response was
resistance of the parasites to the chemical, the more frequent
seen in 36 of the 47 treated herds, but only one herd had a
 outcome, is most common when antiparasitic chemicals are
significant increase. The authors noted a greater response
most needed and therefore most frequently used. Purchased
 to treatment in cows that had been grazed previously on
livestock also may introduce resistant strains of parasites.
pastures that had been occupied with calves and with cows
 However,it must be borne in mind that most cases of apparent
that were historically higher milk producers.
 anthelmintic failure are due either to continued exposure to
Two trials were performed in the Netherlands (Ploeger
infective larvae or to errors in selection and administration of
et al, 1989, 1990). In the first trial, 285 of 527 dry cows were
 an appropriate anthelmintic chemical (Coles, 1988). H. con-
treated with ivermectin. The milk yield over a hypothetical
tortus, T. circumcincta, and Trichostrongylus colubriformis of
 305-day lactation increased an average of 205 kg in the
sheep and goats in widely scattered parts of the world have
treated cows. In this trial, 17 of the 31 treated herds had
displayed resistance to ivermectin, benzimidazoles, and leva-
a positive response, and again greater responses were noted
misole/morantel. Resistance to anthelmintics has been slower
in cows that had historically higher milk yields. In the
n ss 1 iq sd a n n  ee 0
second trial, 676 of 1385 cows in 81 herds were treated
 sporadic cases of resistance to benzimidazoles or macrocyclic
with albendazole within a week of calving. The milk yield
lactones may 0ccur (McKenna, 1996; Vermunt, West, and
during the hypothetical 305-day lactation of the treated
 Pomroy, 1995). The genus most typically incriminated in
cows increased 133 kg, and 49 of the 81 herds had a positive
the case of cattle is Cooperia, but it appears that Ostertagia
response.
and Trichostrorgylus may also sometimes be involved.
In an Australian trial, half of 498 cows in five pasture-fed
Resistance to the different antiparasitics in the United
herds were treated with ivermectin when dry (Walsh,
States is of greatest concern in goats, but reports of resis-
Younis, and Morton, 1995). The milk yield increased 74 L
tance have also occurred with sheep and cattle. Resistance
during the first 100 days of lactation, whereas the yield over
to ivermectin was first reported in the United States for H.
the entire lactation was 86 L. All of the herds had a positive
contortus in Angora goats (Craig and Miller, 1990).
response, but the increase was significant in only one herd.
Resistance of this same parasite was also observed in
No increased response was observed among cows that pre-
cattle in Texas (DeVaney, Craig, and Rowe, 1992). Resis-
viously had been noted to have a high lactation production
tance has now also been seen in Haemonchus and Tricho-
index There was no difference in the cows as to time from
strorgylus in goats in the southern United States (Kaplan
calving to first service, but the calving to conception time
et al, 2007). It seems that resistance of the gastrointestinal
was reduced in the treated cows by 2 to 8 days. As is typical of
nematodes of goats is now a very common event in the
lactating dairy cows, there were few eggs present in the feces
 United States, with resistance having been seen with respect
of the Australian cows, and there was no correlation between
to albendazole, levamisole, ivermectin and moxidectin
egg reduction and the observed increases in milk production
(Mortensen et al, 2003).
(see the excellent review by Reinemeyer, 1995).
Eprinomectin, an avermectin that can be applied to lac-
Lungworms
tating dairy cattle, has now been examined for its effects on
Clinical outbreaks of dictyocaulosis are treated with fen-
adult dairy cattle in several trials where it was administered
bendazole, ivermectin, dormectin, levamisole, oxfendazole,
at the time of calving. In the case of pastured dairy cattle in
 or albendazole. These are highly efficacious against both
Canada, the treatment did seem to produce an economic
adult and immature stages of Dictyocaulus species.
increase in milk production (Ndtvedt et al, 2002). In a sim-
ilar trial in Canada looking at breeding parameters, there was
Subclinical parasitism of adult dairy cattle
a marginally significant improvement in the calving to con-
The need to treat adult dairy cattle for the helminths
ception interval, but not calving to first service interval,
that may be present still remains an open-ended question.
and there was a reduction in the number of breedings to
Herd et al (1983) compared 26 trials in which milk pro-
 conception in treated animals (Sanchez et al, 2002). In two
duction was examined and found that in 14 trials there was
studies in cattle in Canada and the United States with cattle
no change, in seven trials there was an increase after treat-
having limited outdoor exposure, there were not apparent
ment, and in five trials there was an increase in the control
advantages to treatment at calving either in milk production
 group. In a large trial of 9721 lactations examined in Britain
 or in reproduction parameters (Sithole et al, 2005, 2006).
over a 305-day lactation period, there was a 42-kg gain in
 These studies would suggest that when catle are at risk of
170
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
continued infection pressure from pasture, treatment may
places, but the effect of minor losses such as these on the
be warranted but likely will be of little value in most
 general population is minimal. On the other hand, there
confinement systems.
are also parts of the world and systems of husbandry in
which the economic production of food and fiber requires
Young cattle
intelligent intervention to suppress strongylid populations.
Unlike the case for treating adult dairy cattle, there is
Host resistance continues to be of paramount importance
fairly unanimous agreement among parasitologists that the
here, even though conscious selection of resistant stock is
treatment of yearlings and 2-year-olds is a profitable under-
seldom part of the breeding program. The reason is that
taking (see a second excellent review by Reinemeyer, 1990).
resistant hosts contribute less to the growth of the parasite
These are the ages of cattle that tend to suffer significantly
populations than do more susceptible animals, and their
from parasitism. Parasitized replacements grow more
 presence thus tends to benefit the flock as a whole.
slowly and often fail to reach their full growth potential.
 In theory, rotational grazing seeks to prevent or limit the
Such performance results in real financial loss of which the
aza oi su ud Aq  a jo a
on a particular area of pasture no longer than a week so
that eggs passed in their feces do not have time to develop
Subclinical parasitism of sheep
into infective larvae, and then not allowing the animals to
The effects of moderate parasitism in lambs were inves-
return until all the larvae have died off. The considerable
tigated by administering 5000, 10,000, or 20,000 infective 
investment in fence construction required by rotational
T. colubriformis larvae and comparing weight gains and feed
grazing schemes usually discourages strict observance of
efficiency of these artificially infected lambs with the per-
the rules, so the theoretic ideal is seldom realized in practice.
formance of uninfected controls. Although about one half
However, any practicable rotation scheme undoubtedly
of the larvae administered became adult worms, and group
-d  p asd  yo and  ss
average fecal egg counts of 536 to 2236 eggs per gram were
long the parasite generation, if only slightly (Levine and
observed, these levels of infection apparently caused no sig-
Clark, 1961).
nificant differences in average daily gain or feed efficiency
Modern anthelmintics are efficient and comparatively
(Bergstrom, Maki, and Kercher, 1975).
nontoxic. There are places in the world where efficient
livestock production is virtually impossible without
Integrated control of ruminant strongylid infections
them, and they are of undoubted benefit in increasing
Much has been written about prevention and control of
productivity wherever significant parasite losses occur.
strongylidoses. Every scheme has its proponents and
However, there are limitations, hazards, and expenses that
detractors, but there is no unique formula that applies in
we cannot afford to ignore. No anthelmintic can overcome
all situations.
excessive exposure to infection, just as no amount of bailing
Parasitism should be considered as a year-round game
can overcome too large a leak. Crofton (1958) concluded
among the livestock, the strongylids, and the stockman.
that periodic treatment with interim reinfection merely
Certain moves at propitious times are capable of biasing
 delayed attainment of the full parasite potential. He sug-
the game in the stockman's favor, but these moves must
 gested concentrating treatments early in the pasture season
not violate the rules of the game or the results may be
to obtain maximum delay in the parasite population
disappointing or even disastrous. The ultimate criterion
increase because an adult worm in spring is a potential
 nd iau  si loa j u u ssos n
forebear of a whole series of generations that season.
accrues, not the number of worms fatally poisoned. The
Currently it is widely believed that, at least in temperate
purchase of a livestock scale, as suggested by Whitlock
climates, only one generation of ruminant trichostrongylids
(1955a), and the maintenance of adequate production
capable of causing disease is produced (Herd et al, 1984).
records provide objective measures of success.
However, Crofton's basic premise is supported by Herd,
Control efforts may be classified under selective breeding
Parker, and McClure (1984), who found that “prophylactic
for resistant stock, rotational grazing, and anthelmintic
 treatments in the spring were just as effective as suppressive
medication. The first of these has been used the longest.
treatments throughout the entire grazing season and
 Long before worms were recognized as disease agents, shep-
resulted in significant (P<0.001) increases in weight
herds selected productive livestock for breeding, and worms
  a p  od au 
claimed the lives of weaklings (against the shepherd's
and McClure (1984) consisted of four doses of ivermectin
wishes perhaps, but to his eventual benefit) (Whitlock,
(0.02 mg/kg) administered 3, 6, 9, and 12 weeks after spring
1966). There exist, in many parts of the world and under
turnout. In New York State, we freely admit, 12 weeks after
certain systems of husbandry, cattle, sheep, and goats capa-
turnout is geting pretty close to fall.
 ble of thriving without help from science and technology.
Probably the most important type of host resistance is
These animals have parasites and handle them effectively
 premunition. The development of premunition in a grazing
as a population. Individual animals occasionally die
of
flock tends to truncate the growth curve of the parasite
parasitism, just as individuals occasionally get killed by
population by preventing the maturation of new waves of
predators, hung up in fences, or drowned in watering
larvae and thus in effect prolonging the generation time.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
171
Although interference with the development of premuni
examine both dorsal and lateral aspects of the stoma, as is
tion is obviously to be avoided, periodic anthelmintic
the case with permanently mounted specimens.
medication may have precisely this effect.
The buccal cavity of strongyloids is large and directed
anteriorly (see Figure 4-63). The stomal opening is sur-
FAMACHA and refugia
10 saal 3q 01 eadde jeum Jo oml 1o mo1 e Aq papuno1
ad oi Am e ie pasns kius uaaq s 
palings of a stockade, depending on the imagination of the
resistance within Haemonchus contortus from developing
observer. These are called leaf crowns (corona radiata), and
 in a flock of sheep is to treat only those animals needing
much is made of them in the taxonomy of strongyloids.
therapy. This leaves the remainder of the sheep shedding
In some species, the duct of the dorsal esophageal gland is
feces into the environment containing eggs from worms
carried to the rim of the buccal capsule in a sclerotized
that are still fully susceptible to whatever drug or drugs
ridge (dorsal gutter; see Figure 4-63) on the inner wall of
that have been used. In the case of haemonchosis, the rela-
the buccal capsule. In other species the dorsal gutter is
tionship between worm burden and anemia is well estab-
absent (Figure 4-83). Teeth, when present, lie at the base
lished (Whitlock et al, 1966). The FAMACHA technique
of the buccal cavity, where they lacerate the plug of mucous
combines the ability to detect anemia in sheep (and
membrane that is drawn into the buccal cavity by the suck-
 goats) using the mucous membranes around the eyes
 ing action of the muscular esophagus. The copulatory bursa
with the need to treat sheep that have apparent anemia to
is well developed, the spicules long and thin. The vulva is
reduce their burdens of Haemonchus cortortus (Vatta et al,
close to the anus, and the uterus is prodelphic in most
2001). Thus, in the warmer areas where haemonchosis is
strongyloids.
typically the major disease threatening sheep and goats, the
FAMACHA chart system provides a means of easily recog-
Life history
nizing those sheep in need of treatment. It must be remem-
Strongyloid
1  life histories are typical of the order
bered that this system is for areas where haemonchosis is
Strongylida—that is, they are direct with an infective
the major helminth causing disease in a sheep flock; the
third-stage larva—but significant variations occur in cer-
 system is not designed to work where the major parasites
tain groups. For example, Syrgarmus species, the gapeworm
are T. circumcincta or species of Trichostrongylus, Cooperia,
 of domestic and wild birds, and Stephanurus species, the
or Nematodirus.
kidney worm of swine, use earthworms as paratenic hosts.
Superfamlly Strongyloldea
Family Strongylidae
Morphology
Subfamily Strongylinae
Strongyloids tend to be larger and stouter-bodied than
Identification. Members of the subfamily Strongylinae,
trichostrongyloids, and most of them have a large buccal
often referred to as “large strongyles,” are chiefly parasites of
cavity surrounded by a sclerotized wall (buccal capsule)
the large intestine of equines (Strongylus, Triodontophorus,
that is usually rigid but may be jointed or thin and flexible.
Oesophogodontus, and Craterostomum), elephants (Decrusia,
The stomal structures of strongyloids are sufficiently
Equinurbia, and Choniangium), macropodid marsupials
distinct to permit identification of species with occasional
(Macropicola and Hypodontus), and ostriches (Codiostomum).
reference to other characters. Greater dependence must be
Identification of genera and species of strongylin parasites of
placed on these other characters when it is impossible to
 horses is a matter of comparing the microscopic appearance
Internal leaf
Buccal
crown
capsule
Subm
papillae
172
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
of the stomal region of specimens with the series of illustra-
where they undergo the third molt, which is completed
tions of equine parasites found in Chapter 7. There are two leaf
by the seventh to eighth day after infection. Leaving their
crowns, but because the elements of each are similar in size and
third-stage cuticles surrounded by round cells, the fourth-
 number, the two crowns appear as one.
 stage larvae penetrate nearby small arterioles that lack an
Importance. Strongylus vulgaris, Strongylus edentatus,
internal elastic lamina and wander in the intima of these
and Strongylus equinus are among the most destructive
vessels and progressively larger branches of the cranial
parasites of the horse. All three are bloodsuckers as adult
mesenteric artery.
worms in the cecum and colon, but even more important,
Enigk observed that S. vulgaris cannot penetrate the
their larvae undergo migrations that inflict even greater
internal elastic lamina, which thus confines the larvae to
damage, especially in foals and yearlings. Triodontophorus
the intima and helps keep them on their proper course.
 organisms appear, by the ferocious teeth at the base of their
Thus constrained, the rapidly migrating larvae reach the
buccal cavities (see Figure 7-76), to be bloodsucking para-
colic and cecal arteries by the eighth to the fourteenth
sites. Clusters of Triodontophorus tenuicollis worms cause
day after infection and the cranial mesenteric artery by
localized ulceration of the colonic mucous membrane.
the  
eleventh to the twenty-first day (Enigk, 1950b;
Life history of Strongylus vulgaris. The extrahost devel-
Duncan and Pirie, 1972). Some of the larvae push on
 opment of S. vulgaris is typical of strongylids in general (see
into the aorta and its branches, where they may cause
Figure 4-71). Development to the infective stage requires
important pathologic changes (see Figure 7-88). However,
adequate moisture and temperatures in the range 8° to 399
larvae proceeding beyond the cranial mesenteric artery are
C; the time required is inversely related to temperature
probably lost to their species because of the improbability
(e.g-, about 8 to 10 days at 18° C, 16 to 20 days at 12°
of their finding their way back to the cecum and ventral
C). In arid regions, scattering the droppings with a tractor
colon to breed.
and harrow reduces strongylid larva populations by break-
After 2 to 4 months of migrating in the intima, the
ing up the manure and causing it to dry out before the
fourth-stage larvae that have not gone astray or become
larvae have reached the desiccation-resistant third stage.
trapped deep in thrombi are carried by the bloodstream
However, in more humid regions, the interior of even scat-
to the small arteries in the subserosa of the intestinal
tered manure remains sufficiently moist long enough for
wall. The larvae, now grown large, occlude these small
development to the third stage. Once S. vuigaris larvae have
arteries, whose walls then become inflamed and in due
arrived at the third stage, they are very resistant to cold
course are destroyed. The larvae thus liberated from the
and desiccation and can survive on pasture through a
arterial tree then enter the surrounding tissue and
northern winter or in stored dry hay for many months.
become encapsulated in pea- to bean-sized nodules wherein
The longevity of S. vulgaris third-stage larvae depends
the final molt occurs. Some larvae complete the final molt
mainly on the food reserves in their intestinal cells; the
even before returning to the intestinal wall. According to
greater the activity of the larvae, the more rapidly these
Duncan and Pirie (1972), most of the larvae found in the
reserves become exhausted. However, it is imprudent to
cranial mesenteric lesions at 4 months after infection have
depend on S. vuigaris to wear itself out no matter how
molted to the fifth stage, although the fourth-stage cuticle is
warm and humid the weather may be. Any pasture that
still retained as a sheath. This sheath is cast off before these
has held a horse within a year can be assumed to be con-
immature adults return to the intestinal wall. Finally, the
taminated with S. vuigaris infective larvae.
immature adults enter the lumen of the cecum and ventral
 In 1870 Otto Bollinger hypothesized that occlusion of
colon, mature, and commence reproductive activity at
the intestinal arteries by verminous thrombi and emboli
about 6 months after infection. It is rare to find more
could account for most equine colic cases, both fatal and
than 100 or 200 adult S. vulgaris worms in a horse, and
nonfatal. Since then, the causative relationship between S.
their egg production usually constitutes 10% or less of the
vulgaris and colic has been extensively debated and some-
total strongylid output.
what investigated, although not to an extent commensurate
The migrations of fourth-stage S. vulgaris larvae cause
with its scientific and practical importance.
arteritis, thrombosis, and embolism of the cranial mesen-
 The meticulous experimental observations and well-
teric artery and its branches. Although these arterial lesions
thought-out conclusions of Enigk (1950b, 1951) provide
exist to some degree in almost every horse, and principal
the basis for the following outline. For the reader interested
branches are frequently completely occluded by them, fatal
in greater detail than can be presented here, Dr. Georgi has
infarction of the bowel wall is relatively infrequent. This
published an English translation of Enigk's papers (Georgi,
seeming paradox suggests a Darwinian interpretation.
1973), and all serious students of equine medicine
and
Of all domestic animals, the horse has by far the most
pathology should study the review by Ogbourne and
elaborate system of anastomoses in the arterial supply to
Duncan (1977).
the large intestine. The colic vessels are particularly well
When ingested by a horse, the infective third-stage
supplied with the means for rapidly establishing effective
larvae of S. vuigaris cast off their sheaths in the lumen of
collateral circulation (Dobberstein and Hartmann, 1932).
the small intestine and enter the wall of the cecum and
 In an evolutionary context, this may be interpreted as
ventral colon. Here the larvae penetrate to the submucosa,
evidence that S. vulgaris, which has no direct counterpart
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
173
 in other domestic animals, has probably been occluding
 horses intestinal arteries and thus exerting selection pres-
sure for ages.
However, despite this exceptional adaptation, obstruc-
tion of the intestinal arteries does occasionally lead to fatal
 infarction of the bowel. Even temporary curtailment of
 blood flow pending establishment of collateral circulation
may account for a high proportion of clinical colic cases
from which the patient recovers. Furthermore, the fatal
intestinal displacements often interpreted at necropsy
examination to be the cause of colic symptoms are more
likely to be the result of abnormalities of intestinal tone and
 motility brought about by verminous thromboembolism
and the horse's violent efforts to obtain relief.
After the larvae have migrated back to the intestinal lumen,
the arterial lesions heal (Duncan and Pirie, 1975; Pauli et al,
1975). These lesions also heal dramatically after destruction of
the larvae by medication with any of several newer anthelmin-
tics, including ivermectin (Holmes et al, 1990). Development
and resolution of verminous arteritis can be studied radio-
 graphically in young foals by injecting contrast medium
through a catheter that has been introduced into the aorta
by way of a peripheral artery (Slocombe et al, 1977). Two
such radiographs comprise Figure 4-84. The upper radiograph
of a 2-month-old pony foal was taken 1 month after 500 S.
vulgaris larvae were administered through a nasogastric tube.
The cranial mesenteric and ileocecal arteries are enlarged, and
blood flow through the colic arteries is greatly diminished, as
evidenced by the lack of contrast medium flowing through
them. The lower radiograph of the same foal was taken
1 month after albendazole therapy. Now the stem arteries
have returned to nearly normal size, and the contrast
FIGURE 484. Resolution of equine vemminous arteritis after lar-
medium clearly outlines the colic arteries, indicating a greatly
vicidal therapy with albendazole. The ramifications of the cranial
increased flow through those vessels (Rendano et al, 1979b).
mesenteric artery are made visible by contrast arteriography.
Life histories of Strongylus edentatus and Strongylus
The upper radiograph was taken 1 month after infection with
500 Strongylus vulgaris larvae, and albendazole therapy was started
equinus. Adult S. edentatus and S. equinus are about twice
immediately afterward. The lower radiograph was taken 1 month
as large as S. vulgaris, probably twice as bloodthirsty, and
after albendazole therapy.
considerably more difficult to remove with anthelmintic
drugs, but their larvae are not quite as pathogenic.
The migration routes followed by larvae of S. edentatus
and colon. About 11 days after infection, the newly molted
and S. equinus have been elucidated by Wetzel (1940b),
fourth-stage larvae leave their intestinal nodules, cross the
Wetzel and Kersten (1956), and McCraw and Slocombe
peritoneal space, and enter the right half of the liver, which
(1974, 1978).
in the living horse lies in contact with the cecum. These larvae
The third-stage larvae of S. edentatus burrow into the
wander about in the hepatic tissue for 2 months or longer
wall of the large intestine and reach the liver through the
before emerging and entering the pancreas or abdominal
 portal veins. Enclosed in nodules in the hepatic parench-
cavity, where they complete their development to the fifth
yma, they molt to the fourth stage in about 2 weeks. The
stage. The fourth molt occurs about 4 months after infection.
fourth-stage larvae then wander about in the hepatic tissue
 Finally these adult worms penetrate the wall of the large intes-
for about 2 months, growing larger as they go. Leaving the
tine and reenter the lumen to mate. The prepatent period of
liver by way of the hepatic ligaments, the larvae wander
S. equinus is 9 months.
for months in the parietal retroperitoneal tissues and
eventually make their way to the base of the cecum and
Triodontophorus
thence to the bowel lumen. The prepatent period usually is
Triodontophorus species (and the 40-odd species of
cited as 11 months but may be as short as 6 months
cyathostomes) do not migrate far beyond the mucous mem-
(McCraw and Slocombe, 1978).
brane of the colon; therefore the pathogenic effects of their
The third-stage larvae of S. equirus, like those of S. vulgaris,
larvae are considerably less dramatic than those inflicted by
undergo their third molt in nodules in the wall of the cecum
larvae of Strongylhus species. However, T. tenuicollis adults are
174
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
frequently observed clustered in ulcerated areas in the large
intestine.
Subfamily Cyathostominae
Identification. These “small strongyles"” are parasites of
the large intestine of horses, elephants, pigs, marsupials,
and turtles, and there is a multitude of them. About 40
species of cyathostomes parasitize the cecum and colon of
horses, and it is commonplace to find as many as 15 to
20 of these species infecting an individual host at the same
time. Cyathostomins have somewhat smaller buccal cavities
than strongylins. All have distinct inner and outer leaf
crowns, the elements of which differ in size and number
   e    ( i 
elements are inconspicuous and can be seen only in well-
cleared specimens. Identification of species of equine
cyathostomes can be accomplished by comparing dorsal
and lateral aspects of the buccal regions of fresh or cleared,
fixed specimens with the photomicrographs of strongylins
and cyathostomins portrayed in Chapter 7. All of the more
 common species are represented in that collection.
Importance. From 75% to 100% of the eggs passed in
the feces of naturally infected horses are produced by the
small strongyles (Cyathostominae) because these greatly
 outnumber the large strongyles (Strongylinae) both in
numbers of species and in numbers of individuals.
Cyathostomin larvae do not migrate beyond the mucous
membrane of the cecum and colon, so their pathogenic
FGURE 485. Fourth-stage larvae and juvenile adult "small
effects are usually less dramatic than those inflicted by the
strongyles" (Cyathostominae) in the colonic mucosa of a
larvae of Strongylus species. However, infection by large
horse. Massive invasions such as this usually cause severe
numbers of arrested cyathostomin larvae causes a distinct
diarrhea.
clinical disease that usually is observed in late fall, winter, or
early spring (Mirck, 1977). This form of cyathostominosis
therapy directed at the inflammatory reaction. In one
is characterized by watery diarrhea associated with severe
case, dexamethasone (20 mg) was administered intramus-
inflammation of the mucous membrane of the cecum and
cularly each day for 4 days and on alternate days thereafter,
colon, and often terminates fatally. Affected horses display
with the dose reduced by 4 mg every fourth day. In the
persistent diarrhea, progressive emaciation, and marked hy-
second case, dexamethasone (20 mg) was administered
 poalbuminemia sometimes attended by anasarca. The feces
intramuscularly for 10 days. In both cases, response to
may be negative for strongylid eggs, and the history often
steroid therapy was dramatic, with improvement in fecal
includes regular and vigorous anthelmintic medication
consistency noted within 24 hours and return to normal
without effect (Church, Kelly, and Obwolo, 1986; Jasko
serum albumin levels within l week.
and Roth, 1984). There are many more larvae than can
The cyathostomin larvae encysted in the mucosa are
be accommodated as adult parasites, and as they mature,
basically unaffected by routine pyrantel, fenbendazole, or
Jo isisuo susat an s m jno idams ane su
oral ivermectin at 0.2 or 1.0 mg/kg (Klei et al, 1993).
 granulomatous colitis, and masses of cyathostomin larvae
Moxidectin at 0.3 or 0.4 mg/kg has effects against the
are embedded in the mucous membrane (Figure 4-85).
more mature encysted larvae but is less efficacious against
 Massive invasions of the bright red fourth-stage larvae of
the younger third-stage larvae (Bairden et al, 2006; Xiao,
Cylicocyclus insigne riddling the mucosa of the large intes-
Herd, and Majewski, 1994). Fenbendazole at a dose of
tine are particularly impressive in this regard. Most of the
10 mg/kg/day for 5 days has been labeled as effective against
worms are immature, and egg counts are therefore mislead-
both encysted early third-stage larvae and against older
ingly low. Anthelmintic therapy has no influence on the
encysted third-stage and fourth-stage larvae.
course of the disease, although continued treatment will
reduce the numbers of worms being passed in the feces
Treatment and Control of Strongylld Infectlons
(Deprez and Vercruysse, 2003). Church, Kelly, and
In Horses
Obwolo (1986) diagnosed their two cases heroically by
 Horses, asses, and mules host a far greater variety of stron-
taking full-thickness biopsies of the jejunum and cecum
gylid parasites than ruminants and other domestic
or ventral colon, and cured both patients with steroid
aq a sso au ae un uan p se
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
175
infected with tens or even hundreds of thousands of small
worming foals aged up to 6 months. Thereafter, drugs
strongylid worms (Cyathostominae). Most equine parasites
effective against Strongylus species should be substituted.
are distributed wherever horses are kept all over the world.
On the basis of epidemiologic evidence, the most essential
The relative abundances of individual species may vary
 of all strategic treatments is that administered in spring.
from place to place, but the group as a whole seems well
around foaling time. It is during this period that the
adapted to a wide range of climates. In fact, the conditions
adult worm population is greatly augmented through mat-
under which horses are kept and the uses to which they
uration of arrested and migrating larvae. The fecundity of
 are put seem to have far more influence on the mix of
these worms is also increased, and larger numbers of larvae
strongylid parasites they harbor than does the part of the
reach the infective stage, thus posing a threat to young.
world they happen to inhabit. This is in stark contrast to
susceptible horses. Elimination of these egg-laying worms
the situation in ruminants. For example, two sheep farms
in spring renders the pastures safer for grazing horses
lying a few miles apart but at substantially different alti-
(Duncan, 1974).
tudes may have completely different parasite problems
Adult S. vulgaris, S. edentatus, S. equinus, cyathostomes,
because the ecologic conditions at pasture favor develop-
Oxyuris species, and Parascaris species are susceptible to
 ment and survival of the infective larvae of different species
febantel, fenbendazole, ivermectin, oxibendazole, and
of trichostrongyloids at different elevations.
 pyrantel pamoate. Administration of a macrocyclic lactone
With horses, it is a case of management more than of
in fall and early spring affords control of ascarids and stom-
weather. Backyard ponies, livery horses, show and race
ach bots.
-ip mooy sasodnd supaaiq iy iday sssiou pue 'sasu
 Larvae of S. vulgaris migrating in the cranial mesenteric
tinctly different careers and therefore present distinctly
 artery and its ramifications are accessible to attack by several
 different problems for parasite control. “Because manage-
anthelmintics. Ivermectin is highly effective in a single dose at
ment of horses is so variable and the uses to which horses
0.2 mg/kg (Klei et al, 1984; Lyons, Drudge, and Tolliver, 1982;
n s r e snn n o e pd 
Slocombe and McCraw, 1980, 1981; Slocombe et al, 1983).
 of horse parasites should be tailored to the particular horse
Fenbendazole may be administered in a single dose of 30 to
establishment rather than to a set of universal recommen-
60 mg/kg (Duncan et al, 1977) or in five daily doses of 7.5 to
dations" (Craig and Suderman, 1985). “What's a good
10 mg/kg (Duncan, McBeath, and Preston, 1980).
worming schedule for horses?" is a common but naive
Oxfendazole is effective at a dose of 10 mg/kg (Duncan,
question.
McBeath, and Preston, 1980; Kingsbury and Reid, 1981;
About the most strongylid-contaminated environment
Slocombe et al, 1986).
ever devised for a horse is the neat little paddock that, in
wealthy neighborhoods at least, is surrounded by a white
Anthelmintic resistance
-a  s  ss  aiaa s a ' 
Phenothiazine, thiabendazole, cambendazole, mebenda-
sure to satisfy the horse's nutritional needs for more than a
zole, fenbendazole, oxfendazole, and febantel are no longer
few weeks each year, so hay and grain must be fed to make
 as effective against small strongylids as they were when first
up the difference. Great masses of horse manure accumu-
introduced (Drudge and Elam, 1961; Drudge and Lyons,
late, and thriving hordes of strongylid infective larvae
1965; Drudge, Lyons, and Tolliver, 1977, 1979; Hagan,
develop in them and spread out onto the surrounding
1979; Slocombe et al, 1977). Drudge, Lyons, and Tolliver
 grass. The horse enjoys nibbling whatever grass is available
(1979) identified five species (Cyathostomum catinatum,
and is capable of cutting it closer than a lawnmower.
Cyathostomum coronatum, Cylicocyclus nassatus, Cylicoste-
 In such a situation a horse cannot fail to ingest large num-
phanus goldi, and Cylicostephanus longibursatus) that
bers of infective strongylid larvae. A sensible solution to this
exhibited cross-resistance to cambendazole, fenbendazole,
problem might be to provide horses the exercise and fresh
mebendazole, oxfendazole, and thiabendazole. However,
air they need in bare paddocks containing no green plants
all of these worms were highly susceptible to 10 mg/kg of
at all. However, the almost universally adopted “solution"
oxibendazole, a 2-amino substituted benzimidazole. Later
is to keep the horses in their green exercise lots and try to
trials after repeated dosing of the herd for 14 years with
trim the worm population to subclinical levels by periodic
oxibendazole showed that these five species of worms were
administration of anthelmintic drugs. This program has
resistant to other benzimidazoles but still affected by
 been pursued so energetically that the strongylid parasites
ivermectin and piperazine (Lyons et al, 1996). Resistant 
of horses excel over those of all other hosts relative to ben-
populations also may be controlled with pyrantel pamoate,
zimidazole resistance, at least in North America.
with ivermectin, or with a benzimidazole administered
On many breeding farms, all horses older than 2 months
with piperazine. The selection of populations of these five
 are routinely dewormed every 4 to 8 weeks (Drudge and
 cyathostome species resistant to benzimidazole anthelmin-
 Lyons, 1965). The objective of this program is to prevent
tics was rapid, although the large strongylids and other
contamination of the pasture with strongylid eggs, and that
nematode parasites of horses are still readily killed with
is why it is essential that all horses on the premises be
these products. In response to the developing resistance,
treated. Piperazines are effective against both ascarids and
 Duncan (1982) suggested that in any worm control pro-
cyathostomes and are therefore the logical choice for
gram, drugs of different chemical structures should be
176
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
alternated every 6 to 12 months to reduce the likelihood
simply that the fecal matter was always immediately picked
of the development of resistant worm populations; however,
up after deposition—that is, with sufficient manpower it is
as Dr. Kaplan has recently stated, the currently accepted
theoretically possible to completely break the life cycle of
 opinion is that the traditional rotation program is probably
 a a i s sd   
 no longer the best approach (Briggs et al, 2004).
behind the development by Herd of both a mechanical
Because resistance is the inevitable result of frequent,
pasture vacuum and a pasture sweeper (Herd, 1986).
regular anthelmintic medication, a better course might
Horses also will often refuse to graze in areas where they
 be to worm only those horses with significant fecal egg
defecate, dividing a pasture into areas called roughs and
 counts (e.g., 100 eggs per gram). Such a process of selective
lawns. It has been suggested that this may be a means by
chemotherapy has been tried with horses in a polo string
which most horses reduce their intake of strongyle larvae,
(Hamlen-Gomez and Georgi, 1991). This work showed that
although this may not be true in smaller pastures (Medica
certain horses may have had a predisposition to infection
et al, 1996). Dragging and harrowing pastures when occu-
and that strategic deworming of chronic egg shedders
pied will reduce roughs but may spread infected feces over
resulted in a significant savings over regular, routine
the entire pasture, increasing the chance for a horse to
deworming. The possible combination of selective chemo-
ingest larvae. Composting of horse manure before spread-
therapy with the use of a daily deworming product such
ing will kill any parasite eggs that are present.
as Strongid-C (pyrantel tartrate) could possibly lead to
significant improvements in parasite management  in
Famlly Chabertlldae
certain herds of horses.
Subfamily Oesophagostominae and Chabertinae
Coles et al (1999) reported on the discovery of large
Identification
 strongyles that were resistant to pyrantel. Strongyle eggs
There is a transverse fold of cuticle ("ventral groove,” see
were collected from the feces of the three horses that had
Figure 4-63) on the ventral side of the body just posterior to
high numbers of eggs after treatment, and they were found
the buccal cavity. The buccal cavity varies in size from small
by in vitro methods to apparently be resistant. A second
(e.g-, Oesophagostomum columbianum, Figures 4-86 and 4-87)
treatment of one horse had very litle effect on the fecal egg
to very large (e.g-, Chabertia ovina, Figures 4-88 and 4-89).
counts after treatment. Culture of the larvae to the infective
Oesophagostomins are parasites of the large intestines of
stage allowed it to be determined that all three horses
ruminants (O. columbianum, Oesophagostomum venulosum,
were shedding some eggs of S. edentatus and one horse
Oesophagostomum radiatum, and C. ovina), swine (Oesopha-
was shedding mainly the eggs of S. edentatus This appears
gostomum dentatum, Oesophagostomun brevicaudum), and
to be the first report of large strongyle resistance to any
 primates ( Conoweberia species and Ternidens deminutus).
anthelmintic.
Remarkably, and to the great advantage of the horse,
avermectin resistance has not yet been documented
among any of the small strongyles. Recent work has indi-
cated that there may be a trend toward resistance in some
 populations, but there is still no definite evidence that resis-
tance is present (von Samson-Himmelstjerna et al, 2007).
The lack of avermectin resistance in the equine cyathos-
tomes remains a mystery to most parasitologists. Possible
theories include no resistance gene(s) to be selected by
treatment pressure (considered the least likely by many);
the avermectins as dosed having only a minimal “tail"
effect (a period when worms are surrounded by less than
curative doses of drug); ivermectin having no effect on
encysted cyathostomes, leaving them intact as an untreated
refugia (thought the benzimidazoles may have all had some
effect on the encysted forms); and maybe just luck. We can
hope that this continues to be the case forever, but, even
with all the evidence to the contrary, it is expected that
sooner or later the small strongyles of the horse will
become resistant to this class of compounds. Therefore it
is a good idea to keep periodically doing egg counts before
and after treatment to verify product efficacy.
Pasture management
Dr. Georgi used to say something to the effect that “the
FGURE 486. Oesophagostomtum columbianum, dorsoventral view of
king's horses probably had fewer worms." The reason was
 buccal and anterior esophageal regions.
CH A P T ER 4 Helminths
177
FIGURE 489. Chabertia ovina, lateral view of buccal cavity and
 anterior esophageal regions.
FGURE 4-87. Oesophagostomum columbianum, lateral view of buccal
and anterior esophageal regions.
wall of the bowel and not to adult worms in the lumen.
Therefore clinical disease is likely to be associated with non-
patent infection, and diagnosis must depend on correct
Importance
interpretation of clinical signs or postmortem findings.
Oesophagostomins are called rodular worms because
The feces are watery, dark, and very fetid. Weakness
their parasitic larvae tend to become encapsulated by a
is marked, and emaciation rapid. Necropsy examination
somewhat excessive reactive inflammation on the part of
conducted during an outbreak of nodular worm disease
the previously sensitized host. Acute inflammation may
reveals an inflamed intestine studded with active nodules
lead to clinical disease characterized by fetid diarrhea that
filled with creamy pus, each containing a living larva
may be fatal. The nodules later caseate and calcify, and severe
(Figure 4-90). Caseated and calcified nodules should not
involvement may interfere mechanically with normal intes-
 be held accountable for current acute parasitic enteritis but
tinal motility. Clinical signs in ruminants and swine usually
may occasionally cause intussusception or other mechanical
are associated with these reactions to the larval stages in the
abnormality.
 The most important effect of Oesophagostomum species
in swine is the formation of nodules in the gut wall
by developing third-stage larvae. The fourth-stage larvae
emerge from these nodules as early as 2 weeks after infec-
tion, or they remain for several months. Nodule formation
may be accompanied by catarrhal enteritis, spoils sausage
casings, and probably interferes with maximum growth
of young swine. A rise in egg output by sows peaks at
6 or 7 weeks after farrowing and then drops off rapidly.
This could be an important epidemiologic factor in situa-
tions favorable for the development of infective larvae.
Conoweberia apiostomum, Conoweberia stephanostomum,
and T. dermirutus are pathogenic, especially in recently
captured primates with the unaccustomed stresses of con-
finement and transportation (see Figures 8-83 and 8-84).
FGURE 4-88. Chabertia ovina,head-on. The oral end of the esoph-
Acute and chronic disease syndromes caused by C. stepha-
agus with its triradiate lumen is visible at the base of the buccal
nostomum occurred in gorillas from the thirteenth to for-
cavity.
tieth days after capture (Rousselot and Pellissier, 1952).
178
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
The chronic syndrome consisted of intermittent diarrhea,
paleness of the mucous membranes, and the presence of
eggs in the feces. In the acute form, the gorilla refuses to eat
or nibbles a little and suffers some diarrhea but very soon
 passes only small quantities of glairy mucus streaked with
blood, much like that observed in acute amebic dysentery
 of humans. The gorilla remains either lying down or sitting
with both hands on its head in an attitude of human
desperation.
Anthelmintic medication
Many different products are approved for treating infection
with the adults of Oesophagostomum and Chabertia species in
cattle and sheep and Oesophagostormum species in swine.
Family Stephanuridae, Subfamily Stephanurinae
Identification
Stephanurus dentatus, the kidney worm of swine, is a
stout (up to 2 by 40 mm) parasite of the hepatic, renal,
and perirenal tissues, axial musculature, and spinal canal of
swine and sometimes of cattle. The buccal cavity is cup-
 shaped and directed straightforward with 6 to 10 triangular
teeth at its base (Figure 4-91). The gut is convoluted, the
spicules equal and short, and the bursa reduced.
 Earthworms serve as intermediate hosts. The life history
 may be direct or could involve earthworms as facultative
FIGURE 490. Oesophagostomum radiatum fourth-stage larva from a
intermediate hosts, infection occurring by ingestion or
nodule in the intestinal wall of a calf. Oesophagostomum species
skin penetration of third-stage larvae or by ingestion of
fourth-stage larvae are unusual in having buccal cavities relatively
infected earthworms. Once in the body of the pig, the
larger than those in the adult stage.
larvae enter the liver and spend 4 to 9 months wandering
destructively there. Some are trapped by an encapsulating
tissue reaction, but the rest migrate to the retroperitoneal
tissues surrounding the kidneys and ureters. Eggs appear in
the urine 9 to 16 months after infection and persist for
3 years or longer. Piglets may become infected in utero
(Batte, Harkema, and Osborne, 1960; Batte, Moncol, and
Barber,1966).
S. dentatus larvae migrate abortively in other hosts
(e.g-, cattle) and frequently lose their way in pigs. Not
 only liver and kidney but also choice loin chops are fre-
quently condemned because of these destructive larvae.
Although migration of S. dentatus larvae in the spinal
cord may cause posterior paralysis, otherwise the clinical
signs of infection are not distinctive. Extensive liver damage
may lead to emaciation and death.
Anthelmintic medication
Levamisole and fenbendazole are the approved anthel-
mintics for the treatment of S. dentatus infections.
Ivermectin in a mixture as a feed additive designed to deli-
ver a dosage of approximately 0.1 mg/kg daily for 7 days is
also approved for the treatment and control of S. dentatus
infection. Ivermectin (0.3 mg/kg body weight subcuta-
neously) has a marked effect on S. dentatus infections
(Becker, 1986). Albendazole is very active against both
adult and immature S. dentatus but is not approved for
FGURE 4-91. Stephanurus dentatus.
use in swine in the United States.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
179
FGURE 492. Cyathostoma (family Syngamidae) buccal capsule.
Family Syngamidae
The subfamily Syngaminae includes the genera Syrgamus
FIGURE 4-94. Globocephalus urosubulatus, a hookworm of swine;
dorsal (eft) and lateral (right) aspects. (Courtesy Dr. E.l. Braide.)
and Cyathostoma (not Cyathostomum) in birds and
Marnmomonogamus in mammals (see Figure 7-57). All three
have large buccal capsules (Figure 4-92), and all are parasites of
the upper respiratory tract. Males and females of Syngarmus
of large quantities of blood from their hosts, whereas others
and Mammomorogamus species are fused permanently in
such as Uncinaria stenocephala remove very little. Fresh
copula. Earthworms serve as paratenic hosts for Syngarmus.
specimens of A. canirum tend to be dark in color, whereas
Syngamus trachea infections have caused the deaths
of
those of U. sterocephala are quite pale. All hookworms have
farmed rheas, and in these birds, treatment with fenbendazole
a large buccal cavity directed obliquely dorsally, so the ante-
at 25 mg/kg was successful therapy (de Witt, 1995). Ivermectin
rior end of the worm is more or less *hooked,"' but, again,
also is highly effective in the treatment of Syngarmus infections.
this trait is variably developed as can be appreciated from a
comparison of Bunostomum (Figure 4-93) and Globoceph-
 Superfamlly Ancylostomatoldea
alus species (Figure 4-94). The male hookworm, provided
Family Ancylostomatidae
with well-developed bursa, is often found in copula with
Identification
the female, the two worms forming a T because the vulva is
Adult hookworms are parasites of the small intestine.
located some little distance from the caudal extremity. The
Some species such as Ancylostoma caninum cause the loss
female lays typical strongylid eggs, and these appear in the
feces during the morula stage of development.
Two subfamilies are distinguished: Ancylostomatinae
and Bunostominae.‘
"Carnivorous hosts are parasitized
only by the Ancylostomatinae, herbivorous hosts by the
Bunostominae, and omnivorous hosts by both subfamilies"
(Lichtenfels, 1980).
 The subfamily Ancylostomatinae includes the genera
Ancylostoma, Uncinaria, Globocephalus, and Placoconus.
 The most common hookworms of the dog and cat are
species of Ancylostoma and U. stenocephala. Species of
Ancylostoma have buccal cavities with sharp teeth, whereas
those of Uncinaria have cutting plates (Figure 4-95). The
ventral margin of the stoma of Ancylostoma is armed by one
(Ancylostoma braziliense), two (Ancylostoma duodenale), or
three (A. caninum, Ancylostoma tubaeforme) pairs of sharp
teeth. A. braziliense matures in dogs and cats, A. duodenale
in humans, A. carninum in dogs (see Figures 4-64 and 4-95),
and A. tubaeforme in cats (Figure 4-96). The ventral margin
of the stoma of Globocephalus urosubulatus of swine has
-  a e a s aa ru sd 
sule of Placoconus lotoris of raccoons is formed of five
articulating plates (Figure 4-97).
The  subfamily  Bunostominaei
includes the genera
FIGURE 493. Bunostomum sp.
Bunostomum of ruminants (see Figure 4-93), Necator of
180
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
FGURE 495. Dorsoventral and
lateral  aspects  of  the   buccal
and esophageal regions of Ancy-
lostoma caninum and uncinaria
stenocephala.
Ancylostoma caninum
Uncinaria stenocephala
humans, Bathmostomum of elephants, and Grammocephalus
 of elephants and rhinoceroses.
Anthelmintic medication
In ruminants, hookworms can be treated with avermec-
Life history
tins, levamisole, or various benzimidazoles. In pigs, treat-
Infection typically occurs through either ingestion or
ment is usually performed using an avermectin. Cats can be
skin penetration by infective larvae, which then undergo
treated with labeled products containing ivermectin, sela-
more or less extensive migrations through the tissues of
 mectin, moxidectin, milbemycin oxime, pyrantel pamoate,
 the host before developing into adult hookworms in the
emodepside, or febantel. Dogs can be treated with many
small intestine (Figure 4-98; see also Figure 7-44).
Hookworms in sea lions, seals, and dogs are capable of
infecting neonates through transmammary transmission;
transmammary transmission does not appear to occur
with the hookworm of the cat.
FGURE 4-97. Pacoconus fotoris, hookwomm of the raccoon; dorso-
FIGURE 496. Ancylostoma tubaeforme. At left is the dorsoventral
ventral (left) and lateral (right) aspects of the buccal and esopha-
aspect of the stoma, and at right, its lateral aspect.
geal regions.
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
181
Adulthookworm
Egg
Arrested L3
Migrating L3
Infective L3
FIGURE 498. Life history of Ancylostoma caninum. The actively motile sheathed larva develops in
2 to 8 days. Shaded, well-drained soils, wanmth, and humidity provide optimum conditions for
development and survival of this stage, which may infect the host either on being swallowed or by
penetrating its skin. Eggs are shed in the feces about 2 weeks after ingestion of larvae and about
a month after penetration of skin by larvae. However, not all larvae mature. Some invade skeletal
muscle cells (Little, 1978) or gut wall (Schad, 1974, 1979) and enter an arrested state of devel-
 opment. Arrested larvae later become reactivated in response to obscure cues and migrate either
to the small intestine, where they mature, or to the mammary glands, where they are shed in the
milk and infect the pups. Arrested larvae are regularly reactivated during the last 2 weeks of
pregnancy.
182
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
available products that contain pyrantel pamoate, febantel,
 n     n  n
fenbendazole, milbemycin oxime, and moxidectin.
ence infection. Immunity acquired from previous infection
 In Australia there is concern that the hookworm of the
confers increased resistance, but this is difficult to disen-
dog, A. caninurm, is becoming resistant to treatment with
tangle from the influences of advancing age and from the
pyrantel. This was first suggested by a report from New
marked inhibition of further infection exerted by a residual
Zealand of a dog imported from Australia that had a hook-
 population of hookworms (premunition). (2) The ability to
worm infection that would not clear with pyrantel (Jackson
compensate for blood loss caused by hookworms is influ-
et al, 1987). Larvae grown from eggs in the feces of this dog
enced by the hematopoietic capacity and state of nutrition
were used to infect two other dogs that could not be cleared.
of the individual and by the presence or absence of other
of their infections with a 5x dose of pyrantel. There have
stresses.
since been other reports of reduced efficacy from Australia
(Hopkins and Gyr, 1991; Hopkins, Gyr, and Schimmel,
 Clinical forms of disease
1998). Most recently, there has been a controlled trial in
Four different forms of canine hookworm disease can be
Australia that has shown poor efficacy against worms in
 distinguished. Peracute disease occurs in the neonatal pup.
experimentally infected dogs (Kopp et al, 2007). This
Acute disease occurs in older pups and mature dogs.
appears to provide additional rationale for practitioners
Chronic hookworm infection is not uncommon in adult
to order posttreatment fecal examinations to monitor the
 dogs and may or may not be associated with clinical signs.
effects of therapy.
Peracute hookworm disease results from the passage of
infective larvae from dam to nursing pups in the milk.
Hookworm disease of dogs
Transmammary infection of very young pups with as few
The principal importance of hookworms is associated
oidl jeney aaoid Aeu unuum v 1npe oi ol os se
with their ability to cause anemia. Hookworm disease
the pups appear healthy and sleek the first week, then
varies in severity from asymptomatic infection to rapidly
sicken and deteriorate rapidly the second week. The visible
fatal exsanguination, depending on the magnitude of the
mucosae are very pale, and the soff to liquid feces are very
challenge and the resistance of the host. Magnitude of chal-
dark in color because the blood shed by the hookworms in
lenge is determined by the virulence and number of hook-
the small intestine has been partially digested on the way
worms. Virulence depends on the species of hookworm
out. The worms do not lay eggs until the sixteenth day of
involved. A. carinum is much more pathogenic for dogs
infection, so diagnosis must rest on the clinical signs of
than A. braziliense or U. stenocephala because it causes
disease. Prognosis is guarded to poor with or without
much greater blood loss per worm. The number of hook-
treatment.
worms infecting a particular host depends very heavily on
 Treatment is often to little avail in peracute neonatal
the degree of exposure to infective larvae. Exposure, in
hookworm disease. Blood transfusion is essential to keep
turn, depends on the extent to which infected hosts have
affected pups alive long enough for anthelmintic medica-
 contaminated the environment by shedding eggs in their
tion to take effect, and anthelmintic medication must be
feces, and on the suitability of the substrate (gravel and
administered immediately to stop the loss of blood as soon
sand are ideal), temperature, and moisture for development
as possible. On no account should anthelmintic therapy be
and survival of infective larvae.
 delayed. It is impracticable to attempt replacement of
aiandde ue ioy uoisnysuen Aq sasso pooq uomyoou
 -ssen Areuusen ea puea Areueu aq qano
length of time.
sion (Kotake, 1929a, 1929b; Stone and Girardeau, 1966,
Routine cage, pen, and run sanitation and periodic ant-
1968). Transplacental transmission, if it occurs at all, is
helmintic medication of all adult dogs are essential to
overshadowed by transmammary infection (Stoye, 1973).
reduce the level of environmental contamination with
A bitch exposed to only one substantial oral or percutane-
hookworm larvae. When neonatal losses have already
ous infection will shed A. carirum larvae in her milk for the
been experienced, it is essential to examine the visible
next three lactations, although the larval output will dimin-
mucosae of each pup daily from about the seventh day of
ish with each lactation. Currently available anthelmintics
life until weaning and to administer an anthelmintic at the
administered at dosages to treat and control adult hook-
first sign of anemia. Alternatively, antihookworm therapy
worm infections lack significant efficacy against hookworm
should begin 2 weeks after pups are whelped and continue
larvae arrested in the tissues. The arrested larvae of A. cari-
weekly for 3 months (Kelly, 1977).
 a n so  jsd q  
Bitches that have lost litters may be treated with fenben-
with a combination heartworm preventive, and they are
dazole, 50 mg/kg per day, from the fortieth day of gestation
thus still available to move through the mammary gland
to the fourteenth day of lactation, to prevent further losses
 a as sd u a no s  o
(Burke and Roberson, 1983; Duwel and Strasser, 1978).
Host resistance is resolvable into two abilities: (1) The
This treatment attacks the reactivated larvae and is effective
ability to limit the number of hookworms maturing in the
but rather expensive. It also has been shown that ivermectin
 small intestine is influenced by age, premunition, and
treatment of the bitch (0.5 mg/kg body weight administered
acquired immunity. As dogs grow older, they become
4 to 9 days before whelping followed by a second treatment
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
183
10 days later) can also prevent puppies from being infected
replaced by more larvae from the muscles. Schad found
by larvae passed in the milk (Stoye, Meyer, and Schneider,
that if infective larvae were chilled before being adminis-
1987). Treatment of four bitches with a single 1 mg/kg
tered orally to dogs, they became arrested in the gut wall.
subcutaneous injection of doramectin failed to prevent
When reactivated, these larvae were able to become estab-
 transmammary infection of all their puppies, with five of
lished in the intestine in the presence of adults, and neither
the 23 puppies, representing three of the four litters,
removal of adult worms with anthelmintic nor immuno-
becoming infected (Schnieder et al, 1996).
suppression with prednisolone initiated resumed develop-
 Acute hookworm disease results from sudden exposure
ment of the arrested A. canirurm larvae (Schad, 1974, 1979;
of susceptible older pups to large numbers of infective
Schad and Page, 1982). Thus, besides arrested larvae serving
larvae. Even mature dogs may be overwhelmed if exposure
as a source of infection for nursing puppies, they also serve
is sufficiently great. Usually, many eggs will be found in the
to repopulate the intestine with adults that contaminate the
feces of affected animals, but clinical signs may precede the
environment. Practicing veterinarians frequently encounter
appearance of eggs by about 4 days in particularly heavy
n a, on n pn s mu m s
infections. In acute hookworm disease and in chronic
even after repeated treatments with a variety of drugs over
(compensated) hookworm infection, response to simple
the course of many months. This “larva leak" phenomenon
anthelmintic therapy is usually dramatic. Supportive ther-
 provides a plausible explanation for these refractory cases.
apy beyond provision of an adequate diet is unnecessary.
 Chronic (compensated) hookworm infection is usually
Environmental contamination
without signs. Diagnosis rests on the presence of hook-
Because hookworm infection is common and the
worm eggs in the feces and measurable reductions in eryth-
females are prodigious egg layers, populations of infective
rocyte count, blood hemoglobin, or packed cell volume.
larvae are likely to bloom whenever the weather becomes
Occasionally, however, incomplete adjustment between
favorable for their development and survival. Therefore
 parasite and host produces a state of chronic ill health.
most frank hookworm disease cases occur during late
Secondary (decompensated) hookworm disease usually
spring, summer, and early autumn in temperate climates,
involves older dogs that have more ailing them than just
 particularly when mild weather is accompanied by adequate
 hookworms. The cardinal sign again is profound anemia,
rainfall. The infective challenge may become overwhelming
usually in a malnourished or even emaciated animal. The
in carelessly managed kennels and pet shops where feces are
hookworms may indeed kill the dog, but it is important
allowed to accumulate long enough to permit infective
in this case to recognize that they play a secondary role.
larvae to develop. Unpaved runs are particularly favorable
An accurate diagnosis, for example, of “malnutrition with
for the perpetuation of the parasite because the feces mixes
secondary hookworm infection" logically leads to effective
with the soil. This not only makes sanitation difficult but
 therapy. The efficacy of mebendazole and fenbendazole was
provides more favorable cultural conditions, especially
 dramatically reduced in iron- and protein-deficient rats 
when the soil is light, open textured, and well drained.
infected with Nippostrongylus brasiliensis (Duncombe
From 2 to 8 days are required for the morula in the
et al, 1977a, 1977b). Clinical experience indicates that pro-
hookworm egg to develop into an infective third-stage
tein sufficiency is also essential to efficient anthelmintic
larva. Shirt-sleeve temperatures (23° to 30° C) and a mod-
action against hookworms and other parasites. Cases of
erately moist, well-aerated medium are optimal. Thus
malnourished dogs that have secondary hookworm disease
hookworm larvae develop well in shaded areas of well-
and dogs that seem adequately nourished but fail to
drained soils but not in heavy, water-logged soils or
respond to anthelmintic medication should first be given
 sssp pe s poap oi pasoxa ae au a
a course of supportive therapy (e.g-, high-protein diet, fer-
Ancylostoma eggs and larvae are destroyed by freezing,
rous sulfate orally or parenteral iron injections, vitamins,
whereas those of Uncinaria are very resistant to cold.
and, if necessary, blood transfusion) and then remedicated
A. caninum larvae will not develop to the infective stage
with a suitable anthelmintic.
at temperatures consistently below 15° C. Above the opti-
mum temperature for development (30° C), larvae rapidly
Arrested larvae and the refractory egg shedder
develop to the infective stage. It can be reached in 48 hours
Arrested A. carirum larvae are found in the intestinal
at 37° C, the highest temperature compatible with develop-
wall and skeletal muscle tissue of the adult dogs, and these 
ment (McCoy, 1930). Thus, compared with Toxocara eggs,
arrested larvae are not killed by routine treatment. Little
soil pollution by hookworm infective larvae may be viewed
(1978) found that larvae of A. carirum are continually
as a temporary problem that a good hard freeze will
migrating from the muscles to the intestine through the
probably solve.
lungs. When adult worms were already present in the intes-
People are always looking for ways to kill the larvae on
tine, few if any of these larvae developed to maturity, but
soil or lawns, but there is no good method. During mild
when the adult worms were eliminated by treatment, these
weather, sodium borate, broadcast at the rate of 10 1b/100 sq ft
larvae from the muscles were able to mature and start pro-
(0.5 kg/m?) and raked in, will destroy hookworm larvae in
ducing eggs in about 4 weeks. A second course of treatment
gravel- or loam-surfaced runs. This treatment destroys
then eliminated the new adults, and these in turn were
vegetation as well as hookworm larvae and is therefore
184
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
unsuitable for lawns. Resinated dichlorvos, an organopho.
  ne s  a ro   p
sphate, was reported to interfere with the development of
above the high water mark. Such patients reported with
first- and second-stage larvae of A. carinum (Kalkofen,
lesions varying in numbers. They were not the most exten-
1971). Paved surfaces, cages, and the like should first
sively infected ones. Persons with hundreds of lesions
be cleaned thoroughly and then mopped or sprayed
definitely attributed the origin of their infection to contact
with 1% sodium hypochlorite solution (Clorox). This
with damp sand when they were wet with perspiration
solution kills the larvae or at least induces them to cast
while working: repairing an automobile, doing brick work,
off their sheaths, affer which they are more susceptible
or making plumbing connections underneath houses, and
to drying and other unfavorable environmental stresses.
the like.
Large commercial dog-rearing operations make extensive
 The most recent visible lesion is a very narrow erythem-
use of wire-bottomed cages and pens to effect the physical
atous formation along the course traveled by the worm.
separation of the dogs from the bulk of their feces.
Soon a slightly raised line representing the location of the
 In most situations environmental protection is per-
burrow can be palpated. This line becomes visibly elevated,
formed by the routine treatment of pet dogs and cats.
more or less continuous and vesicular. Sometimes bullae
Anthelmintic medication may be used to reduce the
are formed. The surface of the lesion dries, resulting in a
output of hookworm eggs in the feces and thus limit the
thin crust. When the parasite travels it moves from a frac-
degree of contamination of the environment with infective
tion of an inch to several inches a day, advancing, as a rule,
larvae. Therapeutic dosages may be administered monthly,
more rapidly at night.
periodically, or when indicated by positive fecal examina-
To some patients the itching sensation resulting from
tions. Most monthly heartworm preventives will also do
infection is almost intolerable, whereas others endure it
an excellent job in protecting the environment from hook-
with less suffering.
. The severity of the lesions, too, is
worm eggs.
more pronounced in some than in others.
The severity and persistence of the lesions are at least
Cutaneous larva migrans
partly related to hypersensitivity resuling from previous
"Creeping eruption" (human cutaneous larva migrans)
exposure. The lungs may be invaded, but intestinal infec-
 is a linear, tortuous, erythematous, and intensely pruritic
tion with mature worms ensues only in cases involving
eruption of the human skin usually caused by migration of
those species that are normal parasites of humans.
a nematode larva (Kirby-Smith, Dove, and White, 1926).
A. braziliense larvae are most frequently involved in the
Human enteric infections with Ancylostoma caninum
typical protracted cases, especially in the coastal regions
Prociv and Croese (1996) reported on a series of human
of the southeastern United States (White and Dove,
cases with eosinophilic enteritis from northern semitropical
1926). Accidental sporadic or experimental cases involving
Queensland, Australia. Most of these cases came from typ-
A.caninum,U. stenocephala, Bunostomum phlebotomum,
ical suburban housing developments. An adult A. carinum
Strongyloides stercoralis, and Gnathostoma spp. have also
was recovered at colonoscopy from the terminal ileum of
been reported, and the larvae of those species that normally
one patient, and an unidentifiable adult hookworm was
mature in man (A. duodenale, Ancylostoma ceylonicum, and
found on a portion of ileum resected from a second patient.
Necator americanus) produce a transient but otherwise
There have since been additional cases reported from
typical creeping eruption in previously sensitized indivi-
Australia and the United States in which adult A. caninum
duals. It should also be noted that larvae of Gasterophilus
have been recovered and cases that have signs and serology
and Hypoderma species also migrate in human skin (James,
suggestive of A. caninum infection (Prociv and Croese,
1947), producing a clinical condition properly termed cuta-
1996; Vikram-Khoshoo et al, 1995). Signs of infection
neous larva migrans. There is every reason to believe that
have included obscure abdominal pain that may or may
after the larvae disappear from the skin that they will enter
 not be associated with an increased level of circulating
deeper tissues, where they will persist for extended periods
eosinophils. Worms are not observed in most seropositive
(see Figure 8-86).
patients. It appears that these people became infected with
 Probably no nematode larva capable of penetrating the
infective-stage larvae by the cutaneous route as they went
skin is above suspicion in individual cases, but the epide-
about parks and yards without shoes and socks. These cases
miologic importance of any particular species depends on
provide yet another good reason why veterinary practi-
tioners must insist that clients submit fecal samples from
ple, the etiologic prominence of A. braziliense may have
their pets for annual evaluation and work with their clients
much to do with the defecation behavior of dogs and
to practice hookworm prevention and control.
cats, as may be surmised from the following description
of circumstances surrounding infection, lesions, and symp-
Superfamlly Metastrongyloldea
toms by Kirby-Smith, Dove, and White (1926).
Metastrongyloids are parasites of the respiratory, vascular,
 At least 50 percent of the cases of creeping eruption seen
and nervous systems of mammals. Most species whose life
by the senior author are believed to have originated at the
histories have been investigated require a snail or slug inter-
beach, the probable origin being traced to the soft damp
mediate host. However, Metastrongylus species develop to
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
185
Anus
Vulva
FGURE 499. Metastrongylus apri.
the infective stage in earthworms, and F. osleri and F. hirthi
infect their definitive hosts directly. The copulatory bursa is
FGURE 4-100. Muellerius capillaris female.
of the basic strongylid pattern but has suffered varying
degrees of reduction in the evolution of different families.
For example, the bursa is best developed in the family
Family Protostrongylidae
Metastrongylidae (Figure 4-99) but is reduced to mere
Identification
papillae in the family Filaroididae. The vulva is close to
Protostrongylids have a well-developed bursa, spicule,
the anus except in the family Crenosomatidae, in which it
and spicule guide, and the vulva is near the anus (Figure
is located in the midregion of the body. The diversity of
4-100; see also Figure 4-68).
structure and biology displayed by members of the super-
family Metastrongyloidea makes further generalization
Life history
precarious.
 The oviparous protostrongylid females deposit unseg-
mented eggs in the surrounding lung, vascular, or neural
Family Metastrongylidae
tissues. These eggs develop into first-stage larvae before
 The family Metastrongylidae contains only one genus,
they appear in the feces. If these first-stage larvae are
Metastrongylus, all species of which are large white parasites
ingested by any of a wide range of snails and slugs, they
of the bronchi and bronchioles of swine.
develop in these intermediate hosts into doubly ensheathed
third-stage infective larvae. The protostrongylids consid-
Identification
ered here are all parasites of sheep and goats.
The mouth is flanked by a pair of trilobed lips. The spi-
cules are long and thin, the bursa is well developed, and the
Protostrongylus
yulva is near the anus (see Figure 4-99). When passed in the
Protostrongylus rufescens lives in the smaller bronchioles,
 feces of infected swine, the egg contains a larva.
where they may cause localized lesions. Males of this brown-
ish red species can be distinguished from D. filaria by their
Life history
longer, comblike spicules (see Figure 4-68). The female
Oviparous females lay eggs containing first-stage larvae.
 Protostrongylus organism is prodelphic, whereas the female
The standard view is that these eggs do not hatch or
Dictyocaulus organism  is amphidelphic. Fenbendazole-
develop into infective larvae unless they are ingested by
medicated salt has been used successfully to control pro-
an earthworm. However, continued high prevalence
tostrongylid lungworms in free-ranging Rocky Mountain
(50%) in Iowa swine despite confinement rearing and
bighorn sheep in Montana (Jones and Worley, 1997).
 improved sanitation indicates that the earthworm may
 not be an obligatory intermediate host of Metastrongylus
Muellerius
species (Ledet and Greve, 1966).
Muellerius capillaris (see Figure 4- 100) is a tiny species so
Metastrongylus species are of only modest pathologic
deeply embedded in lung tissue or reactive nodules that
and economic importance. It was once supposed that
specimens are extremely difficult to dissect out intact.
they acted as vectors of swine influenza virus, but substan-
Antemortem diagnosis is less difficult because the active
tial proof for this idea is lacking (Wallace, 1977).
first-stage larvae are easily separated from the host's feces
by the Baermann technique and are not difficult to distin-
 Anthelmintic medication 
guish from those of Protostrongylus and Dictyocaulus species
 Fenbendazole, levamisole, and ivermectin are approved
(see Figure 7-61). Muellerius species are usually nonpatho-
 anthelmintics with activity against swine lungworms.
 genic at the levels of infection normally encountered in
186
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
 FIGURE 4-101. Adult Parelaphostrongylus tenuis in the brain cavity of
a deer. The end of the scale is 2 cm across.
nature and agriculture, but heavy infections may have seri-
ous consequences, especially in goats.
Treatment. M. capilaris infection has been treated
successfully in sheep with moxidectin (1% injectable solu-
tion at 0.2 mg/kg) and in goats with topical eprinomectin
(0.5 mg/kg) (Geurden and Vercruysse, 2007; Papadopoulos
et al, 2004). Also, levamisole, fenbendazole, albendazole,
and ivermectin have been used to treat M. capillaris infec-
tions in sheep and goats, but results have been less than
would be hoped for all these products.
FGURE 4102. Crenosoma sp. from the lung of a bear.
Parelaphostrongylus
Parelaphostrorgylus tenuis is normally a parasite of the
especially anteriorly (Figure 4-102). Crenosoma vulpis is less
meninges of the white-tailed deer, O. virginianus, in which
than 16 mm long and found in the bronchi and bronchioles of
species it rarely if ever causes disease (Figure 4-101).
foxes (Vulpes vulpes), wolves (Canis lupus), raccoons (Procyon
However, in abnormal hosts such as sheep, goats, llamas,
lotor), and dogs. Troglostrongylus species are parasites of
camels, moose, caribou, reindeer, wapiti, fallow deer, and
Felidae.
mule deer, P. teruis tends to invade the nervous tissue
proper, causing serious or fatal neurologic disease
Life history
(Baumgartner et al, 1985; Krogdahl, Thilsted, and Olsen,
The ovoviviparous females deposit first-stage larvae or
1987; Mayhew et al, 1976; Nichols et al, 1986) (see Figures
thin-shelled eggs containing first-stage larvae. These ascend
8-93 and 8-94). Because P. tenuis rarely matures in these
the trachea and descend the alimentary tract to exit in the
hosts, larvae are not shed in the feces. Therefore diagnosis is
host's feces (see Figure 7-27) and develop into infective
presumptive and based on the appearance of neurologic
third-stage larvae in snails and slugs. The definitive host
signs in ruminants that share their pastures with white-
 becomes infected by ingesting infected mollusks; the pre-
tailed deer. Cattle are now known to also succumb to
 patent period is 19 days (Wetzel, 1940a).
infection with this parasite, and at least two cases have
been reported (Duncan and Patton, 1998). Six horses had
Treatment
neurologic signs apparently associated with parelephostrongy-
 Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg daily for 3 days) was apparently
losis, and worms were seen in the nerve tissue of two of these
successful in curing an infection of C. vulpis in a Labrador
animals (Biervliet et al, 2004). A 6-month-old colt from
retriever (Peterson et al, 1993). A survey of 55 afebrile dogs 
New York State developed severe encephalitis, was humanely
with chronic cough in Prince Edward Island, Canada,
killed, and was found to be infected with a worm that was
revealed that 15 (27.3%) were infected with C. vulpis
consistent in morphology with P. tenuis (Tanabe et al, 2007).
(Bihr and Conboy, 1999). The dogs were successfully trea-
ted with a course of fenbendazole therapy (50 mg/kg daily
Family Crenosomatidae
for 3 to 7 days). A single treatment with milbemycin oxime
Identification
cleared 32 naturally infected dogs of their C. vulpis infection
 Crenosomatids have well-developed bursae with a large
(Conboy, 2004).
 dorsal ray, the uterus is amphidelphic with a prominent ovi-
The high percentage of dogs positive for C. vulpisin Canada
jectoral sphincter, and the cuticle is thrown into crenated folds,
with the only sign being chronic cough indicates the need to
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
187
carefully consider this worm in the differential for such a sign
in regions where this worm is prevalent. As foxes become more
and more abundant in North America because of reduced
amounts of hunting, it is expected that this infection will
become more prevalent.
Crenosoma species require a molluskan intermediate
host. Control depends on preventing the dog's access to
these intermediate hosts.
Family Angiostrongylidae
The angiostrongylid bursa may be somewhat reduced, but
 the rays conform to the typical strongylid pattern and are well
 defined. The vulva is near the anus, and the uterus is pro-
 delphic. Aelurostrongylus abstrusus is a parasite of the lung
FIGURE 4103. Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, posterior end of a male
parenchyma in cats, Gurltia paralysans is a parasite of the
tail showing the spicules.
leptomeningeal veins in South American cats, and Angiostron-
gylus vasorum is a widely distributed parasite of the pulmonary
 arterial tree of foxes and dogs in western Europe. Recently this
cannot specify what these might be, except for a wide range of
worm was found for the first time to occur in dogs in North
America in Newfoundland, Canada (Conboy et al, 1998).
Probably the cats get their A. abstrusus infective larvae from
Angiostrongylus cantonensis is found in the pulmonary arteries
 paratenic hosts such as mice and voles, but our knowledge
of rats, whereas Argiostrorgylus costaricersis is found in the
of the epidemiology of A. abstrusus and other carnivoran
mesenteric arteries of rodents. Both A. cantonersis and A. cost-
 metastrongyloids is incomplete.
aricersis can also cause disease in other mammalian hosts
Importance. Although many cats with A. abstrusus infec-
 including dogs and primates, including humans. Some place
tion are free of clinical signs, coughing and anorexia may be
the species A. cantonensis and A. costaricensis in the genus
associated with moderate infections. Severe infections are
Parastrongylus.
manifested by cough, dyspnea, and polypnea, all of which
may terminate fatally (Blaisdell, 1952).
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus
Treatment. Kirkpatrick and Megella (1987) successfully
Life history. The oviparous female of A. abstrusus deposits
treated a case of A. abstrusus infection with a single parenteral
as euued hum au u sisu, u saa puasun
dose of ivermectin (0.40 mg/kg), whereas of two cats in Turkey
 Figure 8-87). These appear as small, grayish white subpleural
treated with this regimen, only one cleared (Burgu and
nodules. It is hard to tease intact worms out of tissues, but the
Samehmetoglu, 2004), and in another case this treatment
males have fairly stout spicules (Figure 4-103). In histologic
was not efficacious (Grandi et al, 2005). In Germany, topical
sections or squash preparations of such nodules, all degrees of
selamectin (6 mg/kg) was used to treat one cat twice, a month
development from one-celled eggs to hatched first-stage larvae
apart, with success (Reinhardt etal, 2004), but the same treat-
are in evidence. The first-stage larvae are carried up the tra-
ment failed in two out of three cats in Italy (Grandi et al, 2005).
cheobronchial tree and swallowed, appearing later in the cat's
Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg daily for 3 days) also has been proved
feces (see Figure 7-52). These larvae are very active and can be
efficacious in the treatment of a cat infected with A. abstrusus
readily demonstrated by the Baermann technique, which was
(Schmid and Diwel, 1980) and in four of four cats treated
found to detect 18 of 20 cases of infection with this parasite
at 50 mg/kg daily for 15 days (Grandi et al, 2005). Prednisone
(Willard et al, 1988). Further development occurs only if these
(1 mg/kg orally twice a day for 5 days) may help alleviate many
first-stage larvae enter any of a wide variety of snails and slugs
 of the clinical signs during recovery.
(Blaisdell, 1952; Hobmaier and Hobmaier, 1935). Two molts
without cuticle shedding occur in the mollusk's foot tissues so
Angiostrongylus vasorum
that the infective larvae, which develop in 2 to 5 weeks, are
Life history. First-stage larvae shed in the feces of
enclosed in two sheaths. Cats may be infected experimentally
infected dogs resemble those of A. abstrusus. These larvae
by being fed snails containing third-stage larvae, but the
 invade a wide range of molluskan intermediate hosts and
natural mode of infection is probably through predation of
develop to the infective third stage, but the practical epide-
paratenic hosts that normally eat snails. Mice and possibly
miology of canine angiostrongylosis has yet to be worked
birds may serve as paratenic hosts. The third-stage larvae
out in detail. After ingestion of the mollusk, the larvae
merely encyst in their tissues and undergo no further devel-
migrate to the visceral lymph nodes where they molt to
the adult stage before making their way into the lungs
cat's feces 5 to 6 weeks after infection.
and the pulmonary arteries, where they mature and live
Infection with A. abstrusus usually involves individual rural
(see Figure 8-88). The prepatent period is around 7 weeks.
cats that like to hunt. Control consists of preventing the
 Importance. The parasite has made its way from Europe
cat's access to infected intermediate hosts. Unfortunately, we
into the Atlantic coastal provinces of Canada. Previously,
188
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
cases had been present in imported dogs as in a fatal case
freshwater prawns, which serve as paratenic hosts (Alicata,
in a greyhound from Ireland, with extensive pulmonary
1988). In a series of 55 natural cases of canine neural
thrombosis and interference with clotting leading to mul-
angiostrongylosis from Brisbane, Australia, infection was
tiple subcutaneous hemorrhages (Williams et al, 1985). In a
characterized by ascending paresis involving the tail and
survey of dogs from coastal Canada, 202 dogs from the
Jo sapna aaiu eisaieidy requ pue iappq Aieum
provinces of New Brunswick, Newfoundland, Nova
clinical illness were characterized. Grade 1 consisted of
Scotia, and Prince Edward Island were examined, and
caudal paresis and ataxia of one or both pelvic limbs and
A. vasorum was found in only 16 of 67 dogs from the
pain on deep pressure over the lumbar muscles. Grade
Avalon peninsula of Newfoundland (Conboy, 2004). This
2 began as grade 1, but posterior paresis and inability to
 parasite has now also been found in a coyote from the Avalon
stand unaided developed quickly. Manual expression of
peninsula (Bourque, Whitney, and Conboy, 2005). Besides
urine was necessary. Dogs with both grade 1 and grade
causing lung disease from the deposition of eggs and larvae
2 illness responded satisfactorily to nursing care and
into the lungs, these infections induce clotting disorders
immunosuppressive  corticosteroid  therapy.  H
However,
that can manifest as in the imported greyhound with subcu-
when the anthelmintics levamisole and mebendazole were
taneous hemorrhages or with more deadly intracranial
administered in grade 1 and grade 2 cases, either alone or
hemorrhage (Garosi et al, 2005).
in combination with corticosteroids, a death rate of 75%
Treatment. The 16 dogs that were diagnosed as naturally
ensued. Clearly, anthelmintic medication is contraindicated
infected in Newfoundland were treated with four weekly
in canine neural angiostrongylosis. Grade 3 illness was
 oral doses of 0.5 mg of milbemycin oxime per kilogram.
In 14 of the dogs the clinical signs resolved and shedding of
and extreme hyperalgesia. The prognosis was very poor,
larvae ceased, whereas one dog with severe signs died
and all seven dogs were euthanized (Mason, 1987).
during the course of treatment; one dog was reported to
In 1986 and 1987, rats in New Orleans, Louisiana, were
have improved clinical signs, but a posttreatment fecal
found to be infected with A. cantonensis (Campbell and
sample was not available (Conboy, 2004). Fifty naturally
Little, 1988) A few years later, a howler monkey in the
infected dogs in Denmark were treated either with a
New Orleans zoo had fatal cerebral disease and was ulti-
single topical application of 0.1 mL of imidacloprid 10%/
 mately diagnosed as having been infected with this worm
moxidectin 2.5% per kilogram of body weight (27 dogs) or
(Gardiner et al, 1990). In 1995 a nonfatal case was reported
with 25 mg of oral fenbendazole per kilogram of body
from New Orleans in an 1l-year-old boy who ate a snail on
weight for 20 days (23 dogs), and 85.2% and 91.3% of
a dare (New, Little, and Cross, 1995). In 1996 a miniature
the dogs, respectively, were cleared of larvae in the feces
horse in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, had meningoencephalitis
(Willesen et al, 2007). A. vasorur has also been treated with
and was euthanized (Costa et al, 2000). At necropsy, the
ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg (Martins et al, 1993; Migaud,
horse was found to be infected with A. cantonensis. As of
Marty, and Chartier, 1992), fenbendazole at 20 mg/kg
1997, around one quarter of rats, Rattus norvegicus, exam-
twice daily for 2 or 3 weeks (Migaud, Marty, and
ined in Baton Rouge were found to be infected with this
Chartier, 1992; Patteson et al, 1993), or levamisole at
parasite. The worm has been found in additional animals in
7.5 mg/kg for 2 consecutive days, followed by 10 mg/kg
Louisiana, a lemur, a wood rat, and opossums (Kim et al,
for 2 days, and if the infection does not clear, each of the
2002), and it has killed a white-handed gibbon in a zoo in
individual regimens is repeated (Bolt et al, 1994).
Miami (Duffy et al, 2004). It is expected that additional
 cases will begin to turn up in dogs and possibly cats.
Angiostrongylus cantonensis
Treatment. Treatment seems to be mainly supportive,
 Life history. First-stage larvae are shed in the feces of
with immunosuppression to prevent reaction to the
infected rats and invade molluskan intermediate hosts,
migrating worms, and in Australia the development of an
where they develop to the infective stage. When the mollusk
ELISA for the detection of the infection allows for diagnosis
is eaten by a rat, the liberated third-stage larvae make their
before therapy is begun (Lunn et al, 2003).
way to the brain of the rat, where they molt and grow to
young adults that are about 1 centimeter long. They then
Angiostrongylus costaricensis
enter a vein and are carried to the heart and pulmonary
A. costaricensis is a parasite of rodents in Central and
arteries, where they mature and mate, and the female lays
South America, where the adult worms live in the mesenteric
 eggs that embryonate and hatch. Paratenic hosts involved
arteries; it was reported once from cofton rats in Texas
include crustacea and amphibians.
(Ubelaker and Hall, 1979). Eggs are laid by the females,
 Importance. If people, dogs, or other mammals ingest
and the first-stage larvae occur in the feces of the rodents.
snails or paratenic hosts, the worms may undergo their
Snails are the intermediate hosts. People have become
migration into the brain, causing eosinophilic meningitis
infected with this worm on the ingestion of snails, and
and encephalomyelitis. During the past few decades this
they develop pain in the lower right abdomen, fever, and
worm has spread across the Pacific with one of its interme-
often vomiting. Recently it was reported that infections
diate hosts, the giant African snail Achatina fulica. Infection
with this worm caused the death of two Ma's night
 is typically acquired by eating infected raw snails or slugs or
 monkeys (Aotus nancymaae) and the surgical resection of a
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
189
FGURE 4-104. Life history of Flaroides hirthi. The
female worm in the lung parenchyma of the dog 
lays eggs containing infective first-stage larvae.
Because these larvae are released within the
host, autoinfection is inevitable and the degree
of resulting infection is apparently governed
solely by the host's immune reactions. First-
stage larvae pass up the trachea and out with
the feces, and transmission of F hirthi infec-
 tion occurs principally by coprophagy. Cannibal-
ism and regurgitative feeding provide other
mechanisms.
Transmhitted infectior
portion of the intestine of a siamang (Hylobates syndactylus)
Filaroides rostratus). There is also a species, Filaroides decorus,
housed in zoos in Florida (Miller et al, 2006). Raccoons and
in the lungs of the California sea lion that uses fish as the
opossums trapped around the zoos were also found to be
intermediate host. The two most well known species in veter-
infected.
inary medicine are canine parasites that have direct life cycles,
i.e., F. osleri and F. hirthi (Figure 4-104). Some place the species
Family Filaroididae
 F. osleri and F. rostratus in the genus Oslerus, but although
The Filaroididae family of worms differs from the others
accepted by some and possibly correct, this placement is not
within the superfamily Metastrongyloidea in that these worms
accepted by all.
are without a bursa. (Do not confuse the Filaroididae family of
 Metastrongyles with the very distantly related superfamily
Identification
Filarioidea, the superfamily that contains the mosquito-
 The bursal lobes are reduced to mere papillae (see Figure
transmitted canine heartworm, Dirofilaria immitis.) There
4-69). The spicules are short and arcuate, the vulva is preanal,
 are species within the Filaroididae in a number of carnivores
the uterus is prodelphic, and the body cuticle is inflated to
that use snail intermediate hosts (Filaroides martis and
form a diaphanous teguminal sheath (see Figure 4-60).
190
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
FGURE 4105. Lesions ofFlarmides
species. At left, thelungofa dog with 
Flamides hirthi infection. Foci of
inflammatory reaction to dead and 
dying wonms are scattered over the
lungs. Live F. hirthi womms excite little
if any tissue reaction and, because
they are so very small, are scarcely
visible to the unaided eye. At night,
early Flamides osleri nodules near
the tracheal bifurcation of a dog
 photographed through a fiberoptic
endoscope. (Courtesy Dr. James 
Zimmer.)
B
F. osleri occurs in nodules within the epithelium of the trachea
 F. osleri displays rather low prevalence in spite of its
 and bronchi. F. hirthi lives threaded through the lung
worldwide distribution. It tends to become entrenched in
parenchyma.
breeding stock and resists all efforts to expel it. Public
knowledge that F. osleri is present in a kennel can destroy
Filaroides osleri
the kennel's reputation.
 Life history. Adult F. osleri occur in nodules in the tra-
Treatment and control. Criteria for successful chemo-
chea and bronchi of dogs and certain wild canids such as the
therapy of F. osleri infection include (1) disappearance of
Australian dingo (Figure 4-105; see also Figures 8-91 and 8-
cough and air hunger on exercise, (2) resolution of tracheal
92). The females deposit delicate, thin-shelled eggs contain-
 and bronchial nodules as demonstrated by bronchoscopy,
ing first-stage larvae that hatch before being voided in the
and (3) cessation of fecal larval output. These criteria have
host's feces (see Figure 7-27). The first-stage larvae are
rarely been satisfied, and authors disagree as to the efficacy
 directly infective, and development through all five stages
of various treatments. Some treatments that have been
is completed in the lung tissue of the dog. Infection is ac-
used include fenbendazole, ivermectin, and doramectin.
quired through the ingestion of regurgitated stomach con-
Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg daily for 7 days) was reported
tents, lung tissue, or feces of infected dogs. John Dorrington,
to stop coughing in a dog with an F. osleri infection
a South African veterinary practitioner, was the first to suc-
(Lamb, 1992). Also, ivermectin has been reported to
ceed in transmitting F. osleri infection to dogs by feeding
clear dogs of the signs of F. osleri infections (Boersema,
them first-stage larvae obtained from female worms
Baas, and Schaeffer, 1989; Valet-Picavet, 1991). There
(Dorrington, 1968). It has been postulated that transmission
have been two reports from India, where individual dogs
of F. osleri occurs directly from bitches to their pups by sal-
have been successfully treated with a single injection of
ivary contamination during licking (Dorrington, 1968) and
doramectin (0.2 mg/kg) (Gahlod, Kolte, and Kurkure,
 Jo pouad au sup sdnd n oi saosup juad uoy
2002; Jana, 2002).
regurgitative feeding (Dunsmore and Spratt, 1976).
F. osleri infection develops slowly. Nodule formation can be
Flaroides hirthi
detected with the bronchoscope at about 2 months, and larvae
Life history. F. hirthi, like F. osleri, is infective in the first
can first be demonstrated in the feces by zinc sulfate flotation
larval stage and requires no period of development outside
at 6 to 7 months after experimental feeding of larvae.
the host (Georgi, 1976a; see Figure 4-104). Transmission
 Importance. Milks (1916) summarized the clinical signs
 has been shown to occur among cagemate puppies through
manifested in his three cases of F. osleri infection as follows:
 the ingestion of first-stage larvae in freshly passed feces, and
 The only common symptom . was the spasmodic attack
it has been hypothesized that transmission from brood
of a hard, dry cough which could be started by exercise or
bitches to their litters occurs by the same mechanism
exposure to cold air. These attacks could not be started by pres-
after the fourth or fifth week of the nursing period
sure upon the larynx as in most cases of bronchitis. The dogs
(Georgi et al, 1979b). First-stage larvae arrive in the lungs
would cough several times and finally retch after which the
as early as 6 hours after oral infection, traveling by way of
attack would usually cease . . . the disease runs a very chronic
the hepatic portal circulation, the mesenteric lymphatic
course and does not materially interfere with the health of the
drainage, or both. Molts occur at 1, 2, 6, and 9 days in
animal until the knots become so numerous as to seriously
the lung tissue, and larvae can be demonstrated in the
 obstruct the air passages.
feces by zinc sulfate flotation at 32 to 35 days after infection
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
191
(Georgi, Georgi, and Cleveland, 1977; Georgi et al, 1979a)
(see Figure 7-27).
 Importance. F. hirthi is important because the lesions it
induces in the lungs of dogs used in toxicologic research
interfere with the interpretation of experiments (see Figures
4-105, 8-89, and 8-90). In 1973, Hirth and Hottendorf
described  pathologic changes  in commercially  reared
Corpus
beagle dogs that were associated with F. hirthi The presence
of these minute lungworms in the alveoli and bronchioles
evoked a focal granulomatous reaction and other pulmo-
 nary changes, including some that resembled drug-induced
and neoplastic lesions. Research dogs still appear on occa-
Isthmus
Nerve
sion with F. hirthi in their lungs (Bahnemann and Bauer,
ring
1994; Vajner et al, 2000).
Usually, F. hirthiinfection is not attended by clinical signs
of disease, and antemortem diagnosis is based on demon-
Bulb
strating first-stage larvae in the feces (see Figure 7-27),
although very severe infections may be suspected from
radiographic changes (Rendano et al, 1979a). However,
fatal cases of hyperinfection with this parasite have devel
oped in severely stressed and immune-deficient animals
(August et al, 1980; Craig et al, 1978). Massive hyperinfec-
Intestine
tion with F. hirthi was observed in two Beagle pups exper-
imentally treated with prednisolone at a dosage rate of
4 mg/kg/day for more than 4 months (Genta and Schad,
1984). Dr. Georgi encountered several other cases of fatal
FIGURE 4106. Anterior end of a Strongyloides papillosus free-living
on corticosteroids for long periods. However, because
adult with a typical rhabditifomm esophagus.
these occurred in commercial pharmaceutical laboratories
 observing strict proprietary secrecy, the particulars were
unavailable.
that parasitize domestic animals: Rhabditis (syn., Pelodera),
Treatment and control. For treatment of F. hirthi
Halicephalobus (syn.,Micronema), and Strongyloides.
 infection, albendazole administered orally at a dosage of
25 mg/kg of body weight twice daily for 5 days 
is
Rhabditis (Pelodera)
highly effective (Georgi, Slauson, and Theodorides, 1978).
Rhabditis (Pelodera) strongyloides is a free-living inhabitant of
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg daily for 2 weeks, did not clear a
decaying organic matter but occasionally produces a pruritic,
dog of its F. hirthi infection, whereas a single subcutaneous
hyperemic dermatitis of cattle, swine, dogs, horses, people, and
 injection of ivermectin (0.05 mg/kg) given at a later time
rodents that have been exposed to an excess of the nematode's
 appeared to clear the dog of its infection (Bourdeau and
normal habitat. Damp straw bedding has been incriminated
Ehm, 1992). Treatment of 40 dogs with subcutaneously
repeatedly in canine dermatitis caused by this parasite and was
administered ivermectin once at 1 mg/kg or ivermectin
associated with larvae-associated lesions in 11 hounds in
twice at 1 mg/kg a week apart reduced infections with
Finland (Saari and Nikander, 2006). Similarly, damp and
F. hirthi by 44.8% and 74.1%, respectively, as revealed
dirty straw with high humidity were responsible for the lesions
by necropsy (Bauer and Bahnemann, 1996). Fecal exami-
in a large number of heifers on a dairy in Israel ( Yeruham and
nation of these treated dogs revealed that only 5% to 10%
 Perl, 2005), Diagnosis is based on finding nematode larvae
of the dogs were shedding larvae in their feces, although
with a rhabditiform esophagus in skin scrapings or histologic
higher percentages of the dogs still had worms in their
sections (Figure 4-107; see also Figure 8-72); sometimes adults
lungs.
are also present. If R. strongyloideslarvae are placed on nutrient
agar, they will develop into adults in a day or so. These adults
Order Rhabditida
are 1 to 2 mm long and will promptly fill the Petri dish with
The order Rhabditida is a verylarge group of small nematodes
their offspring. Ivermectin was used to treat a number of the
with a rhabditoid or rhabditiform esophagus consisting of
hounds in Finland with success.
corpus, isthmus, and bulb (Figure 4-106). Many species are
In cattle, especially in the tropics, a parasitic otitis
free-living inhabitants of soil or parasites of lower vertebrate or
externa can develop that is caused by a nematode described
 invertebrate animals. The most famous member of this group
as Rhabditis bovis. Once the infection is established in
is the free-living, model genetic organism, Caerorhabditis
the ear canal, there appears to be a destruction of the
 elegans. There are only three genera in this order Rhabditida
ear epithelium resulting in ulcerations (Msolla, 1989).
192
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Strongyloides
Strorgyloides is an unusual genus in terms of morphology
and life history. (Be careful not to confuse the genus name
Strongyloides with the species name of R. strongyloides or
with the superfamily name Strongyloidea. Also be warned
that the adjective “strongyloid" as used by many authors
is more likely to refer to properties of members of the
superfamily Strongyloidea than to those of the genus
Strongyloides. The ubiquitous prefix derives from the
Greek word strongylos, meaning round and compact, and
apparently has great appeal to taxonomists of every stripe.
Strongyl- has not been restricted to the christening of
s sie sia uns on pandde uaaq seu iq s
sponges {Strongylophora], bugs {Strongylodemas], and
fishes {Strongyliscus], among others.)
Identification
 The tiny parthenogenetic parasitic female lies deep in the
s a a  a  ro si 
intestine (see Figure 8-74); parasitic males do not exist. The
esophagus of the female is nearly cylindric and at least one
FIGURE 4107. Rhabditis strongyloides rhabditiform larva from a
fourth as long as the body (Figure 4-108); the elongate shape of
nutrient agar culture. The culture was grown from scrapings of
 the esophagus is the reason why the female is termed “flari-
an acute erythematous denmmatitis affecting a dog.
form."' Other small nematodes in this location include mem-
bers of the superfamily Trichostrongyloidea, which have a very
much shorter esophagus, and species of Trichirella and
 These ulcerations predispose the ears to secondary bacterial
infection. The cattle have a condition that appears as chronic
wasting. There is some indication that treatment of cattle with
ivermectin may help with these infections, but typically they
 are treated by the topical application of various agents.
Halicephalobus
Halicephalobus gingivalis (syns. Halicephalobus deletrix and
Micronema deletrix) is tiny (250 to 450 by 15 to 20 μm) and
has a rhabditoid esophagus and only one egg in its uterus.
A male of this species has yet to be reported The other
seven species of Halicephalobus apparently are all free-living
in soil, manure, or humus, but H. gingivalis is a highly patho-
 genic facultative parasite of horse and man (Anderson, Linder,
and Peregrine, 1998; Nadler et al, 2003) (see Figure 8-73).
Esophagus-
H. gingivalis also has been seen in a section of skin from the
scrotum of a bull. H. gingivalis was first observed in a nasal
swelling in a horse (Anderson and Bemrick, 1965) and from
the nasal and maxillary sinuses, gums, jaws, kidneys, heart,
Intestine
brain, spinal cord, and meninges in 12 equine cases reported
subsequently (Blunden, Khalil, and Webbon, 1987). The paper
by Blunden and colleagues deserves recognition as a model
case report that students and clinicians would do well to emu-
late. There have been three fatal human infections with this
nematode (Gardiner, Koh, and Cardella, 1981). The first
Vulva
reported human case of fatal meningoencephalomyelitis
caused by H. gingivalis involved a 5-year-old boy who
sustained  extensive  injuries  heavily  contaminated  with
p ipes au huu e ou  au uum au
 passed through its mechanism (Hoogstraten, Connor, and
Neafie, 1976).
FGURE 4108. Strongyloides stercoralis parasitic female.
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
193
Capillaria, both of which have a stichosome esophagus. The
does occur, it usually is confined to massively challenged
embryonated egg, rhabditiform larva (so called because it has
neonates and nurslings. The other exception has been in
the typical corpus, isthmus, and bulbus of the Rhabditida),
immunocompromised or immunosuppressed animals.
 and infective filariforrm third-stage larva (with a long esopha-
 gus) are the stages most important in diagnostic procedures.
Dogs
Of the significant species of Strongyloides in veterinary medi-
 S. stercoralis infection may be asymptomatic, or it may
cine, only those of dogs (also humans) and cats produce eggs
cause any grade of clinical illness. Serious cases involve
that routinely hatch before leaving the body such that first-
signs of bronchopneumonia and severe watery or mucous
stage larvae rather than embryonated eggs are found in the
diarrhea that may easily be confused with the generalized
feces. The free-living adults (see Figures 4-106 and 4-108)
viral diseases of puppyhood. In massive invasions the lungs
frequently develop in cultures of feces from Strorgyloides-
of young pups may be sprinkled with petechial and ecchy-
infected animals.
motic hemorrhages caused by migrating larvae breaking
Prominent species of Strongyloides parasitizing domestic
out of the alveolar capillaries. The prepatent period is
animals and humans include S. stercoralis of humans and
about 1 week. These worms routinely show up in kennels,
dogs; Strongyloides papillosus of ruminants; Strongyloides ran-
and infections of pups can be life threatening (Dillard,
somi of swine; Strongyloides westeri of horses; Strorgyloides
Saari, and Anttila, 2007).
fuellebori of African and Asian primates and of humans;
 S. stercoralis infection in man is unique in its chronicity
Strorgyloides cebus of American primates; and Strongyloides
(Gill et al, 2004). This infection may persist for decades or
ratti and Strorgyloides venezuelersis of rats. Cats in Australia
for life owing to the development to the infective filariform
and India are parasitized by Strongyloides felis, and on rare
larval stage within the patient's digestive tract. These infec-
occasions in the southeastern United States, cats are infected
tive larvae may reinvade the host by penetrating either the
with Strongyloides tumefaciers, which is probably naturally a
bowel wall (internal autoinfection) or perianal skin
 parasite of the bobcat and which causes fibrotic lesions in the
(external autoinfection). Autoinfection accounts for the
colon. Thus all species of domestic animals have a species of
extreme chronicity of infection and, in part, for the explo-
Strongyloides, as do many species of wild mammals and birds
sive development of massive disseminated infection (hyper-
(Little, 1966a, 1966b).
infection) that may overwhelm patients with depressed
cell-mediated immunity. Hyperinfection with S. stercoralis
Life history
has caused the deaths of many persons who have immuno-
The genus Strongyloides is unique among parasites of
 deficiency diseases or are undergoing immunosuppres-
 domestic animals in having alternate free-living and para-
sive therapy or immunosuppression for transplantation
sitic generations. The filariform parasitic female produces
(Dwork, Jaffe, and Lieberman, 1975); the worm has even
eggs by mitotic parthenogenesis, and the larvae from these
been transplanted in the donor organ (Patel, Arvelakis, and
eggs are termed homogonic offspring to distinguish them
Sauter, 2008). Dogs can also develop autoinfection when
from the heterogonic offspring of the free-living, sexual gen-
immunosuppressed (Schad, Hellman, and Muncey, 1984).
eration. Homogonic rhabditiform larvae in the external
The ability of S. stercoralis to undergo internal autoinfec-
environment may develop through two molts into infective
tion is probably due in part to the passage of larvae rather
filariform larvae or through four molts into free-living males
than eggs as occurs with the other species of Strongyloides
and females where all stages have rhabditiform esophagi. If
 parasites in domestic animals.
the third-stage filariform larva enters a suitable host, usually
S. stercoralis is a parasite that is zoonotic, and infections
by penetrating its skin, development proceeds through third
may be shared between dogs and people. Galliard (1951) had
and fourth molts to the filariform parasitic female. The free-
no difficulty producing durable infections in dogs by using
living rhabditiform males and females mate to produce het-
19 strains of S. stercoralis, 11 obtained from Europeans infected
 erogonic rhabditiform larvae that, with minor exceptions,
in different regions of French Indochina (Vietnam) and eight
develop only into infective filariform larvae (Basir, 1950;
from natives of Tonkin, but he found dogs to be quite refrac-
Triantophyllou and Moncol, 1977). The life history of
tory to strains imported from the West Indies and Africa.
Strongyloides species is portrayed in Figure 4- 109.
The epidemiologic role ofthe dog in human S. stercoralis infec-
The major mode of transmission of Strongyloides species in
 Jo podan a ku Aq paop uaaq ae seu uo
mammals appears to be transmammary. This occurs in dogs,
natural transmission from dog to man (Georgi and Sprinkle,
horses, pigs, and ruminants. After an initial infection has been
1974). A recent survey of kenneled dogs and kennel workers in
established, additional larvae tend to migrate to deeper body
Brazil found some dogs infected, but none of the workers
tissues, from which they are then passed to offspring in the
infected, although some workers were serologically positive
 colostrum and milk; this transmammary transmission has
for antibodies to S. stercoralis on ELISA (Goncalves et al,
important implications for disease induction and control.
2007). In kennels the infections often go unnoticed, are main-
tained through transmammary transmission and skin pene-
Importance
trating larvae, and should always be considered a potential
 Strongyloides infections are moderate and asymptomatic
zoonotic agent for kennel employees if a diagnosis of infection
 in most individuals of all domestic species, and when disease
has been made.
194
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Rhabditiform
Infective
larva
stage
Inlung
Filariform
larvae
Parasitic
Free-living
adults
FIGURE 4109. Life stages of Strongyloides stercoralis. Not to same scale.
Horses
convincing evidence that this so-called foal-heat diarrhea is
S. westeri, as with other members of the genus, develops
caused by S. westeri and is not related to any alteration in
rapidly in passed feces to the infective filariform stage, which
the chemical composition of the mare's milk. Heavy infections 
usually enters the host by penetrating its skin or oral mucous
 in foals persist for 10 weeks; lighter infections may last 2 or 3
membranes. S. westeri eggs are encountered almost exclusively
times as long. Occasionally, very light infections are observed
 in suckling and weanling foals; the dam of an infected foal
 in yearlings and older horses. These may represent percutane-
 sheds no S. westeri egs even though she is the source of infec-
ns se psoa pou am pi ssou u suo sno s
tion via the mammary gland (Lyons, Drudge, and Tolliver,
(Enigk, Dey-Hazra, and Batke, 1974). Fortunately, the use of
1969, 1973). The foals will begin to shed eggs in their feces
 ivermectin has probably markedly reduced the presence of S.
at 10 days to 2 weeks after birth. Diarrhea rather frequently
westeri on many farms, and a recent survey in Kentucky thor-
afflicts foals between the ninth and thirteenth day of life, thus
oughbred foals found a prevalence of only 1.5%, whereas dec-
 Occurring coincidentally with the first postparturient estrus of
 ades ago in the same area the prevalence was greater than 90%
the mare. Enigk, Dey-Hazra, and Batke (1974) presented
(Lyons and Tolliver, 2004).
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
195
Ruminants
the mature worm burdens of the piglets and rebuilding
S. papillosus has long been considered to behave typically
the sow's tissue store of arrested larvae for subsequent lit-
as a commensal or at the least causing significant disease
ters (Moncol, 1975).
ji j e u siaq ae ai  jsad um a
 Strongyloidosis of piglets is an acute enteritis with
on a series of studies performed in the late 1960s and early
bloody diarrhea (dysentery), rapid emaciation, anorexia,
1970s, it was shown that even relatively light infections
anemia, and stunting. There may be death losses, but
with this parasite can cause severe disease in goats
from an economic standpoint these may be economically
(Pienaar et al, 1999). In these studies with 89 goats infected
less significant than the retarded growth of the survivors.
with various dosing regimens, some kids died after three
 infections with as few as 2000 to 5000 larvae per exposure.
Treatment
The most susceptible age group was kids 6 weeks to
Ivermectin seems to be the treatment of choice for
6 months of age, although older goats, 6 to 12 months of
almost all species of Strongyloides, including dogs and
 age, also succumbed. Death typically occurred within 9 to
humans (Lindo et al, 1996; Mansfield and Schad, 1992);
30 days of receiving 75,000 larvae. The clinical signs
in people it is marketed as Stromectol (tablets containing
included dehydration, inappetence, emaciation, weakness,
3 mg ivermectin). In dogs with experimental infections of
cachexia, diarrhea, anemia, respiratory distress, and abnor-
S. stercoralis, treatment with ivermectin at 0.8 mg/kg body
mal stools. Fever was not seen in any of the animals.
weight failed to remove larvae from the tissues of the dogs
 Nervous signs were exhibited from day 43 after exposure
(Mansfield and Schad, 1992). S. ransomi, S. papillosis, and
onward, and about 22% of the goats that died had histo-
 S. westeri are also treated with ivermectin (in some cases
pathologic lesions in the brain and spinal cord. Sudden
other avermectins are also so labeled). It has also been
death from hepatic rupture occurred in 6% of the goats.
shown that the treatment of mares at foaling with ivermec-
 In a different set of studies (Nakamura et al, 1994), it was
tin can prevent the infection of suckling foals (Ludwig et al,
shown that the inoculation of live parthenogenetic females
1983). Strorgyloides in pigs can also be treated with leva-
into the duodenum of susceptible lambs produced contin-
misole. S. westeri in horses can also be treated with oxiben-
uous sinus tachycardia immediately after inoculation, with
dazole (15 mg/kg).
the result being death due to cardiac arrest. Thus the effects
of adults in the one study and the numerous lesions seen
Order Oxyurida
in varied tissues of the goats in the other set of studies
Although the order Oxyurida is named for Oxyuris equi, the
would suggest that S. papillosus may be more pathogenic
common and unusually large pinworm of the horse, most
than previously considered.
pinworms are very much smaller than O. equi. The oxyurid
esophagus has a more or less spheric bulb immediately
Pigs
anterior to its junction with the intestine; this bulb often
The S. ransomi female lies deeply embedded in the
has a valve in its lumen (Figure 4-110). One or both sexes
mucous membrane of the small intestine. The larvae in
have a long, tapering tail, and it is for this that they are
eggs shed develop into infective third-stage filariform
called pinworms. All oxyurids are highly host-specific para-
larvae in 2 or 3 days that infect the next host via penetration
sites of the large intestine.
of the skin or oral mucosae. These may follow a tracheal
 migration route to maturation in about 6 days or a somatic
 migration route to accumulate as arrested larvae in the
adipose tissues, especially those of the mammary area.
Tracheal migration and maturation are the usual outcome
in piglets and occur to some extent in older pigs. Mature
gilts tend instead to store S. rarsomi larvae in their adipose
tissues and to shed them later in the colostrum and milk.
The third-stage larvae in the colostrum and milk are said to
be “advanced":
 as compared with the third-stage lar-
vae that originally infected the gilt because they are slightly
larger and their genital primordia longer, wider, and more
conspicuous, and because they mature in suckling pigs in
only 2 to 4 days instead of 6 days. Transmammary infection
is the key to the epidemiology of S. ransomi infection.
Piglets separated at birth from their dam and reared artifi-
cially were free of S. ransomi infection, whereas piglets
allowed to nurse began to shed eggs in their feces 2 to
4 days after birth (Moncol and Batte, 1966). This initial
transmammary infection thus serves to contaminate the
environment of the sow and litter, thereby augmenting
of male (left), stomal end (center), and tail of female (right).
196
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
stage in 4 or 5 days, during which the cementing fluid
dries, cracks, and detaches from the skin in flakes. These
flakes, which contain large numbers of infective eggs,
adhere to mangers, water buckets, walls, and the like,
thus contaminating the environment of the stable. Paper
towels or disposable cloths are to be preferred for cleansing
the perineum of horses because any nondisposable object,
such as a sponge or towel, will inevitably become heavily
contaminated with O. equi eggs. Then when the sponge or
towel is applied to a horse's muzzle after a workout or is
used to clean the bit, the future brightens up for O. equi.
The prepatent period is 5 months.
Severe infection with third- and fourth-stage O. equi
(Figure 4-112) may produce significant inflammation of
the cecal and colonic mucosa manifested by vague signs
of abdominal discomfort. However, the most common
affliction perpetrated by O. equi on the horse is pruritus
ani caused by the adhesive egg masses deposited on the
 perianal skin by the female worm. In its efforts to relieve
the itching, the horse will persistently rub its tail against
FIGURE 4111. Oxyuris equi anterior end showing the esophageal
posts, mangers, and the like until the tail head becomes 
bulb.
disheveled, bare of hair, or even scarified.
Oxyuris equi
Treatment
Adult O. equi (Figure 4-111; see also Figure 7-75) are found
O. equi is an easy parasite to control. All of the available
 principally in the small colon, although occasional speci-
 equine anthelmintics are highly effective against both imma-
mens may be found in the large colon. Instead of simply
ture and adult large pinworms. Ivermectin appears to continue
discharging her eggs in the fecal stream, the gravid female
to work very well (Klei et al, 2001). Pinworms also are
O. equi, which may be anywhere from 40 to 150 mm long,
controlled by the daily administration of pyrantel tartrate.
 migrates down the colon and rectum and out through
the anus to cement her eggs in masses to the skin of the
Probstimayria vivipara
anus and its immediate surroundings. These egg masses
 Probstmayria vivipara is a tiny (less than 3 mm long) pin-
consist of a tenacious yellowish gray fluid containing
worm that gives birth to infective larvae and is therefore
8000 to 60,000 eggs. The eggs develop to the infective
capable of completing its life history within the confines of
its host's large intestine (Figure 4-113).
FIGURE 4112. Oxyuris equi fourth-stage larva. Left, The anterior
end shows the temporary buccal capsule-like modification of
the esophageal corpus that permits attachment to the mucous
FGURE 4113. Probstmayria vivipara adult male anterior end (left)
membrane. Right, The tail.
and tail (right).
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
197
Skrjabineima
Skrjabinema ovis and Skrjabinema caprae, harmless para-
sites of sheep and goats, respectively, are 8 to 10 mm
long. The genus name is pronounced “Skreeyabinema."
Enterobius vernicularis
Enterobius vermicularis is a small (up to 13 mm long) pin-
worm of humans and great apes and still has an extensive
distribution among civilized man despite cooking and
washing, the nemeses of many other parasites (see Figure
7-105). Infection rates vary up to 40%, depending on age
and race. White elementary school children display the
 greatest intensity and prevalence of infection. The gravid
 E. vermicularis female migrates through the anal opening
to cement her eggs to the host's perianal skin. The eggs
 develop to the infective stage within hours and are ready
to reinfect the host by contamination of the hands, to infect
 other individuals by contamination of bedclothing or other
fomites, or to become airborne on dust particles.
Infection may be suspected in children who have pruri-
tus ani and insomnia. Diagnosis is reached by observing
the female worm in the act of depositing her eggs on the
FIGURE 4114. Ascaris suum lips and stoma.
perianal skin or by demonstrating the eggs. This can best be
accomplished by momentarily pressing the adhesive side
 of a piece of cellophane tape against the anus and then
Development to the infective stage differs only in detail
sticking the tape to a slide to prepare it for microscopic
for the various ascarid genera. The single cell develops into
examination. Conventional fecal examination techniques
an infective larva inside the eggshell within several days or
almost uniformly fail to demonstrate the eggs of Enterobius
weeks, depending on the species of worm and the ambient
species and many other pinworms (e.g., Oxyuris species).
temperature. There are many genera of ascaridoid nema-
The important practical point for veterinarians is that
todes that parasitize aquatic vertebrates (e.g., fish, crocodi-
E. vermicularis is a parasite of humans and apes (apes
lians, birds, and sea mammals), and these genera typically
have other species of Enterobius as well), but never of
have free-swimming larval stages initially and various
dogs or cats. Occasionally a physician prescribes removal
required intermediate hosts. The ascaridoids found in
smd po di on nd a a jo eina 1o
domestic animals have adapted to their terrestrial existence
The finest degree of tact is required in dealing with this
by changing the typical life history pattern. Thus the life
situation.
cycles of the ascaridoids in domestic animals are direct
Infection of apes with species of Enterobius is usually
with or without various migrations in the body of the
asymptomatic. However, sporadic cases of fatal ulcerative
 host or through transplacental or transmammary pathways.
enteritis with extensive invasion of the intestinal submuco-
Another adaptation to the terrestrial environment has been
sa and even of the mesenteric lymph nodes by the adult
 the development of an eggshell capable of withstanding the
pinworms have been reported in chimpanzees (Holmes,
extremes of harsh environments. Ascarid eggs are remark-
Kosanke, and White, 1980; Keeling and McClure, 1974;
ably resistant to chemical and physical insults. The single
Schmidt and Prine, 1970). Both Enterobius anthropopitheci,
most important fact to remember in relation to the epide-
a natural parasite of apes, and E. vermicularis of humans
 miology of ascariasis is that the eggs remain infective in soil
have been implicated.
for many years. Various ascarid genera display remarkable
differences in patterns of intrahost development; however,
Order Ascaridida
for the terrestrial species, almost without exception it is
Ascarids are among the largest and most familiar of nem-
now accepted by most that part of the adaptation to the
atode parasites infecting the intestinal tract of domestic
terrestrial environment has been the incorporation of two
animals. The worms found in domestic animals range
molts within the eggshell so that the larval stage hatching
from several inches up to 2 feet in length. The mouth is
from the egg of these ascaridoids is a third-stage larva.
surrounded by three fleshy lips, one dorsal and two
subventral (Figure 4-114), and the tail of the male is usually
Identlflcatlon
curved ventrally. Some genera have lateral cervical alae
 For the purposes of practical identification, adult ascarids
that make the anterior end of the worm resemble an
are quite host-specific. Thus Ascaris suum infects swine,
arrowhead, thus such generic names as Toxocara and
Parascaris equorum infects horses, Toxocara vitulorum
Toxascaris.
infects cattle, Toxocara canis infects dogs, and Toxocara
198
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
FIGURE 4115. Ascaris suum, adult worms collected from naturally
infected pigs.
FGURE 4116. Ascaris suum mechanically hatched infective larva
cati infects cats. Dogs and cats also share a second ascarid,
with retained cuticle of previous stage.
Toxascaris leorina, which must be distinguished from their
respective species of Toxocara (see Figures 7-39 to 7-42).
Ascarid eggs are relatively thick walled, contain a single
latter course appears to be much more probable because
cell when passed in the feces, and are usually sufficiently
the larva will typically proceed up the bronchial tree and
distinctive to permit identification of the species (see
trachea to the pharynx, there to be swallowed, then will
Figures 7-8 to 7-10, 7-25, 7-52, 7-71, and 7-91).
arrive once again in the small intestine, where it will
mature.
Ascaris
In their migrations through various tissues, ascarid larvae
A. suum is a ubiquitous and pathogenic parasite of swine.
at first inflict only mechanical damage, but hypersensitivity
The adult worms are about 30 cm long, white to cream
rapidly develops, and allergic inflammation with eosinophil-
colored, with three large lips typical of the ascaridoids
ic inflammation characterizes the host reaction to subse-
(Figure 4-115; see also Figure 4-114). Long considered a
quent invasions. In pig livers, the inflammation heals
variety of the morphologically indistinguishable human as-
by fibrosis, giving rise to the so-called milk spot lesions
carid Ascaris lumbricoides, A. suum is considered a distinct
(see Figure 7-92) that cause the organ to be condemned by
species by most contemporary authors. However, A. lum-
meat inspectors as unfit for human consumption.
bricoides can mature in swine, and A. suum can mature in
 The lesions of early migrations in the lungs are likewise
humans. Typically, however, these two species maintain
mechanical in nature, and once again the initial focal
separate cycles, with the swine species staying in swine
hemorrhages are followed by hyperemia, edema, and eosin-
and the human species in humans even when both hosts
ophilic infiltration as hypersensitivity develops. In young
live very closely together (Anderson, 1995; Anderson,
pigs, extensive lung lesions give rise to severe respiratory
Romero-Abal, and Jaenike, 1993).
embarrassment. Breathing is rapid, shallow, and marked by
Although the egs of both species will hatch and their
audible expiratory efforts (thumps") and coughing; pigs
larvae will migrate extensively in a wide range of hosts, the
may die. A report from Norway where 40 pigs purchased
infective egg in polluted soil or stuck to the mammary skin
for fattening and placed in a room containing highly con-
of the sow is the key element in the epidemiology of
taminated litter died or were killed owing to acute respira-
A. suurm infection. The infective egg hatches in the stomach
tory disease related to A. suurm migration highlights the
and small intestine (Figure 4-116), releasing the third-stage
continued need for vigilance against this infection
larva (Geenen, Bresciani, and Boes, 1999), which enters the
(Gjestvang, 2005).
wall of the cecum and colon and proceeds to the liver,
The pathologic effects of adult A. suurn infections in the
arriving there in a matter of hours by way of the portal
small intestine are less dramatic than those of the larval
vein (Murrell et al, 1997). After tunneling about in the liver
migrations, but they are undoubtedly significant. There
for several days, the larva arrives in a pulmonary capillary
may be diarrhea, but the most important effect is interfer-
by way of the caudal vena cava, heart, and pulmonary
ence with proper nutrition and normal growth. Heavily
artery. At this point, the larva either may remain in the
infected pigs fail to make economically profitable gains.
circulation to be carried to the somatic tissues or may
Occasional bizarre accidents such as occlusion of the bile
lodge temporarily in the pulmonary capillary and then
duct or perforation of the bowel wall result from the
break out into an alveolus. In the case of A. suum, the
tendency of ascarids to wander.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
199
Diagnosis of clinical ascarosis frequently depends on
clinical and necropsy findings because the main pathologic
events occur during the prepatent stage. Clinical signs of
 severe respiratory distress in a group of growing pigs and
the discovery of extensive petechial and ecchymotic pulmo-
nary hemorrhages and edema contribute to a diagnosis
of acute ascarosis. Pieces of lung tissue should be minced
and placed in a Baermann apparatus to demonstrate
the migrating larvae. Less acute cases are marked by respi-
ratory distress, varying degrees of malnutrition, and lesions
of interstitial pneumonia. Chronic ascarosis is marked by
stunting, emaciation, a copious outpouring of A. suum eggs
 in the feces, and lesions of chronic interstitial pneumonia
and hepatic fibrosis. Such pigs are hopeless from an eco-
nomic point of view.
FIGURE 4117. Adult Parascaris equorum.
Anthelmintic medication
 A. suum, the economically most important nematode of
swine, continues to menace the swine industry despite its
(Figures 4-117 and 4-118). P. equorum resembles A. suum
susceptibility to piperazines, dichlorvos, fenbendazole, leva-
both epidemiologically and with respect to the route
misole, ivermectin, and pyrantel tartrate. It is obvious that
adopted by its larvae in migrating through the tissues.
drugs alone are not successful in controlling this ubiquitous
When the infective egg of P. equorum is swallowed by a
parasite. However, treating and cleaning sows with soap
foal, the larva hatches, burrows into the wall of the small
and warm water 2 weeks before moving them to the far-
intestine, and is carried to the liver by the portal vein. After
 rowing crates will materially reduce the contamination to
migrating about in the hepatic tissues, the larva enters a
which the piglets will be exposed. Treating again at weaning
hepatic vein and is carried by the caudal vena cava, heart,
with continuing attention to the hygienic conditions of the
and pulmonary artery to the lungs, where it enters an al-
premises should keep the growing pigs reasonably free of
veolus. After completing a molt in the lungs, the larva
A. suum. Continuous provision of feeds containing pyrantel
ascends in the expectorant mucus of the tracheobronchial
tartrate prevents the migration and establishment of
 tree and returns by way of the lumen of the esophagus and
A. suum. Pyrantel tartrate is the only approved drug that
stomach to the intestine, where it completes a final molt
kills the infective larva immediately after it hatches in the
and matures.
small intestine.
 In summary, control efforts should be directed at pre-
venting infection of pigs during the first few weeks of life.
Anthelmintic medication of the sow before farrowing.
careful sanitation at farrowing time, and avoidance of expo-
sure of young pigs to contaminated soils all serve to limit
 early infection. A method has been described for moving
pigs into a new breeding facility without the movement of
their parasites (Epe and Blomer, 2001). The described
method included using pigs known to have a low level of
A. suum infection; treatment with ivermectin 2 weeks
before and the day of transport in a clean trailer to a
disinfection platform, where each pig was washed using a
high-pressure sprayer for 10 minutes with tap water and
10 minutes with a 2% Venno Oxygen wash (a combination
of 2-[2-butoxyethoxy] -ethanol, a nonionic surfactant [iso-
tridecanol ethoxylates in an emulsifier, sulfochlorinated
 paraffin oill); transport in another clean trailer to the facil-
ity, and leading through a bath of 2% Neopredisan solu-
tion. A total of 1203 fecal samples examined 4, 6, and 10
weeks after transfer were all negative for A. suurm.
Parascaris
P. equorum, the very large ascarid parasite of the horse,
FIGURE 4118. Parascaris equorum, anterior end of adult female
s u ie s pue  ia 7 o dn aq u
showing the shape of the characteristic lips.
200
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
The first waves of invading larvae inflict mainly mechan-
the intestinal stages of P. equorum. Pyrantel tartrate used as
ical injury, and little more than petechial hemorrhages can
a feed additive prevents ascarid infections in horses.
be observed. However, as the host becomes sensitized to
Over the past few years there have been several reports of
Parascaris antigens, the tissues respond to the presence of
resistance of P. equorum to ivermectin and moxidectin.
larvae with infiltrations of eosinophilic leukocytes and
These reports have come from the United States, Canada,
other inflammatory cells. The damage done to the liver
and Europe (Boersema, Eysker, and Nas, 2002; Craig,
and lungs eventually heals, but the chronic reduction in
Diamond, and Ferwerda, 2007; Hearn and Peregrine,
functional capacity suffered during what normally is a
2003; von Samson-Himmelstjerna et al, 2007; Schougaard
period of rapid growth leaves its mark on the yearling.
and Nielsen, 2007; Slocombe, de Gannes, and Lake, 2007;
It never will be what it could have been.
Stoneham and Coles, 2006). In all these trials horses were
The durable infective egg is the key element in the epi-
not cleared of their infections by treatment with a macro-
demiology of P. equorum infection. These eggs accumulate
cyclic lactone. For the purpose of clearing the horses of
as a growing reservoir of infection in polluted soils, and
they adhere by their sticky shell covering to the teats and
or fenbendazole (in one case a 2X dose of pyrantel pamoate
udder of the brood mare and wait there for the foal to be
was required for clearance [Craig, Diamond, and Ferwerda,
born.
2007]). The macrocyclic lactones still appeared highly
Heavy infection with adult ascarids causes moderate
efficacious against strongyle and Strongyloides infections.
enteritis and subnormal growth through interference with
digestion and absorption of nutrients. Ascaridosis produces
Development of Strongylld, Ascarld, and Strongyloides
a malnourished, undersized, sickly individual with little sta-
Infectlons In Foals
mina and reduced resistance to disease: its haircoat is dull,
Around 60 years ago, Ann F. Russell (1948) reported on her
its skin dry and leathery, and its abdomen too large for its
study of the sequential changes in the composition of worm
frame. It is not unusual to find a half-pail of P. equorum in
 populations in 26 foals from seven different thoroughbred
the small intestine of a foal, a sufficient mass of parasites
studs. She performed fecal egg counts and identified infec-
actually to compete with the host for nutrients. Occa-
tive larvae developing in fecal cultures of samples collected
sionally, adult P. equorurm perforate the bowel wall and
from these foals every week from the age of 4 weeks to at
cause fatal peritonitis. Administration of anthelmintics
least 6 months and, in a few cases, to more than 1 year.
that tend to paralyze ascarids (e.g-, pyrantel pamoate,
These studies remain of interest because they indicate what
piperazine, and ivermectin) to a foal with a heavy
happens without the pressure of modern anthelmintics.
P. equorum burden may occasionally cause impaction or
The interesting thing is that the curves would probably
complete obstruction of the bowel (Cribb et al, 2006;
still appear about the same; the only things that might
Schusser, Kopf, and Prosl, 1988).
change would be that the number of eggs per gram
would be less and there would probably be almost no
Control
larvae of Strongylus vulgaris recovered from the cultures.
 The thick eggshell of P. equorum protects the egg from
However, these two graphs and their interpretation
temperature extremes and ultraviolet irradiation and makes
remain an excellent primer in equine parasitology.
the egg resistant to desiccation and most chemical disin-
 In Figure 4-118, egg counts are plotted against age for
fectants. The epidemiology of P. equorum infection there-
S. westeri, for P. equorurm, and for the family Strongylidae
fore differs considerably from that of strongylids with their
collectively. Note that S. westeri infection reached a maxi-
free-living infective larvae. Therefore effective stall sanita-
mum early in life, then rapidly dropped to a low level and
tion for the control of ascarids involves weekly removal of
finally disappeared at about 5 months of age. This accords
all manure and bedding and thorough cleaning of all 
perfectly with what we now know about the mammary
surfaces with a high-pressure cleaner or steam jenny.
transmission of S. westeri.
Most horsemen find such a program excessively laborious
P. equorum eggs first appeared at about 12 weeks of age,
and rely instead on anthelmintics to suppress production
after which egg counts rose steeply to a peak and then rapidly
and  environmental
of
fll but, instead of disappearing completely, persisted at a
P. equorum. However, because of the extraordinary longev-
low level indefinitely. The 12-week delay in appearance of
ity and hardihood of ascarid eggs, contamination, however
pd puedad al oi aso spuodsao sa una d
gradual, tends to be cumulative, and thorough cleaning at
of this parasite, and we may deduce from this that the infection
least of the foaling stall and of the mare's udder and teats
was acquired soon after birth. Thus anthelmintic medication
before foaling is well worth the effort.
of the pregnant mare, careful bathing of her udder and teats,
and thorough cleaning of the foaling box are logical measures
Anthelmintic medication
for the prevention of significant infection of foals with
Piperazine compounds (100 mg/kg), fenbendazole
P. equorum. The persistence of infection at a low level in
(10 mg/kg), pyrantel (6.6 mg/kg), ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg),
horses of all ages and the extraordinary resistance of the egg
moxidectin (0.4 mg/kg), and a number of other anthelmin-
to the rigors of the external environment make P. equorum a
tics both current and obsolete are highly effective against
 difficult parasite to control.
CH AP T ER 4 Helminths
201
2000
"Strongyles" eggs
the feces of these foals. This is to be expected in view of the
Parascaris equorum
6- to 11-month prepatent periods of Strongylus species and
.. Strongyloides westeri
the general predominance of cyathostomes in horses. It is
1500
curious, therefore, that small numbers of S. vulgaris and
S. edentatus eggs appear in fecal samples of foals up to
per
12 weeks of age. Russell (1948) observed this phenomenon
1000
in every one of 26 foals studied and interpreted it as
evidence of coprophagia. This ingestion of feces by foals
is probably related to the normal process of “seeding” the
500
cecum and colon with beneficial microorganisms essential
for the digestion of cellulose, but it also presents a clear
opportunity for invasion by parasites.
As Figures 4-119 and 4-120 show, strongylid egg output
8121620242832364044485256
increases steadily, and S. vuigaris and S. edentatus eggs
Age (weeks)
appear on schedule at 6 months and 1l months, respec-
FGURE 4119. Average numberof eggs of Parascaris equorum,"'stron-
tively. This clearly indicates that strongylid infection begins
gyles.," and Stmngyloides westeri counted per gram of manure. Data
shortly after birth of the foal and proceeds without inter-
obtained from weekly observations of 26 foals. (Modified from
ruption thereafter. Because young foals are much more
Russell, 1948; reproduced from Evans Jw, Barton A, Hintz HF, et
susceptible to the pathogenic effects of these parasites
al: he horse, New York, 1977, WH Freeman.)
than are older horses, it follows that the greatest efforts
should be directed toward preventing excessive exposure,
especially during the first months of life.
The third and most important curve shown in Figure
4-119 represents a gradual increase in the composite stron-
Toxascaris
 gylid egg counts during the first year of life. To interpret
T. leonina is a parasite of cats and dogs in the cooler
this curve, one must take into account the relative abun-
climates of the world. The adult female can be 10 or so
dances of S. vulgaris, S. edentatus, and the “small strongy-
cm long. The egg of T. leonina develops rapidly, usually
lids" as determined by fecal culture and identification
reaching the infective stage in about a week. If the egg
of the infective larvae. These findings are portrayed in
 is ingested by a rodent or an animal other than the final
 Figure 4-120, which shows that the eggs of the small stron-
host, the larva hatches and invades the wall of the intestine,
 gylids always predominated, representing, at various ages,
where it remains for about a week before proceeding
between 80% and 100% of the total strongylid eggs shed in
to other tissues, where it encysts and remains arrested in
the infective stage. When the infective egg or an infected
rodent is ingested by a dog, cat, or other suitable definitive
Small strangyles
host, the larva invades the mucosa of the small intestine.
 Strongylus edentatus
 There it develops and molts before returning to the lumen
l Other species
of the intestine to mature. Cats and dogs can thus
Strongylus vulgaris
acquire T. leonina infection by ingesting infective eggs or
100
rodents with infective larvae encysted in their tissues
(Figure 4-121).
 The eggs of T. leonina develop to the infective stage in
(+u
75
only 1 week as compared with 4 weeks for Toxocara species
(see Figure 7-9). This rapid development might explain the
 persistence of T. leonina infection in reasonably well-sani-
50
vae
tized cage colonies of dogs. The life cycle of T. leonina with
its rapid infective-larval development and ability to use
mice as paratenic hosts is such that this ascaridoid also
25
often becomes a problem of felids or canids housed in
zoologic gardens.
481216202428323640444852
Toxocara
Age (weeks)
Toxocara is a genus of rather large ascaridoids that as adults
are parasites in the small intestine of various mammals.
FGURE 4120. Percentage of larvae of different species of stron-
 The worms have three large lips and a glandular esophageal
gyles in fecal cultures. Data obtained from weekly observations
of 26 foals. (Modified from Russell, 1948; reproduced from
bulb (the ventriculus) located at the junction of the
Evans JW, Barton A, Hintz HF, et al: The horse, New York, 1977,
 esophagus and intestine. They tend to have cervical alae,
WH Freeman.)
and their eggs have pitted surfaces. Toxocara canis and
202
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Adult T leonina
Eggs containing
 in small intestine 
one cell in feces
Prepatentperiod:
week
to2ymontns
Eggs ingested by dog or cat
Eggs containing
infective larva
Mucosal migration
 in soil
Larvae.
arrested, in tissues
 of paratenic host 
Migration by lymphatics
 or contiguity of tissues
FGURE 4121. Altemative life histories of bxascaris leonina.
T. cati are two of the most commonly observed parasites of
tissues and responding to various chemical and physical
the dog and cat, respectively. T. vitulorum of calves is com-
stimuli, but also by the suitability of the host invaded.
If a Toxocara canis egg hatches in a dog's stomach, the
still can be observed occasionally in feces from calves in the
larva invades the bowel wall and arrives in a pulmonary
United States. Other species of Toxocara include those
capillary by the same route outlined earlier for A. suum.
found in elephants, hippopotami, bats, civet cats, rats,
Unlike A. suum, however, the Toxocara canis larva is con-
 coati mundis, and mongooses.
siderably more prone to remain in the circulation than to
break into the alveolus, especially if its host is a mature dog.
Toxocara canis
If the larva fails to enter the alveolus, it will be returned to
The Toxocara canis worm is commonly seen in puppies
a aq ame p pe sua aieud a kq  a
during the few months after birth. The adults tend to be 10 to
systemic circulation, perhaps to lodge in a kidney or some
15 cm long and cream colored (see Figure 7-43), with the
other somatic tissue, where it will encyst as an arrested
internal reproductive organs appearing white when viewed
infective larva.
through the cuticle in fresh worms. Sometimes when worms
The direction taken at the alveolus is crucial in deter-
are passed in the feces the gut tends to appear rather gray or
mining whether the larva will undergo a tracheal migration
black, and the worms appear darker than when still quite
and develop to sexual maturity or a somatic migration to
lively. Adult dogs infected with this parasite that are shedding
remain arrested as an infective larva in that particular dog.
the eggs in their feces can be found.
The probability of tracheal migration is high in a newborn
puppy. However, by the time the pup is 1 or 2 months old,
Importance
the probability that a newly hatched Toxocara canis larva
Heavy prenatal Toxocara canis infections cause severe
will develop into an adult ascarid in that particular pup has
abdominal discomfort in nursling pups. The pups whimper
fallen to a very low level and remains so indefinitely.
and shriek almost continuously and adopt a peculiar straddle-
During the same period of the pup's life, the probability
legged posture of the hind limbs when standing or walking.
 of somatic migration progressively increases, and arrested
 Alarming numbers of immature and adult worms may appear
infective larvae accumulate in the tissues.
in the feces or vomitus. Death may result from rupture or
Somatic migration also accounts for the accumulation of
obstruction of the intestine as the ascarids, reacting to some
arrested infective Toxocara caris larvae in the tissues of a
irritant, thrash about and become tangled into knots.
wide range of other paratenic intermediate hosts, including
Obstruction of the bile or pancreatic duct occasionally
rodents, sheep, pigs, monkeys, humans, and earthworms
provides prize exhibits for pathology museums.
(see Figures 7-51 and 8-99). If a mouse with arrested infec-
tive larvae in its tissues is eaten by a dog, somatic migration
Life history
is not observed, and in some instances at least, development
The adolescent wanderings of nematode larvae are influ-
 proceeds to maturity in the alimentary tract (Sprent, 1958).
 enced not only by their intrinsic capabilities for penetrating
The mouse not only has saved the larvae but apparently has
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
203
changed them, too. Migration and encystment in paratenic
The question is offen asked if the puppy placed on
hosts and exploitation of the prey-predator relationship is
a
 monthly heartworm preventive also needs to be
an epidemiologic norm for carnivoran ascarids in general.
treated every 2 weeks as per the Centers for Disease
Both T. cati and T. leorina can be transmitted in this
Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines (www.cdc.gov/
manner, as can ascarid parasites of certain wild carnivorans
ncidod/dpd/parasites/ascaris/prevention.htm), which state,
such as Baylisascaris procyonis of the raccoon P. lotor.
“In areas where both ascarids and hookworms are
 It should be remembered that adult dogs can be infected
common, begin treating both puppies and their mothers
with Toxocara canis. In a national survey of fecal samples
with an age-appropriate anthelmintic at 2, 4, 6, and 8 weeks
from dogs in shelters around the United States, although
 of age. Some recommend extending this to 12 weeks and
the lowest level of roundworm infections occurred in dogs
then treating monthly until the pet is 6 months old.
over 7 years of age, greater than 5% of dogs in this age
To treat for ascarids alone, begin by 2%-3 weeks and treat
 group were infected (Blagburn et al, 1996). It has also been
every 2 weeks for at least three additional treatments." In
shown that adult dogs can be infected with Toxocara canis
 one study in the United Kingdom, 104 puppies from three
routinely, as well as repeatedly after anthelmintic clearance,
kennels where Toxocara canis was common were given
if they are given only a relatively few infective eggs, 100 to
either milbemycin oxime with lufenuron (Sentinel) or
200, at once (Dubey, 1978; Fahrion et al, 2008; Maizels and
febantel, pyrantel pamoate, and praziquantel (Drontal
Meghji, 1984). There have been no studies on whether
Plus) beginning at 2 weeks of age, with the Sentinel dogs
larvae in paratenic hosts may more successfully develop
being treated monthly until the dogs were 26 weeks old and
 in adult dogs than larvae in infective eggs.
the Drontal Plus dogs being treated every other week for
From the perspective of the dog and the veterinarian,
12 weeks and then again when the dogs were 26 weeks
the most important arrested larvae of Toxocara canis are
old (Schenker et al, 2006). There was very little difference
those to be found in the tissues of the female dog
in the amount of egg shedding between the two groups, and
(see Figure 7-50). Transmission of infection from bitch to
the Sentinel-treated dogs in this study actually shed slightly
 pups occurs almost exclusively by way of transplacental
fewer eggs and had more negative fecal samples. There are
transimission. During the last trimester of pregnancy,
two additional points that need to be considered relative to
arrested larvae are reactivated and migrate from the tissues
 this question. First, in light of the CDC recommendation,
 of the bitch to the pups in utero (Filleborn, 1921). After
it may be wisest to treat between the first few monthly
parturition, small numbers of reactivated larvae also may be
treatments of a puppy in order to stay in compliance.
shed in the milk, but this is a minor form of transmission
Second, it should be remembered that monthly products
for this parasite. The alternative life histories of Toxocara
are safety tested by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
caris are summarized in Figure 4-122.
(FDA) as though they are going to be given once a month
for the life of the pet, whereas other products are tested as
Treatment
though they are going to be given once per indication of
Owing to transplacental transmission, unless heroic mea-
infection. So, the question remains a complicated one.
sures have been taken to prevent infection, pups may be
In breeding situations, the role of the bitch in the epide-
assumed to be infected. About the only anthelmintic labeled
miology of Toxocara caris is paramount because she harbors
for the treatment of 2-week-old puppies is pyrantel pamoate.
the better part of the reservoir of infection not contained in
Medication should start routinely as early as the second week
the soil. Clients should be advised that bitches bestowing
 of life and be repeated every 2 weeks until the pup is
pathogenic Toxocara canis burdens on their litters will
3 months old. Young puppies are also regularly treated
likely repeat the performance once or twice again, even
with piperazine compounds (110 mg piperazine base per
after the uptake of infective eggs has ceased. Clients should
kilogram), which is considered safe and highly effective
also be made aware that the environment of a bitch with a
 against ascarids in the lumen of the alimentary tract and
litter ofurslingsis likelyto contain veritablecloudsof eggs
therefore ideally suited to removing Toxocara canis as they
from 3 weeks postpartum onward, and it is during this
arrive and develop in the intestinal lumens of perinatally
period that anthelmintic medication and sanitation can be
infected pups. Many of the labels for piperazine products,
applied most effctively and ffcienly. Rather heavy patt
however state that they should not be used in puppies under
infections are regularly observed in nursing bitches for a
6 weeks of age. Drontal Plus (febantel, praziquantel, and
 short period beginning about 1 month after parturition.
 pyrantel pamoate) is labeled for use in puppies older than
This has been explained as follows (Sprent, 1961). Some
3 weeks and weighing over 2 pounds. Milbemycin oxime
reactivated larvae fail to establish themselves in the pups'
(with or without lufenuron) is labeled for puppies over
intestines and are passed with their feces. Brood bitches eat
4 weeks of age and 2 pounds in weight. Puppies over
their pups' feces to clean the nest and, in so doing, afford
6 weeks of age can be treated with fenbendazole or ivermec-
these jettisoned larvae a second chance to mature.
tin with pyrantel pamoate. At 7 weeks of age, puppies can
be treated topically with moxidectin and imidacloprid.
Treating to clear arrested larvae
At 8 weeks the formulation of ivermectin with pyrantel
The phrase “Toxocara canis-free dogs" implies that
 pamoate and praziquantel is labeled for use in puppies.
the dogs are devoid of both adult and larval parasites.
204
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 4122. Alternative life histories of bxocara canis. 1, A paratenic host is any in which a larval
parasite may survive and remain infective for its definitive host without undergoing development.
Any of a wide range of animal species including rodents, sheep, pigs, monkeys, humans, earth-
womms, and adult dogs may serve as paratenic host for oxocara canis larvae. 2, Arested infective
larvae are also found in the tissues of male dogs, but these are supposed to be of little if any epid-
emiologic importance. 3, The larvae that have entered the pups through the placenta molt once in
the fetuses but defer further development until after birth. (Redrawn from Sprent JFA: Observations
However, it is nearly impossible to detect small numbers of 
Bitches with Toxocara canis and A. caninum infections
arrested larvae in the tissues of even a small pup, so the
were medicated daily with fenbendazole from the fortieth
status “Toxocara caris-free” is always to be taken with a
day of gestation to the fourteenth day of lactation at a
grain of salt. The sort of measures required to produce
dosage rate of 50 mg/kg. Their pups were found free of
Toxocara canis-free dogs are usually beyond the resources
both parasites (Duwel and Strasser, 1978). Burke and
(and requirements) of commercial breeders.
Roberson (1983) obtained 89% fewer ascarids and 99%
Griesemer and Gibson (1963) obtained Toxocara canis--
fewer hookworms in pups from dams subjected to the
free pups from colostrum-deprived bitches raised in isola-
same regimen. The timing of medication coincided with
tion that had been maintained on wire through several
the period of reactivation and migration of arrested
 gestations without anthelmintic medication. The somatic
Toxocara canis larvae in these parturient females.
larval burden apparently was eliminated through the
 Ivermectin administered during gestation has been
 placenta over the course of several pregnancies.
shown to cause marked reductions in the number of
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
205
cats are infected acutely during the last part of pregnancy
(Coati, Schnieder, and Epe, 2004). Infected paratenic hosts
unquestionably represent an important reservoir of infec-
tion for adult cats, at least those with well-developed pred-
atory habits. In larvae from cats infected acutely during
pregnancy and from paratenic hosts, the migration in the
cat and their arrested development in the paratenic host
appear in some way to satisfy the larval wanderlust and,
although a small proportion of the larvae may wander as
before, most develop to maturity after a sojourn in the wall.
of the stomach (i.e., a mucosal migration; Sprent, 1956).
Treatment
The fact that cats get neither hookworms nor round-
worms routinely from their mother by transmammary or
transplacental transmission means that treatment of the
very young kitten is not as critical as the early treatment
of young puppies. The only product in the United States
labeled for 2-week-old kittens is pyrantel pamoate; when
HGURE 4123. oxocara cati stomal end showing the broad cervi-
this is formulated with praziquantel (Drontal), the age limit
cal alae.
on the label is 4 weeks and the weight requirement is 1/2
pounds. Piperazine in various formulations is also often
Toxocara canis organisms in puppies born to experimen
administered to young kittens; although as with the dog.
tally infected bitches (Shoop et al, 1988). Treatments of
many of the labels on these products say they should not be
1.0 mg/kg body weight on days 20 and 42 or 0.5 mg/kg
given to kittens younger than 6 weeks of age. The other
body weight on days 38, 41, 44, and 47 of gestation both
aie iei siaqel aaey sies io paaoidde ane ieu sionpond
caused marked reductions in the number of worms recov-
quite conservative relative to the dosing of kittens, with
ered from puppies of treated bitches. These dosages are
some being approved for treatment beginning at 6 weeks
well above the level of ivermectin used in heartworm
of age (ivermectin and milbemycin oxime), 8 weeks (sela-
prophylaxis.
 mectin), and 9 weeks (emodepside and praziquantel); some
of these have weight restrictions as well.
Toxocara cati
The worm T. cati is slightly smaller than Toxocara canis,
Envlronmental Control of Roundworms
with females up to 12 cm long, and has very elegant cervical.
Soil pollution
alae (Figure 4-123 and see Figure 7-56). When the fresh
 Toxocara and Toxascaris eggs are very resistant to envi-
worm is observed, the ventral curvature of the anterior
ronmental extremes and remain infective for years, espe-
end along with the large cervical alae gives the front end
cially in poorly drained clay and silt soils, hence their
 of the worm a cobralike appearance. These worms are com-
accumulation in soil and filth and the threat they pose to
successful dog-rearing progress with time. A reasonable
observed in vomitus by owners. If in doubt about the
explanation for the heavy ascarid infections so frequently
worm's identity, the practitioner can always break the
encountered in hound pups might be sought in the
worm open about one third of the body length behind
common practice of chaining the hounds almost perma-
the head and look for the more familiar Toxocara eggs
nently to doghouses, a practice particularly conducive to
with a microscope. This will work, of course, only if the
soil pollution. Because the infective eggs are virtually
worm presented is a female.
immune to any reasonable measures taken to destroy
them, the most effective measure is to entomb them under
Life history
a concrete or bituminous asphalt slab. Once the slab is
 The migration patterns of T. cati differ qualitatively
installed and provided that feces are not allowed to accumu-
from those of Toxocara canis in that (1) prenatal infection
late for more than a week at a time, the probability of the
through the placenta does not occur and (2) the probability
confined dog ingesting infective ascarid eggs becomes quite
of tracheal migration in egg infections remains high
small. The next best way of decontaminating polluted soil is
throughout the cat's life (Figure 4-124). Neonatal infection
 to replace the top foot or so with fresh gravel.
through the mammary glands had been considered an
important route of infection in kittens (Swerczek,
Contaminated kennel areas
Nielsen, and Helmbolt, 1971); however, more recent work
All surfaces must first be made physically clean. High-
 has shown that transmammary transmission does not occur
 pressure washers like those in car washes are very effective,
in cats with chronic infections, although it can occur if
and inexpensive mobile units are quite satisfactory.
206
CH A P T E R 4Helminths
Adult T cati
Eggs containing
 in small intestine
one cell in feces
Mucosal
migration
(2)
Tracheal migration (1)
(prepatent period:
2months)
weeks
Mucosal
migration 
(2)
Somatic
Infective larvae,
migration
 Eggs ingested by cat
Eggs containing
 arrested in 
infective larvae
tissues of queen 
in soil
Cat eats
paratenic host
Somatic
Infective larvae,
 migration liver to
arrested in tissues
lungs, to tissue 
atenichost
of paratenic host 
 FIGURE 4-124. Altemative life histories of bxocara catf. 1, The probability that ingestion of infective
au jeu aeen 'z 'ren aun jo alaur inouanau ieueisans suiewan uonoaun suaed ot peal lm saa
already undergone somatic migration in a paratenic host, including the queen, satisfy their histotrophic
 requirements with a mucosal migration. Transmammary transmission seems to occur only if the queen
is acutely infected during late pregnancy. The relative epidemiologic importance of these altematives
will depend on the kind of environment, the abundance of suitable paratenic hosts, and the sex and 
habits of the cats (Redrawn from Coati N, Schnieder T, Epe C: Vertical transmission of oxocara cati
Schrank 1788 (Anisakidae) in the cat, Parasitor Res 92:142, 2004; Sprent JFA: The life history and
development of bxocara cati (Schrank, 1788) in the domestic cat, Parasitology 46:54, 1956; Swerczek
TW, Nielsen SW, Helmbolt CF: Transmammary passage of Doxocara cati in the cat, Am J Vet Res 32:89,
1971.)
Wood and wire construction is difficult to clean properly
difficult to reach under many circumstances when dif-
with any kind of equipment or amount of effort. Affer
 ferent housing structures are involved.
 surfaces are physically clean, they may be mopped or
sprayed with 1% sodium hypochlorite (3 cups Clorox per
Paratenic hosts
gallon of cool water) to strip off the outer protein coat of
Mice and other small paratenic hosts may play a signif-
the ascarid eggs so they will not stick to surfaces and can be
icant role in the epidemiology of Toxocara and Toxascaris
rinsed away. The preliminary cleaning is absolutely essential
infection, especially with regard to predacious cats. If you
because any appreciable amount of residual organic matter
 dissect the mice, voles, moles, shrews, and snakes that your
will neutralize the sodium hypochlorite and render it inef-
cat drags in, you will probably find Toxocara larvae encyst-
fective in stripping the ascarid eggs. Notice that nothing has
ed in many of them. A survey in rural England of brown
been said about killing the ascarid eggs. The preceding
rats found larvae of Toxocara in 15% of the rats examined
treatment does not kill ascarid eggs; it just knocks them
(Webster and Macdonald, 1995). In a rural setting there
loose. Ascarid eggs are killed by heat. Raising the temper-
is probably little that can be done about this source of
ature of a cage or bedding above 60° C (140° F) for 5
infection except to confine the dogs and cats indoors.
minutes will kill all eggs, but this temperature may be
Rodents are attracted to the abundance of food in kennels
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
207
and catteries and are not put off by the presence of their
cross-reaction with antibodies to other parasites is consid-
ferocious predators; a mouse is quite willing to risk its life
ered minimal. Thus it seems that people are getting infected
for a kibble. There seems to be little information about the
from the ingestion of eggs that have embryonated in soil
 importance of rodents in transmitting ascarids and other
after having been passed in the feces of dogs and cats. This
parasites to dogs and cats confined to buildings and
means that the veterinary profession has a clear responsibil-
outdoor enclosures. However, considering the facts gath-
ity to identify and eliminate Toxocara canis and T. cati infec-
 ered here, an investment in rodent control could be partly
tion at every opportunity and to provide the public with
written off against the cost of controlling parasites.
 objective scientific information about the epidemiology
and prevention of human toxocarosis.
Human Toxocarosls (Vlsceral Larva Mlgrans)
Cases have been reported of children infected with adult
The widespread distribution of dog feces and the prevalence
T. cati (Eberhard and Alfano, 1998), but it is believed
of Toxocara canis eggs therein led Fulleborn (1921) to
that these children may have ingested intact adult worms
wonder about the pathologic significance in man of
recovered from litter boxes.
nodules containing larvae of this parasite. These nodules
occurred principally in the liver, lungs, kidneys, and
Vlsceral Larva Mlgrans In Nonhuman Hosts
brain. Beaver et al (1952) recognized the causative role of
In veterinary medicine, it should not be forgotten that
Toxocara canis larvae in cases of sustained eosinophilia
other hosts besides people and other primates can develop
(above 50%), pneumonitis, and hepatomegaly in children
disease due to the migrations of the larvae of Toxocara canis
 younger than 3 years old and dubbed the condition visceral
(and T. cati) in their tissues. Cats infected with Toxocara
larva migrans. As a horrible sequela occurring at 3 to
canis develop elevated eosinophil counts and massive
13 years, the larvae may produce granulomatous retinitis.
eosinophilic granulomas in their kidneys and livers and
Misdiagnosis of Toxocara canis-induced granulomatous
have lungs with severe medial hypertrophy of the pulmo-
retinitis as retinoblastoma has prompted the unnecessary
nary vessels (Parsons et al, 1988). There is a long list of
enucleation of children's eyes in at least 36 reported cases.
other hosts that can develop disease due to Toxocara caris
The typical epidemiologic situation around symptom-
that includes sheep, pigs, and tortoises (Parsons, Bowman,
 atic cases involves a toddler eating soil heavily contami-
and Grieve, 1989). The larvae of Toxocara canis and T. cati
nated with infective Toxocara canis eggs. Such soil is
can cause white-spot disease in the livers of pigs similar to
likely to be found wherever dogs habitually defecate and,
those caused by A. suum (Roneus, 1966).
in particularly high concentration, in the nests of maternal
bitches and their litters. The soil of public parks in cities
Baylisascaris
tends to be heavily contaminated with infective Toxocara
Species of Baylisascaris common in North American
canis eggs (Dubin, Segall, and Martindale, 1975; Woodruff
wildlife include B. procyoris of the raccoon, Baylisascaris
and Burg, 1973). Although dirt eating is often considered to
columnaris of the skunk, and Baylisascaris laevis of the wood-
be a manifestation of depraved appetite (i.e., pica) resulting
 chuck. The raccoon has been introduced into Europe, where
from dietary deficiency or emotional insecurity, even well-
it has proliferated quite successfully, and the raccoon round-
nourished, well-adjusted babies should not be trusted to
worm is also now present in Europe. B. procyoris causes a
forgo whatever delicacies may be at hand. Children must
particularly serious form of visceral larva migrans in a wide
not be allowed to play where dogs habitually defecate, and
range of hosts including humans (Kazacos, 2001), and zoo-
 dog feces must never be used to fertilize vegetable gardens.
notic infections have also occurred Europe as well (Kiuchle
The vast majority of infections in humans around the
et al, 1993). Unlike Toxocara larvae, the larvae of B. procyonis
world are without recognized symptoms. People act like
grow larger as they migrate. However, they resemble
other paratenic hosts, and the larvae can persist in the tissues
Toxocara canis larvae in that they tend to invade the central
of primates for at least 10 years (Beaver, 1966). A recent
nervous system of intermediate hosts and, because they
survey of human sera in the United States from people
grow as they migrate (see Figure 8-100), only one to three
over 6 years of age (n = 20,395) revealed that some 13.9%
B. procyonis larvae in the brain may prove fatal. These
were serologically positive for the infection, and because of
properties render them very pathogenic to more than
the biology of the larvae (Won et al, 2007), it is highly likely
100 species of animal, including woodchucks, rabbits,
that this means that they are currently infected. T. cati
ground squirrels, chickens, turkeys, partridges, pigeons,
appears somewhat less important than Toxocara canis as a
cockatiels, chukar partridges, emus, quail, and humans
cause of human infection, with some cases being diagnosed
(Kazacos, 2001; Kazacos et al, 1983; Myers, Monroe, and
serologically (Petithory and Beddock, 1997; Virginia et al,
Greve, 1983; Roth et al, 1982). Unfortunately, human cases
1991), but there is as yet no consensus as to whether specific
continue to 0ccur (Pai et al, 2007; Park et al, 2000), and it is
infections can be reliably distinguished serologically. For
imperative that veterinarians be aware of the risk posed by
people, there is no other logical source of infection in
raccoons either being held in captivity or within a commu-
most cases other than infective eggs in the environment,
nity. Raccoons infected with B. procyonis can be treated with
and in the United States, owing to the lack of other
most of the anthelmintics active against Toxocara canis
common intestinal parasites in people, concerns about
(Bauer and Gey, 1995).
208
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
have been observed in the feces of dogs in Minnesota,
Indiana, Michigan, and Prince Edward Island (Conboy,
1996; Kazacos 2001). Dogs naturally infected with adult
worms have been treated for their B. procyoris infections
 using milbemycin oxime (Bowman et al, 2005). The eggs of
this worm are slightly smaller than those of Toxocara caris
and Trichuris vulpis (Figure 4-126).
Order Spirurida
The order Spirurida contains two suborders: Camallanina
and Spirurina. Members of both suborders require an
arthropod, either a crustacean or an insect, intermediate
host for development to the infective stage. The definitive
host acquires spirurid infections by ingesting infected
arthropods or paratenic hosts that have fed on such arthro-
pods. The suborder Spirurina also includes the superfamily
Filarioidea, for which the intermediate host is a blood-feed-
FGURE 4-125. Infective egg of Baylisascaris procyonis.
ing arthropod that becomes infected while taking its blood
meal and that vectors the parasite when taking another
Hay, straw, and other feedstuffs and bedding materials
blood meal.
contaminated with raccoon feces are often found to be the
source of infective eggs (Figure 4-125) of this parasite.
 Suborder Camallanlna
o r sed ne aq a se pue si
Dracunculus
to play during inclement weather, but such areas should
The suborder Camallanina contains only one genus of
be inspected beforehand to make sure that raccoons have
veterinary significance, Dracunculus, a parasite of the sub-
 not been nesting in them. Ground-feeding birds such as
cutaneous tissues of carnivorans and man (Figure 4-127
 doves, pigeons, and robins are particularly at risk when
and see Figure 7-49). The female Dracunculus is very
they feed on nondigested seeds in dried raccoon feces
large (up to 120 cm), and the male is smaller (up to 40
(Evans and Tangredi, 1985).
mm). When a female has been fertilized, the anus and vulva
Dogs can be hosts of the adult worms. Greve and
atrophy, and a shallow ulcer forms in the host's skin at the
O'Brien (1989) diagnosed infection with adult B. procyonis
location of the anterior end of the worm. When water wets
in a 5-month-old Labrador Retriever (patent) and
a
this ulcer, the female projects her body and prolapses a
6-month-old Golden Retriever (nonpatent) by administer-
length of uterus, which then bursts to discharge a horde
 ing piperazine and identifying the adult and juvenile worms
of larvae (Figure 4-128). Her body then slowly moves
when these were passed in the feces. Eggs of this worm also
toward the opening to await the next wetting.
Humans are infected with their own species of Dracun-
culus, Dracunculus medinensis. This is a parasite that is on the
 ropes in its bout with extinction owing to a massive inter-
 national campaign aimed at its eradication, and only about
10,000 cases a year are now reported in about nine countries
in Africa (Hopkins et al, 2007). A primitive technique
for extracting D. medinensis from humans consisted of
 grasping the worm and winding it up on a stick a little at
a time. The winding takes days because if the worm is
FGURE 4127. Dracuncuus insignis from the axillary connective
FIGURE 4126. An egg of Baylisascaris procyonis and two eggs of
tissue of a dog. Left, The lateral aspect of the stomal end. Right,
Trichuris vuipis in the feces of a naturally infected dog.
The dorsoventral aspect.
CHA P T E R 4 Helminths
209
FIGURE 4128. Dracunculus insignis first-stage larvae.
broken in the process, a severe reaction may develop.
 Surgical excision is the modern treatment of choice.
Veterinarians in the United States are liable to come
across Dracunculus insignis, a parasite of the raccoons and
other carnivorans, including the dog and cat in North
America (see Figure 8-108). Dracunculus species have also
been reported from snakes and snapping turtles in the
 United States. In the life cycle of this genus of worms, the
larvae liberated from the female that is slowly inching out of
the body will become infective if ingested by a copepod of
the genus Cyclops. Development in the copepods takes about
 3 weeks. The definitive host becomes infected by ingesting
 these Cyclops organisms in the drinking water. It appears in
the case of D. insignis that frogs can serve as paratenic hosts
FIGURE 4129. Gnathostoma stomal end (upper) and caudal
(Eberhard and Brandt, 1995), which increases the chance for
extremity of the male (lower).
dogs to become infected by the ingestion of frogs.
stage in water. These larvae hatch and develop to the infec-
Suborder Splrurlna
tive third stage only if ingested by copepods (Cyclops).
The suborder Spirurina contains 10 superfamilies; six are
A variety of amphibians, snakes, and fishes may serve as
of interest as parasites of domestic animals. The stoma
paratenic hosts to convey the gnathostome from the cope-
and surrounding structures of spirurins are distinctive.
pod to the definitive host. The migrations of gnathostome
Comparison of specimens with the illustrations of this sec-
larvae in the liver and other organs of the definitive host are
tion should suffice for generic identification. The one
destructive. The cystic nodules housing adult Gnathostoma
exception here are the Filarioidea, which for the most
spinigerum may break open into the peritoneal cavity with
 part have very plain and simple stomas.
fatal outcome. Larvae of G. spinigerum ingested by human
 beings tend to wander aimlessly without maturing.
Superfamily Gnathostomatoidea
Gnathostoma species have a doughnut-shaped collar
Superfamily Physalopteroidea
of spines surrounding the oral opening (Figure 4-129).
Identification
Adult specimens are found in cystic nodules in the stomach
Physaloptera species are parasites of the stomach of car-
walls of wild and domestic carnivores. Eggs are passed in
nivorans. The mouth is flanked by pseudolabia and sur-
the one- to two-cell stage and develop to the second larval
(i- pue oi- si) ro ro e Aq pao
210
CH A P T E R 4Helminths
dogs and cats often are associated with vomiting, and the
adults are often viewed during endoscopy (Jergens and
Greve,1992)
Life history
 The female worm lays small, thick-walled, larvated eggs.
The larvae in the eggs will develop to the infective stage in
various coprophagous beetles, crickets, and other insects.
The larvae will also use various cold-blooded vertebrates as
paratenic hosts.
Treatment
 Dogs have been treated with fenbendazole at 50 mg/kg
FIGURE 4130. Physaloptera sp. Left, The dorsoventral aspect of
for 3 days (Jergens and Greve, 1992). Infected cats have
the anterior extremity. Right, The lateral aspect of the anterior
been treated with ivermectin at 0.2 mg/kg (Gustafson,
extremity.
1995) and with two doses of pyrantel pamoate at 5 mg/kg
 given 3 weeks apart (Santen, Chastain, and Schmidt, 1993).
A summary of Physaloptera infections in 29 dogs and six
The adult worms are white or pinkish in color and tend to
cats in Iowa concludes with the recommendation that
live with the anterior end embedded in the mucosa (see
e ad jd yo no r e ui aq s
Figure 7-55). In the dog the adult worms often are present
20 mg/kg that may be repeated if signs of vomiting do
also in the very anteriormost portion of the duodenum at
not cease (Campbell and Graham, 1999). These authors
the level of the gastric valve. Infections with these worms in
also suggest that the different anthelmintics used in their
series of cases (fenbendazole, pyrantel pamoate, and pyran-
tel pamoate, praziquantel, and febantel) all appeared
efficacious, but some required elevated doses or longer
treatment times than suggested for typical labeled use.
Superfamily Thelazioidea
Family Pneumospiruridae
 Pneumospirurids are parasites of the lungs of wild carni-
vorans and appear occasionally in domestic dogs and cats.
Pneumospirura and Metathelazia are representative genera.
Family Thelazidae
Thelazia species (Figure 4-132) are parasites of the con-
junctival and lachrymal sacs of domestic animals. North
American species include Thelazia lacrymalis in horses,
Thelazia skrjabini in cattle and horses, Thelazia gulosa
in cattle, and Thelazia californiensis in dogs, sheep, and
various wild mammals. Slightly less than half of the
horses surveyed in Kentucky were found infected with
T. lacrymalis (Lyons et al, 1986). Thelazia species appar-
ently do little harm to cattle and horses in North America,
but exceptional cases requiring treatment may arise.
Life history. The female Thelazia worm deposits thin-
shelled eggs containing larvae that develop to the infective
stage in the face fly, Musca autumnalis. The Oriental face
fly, Musca hervei, serves as intermediate host of Thelazia
species in Japanese cattle (Shinonaga et al, 1974). A great
deal of work over the past few years, carried out mainly in
China and Italy with a canine and human Eurasian species
of Thelazia, Thelazia callipaeda, has revealed that the vec-
tors of this species are drosophilid fruit flies of the genera
Phortica and Amiota (Shen et al, 2006). T. califormiensis has
FIGURE 4131. Physaloptera sp. stoma (upper) and caudal extrem-
been considered as being vectored by the muscoid latrine
ity of male (lower).
flies, Fannia canicularis and Fannia benjamini, but the fruit
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
211
FIGURE 4133. Gongylonema pulchrum, anterior end of worm show-
FGURE 4-132. Thelazia sp. from the conjunctival sac of a horse.
ing bosses on cuticle.
flies may explain ocular cases that have occurred in the
host's esophagus (Gongylonema pulchrum) or rumen
western United States that have been associated with
(Gongylonema verrucosum) (Figure 4-134). Eggs containing
 people getting gnats in their eyes (Kirschner, Dunn, and
first-stage larvae are passed on the host's feces and, if
Ostler, 1990).
ingested by a dung beetle or a cockroach, develop to the
Treatment. Doramectin at 0.2 mg/kg given either sub-
infective stage in about a month. The definitive host
a r e q    a
becomes infected by ingesting the infected insect. Gorgylo-
treatment and control of Thelazia infections in cattle.
nema species are usually harmless.
A single dose of tetramisole subcutaneously at 12.5 to
 Spirocerca lupi, a parasite of canids, is found in fibrous
15 mg/kg produced rapid clinical recovery in infected
 nodules in the wall of the esophagus or stomach (see
cattle. Levamisole at a rate of 5 mg/kg administered sub-
Figures 8-103 to 8-105). The very small (12 × 30 μm)
cutaneously or 1% aqueous solution as an eye lotion was
also effective (Aruo, 1974; Corba, Scales, and Froyd, 1969;
Vassiliades et al, 1975). T. callipaeda infections in dogs have
been successfully treated by subcutaneous injections of
0.2 mg ivermectin per kilogram body weight (Rossi and
 Peruccio, 1989), direct instillation of 1 or 2 drops of 1%
moxidectin into each eye (Lia et al, 2004), or the topical
application to the back of the neck of topical moxidectin
(2.5%) with imidacloprid (10%) providing a dose of mox-
idectin of 2.5 to 6.5 mg/kg (Bianciardi and Otranto, 2005).
Brooks, Greiner, and Walsh (1983) successfully treated
 conjunctivitis in a Senegal parrot caused by Thelazia sp.
by instilling one drop of a 0.125% demecarium bromide,
a cholinesterase inhibitor, into the conjunctival sac and
subsequently flushing three paralyzed worms with sterile
saline solution.
Superfamily Spiruroidea
Gongylonema species are parasites of cattle and other
ungulates. The cuticle is covered with wartlike cuticular
FIGURE 4134. Gongylonema pulchrum. Sinusoidal worm under
bosses (Figure 4-133), especially near the anterior end, and
esophageal mucosa as viewed with an endoscope. (Courtesy
the nematode can usually be found woven into a remarkably
Dr. Thomas Divers, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
regular sinusoidal tract in the mucous membrane of the
University, Ithaca, New York.)
212
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
HGURE 4136. Draschia megastoma and Habronema muscae.
plicatus. D. megastoma is about 13 mm long and has a
funnel-shaped buccal cavity, whereas Habronema species
are larger (22 to 25 mm) and have cylindric buccal cavities
(Figure 4-136). The left spicule of H. rmuscae is five times as
long as the right one, whereas only a twofold disparity
exists between the spicules of H. microstoma. D. megastoma
excites the formation by the host of fibrous nodules riddled
FGURE 4-135. Physocephalus sexalatus
with intercommunicating galleries filled with a creamy pus-
like material in which the worms live (see Figure 7-74).
Habronema species are not associated with nodules.
egg contains a vermiform embryo when shed in the feces
(see Figures 7-25 and 8-105). If ingested by a coprophagous
Life history
 beetle, this vermiform embryo develops into a larva capable
Larvae hatch from the tiny eggs (see Figure 7-71) soon
of infecting dogs and a broad range of paratenic hosts,
after they are laid, and larvae or eggs may be present in the
including lizards, chickens, and mice. When infective
feces. If larvae are ingested by maggots (Musca domestica
larvae are ingested by a dog, they migrate in the adventitia
for D. megastoma and H. muscae; Stomoxys calcitrans for
of the visceral arteries and aorta to the walls of the esoph-
H. microstoma), these develop to the infective third-stage
agus and stomach. Some go astray and encyst in ectopic
larvae in a little more than a week. The infective larvae
locations, but reproductive adults are normally found in
migrate to the head of the fly and collect in the labium.
cystic nodules that communicate with the lumen of the
When a fly alights on a warm, moist surface such as the
esophagus or stomach through fistulas. Dysphagia and
muzzle, ocular conjunctiva, or cutaneous wounds of a
yomiting, esophageal neoplasia, aortic aneurysm or rup-
horse, the larvae change hosts. Those larvae that are swal-
ture, and secondary pulmonary osteoarthropathy may be
lowed presumably complete their life histories, whereas
associated with chronic S. lupi infection.
those that enter wounds have probably reached an impasse.
For S. lupi in dogs the treatment of choice is currently
However, from a veterinary standpoint, these aberrant
 doramectin. It has been given subcutaneously every other
larvae are extremely important because of the granulomas
week for 4 to 6 total treatments at 0.2 or 0.4 mg/kg with
they induce.
 additional treatments given monthly until lesions had
resolved (subcutaneously at 0.4 mg/kg) or orally (0.5 mg/k
Importance
daily) for an additional 6 weeks (Berry, 2000; Lavy et al,
Although Draschia and Habronema species are unimpor-
2002). The treatment appears efficacious, and the lesions
tant as stomach parasites, their larvae are responsible for
in the esophagus resolve remarkably well.
 persistent cutaneous granulomas called cutaneous habrone-
Other examples  of spiruroids
are
Ascarops
and
miasis and a variety of colloquial names (*swamp cancer,"
Physocephalus species (Figure 4-135), parasites of swine,
"bursatti, “summer sores,” “esponja"). These granulomas
Sd  a  s saes 
develop in minor wounds and in areas of skin subjected to
of primates.
more or less continuous wetting. In pastured horses the
skin adjacent to the medial canthus of the eye may be
Superfamily Habronematoidea
drenched in tears stimulated by the presence of flies
Identification
and also very attractive to them. Typical cutaneous habro-
Draschia megastoma, Habronema muscae, and Habrone-
nemiasis lesions are characterized by an initial rapid pro-
 ma microstoma are parasites of the equine stomach, where
duction of granulation tissue that steadfastly refuses to
the adult worms stay remarkably close to the margo
resolve during fly season, by the subsequent appearance
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
213
of caseocalcareous nodules in this granulation tissue, and
by the presence of Draschia or Habronema larvae. Pruritus
is intense, and secondary injury may result from the horse's
efforts to find relief. Habronemic conjunctivitis usually
 assumes the form of an ulcerated nodule containing case-
ocalcareous foci and situated near the medial canthus. Such
nodules tend to abrade the cornea and must be removed
surgically to prevent or alleviate keratitis (Underwood,
1936; Rebhun et al, 1981).
Treatment
Ivermectin and moxidectin are the treatments of choice
for adult Habronema and Draschia species. Ivermectin is 
FGURE 4137. Diroflaria immitis, stomal end.
approved for the treatment of summer sores caused by
larvae of Habronema and Draschia species. Infections,
although rather rare, still occur in the United States, with
lethal to a ferret (Campbell and Blair, 1978; Miller and
63 of 12,720 horses entering the Equine Field Service of the
Merton, 1982; Moreland, Battles, and Nease, 1986;
University of California-Davis Veterinary Medical Teach-
Parrott, Greiner, and Parrott, 1984). Human infection is
ing Hospital between January 1988 and June 2002 (Pusterla
abortive and results in radiographic changes referred to as
et al, 2003). These horses were treated by surgical excision
“coin lesions,”’ which have been misinterpreted as repre-
(seven) or medically (56); all the horses were also treated
senting neoplasia and can lead to unnecessary thoracic
with ivermectin. Gritty masses on conjunctival membranes
surgery (Theis, 2005).
must be excised to prevent injury to the cornea.
Life history. The life history, as outlined in Figure 4-138,
may involve many different species of mosquitoes as inter-
Superfamily Filarioidea
mediate hosts. Today, mosquito-borne human diseases
The dog heartworm, D. immitis, is the filarioid of most
such as malaria and filarial infections are popularly
 importance in veterinary medicine. The filarioids also
viewed as tropical diseases, but not too long ago malaria
include some of the most important nematode parasites
accompanied every summer in the United States. Malaria
of man in tropical climates. Wuchereria bancrofti and
disappeared when the population density of suitable
Brugia malayi cause the acute lymphangitis and chronic
 mosquitoes fell below the level necessary for transmission.
elephantiasis of bancroftian filariasis, and Onchocerca vol-
Reduction in mosquitoes came with the drainage of
vulus causes the ophthalmitis of “river blindness."
swamps for agricultural purposes, with the construction
Filarioids tend to be rather long and thin white- to
of roads, and with intentional efforts at mosquito abate-
cream-colored worms. They are found typically in tissue
ment. Heartworm manages to remain endemic and even to
spaces and body cavities, or sometimes within the vascula-
spread to regions where malaria has disappeared, possibly
ture or lymphatic system. They tend to be without marked
because this parasite is less discriminating in its choice of
nq ou o aa  s n no r
mosquito hosts. Mosquito control, although invisible to
capsule. Often the tail of the male has a spiral flexure. All
the public and most veterinarians, still plays a large part
filarioids are transmitted by bloodsucking insects in which
in preventing human disease and probably plays a major
vermiform embryos called microfilariae develop into infec-
role in keeping heartworm infection levels lower than they
tive third-stage larvae. The microfilariae either circulate in
would be otherwise.
the blood of the definitive host (e.g., Wuchereria, Brugia,
The life cycle of D. irmitis is initiated when the dog is
Dirofilaria, Dipetalonema, and Setaria species) or accumu-
bitten by an infected mosquito. The cycle is summarized
late in the dermal connective tissues (e.g., Onchocerca,
in detail in the excellent review of Abraham (1988). The
Elaeophora species). In either case the microfilariae are
microfilaria (Figure 4-139) is taken up by a female mos-
ingested and the infective larvae deposited when the
quito with her blood meal. The larva develops to the infec-
insect feeds on the definitive host.
tive third stage in the mosquito. When the mosquito takes
another blood meal, the third-stage larva leaves the mouth
Dirofilaria
parts and enters the bite wound and takes up residence in
Identification. These worms are parasites of the pulmo-
the skin (Figure 4-140). The third-stage larva that enters the
 nary arteries. The adult males are 12 to 20 cm long, and the
bite wound molts to a fourth-stage larva within 3 days after
females are 25 to 31 cm long (10 to 12 inches). The faces of
infection. The young fourth-stage larvae are about 1.5 mm
these large (up to 30 cm long) white worms are very plain
long at this time. The fourth-stage larvae reside in the
indeed (Figure 4-137). The dog and its close relatives are
subcutaneous connective tissues and muscles of the abdo-
the natural hosts, but infection also occurs in cats (Calvert
men or thorax for the next 2 to 3 months after infection.
and Mandell, 1982; Dillon et al, 1982) and ferrets (Mustela
 Orihel (1961) reported that the molt from the fourth-stage
 putorius furo). As few as five adult D. immitis may prove
larva to adult occurred 60 to 70 days after infection.
214
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Microfilaria
L3 in malpighian tubule
FIGURE 4138. Life history of Diroflaria immitis, the canine heartworm.Adult heartworms may survive
and produce microfilariae for as long as 5 years. Microfilariae circulate in the blood, where they may
be ingested by a feeding mosquito. About half of the species of North American mosquitoes are
possible intemmediate hosts, but significant vector roles have been demonstrated for only a few.
Larval development occurs in the malpighian tubules, after which infective third-stage larvae
migrate to the salivary glands of the mosquito. The third-stage larvae enter the bite wound when
 the mosquito feeds on a dog. The molt from third-stage larva to fourth-stage larva occurs within
3 days after the bite of the infecting mosquito. Fourth-stage larvae remain in the connective tissues
 for several months, with the molt from fourth-stage larva to young adult occurring 2 to 3 months after
 infection. After the final molt the immature adults (fifth stage) migrate to the pulmonary arteries,
apparently by way of the venous circulation. After reaching the right side of the heart, the young
adults mature and start producing microfilariae at 6 to 9 months after infection.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
215
A
FGURE 4139. Dirofilaria immits.Microfilaria (A) in an unstained Knott's preparation (the red blood cell ghosts are visible), and an infective
third-stage larvae from a mosquito (B).
Lichtenfels et al (1985) reported that the molt occurred at
within the sixth month affer  infection (Orihel, 1961).
 50 to 58 days after infection.
Microfilariae typically are not found in the peripheral
The worms are 12 to 15 mm long when they molt to
blood for several more weeks. Thus the prepatent period
become juvenile adults. The worms enter the pulmonary
(i.e., the period between the infection and the first appear-
arteries and heart after being in the dog for 70 days (Kotani
ance of microfilariae in the blood) is between 6 and
and Powers, 1982). When worms first reach the right side
 9 months long. Once worms begin to produce microfilar-
of the heart and pulmonary arteries, they are 20 to 40 mm
iae, they can continue to do this for over 5 years.
(about an inch) long (Orihel, 1961). By 85 to 120 days after
The microfilariae circulate in the blood of the dog and
infection they reach lengths of up to 3.2 to 11 cm (Kume
are capable of living for up to 2% years (Underwood and
and Itagaki, 1955).
Harwood, 1939).
 Mosquitoes are infected when they bite an infected dog.
the dog, and they contain fully developed microfilariae
The microfilariae, afer remaining in the midgut of the
mosquito for a day, make their way to the malpighian
tubules where they penetrate the cytoplasm of the primary
cells. Under optimal conditions the larvae reenter the
lumen of the malpighian tubules about 5 days after infec-
tion and molt to second-stage larvae about 10 days after
infection and to third-stage larvae by 13 days after infec-
tion. The infective third-stage larvae then migrate through
 the body of the mosquito to the cephalic spaces in the head
and proboscis, where they await the chance of gaining entry
into a new canine host.
 Importance. The canine heartworm, D. immitis, is by far
 the most important filarioid parasite of domestic animals in
North America. Adult heartworms normally are found in
the pulmonary arteries. In heavy infections worms may be
found in the right side of the heart. Worms probably are
FGURE 4140. Dirofilaria immitis third-stage larva protruding from
more common in the right side of the heart at necropsy
the end of the proboscis of an infected mosquito.
than in living dogs because of the reduced pressure that
216
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
occurs as the blood stops flowing into the pulmonary
However, obstruction of capillaries by microfilariae may
arteries. When defunct the worms are carried deeper into
also play a part in the pathogenesis of heartworm disease.
the lungs, where they occlude the pulmonary arterial
Jackson et al (1966) found that dogs with no signs of
branches and produce infarcts. Endemic areas exist in all
disease harbored an average of 25 worms, and that about
 parts of the United States (Rothstein, 1963). Heartworm
50 worms were associated with moderate-to-severe heart-
infection is particularly common along the Atlantic and
worm disease. In dogs with signs of acute hepatic failure,
Gulf Coasts where salt marsh mosquitoes are prevalent,
about 100 worms were concentrated in the venae cavae and
snd uo nou so a ju sno as u pun
 right atrium. Dogs with typical heartworm disease fatigue
that are examined will be found to be infected. There is
easily, cough, and appear unthriffy. Decompensation of the
also an increased prevalence along the course of the
right side of the heart leads to chronic venous congestion,
Misssippi River and its major tributaries such as the
with hepatic cirrhosis and ascites. Pulmonary embolism pre-
Ohio and the Missouri Rivers. A lower prevalence is
cipitates acute episodes of respiratory distress, during which
encountered in the midwestern and north-central states.
 blood and worms from ruptured vessels may be coughed up.
Heartworm is present and transmitted in the western
 Postcaval occlusion causes sudden collapse followed by
United States (Bowman et al, 2007). Heartworm transmis-
death within a few days from acute hepatic insufficiency.
sion is also occurring in southern Canada (Klotins et al,
A surgical procedure has been devised for relieving the
2000; Slocombe and Villeneuve, 1993). One state in the
caval occlusion by way of a jugular vein (Jackson et al,
 United States, Utah, has made heartworm disease report-
1977; Jackson, von Lichtenberg, and Otto, 1962).
able to the State Veterinarian's office.
Based on a survey of U.S. veterinarians (12,173 reporting
The 6- to 7-month prepatent period is free of any evi-
clinics), more than 250,000 dogs in the United States tested
 dence of infection, and the developing and migrating
positive in 2004 for heartworms (Guerrero, Nelson, and
worms cause no disturbance. The patent period, when
Carithers, 2006). This was up a bit from the 2001 survey
microfilariae (see Figure 7-38) may be detected in the cir-
(244,000 positive dogs), and it is believed that the survey
culating blood, is the time of clinical illness. In the conven-
underestimated the actual prevalence of infection. There are
tional view, the physiologic burden imposed on the host is
50 million or so dogs in the United States, and this would
attributed in part to the physical obstruction of vessels,
mean that about 0.5% of the dogs each year (one in 200)
heart chambers, and valves by the adult worms and in
are being diagnosed as infected. This is a preventable
part to the development of a progressive pulmonary end-
disease.
arteritis and obstructive fibrosis leading to pulmonary
 Diagnosis. Infections in dogs with heartworms can be
hypertension and right-sided heart failure (Adcock, 1961).
diagnosed with various antigen detection tests or by finding
There is also a remarkable villous proliferation that occurs
microfilariae in the blood. Antigen will appear in the blood
on the endothelium of the pulmonary arteries that
 about 5 months after the inoculation of third-stage larvae.
 grossly causes the surface of the vessel to appear as
In the normal course of events, microfilariae of D. immitis
though it is covered with a lawn of villi (Figure 4-141).
first appear in the circulation about 6% months after expo-
Repeated embolisms of the finer arterial branches by
sure of the dog to the bites of infected mosquitoes. Thus
defunct adults with infarction and inflammatory response
during the rather long prepatent period, no microfilariae
eventually lead to permanent damage of the vascular bed.
can be detected in blood samples from an infected dog.
 In the young dog, even in areas with a very high back-
ground prevalence in dogs not on prevention, there is very
little to be gained by an examination for heartworm infec-
tion before it is 6 or so months of age. Thus dogs younger
than 6 months old should just be started on monthly
prevention, and if there is concern that a dog may have
been infected before beginning prevention, it can be
checked after 6 months of preventive therapy rather than
waiting a year.
 For adult dogs that have not been on preventive therapy,
they should be examined first to verify that they are heart-
worm negative. This can be done with an antigen test. I and
 others have seen the occasional dog that is antigen-negative
ad oi 0 o) so    
mililiter). Thus, if an adult dog is from an area with a very
high background prevalence or if its background
is
FIGURE 4141. Histologic  section  (hematoxylin and  eosin
unknown, it would probably be wise to also examine a
[H&E] stained] of the pulmonary artery of a dog infected with
drop of blood under a microscope to look for microfilariae.
Diroflaria immitis showing the villous proliferation present on the
In this case there is no need to perform a concentra-
endothelium.
tion method, because one is looking for the dog that is
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
217
antigen-negative and has very high microfilarial counts to
receive a single intramuscular injection of 2.5 mg/kg
 ensure that it does not react to the death of the microfilar-
followed 1 month later by two such treatments 24 hours
iae when the preventive is administered. If microfilariae are
apart. Melarsomine dihydrochloride treatment seems
found in the blood of a North American dog, they most
to be more effective than the older intravenously adminis-
likely belong to either D. immitis or Dipetalonema recondi-
tered thiacetarsemide without any increase in the severity
tum; dogs infected with D. reconditum will be antigen-nega-
of  posttreatment  hypertension and  thromboembolism
tive and typically have fairly low microfilarial counts.
(Rawlings et al, 1993).
(Differentiation of microfilariae of these two species is dis-
 After arsenical therapy has been used, heartworms die
cussed in Chapter 7.)
slowly over a period of days or weeks and are carried by the
If a dog is on a preventive regimen year-round, testing
pulmonary arteries to the lungs, where they lodge and
 should be performed yearly. With year-round prevention,
obstruct the circulation temporarily. Eventually the dead
there is no reason why testing cannot be performed any
worms are removed by phagocytosis. Probably, if the
time during the year, and in these cases and with puppies
worms were killed rapidly and simultaneously, treatment
that started year-round prevention soon after birth, heart-
would prove more lethal than the heartworms. However,
worm testing can just become part of the annual examina-
even with the slow kill, the lungs are gravely insulted during
tion. It must be remembered that macrocyclic lactone
the 4 to 6 weeks after arsenical therapy, and the dog must
products are anthelmintics, and there is always the poten-
not be subjected to stress during this period. Occasionally a
tial for resistance. Because of the relatively long life cycle of
 dog vomits or has fever and respiratory distress after treat-
D. immitis, it seems unlikely that resistance will occur, but
ment. If these reactions are more than transitory, arsenical
the threat remains. Only by the regular checking of dogs on
 medication should be discontinued and supportive therapy,
ei paan aq asui e us unod aaund e
administration of steroids, and enforced rest initiated.
would identify and prevent the spread of a resistant form
For the removal of microfilariae from the circulation after
 of the parasite if one ever did appear.
adulticide therapy, dogs can be given either a microfilaricidal
 For a dog receiving monthly preventives only part of the
dose of ivermectin (0.05 mg/kg body weight), ivermectin at
 year, it must be retested before the initiation of therapy
the preventative dose of 0.006 mg/kg, or milbemycin oxime
each year. Unfortunately, in the case of all tests, there is a
m q  so o s d  
greater chance of a false-positive result when the popula-
These products are not labeled for this use, but because of
tion tested is nearly certain to be all negative (Peregrine,
the lack of drugs approved for the removal of circula-
2005). In this context, it must be remembered when
ting microfilariae, the American Heartworm Society has
 performing an antigen test on a large population of unin-
included these treatments in its recommendations.
fected dogs (by definition, all dogs on preventive regimens 
There are those who recommend that adult heartworms
should be without infection) that there are going to
be removed by placing infected dogs on year-round ivermec-
be false-positive results no matter how good the test is
tin therapy for a number of years (2005 Guidelines For the
(sensitivity and specificity of 99.9% translate to one false-
Diagnosis, Prevention and Management of Heartworm
positive test result in every 1000 tests performed). Thus if a
[Dirofilaria immitis]  Infection in Dogs, American Heart-
dog on a preventive regimen tests positive for heartworm, it
worm Society). I am of the opinion that in this context the
should be retested, and if still testing positive, carefully
FDA's label claims for the monthly products should be fol-
examined for clinical signs that support the diagnosis of
lowed, and dogs should be started on monthly therapy only
 heartworm infection. The treated dog is going to receive
after having been cleared of their infection with adult worms.
a large dose of arsenic, so there is a fairly good reason to
 If dogs with patent heartworm infections are started on
proceed toward treatment with a bit of trepidation.
monthly prophylaxis with an avermectin, some 10% to
Treatment. Different anthelmintics are used to attack
20% or more of dogs, depending on the product chosen,
three different parasitic stages of D. immitis: adult worms
will continue to have circulating microfilariae in their
in pulmonary arteries and the right side of the heart, micro-
 blood for up to a year, or perhaps longer (Bowman et al,
filariae in the circulating blood, and larvae from mosquitoes
1992; Bowman and Torre, 2006a, 2006b). If one wanted to
migrating through the tissues on their way to the heart.
create a scenario in which one was selecting for resistant
Treatment of a dog with patent heartworm infection consists
microfilariae, one would take a dog with a high microfilarial
of first removing the adult parasites with an arsenical and
count and give it an avermectin for months so that the
then eliminating the circulating microfilariae with ivermec-
majority of microfilariae in circulation would be “resistant."
tin or milbemycin oxime later. Drugs targeting the larvae
The conservative approach is to place only dogs that are
 migrating through the tissues are used for prevention.
heartworm free on avermectin preventive therapy.
Melarsomine dihydrochloride has been approved for
Heartworms and many other filarioids are host to endo-
the treatment of dogs infected with adult heartworms. In
symbiotic bacteria of the genus Wolbachia. The bacterium
dogs with mild-to-moderate clinical signs, the treatment
is passed transovarially from the female to her offspring
consists of two intramuscular injections (2.5 mg/kg) given
(Kozek, 1977). These bacteria are also present in D. imrmitis,
24 hours apart. This treatment can be repeated 4 months
in Onchocerca volvulus, and in the species that causes lym-
later if necessary. Dogs with more severe disease should
phatic filariasis in humans. It has been suspected that if
218
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
these endosymbionts are required for survival or if their
data collected at different national weather collection sta-
breakdown products are toxic for the nematode host,
tions. Thus by examination of the maps presented, the
they might be used as targets for chemotherapy. Cattle
 period of transmission for the locale in which they practice
infected with the related filarioid Onchocerca ochengi were
can be determined. The model proposed by Knight and Lok
cleared of their adult worms in nodules by treatment with
(1995) indicates that there are probably no parts of the
ocytetracycline (Langworthy et al, 2000). Unfortunately, the
continental United States where transmission occurs
results of trials with D. irmrmitis have not been as dramatic.
throughout the year. Thus treatment might be given for
However, it has been shown in one long-term trial that
3 months in parts of Canada and 10 months in parts of
treating dogs with doxycycline prevented the development
Florida, with different starting and stopping dates in vari-
in mosquitoes of the few microfilariae available for trans-
ous locations from south to north. This model has received
mission studies (McCall, 2007). It is possible that the doxy-
support recently by work done in Florida and Louisiana,
cycline may be having a direct effect on the worms rather
where mosquitoes (a total of 109,597) were examined year-
than through the Wolbachia (Smith and Rajan, 2000), but 
round with a PCR assay for D. immitis DNA (Watts et al,
whatever the cause, this seems an excellent reason to pro-
2001). No infected mosquito heads were detected in
vide doxycycline therapy to dogs undergoing adulticide
Gainesville, Florida, or Baton Rouge, Louisiana, in the
therapy, preventing potential secondary infections in the
months of December, January, February, and March.
lungs around dying worms, and preventing transmission
The practical advantage of applying this model is a
of any residual microfilariae until they are removed with
reduction in the prescriptions for unnecessary preventive
an avermectin.
treatment in areas where it is not required. If the model is
Prevention. Prevention of heartworm infection cur-
to be applied, other factors must be taken into consider-
rently involves the monthly oral or topical administration
ation. First, there are likely to be microclimatic fluctuations 
of a macrocyclic lactone or the injection every 6 months of
(large bodies of water that stabilize temperatures, decaying
a slow-release formulation of a macrocyclic lactone (moxi-
manure or vegetable matter that raises temperatures, heated
 dectin) to all dogs exposed to atacks of infectious mosqui-
industrial effluents, or heat-absorbing natural and artificial
toes. The vast majority of dogs on preventive therapy are
surfaces) that allow mosquitoes to feed longer, perhaps
 receiving products that are administered once per month.
much longer, in certain areas within given isolines. Also,
The prolonged injectable heartworm preventive with mox-
there are several species of mosquito that overwinter as
idectin in a slow-release carrier is currently unavailable in
adults in some very cold places in North America, and
the United States.
the  contained infective-stage larvae may overwinter
There is a spectrum of avermectin/macrocyclic lactone
within diapausing adult females mosquitoes. Second, it is
products available that when regularly given monthly to
likely that many dogs will travel with their owners, with the
dogs will kill any heartworms that are less than 30 days
effect that isolines will be crossed by many pets during the
old. These include ivermectin, milbemycin oxime, selamec-
course of a year. It also is unlikely that most patients will
tin, and moxidectin. Although some of the molecules them-
see their veterinarian often enough for the discovery and
selves at heartworm preventive doses have activity against
initiation of preventive therapy to work in all cases. Third,
internal parasites, many of the products have been com-
the availability of products that control infections or have
bined with agents that provide additional internal parasite
been combined with anthelmintics active against intestinal
control or have activity against ectoparasites, mainly fleas.
helminths complicates the desire to stop therapy for the
Thus, practitioners can now choose from several different
 a a m sd  sn a n s
products that will provide dogs with protection against
no heartworm transmission. Toxocara canis, T. leonina,
heartworms that will also treat or control internal and ex-
and T. vuipis are all capable of being transmitted even in
ternal parasites, making it fairly easy to develop a useful
the coldest months of the year if soil containing infective
 program for a pet within any given geographic area or with
eggs is disturbed, and A. caninum larvae in sequestered sites
a specific lifestyle.
in the body are known to migrate periodically back to the
A commonly asked question is whether dogs should
intestine, where they develop. Finally, the addition of a flea-
undergo a heartworm prevention program year-round,
control product to the heartworm preventive adds another
for 6 months, or for even shorter periods in regions
reason for considering year-round prevention. In a house-
where the potential transmission cycle may be less than
hold, it is highly possible that the temperatures will remain
6 months. Dr. Slocombe and colleagues (Slocombe et al,
such that fleas can continue to cycle throughout the year,
1995) and Drs. Knight and Lok (1995) presented isolines
even if they are worse in the summer.
for the mean start and end dates of heartworm transmission
With the currently available products, there is no good
in Canada and the United States. These isolines are based
reason why any dog under the care of a veterinarian should
on a model that includes the average life of a mosquito, the
become infected with heartworm. Thus it is imperative that
times when mosquitoes are likely to take their first and
the practitioner carefully consider the area in which the
last blood meals each year, the amount of time required
practice is located, the individual client, and the stated
 at different temperatures for an ingested microfilaria to
and suspected behavior of the pet when formulating a
become an infectious third-stage larva, and temperature
plan for each individual going on a preventive program.
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
219
However, in the design of specific programs for individuals,
it is important to remember that clients do converse with
one another, and difficulties will arise when all clients
and pets are not treated equally if the reasons behind the
 specific recommendations are not made very clear.
Feline heartworm. Infection with D. irmmitis in cats
has received increasing awareness; in 1995, the American
Heartworm Society first published Guidelines for the Diagnosis,
Treatment, and Prevention of Heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis)
Infection in Cats, and current guidelines can be obtained
at the Society's website (www.heartwormsociety.org). The
cat differs from the dog in several major respects relative to
heartworm infection. First, cats tend to harbor very few adult
worms and to remain amicrofilaremic. Thus examination of
blood with concentration methods usually is not a reliable
 detection method, and there may not be sufficient circulating
FIGURE 4143. Setaria equina, dorsoventral (left) and lateral (right)
antigen for detection by the different antigen detection assays.
aspects of the stomal end.
There are antigen and antibody tests that are available for use
in cats. Antibodies will simply show exposure, and antigen
Setaria
may be negative if cats are infected with few worms. Second,
Setaria labiatopapillosa (Figure 4-142) and Setaria equina
cats can develop severe disease owing to the migration of
(Figure 4-143) are large white parasites of the serous mem-
young adult heartworms in their lungs even if they do not
branes of cattle and horses, respectively. The infection is
develop patent infection; this syndrome is called HARD for
transmitted between hosts by mosquitoes. Microfilariae of
heartworm-associated respiratory disease (Blagburn and
 a s ss o   os ss n
 Dillon, 2007). Third, cats can have heartworms migrate to
and the adult parasites are likely to be encountered during
ectopic sites and can die suddenly as a result of aberrantly
abdominal surgery or on the killing floor or necropsy table
migrating heartworms. Fourth, adulticide therapy in cats usu
(Figure 4-144). Migrating Setaria larvae 0ccasionally invade
ally is reserved for animals in stable condition that nevertheless
the central nervous system and cause serious neurologic dis-
continue to have clinical signs not controlled by empiric ther-
ease, especially when they find themselves in other than their
apy. Fith, surgical removal of the worms is considered a
 normal host species.
 potential option in cats. There are now several products that
Actively motile Setaria adult worms are occasionally
can be topically or orally administered to cats monthly that
observed in the anterior eye chamber of horses. Jemelka
will prevent heartworm and other internal parasites, including
(1976) described surgical removal of a 4.38-cm-long
ivermectin, milbemycin oxime, selamectin, and moxidectin
Setaria digitata adult from the anterior eye chamber of a
with imidacloprid. As with similar products for use in dogs,
horse suffering from corneal opacity and hypopion.
these products all have slightly different spectra of activity,
giving the veterinarian an opportunity to pick a product that
Onchocerca
 best fits the practice.
Onchocerca adults, although large, are likely to escape
notice because they are intricately woven into the deep
connective tissues. Once found, they are virtually impossi-
ble to isolate intact, so specimen bottles tend to contain
many fragments of midsection and very few ends.
Onchocerca cervicalis adults are found in the nuchal lig-
ament of the horse (see Figures 8-111 and 8-112), and the
CENT
Cat.No.09-016
FIGURE 4144. Setaria labiatopapillosa, complete worm, recovered
FGURE 4142. Setaria labiatopapillosa, stomal end.
at surgery from a cow.
220
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
microfilariae (see Figure 7-73) are widely distributed in the
Morocco, the former Soviet Union, Rwanda, Burundi,
dermis and other connective tissues including those of
Romania, Bulgaria, South Africa, and Sweden (Bech-Nielsen,
the ocular conjunctivae. Infection is transmitted between
Sjogren, and Lundquist, 1982). The subcutaneous lesions
horses by species of Culicoides. In a random survey of
result in substantial trim losses at slaughter. In South Africa,
 pastured horses in Tompkins County, New York, eight of
three vectors have been identified: Musca lusoria, Musca fas-
12 horses yielded from 1 to 3000 O. cervicalis microfilariae
ciata, and a third as yet undescribed species. Transmission
per biopsy specimen, a piece of skin weighing about 15 mg
probably occurs there throughout the year (Nevill, 1975,
(Georgi, 1976b). Microfilarial pityriasis, summer mange,
1985). These dung-breeding Musca species ingest the first-
equine dhobie itch, and plica polonica are colloquial
stage larvae in the bloody discharge from skin perforations
names for an intensely pruritic dermatitis conventionally
made by the adult P. bovicola female worms lying in the
ascribed to microfilariae of O. cervicalis.
subcutaneous tissues. The larvae develop to the infective
 In North American cattle, Onchocerca gutturosa adults
third stage in the body of the fly and are probably
are found in connective tissues about the nuchal ligament,
deposited in the eyes of cattle when the infected fly feeds on
and Onchocerca lienalis are found in the connective tissue
the lachrymal secretions (Nevill, 1975).
between the spleen and rumen. Both species also may be
found in other connective tissue locations on occasion.
Dipetalonema
Microfilariae of both species are found in the dermis (see
Adult specimens of Dipetalonerma species are most likely
Figure 7-73). The intermediate hosts of bovine Orchocerca
 to be encountered as parasites of the peritoneal cavity of
species are species of Simulium and Culicoides.
monkeys, in which they are very common (Figure 4-145).
Microfilaricidal treatment. Herd and Donham (1983)
The canine parasite D. reconditurn has, as its species
successfully treated 40 horses with dermatitis, alopecia,
 name suggests, been viewed by few humans because it is
and pruritus in association with microfilariae of O. cervi-
small, it is usually few in number, and it lies inconspicu-
calis with a single intramuscular injection of 0.2 mg
ously in the connective tissues. D. reconditum is placed by
ivermectin per kilogram body weight. Twenty-four hours
some within a genus named Acanthocheilonema, whereas
after medication, the ventral abdomens of four of the
others continue to consider this a subgenus within the
horses became edematous. However, this reaction to dead
larger genus Dipetalonema. The microfilariae, on the
microfilariae subsided over the next few days, and marked
other hand, are rather commonly seen (see Figure 7-38)
clinical improvement followed in all horses 2 to 3 weeks
and are easy to confuse with those of D. immitis. D. recon-
after treatment. Moxidectin at 0.3 to 0.5 mg/kg also will
ditum is nonpathogenic to dogs. Its clinical importance
eliminate these microfilariae from the blood of infected
attaches only to confusion of its microfilariae with those
horses (Monahan et al, 1995).
of D. irmmitis (Lindemann, Evans, and McCall, 1983).
Life history. D. reconditum develops to the infective
Parafilaria
stage in the flea Ctenocephalides felis and in the amblyceran
Parafilariosis ((summer bleeding") occurs only outside
louse Heterodoxus spiniger. Microfilariae taken in with the
-du puh aq p si pu  yon go
 blood meal develop into infective third-stage larvae in 7 t0
losa in horses and Parafilaria bovicola in cattle. These para-
14 days. When injected into a dog, these third-stage larvae
sites live in the subcutaneous and intermuscular connective
tissues and, when sexually mature, produce crops of pea-
Epaulets
sized nodules that bleed through a tiny pore. The blood
escapes in fine drops, runs off in streaks along the hairs,
and dries in brown crusts. Eggs and microfilariae of
Parafilaria species may be demonstrated in this material
 but never in samples from the circulation. Active bleeding
occurs only during daylight hours and especially when
horses are exposed to direct sunshine. Baumann (1946)
reported that bleeding in affected horses would, as a rule,
immediately stop when they were brought into the stable,
 only to start again when they were led back out into the
sunshine. He rarely observed bleeding during cool weather.
Vulva
The activity of the lesions observed by Baumann suggests
an adaptation on the part of Parafilaria to the habits of flies
that feed on blood; they are active in warm weather and
avoid shade. It has been shown that P. multipapillosa
develops in the fat body of Haematobia atripalpis
(Gnedina and Osipov, 1960).
FGURE 4145. Dipetalonema sp. from the peritoneal cavity of a
 P. bovicola causes dermal bleeding and subcutaneous brui-
monkey. Left, The dorsoventral aspect of the stomal end. Right,
selike lesions in cattle in the Philippines, India, Tunisia,
The lateral aspect of the stomal end.
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
221
develop into adult worms in 2 to 3 months (Farnell and
discussed here, differ from the Secernentea in two major
Faulkner, 1978; Lindemann and McCall, 1984).
respects. They do not have tails, i.e., the anus is terminal,
Diagnosis. The small adults of D. reconditum cause
so the posterior end of the worm looks like a snipped-off
 no pathologic changes to betray their presence but may be
piece of tubing; and if present, there is only a single spicule.
seen in a sufficiently lean cadaver by scanning the loose sub-
Also, the first-stage larva of all these genera have a little stylet
cutaneous fascia of the limbs and back with a stereoscopic
called an onchiostyle. For the Secernentea, the final host is
microscope (Nelson, 1962). About 90% of the adults are
almost invariably infected by a third-stage infective larva,
located in subcutaneous tissues, but a small percentage can
whether on pasture, in an egg, or coming out of a mosquito.
be found in the peritoneal cavity (Mello, Maia, and Mello,
For the Trichinelloidea, the final host is always infected by
1994). The microfilariae circulate in the blood, usually at low
eating a first-stage larva, even if there is a paratenic host
densities. However, substantial microfilaremias are occa-
involved. In the case of the Dioctophymatoidea, infections
sionally observed. It is not safe to assume that because
of the final host is similar to the Secernentea at least in the
 many microfilariae are present, it must necessarily follow
most familiar example in that the infective stage is the third
that their parents are heartworms. The microfilariae of
stage. In the newer classifications, Adenophorea would be
D. reconditum are distinguished from those of D. immitis
replaced with Enoplea, and Secernentea with Chromadorea;
 by the more slender body, lack of taper at the anterior extre-
also, there would be potential changes in how the words
 mity, and presence of a very much larger cephalic hook in the
would end. Twenty years ago the Secernentea were the Phas-
former species. (Differentiation of these two species of mi-
midia, and the Adenophorea were the Aphasmidia.
crofilaria is considered in detail in Chapter 7.)
One other worm is included in this section, Haycock-
Patton and Faulkner (1992) found that the microfilariae
nema perplexum. These are members of the family
in about 50% of 805 microfilarial-positive dogs in eastern
Robertdollfusidae, which is a family of parasites related to
Tennessee were the microfilariae of D. reconditum, and
the Trichinelloidea with a few species in mammals.
these authors warn practitioners concerning the need for
making an accurate diagnosis before initiating heartworm
Superfamlly Dloctophymatoldea
adulticide therapy. Most of the antigen detection tests used
Dioctophyme
for diagnosing D. immitis infections are capable of distin-
Dioctophyme renale, the giant kidney worm of carnivor-
 guishing between infections with these two parasites.
ans, swine, and sometimes humans, is one of the largest
species of nematodes (Figure 4-146). Mink are the principal
Baeophora
definitive hosts. The female D. renale, which may reach 1 m
Microfilariae of Elaeophora schneideri, the arterial worm
in length and 1 cm in diameter, produces brownish, thick-
of deer, elk, and domestic sheep, produce patches of moist,
shelled eggs (68 X 44 μm) with bipolar plugs. Males are
exudative dermatitis with crust formation on the polls
somewhat smaller (less than 400 mm) and have a terminal
and faces of sheep sent to summer range above 6000 feet
 bell-shaped copulatory bursa and one spicule. The eggs are
(1828 m) in New Mexico, Arizona, and Colorado. Adults
passed in the urine in the one- or two-cel stage and
up to 120 mm long are found in the carotid, iliac, and mes-
develop, in water, to the first larval stage in a month or
enteric arteries. Tabanids are cyclodevelopmental interme-
longer. Larvated eggs are infective to oligochaete annelid
diate hosts.
worms in which they develop to the infective third larval
stage. If infected oligochaetes are ingested by fish or frogs,
Stephanofilaria
the larvae invade the tissues of these paratenic hosts but do
Adults and microfilariae of Stephanofilaria stilesi, a very
not undergo development. However, if the infected
small (less than 6 mm long) filarioid, are found in derma-
fitic lesions on the ventral abdomen of cattle. The infective
larvae of S. stilesi develop in the horn fly Haematobia
irritans.
In India, Stephanofilaria assamensis causes a serious
dermatitis called humpsore in cattle (Bos indicus). Lesions
 may occur on other parts of the body, but the major sites
 are the hump, neck, and legs.
Order Enoplida
 The nematodes in the order Enoplida differ markedly from
all the other nematodes discussed up to this point. Older
 classifications consider the Enoplida part of a different class
within the phylum Nematoda called the Adenophorea.
All the other orders discussed up to here, the Strongylida,
FIGURE 4146. Three specimens of Dioctophyme renale recovered
Rhabditida, Oxyurida, Ascaridida, and Spirurida, would
at necropsy from the abdominal cavity of a dog in Brazil. The ruler
be placed within the Class Secernentea. The Enoplida,
in the figure is 30 cm long. (Courtesy Dr. Suzanne Wolfson.)
222
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Lumen
FGURE 4148. Fichinella spiralis adult male (left) and female (right)
from the small intestine of an experimentally infected rat; a pre-
Stichocytes
larva is exiting the vulva of the female. (Courtesy Dr. Judy
Appleton.)
Life history
Predation has provided an efficient channel for the evo-
lutionary development of many parasites. In most instances 
the larval parasite lies encysted in the tissues of the prey,
and the reproductive adults inhabit the alimentary tract of
the predator. Thus in most systems the predator becomes
 infected by eating the prey, and the prey becomes infected
FIGURE 4147. A portion of the stichosome esophagus of frichuris
by ingesting eggs passed in the feces of the predator.
giraffae.
However, in the unique life history of T. spiralis, both
adult and larval stages occur in sequence in the same
oligochaete (or paratenic host) is ingested by a dog, the D.
host, the tiny adults lying among the villi of the small intes-
rerale larvae mature and complete the cycle (Karmanova,
tine and the larvae they produce becoming curled up in
1968). In the dog, D. rerale may be found in the pelvis of
cysts in the striated muscle (see Figure 8-116). In this
the right kidney or free in the abdominal cavity. The latter
sense, for the Trichinella life cycle to work, the predator
 type of infection is nonpatent.
has to become prey.
First-stage larvae of T. spiralis, liberated from their cysts
Superfamlly Trlchlnelloldea
by digestive enzymes of the host (see Figure 7-93), invade
The superfamily Trichinelloidea contains some very common
the intestinal mucosa. Both sexes reach maturity about
 parasites of domestic animals. Members of this superfamily
2 days after the infected meat is eaten. At 5 days after
are distinguished by their stichosome esophagus, which con-
 infection, the viviparous females are giving birth to prelar-
sists of a capillary tube surrounded by the bodies of a single-
vae (Figure 4-149), which enter the lymphatics and later the
file column of gland cells called stichocytes (Figure 4-147).
bloodstream to be transported to the muscles (Ali Kahn,
There are five genera of interest: Trichinella, Trichuris,
1966). After these prelarvae invade striated muscle cells,
Capillaria, Trichosomoides, and Anatrichosoma. Of these five
they at first lie parallel to the long axes of the fibers and
genera, all lay eggs but Trichinella, and the laid eggs have
are quite easily overlooked. After 2 or 3 weeks they have
bipolar plugs. Also, the males of the genera in the superfamily,
developed into first-stage larvae and roll up in spirals, or
other than adult male Trichinela, have a single spicule or at
like pretzels become enveloped in cysts and are then
least a spicular sheath, which is often spinate.
infective (Figure 4-150; see also Figures 7-93 and 8-116).
Old cysts containing defunct larvae calcify.
Trichinella
 The intestinal (adult) phase of T. spiralis infection varies
Identification
in duration from a little more than a week in dogs to 3 or
The tiny adults of Trichinella spiralis are found embedded
 4 months in humans. Immunosuppressant therapy, often 
in the mucosa of the small intestine of swine, carnivorans, and
instituted to ameliorate the tissue reaction to invading
man (see Figure 8-115). The male is 1.4 to 1.6 mm long, lacks
larvae, may prolong the lives of the adult female worms.
spicule or spicular sheath, and presents two small knobs over
Fortunately, these are accessible to anthelmintic attack.
the cloaca. The female is 3 to 4 mm long, with vulva in the
Almost all mammals can be experimentally infected with
 midesophageal region and anus terminal. She deposits prelar-
T. spiralis, but carnivores and omnivores are more likely
vae directly into the host's intestinal mucosa (Figure 4-148).
to become naturally infected. Infection occurs through
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
223
FIGURE 4150. Fichinella spiralis larvae in muscle press.
for rats, 30 (Chandler and Read, 1961). Human trichinosis
sufferers may display periorbital edema, myalgia, fever,
gastroenteritis, conjunctivitis, pruritus, and skin eruption.
Eosinophilia usually exceeds 20%.
Clinical trichinosis in domestic animals may result from
FGURE 4149. Michinella spiralis prelarva demonstrated in the
both insult inflicted on the intestinal mucosa by the adult
 blood of a cat by the Knott technique.
worms and the host's reaction to invasion of skeletal mus-
cles by the larvae. A case of trichinosis in a rural
predation, cannibalism, and carrion feeding. The larvae en-
Massachusetts cat caused transient hemorrhagic enteritis,
cysted in muscles are exceptionally resistant to external
during which adult T. spiralis worms were found in the
conditions, including extreme putrefaction.
feces, and prelarvae were identified in the blood (see
Figure 4-149). The phase of muscle invasion was without
Importance
clinical signs, but eosinophilia persisted for 3 months
Human trichinosis usually results from eating raw or
(Holzworth and Georgi, 1974). A second case in a
undercooked pork or bear. In the United States, outbreaks
3-month-old kitten is typical of the phase of muscle inva-
of human clinical trichinosis most often involve small
sion: The kitten was lying helplessly on its side with limbs
 groups of people who have shared uncooked sausage, an
extended, showed pain on handling, salivated, breathed
undercooked roast from a locally slaughtered pig, or under-
superficially, and cried constantly (Hemmert-Halswick
cooked bear meat. However, in one Illinois outbreak, in
and Bugge, 1934). Case reports of trichinosis in dogs and
which 23 of 50 members of an extended Dutch-German
cats are few, but it is a question how often it may be over-
family became ill, the source of the T. spiralis larvae in
looked or misdiagnosed.
the homemade sausage was USDA-inspected pork (Potter
et al, 1976). Occasionally, individuals eat completely raw
Treatment
 ground meat ("cannibal sandwich"), a habit more preva-
 T. spiralis infection is infrequently diagnosed in cats
lent among beef lovers than pork lovers. However, ham-
and dogs, but because both of these hosts frequently con-
burger often contains a considerable amount of ground
sume uncooked meat in the form of scraps and prey and
pork whether it is supposed to or not. Outbreaks of trich-
 because the dog displays such a predilection for eating car-
 inellosis in France and other European countries have been
rion, it stands to reason that canine and feline Trichinella
traced to consumption of horsemeat. It seems that horses
infection must in fact be rather common. Treatment is
are more willing to eat meat scraps than people expected
experimental. Cats and dogs experimentally infected with
and that they are fed table scraps more commonly than
T. spiralis have been found to have reduced numbers
expected (Murrell et al, 2004).
of muscle-stage larvae after treatment with albendazole,
 It has been estimated that for humans, ingestion of five tri-
50 mg/kg body weight twice daily for 7 days (Bowman
pue oi sou loy jeiey si 1uaiam apoq jo una 1d aaie eu
et al, 1993).
224
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
Control
Properly cooked trichinae are quite harmless, but a
sojourn in the oven does not guarantee that the parasites
in the center of a large roast will be made more than
uncomfortable unless raised to a uniform internal temper-
ature of 77° C. The cut surface of cooked fresh pork should
 be “white"; any trace of pink demands its return to the
 oven or frying pan. Some methods of rapid cooking in
microwave ovens do not kill all of the encysted T. spiralis
at 77° C or even at 82° C, apparently because the meat does
not heat uniformly (Kotula et al, 1983); even roasts appear-
e u paedand uaum saiel aal uo Ae suop lm bu
microwave oven (Zimmermann, 1983).
Freezing of pork products for several weeks (e.g-, at - 15°
 C for 20 days) has long been considered adequate to kill 
FGURE 4152. Trichuris vulpis and Eucoreus boehmi eggs in a fecal
T. spiralis. However, this cannot safely be applied to the
preparation from a dog.
sylvatic sibling species, Trichinella nativa, found in bears
and other holarctic wildlife, which can withstand storage
see also Figures 7-47 and 8-114). The egg is lemon-
at -20° C for 6 months (Pozio et al, 1992). In certain coun-
shaped with a distinct plug at each pole and contains a
tries (e.g., Germany) where the public demands uncooked
single cell when passed in the feces (Figures 4-152; see
 pork products, meat inspection includes microscopic exam-
also Figures 7-25, 7-52, 7-58, and 7-91); the male has a
d ysn a di ui  r o
spinate, spicular sheath (Figure 4-153).
tions of every carcass. In the United States the traditional
policy has been instead to persuade the public to cook fresh
Life history
 pork thoroughly and to require manufacturers of “ready-to-
Eggs passed in the feces contain only a single celland are not
eat'’ products to cook or freeze them according to specifica-
infective. An infective first-stage larva develops inside the egg
tions that ensure the destruction of trichinae.
in about 1 month but does not hatch unless swallowed by a
suitable host. The infective egg is very resistant, so animals
Trichuris
confined in contaminated environments tend to become rein-
Identification
fected after treatment. Once eggs are ingested, all development
Adult capillarids are found in mammals and other ver-
occurs within the epithelium of the intestine (i.e., there is no
tebrates, but the adults of the genus Trichuris are only
 extraintestinal migration). The prepatent period of Trichuris
found in mammals. The adult body is whip-shaped; the
vuipis in the dog is slightly less than 3 months, in cattle about
anterior end fine, hairlike, and embedded in the wall of
 3 months, and in swine about 45 days.
the large intestine (see Figure 8-113); and the posterior
end stout and lying free in the lumen (Figure 4-151;
Importance
Most canine whipworm infections are symptom-free,
but heavy infections cause bouts of diarrhea alternating
Vulva
Eggs
FGURE 4153. Frichuris discolor. Left, Four eggs are seen in the
vagina of a female. Right, The spinate spicular sheath of the
FIGURE 4151. Frichuris sp. from a cat from Puerto Rico.
male is protruded.
CH A P T ER 4 Helminths
225
with periods during which normal stools are passed. The
administered 2 or 3 weeks after the first theoretically rids
diarrheal feces often contain much mucus and may be
the host of the worms that were unaffected by the first treat-
flecked with blood. Trichuris infection is rare and unim-
ment. T. vulpis differs from the others in requiring about
 portant in North American cats but interesting for its nov.
3 months to mature, so medication should be routinely
elty (see Figures 4-151 and 7-52).
repeated three times at monthly intervals to destroy the
Ruminants are frequently infected but only occasionally
worms as they mature and prevent them from contaminat-
 made ill by their respective species of Trichuris. Individual
ing the environment.
young catle with extraordinarily heavy Trichuris discolor
In the United States, the preferred drugs for treatment of
 infections may suffer massive, sometimes fatal hemorrhages
T. vulpis infection are fenbendazole (Panacur), milbemycin
into the lumen of the cecum (Georgi, Whitlock,
and
oxime (Interceptor or Sentinel), febantel (with praziquantel
Flinton, 1972). Such cases tend to be isolated and rare.
and pyrantel pamoate in Drontal Plus), and moxidectin
When a bona fide case of bovine whipworm disease
(with imidacloprid in Advantage Multi). The rare case of
is diagnosed, all other members of the herd may be free
Trichuris infection in the cat must be handled on an exper-
of clinical signs. Possibly, clinically affected individuals are
imental basis because no drug has been cleared specifically
those that practice peculiar habits favoring ingestion of soil
for this purpose, although fenbendazole or febantel are
containing T. discolor eggs, or perhaps they are afflicted
 probably suitable.
with a hemorrhagic diathesis that magnifies the cost
of the minor trauma inflicted on the cecal wall by the
Capillarids
parasites.
The genus Capillaria has been divided by taxonomists
Very severe Trichuris suis infections in young swine
into a number of genera on several occasions (Moravec,
cause catarrhal enteritis with clinical signs of diarrhea,
1982; Moravec, Prokopic, and Shlikas, 1987). The capillar-
dehydration, anorexia, and retardation of growth (Batte
ids comprise a very large group of worms parasitic in all
et al, 1977). It has been shown that pigs experimentally
classes of vertebrates, and it would seem that differences in
infected by the feeding of T. suis eggs in the presence of
morphology and life cycles would warrant such a division
 antibiotics will have significantly reduced lesions compared
of the group, although not all systematists working in the
with pigs that are simply infected with the whipworms
field agree with some or all the divisions that have been
(Mansfield and Urban, 1996). The authors suggest that
made. Because it is such a large group, the genus Capillaria
the complex pathogenesis of necrotic proliferative colitis
s g   e  o   s
 in pigs may be linked to worm-induced suppression of mu-
genera with names unfamiliar to most (e.g., Eucoleus,
cosal immunity to resident bacteria. The control of T. suis
Hepaticola, Skrjabinocapillaria, Thominx, and upward of a
 infection depends on separating swine from the source of
dozen others), and most of us would be incapable of dis-
 infective eggs, which usually is contaminated soil or filthy
tinguishing the adults of the different genera.
housing.
 The adult worms typically are associated with certain
 epithelial surfaces of their hosts. The veterinary practitioner
Treatment and control
almost never sees the worms themselves, that is, unless the
Trichuris infections in beef cattle can be treated with
worms are associated with visible epithelia allowing their
ivermectin, eprinomectin, or doramectin pour-on with
tracts to be observed, as when the worms are in the skin of
5 mg/10 kg body weight or with injectable doramectin
the African clawed frog (Wade, 1982) or the frontal sinuses
with 0.2 mg/kg body weight. Ivermectin can be used as a
of the fox (Supperer, 1953). Thus in most cases the practi-
drench in sheep for treatment of Trichuris ovis at 0.2 mg/kg
tioner sees only eggs passed in the feces. The species found
body weight.
in the dog and cat have been placed in three genera:
T. suis infections in swine are susceptible to dichlorvos
(1) Eucoleus for those found in the airways, (2) Aonchotheca
(Atgard) fed in meal-type feed at 11.2 to 21.6 mg/kg body
for the worms found in the intestinal tract, and (3)
weight. T. suis infections are also susceptible to fenbenda-
Pearsonema for those that occur in the bladder. The
zole (9 mg/kg for 3 to 12 days).
worms found in the liver of rats and a few other hosts
 Infective T. vulpis eggs survive in soil for a long time, and
have been placed in the genus Calodium. It is possible to
 dogs kept in contact with contaminated soils tend to become
differentiate these few capillarid eggs with relative ease, and
reinfected after treatment. Lasting success in removing these
it seems that this division, at least, is workable.
 parasites depends on separating the patient from these eggs.
However, in the emphasis for the need for sanitation, an
Identification
important possibility may be overlooked. Assuming that
 The adult body is small and, although not whip-shaped,
the developing parasitic larvae are more resistant to anthel-
 otherwise somewhat resembles that of Trichuris species
mintic action than are the adult worms, it follows that patent
(a) sauequu snosnu ul pappaqua aieed sall pu
 infection is almost certain to recur through maturation of
bronchial, alimentary, vesical) or buried in tissue (e.g-).
immature forms that have survived a dose of anthelmintic.
liver; see Figure 8-i17). The eggs differ from those of
 Most common canine intestinal nematode parasites require
Trichuris species only in detail and are described well by
only a few weeks to mature, so a second dose of anthelmintic
Campbell (1991).
226
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Nasal capillariasis
hepatic tissues (see Figure 8-117) where, for lack of suffi-
Eucoleus (Capillaria) boehmi was described as a parasite
cient oxygen, they remain undeveloped until the host is
of the frontal sinus mucosae of the fox (Supperer, 1953).
eaten or otherwise dies and disintegrates. Only then do
This report was largely overlooked and for a long time it
the eggs develop to the infective first larval stage.
was assumed that capillarids found in the nasal and para-
nasal sinuses were the same as those found in the bronchi
Urinary capillariasis
(i.e., Eucoleus aerophilus). The eggs of E. boehmi can be
Pearsonema (Capillaria) plica adults weave the anterior
distinguished from those of E. aerophilus by careful micro-
 portions of their bodies into the mucous membrane of the
scopic inspection of their surfaces. The surface of E. boehmi
'sop o pon aeun aujo sed o pue iappq Areum
is covered with tiny pits like those of a thimble, whereas
cats, foxes, and wolves. The eggs contain one cell when
the surface of E. aerophilus is a network of branching and.
 passed in the urine. The first-stage larva develops in a little
anastomosing ridges (Supperer, 1953). Also, the eggs of
 more than a month but does not hatch unless ingested by an
E. boehmi when passed in the feces have undergone a
 earthworm, which serves as paratenic host. The definitive
number of cell divisions (see Figure 4-152), whereas the
host becomes infected by eating earthworms with first-
eggs of E. aerophilus are passed containing a single cell.
 stage larvae in their tissues, and eggs first appear in the
A fecal specimen from a dog that had been treated repeat-
urine about 2 months later. Enigk (1950a) claimed that P.
edly over a period of a year for purported intractable
plica infection caused growth impairment in young foxes,
whipworm infection was found to contain the eggs of
m isapou kiensn hau ieaq oi eadde sies pue saop inq
E. boehmi, not T. vulpis, and the reason for the repeated
burdens without inconvenience. Pearsonema (Capillaria)
therapeutic failures became clear.
feliscati is a parasite of the urinary bladder of the cat and
resembles P. plica in its biologic properties (see Figure 7-52).
Bronchial capillariasis
The life history of E. (Capillaria) aerophilus may be
Treatment
direct or it may involve earthworms as facultative interme-
Capillariasis, whether nasal, bronchial, urinary, or intest-
diate hosts. Infection of dogs and cats is rarely responsible
inal, is usually asymptomatic. Nevertheless, having identi-
for more than a slight cough, but foxes on fur farms may
fied Capillaria eggs in the feces or urine sediment or on a
harbor pathogenic burdens. Hanson (1933) described the
bronchial swab, the veterinarian usually feels compelled to
disease in foxes as insidious and chronic, characterized by a
medicate. There is no known specific drug for the treatment
rattling and wheezy respiration with spells of coughing and
of these infections. Evinger, Kazacos, and Cantwell (1985)
weakness, and by poor growth, unthriffy fur, failure to shed
reported success in treating nasal capillariasis with a single
 properly, and death due to bronchopneumonia in heavy
oral dose of ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg. Kirkpatrick and Nelson
infections. Low-grade E. aerophilus infection is common
(1987) reported apparent success in treating a case of symp-
in cats and dogs. Diagnosis is based on identifying the
tomatic urinary capillariasis in a border terrier with a single
rather plump, often asymmetric bipolar eggs in the feces
 dose of ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg, injected subcutaneously.
or tracheal mucus (see Figures 7-25, 7-52, and 7-58).
However, cats and dogs infrequently develop the severe
Trichosoimoides
degree of infection observed in captive foxes confined to
Trichosomoides crassicauda is a parasite of the urinary
earthen runs.
bladder of rats. The tiny male T. crassicauda lives inside
the uterus of its mate (Figure 4-154; see also Figure
Intestinal capillariasis
8-120). Infection usually is transmitted from mother rats
Aonchotheca (Capillaria) putori, a parasite of the small
to their offspring before weaning. T. crassicauda has been
intestine of bears, hedgehogs, raccoons, swine, bobcats, and
treated in laboratory rats with ivermectin subcutaneously at
various mustelids, is occasionally found in the domestic cat,
0.2 mg/kg or orally at 3 mg/kg (Findon and Miller, 1987;
Summa et al, 1992) and in pet hooded rats (Bowman, Pare,
 present a differential diagnostic problem with respect to
and Pinckney, 2004).
those of other capillarid species found in cats (Greve and
Kung, 1983).
Anatrichosoma
Ruminants also host several species of capillarids that
Anatrichosoma species are 25 × 0.2 mm long capilarid-like 
fall within the genus Aonchotheca (Pisanu and Bain,
worms that burrow within the stratified squamous epithelium
1999), none of which are of importance in producing dis-
of the nasal passages of African monkeys and the buccal
ease in these hosts.
mucosa of the American opossum, Didelphis virginiana. The
female worms deposit 76 × 58 μm bipolar eggs in these
Hepatic capillariasis
burrows. The fully embryonated eggs reach the surface in
Adult Calodium (Capillaria) hepaticum worms live in
the normal course of regeneration and desquamation. Ante-
the livers of rats, muskrats, woodchucks, other rodents,
 mortem diagnosis is based on demonstrating the eggs on nasal
and a wide range of occasional hosts, including humans.
swabs or in skin biopsies (see Figures 7-104, 8-118, and 8-119).
Eggs deposited by the female worms are trapped in the
Anatrichosoma cutaneum gives rise to subcutaneous nodules
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
227
FIGURE 4155. Macracanthorhynchus hirudinaceus (three fourths nat-
ural size). This worm typically is white but with fixation appears
 dark in this photograph.
FGURE 4154. Frichosomoides crassicauda male in the uterus of a
DNA with that of Trichinella and Halicephalobus, but
female I. crassicauda (left). S. H. Weisbroth, who provided this
there was no amplification.
specimen, has described a Millipore filtration procedure for
demonstrating the eggs of I. crassicauda (right) in rat urine.
MISCElLANEOUS WORMS
 and edema about the joints of the extremities and serpiginous
Thorny-headed worms and leeches are not related to the
blisters of the palms and soles of monkeys.
nematodes, nor are they related to one another. They are
lumped together here for want of a logical and convenient
Haycockneima perplexum
alternative.
H. perplexum is a nematode that has been seen in three
 people in or from Tasmania who become seriously ill with a
Phylum Acanthocephala
worm that has adults and larvae within muscle fibers
The Acanthocephala, or thorny-headed worms, are a small
(Spratt, 2005). It was described as a member of the super-
phylum of highly specialized parasites of the vertebrate
family Muspiceoidea in the family Robertdolfusidae.
digestive tract (Figures 4-155 to 4-157). There are
a u sids u aod sq sm jo d s
separate sexes. The body is normally white and flattened
subcutaneous tissues of mice and bats, the anterior
in situ but becomes more or less cylindric when placed
chamber of the eye of cervids, the brain of falconids, the
 in water, which is the indispensable first step in preparing
 portal and intracardiac veins and epicardial lymphatics of
specimens for identification. The resulting osmotic tur-
kangaroos and wallabies, the pulmonary arteries of koalas
 gor forces the retractable, spiny attachment organ or pro-
and brushtail possums, and the subcutaneous capillaries
boscis out of the body so that the shape and number of
of the ears of reindeer (Spratt et al, 1999).
spines can be ascertained and the specimen thereby identi-
A  14-year-old horse imported from Ireland to
fied (see Figure 4-156). Once the proboscis (and male
Switzerland had masseter atrophy and severe chronic myo-
copulatory bursa) is well protracted, the specimen can
sitis caused by numerous immature and mature female
be fixed in hot alcohol-formaldehyde-acetic acid (AFA)
nematodes (Eckert and Ossent, 2006). The authors felt
solution (85 parts of 85% ethanol, 10 parts of stock
that the infection was due to something that appeared
formalin, 5 parts of glacial acetic acid). These technical
Haycocknerna-like, but they could not rule out the possi-
details are stressed here because unless specimens are
bility of H. gingivalis because of the degeneration of many
 properly prepared, even a specialist may not be able to
of the worms. Attempts were made to compare isolated
identify them.
228
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
FGURE 4156. Macracanthorhynchus ingens proboscis.
Identlflcatlon
Acanthocephalans consist of a body and a retractable spiny
FGURE 4158. Macracanthormhynchus ingens egg containing acanthor
proboscis by which the parasite attaches itself to the intes-
larva.
tinal wall of its host. There is no digestive tract. Nutrients
are absorbed through the tegument.
reencysts in its normal definitive host instead of developing
to maturity. For example, Prosthenorchis elegars adults may
Llfe Hlstory
be found in the intestinal lumen of a monkey, and cysta-
When the egg is laid, it contains a fully developed larva
canths of the same parasite may be found encysted in the
called an acanthor (Figure 4-158). If the egg is ingested
peritoneal membranes.
by a suitable arthropod intermediate host, the acanthor
develops through an acanthella stage (Figure 4-159) into
Macracanthorhynchus
an encysted infective larva called a cystacanth (Figure
Macracanthorhynchus hirudinaceus is a parasite of the small
4-160). The cystacanth is capable of reencysting in a
intestine of swine (see Figure 4-155). The body is white,
range of vertebrate paratenic hosts should they ingest
flattened, and transversely wrinkled, which occasionally
the infected arthropod. Frequently the cystacanth even
causes this parasite to be mistaken for a tapeworm. The
males are about 10 cm long, whereas the females can be
35 cm long. Development to the cystacanth stage infective
for pigs occurs in May beetles, dung beetles, or water bee-
tles in about 3 months. Pigs acquire M. hirudinaceus infec-
tion when rooting for beetle grubs, but the infected adult
beetle is also a source of cystacanths. The prepatent period
is 2 or 3 months. Pigs may display no outward sign of
M hirudinaceus infection, or there may be diarrhea and
emaciation with evidence of acute abdominal pain,
 depending on how deeply the proboscis is embedded in
the intestinal wall.
FIGURE 4157. Adult Macracanthorhynchus ingens. Two adults (left),
anterior end with proboscis (right), adult worms in situ in dog
HGURE 4159. Macracanthorhynchus ingens acanthella from a
intestine (bottom).
Narceus millipede.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
229
A
METRIC
HGURE 4160. Macracanthorhynchus ingens Cystacanth infective
larvae above and as they appear when recovered from a broken
Narceus millipede.
Treatment
There is no approved treatment for M. hirudinaceus
FIGURE 4161. Oncicola sp. from an Arizona coyote Canis latrans.
 infection. Benzimidazole anthelmintics may be tried.
(Courtesy Dr. Frances Phillips.)
An in-feed formulation of ivermectin (0.1 or 0.2 mg/kg
body weight for 7 days) resulted in 100% removal of
adult M. hirudinaceus from pigs (Alva-Valdes et al, 1989).
is marked by watery diarrhea of several months' duration,
 Doramectin at 0.3 mg/kg also proved very good in remoy-
with weakness and progressive emaciation. The appetite
ing M. hirudinaceus from pigs (Yazwinski et al, 1997).
remains normal until a day or so before death. The acute
Macracanthorhynchus ingens (see Figure 4-157), even
course is of less than 1 day's duration and is caused by acute
larger than M. hirudinaceus, is a parasite of the raccoon
bacterial peritonitis resulting from perforation of the intes-
(P. lotor) and black bear (Ursus americanus) and uses milli-
tinal wall by the proboscis.
 pedes of the genus Narceus as intermediate hosts. These
Treatment of caged
1marmosets (Saguirus mystax)
 parasites occasionally infect dogs that eat the infected milli-
infected with P. elegans has shown that fenbendazole
 pedes. To eat a millipede requires extraordinary cunning.
(20 mg/kg body weight for 7 days) was effective in remov-
frightful taste, great excitement, or utter boredom on the
ing these parasites (Demidov et al, 1988).
 part of the dog because the millipedes give off a potent
defensive secretion. The raccoon gets around the problem
Monilifornis
by rolling the millipede about in the dust to exhaust its
Common parasites of wild rodents, Moniliformis species use
supply of defensive secretion, but few dogs have learned
cockroaches as intermediate hosts. The great length (up to
that trick. Cases in dogs have been treated with ivermectin
32 cm) and pseudosegmentation of the body invite misi-
(Pearce et al, 2001).
dentification of this acanthocephalan as a tapeworm.
Prosthenorchis
Oncicola
 Prostherorchis species are up to 55 mm long, pink acantho-
Oncicola canis (Figure 4-161), less than 14 mm long, is a
cephalan parasites of primates. Prosthenorchis organisms
parasite of the dog, coyote, and other canids. It uses the
 propagate very successfully in monkey colonies by using
armadillo as paratenic host for cystacanths.
cockroaches and certain beetles as intermediate hosts.
Monkeys become infected when they eat a cockroach con-
Phylum Annelida
taining the cystacanth larvae of Prosthenorchis species.
Class Hlrudlnea
Both chronic and acute disease syndromes have been
Leeches are predatory or parasitic worms of the phy-
described for Prosthenorchis infection. The chronic course
lum Annelida, which includes the free-living earthworms.
230
C H A P TE R 4 Helminths
Leeches have terminal suckers for locomotion and attach-
Bairden K, Davies HS, Gibson NR, et al: Efficacy of moxidectin 2 per cent
ment and move by looping movements like those of an
oral gel against cyathostomins, particularly third-stage inhibited larvae,
inchworm. They usually are dark or black in color.
in horses, Vet Rec 158:766, 2006.
 Bloodsucking species fasten to the skin or oropharyngeal
Ballard NB, Vande Vusse FJ: Echinococcus multilocuiaris in Illinois and
mucous membrane by means of their powerful suckers,
Nebraska, I Parasitol 69:790, 1983.
Bankov D: Efficacy of praziquantel against Stilesia globipunctata and other
pierce the epidermis, and suck blood. A salivary enzyme,
cestodes in sheep.In International Conference on the Pathophysiology of
hirudin, acts as an anticoagulant and ensures a copious flow
Parasitic Infetions, Thessaloniki, Greece, 1975.
of blood. In some localities, surface waters abound with
Bankoy D: Opiti za diagnostika i terapiya na stileziozata po ovtsete, Vet
bloodsucking leeches that attach to the oropharyngeal or
Nauki 13:28, 1976.
laryngeal mucous membrane when imbibed by the unwary
Barclay WP, Phillips TN, Foerner JI: Intussusception associated with
Anoplocephala perfolfiata infection in five horses, I Am Vet Med Assoc
person or animal. Their presence in these locations may
180:752, 1982.
cause severe bouts of coughing and choking, during
Basir MA: The morphology and development of the sheep nematode,
which blood is ejected by the victim. Infection may last
Strongyldes papillss Wed,1856),CanRe28:17,1950.
several weeks and occasionally causes death. Treatment
Batte EG, Harkema R, Osborne JC: Observations of the life cycle and
consists of mechanically removing the leech.
pathogenicity of the swine kidney worm (Stephanurus dentatus), J Am
Vet Med Assoc 136:622, 1960.
Batte EG, McLamb RD, Muse KE, et al: Pathophysiology of swine trich-
REFERENCES
uriasis, Ar I Vet Res 38:1075, 1977.
Abraham D: Biology of Dirofilaria immitis. In Boreham PFL, Atwell RB,
Batte EG, Moncol DJ, Barber CW: Prenatal infection with the swine
eds: Diroflariasis, Boca Raton, 1988, CRC Press.
kidney worm (Stephanurus dentatus) and associated lesions, J Am Vet
Adcock JL: Pulmonary arterial lesions in canine dirofilariasis, Am J Vet Res
Med Assoc 149:758, 1966.
22:655, 1961.
Bauer C, Bahnemann R: Filaroides hirthi infections in beagle dogs by iver-
Alicata JE: Angiostrongyliasis cantonensis (eosinophilic meningitis): his-
mectin, Vet Parasitol 65:269, 1996.
torical events in its recognition as a new parasitic disease of man, J Wash
Bauer C, Gey A: Effcacy of six anthelmintics against luminal stages of
Acad Sci 78:38, 1988.
Bayfisascaris procyonis in naturally infected raccoons ( Procyon lotor), Vet
Ali Kahn Z: The postembryonic development of Trichinella spiralis with
Parasitol 60:155, 1995.
special reference to ecdysis, I Parasitol 52:248, 1966.
Baumann R: Beobachtungen beim parasitaren Sommerbluten der Pferde,
Alva-Valdes R, Wallace DH, Foster AG, et al: Efficacy of an in-feed for-
Wien Tierartzl Mschr 33:52, 1946.
mulation against gastrointestinal helminths, lungworms, and mites in
Baumgartner W, Zajac A, Hull BL, et al: Parelaphostrongylosis in llamas,
swine, Amm I Vet Res 50:1392, 1989.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 187:1243, 1985.
Anderson FL, Conder GA, Marsland WP: Efficacy of injectable and tablet
Beaver PC: Zoonoses, with particular reference to parasites of veterinary
formulations of praziquantel against mature Echinococcus granulosu,
importance. Biofogy of parasites, New York, 1966, Academic.
Am I Vet Res 39:1861, 1978.
Beaver PC, Snyder CH, Carreara GM, et al: Chronic eosinophilia due to
Anderson RC, Linder KE, Peregrine AS: Halicephalobus gingivalis
visceral larva migrans, Pediatrics 9:7, 1952.
(Stefanski, 1954) from a fatal infection in a horse in Ontario, Canada,
Bech-Nielsen S, Sjogren U, Lundquist H: Paraflariu bovicola (Tubangi
with comments on the validity of H. deletrix and a review of the genus,
1934) in cattl: epizootiology-disease occurrence, Am J Vet Res
Parasite 5:255, 1998.
43:945, 1982.
Anderson RV, Bemrick WJ: Micronema deletrix n. sp.: a saprophagus nem-
 Becker HN: Efficacy of injectable ivermectin against natural infections of
atode inhabiting a nasal tumor of the horse, Proc Helminthof Soc Wash
Stephanurus dentatus in swine, Am J Vet Res 47:1622, 1986.
32:74, 1965.
 Bergstrom RC, Maki LR, Kercher CJ: Average daily gain and feed effi-
Anderson TIC: Ascaris infection in humans from North America: molec-
ciency of lambs with low level trichostrongylid burdens, I Anim Sci
ular evidence for cross infection, Parasitology 110:215, 1995.
41:513, 1975.
Anderson TIC, Romero-Abal ME, Jaenike J: Genetic structure and epide-
Bergstrom RC, Taylor RF, Presgrove T: Fitting fenbendazole into the treat-
miology of Ascaris populations: patterns of host affliation in
ment plan for sheep with fringed tapeworms, Vet Med 83:846, 1988.
Guatemala, Parasitofogy 107:319, 1993.
Beroza GA, Barclay WP, Phillips TM, et al: Cecal perforation and perito-
Anderson WI, Georgi ME, Car BD: Pancreatic atrophy and fibrosis associated
nitis associated with Anoplocephala perfoliata infection in three horses,
with Eurytrema procyonis in a domestic cat, Vet Rec 120:235, 1987.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:804, 1983.
Araujo FP, Schwabe CW, Sawyer JC, Davis WG: Hydatid disease trans-
Berry WL: Spirocerca lupi esophageal granulomas in 7 dogs: resolution
mission in California: a study of the Basque connection, Am J Epidemiol
after treatment with doramectin, J Vet Intern Med 14:609, 2000.
102:291, 1975.
Bianciardi P, Otranto D: Treatment of dog thelaziosis caused by Thelazia
Armour I, Duncan JL, Reid JFS: Activity of oxfendazole against inhibited
 calipaeda (Spirurida, Thelazidae) using a topical formulation of imi-
larvae of Ostertagia ostertagi and Cooperia oncophora, Vet Rec 102:263, 1978.
dacloprid 10% and moxidectin 2.5%, Vet Parasitol 129:89, 2005.
Arru E, Garippa G, Manger BR: Efficacy of epsiprantel against Echino-
Biervliet I van, de Lahunta A, Ennulat D, et al: Acquired cervical scoliosis
coccus granulosus infections in dogs, Res Vet Sci 49:378, 1990.
in six horses associated with dorsal grey column chronic myelitis,
Arundel JH: Cysticercosis in sheep and cattle, Aust Meat Res Comm
Equine Vet J 36:86, 2004.
Rev 4, 1972.
uo shop u uonsajug (sdinn muosouau) uromun v oquo 1 y
Aruo SK: The use of "Nilverm" (tetramisole) in the control of clinical
 Prince Edward Island, Can Vet I40:555, 1999.
signs of Thelazia rhodesii (eyeworm) infections in cattle, Bull Epizoot Dis
Bisset SA, Marshal ED, Morisson L: Economics of a dry-cow anthelmintic
Afr 22:275, 1974.
drenching programme for dairy cows in New Zealand. I. Overall
August JR, Powers RD, Baily WS, Diamond DL: Filaroides hirthi in a dog:
response in 47 herds, Vet Parasitof 26:117, 1987.
fatal hyperinfection suggestive of autoinfection, I Am Vet Med Assoc
Bladt-Knudsen TS, Fossing EC, Bjorn H, et al: Transmission of
176:331, 1980.
Hyostrongylus rubidus in housed pigs, Bull Scand Soc Parasitol 4:117,
Bahnemann R, Bauer C: Lungworm infection in a beagle colony: Fiaroides
1994.
pod jox dxg oudu umuym nou nq uo  yi
Blagburn BL, Dillon AR: Feline heartworm disease: solving the puzzle, Vet
46:55, 1994.
Med March(suppl):7, 2007.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
231
Blagburn BL, Lindsay DS, Vaughan IL, et al: Prevalence of canine parasites
Burke TM, Roberson EL: Fenbendazole treatment of pregnant bitches to
based on fecal flotation, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 18:483, 1996.
reduce prenatal and lactogenic infections of Toxocara canis and
Blaisdell KA: A study of the cat lungworm, Aelurostrongylus abstrusus,
Ancylostoma caninum in pups, IAm Vet Med Assoc 183:987, 1983.
Cornell University, 1952 (doctoral thesis).
Calvert CA, Mandell CP: Diagnosis and management of feline heartworm 
Blunden AS, Khalil LF, Webbon PM: Halicephalobus deetrix infection in a
disease, I Am Vet Med Assoc 180:550, 1982.
horse, Equine Vet I19:255, 1987.
Campbell BG: Trichuris and other trichinelloid nematodes of dogs and cats
Boersema JH, Baas JIM, Schaeffer F: Een harnekking geval van
in the United States, Commpend Cont Educ Pract Vet 13:769, 1991.
"Kennelhoest”" veroorzaakt door Filaroides ostleri, Tydschr Diergeneeskd
Campbell BG, Little MD: The finding of Angiostrongylus cantonensis in rats
114:10, 1989.
in New Orleans, Amm I Trop Med Hyg 38:568, 1988.
Boersema JH, Eysker M, Nas JWM: Apparent resistance of Parascaris
Campbell KL, Graham JC: Physaloptera infection in dogs and cats,
equorurm to macrocylic lactones, Vet Rec 150:279, 2002.
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:299, 1999.
Bogan JA, McKellar QA, Mitchell ES, Scott EW: Efficacy of ivermectin
Campbell WC, Blair LS: Diroflaria immitis experimental infection in the
against Cooperia curticei infection in sheep, Am J Vet Res 49:99, 1988.
ferret (Mustela putorius furo), I Parasitol 64:119, 1978.
 Boisvenue RJ, Hendrix IC: Studies on location of adult fringed tapeworms, 
Cecchi R, Wills SJ, Dean R, Pearson GR: Demonstration of Olulanus 
Thysanosoma actinoides, in feeder lambs, Proc Helrminthof Soc Wash
tricuspis in the stomach of domestic cats by biopsy, I Comp Pathot
54:204, 1987.
134:374, 2006.
Bollinger O: Die Kolik der Pferde und das Wurmaneurysma der
Chandler AC, Read CP: Introduction to parasitology, ed 10, New York,
 Eingeweidearterien. Eine pathologische und Klinische Untersuchung,
1961, John Wiley & Sons.
Beitr. Vergieich. Path. u. Path. Anat. Hausth. Muinchen, Heft I, 1870.
 Chung NY, Miyahara AY, Chung G: The prevalence of feline liver flukes in
Bolt G, Monrad J, Koch J, Jensen AL: Canine angiostrongylosis: a review,
the City and County of Honolulu, I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:258, 1977.
Vet Rec 135:447, 1994.
Church S, Kelly DF, Obwolo MJ: Diagnosis and successful treatment of
Bourdeau P, Ehm JP: Cas original de Fiaroidose due a Filaroidose sp.
 diarrhoea in horses caused by immature small strongyles apparently
chez le chien. Donnees actuelles sur la Filarotidose a Filaridose hirthi
insusceptible to anthelmintics, Equine Vet J 18:401, 1986.
Georgi et Anderson 1975, Rec Med Vet 168:315, 1992.
Clunies Ross I, Gordon HMcL: The internal parasites and parasitic diseases
Bourque A, Whitney H, Conboy G: Angiostrongylus vasorum infection in a
of sheep, Sydney, 1936, Angus and Robertson.
coyote (Canis latrans) from Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada,
J Wildf Dis 4l:816, 2005.
Schrank 1788 (Anisakidae) in the cat, Parasitof Res 92:142, 2004.
Bowman DD, Darrigrand RA, Frongillo MK, et al: Treatment of experimen-
Coles GC: Strategies for control of anthelmintic-resistant nematodes of
tally induced trichinosis in dogs and cats, Am J Vet Res 54:1303, 1993.
numinants, I Am Vet Med Assoc 192:330, 1988.
Bowman DD, Frongillo MK, Johnson RC,et al: Evaluation of praziquantel
Coles GC, Brown SN, Trembath CM: Pyrantel-resistant large stronglyes in
pue ssop u! siseruruosered paonput Xejuaruadxa jo juawiean roj
racehorses, Vet Rec 145:408, 1999.
cats, Am I Vet Res 52:68, 1991.
Collett MG, Pomroy WE, Guilford WG, et al: Gastric Offulanus tricuspis
Bowman DD, Johnson RC, Ulrich ME, etal: Effects of long-term admin-
infection identified in captive cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus) with chronic
jstration of ivermectin and milbemycin oxime on circulating microfi-
vomiting, I S Afr Vet Assoc 7l:251, 2000.
lariae and parasite antigenemia in dogs with patent heartworm
Conboy G: Diagnostic parasitology, Can Vet I 37:181, 1996.
infections. In Proceedings of the 1992 Heartworm Symposium, March
Conboy G: Natural infections of Crenosoma vuipis and Angiostrongylus
27, 1992, Austin, Texas.
-uaqiu ym juawean xayn pue epeue suey u ssop u tunkosmA
Bowman DD, Torre CJ: An examination of the published effects of pre-
cin oxime, Vet Rec 155:16, 2004.
ventative dosages of macrolide treatment on numbers of circulating
Conboy GA, Stromberg BE, Schlotthauer JC: Efficacy of clorsulon against
microfilariae in dogs with patent heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis) infec-
Fascioloides magna infection in sheep, J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:910, 1988.
tions. In Fifty-First Annual Meeting of the American Association of
Conboy GA, Whitney H, Ralhan S: Angiostrongylus vasorum infection in dogs
Parasitologists, Honolulu, 2006a.
inNewfoundand,Canada.In Forty-Third AnnualMeeting ofthe American
Bowman DD, Torre CJ: The effects of preventative dosages of macrolide
Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, Baltimore, July 25, 1998.
Corba J, Scales B, Froyd G: The effect of DL-tetramisole on Thelazia
(Dirofilaria immitis) infections, Touch Briefings, U.S. Companion
rhodesii (eye-worm) in cattle, Trop Ani Heath Prod l:19, 1969.
Animal Health, 2006b.
Costa LRR, McClure JI, Snider II TG, et al: Verminous meningoenceph-
Bowman DD, Torre CJ, Mannella C: Survey of ll western states for heart-
alomyelitis by Angiostrongylus (Parastrongylus) cantonenisis in an
worm (Dirofiaria immitis) infection, heartworm diagnostic and preven-
American Miniature Horse, Equine Vet Educ 12:2, 2000.
tion protocols, and fecal examination protocols for gastrointestinal
Courtney CH, Shearer JK, Plue RE: Efficacy and safety of clorsulon used
parasites, Vet Ther 8:293, 2007.
concurrently with ivermectin for control of Fasciola hepatica in Florida
Bowman DD, Ulrich MA, Gregory DE, et al: Treatment of Baylisascaris
beef cattle, Arm I Vet Res 46:1245, 1985.
Craig TM, Brown TW, Shepstad DK, Williams GD: Fatal Filaroides hirthi
129:285, 2005.
infection in a dog, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 172:1096, 1978.
Bowman MR, Pare JA, Pinckney RD: Trichosomoides crassicauda infection
Craig TM, Diamond PL, Ferwerda NS: Evidence of ivermectin resistance by
in a pet hooded rat, Vet Rec 154:374, 2004.
Parascaris equorum on a Texas horse farm, J Equine Vet Sci 27:67, 2007.
 Breuer W, Hasslinger MA, Hermanns W: Chronische Gastritis durch
Craig TM, Miller DK: Resistance by Haemonchus contortus to jvermectin
Ollulanus tricuspis (Leuckart, 1865) bei einem Tiger, Berl Munch
in Angora goats, Vet Rec 126:580, 1990.
Tierarztl Wochenschr 106:47, 1993.
Craig TM, Suderman MT: Parasites of horses and considerations for their
Briggs K, Reinemeyer C, French D, et al: Parasite primer—Part 1. Bad bug
control, Southwest Vet 36:2ll, 1985.
basics, Horse, January l-5, 2004.
Cribb NC, Cote NM, Bouré LP, Peregrine AS: Acute small intestinal
Briskey DW, Scroggs MG, Hurtig FS: A prevalence survey of liver flukes
obstruction associated with Parascaris equorum infection in young
(Distoma) in beef cows at slaughter in the western United States, Agri-
horses: 25 cases (1985-2004), N Z Vet J 54:338, 2006.
Practice 15:8, 1994.
ad uo pun daus u sudod aud an iaH uor
Brooks DE, Greiner EC, Walsh MT: Conjunctivitis caused by Thelazia sp.
Farnham Royal, Bucks, England, 1963, Commonwealth Agricultural
in a Senegal parrot, I Am Vet Med Assoc 183:1305, 1983.
Bureaux.
Burgu A, Sarmehmetoglu O: Aelurostrongylus abstrusus infection in two
Crofton HD: Nematode parasite populations in sheep on lowland farms. I.
cats, Vet Rec 154:602, 2004.
Worm egg counts in ewes, Parasitology 44:465, 1954.
232
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Crofton HD: Nematode parasite populations in sheep on lowland farms.
Duncan RB Jr, Patton S: Naturall occurring cerebrospinal parelephos-
IV. The effects of anthelmintic treatment, Parasitology 48:235, 1958.
trongylosis in a heifer, I Vet Duagn Invest 10:287, 1998.
Crofton HD: Nematodes, London, 1966, Hutchinson University Library.
Duncombe VM, Bolin TD, Davis AE, et al: Nippostrongylus brasiliensis
Crofton HD, Thomas RJ: A further description of Nematodirus battus
infection in the rat: effect of iron and protein deficiency and dexameth-
Crofton and Thomas, 1951, I Helrminthol 28:119, 1954.
asone on the efficacy of benzimidazole anthelmintics, Gut 18:892, 1977a.
Crofton HD, Thomas RJ: A new species of Nematodirus in sheep, Nature
 Duncombe VM, Bolin TD, Davis AE, et al: The effect of iron and protein
168:559, 1951.
deficiency and dexamethasone on the efficacy of benzimidazole anthel-
Daubney R: The life histories of Dictyocaulus filaria (Rud.) and
Dictyocaulus viviparous (Bloch), I Comp Pathol Therap 33:225, 1920.
the Advancement of Veterinary Parasitology, Sydney, Australia, 1977b.
Demidov NV, Khrustalev AV, Vibe PP, et al: Use of anthelmintics against
Dunsmore ID, Spratt DM: The lije cycle of Filaroides osleri in the dingo.
helminth infections in monkeys, Helmminthof Abs Ser A 60:1524,
Paper presented at the Meting of theAustralian Society of Parasitology.
1988(abstract).
Melbourne, Australia, 1976 (abstract).
Deprez P, Vercruyse J: Treatment and follow-up of clinical cyathostomi-
Durette-Desset MC, Chabaud AG, Ashford RW, et al: Two new species of
nosis in horses, I Vet Med A Physiof Pathor Clin Med 50:527, 2003.
Trichostrongylidae (Nematoda: Trichostrongyloidea), parasitic in
DeVaney JA, Craig TM, Rowe LD: Resistance to ivermectin by
Gorilla gorilla beringei in Uganda, Syst Parasitof 23:59, 1992.
Haemonchus contortus in goats and calves, Int J Parasitol 22:369, 1992.
 Diwel D, Strasser H: Versuche zur Geburt helminthenfreier Hundewelpen
de Witt JI: Mortality of rheas caused by Syngammus trachea infection, Vet Q
durch Fenbendazol-behandlung, Dtsch Tierarzt Wochenschr 85:239, 1978.
17:39, 1995.
Dwork KG, Jaffe JR, Lieberman HD: Strongyloidiasis with massive hyper-
uomadei isuee (jaunrzid) nuoia jo Aeoa aul :y erzeH-a
infection, N Y State I Med 75:1230, 1975.
infections in dog and cat, Vet Med Rev 2:134, 1976.
Eberhard ML, Alfano E: Adult Toxocara cati infections in U.S. children:
Dillard KJ, Saari SAM, Anttila M: Strongyloides stercoralis infection in a
report of four cases, Am I Trop Med Hyg 59:404, 1998.
Finnish kennel, Acta Vet Scand 49:37, 2007.
Eberhard ML, Brandt FH: The role of tadpoles and frogs as paratenic hosts
Dillon R, Sakas PS, Buxton BA, Schultz RD: Indirect immunofluorescence
in the life cycle of Dracunculus insignis (Nematoda: Dracunculoidea),
testing for diagnosis of occult Dirofilaria immitis infection in three cats,
I Parasitol 8l:792, 1995.
I Arm Vet Med Assoc 180:80, 1982.
Eckerlin RP, Leigh WH:
Platynosomum
fastosum Kossack, 1910
 Dobberstein J, Hartmann H: Uber die Anastomosenbildung im Bereich der
(Trematoda: Dicrocoelidae) in South Florida, I Parasitol 48(suppl):
 Blind- und Grimmdarmarterien des Pferdes und ihre Bedeutung fir die
49, 1962.
Entstehung der embolischen, Kolik Ber Tierdrztl Woche nschr 48:399, 1932.
Eckert J, Ossent P: Haycocknema-like nematodes in muscle fibres of a
Donaldson J, van Houtert MFJ, Sykes AR: The effect of protein supply on
horse, Vet Parasitof 139:256, 2006.
the periparturient parasite status of the mature ewe, Proc N Z Soc Anim
Eckert J, von Brand T, Voge M: Asexual multiplication of Mesocestoides cortt
Prod 57:186, 1997.
(Cestoda) in the intestines of dogs and skunks, I Parasitol 55:241, 1969.
Dorrington JE: Studies on Filaroides osleri infestation in dogs,
Ehrenford FA: True parasitism of dogs by Hymenofepis dirminuta, Canine
Onderstepoort I Vet Res 35:225, 1968.
Pract 4:31, 1977.
 Drudge JH, Elam G: Preliminary observations on the resistance of horse
strongyles to phenothiazine, I Parasitof 47(suppl):38, 1961.
Z Tropenmed Parasitof 1:560, 1950a.
 pue jouo yurway ul sjuadogaaap aman iia suoii 'Hf aapnia
Strongylus vulgaris research. In Proceedings of the lith Annual
(Nematodes) in Wirtstier, Z Tropenmed Parasitol 2:523, 1951.
Meeting of the Association of Equine Practitioners, Miami Beach, 1965.
Enigk K: Zir Entwicklung von Strongylus vuigaris (Nematodes) in
auimba jo aoueisisan alozepiwzuag ios raaol 'lg suokg 'Hi aspnia
Wirtstier, Z Tropenmed Parasitof 2:287, 1950b.
strongylescritical tests of six compounds against population B, Am
Enigk K, Dey-Hazra A, Batke J: Zur klinischen Bedeutung und Behandlung
I Vet Res 40:590, 1979.
des galaktogen erworbenen Strongyloides Befalls der Fohlen, Dtsch
Drudge JH, Lyons ET, Tolliver SC: Resistance of equine strongyles to thiaben-
Tierarztl Wochenschr 81:605, 1974.
dazole: critical tests of two strains, Vet Med Smafl Anir Clin 72:433, 1977.
Epe C, Blomer A: Erfahrungen mit einem kombinierten Chemo-
Dubey IP, Miller TB, Sharma SP: Fenbendazole for treatment of Paragonimus
prophylaxeund Desinfektions-programm gegen Ascaris suum beim
kellicotti infection in dogs, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 174:835, 1979.
Neubau eines Sauenzuchtstalles, Prakt Trerarzt 82:452, 2001.
Dubin S, Segall S, Martindale J: Contamination of soil in two city parks
Evans IW, Green PE: Preliminary evaluation of four anthelmintics against
with canine nematode ova including Toxocara canis a preliminary
the cat liver fluke Platynosomum concinnum, Aust Vet J 54:454, 1978.
study, Arm I Pubric Health 65:1242, 1975.
Evans RH, Tangredi B: Cerebrospinal nematodiasis in free-ranging birds, J
Duffy MS, Miller CL, Kinsella IM, de Lahunta A: Parastrongylus cantonen-
Arm Vet Med Assoc 187:1213, 1985.
sis in a nonhuman primate, Florida, Emerg Infect Dis 10:2207, 2004.
Evinger IV, Kazacos KR, Cantwell HD: Ivermectin for treatment of nasal
Duncan IL: Field studies on the epidemiology of mixed strongyle infection
capillariasis in a dog, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 186:174, 1985.
in the horse, Vet Rec 94:337, 1974.
Fan PC, Lin CY, Chen CC, Chung WC: Morphological description of 
Duncan JL: Internal parasites of horses: treatment and control, In Pract
Taenia saginata asiatica (Cyclophyllidea: Taenidae) from man in
4:83, 1982.
Asia, I Helrminthol 69:299, 1995.
Duncan JL, Armour J, Bairden K, et al: The successful removal of
Farnell DR, Faulkner DR: Prepatent period of Dipetalonema reconditum in
inhibited fourth-stage Ostertagia ostertagi larvae by fenbendazole,
experimentally infected dogs, I Parasitol 64:565, 1978.
Vet Rec 98:342, 1976.
Findon G, Miller TE: Treatment of Trichosomoides crassicauda in labora-
Duncan JL, McBeath DG, Best IMJ, et al: The effcacy of fenbendazole in
tory rats using ivermectin, Lab Anirm Sei 37:496, 1987.
the control of immature strongyle infections in ponies, Equine Vet J
Foreyt WJ, Drawe DL: Efficacy of clorsulon and albendazole against
9:146, 1977.
Fascioloides magna in naturally infected white-tailed deer, I Am Vet
 Duncan JL, McBeath DG, Preston NK: Studies on the efficacy of fenben-
Med Assoc 187:1187, 1985.
dazole used in a divided dosage regime against strongyle infections in
Foreyt WJ, Gorham JR: Evaluation of praziquantel against induced
ponies, Equine Vet J 12:78, 1980.
Nanophyetus salrmincola infections in coyotes and dogs, Am J Vet Res
Duncan JL, Pirie HM: The life cycle of Strongyfus vulgaris in the horse,
49:563, 1988.
Res Vet Sci 13:374, 1972.
Freeman RS, Stuart PF, Cullen JB, et al: Fatal human infection with meso-
Duncan JL, Pirie HM: The pathogenesis of single experimental infections
cercariae of the trematode Alaria Americana, Am J Trop Med Hyg
with Strongyfus vuigaris in foals, Res Vet Sci 18:82, 1975.
25:803, 1976.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
233
Filleborn F: Askarisinfektion durch Verzehren eingekapselter Larven und
Greiner EC, Lane TI: Effects of the daily feeding of pyrantel tartrate on
ubergelungene intrauterine Askarisinfektion, Arch Schifs u Tropenhyg
Anoplocephala infections in three horses: a pilot study, JEquine Vet Sci
25:367, 1921.
14:43, 1994.
Gahlod BM, Kolte SW, Kurkure NV: Treatment of canine Osterus osteri
Greve JH, Kung FY: Capilaria putorit in domestic cats in Iowa, J Am Vet
infection with doramectin—a case report, Ind Vet I 79:168, 2002.
Med Assoc 182:51l, 1983.
Galliard H: Recherches sur I'infestation experimentale a Strongyloides ster
shp o un sua susia  ias uago Hi ar
coralis au Tonkin XII, Ann Parasitof 26:201, 1951.
Companion Anim Pract 19:41, 1989.
Gardiner CH, Koh DS, Cardella TA: Micronema in man: third fatal infec-
Griesemer RA, Gibson JP: The establishment of an ascarid-free beagle dog
tion, Am I Trop Med Hyg 30:586, 1981.
colony, I Am Vet Med Assoc 143:965, 1963.
Gardiner CH, Wells S, Gutter AE, et al: Eosinophilic meningoencephalitis
Guerrero J, Nelson CT, Carithers DS: Results and realistic implications
due to Angiostrongyfus cantonensis as the cause of death in captive non-
of the 2004 AHS-Merial Heartworm Survey. In Fifty-First Annual
human primates, Arm I Trop Med Hyg 42:70, 1990.
Meeting of the American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists,
Garosi LS, Platt SR, McConnell JF, et al: Intracranial haemorrhage asso
Honolulu, 2006.
ciated with Angiostrongylus vasorum infection in three dogs, J Smalf
Gustafson BW: Ivermectin in the treatment of Physaloptera praeputialis in
Anim Pract 46:93, 2005.
two cats, I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 31:416, 1995.
Geenen PL, Bresciani J, Boes I: The morphogenesis of Ascaris suurm to the
Hagan CJ: More on febantel and trichlorfon, Vet Med Small Anim Clin
infective third-stage larvae within the egg, J Parasitof 85:616, 1999.
74:6, 1979.
Genta RM, Schad GA: Fiaroides hirth: hyperinfective lungworm infection
Hamlen-Gomez H, Georgi JR: Equine helminth infections: control by
 in immunosuppressed dogs, Vet Pathoi 21:349, 1984.
 selective chemotherapy, Equine Vet I 23:198, 1991.
Georgi IR: Estimation of parasitic blood loss by whole-body counting, Am
Hanichen T, Hasslinger MA: Chronische Gastritis durch Offulammus tricus-
I Vet Res 25:246, 1964.
pis (Leuckart, 1865) bei einer Katze, Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr
Georgi JR: Filaroides hirthi: experimental transmission among Beagle dogs
90:59, 1977.
through ingestion of first-stage larvae, Science 194:735, 1976a.
Hanson KB: Test of the efficacy of single treatments with tracheal brushes
Georgi IR: Letter to the editor: accessions of the Laboratory of Parasitology
 in the mechanical removal of lungworms from foxes, I Am Vet Med
for 1975, Cornell Vet 66:604, 1976b.
Assoc 82:12, 1933.
Georgi IR: The Kikuchi-Enigk model of Strongylus vuigaris migrations in
Hargis AM, Prieur DJ, Blanchard JL: Prevalence, lesions, and differential
the horse, Cornefl Vet 63:220, 1973.
diagnosis of Ofulanus tricuspis infection in cats, Vet Pathof 20:7l, 1983.
Georgi JR, de Lahunta A, Percy DH: Cerebral coenurosis in a cat: report of 
Hasslinger MA: Olulanus tricuspis, the stomach worm of cats,Feline Pract
a case, Cornell Vet 59:127, 1969.
14:22, 1984.
Georgi JR, Fahnestock GR, Bohm MFK, Adsit JC: The migration and
Hayes MA, Creighton SR: A coenurus in the brain of a cat, Can Vet J
development of Filaroides hirthi in dogs, Parasitology 79:39, 1979a.
19:341, 1978.
Georgi IR, Georgi ME, Cleveland DI: Patency and transmission of
Hemmert-Halswick A, Bugge G: Trichinen und Trichinose, Ergebn Algem
Filaroides hirthi infection, Parasitology 75:251, 1977b.
Path u Path Anat 28:313, 1934.
Georgi IR, Georgi ME, Fahnestock GR, Theodorides VJ: Transmission and
Hearn FPD, Peregrine AS: Identification of foals infected with Parascaris
equorum apparently resistant to ivermectin, J Am Vet Med Assoc
40:829, 1979.
223:482, 2003.
Georgi JR, Slauson DO, Theodorides VJ: Anthelmintic activity of
Herd RP: Parasite control in horses: pasture sweeping, Mod Vet Pract
albendazole against Fiaroides hirthi lungworms in dogs, Am J Vet Res
67:893, 1986.
39:803, 1978.
Herd RP, Coman BJ: Transmission of Echinococcus granulosus from kan-
Georgi JR, Sprinkle CL: A case of human strongyloidosis apparently
garoos to domestic dogs, Aust Vet I 5l:591, 1975.
contracted from asymptomatic colony dogs, Am J Trop Hyg 23:
Herd RP, Donham JC: Effcacy of ivermectin against Onchocerca cervicalis
899, 1974.
microfilarial dermatitis in horses, Am J Vet Res 44:1l02, 1983.
Georgi JR, Whitlock JH: Erythrocyte loss and restitution in ovine hae-
Herd RP, Parker CF, McClure KE: Epidemiologic approach to the control
s saa f uy apou jeayieu siseq pue spoya isisououo
of sheep nematodes, IAm Vet Med Assoc 184:680, 1984.
26:310, 1965.
Herd RP, Streitel RH, McClure KE, et al: Control of periparturient
Georgi JR, Whitlock RH, Flinton JH: Fatal Trichuris discolor infection in a
rise in worm egg counts of lambing ewes, I Am Vet Med Assoc 186:
Holstein-Friesian heifer: report of a case, Cornelf Vet 62:58, 1972.
375, 1983.
Geurden T, Vercruysse J: Field effcacy of eprinomectin against a natural
Herd RP, Streitel RH, McClure KE, Parker CF: Control of hypobiotic and
Muellerius capilfaris infection in dairy goats, Vet Parasitof 147:190, 2007.
benzimidazole-resistant nematodes of sheep, J Am Vet Med AssoC
Gibson TE, Everett G: Ecology of the free-living stages of Nermatodirus
184:726, 1984.
battus, Res Vet Sci 31:323, 1981.
Hirth RS, Hottendorf GH: Lesions produced by a new lungworm in Beagle
Gill GV, Welch E, Bailey IW, et al: Chronic Strongyloides stercoralis infec-
dogs, Vet Pathol 10:385, 1973.
tion in former British Far East prisoners of war, QJM 97:789, 2004.
Hoberg EP, Alkire NL, de Queiroz A, Jones A: Out of Africa: origins of the
Gjestvang M: Ascaridiasis como causa de tastornos respiratorios agudos
Taenia tapeworms in humans, Proc Biol Sci 268:781, 2001.
y muerte en cerdos de cebo, Suis 22:26, 2005.
Hoberg EP, Zimmerman GL, Lichtenfels JR: First report of Nematodirus battus
Gnedina MP, Osipov AN: The life cycle of Paraflaria multipapillosa
(Dondamine and Drouilly, 1878) parasitic in the horse, Doklad Acad
 comparison to other species, Proc Helrminthof Soc Wash 53:80, 1986.
Nauk SSSR 131:1219, 1960.
Hobmaier A, Hobmaier M: Intermediate hosts of Aelurostrongyius abstru-
Goff WL, Ronald NC: Miracidia hatching technique for diagnosis of
sus of the cat, Proc Soc Exp Biof Med 32:1641, 1935.
canine schistosomiasis, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1l17:699, 1980.
Hollands RD: Autumn nematodirosis, Vet Rec ll5:526, 1984.
Goldberg S, Bursey CR: Transport of helminths to Hawai via the brown
Holmes DD, Kosanke SD, White GL: Fatal enterobiasis in a chimpanzee,
anole, Anolis sagrei (Polychrotidae), J Parasitol 86:750, 2000.
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 177:911, 1980.
Goncalves ALR, Machado GA, Goncalves-Pires MRF, et al: Evaluation of
Holmes RA, Klei TR, McClure JR, et al: Sequential mesenteric arteriogra-
strongyloidiasis in kennel dogs and keepers by parasitological and ser-
phy in pony foals during repeated inoculations of Strongylus vulgaris
ological assays, Vet Parasitof 147:132, 2007.
and treatment with ivermectin, Am J Vet Res 5l:66l, 1990.
Grandi G, Calvi LE, Venco L, et al: Aelurostrongylus abstrusus (cat lung-
Holzworth J, Georgi JR: Trichinosis in a cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc
worm) infection in five cats from Italy, Vet Parasitof 134:177, 2005.
165:186, 1974.
234
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
Hong ST, Lee SH, Lee SI, et al: Sustained-release praziquantel tablet: phar-
Kazacos KR: Baylisascaris procyonis and related species. In Samuel WM,
macokinetics and the treatment of clonorchiasis in beagle dogs,
Pybus MJ, Kocan AA,eds: Parasitic diseases of wild mammals, Ames,
Parasitof Res 91:316, 2003.
Iowa, 2001, Iowa State University Press.
Hoogstraten J, Connor DH, Neafie RC: Micronemiasis, In Pathology of
Kazacos KR, Reed WM, Kazacos EA, Thacker HL: Fatal cerebrospinal
tropical and extraordinary diseases, vol 2, Washington, DC,1976, Armed
disease caused by Baylisascaris procyonis in domestic rabbits, I Am Vet
Forces Institute of Pathology.
Med Assoc 183:967, 1983.
Hoover RC, Lincoln SD, Hall RF, Wescott R: Seasonal transmission of
Keeling ME, McClure HM: Pneumococcal meningitis and fatal enterobj-
 Fasciofa hepatica to cattle in northwestern United States, JArm Vet Med
asis in a chimpanzee, Lab Amirm Sci 24:92, 1974.
Assoc 184:695, 1984.
Ketzis J, Bowman DD, Fogarty EA, et al: Explaining premunition with kin
Hopkin DR, Ruiz-Tiben E, Eberhard ML, et al: Progress toward global
selection. In Eighteenth International Conference of the Worid Association
eradication of dracunculiasis, January 2005-May 2007, MMWR Morb
for the Advancerment of Veterinary Parasitology, August, 2001.
Mortal Wkly Rep 56:813, 2007.
Khoshoo V, Craver R, Schantz P, et al: Abdominal pain, pangut eosinophi-
Hopkins TJ, Gyr P: Synergism of a combination of febantel and
lia, and a dog hookworm infection, I Ped Gastroent Nutr 2l:48l, 1995.
Pyrantel embonate against Ancylostoma caninum on dogs, Vet Med
Kim DY, Stewart TB, Bauer RW, Mitchell M: Parastrongyfus
Rev 61:3, 1991.
(Angiostrongylus) cantonensis now endemic in Louisiana wildlife,
Hopkins TJ, Gyr P, Schimmel A: The effect of pyrantel embonate
J Parasitol 88:1024, 2002.
with oxantel embonate-praziquantel, pyrantel embonate with febantel.
Kingsbury PA, Reid JFS: Anthelmintic activity of paste and drench for
praziquantel and milbemycin oxime on natural infestations of
mulations of oxfendazole in horses, Vet Rec 109:404, 1981.
Ancylostoma caninum in dogs, Aust Vet Pract 28:53, 1998.
Kingston N, Williams ES, Bergstrom RC, et al: Cerebral coenuriasis in
Hosie BD: Autumn nematodirosis, Vet Rec ll5:666, 1984.
domestic cats in Wyoming and Alaska, Proc Helminthol Soc Wash
pnp alq ut aujod jo alon sisorsey ia oua 'lf emes 'h otass
51:309, 1984.
hyperplasia, Science 198:1157, 1977.
Kirby-Smith JL, Dove WE, White GF: Creeping eruption, Arch Dermatol
Isseroff H, Spengler RN, Charnock DR: Fascioliasis: similarities of the anemia
Syphilof 13:137, 1926.
 in rats to that produced by infused proline, I Parasitof 65:709, 1979.
Kirkpatrick CE, Megella C: Use of ivermectin in treatment of
Jackson R, Lance DM, Townsend K, Stewart K: Isolation of anthelmintic
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus and Toxocara cati infections in a cat, J Am
resistant Ancylostoma caninum, N Z Vet J 35:215, 1987.
Vet Med Assoc 190:1309, 1987.
Jackson RF, Otto GF, Bauman PM, et al: Distribution of heartworms in
Kirkpatrick CE, Nelson GR: Ivermectin treatment of urinary capillariasis 
the right side of the heart and adjacent vessels of the dog, I Am Vet Med
in a dog, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 19l:701, 1987.
Assoc 149:515, 1966.
Kirschner BI, Dunn JP, Ostler HB: Conjunctivitis caused by Thelaziua
Jackson RF, Seymour WG, Growney PJ, Otto GF: Surgical treatment of the
californiensis, Am I Ophthaimol 110:573,1990.
caval syndrome of canine heartworm disease, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Klei TR, Chapman MR, French DD, Taylor HW: Evaluation of ivermectin 
171:1065, 1977.
at an elevated dose against equine cyathostome larvae, Vet Parasitof
Jackson RF, von Lichtenberg F, Otto GF: Occurrence of adult heartworms
47:99, 1993.
in the venae cayvae of dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 141:117, 1962.
Klei TR, Rehbein S, Visser M, et al: Reevaluation of ivermectin efficacy
James MT: The fhies that cause myiasis in man, USDA Misc Publication,
against equine gastrointestinal parasites, Vet Parasitol 98:315, 2001.
Washington, DC, 1947, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Klei TR, Torbert BJ, Chapman MR, Turk MA: Efficacy of ivermectin in
Jana D: A note on canine filaroideasis and its successful treatment, Intas
injectable and oral paste formulations against 8-week-old Strongyfus
Pofivet 3:92, 2002.
vuigaris in ponies, Am I Vet Res 45:183, 1984.
Jarrett WFH, McIntyre WIM, Jennings FW, et al: The natural history of
Klotins KC, Martin SW, Bonnett BN, et al: Canine heartworm testing in
parasitic bronchitis with notes on prophylaxis and treatment, Vet Rec
Canada: are we being effective? Can Vet I 4l:929, 2000.
69:1329, 1957.
Knight DH, Lok JB: Seasonal timing of heartworm chemoprophylaxis in
Jasko DJ, Roth L: Granulomatous colitis associated with small strongyle
the United States. In Proceedings of the 1995 Heartworm Symposium,
larvae in a horse, I Am Vet Med Assoc 185:553, 1984.
Auburn, Alabama, March 30, 1995.
Jemelka ED: Removal of Setaria digitata from the anterior chamber of the
Kopp SR, Kotze AC, McCarthy JIS, Coleman GT: High-level pyrantel resistance
equine eye, Vet Med Smalf Anim Clin 71:673, 1976.
in the hookworm Ancylostoma caninu, Vet Parasitof 143:299, 2007.
Jergens AA, Greve JH: Endoscopy case of the month: chronic vomiting in a
Kotake M: An experimental study on passing through the mammary gland
dog, Vet Med 87:872, 1992.
of ascaris and hookworm larvae, Osaka, Igakkai Zasshi 28:125l, 1929a.
Jones LC, Worley DE: Use of fenbendazole for long-term control of pro-
Kotake M: Hookworm larvae in the mammary gland, Osaka, Igakkai
uoyaq urejunon Ayooy Sursuer-ay ur suromsunl Psuonsm
Zasshi 28:2493, 1929b.
sheep, I Widl Dis 33:365, 1997.
Kotani T, Powers KG: Developmental stages of Dirofilaria immitis in the
Kalkofen VP: Effect of dichlorvos on eggs and larvae of Ancylostoma cani-
dog, Am I Vet Res 43:2199, 1982.
num, Am I Trop Med Hyg 20:436, 1971.
Kotula AW, Murrell KD, Acosta-Stein L, et al: Destruction of Trichinella 
Kanter M, Mott J, Ohashi N, et al: Analysis of 16S rRNA and 51-kilodalton
spiralis during cooking, I Food Sci48:765, 1983.
antigen gene and transmission in mice of Ehrlichia risticti in virgulate
Kozek WJ: Transovarially-transmitted intracellular microorganizms in
trematodes from Elirmia livescens snails in Ohio, J Clin Microbiol
adult and larval stages of Brugia malayi, I Parasitol 63:992, 1977.
38:3349, 2000.
Krogdahl DW, Thilsted JP, Olsen SK: Ataxia and hypermetria caused by
Kaplan RM, Burke JM, TerillTH,et al: Validation of the FAMACHA eye
Parelaphostrongyius tenuis infection in llamas, J Am Vet Med Assoc
color chart for detecting clinical anemia in sheep and goats on farms in
190:191, 1987.
the southern United States, Vet Parasitof 123:105, 2004.
Kichle M, Knorr HLJ, Medenblik-Frysch S, et al: Diffuse unilateral sub-
Kaplan RM, Vidyashankar AN, Howell SB, et al: A novel approach for
 acute neuroretinitis syndrome in a German most likely caused by the
 combining the use of in vitro and in vivo data to measure and detect
raccoon roundworm, Baylisascaris procyonis, Graefes Arch Clin Exp
emerging moxidectin resistance in gastrointestinal nematodes of goats,
Ophthaimol 231:48, 1993.
Int I Parasitof 37:795, 2007.
Kume S, Itagaki S: On the life-cycle of Diroflaria immitis in the dog as the
Karmanova EM: Fundamentals of nematology, vol 20: Dioctophymatoidea of
final host, Br Vet I 11l:16, 1955.
animals and man and diseases caused by them, Moscow, 1968, Nauka
Lamb CR: What is your diagnosis? I Smalf Anim Pract 33:358, 1992.
 Publishers (Translated from Russian by Amerind Publishing Co Pvt Ltd,
Langworthy NG, Renz A, Mackenstet U, et al: Macrofilaricidal activity of
New Delhi, 1985.)
tetracycline against the filarial nematode Onchocerca ochengi: elimination
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
235
of Wolbachia precedes worm death and suggests a dependent relation-
Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, McDowell KJ, et al: Field test of the activity of the
ship, Proc Biof Sci 267:1063, 2000.
low dose rate (2.64 mg/kg) of pyrantel tartrate on Anoplocephala perfo-
Lavy E, Aroch I, Bark H, et al: Evaluation of doramectin for the treatment 
fata in thoroughbreds on a farm in central Kentucky, J Heirm Soc Wash
of experimental canine spirocercosis, Vet Parasitof 109:65, 2002.
64:283, 1997.
Leathers CW, Foreyt WJ, Fetcher A, Foreyt KM: Clinical fascioliasis in
Madigan JE, Pusterla N, Johnson E, et al: Transmission of Ehrlichua
domestic goats in Montana, J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:1451, 1982.
ristici, the agent of Potomac horse fever, using naturally infected
Ledet AE, Greve JH: Lungworm infection in Iowa swine, I Am Vet Med
aquatic insects and helminth vectors: preliminary report, Equine Vet J
Assoc 148:547, 1966.
32:275, 2000.
 Levine ND, Clark DT: The relation of weekly pasture rotation to acquisi-
Maizels RM, Meghji M: Repeated patent infection of adult dogs with
tion of gastrointestinal nematodes by sheep, Ill Vet 4:42, 1961.
Toxocara canis, I Helminthol 58:327, 1984.
Lia RP, Traversa D, Agostini A, Otranto D: Field effcacy of moxidectin 1
Malone JB, Loyacano AF, Hugh-Jones ME, et al: A three-year study on
per cent against Thelaziua calipaeda in naturall infected dogs, Vet Rec
seasonal transmission and control of Fasciola hepatica of cattle in
154:143, 2004.
Louisiana, Prev Vet Med 3:131, 1984.
Lichtenfels JR: CIH keys to the nematode parasites of vertebrates. VIIl. Keys
Malone JB, Ramsey RT, Loyacano AF: Efficacy of clorsulon for treatment
togeneraof thesuperfamiliesAncylostomatoidea andDiaphanocephaloi
 of mature naturally acquired and 8-week-old experimentally induced
dea, Farnham Royal, Bucks, England, 1980, Commonwealth Agricul-
Fasciola hepatica infections in cattle, Am IVet Res 45:851, 1984.
tural Bureaux.
Mansfield LS, Schad GA: Ivermectin treatment of naturally acquired and
Lichtenfels JR, Pilitt PA, Kotani T, et al: Morphogenesis of developmental
experimentally induced Strongyloides stercoralis infections in dogs, JAm
stages of Dirofilaria immitis (Nematoda) in the dog, Proc Helminthol Soc
Vet Med Assoc 201:726, 1992.
Wash 52:98, 1985.
Mansfield LS, Urban JF Ir: The pathogenesis of necrotic proliferative coli-
Lindemann BA, Evans TL, McCall JW: Clinical responses of dogs to exper-
tis in swine is linked to whipworm induced suppression of mucosal
imentally induced Dipetalonema reconditum infection, Am J Vet Res
immunity to resident bacteria, Vet Immunol Immunopathol 50:l, 1996.
44:2170, 1983.
Martinez GMH: Tratamiento con praziquantel en la parasitosis ocasionada
Lindemann BA, McCall JW: Experimental Dipetalonema reconditum infec-
por Thysanosoma actinoides en borregos, Vet Mex 15:230, 1984.
tions in dogs, I Parasitof 70:167, 1984.
Martins MWS, Aston G, Simpson VR, et al: Angiostrongylosis in
 Lindo JF, Atkins NS, Lee MG, et al: Parasite-specific serum IgG following
Cornwall: clinical presentation of eight cases, J Smafl Anim Pract
successful treatment of endemic strongyloidiasis using ivermectin, Trans
34:20, 1993.
R Soc Trop Med Hyg 90:702, 1996.
Mason KV: Canine neural angiostrongylosis: the clinical and therapeutic
Little MD: Comparative morphology of six species of Strongyloiudes
features of 55 natural cases, Aust Vet I 64:201, 1987.
(Nematoda) and redefinition of the genus, I Parasitof 52:69, 1966a.
Mayhew IG, deLahunta A, Georgi JR, Aspros DG: Naturally occurring
 Little MD: Dormant Ancylostoma caninum larvae in muscle as a source of
cerebrospinal parelaphostrongylosis, Cornefl Vet 66:56, 1976.
subsequent patent infection in the dog. In Fifty-Third Annual Meeting of
McCall J: Heartworm and Wolbachia: therapeutic implications, American
the American Society of Parasitology, Chicago, 1978.
Heartworm Society. Presented at 2007 Heartworm Symposium,
 Little MD: Seven new species of Strongyloides (Nematoda) from Louisiana,
Washington, DC, 2007.
J Parasitol 52:85, 1966b.
 McCoy OR: The influence of temperature, hydrogen-ion concentration
Loos-Frank B: One or two intermediate hosts in the life cycle of Mesocestoides
and oxygen tension on the development of the eggs and larvae of the
(Cyclophyllidea, Mesocestoididae), Harasitof Res 77:726, 1991.
dog hookworm Ancylostomma caninum, Am I Hyg 1l:413, 1930.
Love S, Biddle A: WormKill 2000, No. DAI/118, 2000, Agnote-NSW-
McCraw BM, Slocombe JOD: Early development of and pathology asso-
Agriculture.
ciated with Strongylus edentatus,Can J Comp Med 38:124,1974.
Loveless RM, Anderson FL, Ramsay MJ, Hedelius RK: Echinococcus gran-
McCraw BM, Slocombe JOD: Strongylus edentatus. development and
ulosus in dogs and sheep in central Utah, 1971-1976, Am J Vet Res
lesions from ten weeks postinfection to patency, Can I Comp Med
39:499, 1978.
42:340, 1978.
Ludwig KG, Craig TM, Bowen JM, et al: Efficacy of ivermectin in
McKellar Q, Bairden K, Duncan JL, et al: Change in N. battus epidemiol-
controlling Strongyloides westeri infections in foals, Am J Vet Res
ogy, Vet Rec 113:309, 1983.
44:314, 1983.
McKenna DB: Anthelmintic resistance in cattle nematodes in New
Lunn J, Lee R, Martin P, Malik R: Antemortem diagnosis of canine neural 
Zealand: is it increasing? N Z Vet I 44:76, 1996.
angiostrongylosis using ELISA, Aust Vet J 8l:128, 2003.
Medica DL, Hanaway MJ, Ralston SL, et al: Grazing behavior of horses
Lyons ET, Drudge JH, Tolliver S: Ivermectin: activity against larval
 aa aua I yuonau psuons on uosodspand ansed uo
Strongyilus vulgaris and Trichostrongylus axei in experimental infections
16:421, 1996.
in ponies, Am I Vet Res 43:1449, 1982.
Mello EBF, Maia AAM, Mello LAP: Localizacao do Dipetalonema recondi-
Lyons ET, Drudge JIH, Tolliver S: On the life cycle of Strongyloides westeri
tum(Grassi, 1890) (Nematoda: Filaridae) de Canis familiaris, Braz J Vet
in the equine, I Parasitol 59:780, 1973.
Res Anim Sei 31:9, 1994.
Lyons ET, Drudge JH, Tolliver S: Parasites from the mare's milk, Blood
Michel JF, Richards M, Altman JFB, et al: Effect of anthelmintic treatment
Horse 95:2270, 1969.
 on the milk yield of dairy cows in England, Scotland, and Wales, Vet Rec
Lyons ET, Tolliver SC: Prevalence of parasite eggs (Strongyloides westeri,
111:546, 1982.
Parascaris equorum, and strongyles) and oocysts (Eimeria leuckarti)
Migaud P, Marty C, Chartier C: Quel es votre diagnostic? Point Vet 23:989,
in the feces of Thoroughbred foals on 14 farms in central Kentucky
1992.
in 2003, Parasitol Res 92:400, 2004.
Milks HJ: A preliminary report on verminous bronchitis in dogs, Cornell
Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JH, et al: Activity of praziquantel against
Vet 6:50, 1916.
Anoplocephaia perfoliata (Cestoda) inhorses, IHelm Soc Wash 59:1,1992.
Miller CL, Kinsella JM, Garner MM, et al: Endemic infections of
Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JH, et al: Critical test evaluation (1977-
Parastrongyilus (Angiostrongylus) costaricensis in two species of nonhu-
1992) of drug effcacy against endoparasites featuring benzimidazole-
man primates, raccoons, and an opossum from Miami, Florida,
resistant small strongyles (population S) in Shetland ponies, Vet
JParasitol 92:406, 2006.
Parasitol 66:67, 1996.
Miller WR, Merton DA: Dirofilariasis in a ferret, I Arm Vet Med Assoc
Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JH, et al: Eyeworms ( Thelaziua facrymalis) in
180:1103, 1982.
one- to four-year-old thoroughbreds at necropsy in Kentucky, Am J Vet 
Mirck MH: Cyathostominose: een vorm van ernstige strongylidose,
Res 47:315, 1986.
Tydschr Diergeneeskd 102:932, 1977.
236
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Monahan CM, Chapman MR, French DD, Klei TR: Efficacy of moxi-
Parrott TY, Greiner EC, Parrott JD: Dirofiaria immitis infection in three
dectin oral gel against Onchocerca cervicalis microfilariae, J Parasitol
ferrets, I Am Vet Med Assoc 184:582, 1984.
81:117, 1995.
Parsons JC, Bowman DD, Gillette DM, Grieve RB: Disseminated granu-
Moncol DJ: Supplement to the life history of Strongyloides ransomi
lomatous disease in a cat caused by larvae of Toxocara canis, I Comp
 Schwartz and Alicata, 1930 (Nematoda: Strongyloididae) of pigs, Proc
Pathol 99:343, 1988.
Helminth Soc Wash 42:86, 1975.
Parsons JC, Bowman DD, Grieve RB: Pathological and haematological
Moncol DJ, Batte EG: Transcolostral infection of newborn pigs with
responses of cats experimentally infected with Toxocara canis larvae,
Strongyloides ransomi, Vet Med SmallAnim Clin 61:583, 1966.
Int I Parasitof 19:479, 1989.
Moravec F: Proposal of a new systematic arrangement of nematodes of the
Patel G, Arvelakis A, Sauter BV: Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome
family Capillaridae, Fofia Parasitof ( Praha) 29:119, 1982.
 after intestinal transplantation, Transpl Infect Dis 10:137, 2008.
Moravec F, Prokopic J, Shlikas AV: The biology of nematodes of the family
Patteson MW, Gibbs C, Wotton PR, Day MJ: Angiostrongylus vasorum
Capillaridae Neveu-Lemaire, 1936, Fofia Parasitol (Praha) 34:39, 1987.
infection in seven dogs, Vet Rec 133:565, 1993.
Moreland AF, Battles AH, Nease JH: Dirofilariasis in a ferret, I Arm Vet
Patton S,Faulkner CT: Prevalence of Dirofilaria immitis and Dipetalonema
Med Assoc 188:864, 1986.
reconditum infection in dogs: 805 cases (1980-1989), I Am Vet Med
Mortensen LL, Williamson LH, Terrill TH, et al: Evaluation of prevalence
Assoc 200:1533, 1992.
 and clinical implications of anthelmintic resistance in gastrointestinal
Pauli B, Althaus S, Von Tscharner C: Uber die Organisation von
nematodes in goats, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 223:495, 2003.
Thromben nach Arterienverletzungen durch wandernde 4. Larven-
Msolla P: Bovine parasitic otitis: an up-to-date review, Vet Ann 1989:
stadien von Strongyius vuigaris beim Pferd (licht- und elektronmikro-
2973, 1989.
scopische Untersuchungen), Beitr Pathof 155:357, 1975.
Mueller JF: The biology of Spirometra, I Parasitof 60:3, 1974.
Pearce JR, Hendrix CM, Allison N, Butler JM: Macracanthorhynchus ingens
Mueller JF, Coulston F: Experimental human infection with the sparga-
infection in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 219:194, 2001.
num larva of Spirommetra mansonoides (Mueller, 1935), Am J Trop Med
Pearson JC: Studies on the life cycles and morphology of the larval stages
2:399, 1941.
 of Alaria arisaemoides Augustine and Uribe 1927 and Alariu canis LaRue
Murrell KD, Djordjevic M, Cuperlovic K, et al: Epidemiology of
and Fallis, 1936 (Trematoda: Diplostomidae): Can J Zool 34:295, 1956.
Trichinella infection in the horse: the risk from animal product feeding
Peregrine AS: Rational use of diagnostic tests. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC,
practices, Vet Parasitof 123:223, 2004.
eds: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 6, St Louis, 2005, Elsevier.
Murrell KD, Eriksen L, Nansen P, et al: Ascaris suumr: a revision of its early
Peterson EN, Barr SC, Gould WJ 3rd, et al: Use of fenbendazole for treat-
migratory path and implications for human ascariasis, J Parasitof
 p   i o e un uau s o jo u
83:255, 1997.
202:1483, 1993.
Myers RK, Monroe WE, Greve JH: Cerebrospinal nematodiasis in a cock-
Petithory IC, Beddock A: Role de Toxocara cati dans le syndrome de larva
atiel, I Am Vet Med Assoc 183:1089, 1983.
migrans visceral, Bull Soc Fr Parasitof 15:199, 1997.
Nadler SA, Carreno RA, Adams BJ, et al: Molecular phylogenetics and
Pienaar JG, Basson PA, du Plessis JL, et al: Experimental studies with
diagnosis of soil and clinical isolates of Halicephalobus gingivalis
Strongyloides papillosus in goats, Onderstepoort J Vet Res 66:191, 1999.
(Nematoda: Cephalobina: Panagrolaimoidea), an opportunistic patho-
Pisanu B, Bain O: Aonchotheca musimon n. sp. (Nematoda: Capilarinae)
gen of horses, Int I Parasitof 33:1l15, 2003.
from the mouflon Ovis musimon in the sub-Antarctic Kerguelen
Nakamura Y, Tsuji N, Taira N, Hirose H: Parasitic females of Strongylordes
archipelago, with comments on the relationships with A. bilobata
papilosus as a pathogenic stage for sudden cardiac death in infected
(Bhalerao, 1933) Moravec, 1982 and other species of the genus, Syst
lambs, I Vet Med Sci 56:723, 1994.
Parasitol 43:17, 1999.
Ndtvedt A, Dohoo I, Sanchez J, et al: Increase in milk yield following
Poeger HW, Kloosterman A, Bargeman G, et al: Milk yield increases after
eprinomectin treatment at calving in pastured dairy cattle, Vet
anthelmintic treatment of dairy cattle related to some parameters esti-
Parasitof 105:191, 2002.
mating helminth infection, Vet Parasitof 35:103, 1990.
Nelson GS: Dipetalonema reconditum (Grassi, 1889) from the dog with a
Poeger HW, Schoenmaker GJW, Kloosterman A, Borgsteede FH: Effect of
note on its development in the flea, Ctenocephalides felis in the louse,
 anthelmintic treatment of dairy cattle on milk production related to some
Heterodoxus spiniger, I Helinthof 36:297, 1962.
parameters estimating nematode infection, Vet Parasitol 34:239, 1989.
omoq mnund jo uorssusuen ayn uo jodau Areuruaid ia aan
Potter ME, Kruse MB, Matthews MA, et al: A sausage-associated outbreak
in South Africa, Onderstepoort J Vet Res 4l:41, 1975.
of trichinosis in Ilinois, Am I Public Health 66:194, 1976.
Nevill EM: The epidemiology of Paraflariu bovicola in the Transvaal
Poynter D: Parasitic bronchitis, Adv Parasitof l:179, 1963.
Bushveld of South Africa, Onderstepoort J Vet Res 52:261, 1985.
Pozio E, LaRosa G, Murrell KD, Lichtenfels JR: Taxonomic revision of the
New D, Little MD, Cross J: Angiostrongylus cantonensis infection from
genus Trichinella, I Parasitol 78:654, 1992.
eating raw snails, N Engl I Med 332:1105, 1995.
Prociv P, Croese J: Human enteric infection with Ancylostoma caninumm:
Nichols DK, Montali RJ, Phillips LG, et al: Parelaphostrongylus tenuis in
doul myoy 'sisouooz mau, e jo iyal ay u! pasierddear suromyooy
captive reindeer and sable antelope, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 188:619, 1986.
62:23, 1996.
Ogbourne CP, Duncan JL: Strongylus vuigaris in the horse: its biology and
Proudman CJ, Edwards GB: Are tapeworms associated with equine colic?
veterinary importance, CIH Misc Pub No 4, Farnham Royal, Slough,
A case control study, Equine Vet J 25:224, 1993.
England, 1977, Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux.
Proudman CJ, French NP, Trees AJ: Tapeworm infection is a significant 
Orihel TC: Morphology of the larval stages of Diroflaria immitis in the
risk factor for spasmodic colic and ileal impaction colic in the horse,
dog, I Parasitof 47:252, 1961.
Eguine Vet30:194,1993.
Pai PJ, Blackburn BG, Kazacos KR, et al: Full recovery from Bayfisascaris
Pugh RE: Effects on the development of Dipylidium caninum and on the
 procyonis eosinophilic meningitis, Emerg Infect Dis 13:928, 2007.
host reaction to this parasite in the adult flea (Ctenocephalides felis felis),
Palsson PA: Echinococcosis and its elimination in Iceland, Hist Med Vet
Parasitol Res 73:17l, 1987.
1:4, 1976.
 Pusterla N, Johnson E, Chae JS, et al: Molecular detection of an Ehrlichia-
Papadopoulos E, Sotiraki S, Himonas C, Fthenakis GC: Treatment of small
like agent in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) from northern
lungworm infestation in sheep by using moxidectin, Vet Parasitol
California, Vet Parasitol 92:199, 2000.
121:329, 2004.
 Pusterla N, Watson JL, Wilson WD, et al: Cutaneous and ocular habronemiasis
Park SY, Glaser C, Murray WJ, et al: Raccoon roundworm (Bayfisascaris
in horses: 63 cases (1988-2002), J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:978, 2003.
procyonis) encephalitis: case report and field investigation, Pediatrics
Rawlings CA, Raynaud JP, Lewis RE, Duncan JR: Pulmonary thromboem-
106:E56, 2000.
bolism and hypertension after thiacetarsamide vs. melarsomine
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
237
dihydrochloride treatment of Dirofilaria immitis infection in dogs, Am J
tablets on Toxocara canis egg shedding in naturally infected pups, Vet
Vet Res 54:920, 1993.
Parasitof 137:369, 2006.
Rebhun WC, Mirro EJ, Georgi ME, Kern TJ: Habronemic conjunctivitis in
Schmid K, Diwel D: Zum Einsatz von Fenbendazol (Panacur Tableten
horses, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 179:469, 1981.
ad us. vet.) gegen Helminthenbefall bei Katzen, Trierartzl Umschau
45:868, 1980.
ment heifers, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 12:76l, 1990.
Schmidt RE, Prine JR: Severe enterobiasis in a chimpanzee, Pathof Vet
Reinemeyer CR: Should you deworm your client's dairy cattl? Vet Med
7:56, 1970.
90:496, 1995.
Schnieder T, Lechler M, Epe C, et al: The efficacy of doramectin on
Reinhardt S, Ottenjann M, Schunack B, et al: Lungenwurmbefall
arrested larvae of Ancylostoma in early pregnancy of bitches, J Vet
(Aelurostrongylus abstrusus) bei einer Katze, Kleintierpraxis 49:239, 2004.
Med B Infect Dis Vet Public Heath 43:351, 1996.
Rendano VT, Georgi JR, Fahnestock GR, et al: Fiaroides hirthi lungworm
Schougaard H, Nielsen MK: Apparent ivermectin resistance of Parascaris
infection in dogs: its radiographic appearance, Vet Radiol 20:2, 1979a.
equorum in foals in Denmark, Vet Rec 160:439, 2007.
 Rendano VT, Georgi JR, White KK, et al: Equine verminous arteritis: an
Schusser G, Kopf N, Prosl H: Dinndarmverstopfung (Obturatio intestini
arteriographic evaluation of the larvicidal activity of albendazole, Equine
jejuni) bei einem finf Monate alten Traberhengstfohlen durch
Vet I 11:223, 1979b.
Askariden nach Eingabe eines Anthelmintikums, Wien Tierartzl Mschr
Rodger IL: Change in N. batus epidemiology, Vet Rec 112:261, 1983.
75:152, 1988.
Roepstorff A, Murrell KD: Transmission dynamics of helminth parasites of
Shen JL, Gasser RB, Chu DY, et al: Human thelaziosis: a neglected parasitic
pigs on continuous pasture: Oesophagostomum dentatum and Hyo-
disease of the eye, I Parasitol 92:872, 2006.
strongylus rubidus, Int I Parasitol 27:553, 1997.
Shinonaga S, Miyamoto K, Kano R, et al: Musca hervie Villeneuve, 1922 as
Rolfe PF, Boray IC: Chemotherapy of paramphistomiasis in cattle, Aust
an intermediate host of eyeworms (Thelazia) in Japan, I Med Entomof
Vet I 64:328, 1987.
11:595, 1974.
 Rolfe PF, Boray IC: Comparative efficacy of moxidectin, and ivermectin/
Shoop WL, Corkum KC: Transmammary infection of newborn by larval
 corsulon combination, and closantel against immature paramphis-
trematodes, Science 223:1082, 1984.
tomes in cattle, Aust Vet J 70:265, 1993.
Shoop WL, Egerton JR, Eary CH, et al: Control of Toxocara canis trans-
Rommel M, Grelck H, Horchner F: Zur Wirksamkeit von Praziquantel
mission from bitch to ofspring with ivermectin. In Sixty-Third Annual
gegen Bandwirmer in experimentell infizierten Hunden und Katzen,
Meeting of the American Society of Parasitologists, 1988.
Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr 89:255, 1976.
Sithole F, Dohoo I, Leslie K, et al: Effect of eprinomectin pour-on treat-
 Ronald NC, Craig TM: Fenbendazole for the treatment of Heterobiharzia
ment around calving on reproduction parameters in adult dairy cows
americana infection in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 182:172, 1983.
with limited outdoor exposure, Prev Vet Med 75:267, 2006.
Roneus O: Studies on the aetiology and pathogenesis of white spots in the
Sithole F, Dohoo I, Leslie K, et al: Effect of eprinomectin treatment at
liver of pigs, Acta Vet Scand 7:l, 1966.
calving on milk production in dairy herds with limited outdoor expo-
Rossi L, Peruccio C: Thelaziosi oculare nel canei aspeti clinici e terapeu-
sure, I Dairy Sci 88:929, 2005.
tici, Veterinaria 3:47, 1989.
Slocombe JOD: Prevalence and treatment of tapeworms in horses, Can Vet
 Roth L, Georgi ME, King JM, Tennant BC: Parasitic encephalitis due to
J20:136, 1979.
Baylisascaris sp. in wild and captive woodchucks, (Marmota monax),
Slocombe JOD, Bhactendu-Srivastava B, Surgeoner GA: The transmission
Vet Pathol 19:658, 1982.
period for heartworm in Canada. In Proceedings of the 1995 Heartworm
 Rothstein N: Canine microfilariasis in sentry dogs in the United States, J
Symposium, Auburn, Alabama, March 31, 1995.
Parasitof 49:49, 1963.
Slocombe JOD, de Gannes RVG, Lake MC: Macrocyclic lactone-resistant
Parascaris equorum on stud farms in Canada and effectiveness of fen-
fluke infection in a cat, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 180:545, 1982.
bendazole and pyrantel pamoate, Vet Parasitof 145:37l, 2007.
Rousselot R, Pellissier A: Il. Oesophagostomose nodulaire a Oeso-
Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM: Controlled tests of ivermectin against
phagostomum stephanostommum du gorille et du chimpanzee, Soc Path
migrating Strongyfus vuigaris in ponies, Am J Vet Res 42:1050, 1981.
Exotique Butll 45:568, 1952.
Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM: Evaluation of pyrantel pamoate, nitramisole,
Russell AF: The development of helminthiasis in thoroughbred foals,
and avermectin Bla against migrating Strongyfus vuigaris larvae, Can
J Comp Pathol 58:107, 1948.
J Comp Med 44:93, 1980.
Saari SAM, Nikander SE: Pelodera (syn. Rhabditis) strongyloides as a cause of
Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM, Pennock PW, Baird JD: Effectiveness of
dermatitis: a report of 11 dogs from Finland, Acta Vet Scand 48:18, 2006.
fenbendazole against later fourth-stage Strongyius vuigaris in ponies,
Sakamoto T: The anthelmintic effect of Droncit on adult tapeworms
Am J Vet Res 44:2285, 1983.
of Hydatigera taeniaeformis, Mesocestoides corti, Echinococcus multi-
Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM, Pennock PW, et al: Effectivenes of iver-
focularis, Diphyllobothrium erinacei, and D. latum, Vet Med Rev l:64,
mectin against later fourth-stage Strongylus vulgaris in ponies, Am J Vet
1977.
Res 43:1525, 1982.
Sanchez J, Ndtvedt A, Dohoo I, DesCoteaux L: The effect of eprinomectin
Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM, Pennock PW, et al: Effectiveness of oxfen-
ul smos Aiiep lnpe ul siajaered uononpordan uo Surajeo ie juawieanl
dazole against early and later fourth-stage Strongys vulgarisin ponies,
Canada, Prev Vet Med 56:165, 2002.
An I Vet Res 47:495, 1986.
Santen DR, Chastain CB, Schmidt DA: Effcacy of pyrantel pamoate
Slocombe JOD, Rendano VT, Owen RR, et al: Arteriography in ponies
against Physaloptera in a cat, I Amm Anirm Hosp Assoc 29:53, 1993.
with Strongylus vuigaris arterit, Can I Commp Med 4l:137, 1977.
Schad GA: Experimentally induced arrested development of parasite larvae
Slocombe JOD, Villeneuve A: Heartworm in dogs in Canada in 1991, Can.
of hookworms, Proc 3rd Int Congr Parasitof 2:772, 1974.
Vet 34:630, 1993.
Schad GA: Ancylostoma duodenale: maintenance through six generations
Smith HL, Rajan TV; Tetracycline inhibits development of the infective-
of helminth-naive pups, Exp Parasitol 47:246, 1979.
stage larvae of filarial nematodes in vitro, Exp Parasitol 95:265, 2000.
Schad GA, Hellman ME, Muncey DW: Strongyloides stercoralis hyperin-
Smith MC, Bailey CS, Baker N, et al: Cerebral coenurosis in a cat, J Am Vet
fection in immunosuppressed dogs, Exp Parasitot 57:287, 1984.
Med Assoc 192:82, 1988.
Schad GA, Page MR: Ancylostoma caniumm: adult worm removal, cortico-
Spratt DM: Australian ecosystems, capricious food chains and parasitic
steroid treatment, and resumed development of arested larvae in dogs,
consequences for people, Int I Parasitof 35:717, 2005.
Exp Parasitol 54:303, 1982.
Spratt DM, Beveridge I, Andrews JRH, Dennett X: Haycocknema per-
Schenker R, Cody R, Strehlau G: Comparative effects of milbemycin
plexum ng, n. sp. (Nematoda: Robertdolfusidae): an intramyofibre
oxime-based and  febantel-pyrantel embonate based anthelmintic
parasite in man, Syst Parasitol 43:123, 1999.
238
C H A P T E R 4 Helminths
Sprent JFA: Observations on the development of Toxocara canis (Werner,
Valet-Picavet S: Une bronchite tres "verminuese" ou filaroidose a Osterus
1782) in the dog, Parasitology 48:184, 1958.
oseri chez un chien, Action Vet l157:19, 1991.
Sprent JFA: Post-parturient infection of the bitch with Toxocara canis,
Vassiliades G, Bouffet P, Friot D, et al: Traitement de la thelaziose oculaire
J Parasitol 47:284, 1961.
bovine au Senegal, Rev Elev Med Vet Pays Trop 28:315, 1975.
Sprent JFA: The life history and development of Toxocara cati (Schrank,
Vatta AF, Letty BA, van der, Linde MI, et al: Testing for clinical anaemia
1788) in the domestic cat, Parasitology 46:54, 1956.
-uo rood-aounosa xapun pauey sieo u dds snyououan kq pasnes
Stewart DF: Studies on the resistance of sheep to infestation with
ditions in South Africa using an eye colour chart developed for sheep,
Haemonchus contortus and Trichostrongylus spp. and on the immuno-
Vet Parasitol 99:1, 2001.
logical reactions of sheep exposed to infestation. IV. The antibody
Vermunt JJ, West DM, Pomroy WE: Multiple resistance to ivermectin
and oxfendazole in Cooperia species of cattle in New Zealand, Vet Rec
phenomenon, Aust I Agr Res l:427, 1950.
137:43, 1995.
Stewart DF: Studies on the resistance of sheep to infestation with
Verster A: A taxonomic revision of the genus Taenia Linnaeus, 1758,
Haemonchus contortus and Trichostrongyilus spp. and on the immuno-
Onderstepoort J Vet Res 36:3, 1969.
logical reactions of sheep exposed to infestation. V. The nature of the
Virginia P, Nagakura K, Ferreira O, Tateno S: Serologic evidence of tox-
"self-cure" phenomenon, Aust I Agr Res 4:100, 1953.
ocariasis in northeast Brazil, Jpn J Med Sci Biof 44:1, 1991.
Stoll NR: Studies with the strongyloid nematode Haemonchus contortus. I.
von Samson-Himmelstjerna G, Fritzen B, Demeler J, et al: Cases of reduced
 Acquired resistance of hosts under natural reinfection conditions out-
Cyathostomin egg-reappearance period and failure of Parascaris equorum
of-doors, Am I Hyg 10:384, 1929.
egg count reduction following ivermectin treatment as well as survey on
Stone WM, Girardeau MH: Ancylostoma caninum larvae present in the
 Pyrantel effcacy on German horse farms, Vet Parasitol 144:74, 2007.
colostrum of a bitch, Vet Rec 79:773, 1966.
Wade SE: Capilariua xenopodis sp. n. (Nematoda: Trichuroidea) from the
 Stone WM, Girardeau MH: Transmammary passage of Ancylostoma cani-
epidermis of the South African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis, Daudin),
num larvae in dogs, I Parasitol 54:426, 1968.
Proc Helminthol Soc Wash 49:86, 1982.
Stoneham S, Coles G: Ivermectin resistance in Parascaris equorum, Vet Rec
Wallace GW: Swine influenza and lungworms, I Infect Dis 135:490, 1977
158:572, 2006.
(editorial).
Stoye M: Untersuchungen iber die Moglichkeit Pranataler and galaktoge-
Walsh TA, Younis PJ, Morton TM: The effect of ivermectin treatment of
a
Infecktionen mit Ancylostoma
caninum Ercolani, 1859
late pregnant dairy cows in southwest Victoria on subsequent milk
(Ancylostomidae) beim Hund, Zentraibr Vet Med Series B 20:1, 1973.
production and reproductive performance, Aust Vet I 72:20i, 1995.
Stoye M, Meyer O,Schneider T: Zur Wirkung von Ivemectin auf reakti-
Wardle RA, McLeod JA: The zoology of tapeworms, Minneapolis, 1952,
verte somatische Larven von Ancylostoma caninum Ercolani 1858
 University of Minnesota Press.
(Ancylostomatidae) in der graviden Hinden, I Vet Med B Infect Dis
Watts KJ, Reddy GR, Holmes RA, et al: Seasonal prevalence of third-stage
Vet Pubhic Health 34:13, 1987.
larvae of Diroflaria immitis in mosquitoes from Florida and Louisiana, I
Stromberg BE, Schlotthauer JIC, Seibert BP, et al: Activity of closantel
Parasitof 87:322, 2001.
against experimentally induced Fascioloides magna infection in sheep,
Webster JP, Macdonald DW: Parasites of wild brown rats (Rattus norve-
Ar I Vet Res 46:2527, 1985.
gicus) on UK farms, Parasitology 11l:247, 1995.
Summa MEL, Ebisui L, Osaka IT, de Tolosa EM: Effcacy of oral ivermec-
Wetzel R: Zir Biologie des Fuchslungenwurmes, Crenosoma vuipis, Arch
tin against Trichosomoides crassicauda in naturally infected laboratory
Wissenschaftl Prakt Tierheik 75:445, 1940a.
rats, Lab Ani Sci 42:620, 1992.
Wetzel R: Zur Entwicklung des grossen Palisadenwurmes (Strongylus equi-
Supperer R: Capillaria bohmi spec. nov., eine neue Haarwurm Art aus den
nus) im Pferde, Arch Wissenschaft Prakt Tierheilk 76:81, 1940b.
 Stirnhohles des Fuchses, Z Parasitenkd 16:5l, 1953.
Wetzel R, Kersten W: Die Leberphase der Entwicklung von Strongylus
Swerczek TW, Nielsen SW, Helmbolt CF: Transmammary passage of
edentatus, Wien Tierartzl Mschr 43:664, 1956.
Toxocara cati in the cat, Am J Vet Res 32:89, 1971.
White GF, Dove WE: Dogs and cats concerned in the causation of creeping
Tanabe M, Kelly R, de Lahunta A, et al: Verminous encephalitis in a horse
eruption, Offcial Record, vol 5, No 43, Beltsville, Md, 1926, U.S.
produced by nematodes in the family Protostrongylidae, Vet Pathol
Department of Agriculture.
44:119, 2007.
Whitlock JH: A study of the inheritance of resistance to trichostrongyli-
Theis JH: Public health aspects of dirofilariasis in the United States, Vet
dosis in sheep, Cornefl Vet 45:422, 1955a.
Parasitol 133:157, 2005.
Whitlock JH: Biology of a nematode. In Soulsby EJL, eds: Biology of
Theodorides VJ, Free SM: Effects of anthelmintic treatment on milk yield,
parasites, New York, 1966, Academic.
Vet Rec 113:248, 1983.
Whitlock JH: The inheritance of resistance to trichostrongylidosis in
Theodorides VJ, Freeman JF, Georgi JR: Anthelmintic activity of albenda-
sheep. I. Demonstration of the validity of the phenomenon, Cornell
zole against Dicrocoelium dendriticum in sheep, Vet Med Small Anim
Vet 48:127, 1958.
Chin 77:569, 1982.
Whitlock JH: The relationship of the available natural milk supply to the pro-
 Thomas H, Gonnert R: The efficacy of praziquantel against cestodes in
duction of the trichostrongylidoses in sheep, Comell Vet 4l:299, 1951.
cats, dogs, and sheep, Res Sci 24:20, 1978.
Whitlock JH: Trichostrongylidosis in sheep and cattle. In Proceedings of the
Thomas RJ, Stevens AJ: Some observations on Nematodirus disease in
92nd Annual Meeting of American Veterinary Medical Association,
 Northumberland and Durham, Vet Rec 68:47l, 1956.
Minneapolis, 1955b.
Tindall B: Fasciola hepatica: this fluke is no fluke, Anim Nutr Health
Whitlock JH, Georgi JR, Robson DS, et al: Haemonchosis: an orderly
40:6, 1985.
disease, Cornefl Vet 56:544, 1966.
Triantophyllou AC, Moncol DJ: Cytology, reproduction, and sex
Willard MD, Roberts RE, Allison N, et al: Diagnosis of Aelurostrongylus
determination of Strongyloides ransomi and S. papillosus, J Parasitol
abstrusus and Dirofilaria immitis infections in cats from a humane shel-
63:961, 1977.
ter, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 192:913, 1988.
Ubelaker JE, Hall NM: First report of Angiostrongylus costaricensis Morera
Willesen JL, Kristensen AT, Jensen AL, et al: Efficacy and safety of imida-
and Cespedes 1971 in the United States, I Parasitof 65:307, 1979.
 cloprid/moxidectin spot-on solution and fenbendazole in the treatment
Underwood JR: Habronemiasis, Vet Bufl 30:16, 1936.
of dogs naturally infected with Angiostrongyfus vasorum (Baillet, 1866),
Underwood PC, Harwood PD: Survival and location of the microfilariae
Vet Parasitol 147:258, 2007.
of Dirofilaria immitis in the dog, I Parasitof 25:23, 1939.
Vajner L, Vortel V, Brejcha A: Lung filaroidosis in the beagle dog breeding
against inhibited early fourth-stage larvae of Ostertagia ostertagi Vet Rec
colony, Veterinarni Medicina 45:25, 2000.
101:484, 1977.
CH A P T E R 4 Helminths
239
Williams JF, Lindemann B, Padgett GA, et al: Angiostrongylosis in a grey-
Yazwinski TA, Tucker C, Featherston H, et al: Endectocidal efficacies of 
hound, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 10:l101, 1985.
doramectin in naturally parasitized pigs, Vet Parasitol 70:123, 1997.
wyI hop e ui siseioisao geauoad id yrylasug 'w espurl di seim
Yeruham I, Perl S: Dermatitis in a dairy herd caused by Pelodera strongy-
Vet Med Assoc 186:1103, 1985.
loides (Nematoda: Rhabditidae), I Vet Med B Infect Dis Vet Public Heaith
Williams JF, Shearer AM: Taenia taeniaeformis in cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
52:197, 2005.
181:386, 1982.
Yorke W, Maplestone PA: The nermatode parasites of vertebrates,
Won K, Kruszon-Moran D, Schantz P, et al: National seroprevalence and
 Philadelphia, 1926, P Blakiston's Son.
risk factors for zoonotic Toxocara spp. infection. In Fifty-Sixth Annual
Zimmerman GL, Hoberg EP, Rickard LG, et al: Broadened geographic
Meeting of the American Society ofTropical Medicine and Hygiene, 2007.
range and periods of transmission for Nematodirus battus in the
Woodruff AW, Burg OA: Prevalence of infective ova of Toxocara species in 
United States. In Proceedings from the 89th Annual meeting of the U.S.
public places, Br Med I 4:470, 1973.
Animal Health Association, Louisville, Ky, 1986.
Xiao LH, Herd RP, Majewski GA: Comparative efficacy of moxidectin and
Zimmermann WJ: Evaluation of microwave cooking procedures
jvermectin against hypobiotic and encysted cyathostomes and other
and ovens for devitalizing trichinae in pork roasts, I Food Sci 48:856,
equine parasites, Vet Parasitof 53:83, 1994.
1983.
Yazwinski TA, Kilgore RL, Presson BL, et al: Effcacy of oral clorsulon
in treatment of Fasciola hepatica infections in calves, Am J Vet Res
46:163, 1985.
CHAPTER5
Vector-Borne Diseases
Susan E.Little
The term vector-borre disease refers to any of a broad array
Arthropod vectors transmit disease agents from almost
of infectious diseases caused by pathogens that are trans-
every major class of pathogens, including viruses, rickettsia
mitted by arthropods or other biologic intermediaries.
and other bacteria, protozoa, and helminths. Many of these
 Although transmission usually occurs on blood feeding by
organisms gain entry to the host via blood feeding, but
an infected insect or acarine parasite, infection can also
vector-borne disease agents are by no means limited to
result when a vertebrate host ingests a vector or on con-
the circulation and on initial infection may go on to estab-
tamination of a wound by infectious organisms in the feces
lish and cause disease in virtually any organ system.
of the arthropod intermediary. Regardless of the means
Arthropods may serve as mechanical transmitters of patho-
of transmission, the vector, a critical component in disease
gens, in which the vector harbors a transient infection on,
transmission, engages in a lifestyle that is at least partially
for example, contaminated mouthparts, or the arthropod
parasitic and that somehow contributes to its ability to both
may be a true biologic vector of the disease agent, remain-
acquire and serve as a source of infection to animals.
ing infected with the organism long term, and in many
Diseases transmitted by arthropods have held a central
instances even may be a required part of the life cycle of
role in veterinary medicine in general, and veterinary
a given pathogen. When there is a long-standing evolution-
parasitology in particular, for over a century. In 1889,
ary relationship, biologic vectors may become intimately
Drs. Theobald Smith, Frederick Kilborne, and Cooper
associated with the pathogen and may maintain the infec-
Curtice completed their description of transmission of
2 o a un  ho han se ass uo
Babesia bigemina, causative agent of Texas cattle fever, by
mature form, or they may transovarially pass the organ-
Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) spp. ticks, and then used that
isms from the female to the offspring. In addition, some
knowledge to design and implement a successful eradica-
disease agents can be transmitted horizontally within vector
tion program in the United States (Logue, 1995). Their
populations through sexual contact between arthropods or
discovery was the first recognition of arthropod transmis
via simultaneous cofeeding on a vertebrate host.
a ioy Aem aul paaed i! pue (quaae snouoaju ue jo uois
Classically, arthropod vectors acquire infections via
elucidation of numerous other vector-pathogen relation-
feeding on an infected vertebrate reservoir host. Therefore
ships. In recent years, knowledge about the relative impor-
 the disease agent requires both an active vector population
   -    
and an infected reservoir host system to persist in nature.
veterinary medicine and public health has dramatically
In some systems, vertebrates may become only transiently
expanded, particularly in North America, where a number
infected and the disease agent instead is maintained in
of new disease agents have been described.
 chronically infected arthropods and/or is passed transova-
 The apparent increase in the frequency with which veter-
rially to the next arthropod generation. In these systems,
inarians and physicians encounter vector-borne diseases
 the infected arthropods may infect a vertebrate anplifying
has been attributed to several factors, including increasing
host, which can develop a short-lived infection capable of
vector populations as a result of spread to new areas or
infecting the rest of the vector population. In other systems,
point introductions of new species of vectors, expanding
infection in the vertebrate reservoir hosts may be main-
habitat and increasing wildlife reservoir host populations,
tained by transmission by a species of arthropod that
and relatively recent biogeographic and climate changes
does not feed on domestic animals or people. In these
that favor vector populations (Gratz, 1999). However,
instances, a distinct, often related species of arthropod is
 sa      
required to serve as a bridge vector to actually bring the
vector-borne disease agents is the increased recognition of
infection from the wildlife reservoir host to companion
these organisms owing to improved detection methods that
animals, livestock, or people.
use molecular rather than purely classic microbiologic
Vectors and the organisms they transmit develop inti-
approaches. Indeed, several of the organisms discussed in
mate associations over evolutionary time. The species of
 i  o  a   
arthropod that can effectively serve as a biologic interme-
sequence and have yet to be isolated in culture.
diary for a given pathogen is often limited to one or a few
240
C H A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
241
closely related organisms that serve as the primary vector
serving as reservoir hosts and amplifying hosts to infect
for that disease agent. However, in some cases other
mosquitoes and create the risk of infection to both animals
secondary vectors that have the ability to transmit at
and people. Other arboviruses of both veterinary and
least some strains of the same species of pathogen are
 public health importance are transmitted via biting
also found. Although these secondary vectors may have a
midges (Culicoides species) or mechanically by fleas, mos-
somewhat reduced competency for transmission, they can
quitoes, or blackflies.
2 po ps ai   p p an 
 given disease agent or allow the persistence of an organism
Equine Encephalitides
 on introduction into a new area. Similarly, a given arthro-
 u sq a sd are sa aa a
pod species may be infected with and capable of transmit-
the veterinary mosquito-borne viral disease agents. This
ting several distinct agents. Exposure to a vector population
complex within the Togaviridae is composed of a large
that harbors several different pathogens creates a risk of
group of related serovars of Eastern, Western, and
co-infection, which may exacerbate the disease state in
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, which are commonly
the animal (Thomas et al, 2001).
referred to as EEE, WEE, and VEE virus, respectively. The
The transmission rate of a pathogen is defined as the
serovars of VEE virus are further subdivided into either
 number of new infections that occur per unit time. For
endemic or epizootic types. EEE virus and WEE virus are
vector-borne diseases, characteristics of the vector, the
maintained in passerine bird reservoir hosts and strictly
reservoir host, and the pathogen itself all influence the
ornithophilic mosquitoes. However, outbreaks can occur
transmission rate. In addition to direct variables such as
when bridge vectors emerge to carry virus from birds to
longevity and home range of vector species and longevity
horses and people. Enzootic VEE virus is maintained largely
and persistence of infection in the reservoir host, the inter-
in rodent reservoir hosts and is transmitted by culicine
actions among vector, reservoir, and pathogen will affect
mosquitoes. The maintenance cycle of epizootic VEE
the ultimate transmission rate of a given vector-borne dis-
virus is less well understood but appears to involve avian
ease agent. For example, the extrinsic incubation period
reservoir hosts, a large number of mosquito vectors, and
required for the pathogen to develop in the vector to the
equine amplifying hosts; horses develop high viremia on
 infectious stage will directly influence how rapidly the vec-
infection, providing a ready source of virus to infect mos-
tor can transmit the organism after acquisition; the length
quitoes during outbreaks. Vaccines are available to protect
  q  od n  s o
horses from infection with the equine encephalitis viruses
ambient temperature. Similarly, the intrinsic incubation
(Tabamo and Donahue, 1999; Weaver et al, 2004).
period required for a vertebrate reservoir to develop a
 patent infection that can go on to infect subsequent vectors
Flaviviruses
will affect prevalence of infection in the vector population
Other important mosquito-borne veterinary viral diseases
(Reisen, 2002).
include those caused by flaviviruses, such as West Nile and
To effectively serve as a reservoir host, a given vertebrate
Japanese encephalitis. Both West Nile and Japanese enceph-
species not only must be susceptible to infection and able to
alitis viruses are maintained in cycles involving bird reser-
infect vectors that are likewise competent to go on to trans-
voir hosts and mosquito vectors. Infection of horses,
mit the infection, but it also must share a common niche
people, and rarely dogs with West Nile virus can lead to
with the competent vector that allows frequent interactions.
development of a febrile disease that in severe cases can
 For example, the reservoir and vector must be active in the
 progress to encephalitis and death. The virus, which was
same habitat, at the same time of day, and at the same time
originally described in Africa, was introduced to North
of year for acquisition and transmission to occur. Without
America in 1999 and is now well established across the
frequent ecologic interactions, vector-borne diseases are
United States. Horses do not serve as a source of mosquito
unlikely to persist even when ample vertebrate reservoir
infection with West Nile virus. A vaccine is available to
 hosts, arthropod vectors, and pathogens are present in a
protect horses from the severe disease associated with infec-
given area.
tion with West Nile virus (Dauphin and Zientara, 2006).
Outbreaks of Japanese encephalitis in Asia usually involve
 pigs as well as horses and people, and pigs have been shown
VIRAL PATHOGENS TRANSMITTED BY
ARTHROPODS
to serve as an amplifying host for this virus (Wu, Huang,
and Chien, 1999).
A number of important viral pathogens are transmitted by
arthropods (Table 5-1). Viral disease agents transmitted by
Bunyaviruses
 arthropod biologic vectors are commonly referred to as
 a ea  al saq a as s
arboviruses and include members of the Togaviridae,
also arboviral diseases. Rift Valley fever is endemic in areas
Flaviviridae, Bunyaviridae, and Reoviridae. Mosquitoes
of Africa and is maintained in a cycle between mosquito
are by far the most common vectors of arboviruses. The
vectors and ruminant reservoir hosts. Huge epidemics
majority of known arboviruses are zoonotic, with wild
involving hundreds of thousands of cases in ruminants
birds, wild rodents, and, in some cases, domestic animals
and people have occurred. Although Rift Valley fever
242
TABLE 5-1
Vector-Borne Viral Diseases of Veterinary Importance
Dlsease
Cause
Vlrus Famlly
Vector
Reservolr Host
 Specles Affected
Equine encephalitides
Eastern equine encephalitis
Togaviridae
Mosquitoes
 Passerine birds
Horses, birds, dogs.
L
virus (EEEV)
pigs people
H
Western equine encephalitis
Togaviridae
Mosquitoes
 Passerine birds
 Horses, people 
d
virus (WEEV)
E
Enzootic Venezuelan equine
Togaviridae
Mosquitoes
Rodents primarily, also
 Horses, people
R
encephalitis virus (enVEEV)
birds, opossums, bats
Epizootic Venezuelan equine
Togaviridae
Mosquitoes
Birds, horses
Horses, people
Vector-
encephalitis virus (epVEEV)
West Nile
West Nile virus (WNV)
 Flaviviridae
Mosquitoes
Birds
Horses, people, dogs
 Japanese encephalitis
Japanese encephalitis virus
 Flaviviridae
Mosquitoes
Birds, horses, pigs
 Horses, pigs people
(JEV)
Rift valley fever
Rift valley fever virus (RVFV)
Bunyaviridae
Mosquitoes
Ruminants
Cattle, goats, sheep.
people
a 
Reoviridae virus
Reoviridae
Culicoides
Ruminants
Sheep, goats, deer 
hemorrhagic disease
 Epizootic hemorrhagic disease
(BT, EHD)
virus
Affican horse sickness (AHS)
African horse sickness virus
Reoviridae
Culicoides
Wild equids, horses
Horses, mules,
donkeys
Colorado tick fever
Colorado tick fever virus
Reoviridae
Dermacentor
Rodents
 People
Tick-borne encephalitis
Tick-borne encephalitis viruses
 Flaviviridae
Ixodes, Dermacentor,
Various
 People, sheep, cattle,
 complex (louping ill.
Haemaphysalis
horses, dogs, pigs.
 Powassan encephalitis,
and others
Russian spring-summer
encephalitis, Omsk
hemorrhagic fever)
 African swine fever
 African swine fever virus
Asfarviridae
Ornithodorus species,
Ticks, wild suids, pigs
Pigs
Stomoxys calcitrans
Myxomatosis
Myxoma virus
Poxviridae
Fleas, mosquitoes,
 Rabbits, hares
European rabbits
Simulium species
 Equine infectious anemia
Equine infectious anemia virus
Retroviridae
Stomoxys, Chrysops
Horses
Horses, other equids
Fowlpox
 Fowlpox, canarypox, pigeonpox
Poxviridae
Mosquitoes, fleas
Birds
Birds
virus
CH A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
243
virus is zoonotic, with people becoming infected via direct
develop a nonspecific febrile flulike illness; the fever is often
contact with infected animals as well as through mosquito
biphasic. Similar diseases of people and animals include
bites, human disease is usually characterized by high
those caused by flaviviruses in the tick-borne encephalitis
morbidity but low mortality (Gerdes, 2004).
(TBE) complex, such as louping ill, Powassan encephalitis,
TBE, Russian spring-summer encephalitis, and Omsk
Reoviruses
hemorrhagic fever; all are transmitted via hard ticks,
Bluetongue and epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD) are
including members of the genera Ixodes, Dermacentor,
caused by closely related members of the Reoviridae and are
and Haemaphysalis (Dumpis, Crook, and Oksi, 1999;
 transmitted to ruminants via biting midges (Culicoides spe-
Emmons, 1988). Some authors suspect that members of
cies). Culicoides variipennis is considered the principal vector
the TBE complex may also be transmitted by fleas, but
of both bluetongue virus and EHD virus in North America;
these relationships are not well defined. Louping ill is
Culicoides brevitarsis is more important in Australia, and
primarily a disease of sheep, although catle, horses, pigs,
Culicoides imicola is the major vector in southern Europe,
and humans may also be affected; infected individuals
Africa, and the Middle East. There are more than 25 sero-
 develop a febrile illness followed by progressively worsening
types of bluetongue worldwide and at least 10 serotypes of
neurologic disease that in sheep is often characterized by
EHD. Although many ruminants are susceptible, disease
gait abnormalities (Gritsun, Nuttall, and Gould, 2003).
  n n  i sa q a s
 Powassan encephalitis is reported primarily from people
occasionally seen in goats, and is considered rare in cattle
in the western United States, western Canada, and the
(Barratt-Boyes and MacLachlan, 1995). Disease is character-
former Soviet Union, whereas TBE, Russian spring-
ized by ulcerative lesions in the mouth, around the muzzle,
summer encephalitis, and Omsk hemorrhagic fever are
 on the coronary band, and between the toes. In severe cases,
more commonly seen in people in Europe and northern
respiratory compromise due to pleural effusion and hemor-
Asia (Gritsun, Nuttall, and Gould, 2003). All mammals
rhage is manifested as cyanosis, which gives a bluish cast to
are susceptible to infection with TBE viruses; human dis-
the tongue. Hemorrhage is also a prominent finding in EHD,
ease can follow ingestion of unpasteurized dairy products,
which in North America most commonly infects and causes
particularly those prepared from goat milk (Dumpis,
disease in deer. Cattle and sheep are susceptible to EHD
Crook, and Oksi, 1999).
virus, but most infections in domestic ruminants appear to
African swine fever (ASF) virus, currently classified
result in subclinical disease. The Ibaraki virus, which is
with other ASF-like viruses as an Asfarviridae, is directly
considered to be a member of the EHD virus group, does
or indirectly transmissible between pigs but can also be
cause a febrile disease in cattle that results in both oral
maintained in Ornithodoros species soft ticks transstadially,
ulceration and striated and skeletal muscle degeneration
transovarially, and sexually for years, being transmitted to
(Inaba, 1975).
pigs whenever the opportunity arises for feeding to occur
African horse sickness (AHS) virus is another
(Plowright, 1981). Biting flies, including Stomoxys caici-
Culicoides- borne member of the Reoviridae and is transmit-
trans, are also able to transmit ASF virus mechanically
ted between equids by C. imicola and Culicoides bolitinos.
between pigs (Mellor, Kitching, and Wilkinson, 1987).
This virus causes a severe, offen fatal disease of horses and
Infection of pigs results in high fever, anorexia, hemor-
other equids in sub-Saharan Africa; outbreaks have also
rhage, and rapid death; with the most virulent strains, mor-
been reported in the Middle East and southern Europe.
tality approaches 100% (Mebus, 1988). Less virulent strains
 During epidemics, which occur affer periods of drought
 produce chronic ASF and may result in weight loss, respi-
followed by heavy rains, mechanical transmission
by
ratory disease, and enlarged lymph nodes in infected pigs
other biting flies may also occur. Dogs can become infected
(Mebus, 1988). Treatment and vaccines for ASF are not
with AHS virus but do not play a role in the epidemiology
available.
of disease. Infected horses develop a fever that may
be
followed by respiratory distress and/or pronounced facial
Mechanical Transmission of Viruses
edema. In susceptible populations of horses, mortality
by Arthropods
rates from AHS virus infection range from 50% to 95%.
Mechanical transmission of viruses by arthropod vectors
Mules and donkeys develop less severe disease with lower
 i ssn r  s o
mortality, and death is rarely seen in zebras (Mellor and
inoculation can allow transmission, for some of these dis-
Hamblin, 2004).
ease agents the presence of arthropod vectors greatly facil-
itates transfer within a population. For example, myxoma
Tick-Transmitted Viruses
virus of rabbits is mechanically transmitted between rabbits
Viruses may also be transmitted by ticks. For example,
by a number of blood-feeding arthropods, including mos-
Coltivirus, which causes Colorado tick fever in people, is
quitoes and fleas; the organisms may survive and remain
transmitted from rodent reservoir hosts to people via
infectious in a flea for several months. Native rabbits in the
Dermacentor andersoni. Disease is most commonly seen in
Americas develop only mild fibromas when infected, but
 the western United States and Canada and develops as soon
when the virus is transmitted to European rabbits, a severe
as 4 to 5 days after a tick bite, when affected individuals
and usually fatal infection characterized by high viremia
244
C H A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
and progressively enlarging skin lesions ensues, character-
poultry (Gustafson et al, 1997). The viral infection induces
onoia ie sie u pasn aq on sa sn pat ie ss
the development of hyperplastic cutaneous lesions on the
control of rabbits in both Australia and Europe. However,
unfeathered regions of the skin (beak, cere, legs) that offen
over time, populations of European rabbits develop resis-
become hemorrhagic. Occasionally, perhaps owing to infec-
tance to strains of myxoma virus, making control efforts
tion after inhalation or ingestion of contaminated material,
largely ineffective (Kerr and Best, 1998).
lesions form in the oral cavity or respiratory tract. Infection
Equine infectious anemia virus is another example of a
results in decreased growth and production, but most
virus that is transmitted mechanically by arthropods.
affected animals survive. Mortality, when it occurs, is asso-
Infection is readily spread between horses in relatively
ciated with severe oral or respiratory tract lesions or, in the
case of wild birds, large lesions on the legs, feet, or perioc-
flies and deerflies. These large biting flies deliver irritating,
ular region that impair mobility or vision, resulting in pre-
 painful bites, and defensive activity by the horses results in
dation or starvation. There is no treatment once lesions
frequent interrupted feeding. The flies quickly return, how-
have developed. However, vaccines are available to prevent
ever, to complete their blood meal on the same horse or
disease in poultry.
another horse in the same vicinity, resulting in mechanical
transmission (Issel et al, 1988). Most infected horses do not
RICKETTSIAL PATHOGENS TRANSMITTED
develop clinical disease. However, in some horses, acute
BY VECTORS
infection can result in high fever and death within 2 to
3 weeks. Others may develop chronic disease associated
The term rickettsia refers to any of a large number of obli-
with intermittent fever, depression, anemia, and petechial
gate intracelular gram-negative bacteria within the order
hemorrhages. Regardless of the presence of clinical disease,
Rickettsiales. Two major families are currently defined: the
almost all infected horses remain so for life, serving as a
Rickettsiaceae, which include the genera Rickettsia,
reservoir of infection (Coggins, 1984). An agar immunodif-
Orientia, and Coxiella, and the Anaplasmataceae, which
fusion test (Coggins test) is widely used to identify these
include the genera Anaplasma, Ehrlichia, Wolbachia, and
 carriers so they can be segregated from noninfected horses
Neorickettsia; phylogenetic reorganization of the latter
 and thus transmission can be prevented.
 group in 2001 resulted in a number of taxonomic changes,
Fowlpox of birds, including poultry, canaries, pigeons,
 particularly at the genus level (Dumler et al, 2001). Survival
and a variety of wild birds, is caused by a variety of avian
of these organisms and transmission between animals are
 pox viruses that can be transmitted mechanically by mos-
dependent on invertebrate vectors. Ticks are by far the most
quitoes or through direct contact between infected and
common vector of rickettsial agents, but some rickettsial
naive birds. Infections have also been associated with the
 organisms, including members of the genera Wolbachia and
presence of the sticktight flea, Echidnophaga gallinarum, on
Neorickettsia, use helminth vectors (Table 5-2).
TABLE 5-2
Vector-Borne Rickettsial Diseases of Veterinary Importance
Dlsease
Cause
Prlmary Vector
Reservolr Host
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Rickettsia rickettsii
Dermacentor spp.
Rodents
Epidemic typhus
Rickertsia prowazekii
Pediculus humanus
Humans, flying squirrels
 Endemic typhus; murine
Rickettsia typhi
Xenopsylla cheopis; other fleas
Rodents, other mammals
typhus
 Murine typhus-like disease
Rickettsia felis
Ctenocephalides felis
Opossums
Rickettsialpox
Rickettsia akari
Liponyssoides mites
Rodents
Q fever
Coxiella burnetii
Amblyomma spp., other ticks
Various mammals
 Scrub typhus
Orientia tsutsugamushi
Leptotrombidum mites
Rodents
 Bovine anaplasmosis
Anaplasma marginale
Dermacentor spp.
Cattle
Canine anaplasmosis
Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Ixodes spp.
Rodents, ruminants
Anaplasma platys
Rhipicephalus sanguineus*
Dogs
Canine ehrlichiosis
Ehrlichia canis
Rhipicephalus sanguineus
Dogs
Ehrlichia ewingii
Amblyomma americanum
Dogs, white-tailed deer
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
Amblyomma americanum
White-tailed deer
Heartwater
Ehrlichia ruminantium
Amblyomma spp.
Ruminants
Salmon poisoning
Neorickettsia helminthoeca
Nanophyetus salmincola
 Salmonid fish
 Potomac horse fever
Neorickettsia risticii
Acanthatrium oregonense
Bats, caddisflies
*Transmission by Rhipicephatus sanguineus is suspected but has not yet been fully confirmed.
CH A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
245
Many rickettsial organisms have long been recognized as
rash ("spots") that characteristically appears first on the
agents of veterinary and human disease. In recent years,
forearms, wrists, and ankles 3 to 4 days after initiation of
evidence continues to amass that underscores the signifi-
fever (Thorner et al, 1998). Petechial and/or ecchymotic
 cance and importance of rickettsia as pathogens (see Table
hemorrhages may develop in some dogs, but a rash is not
5-2). Species of rickettsia differ in the primary vector
evident. In Europe and Africa, ticks transmit R. conorii,
responsible for transmitting infection, the reservoir
which causes the relatively milder disease of Boutonneuse
host(s) important for maintaining a source of infection in
fever. A number of tick-transmitted spotted fever rickettsia
nature, and the cell type infected, but all are susceptible to
with potential public health importance, including Rickettsia
 tetracycline antibiotics. Because of this shared susceptibil-
parkeri and Rickettsia amblyommii, continue to be described
ity, tetracycline, specifically doxycycline, is considered the
(Azad and Beard, 1998).
treatment of choice for rickettsial infections in both veter-
inary and human medicine (Raoult and Drancourt, 1991).
Other Rickettsia
To date, with the exception of Potomac horse fever, there
Other Rickettsia species of public health importance include
 are no widely available commercial vaccines that reliably
Rickettsia typhi, a flea-transmitted organism that causes
protect against infection with rickettsial agents; accord-
endemic or murine typhus, and Rickettsia prowazekii,
ingly, stringent attention to control and avoidance of
causative agent of epidemic typhus in people and primarily
ficks and other vectors remains the best means of prevent-
 no  a a a adoad a 
ing disease.
 organisms cause a disease in people similar to spotted
fever. Another rickettsial agent, Coxiella burneti, causes
The Rickettsiaceae
Q fever in people and a variety of animals. Transmission
Rocky Mountaln Spotted Fever
of C. burneti by ticks can occur, but most cases in people
The best known member of the family Rickettsiaceae in the
are thought to be acquired by inhalation of organisms in
Americas is Rickettsia rickettsi, causative agent of Rocky
contaminated dust (Terheggen and Leggat, 2007). Mites
Mountain spotted fever. The organism is transmitted
transmit some rickettsial pathogens as well, including
 between rodent reservoir and amplifying hosts and to dogs
Rickettsia akari, causative agent of rickettsialpox, a nonfa-
and people via ticks. Dermacentor species are the most
tal febrile disease of people that is predominantly seen in
important vectors of R. rickettsii in North America and
urban areas, and Orientia tsutsugamushi, the causative agent
maintain the infection within the tick population transova-
of scrub typhus in Asia and Australia (Boyd, 1997;
rially as well as transstadially, thus serving as a reservoir of
Chattopadhyay and Richards, 2007).
the organism as well (McDade and Newhouse, 1986).
Rhipicephalus sanguineus has long been established, along
The Anaplasmataceae
with Amblyomma cajennense, as an important vector of
The family Anaplasmataceae includes a wide variety of
R. rickettsii in Mexico, Central America, and South
pathogens, including organisms such as Anaplasma rmargin-
America and was recently was implicated in an outbreak of
ale and Ehrlichia canis, which have been known to be
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever in humans and dogs in the
important in veterinary medicine for many decades, as
southwestern United States (Demma et al, 2005).
well as a number of recently recognized important zoonotic
Rodents are widely considered the most important ver-
and veterinary pathogens. Although the different species
tebrate reservoir amplifying hosts in nature for R. rickettsi;
tend to infect different cell types and to cycle in nature
however, the involvement of R. sanguineus, which prefers to
using distinct reservoir hosts and tick vectors, all respond
feed on dogs in all life stages, in transmitting infection to
 to therapy with doxycycline, and, with the exception of the
dogs and people in some regions suggests other vertebrate
Neoricketsia and Wolbachia species, all are primarily trans-
hosts may also play a role in maintaining a source of infec-
mitted by ixodid ticks. Direct mechanical transmission of
tion. The full role of other ticks historically implicated as
some blood-borne rickettsia by biting flies or via inten-
vectors of R. rickettsi, including Amblyomma americanum
fional or accidental blood subinoculation has also been
or Haemaphysalis leporispalustris, warrants further investi-
shown to occur.
gation. Understanding the epidemiology of R. rickettsi is
complicated by the presence of a variety of closely related
Anaplasima specles
Rickettsia species, such as Rickettsia conorii or Rickettsia
A. marginale, which causes anemia and fever in cattle, is
japonica, which may
transmitted between cows by Dermacentor and Rhipicepha-
(Brouqui et al, 2007).
lus (Boophilus) species ticks; A. marginale may also be trans-
Infection with R. rickettsii causes a febrile illness that may
mitted mechanically between cattle via biting flies (e.g--
pe sop un uass auoo isou si ass anaass aq
Tabanus species) (Ewing, 1981; Hawkins, Love, and Hidalgo,
people, although Rocky Mountain spoted fever has also
1982). Morulae of A. marginale are readily found in erythro-
been reported in cats. The organisms infect and damage
cytes of acutely affected cattle (Figure 5-1). Anaplasma (Ehr-
endothelial cells, resulting in a progressive necrotic vasculi-
lichia) platys, on the other hand, infects platelets of dogs.
tis; thrombocytopenia is also commonly seen. People with
Although not yet definitely shown, this organism is thought
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever often develop a nonpruritic
to be transmitted to dogs by R. sarguineus and can cause a
246
C H A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
FIGURE 5-1. Anaplasma maginale (arrows) in bovine erythrocytes.
(Courtesy K. Kocan, Oklahoma State University.)
FGURE 5-2. Morulae (arrows) of Ehrichia canis within a circulating
monocyte. (Courtesy E. Johnson, Oklahoma State University.)
mild febrile disease characterized by cyclic thrombocytope-
nia in some dogs, which may be exacerbated on co-infection.
known to be transmitted by A. americarum, and both
Neither A. marginale nor A. platys have been shown to be 
dogs and deer may be able to serve as a source of infection
Zoonotic. However, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, which is
to vector ticks (Anziani, Ewing, and Barker, 1990; Yabsley
transmitted from rodent reservoir hosts by Ixodes ticks, is
et al, 2002).
able to infect a wide variety of vertebrates including people.
 E. chaffensis infection in dogs also occurs but appears to
This organism was originally referred to as Ehrlichia equi
only rarely result in overt clinical disease. However, human
and the human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (HGE) agent in
monocytic ehrlichiosis caused by E. chaffeensis is considered
North America and Ehrlichia phagocytophila in Europe; var-
the most common tick-borne disease of people in many
ious strains of A. phagocytophilum have been shown to cause
areas of the southern United States. E. chaffersis is main-
an acute febrile disease in people, horses, dogs, and rumi-
tained in nature in a cycle involving A. americarum as
nants (Dumler et al, 2005). The disease produced is referred
vector tick and white-tailed deer as primary reservoir host
to as granulocytic anaplasmosis, or, in the case of ruminants
(Lockhart et al, 1997).
 in Europe, tick-borne fever.
Heartwater disease
Ehrlichia specles
Another ehrlichial agent, Ehrlichia ruminantium (for-
 The species important in veterinary medicine and public
merly Cowdria ruminantium), causes heartwater, or cow.
health include E. canis, causative agent of canine monocytic
driosis, in ruminants in Africa as well as in areas of the
ehrlichiosis (Figure 5-2), Ehrlichia ewingi, which primarily
Caribbean where the organism and vector ticks have been
infects neutrophils (Figure 5-3), and Ehrlichia chaffeensis,
the causative agent of human monocytic ehrlichiosis, which
has also been reported from dogs. All three of these
organisms are now known to be zoonotic, with people
becoming infected after a tick bite (Parola, Davoust, and
Raoult, 2005).
E. canis causes a severe febrile disease in dogs character-
ized by thrombocytopenia, lymphadenomegaly, ocular
signs, and bleeding diatheses. Chronic infections may
 result in emaciation and hypoplastic bone marrow leading
to pancytopenia. The organism is maintained in dog popu-
Ss  aq sop min pnn si p so
Dermacentor variabilis has also been shown capable of
transmitting E. canis (Johnson et al, 1998).
 Infection with E. ewingi appears to result in less severe
 disease in dogs however, in some areas of the southern
United States, E. ewingi infection is more common in
dogs than that caused by E. caris (Liddell et al, 2003).
Although other ticks may be involved, E. ewingii is
FGURE 53. Morula (arrow) of Ehrlichia ewingi inside a neutrophil.
CH A P T' E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
247
 introduced and established. This organism, which is trans-
organism, Neorickettsia sennetsu, is well established as the
mitted by a variety of Amblyomma ticks, may also cause
causative agent of Sennetsu fever in Japan and Malaysia.
disease in dogs and people (Allsopp and Allsopp, 2001;
The life history and maintenance cycle for N. sernetsu are
Allsopp, Louw, and Meyer, 2005). A variety of wild rumi-
unknown (Rikihisa, 2006).
nants, including blesbok and wildebeest, serve as reservoir
hosts for E. ruminantium. On introduction by a feeding
Wolbachia specles
tick, the organisms invade and multiply in endothelial
Members of the genus Wolbachia have been reported as
cells, resulting in a febrile disease characterized by vasculi-
endosymbionts from a variety of helminths and arthropods
tis; the common name of the disease refers to the develop-
(Fenn et al, 2006). Wolbachia species are found in close asso-
ment of pericardial effusion in acute cases. Although an
ciation with several filarid worms, including Dirofilaria
endemic cycle of heartwater is not known to have been
immitis, the causative agent of heartworm disease (Sironi
established in the continental Americas, occasional intro-
et al, 1995). There is some evidence that Wolbachia species
ductions occur, and native ticks and wildlife have been
play a role in inflammation during heartworm infections,
shown to be competent vectors and reservoir hosts, respec-
and removing these ricketsia appears to decrease worm
tively (Burridge et al, 2002; Uilenberg, 1982). Recently an E.
fecundity and survival (Genchi et al, 1998; Kramer et al,
ruminantium-like organism from A. americanum collected
2005). Understanding the role of Wolbachia species in filarid
from the southern United States was reported to cause dis-
worm survival and pathogenesis is an area of ongoing
    o   s  e  
research.
human infection (Loftis et al, 2006).
OTHER BACTERIAL PATHOGENS
Neorickettsia specles
IRANSMITTED BY VECTORS
 Members of the genus Neoricketsia are unusual among the
rickettsial pathogens in that they are transmitted by trema-
Several other bacterial pathogens, in addition to rickettsia,
todes rather than arthropod vectors; accordingly, infection
are also transmitted by arthropod vectors. Some of these
is associated with consumption of fish or other intermedi-
diseases are of considerable consequence and concern to
ate hosts rather than infestations with ticks or other
pet and livestock owners. Some of the important genera of 
ectoparasites.
bacteria involved include Borrelia, Bartonella, Mycoplasma,
Neorickettsia helminthoeca is vectored by Nanophyetus
and Yersinia (Table 5-3).
salmincola, a trematode of dogs and other carnivores and
causes salmon poisoning disease. The rickettsiae invade
Borrelia species
the tissues of the fluke and are passed along with the off-
The best known and most commonly diagnosed arthropod-
spring through snails to salmonid fish intermediate hosts.
transmitted bacterial disease in the United States is Borrelia
When a dog ingests the fish it becomes infected with both
burgdorferi, the causative agent of Lyme borreliosis or Lyme
the trematodes and the rickettsia. A highly fatal disease,
disease in North America. Over 20,000 cases of Lyme bor-
commonly referred to as salmon poisoning, ensues and is
reliosis are reported each year in the United States alone.
characterized by severe gastroenteritis, enlarged lymph
In Europe, borreliosis in people and dogs may be caused
nodes, and a very high fever that decreases to hypothermia
by B. burgdorferi, Borrelia garinii, or Borrelia afzeli.
shortly before death. Affected dogs are anorexic and rapidly
Borrelia burgdorferi is maintained in nature in a cycle invol-
lose weight. Although many vertebrates, including humans,
ving rodent reservoir hosts and Ixodes species vectors.
may develop infections with N. salmincola, salmon poison-
The most important vector of B. burgdorferi in the eastern
ing caused by N. helminthoeca appears to occur only in
United States is Ixodes scapularis, whereas Ixodes pacificus is
dogs and wild canids. Salmon poisoning in dogs is largely
responsible for the majority of infections seen on the West
limited to areas of the Pacific Northwest where the vector
Coast. Other Ixodes species can transmit B. burgdorferi in
trematode cycles in nature, although canine disease caused
nature but rarely feed on humans or dogs (Oliver et al,
by N. helminthoeca has been reported from Brazil (Headley
 2003). Deer are important as a host for the adult ticks and
et al, 2006).
thus serve to maintain large tick populations in an area, but
Neorickettsia risticii is a related rickettsia that causes
deer are not considered a competent reservoir host for
Potomac horse fever, also referred to as equine monocytic
B. burgdorferi (Telford et al, 1988).
ehrlichiosis, sporadically in many areas of North America;
Endemic transmission of Lyme borreliosis in North
this disease has also been reported from Europe. Horses
America appears to be largely limited to areas of the north-
acquire the infection on ingestion of caddisflies parasitized
 eastern, upper midwestern, and West Coast states. A labo-
with metacercaria of Acanthatrium oregonense, a trematode
ratory confirmed case of autochthonous infection (an
of bats (Pusterla et al, 2003). Infection results in an acute,
febrile disease that can be severe; depression, anorexia,
to imported) with B. burgdorferi in any eastern state south
dehydration, abortion, diarrhea, and laminitis also occur.
of Maryland or Virginia has not been documented, and
The organisms are primarily found in monocytes. Although
Lyme disease is considered rare, if it occurs at all, in the
N. ristici has not been reported to infect people, a related
southern United States (Wormser et al, 2006). Infection in
248
C H A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
TABLE 5-3
Other Bacterial Vector-Borne Diseases of Veterinary Importance
Dlsease
Etlology
Prlmary Vector
Reservolr Host
 Lyme borreliosis
Borrelia burgdorferi; also Borrelia
Ixodes scapularis, other Ixodes
Mice, other rodents
afzeli and Borrelia garinii in
species
Europe
Avian spirochetosis
Borrelia anserina
Argas persicus
Argas persicus
Tick-borne relapsing fever
Various Borrelia species
Ornithodorus species
Rodents
Louse-borne relapsing
Borrelia recurrentis
Pediculus humanus
 People
 Bovine borreliosis
Borrelia theileri
Rhipicephalus species
Cattle
Trench fever
Bartonella quintana
Pediculus humanus
 People
Cat scratch disease
Bartonella henselae, Bartonella
Fleas (Ctenocephalides felis)
Cats
clarridgeiae
 Canine bartonellosis
Various Bartonella species
Ticks suspected
Unknown
 Feline hemoplasmosis
Mycoplasma haemofelis,Mycoplasma
Fleas suspected
s
haemominutum
 Canine hemoplasmosis
Mycoplasma haemocanis
Rhipicephalus sanguineus
Dogs
 T'ularemia
Francisella tularensis
Various ticks, mosquitoes
 Rabbits, other mammals
Plague
Yersinia pestis
Xenopsylla cheopis; other fleas
Rodents
Infectious bovine
Moraxella bovis
Musca autumnalis
Cattle
keratoconjunctivitis
dogs parallels that in humans. In published surveys, most
Tick-borne relapsing fever is caused by a large number
dogs that test positive for B. burgdorferi in nonendemic areas
of soft-tick-transmitted Borrelia species, such as Borrelia
have a history of travel to an area where disease is endemic
hermsii, Borrelia turicata, and B. parkeri, each of which is
(Duncan et al, 2004). Nonetheless, large numbers of dogs
transmitted by a corresponding Orrithodoros soft tick
in nonendemic areas will test positive for antibodies to
(Barbour and Hayes, 1986). Tick-borne relapsing fever bor-
B. burgdorferi.
reliosis is present in Asia, Europe, Africa, and the Americas;
Dogs with Lyme borreliosis most commonly have fever,
in North America, disease is most commonly seen in people
anorexia, polyarthritis, and lymphadenopathy; although
in the western United States (Dworkin, Schwan, and
uncommon, protein-losing nephropathy associated with
Anderson, 2002).
infection may result in edema, weight loss, vomiting, and
Louse-borne relapsing fever is caused by Borrelia recur.
diarrhea. In people, acute Lyme borreliosis is characterized
 o       
by headache, fever, muscle and joint pain, and, in approxi-
Pediculus humanus. Infection with B. recurrentis occurs
mately 70% of patients, an expanding circular rash (>5 cm
only in people, with epidemics developing in times of
 diameter), termed erytherma migrans, that develops at the
famine, war, or mass migration; animals are not involved
primary tick bite or as a secondary lesion; erythema migrans
as reservoir hosts (Raoult and Roux, 1999).
is not recognized in dogs. If not treated in the acute phase,
Bovine borreliosis caused by Borrelia theileri induces a
 people may experience chronic, disseminated disease that
relatively mild disease in cattle, sheep, and horses; infection
can result in arthritis, carditis, or neurologic disease; it is
is transmitted by Rhipicephalus ticks, including Boophilus
not clear if cardiac and neurologic disease is associated
subspecies. Also referred to as tick spirochetosis, bovine bor-
with B. burgdorferi infection in dogs (Littman et al, 2006).
reliosis caused by B. theileri has been reported from Africa,
Australia, and central and southern North America (Smith
 Other Dlseases Caused by Borrelia specles
et al, 1985).
 a sads ag aq psn sss ro
Other related Borrelia species include Borrelia miyamotoi
spirochetosis, relapsing fever, and bovine borreliosis.
and Borrelia lonestari (Figure 5-4), both of which are also
Avian spirochetosis due to infection with Borrelia arserina
hard-tick-transmitted spirochetes that infect both ticks and
causes disease in turkeys, chickens, geese, pheasants, and other
mammals (Fukunaga et al, 1995; Moyer et al, 2006).
birds. Affected birds become febrile and cyanotic. Infection
is transmitted to birds via the feces of the soft-tick vectors,
Bartonella species
Argas persicus and related species; infection can also be main-
Several vector-borne Bartonella species also infect and cause
tained long term in soff-tick populations through transovarial
disease in people, dogs, and cats. Trench fever, a moderate to
transmission (Zaher, Soliman, and Diab, 1977).
severe febrile disease of people characterized by marked
C H A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
249
Mycoplasma species
Other important  vector-associated  bacterial  infections
include the hemoplasma species of Mycoplasma (formerly
Haemobartonela), which appear as small pleomorphic
bacteria attached to the surface of erythrocytes on stained
blood smears. Mycoplasma haemofelis is widely thought
to be transmitted to cats by fleas, although this route of
infection has yet to be experimentally confirmed (Woods,
Wisnewski, and Lappin, 2006). Mycoplasma haemocanis is
known to be transmitted to dogs by ticks (R. sarguineus),
and infections with M. haemocanis are maintained in
tick populations both transstadially and transovarially
(Seneviratna et al, 1973). In cats, infections with M. hae-
mofelis and the related Mycoplasma haemominutum may be
FGURE 5-4. Relapsing-fever-like Borrelia species (Borrelia lone-
clinically inapparent. However, M. haemofelis can cause
stari) on a blood smear from a white-tailed deer.
mild to severe clinically apparent anemia, splenomegaly,
enlarged lymph nodes, icterus, and respiratory distress.
splenic enlargement, is caused by Bartonella quintara and is
Disease is more common in cats immunocompromised
s d 's apoq ppau ea adoad on pu
by concurrent immunosuppressive viral infections such as
Trench fever, so named because of the widespread illness
with feline leukemia virus (FeLV) but can also be seen in
 recognized in soldiers during the First World War, is not a
cats without concurrent FeLV infection (Harrus et al,
zoonotic disease, and people rather than animals serve as
2002). Disease due to infection with M. haemocanis is con-
reservoir hosts (Maurin and Raoult, 1996). In contrast,
sidered rare in spleen-intact dogs.
cat scratch disease caused by Bartonella henselae and
Bartonella clarridgeiae is directly zoonotic, with people most
Tularemia
often infected when bitten or scratched by a bacteremic cat
Arthropod vectors can also be important in the transmis-
that harbors infectious B. henselae or B. clarridgeiae on teeth
sion of disease agents considered to have a potential role in
or claws. Infection of immunocompetent people usually
bioterrorism, including the causative agents of tularemia
results in a self-limiting, mild febrile disease characterized
and plague. In North America, infections with Francisella
by regional lymphadenopathy. The agents of cat scratch dis-
tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia, are acquired
 directly from contact with infected carcasses, particularly
vectors; however, B. herselae can be transmitted from infected
rabbits. However, transmission by ticks and transmission
to naive cats, particularly kittens, through fleas as well as
by biting flies are also considered important routes of
through direct contact, and controlling flea infestation is con-
infection, and a number of tick species in the genera
sidered important to limit bacteremia in cats (Foil et al, 1998;
Dermacentor, Amblyomma, Ixodes, and Haemaphysalis
Foley et al, 1998). In addition to the characteristic febrile
may be responsible for transmitting infection between ani-
diseases caused by bartonellosis  in immunocompetent
mals in nature. Mosquitoes are also involved in transmis-
 people, infection with both B. quintana and B. henselae can
sion of some biovars of F. tularensis (Petersen and Schriefer,
-o  sie r  ad 
2005). Clinical disease in animals is most commonly seen in
compromised patients (Koehler et al, 1997).
cats, presumably after ingestion of infected prey (Woods
B. quintana and B. henselae, along with other Bartonella
et al, 1998). Transmission of F. tularensis to people directly
species such as Bartonella vinsoni subsp. berkhoffi and
via bites or scratches of infected cats, although possible, is
Bartonella elizabethae, have also become increasingly recog-
considered rare.
 nized as canine pathogens in recent years. These organisms
Plague
have been associated with endocarditis, myocarditis, and
 granulomatous lymphadenitis in dogs (Kelly et al, 2006;
 Plague caused by Yersinia pestis is transmitted between ani-
Morales et al, 2007). Although the arthropod(s) responsible
mals and to people via fleas; infection with Y. pestis is rare
for transmitting these Bartonella infections to dogs, if any,
in North America, but a natural focus of transmission is
have not yet been confirmed, ticks are strongly suspected to
maintained in a cycle involving fleas and prairie dogs in the
play a role, and these agents are likely to increase in impor-
western United States (Anderson and Williams, 1997).
tance as canine vector-borne pathogens in the future.
Animals infected with Y. pestis may develop fever and
 Human infection and associated disease has been reported
enlarged lymph nodes; cats appear particularly susceptible
with some of the canine-associated Bartorella species
to the disease (Gage et al, 2000). Infected cats can serve as a
(e.g-, B. virsonii subsp. berkhoffii); transmission routes to
source of infection directly through bites and scratches or
people are not clear, but direct transmission from an
through aerosolization of bacteria; cats also may support
 infected dog to a person via a bite or scratch is suspected
 populations of fleas, which are then able to transmit the
to be a potential route for exposure (Chomel et al, 2006).
 infection to people. Both flea control and prevention of
250
C H A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
TABLE 5-4
 Representative Vector-Borne Protozoal Diseases of Veterinary Importance
Dlsease
Cause
 Prlmary Vector
Reservolr Host
Trypanosomiasis (nagana; sleeping
Various Trypanosoma
T'setse flies
Various mammals, including humans
sickness; surra; mal de Caderas)
species
Chagas disease
Trypanosoma cruzi
Triatomine bugs
Rodents; other small and medium-
sized mammals; domestic dogs
Leishmaniasis (visceral leishmaniasis;
Leishmania species
 Sand flies
Rodents; other small mammals;
cutaneous leishmaniasis;
sop oss
mucocutaneous leishmaniasis)
Histomoniasis
Histomonas meleagridis
Heterakis gallinarum
Various birds, especially inapparent
carriers such as pheasants, chickens
Hepatozoonosis
Hepatozoon canis
Rhipicephalus sanguineus
Domestic dogs
Hepatozoon americanum
Amblyomma maculatum
 Domestic dogs, other wildlife?
Babesiosis (T'exas cattle fever; bovine
Various Babesia species
Rhipicephalus,
Various mammals for each of the
 babesiosis; equine piroplasmosis;
Dermacentor, Ixodes
different species
canine babesiosis)
East Coast fever
Theileria parva
Rhipicephalus species
 African buffalo
Cytauxzoonosis
Cytauxzoon felis
Dermacentor variabilis
Bobcats
 ingestion of prey species are critical to preventing infections
early fall, when face fly populations are well established
with Y. pestis in cats and dogs.
and exposure to ultraviolet light, another risk factor for
infection, is at its peak (Lepper and Barton, 1987).
Mechanical Transmission of Bacteria by
Vaccines and effective antibiotic treatments are available,
Arthropods
 but face fly control remains a critical component of prevent-
In addition to their role in biologic maintenance and trans-
ing infection with M. bovis in cattle.
mission of disease agents, arthropods can also serve as
important mechanical transmitters of bacteria. For example,
VECTOR-BORNE PROTOZOA AND
tra nsmission of Moraxella bovis, the causative agent of infec-
HELMINTHS
tious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (pink eye) in cattle, is
facilitated by the presence of the face fly, Musca autumnalis,
In addition to viral and bacterial pathogens, a number of
which efficiently moves the organism between animals
 protozoal and helminth parasites are transmitted via vectors
housed together on pasture (Gerhardt et al, 1982). Disease
(Tables 5-4 and 5-5). Biting flies transmit several important
 is more commonly seen in pastured cattle in summer and
 protozoan and metazoan parasites, including the Leishmania
TABLE 5-5
 Representative Vector-Borne Helminth Diseases of Veterinary Importance
Dlsease
Cause
Prlmary Vector
Reservolr Host
 Dipylidiasis
Dipylidium caninum
Ctenocephalides felis; also chewing lice
Dogs, cats
Eyeworm
Thelazia species
Muscid flies
Various mammals
Habronemiasis; swamp
Habronema species,
Muscid flies
Horses
cancer; summer sores
 Draschia species
Heartworm
Dirofilaria immitis
Mosquitoes
Dogs, wild canids
 Onchocerciasis
Onchocerca species.
Culicoides species; Simulium species
Horses, cattle
 Setariasis
Setaria species
Mosquitoes
Cattle, horses
 Parafliariasis; summer
Parafilaria multipapillosa
Haematobia species
Horses
bleeding
Parafilaria bovicola
Muscid flies
Cattle
 Elaeophorosis; sorehead
Elaeophora schneideri
Tabanid flies
Mule deer
 Bovine stephanofilariasis;
Stephanoflaria stilesi,
Haematobia irritans, Musca conducens
Cattle
hump sore
Stephanofilaria assamensis
CH A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
251
FIGURE 58. Hepatozoon americanum gamont (arrow) within a canine
FGURE 5-5. Babesia gibsoni (arrows) within canine erythrocytes.
leukocyte. (Courtesy E. Johnson, Oklahoma State University.)
(Courtesy R. Allison, Oklahoma State University.)
species (Figure 5-5) that cause visceral and cutaneous leish-
maniasis, Tryparosoma cruzi and other trypanosomiasis-
 inducing agents, and Dirofilaria immitis, the causative
agent of heartworm. Similarly, ticks are centrally important
in the transmission of protozoal infections that cause
serious, at times fatal, disease in the host including those
caused by Babesia species (Figure 5-6), Cytauxzoon felis
(Figure 5-7), Theileria parva, and Hepatozoon species
(Figure 5-8). Fleas or chewing lice are required to transmit
Dipylidium caninurm to dogs and cats. Although infection 
with all of these parasites may be reduced by efforts to con-
trol vector populations, vector control alone is not consid-
ered an effective means of preventing infection or disease in
animals. These pathogens and the diseases they cause are
described in Chapters 3 and 4.
 FGURE 5-6. Leishmania amastigotes (arrow) within macrophages.
REFERENCES
Allsopp MT, Allsopp BA: Novel Ehrlichia genotype detected in dogs in
South Africa, J Clin Microbiol 39:4204, 2001.
Allsopp MT, Louw M, Meyer EC: Ehrlichia ruminantiumm: an emerging
human pathogen, Ann N Y Acad Sci 1063:358, 2005.
Anderson SH, Williams ES: Plague in a complex of white-tailed prairie
dogs and associated small mammals in Wyoming, I Widf Dis 33:720,
1997.
Anziani OS, Ewing SA, Barker RW: Experimental transmission of a gran-
uocytic form of the tribe Ehrlichieae by Dermacentor variabiis and
Amblyomma americanum to dogs, Am J Vet Res 51:929, 1990.
Azad AF, Beard CB: Rickettsial pathogens and their arthropod vectors,
Emerg Infect Dis 4:179, 1998.
Barbour AG, Hayes SF: Biology of Borrelia species, Microbiol Rev 50:381,
1986.
Barratt-Boyes SM, MacLachlan NJ: Pathogenesis of bluetongue virus infec-
tion of cattle, I Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1322, 1995.
Boyd AS: Rickettsialpox, Dermatol Clin 15:313, 1997.
Brouqui P, Parola P, Fournier PE, Raoult D: Spotted fever rickettsioses in
southern and eastern Europe, FEMS Immunof Med Microbiof 49:2, 2007.
Burridge MJ, Simmons LA, Peter TF, Mahan SM: Increasing risks of intro-
FGURE 5-7. Cytauxzoon felis merozoites (arrows) within feline eryth-
duction of heartwater onto the American mainland associated with
rocytes. (Courtesy M. Reichard, Oklahoma State University.)
animal movements, Ann N Y Acad Sei 969:269, 2002.
252
C H A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
Chattopadhyay S, Richards AL: Scrub typhus vaccines: past history and
Headley SA, Scorpio DG, Barat NC, et al: Neorickettsia helrminthoeca in
recent developments, Hum Vaccin 3:730, 2007.
dog, Brazil, Emerg Infect Dis 12:1303, 2006.
Chomel BB, Boulouis HJ, Maruyama S, Breitschwerdt EB: Bartonella spp.
Inaba U: Ibaraki disease and its relationship to bluetongue, Aust Vet J
in pets and effect on human health, Emerg Infect Dis 12:389, 2006.
51:178, 1975.
Coggins L: Carriers of equine infectious anemia virus, IAm Vet Med Assoc
Issel CJ, Rushlow K, Foil LD, Montelaro RC: A perspective on equine
184:279, 1984.
infectious anemia with an emphasis on vector transmission and genetic
Dauphin G, Zientara S: West Nile virus: recent trends in diagnosis and
analysis, Vet Microbiof 17:251, 1988.
yaccine development, Vaccine 25:5563, 2007.
Johnson EM, Ewing SA, Barker RW, et al: Experimental transmission of 
Demma LJ, Traeger MS, Nicholson WL, et al: Rocky Mountain spotted
Ehrlichia canis (Rickettsiales: Ehrlichieae) by Dermacentor variabilis
fever from an unexpected tick vector in Arizona, N Engi I Med 353:587,
(Acari: Ixodidae), Vet Parasitol 74:277, 1998.
2005.
Kelly P, Rolain IM, Maggi R, et al: Bartonella quintana endocarditis in
Dumler IS, Barbet AF, Bekker CP, et al: Reorganization of genera in the
dogs, Emerg Infect Dis 12:1869, 2006.
families Rickettsiaceae and Anaplasmataceae in the order Rickettsiales:
Kerr PJ, Best SM: Myxoma virus in rabbits, Rev Sci Tech 17:256, 1998.
unification of some species of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria with
Koehler JE,anchezMA,GarridoCS,et al:Molecular epidmiology of
Ehrlicha andEhlichi with Neoricketsia,descriptionsof sixnewspecies
N ssad-se e ym sadu su 
combinations and designation of Ehrlichia equi and ‘HGE agent' as
Engl I Med 337:1876, 1997.
subjective synonyms of Ehrlichia phagocytophila, Int J Syst Evol
Kramer L, Simon F, Tamarozzi F, et al: Is Wofbachia complicating the
Microbiof 51:2145, 2001.
pathological effects of Dirofiaria immitis infections? Vet Parasitol
Dumler IS, Choi KS, Garcia-Garcia JC, et al: Human granulocytic anaplas-
133:133, 2005.
mosis and Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Emerg Infect Dis ll:1828, 2005.
Lepper AW, Barton IJ: Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis: seasonal
Dumpis U, Crook D, Oksi J: Tick-borne encephalitis, Clin Infect Dis
variation in cultural, biochemical and immunoreactive properties of
28:882, 1999.
Moraxelfa bovis isolated from the eyes of cattle, Aust Vet J 64:33, 1987.
Duncan AW, Correa MT, Levine JF, Breitschwerdt EB: The dog as a sen-
Liddell AM, Stockham SL, Scott MA, et al: Predominance of Ehrlichia
tinel for human infection: prevalence of Borrelia burgdorferi C6 anti-
ewingui in Missouri dogs, I Clin Microbiol 4l:4617, 2003.
bodies in dogs from southeastern and mid-Atlantic states, Vector Borne
Littman MP, Goldstein RE, Labato MA, et al: ACVIM small animal con-
Zoonotic Dis 4:221, 2004.
sensus statement on Lyme disease in dogs: diagnosis, treatment, and
Dworkin MS, Schwan TG, Anderson DE: Tick-borne relapsing fever in
prevention, I Vet Intern Med 20:422, 2006.
North America, Med Clin North Am 86:417, 2002.
Lockhart JM, Davidson WR, Stallknecht DE, et al: Natural history of 
Emmons RW: Ecology of Colorado tick fever, Annu Rev Microbiol 42:49,
Ehrlichia chafensis (Rickettsiales: Ehrlichieae) in the piedmont phys-
1988.
iographic province of Georgia, I Parasitof 83:887, 1997.
Ewing SA: Transmission of Anaplasma marginale by arthropods. In
Loftis AD, Reeves WK, Spurlock JP, et al: Infection of a goat with a tick-
Proceedings of the Seventh National Anaplasmosis Conference,
transmitted Ehrlichia from Georgia, U.S.A., that is closely related to
 Mississippi State University, 1981, Starkville, Mississippi.
Ehrlichia ruminantium, I Vector Ecof 31:213, 2006.
 Fenn K, Conlon C, Jones M, et al: Phylogenetic relationships of the
Logue IN: Beyond the germ theory, College Station, Texas, 1995, Texas
Wolbachia of nematodes and arthropods, PLoS Pathog 2:e94, 2006.
A&M University Press.
Foil L, Andress E, Freeland RL, et al: Experimental infection of domestic
Maurin M, Raoult D: Bartonella (Rochalimaea) quintana infections, Chin
cats with Bartonella henselne by inoculation of Ctenocephalides felis
Microbiol Rev 9:273, 1996.
(Siphonaptera: Pulicidae) feces, J Med Entommof 35:625, 1998.
McDade JE, Newhouse VF: Natural history of Rickettsia rickettsi, Annu
Foley IE, Chomel B, Kikuchi Y, et al: Seroprevalence of Bartonela henselae 
Rev Microbiol 40:287, 1986.
in cattery cats: association with cattery hygiene and flea infestation, Vet
Mebus CA: African swine fever, Adv Virus Res 35:251, 1988.
Q 20:1, 1998.
 Mellor PS, Kitching RP, Wilkinson PJ: Mechanical transmission of capri-
Fukunaga M, Takahashi Y, Tsuruta Y, et al: Genetic and phenotypic anal-
ysis of Borrela miyamtoisp. nov., isolated from the ixodid tick xodes
Sci 43:109, 1987.
joaong iss i aur uedef u aseasp auk rog roian ayn snsiad
Mellor PS, Hamblin C: African horse sickness, Vet Res 35:445, 2004.
45:804, 1995.
Morales SC, Breitschwerdt EB, Washabau RJ, et al: Detection of Bartonela
Gage KL, Dennis DT, Orloski KA, et al: Cases of cat-associated human
henselae DNA in two dogs with pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis, I Am
plague in the Western US, 1977-1998, Chin Infect Dis 30:893, 2000.
Vet Med Assoc 230:681, 2007.
Genchi C, Sacchi L, Bandi C, Venco L: Preliminary results on the effect of
Moyer PL, Varela AS, Luttrell MP, et al: White-tailed deer (Odocoileus
tetracycline on the embryogenesis and symbiotic bacteria (Wotbachia)
virginianus) develop spirochetemia follwing experimental infection
of Dirofilaria immitis. An update and discussion, Parassitologia 40:247,
with Borrelia lonestar, Vet Microbiol 1l15:229, 2006.
1998.
Oliver JHIr, Lin T, Gao L, et al: An enzootic transmission cycle of Lyme
Gerdes GH: Rift Valley fever, Rev Sci Tech 23:613, 2004.
borreliosis spirochetes in the southeastern United States, Proc Natl Acad
Gerhardt RR, Allen IW, Greene WH, Smith PC: The role of face flies in an
Sci U S A 100:11642, 2003.
episode of infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis, J Amm Vet Med Assoc
 Parola P, Davoust B, Raoult D: Tick- and flea-borne ricketsial emerging
180:156, 1982.
zoonoses, Vet Res 36:469, 2005.
Gratz NG: Emerging and resurging vector-borne diseases, Ann Rev
Petersen JM, Schriefer ME: Tularemia: emergence/re-emergence, Vet Res 
Entomof 44:51,1999
36:455, 2005.
Gritsun TS, Nuttall PA, Gould EA: Tick-borne flaviviruses, Adv Virus Res
Plowright W: African swine fever. In Davis JW, Karstad LH, Trainer DO,
61:317, 2003.
eds: Infectious diseases of wild mammals, ed 2, Ames, Iowa, 198l, Iowa
Gustafson CR, Bickford AA, Cooper GL, Charlton BR: Sticktight fleas
State University Press.
associated with fowl pox in a backyard chicken flock in California,
Pusterla N, Johnson EM, Chae JS, Madigan JE: Digenetic trematodes,
Avian Dis 41:1006, 1997.
Acanthatrium sp. and Lecithodendrium sp., as vectors of Neorickettsia
Harrus S, Klement E, Aroch I, et al: Retrospective study of 46 cases of
ristici, the agent of Potomac horse fever, I Helminthol 77:335, 2003.
feline haemobartonellosis in Israel and their relationships with FeLV
Raoult D, Drancourt M: Antimicrobial therapy of rickettsial diseases,
and FIV infections, Vet Rec 15l:82, 2002.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 35:2457, 1991.
Hawkins JA, Love JN, Hidalgo RJ: Mechanical transmission of anaplas-
Raoult D, Roux V: The body louse as a vector of reemerging human
mosis by tabanids (Diptera: Tabanidae), Ar I Vet Res 43:732, 1982.
diseases, Clin Infect Dis 29:888, 1999.
CH A P T E R 5 Vector-Borne Diseases
253
Reisen WK: Epidemiology of vector-borne diseases. In Mullen G,
Thorner AR, Walker DH, Petri WA: Rocky mountain spotted fever, Clin
Durden L, eds: Medical and veterinary entomology, Boston, 2002,
Infect Dis 27:1353, 1998.
Academic Press.
Uilenberg G: Experimental transmission of Cowdria ruinantrum by the
Rikihisa Y: New findings on members of the family Anaplasmataceae of
Gulf coast tick Amblyomma macuiatur danger of introducing heart-
veterinary importance, Ann N Y Acad Sci 1078:438, 2006.
water and benign African theileriasis onto the American mainland, Am
Seneviratna P, Wecrasinghe, Ariyadasa S: Transmission of Haermobartonelfa
I Vet Res 43:1279, 1982.
canis by the dog tick, Rhipicephaus sanguineus, Res Vet Sci 14:112, 1973.
Weaver SC, Ferro C, Barrera R, et al: Venezuelan equine encephalitis,
 Sironi M, Bandi C, Sacchi L, et al: Molecular evidence for a close relative of
Annu Rev Entomol 49:141, 2004.
the arthropod endosymbiont Wofbachia in a filarial worm, Mof Biochem
Woods JP, Crystal MA, Morton RJ, Panciera RJ: Tularemia in two cats,
Parasitol 74:223, 1995.
I Arm Vet Med Assoc 212:81, 1998.
 Smith RD, Miranpuri GS, Adams JH, Ahrens EH: Borrelia theiler: isola-
Woods JE, Wisnewski N, Lappin MR: Attempted transmission of
tion from ticks (Boophius micropius) and tick-borne transmission
Candidatus Mycopiasma haemorminutum and Mycoplasma haemofelis
between splenectomized calves, Am I Vet Res 46:1396, 1985.
by feeding cats infected Ctenocephalides felis, Am J Vet Res 67:494, 2006.
Tabamo RE, Donahue JE: Eastern equine encephalitis: case report and
Wormser GP, Dattwyler RJ, Shapiro ED, et al: The clinical assessment,
literature review, Med Health R I 82:23, 1999.
treatment, and prevention of Lyme disease, human granulocytic ana-
Telford SR 3rd, Mather TN, Moore SI, et al: Incompetence of deer
plasmosis, and babesiosis: clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious
as reservoirs of the Lyme disease spirochete, Am J Trop Med Hyg
Diseases Society of America, Clin Infect Dis 43:1089, 2006.
39:105, 1988.
Wu YC, Huang YS, Chien LJ: The epidemiology of Japanese encephalitis
Terheggen U, Leggat PA: Clinical manifestations of Q fever in adults and
on Taiwan during 1966-1997, Am I Trop Med Hyg 6l:78, 1999.
children, Travel Med Infect Dis 5:159, 2007.
Yabsley MJ, Varela AS, Tate CM, et al: Ehrlichua ewingi infection in white-
Thomas V, Anguita J, Barthold SW, Fikrig E: Coinfection with Borrelia
tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), Emerg Infet Dis 8:668, 2002.
burgdorferi and the agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis alters
Zaher MA, Soliman ZR, Diab FM: An experimental study of Borrelia
murine immune responses, pathogen burden, and severity of Lyme
anserina in four species of Argas ticks. 2. Transstadial survival and
arthritis, Infect Immun 69:3359, 2001.
transovarial transmission, Z Parasitenkd 53:213, 1977.
CHAPTER6
Antiparasitic Drugs
Randy C. Lynn
 parasiticide is a poison that is more toxic to para-
published reports must also be submitted. Drugs intended
 sites than to their hosts. The degree of discrimina-
for food animals must be accompanied by data on tissue
. tion is sometimes small, sometimes considerable,
residues and the route and rate of excretion of the parent
but never complete, so that application of parasiticides
compound and its major metabolites. The amount and the
always entails some hazard to the host. As a matter of
structures of the longest-lasting tissue residue also must be
fact, it is sometimes easier to explain the deleterious effects
determined, and if the substance has similarities to known
that parasiticides frequently exert on the host than to
carcinogenic chemicals, a 2-year toxicity experiment is then
explain how they kill parasites.
required in rats and mice.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) requires an
environmental impact analysis of the new compound.
DEVELOPMENT
 Phytotoxicity and the effects on fish and other lower animals
Stages in the development of a typical insecticide or anthel
also must be vigorously studied. A thorough analysis must be
mintic proceed approximately as follows. First, many thou-
conducted to establish any potential effects on workers who
sands of compounds must be screened before one is found that
apply the product. Worker safety must also be addressed, so
shows promise. The screening procedure, in the case of an
that the appropriate safety measures (e.g-- gloves, safety
anthelmintic, could require the demonstration of in vivo activ.
glasses) can be written into the instructions.
ity against some convenient parasite (e.g-, Nermatospiroides
Before a new anthelmintic or any new parasiticide can be
dubius, Nippostrongylus brasiliensis, Syphacia obvelata, or
approved, well-controlled experiments must be carried out
Hymenolepis nana of laboratory rodents; Ascaridia galli or
involving sacrifice of the test animals and determination of
Heterakis gallirnarum of chickens). In vitro assays have been
residual worm burdens after treatment. Confirmation
developed that allow rapid screening of large numbers of
experiments must be conducted by several independent
potential agents (Londershausen, 1996). A preliminary esti-
laboratories as a series of field tests in different geographic
mate of mammalian toxicity is also obtained from experiments
regions of the United States.
on rats and mice.
The package label is required by law to bear all the nec-
The activity screening tests and preliminary toxicity stu.
essary cautions and to notify the user about all adverse
dies greatly reduce the list of suitable candidates but are of
reactions that have been discovered. Six months after a
little value in predicting the effect of a particular drug either
 product enters the market and at regular intervals there-
 on a particular species of domestic animal or on its cus-
after, the manufacturer is required to report to the FDA any
tomary assemblage of parasites. Responses of various spe-
adverse reactions that have come to light and to add appro-
cies and strains of parasites and their hosts to antiparasitic
priate notices to the label or withdraw the product from the
agents are sometimes quite selective. Thus ascarids are very
marketplace. As a result, the label (or package insert) has
sensitive to piperazines, whereas hookworms are quite
become one of the most objective and current sources of
refractory. Most breeds of cattle and dogs tolerate judicious
information on parasiticides.
applications of organophosphate insecticides, whereas
In the early phases of new product development, the mol.
Brahman cattle, greyhounds, and whippet dogs are likely
ecule is usually identified by only a code number, S-147 for
to be fatally intoxicated by such treatment. The necessary
example. This is to keep the hundreds of thousands of poten-
 information can be obtained only through experiments on
tial products separate and to avoid the trouble of naming
domestic animals and the parasites for which the anthel-
each one. Once the product clears the early hurdles of activ-
mintic is intended.
ity and safety, it is given a nonproprietary (generic) name.
When a manufacturing firm files a New Animal Drug
The nonproprietary name is used in the scientific literature
Application with the Food and Drug Administration
worldwide
to identify the molecule. Thus S-147 now
(FDA), it must submit complete information on its chem-
becomes milbemycin oxime. As product development pro-
istry, process of manufacture, and quantitative assay meth-
ceeds, the marketing staff develops a trade name. This name
ods. Results of all experiments conducted to establish the
will be trademarked and applied to a specific formulation.
safety and efficacy of the new product and all relevant
At this point milbemycin oxime becomes Interceptor.
254
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
255
One molecule may have several different trade names
 The diversity of structure, biologic activity, and toxicity
that correspond to different formulations or to different
among insecticides is exceeded only by the number and
countries. For example, milbemycin oxime is marketed
variety of insects, mites, and ticks that need to be con-
and sold as Interceptor for internal parasite control, sold
trolled. The label of every insecticide container must be
as MilbeMite for treatment of ear mites, and sold in combi-
read carefully and understood before the contents are
 nation with lufenuron as Sentinel. These trade names
applied to the animal. The label is the most up-to-date
will be used in the advertising and promotion of the
and authoritative source of information available (Bayley,
 product. In this text the nonproprietary names are used to
2007). In addition, there are several good review texts that
identify the products, and some of the trade names are
discuss the chemistry, mode of action, and toxicity of insec-
mentioned.
ticides (Coats, 1982; Fest and Schmidt, 1982; Hassall, 1982;
Hayes and Laws, 1991; Plapp, 1991; Ware, 1983; Ware,
Resistance to Parasiticides
1986). The Insecticide Resistance Action Committe
 Regular application of antiparasitic drugs to populations of
(IRAC) recently organized all known insecticides by their
parasites inevitably results in the development of resistant
mode of action (IRAC, 2007).
parasite populations through selection of resistant pheno-
The treatment of insecticidal overdose or toxicity is a
types. Eventually the once-effective drug ceases to work and
complex subject that lies outside the scope of this chapter.
must be replaced by another.
A few general comments, however, are included about treat-
 Unfortunately, the replacement also may fail against the
ment of affected patients. For more specific up-to-date infor-
resistant strain, especially if it is a chemical congener of the
mation, the veterinarian should consult the ASPCA National
original. This has happened often enough to serve us warn-
Animal Poison Control Center at 800-548-2423. They main-
ing. We need to develop better ways of controlling parasites
tain a 24-hour service staffed with veterinary toxicologists to
than to lash away at them crudely and blindly with one
 consult about animal poisoning of any type.
chemical after another.
The literature on antiparasitic drugs is enormous. In the
Botanic Agents
interests of both economy and readability, we have tried to
The botanic insecticides are derived from plant materials.
list the few references that will guide the veterinarian who
Ground plant parts (e.g-, flowers, leaves, stems, roots) or
 needs more specific information about these agents.
their extracts may be combined in a variety of formulations.
It is important to note here whom one calls when potential
Essential oils from plants are often used as insect attractants
adverse reactions or problems arise. The American Society for
or repellents. Botanic insecticides, particularly pyrethrins,
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) National
have excellent toxic effects against a variety of crop and
Animal Poison Control Center is exquisitely staffed and has
animal insect pests, very short persistence in the environ-
the largest database available for consultation. They charge a
ment, and relatively low toxicity to animals. Pyrethroids are
small consultation fee for each case and can be reached at 800-
synthetic pyrethrum-like compounds with superior potency
548-2423. The manufacturer of the product also can be con-
and knockdown activity.
sulted and is required by law to notify federal authorities
concerning all adverse reactions. The manufacturer may
Rotenone
also be prepared to provide assistance in investigating and
 Rotenone is an insecticidal product obtained from the roots
 treating any adverse event.
of several plants. Rotenone was first used by natives in
South America to paralyze fish, causing them to surface
INSECTICIDES
so that they could easily be caught. In the 1800s it was
first used to control leaf-eating caterpillars. Rotenone is
The United States Federal Environmental Pesticide Control
the insecticidal component of derris root, cube root, and
Act (FEPCA) of 1972 is administered by the EPA, which
several other leguminous shrubs. It acts as an inhibitor of
controls the distribution, sale, and use of pesticides within
mitochondrial respiratory enzymes. Rotenone is insoluble
 each state and between states. This act even specifies what
in water but very soluble in alcohols, acetone, carbon tetra-
 penalties may be imposed for the misuse of pesticides. State
chloride, chloroform, and many other organic solvents. It
 governments may establish even stricter standards than
 decomposes on exposure to light and air. The oral median
those set by FEPCA.
lethal dose (LDso) of rotenone for rats is 133 mg/kg and for
Users of pesticides bear a legal responsibility in the United
white mice, 350 mg/kg, but it is toxic to fish. Rotenone,
 States for knowing which chemicals they are currently per-
alone or synergized, is the main insecticidal ingredient in
mitted to use and for using these chemicals only in strict
Goodwinol Ointment and several ear mite solutions. It may
 accordance with the indications and directions on the pack-
be applied to cats and dogs as an ointment, solution, or
age labels. Current information on pesticides should be
shampoo for the control of a variety of arthropod parasites
sought from the pesticide coordinator, extension entomol-
including localized demodicosis in dogs and ear mites,
 ogist with livestock responsibility, or extension veterinarian
Otodectes cynotis, in cats, dogs, and rabbits.
appointed by the state agricultural extension services and
WARNING: Kittens younger than 4 weeks old and suckling
land grant colleges.
 puppies should not be treated with rotenone products.
256
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
Rotenone is toxic to swine, fish, and snakes and should not
biodegradable but sufficiently stable when exposed to air
be applied to these animals. Cats and dogs may vomit after
 s     o rr 
licking rotenone from their coats. It may be carcinogenic
excellent control of insects.
in rats.
Pyrethroids have a greater insecticidal effect when the
temperature is lowered. In chemist's language, they have a
Pyrethrlns
negative temperature coefficient. Pyrethroids initially stimu-
The flower head of the pyrethrum plant Chrysanthermum
late and then depress nerve cell function and eventually cause
cinerariaefoliurm contains six closely related insecticidal sub-
 paralysis. The fast knockdown of flying insects is the result of
stances (pyrethrin I and II, cinerin I and II, jasmolin I and
rapid muscular paralysis. Pyrethroids have low mammalian
II) that are known as pyrethrins. Pyrethrins are rapidly
toxicity, but some pyrethroids provoke sensation of the skin
degradable in the presence of moisture, air, and light and
or mucosa. They are toxic to fish.
are also rapidly biodegradable. They are very soluble in
Research into pyrethroid chemistry has resulted in many
kerosene but insoluble in water. The oral LDso of pyrethrin
new products. For one to make some sense of this profu-
for rats is 200 to 1500 mg/kg, depending on the purity of
sion of new products, it is best to divide them by genera-
the product, and the dermal LDso for rats is greater than
tion. The first generation was represented by D-trans-
-ond uoeu as and u suad y/ n
allethrin, which was a synthetic duplicate of cinerin I, a
blems in rats, but regular aerosol applications should not
component of natural pyrethrin. The second-generation
produce any adverse reactions in domestic animals. Because
pyrethroids include tetramethrin, resmethrin, and pheno-
they are toxic to fish, pyrethrin aerosols should not be used
thrin. They are more potent than pyrethrin in knockdown
near fish tanks, but regular use has little impact on game
 ne on arsoxa uo iidn ssodooap iq houaod
fish and other wildlife.
sunlight. The third-generation pyrethroids are appreciably
Pyrethrins rapidly knock down, paralyze, and kill arthro-
more potent than earlier generations and are photostable
pods by disrupting sodium and potassium ion transport in
for several days in full sun. They are represented by fenva-
 nerve membranes, thus poisoning neurotransmission along
lerate and permethrin. The fourth-generation pyrethroids
the axon and at the synapse (Kahn, 2005). Residues of pyr-
are represented by cypermethrin and fluvalinate.
ethrins are sometimes repellent. Pyrethrins are usually com-
The fifth-generation pyrethroids are the newest available
bined with a synergist such as piperonyl butoxide or N-octyl
and are represented by beta-cyfluthrin, an isomer subset of
bicycloheptene dicarboximide. Synergists increase the insec-
cyfluthrin. They are more photostable and more potent
ticidal activity 10 to 20 times (Plapp, 1991). Synergists poison
than the previous generation. The disadvantage of increased
the mixed function oxidases, which detoxify insecticides in
potency, and especially increased persistence in the envir-
the insect (Kahn, 2005).
onment, is the development of insect resistance. In fact,
Because of the safety and rapid knockdown effect of nat-
insect resistance to synthetic pyrethroids has been docu-
ural pyrethrins, they enjoy widespread use in the home and
mented (Plapp, 1991). Synthetic pyrethroid products com-
in agriculture. Natural pyrethrins have more uses approved
 monly used on domestic animals are listed in the following
by the EPA than any other insecticide. Many commercially
discussion according to generation.
available insecticides formulated as aerosols, fogs, sham-
poos, and mists contain a mixture of pyrethrins and a syn-
Flrst-Generatlon Pyrethrolds
ergist (e.g., Aurimite, Mita-Clear, Mycodex Pet Shampoo,
The first-generation synthetic pyrethroid (D-trans-allethrin)
Synerkyl).
is a synthetic duplicate of the natural pyrethrin, cinerin 1.
Pyrethrin aerosols, fogs, sprays, and powders control face
No more potent or stable than natural pyrethrin, it is rap-
flies, horseflies, houseflies, stable flies, mosquitoes, fleas, lice,
idly degraded by light and air. D-Trans-allethrin, the first-
and ticks. Pyrethrins are registered for application to beef
generation pyrethroid, is a mixture of several optical
and lactating dairy cattle and in dairy barns and milk houses.
isomers. It has low mammalian toxicity. The LDso of alle-
They are not persistent insecticides, so regular and repeated
thrin for rats is greater than 920 mg/kg. D-Trans-allethrin is
application is necessary. Resistance to pyrethrins has been
formulated into a flea shampoo (Hartz Advanced Care 2 in
reported in houseflies and in some cattle ticks.
1) for removing fleas from dogs and cats.
WARNiNG: Pyrethrins should not be applied to kittens
younger than 4 weeks old or to suckling puppies. In case of
Second-Generatlon Pyrethrolds
ingestion, the most toxic component is usually the solvent.
The second-generation synthetic pyrethroids were the first
Therefore vomiting is contraindicated. Administer activated
step forward from the natural pyrethrins. They increased
charcoal and supportive therapy In case of dermal exposure,
the knockdown potency 10 to 50 times more than the nat-
the animal should be bathed with a good detergent.
ural products but were not much more stable in sunlight
than the natural pyrethrins.
Pyrethroids
Pyrethroids are synthetic pyrethrin-like substances. These
Phenothrin
new chemicals are more potent and possess a greater knock-
Phenothrin is a second-generation pyrethroid that
down effect than do the plant pyrethrins. Pyrethroids are
recently appeared on the scene for flea control in pets.
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
257
The acute oral LDso of phenothrin in rats is 5000 mg/kg,
4000 mg/kg. Like fenvalerate, permethrin is very toxic to fish.
and the LDso for dermal exposure in rats is greater than
It is photostable, with effective residues lasting 4 to 7 days on
10,000 mg/kg. Phenothrin is formulated into an array of
crop foliage. Permethrin is registered in a wide variety of
over-the-counter spot-on products for control of fleas
formulations as a treatment for residual animal quarters
(Hartz Advanced Care 3 in 1) for use on dogs and cats.
(dairy barns, feedlots, stables, poultry houses, swine, and
pea oi shep oe kiaaa uo-jods e se padde si ionpoid au
 other animal housing) to control houseflies, stable flies, and
and control fleas and ticks. It is also formulated in combi-
other manure- breeding flies.
 nation with an insect growth regulator (IGR), methoprene,
Permethrin is the most ubiquitous of the pyrethroids
to more effectively break the flea life cycle (Hartz Advanced
approved for use on or around animals. It is available in
Care 4 in 1) in dogs and cats. The label states that the
on-animal sprays, dips, shampoo, ear tags, pour-on formu-
 product is waterproof after application.
las, and dust, for use on dogs, cats, horses, cattle, and swine.
It is also available in concentrated form for direct application
Resmethrin
to dogs ( Proticall). Permethrin is also available in combina-
 Resmethrin, a second-generation synthetic pyrethroid, is
tion with imidacloprid and methoprene for flea control (see
 not synergized to any appreciable extent by pyrethrum
discussion of combination products, later). It then acts sys-
synergists. Of great significance is resmethrin's low mam-
temica lly to control adult fleas. Permethrin is widely used as
malian toxicity. Its acute oral LDso for rats is 4240 mg/kg.
a premises spray (Defend, Ectrin, Expar) for use around
 Resmethrin shows excellent knockdown effect and is avail-
livestock and pets to control fleas, ticks, and flies.
able for use in a fly repellant, and for premises foggers
(Formula F-500) for the control of flies, mosquitoes, gnats,
Fourth-Generatlon Pyrethrolds
and other insects.
The fourth-generation pyrethroids are more potent and
longer lasting than earlier generations. The class is repre-
Tetramethrin
sented by cyfluthrin, cypermethrin, deltamethrin, and lam-
Tetramethrin is a second-generation synthetic pyrethroid
bdacyalothrin in an increasing variety of formulations.
originally developed in Japan. Its acute oral LDso in rats is
 greater than 2500 mg/kg. Tetramethrin is available in a total
Cyfluthrin
release fogger in combination with etofenprox (a pyrethroid
Cyfluthrin is a fourth-generation pyrethroid with an
ether insecticide) to kill flying and crawling insects in the
acute oral LDso for rats of 500 mg/kg. The product is for-
outside environment (Vet-Kem Siphotrol Outdoor Fogger).
mulated into a pour-on (CyLence) for beef and dairy cattle
As with all foggers, be certain to follow the directions includ-
(including lactating cows) to control horn flies, face flies,
ing covering food, avoiding contact with pilot lights and
 biting lice, and sucking lice. It is approved in a 1% dust and
open flames, leaving the area, and airing out the premises
wettable powder (Tempo) for use in and around livestock
thoroughly after treatment. Tetramethrin is also available as
housing and for food-handling locations for a long list of
 an inverted aerosol for control of fleas, ticks, and carpet
flying and crawling insects.
beetles (Virbac KnockOut).
Cypermethrin
Thlrd-Generatlon Pyrethrolds
Cypermethrin is a potent fourth-generation synthetic py-
The third-generation synthetic pyrethroids became available
rethroid. Its acute oral LDso for rats is 4150 mg/kg. It is
in the 1970s. Photostability is the hallmark of this class. For
approved for use in fly lotion (Repel-X), and fly spray
 the first time, increased potency and photostability were
(Endure) for use on horses.
fixed in the same molecule.
Deltamethrin
Fenvalerate
 Deltamethrin is a fourth-generation pyrethroid. The
Fenvalerate, the first of the third-generation pyrethroids
acute oral LDso in rats is 31 to 139 mg/kg for deltamethrin,
to be commercially successful, is very photostable and
 and the acute dermal LDso in rabbits is greater than 2000 mg/
potent. Its acute oral LDso for rats is 451 mg/kg, and its
kg. It is formulated into a premise spray (Annihilator), wet-
acute dermal LDso in rabbits is 2500 mg/kg. Fenvalerate is
table powder, for control of pest species in pet housing and
highly toxic to fish. It is formulated for long residual insec-
residential areas. It is also available as a flea collar for dogs
ticide activity. Ectrin cattle ear tags are used in dairy and
(Novation).
beef cattle for control of horn flies, face flies, Gulf Coast
ticks, and spinose ear ticks and as an aid in the control of
Lambdacyalothrin
lice, stable flies, and houseflies.
Lambdacyalothrin is a fourth-generation synthetic py-
rethroid. Its acute oral LDso for male rats is only 79 mg/
Permethrin
kg. The product is available as a pour-on (Saber) for use on
Permethrin, a third-generation pyrethroid, is an extremely
beef cattle and calves. It is labeled for use against lice and
active insecticide with a rapid knockdown effect against a
horn flies. It is formulated into a premises spray (Grenade) to
variety of insects. Its acute oral LDso for rats is greater than
control insects in and around livestock housing structures.
258
C H A P T E R 6  Antiparasitic Drugs
Lambdacyalothrin is also formulated in combination with
required (Buck, 1991). Artificial respiration may be requi
the organophosphate pirimiphos to form ear tags (Double
red in severe cases of carbamate and organophosphate
Barrel VP) labeled for up to 5 months control of horn flies
poisoning.
and up to 4 months' control of face flies. The ear tags are
 Carbamates, and particularly organophosphates, should
approved for use on beef cattle and nonlactating dairy cattle
not be used in conjunction with other cholinesterase inhibi-
and calves.
tors or other insecticides because the effect of these chemicals
on cholinesterase reserves is cumulative. Organophosphates
Flfth-Generatlon Pyrethrolds
should not be applied to sighthounds (e.g-, greyhounds and
The fifth-generation pyrethroids are at the cutting edge of
whippet dogs) or to certain breeds of cattle (e.g., Chianina,
 pyrethroid development. They are the most potent and the
Charolais, Gelbvieh, Simmental, Brahman) because these
longest lasting. Currently they are available only in insecticidal
breeds have idiosyncratic reactions to this class of compound.
ear tags.
Application of organophosphates to cattle infested with
Hypoderma larvae may lead to host-parasite reaction.
Beta-cyfluthrin
Beta-cyfluthrin is one of the isomers found in cyfluthrin.
Carbamates
It is designated by the manufacturer as a fifth-generation
 Carbamates inactivate AChE in a two-step process: first a
pyrethroid. The insecticide is formulated into ear tags
reversible carbamate-AChE complex is formed, then the
(CyLence Ultra) approved for use on beef cattle to control
AChE is carbamylated and inactive. Later the carbamate
face flies, horn flies, Gulf Coast ticks, and spinose ear ticks.
is cleaved away, which frees the original AChE, but the
The ear tags remain effective for up to 5 months. Like other
carbamate is unable to bind another AChE molecule
insecticide ear tags, continuous use of one agent can lead to
(Hayes and Laws, 1991). The antidote of choice is atropine;
insect resistance. To help delay resistance, one should rotate
2-PAM is contraindicated for carbamate toxicity.
the class of insecticide from season to season. The cyflu-
thrin ear tags should be removed at the end of fly season
Carbaryl
and before slaughter.
Carbaryl, also known by the trade name Sevin, is the
most commonly used carbamate. Introduced in 1956, it
Carbamates and Organophosphates
was the first commercially successful carbamate. The mam-
Carbamates and organophosphates are commonly used
malian toxicity of carbaryl is low; its oral LDso for female
insecticides. One should be aware of their toxic effects on
rats is 500 mg/kg. Carbaryl is highly toxic to honeybees.
animals (Hayes and Laws, 1991). These insecticides exert
The product is most commonly used to control fleas and
their toxic action by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase (AChE),
ticks on small animals.
an important enzyme of the nervous system. The carbamate
and organophosphate insecticides bind and inactivate
Dogs and cats
AChE, with the result that acetylcholine accumulates at
Carbaryl is used alone or in combination with synergists.
the neural synapse. They thus function as synaptic poisons
Adult dogs and cats infested with fleas, lice, or ticks may be
(Ware, 1983)
washed with products containing 0.5% to 1% carbaryl
The accumulation of acetylcholine produces signs of
(Mycodex with carbaryl). A free-flowing dust formulation
acute poisoning, which are principally the result of acetyl-
containing 2% to 5% carbaryl (Adams flea and tick dust)
 choline's muscarinic effects at autonomic effector organs
also may be used. The dust is sprinkled over the animal then
(miosis, lacrimation, salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, fre-
thoroughly rubbed into the coat. Unfortunately, fleas and
quent urination, dyspnea, bradycardia, and hypotension)
ticks in many areas have developed resistance to carbaryl.
and its nicotinic effects at the neuromuscular junction
WARNiNG: Do not use other cholinesterase-inhibiting
(rapid involuntary muscle twitching and scaftered fascicu-
 chemicals with products containing carbaryl. Puppies and
lations followed by severe weakness and paralysis)
kittens younger than 4 weeks should not be treated with
(Brunton, 2006). Death is usually due to respiratory failure.
carbaryl preparations. Read the label for other specific
Many organophosphorus insecticides show a chronic
 product restrictions. If animals show signs of poisoning.
 neurotoxicity with degeneration of long axons in the spinal
administer atropine. Use of 2-PAM is contraindicated in
cord and peripheral nerves (e.g-, sciatic nerve). Atropine
carbaryl poisoning.
administered parenterally is the preferred antidote for carba.
 mate and organophosphate poisoning. Organophosphate
Methomyl
poisoning also may be reversed with pralidoxime (2-PAM),
Methomyl, introduced in 1966, is more potent than car-
but this drug is contraindicated in carbamate poisoning.
baryl and very toxic to mammals. Its oral LDso for rats is
The principal action of pralidoxime chloride is to reacti-
17 mg/kg. Methomyl has demonstrated a broad spectrum
vate AChE, which in turn destroys the accumulated acetyl
of activity against a wide range of insects infesting vegetables
choline so that the synapses and neuromuscular junctions
and field crops. It has a very rapid action. Flies are killed when
 can regain normal function. Pralidoxime chloride is rela-
they come into contact with or ingest methomyl. Methomyl
tively short acting, so repeated administration is usually
is the insecticidal ingredient in Blue Streak Fly Bait.
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
259
WARNiNG: Methomyl is toxic to fish and honeybees. It
Because of their simple straight-chain structures, they are
should be kept away from domestic animals. In case of
readily broken down.
 poisoning, administer atropine.
Dichlorvos
Propoxur
 Propoxur is an older carbamate that was introduced in
developed in the early 1960s. Its acute oral LDso for rats is
1959. It has a quick knockdown action and affords residual
approximately 50 mg/kg. A unique property of dichlorvos is 
effects for several weeks. Propoxur is toxic to birds and hon-
its high vapor pressure, which makes it an excellent agent for
eybees but can be used safely on and around domestic ani-
killing insects in a closed space. It was also the first product to
mals. The oral LDso of propoxur for rats is 100 mg/kg.
be incorporated into an effective flea collar. Dichlorvos has
 Propoxur is the active ingredient in foam control topical
quick knockdown insecticidal action as a contact, systemic,
insecticides. It is also commonly used in flea collars for
and fumigant agent, but it has little residual effect. Its half-life
 dogs and cats (Bansect, Scratchex). It is an ingredient in sev.
in neutral aqueous media is about 8 hours. Rapid hydrolysis
eral formulations that combine propoxur with methoprene,
also is noted in the mammalian body. In slow-release phar-
an IGR (Sergeant's Double Duty, Vet-Kem Breakaway).
maceutical forms, dichlorvos demonstrates a high degree of
activity against the economically important nematodes of
Organophosphates
swine (see discussion of anthelmintics).
The organophosphates are synaptic poisons that work by
Cattle. Dichlorvos Vapona Concentrate is diluted to a
 inactivating AChE. The inactivation process occurs in two
concentration of 1% in water or diesel oil. The product is
steps. First the organophosphate reversibly binds to the
sprayed on beef and dairy cattle at the rate of 30 to 60 mL
active site of AChE. Later the phosphate becomes irrevers-
 per head for the control of face flies, horn flies, stable flies,
ibly bound to the AChE enzyme. Once irreversibly bound,
houseflies, gnats, and mosquitoes. It can also be used as a
the enzyme cannot be regenerated, so the tissue must syn-
premise spray.
thesize new enzyme. 2-PAM is effective in reversing the first
Food animals should not be treated within 1 day of
reaction and regenerating the enzyme. It is most effective
slaughter. For standard precautions to be followed in dealing
when given soon after exposure (Buck, 1991).
with organophosphorus insecticides, see earlier discussion.
A long list of organophosphates is available for use on
and around animals. For the list to be less imposing, it will
Phenyl derivatives
be divided into three groups by chemical structure: aliphat-
The phenyl derivatives are structurally more complex
ic derivatives, phenyl derivatives, and heterocyclic deriva-
 organophosphates than the aliphatic derivatives because
fives. The aliphatic derivatives were the first to be
they have a benzene ring in their structure. They were the
 s r a e aa a n
second major class of organophosphate to be developed.
complex rings. Because their structure is simple, they are
Because of their structural differences from the aliphatic deri-
rapidly broken down in the animal and the environment.
vatives, they are longer lasting in the environment. The phenyl
The phenyl derivatives, the second group, have a benzene
 derivatives are represented by tetrachlorvinphos.
ring in their structure. The phenyl derivatives were the
second class of organophosphates to be developed. They
Tetrachlorvinphos
are longer lasting than the aliphatic derivatives. The last
Tetrachlorvinphos is a phenyl derivative organophosphate
 group to be developed, the heterocyclic derivatives, has
with low mammalian toxicity. The oral LDso of tetrachlor-
ring structures in which at least one carbon atom is
vinphos for rats is 4000 to 5000 mg/kg. Tetrachlorvinphos is
replaced by oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur. The members of
available as a spray, powder and collar for control of fleas on
this group are the longest lasting of the organophosphates.
dogs and cats and a feed-through for horses.
 Toxicity from organophosphate insecticides is usually a
Dogs and cats. Tetrachlorvinphos is available in an array
medical emergency requiring treatment with activated char-
 of sprays, powders, and collars (Hartz Advanced Care 2 in
coal and bathing to decrease absorption, 2-PAM to reverse
1) for control of fleas and ticks on dogs and cats and in
binding to AChE, and atropine to decrease the clinical signs
their environment. It is also formulated into combination
of acetylcholine excess (Kahn, 2005).
with an IGR, methoprene, for more effective control of the
 Many of the organophosphates available in the past have
flea life cycle (Hartz Advanced Care 3 in 1).
 disappeared from the scene, either from losing market share
 Horses. This product is formulated into a feed-through
to newer products or from reregistration issues with the
fly control for control of stable flies and houseflies
EPA. The current list is shorter than that found in the
(Equitrol). For best results all horses in the stable should
earlier editions of this volume.
be fed the product. Begin treatment before flies emerge in
the spring, and continue feeding until fly season is over.
Aliphatic derivatives
The aliphatic derivatives were the very first organophos-
Heterocyclic derivatives
 phate products to be commercially available. Dichlorvos and
 The heterocyclic derivatives were the last group of orga-
ethion are the only aliphatic derivatives still used on animals.
 nophosphates to be developed. Chemically they all have a
260
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
ring structure in which at least one of the atoms in the ring is
stable flies, houseflies, and lice. These ear tags can also be
 Oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur. The heterocyclic ring may con-
used in winter to control lice.
sist of three, five, or six atoms. The heterocyclic derivatives
are the longest lasting of all the organophosphates. They are
Phosmet
used widely on animals and are represented by chlorpyrifos,
 Phosmet is a time-tested heterocyclic organophosphate
coumaphos, diazinon, phosmet, and pirimiphos.
insecticide registered for use on many insect pests. Its oral
LDso for male rats is 147 to 316 mg/kg, and its acute dermal
Chlorpyrifos
 LDso for rabbits is 3160 mg/kg.
Chlorpyrifos (Dursban) is moderately persistent in the
Cattle. Phosmet is formulated (Del-Phos Emulsifiable
environment and serves well for the control of mosquito
Liquid) for the control of lice, winter ticks, Lone Star
larvae, fly larvae, fire ants, and termites. Its acute oral LDso
ticks, Gulf Coast ear ticks, horn flies, and sarcoptic
in rats is 163 mg/kg, and its acute dermal LDso in rabbits is
 mange on beef and nonlactating dairy cattle. The product
2000 mg/kg.
 pea a rq no as aq pe aq a
 Chlorpyrifos is formulated as a dip and a shampoo that
the spray may be slaughtered 3 days after treatment. Do not
are indicated for the control of fleas and ticks on dogs only.
apply to sick, diseased animals or calves younger than
It is claimed that one application will kill fleas and protect
3 months old. Do not treat dairy animals within 28 days
against reinfestation for up to 1 month. For more effective
of freshening.
control of fleas, bedding and resting areas should also be
Swine. Phosmet is registered (Del-Phos Emulsifiable
sprayed. It is suggested that pregnant bitches and pups
Liquid) as a spray for the control of lice, and sarcoptic
younger than 10 weeks old should not be treated with
mange in swine. Swine treated with the spray may be
chlorpyrifos.
is on kide iou o quan iae Aep l panans
pigs or directly to nursing pigs.
Coumaphos
Coumaphos is a heterocyclic derivative organophos-
Pirimiphos
phate of relatively low toxicity for mammals. Mice are
Pirimiphos is a heterocyclic organophosphate. Its acute
very sensitive to coumaphos. Their oral LDso is 55 mg/kg,
oral LDso for female rats is 2050 mg/kg. It is formulated
whereas the oral LDso for rats is 90 to 110 mg/kg.
into a 20% cattle ear tag (Dominator) that is approved for
Coumaphos hydrolyzes slowly under alkaline conditions,
use on beef cattle, calves, and nonlactating dairy cattle.
but rapid degradation occurs in the liver of cattle.
Pirimiphos protects against horn flies and aids in control
Coumaphos is available as an emulsifiable concentrate
of face flies for 5 months.
(Co-Ral) or dust for use on animals and premises to con-
Pirimiphos is also formulated in combination with the
trol a wide range of parasitic arthropods.
synthetic pyrethroid lambdacyalothrin to form ear tags
Cattle. For the control of cattle lice, horn flies, face flies,
(Double Barrel VP) labeled for up to 5 months’ control of
 and ticks, coumaphos is sprayed on, dusted, or applied with
horn flies and up to 4 months' control of face flies. The ear
a backrubber. Coumaphos may be used on beef and lactat-
tags are approved for use on beef cattle and nonlactating
ing dairy cattle without limitations for slaughter.
dairy cattle and calves.
Coumaphos is also formulated in an ear tag in combi-
 nation with diazinon (Co-Ral Plus). It is approved for con-
Formamidines
trol of horn flies, Gulf Coast ticks, and spinose ear ticks and
The formamidines are a promising new group of acaricidal
as an aid to control of face flies. These ear tags are approved
compounds effective against cattle ticks and mange mites of
for use on beef and nonlactating dairy cattle.
swine and dogs. Formamidines work as octopaminergic
Swine. Coumaphos spray (Co-Ral) is applied directly to
agonists (IRAC, 2007; Salgado, 2007). In the United
 pigs for the control of lice by spray or dust.
States, amitraz is approved for use in dogs, cattle, and
Horses. Coumaphos is sprayed on horses for the control
swine.
of external parasites, including flies, lice, and ticks.
Amltraz
Diazinon
Amitraz is the only formamidine approved for use on ani-
 Diazinon is a relatively safe heterocyclic organophos-
mals in the United States. Its acute oral LDso for rats is 800
phate with a good record of safety. Over several decades
mg/kg, and its dermal LDso for rabbits is greater than 200
it has been used to kill a wide spectrum of insect pests. Its
mg/kg. When applied to the skin of dogs as a 0.025% solu-
oral LDso for rats is 300 to 400 mg/kg, and its acute dermal
tion, amitraz produced transient sedation, depression of the
LDso in rabbits is 4000 mg/kg.
rectal temperature, and elevation of blood glucose. Amitraz
 Diazinon is currently available in a flea collar (Preventef)
was well tolerated by dogs when administered orally at
for use on dogs and cats against fleas and ticks. It is also
0.25 mg/kg daily for 90 days, but at 1 to 4 mg/kg hypergly.
available in ear tags (Patriot) for use on beef and nonlactat-
cemia was consistently observed. In clinical studies, tran-
 ing dairy cattle to control horn flies, Gulf Coast ticks, and
sient sedation was the most frequently observed untoward
spinose ear ticks and as an aid in the control of face flies,
effect.
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
261
Dogs
knockdown against fleas, the pyriproxyfen interrupts the flea
Mitaban liquid contains 19.9% amitraz and is diluted to
life cycle, and the permethrin provides activity against ticks
a 0.025% solution for the treatment of generalized demodi-
(deer tick, Ixodes scapularis; brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus
cosis in dogs. The contents of one 10.6-mL vial are mixed
sanguineus; American dog tick, Dermacentor variabilis; and
with 2 gallons of warm water for each of three to six treat-
Gulf Coast tick, Amblyomma maculatum) and mosquitoes
ments spaced 14 days apart. It is suggested that treatment be
(Culex pipiens, Ochlerotatus triseriatus, and Aedes aegypti).
 continued until no viable mites are found in skin scrapings
A single topical dose kills 96% of fleas within 6 hours and
made at two successive treatments, or until six treatments
 provides effective control of fleas, ticks, and mosquitoes for
 ss pas d  au e aq aa
at least 30 days. Do rot use this product on cats.
amitraz should not be used for treatment of localized dem-
odicosis or scabies. The safety of amitraz has not been eval-
Imldacloprld
uated in pregnant bitches or in dogs younger than 4 months
Imidacloprid is a chloronicotinyl insecticide. It binds irre-
old. Mitaban concentrate is flammable. Wear rubber gloves
versibly at nicotinic acetylcholine receptor sites. This recep-
when preparing dilutions and applying these to dogs.
tor is a subtype that is apparently essential for insect
Amitraz is also available in a collar for dogs. The product
 d   si i q 
Preventic kills ticks on dogs for 3 months. The collar con-
tissue distribution from all known mammalian nicotinic
tains enough amitraz to cause illness if ingested. The collar
receptors (Griffin, Krieger, and Liege, 1997; Liu and
must be fitted properly to prevent it from coming loose and
Weller, 1996; Londershausen, 1996). Its acute oral LDs0
being ingested. The amitraz collar must not be used on sick,
in rats is 450 mg/kg. Imidacloprid is available in a 9.1%
convalescing animals or puppies less than 12 weeks of age.
topical spot-on formulation (Advantage) for use in dogs,
It has no effect on fleas, so other means of insect control
cats, puppies, and kittens for control of fleas. The product
must be applied. A recently approved combination product
is very effective in laboratory and field use to control fleas
(ProMeris for dogs) contains amitraz plus metaflumizone
(Arther et al, 1997; Cruthers and Bock, 1997; Cunningham
for treatment of ticks and fleas in dogs. For more informa-
and Everett, 1997; Hopkins, 1997; Hopkins et al, 1997). It is
tion on the combination product, see the section on
also effective after shampooing (Cunningham et al, 1997a),
metaflumizone.
 although the label recommends reapplication after bathing.
 Safety testing has revealed no concerns when the product is
Cattle and swine
used according to the label (Griffin, Hopkins, and Kerwick,
Amitraz is available in a 12.5% emulsifiable concentrate
1997). Do not use it in puppies 7 weeks or younger or
(Taktic EC) for use against ticks, mange mites, and lice 
kittens 8 weeks or younger or in sick or debilitated animals.
on beef cattle, dairy cattle, and swine. For use against cattle
Imidacloprid is also formulated in combination with
ticks and lice, the product is diluted 760 mL/100 gallons of
permethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid. The combination prod-
water and applied as a spray or dip. For lice a second treat-
uct (K9 Advantix) is registered for use against fleas, ticks,
 ment in 10 to 14 days is required For use against cattle sca-
and mosquitoes in dogs. The spot-on formulation is
 bies and mange and lice in swine, the product is diluted 760
applied once every 30 days. Do not use on puppies less
mL/50 gallons of water and used as a spray or dip. For
than 7 weeks old. Do not use on cats.
scabies, a second treatment must be applied in 7 to 10 days.
The newest imidacloprid combination product (Advantage
No slaughter withdrawal is required for cattle, and no
Multi) contains imidacloprid for external parasites and mox-
milk withdrawal is required for dairy cattle. Swine must not
idectin for internal parasites, including heartworm. It is
 be treated within 3 days of slaughter.
approved for use in dogs and cats. For more information,
WARNiNG: Horses must not be treated with amitraz, or
see combination products at the end of the chapter.
fatal colon impaction may result.
Nltenpyram
Neonlcotlnolds
Nitenpyram is a neonicotinoid insecticide. It has the unique
 The neonicotinoids represent a heterogenous class of insec-
action of rapid oral absorption and low toxicity to dogs and
ticides that are just now coming the veterinary marketplace in
cats. As a result of this action, a single oral dose provides
 the United States. Insecticides in this class work by binding
extremely rapid knockdown of flea populations (Schenker
to the nicotinic AChE receptors. They represent the newest
et al, 2003). Studies have shown activity against fleas within
and most exciting chemistry to be applied to arthropod pests
30 minutes after oral administration. Efficacy was greater
 of domestic animals (Tomizawa and Casida, 2005).
than 90% within 4 hours in dogs and within 6 hours in
cats. Nitenpyram has a short half-life and is quickly cleared
Dlnotefuran
from th body. Daily administration in dogs and cats will not
Dinotefuran is a new nicotinoid insecticide that has
result in bioaccumulation.
excellent activity against fleas (Wakita et al, 2005). It is
Nitenpyram is available in tablet form (Capstar). The
formulated as a topical spot-on combination product
small tablet contains 1l.4 mg and is labeled for use in
containing 4.95% dinotefuran, 0.44% pyriproxyfen, and
cats and dogs up to 25 pounds in body weight. The large
36.08% permethrin (Vectra 3D). The dinotefuran provides
tablet contains 57 mg and is for use in dogs weighing
262
C H A P T E R 6  Antiparasitic Drugs
25.1 to 125 pounds. The wide dosage range is a testament to
only on dogs infested with sarcoptic mange. Benzyl benzo-
the favorable margin of safety.
ate is marketed as a 36% lotion (Mange Treatment) for
Nitenpyram should not be used in dogs and cats less
treatment of Sarcoptes scabiei. For spot treatment of local-
 sam   ssa o nm oq  sd  
ized infestations, apply every 7 days. It is also available in a
age. Pets that are heavily infested with fleas may begin
29% preparation (Happy Jack Sardex II) for sarcoptic
scratching after treatment with nitenpyram; this is usually
mange. For the treatment of generalized forms of sarcoptic
an effect from the dying fleas and not an adverse effect from
and demodectic mange, the hair is first clipped from the
the product (Chatellier, 2001; Dobson et al, 2000; Dryden
entire body, and the dog is bathed to remove all crusty
et al, 2001; Schenker, 2000; Schenker, Luempert, and
materials. Mange lotion is then applied while the dog is
Barnett, 2000; Schenker, Luempert, and Barnett, 2001;
still wet. Benzyl benzoate has no residual effect. Therefore
Schenker et al, 2000; Schenker et al, 2001; Witte and
repeated applications are required every 7 days until the
(07 ‘ 1a  07 ‘1 1a 3 107 1
e aq pou nous sinnd ssa dn s u
to dogs under 12 weeks old, or to pregnant or nursing
Splnosad
Spinosad is structurally classed as a spinosyn, which is a
used on cats. If application is carried out by dipping.
nonbacterial tetracyclic macrolide. Although it is not a true
 protect the patient's eyes with a bland ointment.
 neonicotinoid insecticide, this molecule works by activating
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the insect (IRAC, 2007;
Flpronll
Salgado, 2007). The receptor binding site for spinosad is
Fipronil is a phenylpyrazole insecticide. It is a potent antag-
separate and distinct from other neonicotinoids, fiproles,
onist of the GABA-gated chloride channel (Gant et al, 1996;
milbemycins, avermectins, and cyclodienes. Spinosad-
IRAC, 2007; Tomlin, 2000). The acute oral LDso of fipronil
treated insects show involuntary muscle contractions and
for rats is 100 mg/kg. A large volume of literature is avail-
tremors from activation of the motor neurons. Prolonged
able to show the mechanism of action, clinical efficacy, and
exposure results in paralysis and death of the flea. Selective
safety when fipronil is used against fleas in dogs and cats. It
toxicity in the flea versus the vertebrate host is conferred by
is approved in a 0.29% spray (Frontline Spray) for use on
the differential sensitivity of the nicotinic receptors between
dogs, cats, puppies, and kittens. This spray is efective
the flea and the host (Snyder et al, 2007). Spinosad had a
against fleas even after bathing (Jeannin et al, 1994; Postal
wide safety margin when tested in laboratory and clinical
et al, 1994; Tanner et al, 1996). It is also effective against
studies. Spinosad is thought to be secreted in the milk of
ticks and sarcoptic mange mites (Curtis, 1996; Hunter,
lactating bitches. Safety studies in nursing bitches showed
Keister, and Jeannin, 1996a; LeNain et al, 1996). The
increased lethargy, weakness, and dehydration in the litters
spray should not be used in puppies and kittens younger
of bitches given a high dose (4.4x) of spinosad.
than 8 weeks old.
Spinosad has been employed in Australia to control blow-
Fipronil is available in convenient spot-on formulations
flies and lice on sheep (Kirst et al, 2002). In dogs it demon-
for dogs and for cats (Frontline Top Spot). These formula-
strates rapid oral absorption and low toxicity. Studies in
tions are effective in spreading the product through the
dogs have shown 53% activity against fleas within 30 minutes
sebum covering the hair and skin with minimal systemic
after oral administration, and efficacy was 100% within
absorption (Birckel et al, 1996; Weil et al, 1997). The cat
4 hours. Spinosad also confers long-lasting protection aga-
product is effective against ticks for 30 days and fleas for as
inst fleas that provides 100% efficacy at 21 days and 96%
long as 45 days. The dog product is effective against ticks
efficacy at 30 days after a single oral dose (Snyder et al, 2007).
for at least 30 days and fleas for as long as 90 days. (Hunter,
Spinosad is available in a chewable, beef-flavored tablet
Keister, and Jeannin, 1996b; Cunningham et al, 1997b;
form (Comfortis). There are five different chewable tablet
Cunningham et al, 1997c; Postal et al, 1996a; Postal et al,
sizes; all are formulated to deliver the minimum target dose
1996b). It is effective against chewing lice in cats. It is also
of 30 mg/kg of body weight. The product is approved
effective after exposure to rain or bathing (Everett et al,
for redosing every 30 days in dogs for the prevention and
1997). Laboratory and field safety studies reveal no con-
control of flea infestations. In 2008, the FDA issued a safety
cerns when the product is used according to the label
warning about concurrent use of Comfortis in combination
(Arnaud and Consalvi, 1997a; Arnaud and Consalvi,
with high doses of ivermectin to treat nonresponsive demo-
1997b; Consalvi et al, 1996). Do not use it in puppies youn-
dectic mange. Some dogs treated in this manner have devel-
ger than 10 weeks old or in kittens younger than 8 weeks
oped ivermectin toxicity. The manufacturer recommends
old. Wear rubber gloves when applying the product. Some
that dogs given high doses of ivermectin should not be
reports indicate that fipronil is effective against ear mites
given Comfortis.
(Vincenzi and Genchi, 1997).
Fipronil is now available in combination with metho-
Novel Insecticides
prene, an IGR, in a convenient spot-on formulation. The
Benzyl Benzoate
combination product is sold under the trade name
Benzyl benzoate is an insecticide with an unknown mode of
Frontline Plus. For dogs and cats it is effective against
action. It is effective against most ectoparasites but is used
fleas, ticks, and chewing lice for 30 days. The combination
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
263
 of an adulticide and an IGR provides activity against the
area has been to protect humans from flying insects. In gen-
immature and adult life stages of the flea, thus breaking the
 eral these products are rather volatile and regarded as having
life cycle of the pest. Do not use in puppies or kittens
little toxicity to the host animal (Hayes and Laws, 1991).
younger than 8 weeks old.
DEET
Metaflumlzone
DEET is the official nonproprietary name for N,N-diethyl-
Metaflumizone is a semicarbazone insecticide that binds to
3-methylbenzamide or N,N-diethyl-rm-toluamide. Its oral
voltage-dependent sodium channels in the axon and den-
LDso for rats is 2000 mg/kg. DEET is used as a repellent
drite and blocks the flow of sodium across the neuronal
for mosquitoes, gnats, flies, fleas, ticks, and chiggers. For
membrane (IRAC, 2007; Salgado and Hayashi, 2007; Takagi
continuing protection, frequent applications are necessary.
et al, 2007). The molecule has extremely low mammalian
toxicity in rats with an oral LDso greater than 5000 mg/kg
DI-N-propyl Isoclnchomeronate
(Hempel et al, 2007). It is approved as an 18.53% topical
Di-N-propyl isocinchomeronate is a relatively safe insect
for cats (ProMeris for cats), should be given before flea
repellent, with an oral LDso for rats of 5200 to 7200 mg/
exposure, and may be given every month for control of
 a  q      
flea populations. The active ingredient is distributed
MGK Repellent 326. It is usually formulated with other
throughout the skin and hair of the cat and works by
 insect repellents, insecticides, or synergists for use on pets
direct contact with the flea (DeLay et al, 2007a; Dryden
and livestock.
et al, 2007). A single dose is effective against adult fleas
and prevents flea egg production for up to 7 weeks
Insect Growth Regulators
(Holzmer et al, 2007). Repeated use at five times the
 An exciting area of recent advance in the struggle against
 approved dose was safe in cats and kittens as young as 8
insects is the advent of insect growth regulators (IGRs). The
weeks old (Heaney and Lindahl, 2007). When administered
sheer number of insecticides covered in this chapter would
to cats and kittens every 30 days, the product was highly
 suggest that insect problems are no longer a threat to the
effective against fleas in a large scale European clinical study
health and welfare of our domestic animals, but anyone
(Hellmann et al, 2007a).
who works in the field knows that this is far from the
Metaflumizone is also approved as a topical for use in dogs
case. The central problem with most insecticides is that
(ProMeris for dogs). The dog product contains 14.24%
they are effective against and directed toward only the
metaflumizone and 14.24% amitraz. The metaflumizone
adult insect, the one that bites and annoys.
 molecule knocks out fleas, and amitraz provides activity
Adulticidal products need to be applied thoroughly and
against ticks. The product should be given before flea expo-
often to control adult insect populations, but this is often
sure and may be given every month for control of flea and
unworkable. The applicator trying to stem the flow of adult
tick populations ( deer ticks, I. scapularis; brown dog ticks, R.
insects often feels like the Dutch boy with his finger in the
 sanguineus; American dog ticks, D. variabilis and lone star
dike. The IGRs provide relief from this approach by killing
ticks, Amblyomma americanum) (Rugg and Hair, 2007;
immature insects where they grow and develop, thus break-
Sabnis, Zupan, and Gliddon, 2007). Metaflumizone is dis-
ing the life cycle and providing true relief from insect annoy.
tributed throughout the skin and hair of the dog and works
ance. The IGRs typically are juvenile hormone mimics that
by direct contact with the flea (DeLay et al, 2007b). A single
bind to juvenile hormone receptors in the immature insect
 dose is effective against adult fleas and prevents flea egg pro-
and prevent survival to the next stage of development.
duction for up to 6 weeks and against ticks for up to 4 weeks
Methoprene and pyriproxyfen are the best-known juvenile
(Rugg et al, 2007). Repeated use at three to five times the
hormone mimics.
 approved dose produced mild transient effects on blood urea
IGR products are the safest and most effective products
 nitrogen (BUN), blood glucose, leukocyte, neutrophil, and
available. Their safety lies in the fact that mammalian hosts
monocyte numbers and was safe at the recommended dose in
dn  aan  s aan u a
dogs and puppies as young as 8 weeks old. When adminis.
(Londershausen, 1996). Therefore IGR products cannot
tered to dogs and puppies every 30 days, the product was
have any biologic effect on the host. These products have
highly effective against fleas and ticks in a large scale
an important side effect on safety. When used properly,
European clinical study (Hellmann et al, 2007b). Although
they dramatically decrease the use of more toxic adulticides.
the drug is not approved for use against mange mites
It follows then that insect control programs with IGRs are
(Demodex canis and S. scabiei), there are published reports
often safer to the host and the environment than programs
that the dog product has efficacy in that regard (Fourie et al,
with adulticides alone.
2007a; Fourie et al, 2007b).
Cyromazlne
Repellents
Cyromazine is a unique product that has IGR properties
 Repellents are compounds that prevent or discourage pests
limited to the filth flies (e.g-, houseflies, lesser houseflies,
from approaching a treated area or that induce them to leave
stable flies, soldier flies). It has no effect on most of the
soon after approaching. The most intensive research in this
other orders of beneficial insects. Cyromazine works by
264
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
blocking the formation of new cuticle in the fly larvae. It is
use in pets who are at least 4 weeks old. It is given orally to
a molting disruptor; the fly larva molts from the first to
dogs and cats every 30 days. Lufenuron is also available in an
the second instar stage, but it does not survive the molt
injectable formulation (Program 6-Month Injectable for
(IRAC,2007).
Cats) that is designed to allow application every 6 months
for control of fleas. The drug is very lipophilic, so it resides in
Horses
the fat tissues of the pet, where it redistributes into the
Cyromazine is formulated into a 2.12% feed additive
bloodstream for at least 30 days. Adult fleas ingest lufenuron
d a su n a  r s) 
when they feed, and the drug is passed transovarially to the
should be fed as part of the daily ration to contain 300
flea egg. Most flea eggs exposed to lufenuron fail to hatch,
a iue sn i pisii si lI ep id si iad u
and the few flea larvae that do successfully hatch die during
flies and stable flies in and around horses, barns, stables,
their first molt. The action on the immature flea is thought
 paddocks and race tracks. Do not contaminate water, food,
to be due to disruption of chitin synthesis and deposition.
or feed with this product. Do not apply directly to water.
Lufenuron is a convenient and effective agent for flea control
in pets. It is known to be safe in pets of all ages, as well as in
Poultry
breeding dogs and cats. Lufenuron is also available in a two-
 The product is formulated as a feed premix (Larvadex
way combination with milbemycin oxime (Sentinel) for
1% Premix) and a liquid concentrate (Larvadex 2 SL). The
control of fleas and internal parasites in dogs; see the com-
 premix is approved for feeding to caged layers and broiler
bination products at the end of this chapter for more
breeders at 1 pound of premix per ton of final feed.
information.
Cyromazine passes through the bird and is deposited in
the manure, where it controls filth flies developing there.
Methoprene
The surface spray is used to control fly larvae in other
 s u  m m i  si ao
breeding places such as feed spills, dead bird piles, and
 oral LDso for rats is 34,600 mg/kg. Methoprene is a true
manure storage areas.
IGR, acting as a juvenile growth hormone mimic that
arrests larval development, which in turn results in the
Diflubenzuron
death of the larva (IRAC, 2007). Methoprene is sensitive
Diflubenzuron is not a true IGR but is included here for
to degradation by ultraviolet (UV) light.
simplicity. It does not bind to juvenile hormone receptors.
Methoprene has had wide commercial success against
 Diflubenzuron is an inhibitor of chitin biosynthesis.
.It
fleas. It is available in a wide variety of products formulated
interferes with chitin deposition and thus prevents the
with methoprene alone or in combination with adult insec-
shedding of the old skin, leading to the death of larvae or
tficides for control of fleas and other pests. Methoprene is
pupae. It also prevents hatching of eggs. In both acute and
ovicidal and larvicidal against fleas. Products with metho-
chronic studies in laboratory animals, diflubenzuron was
prene alone will be covered in this portion of the chapter.
well tolerated.
Combination products are covered later under headings
with the adulticides.
Horses
 Methoprene is formulated into feed premix and a salt
Diflubenzuron is formulated into 0.24% feed additive
block (Altosid) that delivers the IGR orally to cattle. These
(SimpliFly, Equitrol II) for use against stable flies and
 products are registered for control of horn flies in cattle.
houseflies in horses. The product is fed to horses daily to
These products may be used in beef cattle and both dry and
control filth fly larvae in the manure. The daily dose is
lactating dairy cattle during the horn fly season. No with-
6.8 mg of diflubenzuron per 100 pounds of body weight.
drawal period is required before slaughter or milking.
Do not use in horses intended for slaughter.
Do not allow this product to contaminate surface water.
Cattle
Pyrlproxyfen
Diflubenzuron is also formulated into a 5% pour-on
Pyriproxyfen is an IGR and a juvenile hormone mimic
 product in combination with permethrin, a synthetic py-
(IRAC, 2007). The secretion of juvenile hormone in the
rethroid. The product is applied directly to beef and dairy
immature insect causes it to molt into the next life stage,
cattle at a rate of 3 mL per 100 pounds body weight for
but the absence of juvenile hormone at the time of the molt
control of lice. Cattle treated with the approved rate can
allows maturation to occur. The net effect of the juvenile
be slaughtered or milked immediately. This product is
hormone mimic is to interfere with the larval-to-pupal
toxic to aquatic invertebrates; do not contaminate water
and pupal-to-adult molts (Nylar Technical Bulletin, 1997).
sources.
 The acute oral LDso of pyriproxyfen in rats is greater than
5000 mg/kg, which demonstrates the very wide margin of
Lufenuron
safety. The product is 100% effective against flea reproduc-
Lufenuron is an IGR that works by inhibiting chitin biosyn-
tion in carpets for more than 6 months after application
thesis (IRAC, 2007). Lufenuron is approved for use in dogs
(Nylar Technical Bulletin, 1997). It represents another
and cats for control of fleas (Program) and is approved for
important addition to the insecticide arsenal.
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
265
Pyriproxyfen is available in a wide variety of products
ANTIPROTOZOALS
formulated alone or in combination with adult insecticides
for control of flas and other pests. Products with pyriproxy-
We have tried in this discussion to characterize briefly the
fen alone are covered in this portion of the chapter.
biologic activities of a few approved and some nonap-
Combination products are covered under headings with
 proved but legally obtainable antiprotozoal drugs. As with
the adulticides.
any drug, the information on the label or package insert
This IGR is registered as a 1.3% concentrate (EctoKyl IGR,
must always be read and directions followed before anti
 OmniTrol IGR) to be sprayed in residential locations and pet
 protozoal agents are administered. For more detailed infor-
 premises to kill flea larvae and eggs. A single application lasts
mation, the reader should consult detailed review articles
for 7 months. Pyriproxyfen is also formulated into a 0.01%
(Barr, 2006; Campbell and Rew, 1985; Lindsay and
ready to use spray (HouseSaver). It is labeled to spray in the
Blagburn, 2001; Schillhorn van Veen, 1986; Snyder, Floyd,
 indoor environment to control flea larvae and eggs.
and DiPietro, 1991; Speer, 1999).
 Pyriproxyfen is formulated into a 5.3% stripe-on formu-
lation (Bio Spot) that is labeled for direct application to cats
Nonsulfonamides
for control of flea eggs. A single application controls flea eggs
Albendazole
for 3 months. Do not use in kittens less than 12 weeks old.
 Albendazole is more completely described later in the section
This IGR is also incorporated into a wide range of pro-
on benzimidazole anthelmintics. It is included in this section
ducts that contain adult insecticides and synergists for
for a discussion of its activity against Giardia organisms.
application to dogs, cats, and premises to control fleas
 Evidence in one study suggests that albendazole is 100% effec-
and other animal parasites.
tive in treating giardiasis in dogs (Barr et al, 1993). The dosage
given in that study was 25 mg/kg twice a day for four doses.
Synergists
Unfortunately, recent evidence has shown that albendazole
 The synergists are not considered toxic in their own right
can cause significant adverse reactions in dogs and cats.
and have no direct effect in killing insects. They are used
Albendazole, like other benzimidazoles, is well absorbed
with insecticides to enhance insecticidal activity. They are
(about 50% bioavailable) and converted in the liver to its
most often used with pyrethrins, in which they can increase
active metabolites, albendazole sulfoxide and albendazole
the potency tenfold to twentyfold (Plapp, 1991). The mode
sulfone. These active metabolites are thought to bind to
of action is to inhibit mixed-function oxidases-enzymes in
tubulin molecules, which prohibits the formation of micro-
the insect that metabolize foreign compounds. When the
tubules and disrupts cell division. There is also evidence
 insect is inhibited from destroying the insecticide, the agent
that benzimidazoles can inhibit fumarate reductase, which
can kill the pest. The synergists are most commonly listed
 blocks mitochondrial function, thus depriving the parasite
 on the label by their chemical name, which is not designed
of energy and resulting in death. In Giardia organisms,
to be user friendly.
albendazole causes structural changes in the trophozoite
stage, including damage to the adhesive disk and the inter-
NOctyl Blcycloheptene Dlcarboxlmlde
nal microtubule cytoskeleton, but not the flagella (Lindsay
 N-Octyl bicycloheptene dicarboximide inhibits the micro-
and Blagburn, 2001). The parent drug and its metabolites
somal detoxification of insecticides, thus maximizing their
are excreted primarily in the urine.
toxicity. It is also known by the designation MGK 264. The
Albendazole has proved to be teratogenic, thus limiting its
drug is registered for application to beef and dairy cattle,
use in pregnant animals. Dogs treated with 50 mg/kg twice
sheep, goats, horses, swine, dogs, and cats and to agricul-
daily may have anorexia, and cats treated with 100 mg/kg/day
tural buildings and animal quarters for the control of
for 14 to 21 days showed weight loss, neutropenia, and
annoying insects. It is often formulated with piperonyl but-
mental dullness (Plumb, 2005). The drug is known to be
 Oxide and insecticides as aerosols, pressurized sprays, and
toxic in dogs and cats in clinical use (Meyer, 1998; Stokol
free-flowing dusts.
et al, 1997). Reported toxicities included myelosuppression
(anemia, leukopenia, and/or thrombocytopenia), abortion,
Plperonyl Butoxlde
teratogenicity, anorexia, depression, ataxia, vomiting, and
Piperonyl butoxide is a pale yellowish liquid, soluble in
diarrhea. Veterinarians are advised to use caution with this
alcohols, benzene, freons, and other organic solvents.
product in dogs and cats. Albendazole is available in an oral
It is very safe for animals, with an oral LDso for rats of
suspension and paste (Valbazen) containing 113.6 mg/mL.
about 7500 mg/kg. Chlorinated hydrocarbons, carbamates,
organophosphates, and particularly pyrethrins and rote-
Amprollum
 none are synergized by piperonyl butoxide. The insecticidal
The coccidiostatic activity of amprolium is related to its mim-
activity of these compounds is enhanced because piperonyl
icry of thiamine and competition for absorption of thiamine
butoxide inhibits degradation of the insecticide by the
by the parasite. The activity occurs because of the structural
 insect's microsomal enzymes (IRAC, 2007). Numerous pro-
similarity between thiamin and amprolium (United States
ducts contain piperonyl butoxide as a synergist with pyre-
Pharmacopeia [USP], 1998). The anticoccidial effect may by
 thrins, permethrin, carbaryl, or diazinon.
reversed by the feeding of excess thiamine. Amprolium is
266
C H A P T E R 6  Antiparasitic Drugs
most effective against the first-generation schizont stage and
Cllndamycln
thus is more effective as a preventative than as a treatment.
Clindamycin is currently considered the drug of choice for
treating clinical toxoplasmosis in dogs and cats (Dubey and.
Broilers, layers, and turkeys
Lappin, 2006). Structurally, clindamycin is a congener of
Amprolium (Amprol) is fed in poultry rations or drink-
lincomycin. The drug is well absorbed (90%) after oral
ing water to prevent or treat coccidiosis. Amprolium is given
administration and widely distributed in most tissues,
in the water for 2 weeks at 0.0125% (0.025% for severe
except the central nervous system. It readily crosses the
outbreaks), then given at 0.006% for another 2 weeks.
placenta and is extensively bound to plasma proteins.
Clindamycin is metabolized in the liver and excreted pri-
Cattle
marily in the urine and bile. It acts by binding to the 50S
For treatment of active coccidia, Eimeria bovis, and
subunit of the bacterial (or parasitic) ribosome and block-
Eimeria zuerni, infections in catle, amprolium is formu-
 ing the transpeptidation reaction (Brunton, 2006). Gastro-
lated as a 9.6% drench solution (Corid Oral Solution), 20%
intestinal upset is sometimes reported in animals receiving
soluble powder (Corid Soluble Powder), or feed additive
clindamycin. Severe, even fatal, pseudomembranous en-
(Corid 25%). Administration of amprolium is by drench or
terocolitis has been reported in people, caused by over-
drinking water, or it is mixed into a complete feed at the
growth of Clostridium difficile.
approximate dosage of 10 mg/kg for 5 consecutive days. For
Treatment of systemic toxoplasma infection in dogs can
 prevention of coccidiosis caused by coccidia, E. bovis, and
be accomplished with oral or intramuscular clindamycin at
E. zuerni, during periods of exposure a dosage of 5 mg/kg
15 to 22 mg/kg twice daily for 4 to 8 weeks (Dubey and
daily for 21 days is recommended. Other species of Eimeria
Lappin, 2006; Greene, Cook, and Mahaffey, 1985). Cats
are also susceptible to amprolium, but the drug label claims
can be treated for systemic infections with oral or parenteral
efficacy against only E. bovis and E. zuernii. Cattle treated
clindamycin at 12.5 to 25 mg/kg twice daily for 2 to 4 weeks.
with 50 mg of amprolium per kilogram per day did not
This regimen is also useful to control the shedding of oocysts
have adverse reactions. Animals should not be medicated
(Lappin et al, 1989). The drug should be given with caution
within 24 hours of slaughter.
 in cats with pulmonic toxoplasmosis parenteral administra-
tion to experimentally infected cats resulted in several deaths
Sheep and goats
(Plumb, 2005).
Amprolium may protect lambs against coccidia when
Clindamycin is available in several veterinary formula-
given orally at 55 mg/kg twice daily for 19 days (USP, 1998).
tions (Antirobe): tablets containing 25, 75, or 150 mg and
an oral solution containing 25 mg/mL. Similar clindamycin
Pigs
formulations are available for use in people (Cleocin): 75-
Coccidiosis caused by Isospora suis is occasionally a
and 150-mg oral capsules, 15 mg/mL oral pediatric suspen-
problem in swine. Pigs aged 5 to 10 days die without pass-
sion, and an injectable solution containing 150 mg/mL.
ing oocysts. Although not approved, amprolium therapy
may be beneficial in preventing the disease (USP, 1998).
Clopldol
Clopidol is a pyridinol coccidiostat that has some activity
Dogs
against ionophore-resistant strains of coccidia. It acts
 Treatment of dogs requires adapting the approved for-
against the sporozoite stage, allowing host cell penetration
mulations to small animal use. The target dose for treat-
without development. It is insoluble in water but is avail-
ment of dogs is 100 to 200 mg/kg by mouth daily in food
able as a feed additive (Coyden 25). The product is fed to
and water (Plumb, 2005). Dogs may be treated by mixing
chickens at 0.0125% or 0.025%. It should not be fed to
30 mL of 9.6% amprolium and 1 gallon (3.8 L) of drinking
laying hens, to chickens older than 16 weeks of age, or
water and offering it as the sole source of drinking water
"(loz ‘uqleia pue Aespu) naiuanes jo saep s um
(Smart, 1971). Alternatively, 1.25 g of 20% amprolium
powder can be mixed with enough daily ration for four
Decoqulnate
 puppies (USP, 1998). Amprolium should be provided in
Decoquinate is an approved coccidiostatic drug for the
either the food or water but not both for a period of 7
control of coccidial (Eimeria) infections in chickens,
days. It may be given as a treatment for coccidia or as a
cattle, sheep, and goats. This quinolone product kills the
preventative for 7 days before shipping puppies or to
sporozoite stage of the life cycle. It disrupts the electron
bitches just before whelping.
transport in the mitochondrial cytochrome system of the
 parasite (Plumb, 2005). Decoquinate is primarily indicated
Cats
for prevention rather than treatment of coccidiosis.
Amprolium may be used against coccidia at a dose of 60
Decoquinate is indicated for prevention of coccidiosis
to 100 mg/kg by mouth, which may be accomplished by
caused by E. bovis and E. zuermi in ruminating calves and
direct oral administration (Dubey and Greene, 2006).
older cattle. It is fed (Deccox) at 0.5 mg/kg body weight per
Medication in food or water may be more unreliable in
day for at least 28 days during periods of exposure to infec-
s  e p iq so n e s
tive oocysts. In young sheep and goats, decoquinate is used
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
267
at the same rate for the prevention of infections caused by
formulated in a complete ration at a concentration of 113 g
Eimeria species.
per ton.
WARNiNG: Decoquinate should not be fed to laying hens,
breeding animals, or lactating cows, sheep, or goats.
Poultry
Complete feeds containing decoquinate should be consumed
u pue 'sh 'siaoq u pode i piiesi
within 7 days of manufacture. Bentonite should not be used
partridges to prevent coccidiosis caused by Eimeria tenella,
in decoquinate feeds.
Eimeria necatrix, Eimeria acervulina, Eimeria brunetti,
Eimeria mivati, Eimeria maxima, Eimeria meleagrimitis,
Imldocarb
Eimeria galopavonis, Eimeria adenoeides, and Eimeria legio-
 Imidocarb is an aromatic diamidine antiprotozoal agent. It
nensis. It is also approved for use in chukar partridges for
works by inhibiting nucleic acid metabolism in susceptible
 prevention of E. legionensis. The product (Avatec) is mixed
organisms. It is particularly effective in treating infections
into a complete ration for broilers and turkeys at a rate of
with intracellular arthropod-borne organisms, including
68 to 113 g/ton. Chukar partridges should be fed lasalocid
Babesia,
Haemobartonella,
Ehrlichia,
Hepatozoon,
and
at a dose rate of 113 g/ton. Withdraw product at least
Cytauxzoon (Plumb, 2005). The approved product (Imizol)
3 days before slaughter.
is a 12% sterile injectable solution that is approved for treat-
ment of babesiosis in dogs. The product should be injected at
Metronldazole
a dose of 6.6 mg/kg, and injections should be given 14 days
 The nitroimidazoles represent a very useful class of anti-
apart. Do not give by intravenous injection. The safety of this
biotics that have broad-spectrum activity against trichomo-
upaaq no saiddnd u pausisa uaq pou seu pnpod
nads, amebas, and Giardia organisms, as well as anaerobic
pregnant, or lactating dogs.
 cocci and bacillus species. The prototypical nitroimidazole
is metronidazole, which has become the drug of choice for
Lasalocld
 treatment of infection with Giardia organisms. Other drugs
 Lasalocid, an ionophore closely related to monensin, is pro-
in the class (ipronidazole, tinidazole, nimorazole, ornida-
 duced by a streptomycete. Like other ionophores, it forms
zole, and benznidazole) have been used to control Giardia
complexes with sodium and potassium ions. This action
organisms. Only metronidazole and tinidazole are currently
renders the parasite membranes permeable to ions, and mi-
available in the United States. None of the nitroimidazole
tochondrial functions are inhibited. The trophozoite stage
drugs are approved for use in animals. The FDA strongly
is most susceptible to lasalocid (Guyonnet, Johnson, and
warns against their use in food-producing animals because
Long, 1990). Lasalocid is the least toxic of the ionophores.
this class of drug has been shown to produce tumors in
 It is approved for use in cattle, sheep, rabbits, and poultry
laboratory rodents.
for the control of coccidia and improvement of feed effi-
 Metronidazole (Flagyl)is wellabsorbed from the gastro-
ciency. Do not feed to horses, or fatal reactions may result.
intestinal tract. It has low protein binding and is well dis-
tributed in the body. After entering the target cell,
Cattle
metronidazole interacts with the protozoal DNA, in
Lasalocid is available in dry or liquid feed additives
which it causes a loss of helical structure and strand break-
(Bovatec). The product may be mixed into a complete
age ( USP, 1998). The liver extensively metabolizes the drug,
feed for confined cattle or a feed supplement for pasture
and in humans hepatic transformation is responsible for
cattle to deliver a target dose of 1 mg/kg body weight per
 50% of the total elimination. Patients receiving cimetidine
day (360 mg/head maximum dose). It is effective against
or phenobarbital may require adjustment in the dosage
E. bovis and E. zuernii in cattle. Feed continuously during
because of drug interaction. Metronidazole toxicity may
exposure to coccidia. Do not feed to calves to be processed
be seen with high doses. Neurologic toxicity includes
for veal.
ataxia, nystagmus, seizures, tremors, or weakness (Dow
et al, 1989; USP, 1998).
Sheep
Numerous studies have demonstrated that metronida-
 Lasalocid may be mixed into a complete feed for sheep
zole is an effective treatment for giardiasis (Barr, 2006;
 fed in confinement. The feed should be mixed to provide a
Boreham, Phillips, and Shepherd, 1984; Kirkpatrick and
final concentration of 20 to 30 g of lasalocid per ton of
Farrell, 1984; Watson, 1980; Zimmer, 1987; Zimmer and
complete feed, to deliver a dose of 15 to 70 mg/head/day.
Burrington, 1986), although efficacy is rarely 100%. Dogs
This dose is effective against Eimeria ovina, Eimeria cran-
may be treated orally with 15 to 30 mg/kg once or twice
dallis,Eimeria ovinoidalis (Eimeria ninakholyakimovi),
 daily, and therapy should be continued for 5 to 7 days
Eimeria parva, and Eimeria intricata in sheep. Feed con-
(Barr, 2006). Cats may be treated orally with 10 to
tinuously during exposure to coccidia.
25 mg/kg once or twice daily, and therapy should be con-
tinued for 5 to 7 days (Barr, 2006). The commercially avail-
Rabbits
able product (Flagyl) is formulated in 250- and 500-mg
Lasalocid is approved for use in rabbits for the preven-
tablets. Parenteral formulations are also available, but
tion of coccidiosis caused by Eimeria stiedae. The product is
their usefulness would seem questionable considering that
268
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
the giardial trophozoites live in the lumen of the gastroin-
E. acervulina, E. maxima, E. necatrix, and E. brunetti. The
testinal tract.
mechanism of action is unknown (Lindsay and Blagburn,
2001). It is available as a 25% feed additive (Nicarb) and is
Monensln
approved for use at 0.0125% in the feed of broilers. The
Monensin is an antibiotic produced as a fermentation prod-
product should not be fed within 4 days of slaughter or to
uct of Streptomyces cinnamonensis. It is used in cattle, goats,
laying hens. It is not effective for treatment of coccidiosis,
poultry, and quail for its coccidiostatic activities. It forms
and it may depress growth in young birds (Lindsay and
ionophores with sodium and potassium in the host and
Blagburn, 2001).
in the parasite. When the parasite mitochondrial mem-
brane is affected, it is rendered permeable to potassium
Nltazoxanlde
and sodium ions. Feeding monensin to horses or guinea
Nitazoxanide is an thiazolide antiprotozoal agent with
fowl can be fatal.
 broad spectrum activity against internal parasites, protozoa,
and viral diseases (Craig et al, 2003; Fox and Saravolatz,
Cattle
2005). In people it is approved (Alinia) for treatment of
Monensin is available as a feed additive (Rumensin) for
Giardia and Cryptosporidium infection in young children
cattle for growth promotion and for prevention and control
and adults. In horses it is effective in treatment of
of coccidiosis. For control of coccidiosis due to E. bovis and
Sarcocystis neurona, the cause of equine protozoal myelo-
E. zuernii, the product should be fed at a rate of 10 to 30 g/
encephalitis (EPM) (Gargala, Delaunay, and Pitel, 2001). It
ton, up to 360 mg/head/day. It should be fed continuously
is formulated into a ready-to-use oral paste (Navigator)
during periods of exposure to coccidia or when coccidia are
that is administered daily for 28 days. The product is
likely to be a hazard. The product is not for use in veal
given at 25 mg/kg for 5 days, then given at 50 mg/kg for
calves.
23 days. Because this product has broad-spectrum activity,
oral administration can disrupt the normal microbial flora
Goats and sheep
of the gastrointestinal tract. The incidence of this effect is
Monensin is approved for use in goats (Rumensin) for
not different from that after the administration of oral
the prevention of E. crandallis, Eimeria christenseni, and E.
antibiotics to horses. Navigator has an EPM relapse rate
ninakholyakimovi infection in confined goats. It should be
of less than 1%, because the active ingredient produces a
fed at a rate of 20 g/ton of complete ration. Do not feed to
lethal effect on the parasite.
lactating goats. Monensin is not approved for use in sheep,
The dosage of Navigator should be determined using an
but some authorities indicate that it is useful when fed at a
accurate body weight. Navigator may cause a spike in body
rate of 1 mg/kg of body weight per day (McDougald and
temperature, temporary anorexia, or a temporary worsen-
Roberson, 1988; Schillhorn van Veen, 1986).
ing of neurologic status. These effects are believed to be due
to the death of the parasites in the central nervous system.
Poultry
It should not be used in horses less than 1 year of age or in
Monensin (Coban) is used in broilers and pullets to pre-
horses that are sick or debilitated.
vent coccidiosis caused by E. necatrix, E. tenella, E. acervu-
A recent study suggests that administration of nitazox-
lina, E. brunetti, E. mivati, and E. maxima. It is fed at a rate of
anide is effective in preventing EPM in young horses that
90 to 110 g/ton of complete feed. It is also approved for use
 are at increased risk for EPM owing to intensive training.
in turkeys to prevent infection with E. adenoeides, E. melea-
The dose tested in this study was 11.36 mg/kg body weight
grimitis, and E. gallopavonis when fed at 54 to 90 g/ton.
2 days per week (Easter, 2007).
Bobwhite quail can be fed monensin at 73 g/ton to prevent
coccidiosis caused by Eimeria dispersa and Eimeria lettyae.
Ponazurll
Si peu (snbe) pnpond jeozoodue ue si jnzeuod
Narasln
 approved for treatment of EPM, which is caused by S. neurona
Narasin  is an ionophore  coccidiostat  produced by
(Freedom of information summary for Marquis, 2001;
Streptormyces aureofaciens. Similar in structure to salinomycin
Lech, 2002).
(Lindsay and Blagburn, 2001), it is available as a feed additive
-3y/u 0i pue By/u s ie paisat uaaq sey ionpoid aul
(Monteban) for use only in broilers. The product is fed at a
The approved dose is 5 mg/kg orally per day for 28 days. In
rate of 54 to 72 g/ton of feed for prevention of coccidiosis
the pivotal clinical study 54% of the horses with EPM
caused by E. necatrix, E. tenella, E. acervulina, E. brunetti,
improved at least one grade as judged by the attending
E. mivati, and E. maxima. No withdrawal period is required
veterinarian, and 58% of the horses treated with 10 mg/
before slaughter. It should not be fed to laying hens. Ingestion
kg improved at least one grade. In a smaller field study with
by adult turkeys, horses, or ponies may be fatal.
seven horses, all seven improved when treated with 5 mg/
kg. Safety studies demonstrated that administration at
Nlcarbazln
doses of 10 mg/kg or greater produced transient episodes
 Nicarbazin is a synthetic coccidiostat effective in preventing
of loose feces (Furr and Kennedy, 2001; Furr et al, 2001;
cecal and intestinal coccidiosis caused by E. tenella,
Furr et al, 2006; Kennedy, Campbell, and Seizer, 2001).
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
269
Robenldlne
of the pathogen. A vast array of sulfa agents has been created
Robenidine is a synthetic coccidiostat chemically similar to
and described, but most have been lost in the sands of time.
 guanidine. It is an older drug with a history of developing
The important differences among these agents are their solu-
resistant strains of coccidia but is now used to treat iono-
bility, duration of action, and activity against key pathogens.
phore-resistant strains. Robenidine is available in a feed
Fortunately, the sulfas included in this discussion demon-
additive (Robenz) for use in broilers only. The product is
strate acceptable performance in all three categories: solubil.
fed at 30 g/ton of feed for prevention of coccidiosis caused
ity is adequate; they are given once or twice daily or in the feed;
by E. mivati, E. brunetti, E. tenella, E. acervulina, E. maxima,
and they have a reasonably broad spectrum of action. The sulfa
and E. necatrix It should not be fed to laying hens or within
drugs are primarily efective against the schizont stages of the
 5 days of slaughter. Meat and eggs from treated birds have
coccidia; therefore prolonged treatment may be required for
 an unpleasant taste if the withdrawal period is not followed
the drug effectively to block the life cycle (USP, 1998).
(Lindsay and Blagburn, 2001).
The diaminopyrimidine potentiators (trimethoprim,
 ormetoprim, pyrimethamine) act in concert with sulfona-
Sallnomycln
mides by blocking the next step (dihydrofolate reductase)
 Salinomycin was the third ionophore coccidiostat to enter the
in folic acid synthesis. These agents are highly selective
market in the United States. A fermentation product of
inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase. This sequential block-
ade of folic acid synthesis produces significant potentiation
stage. Salinomycin is available as a feed additive (Bio-Cox)
 of activity and is a classic case of drug potentiation.
for use in broilers, pullets, and quail. It is fed at 40 to 60 g/
The sulfonamides are weak acids that are well absorbed
ton (50 g/ton for quail) for prevention of coccidiosis caused by
from the gastrointestinal tract (except for sulfaquinoxaline)
E. tenella,E.necatrix,E.acervulina,E.maxima,E brunetti,and
and are widely distributed in the body. Sulfadimethoxine
E. rmivati in chickens and coccidiosis caused by E. dispersa and
and sulfamethoxazole have high serum protein binding,
 E. lettyae in quail. Do not feed salinomycin to laying hens. No
which provides decreased body clearance and long half-
withdrawal period is required before slaughter. The product
lives. They undergo metabolic alteration in the liver and
 may be fatal if fed to adult turkeys or horses.
subsequent renal clearance. Trimethoprim, ormetoprim,
and pyrimethamine are also well absorbed from the gut,
Semduramlcln
widely distributed, then hydroxylated and excreted through
Semduramicin is an ionophore coccidiostat produced by
the urinary tract.
Actinomadura roseorufa. It is available as a feed additive
The long history of sulfa use in veterinary medicine has
(Aviax) for use in broiler chickens only. The product is
resulted in a wide array of toxic and idiosyncratic reactions
fed at 22.7 g/ton for prevention of coccidiosis caused by
in animals. Historically, the most common and most avoid-
E. tenella, E.acervulina, E. maxima,E. brunetti, E. necatrix,
able reactions result from crystallization in the urinary tract,
and E. mivati It should not be fed to egg-laying chickens or
with secondary crystalluria, hematuria, and urinary obstruc-
to broilers within 5 days of slaughter.
tion. Recent reviews in human medicine indicate that the
improved solubility of the modern preparations has greatly
Sulfonamides
decreased the risk of crystalluria. Nevertheless, it is still pru-
Sulfonamides are the treatments of choice for small-animal
dent to ensure adequate water intake and proper hydration
 coccidia and very useful for the treatment of large-animal
during sulfa therapy (Cribb et al, 1996). The human litera-
coccidiosis. Unfortunately there is a paucity of research
ture also suggests that the sulfonamides may be directly
nephrotoxic (Cribb et al, 1996). Hematopoietic disorders
with sulfamethoxine and sulfaguanidine against coccidia
(thrombocytopenia and leukopenia) have also been reported
support their use. However, these two agents are no longer
as a result of sulfa therapy. Sulfaquinoxaline especially has
available in the United States (Boch et al, 1981; Correa et al,
been associated with hypothrombinemia, hemorrhage, and
1983). Clinicians have empirically substituted more readily
death in puppies receiving therapy for coccidia (Patterson
available sulfonamides and have had apparent clinical suc-
and Grenn, 1975).
cess (Dubey, 1993). Several simple sulfas and potentiated
Idiosyncratic reactions in animals and people offten
sulfas are commonly used in the United States: sulfachlor-
include immune-mediated phenomena, including hyper-
pyridazine (Vetisulid), sulfadimethoxine (Albon), sulfadi-
sensitivity reactions, drug fever, urticaria, nonseptic polyar-
methoxine with ormetoprim (Primor), sulfadiazine with
thritis, focal retinitis, and hepatitis. Fortunately, these
pyrimethamine (ReBalance), sulfadiazine with trimetho-
reactions occur at very low rates when sulfonamides are
 prim (Tribrissen), sulfamethazine, sulfamethoxazole with 
used at recommended dose rates and for less than 2 weeks
 trimethoprim (Bactrim, Septra), and sulfaquinoxaline.
(USP, 1998).
The sulfonamides are structural analogues of para-
 Four sulfa products are currently available for use in
aminobenzoic acid (PABA) that competitively inhibit the
small-animal medicine: sulfadimethoxine, sulfadimethox-
dihydropterate synthetase step in the synthesis of folic acid,
ine with ormetoprim, sulfadiazine with trimethoprim,
which is required for synthesis of RNA and DNA. Inhibition
and sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim. Sulfamethazine
by sulfas impairs protein synthesis, metabolism, and growth
and sulfaquinoxaline are used in livestock, and sulfadiazine
270
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
plus pyrimethamine (ReBalance) is approved for use in
xop1ns 10 3 007/0001 10 ^001/00 04/007 607/001
horses for treatment of EPM.
ine/ormetoprim (Primor). The tablets are designated by
the total weight of active ingredient in each tablet. Thus
Sulfadlmethoxlne
the Primor 120 contains 100 mg of sulfadimethoxine and
Sulfadimethoxine is a rapidly absorbed, long-acting sulfon-
20 mg of ormetoprim. The approved starting dosage for
amide. It is not acetylated in the dog and is excreted
dogs is 55 mg/kg orally on the first day of treatment,
unchanged in the urine. The drug is approved for treat-
then 27.5 mg/kg orally once per day for 14 to 21 days.
ment of coccidiosis in dogs, cats, cattle, chickens, and tur-
Do not treat beyond 21 days (Bayley, 2007).
keys and for treatment of strangles in horses. It has a wide
It is interesting to note that the only recent controlled
margin of safety. Dogs given multiple oral doses of 160 mg/
study of coccidiosis therapy in dogs was conducted
kg by mouth daily for 13 weeks showed no signs of toxicity.
with this drug combination. In that study, 32.5 mg/kg or
 Diarrhea was the only reaction seen in dogs given single
66 mg/kg was given continuously in the food for 23 days,
oral doses of 16 g/kg (Bayley, 2007).
subsequent to experimental oocyst infection. The higher
 It is important that all treated animals receive adequate
 dose of 66 mg/kg provided better results and did not pro-
water intake to prevent dehydration and crystalluria, as well
duce any adverse reactions (Dunbar and Foreyt, 1985).
as proper nutrition during therapy for coccidiosis. Sulfadi-
Poultry can be treated with the combination in a feed
methoxine is available as a 40% injection (Albon), in 125-,
additive (RofenAid 40). Chickens are fed at 0.0125%
250-, and 500-mg tablets (Albon), and as a pleasant-
sulfa and 0.0075% ormetoprim. Turkeys are treated
tasting 5% suspension (Albon), a 12.5% oral solution
with 0.00625% sulfa and 0.00375% ormetoprim, ducks
(Albon), an oral bolus (Albon), and a sustained-release
with 0.05% and 0.03%, and chukar partridge with
bolus (Albon SR).
0.0125% and 0.0075%, respectively. Do not feed drug
within 5 days of slaughter. Do not feed to birds producing
Dogs and cats
eggs for human consumption.
The recommended dosage is an initial dose of 55 mg/kg
orally or by subcutaneous or intravenous injection for the
Sulfadlazlne wlth Pyrlmethamlne
first day and subsequent doses of 27.5 mg/kg orally once
Sulfadiazine with pyrimethamine (ReBalance) is a rational
per day for 12 to 21 days. It seems reasonable that because
drug combination that is approved for the treatment of
coccidia are enteric pathogens, the oral route would be
horses with EPM caused by S. reurona. It is provided in an
most effective.
oral suspension containing 250 mg of sulfadiazine per milliliter
and 12.5 mg of pyrimethamine per milliter. The approved
Cattle and horses
oral dose is 4 mL/50 kg body weight, once daily. The duration
 The recommended dosage is an initial dose of 5 mg/kg
of treatment is dependent on clinical response to treatment,
orally or by subcutaneous or intravenous injection for the
but the usual course of therapy is from 90 to 270 days.
first day and subsequent doses of 27.5 mg/kg orally once
Horses undergoing treatment should be watched closely
per day for 4 days. For the sustained-release bolus, give
for worsening neurologic function (treatment crisis), which
cattle one 12.5-g bolus orally per 200 pounds body
may occur during the first 5 weeks of treatment. Anemia,
weight. Discard milk for 60 hours (five milkings) after
leukopenia, or bone marrow suppression may occur in
the last treatment. Do not administer drug within 7 days
 some horses. Interruption of treatment or administration
of slaughter. Consult the approved label for accurate dosage
 of dietary supplements with folinic acid may be indicated.
and withdrawal information, because there are differences
according to dosage form.
Sulfadlazlne wlth Trlmethoprlm
Sulfadiazine with trimethoprim is the potentiated sulfa with
Poultry
the most years of actual use in veterinary medicine. For
Coccidiosis in broilers, pullets, and turkeys can be
many years it was the only potentiated sulfa approved for
treated with oral sulfadimethoxine mixed into the drink-
use in animals. Trimethoprim is a diaminopyrimidine
ing water. The usual dosage is 0.05% for chickens and
 potentiator with very low mammalian toxicity.
0.025% for turkeys for 5 days. Do not use drug in chickens
 The manufacturer recommends that animals with marked
older than 16 weeks or in turkeys older than 24 weeks. Do
hepatic parenchymal damage, blood dyscrasias, or previous
not administer drug within 5 days of slaughter.
sulfonamide sensitivity should not be given this product
(Bayley, 2007; Plumb, 2005). Horses may be treated with an
Sulfadlmethoxlne wlth Ormetoprlm
oral paste formulation (Tribrissen), which contains 333 mg
Sulfadimethoxine with ormetoprim constitutes a rational
 sulfadiazine and 67 mg trimethoprim per gram. The approved
combination that potentiates the action of both drugs by
 uiam Apoq yo spuod 0s1 ad aised  8 g si aeso
blocking two sequential steps in the synthesis of folic acid.
daily for 5 to 7 days. The equine injectable formulation con-
Ormetoprim is a diaminopyrimidine potentiator  with
tains 400 mg of sulfadiazine per milliter and 80 mg of
very low mammalian toxicity. The available tablets contain
 trimethoprim per milliter (Tribrissen 48% injection).
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
271
Sulfamethazlne
such as Task Capsules (dichlorvos) and Filaribits (diethyl-
The sodium salt of sulfamethazine may be administered in
 carbamazine). For simplicity, these drugs do not appear in
water (Sulmet) or by oral bolus (Sulfa-Max, Sulmet) to
the current edition. Earlier editions of this text should be
cattle, swine, chickens, and turkeys, for the control of coc-
consulted for information about discontinued products.
cidiosis. The usual dose is 237 mg sulfamethazine per kilo-
An exhaustive review of the pharmacology, mechanism
gram, which may be administered orally on the first day and
of action, pharmacokinetics, and efficacy of anthelmintics is
followed by 123 mg/kg every day for 4 days (5 days total
outside the scope of this book. We have included a few key
treatment). A sustained-release bolus (Sustain Il) is avail-
references in the text to help the veterinarian understand
able for cattle, which delivers 32.1 g of sulfamethazine over
the mechanism of action (Martin, 1997). For more exhaus-
3 days. One bolus is given per 200 pounds of body weight.
five information on anthelmintics, two excellent works
 Animals should be provided with plenty of water when they
should be consulted (Arundel et al, 1985; Campbell and
are on sulfonamide medication. Withdrawal recommenda-
 aq paaodde sionpond jo uuaduo v "si ma
tions should be followed for food-producing animals.
FDA and commercially available can be found in the
Cormpendium of Veterinary Products (Bayley, 2008).
Sulfamethoxazole wlth Trlmethoprlm
Gastrointestinal parasites are among the most common
 Sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim is a readily available
infectious agents that veterinarians must manage (Blagburn
 product approved for use in people (Bactrim, Septra). It is
et al, 1996). In the landmark parasite prevalence study,
 not currently approved for use in animals. Because of
Blagburn and colleagues evaluated more than 6000 canine
its similarity to veterinary potentiated sulfonamides and
fecal specimens from all 50 states and the District of
because low-cost generics are available, this drug is widely
Columbia. The results indicate that internal parasites
used in veterinary medicine. There is some controversy
remain common in dogs. Nationwide, 36% of the samples
about the appropriate dosage regimen for this human-
tested were positive for roundworm, Toxocara canis; hook-
labeled product in animals, but many clinicians gain accept-
worm, Ancylostoma caninum; or whipworm, Trichuris
able clinical results using the same dosage as for sulfadiazine.
vulpis. Even more surprising, 52% of the samples from
 A 5/1 fixed combination of sulfamethoxazole/trimetho-
the southwestern United States were positive for at least
prim is available as tablets and a pediatric suspension. The
 one of the important nematodes. Although these parasites 
available single-strength tablets contain 400 mg and 80 mg,
affect the health of dogs, several are also zoonotic
 and the double-strength tablets contain 800 mg and 160 mg,
pathogens.
of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim, respectively. The
Much research has focused on defining the mechanism
pediatric oral suspension contains 40 mg of sulfamethoxa-
of action for anthelmintics. It is hoped that this informa-
 zole per milliliter and 8 mg of trimethoprim per milliliter.
tion will lead eventually to new therapeutic agents. Several
 The dosage for bacterial infections and coccidiosis in dogs
reviews discuss this exciting research (Londershausen, 1996;
and cats is 30 mg/kg once or twice daily for 14 to 21 days and
Martin, 1993; Martin, 1997). The current information has
 may be indicated in severe coccidial infections.
shed new light on mechanisms of drug action and in many
cases has changed our opinion on how these drugs work.
Sulfaqulnoxallne
Anthelmintics approved by the FDA and still commer-
Sulfaquinoxaline is a sulfonamide approved for use in chick-
cially available are grouped together by class according to
ens, turkeys, and cattle for control and treatment of coccid-
their generic names.
ia. It is not well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
Sulfaquinoxaline is available as a water medication (Sul-
Macrocyclic Lactones
Q-Nox). It should be mixed according to the label, which
  (   
provides cattle with a target dose of 6 mg/lb/day. Chickens
the control of parasites in both man and animal.
should receive 10 to 45 mg/pound/day. Turkeys should be
Ivermectin is the best-known agent in this class, which
 given 3.5 to 55 mg/pound/day. Treatment should be admi-
includes avermectins and milbemycins. They are generally
nistered for 3 to 5 days in cattle and for 2 to 3 days in
regarded as the most effective and least toxic parasiticides
chickens and turkeys. Make a fresh solution every day. Do
yet developed. These products are all similar in that they are
 not give sulfaquinoxaline to lactating dairy cattle or to veal
antibiotics produced by streptomycete microorganisms,
calves. It should not be used within 10 days of slaughter.
and they have large macrocyclic structures. Although orig-
inally thought to act by disturbing GABA-mediated neuro-
ANTHELMINTICS
transmission, it is now known that they all bind with high
affinity to a glutamate-gated chloride channel (Arena et al.
Several changes have occurred since the last edition of this
1991; Martin, 1993; Martin, 1997; Shoop, Mrozik, and
volume was published (Bowman, 2003), most notably the
Fisher, 1995; Vercruysse and Rew, 2002; Wolstenholme
more widespread use of ivermectin and the emergence of
and Rogers, 2005). The macrocyclic lactones bind to gluta-
other macrocyclic lactones. Drug manufacturers have dis-
mate receptors that trigger chloride influx, which hyper-
continued production of many tried and true anthelmintics
polarizes the parasite neuron and prevents initiation or
272
C H A P T E R 6  Antiparasitic Drugs
propagation of normal action potentials. The net effect is
Darmalinia bovis and the mange mite Chorioptes bovis. The
 paralysis and death of the target parasite.
injectable solution should not be used in cattle within
The macrocyclic lactones have revolutionized treatment
30 days of slaughter, and the pour-on product should not
of parasitic disease. In general, they are highly effective at
be used in cattle within 45 days of slaughter.
low doses, are very safe, and provide true broad-spectrum
activity against nematodes and arthropods. Commercially
Swine
they have crushed the competition. Many conventional
Doramectin injection (Dectomax) is also approved for use
drugs that are direct competitors of this class were soon
 in swine. Injections of 0.3 mg/kg are effective against large
retired from common use and eventually discontinued by
roundworm, Ascaris suum; nodular worm, Oesophagostomurm
the manufacturer. Many of the old drugs are casualties of
dentatum, Oesophagostomum quadrispinulatum; small stomach
the “macrocyclic revolution.""
worm,
Hyostrongylus rubidus; threadworm, Strongyloides
 Despite their beneficial activities, macrocyclic lactones
ransormi; kidney worm, Stephanurus dentatus; lungworm,
 have several flaws. They are ineffective against cestodes
Metastrongylus species; mange mite, S. scabiei var. suis and
and trematodes and they are sometimes expensive. The
sucking lice, Haematopinus suis (Arends, Skogerboe, and
U.S. patent on ivermectin has now expired; this has allowed
Ritzhaupt, 1997a; Arends, Skogerboe, and Ritzhaupt, 1997b;
generic competitors to enter the market, which is now
Lichtensteiger et al, 1997; Logan, Weatherley, and Jones, 1997;
changing cost of treatment with ivermectin.
Saeki et al, 1995; Stewart, Fox, and Wiles, 1996a; Stewart, Fox,
The literature surrounding these products is overwhelm-
and Wiles, 1996b). It should not be used in swine within
 ing, but there are several good reviews that pare the literature
24 days of slaughter.
down to comprehendible levels (Bennett, 1986; Campbell
1989; Shoop, Mrozik, and Fisher, 1995; Vercruysse and
Eprlnomectln
Rew,2002).
Eprinomectin is a second-generation macrocyclic lactone. It
was synthesized from avermectin B by the same group that
Doramectln
discovered ivermectin. The paper that describes the effort to
Doramectin is a fermentation product from a mutant strain
find eprinomectin is a beautiful description of targeted
of Streptomyces avermitilis, and its spectrum of action is
research and should be read by any scientist interested in
  s  o a  o i on r
understanding the pharmaceutical research process (Shoop
nation half-life about twice that of ivermectin (Shoop,
et al, 1996a). Eprinomectin is synthesized from a fermentation
Mrozik, and Fisher, 1995; Fris and Bjoern, 1997).
 product of S. avermitilis It has extremely broad-spectrum
activity, is formulated in an easy-to-apply pour-on formula-
Cattle
tion, and, most surprisingly, has zero time withdrawal for
 Doramectin (Dectomax, Dectomax Pour-On) provides
meat and milk. It is the only macrocyclic that can be used
broad-spectrum activity against bovine parasites. When
in lactating dairy cattle because it partitions away from milk
injected subcutaneously in cattle at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg or
(Shoop et al, 1996b).
applied topically at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg, it is effective against
brown stomach worm, Ostertagia ostertagi, Ostertagia lyrata;
Cattle
barber pole worm, Haemorchus placei; small stomach worm,
Eprinomectin (Eprinex) is approved in a topical formula-
Trichostrongylus axei, Trichostrongylus longispicularis; bank-
tion, which is applied at 0.5 mg/kg. It is effective against all
rupt worm, Trichostrongylus colubriformis; small intestinal
common cattle nematodes, including barber pole worm,
worm, Cooperia oncophora, Cooperia punctata, Cooperia pec-
H. placei; brown stomach worm, O. ostertagi, O. lyrata,
tinata, Cooperia surnabada; hookworm, Bunostomum phle-
Ostertagia leptospicularis; small intestinal worm, C. onco-
botomum; intestinal threadworm, Strongyloides papillosus;
phora, C. punctata, C. surnabada; small stomach worm,
nodular worm, Oesophagostomum radiatum; whipworm,
T. axei, T. longispicularis; bankrupt worm, T. colubriformis
Trichuris species; lungworm, Dictyocaulus viviparus; eye-
thread-necked intestinal worm, Nematodirus helvetiarus;
worm, Thelazia species; cattle grub, Hypoderma bovis,
nodular worm, O. radiatum; hookworm, B. phlebotomum;
Hypoderma lineatum; mange mite, Psoroptes bovis, S. scabiei;
 intestinal threadworm, S. papillosus; lungworm, D. viviparus;
sucking lice, Haematopinus eurystermus, Linognathus vituli,
and whipworm, Trichuris species (Cramer, Eagleson, and
and Solenopotes capillatus (Eddi et al, 1993; Gonzales et al,
Farrington, 1997; Gogolewski et al, 1997b; Reid, Eagleson,
1993; Goudie et al, 1993; Hendrickx et al, 1993; Jones et al,
and Langholff, 1997; Yazwinski et al, 1997). The efficacy is
1993; Kennedy and Phillips, 1993; Logan et al, 1993; Moya-
not affected by coat length or by rain or weather (Gogolewski
Borja et al, 1993a; Reinemeyer and Courtney, 2001a;
et al, 1997a). Not surprisingly, eprinomectin is also effective
Vercruysse et al, 1993; Weatherley et al, 1993; Wicks et al,
against many arthropod ectoparasites, including cattle grubs,
1993). Rather surprising is doramectin's activity against the
H. lineatum, H. bovis sucking lice, L. vituli, H. eurysternus,
screwworm Cochliomyia hominivorax, which is missing from
S. capillatus; biting lice, Damalinia (Bovicola) bovis; mange
other macrocyclic agents (Moya-Borja et al, 1993b). The
mite, C. bovis, S. scabiei; and horn fly, Haermatobia irritans
injection should not be used within 35 days of slaughter.
(Eagleson, Holste, and Pollmeier, 1997; Eagleson et al, 1997;
 The pour-on product also has activity against biting lice
Thompson et al, 1997).
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
273
Ivermectln
Cylicodontophorus species; Cylicostephanus species (including
 Ivermectin was the first commercially available macrolide.
Cylicostephanus calicatus, Cylicostephanus goldi, Cylicostepha
The avermectins were isolated from the fermentation broth
nus longibursatus, and Cylicostephanus minutus); Petrovinema
of S. averrmitilis. The discovery of the anthelmintic activity
poculatum; adult and fourth-stage larvae of pinworm Oxyuris
was made by administering the actinomycetic broth to mice
unuonba supsnurd pueose jo sabes jeaiel pue ympe inbe
infected with the nematode N. dubius. Ivermectin is effec-
adult hairworm, T. axei; adult stomach worm, Habronema
tive against many nematodes and arthropods. It is very
muscae; botfly larvae, Gasterophilus intestinalis
and
effective against immature heartworm, D. immitis, but has
Gasterophilus nasalis; adult and fourth-stage larvae of lung-
minimal effect on adult heartworms. The thick-necked
worm, Dictyocaulus arnfieldi; threadworm, Strongyloides wes-
intestinal worm, N. helvetiarus, in catfle is one of the
teri; summer sore caused by Habronema and Draschia
least sensitive worms; about 85% efficacy was reported in
species; and dermatitis caused by microfilariae of neck
the literature. The suggested dose levels are 0.2 mg/kg for
threadworm Onchocerca cervicalis. On occasion, treated
cattle, sheep, and horses and 0.3 mg/kg for swine. The cur-
horses exhibit edematous reactions caused by a massive
rent literature contains reports of use against more that
release of parasitic antigens.
 300 species of parasites in a very long list of hosts.
Oral administration of three times the recommended
Administration of ivermectin to pregnant rats, mice, and
dose of ivermectin was well tolerated by horses. Pregnant
rabbits produced teratism in fetuses only at or near mater-
mares treated orally with 0.6 mg of ivermectin per kilogram
notoxic doses. There was no teratogenesis in cattle, sheep,
throughout the organogenesis period gave birth to normal,
and dogs when ivermectin was administered to pregnant
healthy foals. Treatment with 0.6 mg of ivermectin per
animals at four times the recommended dose. Although
kilogram did not affect the sexual behavior of stallions,
 toxicity for aquatic animals is high, the binding of ivermec-
and the quality of semen was not affected. Ivermectin
tin in soil reduces its concentration to levels that have no
Qe ie sar bupnou 'sase  jo sasou u pn aq k
impact on the quality of the environment. The acute oral
 stage of pregnancy, and breeding stallions.
 LDso of ivermectin in mice varied from 11.6 to 87.2 mg/kg,
and the LDso for rats was 42.8 to 52.8 mg/kg. In a 14-week
Cattle
study with rats, the "no-effect" level was 0.4 mg/kg.
Ivermectin (Ivomec) is formulated as a 1% (10 mg/mL)
Although originally believed to act by disturbing GABA-
liquid for subcutaneous injection at a dose level of 0.2 mg/kg
mediated neurotransmission, it is now known that ivermec-
of body weight. The subcutaneous administration of iver-
tin binds with high affinity to a glutamate-gated chloride
mectin affords excellent efficacy against adult and larval
channel (Martin, 1993; Shoop, Mrozik, and Fisher, 1995).
stages of brown stomach worm, O. ostertagi (including inhib-
Ivermectin binds to the glutamate receptor, which triggers
ited forms), O. lyrata; barber pole worm, H. placei; small
 chloride influx, which hyperpolarizes the parasite neuron
stomach worm, T. axei; bankrupt worm, T. cohubriformis;
 and prevents initiation or propagation of normal action
small intestinal worm, C. oncophora, C. punctata, C. pecti-
potentials. The net effect is paralysis and death of the
nata; nodular worm, O. radiatum; hookworm, B. phleboto-
target parasite. In arthropods, ivermectin inhibits transmis-
mum; adult thread-necked intestinal worm, N. helvetiarus,
sion of signals at the neuromuscular junctions by the same
Nematodirus spathiger; adult intestinal threadworm, S. papil-
mechanism. Death results from paralysis in both nematodes
losus; and lungworm, D. viviparus. Ivermectin injection is
and arthropods.
highly active against catle grubs (first, second, and third
instars) H. bovis and H. lineatum, sucking lice, L. vituli,
Horses
H. eurystermus, S. capillatus; and mange mite, Psorptes ovis,
 Ivermectin ( Eqvalan paste or liquid) has a broad spectrum
and S. scabiei var. bovis. Injectable ivermectin affords consis-
of activity against nematodes and arthropod parasites of
tently good efficacy against sucking lice and mites. The effi-
horses and is administered orally at 0.2 mg/kg of body
cacy of ivermectin against biting lice is erratic. Ivermectin is
weight. It is used for the treatment and control of large
also active against adult Parafilaria bovicola, which causes
strongyles: adult Strongylus equinus; adult, arterial,
and
summer bleeding, and adult and immature eyeworm,
migrating larval stages of Strongylus vulgaris; adult and
Thelazia rhodesi. The drug is absorbed, widely distributed
migrating tissue stages of Strongylus edentatus adult
in the tissues, and excreted in the feces as unaltered ivermec-
tin that may prevent the development of coprophilic larvae.
cauda, Triodontophorus serratus, and Craterostomum acuti-
Ivermectin is slowly eliminated from the body.
caudatum); and small strongyles, including those resistant
Ivermectin up to 1.2 mg/kg was well tolerated by cattle.
to some benzimidazole class compounds: Corornocyclus spe-
 Higher doses resulted in transient localized swellings at the
cies (including Coronocyclus coronatus, Coronocyclus labiatus,
 injection site. Cattle injected with 8 mg/kg became recum-
and Coronocyclus labratus); adult and fourth-stage larvae of
bent within 24 hours after treatment, and three animals died.
Cyathostomum species (including Cyathostomum catinatum
 Ivermectin at a dose of 0.4 mg/kg was administered to preg-
and
Cyathostomumpateratum);
Cylicocyclus species
nant cows 7 to 56 days after insemination. There were no
adverse effects on the cows and no teratogenic effects in the
Cylicocyclus nassatus, and Cylicocyclus brevicapsulatus);
calves that were delivered. No adverse effects were observed
274
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
in the breeding performance or semen quality of bulls trea-
indicated for the treatment and control of adult and fourth-
ted with ivermectin at 0.4 mg/kg. The withdrawal time for
stage larvae of large roundworm, A. suum; small stomach
cattle given the injectable ivermectin is 35 days. Do not use in
worm, H. rubidus; nodular worm, Oesophagostomum spe-
female dairy catle of breeding age, and do not use in lactat-
cies; threadworm, S. ransormi (including the somatic
ing dairy cattle. Do not use in veal calves. The rapid death of
larvae); adult lungworm Metastrongylus species; sucking
cattle grubs after administration of ivermectin may result in
lice, H. suis; and mange mites, S. scabiei var. suis. The colos-
acute esophagitis and posterior paresis as a consequence of
 tral transmission of S. ransomi can be prevented by injecting
spinal cord hemorrhages.
ivermectin into sows 7 to 14 days before farrowing. Ivermec-
Ivermectin is also available in a pour-on formulation for
pue nnpe a isuae ae kuay aq on umous sm u
application to cattle. It contains 5 mg of ivermectin per milli-
fourth-stage larvae of the swine kidney worm S. dentatus.
liter and is applied at a rate of 1 mL/10 kg. The pour-on for-
Swine should not be treated within 18 days of slaughter. In
mulation is approved for the removal of brown stomach
 short-term studies, ivermectin was injected into swine at up
worm, O. ostertagi; barber pole worm, H. placei; smallstomach
to 30 mg/kg without fatal sequelae, but lethargy, ataxia,
worm, T. axei; bankrupt worm, T. colubriformis; small intes-
labored breathing, and other toxicity signs were noted. No
tinal worm, C. oncophora, C. punctata, C. surnabada; adult
toxic effects were observed in sows treated with 0.6 mg/kg
intestinal threadworm, S. papillosus; nodular worm, O. radia-
during the first month of gestation, and no teratogenic
tum; whipworm, Trichuris species; lungworm, D. viviparus;
effects were observed in the litters. Also, no adverse effects
cattle grub, H. bovis, H. lineaturm; mange mites, S. scabiei
were observed in the breeding performance or semen quality
var. bovis; sucking lice, L. vituli, H. eurysternus, S. capillatus;
of boars treated with 0.6 mg of ivermectin per kilogram.
biting lice, D. bovis, and horn fly H. irritans. Cattle must not be
Ivermectin is also available in a premix for administra-
treated with topical ivermectin within 48 days of slaughter for
tion in feed (Ivomec Premix for Swine). It is formulated to
human consumption. Because a withdrawal time in milk has
provide 0.1 mg of ivermectin per kilogram of body weight
not been established, do not use ivermectin in female dairy
daily for a maximum of 7 consecutive days. The drug is
cattle of breeding age. Do not use in veal calves.
approved for the treatment of large roundworm, A. suum;
thick stomach worm, Ascarops strongylina; small stomach
Sheep
worm, H. rubidus; nodular worm, Oesophagostomum spe-
 Ivermectin (Ivomec) drench at a dose level of 0.2 mg/kg
cies; kidney worm, S. dentatus; threadworm, S. rarsomi;
is approved for the treatment and control of the adult
lungworm, Metastrongylus species; sucking lice, H. suis;
and fourth-stage larvae of barber pole worm, Haermonchus
and mange mites, S. scabiei var. suis. Medicated feed
contortus, H. 1
placei (adults only); brown stomach
should be withdrawn 5 days before slaughter.
worm, Telodorsagia (Ostertagia) circumcincta; small stom-
ach worm, T. axei; bankrupt worm, T. colubriformis;
American bison and reindeer
Cooper's worm, C. oncophora (adults only), Cooperia
Ivermectin (Ivomec) 1% injection is approved by the
curticei; nodular worm, Oesophagostomum columbianum,
FDA for the treatment and control of grubs, H. bovis, in
Oesophagostomum venulosum (adults only); thread-necked
American bison (Bison bisor) and for warbles, Oedermagena
intestinal worm, Nematodirus battus, N. spathiger; intestinal
tarandi, in reindeer (Rangifer tarandus). The effective dose is
threadworm, S. papillosus (adults only); large-mouth bowel
0.2 mg/kg injected subcutaneously. Do not treat these ani-
worm, Chabertia ovina (adults only); whipworm, Trichuris
mals within 8 weeks of slaughter.
ovis (adults only); lungworm, Dictyocauus filaria, and all
the larval stages of the nasal bot Oestrus ovis. There is a label
Dogs
limitation stating that sheep should not be treated within
Ivermectin (Heartgard) tablets and chewable tablets are
11 days of slaughter.
administered orally at a dose level of 0.006 mg (6 mcg) per
Overseas, injectable ivermectin is used for the treatment
kilogram at monthly intervals to prevent the establishment
 of psoroptic mange. Numerous reports indicate that iver-
of heartworm, Dirofilaria immitis. The initial dose should
mectin is highly active against benzimidazole-resistant
be given within a month after the first exposure to mos-
populations of Haemonchus, Trichostrongylus, and Osterta-
quitoes and throughout the year when mosquitoes are
gia organisms, although recent evidence suggests that iver-
active. The last treatment must be given to dogs within a
mectin-resistant strains are now developing in sheep and
month affer the last exposure to mosquitoes. Ivermectin
 goats. The USP monograph cautions against the routine use
has minimal activity against the adult heartworm. It is
of ivermectin oral solution in goats in order to delay the
active only against the third and fourth-stage larvae and
onset of parasite resistance (USP, 2006). The unapproved
the circulating microfilariae. Heartgard should not be
 parenteral dose in sheep and goats is 0.2 mg/kg by subcu-
given to dogs younger than 6 weeks of age.
taneous injection.
A single oral dose of ivermectin administered within
2 months after infection prevents the establishment of the
Swine
worms in the heart. A single dose of 0.05 mg/kg is ade-
Ivermectin 1% injection (Ivomec) is administered sub-
quate to clear the circulating microfilariae when given to
cutaneously in the neck area at a dose level of 0.3 mg/kg. It is
dogs 4 weeks after the administration of an adulticide.
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
275
 Ivermectin is not approved as a microfilaricide. When iver
drug has structural similarities to ivermectin and works
mectin (6 mg/kg) is given to heartworm-positive dogs over
by the same mechanism of action.
several months, the circulating microfilariae are eliminated,
resulting in an occult infection. Thus dogs on monthly
Dogs
ivermectin should be tested with an occult heartworm
Milbemycin oxime tablets (Interceptor) are formulated to
test (Bowman, 1992; Courtney, Zeng, and Maler, 1998;
'sp oe ra uaia uum uam apoq Jo y s'o ra
Lok and Knight, 1995).
they are effective in preventing heartworms, D. irmmitis (Bater,
Ivermectin as a single subcutaneous injection at 0.2 mg/kg
1989; Bradley, 1989; Grieve et al, 1991). The product also kills
demonstrated high efficacy against immature and adult
hookworms, A. carirum, and removes and controls round-
roundworm, T. canis; hookworm, A. caninum, Ancylostoma
worm, T. canis and T. leonina, and whipworm, T. vuipis
braziliense, Uncinaria stenocephala; and parasitic threadworm,
(Blagburn et al, 1992b; Bowman, Johnson, and Hepler, 1990;
Strongyloides stercoralis. Ivermectin activity against round-
Bowman et al, 1988; Bowman et al, 1991; USP, 2006).
worm, Toxascaris leonina, and whipworm, T. vulpis, is erratic
 Milbemycin oxime has been extensively tested with regard to
(USP, 2006).
safety. It is nontoxic to collies at up to 20 times the recom-
 Ivermectin is safe in collies at the approved dose of
mended dose (Blagburn et al, 1989; Sasaki et al, 1990) and can
0.006 mg (6 mcg) per kilogram. When ivermectin is
safely be given to pregnant and nursing animals. Although an
given at a dose of 200 mg/kg (32 times the label dose),
LDso was never determined in dogs, the drug was welltolerated
 some genetic lines of collies exhibit severe adverse reac-
when given at 200 mg/kg in a single oral dose.
tions: mydriasis, ataxia, tremors, drooling, paresis, recum-
Milbemycin oxime, like ivermectin, is known to kill
bency, excitability, stupor, and coma. A single oral dose of
heartworm microfilariae and inhibit the release of new
2 mg/kg and repeated oral doses of 0.5 mg/kg/day for
microfilariae, so all dogs on routine monthly heartworm
14 weeks were well tolerated by dogs of other breeds.
prophylaxis should be tested with adult antigen tests
Mydriasis, depression, tremors, ataxia, coma, and death
(Blagburn et al, 1992a; Bowman, 1992; Courtney, Zeng,
have been observed after doses in excess of 20 mg/kg in
and Maler, 1998; Lok and Knight, 1995; Lok et al, 1992).
laboratory dogs (Pulliam et al, 1985). No teratism was
Some work (Garfield and Reedy, 1992; Miller et al, 1993;
 s d m   p
Miller et al, 1995b; Mueller, 2004) has shown that milbe-
 repeated oral doses of ivermectin at 0.5 mg/kg.
mycin oxime is effective in curing amitraz-resistant mange
 Ivermectin has been used in the treatment of mange,
mite D. caris when given at a dosage of 1 to 2 mg/kg daily
D. canis, at a dosage of 0.4 to 0.6 mg/kg orally daily for 2
 for 60 to 90 days. It is also highly effective against mange
to 4 months (Mueller, 2004; Plumb, 2005); this use is not
mite S. scabiei when given orally at 1 mg/kg every other day
 approved and should be applied with caution in collies and
for 10 to 14 days (Bourdeau, Blumstein, and Ibisch, 1997).
other herding breeds.
It is interesting that milbemycin oxime is effective against
 Several combination products containing ivermectin
the nasal mite Preumonyssoides caninum when given at
are available. For more information, see the section on
0.5 to 1 mg/kg once a week for 3 weeks (Gunnarsson
combination products.
et al, 1997). Use of milbemycin against nasal mites is not
approved by the FDA.
Cats
 Ivermectin is approved as a heartworm preventive for
Cats
cats (Heartgard Chewables for Cats). Monthly doses of
 Approved for use in cats (Interceptor), milbemycin
0.024 mg (24 mcg) per kilogram are effective in preventing
oxime is effective against heartworm, D. irmmitis, at a dose
the development of heartworm, D. irmmitis (McTier et al,
of 0.5 mg/kg every 30 days (Stewart, Hepler, and Grieve,
1992; Paul et al, 1992). It is also approved for use against
1992) and against hookworm, A. tubaeforme; it is also effec-
hookworm, Ancylostoma braziliense and Ancylostoma tubae-
tive against roundworm, T. cati, when given at a dose of
forme (Nolan et al, 1992; Roberson et al, 1992). A dose of
1.5 mg/kg (Blagburn et al, 1992c; USP, 2006).
0.3 mg/kg is required to eliminate roundworm, Toxocara
Milbemite Otic Solution is a 0.1% solution of milbemycin
cati (Blagburn et al, 1987; Kirkpatrick and Megella, 1987).
 oxime approved for the treatment of ear mite, O. cynotis,
Ivermectin is approved in a liposomal formulation
infestations in cats and kittens 8 weeks of age or older. It is
(Acarexx). It is approved for the treatment of ear mites,
effective against all life stages of the ear mite (Milbemite Otic
O. cynotis, in cats and kittens 4 weeks of age or older.
Solution, 2000).
 Recent studies have demonstrated activity against the eggs
and immature stages of the ear mite (Bowman, Kato, and
Turtles
Fogarty, 2001; Wexler-Mitchell, 2001).
It is interesting to note that milbemycin oxime is appar-
ently nontoxic in turtles and proved somewhat effective in a
Mllbemycln Oxime
small study conducted on red-eared sliders (Chryserys
Milbemycin oxime was the second macrocyclic lactone to
scripta elegans) and Gulf Coast box turtles (Terrapene car-
achieve approval by the FDA. It is a fermentation product
olina major) (Bodri, Nolan, and Skeeba, 1993). It is not
approved for this use.
276
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
Moxldectln
at any time after treatment. Do not use in veal calves or
Moxidectin is a chemically altered product of Streptomyces
preruminating calves.
 cyaneogriseus noncyanogenus. It has a similar range of activ-
 ity and safety margin as ivermectin.
Sheep
 Moxidectin is approved in a 1% oral drench (Cydectin)
Horses
for use in sheep. When given orally at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg.
Moxidectin 2% gel (Quest Gel) can be given by oral admin-
it is effective in removing adult and L4 stages of barber pole
istration (0.3 mg/kg) against large strongyles, S. vulgaris (adult
worm, H. contortus; brown stomach worm, Teladorsagia
L4/L5), S.edentatus (adult,tissue stages), T. brevicauda (adult),
(Ostertagia) circumcincta, Teladorsagia (Ostertagia) trifur-
T. serratus (adult); small strongyles, Cyathostommum species
cata; small stomach worm, T. axei, T. colubriformis,
(including C. catinatum and C. pateratum), Cylicostephanus
Trichostrongylus vitrinus; Cooper's worm, C. curticei,
species (including C. calicatus, C. goldi, C. longibursatus, and
C. oncophora; nodular worm, O. columbianum, O. venulo-
C. mirutus), Cylicocyclus species (including C. insigne, C. lep-
sum; thread-necked intestinal worm, N. batus, Nematodi-
tostomum, C. nassatus, and C. radiatus), Coronocyclus species
rus filicollis, and N. spathiger (Craig et al, 1992). Sheep
(including C. coronatus, C. labiatus, C. labratus, Gyalocephalus
treated with moxidectin oral solution should not be slaugh-
capitatus, and P. petrolatu); ascarid P. equorum (adults and L4);
tered within 7 days of treatment. Moxidectin should not be
pinworm, O. equi hairworm, T. axei (adult); stomach worm,
used in sheep that are producing milk for human consump-
H. muscae; and botfly larva, G. intestinalis and G. rasalis (Bello
tion. The USP monograph cautions against the routine use
and Laningham, 1994; Lyons et al, 1992; New Quest Gel dewor-
 of moxidectin oral solution in goats in order to delay the
mer and boticide, Anon, 1997a; Slocombe and Lake, 1997;
onset of parasite resistance (USP, 2006).
Taylor and Kenny, 1995; Vercruysse et al, 1997b). It seems to
be particularly effective against encysted small strongyles.
Dogs
Moxidectin is safe for use in mares during breeding, gestation,
 Moxidectin is known to be very active against heart-
 and lactation, and for foals older than 6 months.
worms  (D. immitis) and gastrointestinal nematodes.
Proheart 6 is a sustained-release formulation that provides
Cattle
therapeutic levels of moxidectin for 6 months after injec-
Moxidectin (Cydectin)1% injectable solution
is
tion. In 2001, Proheart 6 was approved in the United States
approved by the FDA for use in beef cattle and nonlactating
for prevention of heartworm (D. irmmitis) and for the treat-
 dairy catle. It is injected subcutaneously at a dose of 0.2
ment of existing larvae and adult hookworm (A. canirum)
 mg/kg for treatment and control of brown stomach worm,
infection (Blagburn, Paul et al, 2001; Lok, Knight et al,
O. ostertagi (adult and L4); barber pole worm, H. placei
2001; McCall, Supakorndej et al, 2001).
(adult); small stomach worm, T. axei (adult); bankrupt
 In 2004, the manufacturer voluntarily recalled Proheart 6
worm, T. colubriformis (L4); small intestinal worm, C. onco-
at the request of the FDA, which was concerned about the
phora (adult and L4), C. punctata (adult and L4), C. surna-
incidence of adverse reactions. These reactions included
bada (adult and L4); nodular worm, O. radiatum (adult
reports of anaphylaxis, liver disease, autoimmune hemolytic
and L4); whipworm, Trichuris species (adult); lungworm,
 disease, convulsions, and death. The incidence approached
D. viviparus; cattle grub, H. bovis, H. lineatum; mange mite,
5.2 cases per 10,000 doses given in 2002 (FDAH, 2008).
P. ovis; sucking lice, L. vituli, and S. capillatus (Eysker and
 Extensive studies conducted by the manufacturer showed
Boersema, 1992; Ranjan et al, 1992; Scholl, Guillot, and
that a mixture of residual solvents were to blame for the
Wang, 1992; Williams, Barras, and Wang, 1992; Williams
adverse reactions. Product marketed outside the United
et al, 1992; Zimmerman, Hoberg, and Pankavich, 1992).
States with low levels of residual solvent demonstrated
Moxidectin injection should not be given to cattle less
improved safety over the original production batches. In
than 8 weeks old and not within 2l days of slaughter.
addition, the manufacturer and the FDA have formulated a
The product should not be given to veal calves or lactating
"Risk Minimization Action Plan (RiskMAP)” that permitted
dairy cattle.
the product to be reintroduced to the United States market in
A 0.5% pour-on formulation of moxidectin (Cydectin)
2008 (FDAH, 2008). The RiskMAP requires that practicing
is approved in the United States at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg to
veterinarians complete web-based training before using the
 control all the parasites previously mentioned along with
product. Key components of the training are to make veter-
additional species of small intestinal worm, C. pectinata
inarians aware of which patients are suitable candidates for
(adult), Cooperia spatulata (adult); hookworm, B. phlebo-
treatment and to require pretreatment bloodwork, complete
tomum (adult); thread-necked intestinal worm, N. helvetia-
record keeping, and a commitment to report adverse reac-
nus (adult and L4); mange mite, Chorioptes bovis; sucking
tions promptly. The RiskMAP also requires that pet owners
lice, H. eurysternus; biting lice, Bovicola (Damalinia) bovis;
sign a consent form before injection of the product. The
and horn fly, H irritans (Morin et al, 1996; Vercruysse et al,
RiskMAP program is similar to other programs applied in
1997a). Moxidectin pour-on, is approved for use in beef
human medicine for important life-saving drugs.
and dairy cale; there is neither a preslaughter withdrawal
The manufacturer states that Proheart 6 is generally well
period or milk discard time. Meat and milk may used
tolerated. The product is not to be used in sick, debilitated,
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
277
or underweight animals; animals with a history of weight
Conventional wisdom holds that benzimidazoles bind to
loss; or within a month of vaccination. Proheart 6 is to be
tubulin molecules, which inhibits the formation of micro-
used with caution in dogs with preexisting allergic disease.
tubules and disrupts cell division ( Frayha et al, 1997; Martin,
A small percentage of dogs show mild, transient swelling or
1997; Reinemeyer and Courtney, 200la). It has a much
itching at the injection site. Although rare, allergic, diges-
higher affinity for nematode tubulin versus mammalian
tive, hematologic, or neurologic reactions may occur.
tubulin, thus providing selective activity against parasites.
Time will tell if the reintroduction of this important
Evidence also indicates that the benzimidazoles can inhibit
heartworm preventative under the RiskMAP will be
fumarate reductase, which blocks mitochondrial function,
 embraced by practicing veterinarians and their patients.
depriving the parasite of energy and thus resulting in death.
The benzimidazoles are poorly soluble and therefore are
Selamectln
generally given by mouth. In general, they are more effec-
 Selamectin is a novel endectocide that is prepared by semisyn-
five in horses and ruminants because of their slow transit
thetic modification of doramectin (Bishop et al, 2000). It is the
through the cecum and rumen. The dose is usually more
first macrocyclic lactone to provide activity against internal
effective when divided, thus prolonging the contact time
and external parasites of dogs without toxicity in collies.
with the parasite. Two members of the benzimidazole
 group (albendazole and oxfendazole) have been found to
Dogs and cats
be teratogenic, which limits their use in pregnant animals.
Selamectin topical solution (Revolution) is formulated
For simplicity the probenzimidazole drug febantel is
for topical application in dogs and cats. It is approved for
included in this section. It is a nonbenzimidazole drug
use in dogs that are at least 6 weeks old and cats that are at
that is metabolized to a benzimidazole. It therefore shares
least 8 weeks old. The stated dose is a minimum of 6 mg/kg
a similar efficacy and mechanism of action with the other
every 30 days. Selamectin topical solution is approved for
benzimidazoles.
control of external parasites including the elimination and
control of fleas, Ctenocephalides felis, and ear mites, O. cyno-
Albendazole
tis (Boy et al, 2000; McTier et al, 2000a; McTier et al, 2000b;
 Albendazole, the newest benzimidazole, has potent broad-
Shanks et al, 2000a; Shanks et al, 2000b; Six et al, 2000a).
spectrum anthelmintic activity. It offers a wide margin of
 In dogs it is approved for the treatment and control of sar-
safety in cattle when used according to the label specifications.
coptic mange, S. scabiei, and the American dog tick, D. var-
Albendazole has demonstrated a broad spectrum of ant-
iabilis (Jernigan et al, 2000; Shanks et al, 2000c). It is
helmintic activity against gastrointestinal nematodes; lung
 especially known for the prevention of heartworm, D. irmmi-
nematodes, including inhibited larval forms; cestodes; and
tis, in both dogs and cats (Boy et al, 2000). It is not effective
lung and liver trematodes in farm animals, companion ani-
in clearing microfilariae. Although unapproved, selamectin
mals, and humans. Albendazole (Zentel) is used overseas
is also effective against the roundworm, T. canis (USP,
for the treatment of intestinal helminth infections, hydatid
2006). In cats it is also effective in the treatment and control
disease, and cysticercoses of humans.
of hookworm, A. tubaeforme, and roundworm, T. cati
(McTier et al, 2000b; Six et al, 2000b). All this activity is
Cattle
 provided in a convenient topical product that demonstrates
 Albendazole is available in oral paste and oral suspen-
 a good margin of safety in both dogs and cats (Krautmann
sion for cattle (Valbazen). It is administered orally at a dose
et al, 2000; Novotny et al, 2000).
level of 10 mg/kg for the removal and control of adult and
larval stages of internal parasites including barber pole
Benzimidazoles
worm, H. contortus, H. placei; brown stomach worm, O.
The benzimidazoles represent a large family of broad-
ostertagi; adult and fourth-stage inhibited larvae of small
 spectrum agents that have been used widely for many
stomach worm, T. axei; bankrupt worm, T. colubriformis,
years in a broad array of animal species. Excellent review
thread-necked intestinal worm, N. spathiger, N. helvetiarus;
articles (Campbell, 1990; Lacey, 1990; Loukas and Hotez,
small intestinal worm, C. punctata, C. oncophora; hook-
2006; Martin, 1997; McKellar and Scott, 1990) discuss the
worm, B. phlebotormum; nodular worm, O. radiatum; lung-
history, mode of action, and spectrum of activity of this
worm,1
D.1
viviparus;
tapeworm, Moniezia benedeni,
useful class of anthelmintics.
Moniezia expansa; and adult liver fluke, Fasciola hepatica
Thiabendazole was the first benzimidazole discovered,
(Bogan and Armour, 1987; Prichard, 1986; Prichard, 1987).
and it represented a major step forward when it became
The safety of albendazole in single and repeated treat-
available more than 30 years ago. At the time of its intro-
ments was evaluated in healthy and parasitized cattle. A
 duction, thiabendazole was a true broad-spectrum product
single dose of 75 mg/kg of body weight was well tolerated.
that was very safe to the host animal. Since that time, par-
Albendazole was embryotoxic when administered to cows
asite resistance to the benzimidazoles has been discovered
at a dosage rate of 25 mg/kg during the first 7 to 17 days of
in several species.
 gestation. The conception rate of cows treated affer the
Considerable effort has been devoted to determining the
twenty-first day of gestation was comparable to that in
 mechanism by which the benzimidazoles act on parasites.
controls, and all cows gave birth to normal calves.
278
C H A P T E R 6  Antiparasitic Drugs
In the United States, cattle must not be slaughtered
molecules (McKellar and Scott, 1990). The oral acute toxic
within 27 days after treatment. Also, albendazole should
dose in mice, rats, and dogs is more than 10,0o0 mg/kg.
not be used in female dairy catle of breeding age, and
At oral doses above 150 mg/kg daily for 6 days, transient
the label cautions that the drug should not be given to
salivation, diarrhea, vomiting, and anorexia may be seen in
pregnant cows during the first 45 days of gestation.
dogs and cats.
Febantel is not available in a single entity formulation, but
Sheep
combination products of febantel with praziquantel and
 Albendazole 11.36% suspension (Valbazen) is FDA
 pyrantel are discussed in the section on combination products.
approved as an oral drench for sheep. The product is admi-
nistered orally at 7.5 mg/kg for the removal and control of
Fenbendazole
adult liver fluke, F. hepatica, Fasciola magna; common tape-
Fenbendazole is a commercially successful benzimidazole
worm, M. expansa; fringed tapeworm, Thysanoma acti-
that is widely used in domestic animals. The oral LDso for
nioides; brown stomach worm, Telodorsagia (Ostertagia)
rats and mice is higher than 10,000 mg/kg. Fenbendazole
circumcincta, Marshallagia marshalli; barber pole worm,
 does not have embryotoxic or teratogenic effects in rats,
H. contortus; small stomach worm, T. axei; thread-necked
sheep, and cattle. In the rabbit, fenbendazole was fetotoxic
worm, N. spathiger, N. filicollis; Cooper's worm, C. onco-
but not teratogenic, and no carcinogenesis was observed in
phora; bankrupt worm, T. colubriformis; nodular worm,
lifetime studies in rats and mice. In a 6-month toxicity study
O. columbianum, large-mouth bowel worm; C. ovina;
in dogs, no effect was observed at 4 mg/kg or less.
and lungworm, D. filaria (McKellar and Scott, 1990).
Absorbed fenbendazole is metabolized to at least two active
Albendazole at 15 mg/kg is used overseas for the treatment
metabolites, oxfendazole sulfoxide and oxfendazole sulfone.
of small liver fluke Dicrocoelium dendriticum. The maximum
In ruminants it is known to undergo enterohepatic cycling.
tolerated dose in sheep is reported to be about 37.5 mg/kg.
which serves to prolong effective blood levels (USP, 1998).
Albendazole may induce fetal skeletal abnormalities
Fenbendazole is a broad-spectrum anthelmintic with
when administered at a dose level of 11 mg/kg or more
activity against gastrointestinal nematodes and cestodes
to ewes during the first 10 to 17 days of pregnancy.
and lung nematodes in cattle, sheep, goats, and horses.
No untoward effects have been reported after its use in
Activity against a variety of helminth parasites in dogs,
many thousands of sheep, however.
cats, and many zoo animals also has been reported. In
WARninG: Care should be taken to adhere to recom-
the United States, fenbendazole is approved for control of
mended dosages, particularly when treating ewes during
helminth parasites in horses, cattle, dogs, and zoo animals.
the first month of pregnancy. Do not give to ewes during.
the first 30 days of pregnancy or for 30 days after removal of
Cattle
rams. Sheep should not be treated within 7 days of slaughter.
Fenbendazole is available in a wide range of formulated
products including suspension, premix pellets, granules,
Dogs and cats
paste, and deworming block, and a free-choice mineral sup-
Albendazole is not approved for use in dogs and cats. Dogs
plement (Panacur, Safe-Guard) is administered orally or fed to
treated with 50 mg/kg twice daily may have anorexia, and cats
dairy and beef cattle at 5 mg/kg for the removal and control of
treated with 100 mg/kg daily for 14 to 21 days showed weight
adult and larval stages of barber pole worm, H. cortortus, H.
loss, neutropenia, and mental dullness (Plumb, 2005). Dogs
placei; brown stomach worm, O. ostertagi small stomach
can be treated for lungworm, Filaroides hirthi, at a dosage of
worm, T. axei; hookworm, B. phlebotomum; thread-necked
25 to 50 mg/kg twice daily for 5 days (Georgi, Slauson, and
worm, N. helvetianus; small intestinal worm, C. punctata, C.
Theorides, 1978). Bladder worm, Capillaria plica, can be trea-
oncophora; bankrupt worm, T. colubriformis; nodular worm,
ted at a dosage of 50 mg/kg twice daily for 10 to 14 days
O. radiatum, and lungworm, D. viviparous (Yazwinski et al,
(Brown and Barsanti, 1989) and lung fluke, Paragonirmus
1985; Yazwinski et al, 1989). For the removal of tapeworms,
kellicotti, can be treated at a dosage of 25 mg/kg twice daily
M. benedei, and the inhibited fourth-stage larvae of brown
for 21 days. The same dosage is effective for Paragonirus
stomach worm, O. ostertagi, fenbendazole is used in beef cattle
organisms in cats (Plumb, 2005). Although albendazole is
at 10 mg/kg; this dose is not approved for use in dairy cattle.
effective against these uncommon parasites, ivermectin and
Overseas, the recommended dose level is 7.5 mg/kg, with addi-
 praziquantel are more convenient therapies and likely to be
tional claims of efficacy against Trichuris, Strongyloides, and
just as effective. More interesting is the use of albendazole
Capillaria species and nematode eggs. The maximum tolerated
against Giardia organisms in dogs at 25 mg/kg twice daily for
dose is about 2000 mg/kg. In cattle, fenbendazole is not
2 days (Barr et al, 1993). Recent evidence suggests that this
embryotoxic or teratogenic and does not impair the fertility
product may cause aplastic anemia in dogs and cats, so it
of bulls (Muser and Paul, 1984). Fenbendazole has been shown
should be used with caution (Plumb, 2005).
to be effective against Giardia organisms in calves when given
as a single oral dose of 10 mg/kg (O'Handley et al, 1997).
Febantel
WARNiNG: Cattle must not be slaughtered within 8 days
 Febantel is a prodrug that is metabolized to fenbendazole and
of medication with fenbendazole, and dairy cattle of breed-
oxfendazole, which are undoubtedly the active parasiticide
ing age should not be treated with the 10 mg/kg dose.
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
279
No milk discard is required for dairy cattle treated with the
Some Haemorchus populations apparently have developed
5 mg/kg dose. Do not use in veal calves.
resistance to fenbendazole. Do not use in dairy goats produ-
cing milk for human consumption. Do not treat goats within
Horses
6 days of slaughter.
 Fenbendazole suspension, granules, or paste (Panacur) is
 administered orally to horses at 5 mg/kg for the control of
Sheep
large strongyles, S. vuigaris, S. edentatus, S. equinus,
Overseas, oral administration of fenbendazole at 5 mg/
Triodontophorus species; small strongyles, Cyathostomum,
kg is recommended for removal of adult and immature
Cylicocyclus Cylicostephanus, and Cylicodontophorus spe-
stages of gastrointestinal nematodes, cestodes, and lung
cies; and pinworm, O. equi. For the removal of ascarids,
nematodes.:
 Some Haemonchus populations  apparently
 P. equorum, a dose of 10 mg/kg is recommended. Pregnant
have developed resistance to fenbendazole. The FDA has
mares, stallions, and foals may be treated safely with fen-
approved the use of fenbendazole for the treatment of
bendazole at the recommended dosages. For the control of
lung-worm, Protostrongylus species, in Rocky Mountain
fourth-stage larvae of S. vulgaris, the unapproved dosage is
bighorn sheep.
10 mg/kg daily for 5 days (Lyons, Tolliver, and Drudge,
1983; Leneau, Haig, and Ho, 1985).
Zoo animals
Fenbendazole granules (Panacur) are among the few
Swine
 ve a kq pde ane sinpd iera
 Fenbendazole is approved as a feed additive (Safe-Guard)
use in zoo animals. The label allows use in lions, Parthera
for swine. A total dose of 9 mg/kg is divided and fed over a 3-
leo; tigers, Panthera tigris; cheetahs, Acinonyx jubatus;
to 12-day period. This dosage removes the adult and imma-
pumas, Felis concolor; jaguars, Panthera onca; leopards,
ture forms of large roundworm, A. suum; small stomach
worm, H. rubidus; nodular worm, O. dentatum, O. quadris-
Ursus horribilis; polar bears, Ursus maritimus; and black
pinulatum; whipworm, Trichuris suis; kidney worm, S. den-
bears, Ursus americanus. The label recommends 10 mg/kg
tatus; and lungworm, Metastrongylus apri, Metastrongylus
orally for 3 consecutive days. It is used to remove ascarids,
 pudendotectus (Biehl, 1986). There is no withdrawal time
 hookworms, and tapeworms from these species. The actual
restriction when pigs are treated at the approved dose.
list of approved parasite indications is rather complex owing
   ss o go   n 
Dogs
 common parasites found in each. In summary, the following
 Fenbendazole granules (Panacur) at a dose level of 50 mg/
parasites may be controlled in these zoo animals: round-
kg are mixed in the feed and given to dogs for 3 consecutive
worm, T. cati, T. leonina, Baylisascaris transfuga; hookworm,
days for the removal of roundworm, T. canis, T. leonina; hook-
Ancylostoma species, A. caninum; and tapeworm, Taenia
worm, A. canirum, U. sterocephala; whipworm, T. vulpis; and
hydatigena, Taenia krabbei, and Taenia taeniaeformis. The
tapeworm, Taenia pisiformis (Bowman, 1992; Burke and
label requires that the drug not be given to game animals
Roberson, 1978; Burke and Roberson, 1979; Roberson and
14 days before or during hunting season (Bayley, 2007).
Burke, 1982; Reinemeyer, 2000). Fenbendazole is approved
Safety trials in zoo animals dosed at 100 mg/kg (use rate
for use in dogs only at least 6 weeks of age.
X 10) showed mild signs of anorexia and loose stool. There
Prolonged therapy at 50 mg/kg for several weeks demon-
was no effect on reproduction at this dose.
strated excellent activity against the lung fluke, P. kellicotti
 Fenbendazole (Safe-guard) is also approved by the FDA
(Dubey et al, 1979). Fenbendazole is safe, and there are no
for use in large wildlife and game animals, including feral
known contraindications for its use in dogs with Giardia
swine, Sus scrofa; bighorn sheep, Ovis canadensis canadensis;
organisms at a dose of 50 mg/kg (Barr, 2006).
and ruminants of the subfamily Antilopinae, gazelles and
impala; Hippotraginae, addax and oryx; and Caprinae,
Cats
mouflon and saiga. These animals are treated in the feed
Fenbendazole is not currently approved for use in cats.
with 2.5 mg/kg (ruminants), 3 mg/kg (swine), or 10 mg/kg
When given at an oral dose of 50 mg/kg for 3 consecutive
(bighorn sheep) for 3 consecutive days. The label requires
days, it is effective against adult roundworm, T. cati, and
that the drug not be given to game animals 14 days before
hookworm, A. tubaeforme. Treatment of lungworm, Aelu-
or during hunting season (Bayley, 2007).
rostrongylus abstrusus, and lung fluke, P. kellicotti, may
require 14 days of therapy (Bowman, 1992; Plumb, 2005;
Oxfendazole
Roberson and Burke, 1980).
Oxfendazole is a broad-spectrum benzimidazole approved in
the United States for use in cattle. Oxfendazole is metabolized
Goats
in ruminants to oxfendazole sulfone and fenbendazole, but
Fenbendazole 10% suspension (Safe-Guard) is approved
the primary anthelmintic action is caused by the parent drug
for use in goats. A single oral dose of 5 mg/kg is recommen
(Marriner and Bogan, 1981). Its oral LDso is more than
ded for removal of barber pole worm, H. contortus, and
1600 mg/kg for Beagle dogs and exceds 6400 mg/kg for
brown stomach worm, Telodorsagia (Ostertagia) circumcincta.
rats and mice.
280
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
Cattle
still available in a combination product for use in
S'7 ie paiaisuupe si (ryeus) uoisudsns ajozepua
ears (Tresaderm), which has activity against ear mites,
mg/kg by oral dosing syringe. The drug is approved for use in
O. cynotis, in dogs and cats.
beef and nonlactating dairy cattle. It is effective against lung-
worm, D. viviparus; barber pole worm, H. contortus, H. placei;
Imidazothiazoles
small stomach worm, T. axei; brown stomach worm, O. oster-
Tetramisole, discovered in 1966, was the first in the devel.
tagi; nodular worm, O. radiatum; hookworm, B. phleboto-
opment of the imidazothiazoles. Tetramisole was actually a
mum; small intestinal worm, C. punctata, C. oncophora,
racemic mixture of two optical isomers. Only the L-isomer
Cooperia mcrmasteri; and tapeworm, Moniezia benedeni
(levamisole) has anthelmintic activity. The active isomer
(Todd and Mansfield, 1979).
was subsequently developed as levamisole. In this class of
Cattle must not be slaughtered within 7 days of treat-
anthelmintic, only levamisole is still commercially available.
ment. Because no milk withdrawal time has been estab-
The imidazothiazoles act as nicotinic agonists that dis-
lished, do not use oxfendazole in female dairy cattle of
turb the neuromuscular system, thus causing contraction
breeding age.
and subsequent tonic paralysis (Coles, 1977; Coles et al,
1975; Martin, 1993). It seems that the nicotinic acetylcho-
Oxlbendazole
line receptors of invertebrate parasites are essential for neu-
 Oxibendazole, a broad-spectrum benzimidazole, is appar-
rofunction but differ in physiology and distribution in
ently effective against benzimidazole-resistant small stron-
mammals (Londershausen, 1996). The imidazothiazoles
gyles (Drudge, Lyons, and Tolliver, 1979). Its acute oral
also are known to interfere with the fumarate reduction
LDso is greater than 10,000 mg/kg in guinea pigs, hamsters,
 system, which plays a key role in mitochondrial energy
and rabbits and greater than 32,000 mg/kg in mice. A single
 production (Arundel et al, 1985; Behm and Bryant, 1979).
dose of 600 mg/kg was well tolerated by cattle, sheep, and
 ponies, and no adverse reactions were observed in rats and
Levamlsole
dogs treated with up to 30 mg/kg daily for 3 months. No
Levamisole (Levasole) is administered orally as a bolus, oral
 evidence of teratogenicity or embryotoxicity was observed
drench, or injectable solution to cattle, sheep, and swine for
in rats, mice, sheep, cattle, or horses.
the control of gastrointestinal and lung nematodes. An
aqueous solution of levamisole phosphate (13.6% or
Horses
18.2%) is for subcutaneous injection in cattle.
Oxibendazole paste or suspension (Anthelcide EQ) is admi-
The oral LDso of levamisole for rats is 480 mg/kg and for
nistered orally to horses at 10 mg/kg for the removal and con-
mice, 210 mg/kg. Some sheep treated orally with tetramisole
trol of large strongyles, S. vulgaris, S. edentatus, S. equirus,
at 80 mg/kg died. Subcutaneous injection is more toxic than
Triodontophorus species; small strongyles, Cyathostormum,
oral administration. Signs of cholinergic toxicity such as lip
Cylicocyclus,Cylicostephanus,Cylicodontophorus,Gyalocep-
licking, salivation, lacrimation, head shaking, ataxia, and
halus species; ascarid, P. equorurm; and pinworms, O. equi
 muscle tremors may occur at lower dosage levels. At the
(Drudge et al, 198la; Drudge et al, 1981b; Drudge et al,
recommended dosage level, an occasional animal may show
1985). The dose must be increased to 15 mg/kg for treatment
transitory muzzle foam and licking of the lips. At twice the
of threadworm, S. westeri (DiPetro and Todd, 1987).
therapeutic dosage level, calves may show increased alertness,
Oxibendazole is not effective against botfly larvae, but it is
salivation, head shaking, and muscle tremors.
highly effective against benzimidazole-resistant cyathostomes
(Drudge et al, 1981a; Drudge et al, 1981b; Drudge et al, 1985)
Cattle
Levamisole  hydrochloride administered orally  as a
Thlabendazole
drench, bolus, or injectable solution (Levasole) is highly
The discovery of thiabendazole in 1961 marked the begin-
effective against barber pole worm, H. placei; brown stomach
ning of truly broad-spectrum anthelmintics. The first of the
worm, O. ostertagi; small stomach worm, T. axei, T. long-
benzimidazoles, thiabendazole is a very safe compound. Its
ispicularis; small intestinal worms, C. oncophora, C. punctata;
acute oral LDso for rats is 3100 mg/kg. Thiabendazole was
thread-necked intestinal worm, N. spathiger; hookworm,
used as an anthelmintic in sheep, goats, cattle, horses,
B. phlebotomum; nodular worm, O. radiatum, and lung-
swine, and other animals in which it is active against the
worm, D. viviparous (Baker and Fisk, 1972; Curr, 1977;
adults and some immature forms of nematodes, and it
Lyons et al, 1972; Lyons et al, 1975; Seibert et al, 1986).
inhibited embryonation of nematode eggs. It was also
 Arrested early fourth-stage larvae of Ostertagia species are
active against fungi and mites. Owing to its wide margin
refractory to levamisole. The dose for cattle is 8 mg/kg orally
of safety, thiabendazole was used in animals of all ages and
and 6 mg/kg by subcutaneous injection of the phosphate salt.
in pregnant and debilitated animals. Thiabendazole was
WARNING: A slight nonpersistent reaction may occur at
 available in a variety of pharmaceutical forms (suspension,
the site of levamisole phosphate injection. Cattle should not
bolus, paste, feed block, and top-dressing pellets) under
be slaughtered within 7 days of injection or 2 days of oral
various proprietary names. All but one dosage form have
 medication. Levamisole is not to be used in dairy animals of
leff the market in the United States. Thiabendazole is
breeding age to avoid drug residues in milk.
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
281
Sheep
Pyrantel
Orally administered levamisole drench or bolus ( Levasole)
Pyrantel is the most widely used of all the tetrahydropyrimi-
removes barber pole worm, H. contortus; small stomach
dine anthelmintics. The tartrate salt is a white powder, sol-
worm, T. axei; brown stomach worm, Teladorsagia
uble in water, which is used as a powder and pellets in horses
(Ostertagia) circumcincta; bankrupt worm, T. colubriformis;
and swine. Pyrantel tartrate is well absorbed after oral
Cooper's worm, C. curticei; thread-necked intestinal worm,
administration in the rat, dog, and pig. Plasma levels peak
N. spathiger; hookworm, Bunostomum trigonocephalum;
within 2 to 3 hours, and the drug is rapidly metabolized and
nodular worm, O. colurmbiarurm; large-mouth bowel worm,
eliminated in the urine.
C. ovina; and lungworm, D. filaria, at an oral dose of 8 mg/kg
Pyrantel pamoate is a yellow powder, insoluble in water,
(Callinan and Barton, 1979; Craig and Shepherd, 1980).
which is available as a ready-to-use suspension for dogs and
 Levamisole is also efficacious against the immature stages of
horses and as tablets for dogs. Pyrantel salts are stable in solid
Haemonchus, Nematodirus, Bunostomum, Oesophagostomum,
form but photodegrade when dissolved or suspended in
 Chabertia, and Dictyocaulus species.
water, resulting in reduction of potency. Pyrantel pamoate
WARNiNG: Levamisole has an ample therapeutic margin,
is poorly absorbed from the intestine.
but an occasional sheep will show side effects (e.g-, lip
licking, salivation, increased alertness, muscle tremors),
Dogs
 even at the recommended dose. Debilitated sheep appear
Pyrantel pamoate, as a palatable suspension, chewable
to be more susceptible to toxicity. Sheep should not be
tablets, or plain tablets (Nemex), is indicated for the
slaughtered within 72 hours of treatment.
removal of roundworm, T. canis and T. leorina, and hook-
worm, A. caninum, and U. stenocephala, from dogs and
Swine
 puppies (Bradley and Conway, 1978; Clark et al, 1991;
Levamisole administered to swine in water (Levasol)
Jacobs, 1987a; Klein, Bradley, and Conway, 1978;
removes large roundworm, A. suum; nodular worm, Oesoph-
Linquist, 1975; Todd et al, 1975). The recommended dose
 agostomum species; intestinal threadworm, S. ransomi; and
of 5 mg/kg is administered orally or mixed with a small
lungworm Metastrorgylus species.
amount of feed. For animals weighing 2.25 kg or less, the
WARNiNG: Levamisole should be administered to pigs of
aq sq aod pud y/ ii oi pas si aso
weanling to market age after an overnight fast. Breeding pigs
shown to be safe in nursing and weanling pups, pregnant
do not need to be fasted before treatment. Pigs should not be
bitches, males used for breeding, and dogs infected
treated within 3 days of slaughter. Salivation or muzzle foam
with heartworm, D. irmmitis. Its oral LDso is greater than
is occasionally observed after treatment. Pigs infected with
690 mg/kg in dogs. No significant morphologic changes
adult lungworms may vomit or cough. These reactions may
were induced in dogs given 94 mg/kg daily for 90 days.
be caused by the expulsion of paralyzed lungworms from the
Pyrantel pamoate is compatible with organophosphates
bronchi.
and other antiparasitic and antimicrobial agents.
Opossum
Horses
Levamisole is unapproved for use in opossums
 Pyrantel pamoate, available for horses as a paste or
(Didelphis virginiana) but is the drug of choice for control-
caramel-flavored suspension (Strongid Paste, Strongid T),
ling internal parasites according to the National Opossum
administered at 6.6 mg of pyrantel base per kilogram elim-
Society (NOS). The NOS advocates subcutaneous injection
inates large strongyles, S. vulgaris, S. edentatus, S. equinus;
of levamisole at a dose of 6 mg/kg for animals over 200 g
pinworm, O. equi; ascarid, P. equorum, and several species of
body weight (NOS, 2007).
the subfamily Cyathostominae, including populations resis-
tant to benzimidazoles (Lyons, Drudge, and Tolliver, 1974).
Tetrahydropyrimidines
A single oral dose of 13.2 mg of pyrantel base per kilogram
The tetrahydropyrimidines include the numerous salts of
was 98% effective against tapeworm, Anoplocephala perfo-
pyrantel, mora ntel, and the investigational compound oxan-
liata, but this is not an approved dose level (Craig et al,
tel, which is available outside the United States. They all act as
2003; Lyons et al, 1986).
 nicotinic agonists, which disturb the neuromuscular system,
Pyrantel tartrate (Strongid C) is fed continuously at a dose
causing contraction and subsequent tonic paralysis (Aubry
 of 2.6 mg/kg of body weight daily for the prevention of S.
et al, 1970; Eyre, 1970; Martin, 1993; Martin, 1997). In vitro
vuigaris larval migration and the control of adult large stron-
experiments indicate that pyrantel is 100 times more power-
gyles, S. vulgaris, S. edentatus, Triodontophorus species; adult
ful than acetylcholine. It seems that the nicotinic acetylcho-
and larval small strongyles, Cyathostomum, Cylicodonto-
line receptors of invertebrate parasites are essential for
phorus, Cylicocyclus, Cylicostephanus, and Poteriostomum spe-
neurofunction but different in physiology and distribution
cies; adult and larval pinworm, O. equi; and adult and larval
 in mammals (Londershausen, 1996).
ascarid, P. equorum (Cornwell and Jones, 1968; Drudge et al,
In ruminants these products are rapidly metabolized to
1982; Lyons, Drudge, and Tolliver, 1975). Pyrantel is safe for
inactive metabolites. Therefore ruminants require higher
use in horses and ponies of all ages, including sucklings,
doses than monogastric animals (Campbell and Rew, 1985).
weanlings, and pregnant mares. It can be used concurrently
282
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
with insecticides, tranquilizers, muscle relaxants, and central
withdrawal. Catle should not be slaughtered within 14 days
nervous system depressants.
after treatment. It may be given simultaneously with vac-
cines, injectable drugs, and external parasiticides without
Swine
concern.
Pyrantel tartrate (Banminth 48), when fed once at 96 g/
ton of complete feed as the sole ration, prevents the migra-
Goats
tion and establishment of large roundworm, A. suum; and
 Morantel tartrate (Goat Care-2X) is mixed in a complete
nodular worm, Oesophagostomum species. When fed to pigs
feed or top dressed to deliver 9.7 mg/kg of body weight for
for 3 consecutive days, this medicated feed removes the
the removal of adult barber pole worm, H. contortus; brown
adults and fourth-stage larvae of A. suurm. Pyrantel tartrate
stomach worm, Teladorsagia (Ostertagia) circumcincta; and
is also mixed with feed at the rate of 800 g/ton of complete
small stomach worm, T. axei in goats. Goats should not be
feed and fed to pigs for the treatment of A. suum and
slaughtered within 30 days of treatment.
 Oesophagostormurn species infection for 1 day at the rate
of 1 kg feed per 40 kg body weight (1 pound of feed per
Cyclic Depsipeptides
BX 16 said 1oy paay Jo By e'7 0i dn (1uaiam Apoq spunod 0f
Emodepslde
and heavier. Pyrantel is the only approved anthelmintic
Emodepside is the first cyclic depsipeptide to be approved for
that will prevent the appearance of “milk spots" on the
use against animal parasites in the United States. The product
livers of pigs when administered continuously. It does so
binds to a presynaptic latrophilin receptor in parasitic nema-
by killing the larvae of A. suum in the lumen of the gut as
todes, which results in flaccid paralysis and death (Harder
they hatch from eggs (Biehl, 1986).
et al, 2005). It has low to moderate acute toxicity in mamma-
WARNiNG: Pyrantel should not be given to pigs within
lian species; the oral LDso in rats is greater than 500 mg/kg and
24 hours of slaughter. Because the drug is photodegradable,
is more than 2000 mg/kg when applied to the skin. Studies in
it should be used immediately after the package is opened.
rats and rabbits suggest that emodepside may interfere with
Pyrantel tartrate should not be mixed with rations contain-
fetal development. Women who are pregnant or who may
ing bentonite. Beca use pyrantel and piperazine appear to be
become pregnant should avoid direct contact with emodep-
 pharmacologic antagonists, they probably should not be
 side by wearing disposable gloves when handling the product.
used concurrently.
1.98% emodepside and 7.94% praziquantel for use in cats
Cattle, sheep, and goats
(Profender). The prefilled applicators deliver the minimum
Pyrantel tartrate is not approved by the FDA for use in
dose of 3 mg of emodepside per kilogram and 12 mg of pra-
cattle, sheep, and goats but is effective at 25 mg/kg against
ziquantel per kilogram. The active ingredients are readily
barber pole worm, H. contortus; brown stomach worm,
absorbed through the skin, enter systemic circulation, and
O. ostertagi, Teladorsagia (Ostertagia) circumcincta; small
act on target parasites in the gastrointestinal tract. The prod-
stomach worm, T. axei; bankrupt worm, T. colubriformis;
uct is effective in removing roundworm, T. cati (adult and
thread-necked worm, N. battus, N. spathiger; small intesti-
L4); hookworm, A. tubaeforme (adult, immature adult and
nal worm, Cooperia species; and hookworm, Bunostomum
L4); and tapeworm, Dipylidium caninum and T. taeniaeformis
species (Arundel et al, 1985; Campbell and Rew, 1985;
(Altreuther et al, 2005a; Charles et al, 2005; Reinemeyer et al,
Reinemeyer and Courtney, 200la).
2005). Profender was very effective when used in large scale
clinical studies (Altreuther et al, 2005b).
Morantel Tartrate
Morantel is the 3-methyl analogue of pyrantel. Morantel
Piperazine
tartrate is used for the control of gastrointestinal nematodes
Piperazine produces a neuromuscular blockade through
 in cattle and goats. Its acute oral LDso is 437 mg/kg in male
disruption of GABA neurotransmission. Most data suggest
mice and 926 mg/kg in male rats.
that the receptors in nematodes and insects resemble the
mammalian GABA subtype, but they are clearly different
Cattle
from their vertebrate counterparts (Londershausen, 1996;
 Morantel tartrate (Rumatel) is mixed in a complete feed
Martin, 1997). Piperazine is quite safe to use in all species,
or top dressed to deliver 9.7 mg/kg of body weight for the
 a ue jo ds mu e   ing
removal of adult barber pole worm, Haemonchus species;
Courtney, 2001a).
brown stomach worm, Ostertagia species; small stomach
Various salts of piperazine (e.g-, adipate, hydrochloride,
worm, Trichostrongylus species; small intestinal worm,
sulfate, monohydrate, citrate, dihydrochloride) are used as
Cooperia species; thread-necked intestinal worm, Nematodi-
anthelmintics in swine, poultry, horses, dogs, and cats. The
rus species; and nodular worm, O. radiatum in cattle
amount of piperazine base in each salt varies widely. The
(Anderson and Marais, 1975; Conway et al, 1973; Ciordia
adipate, citrate, phosphate, and dihydrochloride salts contain
and McCampbell, 1973). Activity against larval stages of
a 37%, 35%, 42%, and 50% piperazine base, respectively
these nematodes appears to be variable. Morantel may
(USP, 1998). Anthelmintic activity depends on freeing piper-
be
administered to lactating dairy cows without requiring milk
azine base in the gastrointestinal tract. Piperazine is rapidly
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
283
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and quickly cleared
accumulates at the postsynaptic junction, which results in
by urinary excretion. Elimination is virtually complete within
continued depolarization. The end result is paralysis (Fest
24 hours. Piperazine should be used with caution in animals
and Schmidt, 1982; Hart and Lee, 1966; Lee and Hodsden,
with hepatic or renal dysfunction. The drug may not be effec-
1963). The toxicity of organophosphates is generally
tive in animals with intestinal hypomotility because the
related to their ability to inactivate the AChE of the host.
paralyzed worms may recover from the effects of the drug
Such toxicity is best treated with pralidoxime (2-PAM) and
before they are passed in the stool. Occasional adverse
atropine (Nelson, Allen, and Mozier, 1967; Smith, 1986;
 reactions observed include ataxia, diarrhea, and vomiting.
Woodard, 1957).
Piperazine is available as tablets, solution, and soluble
Dichlorvos is an organophosphate that is effective
 powder under many proprietary names (Pipa-Tabs, Tasty
against many internal and external parasites. It is rapidly
Paste). The drug is practically nontoxic. Its oral LDso for
degraded in mammals. The acute oral LDso of dichlorvos
rats is 4.9 g/kg and for chickens, 8 g/kg. Piperazine can be
for rats is 80 mg/kg. In dogs, the oral LDso of unformulated
administered to animals of all ages.
dichlorvos is 28 to 45 mg/kg, whereas formulated (resi-
nated) dichlorvos is of low toxicity, with an oral LDso of
Dogs and cats
387 to 1262 mg/kg. No untoward reactions were observed
Piperazine is administered orally at 45 to 65 mg of piper-
in pregnant mice, rats, rabbits, sows, mares, bitches, and
azine base per kilogram (USP, 1998), although higher doses
queens medicated with dichlorvos.
(100 to 250 mg/kg) have been reported in the literature
(English and Sprent, 1965; Jacobs, 1987a; Jacobs, 1987b;
Swine
Sharp, Sepesi, and Collins, 1973). It is effective against
Dichlorvos is formulated for pigs in polyvinyl chloride resin
adult roundworm, T. canis, T. cati, and T. leonina.
 pellets (Atgard). It is mixed into a complete meal type feed
(not unground grain or pelleted meal) to deliver 12.5 to 21.6
Horses
mg/kg of body weight for the removal of adults and fourth-
Piperazine is effective against ascarid, P. equorum, at an oral
stage larvae of large roundworm, A. suum, whipworm, T. suis;
 dose of 110 mg of piperazine base per kilogram. Reasonable
nodular worm, Oesophagostormurm species; and adult thick
efficacy was also observed against large strongyle, S. vulgaris;
stomach worms, A. strongylina in boars, weaners, fatteners,
pinworm, O. equi; and many species of small strongyles at
gilts, and sows (Arundel et al, 1985; Biehl, 1986). For best
220 to 275 mg/kg (Downey, 1977; Gibson, 1957; Poynter,
results, sows and gilts should be medicated shortly before far-
1955a; Poynter, 1955b; Poynter, 1956). Foals should first be
rowing and again at weaning. It is best to administer the med-
treated when they are 8 weeks old. The treatment may be
icated feed to smal lots of compatibly sized pigs (e.g-, single
 repeated every 4 weeks if necessary.
litters) at one time so they can be watched while feeding to
ensure that all eat their share. Preliminary fasting is unneces-
Cattle, goats, and sheep
sary, but alternative sources of feed should be excluded during
Piperazine is given at 110 mg of base per kilogram orally in a
the medication period. When administered immediately
single dose for control of nodular worms ( Oesophagostomum
 before parturition at 8.8 times the recommended dose, resi-
species) and roundworm (Toxocara [Neoascaris] vitulorum)
nated dichlorvos produced no adverse reactions in sows. There
(Reinemeyer and Courtney, 2001a; USP, 1998). It is not
is no preslaughter withdrawal period when the drug is used at
 often used in ruminants because of its narrow spectrum of
the recommended dosage level.
action.
WARNinG: Dichlorvos should not be used with other cho-
linesterase-inhibiting chemicals, taeniacides, antifilarials,
Swlne
muscle relaxants, phenothiazine tranquilizers, or central ner-
Piperazine in drinking water is offered to pigs at 110 mg/kg
vous system depressants. Atropine and pralidoxime (2-PAM)
for the removal of large roundworm (A. suum) and nodular
 are the recommended antidotes for organophosphate
worm (Oesophagostomum species) (Biehl, 1986).
poisoning.
Chlckens and turkeys
Isoquinolones
Piperazine is administered in feed or water for 2 days at
The isoquinolones are represented by two closely related
 32 mg of base per kilogram. It is very effective against round-
cestocides: praziquantel and epsiprantel. This class of ces-
worm, A. gali, but not against the cecal worm, H. gallinarum
tocide is the safest and most effective yet approved in the
(Reinemeyer and Courtney, 2001la; USP, 1998).
United States. These drugs attack the neuromuscular junc-
tion and the tegument. The first effect causes an instanta-
Organophosphates
neous contraction and paralysis of the parasite (Andrews
Dlchlorvos
et al, 1983). The second effect is a devastating vacuolization
Dichlorvos is an organophosphate taken internally to kill
and destruction of the protective tegument (Arundel et al,
parasites. It phosphorylates the AChE enzyme. Normal
1985; Frayha et al, 1997). The combined effects of paralysis
AChE eliminates acetylcholine when it is released at the post-
 and tegmental destruction provide excellent activity against
 synaptic junction. When AChE is inactivated, acetylcholine
cestodes.
284
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
Prazlquantel
in mice and rats showed the oral minimum lethal dose of
Praziquantel was the first isoquinolone cestocide approved in
epsiprantel to be more than 5000 mg/kg. Epsiprantel at an
the United States. It displays marked anthelmintic activity
oral dosage level of 2.75 mg/kg for cats or 5.5 mg/kg for
against a wide range of adult and larval cestodes and trema-
dogs, as a single oral film-coated tablet, effectively removes
todes of the genus Schistosoma. Praziquantel is a very safe
the following tapeworms: D. caninum, T. taeniaeformis,
anthelmintic. Rats tolerated daily administration of up to
T. pisiformis, and T. hydatigena (Corwin et al, 1989;
1000 mg/kg for 4 weeks, and dogs tolerated up to 180 mg/
Manger and Brewer, 1989). Doses as high as 100 mg/kg
kg daily for 13 weeks. Adverse reactions in dogs and cats
and 200 mg/kg in cats and dogs were well tolerated.
include transient anorexia, diarrhea, incoordination, and
Epsiprantel was given concurrently with antinflammatory
lethargy. Vomiting and salivation are typically observed at
drugs, insecticides, and other anthelmintic drugs with no
high dosage rates. The drug has high oral bioavailability,
incompatibilities observed. Epsiprantel is only slightly
high protein binding, and a marked first-pass effect. It is rap-
absorbed through the digestive tract of cats and dogs.
idly metabolized in the kidney and liver, and the half-life for
 It is eliminated in the feces unchanged.
elimination is about 2 hours. About 80% of the dose is elimi-
WARNING: The safety of using epsiprantel in pregnant
nated through the urine. The remainder is cleared through the
dogs and cats has not been determined, and it should not
 bile and stool. Praziquantel did not induce embryotoxicity,
be used in puppies and kittens younger than 7 weeks of age.
teratogenesis, mutagenesis, or carcinogenesis, nor did it affect
the reproductive performance of test animals.
Arsenicals
Heavy metals such as arsenic and antimony are well repre-
Dogs and cats
sented in the history of anthelmintics. Today they have been
Praziquantel (Droncit) is administered orally or injected
a i snp aaaa aro pue iaes Aq kiie paseda
subcutaneously at 2.5 to 7.5 mg/kg for the removal of the
most common parasites. Their use in domestic animals is
following tapeworms: D. caninum, T. taeniaeformis, T. pisifor-
now limited to one product that is used to remove adult
mis, T. hydatigena, T. ovis, Mesocestoides corti, Echinococcus
heartworm (D. irmmitis). The therapeutic effect depends on
granulosus, Echinococcus multilocularis, Spirometra species,
a reaction between the arsenic salt and sulfhydryl-containing
Diphyllobothrium latum, Diphyllobothrium erinacei, and
enzymes (Ledbetter, 1984; Gilman et al, 1990). Inactivation
Joyeuxiella pasqualei (Andersen, Conder, and Marsland,
of parasite enzyme systems results in death. Arsenic is widely
1978; Andersen, Conder, and Marsland, 1979; Gemmell,
known as a toxin in humans and animals. Due caution is
Johnstone, and Oudemans, 1977; Gemmell, Johnstone, and
 required when using arsenical products.
Oudemans, 1980; Kruckenberg, Meyer, and Eastman, 1981;
Thakur et al, 1978; Thomas and Gonnert, 1978; USP, 1998).
Melarsomlne
A higher dosage is also highly active when injected subcuta-
Melarsomine dihydrochloride (Immiticide) is the only
neously or intramuscularly. Praziquantel is not intended for
arsenical anthelmintic that is commercially available in
 use in puppies or kittens younger than 4 weeks old.
the United States for veterinary use. Melarsomine has an
efficacy of 92% to 98% for adult D. irmmitis (Dzimianski
Sheep, goats, and chickens
et al, 1992; Keister, Tanner, and Meo, 1995; Keister et al,
Although not approved for use in these species, prazi-
1992; Miller et al, 1995a; Rawlings et al, 1993). The product
quantel may be used for tapeworm infections from
is administered intramuscularly at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg for
Avitellina species, Stilesia species, Moniezia species,
two injections given 3 or 24 hours apart. The drug is rapidly
Choanotaenia infundibulum, Davainea proglottina, and
absorbed from the injection site, with a mean absorption
Raillietina cesticellus. Sheep and goats may be treated with
half-life after intramuscular administration of 2.6 minutes
a dose of 10 to 15 mg/kg, and chickens with a dose of 10
and peak blood concentration occurs at 8 minutes afer
 mg/kg (Reinemeyer and Courtney, 2001b).
injection. The drug is rapidly distributed to most tissues.
 The parent drug and the arsenoxide metabolite are rapidly
Horses
eliminated in the feces, probably by biliary excretion. The
Although not approved alone for use in horses, praziquan-
arsenic acid metabolite is rapidly eliminated in the urine, so
tel may be used for tapeworm infections from A. perfoliata.
there is no significant bioaccumulation (Keister, Tanner,
Horses may be treated with a single dose of 1.25 mg/kg (Craig
and Meo, 1995).
et al, 2003). Praziquantel is approved in combination with
Clinical studies indicate that the treatment is well toler-
macrocyclic lactones for use in horses. Combination products
ated even in dogs that have clinical signs of heartworm
containing praziquantel and other anthelmintics such as
disease (Case et al, 1995; Miller et al, 1995a; Vezzoni,
febantel, pyrantel or ivermectin are also available. See the
Genchi, and Raynaud, 1992).
section on combination products for more information.
Miscellaneous Anthelmintics
Epslprantel
The miscellaneous anthelmintics include an assortment of
 Epsiprantel (Cestex) was the second isoquinolone cestocide
many different classes of drug. Some of these anthelmintics
 to be approved in the United States. Acute toxicity studies
are older chemicals that have not yet outlived their
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
285
usefulness. Some have unique attributes that keep them in
dosing regimen is different from that of the single-entity
use and commercially available.
drugs discussed in the preceding sections. The toxicity and
mechanism of action are covered in the preceding sections
Clorsulon
of the chapter.
Clorsulon, a benzene sulfonamide compound, is very effec-
tive in cattle against the immature and mature liver fluke
Ivermectln and Clorsulon
Fasciola hepatica. The formulated product (Curatrem) is
An injecta ble product (Ivomec Plus) containing clorsulon
given in a drench to cattle and sheep at a dose of 7 mg/
and ivermectin is approved for use in cattle. The addition
kg. A single dose is more than 99% effective in removing
of clorsulon extends the parasitic spectrum of ivermectin to
F. hepatica (Campbell and Rew, 1985; Kilgore et al, 1985;
include liver fluke F. hepatica. The product is injected sub-
Wallace et al, 1985). The drug should not be given to lac-
cutaneously behind the shoulder at a dose of 1 mL/50 kg of
tating dairy cattle because no milk withdrawal time
has
body weight. This dose volume delivers 0.2 mg ivermectin
been established. Cattle should not be treated within
and 2 mg clorsulon per kilogram of body weight. It is effective
 7 days before slaughter. Timing for retreatment should be
against brown stomach worm, O. ostertagi, O. lyrata; barber
based on risk patterns where the cattle are pastured.
pole worm, H. placei; small stomach worm, T. axei; bankrupt
 Clorsulon is also available in combination with ivermec-
worm, T. colubriformis; small intestinal worm, C. oncophora,
tin. For more information, see the section on combination
C. punctata, C. pectinata; hookworm, B. phlebotomum;
drugs.
thread-necked intestinal worm, N. helvetiarus, N. spathiger;
nodular worm, O. radiatum; lungworm, D. viviparus; liver
Dlchlorophene
fluke, F. hepatica; cattle grub, H. bovis, H. lineatum; sucking
Dichlorophene (Happy Jack Tapeworm Tablets) is a chlo-
lice, L. vituli, H. eurysternus, S. capillatus; and mange mites,
rinated analogue of diphenylmethane. It has low toxicity in
P. ovis, and S. scabiei var. bovis. Do not treat cattle within
 mammals. The oral LDso of dichlorophene for rats is 2690
49 days before slaughter. Do not use product in female dairy
mg/kg, and the acute oral LDso for dogs is 1000 mg/kg.
cattle of breeding age, because no milk withholding time has
 Dichlorophene has bacteriostatic, fungicidal, and cesticidal
been established. Do not use in veal calves.
 properties. It uncouples electron-transport-linked phos-
phorylation in the parasite mitochondria. The drug is rel-
Ivermectln and Prazlquantel
atively safe in the host because of its low gastrointestinal
Two oral paste products (Equimax, Zimectrin Gold) con-
absorption (Arundel et al, 1985; Lovell et al, 1990).
taining ivermectin and praziquantel are approved for use in
a u pi, ue se ano uaaa aq Aeu auaqdono
horses. The addition of praziquantel extends the parasitic
removal" of D. carirum and T. pisiformis tapeworms from
 spectrum of ivermectin to include the tapeworm A. perfo-
dogs (Reinemeyer and Courtney, 2001b). The drug may be
liata. Equimax paste is given orally at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg
administered orally in tablet or capsule form at 220 mg/kg
body weight for ivermectin and 1.5 mg/kg body weight for
after an overnight fast. The tapeworms are killed, digested,
 praziquantel. Zimectrin Gold is given orally at a dose of
and eliminated in an unrecognizable form. An occasional
0.2 mg/kg body weight for ivermectin and 1 mg/kg body
animal may vomit or have diarrhea after treatment with
weight for praziquantel.
dichlorophene.
Both combination products are approved for the treat-
ment and control of tapeworms, A. perfoliata; large stron-
Broad-Spectrum Combinations
 gyles, adult S. equinus; adult, arterial, and migrating larval
The veterinary practitioner is always looking for anthelmin-
stages of S. vuigaris, adult and migrating tissue stages of
tic products that cover ever-increasing spectra of parasites.
S.6
edentatus, adult Triodontophorus species (including
T. brevicauda, T. serratus, and Craterostomum acuticauda-
 First, they obviate dosing with several different products at
turn); small strongyles, including those resistant to some
once when a patient has a mixed parasite infection, which
benzimidazole class compounds, Coronocyclus species
 makes administration easier. Second, they provide peace of
(including C. coronatus, C. labiatus, and C. labratus),
mind that a parasitized animal will be cleared of parasites
adult and fourth-stage larvae of Cyathostomurn species
 missed perhaps in diagnosis. For instance, a puppy from
(including C. catinatum and C. pateratum), Cylicocyclus
 the animal shelter will be beter served with a product that
species (including C. insigne, C. leptostomum, C. rassatus,
 n    n  
and C. brevicapsulatus),
Cylicodontophorus
species,
worms than with a product that is effective only against
Cylicostephanus species, (including C. calicatus, C. goldi,
roundworms.
C. longibursatus, and C. minutus), P. poculatum, adult and
There are two ways to get broad-spectrum products:
fourth-stage larvae of pinworms, O. equi; adult and larval
either discover a single chemical that has a broad spectrum
stages of roundworms, P. equorurm; adult hairworms,
(not an easy task) or combine several compatible products
T. axei; adult stomach worms, H. muscae; botfly larvae,
to build the desired spectrum of activity.
G. intestinalis and G. nasalis; adult and fourth-stage larvae of
 In this section the combination products are discussed.
lungworms D. arnfieldi; intestinal threadworms, S. westeri;
 In most cases the formulation may have changed, and the
summer sores caused by cutaneous third-stage larvae of
286
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
Habronema and Draschia species; and dermatitis caused by
Mllbemycln Oxlme and Lufenuron
microfilariae of neck threadworm O. cervicalis. On occa-
A two-way combination of milbemycin oxime and lufenuron
sion, treated horses exhibit edematous reactions caused
(Sentinel) is approved for use in dogs. It is formulated todeliver
by a massive release of parasitic antigens.
a minimum dose of 0.5 mg of milbemycin oxime and 10 mg of
Oral administration of 10 times the recommended dose
of Zimectrin Gold was well tolerated in 5-month-old foals.
30 days, it is effective in preventing heartworms (D. irmmitis).
Zimectrin Gold has not been tested in pregnant mares, in
The product also kills hookworms, A. carirum; removes and
breeding stallions, or in foals less than 5 months of age. On
controls roundworm (T. canis, T. leorina) and whipworm
the other hand, Equimax paste is approved for use in horses
(Trichuris vulpis), and controls flea populations. Do not use
as young as 4 weeks of age, breeding stallions, and breeding.
in puppies less than 4 weeks of age or weighing less than
pregnant, or lactating mares. Do not use either product in
2 pounds. This produet is approved for concurrent adminis-
horses intended for food.
 tration with nitenpyram (Capstar) for quick knockdown of
preexisting flea populations.
Ivermectln and Pyrantel Pamoate
Ivermectin combined with pyrantel pamoate is available in
Moxldectln and Imldacloprld 
flavored chunks or tablets (Heartgard-30 Plus, Iverhart Plus,
A new combination product (Advantage Multi) contains
Tri-Heart Plus) for dogs. Because the heartworm preven-
imidacloprid for external parasites and moxidectin for
     n   
'seo pue shop u ssn ioy paaoidde si i sasied peua
testinal parasites, pyrantel pamoate is added to provide
Advantage Multi is a topical product designed to deliver
action against these important parasite species. The product
10 mg/kg of imidacloprid and 2.5 mg/kg moxidectin for
is formulated to deliver a target dose of 0.006 mg (6 mcg) of
dogs or 1 mg/kg moxidectin for cats. In dogs the product is
ivermectin and 5 mg of pyrantel pamoate per kilogram
 approved for the prevention of heartworm, D. inmmitis, and
of body weight. The product is given orally to dogs every
for the treatment and control of adult and larval hook-
30 days to prevent heartworm, D. immitis, and for the treat-
worm, A. caninum, U. stenocephala; adult and larval round-
ment and control of roundworm, T. canis and T. leonina,
worm, T. canis, T. leonina; and whipworm, T. vulpis
and hookworms, A. caninum, A. braziliense, and U. stenoce-
(Arther et al, 2005). The cat product is approved for the
phala (Clark et al, 1992a). The product should be given at
prevention of heartworm, D. immitis, and for the treatment
monthly intervals during the heartworm season. Recent stu-
and control of adult and larval hookworm, A. tubaeforme,
dies have shown that adult heartworms are not able to main-
and adult and larval roundworm, T. cati. The product is
tain detectable levels of microfilariae when exposed to
also effective in killing adult fleas and in treating flea infes-
ivermectin, so an antigen test should be used to reveal the
tations due to C. felis and for the removal and control of ear
presence of adult heartworms (Bowman et al, 1992). Safety
mites, O. cynotis.
tests have revealed that the ivermectin-pyrantel combination
Do not use the dog product on cats. The dog product
is well tolerated (Clark, Pulliam, and Daurio, 1992). Do not
has not been tested in dogs less than 7 weeks old or under
give this medication to dogs younger than 6 weeks of age or
3 pounds (1.36 kg) body weight. It has not been tested
to those with existing heartworm infections.
in breeding, pregnant, or lactating dogs. Dogs should be
tested for the presence of heartworm before administration.
Ivermectln, Pyrantel Pamoate, and Prazlquantel
The dog product is not effective against adult heartworm
 Ivermectin combined with pyrantel pamoate and praziquan-
or for clearing microfilariae. The dog product was well
tel is available in flavored tablets (Iverhart Max) for dogs.
tolerated when given at five times the
approved
Adding praziquantel to the two-way combination product
dose. Ensure that dogs cannot lick the product from the
mentioned earlier extends the parasite spectrum to include
application site. Ingestion of the product by dogs may
the tapeworms. The product is formulated to deliver a target
 cause serious reactions including depression, salivation,
dose of 0.006 mg (6 mcg) of ivermectin, 5 mg of pyrantel
dilated pupils, incoordination, panting, and generalized
pamoate, and 5 mg of praziquantel per kilogram of body
tremors.
The cat product should not be used on cats less than
 to prevent heartworm, D. immitis, and for the treatment and
 9 weeks of age or under 2 pounds (0.9 kg) body weight. The
 control of roundworm, T. canis and T. leonina; hookworms,
product was well tolerated when given at five times the
A. caninum, A. braziliense, U. stenocephala; and tapeworm,
approved dose in 9-week-old kittens. Cats treated with a
D. caninum, T. pisiformis. The product should be given at
single 10x dose exhibited mild, transient hypersalivation.
monthly intervals during the heartworm season. Recent stu-
 Avoid oral ingestion. Cats may experience hypersalivation,
dies have shown that adult heartworms are not able to main-
tremors, vomiting, and decreased appetite if the product is
tain detectable levels of microfilariae when exposed
to
given orally or licked from the application site.
ivermectin, so an antigen test should be used to reveal the
 presence of adult heartworms (Bowman et al, 1992). Do not
Moxldectln and Prazlquantel
give this medication to dogs younger than 8 weeks of age or
Two oral paste products (ComboCare, Quest Plus) con-
to those with existing heartworm infections.
taining moxidectin and praziquantel are approved for use
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
287
in horses. The addition of praziquantel extends the parasitic
References
 spectrum of ivermectin to include the tapeworm A. perfo-
liata. The combination products are given orally at a dose
Altreuther G, Borgsteede F, Buch J, et al: Efficacy of a topically administered
 of 0.4 mg/kg body weight for moxidectin and 2.5 mg/kg
combination of emodepside and praziquantel against mature and imma-
ture Ancylostoma tubaeforme in domestic cats, Parasitof Res 97:S51, 2005a.
body weight for praziquantel.
Altreuther G,Buch J, Chals ,t al: Fildealuationof theffcacy and
Both combination products are approved for the treat-
safety of emodepside/praziquantel spot-on solution against naturally
ment and control of tapeworm, A. perfoliata; large stron-
acquired nematode and cestode infections in domestic cats, Parasitof
 gyles, adult and migrating larval stages of S. vulgaris, adult
Res 97:S58, 2005b.
Andersen FL, Conder GA, Marsland WP: Efficacy of injectable and tablet
and migrating tissue stages S. edentatus, adult T. brevicauda,
formulations of praziquantel against mature Echinococcus granulosus,
adult T. serratus, adult smallstrongyles, Cyathostomum spe-
Arm I Vet Res 39:1861, 1978.
cies (C. catinatum and C. pateratum), Cylicostephanus spe-
Andersen FL, Conder GA, Marsland WP: Efficacy of injectable and tablet
cies (C. calicatus, C. goldi, C. longibursatus, and C. minutus),
formulations of praziquantel against immature Echinococcus granulosus,
Cylicocyclus species, (C. insigne, C. leptostomum, and C.
A I Vet Res 40:700, 1979.
Anderson PJS, Marais FS: The control of adult parasitic nematodes of
nassatus), Coronocyclus species (C. coronatus, C. labiatus,
cattle with morantel tartrate, I S Afr Vet Assoc 46:325, 1975.
C. labratus, and Gyalocephalus capitatus); adult and larval
Andrews P, Thomas H, Pohlke R, Seubert J: Praziquantel, Med Res Rev
ascarids, P. equorum, adult and larval pinworms, O. equi;
3:147, 1983.
adult hairworms, T. axei; stomach worms, H. muscae; and
Anon: New Quest Gel dewormer and boticide, I Equine Vet Sci 17:406, 1997a.
botfly larvae, G. intestinalis, and G. nasalis. It seems to be
Arena JP, Liu KK, Paress PS, Cully DF: Avermectin-sensitive chloride
channels induced by Caenorhabditis elegans RNA in Xenopus oocytes,
particularly effective against encysted small strongyles. The
Mol Pharmacol 40:368, 1991.
moxidectin combination products are safe for use in horses
Arends JJ, Skogerboe TL, Ritzhaupt LK: Study one: duration of effcacy
older than 6 months of age; they have not been tested in
of doramectin and jvermectin against Sarcoptes scabiei var. suis.
mares during breeding, gestation, and lactation or in breed-
In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the American Association
ing stallions.
of Veterinary Parasitologists, Reno, Nev, 1997a.
Arends J, Skogerboe TL, Ritzhaupt LK: Study two: duration of efficacy of
doramectin and ivermectin against Sarcoptes scabiei var. suis. In
Pyrantel and Prazlquantel
Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the American Association of
Two-way combinations of praziquantel and pyrantel are
Veterinary Parasitologists, Reno, Nev, 1997b.
approved for use in dogs (Virbantel) and for cats and kit-
Arnaud JP, Consalvi PJ: Evaluation of acute oral tolerance of fipronil and
excipient and the tolerance of Frontline Top Spot in cats and dogs.
tens (Drontal). The dog product is formulated to deliver 5
In Proceedings of the North American Veterinary Conference, Orlando,
 mg of praziquantel and 5 mg of pyrantel pamoate per kilo-
Fla, 1997a.
gram of body weight. A single dose is given to dogs to
Arnaud JP, Consalvi PJ: Investigative studies to evaluate the safety of
remove tapeworm, D. caninum, T. pisiformis; hookworm,
Frontline Top Spot treatment for dogs and cats. In Proceedings of the
A. caninum, A. braziliense, U. stenocephala; and round-
North American Veterinary Conference,Orlando,Fla,1997b.
Arther R, Bowman D, Slone R, Travis LE: Imidacloprid plus moxidectin
worm, T. canis, T. leonina.
topical solution for the prevention of heartworm disease (Dirofilaria
The cat product is formulated to deliver 5 mg of prazi-
immitis) in dogs, Parasitol Res 97:S76, 2005.
quantel and 20 mg of pyrantel pamoate per kilogram. A
Arther RG, Cunningham J, Dorn H, et al: Effcacy of imidacloprid for
single dose is given to cats and kittens to remove tape-
removal and control of fleas (Ctenocephalides felis) on dogs, Am I Vet
worms, D. caninum, T. taeniaeformis; hookworm, A. tubae-
Res 58:848, 1997.
 forme; and roundworm, T. cati. This combination product
Arundel JH: Chemotherapy of gastrointestinal helminths. In Vanden
Bossche H, Thienpoint D, Janssens PG, eds: Chemotherapy of gastroin-
should not be used in kittens under 1.5 pounds in body
testinal helrminths, New York, 1985, Springer-Verlagr.
weight or younger than 4 weeks of age.
Aubry ML, Cowell P, Davey MJ, Shevde S: Aspects of the pharmacology
of a new anthelmintic: pyrantel, Br J Pharmacof 38:332, 1970.
Pyrantel, Prazlquantel, and Febantel
 Baker NF, Fisk RA: Levamisole as an anthelmintic in calves, Am J Vet Res
 A three-way combination of febantel, praziquantel, and py-
33:1121, 1972.
Barr S: Enteric protozoal infections. In Greene C, ed: Infectious diseases
 rantel (Drontal Plus) is available in the United States. This
of the dog and cat, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier.
product is formulated to deliver 25 to 35 mg of febantel, 5
Barr SC, Bowman DD, Heller RL, Erb HN: Efficacy of albendazole against
to 7 mg of praziquantel, and 5 to 7 mg of pyrantel pamoate
giardiasis in dogs, Amm I Vet Res 54:926, 1993.
per kilogram. A single dose is given to dogs to remove
Bater AK: Effcacy of oral milbemycin against naturally acquired heart-
tapeworm, D. caninum, T. pisiformis, E. granulosus; hook-
worm infection in dogs. In Otto GF, ed: Proceedings of the Heartworm
Symposium "89, Charleston, SC, 1989, American Heartworm Society.
worm, A. caninum, U. stenocephala; roundworm, T. canis,
Bayley AJ: Compendium of veterinary products, Port Huron, Mich, 2008,
T. leonina; and whipworm, T. vulpis (Bowman and Arthur,
 North American Compendiums.
1993; Cruthers, Slone, and Arthur, 1993). This combination
Behm CA, Bryant C: Anthelmintic action: a metabolic approach, Vet
 is effective against the nematodes when given in a single
Parasitol 5:39, 1979 (review).
Bello TR, Laningham ET: A controlled trial evaluation of three oral dosages
oral dose. Febantel alone requires three daily doses to
of moxidectin against equine parasites, I Equine Vet Sci 14:483, 1994.
be effective in monogastric animals. This combination
Bennett DG: Clinical pharmacology of ivermectin, I Am Vet Med Assoc
should not be used in pregnant dogs, in dogs less than
189:100, 1986.
2 pounds in body weight, or in puppies younger than
Biehl LG: Anthelmintics for swine, Vet Clin North A Food Anim Pract
3 weeks of age.
2:481, 1986.
288
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
Birckel P, Cochet P, Benard P, et al: Cutaneous distribution of l4C-fipronil in
Bradley RE: Dose titration and efficacy of milbemycin oxime for prophy-
the dog and in the cat following a spot-on administration. In Proceedings
laxis against Dirofilariua immitis infection in dogs. In Proceedings of the
of the Third World Congress of Veterinary Dermatology, Edinburgh, 1996.
Heartworm Symposium "89, Charleston, SC, 1989, American Heartworm
 Bishop BF, Bruce CI, Evans NA, et al: Selamectin: a novel broad-spectrum
Society.
endectocide for dogs and cats, Vet Parasitof 91:163, 2000.
Brown SA, Barsanti JA: Diseases of the bladder and urethra In Ettinger SJ,
Blagburn BL, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, Vaughan JL: Anthelmintic efficacy
ed:Textbook ofveteinaryinteamedcine,Philadelphia,1989,aus.
of ivermectin in naturall parasitized cats, Amm J Vet Res 48:670, 1987.
Brunton L: Goodman and Gilman's the pharmacological basis of therapeu-
Blagburn BL, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, et al: Efficacy of milbemycin oxime
tics, New York, 2006, McGraw-Hill.
against naturally acquired or experimentally induced Ancylostoma spp.
Buck WB: Toxicity of pesticides in livestock. In Pimental D, Hanson AA,
and Trichuris vulpis infections in dogs, Am J Vet Res 53:513, 1992b.
eds: CRC handbook of pest management in agricuiture,Boca Raton, Fla,
Blagburn BL, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, et al: Milbemycin: efficacy and
1991, CRC Press.
toxicity in beagle and collie dogs. In Otto GF, ed: Proceedings of the
 Burke TM, Roberson EL: Critical studies of fenbendazole suspension
Heartworm Symposium "89, Charleston, SC, 1989, American Heartworm
(10%) against naturally occurring helminth infections in dogs, Am J
Society.
Vet Res 39:1799, 1978.
 Blagburn BL, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, et al: Post-adulticide milbemycin
 Burke TM, Roberson EL: Use of fenbendazole suspension (10%) against
oxime microflaricidal activity indogs natwrally infected with Droflra
experimental infections of Toxocara canis and Ancylostoma caninurm in
immitis. In Soll MD, ed: Proceedings of the Heartworm Symposium
beagle pups, Am I Vet Res 40:552, 1979.
'92, Austin, Texas, 1992a, American Heartworm Society.
Callinan APL, Barton NJ: Efficacies of thiabendazole and levamisole
Blagburn BL, Hendrix CM, Vaughan JL, et al: Effcacy of milbemycin
against sheep nematodes in Western Victoria, Aust Vet I55:255, 1979.
oxime against Ancyfostoma tubaeforme in experimentally infected cats.
Campbell WC: Benzimidazoles: veterinary uses, Parasitof Today 6:130, 1990.
In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the American Association of
Campbell WC: Ivermectin and abametin, New York, 1989, Springer-Verlag.
Veterinary Parasitologists, Boston,1992c.
Campbell WC, Rew RS: Chemotherapy of parasitic diseases, New York,
Blagburn BL, Lindsay DS, Vaughan JL, et al: Prevalence of canine parasites
1985, Plenum.
based on fecal floatation, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 18:483, 1996.
Case IL, Tanner PA, Keister DM, et al: A clinical field trial of melarsomine
Blagbwrn BL, Paul AJ, etal: Safety of moxidectin canine SR(sustained release)
dihydrochloride (RM340) in dogs with severe (class 3) heartworm
injectable in ivermectin-sensitive Collies and in naturall infected mongrel
disease. In Proceedings of the Heartworm Symposium "95, Auburn, Ala,
dogs. In Seward RL, ed: Proceedings of the 1Oth American Heartworm Sym-
1995, American Heartworm Society.
posium, San Antonio, Texas, 2001, American Heartworm Society.
Charles S, Altreuther G, Reinemeyer C, et al: Evaluation of the effcacy of
Boch J, Gobel E, Heine J, Erber M: [Isospora infection in the dog and cat],
emodepside + praziquantel topical solution against cestode (Dipylidium
Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr 94:384, 1981.
caninum, Taenia taeniaformis, and Echinococcus multilocularis) infec-
Bodri MS, Nolan TJ, Skeeba SJ: Safety of milbemycin (A3-A4 oxime)
tions in cats, Parasitol Res 97:S33, 2005.
in chelonians, J Zoo Widl Med 24:17l, 1993.
Chatellier K: Nitenpyram, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 23:748, 2001.
Bogan J, Armour J: Anthelmintics for ruminants, Int J Parasitof 17:483, 1987.
Ciordia H, McCampbell HC: Anthelmintic activity of morantel tartrate in
Boreham PFL, Phillips RE, Shepherd RW: The sensitivity of Giardia intes-
calves, Amm J Vet Res 34:619, 1973.
tinalis to drugs in vitro, I Antimicrob Chemother 14:449, 1984.
Clark JN, Daurio CP, Barth DW, Batty AF: Evaluation of a beef-based
Bourdeau P, Blumstein P, Ibisch C: Treatment of sarcoptic mange in
 chewable formulation of pyrantel against induced and natural infections 
the dog with milbemycin oxime: comparison of four protocols.
of hookworms and ascarids in dogs, Vet Parasitol 40:127, 1991.
In Proceedings of the 14th Annual Congress of the European Society of
Clark IN, Daurio CP, Plue RE, et al: Efficacy of jvermectin and pyrantel
Veterinary Dermatology,Pisa, Italy,1997.
pamoate combined in a chewable formulation against heartworm,
Bowman DD: Anthelmintis for dogs and cats effective against nematodes
hookworm, and ascarid infections in dogs, Am I Vet Res 53:517, 1992.
and cestodes, Commpend Cont Educ Pract Vet 14:597, 1992.
Clark IN, Pulliam JD, Daurio CP: Safety study of a beef-based chewable
Bowman DD: Georgis’ parasitology for veterinarians, Philadelphia, 2003,
tablet formulation of ivermectin and pyrantel pamoate in growing dogs,
Saunders.
pups and breeding adult dogs, Am I Vet Res 53:608, 1992.
Bowman DD, Arthur RG: Laboratory evaluation of Drontal plus (febantel/
Coats IR: Insecticide mode of action, San Diego, 1982, Academic Press.
praziquantel/pyrantel) tablets for dogs. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Coles GC: The biochemical mode of action of some modern anthelmintics,
Meeting of the American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists,
Pestic Sci 8:536, 1977.
Minneapolis, 1993.
Coles GC, East JM, et al: The mechanism of action of the anthelmintic
 Bowman DD, Johnson RB, Ulrich ME, et al: Effects of long-term admin-
levamisole, Gen Pharmacof 6:309, 1975.
istration of ivermectin or milbemycin oxime on circulating microflariae
Consalvi PJ, Arnaud JP, Jeannin P, et al: Safety of a 0.25% w/w fipronil
Ul 'suonnaju! wromleay yuajed ym sop ut erwauashue aseied pue
solution (Frontline Spray) in dogs and cats: results of a pharmacovig-
Soll MD, ed: Proceedings of the Heartworm Symposium "92, Austin,
ilance survey one year after launch. In Proceedings of the 4ist Annual
Texas, 1992, American Heartworm Society.
Meeting of theAmerican Association ofVeterinaryParasitologists,
 Bowman DD, Johnson RC, Hepler DI: Effects of milbemycin oxime on
Louisville, 1996.
adult hookworms in dogs with naturally acquired infections, Am J Vet
Conway DP, De Goosh C, Arakawa A: Anthelmintic efficacy of morantel
Res 51:487, 1990.
tartrate in cattle, Amm J Vet Res 34:621, 1973.
Bowman DD, Kato S, Fogarty EA: Effects of ivermectin otic suspension on
Cornwell RL, Jones RM: Critical tests in the horse with the anthelmintic
egg hatching of the cat ear mite, Otodectes cynotis, in vitro, Vet Ther
Pyrantel tartrate, Vet Rec 82:483, 1968.
2:311, 2001.
Correa WM, Correa CNM, Langoni H, et al: Canine isosporosis, Canine
Bowman DD, Lin DS, Johnson RC, Hepler DI: Effects of milbemycin
Pract 10:44, 1983.
unydaous muuu pue unu muosoouy npe uo auxo
Corwin RM, Green SP, Keefe TI: Dose titration and confirmation tests for
dogs with experimentally induced infections, Am J Vet Res 52:64, 1991.
 determination of cesticidal efficacy of epsiprantel in dogs, Am J Vet Res
Bowman DD, Parsons JI, Grieve RB, Hepler DI: Effects of milbemycin on
50:1076, 1989.
adult Toxocara canis in dogs with experimentally induced infection, Am
Courtney C, Zeng Q, Maler M: The effect of chronic administration of
I Vet Res 49:1986, 1988.
milbemycin oxime and jvermectin on microfilaremias in heartworm
Boy MG, Six RH, Thomas CA, et al: Efficacy and safety of selamectin
infected dogs. In Seward R, ed: Recent advances in heartworm disease:
against fleas and heartworms in dogs and cats presented as veterinary
Symposium "98, American Heartworm Society, Tampa, Fla, May l-3,
patients in North America, Vet Parasitol 91:233, 2000.
1998, American Heartworm Society.
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
289
Craig T, Scrutchfield W, Thompson J, et al: Comparison of anthelmintic
Dryden M, Magid-Denenberg T, Bunch S, et al: Control of fleas on dogs
activity of pyrantel, praziquantel, and nitazoxanide against
and cats and in homes with the combination of oral lufenuron and
Anoplocephala perfoliata in horses, I Equine Vet Sci 23:68, 2003.
nitenpyram, Vet Ther 2:208, 2001.
Craig TM, Hatfield TA, Pankavich JA, Wang GT: Efficacy of moxidectin
Dryden M, Payne P, Lowe A, et al: Efficacy of a topically applied formu-
against an ivermectin resistant strain of Haemonchus contortus in sheep.
a ea e ee e ay see see uo aou jo uo
Vet Parasitol 41:329, 1992.
production and hatch, and adult flea emergence, Vet Parasitof
Craig TM, Shepherd E: Efficacy of albendazole and levamisole in sheep
150:263, 2007.
against Thysanosoma actinoides and Haermonchus contortus from the
Dubey J, Greene C: Enteric coccidiosis. In Greene C, ed: Infectious diseases
Edwards Plateau, Texas, Am J Vet Res 4l:425, 1980.
of the dog and cat, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier.
Cramer LG, Eagleson JS, Farrington DO: The use of eprinomectin pour on
Dubey J, Lappin M: Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis. In Greene C, ed:
formulations against endoparasite infections in cattle. Procedings of the
Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier.
16th International Conference of the World Association for the Advancement
Dubey IP: Intestinal protozoa infections, Vet Clin North Amm Smalf Anim
of Veterinary Parasitology, Sun City, South Africa, Aug 10-15, 1997.
Pract 23:37, 1993.
Cribb AE, Lee BL, Trepanier LA, Spielberg SP: Adverse reactions to sul-
Dubey IP, Miller TB, Sharma SP: Fenbendazole for treatment of Paragonimus
phonamide and sulphonamide-trimethoprim antimicrobials: clinical
kellicottinfection in dogs,JAm Vet Med Assoc 174:835, 1979.
syndromes and pathogenesis, Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 15:9, 1996.
Dunbar MR, Foreyt WJ: Prevention of coccidiosis in domestic dogs and
Cruthers L, Bock E: Evaluation of how quickly imidacloprid kills fleas on
captive coyotes (Canis fatrans) with sulfadimethoxine-ormetoprim
dogs, Commpend Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:27, 1997.
combination, Am I Vet Res 46:1899, 1985.
Cruthers LR, Slone RL, Arthur RG: Efficacy of Drontal plus (praziquantel/
Dzimianski MT, McCall IW, McTier TL, et al Preliminary results of the efficacy
Pyrantel/febantel) tablets for removal of Ancylostoma caninurm,
of RM 340 administered seasonally to heartworm antigen and microfilaria
Uncinaria stenocephala,and Toxascaris leonina. In Proceedings of the
positive dogs living outdoors in a heartworm endemic area In Proceedings of
38th Annual Meeting of the American Association of Veterinary
the Heartworm Symposium '92, Austin, Texas, 1992, American Heartworm
Parasitologists, Minneapolis, 1993.
Society.
Cunningham J, Everett R: Efficacy of imidacloprid on large dogs, Compend
EaglesonJHolste J,KunkleN,etal Thefcacyof tpically apld
Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:28, 1997.
eprinomectin for treatment of Choroptes bovis infestations.
Cunningham J, Everett R, Arthur RG: Effects of shampooing or water
In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference of the World
exposure on the initial and residual efficacy of imidacloprid, Compend
Association for the Advancement of Veterinary Parasitology, Aug 10-15,
Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:29, 1997a.
1997.
Cunningham J, Everett R, Hunter IS, et al: Residual efficacy of Frontline
Eagleson JS, Holste JE, Pollmeier M: Efficacy of topically applied eprino-
Top Spot for the control of fleas and ticks in the dog. In Proceedings of
mectin against the biting louse Damalinia (Bovicofa) bovis. In
the North American Veterinary Conference, Orlando, Fla, 1997b.
Proceedings ofthe16thInternationalConference oftheWorld
Cunningham J, Everett R, Hunter JS, et al: Residual efficacy of Frontline 
Association for the Advancement of Veterinary Parasitology, Aug 10-15,
Top Spot for the control of fleas in the cat. In Proceedings of the North
1997.
American Veterinary Conference, Orlando, Fla, 1997c.
Easter L: Clinical update: equine protozoal myeloencephalitis (EPM)
Curr C: The effect of dermally applied levamisole against the parasitic
prevention, Vet Forum 24:54, 2007.
nematodes of cattle, Aust Vet I 53:425, 1977.
Eddi C, Bianchin I, Honer MR, et al: Effcacy of doramectin against field
E ut ahueu odooes iean o Aeds jquoudy luaad sz'o jo asn id sin
nematode infections of cattle in Latin America, Vet Parasitof 49:39, 1993.
litter of five week old puppies, Vet Rec 139:43, 1996.
English PB,Sprent IFA: The large roundworms of dogs and cats:effectiveness
DeLay R, Lacoste E, Delprat S, Blond-Riou F: Pharmacokinetics of meta-
of piperazine salts against immature Toxocara canis in prenatally infected
flumizone in the plasma and hair of cats following topical application,
puppies, Aust Vet I 4l:50, 1965.
Vet Parasitol 150:258, 2007a.
-eaa oi Apnis aagessau uy ije ia 'd lauuel 'f weysuruun y nanang
DeLay R, Lacoste E, Mezzasalma T, Blond-Riou F: Pharmacokinetics of
uate the effect of water immersion or shampooing on the efficacy of
metaflumizone and amitraz in the plasma and hair of dogs following
Frontline Top Spot. In Proceedings of the North American Veterinary
topical application, Vet Parasitol 150:251, 2007b.
Conference, Orlando, Fla, 1997.
DiPetro JA, Todd KS: Anthelmintics used in treatment of parasitic infec-
Eyre P: Some pharmacodynamic effects of the nematodes: methyridine,
tions of horses, Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 3:1, 1987.
tetramisole and pyrantel, I Pharm Pharmacol 22:26, 1970.
Dobson P, Tinembart O, Fisch R, Junquera P: Efficacy of nitenpyram as a
Eysker M, Boersema JH: The efficacy of moxidectin against Dutyocauius
 systemic flea adulticide in dogs and cats, Vet Rec 147:709, 2000.
viviparus in cattle, Vet Q 14:79, 1992.
Dow SC, LeCouteur RA, Poss ML, Beadleston D: Central nervous system
FDAH: Risk Minimization Action Plan (RiskMAP) for Proheart 6
toxicosis associated with metronidazole treatment of dogs: Five cases
(Moxidetin) Sustained Release Injectable for Dogs Fort Dodge Animal
(1984-1987), I Arm Vet Med Assoc 195:365, 1989.
Health, 2008, Pharmaceutical Research & Development, PO Box 5366,
 Downey NE: Controlled trials of the anthelmintic oxfendazole in ewes and
Princeton, NI 08543-5366.
lambs naturally infected with gastrointestinal nematodes, Vet Rec
Fest C, Schmidt KJ: The chemmistry of organophosphorus pesticides, ed 2,
101:260, 1977.
New York, 1982, Springer-Verlag.
Drudge JH, Lyons ET, Tolliver BS, et al: Further clinical trials on strongyle
Fourie L, Kok D, duPlessis A, Rugg D: Efficacy of a novel formulation of
control with some contemporary anthelmintics, Equine Pract 3:27, 1981a.
metaflumizone plus amitraz for the treatment of demodectic mange in
Drudge JH, Lyons ET, Tolliver SC: Benzimidazole resistance of equine
dogs, Vet Parasitof 150:268, 2007a.
strongyles—critical tests of six compounds against population B,
Fourie L, Kok D, duPlessis A, Rugg D: Efficacy of a novel formulation of 
Arm I Vet Res 40:590, 1979.
metaflumizone plus amitraz for the treatment of sarcoptic mange in
Drudge JH, Lyons ET, Tolliver SC: Clinical trials comparing oxfendazole
dogs, Vet Parasitof 150:275, 2007b.
with oxibendazole and pyrantel for strongyle control in thoroughbreds fea-
Fox L, Saravolatz L: Nitazoxanide: a new thiazolide antiparasitic agent,
turing benzimidazole-resistant small strongyles, Equine Pract 7:23, 1985.
Clin Infect Dis 40:1173, 2005.
Drudge JH, Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Kubis JIE: Clinical trials of oxibendazole
Frayha GJ, Smyth JD, Gobert IG, Savel J: The mechanisms of action
for control of equine internal parasites, Mod Vet Pract 62:679, 1981b.
of antiprotozoal and anthelmintic drugs in man, Gen Pharmacol 28:
Drudge JH, Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, et al: Pyrantel in horses, clinical trials
273, 1997.
with emphasis on a paste formulation and activity on benzimidazole-
Freedom of information summary for Marquis (NADA 14l-188), 2001.
resistant small strongyles, Vet Med Smafl Anim Clin 77:957, 1982.
Available at: www.fda.gov/cvm/efoi. Accessed 2002.
290
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
Fris C, Bjoern H: Pharmacokinetics of doramectin and jvermectin in
Hassall KA: The cheristry of pesticides: their metabolism, mode of action,
swine. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the American
and uses in crop protection, London, 1982, MacMillan Press.
Association of Veterinary Parasitofogists, Reno, Nev, 1997.
Hayes WJ, Laws ER: Handbook of pesticide toxicology, New York, 1991,
Furr M, Kennedy T: Cerebrospinal fluid and serum concentrations of
Academic Press.
ponazuril in horses, Vet Ther 2:232, 2001.
Heaney K, Lindahl R: Safety of topically applied metaflumizone spot-
Furr M, Kennedy T, MacKay R, et al: Effcacy of ponazuril 15% oral paste as
on formulation for flea control in cats and kittens, Vet Parasitof
a treatment for equine protozoal myeloencephalitis, Vet Ther 2:215, 2001.
150:233, 2007b.
Furr M, McKenzie H, Savill W, et al: Prophylactic administration of
Hellmann K, Adler K, Parker L, et al: Evaluation of the efficacy and safety
ponazuril reduces clinical signs and delays seroconversion in horses
 of a novel formulation of metaflumizone in cats naturally infested with
challenged with Sarcocystis neurona, J Parasitol 92:637, 2006.
fleas in Europe, Vet Parasitof 150:246, 2007a.
Gant DB, Chalmers AE, Wolff MA, et al: Mode of action of fipronil.
Hellmann K, Adler K, Parker L, et al: Evaluation of the efficacy and safety
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the American Association
of a novel formulation of metaflumizone plus amitraz in dogs naturally
of Veterinary Parasitologists, Louisville, 1996.
infested with fleas and ticks in Europe, Vet Parasitof 150:239, 2007b.
Garfield RA, Reedy LM: The use of oral milbemycin oxime (Interceptor)
Hempel K, Hess F, Bogi C, et al: Toxicological properties of metaflumizone,
in the treatment of chronic generalized canine demodicosis, Vet
Vet Parasitol 150:190, 2007b.
Dermatol 3:231, 1992.
Hendrickx MO, Anderson L, Boulard C, et al: Effcacy of doramectin
Gargala G, Delaunay A, Pitel P: In vitro effcacy of nitazoxanide and its
against warble fly larvae (Hypoderma bovis), Vet Parasitof 49:75, 1993.
metabolites tizoxanide and tizoxanide glucuronide against Sarcocystis
Holzmer S, Hair J, Dryden M, et al: Efficacy of a novel formulation of
neurona. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the American
metaflumizone for the control of fleas (Ctenocephalides felis) on cats,
Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, Boston, 2001.
Vet Parasitof 150:219, 2007.
Gemmell MA, Johnstone PD, Oudemansi G: The effect of praziquantel on
Hopkins TJ: Imidacloprid: Ctenocephalides felis control on dogs under
Echinococcus granulosus, Taenia hydatigena and Taenia ovis infections in
field conditions in Australia, Commpend Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:25, 1997.
dogs, Res Vet Sci 23:121, 1977.
Hopkins TJ, Kerwick C, Gyr P, et al: Efficacy of imidacloprid to remove
Gemmell MA, Johnstone PD, Oudemans G: The effect of route of admin-
and prevent Ctenocephalides felis infestations on dogs and cats, Compend
 istration on the efficacy of praziquantel against Echinococcus granulosus
Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:1l, 1997.
infections in dogs, Res Vet Sci 29:131, 1980.
Hunter JIS, Keister DM, Jeannin P: A comparison of the tick control effi-
Georgi JR, Slauson DO, Theorides VJ: Anthelmintic activity of albendazole
cacy of Frontline spray treatment against the American dog tick and
against Filaroides hirthi lungworms in dogs, Am I Vet Res 39:803, 1978.
brown dog tick. In Proceedings of the 4ist Meeting of the American
Gibson TE: Critical tests of piperazine adipate as an equine anthelmintic,
Assciation of Veterinary Parasitologists, Louisville, 1996a.
Br Vet I 113:90, 1957.
Hunter JS, Keister DM, Jeannin P: The effect of fipronil treated dog hair
Gilman AG, Rall TW, Nies AS, et al, eds: Goodman and Giman's the
on the survival of the immature stages of the cat flea Ctenocephalides
pharmacological basis of therapeutics, New York, 1990, Pergamon.
felis. In Proceedings of the 4ist Meeting of the American College of
Gogolewski RP, Allerton GR, Pitt SR, et al: Effect of simulated rain, coat
Veterinary Internal Medicine, San Antonio, Texas, 1996b.
length and exposure to natural climatic conditions on the efficacy of a
Insecticide Resistance Action Committee (IRAC): IRAC Web page.
topical formulation of eprinomectin against endoparasites of cattle, Vet
Available at: www.irac-online.org. Accessed May 15, 2008.
Parasitol 69(1/2):95, 1997a.
Jacobs DE: Anthelmintics for dogs and cats, Int I Parasitof 17:51l, 1987a.
Gogolewski RP, Slacek B, Familton AS, et al: Efficacy of a topical formu-
Jacobs DE: Control of Toxocara canis in puppies: a comparison of screen-
lation of eprinomectin against endoparasites of cattle in New Zealand,
ing techniques and evaluation of a dosing programme, J Vet Pharmacof
N Z Vet I 45:l, 1997b.
Ther 10:23, 1987b.
Gonzales IC, Muniz RA, Farias A, et al: Therapeutic and persistent eff-
Jeannin P, Postal JM, Hunter J, et al: Fipronil: a new insecticide for flea
cacy of doramectin against Boophilus microplus in cattle, Vet Parasitof
control. In Proceedings of the British Small Animal Veterinary
49:107, 1993
Association, Birmingham, UK, 1994.
Goudie AC, Evans NA, Gration KAF, et al: Doramectin—a potent novel
Jernigan AD, McTier TL, Chieffo C, et al: Efficacy of selamectin against
endectocide, Vet Parasitof 49:5, 1993.
experimentally induced tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineus and Dermacentor
Greene CE, Cook JR, Mahaffey EA: Clindamycin for treatment of
variabiis) infestations of dogs, Vet Parasitof 9l:359, 2000.
Toxopiasma polymyositis in a dog, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 187:631, 1985.
 Jones RM, Logan NB, Weatherly AJ, et al: Activity of doramectin against
Grieve RB, Frank GR, Stewart VA, et al: Chemoprophylactic effects of
nematodes endoparasites of cattle, Vet Parasitof 49:27, 1993.
milbemycin oxime against larvae of Diroflaria immitis during prepatent
Kahn CM: The Merck veterinary manual, Whitehouse Station, NJ, 2005,
development, Arm I Vet Res 52:2040, 1991.
Merck.
Griffin L, Hopkins TJ, Kerwick C: Imidacloprid: safety of a new insec-
Keister DM, Dzimianski MT, McTier TL, et al: Dose selection and con-
ticidal compound in dogs and cats, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:21,
firmation of RM 340, a new filaricide for the treatment of dogs with
1997.
immature and mature Diroflaria immitis In Soll MD, ed: Proceedings of
Griffin L, Krieger K, Liege P: Imidacloprid: a new compound for control
the Heartworm Symposium ‘92, Austin, Texas, 1992, American
of fleas and flea-initiated dermatitis, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:
Heartworm Society.
17, 1997.
Keister DM, Tanner PA, Meo NJ: Immiticide: review of discovery,
Gunnarsson L, Moller L, Einarsson A, et al: Effcacy of milbemycin oxime
development and utility. In Proceedings of the Heartworm Symposium
in the treatment of nasal mite (Pneumonyssoides caninum) infection in
'95, Auburn, Ala, 1995, American Heartworm Society.
dogs. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual Congress of the European Society
Kennedy MJ, Phillips FE: Efficacy of doramectin against eyeworms
of Veterinary Dermatology, Pisa, Italy, 1997.
(Thelazia spp.) in naturally and experimentally infected cattle,
Guyonnet V, Johnson JK, Long PL: Studies on the stage of action of
Vet Parasitol 49:6l, 1993.
lasalocid against Eimeria tenella and Eimeria acervulina in the chicken.
ul aised jero %sl lunzeuod jo Aiajes :A lazias 'f maqdue 1 Xpauuay
Vet Parasitol 37:93, 1990.
horses, Vet Ther 2:223, 2001.
Harder A, Holden-Dye L, Walker R, Wunderlich F: Mechanisms of action
Kilgore RL, Williams ML, Benz GW, Gross SJ: Comparative efficacy of
of emodepside, Parasitof Res 97:S1, 2005.
clorsulon and albendazole against Fasciola hepatica in cattle, Am J Vet
Res 46:1553, 1985.
and their inhibition by the organophosphate anthelmintic haloxon,
Kirkpatrick CE, Farrell JP: Feline giardiasis: observations on natural and
Exp Parasitof 18:332, 1966.
induced infections, Am I Vet Res 45:2182, 1984.
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
291
Kirkpatrick CE, Megella C: Use of ivermectin in treatment of
Lyons ET, Drudge JH, Tolliver SC: Critical tests of three salts of pyrantel
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus and Toxocara cati infections in a cat, I Am
against internal parasites of the horse, Arm J Vet Res 35:1515, 1974.
Vet Med Assoc 190:1309, 1987.
Lyons ET, Drudge IH, Tolliver SC: Field tests of three salts of pyrantel
 Kirst HA, Creemer LC, Naylor SA, et al: Evaluation and development of
against internal parasites of the horse, Am J Vet Res 36:161, 1975.
spinosyns to control ectoparasites on catle and sheep, Curr Top Med
Lyons ET, Drudge JH, Tolliver SC, et al: Pyrantel pamoate: evaluating its
Chem 2:675, 2002.
activity against equine tapeworms, Vet Med 81:280, 1986.
 Klein JB, Bradley RE, Conway DP: Anthelmintic efficacy of pyrantel pam-
Lyons ET, Tollver SC, Drudge JH: Critical tests in equids with fenben-
oate against the roundworm, Toxocara canis, and the hookworm,
dazole alone of combined with piperazine: particular reference to activ-
Ancylostoma caninum, in dogs, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 73:101l, 1978.
ity on benzimidazole-resistant small strongyles, Vet Parasitof 12:91,
Krautmann MJ, Novotny MJ, DeKeulenaer K, et al: Safety of selamectin in
1983.
cats, Vet Parasitof 91:393, 2000.
Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JH, et al: Critical and controlled tests of
Kruckenberg SM, Meyer AD, Eastman WR: Preliminary studies on the
activity of moxidectin (CL301,423) against natural infections of internal
effect of praziquantel against tapeworms in dogs and cats, Vet Med
parasites of equids, Vet Parasitof 4l:255, 1992.
Small Anim Chin 76:689, 1981.
Aruruad :paan uomadei mau e jaueidisdg ian iamag dg raun
Lacey E: Mode of action of benzimidazoles, Parasitof Today 6:ll2, 1990.
efficacy studies in dogs and cats, Br Vet I 145:384, 1989.
Lappin MR, Greene CE, Winston S, et al: Clinical feline toxoplasmosis,
Marriner SE, Bogan JA: Pharmacokinetics of oxfendazole in sheep, Am J
J Vet Intern Med 3:139, 1989.
Vet Res 42:1143, 1981.
Lech P: Ponazuril, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 24:484, 2002.
Martin R: Modes of action of anthelmintic drugs, Vet J 154:ll, 1997.
Ledbetter MG: Storage considerations for thiacetarsemide sodium, J Am
pue saseied apoieau un rosssuen ienosnwoinan iio uien
VetMed Assoc185:753,1984
antinematodal drug action, Pharmacol Ther 58:130, 1993.
Lee RM, Hodsden MR: Cholinesterase activity in Haemmonchus contortus
McCall IW, Supakorndej P, et al: Evaluation of retroactive and adulticidal
and its inhibition by organophosphorus anthelmintics, Biochem
activity of moxidectin SR (sustained release) injectable formulation
Pharmacol 12:1241, 1963.
against Dirofilaria immitis infections in beagles. In Seward RL, ed:
-of Auds puoudyf %sz'o pfo Aommfg ie ia 'd uuueal 'f jeisod 's ureN]
Proceedings of the 1Oth American Heartworm Symposium, San Antonio,
mutation in the control ofa natural tick infestation on dogs, Birmingham,
Texas, 2001, American Heartworm Society.
UK, 1996, British Veterinary Dermatology Group, BSAVA.
McDougald LR, Roberson EL: Antiprotozoan drugs. In Booth NH,
Leneau H, Haig M, Ho I: Safety of larvicidal doses of fenbendazole in
McDonald LE, eds: Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, Ames,
horses, Mod Vet Pract 66:B17, 1985.
Iowa, 1988, Iowa State University Press.
Lichtensteiger CA, Dipietro JA, Paul AJ, et al: Duration of activity of
McKellar QA, Scott EW: The benzimidazole anthelmintics—a review, J Vet
doramectin and ivermectin against Ascaris suurm in experimentally
Pharmacol Ther 13:223, 1990.
infected pigs. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the
McTier TL, McCall JW, Dzimianski MT, et al: Prevention of heartworm
American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, Reno, Nev, 1997.
infection in cats by treatment with ivermectin at one month post-
Lindsay DS, Blagburn BL: Antiprotozoan drugs. In Adams HR, ed:
infection. In Sol, MD ed: Proceedings of the Heartworm Symposium
Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, Ames, Iowa, 2001, Iowa
'92, Austin, Texas, 1992, American Heartworm Society.
 State University Press.
McTier TL, Shanks DJ, Wren JA, et al: Efficacy of selamectin against
Linquist WD: Drug evaluation of pyrantel pamoate against Ancylostoma,
experimentally induced and naturally acquired infections of Toxocara
Toxocara, and Toxascaris in eleven dogs, Am J Vet Res 36:1387, 1975.
cati and Ancylostoma tubaeforme in cats, Vet Parasitol 9l:3ll, 2000a.
Liu LX, Weller PF: Antiparasitic drugs, N Engl I Med 334:1178, 1996.
McTier TL, Siedek EM, Clemence RG, et al: Efficacy of selamectin
Logan NB, Weatherley AJ, Jones RM: Activity of doramectin against
against experimentally induced and naturally acquired ascarid
nematode and arthropod parasites of swine, Vet Parasitol 66:87, 1997.
(Toxocara canis and Toxascaris leonina) infections in dogs, Vet
Logan NB, Weatherley AJ, Phillips FE, et al: Spectrum of activity of
Parasitof 91:333, 2000b.
doramectin against cattle mites and lice, Vet Parasitof 49:67, 1993.
Meyer EK: Adverse events associated with albendazole and other products
Lok JB, Knight DH: Macrolide effects on reproductive function in male
used for treatment of giardiasis, I Ar Vet Med Assoc 213:44, 1998.
and female heartworms. In Proceedings of the Heartworm Symposium
Mibemite Otic Sofution. Freedom of information summary for NADA
'95, Auburn, Ala, 1995.
141-163, 2000. Available at: www.fda.gov/cvm/efoi.
Lok JB, Knight DH, et al: Six-month prophylactic effcacy of an
Miller MW, Keister DM, Tanner PA, et al: Clinical efficacy and safety trial
injectable, sustained release formulation of moxidectin against
of melarsomine dihydrochloride (RM340) and thiacetarsemide in
Dirofilaria immitis infection. In Seward RL, ed: Proceedings of the 10th
dogs with moderate (class 2) heartworm disease. In Proceedings of
American Heartworm Symposium, San Antonio, Texas, 2001, American
the Heartworm Symposium "95, Auburn, Ala, 1995a, American
Heartworm Society.
Heartworm Society.
Lok JB, Knight DH, LaPaugh DA, et al Kinetics of microflaremia suppression
Miller WH, Scott DW, Cayatte SM, et al: Clinical efficacy of increased
-Bar onoeydod e aye pue suunp sop paausuu mrfon u!
dosages of milbemycin oxime for treatment of generalized demodicosis
men of milbemycin oxime. In Soll MD, ed: Proceedings of the Heartworm
in adult dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1581, 1995b.
 Syrposium *92, Austin, Texas, 1992, American Heartworm Society.
Miller WH, Scott DW, Wellington JR, Panit R: Clinical efficacy of milbe-
Londershausen M: Approaches to new parasiticides, Pestic Sci 48:269, 1996.
mycin oxime in the treatment of generalized demodicosis in adult dogs,
Loukas A, Hotez P: Chemotherapy of helminth infections. In Brunton L,
I Ar Vet Med Assoc 203:1426, 1993.
ed: Goodman e Gilman's the pharmacological basis of therapeutics, New
Morin D, Valdez R, Lichtensteiger C, et al: Efficacy of moxidectin 0.5%
York, 2006, McGraw-Hill.
'ies u! suooaju apoeuau painbse Aeneu isurese uo-nod
Lovell RA, Trammel HL, Beasley VR, et al: A review of 83 reports of
Vet Parasitol 65:75, 1996.
suspected toluene/dichlorophen toxicoses in cats and dogs, J Am
Moya-Borja GE, Muniz RA, Sanavria A, et al: Therapeutic and persistent
Anirm Hosp Assoc 26:652, 1990.
1against Dermatobia
Ihomminis in cattle,
Lyons ET, Drudge JH, La Bore DE, Tolliver SC: Controlled test of anthel-
Vet Parasitol 49:85, 1993a.
mintic activity of levamisole administered to calves via drinking water,
Moya-Borja GE, Oliveira CMB, Muniz RA, Goncalves LC: Prophylactic
subcutaneous injection or alflfa pellet premix, Am J Vet Res 36:777, 1975.
and persistent effcacy of doramectin against Cochliormyia horminivorax
Lyons ET, Drudge JH, La Bore DE, Tolliver SC: Field and controlled test
in cattle, Vet Parasitol 49:95, 1993b.
evaluations of levamisole against natural infections of gastrointestinal
Mueller R: Treatment protocols for demodicosis: an evidence-based
nematodes and lungworms in calves, Am I Vet Res 33:65, 1972.
review, Vet Dermatof 15:75, 2004.
292
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
Muser RK, Paul JW: Safety of fenbendazole use in cattle, Mod Vet Pract
Reinemeyer CR, Courtney CH: Anticestodal and antitrematodal drugs.
65:371, 1984.
In Adams HR, ed: Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, Ames,
Nelson DL, Allen AD, Mozier JO, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of adverse
Iowa, 2001b, Iowa State University Press.
reactions in cattle treated for grubs with a systemic insecticide, Vet Med
Roberson EL, Burke TM: Evaluation of granulated fenbendazole (22.2%)
Small Anim Clin 62:683, 1967.
against induced and naturally occurring helminth infections in cats,
 Nolan TJ, Niamatali S, Bhopale V, et al: Efficacy of a chewable formulation
Arm  Vet Res 41:1499, 1980.
of jvermectin against a mixed infection of Ancylostoma braziliense and
Roberson EL, Burke TM: Evaluation of granulated fenbendazole as a treat-
Ancylostoma tubaeforme in cats, Am J Vet Res 53:14ll, 1992.
ment for helminth infections in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 180:53, 1982.
National Opossum Society (NOS): www.opossum.org. Accessed July 2, 2008.
 Roberson EL, Schad GA, Ambrose DL, et al: Efficacy of ivermectin against
Novotny MJ, Krautmann MJ, Ehrhart JC, et al: Safety of selamectin in
hookworm infections in cats. In Soll MD, ed: Proceedings of the
dogs, Vet Parasitol 91:377, 2000.
Heartworm Symposium "92, Austin, Texas, 1992, American Heartworm
Nylar Technical Bulletin, Minneapolis, 1997, McLaughlin Gormley King.
Society.
O'Handley RM, Olson ME, McAllister TA, et al: Efficacy of fenbendazole
Rugg D, Hair J: Dose determination of a novel formulation of metaflu-
for treatment of giardiasis in calves, Am I Vet Res 58:384, 1997.
mizone plus amitraz for control of cat fleas (Ctenocephalides felis felis)
Patterson JIM, Grenn HH: Hemorrhage and death in dogs following the
and brown dog ticks (Rhipicephalus sanguineus) on dogs, Vet Parasitof
administration of sulfaquinoxaline, Can Vet J 16:265, 1975.
150:203, 2007.
Paul AJ, Acre KE, Todd KS, et al: Efficacy of ivermectin against Dirofilari
Rugg D, Hair J, Everett R, et al: Confirmation of the effcacy of a novel
immitis in cats 30 and 45 days post-infection. In Soll MD, ed:
formulation of metaflumizone plus amitraz for the treatment and
Proceedings of the Heartworm Symposium "92, Austin, Texas, 1992,
control of fleas and ticks on dogs, Vet Parasitof 150:209, 2007.
American Heartworm Society.
Sabnis S, Zupan J, Gliddon M: Topical formulations of metaflumizone
Plapp FW: The nature, modes of action, and toxicity of insecticides. In
josnund saa 'ssop u suoniisaut yl pue ea iean oi zene snd
Pimentel D, ed: CRC handbook of pest management in agricufture, Boca
150:196, 2007.
Raton, Fla, 1991, CRC Press.
Saeki H, Ishii T, Ohta M, et al: Evaluation of anthelmintic efficacy of
Plumb DC: Plumb's veterinary drug handbook, Ames, Iowa, 2005,
 doramectin against gastrointestinal nematodes by fecal examination in
Blackwell.
cattle in Japan, I Vet Med Sci 57:1057, 1995.
Postal JM, Jeannin P, Consalvi PJ, et al: Efficacy of a 0.25% fipronil pump-
Salgado V: The mechanism ofaction of metafumizone and other veterinary
spray formulation against cat flea infestations (Ctenocephalides felis) in
ectoparasiticides, World Association for the Advancement of Veterinary
Cats. In Proceedings of the XIX World Congress of the Worid Smalf Animal
 Parasitologists, Fort Dodge Animal Health, 2007.
Veterinary Association, Durban, South Africa, 1994.
Salgado V, Hayashi J: Metaflumizone is a novel sodium channel blocker
Postal JM, LeNain S, Fillon F, et al: Efficacy of a 10% fipronil spot-on
insecticide, Vet Parasitof 150:182, 2007.
Sasaki Y, Kitagawa H, Murase S, et al: Susceptibility of rough-coated
 Birmingham, UK, 1996a, British Veterinary Dermatology Group, BSAVA.
collies to milbemycin oxime, Jpn I Vet Sci 52:1269, 1990.
 Postal JIM, LeNain S, Longo F, et al: Field efficacy of Frontline Top Spot in
Schenker R: Simulated home trials to compare nitenpyram flavored tablets
the treatment and control of flea infestation. In Proceedings of the World
in combination with Program (lufenuron) to Program alone for the
Congress of Veterinary Dermatology, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1996b.
o a y y- ui   s uo sf  ro pm
 Poynter D: A comparative assessment of the anthelmintic activity in horses
the American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, Salt Lake City,
of four piperazine compounds, Vet Rec 68:291, 1956.
2000.
Poynter D: Piperazine adipate as an equine anthelmintic, Vet Rec 67:159, 1955a.
Schenker R, Humbert-Droz E, Moyses EW, et al: Effcacy of nitenpyram
Poynter D: The efficacy of piperazine adipate administered in bran mash
against a flea strain with resistance to fipronil. In Forty-Fifth Annuar
to horses, Vet Rec 67:625, 1955b.
Meeting of the Amerian Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, Salt
Prichard RK: Anthelmintics for cattle, Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
Lake City, 2000.
2:489, 1986.
Schenker R, Luempert L, Barnett S: Efficacy of nitenpyram against fleas on dogs
 Prichard RK: The pharmacology of anthelmintics in livestock, Intl [
and cats in a clinical field study, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet, 23:12, 2001.
Parasitof 17:473, 1987.
Schenker R, Luempert LG, Barnett SH: Efficacy of nitenpyram against fleas
Pulliam JD, Seward RL, Henry RT, et al: Investigating ivermectin toxicity
on dogs and cats in a clinical field study. In Forty-Fijth Annual Meeting of
in Collies, Vet Med 80:33, 1985.
the American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, Salt Lake City, 2000.
Ranjan S, Trudeau C, Prichard RK, et al: Efficacy of moxidectin against
Schenker R, Tinembart O, Barnett S, et al: A brief introduction to niten-
naturally acquired nematode infections in cattle. Vet Parasitof 4l:227,
 Pyram: a new flea adulticide for cats and dogs, Compend Cont Educ
1992.
Pract Vet 23:4, 2001.
Rawlings CA, Raynaud JP, Lewis RE, Duncan JR: Pulmonary thromboem-
Schenker R, Tinembart O, Humbert-Droz E, et al: Comparative speed of
bolism and hypertension after thiacetarsemide vs melarsomine dihy-
kill between nitenpyram, fipronil, imidacloprid, selamectin, and cythio-
drochloride treatment of Diroflaria immitis infection in dogs, Am J
ate against adult Ctenocephalides felis (Bouche) on cats and dogs,
Vet Res 54:920, 1993.
Vet Parasitol 112:249, 2003.
 Reid JFS, Eagleson JS, Langholff WK: Persistent efficacy of eprinomectin
Schillhorn van Veen TW: Coccidiosis in ruminants, Compend Cont Educ
 pour-on against gastrointestinal and pulmonary nematodes in cattle.
Pract Vet 8:F52, 1986.
In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference of the World
Scholl PJ, Guillot FS, Wang GT: Moxidectin: systemic activity against
Association for the Advancement of Veterinary Parasitology,Sun City,
common cattle grubs (Hypoderma fineatum) (Diptera: Oestridae) and
South Africa, Aug 10-15, 1997.
trichostrongyle nematodes in cattle, Vet Parasitof 41:203, 1992.
Reinemeyer C, Charles S, Buch J, et al: Evaluation of the efficacy emodep-
 Seibert BP, Guerrero J, Newcomb KM, et al: Seasonal comparisons of ant-
side plus praziquantel topical solution against ascarid infections
helmintic activity of levamisole pour-on in cattle in the USA, Vet Rec
(Toxocara cati or Toxascaris leonina), Parasitol Res 97:S4l, 2005.
118:40, 1986.
 Reinemeyer CE, Courtney CH: Antinematodal Drugs. In Adams HR, ed:
Shanks DJ, McTier TL, Behan S, et al: The efficacy of selamectin in the
Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, Ames, Iowa, 200la, Iowa
'ssop uo aqps sadours jo suoeisaju paunbe Aeunieu jo juaea
State University Press.
Vet Parasitol 91:269, 2000a.
Reinemeyer CR: Treatment of parasites. In Bonogura JD, ed: Kirk's current
Shanks DJ, McTier TL, Rowan TG, et al: The efficacy of selamectin in the
treatment of naturally acquired aural infestations of Otodectes cynotis on
Saunders.
dogs and cats, Vet Parasitol 91:283, 2000b.
C H A P T' E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
293
Shanks DI, Rowan TG, Jones RL, et al: Efficacy of selamectin in the treat-
Tomlin CDS: The pesticide manual: α world compendium, Bath, UK, 2000,
ment and prevention of flea (Ctenocephalides felis felis) infestations on
 Farnham, British Crop Protection Council.
dogs and cats housed in simulated home environments, Vet Parasitof
91:213, 2000c.
(September), Rockville, Maryland, 1998, United States Pharmacopeial
 Sharp ML, Sepesi JP, Collins JA: A comparative critical assay on canine
Convention.
anthelmintics, Vet Med Smalfl Anim Clin 68:131, 1973.
United States Pharmacopeia (USP): Macrocyclic lactones (veterinary
Shoop WL, Demontigny P, Fink DW, et al: Efficacy in sheep and phar-
systemic). USP Veterinary Pharmaceutical Information Monograph,
macokinetics in cattle that led to the selection of eprinomectin as a
2006. Available at: www.usp.org. Accessed February 2008.
topical endectocide for cattle, Int I Parasitol 26:1227, 1996a.
Vercruysse J, Claerebout E, Dorny P, et al: Persistence of the efficacy of
Shoop WL, Egerton JR, Eary CH, et al: Eprinomectin: a novel avermectin
pour-on and injectable moxidectin against Ostertagia ostertagi and Dic-
for use as a topical endectocide for cattle, Int I Parasitof 26:1237, 1996b.
tyocaulus viviparus in experimentally infected cattle, Vet Rec 140(3):
Shoop WL, Mrozik H, Fisher MH: Structure and activity of avermectins
64-66, 1997a.
and milbemycins in animal health, Vet Parasitol 59:139, 1995.
Vercruysse J, Dorny P, Hong C, et al: Efficacy of doramectin in the pre-
 Six RH, Clemence RG, Thomas CA, et al: Efficacy and safety of selamectin
vention of gastrointestinal nematode infections in grazing cattle,
against Sarcoptesscabieion dogs and Otodetes cynotis on dogs and cats
Vet Parasitol 49:51, 1993.
 presented as veterinary patients, Vet Parasitof 9i:291, 200a.
Vercruysse J, Eysker M, Demeulenaere D, et al: Remanent effct of a 2%
Six RH, Sture GH, Thomas CA, et al: Effcacy and safety of selamectin
moxidectin gel on establishment of small strongyles. In Proceedings of the
against gastrointestinal nematodes in cats presented as veterinary
42ndAnnualMeeting oftheAmericanAssociation ofVeterinary
 patients, Vet Parasitol 91:321, 2000b.
Parasitologists, Reno, Nev, 1997b.
Slocombe O, Lake MC: Dose confirmation trial of moxidectin equine oral
Vercruysse J, Rew R: Macrocyclic lactones in antiparasitic therapy, New
gel against Gasterophius spp.in equines. In Proceedings of the 42nd
York, 2002, CAB International.
Annual Meeting of the American Association of Veterinary Parasitologists,
Vezzoni A, Genchi C, Raynaud JP: Adulticide efficacy of RM 340 in dogs with
Reno, Nev, 1997.
mild and severe natural infections. In Soll MD, ed: Proceedings ofthe 14th
Smart J: Amprolium for canine coccidiosis, Mod Vet Pract 52:41, 1971.
Annual Congress of the Heartworm Symposium 92, Austin, Texas, 1992,
Smith JA: Toxic encephalopathies in cattle. In Howard JL, ed: Current
American Heartworm Society.
veterinary therapy: food animal practice vol 2, Philadelphia, 1986,
Vincenzi P, Genchi C: Effcacy of fipronil (Frontline) against ear mites (Oto-
Saunders.
dectes cynotis)in dogs and cats.In Proceedings ofthe14th Annual Congress
Snyder DE, Floyd JG, DiPietro JA: Use of anthelmintics and anticoccidial
of the European Society of Veterinary Dermatofogy, Pisa, Italy, 1997.
compounds in cattle, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 13:1847, 1991.
 -asu! jaaou e jo juadoaaaa a 1ysiy g epeuek 'N nsek '1 eiem
 Snyder DE, Meyere J, Zimmermann AG, et al: Preliminary studies on the 
cide, dinotefuran, I Pestic Sci 30:122, 2005.
effectiveness of the novel pulicide spinosad, for the treatment and
Wallace DH, Kilgore RL, Benz GW: Clorsulon: a new fasciolicide, Mod Vet
control of fleas on dogs, Vet Parasitol 150:345, 2007.
Pract 66:879, 1985.
Speer CA: Coccidiosis. In Howard JL, Smith RA, eds: Current veterinary
Ware GW: Fundamentals of pesticides: α self instruction guide, ed 2, Fresno,
therapy 4: food animal practice, Philadelphia, 1999, Saunders.
Calif, 1986, Thompson.
 Stewart TB, Fox MC, Wiles SE: Doramectin efficacy against gastrointestinal
Ware GW: Pesticides, theory and application, San Francisco, 1983,
nematodes in pigs, Vet Parasitol 66:101, 1996a.
WH Freeman.
Stewart TB, Fox MC, Wiles SE: Doramectin efficacy against the kidney
Watson ADJ: Giardiasis and colitis in a dog, Austr Vet J 56:444, 1980.
worm Stephanurus dentatus in sows, Vet Parasitol 66:95, 1996b.
Weatherley AJ, Hong C, Harris TJ, et al: Persistent efficacy of doramectin
Stewart VA, Hepler DI, Grieve RB: Efficacy of milbemycin oxime in
against experimental nematode infections in calves, Vet Parasitof 49:45,
chemoprophylaxis of dirofilariasis in cats, Am I Vet Res 53:2274, 1992.
1993.
 Stokol T, Randolph JF, Nachbar S, et al: Development of bone marrow
Weil A, Birckel P, Bosc F, et al: Plasma, skin, and hair distribution of fipronil
toxicosis after albendazole administration in a dog and cat, I Am Vet
following topical administration to the dog and to the cat. In Proceedings of
Med Assoc 210:1753, 1997.
the North American Veterinary Conference, Orlando, Fla, 1997.
Takagi K, Hamaguchi H, Nishimatsu T, Konno T: Discovery of metaflu-
Wexler-Mitchell E: Ear mites in a 33-cat household, Vet Forum 18:57, 2001.
mizone, a novel semicarbazone insecticide, Vet Parasitof 150:177, 2007.
Wicks SR, Kaye B, Weatherley AJ, et al: Effect of formulation on the
Tanner PA, Hunter JS, Keister DM: An investigative study to evaluate the 
pharmacokinetics and efficacy of doramectin, Vet Parasitof 49:17, 1993.
effect of bathing of laboratory dogs on the efficacy of fipronil spray.
Williams JC, Barras SA, Wang GT: Efficacy of moxidectin against gastro-
In Proceedings of the 4ist Annual Meeting of the American Assciation of
intestinal nematodes of cattle, Vet Rec 13l:345, 1992.
Veterinary Parasitologists, Louisville, 1996.
Williams JC, Nault C, Ramsey RT, Wang GT: Efficacy of Cydectin moxidectin
Taylor SM, Kenny J: Comparison of moxidectin with ivermectin and
1% injectable against experimental infections of Dictyocaulus viviparous
pyrantel embonate for reduction of faecal egg counts in horses,
and Bunostomum phlebotommum superimposed on natural gastrointestinal
Vet Rec 137:516, 1995.
infections in calves, Vet Parasitof 43:293, 1992.
Thakur SA, Prezioso U, Marchevsky N: Efficacy of Droncit against
Witte S, Luempert L: Laboratory safety studies of nitenpyram tablets for
Echinococcus granulosus infection in dogs, Am J Vet Res 39:859, 1978.
the rapid removal of fleas on cats and dogs, Compend Cont Educ Pract
 Thomas H, Gonnert R: The efficacy of praziquantel against cestodes in
Vet 23:7, 2001.
cats, dogs, and sheep, Res Vet Sci 24:20, 1978.
Witte ST, Luempert LG, Goldenthal EI, et al: Safety of nitenpyram in dogs.
Thompson DR, Rehbein S, Loewenstein M, et al: Efficacy of eprinomectin
In Forty-Fijfth Annual Meeting of the American Association ofVeterinary
against Sarcoptes scabie in cattle. In Proceedings of the 16th Internationaf
Parasitologists, Salt Lake City, 2000a.
Conference of the Worid Associationfor the Advancement ofVeterinary
Witte ST, Luempert LG, Johnson BE, et al: Safety of nitenpyram in cats.
Parasitology, 1997.
In Forty-Fifth Annual Meeting of the American Association of Veterinary
Todd AC, Crowley J, Scholl P, Conway DP: Critical tests with pyrantel
Parasitofogists, Salt Lake City, 2000b.
 pamoate against internal parasites in dogs from Wisconsin, Vet Med
Wolstenholme A, Rogers A: Glutamate-gated chloride channels and the
Small Anim Clin 70:936, 1975.
mode of action of the avermectin/milbemycin anthelmintics,
Todd KS, Mansfield ME: Evaluation of four forms of oxfendazole against
Parasitology 131(Suppl):85, 2005.
nematodes of cattle, Arm I Vet Res 40:423, 1979.
Woodard GT: The treatment of organic phosphate insecticide poisoning
Tomizawa M, Casida IE: Neonicotinoid insecticide toxicology: mechan-
with atropine sulfate and 2-PAM (2-pyridine aldoxime methiodide),
isms of selective action, Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicof 45:247, 2005.
Vet Mfed 52:571, 1957.
294
C H A P T E R 6 Antiparasitic Drugs
Yazwinski TA, Greenway TE, Tilley W, et al: Efficacy of fenbendazole
Zimmer JF: Treatment of feline giardiasis with metronidazole, Cornelf Vet
against gastrointestinal nematode larvae in cattle, Vet Med Small
77:383, 1987.
Anim Chin 84:1899, 1989.
Zimmer IF, Burrington DB: Comparison of four protocols for the treatment
Yazwinski TA, Johnson EG, Thompson DR, et al: Nematocidal efficacy of 
of canine giardiasis, I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 22:168, 1986.
eprinomectin, delivered topically, in naturally infected cattle, Am J Vet
Zimmerman GL, Hoberg EP, Pankavich JA: Efficacy of orally administered
Res 58:612, 1997.
moxidectin against naturally acquired gastrointestinal nematodes in 
Yazwinski TA, Presson BL, Featherstone HE: Comparative anthelmintic effi-
cattle, Ar I Vet Res 53:1409, 1992.
cacies of fenbendazole, levamisole and thiabendazole in cattle, Agri-Practice 
6:4, 1985.
CHAPTER7
Diagnostic Parasitology
 For busy veterinarians it is necessary to achieve fairly accu-
FECAL EXAMINATION
rate identification of parasites with a reasonable expendi-
ture of effort. The conventional system is to take advantage
Qualitative Fecal Examination
of the site and host specificities of parasites and list them
Dlrect Smear
according to their customary locations in or on their cus-
The direct smear made by breaking up a very small particle
tomary hosts. With the use of this system, it is good to
of feces in a drop of saline is a simple, quick method. When
recognize that it must fail in abnormal cases. Whenever
examining outpatients, many small animal practitioners
doubt arises or the exact identity of a parasite is essential
routinely smear the feces adhering to the rectal thermom-
(e.g-, as for publication), recourse must be had to detailed
eter directly on a microscope slide. Use of a coverslip
a o e  a s 
improves the optics, subdues eddy currents, and helps pre-
The diagnostic categories used in the following discus-
vent soiling of the objective lens of the microscope. The use
sion do not adhere consistently to any particular level of
of saline rather than water prevents the lysis of fragile tro-
 taxonomic nomenclature. This is because the goals of typo-
phozoites of protozoa that are subject to distortion by
logic taxonomy differ from those of applied parasitology.
osmotic changes. Because the resulting suspension must
Taxonomists strive to arrange living organisms into ranks
be thin enough to read through, only a small particle of
and files in a way that, to their tastes at least, best displays
feces can be examined, but limited efficiency is the only
the phylogenetic relationships among them. However, the
shortcoming of this technique. Negative findings are incon-
       
clusive, but positive results are just as valid as those
 served by diagnostic categories that do not happen to coin-
 obtained with the more efficient concentration techniques.
cide consistently with any particular level of the taxono-
 In fact, the smear presents advantages over concentration
 mist's classification scheme. Therefore we identify an egg
techniques in dealing with delicate forms such as nematode
from one of several dozens of species of canine tapeworms
larvae and protozoan trophozoites, which may be distorted
as a taenid egg rather than as a Taenia pisiformis egg
or destroyed by concentration media, and with particularly
because it is practically impossible to carry the identifica-
heavy eggs that fail to float in them. Direct smears of fresh
tion of such eggs below the family level. Fortunately, all
fecal material also allow us to observe motility of amebas,
members of this particular family except Echirococcus
flagellates, nematode larvae, and the like. As a rule, the
respond in about the same way to anthelmintic therapy,
concentration techniques should supplement rather than
and the infective larvae of all develop in vertebrate inter-
supplant the smear, but in practice one or the other tech-
mediate hosts. Therefore the diagnostic category “taenid"
nique is adopted as a matter of routine.
is adequate to the needs of effective treatment and control.
 In another instance, the recognition of a worm as a member
Detectlng Paraslte Antlgens In Feces
of its particular phylum may suffice. For example, an
The detection of antigens in feces (coproantigens) by var-
acanthocephalan from a pig is almost certain to be
 aou uosq si sessun ades-uue so
Macracanthorhynchus hirudinaceus. In still other instances,
more routine. Methods have existed for some time for the
however, species identification is necessary. For example,
laboratory detection of parasite antigens in feces, particu-
the distinction between Toxocara canis and Toxascaris
larly those of Giardia and Cryptosporidium. Now the
leorira is important from the standpoints of both animal
method exists for the routine in-house detection of the
parasite control and public health.
cyst wall antigen of Giardia in the feces of dogs and cats
Unfortunately there are many important practical
using the IDEXX SNAP Giardia Test, and many labs now
 distinctions that transcend even the lowest levels of con-
run similar plate tests for submited veterinary samples.
ventional systematics. There exist infraspecific races of
The need to be able to distinguish the eggs of taenid
-d n     s 
tapeworms in dogs for the purpose of distinguishing the
city, antigenicity, and response to pharmacologic agents
dangerous eggs of Echinococcus granulosus and Echinococcus
yet, on morphologic grounds, fall into the same species.
multilocularis from the eggs of T. pisiformis and other
Here we must make our way with whatever criterion
Taenia species has led to the development of coproantigen
proves helpful.
detection enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs)
295
296
C H A P T E R 7  Diagnostic Parasitology
for these parasites. Thus it is possible to detect the antigens
the eggs and fecal debris, the former will float, whereas the
of this parasite in certain laboratories and to distinguish
latter will sink. In general, techniques based on the flotation
those of E. granulosus and E. multilocularis, as well as to
principle work well for nematode and cestode eggs and
distinguish them from those of Taeria species and other
n s  o  iq so und s
intestinal parasites and pathogens (Deplazes et al, 1999).
eggs and distort protozoan trophozoites and certain
It has also been shown that these types of antigen assays
nematode larvae and protozoan cysts beyond recognition.
can be used to follow experimental infections with echino-
Zinc sulfate (specific gravity 1.18) is superior to sucrose of
coccosis in dogs and to monitor treatment efficacy (Jenkins
equal density for floating protozoan cysts and nematode
et al, 2000). It appears that these assays are now good
larvae because it is slower to shrink and distort them.
enough to begin to be used routinely in surveys of canine
Feces puddling is by no means an exact science. The
populations for the presence of these parasites and perhaps
actual procedure followed is less important than a show
 to monitor the success of control programs.
of respect for the basic principles involved. A workable
 Coproantigens are being examined as to their usefulness
 procedure is outlined as follows:
in the diagnosis of bovine trichostrongylids. This could
1. Mix a teaspoonful or so of feces with enough water to
prove highly useful for prescreening cattle and other rumi-
make a semisolid suspension. Use a tongue depressor
nants for various drug-testing protocols. In cattle experi-
and a paper cup.
mentally infected with Ostertagia ostertagi, a coproantigen
2. Place two layers of single-sheet gauze over a second
capture ELISA gave very good results in experimentally
paper cup, and empty the fecal suspension into it.
 infected cattle, showing a rise over the course of the infection
Return the gauze with the solid waste to the first cup
(Agneessens, Claerebout, and Vercruysse, 2001); unfortu-
and discard.
 3. Pinch the rim of the second paper cup to form a
correlated with worm numbers at necropsy, but some cor-
pouring spout, and transfer contents to 15-mL
relation was evident. More recently promise has also been
centrifuge tubes.
found using an ELISA to look for Teladorsagia circumcincta
4. Centrifuge for 3 minutes, and decant the supernatant
in sheep in which cross-reactivity could be minimized by the
containing fats and dissolved pigments.
heat treating of the fecal sample (Johnson, Behnke, and
 5. Add concentrated sucrose solution (specific gravity 1.33)
Coles, 2004). There is every reason to believe that such
to 1 cm from the top of the tube, and resuspend the
tests are going to become more and more common, and
sediment with an applicator stick. Insert stopper, and mix
 perhaps routine, as they have become for Giardia.
by four or more inversions. The viscosity of the sugar
solution impedes mixing, but the solution must
Polymerase Chaln Reactlon
nevertheless be thoroughly mixed with the sediment.
The detection of various genetic markers for different
6. Centrifuge for 5 minutes. Without removing the tube
parasites found in feces is now being routinely done in the
from the centrifuge, pick up the surface film
case of several protozoa. The most commonly used are
 containing eggs and cysts by touching it gently with a
currently various assays for Cryptosporidium and Giardia
“glass nail" or wire loop. Transfer the surface film to
(e.g-, O'Handley et al, 2000; Xiao et al, 2001). This is being
a microscope slide, and add a coverslip. Variant:
driven mainly by the desire to determine the source of para-
Alternatively, after step 5 has been completed, the
sites that may have caused zoonotic infections in different
centrifuge tube may be filled to the brim with
waterborne outbreaks. More recently, work has begun on the
saturated sucrose solution and a coverslip applied to
detection of different trichostrongylid species (Schnieder,
the top. After centrifuging, remove the coverslip by
Heise, and Epe, 1999; Zarlenga et al, 2001). Once such
lifting it straight up and place it and its adherent film
work is incorporated into a quantitative assay, it may be
of sugar solution on a glass slide. This variant will not
 possible to determine, with DNA extracted from feces, the
work with fixed angle-head centrifuges.
relative abundance of different worms within the ruminant
7. Scan the slide under X 100 magnification. To avoid
host. The recent use of the reverse line blot hybridization
omission or overlap of fields, start by scanning along
method for the identification of horse strongyles, if applied
one edge of the coverslip from one corner to the
to feces of hosts and their respective helminths, would be a
other. Then shift one field width and continue
very powerful tool to aid in the diagnosis of infections in
scanning. The shift can be executed precisely by
most domestic animals (Traversa et al, 2007).
concentrating attention on any object that happens
to lie at or near the edge of the field and moving that
Flotatlon Concentratlon of Eggs and Cysts
object to the other edge with the mechanical stage
All flotation techniques take advantage of a difference in the
adjustment. As skill in identification is acquired, the
buoyancy of parasites relative to food residues. If some
  a     
feces are suspended in water, the eggs and solid fecal
considerable saving of time. Very small objects such as
 particles will settle out, allowing the supernatant fats and
Giardia cysts and Cryptosporidium oocysts must, of
dissolved pigments to be decanted. If the sediment is then
course, be hunted with the high dry lens and perhaps
resuspended in a solution intermediate in density between
studied further under oil immersion.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
297
Gravitational force may be used in lieu of centrifugal
force, but it is weaker and therefore takes longer. Several
commercially available, disposable fecal analysis kits that
work by gravity afford satisfactory results. If sodium nitrate
solution (specific gravity 1.20) is used as flotation medium,
the preparation is ready for microscopic examination in
10 minutes. Saturated sucrose solution, because of its
 greater viscosity, requires 15 to 20 minutes to yield equiv-
alent results. A disadvantage of sodium nitrate is that the
slide must be examined promptly. Otherwise, osmotic dis-
tortion may have rendered the parasites difficult to identify,
or crystallization of the medium may have totally obscured
the microscopic field.
Fecal Sedlmentatlon Technlques
 Sedimentation techniques, like direct fecal smears, demon-
strate objects that are too heavy or too delicate to concen-
trate by the techniques just described. Sedimentation is
more sensitive than the direct smear in terms of the
number of organisms demonstrated, and the slide is
 seu sap i al go  sia pe on iaia
removed. Sedimentation is particularly appropriate for
trematode and acanthocephalan eggs, amebas, ciliates,
and formalin-fixed Giardia cysts. However, sedimentation
is far less sensitive than flotation in concentrated sucrose
Figure 7-1. Baemmann apparatus for separating and concentrat-
for most nematode eggs and coccidian oocysts including
ing nematode larvae from feces, minced tissues, and soil sam-
Cryptosporidium, less sensitive than flotation in zinc sulfate
ples. The specimen is placed in the basket of a tea strainer or
(specific gravity 1.18) for fresh Giardia cysts and Filaroides
wrapped in cheesecloth and immersed in lukewarm water in the
larvae, and less sensitive than the Baermann technique
described later for larvae of Strongyloides, Aelurostrongylus,
to the pinch clamp and may then be recovered in a small volume
and Dictyocaulus and other active nematode larvae. It is
of water. A few minutes to several hours may be required,
unfortunate that there is not one best technique that
depending on the kind of larvae and the degree of infection.
serves all purposes equally well. However, considering the
extreme diversity of the organisms with which we deal, our
techniques are remarkably few and simple.
 9. Remove stopper and centrifuge for 1 minute at 2000
The formalin-ether method should be avoided at all costs
rpm.
because ethyl ether has blown up enough people already. The
10. Decant supernatant, transfer a portion of the
formalin-ethyl acetate method is safer and probably just as
sediment to a microscope slide, and examine.
 good. Formalin preserves the feces, stops or slows develop-
Note: To duplicate the sensitivity of flotation techniques
ment of most parasites, and reduces the odor of the sample.
in detecting most nematode eggs and coccidian oocysts,
Ethyl acetate removes fats, pigments, and other substances
examine at least half of the sediment microscopically.
that interfere with microscopic study. The following outline
is freely adapted from Faler and Faler (1984):
Concentratlon of Nematode Larvae by
1. Mix a teaspoonful or so of feces with 10 mL of water
the Baermann Technlque
 or 10% neutral buffered formalin.
In the Baermann technique, advantage is taken of the inability
2. Strain the mixture through a tea strainer or two layers
of most nematode larvae to swim against gravity. The vertical
of cheesecloth.
migrations of nematode larvae on vegetation occur in mois-
3. Transfer strained mixture to a 15-mL centrifuge tube.
ture films where surface tension translates their sinusoidal
4. Centrifuge for 1 to 2 minutes at 1500 to 2000 rpm.
body movements into effective locomotion. By contrast, nem-
 5. Discard the supernatant.
atode larvae tend to sink gradually in an appreciable body of
 6. Resuspend the sediment in 10 mL of water or
water within which there is no surface tension. A typical
formalin, and repeat steps 4 and 5 until the 
Baermann apparatus is illustrated in Figure 7-1. Break up a
supernatant is clear.
fairly large fecal specimen (5to 15 g) place it in a tea strainer or
 7. Resuspend the sediment in 10 mL of water or
wrap it in cheesecloth; and place it in lukewarm water in the
formalin, and add 3 mL reagent grade ethyl acetate.
funnel. The warmth stimulates larval motility, and many
 8. Insert stopper and shake the preparation vigorously for
larvae will come to the surface of the fecal mass, fall off, and
30 seconds.
descend to the pinch clamp. In heavy infections, larvae can be
298
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
drawn off in a drop of water after an hour or so, but when few
done by simply inverting the centrifuge tube in a single
larvae are present, it may be necessary to leave the “Baermann"
motion. Sediment containing the larvae can then be taken
set up overnight. If more than a single drop of water is drawn
up in the small volume of water retained by cohesion and
for examination, it will be necessary to centrifuge, decant,
 transferred with a bulb pipette to a microscope slide.
and pipette a drop of sediment. There are many refinements
Nutrient agar plates provide excellent growing condi-
and modifications of this technique, but the same simple
tions for certain nematode eggs or larvae that have been
 principle underlies them all.
separated from feces and concentrated by the techniques
The infective first-stage larvae of Filaroides osleri and
already described. For example, rhabditiform larvae that
Filaroides hirthi are lethargic and do not migrate out of
have been concentrated from dog feces by the Baermann
the fecal mass. The Baermann technique is therefore an
technique are deposited on the surface of the agar in a
utter failure with respect to Filaroides larvae, and it is nec-
 small volume of water and incubated at room temperature.
 essary to resort to the flotation concentration technique
 If these are Strongyloides larvae, the culture will be found
with zinc sulfate (specific gravity 1.18) as flotation medium.
teeming with infective filariform larvae and/or rhabditi-
form adult worms in less than 2 days.
Culture of Nematode Larvae
 Identification of larvae often requires that they be killed
Generic identification of strongylid eggs usually requires
in an extended posture. This is easily accomplished by
rearing infective-stage larvae. Well-formed horse and
judiciously warming the droplet of water before applying
sheep feces contain just the right amount of water and
the coverslip. Hold a lighted match below the slide and
can usually be successfully cultured merely by placing a
view the cessation of motion and extension of larvae
 psu uaq s  iei po e u siad ma
from above. “Relaxation" is the customary euphemism
0.1% sodium carbonate solution to inhibit mold growth
applied to the thermal death of nematodes. Because
and by storing the jar in a drawer or dark shelf at room
Strongyloides tend to revive, it may be necessary to heat
temperature for a week to 10 days. The walls of the jar
them up again. Avoid overheating the larvae because this
should always be covered with droplets of condensed mois-
distorts them. As an alternative to heating, a drop of
ture. If the culture appears to be drying out, add a few
 Lugol's solution may be added at the edge of the coverslip.
 drops of water or sodium carbonate solution. When the
This both relaxes and stains the larvae.
jar is returned to the light after incubation, larvae will
Whenever measurements are critical, the coverslip must
soon be found squirming about in the condensation drop-
be supported, or it will press on the larvae and distort them.
lets on the walls of the jar.
 Ring the coverslip with petroleum jelly to avoid this effect
Catfle feces of similar consistency can also be cultured
and to retard evaporation. The coverslip may be ringed
without further preparation, but usually cattle feces are
quickly and conveniently as follows: Spread some petro-
more fluid and require the addition of vermiculite or
leum jelly in a thin film on the heel of the left hand.
sand to produce a damp but not wet culture.
Then, holding a coverslip edgeways between the thumb
All fecal cultural techniques are essentially qualitative
and forefinger of the right hand, draw each edge of the
because various species of nematodes have differing opti-
coverslip in turn through the film to obtain a uniform
mum conditions for hatching, development, and survival.
dam of petroleum jelly all around the perimeter.
As a result, the relative abundance of species of third-stage
larvae harvested from cultures is not a simple function of the
Culture of Coccldlan Oocysts for Sporulatlon
relative abundances of species of strongylid eggs that were
Mix a small amount of feces or concentrated suspension of
present at the start. Haermonchus contortus or Strongyloides
oocysts with 1% potassium dichromate solution, and make
papillosus larvae tend to predominate in culture whenever
a shallow pool of this mixture in a Petri dish. Sporulating
eggs ofeither ofthese species are present in the feces, and the
 0ocysts need a lot of air, so the pool must be shallow to
possible clinical importance of Trichostrongylus or Cooperia
favor diffusion of oxygen, but do not let the culture dry out;
should not be discounted because they are represented by
add more dichromate solution if necessary. Sporulation is
only a small number of larvae.
usually complete after 2 to 4 days' incubation at room
Culture of dog feces for the demonstration of Strongy-
temperature, but some species require weeks.
loides stercoralis filariform larvae consists of merely storing
the specimen in a jar at room temperature. Filariform
Mlcrometry
larvae of the homogonic generation appear by 24 to
 Measuring the lengths of parasites with a microscope equipped
48 hours, but if the isolate under study is principally or
with a calibrated eyepiece micrometer sometimes provides the
entirely heterogonic, substantial numbers of filariform
most effcient means of reaching a diagnosis. An object
larvae will not appear in less than 96 hours.
 micrometer is a glass microscope slide etched with a linear
When larvae can be seen swimming in droplets of
scale 1 or 2 mm long and subdivided in units of 10 μm
condensed moisture on the walls of the culture jar, rinse
(0.01 mm). An eyepiece micrometer is a glass disc etched
the walls of the jar with a small volume of water, collect the
with a scale of arbitrary units. The disc is inserted into the
rinsings, and concentrate the larvae by centrifugation. Few
microscope eyepiece, and the scale may be used to compare
larvae will be lost with the supernatant if the decanting is
linear dimensions of objects in the microscopic field.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
299
0'J
the eyepiece micrometer scale is about one-eighth tum out of alignment. Right, The scales have
been made parallel by rotating the eyepiece; the object scale has been brought into focus, and the
zero line (O.0) of the object scale has been aligned with the zero (O) line of the eyepiece scale by
(measuring consistently from the right edges of the rather thick object scale lines) so that at this
magnification each ocular division equals 4.25 mm. An oocyst measuring 9 by 5.5 divisions would
therefore be 38.2 mm long by 23.4 mm wide.
 For example, the ratio of length to width of a particular kind of
of Stoll (1923 and 1930), Gordon and Whitlock (1939),
 egg may be determined. To measure absolute lengths, how-
Whitlock (1941), and Kauzal and Gordon (1941).
 ever, one must first calibrate the eyepiece micrometer for each
Briefly, a sample of feces is weighed and vigorously
objective magnification against the scale of the object
mixed with water in the proportion of 1 g/15 mL.
micrometer.
Aliquots of 0.3 mL are drawn from this suspension and
1. Focus the x10 objective on the scale of the object
mixed with equal parts of saturated sucrose solution in a
micrometer.
counting chamber. The parasite eggs float in this medium
2. Rotate the eyepiece until the eyepiece scale and
and come to rest at the undersurface of the chamber cover.
objective scale are parallel.
 In this way, all the eggs in a 0.02-g subsample are brought
3. Align their zero marks by adjusting the mechanical
into the same focal plane of a microscopic field that is
stage (Figure 7-2).
relatively free of fecal debris. The number of eggs counted
4. Locate any point past the halfway mark at which the
in this aliquot is multiplied by 50 to yield an estimate of the
two scales are in perfect register. The ratio of the object
number of eggs per gram of feces.
length to the number of eyepiece scale divisions up to
this point provides a factor for converting all
Materials required
subsequent eyepiece micrometer measurements made
1. Balance sensitive enough to indicate a change of as
with the X 10 objective to absolute units. In Figure 7-2,
 little as 0.1 g in sample weight.
40 eyepiece scale divisions correspond exactly to
2. Mixing apparatus (Figure 7-3) consisting of a 250- to
170 mm of the object micrometer scale, yielding a ratio
300-mL graduated cylinder with a height-to-diameter
of 4.25 mm per scale division.
ratio of about 2 to 1 (the cylinder in Figure 7-3 was made
 5. Repeat the calibration procedure for all objective
by sa wing off a 500-mL plastic cylinder at the 300-mL
magnifications.
 mark) and an electric hand drill with a special beater.
 Note: Microscopes with variable tube lengths and other
The beater may be easily fabricated with a brass rod for
sources of variation in secondary magnification must be
the shank and a strip of old inner tube for the beater.
brought into the same state of adjustment each time
The beater shank should glide freely through a hole in a
measurements are taken or else they must be recalibrated
rubber stopper that fits the graduated cylinder.
   i     
3.0
Counting chamber (Figure 7-4). Two microscope
binocular microscopes alters the tube length and is easily
slides separated by two thicknesses of slide cut into
 overlooked as a source of error.
narrow strips and cemented together with aquarium
po aq Pnous s r pu adn au 
Quantitative Fecal Examination
slightly to facilitate filling the chamber. To clean the
Dllutlon Egg Counts
chamber, rinse under a stream of cold water.
The Cornell-McMaster dilution egg counting technique as
4.1
 Avian tuberculin syringe, 1 mL. The needle hub may
described in the following paragraphs is based on the work
be ground off to avoid plugging by coarse debris.
300
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Fgure 7-3. Mixing apparatus for preparing fecal suspensions.
7
5. Saturated sucrose solution. Add granulated table sugar
Fgure 7-4. Loading the counting chamber. Two 0.3-mL volumes
to boiling water, stirring continuously until no more
of saturated sucrose solution are placed in the counting cham-
will dissolve. Cool. Add a few phenol crystals to
ber. Then a O.3-mL aliquot of fecal suspension is added to each
inhibit mold growth. The specific gravity at room
volume of sucrose solution and thoroughly mixed with a dissect-
 temperature should be at least 1.31.
ing needle.
6. Paper cups, tongue depressors, and dissecting needles.
An alternative method with an electric stir plate, a
Procedure
magnetic stir bar, a 100-mL beaker, and magnesium sulfate
1. Weigh out 10 g of feces in a paper cup (correct for
(Epsom salts) of a specific gravity of 1.2 as the flotation
tare) and add to 150 mL water in the graduated
medium is described in the following procedure with
cylinder. If less than 10 g of feces is available, reduce
a precalibrated counting chamber (Advanced Equine
the volume of water to preserve the 1:15 proportion.
Products, 5004 228th Ave. SE, Issaquah, WA 98029).
2. Mix feces and water thoroughly. With the hand drill
1. Place beaker on balance, tare it, and weigh out 4 g
mixer, only a few seconds are required.
of feces into the beaker.
3. (Optional) The suspension may be passed through a tea
2. Add approximately 10 mL of the magnesium sulfate
strainer to remove coarse debris that might interfere
solution, and mix well using applicator sticks or
with microscopic examination. This is often necessary
a tongue depressor to break up the fecal matter as
when examining horse manure but should be avoided
much as possible.
if possible because it may yield lower counts.
 3. Bring the volume to 60 mL with additional
4. Place 0.3 mL saturated sucrose solution in each half
flotation medium, and add a stir bar. Stir for
of the counting chamber (see Figure 7-4).
5 minutes at moderate speed.
 5. Stir the fecal suspension, withdraw two 0.3-mL
4. Using a glass slide to make a score mark, score
aliquots, and add one to each pool of sucrose solution
a pasture pipette halfway between the tip and the
in the counting chamber.
barrel and break off the tip to produce a wider
6. Mix each aliquot-sucrose pool thoroughly with a
bore. (Caution: Pasteur pipettes have caused
dissecting needle, and allow the preparation to stand
numerous laboratory accidents; use with care).
for about 15 minutes.
 5. Load the pipette with the fecal material from the
7. Count all the eggs in each pool while scanning with
stirring beaker, and fill both chambers on the
the low power of the microscope. The focal plane
precalibrated counting chamber.
 containing the eggs may be quickly located by the
6. Let the preparation stand 5 minutes to allow the
 presence of air bubbles. Take care to include eggs lying
in the optically darkened borders of the pools.
 eggs within the grids of both chambers using the
Variations of this technique with the use of calibrated
X 10 objective.
 chambers overcome the difficulty of counting eggs in the
 7. Calculate eggs per gram of feces by multiplying
optically darkened borders of the pools. Unfortunately such
the total number of eggs counted in the two
chambers often prove difficult to obtain commercially.
chambers by 50.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
301
Concentratlon Egg Counts
twice as concentrated, the concentration procedure is
Dilution egg count procedures are less reliable for quantifying
more efficient in detecting Eirmeria oocysts than is the dilu-
low levels of parasitic infection than are concentration egg
tion procedure.
counts (see Statistical Considerations, later). Of course, there
is a limit to the number of eggs that can be counted conveni-
Interpretatlon of Egg Count Data
ently, so one must choose the procedure best suited to the level
Statistical considerations
of infection. A practical solution is proposed as follows:
If it were possible to obtain a uniform distribution of
1. Weigh out 10 g of feces in a paper cup (correct
parasite eggs in the fecal suspension, we could expect to
for tare), and add to 150 mL water in the
find the same number of eggs in all aliquots. However, as
 graduated cylinder. If less than 10 g of feces is
we mix the suspension, the distribution of eggs does not
available, reduce the volume of water to preserve
become uniform but instead becomes a random distribu-
the 1:15 proportion.
tion and stays random as long as we continue mixing.
2. Mix feces and water thoroughly. With the hand
Aliquots from a thoroughly mixed suspension thus repre-
drill mixer, only a few seconds are required.
sent fair samples drawn from a random distribution, and
3. (Optional) The suspension may be passed through
the numbers of eggs counted in replicate aliquots vary in a
a tea strainer to remove coarse debris that might
 predictable fashion.
 interfere with microscopic examination. This step
When relatively rare objects are distributed at random in
is often necessary when examining horse manure
space (or relatively infrequent events are distributed at random
but should be avoided if possible because it may
in time), the number of objects to be found in each sample
yield lower counts. Note: So far, the procedure is
volume (or the number of occurrences in each sample time
identical to the dilution egg count procedure
interval) follows a Poisson distribution. In a 150-mL fecal
described before.
suspension there is room for well over a billion eggs, yet
4. Draw a 15-mL (1l-g solids equivalent) aliquot of
even in acute haemonchosis, there rarely will be more than a
well-mixed fecal suspension, and transfer it to a
half million present. This means that for every 2000 volumes
15-mL centrifuge tube.
the size of one Haemonchus egg, no more than one volume will
 5. Centrifuge for 3 minutes, and decant the
actually contain an egg. Therefore eggs counted in aliquots
supernatant containing fats and dissolved pigments.
drawn from a well-mixed fecal suspension meet the specifica-
6. Add concentrated sucrose solution (specific gravity
  ie s si n , r s
1.3) to 1 cm from the top of the tube, and
space," and we can expect the number counted in each
resuspend the sediment with an applicator stick.
sample volume to follow a Poisson distribution.
 Insert stopper and mix by four or more inversions.
The mean and variance of a Poisson distribution are
 7. Add concentrated sucrose solution to the brim,
equal. This fact can be turned to practical advantage because
and place a coverslip on top.
it provides a criterion by which we can assess the adequacy of
8. Centrifuge for 10 minutes. Do not use a fixed-
our technique. If the variance of a series of aliquot counts
angle centrifuge. The cups must be horizontal
turns out to be much greater than the mean, we may
during centrifugation.
conclude that the mixing, sampling, or counting has been
 9. After centrifuging, remove the coverslip by lifing
carelessly done. If, on the other hand, the sample variance
it straight up and place it and its adherent film of
turns out to be much smaller than the mean, we may
sugar solution on a glass slide.
aienbs-uo eiep au paapny, sey suosuos ieui apnpouon
10. Scan the slide under x50 to × 100 magnification,
analysis provides an objective numeric method for testing
counting eggs as you go. To avoid omission or
how well replicate egg counts fit the Poisson distribution
 overlap of fields, start by scanning along one edge
(Hunter and Quenouille, 1952), but few practitioners
of the coverslip from one corner to the other.
would be tempted to bother with the necessary calculations.
Then shift one field width and continue scanning.
A simple alternative is provided by the graph in Figure 7-5.
The shift can be executed precisely by concentrating
The diagonal lines drawn on this graph enclose a zone within
eu o ie al oi sude i p e uo u
which 95% of all points representing duplicate egg counts
the edge of the field and moving that object to the
should fall, on the average, provided the sampling and
other edge with the mechanical stage adjustment.
counting are adequate. The tolerance bounds on the graph
 The number of eggs counted by this procedure provides
are nearly parallel instead of divergent, as might be expected
a minimum estimate of the number of eggs per gram of
considering the equality of means and variances inherent in
feces. The estimate can be improved by adding another
the Poisson distribution, because the axes have square root
drop of concentrated sucrose solution to the centrifuge
scales. Square root transformation of a Poisson variate con-
tube, placing a second coverslip on top, and repeating
verts the variance to a constant for all but very small values
steps 7 through 10. If there are too many eggs on the
of the variate. In Figure 7-5, of 151 pairs of egg counts,
first coverslip to count conveniently, either repeat the
19 (13%) lie on or outside the boundaries of the 95%
 procedure with a smaller aliquot or resort to dilution egg
zone. This is almost three times too many, and we may
counting. Perhaps because the sucrose solution used is
conclude that technical performance could be improved.
302
C H A P T E R 7  Diagnostic Parasitology
250
22
02
175
5
125
100
06
08
70
200225250275300
Figure 7-5. Plot of 151 duplicate egg counts. According to theory, no more than eight points
should have fallen outside the diagonal boundary lines. More careful mixing, sampling, and count-
ing could improve the picture.
Applications
Egg-counting techniques may be applied, in principle, to
To slow or stop the development of resistance, one should
any patent parasitic infection of any host. For practical
administer anthelmintics only when they are actually needed
purposes, however, they find their greatest utility in esti-
to reduce a significant rate of pasture contamination.
mating levels of strongyle infections in ruminants and
 This can be accomplished by performing periodic fecal egg
horses. Under conditions of ordinary husbandry, these spe-
counts on a representative sample of the herd. When egg out-
cies of domestic animals always shed strongyle eggs in their
put is low, treatment may be delayed until it has reached a
feces except when they have recently been treated with an
point deemed significant in relationship to the extent and
effective anthelmintic drug. Therefore the question is not
productivity of pasture, the stocking rate, the species and
whether these animals are infected with strongyles but,
susceptibility of hosts, and the objectives of the husbandry
 instead, what level of infection is present.
operation. The critical number of eggs per gram at which
the herd ought to be treated cannot be specified without
Determlnlng Rates of Envlronmental Contamlnatlon
taking all of these factors into consideration. For example,
Most contemporary methods for controlling strongyles in
ado1dde ue aq Aipasoddns juau ueia 1ad sasa 001
S d  r   
critical number for clinically normal sheep grazing at
with anthelmintic drugs to suppress the production of
low stocking rate under weather conditions favorable to
eggs and thereby curtail contamination of the pastures.
H. contortus. However, it would be best not to exceed
Unfortunately, when populations of parasites are repeatedly
100 eggs per gram for brood mares with foals at their sides
exposed to anthelmintics for several years, they develop
 grazing a small paddock. In both of these cases the critical
resistance to these anthelmintics and their chemical
number would be subject to revision according to the
congeners. The more frequently anthelmintic medication
results  achieved  and  any   significant  modifications  of
is applied, the more rapidly does resistance to them develop.
management practices.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
303
Dlagnoslng Cllnlcal llness
may frequently allow a more specific identification by obser
High egg counts (e.g-, more than 5000 eggs/g for sheep and
vation of the subsequent development in fecal culture.
 goats or more than 500 eggs/g for cattle) are easy to interpret.
 They indicate that these animals are infected with many
Nematode Eggs
Nematodes have eggs. An egg contains a fertilized zygote,
 not necessarily indicate that the host is suffering from clin-
with the fertilization of the ovum by the amoeboid sperm
ical parasitic disease because healthy, well-nourished hosts
having occurred within the oviduct and seminal receptacle
can often support and compensate for very impressive popu-
before the eggs enter the uterus. The shell proper of the
lations of parasites. Negative egg counts indicate that the
nematode egg is a smooth, homogeneous, transparent cap-
host either is uninfected or is infected with nonreproductive
sule of chitin. An internal lipid layer (vitelline membrane)
worms (e.g, developing or arrested larvae, infertile adults).
and a narrow fluid-filled space separate the capsule from its
Negative egg counts are typical of the early stages of winter
 contained embryo. Depending on the parasite, the egg may
 ostertagiosis in cattle and peracute hookworm disease in
be passed with the zygote in a single-cell stage, having
 newborn pups. Such facts tend to discredit quantitative
undergone a number of divisions, or already developed
fecal analysis in the minds of those who require short lists
to contain a fully formed first-stage larva. In some cases,
of simple, plausible rules. However, when interpreted by
first-stage larvae hatch from the eggs within the host and
 minds familiar with the biology of both host and parasite,
are passed in the feces.
 egg counts provide one valuable insight into the interactions
Nematode eggs representative of the different orders and
taking place between them.
superfamilies of these parasites have characteristics that
typify the group. Thus an egg can usually be identified
GENERAL IDENTIFICATION OF EGGS,
as that of an oxyurid, ascaridid, spirurid, rhabditoid, stron-
CYSIs, AND LaRVaE
gylid, or trichinelloid. In general, nematode eggs vary in
size from 30 μm to 100 μm in greatest diameter, although
Parasite vs. Pseudoparasite
a few examples such as Nermatodirus may be up to 200 μm
One must first learn to distinguish between parasites and
in length.
-qnq i se yns sisaio paeaun iq res aadns
bles, pollen grains, hair, plant fibers, fat droplets, and corn
The Oxyurld Egg
smut spores. Identification of pseudoparasites may occa-
The eggs of the oxyurid parasites of ruminants, horses,
sionally shed light on the host's recent dietary adventures.
and primates tend to have a rather thick, colorless shell
 Suppose, for example, that we find Moniezia expansa eggs
and to contain a larva when observed. Most of the eggs
in a specimen of dog feces. We know then that the dog has
also appear flattened on one side. The large pinworm of
 recently eaten sheep feces because M. expansa is a parasite
 the horse, Oxyuris equi, has an egg that appears to have an
of sheep and never of dogs. Actually, because M. expansa is
operculum on one end. Dogs and cats are not hosts to
a true parasite when it is in a sheep, its egg should be called
pinworms, so the presence of these eggs in their feces
a spurious parasite rather than a pseudoparasite when it is
should be considered a spurious finding unless proven oth-
found in dog feces, but perhaps that distinction is a bit too
erwise (Figure 7-7).
 pedantic. For practical purposes, if a dog or cat is passing
an unidentifiable object in its feces, give the animal an
The Ascarldold Egg
enema, confine it for 24 to 36 hours, and do another
The eggs of the ascaridoid parasites of domestic animals are
fecal examination. If the unidentifiable object is still
typically thick shelled and oblong to spheric in appearance.
there, chances are it is a parasite, whereas if it is gone, it
 In some ascaridoid eggs there is an apparent operculum as in
was probably a pseudoparasite. It is probably more efficient
 some eggs such as those of Porrocaecurm from hawks (Figure
to learn to identify the bona fide parasites and to ignore the
 7-8). When passed in the feces, these eggs tend to contain a
 irrelevant rubbish scattered about them rather than trying
single cell. Some eggs, such as those of Toxocara, Parascaris,
to identify all objects in the microscopic field. However,
and Ascaris, are covered with an albuminous coat applied by
 some objects are commonly observed that have regular
the female over the chitinous eggshell; this layer of protein
shapes. Examples of these more common pseudoparasites
may be smooth as in Toxascaris (Figure 7-9), rough as in
are shown in Figure 7-6.
Parascaris (see Figure 7-71), or uniformly and distinctively
 Fecal specimens for parasitologic examination should be
patterned as in Toxocara (Figure 7-10). The material may be
fresh and not contaminated with soil or bedding. If feces are
tanned in the fecal stream, giving it a dark-brown color as in
allowed to stand, single cells develop into morulae, larvae
Ascaris and Parascaris. This material may sometimes break
hatch, and oocysts begin to sporulate. Identification of
off from the eggshell, and the egg will then appear with
developmental stages other than those usually encountered
a clear smooth shell. The eggs of infertile ascaridoids are
is possible but requires greater skill. Contamination with soil
sometimes found in the feces, and their shape is often
or bedding will likely lead to confusion because the specimen
less regular than that of the fertilized egg. The eggs of ascar-
may be invaded by free-living nematodes and arthropods.
idoids tend to be large overall, around 80 to 100 μm in
 Starting, however, with a fresh, uncontaminated specimen
diameter.
304
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
H
Figure 7-6. Pseudoparasites. A, Cheyletiella blakei, an arachnid parasite of the cat (x108). B,
Monocystis, a protozoan parasite of the earthworm. C, Monocystis and ruminant Emeria cysts in
pollen (×425). F, Saccharomycopsis gutturlatus, normal alimentary yeast of rabbits ( ×425). G, Plant
hair (x168). H, Plant hair (x63). I, Plant hair (x63).
The Splrurld Egg
material. Filarids are an ovoviviparous form of spirurid
The eggs of the spirurid nematodes found in feces are of at
 that produce microfilariae rather than eggs.
least two basic types. One type of egg, represented by those
of Physaloptera and Spirocerca, is about 30 μm long, cov-
The Rhabdltold Egg
ered by a thick colorless shell, and contains an embryo.
 The rhabditoid eggs found in the feces of domestic animals
Aq pn sms s jo pd ane sia 
 are of two types. One type represents the spurious eggs of
terrestrial coprophagous insects (Figure 7-11). The other
soil nematodes that have been ingested by a host or even
spirurids, such as Habronerna and Draschia, have very
laid by free-living coprophagous nematodes that have
thin eggshells that may be distorted by the contained
invaded a fecal pat. The second type of rhabditoid egg
larva. These eggs and the contained larva are typical of
represents the eggs of those parthenogenetic females of
those spirurids transmitted by flying insects that obtain
the Strongyloides species that produce eggs (Figure 7-12).
their infection through the feeding of maggots on fecal
 In domestic animals in North America, only S. stercoralis of
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
305
Fgure 7-7. Oxyurid (pinworm) eggs from a bearded dragon,
Pogona vitticeps.
Fgure 7-8. Ascaridoid, Pormcaecum, egg from a red-tailed hawk,
Buteo jamaicensis.
the dog and human typically produces larvae. Other
Strongyloides species, such as Strongyloides felis of cats in
Australia and Southeast Asia and various species in wildlife
ellipsoidal eggs containing an embryo in the morula stage
hosts, also shed larval stages in the feces. The eggs of the
of development, and this same stage is found in the host's
Strongyloides species shed by horses, swine, and ruminants
feces (Figures 7-13, 7-14, and 7-15). In this text, such eggs
are typically small, with a thin colorless shell, and contain a
are collectively referred to as “strongyle” eggs because that
larva. In feces that are not fresh, the smal size of these eggs,
is what most clinicians and diagnostic parasitologists call
less than 50 μm, will be one of the best criteria for separat-
them. The eggs of Metastrongyloidea are also thin walled
 ing these eggs from those of developed strongylid eggs.
and ellipsoidal, but the developmental stage deposited
in the host's tissues by different species of female meta-
The Strongyle Egg
strongyloids varies from a single cell (e.g-, Muellerius) to
 Females of the superfamilies Strongyloidea, Trichostron-
a first-stage larva that is ready to hatch (e.g., Filaroides).
 gyloidea, and Ancylostomatoidea lay rather thin-walled
Even those laid in the single-cell stage develop to the first
A
C
D
E
specimens, with shell layers indicated by opposed arrowheads, B, Two-celled stage. C, Morula
Stage. D, Infective larva in eggshell. E, Infective larva artificially hatched in vitro. Hatching of
ascarid eggs does not normally occur until they have been ingested by a host ( x425).
306
C H A P T E R  7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Figure 7-13. Strongylid egg (Obeliscoides cuniculf, Trichostrongyloi-
dea) from a rabbit.
Fgure 7-10. Surface of a Toxocara canis egg cleared in Berlese
layer (phase contrast x660).
Figure 7-14. Strongylid egg (Oesophagostomum sp., Strongyloidea)
from a gorilla; this egg was fixed with formalin, and the morula
 appears somewhat contracted.
Fgure 7-11. Eggs of a spirurid (Tetrameres) and a trichinelloid
(capillarid) from a duck.
 Figure 7-15. Strongylid egg (Syngamus sp., Strongyloidea) from a
Fgure 7-12. Rhabditoid egg (Strongyloides papillosus) from a goat.
Crow, Corvus brachyrhynchos.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
307
larval stage and may have hatched by the time they appear
early stages of division when passed in the feces. The eggs of
 in the feces. Therefore either larvated eggs (e.g., Metastron-
Anatrichosoma and Trichosomoides are different in that they
 gylus) or first-stage larvae are found in the feces of hosts
contain a fully formed larva. In the dog, the eggs of the
with patent metastrongyloid infections.
capillarids are smaller than the egg of Trichuris vulpis,
which is about 80 μm long. Unfortunately, this is not
A diagnostic dilemma
necessarily true for other mammalian hosts.
With few exceptions, the generic identity of individual
Nematode Larvae
 inspection or micrometry (see Figure 7-58). Nermatodirus
The larvae of nematodes shed in the feces are most readily
eggs stand out because of their large size, and Bunostormum
identified with reference to the host parasitized and there-
phlebotomum eggs have sticky surfaces that accumulate
fore are discussed for each host as appropriate. The initial
debris, but the rest look very much alike. Necropsy of a
 goal must be to identify them for what they are and not to
few animals to establish an accurate diagnosis is justifiable
confuse them with hairs, threads, or plant fibers. The more
if the unit value of the animal is sufficiently low or the herd
common problem is finding an artifact and thinking it a
sufficiently large. Owners of valuable animals are under-
nematode larva. Most individuals will recognize a larva
standably reluctant to sacrifice them, however, and recourse
when they see one (Figure 7-17). The important thing is
must be had to larval identification (see discussion of
not to forget to look for them. The nematode larvae found
identification of strongyle infective larvae). Whenever the
in the feces of domestic animals all tend to be around
situation is too urgent to afford the necessary delay of
300 μm in length. Special attention must be paid to the
culturing, the clinical signs should be clear enough to
relative lengths of the buccal capsule and esophagus, the
 suggest a reasonably accurate diagnosis.
structure of the tail, and the size and position of the genital
primordium. If feces are old or collected from the soil,
The Trlchlnellold Egg
there may be many nematode larvae present that have
The eggs of Trichuris and capillarids are typically brown
hatched from eggs of developed parasitic forms or from
shelled with polar plugs and tend to be elongate or
soil or coprophagous nematodes that have invaded the
barrel-shaped. Trichuris is confined to mammalian hosts.
fecal matter. The process of identification is much more
Therefore when these eggs are found in other vertebrates,
difficult in these situations.
the first thought should be that they are capillarid eggs. The
eggs of the Trichuris species tend to have smooth shells,
Trematode Eggs
whereas those of capillarids tend to have various forms of
The eggs of trematode parasites of vertebrates tend to have
delicate surface ornamentation (e.g-, pits, roughened areas,
 a golden- to dark-brown color and to have an operculum
 small wavy lines). Capillarid eggs, unlike those of Trichuris
on one end (Figure 7-18). The eggs can vary in size from
s an uo nou ae  sd r   's
straight-line axis (Figure 7-16). However, the eggs
of
 Trichuris may become highly distorted after drug therapy
that has not removed all female worms. Both Trichuris and
capillarids tend to have eggs that are single celled or in the
Figure 7-17. Didelphostrongylus larva (Metastrongyloidea) from the
Fgure 7-16. Trichinelloid egg (capillarid) from a duck.
feces of an opossum, Diderphis virginiana.
308
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Figure 7-19. Tapeworm egg (Anoplocephalidae) from a gorilla,
Figure 7-18. Trematode egg (Strigeidae) from a great horned owl,
Gorila gonilla berengi.
Bubo virginianus.
tapeworms contain six hooklets when passed, which will
20 to 200 μm in maximum length. Some of these eggs con-
help to identify the eggs as tapeworm eggs (see Figure
tain a fully formed miracidium when passed in the feces,
7-20). The “shells" of cyclophyllidean tapeworms can
whereas others contain a number of developing cells.
In
vary markedly (e.g-, the thick, brown surface of a taeniid
the identification of trematode eggs, attention must 
be
given to the size and shape ofthe eggs, as well as to whether
and the odd-shaped square to round eggs of the various
they contain an embryo, whether the operculum appears as a
anoplocephalid genera (see Figure 7-19). Tapeworm eggs
simple cap or a cap in an indented seat or rim on the eggshell,
appear to behave erratically in different flotation media and
and whether there are any structures on the shell such as
 can be hard to demonstrate even when present. Sugar solu-
bumps or spines opposite the operculum. The eggs of the
tion works well for taenid eggs, but not for many of the
schistosomes are not operculate, contain fully developed
 other egg types that may be encountered.
miracidia when passed with the feces, and often have differ.
ent types of spines on one end of the eggshell depending on
Acanthocephala Eggs
the species involved. Trematode eggs tend to be denser and
The eggs of Acanthocephala tend to be elongated and have
not to float as well as those of nematodes in many of the
shells composed of three layers (Figure 7-2i). If the larva
lighter flotation media, and in sugar the eggs often rupture
and appear as empty brown shells that may be collapsed on
one side. When dealing with the schistosomes, one must take
care to wash the feces with saline rather than water because
 the water induces the miracidium to hatch, making the eggs
harder to find and identify.
Cestode Eggs
Some tapeworms commonly shed eggs into the fecal stream
(e.g., Diphyllobothriurmn), whereas others more typically shed
segments, (e.g-, Taenia). However, it is not uncommon to
find eggs or egg capsules of the latter type in fecal matter
from which the segments may have crawled away before
collection. The larva that develops in these eggs will have
six hooklets (three pairs) (Figures 7-19 and 7-20), but those
in the eggs of the pseudophyllidean tapeworms Diphyllo-
bothrium and Spirometra will not have developed by the
time the eggs are passed in the feces. The eggs of these
two species are also operculate and may initially be con-
Figure 7-20. Tapeworm egg (Cyclophyllidean) from a chicken.
fused with the egg of a trematode. The confusion may
Note the hooklets in the embryo (oncosphere) within the egg.
 persist even affer a good deal of study of the actual eggs
Undemeath the egg is a Monocystis sporocyst that was probably
and pictures of them. The eggs of the cyclophyllidean
ingested in an earthworm.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
309
Figure 7-22. Ciliate cyst (Buxtonella sulicata) from the feces of a cow.
Fgure 7-21. Acanthocephalan egg (Macracanthorhynchus ingens)
80 μm in length. The cysts of Giardia appear rather clear in
from a raccoon; note the several layers to the eggshell and the
both zinc-sulfate and sugar preparations, and their overall
contained acanthor larva.
appearance is similar to that of amebas that are more round
in outline. In many flotation media, cysts of Giardia will
inside can be seen, the spines present on one end of the
appear collapsed internally with the ovoid cyst wall remain-
larva can often be identified, which clinches the diagnosis.
ing intact, whereas collapsed cysts of amebas may appear
The eggs of some Acanthocephala offen appear dark brown
much like Ping-Pong balls that have been indented various
in the feces (e.g., Macracanthorhynchus species) and are
amounts on one side. The oocysts of Cryptosporidium are
sa piopise on es r e u puu Aqqond
very small and can be found near the surface of the cover-
because the eggshells are clear when the eggs leave the
slip. They are much easier to see in a sugar flotation, where
female worm. Not all acanthocephalan eggs are brown,
they will appear as a hyaline pink body, than in zinc-sulfate,
and the very clear ones may be difficult to observe,
where they appear to be clearer. The oocysts of Isospora and
particularly if one is not expecting to find them. There
Eimeria do very well in sugar flotation media and present
are numerous Acanthocephala present in wildlife hosts,
a crisp, clear image of a shell and a central sporoblast.
 and it is there that skill has to be developed in diagnosing
On many species of Eimeria, the micropyle and micropylar
infections with different species.
cap, when present, can be easily discerned. On some
Eimeria species it may be difficult to make out the micro-
Pentastomid Eggs
pyle on all specimens. The oocysts of Toxoplasma are
 In the United States the eggs of pentastomids will most typ-
similar in size to the cysts of Giardia. If the aperture on
ically be observed in the feces of snakes or gulls. Elsewhere in
the condenser diaphragm is not closed and the light coming
the world they can be observed in the feces of dogs and other
through the scope is too bright, many of the smaller
hosts. Pentastomid eggs are typically quite large, 100 to 200
protozoa will disappear into the background.
 μm in diameter, with a thin external shell that surrounds
what looks like a developing mite. The developing larva is
offen separated from the eggshell by a rather large area of
 empty space. The difficulty is in determining whether what is
observed is the egg of a pentastomid or the egg of a mite that
has been ingested. It is not uncommon to find in feces the
eggs of free-living mites and parasitic mites ingested while
an animal is grooming. The pentastomid developing within
the egg will typically have four or six small claws, which
might help distinguish the mite from the pentastomid
(see Figures 2-124 and 8-10).
Protozoan Cysts and Oocysts
The cysts and oocysts of protozoa will range from 4 to
30 μm in greatest diameter, with the odd large cysts of
Balantidium and Buxtonella (Figure 7-22) reaching sizes
of 40 to 60 μm and the thick-walled oocysts of Eimeria
leuckarti and Eimeria macusaniensis (Figure 7-23) reaching
Fgure 7-23. Coccidian oocyst (Eimeria macusaniensis) from a lama.
310
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
SKIN SCRAPINGS FOR MANGE DIAGNOSIS
1. Add 10 volumes of 5% KOH to 1 volume of skin
scrapings in a large (500- to 1000-volume capacity)
Skin scrapings for mange diagnosis must be obtained in a
beaker, cover with a watch glass or funnel to return
manner that takes into account both the nature of the lesion
condensate, and heat until hair and epidermal scales
and the location of the mite in question (Figure 7-24).
dissolve. It may be necessary to boil the mixture, but
For lesions with minimal epidermal hyperplasia and lesions
 do not allow it to boil dry. Beware of spattering lye!
caused by deeply burrowing mites (e.g-, Sarcoptes, Dermodex),
2. Allow to cool.
dip a scalpel blade in mineral oil, pinch a fold of skin firmly
3. Transfer to a centrifuge tube, centrifuge, decant
between the thumb and forefinger and, holding the blade at
supernatant, resuspend sediment in water, and
right angles to the skin, scrape until blood begins to seep from
centrifuge again. These steps dispose of interfering
the abrasion Most animals do not object to deep scraping.
soaps. Decant the supernatant.
although local anesthesia may occasionally be required. Much
4. Transfer sediment to a Petri dish and search for
of the detritus will adhere to the layer of mineral oil on the
mites and eggs with a stereomicroscope or X10
pue apis adossou e oi paajsu aq Aeu pue apeq iadies
pocket lens, or proceed with step 5.
searched for mites.
 5. Add saturated sucrose solution to the tube, and
For lesions with marked epidermal hyperplasia and
centrifuge again. Pick mites off the top of the
exfoliation and lesions caused by lice and superficially dwelling
sucrose solution with a wire loop or glass nail and
mites (e.g., Chorioptes), scrape the detritus into an ointment
transfer them to a microscope slide for study under
tin using the cover as a scraper. Examine scrapings under a
the compound microscope.
stereoscopic microscope or with a hand lens to find the lice
Ear mites may be removed from the external ear canal with
and mites crawling about. Dip fine-tipped thumb forceps or a
a cotton swab. If the swab is placed on a dark background in
dissecting needle into Berlese solution, and use this sticky
sunlight or near an incandescent lamp, white Otodectes mites
mounting medium to pick up mites and transfer them to a
may be seen crawling about within a few minutes.
slide for closer study under the compound microscope. Berlese
solution is made by mixing 200 g chloral hydrate, 30 g gum
NECROPSY PROCEDURES
arabic, 20 g glycerin, and 50 mL distilled water; boiling this
mixture for 5 to 15 minutes; and filtering it through cheese-
Occasionally, severe or fatal parasitosis may escape ante-
cloth. Berlese solution clears the specimen and hardens to pro-
mortem diagnosis. For example, pups with peracute hook-
duce a permanent preparation. Unfortunately, chloral hydrate
worm disease may bleed to death before shedding an egg.
is now regulated as a narcotic, and different lots of gum arabic
When disease breaks out in a flock of sheep, postmortem
vary considerably in quality so that good Berlese solution is
examination of a few sick animals often provides the most
getting hard to come by. Glycerin is a reasonably satisfactory
efficient and economical means of arriving at a diagnosis.
In strongylid infections of sheep, various combinations of
sium hydroxide solution also may be used as a temporary
primary and secondary pathogens often yield a confusing
mounting medium that digests epidermis and hair, thus
array of clinical signs that may be resolved by identification
helping to clear the microscopic field of debris.
and enumeration of the worms.
 If the scraping contains much debris, and no lice or
Necropsy findings must be correlated with the case his-
mites have been found by inspection with the stereoscopic
tory and clinical signs to arrive at a definitive diagnosis.
microscope or hand lens, proceed as follows:
This is especially true of parasitic diseases. For example, a
 diagnosis of acute haemonchosis must rest not only on the
demonstration of a sufficient number of H. cortortus
worms in the abomasum, but also on the existence of
clinical anemia. If there is no anemia, then there is no
haemonchosis. In fact, H. contortus worms sometimes
 desert a moribund host so that, on necropsy examination,
pallor and edema of the tissues is found, but no worms.
The correct diagnosis is still haemonchosis.
Opening the Cadaver
Arrange a ruminant cadaver on its left side to get the rumen
out of the way. Cadavers of other species are about equally
accessible from either side, but you should adopt a consis-
    r    e 
appearance and location of the various organs so that
any abnormal relationship will be quickly noticed. Incise
Fgure 7-24. Orthohalarachne attenuata (mite, Halarachnidae) from a
the skin along the midline from the submaxillary space to
northern fur seal, Calorhinus uwrsinus.
the perineum. Reflect the skin from one side, including the
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
311
superficial thoracic muscles and the pectoral limb with it so
mucosal debris and, with a bit of extra effort, provides an
as to lay bare the rib cage. Cut the ribs close to the axial
 estimate of the number of worms present.
muscles and the costal cartilages close to the sternum.
1. Transfer all ingesta from a particular organ (the
Lift away the rib cage, severing atachments to the dia-
abomasum is an easy one with which to begin) to
phragm in the process. Incise the abdominal wall along
a bucket; scrub or lightly scrape the mucosal
the midline, taking pains to avoid puncturing the viscera.
surface to ensure complete transfer of worms.
Carry the incision across the brim of the pubis and reflect
2. Add several quarts of tepid water, mix, and allow
the abdominal wall. Split the pubic symphysis or incise the
to stand for about 5 minutes so that the worms and
ligaments of the hip joint and reflect the pelvic limb.
heavy debris can settle to the bottom; then decant the
 supernatant. Repeat this process until the sediment
Thoracic Viscera
consists principally of worms and coarse ingesta.
 Incise the intermandibular muscles, hyoid apparatus, and
3. Transfer a small amount of sediment to a Petri dish
other attachments, and dissect the tongue, larynx, trachea,
and examine with transillumination, preferably
and esophagus. Removal of the heart and lungs is facilitated
under a magnifying glass or stereoscopic
by traction on the trachea and esophagus. The points of
microscope. If the worms have been taken from the
aftachment (aorta, cavae, azygous vein, various ligaments)
cadaver of a recently dead animal, they will become
are easily found and severed. Remove the thoracic viscera
very active in the tepid water and can be easily
from the carcass. Lay open the tracheobronchial tree, heart
detected and fished out with forceps for closer
chambers, cavae, aortic trunk, and ramifications of the
examination.
pulmonary arteries, and inspect the contents and linings
The small intestine is long, and life is short. Most of the
for  macroscopic parasites. Very small metastrongylid
important nematode parasites of the ruminant small intes-
nematodes (e.g-,
Muellerius capillaris,Aelurostrongylus
tine can be collected by flushing a liter of water through its
abstrusus, F. hirthi) are practically invisible grossly. These
first 6 meters. Insert a funnel into the pyloric end of
may be demonstrated in squash preparations of their
6 meters of unopened small intestine and pour a beaker
 grayish subpleural nodules. The Baermann technique is
 of water into it. Massage the water along the length of gut
useful for demonstrating larvae of lung 1
nematodes
and collect it at the other end; then proceed with steps
(e.g-, Muellerius, Aelurostrongylus), but usually fails in the
2 and 3 above.
case of F. hirthi because the larvae of this parasite are too
A popular alternative to step 2 is to rinse sediment vigor-
lethargic to migrate out of the lung tissues.
ously over a sieve with openings small enough to retain
the parasites but large enough to pass water and fine debris.
Abdominal Viscera
The sieve may then be inverted and back-rinsed to transfer the
Examine the peritoneum for cysticerci, tetrathyridia, encysted
parasites and coarse debris to a collecting vessel. If time or
pentastomids, and acanthocephalan nymphs. Strorgylus eden
facilities to examine sediment for parasites are lacking, the
tatus larvae may often be observed immediately beneath the
sediment can be preserved in 10% formalin and attended to
parietal peritoneum of horses. Examine the surface of the liver
later. Be sure to sieve preserved sediments once again to
for migration racks of ascarid, taeniid, and Fasciola larvae, and
remove the formalin before aftempting to isolate and study
the kidneys for encysted Toxocara larvae. The equine pancreas
the parasites; this may save you a big headache.
is a favorite location for Strongylus equinuslarvae. Place double
 Because we are almost certain to find parasites in sheep,
ligatures around the cardia (or omasoabomasal junction),
 young cattle, and horses, it follows that the evaluation of the
pylorus, and ileocecal junction, thus isolating the stomach,
necropsy findings must rest on the abundance of the para-
small intestine, and large intestine. These regions provide
sites as well as on their identity. To obtain an estimate of
differing environments for distinct sets of parasites, and valu-
worm numbers, substitute step 3a for step 3 and proceed as
able diagnostic information is lost by pooling the collection
follows:
from the entire gut. Open one region at a time, carefully
3a. Transfer the washed sediment to a graduated
poking through the ingesta and scanning the mucosa for the
cylinder, and fill with water to 1 liter. We now
smaller forms. Many parasites of dogs, cats, horses, and pigs
have all the worms from some particular organ
e ae aa inq saa papru a ym aas oi ynou ie ane
suspended in 1 liter.
few very small ones that are important (e.g-, Strorgyloides,
4. Stir the suspension thoroughly, and withdraw
Trichinella). Scrape the mucosa of the small intestine and
a 50-mL aliquot.
examine the scrapings for small nematodes, coccidia, and
5. Pour a small portion of the 50-mL aliquot into
the like.
a Petri dish, and count all of the worms. Continue
 Most of the important nematode parasites of ruminants
until the 50 mL is used up. The number of worms
 n nu  a s a p  s a a
counted times 20 provides an estimate of the total
them. The population of nematodes sufficient to kill a heifer
number of worms in the particular organ.
may pass the notice of a careless prosector completely. The
  n      m 
following technique accomplishes the concentration and
other necropsy findings, especially the nutritional status
separation of these worms from much of the ingesta and
of the cadaver and lesions specifically related to the
312
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
 parasites found. Etiologic significance should be attached to
PARASITES OF DOGS
Trichostrongylus or Cooperia only if it is apparent that the ani-
mal has suffered severe and protracted diarrhea. The presence
Stages in Feces
of even 10,000 Trichostrorgylus worms in a well-nourished
The common internal parasitisms of dogs can usually be
lamb carcass with formed fecal pellets in the rectum suggests
 diagnosed on the basis of the microscopic appearance of
only that we should search further for the cause of death.
 eggs, cysts, or larvae found in the feces. Micrometry or fecal
Etiologic significance should be attached to Haermonchus
culture may be necessary when more specific identification
only if the carcass shows signs of anemia. Cattle with oster-
is required than can be accomplished on the basis of micro-
 tagiosis can become emaciated on full feed. These animals do
 scopic appearance alone.
not even lose their appetites but develop malabsorption that
causes them to starve to death in the midst of plenty. It is just
Nematode Eggs
as well not to accuse the farmer of starving the animal to
Eggs of some nematode parasites of dogs are shown in
death when in fact Ostertagia is the culprit.
Figures 7-25 and 7-26.
x1000
x1000
Toxascaris leonina
Cystoisospora canis
Toxocara canis
Trichuris vuipis
Eucoleus boehmi
x1000
Ancylostoma caninum
Uncinaria stenocephala
Spirocerca fupi
Fgure 7-25. Eggs of some nematode parasites of dogs (x400, except for Cystoisospora canis and
Spipcerca upi; bar represents 100 μm divided into 10-pum units). Dxascars leonina produces a colorless,
 subspheric to ellipsoidal egg shell with a smooth shell surface and a prominent lipid layer containing
one or sometimes two cells in fresh specimens. Cystoisospora canis, a coccidian oocyst and not a nem-
atode egg, is portrayed here × 10o0 to illustrate how easily it might be confused with I leonina unless
the difference in size orthe absence of alipid layer is noticed. Doxocara canis produces a yellowish brown,
Subspheric egg with a unifommly pitted shell surounding a single cell in fresh specimens. Trichuris vulpis
'wr g/ ueun alow aaejane saae sidinn 1 'sanjd jelodig aney pue pedeus-uowal ane saae pueiden pue
whereas those of capillarids average less than 75 μm in length.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
313
of the following metastrongyloids: F. osleri, F. hirthi,
Crenosoma sp., or Angiostrongylus vasorum. The esophagus
of metastrongyloid larvae is longer than the rhabditiform
esophagus of the first-stage Strongyloides larva, and the tail
may have a slight kink as in Filaroides or a dorsal spine as in
Angiostrongylus, whereas the tail of the Strongyloides and
d e on kos siade a ss-sn os
(Figure 7-27).
 If the sample is stale, hookworm larvae may have devel-
oped and hatched. These somewhat resemble Strorgyloides
rhabditiform larvae but have a longer buccal capsule
and smaller genital rudiment (see Figure 7-27). Should
 doubt remain, culture the feces for the development of
Fgure 7-26. Gnathostoma spinigerum from a dog ( x400). This dog
infective stages. The infective sheathed third-stage larvae of
belonged to a pet shop owner who occasionally fed it defunct
hookworms do not begin to appear until after 5 to 7 days
 topical fish. Infection with this exotic parasite probably was
of incubation at room temperature, whereas homogonic
acquired by eating one of these fishes.
Strongyloides filariform larvae appear as early as 24 to
36 hours, and heterogonic filariform larvae appear in
 The stage of embryonic development of eggs found in
about 4 days. Strongyloides flariform larvae are slender,
fresh fecal specimens varies among nematode species and
with a very long esophagus, and the tip of their tail
thus provides us with diagnostic criteria. In fresh fecal spe-
appears notched or truncated (Figure 7-28). If the specimen
cimens, Toxocara, Toxascaris, Trichuris, and the capillarid
is contaminated with soil or extraneous organic material,
eggs of Eucoleus aerophilus and Aonchotheca putori contain
free-living nematodes and their larvae may confuse
a single cell. The Ancylostoma or Uncinaria embryo has
the issue. Under such circumstances, the best course is to
already segmented to produce a morula, as has the capil-
obtain a fresh sample directly from the dog's rectum.
larid egg of Eucoleus boehmi. Many spirurid eggs contain
first-stage larvae, and Strongyloides and Filaroides have
Tapeworm Segments
already hatched and appear in the feces as first-stage
Detached segments of cyclophyllidean tapeworms are often
larvae. The development of a typical nematode egg is por-
found crawling about on the perineum or fresh feces of
trayed in Figure 7-9.
infected dogs (and cats). Hand lens inspection permits
Recovery of E. aerophilus eggs from respiratory mucus by
identification for practical purposes. Owners sometimes
tracheal swab requires general anesthesia. The presence of
submit for identification shriveled objects that are actually
Pearsonema plica eggs in fresh fecal specimens represents
dehydrated tapeworm segments (Figure 7-29, A). If these
 contamination with urine. Urine specimens may also con-
are soaked in water, they will usually regain their familiar
tain eggs of Dioctophyme renale, but these have much larger
appearance (Figure 7-29, B). Should doubt remain, the
and rougher shells than do the eggs of P. plica, and the eggs of
“reconstituted" segment may be squashed between two
D. renale are typically in a two-cel stage when passed.
microscope slides bound together with adhesive tape.
Ancylostoma and Uncinaria egs have a smooth, clear, color-
less, ellipsoidal shell and contain an embryo in the morula
appearance of its eggs and such organs (eg- genital pore,
stage of development. Ancylostoma caninum eggs average less
uterine diverticula or capsules, parauterine organ) as may
than 65 μm, whereas Uncinaria stenocephala egs average
persist in gravid segments of various species (Figures 7-30 to
more than 70 μm in length. Mixed infection with these
7-33; see also Figure 7-29). Taenid segments are roughly
 two common species is easily recognized by the simultane-
rectangular with a single, lateral genital pore and con-
ous presence of eggs of disparate size. Gomes de Faria
tain taenid eggs (see Figures 7-29, 7-30, and 7-33, A).
(1910), who first described Ancylostoma braziliense, gave
Dipylidiur segments are shaped somewhat like cucumber
the dimensions of that egg as 65 by 32 μm. Caution: The
seeds, have a genital pore on each lateral margin, and contain
eggs of strongyle parasites of domestic herbivores frequently
eggs clustered in packets (uterine capsules) (see Figures 7-31
and 7-33, D). Mesocestoides segments have a dorsal genital
be confused with hookworm eggs. Eggs of the order
 pore and eggs massed in a central, thick-walled parauterine
Spirurida are usually smooth walled and contain a larva.
 Organ (Figure 7-32), and fresh segments are said by some to
The most important of these, Spirocerca lupi, produces
resemble sesame seeds.
sua papunou ym sasa supus (ur i Aq oe) leus Aia
Tapeworm Eggs
Nematode Larvae
In the majority of tapeworms, the segmentation, gastrula-
 If the canine fecal sample is fresh and not contaminated with
tion, and embryogeny of the egg takes place within the
soil or extraneous organic material, larvae found swimming
uterus of the adult worm. This is the case in the com-
about the microscopic field may be either S. stercoralis or one
314
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Crenosoma
Buccal cavity
Filaroidesosleri
Genital rudiment
F. hirthi
Ancylostoma
Strongyioides
species are metastrongyloid lungwomms and usually undergo no development in fecal cultures.
 Strongyloides and Ancylostoma first-stage larvae can be distinguished by differences in the relative
sizes of their genital rudiments and relative lengths of their buccal cavities. In fecal cultures, both 
 Strongyloides and Ancylostoma develop to the infective stage (see Figure 7-28).
pseudophyllidean eggs, the egg, surrounded by yolk cells,
visible, they may sometimes be demonstrated by pressing
does not begin to embryonate until it leaves the uterus and
a needlepoint on the coverslip to break the embryophore
enters the environment.
(see Figures 7-33, B and 7-33, C). The eggs of Echinococcus
are a serious menace to human health and cannot be distin-
Cyclophylldean Eggs
guished from those of Taenia. In Echinococcus endemic areas,
Taenid eggs are spheric or subglobular with a radially striated
therefore, the discovery of taenid eggs in canine fecal samples
embryophore (a shell-like covering) and contain an embryo
 demands prompt anthelmintic therapy and caution in the
(oncosphere or hexacanth embryo) with three pairs of hooks
handling and disposal of feces. The egs of Dipylididae
(see Figures 4-36 and 7-33, A). If the hooks are not clearly
are spheric or subspheric with an unstriated embryophore,
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
315
Strongyloides
Ancylostoma
Fgure 7-28. Third-stage infective larvae of Strongyloides and
Ancylostoma. Strongyloides infective larvae have a very long esopha-
gus, and the tip of the tail appears to be notched. (Actually, it is
composed of four small projections of the double lateral alae.)
Ancylostoma infective larvae are usually enclosed in the uncast
R
Auas aupuaixa ueas alay 'aeis puonas aul jo (yneaus) aoiin
beyond the tail of the third stage. The arrows point to the
Fgure 7-29. A, Dehydrated taeniid segments. B, Same segments
esophageal-intestinal junctions.
after an ovemight soaking in water.
 contain an oncosphere, and are enveloped in a uterine capsule.
 d sa o on    a  u
(see Figure 7-33, D). In Joyeuxiella and Diplopylidium there
is only one egg per uterine capsule. The eggs of Mesocestoides
are oval and thin shelled and contain an oncosphere.
 Dlphyllobothrlld Eggs
 Diphyllobothrid eggs are discharged continuously through
the uterine pores of many segments along the body of the
worm and hence are passed independently of any detached
segment. Diphyllobothrium and Spirometra eggs are oval
with an operculum at one pole and a small button at the
other (Figure 7-34, A) which often makes them difficult to
distinguish from certain trematode eggs (Figure 7-34).
 Acanthocephalan Eggs
 Acanthocephalan eggs have a thick outer and thinner inner
shell enclosing an embryo called an acanthor. The external
Figure 7-30. Taenid segment in squash preparation.
316
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
D
Fgure 7-33. Tapeworm eggs. A, Three taenid eggs. B, Taenid 
egg, hooks not visible. C, Oncosphere emerging from the broken 
embryophore of the taenid egg at left. D, Dipylidium egg capsule
(×400).
Figure 7-31. Dipylidium caninum segments.
surface of the egg of Macracanthorhynchus is elegantly
patterned (Figure 7-35).
Trematode Eggs
Eggs of most digenetic trematodes have an operculum
 at one pole and contain an embryo whose stage of devel-
opment varies with the species in question (Figure 7-36).
Schistosome eggs, on the other hand, lack an operculum
and contain a fully developed miracidium that hatches
shortly after the egg comes in contact with water. Many,
but not all, schistosome eggs have a sharp spine. If a
dog has fed recently on trematode-infected tissues such
Parauterine
organ
A
B
C
Fgure 7-34. Operculate eggs ( x400). A, Diphyllobothrium egg. B
and C, Unidentified eggs; their prominent opercula suggest that,
except for their small size, these might be Paragonimus eggs (see
 Figure 7-32. Mesocestoides sp. gravid segment; fresh, unrelaxed.
Fgure 7-36, B). This figure illustrates the difficulty of distinguish-
and viewed with transmitted light.
ing Diphyllobothrium eggs from those of certain trematodes.
C H A P T E R 7  Diagnostic Parasitology
317
accomplished by fecal culture for oocyst sporulation.
Sporulated Eirmeria oocysts contain four sporocysts, each
 of which contains two sporozoites (Figure 7-37, C).
Identification of species of Cystoisospora, Hamrnondia,
and Neospora requires micrometry. Oocyst dimensions in
micrometers for species infecting dogs are as follows:
Cystoisospora canis, 32 to 42 × 27 to 33; Cystoisospora
ohioensis, 19 to 27 × 18 to 23; Cystoisospora burrowsi,
17 to 22 × 16 to 19; Hammondia heydormi, 10 to 13 × 10
to 13 (Trayser and Todd, 1978); and Neospora caninum,
11.7 × 11.3 (Lindsay, Upton, and Dubey, 1999).
A
B
Sarcocystis
 Sarcocystis species sporulate within the host, and the
Fgure 7-35. Macracanthorhynchus ingens (Acanthocephala) egg
 fragile oocyst wall often breaks so that the sporocyst con-
(×40o). A, Acanthor in focus. B, Surface of shell in focus.
taining four sporozoites is the form usually found in
the feces (see Figure 7-54, D). Sporocysts measure 11 to
as sheep liver infected with Dicrocoelium or Fasciola or
28 × 7 to 13 μm, but it is not possible to distinguish species
rabbit entrails infected with Hasstilesia, the presence of
of Sarcocystis by micrometry of sporocysts (Dubey, 1976).
myriad trematode eggs in its fecal specimen may lead to
 The host relationships of common species of Sarcocystis are
misdiagnosis.
presented in Table 3-1.
Coccldlan Oocysts and Sporocysts
Amebas
Cystoisospora
Entamoeba histolytica, a serious human pathogen, may
Cystoisospora, Hammondia, and Neospora oocysts have
appear in canine fecal specimens as either trophozoite or
colorless, ovoid or ellipsoidal, smooth-surfaced walls with-
 cyst. The trophozoites are more likely to be encountered in
out micropyle or polar cap and contain a single sporont
diarrheal feces and the cysts in formed fecal specimens.
when passed in the feces of the host (see Figure 7-25).
Trophozoites of the E. histolytica are 10 to 30 μm across,
Sporulation occurs in 2 to 4 days at room temperature.
and their nuclei have marginated chromatin and a small
The fully sporulated Cystoisospora oocyst then contains
central endosome. E. histolytica trophozoites display ame-
two sporocysts, each of which contains four sporozoites
boid movement and often ingest erythrocytes. The mature
(Figure 7-37, A). Because dogs tend to be coprophagic,
cysts are 10 to 20 μm in diameter and contain four nuclei.
0ocysts of various other coccidia, especially Eimeria species
 Entamoeba coli trophozoites are 20 to 30 μm in diame-
of herbivores, are very common pseudoparasites in dog
ter. Their nuclei have a relatively large eccentric endosome.
feces. If the Eimeria species in question have micropyles,
Erythrocytes are not found in E. coli trophozoites. As many
polar caps, or other distinguishing features, they present no
as eight nuclei may be counted in E. coli cysts.
diagnostic problem (Figure 7-37, B), but many species are
Entamoeba gingivalis, a parasite of the oral cavity, infects
difficultto(
differentiate
from
Cystoisospora  species.
 both man and dog. Only trophozoites, ranging in size from
 Differentiation of Eimeria and Cystoisospora may
be
5 to 35 μm, are found in oral scrapings.
A
B
Figure 7-36. Trematode eggs ( ×400). A, Alaria sp. B, Paragonimus kelficotti. C, Nanophyetus salmincola.
318
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
A
B
C
Fgure 7-37. Coccidian oocysts (×1000). A, Cystoisospora canis, sporulated. B, Eimeria spp., one-cell
 stage. C, Emeria sp., sporulated. Cystoisospora species sporulated oocysts contain two sporocysts, each
which contains two sporozoites. See Figure 7-25 for Cystoisospora canis one-cell stage.
Flagellates
Technlque of Knott (1939) Modlfled
Giardia trophozoites are less than 21 μm long, bilaterally
1. Draw a sample of venous blood into a syringe
symmetric, and pear-shaped. Two nuclei with large central
containing a suitable anticoagulant such as ethylene-
endosomes look like a pair of eyes (see Figure 7-94). Giardia
 diaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) or heparin.
cysts are less than 12 μm long, are ellipsoidal, and contain
 2. Draw 1 to 2 mL of air into the syringe, and mix
four nuclei.
the blood and anticoagulant by rocking the
Trichormonas and related genera do not form cysts and
syringe so as to run the air bubble back and
occur in feces (usually diarrheal) only as mononucleated
forth along the length of the barrel. Prolonged
trophozoites.
delay and thermal extremes are to be avoided.
 Remix blood immediately before proceeding
Clllates
with step 3.
Balantidium coli trophozoites are ovoid with a cytostome at
3. Place 1 mL of blood in a 15-mL centrifuge tube.
one end; measure 25 to 150 μm in diameter; contain one
Add 10 mL of 2% formalin, stopper, and mix by
macronucleus and one micronucleus, two contractile
inversion and shaking. Note: When submitting blood
vacuoles, and inclusions; and are covered with rows of
samples to a laboratory for identification of
cilia (see Figure 3-8). Cysts are spheric or ovoid, measure
microfilariae, complete only steps 1, 2, and 3 to
40 to 60 μm in diameter, and have a wall consisting of two
 prepare them for shipment.
membranes (see Figure 3-8).
4.Wait 2 or 3 minutes.
 5. Centrifuge for about 5 minutes, and pour off the
 Fixation and Identification of Microfilariae
supernatant by inverting the centrifuge tube only once.
in Blood
Remove the drop that clings to the rim of the tube
 The simplest procedure for diagnosing the presence of
with absorbent paper.
microfilariae in the blood of dogs is to place a drop of
6. Add one drop of 0.1% methylene blue to the
heparinized venous blood on a slide, add a coverslip, and
sediment, mix, and transfer some stained sediment
 examine the preparation under low and high dry magnifi-
to a slide for microscopic examination.
 cation. Microfilariae reveal their presence by agitating the
There are other microfilarial concentration techniques,
erythrocytes in their immediate vicinity. In general, if more
but the Knott test is preferred because it is standard, it is
than 5 or 10 microfilariae are observed per drop of blood,
 inexpensive, and it includes the best preparative technique
they are probably Dirofilaria immitis. If fewer than that
for specimens submitted to the laboratory. The quality
are observed, they may represent either heartworm 
or
and concentration of the formalin solution are critical.
another filarid parasite infection. In North America the
Two percent formalin is 2 mL of stock 37% formaldehyde
only other filarid recognized in dogs is Dipetalonerma
solution (i.e., formalin) and 98 mL of distilled water. This
reconditum (Newton and Wright, 1956, 1957), but in cer-
 reagent tends to deteriorate in storage and should be made
tain other parts of the world, there are also other species
up fresh periodica lly.
that need to be dealt with. The following procedure is about
15 times as sensitive as the direct smear and permits
Dlfferentlatlon of Mlcrofllarlae
more accurate differentiation of microfilariae of D. immitis
Microfilariae of D. irmrmitis are 6.0 to 7.0 μm wide,
and D. reconditum.
whereas those of D. reconditum are less than 5.6 μm wide.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
319
Hook
Ghost
Dirofilaria immitis
Dipetalonema reconditum
Figure 7-38. Microfilariae of Diroflaria immitis and Dipetalonema reconditum (×2000). See text for
exposition of differential characters.
Length measurement is a more tedious and less reliable
Esophagus and stomach
differential criterion. When fixed by the preceding tech-
Nematodes
 nique, the tails of D. reconditum microfilariae tend to be
Spirocerca lupi (Spirurida). Found in fibrous nodules in
curved like an ovariectomy hook. The anterior end of the
the wall of the esophagus and sometimes the stomach
D. irmmitis microfilaria tapers gently, whereas that of D.
reconditum maintains about the same diameter throughout.
ventitia of the arteries and aorta to the walls of the stomach
The cephalic hook of D. reconditurn (Figure 7-38) is
or esophagus. Adults encyst in nodules that communicate
 demonstrable with the X40 objective of any modern, stan-
with the lumen of these two organs. Cysts may be found
 dard, compound microscope in samples prepared by the 
in other locations as well. Chronic infection is associated
Knott technique described earlier. It is not necessary to
with dysphagia, vomiting, esophageal osteosarcoma, aortic
resort to thick smears or special stains to demonstrate the
aneurysm (rupture rare), and pulmonary osteoarthropathy.
cephalic hook. Patience is required at first, but with practice
Physaloptera rara and Physaloptera praeputialis (Spir-
the cephalic hook proves the quickest, easiest, and most
 (re- p oi si as) sm n (m
reliable differential criterion.
found with their anterior end embedded into the gastric
mucosa. Infection can be asymptomatic or may be associ-
Annotated Host-Organ Listing of
ated with vomiting and anorexia.
Parasites of Dogs
Gnathostoma spinigerum (Spirurida). Relatively rare in
Toxoplasma gondi may occur in any tissue of any host as
North America (see Figure 4-129). Adults encyst in nodules
extracellular or intracellular tachyzoites or as bradyzoites in
 in the stomach wall. Larval migration through the liver and
cysts (see Figure 8-35). N. caninum may occur in similar
other organs is destructive. Rupture of nodules containing
locations (see Figures 3-22 and 8-36).
adult worms into the peritoneal cavity can cause a medical
emergency.
 Allmentary System
Mouth
Small intestine
Protozoa
Nematodes
Trichomonas canistomae (Mastigophora). Found around
Toxocara canis and T. leonina (Ascaridoidea). Toxocara
 gum margins; nonpathogenic.
has a ventriculus intercalated between the esophagus and
320
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Figure 7-39. Toxocara. A ventriculus is intercalated between the
esophagus and the intestine ( x108).
the intestine (Figure 7-39), whereas Toxascaris has none
(Figure 7-40). The ventriculus is visible in transilluminated
fixed, cleared specimens under the compound microscope.
Large, fixed specimens may be dissected to determine the
Figure 7-41. Doxocara. The tail of the male is fingerlike (x108).
presence or absence of a ventriculus. The tail of male
Toxocara is fingerlike (Figure 7-4l), whereas the tail of
male Toxascaris tapers to a point (Figure 7-42). Female
in a book. Persons basing their diagnoses on superficial
Toxocara and Toxascaris may be distinguished by comparing
appearances often confuse Toxascaris eggs with Cystoisospora
their eggs (see Figure 7-25). In acquiring diagnostic skill
caris oocysts less than half as large. In Figure 7-25, a T. leornina
 one must not be content with merely comparing general
egg ×425 and a Cystoisospora canis oocyst x1000 have
 impressions of the microscopic image with a set of pictures
 se a       d 
Fgure 7-40. Joxascaris. There is no ventriculus between the
esophagus and the intestine ( x108).
Fgure 7-42. Joxascars. The tail of the male tapers gradually ( × 168).
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
321
Hgure 7-43. Toxocara canis worms in the intestine of a dog at
necropsy.
could be made. The matter may be resolved with an ocular
Fgure 7-44. Ancylostoma caninum female attached to the intestinal
micrometer or, more simply, through observation of whether
mucosa at a feeding site.
a distinct lipid layer is present (Toxascaris) or absent
(Cystoisospora). Ascarids in the small intestine may cause
 of larvae; infection may be fatal. Affected pups will have
bloating and can interfere with intestinal motility and diges-
pale mucous membranes, and they can pass soff liquid
tion (Figure 7-43). Mucoid diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal
stools containing partially digested blood.
distension, emaciation, and a failure to thrive may all be
S. stercoralis (Rhabditoidea). The tiny (2.2 mm) parthe-
noted as clinical signs. Infection with T. leorira is less patho-
nogenetic parasitic female worms (see Figure 4-108) may be
 genic and usually only results in the worst cases with diarrhea
 found in scrapings of the mucous membrane. Clinical signs 
and vomiting.
vary from none to watery diarrhea.
Baylisascaris procyonis, the raccoon roundworm, is
Trichinella spiralis (Trichinelloidea). The small adults are
shonoup e si sii som npe se shop ul dn Sumous
found threaded through the mucosa of the duodenum and
parasite because the zoonotic disease produced by the
 ingestion of embryonated eggs can be devastating and life
Figure 4-148). Vomiting or mild diarrhea may result.
threatening. Although a rather rare condition, cases are
regularly occurring. When fully mature, the worms tend
Cestodes
to be larger than Toxocara canis or T. leonina, and the
T.pisiformis, Taenia hydatigena, Taenia ovis, Taenia
s aie aa ie siy al aq paieua aq ue sia
multiceps, and Taenia serialis (Taeniidae). Adult tapeworms
have a rough external shell (see Figure 4-125), and appear
typically (Figure 7-45; see also Figures 4-33 to 4-35 and
browner than the eggs of the two common dog ascaridoids.
4-37), cause no significant signs.
 Infected dogs are typically without any clinical signs.
 E. granulosus and E. multilocularis (Taenidae). Adult tape-
Ancylostoma caninum, A. braziliense, and U. stenocephala
worms typically (see Figure 4-43), cause no significant signs.
(Ancylostomatoidea). Mature hookworms 
are found
anchored to the mucosa by their buccal capsules unless
the cadaver has cooled out or the host has died of an over-
  sds  s m u s  a
found unattached. Preadult A. caninum burrow deeply and
destructively in the mucosa (Figure 7-44), and the mesen-
teric lymph nodes may be hemorrhagic as a result during
the prepatent phase of severe infections. An adult A. cani-
rum is colored red, whereas A. braziliense and U. stenoce-
phala are grayish white. The red color of A. caninum
quickly fades on fixation, however. S
Specimens may be
differentiated by microscopic examination of their buccal
structures: A. caninum has three pairs of pointed teeth on
the ventral border of the buccal capsule; A. braziliense has
one pair of pointed teeth; and U. stenocephala has a pair of
rounded plates instead of teeth (see Figure 4-95). A. cani-
murn sucks much more blood than either of the other hook-
worm species afecting dogs. Suckling pups experience
Fgure 7-45. Anterior ends of aenia pisiformis with the attachment
 peracute infections owing to transmammary transmission
sites from three scolices.
322
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
(see Figures 4-155 and 7-35); dogs acquire infection by
ingesting millipedes, with diarrhea as the main clinical sign.
Protozoa
Flagellates. Giardia canis (see Figure 7-94) trophozoites
on mucosa of the small intestine can be visualized in scrap-
    osn aq pa s
occur, typically in younger animals. Other infected dogs
may or may not have signs but may have periodically soff
feces with a foul odor. Cysts are often excreted without
clinical signs.
Coccidia. Cystoisospora canis, C. ohioensis, C. burrowsi,
H. heydorni, and N. caninum (Apicomplexa) oocysts contain
a single sporont when shed in the feces (see Figure 7-25).
Fgure 7-46. Dipylidium caninum in the intestine of a dog at
Schizonts, gamonts, and oocysts may also be found in histo-
necropsy.
logic sections or mucosal scrapings. These coccidia cause
damage to host enterocytes. Young animals and immunocom-
Dipylidium caninum, Diplopylidium, and Joyeuxiella
promised animals are most often affected. The main clinical
(Dipylididae). Typically without clinical signs (Figure
sign is diarrhea, which is usually watery but may also contain
7-46; see also Figures 4-55, 7-31, and 7-33), infection can
mucus or blood.
result in impaction in young puppies.
Sarcocystis cruzi, Sarcocystis ovicanis, Sarcocystis miescheri-
Mesocestoides species (Mesocestoididae). Typically, infec-
ana, Sarcocystis bertrami, Sarcocystis fayeri, and Sarcocystis
 tion is without clinical signs (see Figures 4-58 and 7-32).
hermionilatrantis (see
Table
　2-1
 and
1Figure
7-54)
Diphyllobothrium latum (Diphyllobothridae). Typically,
(Apicomplexa) have sexual stages in the mucosa, usually
infection is without any signs (see Figures 4-25, 4-26, and
with no clinical signs.
7-34, A).
 Cryptosporidium canis (Apicomplexa) has minute stages
on the apical margins of the enterocytes that would be
Trematodes
difficult to see without histologic sections. Most infections
Alaria americana (5 mm), Alaria arisaemoides (10 mm),
occur in dogs less than 6 months old or in dogs that are
Alaria canis (3.2 mm), and Alaria michiganensis (1.9 mm)
immunocompromised.
(Diplostomatidae) (see Figure 4-22).
Mesostephanus appendiculatun (1.8 mm) and Mesoste-
Cecum and colon
phanus longisaccus (1 mm) (Cyathocotylidae). These
Nematodes
cyathocotylids resemble Alaria in having a bulbous tribo-
T. vulpis (Trichuroidea) (Figure 7-47; see also Figures
cytic organ but differ in not being divided into distinct
4-151, 4-153, 7-25, 8-113, and 8-114). In small numbers,
fore- and hind-body regions.
worms are found in the cecum; in heavier infections,
Echinochasrmus schwartzi (2.1 mm) (Echinostomatidae)
is a slender echinostomatid with a collar of spines sur-
rounding the oral sucker.
Apophallus venustus
(1.4mm)，
Cryptocotyle lingua
(2.2 mm), and Phagicola longa (1.2 mm) (Heterophyidae).
Dogs ingesting fish and acquiring C. lirgua can have severe
enteritis.
Plagiorchis species. This small (1.2 mm) plagiorchiid
has a spindle-shaped, spinous body with well-developed
suckers; the genital pore is anterior to the ventral sucker.
Nanophyetus salmincola (1.1 mm, see Figure 4-13) and
Sellacotyle mustelae (0.4 mm) (Troglotrematidae) are
ovoid and pear-shaped, respectively, and have spinous
bodies and well-developed suckers. N. salmincola is host
to Neorickettsia helminthoeca, which causes salmon poison-
ing in dogs. Signs include hemorrhagic enteritis and
lymphadenopathy.
Acanthocephala
Fgure 7-47. richuris vulpis posterior ends of worms on the
Oncicola caris is small (14 mm) and spindle-shaped (see
mucosa of the cecum; the anterior portions of the worms are
Figure 4-161). Macracanthorhynchus ingens is very large
 embedded in the mucosa.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
323
worms also are found with their anterior end embedded in
the mucosa of the colon and rectum. Most dogs are without
clinical signs. Dogs can have large bowel diarrhea charac-
 terized by hematochezia; mucus and straining are the main
-nsd no uoap oi pe a e suis e
 dohypoadrenocorticism in middle-aged and older dogs as a
result of isotonic fluid loss causing hyponatremia, meta-
 bolic acidosis, and hyperkalemia.
Protozoa
E. histolytica and E. coli are cyst-forming amebas.
Trophozoites of E. histolytica may contain phagocytosed
erythrocytes. Infection with these organisms seems very
rare in dogs in the United States.
Trichomonas species and Pentatrichomonas hominis are
non-cyst-forming mucosoflagellates. They can be found
by examination of mucus and will lyse in water, so saline
Figure 7-48. Pneumonyssoides caninum mites (Mesostigmata,
preparations are required.
Halarachnidae) in the nasal sinuses of a dog at necropsy.
B. coli (ciliate) (see Figure 3-8) has caused colitis in dogs
(Courtesy Dr. John M. King.)
on very rare occasions.
Liver and pancreas
Nematode
Nematodes
 D. renale is a giant red worm (up to 1 m, Trichinelloidea)
Toxocara canis and T. leonina (Ascaridoidea) sometimes
in the peritoneal cavity or renal pelvis (see Figure 4-146).
erratically invade the common bile duct or pancreatic duct
 Besides the occasional free adult in the peritoneal cavity,
causing obstruction or rupture.
the third-stage larvae cross through the peritoneal cavity on
Calodium (Capillaria) hepaticum (Trichinelloidea) (see
their way to the liver, where they molt to the fourth stage.
Figure 8-117) is found in the liver of dogs usually as an
Fourth-stage larvae again traverse the peritoneal cavity
 incidental necropsy finding.
before entering the renal capsule. A serofibrinous to chronic
fibrinous peritonitis can result.
 Nematode larvae
Toxocara canis (Ascaridoidea) can have encapsulated
Resplratory System
larvae widely distributed in adult animals, especially in
Nasal passages
skeletal muscle and the kidneys, but also the liver.
Nematodes
Filaroides species.
Eucoleus (Capillaria) boehmi (Trichinelloidea) may
cause sneezing.
Trematodes
Opisthorchis tenuicollis, Opisthorchis viverrini, Clonorchis
Arthropods
sinensis, Metorchis albidus, and Metorchis conjunctus
Prneumoryssoides caninum (Mesostigmata) (Figure 7-48;
(Opisthorchiidae) in bile ducts (see Figure 4- 10); infections
see also Figure 8-8). Clinical signs include reverse sneezing,
are usually asymptomatic unless a large worm burden
chronic nasal discharge, nasal irritation, and epistaxis.
is present, in which case severe hepatic dysfunction can
Inflammation of the nasal cavity may result in the loss of
result.
the sense of smell.
 Eggs of Heterobitharzia americana (Schistosomatidae)
Linguatula serrata (130 mm, Pentastomida). These
 in tissues are surrounded by granulomatous reaction; gran-
 organisms are bloodsucking, wormlike parasites of the
ulomatous lesions in the liver may be associated with an
nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. They can cause epistaxis,
elevation of hepatic enzymes. Flushing the vascular system
inflammation, and respiratory distress.
 of the liver with saline may produce large numbers of
paired flukes. Clinical signs are nonspecific and
1may
Trachea and bronchi
include anorexia, lethargy, weight loss, and diarrhea.
Nematodes
F. osleri (Metastrongyloidea) (see Figures 4-105 and 7-27).
Peritoneum and peritoneal cavity
F. osleri occurs in nodules near the bifurcation of the tra-
Cestode larvae
 chea with clinical signs of respiratory distress.
Mesocestoides tetrathyridia (see Figures 8-65 to 8-67) can
Crernosoma vulpis (Metastrongyloidea) (see Figures 4-102
be associated with massive infections owing to asexual mul-
and 7-27) are small worms (16 mm) found on bronchial and
tiplication that may be associated with diarrhea, abdominal
bronchiolar mucosa, causing most typically signs of chronic
 distension, pain, and weakness.
 cough, dyspnea, and exercise intolerance.
324
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Eucoleus (Capillaria) aerophilus (Trichinelloidea) is asso-
exercise intolerance, syncope, ventricular tachycardia, and
 ciated with signs of coughing.
sudden death.
Lung parenchyma
Nematodes
Nematodes
D. immitis (300 mm, Filarioidea) occurs in right ven-
F.hirthiand Filaroides milksi (Andersonstrongylus milksi)
tricle, right atrium, pulmonary arteries, and rarely venae
(Metastrongyloidea) (Georgi, 1975, and see Figures 4-69,
cavae (see Figures 4-137 and 7-38). Adult worms live in
7-27, 8-89, and 8-90). Most dogs are asymptomatic, but
the pulmonary arteries and cause clinical signs indica-
immunocompromised dogs may show signs of severe
tive of cardiac, pulmonary, hepatic, and renal involve-
pneumonia that can be fatal.
ment. In heavy infections, worms can invade the right
D. irmmitis (Filarioidea) (see Figures 4-137 and 7-38)
side of the heart and cause congestive heart failure and
 organisms are large (30 cm) worms that occur in pulmo-
ascites. Clinical signs can include coughing, exercise
nary infarcts.
intolerance, dyspnea, syncope, hepatomegaly, and abnor-
mal heart and lung sounds on auscultation. Vena cava
Nematode larvae
syndrome can also result owing to obstruction by adult
Petechial hemorrhages, areas of focal necrosis, and nod-
worms.
ular inflammation of lung tissue may be caused by migrat-
A. vasorum (25 mm, Metastrongyloidea) is much smaller
 ing nematode larvae. Such lesions should be investigated by
than D. immitis and located in the pulmonary arterial
preparing squashes and by the Baermann technique.
 branches. First-stage larvae resembling those of Aelurostron-
Identification of nematode larvae in histologic preparations
gylus (see Figure 7-52) are shed in the host's feces. Dogs
is considered in Chapter 8.
may experience exercise intolerance, weight loss, subcuta-
A. vasorum (Metastrongyloidea) eggs and larvae cause
neous edema due to congestive heart failure and lung
respiratory lesions, and clinical signs are varied. Dogs
damage, or coagulation abnormalities.
may experience exercise intolerance, weight loss, subcuta-
Toxocara canis (Ascaridoidea) larvae in cardiac muscle.
neous edema due to congestive heart failure and lung
 damage, or coagulation abnormalities.
Mesenteric and portal veins
S. stercoralis (Rhabditoidea) filariform larvae (see Figure
Trematodes
7-28) are migrating larvae that can also cause areas of
Heterobilharzia americana (Schistosomatidae) (see Figures
ecchymotic and petechial hemorrhage throughout the
4-24 and 8-50) causes disease by the eggs that erode their
lung parenchyma.
way through the intestinal mucosa and cause granulomatous
A. caninum, A.
braziliense,
and
U.
stenocephala
reactions in the liver.
(Ancylostomatoidea) (see Figure 7-28).
 Toxocara canis (Ascaridoidea) (Figure 7-51) migrating
Blood
 larvae can cause pneumonia.
Nematode microfilariae 
Microfilariae of D. immitis (Onchocercidae).
D.immitisand D.reconditum (Filarioidea) (see Figure 7-38).
Trematodes
Protozoa
Paragonimus kellicotti (Troglotrematidae) (see Figures
Babesia canis (Apicomplexa) (see Figure 3-28) will be
4-14, 4-15, and 7-36, B) live in fluke-filled cysts that are
seen only at necropsy if blood films are made. Clinical
surrounded by large areas of granulation tissue around the
signs of canine babesiosis include pale mucous membranes,
 escaping eggs. These organisms can cause severe loss of lung
icterus, hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria, depression,
function.
weakness, fever, anorexia, and splenomegaly
T. cruzi (hemoflagellate) trypomastigotes may be scarce
Vascular System
in blood films. Examine heart muscle histologically for
Pulmonary artery, right side of the heart, and
amastigotes (see Figure 8-17).
venae cavae
Protozoa
Skeletal Muscles
T. gondi, cardiac muscle (Apicomplexa).
Protozoa
Trypanosoma cruzi (hemoflagellate) amastigotes in heart
N. caninum (see Figure 2-20, Apicomplexa) causes dis-
muscle cause acute myocarditis by myocardial invasion and
ease mainly in dogs less than 6 months of age, which will
cycles of multiplication and cell rupture. Weakness, exercise
show signs of paralysis. The pelvic limbs are more severely
intolerance, syncope, lymphadenopathy, pale mucous
affected than the thoracic, and signs of progressive muscle
membranes, neurologic signs, and signs of right- or left-
atrophy are present.
sided heart failure manifested on the electrocardiogram
(ECG) as decreased QRS complexes and heart block can
Nematode larvae
be seen clinically. Chronic infection can progress to dilated
T. spiralis (Trichinelloidea) (see Figures 4-150, 7-92, and
cardiomyopathy, and dogs can show signs of weakness,
8-116) usually does not cause clinical signs in dogs.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
325
Fgure 7-49. Dracunculus insignis discovered in canine dissection 
 as part of anatomy class in 1966.
Fgure 7-50. bxocara canis lesions in canine kidneys.
A. arinum (Ancylostomatoidea) larvae are present in
vacuoles in muscle fibers with little or no evidence of
Urogenltal System
host reaction (see Figure 8-86).
Kidney
Nematodes
Connectlve Tlssues
 D. renale (up to 1 meter, Trichinelloidea). A giant red
Protozoa
worm in the renal pelvis or peritoneal cavity (see Figure
Hepatozoon americana (Apicomplexa) can cause myosi
4-146). The right kidney is most often affected. Clinical
tis and periosteal bone proliferation with changes that
signs include enlargement of the right kidney, hematuria,
might be evident on radiographs. The organisms can
urinary tract infections, and rarely renal failure if both
form large cysts in the muscles, and muscle atrophy, hyper-
kidneys are affected.
esthesia, and reluctance to move can result.
Nematode larvae
Nematodes
Toxocara canis (Ascaridoidea) (Figures 7-50 and 7-51)
D. reconditum (32 mm, Filarioidea) (see Figure 4-145)
larvae can cause nodular lesions to form in the kidneys
without clinical signs.
but typically do not cause clinical signs.
D. immitis (300 mm, Filarioidea) (see Figure 4-135)
A. caninum (Ancylostomatoidea) larvae will enter
migratory stages and ectopically migrating adults.
muscle cells of dogs.
Dracunculus insignis (360 mm, Spirurida) (Figure 7-49,
and see Figures 4-127, 4-128, and 8-108) causes subcutane-
Urinary bladder
 ous nodules with associated pyoderma and focal erythema.
Nematodes
Larvae with very long tails may be expressed from the
Pearsonema (Capillaria) plica (60 mm, Trichinelloidea)
nodules.
organisms can be found in the epithelium of the urinary
bladder and usually do not cause signs. If large numbers are
Insect larvae
 present, dogs can have pollakiuria, dysuria, hematuria, and
Cuterebra (30 mm, Cuterebridae) (see Figures 2-31, 2-32,
stranguria.
8-1, and 8-2) larvae migrate to the skin to create a warble.
The skin can be sensitive in this area, and a draining tract
Nervous System
may be present. The spiracles of the larvae may be seen
Brain and spinal cord
protruding from the fistula, and the larvae can be extracted
Protozoa
from the opening.
e o ( i s) (eaoiv) u 
Cochliomyia hominivorax (17 mm, Calliphoridae) (see
in older dogs, causing signs of central nervous system invol-
Figures 2-12 and 2-19).
vement that include seizures and tremors, whereas cerebellar
Phaenicia sericata, Phormia regina, and Protophormia
involvement will result in postural deficits
terraenovae (17 mm, Calliphoridae) (see Figures 2-12
and 2-19).
Nematodes
Wohlfahrtia vigil and Wohlfahrtia opaca (Sarcophagidae)
 Baylisascaris species (Ascaridoidea) larvae have on rare
(see Figure 2-19).
Occasions caused neurologic disease in dogs (Thomas, 1988).
326
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
maculatum, Ixodes species, and others (Ixodidae) (see
Figures 2-69, 2-70, and 2-74 to 2-90).
Sarcoptes scabiei (Sarcoptidae) (see Figures 2-102 and
 8-3) mites cause alopecia that usually spares the dorsum.
Skin lesions are reddish and covered with yellowish crusty
material. Severe self-trauma to the skin may result owing to
intense pruritus.
Otodectes cynotis (Psoroptidae) (see Figure 2-1l1) causes
otitis with predisposition to secondary infections.
Demodex caris (Demodicidae) (see Figures 2-115 and
8-6) can normally be found on dogs in low numbers, and
usually they do not cause disease. Demodicosis can be a
localized problem, usually affecting the face and presenting
as alopecia and scales surrounding the eyes and the mouth.
Generalized demodicosis causes large reddened scaly alope-
cic coalescing patches on the head, legs, and trunk.
Folliculitis and furunculosis can be present, and generalized
lymphadenopathy is typical. Secondary bacterial infections
cause inflammation and exudation.
Cheyletiella yasguri (Cheyletidae) (see Figure 2-116) is
not generally associated with signs; may cause mild
dermatitis.
Nematode larvae
Rhabditis strongyloides (Rhabditida) (see Figures 4-107
and 8-72) larvae cause a pruritic hyperemic dermatitis.
The larvae are usually free living on decaying organic
Fgure 7-51. Joxocara larva from a rabbit's liver ( x250).
matter, and therefore the lesions are typically distributed
on areas of the body that come in contact with the ground
such as the feet and the ventral thorax and abdomen.
Eye
Nematodes
PARASITES OF CATS
Toxocara canis (Ascaridoidea) has on rare occasion been
found in the retina (Hughes, Dubielzig, and Kazacos, 1987).
Stages in Feces
D. irmrmitis (Filarioidea) (see Figures 4-137 and 7-38) can
Cats share a few parasites (e-g-, T. leonina, Eucoleus
occur erratically in the anterior chamber of the eye or the
[Capillaria] aerophilus D. caninum, P. kellicotti) with dogs,
epidural space.
and cross-infections with others may occur on rare occasions.
Thelazia californiensis (19 mm, Spirurida) (see Figure
In other parts of the world, cats and dogs may share numer-
4-132) can on occasion be found in the conjunctival sac
ous trematodes acquired from the ingestion of fish. However,
and ducts of the lacrimal gland.
the most common cat parasites (Figures 7-52 to 7-54) are
different species of the genera found in dogs (e.g-, Toxocara
Skln and Halr
cati, Ancylostoma tubaeforme, Cystoisospora felis).
Insects
Adult dipterans.
Nematode Eggs and Larvae
L. setosus (Anoplura) (see Figure 2-39).
The most common nematodes of the cat are T. cati and
Trichodectes canis (Mallophaga) (see Figure 2-47).
A. tubaeforme; in the southeastern United States, a good
percentage of the hookworm eggs might also be those
antennae that lie in cephalic grooves, and the anterior
of A. braziliense. Cats can harbor T. leonina, but this
margin of the head is pointed; the organism is restricted
seem to be more uncommon now than it once was.
to warm climates.
Pseudoparasitism in cats is usually the result of predation
Ctenocephalides canis, Ctenocephalides felis, Pulex irri-
rather than coprophagy. For example, the eggs of Calodiurm
tans, and Echidnophaga gallinacea (Siphonaptera) (see
(Capillaria) hepaticum accumulate in infected rodent livers
Figures 2-52, 2-53, 2-54, and 2-56).
and may be found in the feces of a cat that has eaten such a
rodent (see Figure 8-117). Feline Trichuris infection often
Arachnids
 excites lively debate because its rare appearances in cats in
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, Dermacentor variabilis, Der-
North American violate a time-honored belief that it does
macentor andersoni,Amblyomma americanum, Amblyomma
not exist at all. In any case, it is certainly of litle practical
C H A P T' E R 7Diagnostic Parasitology
327
Toxocara catf
7. cat (infertile)
Toxascaris eonina
A.aerophila
P. feliscati
A. putorii
Trichuris spp.
Capillaries
Aefurostrongylusabstrusus
Ancylostomatubaeforme
50
100μ
Figure 7-52. Nematode parasites of cats. Toxocara cati eggs are smaller and more delicate than 
Ba aul 'saop pue sie yroa jo anseied e si eoal seosxoi (a- any aas) saa sue eesoxo
aul 'sien uenuawv yuon jo saiseied anei ane saads sunyn aa e wag awen ainay sun u
Buunp punoy sem jeul oiy ouand way jea e jo saoay aul u! panasgo sem yal le aa sunyou 
necropsy to contain three female Trichur's sp. worms. The egg at right, from a New York State cat,
was presumptively identified as Fichuris sp. because of its close resemblance (except for smaller
size) to Fichuris vulpis (see Figure 7-25). Aelurostrongylus abstrusus larvae may be identified by their
curiously shaped tail.
328
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Figure 7-53. Eggs of cat platyhelminths. A, Benia
taeniaeformis. This taenid cestode egg has a radially
striated embryophore and contains a fully developed 
oncosphere. B, Spirmmetra mansonoides. This diphyllobo-
thrid cestode egg has an operculate capsule and
contains an undeveloped embryo. C, Platynosomum
fastosum. This dicrocoelid trematode egg also has
 an operculate capsule but contains a fully developed
miracidium.
P
C
importance aside from its tendency to complicate the dif-
Trematode Eggs
ferential diagnosis of pulmonary and vesical capillariasis.
 Cats around the world are host to nearly 100, or perhaps more,
Cats are host to capillarids, typically E. aerophilus from
species of trematodes (Bowman et al, 2002). The trematodes
the respiratory system and A. putori from the stomach
live in the mouth, intestinal tract, pancreatic and bile duets,
and small intestine.
nasal fossae, lungs, and blood vessels Inall cases the eggs make
their way into the feces. The eggs of most of these trematodes
Cestode Eggs and Segments
 are operculate, but the eggs of the Schistosomatidae are not.
Cats most commonly are host to one of four tapeworms,
Some of the eggs are embryonated when passed (e.g., those of
although they can be infected with D. latum and a few other
Platynosomum fastosum) whereas others (e.g-, P. kellicotti)
unusual species. The four tapeworms most commonly found
contain the zygote surrounded by yolk. Some eggs can be
in cats in North America are Spirometra mansonoides,
quite large, such as those of Alaria species, whereas others
Taenia taeniaeformis, D. caninum, and Mesocestoides species.
are very small, such as those of Metagorirmus species.
The eggs of Spirormetra species are brown, fairly elongate,
and operculate. The eggs of T. taeniaeformis are nearly spher-
Cystoisospora, Haimimondia, Besnoitia,
oid. In the case of cats that use litter pans, people are often
and oxoplasima
aware of the segments passed by cats: rectangular segments
The species of Cystoisospora infecting cats are entirely distinct
are taenid segments, cucumber-seed-shaped segments are
from those infecting dogs. The largest oocyst is that of
those of D. caninum, and the small sesame-seed-shaped seg-
Cystoisospora felis. A midsize oocyst is Cystoisospora rivolta.
ments are those of Mesocestoides species. Cats can be infected
There are several species and genera producing smaller oocysts,
   i s  q  ss 
including Besnoitia darlingi, Besnoitia wallacei, and Besnoitia
than dogs.
jellisoni, along with T. gondii and Hammondia hammondi.
Figure 7-54. Coccidian cysts of cats. A,
Cystoisospora felis (×100o). B, Oystoisospora rnv-
olta ( x2000). C, oxoplasma gondii (×2000). D,
Sarcocystis sp ( × 2000). Sarcocystis sporocysts
released by rupture of the oocyst wall are
only slightly larger than I. gondii but are ovoid 
B
rather than subspheric and contain four
sporozoites.
C
D
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
329
TABLE 7-1
 Oocyst Dimensions in Cat Parasites
Specles
Oocyst Dlmenslons (μm)
C. felis
38-51 × 27-39
Cystoisospora rivolta
21-28 × 18-23
Besnoitia darlingi
11-13 × 11-13
Besnoitia wallacei
16-19 × 10-13
Toxoplasma gondi
11-13 × 9-11
Hammondia hammondi
11-13 × 10-12
Careful micrometry affords differentiation of the larger species
 of oocysts, but, unfortunately, the most important species,
Toxoplasma, remains confounded with Hammondia. Until
Figure 7-55. Physaloptera praeputialis in the stomach of a cat.
this dilemma is resolved, oocysts smaller than 14 μm should
be regarded as Toxoplasma, just to be on the safe side (see Figure
7-54 and Table 7-1).
P. praeputialis and P. rara (Spirurida) (Figure 7-55; see
also Figures 4-130 and 4-131), with the anterior end
Sarcocystis
attached to the gastric mucosa, may be diagnosed endosco-
Sarcocystis sporulates within the host, and the fragile oocyst
pically and may cause vomiting.
wall often breaks. Therefore the sporocyst measuring 9 to 12 ×
Ollulanus tricuspis (1 mm, Trichostrongyloidea) (see
7 to 12 μm and containing four sporozoites is the form usually
Figure 4-80) living in the stomach wall of infected cats
found in the feces (see Figure 7-54). It is not possible to easily
 causes chronic gastritis that results in vomiting, anorexia,
distinguish species of Sarcocystis by micrometry.
weight loss, and possibly death.
Aonchotheca (Capillaria) putori (Trichinelloidea) (see
Cryptosporidiun
Figure 7-52) usually causes no clinical signs; it has been
The oocysts of Cryptosporidium felis are best floated in
reported to cause perforation at the caudal aspect of the
saturated sucrose solution. Because the oocysts are a mere
pylorus.
 5 μm in diameter, slides must be scanned at high dry mag-
nification. Cryptosporidium oocysts tend to lie in the focal
Small intestine
plane immediately below the coverslip (i.e., at the top of the
Nematodes
air bubbles) (see Figure 3-16).
T. cati (Ascaridoidea) (Figure 7-56; see also Figures
4-123, 7-39 to 7-42, and 7-52) infection is usually without
Annotated Host-Organ Listing of
clinical signs except in very heavy infections.
Parasites of Cats
T. leonina (Ascaridoidea) (see Figures 4-123, 7-39 to
T. gondi may occur in any tissue of any host as extracellular or
7-42, and 7-52) infection is typically without signs.
 intracellular tachyzoites or as bradyzoites in cysts (see Figures
A. tubaeforme (Ancylostomatoidea) (see Figures 4-95,
3-21 and 8-35). Sexual reproduction with formation of oocysts
4-96, 4-98, and 7-52) usually causes no clinical signs, but
 so  n   s ( i )
cats may have weight loss, regenerative anemia, and loose,
members of the cat family (Felidae).
Allmentary System
Mouth
Protozoa
Trichomonas felistomae (flagellate) is found around
the gum margins and is mainly observed in cats infected
with feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), feline leukemia
virus (FeLV), or feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) or cats
 suffering from gingivitis; it is nonpathogenic.
Stomach and esophagus
Nematodes
G. spinigerum (Spirurida) (see Figure 4-129), with head
attached to stomach mucosa, may cause gastric wall
perforation.
Fgure 7-56. bxocara cati in the intestine of a cat at necropsy.
330
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
tarry stools, and infection has resulted in death owing to
Cryptosporidium felis (see Figure 3-16; Apicomplexa)
significant blood loss from the intestinal mucosa.
asexual and sexual stages occur in the apical portion
A. brazilierse (Ancylostomatoidea) (see Figures 4-95,
of the epithelial cels; they are probably visible only
4-96, 4-98, and 7-52) causes less blood loss than A. tubae-
via histologic sections.  Infection  is usually  without
forme, and experimentally infected kittens have maintained
signs, although occasionally it is accompanied by severe
unaffected red blood cell parameters.
diarrhea.
U. stenocephala (Ancylostomatoidea) (see Figures 4-95,
4-96, 4-98, and 7-52) infections in cats in the United States
Large intestine
are very rare.
Nematodes
Strongyloides felis (common in Australia; Speare and
 Strongyloides tumefaciens (5 mm, Rhabditida) forms
Tinsley, 1987) (5 mm, Rhabditida).
large tumorlike nodules in the large intestine, which are
T. spiralis (Trichinelloidea) (see Figure 4-148) causes
detected on abdominal palpation as a firm, fibrotic colon.
signs referable to mild gastrointestinal upset, such as
Trichuris campanula and Trichuris serrata (exotic, South
vomiting and diarrhea, maybe bloody diarrhea.
America: Trichinelloidea) (see Figures 4-151 and 7-52).
Aonchotheca (Capillaria) putori (Trichinelloidea) (see
Figures 7-52) is present in the small intestine as well as
Liver, bile ducts, and gallbladder; pancreatic duct
the stomach.
Nematodes
Calodiun (Capillaria) hepaticum (Trichinelloidea) (see
Cestodes
Figure 8-117).
T. taeniaeformis (Taenidae) (see Figures 4-34 and 4-36)
Toxocara canis (Ascaridoidea) larvae, granulomas
occurs typically without signs.
(Figure 8-99) (Parsons et al, 1988).
E. multilocularis (Taeniidae) (see Figure 4-43) occurs
typically without signs.
Trematodes
D. canirum (Dipylidiidae) (see Figures 4-53, 7-5, and
O.tenuicollis and Opisthorchis felineus (30 mm,
 7-33) occurs typically without signs.
 Opisthorchidae) in gall bladder and bile ducts is likely
Mesocestoides lineatus (Mesocestoididae) (see Figures
to induce cirrhosis, cholecystitis, and the development
4-58 and 7-32) occurs typically without signs.
 of edema and ascites owing to continuing periportal
 si ) (oi s s
fibrosis.
and 4-29) may be associated with diarrhea, emaciation, or
M. albidus (4.6 mm) and M. corjunctus (6.6 mm)
vomiting.
(Opisthorchiidae) in bile ducts are associated with icterus
and cholangiohepatitis, ascites, jaundice, and emaciation.
Trematodes
Amphimerus pseudofelineus (22 mm, Opisthorchiidae)
Alaria marcianae (5 mm, Diplostomatidae) (see Figures
 occurs in gallbladder and bile ducts with anorexia, weight
 4-20 and 4-22) occurs typically without signs.
loss, diarrhea, vomiting, and icterus.
A. verustus (1.4 mm, Heterophyidae) occurs typically
Parametorchis complexus (10 mm, Opisthorchiidae)
without signs.
occurs in bile ducts.
P. lorga (1.2 mm, Heterophyidae) occurs typically with-
C. sinersis (Asia) (Opisthorchiidae) (see Figures 4-10
out signs.
and 4-17) occurs in gallbladder and bile ducts with occa-
Mesostepharus milvi (1.8 mm, Cyathocotylidae) occurs
 sional pancreatic duct involvement causing progressive liver
typica lly without signs.
cirrhosis.
P.fastosum (Platynosomum concinnum?)(8 mm,
Acanthocephala
Dicrocoelidae) occurs in tropical climates in gallbladder
 Oncicola species (see Figure 4-161) occurs typically with-
and bile ducts, causing anorexia, weight loss, vomiting,
out signs.
 depression, mucoid diarrhea, jaundice, and hepatomegaly.
Eurytrema procyonis (3.3 mm) (Dicrocoelidae) (Figures
Protozoa
4-19 and 7-53) occurs in pancreatic duct, bile ducts, and
Cystoisospora felis, C. rivolta, Besnoitia species, H. ham-
 gallbladder, causing cirrhosis and pancreatic atrophy and
mondi, and T. gondii (Coccidia) (see Figure 7-54) stages
fibrosis.
occur in the intestinal epithelium, where they might cause
enteritis and perhaps mild diarrhea.
Resplratory System
Sarcocystis hirsuta, Sarcocystis tenella, Sarcocystis porcifelis,
Nasal cavity, trachea, and bronchi
and Sarcocystis leporurn (Coccidia) (see Table 2-1 and Figure
Nematodes
 7-54) occur with sexual stages in the intestinal epithelium.
Eucoleus (Capillaria) aerophilus (Trichinelloidea) (see
Giardia felis (see Figure 3-6) trophozoites present on
Figure 7-52).
 intestinal epithelium may be detected in mucosal scrapings.
Mammomonogamus species (Syngamidae) (Figure 7-57)
G. felis infection usually occurs without signs, but diarrhea
occurs in nares and nasopharynx; species seen in the
may occur.
middle ear.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
331
anemia, depression, anorexia, dehydration, fever, icterus,
and enlargement of the liver and spleen.
Nematode microfilariae
D. immitis (Filarioidea) (see Figure 7-38) rarely pro-
duces microfilariae in cats; other filarids infect cats in
other parts of the world.
Skeletal Muscles
Nematode larvae
T. spiralis (Trichinelloidea) (see Figures 4-150, 7-92, and
8-116).
Connectlve Tlssues
Insect larvae
Cuterebra species (Diptera) (30 mm) (see Figures 2-32,
Fgure 7-57. Mammomonogamus auris in the middle ear of a cat
 8-1, and 8-2) occur as migrating forms.
as viewed through an otoscope. (Courtesy Dr. Edgar Tudor,
 Paradise Animal Hospital, Saipan, USA.)
Urogenltal System
Kidneys
Lung parenchyma
Nematodes
Nematodes
Toxocara canis (Ascaridoidea) larvae, granulomas
A. abstrusus (9 mm, Metastrongyloidea) (see Figures 7-52
(Parsons et al, 1988).
and 8-85) occurs in terminal respiratory bronchioles and
 alveolar ducts, with the majority of signs being related to
Urinary bladder
 developing eggs lodged in the tissues; cats harboring large
Nematodes
worm burdens may experience bronchopneumonia and
Pearsonema (Capillaria) plica (60 mm), and Pearsonema
show signs of open mouthed abdominal breathing.
feliscati (32 mm) (Trichinelloidea) (see Figure 7-52).
Trematodes
Nervous System
P. kellicotti and other Paragonimus species outside
Nematodes
 United States (Troglotrematidae) (see Figures 4-14, 4-15,
D. irmmitis (Filarioidea) adults migrate erratically in
 no sid u asid sanou u 1nso (a '9e- pue
meninges and ventricles (see Figures 4-137 and 4-138).
 greater numbers within the cysts; animals are generally
without signs, but respiratory distress or even death may
Insect larvae
be associated with the infection.
Cuterebra species (Diptera) (30 mm) (see Figures 2-32,
8-1, and 8-2) larvae can migrate through spinal cord and
Vascular System
brain with clinical signs largely dependent on the path
Heart
taken; seizures, vestibular signs, blindness, dementia, cir-
Nematodes
cling, disorientation, and death have all been noted.
D. imritis (Filarioidea) (see Figures 4-137, 4-138, and
8-109) occurs in arteries; cats very typically have few
Eye
worms and signs of infection from migrating developmental
Protozoa
forms.
T. gondi (Coccidia) can cause iritis, uveitis, detached
Toxocara canis (Ascaridoidea) larvae, granulomas
retina, iridocyclitis, keratic precipitates, mydriasis, aniso-
(Parsons et al, 1988).
coria, and delayed pupillary reflex.
Mesenteric veins
Skln and Halr
Trematodes
Insects
Schistosoma japonicum (Schistosomatidae) in cats in
Adult dipterans.
southeast Asian countries.
Felicola subrostratus (Mallophaga) (see Figure 2-48).
Ctenocephalides felis, Ctenocephalides canis, and E. galli-
Blood
racea (Siphonaptera) (see Figures 2-53 and 2-54).
Protozoa
Cytauxzoon felis (piroplasm) (see Figure 3-29) occurs with
Insect larvae
merozoites in erythrocytes and schizonts in macrophages in
Cuterebra species (Diptera) (30 mm) (see Figures 2-32,
lumen of vessels in most organs. Cats may show signs of
8-1, and 8-2) larvae penetrate the skin of the cat after
332
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
internal migrations and form a subcutaneous warble. The
encountered both sizes in a single culture. Similarly,
third stage larvae and its spiracles can often be seen through
Burostomum species are distinguished from other sheathed
the pore of the warble.
strongyle larvae by their smaller size. Other genera of
sheathed larvae may be grouped according to the length
Arachnids
of their caudal sheath extension (the extension of the
 Dermacentor species, Haemaphysalis leporispalustris, and
sheath beyond the tip of the larva's tail): short, Tricho-
Ixodes species (Ixodidae) (see Figures 2-75 to 2-79, 2-82,
strongylus and Ostertagia; medium, Haemonchus and Coop-
and 2-86 to 2-88).
eria; and long, Oesophagostomum and Chabertia, as
Notoedres cati and S. sabiei (Sarcoptidae) (see Figures 2-
illustrated in Figures 7-59 and 7-60. Within these group-
100, A and 2-102 to 2-105).
ings, further identification depends on micrometry and
O. cyrotis (Psoroptidae) (see Figure 2-101, A and 2-111).
observation of such morphologic details as the caudal
Lyrxacarus radovskyi (Listrophoroidea) (see Figure 2-114).
tubercles of Trichostrongylus, the “oval bodies" of Coope-
Cheyletiella blakei (Cheyletidae) (see Figure 2-116).
ria, and the number and shape of the intestinal cells
Demodex cati (Demodicidae) (see Figure 2-115).
of Oesophagostomum and Chabertia. The odd larva may
Neotrombicula whartoni and Walchia americana (Trom-
defy identification, but accurate diagnosis of the pre-
biculidae) (see Figures 2-119 and 2-120). N. whartoni, a
 dominating genera in a culture is not a diffcult task. Pro-
bright red chigger, has been found in the external ear
 ceed as follows:
canal of cats. W. americana, normally a parasite of the
 Place a drop of the larval suspension on a microscope
gray squirrel Sciurus carolinensis, is capable of causing a
slide. Relax the larvae by gentle warming or by adding a
severe and generalized dermatitis in cats (Lowenstine, Car-
drop of Lugol's solution (5 g iodine crystals and 10 g
 penter, and O'Connor, 1979).
 potassium iodide in 100 mL distilled water). Ring the cov-
erslip with petroleum jelly for support and thus prevent
PARASITES OF RUMINANTS
distortion of the larvae. Avoid higher magnifications at
first but instead scan the slide under low power to get an
Stages in Feces
impression of how many different kinds of larvae are pres-
Nematode Eggs
ent. Then seek representatives of each kind; examine these
 Other than the numerous eggs of various strongylid para-
under higher power; and take whatever measurements may
sites that will be present in the feces, one commonly finds
be necessary for generic or specific diagnosis. The data in
the eggs of Strongyloides, Trichuris, and capillarids (Figure
Table 7-2 are taken from the works of Dikmans and
7-58). The strongylid eggs present in ruminant feces cannot
Andrews (1933, sheep) and Keith (1953, cattle). The
be readily identified to genus or species with the exception
number of intestinal cells is 16, except as otherwise
of certain types (e.g., Nematodirus battus). When a more
aee u r aie sq m pd exi u
specific diagnosis is required, it is necessary to culture the
and require more care for their differentiation than com-
stages present in the feces to the infective stage.
parisons among other groups.
Eggs of the following ruminant nematodes are not illu-
strated in Figure 7-58. Toxocara vitulorum (parasite of
Lungworm Larvae
cattle) eggs look a lot like Toxocara canis eggs, are subglob-
D.
viviparus is the only lung nematode of cattle.
ular with a uniformly pitted surface, and contain a single
Dictyocaulus filaria, Protostrongylus rufescens, and M.
cell when passed. Note: Patent Ascaris suum infections are
capillaris are common lung nematodes of sheep and goats
occasionally reported from sheep and cattle. A. suum eggs
in North America. Differential diagnosis is based on mor-
(see Figure 7-64) are easy to distinguish from those of
phologic features of the first-stage larvae found in the host's
T. vitulorum. Gongylonema eggs are thick walled, have bi-
feces (Figure 7-6l). Dictyocaulus species larvae are tough
 polar opercula, and contain vermiform embryos. Skrjabi-
a r-  aq  q o 
nerma ovis eggs are typical pinworm eggs, with one side
counting technique, but the counting should be done
slightly flattened (see Figure 7-67).
promptly to avoid osmotic shriveling of the larvae. For
sensitive qualitative diagnosis of lungworm infections, the
Identlflcatlon of Strongyle Infectlve Larvae
 Baermann is the technique of choice.
Identification of third-stage infective larvae in cultured
ruminant feces is challenging but not formidable. Usually
Cestode Eggs
two or more genera are present, and one can best determine
The eggs found in the feces of cattle are all from tapeworms
just how many there are by scanning the slide at low power
within the family Anoplocephalidae (see Figures 4-50 and
and mentally grouping those of similar appearance.
7-19). The egg of Moniezia benedeni has a fairly thick shell
Certain species stand out from the crowd. For example,
and seems to be cuboidal in shape. The other species of
Strongyloides larvae are more slender than any of the
anoplocephalid tapeworms for the most part seem to have
 others, lack a sheath, and have a long cylindric esophagus
fairly thin shells that distort in various flotation media (and
and truncated tail. Two sizes, of which the larger is
also clear to some extent). In almost all cases, careful
"standard,” are portrayed in Figure 7-59. Dr. Georgi has
inspection of the egg will allow the visualization of the
C H A P T' E R 7Diagnostic Parasitology
333
Strongyle
Strongyloides papillosus
Nema
Trichuris ovis
Moniezia benedeni
Figure 7-58. Eggs of common ruminant parasites. Strongyle eggs are ellipsoidal, are smooth-
are considerably smaller than the one shown here. Marshallagia marshalli eggs (not shown) are also
'salod pauiod ssal pue sapis lalleied arow guaey ui saa snaean wo jap ing aael Aa
 S. papillosus eggs are slightly smaller than strongyle eggs and contain a rhabditiform larva in fresh
fecal specimens. On incubation, the larvae soon hatch and develop into infective filariform larvae
(see Figure 3-62) or free-living adult males and females, predominantly the latter. Fichurs eggs of
ruminants are more than 60 mm long: those of Capillaria are less than 60 mm long. Moniezia eggs
contain a pear-shaped embryophore containing an oncosphere. Thysanosoma eggs (not shown here)
are grouped in uterine capsules.
334
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Tails (×425)
Trichostrongyius
Haemonchus
Chabertia
Chabertia
Strongyioides
(x250)
(x250)
Figure 7-59. Infective third-stage larvae of nematode parasites of sheep. Both large and small
 Strongyloides infective larvae are represented at the same magnification.
pyriform apparatus containing the larva with its six
the sediment. The formalin-ethyl acetate sedimentation
hooklets.
technique is also appropriate. The operculum of trematode
 eggs is sometimes difficult to see. When in doubt, press the
Trematode Eggs
coverslip with a pencil point. Usually, the type of opercu-
Trematode eggs may fail to float in the concentrations of
lum found on trematode eggs will pop open under such
sugar solutions ordinarily used. They are best concentrated
pressure (Figure 7-62, B).
by washing feces through sieves to remove coarse debris,
 Fasciola hepatica eggs are large (up to 150 μm) and oper-
then centrifuging the washings. The eggs will be found in
culate and contain a cluster of yolk cells (Figure 7-62, A).
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
335
Tricho-
Oster-
Buno-
Haem-
Oesopha-
strongyius
tagia
stomum
onchus
Cooperia
gostomum
0.1
0.2
0.3 mm
L
Figure 7-60. Tails of infective third-stage larvae of nematode parasites of cattle and the anterior
end of a Cooperia larva showing the conspicuous oval bodies (arrow), which represent opticall
cross-sections of a bundle of fibers surrounding the buccal capsule (x350). (From whitlock JH:
The diagnosis of veterinary parasitisms, Philadelphia, 1960, Lea & Febiger.)
Fasciola gigantica (Africa, Hawai, Philippines, and India)
0ocysts in the feces (Figures 7-63 and 7-64), but also on
eggs are like those of F. hepatica but larger (more than
consideration of the case history and clinical signs.
150 μm). Eggs of Fascioloides magna, normally a parasite
Figure 7-63 presents the unsporulated and sporulated
of deer, resemble those of F. hepatica but are infrequently
 s ds   yo ss  j so
found in the feces of infected domestic ruminants
a closely similar set, which do not, however, cross-infect and
because the eggs are trapped in the hepatic cysts con-
taining the adult worms in cattle and because the flukes
 Eimeria of sheep and goats are listed in Table 7-3. The species
fail to mature in sheep and goats. Paramphistomatid
listed for sheep are those illustrated in Figure 7-63. Eimeria
(rumen fluke) eggs are large and easily confused with
ahsata, Eimeria bakuensis, and Eimeria crandallis differ
those of Fasciola species (Figure 7-62). Dicrocoelium
mainly in size, and the ranges overlap, so differentiating
dendriticum eggs are small (50 μm), lopsided, and yellowish
these three species is problematic. Therefore these three spe-
brown and contain a miracidium (Figure 7-62, C).
 pue 'dnoa rinsu, sapun e- aei u aistl are sa
Eurytrema pancreaticum (Far East) eggs resemble those
counterpart goat parasites are listed under “Arloirgi group."
 of D. dendriticum. Schistosome eggs lack an operculum,
Oocysts of Eimeria caprovina, Eimeria absheronae, and
contain a fully developed miracidium, and are armed
Eimeria caprina resemble those of Eimeria faurei very
with a spine.
closely, so we have also assigned these species to an unofficial
composite group. (In the table, asterisks indicate those
Coccldla of Rumlnants
species most likely to be responsible for clinical signs of
 Oocysts of Eimeria species are often found in considerable
coccidiosis.)
 numbers in the feces of healthy ruminants. Even experi-
mental lambs raised on wire become infected with coccidia.
Cryptosporidium
 Despite their frequent occurrence in healthy animals, coc-
The oocysts are best concentrated by flotation in saturated
cidia are quite capable of causing serious disease in cattle,
sucrose solution. Because the oocysts of Cryptosporidium
sheep, and goats. At times, severe disease signs appear
parvum and Cryptosporidium bovis are a mere 5 pm in
before oocysts are shed in the feces. Diagnosis of clinical
diameter, the slide must be scanned under high dry mag-
 coccidiosis must be based not only on identification of the
nification. Cryptosporidium oocysts tend to lie in the focal
336
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
TABLE 7-2
Table of Measurements of Infective Third-Stage Larvae of Strongyles Infecting Sheep and Cattle
Measurements (mlcrons)
Genus
Tall of
Extenslon
(sensu latu)*
 Overall
Sheatht
of Sheatht
Speclal Morphologlcal Features
Strongyloides
Sheep
574-710
Sheath
Length of esophagus at least % length of body cauda
Cattle
524-678
Absent
extremity of larva truncated (see Figure 5-33)
Trichostrongylus
daaus
622-796
76-118
21-40
Tiny tubercles on tip of tail
Cattle
619-762
83-107
25-39
Ostertagia
 Sheep
797-910
92-130
30-60
Cattle
784-928
126-170
55-75
Haemonchus
Sheep
650-751
119-146
65-78
 Sheath kinked at tip of tail; abterior end tapers
Cattle
749-866
158-193
87-119
Cooperia oncophora
Sheep
804-924
124-150
62-82
Two conspicuous oval bodies at anterior end
Cattle
809-976
146-190
79-111
of esophagus
Cooperia spp.
Sheep
711-850
97-122
35-52
 T'wo conspicuous oval bodies at anterior end
Cattle
666-866
109-142
47-71
of esophagus
Nematodirus
Sheep
922-1118
310-350
250-290
 Unlikely to be encountered in cultures less than
Cattle
1095-1142
296-347
207-266
 2 weeks old; forked tail with rodlike process;
intestine has 8 cells
Bunostomum
Sheep
514-678
153-183
85-115
 Small size, long tail sheath
Cattle
500-583
129-158
59-83
Oesophagotomum
daaus
771-923
193-235
125-160
16-24 triangular intestinal cells
Cattle
726-857
209-257
134-182
Chaberia
daaus
710-789
175-220
110-150
 24-32 rectangular intestinal cells
*Taxa grouped with braces are similar in appearance and require more care for differentiation than other groups.
Anus to tip of sheath.
fTip of larva to tip of sheath.
plane immediately below the coverslip (i.e., at the top of the
Cattle are also host to a commensal protozoan, Buxtonella
air bubbles) (see Figure 3-16). Cattle are hosts of three
sulcata, which has cysts in the feces that look very similar to
species of Cryptosporidium: C. parvum and C. bovis of
those of B. coli of pigs.
the small intestine and Cryptosporidium andersoni of the
abomasum. The oocysts of C. andersoni are larger than
Annotated Host-Organ Listing of Parasites
those of C. parvum, being about 7 μm in diameter, and
of Ruminants
are ellipsoidal (see Figure 3-17).
 T. gondi may occur in any tissue of any host as extracelular
or intracellular tachyzoites or as bradyzoites in cysts (see
Other Protozoa
Figure 8-35).
Cattle, sheep, and other ruminants can also be host to other
protozoa. Among the most common groups of protozoa
Allmentary System
seen in the feces of cattle, sheep, and other ruminants are
Mouth, esophagus, and forestomachs
ameba cysts, considered in these hosts to be commensals.
Protozoa
Also, Giardia can sometimes be found in the feces of rumi-
Sarcocystis (Apicomplexa) sarcocysts occur in muscles of
 nants, some having signs of infection and some without.
tongue and esophagus (see Figures 8-32 and 8-33).
C H A P T' E R 7Diagnostic Parasitology
337
Dictyocaulus viviparus(x250)
Dictyocaulus filaria (x250)
(×1000)
Protostrongylus sp. (x425)
Muellerius sp. (x425)
Figure 7-61. Frst-stage larvae of ruminant lungworms. Dictyocaurus viviparus is the only lungworm of
cattle, and D. viviparus first-stage larvae are the only larvae of parasitic nematodes found in fresh
cattle dung. Notice the prominent granules. Dictyocaurus flaria first-stage larvae from sheep are
large and have bluntly rounded tails and a "button" at the mouth, and likewise have prominent
granules. Protostrongylus rufescens larvae are rather stout and have conically tapering tails without 
spines. Muelferus capilaris larvae have a curiously shaped tail with a dorsal spine (inset).
338
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Figure 7-62. Eggs of some trematode
parasites of ruminants (x425).
A,
Fasciola hepatica. B, (Right and Left),
Paramphistominae. C, (Top and Bottom),
Dicrocoelium dendriticum.
B
C
 Figure 7-63. Unsporulated and sporulated oocysts of nine
species of Emeria of sheep (x1000). (From Joyner LP,
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Norton CC, Davies SFM, Watkins CV: The species of coc-
Please refer to the printed publication.
cidia occuring in cattle and sheep in the southwest of
England, Parasitology 56:533, 1966. Crown copynight.
Reproduced with permission from the Controller of Her
Britannic Majesty's Stationery Office.)
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
Fgure 7-64. Unsporulated and sporulated oocysts of 12 species of Emeria of cattle (x1000).
(From Joyner LP, Norton CC, Davies SFM, Watkins CV: The species of coccidia occuring in cattle
and sheep in the southwest of England, Parasitology 56:536, 1966. Crown copyright. Reproduced 
with permission from the Controller of Her Britannic Majesty's Stationery Office.)
TABLE 7-3
Corresponding Species of Eimeria of Sheep and of Goats
Ahsata Group
Arlolngl Group
Faurel Group
Absheronae Group
Eimeria ahsata,* Eimeria bakuensis,*
Eimeria arloingi,* Eimeria hirci,
Eimeria faurei and
Eimeria absheronae,*Eimeria caprina.
and Eimeria crandallis
and Eimeria christensenit
Eimeria caprovina
and Eimeria caprovina
Eimeria intricata
Eimeria kocharit
Eimeria ovinoidalis
Eimerianinakohlyakimovae
Eimeria granulosa
Eimeria jolchijevi
Eimeria parva
Eimeria alijevit
Eimeria pallida
Eimeria pallida
*Those species most likely to be responsible for clinical signs of coccidiosis
340
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Cestode larvae
TABLE 7-4
Taenia species (Taeniidae) cysticerci occur in muscles of
 Nematodes in the Abomasum and Small Intestine
tongue (see Figures 4-38 and 8-60).
Genus
Length (mm)
Flgure(s)
Insect larvae
Abomasum
Hypoderma lineatum (Diptera: Hypodermatidae) in wall
Haemonchus
14-30
4-72,4-75
 of esophagus.
Mecistocirrus
43
4-77
Ostertagia
7-9
4-66, 4-72
Nematodes
Trichostrongylus axei
1
4-70, 4-72
Gongylonema pulchrum (150 mm), and Gorgylonema
verrucosurm (100 mm) (Spirurida) (see Figures 4-133, 4-134,
Small Intestine
and 7-105) occur woven in a neat, sinusoidal pattern in the
Cooperia
6-16
4-72,4-78
esophageal (G. pulchrum) or ruminal (G. verrucosum) mucosa.
Trichostrongylus
6-7
4-70, 4-72
Nematodirus
20-25
4-72, 4-76
Trematodes
Cotylophoron
cotylophoron,
Paramphistomum
cervi,
Paramphistomum liorchis, and Paramphistomum microbo-
throides (Paramphistomatidae) (see Figure 4-12).
developing world. It has an esophageal ventriculus and
 produces subspheric eggs with a pitted T. canis like shell
Abomasum
surface. A. suum, a very occasional parasite of ruminants,
Protozoan
lacks a ventriculus and produces ellipsoidal eggs with a
 Eirmeria gilruthi(Cocidia) megaschizonts (see Figure 8-27).
mammillated shell surface.
C. andersoni (Apicomplexa) occurs usually without clin-
Cooperia curticei, Cooperia bisonis, Cooperia onco-
ical signs.
phora, Cooperia pectinata, Cooperia punctata, Cooperia
spatulata, Cooperia occidentalis, Trichostrongylus colu-
Nematodes
briformis,Trichostrongylus longispicularis,Trichostrongylus
H. contortus, Haemonchus placei, Haemonchus similis,
capricola, Trichostrongylus vitrinus, Nematodirus helvetia-
Mecistocirrus digitatus, Ostertagia ostertagi, Ostertagia bisonis,
nus, Nematodirus spathiger, Nematodirus filicollis, Nema-
Ostertagia (Teladorsagia) circumcincta, Ostertagia orloff,
todirus abnormalis, Nematodirus lanceolatus, and N. battus
Ostertagia trifurcata, Ostertagia (Grosspiculagia) lyrata, Oster-
(Strongylida: Trichostrongyloidea) occur, with the typical
tagia (Grosspiculagia) occidentalis, Ostertagia (Telodorsagia)
associated signs in heavy infections being diarrhea (see
davtiani, Ostertagia (Pseudostertagia) bullosa, M. marshalli
Table 7-4).
and Trichostrorgylus axei (Strongylida: Trichostrongyloidea)
B. phlebotomum (cattle) and Bunostomum trigonocepha-
(Figure 7-65, Table 7-4). These parasites, depending on the
lum (sheep) (25 mm, Ancylostomatoidea) (see Figure 4-93)
species, cause anemia, diarrhea, abomasitis, and so on.
are capable of causing anemia in younger animals with
heavy infections.
Small intestine
S. papillosus (6 mm, Rhabditida) (see Figure 4-109) can
Nematodes
cause diarrhea and anemia when present in large numbers.
T. vitulorum (30 cm, Ascaridoidea) is only rarely seen
Aonchotheca(Capillaria)
bovis
and
Aonchotheca
 in the United States, although it can be common in the
(Capillaria) brevipes (Trichinelloidea) (see Figure 7-58).
Oesophagostomum species third- and fourth-stage larvae
(Strongyloidea) (see Figure 4-90).
Cestodes
M. exparsa and M. benedeni (Anoplocephalidae) (Figure
7-66; see also Figures 4-49, 4-50, and 7-58) typically occur
with no clinical signs.
Thysanosoma actinoides, Wyominia tetoni (Anoplocepha-
lidae) typically occur with no clinical signs.
Thysaniezia, Stilesia, Avitellina (Anoplocephalidae) are
exotic anoplocephalids of ruminants.
Protozoa
Eimeria species (Coccidia) (see Figures 7-63, 7-64, and
8-20 to 8-24), depending on the species involved, can cause
Fgure 7-65. Lesions in the abomasum of a cow caused by larvae
severe enteritis with bloody diarrhea; stages may be visible
of Ostertagia ostertagi.
in wet mount scrapings of the intestinal mucosa.
C H A P T E R 7  Diagnostic Parasitology
341
Protozoa
Eimeria species (Coccidia) (see Figures 7-63, 7-64, and
8-20 to 8-24).
Entamoeba bovis and other species of amebas are con-
sidered nonpathogenic parasites or commensals of the large
bowel of ruminants.
B. suicata (ciliate) is a commensal of the large bowel of
cattle (see Figure 7-22).
Liver
Nematodes
A. suum (Ascaridida) of swine will on rare occasions
 sometimes appear in the bile ducts of sheep and cattle.
Stepharurus dentatus (Strongyloidea) (see Figure 4-91)
has immature larvae that can migrate through the bovine
liver and cause severe trauma.
Fgure 7-66. Moniezia benedeni in the intestine of a cow at necropsy.
Cestodes
C. parvum, C. bovis, and C. andersoni (Apicomplexa)
T. actinoides and Wyominia tetoni (Anoplocephalidae)
occur, with the C. parvum being a cause of diarrhea in
can sometimes be found in the bile ducts of ruminants
calves less than 30 days of age (see Figures 3-16 and 3-17).
into which they have migrated soon after the animal's
Giardia species (flagellate) (see Figure 7-94) can cause 
death; with rapid ligation of the duct, the worms will be
 diarrhea in young animals and sometimes adults.
found in the small intestine.
Cecum and colon
Cestode larvae
Nematodes
E. granulosus and E. multilocularis hydatids (Taenidae)
Oesophagostomum radiatum (cattle), Oesophagostomum
(see Figures 4-44 to 4-48, 8-57, 8-58, and 8-64) cause signs
columbianum (sheep and goats), Oesophagostomum venulo-
that may be severe depending on the location of the cysts
sum (sheep and goats), and Chabertia ovina (sheep and
produced.
 goats) (18 to 22 mm, Strongyloidea) (see Figures 4-86 to
T. hydatigena cysticerci (Taeniidae) (see Figure 4-38).
4-90). The fourth-stage larvae of O. radiatum in cattle and
O. columbianum in sheep may be found in abscesses in the
Trematodes
gut wall (see Figure 4-90).
Fasciola hepatica,
F. gigantica, and F.
.magna
Trichuris discolor (52 mm, cattle) and Trichuris ovis (70
(Fasciolidae) (Figure 7-68; see also Figures 4-1 to 4-9 and
mm, sheep and goats) (Trichinelloidea) (see Figure 7-58)
7-62, A). F. hepatica (30 mm) is endemic in western and Gulf
can be associated with clinical diarrhea.
states of the United States and in Hawaii, Puerto
S. ovis and Skrjabinema caprae (8 to 10 mm, Oxyurida)
Rico, British Columbia, and eastern provinces of Canada.
infections are usually without clinical signs (Figure 7-67).
Fgure 7-68. Liver of a sheep that has been fatally infected with
Fgure 7-67. Skrjabinema caprae egg and an Emeria oocyst in the
Fascioloides magna showing the typical lesions and deposits of
feces of a goat ( x400).
black "fluke pigment."
342
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
F. gigantica (75 mm) is endemic in Hawaii and Africa.
Cestode larvae
F. magna (100 mm) occurs in foci throughout North
E. granulosus (Taenidae) (see Figures 4-44, 4-45, and
America; remember that the final host is typically the
 8-64) has cysts that can become quite large when present
white-tailed deer. The migratory tracts and lesions produced
in lung tissue.
by F. rmagna can be marked in ruminants with large deposits
of black “fluke pigment," often fatal in smaller ruminants.
Vascular System
D. dendriticum (Europe, Asia, Africa, South America)
Heart
has been introduced into North America, and it occurs in
Cestode larvae
central New York State and the Pacific northwest; it causes
Taenia saginata (Taenidae) cysticerci are found in the
chronic hepatic fibrosis.
muscles of cattle in the United States.
E. pancreaticum (Asia and Brazil) (Dicrocoelidae) (see
T. ovis (Taeniidae) cysticerci are found in the various mus-
Figures 4-18 and 7-62, C).
cles of sheep but are considered exotic now in the United States.
Peritoneum and peritoneal cavity
Arteries
Nematode
Nematodes
Setaria labiatopapillosa (Filarioidea) (see Figure 4-142)
 Elaeophora schneideri (sheep; Filarioidea) occurs in the
 are large white filarids that are sometimes found as inci-
western United States.
dental findings in the abdominal cavity of cattle.
Elaeophora poeli (cattle; Filarioidea) is an exotic infec-
tion in Africa and Asia.
Cestode larvae
Onchocerca armillata (cattle; Filarioidea) is an exotic
T. hydatigena larvae (Taenidae) (see Figure 4-48) are cys-
infection in Africa and Asia.
ticerci that often have a long “neck" anterior to the scolex.
veins
Pentastomid nymphs
Trematodes
L. serrata (Pentastomida) (see Figure 2-123) larvae can
  ) s ss 
 be found in the abdominal cavity of viscera of ruminants,
are all exotic. S. japoricum is found in Asia with a wide mam-
most commonly in Africa.
 malian host range. Species in cattle, sheep, and goats include
Schistosoma bovis (Africa, Asia, southern Europe) and
Resplratory System
Schistosoma nasalis, Schistosoma matthei, Schistosoma indicum,
Nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses
Schistosoma spindale, and Schistosoma turkestanica (Asia).
Insect larvae
Oestrus ovis larvae in sheep and goats (Oestridae) (see
Lymph nodes
Figure 2-22) are found in the nasal sinuses; they may be
Pentastomids
rather small or quite large (10 to 20 mm) depending on
Linguatula serrata (see Figure 2-123).
their developmental age.
Blood
Trachea and bronchi
 Nematode microfilariae
Nematodes
S. labiatopapillosa (Filarioidea).
 Dictyocaulus viviparus (80 mm, cattle) (Trichostrongy-
loidea) is the only lung-dwelling nematode found in catle;
Protozoa
these can cause severe respiratory distress when present in
sa is si is a i
large numbers.
Babesia argentina, Theileria parva, Theileria annulata, and
D. filaria (100 mm, sheep and goats) (Trichostrongy-
Theileria mutans (piroplasms) (see Figure 3-29) are all basi-
loidea) (see Figures 4-72, 4-81, and 7-61) can cause respi-
cally exotic at this time in the United States.
ratory distress in the infected host.
Trypanosoma theileri (cattle) and Trypanosoma melopha-
P. rufescens (50 mm; sheep) (Metastrongyloidea) (see
giurm (sheep) (hemoflagellates) (see Figure 3-2). Rarely seen
Figures 4-68 and 7-61).
 in blood films, these organisms are readily demonstrable by
Mammomonogamus laryngeus (Syngamidae) (see Figure
blood culture.
3-91). Male and female worms are fused in copula; they are
endemic in Puerto Rico and various Caribbean islands.
Rickettsia
 These worms have a large strongylid buccal capsule.
Anaplasma marginale, Mycoplasma wenyonii, and Myco-
plasma ovis.
Lung parenchyma
Nematodes
Skeletal Muscles and Connectlve Tlssues
M. capillaris (Metastrongyloidea) (see Figures 3-100
Cestode larvae
and 5-35).
T. saginata (Taenidae) cysticerci are found most fre-
O. columbianum larvae (erratic migration) (see Figure 4-90).
quently in the muscles of mastication, tongue, heart, and
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
343
muscular portion of the diaphragm of cattle; scolex with
Eye
four suckers but no hooks.
Nematodes
T. hydatigena (Taenidae) (see Figure 3-29) cysticerci are
T. californiensis (sheep), Thelazia gulosa (cattle), and
sometimes found in skeletal muscles but more commonly
Thelazia skrjabini (cattle) (Spirurida), in conjunctival sac
 in liver or on peritoneal membranes.
and lachrymal duct (see Figure 4-132) may be associated
 T. ovis (Taenidae) cysticerci are pea-sized vesicles found
with conjunctivitis and development of granulation tissue.
in the heart and esophagus and beneath the epicardium and
 diaphragmatic pleura of sheep and goats; exotic in the
Skln and Halr
United States.
Insects
Dipteran adults
Insect larvae
Musca autumnalis, Stomoxys calcitrans, and Haematobia
Hypoderma bovis and H. lineatum (Hypodermatidae)
irritans (Muscidae) (see Figures 2-13, 2-14, and 2-15)
(see Figure 2-22) larvae overwinter in the northern climates
adults spend a good deal of time on cattle; S. calcitrans is
within cattle, with H. bovis being in the spinal canal and H.
more likely to rest off of cattle when not feeding.
lineatum being in tissues around the esophagus.
Glossina species (Africa) (see Figure 2-16).
Melophagus ovinus (Hippoboscidae) (see Figure 2-17)
Nematodes
 pupae and adults of the ked are found on the fleece.
Onchocerca gutturosa, Onchocerca lienalis, Onchocerca
H. bovis and H. lineatum (Hypodermatidae), the gad-
bovis,
and
Onchocerca gibsoni (Filarioidea). Adult
flies, are rarely seen as they hover about cattle gluing their
Onchocerca worms are found in deep connective tissues,
eggs to hairs on the animals.
microfilariae in the dermis. In Australian catfle, O. gibsoni
Tabanidae (see Figures 2-10 and 2-11) land on cattle
produces nodules in the brisket that require extensive trim-
typically only long enough to feed.
ming. We have seen O. gibsori in corned beef purchased in
a local supermarket.
Dipteran larvae
H. bovis and H.lineatum (30 mm, Hypodermatidae) (see
Protozoa
Figure 2-22) bots mature in warbles in the skin of cattle
typically along the back of the animal.
(see Table 2-1 and Figure 8-32).
Calliphoridae and Sarcophagidae (see Figures 2-12, 2-18,
and 2-19) maggots can be serious pests of ruminant, new-
Urogenltal System
borns, and animals that are wounded or down and soiled
Protozoans
for an extended period.
Tritrichomonas foetus (Flagellate) (see Figures 3-4 and 3-5).
T. gondi (Apicomplexa) placentas of aborting sheep.
Anoplurans
N. caninum (Apicomplexa) placentas of aborting cattle.
Haematopinus eurysternus, Haematopinus quadripertu-
SuS,
Haematopinus tuberculatus,
Linognathus vituli,
Nervous System
Solenopotes capillatus (cattle), Linognathus ovillus, Linogna
Brain, spinal cord, and meninges
thus pedalis, Linognathus oviformis (sheep), Linognathus
Protozoa
oviformis, and Linognathus stenopsis (goat) (see Figures
 Sarcocystis-like organism (Apicomplexa) in brain of
2-36, 2-38, and 2-40).
cattle (Dubey, Perry, and Kennedy, 1987).
Mallophagans
Nematode
Damalinia (Bovicola) bovis (cattle), Damalinia ovis
Parelaphostrongylus  tenuis (Metastrongylidae)(see
(sheep), Damalinia caprae, Damalinia limbatus, Damalinia
Figures 8-93 and 8-94). Adults are typically found in
(Holokartikos) crassipes (goats) (see Figure 2-45).
white-tailed deer. Larvae and young adults that find their
way into sheep and goats migrate through the spinal cord
Siphonaptera
 and brain, causing paralysis. Infections in cale are rare but
Echidnophaga gallinacea (see Figure 2-54).
are reported.
Ctenocephalides felis can cause severe distress in calves
and has even been reported to cause the death of calves,
Cestode larvae
lambs, and sheep, although mainly in tropical settings over-
T. multiceps (Taenidae) occurs in the brain of sheep and
seas (see Figure 2-53).
-eb1o au (79-8 pue 7t- samal aas) .pia, Busnes sieos
ism is exotic and supposedly no longer in North America.
Arachnids
Metastigmata: ixodidae
Insect larva
A.americanum, Amblyomma cajennense, A. maculatum,
H. bovis (Hypodermatidae) larvae in the spinal canal of
Amblyomma inornatun (Mexico), Amblyomma oblongo-
cattle.
guttatum (Central and South America), and Amblyomma
344
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
variegatum (imported to Caribbean from Africa, eradica-
tion from area in process) (see Figure 2-69).
Boophilus annulatus and Boophilus microplus (see Figure
2-84); B. arnulatus is considered exotic and should be
reported if found on cattle.
D.andersoni,Dermacentor albipictus,Dermacentor occi-
dentalis, Dermacentor nigrolineatus, D. variabilis, and
Dermacentor (Otocentor) ritens (see Figures 2-86 to 2-88).
Ixodes cookei, Ixodes pacificus, Ixodes scapularis (see
Figures 2-70,2-75, and 2-78).
Metastigmata: argasidae
Otobius megnini (spinose ear tick) (see Figure 2-73),
Fgure 7-69. Emeria leuckarti unsporulated (let) and sporulated
(right) 00cysts (x425).
with larvae and nymphs in the ears.
Ornithodoros coriaceus and Ornithodoros turicata (see
Figure 2-72) will get on the hosts only long enough to feed.
PARASITES OF HORSES
Astigmata
Stages in Feces
S. scabiei (see Figures 2-100 and 2-102) can cause severe
The intestinal parasites of horses form a unique group.
dermatitis, especially in cattle.
Horses host only two coccidian species, C. parvurm and
Chorioptes bovis (see Figures 2-101, 2-109, and 2-110).
E. leuckarti (Apicomplexa) (Figure 7-69), and only three
Psoroptes ovis (see Figure 2-100, 2-107, and 2-108) is
species of tapeworms (Anoplocephala magna, Anoplocephala
considered eradicated for the most part from the United
perfoliata, and Paranoplocephala mamillana), all of which
States, but this or other very similar mites turn up in the
belong to the family Anoplocephalidae (Figure 7-70).
ears of llamas and other American camelids, various wild
Nematodes form the largest group (Figure 7-71), which
sheep, and cale in the southern and western parts of the
includes one ascarid (Parascaris equorum), two pinworms
United States.
(O. equi and Probstmayria vivipara), one rhabditoid nema-
tode, Strorgyloides westeri, three habronematid spirurids
Prostigmata
(Habronema muscae, Habronema microstoma, and Draschia
Demodex bovis, Demodex ovis, and Demodex caprae (see
megastoma), and many strongylids that are all members of
Figures 2-115 and 8-7) can cause very large lesions in the
the Strongyloidea except one, T. axei in the Trichostrongy-
skin of goats and cattle, each containing thousands of mites.
loidea.
Although the horse hosts no hookworms or
Psorobia bos (cattle) and Psorergates ovis (sheep and
whipworm, 54 species of strongylids more than make
 goats) (Psorergatidae) are the ruminant itch mites.
up for these deficiencies. The strongylids are cosmopoli-
Trombiculidae (see Figures 2-118 to 2-120), chiggers,
tan in distribution, and naturally infected horses tend to
are larvae of free-living adult mites and can cause severe
harbor a dozen or more species simultaneously. The diag-
pruritus often localizing within the ears.
nostic dilemma associated with strongylid eggs is thus
accentuated in the case of the horse. However, the major
Mesostigmata
Raillietia auris (cattle) and Raillietia caprae (goats). Ear
mites (see Figure 2-96).
Protozoan
Besnoitia besnoiti (Coccidia), exotic.
Nematodes
Stephanofilaria stilesi (6 mm, Filarioidea). Very small
adult filariids in skin of ventral abdomen, exotic.
Parafilaria bovicola (Filarioidea). Adults in subcutaneous
tissues cause ^summer bleeding" in cattle, exotic.
O. guturosa, O. lienalis, and O. bovis (Filarioidea).
Microfilariae found in dermis of cattle.
E. schneideri (Filarioidea) microfilariae can be found in
the skin, usually in the head region.
Figure 7-70. Anoplocephala magna (left) and Anoplocephala perfoliata
Rhabditis strongyloides (Rhabditida) (see Figures 4-107
(right) eggs (x425). The oncospheres are enclosed by pear-
and 8-72) larvae will enter the hair follicles of animals on
shaped embryophores. The egg of Paranoplocephala mamilana is
 Occasion if they are resting on damp hay or other bedding.
only three fourths as large as these.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
345
Parascaris equorum
Parascaris equorum
Oxyuris equi
Strongyle
Strongyle
Strongyle
Strongyloides westeri
Habronema sp.
Draschiamegastoma
门
50
100 μm
1
Figure 7-71. Eggs of some nematode parasites of horses.
diagnostic categories can be identified by fecal culture
are smooth and clear. Strongyle eggs present the usual
(Figure 7-72).
differential diagnostic problem. Recourse may be had to
 The majority of parasite stages that float in a sugar
fecal culture and identification of infective third-stage
flotation of equine feces are relatively easy to recognize.
larvae (see Figure 7-72). S. westeri eggs are smaller than
P. equorum eggs are yellowish brown with thick, subspheric,
 strongyle eggs and contain a rhabditiform larva in fresh
rough-surfaced shell walls and contain one cell. Eggs are
specimens. O. equi eggs are more likely to be recovered
often found with their external protein layer partially or
from anal scrapings than from fecal specimens. The egg
completely detached. The exposed portions of such shells
shown here was collected by momentarily pressing the
346
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Cyathostominae
Triodontophorus
Strongylus
Strongylus
edentatus
vulgaris
Poteriostomum
.5 mm
.1 mm
Fgure 7-72. Infective third-stage larvae of some horse strongylids. Larvae of the subfamily
Cyathostominae, represented here by Cyathostomum catinatum, have eight intestinal cells. Gyaloce-
-n aun ina) t su soydopo 'gt sey wnaisan zt seu (umous ioui sneideo snjeto
tophorus serratus larvae shown here have only 16), Strongylus edentatus has 18 to 20, and Strongylus
vuigaris has 32 intestinal cells. S. vulgaris is easily distinguished from all the rest by its large size
and long column of intestinal cells.
adhesive side of a piece of cellophane tape against a horse's
large numbers such as when the adults are present in the
anus and then was mounted by sticking the tape to a micro-
same animal on the necropsy table. Draschia and
scope slide (see Figure 7-71).
Habronema eggs are cigar-shaped and contain a vermiform
The eggs of Draschia, Habronema, and the equine tape-
 embryo. Such eggs are difficult to demonstrate in feces. If a
worms tend not to float very well in various solutions
technique for antemortem diagnosis of gastric habronemi-
because they are fairly fragile and hard to float in
asis is essential, resort to xenodiagnosis using Musca dormes-
 common flotation media. They can actually even be very
tica larvae for D. megastoma and H. muscae, and S.
hard to find when its seems that they should be present in
calcitrans larvae for H. microstoma.
C H A P T' E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
347
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
Figure 7-73. Microfilariae of filarid parasites of horses. (With kind permission from Springer
Sciences+Business Media: Parasitology research, Capillaria Bohmi spec. nov., eine neue
Haarwummart aus den Stimhohlen des Fuchses, Vol 16, No 1, January 1953, Supperer R.)
Identification of Equine Microfilariae
are unsheathed, and have a rounded posterior extremity
Equine microfilariae as drawn by Dr. Jay Georgi are shown
(Supperer, 1953).
diagrammatically in Figure 7-73. The reality is that after the
Microfilariae of Onchocerca cervicalis, Onchocerca reticu-
 approval of ivermectin and the other avermectins for use in
lata, and Elaeophora bohmi may be demonstrated by excis-
horses, it is hard to find microfilariae commonly in horses
ing a small piece of skin from near the linea alba and
any more; the routine ivermectin administration to horses
 placing it in physiologic saline solution. The microfilariae
may be reducing transmission or suppressing microfilariae.
of these three species will soon be observed migrating out of
The sheathed microfilariae of Setaria equina may be
the dermis into the saline solution. Leave the preparation
demonstrated in blood samples by the techniques described
set up overnight to detect low levels of microfiladerma.
for detecting the microfilariae of the canine heartworm.
O. cervicalis microfilariae are slender, delicate, and
Parafilaria multipapillosa microfilariae may be found in
207 to 240 μm long.
blood discharged from “summer bleeding” nodules caused
O. reticulata microfilariae are 330 to 370 μm long and
by the adult female worms. They are less than 200 μm long,
have a long, whiplike tail ending in a fine point.
348
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Stomach
Nematodes
D. megastoma, H. muscae, and H. microstoma (Spirurida)
(see Figure 4-136) are found in the stomach, with H. muscae
and H. microstoma being on the mucosa and D. megastoma
in nodules at the margo plicatus (see Figure 7-74).
Trichostrongylus axei (Trichostrongyloidea) (see Figures
4-70 and 4-72) infections may cause hypertrophic gastritis
with mucosal proliferations and are often associated with
shared pasturage with cattle.
Insect larvae
G. intestinalis (Diptera: Gasterophilidae) (see Figures
2-22, 2-26 to 2-30, and 7-74), even with their specific
designation, are found in the stomach.
Fgure 7-74. Stomach of a horse showing the attachment of bots,
Gasterophilus intestinalis, and a lesion produced at the margo
Small intestine
plicatus by an infection with the spirurid Draschia megastoma.
Nematodes
P. equorum (Ascaridoidea) (see Figure 7-71) can be
E. bohmi microfilariae are 300 to 330 μm long and may
anywhere in length from 1 inch to 2 feet; often with regu-
be distinguished from O. reticulata by a difference in the
lar deworming only small worms are found at necropsy.
 distance from the genital cell to the tip of the tail, which is
S. westeri (Rhabditida) (see Figures 4-109, 7-71, and 8-74)
 greater than 140 μm for O. reticulata and less than 120 μm
is very small and threaded through the intestinal mucosa.
for E. bohmi.
Cestodes
Annotated Host-Organ Listing of Parasites
 A. rmagna, P. mamillana (Anoplocephalidae) (see Figures
of Horses
4-51, 4-52, and 7-70).
Allmentary System
Mouth
Protozoa
Insect larvae
Cryptosporidiurm species (Apicomplexa) can cause seri-
Gasterophilus intestinalis, Gasterophilus nasalis and Gas-
ous diarrhea in neonatal foals.
terophilushaemorrhoidalis
(Diptera:
Gasterophilidae)
E. leuckarti (Coccidia) (see Figures 7-69 and 8-25) has
(Figure 7-74; see also Figures 2-22 and 2-26 to 2-30)
large schizonts and oocysts that may be demonstrated in
larvae can be found in the tongue, in the interdental pock-
mucosal scrapings.
ets, or at the base of the tongue.
Giardia species (flagellate) (see Figure 7-94) can be
found as trophozoites in light scrapings of the mucosal
Protozoan
surface of the anterior small intestine.
Trichomonas equibuccalis (mucosoflagellate) is found
 around gum margins of cheek teeth.
Insects
G. nasalis and G. haemorrhoidalis (Diptera: Gasterophi-
lidae) larvae are found in the in duodenum.
Large intestine
Nematodes
O. equi (150 mm) and P. vivipara (3 mm) (Oxyurida) (see
Figures 4-111 to 4-113, and 7-71). O. equi (Figure 7-75)
is commonly seen because the females crawl out of the
anus, causing tail rubbing; P. vivipara is almost never seen.
Family Strongylidae. The horse is host to about 60 spe-
 cies belonging to the family Strongylidae, and as many as
20 different species are often found in the same horse.
Subfamily Strongylinae. Strongylus vulgaris, S. edentatus,
S.
equinus,
Triodortophorus
serratus,
Triodontophorus
brevicauda,Triodontophorus tenuicollis,Triodontophorus nip
ponicus, Oesophagodontus robustus, and Craterostomum acuti-
Figure 7-75. Oxyuris equi adults recovered from a horse at
caudatum (Figure 7-76; see also Figures 4-63, 7-79 [bottom
necropsy.
row], 7-78, and 7-79).
C H A P T' E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
349
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
Figure 7-76. Members of the subfamily Strongylinae (large strongyles) and Gyalocephalus capitatus
(subfamily Cyathostominae). Strongylus vulgaris and Oesophagodontus robustus (×72); Strongylus equinus
( x40); Stmngylus edentatus (x33); Triodontophorus spp. and Gyalocephalus capitatus (×112). (Strongylus
species cleared and mounted by the glycol methacrylate method of Pijanowski et al: Cornell Vet
62:333, 1972.)
Subfamily Cyathostominae. Genera: Cyathostormurn,
for identification can be seen without recourse to clearing
Cylicocyclus, Cylicostephanus, Cylicodontophorus, Poteriosto-
agents. Simply mount the specimen under a coverslip in a
mum, Paraposteriostomum, Petrovinema, Coronocyclus, and
drop of water. With this simple preparation it is usually
Gyalocephalus (Figures 7-77 to 7-87).
 possible to roll the specimen so that both dorsal and lateral
Each series can be identified by careful study of the
aspects may be studied. Even preserved specimens may be
stomal region alone. With fresh specimens, detail sufficient
studied in this manner but tend to be considerably less
350
C H A P T' E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Coronocyclus coronatum
Cyathostomum catinatum
Cyathostomum tetracanthum
Figure 7-77. Members of the subfamily Cyathostominae. Dorsoventral (let), dorsal surface
(center), and lateral (right) views of the heads of Coronocyclus coronatus (top row), Coronocyclus catinatum
(middle row), and Cyathostomum tetracanthum (bottom row). (All ×283.)
transparent than fresh specimens. For comparisons to be
the group (Lichtenfels et al, 1998) is the system that has
 made easily, illustrations of the species that bear the greatest
been applied in the following pictorial key.
resemblance to one another have been grouped together.
The nomenclature of J. Ralph Lichtenfels's excellent mono-
Cestode
graph Helminths of Domestic Equids (Proc Helrninthol Soc
A. perfoliata (Anoplocephalidae) (see Figures 4-52 and
Wash, 42, 1975) along with an update on the taxonomy of
7-70) is found mainly in the cecum; this tapeworm tends
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
351
Coronocycfus labiatum
Coronocycfusfabratus
Cylicostephanus goidi
Fgure 7-78. Members of the subfamily Cyathostominae. Dorsoventral (left), dorsal surface
(center), and lateral (right) of the heads of Coronocyclus labiatus (top row), Coronocyclus labratus (middle
row), and Cylicostephanus goldi (bottom row). (All ×283.)
also to cluster in the ileum near the ileocecal valve, where it
Liver
is associated with ulceration and chronic inflammation of
Nematode larvae
the ileal wall.
P.
equorum (Ascaridoidea) passes through the liver
on its way to the lung after the infective-stage eggs are
Insect
ingested.
G. haemorrhoidalis (Diptera: Gasterophilidae) larvae
S. edentatus and S. equinus (see Figures 8-79 to 8-82) will
sometime attach briefly as they make their way out of the
   d     
 intestinal tract into the environment.
 patency.
352
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Cylicostephanus asymetricus
Submedia
teeth
Cylicostephanus bidentatus
Craterostomum acuticaudatum
Fgure 7-79. Members of the subfamily Cyathostominae and Craterostomum acuticaudatum (subfamily
Strongylinae). Dorsoventral (left), dorsal surface (center), and lateral (right) views of the heads
acuticaudatum (bottom row). (All ×283.)
C H A P T' E R 7Diagnostic Parasitology
353
Cylicostephanus calicatus
50
100
Cylicostephanus minutus
Cylicostephanus longibursatus
Fgure 7-80. Members of the subfamily Cyathostominae. Dorsoventral (let), dorsal surface
(center), and lateral (right) views of the heads of Cylicostephanus calicatus (top mw), Cylicostephanus
minutus (middle row), and C. fongibursatus (bottom row). (All ×425.)
354
C H A P T E R 7Diagnostic Parasitology
Buccal
fold
Cylicocycfusnassatus
100
Cylicocycfusashworthi
Cylicocyclus leptostomus
Fgure 7-81. Members of the subfamily Cyathostominae. Dorsoventral (left), dorsal surface 
e  ( d)    s ae s (   )
(middle row), and Cylicocyclus leptostomus (bottom row). (C. nassatus and C. leptostomus x283, C. ashworthi
x242.)
C H A P T' E R 7Diagnostic Parasitology
355
Subn
Cylicocyclus elongatus
Hoo
Cyilicocycfusinsigne
Cylicocycius uitrajectinus
Fgure 7-82. Members of the subfamily Cyathostominae. Dorsoventral (left), dorsal surface
i  ( ) sa   sy  j s ( l p )
(middle row), and Oylicocyclus ultrajectinus (bottom row). (All ×112.)
356
C H A P T E R 7Diagnostic Parasitology
Poteriostomumimparidentaturm
Int. leaf crown
100
200
Poteriostomum ratzii
Paraposteriostomum mettami
Fgure 7-83. Members of the subfamily Cyathostominae. Dorsoventral (left), dorsal surface
 do) y  o su a o  ) l  a)
Poteriostomum ratzi (middle row), and Paraposteriostomum mettami (bottom row). (All x112.)
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
357
Cylicodontophorus bicoronatus
001
Paraposteriostomum euproctus
Cyathostomum pateratum
Fgure 7-84. Members of the subfamily Cyathostominae. Dorsoventral (left),. dorsal surface
(center). and lateral (right) views of the heads of Cylicodontophorus bicoronatus (top row).
Paraposteriostomum euproctus (middle row), and Cyathostomum pateratum (bottom row). (All x170.)
358
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Figure 7-85. Cylicocyclus auriculatus (subfamily Cyathostominae)
Figure 7-87. Cylicocyclus brevicapsulatus, the only homely member
(x50). Note prominent lateral head papillae. Arow indicates
of the subfamily Cyathostominae ( x168).
 position of excretory pore.
Cestode larvae
E. grarulosus (Taeniidae) (see Figures 4-44 to 4-46 and
8-64) hydatid cysts are very rare in horses in most of the
world and especially so in the United States.
Pancreas
Nematode
S. equinus (Strongylinae) (see Figure 8-82) larvae
 migrate sometimes into the pancreas before patency.
Peritoneum and peritoneal cavity
Nematodes
S. equirna (150 mm; Filarioidea) (see Figures 4-143 and
 7-73) adults live in the peritoneal cavity.
S. edentatus (44 mm; Strongylinae) (see Figures 8-78 to
Figure 7-88. Strongylus vulgaris verminous arteritis and aneurysm 
8-81) larvae migrate.
 in a pony aorta discovered during junior surgery.
100
200
200
Petrovinema poculatum
Cylicocycfusradiatus
Fgure 7-86. Members of the subfamily Cyathostominae.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
359
Skeletal Muscles and Connectlve Tlssues
Nematodes
Fourth-stag
T. spiralis (Trichinelloidea) first-stage larvae has been
cuticle
found in Europe in horses fattened for human consumption.
O. cervicalis (Filarioidea) adults are found in nuchal
ligament.
Protozoa
S. bertrami and S. fayeri (coccidians) (see Table 2-1 and
Figures 8-32 and 8-33) occur as sarcocysts within muscle
fibers.
Insect Larvae
H. bovis and H. lineatum (Diptera: Hypodermatidae)
(see Figure 2-22) will on occasion migrate erratically into
Fgure 7-89. Strongylus vulgaris fourth stage (left, x108) and imma-
the subcutaneous dorsal tissues of horses.
ture fifth stage (right, x38) from a mural thrombus of the cranial
 mesenteric artery of a horse.
Nematode microfilariae
O. cervicalis and O. reticulata (Filarioidea) (see Figures
Resplratory System
8-111 and 8-112) microfilariae are found in the dermis.
 Paranasal sinuses
Insect larva
Urogenltal System
 Rhinoestrus purpureus (Oestridae) is an exotic nasal bot.
Kidneys
Nematode
 Bronchi and bronchioles
Halicephaiobus gingivalis (Rhabditida) can be found in
Nematode
various viscera of the horse as adult females and larvae,
Dictyocaulus arnfieldi (65 mm; Trichostrongyloidea)
with one site of infection often being the kidney.
(see Figures 4-143 and 7-73) is found in horses;
 donkeys are thought to help maintain the infection among
Protozoan
equines.
Klossiella equi (coccidian) (Figure 8-30).
Lung parenchyma
Testes
Nematode
Nematode
S. edentatus (aberrant migration) (see Figures 8-78 and 8-80).
S. edentatus (Strongylinae) (see Figures 8-78 to 8-81)
P. equorum (Ascaridoidea) has larvae that routinely
sometimes has immature adults in vaginal tunics.
make a liver-to-lung migration in the horse before return-
ing to the intestinal tract. There is reason to believe that
Nervous System
 many of the larvae that do not develop to the adult stage
Brain and spinal cord
in horses still make it to the lungs and cause eosinophil-
Nematodes
 associated pathology.
S. vulgaris (Strongylinae) (see Figures 7-76 and 7-89) may
have fourth-stage larvae or young adults migrating errati-
Vascular System
cally, even one worm can cause fatal neurologic disease.
Arteries
Setaria species (Filarioidea) (see Figures 4-32, 4-33, and
Nematodes
7-73) can undergo erratic migration with neurologic dis-
S. vulgaris (Figures 7-88 and 7-89) larvae migrating
ease; this seems to happen most often in Asia.
through the walls of the mesenteric arteries produce remark-
H. gingivalis (Rhabditoidea) causes neurologic disease
ably severe lesions in the walls of these vessels.
that can be fatal.
E. bohmi (Filarioidea) (see Figure 7-73) is found in intimal
D. megastoma (Spirurida) (Mayhew et al, 1983).
nodules of the wall of the aorta and other vessels. It is exotic.
Insects
Blood
H. bovis and H. lineatum (Diptera: Hypodermatidae) may
 Nematode microfilaria
have larvae undergoing erratic migration in the atypical
S. equina (Filarioidea) (see Figure 7-73).
equine host; one larva can cause fatal neurologic disease.
Protozoan
Protozoa
Babesia caballi (piroplasm) (see Figure 3-29) could be
 Equine protozoan myelitis (EPM) organism (Apicom-
 seen in fixed red blood cells.
plexa) Sarcocystis neurona.
360
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Eye
Nematodes
Thelazia lacrymalis (Spirurida) (see Figure 4-132) is
found in the conjunctival sac and lachrymal ducts.
 D. megastoma and Habronema species (Spirurida) larvae
may cause habronemic conjunctivitis.
Onchocerca species microfilariae (see Figure 7-73).
Skln and Halr
Insects
M. autumnalis and S. calcitrans (Diptera: Muscidae) (see
Figures 2-13 and 2-14).
Hippobosca equina and Lipoptena cervi (Diptera:
Hippoboscidae) (see Figure 2-17) are the keds of horses.
H. equina tends to be rare in the United States; L. cervi of
 Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
deer is common but fortunately only rarely gets on horses.
Please refer to the printed publication.
G.intestinalis, G. nasalis, and G. haemorrhoidalis
(Diptera: Gasterophilidae) females  will  hover around
horses while they lay their eggs glued to hairs.
Tabanus and Chrysops species (Diptera: Tabanidae) (see
Figures 2-10 and 2-1i) will attack in bright sun long
 enough to inflict a painful bite.
Haematopinus asini (Anoplura).
Damalinia equi (Mallophaga: Ischnocera).
E. gallirnacea (Siphonaptera) (see Figure 2-54).
Triatoma sanguisuga (Hemiptera: Triatominae) (see
Figure 2-63).
Insect larvae
H. bovis and H. lineatum (Diptera) (see Figure 2-22)
larvae are found in the subcutis of the saddle area.
Arachnids
Figure 7-90. Sporulated oocysts of eight species of Eimeria and
Amblyomma,
Anocentor,
Boophilus,
Dermacentor,
one species of Cystoisospora from swine. (From Vetterling JM:
Haemaphysalis,
Hyalomma, Ixodes, and Rhipicephalus
J Parasitol 51:909, 1965.)
(Metastigmata: Ixodidae) (see Figures 2-74, 2-91).
S. sabiei (Sarcoptidae; Astigmata) (see Figures 2-100
PARASITES OF SWINE
and 2-102).
P. ovis and C. bovis (Psoroptidae; Astigmata) (see
Stages in Feces
Figures 2-100, 2-101, and 2-107 to 2-110).
Intestinal protozoa include eight species of Eirmeria and Cys-
Trombiculidae (Prostigmata) (see Figures 2-118 to 2-120).
toisospora suis (Figure 7-90), Cryptosporidium suis, Entamoe-
Demodex equi (Prostigmata) (see Figure 2-115).
ba polecki, Iodamoeba buetschli, Endolimax nana, Giardia
species, other flagellates, and the very common ciliate B.
Nematode microfilariae and larvae
coli (see Figure 3-8). Other than the species of Eimeria, Cys-
P. multipapillosa (Filarioidea) (see Figure 7-73) has micro-
toisospora, and Cryptosporidium, most of these parasites will
filariae in serosanguineous discharge from ulcerated nodules.
not be seen in sugar flotations owing to distortion.
O. cervicalis and O. reticulata (Filarioidea) (see Figures
 There are a number of common eggs found in pig feces that
7-71, 8-11l, and 8-112) have microfilariae almost universally
 include nematodes and an acanthocephalan (Figure 7-91). The
present in the dermis of horses, especially the dermis of the
fertile eggs of the ascaridoid A. suum have a rough, bile-
ventrum, if they have not been on routine avermectin therapy.
stained, external protein layer. Infertile A. suum eggs can
R. strongyloides (Rhabditida) (see Figure 4-107)
can
be common and appear a little longer and thinner than the
cause dermatitis in horses if they are down, as, for example,
fertilized eggs; the middle wall of the shell tends to be thinner,
on straw for a day or two after surgery.
and the central portion looks disorganized. The spirurids
D. megastoma, H.
muscae,
 and
H. microstoma
Ascarops and Physocephaius produce thick-walled, larvated
(Spirurida) have larvae that excite exuberant granuloma-
eggs. Strongyloides ransomi Rhabditida) eggsresemble those
tous reactions in skin wounds, areas of skin subject to fre-
of S. papillosus (Rhabditida) and are thin-shelled and larvated
quent wetting, and ocular conjunctiva.
(see Figure 7-58). Strongyle eggs in pig feces may represent
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
361
Ascaris suum
A. suum (infertile)
Trichuris stis
Strongyie
Metastrongyius sp.
Macracanthorhynchus
hirudinaceus
Figure 7-91. Eggs of some parasites of swine (x425).
infection with Hyostrongylus rubidus (Trichostrongyloidea),
slides and scanning under low power. The diaphragm and
Oesophagostomurn species (Strongyloidea), or Globocephalus
masseter muscles are especially likely to yield positive
urosubulatus or Necator americanus (Ancylostomatoidea),
findings.
but most commonly with only the first two. The Metastron-
1. Detach a small scrap of meat and place it on a
 gyloidea parasitic organism in swine is unusual compared with
microscope slide.
many in that it has an earthworm rather than a molluscan
2. Cover with a second microscope slide, and press
 intermediate host, and unlike most metastrongyloids
of
the two slides together with the thumb and
domestic animals, Metastrongylus apri, Metastrongylus salmi,
forefinger, thus squashing the scrap of meat.
and Metastrongylus pudendotectus eggs are smalland subglob-
 3. While maintaining pressure, bind the slides
uar and contain a larva. Trichuris suis (Trichinelloidea) living
firmly together by wrapping each end with
in the mucosa of the cecum and colon are typical of the genus,
adhesive tape.
are almost identical to the Trichuris trichiura of humans, and
4. Trim off any meat protruding from between
are smaller than the eggs of the dog whipworm, T. vulpis. M.
 the slides to avoid contaminating the microscope
hirudiraceus (Acanthocephala) eggs have three concentric,
stage.
ellipsoidal shells surrounding the acanthor embryo.
5. Scan the entire field under low power. Larvae, if
 present, are easily visible (Figure 7-92). Note:
Stages in Urine
This procedure is also applicable to the other
The eggs of S. dentatus (Strongyloidea) are large and moru-
tissue-dwelling parasites such as the smaller
lated and are found in urine specimens from infected swine.
lungworms of sheep and carnivorans, encysted
 The last urine voided contains the highest concentration
Toxocara larvae, and the like.
of eggs.
Tlssue Dlgestlon
Examination for Trichinae
Peptic digestion is used to detect light infection with
 Squash Preparatlon
T. spiralis and other nematodes in tissues. Gastric juice
Moderate to heavy T. spiralis infections can be diagnosed by
digests the muscle tissue but not the larvae of T. spiralis.
simply squashing bits of muscle tissue between two glass
Pepsin-acid solution consists of 0.2 g granular pepsin and
362
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Stomach
Nematodes
Physocephalus sexalatus (see Figure 4-135), Ascarops
strongylina, Gnathostoma hispidum (see Figure 4-129), and
Simondsia paradoxa (Spirurida).
H. rubidus (9 mm) and O. tricuspis (1 mm) (Trichos-
trongyloidea) (see Figures 4-78 and 4-79).
Aonchotheca (Capilaria) gastrosuis (Trichinelloidea)
(see Figure 7-52).
Small intestine
Nematodes
A. suum (410 mm; Ascaridoidea) (Figure 7-93; see also
Figures 4-114 to 4-116 and 7-52).
G. urosubulatus (6 mm; Ancylostomatoidea) (see
Figure 4-94).
Fgure 7-92. Irichinella spiralis cyst in a fresh digest preparation of
S. rarsomi (5 mm; Rhabditida) (see Figures 4-108
rat muscle.
and 4-109).
1.0 mL concentrated hydrochloric acid in 100 mL distilled
T. spiralis (4 mm; Trichinelloidea) (see Figures 4-148 to
water.
4-150, and 7-92).
 1. Weigh out 4 g of tissue and mince it with a scalpel.
 2. Add 100 mL of pepsin-acid solution, and allow to
 Acanthocephala
stand for about 1 to 6 hours at 37° C.
M. hirudinaceus (470 mm) (see Figure 4-155)
 3. Decant excess supernatant carefully, suspend
sediment, and transfer to a Petri plate.
Protozoa
 4. Count larvae under a dissecting microscope. Larvae
 r ss  e ne   
may be retrieved with a Pasteur pipette for closer
(coccidians); usually infection is without clinical signs.
 study under the compound microscope.
Cystoisospora suis (coccidian) causes enteritis in the
small intestine of young animals.
Annotated Host-Organ List of Parasites
Cryptosporidium suis (Apicomplexa)
of Swine
Giardia species (mucosoflagellate) (Figure 7-94; see also
Allmentary System
Figure 3-6); infection is usually without signs.
Mouth and esophagus
Nematodes
Cecum and colon
G. pulchrum (150 mm; Spirurida) (see Figures 4-133,
Nematodes
4-134, and 7-105).
Oesophagostormun dentatum, Oesophagostomurn brevi-
Eucoleus (Capillaria) garfiai (Trichinelloidea) is found in
caudum, Oesophagostomum georgianum, and Oesophagosto-
the epithelia of the tongue of wild pigs.
mum quadrispinulatum (Strongyloidea) (see Figures 4-86
and 4-87)
T. suis (Trichinelloidea) (see Figures 4-151 to 4-153,
and 7-91).
Protozoans
E. polecki, E. rana, I. buetschli, and others (amebas) are
considered for the most part to be commensals.
Chilomastix mesnili, Tetratrichomonas buttreyi, Tricho-
mitus rotunda, and Tritrichomonas suis (mucosoflagellates)
are considered for the most part to be commensals.
B. coli (ciliate) (see Figure 3-8) is a commensal organism
that can on occasion cause colitis.
Liver, pancreas, and peritoneal cavity
Nematode larvae
A. suum (Ascaridoidea) (see Figure 4-116) has migrating
larvae that cause “milk spot" lesions on the liver surface.
Figure 7-93. Lesions induced in the liver of a pig exposed to the
S. dentatus (Strongyloidea) migrating larvae in liver and
infective eggs of Ascaris suum (right); normal liver on left.
pancreas (see Figure 4-91).
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
363
Hymenolepis nana
H. diminuta
Giardia
Cittotaeniactenoides
Aspicufuris
Obeliscodes cuniculi
Passalurus ambiguus
Eimeria
Figure 7-94. Common parasites of laboratory mice, rats, and rabbits. For a more comprehensive 
listing of laboratory animal parasites by host and organ, see text. Mouse and rat: Hymenolepis nana
and Hymenolepis diminuta (Hymenolepididae) are also parasites of humans. H. nana infection in
rodent colonies is directly infective to human beings; no intermediate host is required by this
facultatively, for H. nana. Giardia (Mastigophora) trophozoites (group of five, center) and cysts (inset,
upper left) are common parasites of mice. Rabbit: Cittotaenia ctenoides (Anoplocephalidae) eggs
appear as amorphous spheres (left of arrow) until crushed by pressure on the coverslip (right of
arrow), whereupon the oncosphere and pear-shaped embryophore become visible. Obeliscoides cu-
niculi eggs are typical strongyle eggs. Passalurus ambiguus (Oxyuridae) are somewhat asymmetric and 
have a cap at one end. Emeria, sporulated oocysts. Avoid mistaking Saccharomycopsis gurtulatus (see 
Fgure 7-6) for a bona fide parasite of the rabbit. All x425 except Giardia ( x1000).
364
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Trematodes
Urogenltal System
 F. hepatica and F. gigantica (Fasciolidae) (see Figures 4-2
Nematode
and 4-11).
S. dentatus (45 mm; Strongylida) (see Figure 4-91).
 Stout, white worms occur in the kidneys, ureters, urinary
Cestode larvae
bladder, perirenal fat, pork chops, spinal canal, and else-
E. granulosus (Taenidae) (see Figures 4-44 to 4-46 and
where as a result of erratic migrations.
8-64) hydatids are very rare in the United States.
T. hydatigena (Taeniidae) (see Figure 4-48) cysticerci
Skln and Halr
can be found on rare occasions, mainly in wild pigs.
Insects
Musca and Stormoxys (Diptera) (see Figures 2-13 and 2-14).
Resplratory System
Haematopirus suis (Anoplura) (see Figure 2-37).
 Bronchi and bronchioles
P.
irritans, E.
gallinacea, and Tunga penetrans
Nematodes
(Siphonaptera) (see Figures 12-54, 2-56, and 2-62).
M. apri, M. salmi, and M. pudendotectus (Metastrongy-
 loidea) (see Figure 4-99) can cause signs of respiratory distress
Arachnids
in pigs.
Metastigmata (ticks) (see Figures 2-74 and 2-91).
S. scabiei (Astigmata) (see Figures 2-100 and 2-102) con-
Lung parenchyma
tinues to be a problem in pigs.
Nematode larva
Demodex phylloides (Prostigmata) (see Figure 2-115)
A. suum (Ascaridoidea) (see Figure 4-1l16) organisms
causes pimples on pigs full of huge numbers of mites.
migrate through after the liver and cause disease in reaction
to their passage.
PARASITES OF LABORATORY RABBITS
AND RODENIS
Cestode larva
E. grarulosus (Taeniidae) (see Figures 4-44 to 4-46 and
al n aad on arddo ie  ssd a
 8-64) hydatids in pigs in the United States seem to be very
histories the day their host becomes a member of a labo-
rare.
ratory animal colony. Although they may limit the useful-
ness of their immediate hosts as experimental subjects, such
Trematode
parasites present no continuing problem of control.
Paragonimus kellicotti (Troglotrematidae) (see Figures
Heartworm infection, for example, renders a dog unfit
4-14, 4-15, and 7-36, B) would be an excellent para-
for experiments involving the circulatory or respiratory
site of wild pigs and is liable to do very well in pigs fed
system but, in the absence of mosquitoes, must remain
crayfish.
confined to the host in which it arrived. On the other
hand, a surprising variety of arthropod, protozoan, and
Skeletal Muscles and Connectlve Tlssues
helminth parasites do succeed in maintaining impressive
Nematode larva
populations even in reasonably hygienic laboratory
T. spiralis (Trichinelloidea) (see Figures 7-92 and 8-116)
larvae can be present in very large numbers per gram of pig
 muscle without the pig showing signs of disease.
Cestode larvae
Taenia solium (Taeniidae) (see Figure 8-60) cysticerci in
muscle are a potential problem in areas where humans who
 might be infected with adults, especially those from certain
developing countries, are working around pigs as animal
handlers; cysts cause carcass condemnations.
S. marsonoides (Diphyllobothriidae) (see Figures 4-31
and 8-68) spargana can occur in pigs, which serve as para-
tenic hosts.
Trematode larvae
Alaria (mesocercariae, Diplostomatidae).
Protozoa
S. miescheriana, S. porcifelis, and Sarcocystis suihominis
(coccidians) (see Table 2-1 and Figures 8-32 and 8-33) sarco-
Figure 7-95. Obeliscoides cuniculi, stomal end (left) and bursa and 
cysts occur in the muscles of pigs.
 spicules of male (right) (×120).
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
365
Figure 7-98. Leporacarus gibbus, a hair-clasping mite of rabbits
(x100). (Courtesy Dr. Stephen Weisbroth.)
Passalurus ambiguus (1l mm; Oxyurida) (see Figure
Fgure 7-96. Cysticerci of aenia pisiformis in the abdominal cavity
4-110).
of an experimentally infected domestic rabbit.
Trichuris leporis (Trichinelloidea).
animal colonies. Hair-clasping mites, mucosoflagellates,
Cestode
coccidians, Hymenolepis tapeworms, and pinworms are
Cittotaenia ctenoides (Anoplocephalidae) (see Figure 7-94).
 particularly common. The following incomplete outline
 includes only the common parasites of laboratory rabbits,
Protozoa
rats, mice, guinea pigs, monkeys, and apes.
 Eireria species (coccidian) (see Figure 7-94). Ten spe-
A few of the more common parasites of rodents and
cies of Eimeria parasitize the intestinal epithelium and
rabbits are represented in Figure 7-94.
cause diarrhea and emaciation.
Entamoeba curiculi (ameba). Nonpathogenic.
Annotated Host-Organ Listing of Common
Parasites of Rabbits
Liver and peritoneal cavity
Allmentary System
Protozoa
Stomach
Eimeria stiedae (Coccidia) causes biliary coccidiosis (see
Nematodes
Figure 8-28).
Obeliscoides cuniculi and Graphidium strigosum (18 to 20
mm; Trichostrongyloidea) (Figure 7-95). Spicules of O. cunic-
Cestode larvae
uli are 0.54 mm; of G. strigosum, 2.4 mm.
T. pisiformis (Taenidae) (Figure 7-96) cysticerci initially
migrate through the liver but ultimately settle down to
Intestine
mature in the peritoneal cavity.
Nematodes
Trichostrongyhus retortaeformis and Nematodirus leporis
Skln and Halr
(Trichostrongyloidea) (see Figures 4-70 and 4-72).
Arachnids
S. papillosus (6 mm; Rhabditida).
Psoroptes cuniculi (Astigmata) (Figure 7-97; see also
Figures 2-100, 2-107, and 2-108) can cause severe ear
canker in rabbits.
Sarcoptes and Chorioptes (Astigmata) (see Figures 2-100,
2-101, 2-102, and 2-109).
Leporacarus gibbus (Listrophoridae) (Figure 7-98).
Cheyletiella parasitovorax (Prostigmata)
）(see Figure
2-116).
Annotated Host-organ Listing of Common
Parasites of Rats
Allmentary System
Stomach and intestines
Nematodes
Nippostrongylus brasiliensis (6 mm; Trichostrongyloidea)
(Figure 7-99).
Strongyloides ratti (Rhabditida) (see Figure 4-109).
Figure 7-97. Ear of a rabbit infested with Psoroptes cuniculf.
Gongylonerma neoplasticurn (Spirurida) (see Figure 7- 105).
366
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Fgure 7-99. Nippostrongylus brasiliensis. A, Bursa and spicules of
male (×125). B, Caudal end of female (×150). C, Esophageal
region (x150).
Syphacia muris and Aspiculuris ratti (Oxyurida).
Heterakis spumosa (16 mm; Ascaridida).
T. spiralis (Trichinelloidea) (see Figure 4-148).
Trichuris muris (Trichinelloidea).
Cestode
Fgure 7-101. Polyplax spinulosa male (×108).
Hymenolepis diminuta (Hymenolepididae)  (see Figure
7-94). Scolex without hooks.
Liver
Nematode
Protozoans
Calodium (Capillaria) hepaticum (Trichinelloidea) (see
Eimeria nieschultzi and other species (coccidians) (see
Figure 8-117).
Figure 7-94).
Giardia (mucosoflagellate) (see Figure 7-94).
Cestode larvae
T. taeniaeformis (Taenidae) (see Figure 8-61).
Protozoa
Hepatozoon muris (plasmodium) has schizogony occur-
ring in the hepatic cells; gamonts are found in the mono-
Fgure 7-100. Pinwomms of mice: Syphacia obvelata male (let) and
Aspiculuris tetraptera anterior end (right) (x80).
Figure 7-102. Balantidium cofi cyst in the feces of a guinea pig.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
367
cytes of the circulating blood. The vector is a mesostigmatid
mite, Echinolaelaps echidninus.
Urogenltal System
Nematodes
Trichosomoides crassicauda (Trichinelloidea) (see Figures
3-142 and 8-120) lives threaded through the bladder
 epithelium; the male lives in the reproductive system of
the female worm.
Skln and Halr
Insects
Polyplax spinulosa (Anoplura) (Figure 7-101).
Xenopsylla cheopis (Siphonaptera) (see Figure 2-55).
Figure 7-103. Guinea pig infested with the louse Giricola porcelf.
Arachnids
Ornithonyssus bacoti (Mesostigmata).
Radfordia ensifera (Prostigmata).
Notoedres rmuris (Astigmata) (see Figures 2-103 and 2-104).
Urogenltal System
Kidneys
Annotated Host-Organ Listing of Common
Protozoa
Parasites of Mice
Klossiella muris (coccidian) usually seen on histosections.
Allmentary System
 Stomach and intestines
Skin and hair
Protozoa
Insects
Cryptosporidium muris (stomach) and C. parvum (small
Polyplax serrata (Anoplura) (see Figure 2-41).
intestine) (see Figures 3-17, C. andersoni; 3-18, C. parvum).
Arachnids
Nematodes
Myobia musculi and Radfordia affinis (Prostigmata) (see
Heligmosomoides polygyrus (syn. Nematospiroides dubius;
Figure 2-117). Myobids do not migrate away from a dead
Trichostrongyloidea) organisms are reddish and tightly coiled.
host; the carcass must be scanned carefully with a stereo-
N brasiliensis (6 mm; Trichostrongyloidea) (see Figure 7-99).
scopic microscope to find them.
Syphacia obvelata and Aspiculuris tetraptera (Oxy
Myocoptes musculinus (Astigmata) (see Figure 2-113).
uroidea) (see Figure 7-100).
O. bacoti and Allodermanyssus sanguineus (Mesostig-
H. spumosa (Ascaridida).
mata) (see Figure 2-92, Orrmithoryssus sylviarum).
T. muris (Trichinelloidea).
Annotated Host-Organ Listing of Common
Cestodes
Parasites of Guinea Pigs
Hymenolepis nana and H. diminuta (Hymenolepididae)
Allmentary System
(see Figure 7-94). The scolex of H. nana is armed with
Nematode
hooks; that of H. dimiruta is unarmed.
Paraspidodera uncinata (Oxyurida).
Fgure 7-104. Three parasites of pri-
mates. For a more complete listing of
simian parasites by host and organ,
see text. Anatrichosoma cynomolgi adult
womms tunnel in the nasal mucosa.
Anoplocephalid eggs have a pear-
shaped   embryophore   surrounding
the oncosphere. Prosthenorchis elegans
(Acanthocephala) eggs have a thick
outer shell and thin inner shells
enclosing the embryo (acanthor).
Anatrichosoma cynomoigi
Anoplocephalidae
Prosthenorchis elegans
368
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Cestode
Nochtia nochti (Trichostrongyloidea). Bright red worms
H. rana (see Figure 7-94).
lie within or protrude from gastric papillomata in the pre-
pyloric region of the stomach. Cross-sections of N. nochti in
Protozoa
histologic preparations display 16 distinct longitudinal
Eimeria caviae (coccidian).
 cuticular ridges and channeled lateral alae.
Balantidium species (ciliate) (Figure 7-102, and see
Trichostrongylus, Molineus and Nematodirus (Trichos-
Figure 3-8).
trongyloidea) (see Figure 4-72).
Cryptosporidium wrairi (see 3-18, C. parvum).
Oesophagostomum (Conoweberia) apiostomum, Oesopha-
gostomum stephanostomun, and Ternidens deminutus
Skln and Halr
(Strongyloidea) (see Figures 4-63 and 7-105). S
Stout-
Insects
bodied “nodular worms" with leaf crowns and transverse
Gliricola porcelli, Gyropus ovalis, and Trimenopon hispi-
ventral cervical groove.
du (Mallophaga) (Figure 7-103, and see Figure 2-50).
Necator, Ancylostoma, and Globocephalus (Ancylostoma-
toidea) (see Figures 4-94 and 4-95).
Arachnids
Ascaris lumbricoides (Ascaridoidea) (Figure 4-114).
Chirodiscoides caviae (Astigmata) (see Figure 2-112).
Trichuris species (Trichinelloidea) (4-151).
Trixacarus caviae (Astigmata) can cause severe mange in
(e  )  ss 
guinea pigs that can be fatal.
Pinworms are quite host-specific. Generally speaking, a spe-
cies of pinworm infects a genus of monkeys. Enterobius
PARASITES OF MONKEYS AND APES
vermicularis and Enterobius anthropopitheci occur
 in
chimpanzees. Enterobius species are usually considered
The kinds of parasites to be found depend on the species
nonpathogenic, but sometimes they invade the wall of the
and geographic origin of the monkey and on the duration
intestine and produce serious or even fatal disease.
and environmental conditions of its captivity. Certain para-
Streptopharagus, Gongylonema,Protospirura,Physocephalus,
sites (e.g-, Strongyloides and Oesophagostormum) flourish in
and Rictularia, Physaloptera (Spirurida) (see Figures 4-130,
captive monkeys. Others, especially those whose natural
4-131, 4-133, 4-134, and 7-105). Protospirura muricola, a par-
intermediate hosts are no longer available, tend to fade
asite of rodents that uses the cockroach Leucophaea maderae as
away. In mixed colonies, parasites that are not discriminat-
intermediate host, has been observed to cause perforation of
ing in their selection of hosts may spread to species
of
the stomach in captive monkeys (Foster and Johnson, 1939).
monkeys that, for geographic or ecologic reasons, rarely
or never infect in the wild. Such cross-infections are more
Cestodes
likely to cause disease because of the lack of mutual adap-
Bertiella studeri (Anoplocephalidae) is large and has four
tation of host and parasite. The following therefore repre-
suckers and no hooks.
sents a composite listing of the more common parasites of
H. nana (Hymenolepididae) (see Figure 7-94) is very
monkeys and apes without particular regard to natural host
small, has four suckers, and has hooks.
species' preferences or geographic origins.
Acanthocephalans
Stages in Feces
Prosthenorchis and Moriliformis (see Figure 7-95).
Some eggs of primate parasites are shown in Figure 7-105.
 Many of the parasites are shared with humans, and a text
Trematode
such as Atlas of Human Parasitology (Ash and Orihel, 1990)
Gastrodiscoides hominis (Paramphistomatidae).
can be consulted for the identification of the many shared
parasites.
Protozoans
B. coli (ciliate) (see Figure 3-8) causes acute enteritis
Allmentary System
(Teare and Loomis, 1982).
Nematodes
E. histolytica (ameba) is pathogenic as in humans.
Cephalobus parasiticus (Rhabditida). These harmless
Giardia lamblia (flagellate) (see Figure 7-94).
 parasites of the stomach and intestines of Macaca iris
mordax (and probably others) resemble the free-living
Llver and Pancreas
 generation of Strongyloides. Their rhabditiform larvae may
Protozoans
be confused with those of Strongyloides on fecal examina-
Hepatocystis kochi schizonts.
tion. They do not, however, develop into filariform larvae,
E. histolytica (ameba) can cause hepatic abscess.
 a o a psa  a  a o
specimen.
Nematodes
Strongyloides fuelleborni and S. stercoralis (Rhabditida)
Calodium (Capillaria) hepaticum (Trichinelloidea) (see
(see Figure 4-109). Simian strongyloidosis is a human
Figure 8-l17) occurs with worms and eggs in hepatic
health hazard.
parenchyma.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
369
Enterobius
(x25)
Oesophagostomum
(×168)
Gongylonema
(×168)
Streptopharagus
Physaloptera
(×168)
(0/x)
Fgure 7-105. Some nematode parasites of monkeys and apes. (Courtesy Dr. M.M. Rabstein.)
Trichospirura leptostorma (Spirurida) is a 10- to 20-mm
monkey. When the host drinks infested water, the young
worm with a long capillary pharynx; associated with vary-
leeches enter the mouth, nose, pharynx, or larynx and
 ing degrees of fibrosing pancreatitis. Found in pancreatic
attach to the mucous membrane. They remain in these
duct of American primates.
locations for several weeks unless removed.
Resplratory System
Arachnid
Nose and throat
Rhinophaga species.
Nematode
Anatrichosoma (Trichinelloidea) (see Figures 8-118 and
Lungs
8-119).
Nematodes
Filaroides (Metastrongyloidea).
Annelids
Metathelazia (Spirurida).
 The leeches that attack the pharyngeal mucosa of mon-
ps- ae e m sp ya ie are si
Cestode larva
 caudal sucker. The presence of this bloodsucking parasite
E. granulosus (Taenidae) (see Figures 4-44 to 4-46 and
is suggested by chronic epistaxis in a recently captured
8-64).
370
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
Arachnid
Ash LR, Orihel TC: Atlas of human parasitology, Chicago, 1990, ASCP
Preumonyssus simicola (Mesostigmata) (Figure 8-8).
Press.
Bowman DD, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, et al: Feline clinical parasitology,
Serous cavities
Ames, Iowa, 2002, Iowa State University Press.
Nematode
Craig TM, Barton CL, Mercer SH, et al: Dermal leishmaniasis in a Texas
 Dipetalonema species (Filarioidea) (see Figure 4-145).
cat, Am I Trop Med Hyg 35:1110, 1986.
Deplazes P, Alther P, Tanner I, et al: Echinococcus mutilocularis coproan-
tigen detection by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in fox, dog, and
Cestode larvae
cat populations, I Parasitol 85:115, 1999.
T. hydatigena (cysticercus) (see Figure 4-48).
Dikmans G, Andrews IS: A comparative morphological study of the infec-
Mesocestoides (tetrathyridium) (see Figures 8-65 to 8-67).
tive larvae of the common nematodes parasitic in the alimentary tract of 
sheep, Trans Am Microsc Soc 52:l, 1933.
S. marsoroides (plerocercoid) (see Figures 4-31 and 8-68).
Dubey IP: A review of Sarcocystis of domestic animals and of other coc-
cidia of cats and dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 169:1061, 1976.
Pentastomid nymphs
Dubey IP, Perry A, Kennedy MJ: Encephalitis caused by a Sarcocystis-like
Porocephalus, Armillifer, and Linguatula.
organism in a steer, J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:231, 1987.
Faler K, Faler K: Improved detection of intestinal parasites, Mod Vet Pract
65:273, 1984.
 Acanthocephalans
Foster AO, Johnson CM: A preliminary note on the identity, life cycle, and
Prosthenorchis species.
pathogenicity of an important nematode parasite of captive monkeys,
Am I Trop Med 19:265, 1939.
Blood
Georgi JR: Differential characters of Filaroides milksi Whitlock, 1956 and
Filaroides hirthi Georgi and Anderson, Proc Helminthol Soc Wash
Nematode microfilariae
Tetrapetalonema, Loa, and
46:142, 1975.
Dirofilaria,Dipetalonema,
Gordon HM, Whitlock HV: A new technique for counting nematode eggs
Brugia (Filarioidea). Differentiation of the many kinds of
in sheep faeces, I Counc Sci Industr Res (Aust) 12:50, 1939.
microfilariae found in monkeys from all parts of the tropics
Hughes PL, Dubielzig RR, Kazacos KR: Multifocal retinitis in New Zealand 
is a task for the specialist. Many species remain to be described.
sheep dogs, Vet Pathol 24:22, 1987.
Hunter GC, Quenouill MH: A statistical examination of the worm egg
count sampling technique for sheep, I Helminthof 26:157, 1952.
Protozoans
Jenkins DJ, Fraser A, Bradshaw H, Craig PS: Detection of Echirnococcus
 Simian malaria organisms, Plasmodium and Hepatocystis.
granulosus coproantigens in Australian canids with natural or experi-
mental infection, I Parasitof 86:140, 2000.
Muscles and Connectlve Tlssues
Johnson DA, Behnke JM, Coles GC: Copro-antigen capture ELISA
Nematodes
improvement of specificity by heat treatment, Parasitology 129:ll5,
Onchocerca,Dirofilaria,Dipetalonema,Tetrapetalonema,
2004.
Loa, and Brugia (Filarioidea) (see Figures 4-137 and 4-145).
 Kauzal GP, Gordon HM: A useful mixing apparatus for the preparation of
Onchocerca microfilariae are found in the dermis.
suspensions of faeces for helminthological examinations, J Counc Sci
Industr Res (Aust) 14:304, 1941.
Cestode larvae
Keith RK: Infective larvae of cattle nematodes, Aust I Zoof l:223, 1953.
Knott J: A method for making microfilarial surveys on day blood, Trans R
Taenia (cysticercus).
Soc Trop Med Hyg 33:191, 1939.
Mesocestoides (tetrathyridium) (see Figures 8-65 to 8-67).
Lichtenfels JR: Helminths of domestic equids, Proc Helrminthol Soc Wash
 Spirometra (plerocercoid) (see Figures 4-31 and 8-68).
(Special Issue) 42:l, 1975.
Lichtenfels JR, Kharchenko VA, Krecek RC, et al: An annotated checklist
Skln and Halr
by genus and species of 93 species level names for 51 recognized species
of small strongyles (Nematoda: Strongyloidea: Cyathostominea) of
Insects
horses, asses, and zebras of the world, Vet Parasitof 79:65, 1998.
Pedicinus and Pthirus (Anoplura) (see Figure 2-43).
Lindsay DS, Upton SJ, Dubey IP: A structural study of the Neospora
caninum oocyst, Int J Parasitof 29:1521, 1999.
Nematodes
Lowenstine LJ, Carpenter JL, O'Connor BM: Trombiculosis in a cat, JAm
Anatrichosoma cutaneum (Trichinelloidea).Very slender
Vet Med Assoc 175:289, 1979.
Mayhew IG, Lichtenfels JR, Greiner EC, et al: Migration of a spirurid
(25 by 0.2 mm) worms give rise to subcutaneous nodules,
nematode through the brain of a horse, J Am Vet Med Assoc
edema about the joints, and elongated, serpiginous blisters 
180:1306, 1983.
of the palms and soles. Adult females burrow in the
Newton WL, Wright WH: A reevaluation of the canine filariasis problem
epidermis of the palms and soles.
in the United States, Vet Med 52:75, 1957.
Onchocerca microfilariae.
Newton WL, Wright WH: The occurrence of a dog filarid other than
Dirofiaria irmmitis in the United States, I Parasitof 42:246, 1956.
Dracunculus (Spirurida) (see Figures 4-127 and 4-128).
O'Handley RMO, Olson ME, Fraser D, et al: Prevalence and genotypic
 characterization of Giuardia in dairy calves from Western Australia and
REFERENCES
Western Canada, Vet Parasitol 90:193, 2000.
Agneessens J, Claerebout E, Vercruysse J: Development of a copro-antigen
Parsons JC, Bowman DD, Gilltte DM, Grieve RB: Disseminated granu-
capture LA fordetecting Ostertagiaostertagiinfectinsn catl, V
lomatous disease in a cat caused by larvae of Toxocara canis, J Commp
Parasitol 97:227, 2001.
Pathol 99:343, 1988.
C H A P T E R 7 Diagnostic Parasitology
371
Schnieder T, Heise M, Epe C: Genus-specific PCR for the differentiation of
Traversa D, Iorio R, Klei TR, et al: New method for simultaneous species-
eggs or larvae from gastrointestinal nematodes of ruminants, Parasitol
specific identification of equine strongyles (Nematoda, Strongylida) by
Res 85:895, 1999.
reverse line blot hybridization, J Clin Microbiof 45(9):2937, 2007.
I aa prsry saf saous rog sieo jo Aaans ia Aasul ' ards
Trayser CV, Todd KS: Life cycle of Isospora burrowsi n. sp. (Protozoa:
64:191, 1987.
Eimeridae) from the dog Canis familiaris, Am I Vet Res 39:95, 1978.
Stoll NR: Investigations on the control of hookworm disease, XV: an
Whitlock JH: A practical dilution egg count procedure, I Am Vet Med
effective method of counting hookworm egs in human feces, Am J
Assoc 98:466, 1941.
Hyg 3:59, 1923.
Whitlock JH: The diagnosis of veterinary parasitisms, Philadelphia, 1960,
Stoll NR: On methods of counting nematode ova in sheep dung,
Lea & Febiger.
Parasitology 22:116, 1930.
Xiao L, Bern C, Kimor J, et al: Identification of 5 types of Cryptosporidium
Supperer R: Filariosen der Pferde in Osterreich, Wien Tierarztl Monatsschr
parasites in children in Lima, Peru, I Infect Dis 183:492, 2001.
40:214, 1953.
Zarlenga DS, Chute MB, Gasbarre LC, Boyd PC: A multiplex PCR assay
Teare JA, Loomis MR: Epizootic of balantidiasis in lowland gorillas, J Am 
for differentiating economically important gastrointestinal nematodes
Vet Med Assoc 181:1345, 1982.
of cattle, Vet Parasitof 97:199, 2001.
 Thomas IS: Encephalomyelitis in a dog caused by Bayfisascaris infection,
Vet Pathof 25:94, 1988.
CHAPTER8
Histopathol
Uiagnosis
Mark L. Eberhard
The microscopic identification of parasites in tissue sections
volume 1, Helminthiases, by W.M. Meyers, R.C. Neafie, A.M.
 is an interesting challenge. Often a diagnostician is provided
Marty, and D.J. Wear, AFIP, 2000, American Registry of
with a single slide that shows only pieces of the parasite. In an
Pathology, Washington, DC.
attempt to identify an object believed to be a parasite, one
should gather as much information about the patient as
ARTHROPODS
 possible, including life history and clinical signs. It is also
important to be familiar with the kind of parasites most
Arthropods, composed of hundreds of thousands of species,
likely to be found in the particular host and tissue under
have such diverse features that attempting to describe them
study, as well as in the specific geographic area. The host-
succinctly is nearly impossible. Arthropods do have some
organ listing of parasites in the preceding chapter should be
shared features—e.g-, they have a segmented body, chitinous
considered as a checklist of possibilities. The main objective
exoskeleton, coelom, and jointed appendages. The chitinous
of this section is to emphasize some of the major microscopic
exoskeleton, the cuticle, in histologic sections usually
anatomic features of parasites that can be helpful in their
appears thick and dark, but usually the exoskeleton itself
identification in histologic sections. For the arthropods and
does not take up stain. Over some parts of the body, espe-
metazoan parasites, several defining characteristics can be
 cially in areas between segments or joints in an appendage,
listed for each group of parasites, but the presence or absence
the cuticle can be very thin. The striated muscle of arthro-
of a body cavity and digestive tract, and the type and distri-
pods is diagnostic for this group of pathogens if they can be
bution of muscle fibers are important criteria to be consid-
found in the sections. The larger arthropods also have a
 ered in making an initial placement into a major group.
 respiratory system that is composed of a racemose tracheal
For further reading and assistance with diagnosis of para-
-o saqn pazi aisnoa se sidde uooss u ieu uisis
sites in tissues, the following sources are helpful. A report deal-
sing throughout the body. The larger of the tracheal
ing with the present subject is “Identification of Parasitic
branches have chitinous reinforcing rings. Arthropods also
Metazoa in Tissue Sections" by MayBelle Chitwood and
can contain fat bodies that often appear darkly stained in
sections. Smaller parasitic arthropods often have rounded to
ogy, volume 32, pages 407 to 519, 1972, and later reprinted
elongate bodies that are apparent in tissue sections, and
as a monograph by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
sometimes one is fortunate enough to observe sections
Texts dealing with the subject include Pathology of Tropical
through paired, jointed legs. All together these features are
and Extraordinary Diseases, volumes 1 and 2, edited by
fairly complete in defining an arthropod in section.
C.H. Binford and D.H. Connor, Washington, DC, 1976,
There are three major groups of arthropods that are likely
Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP); Pathology of
to appear in histologic section. The insects (subphylum
Infectious Diseases, volumes 1 and 2, by D.H. Connor, F.W.
Mandibulata, class Insecta) contain the maggots of various
Chandler, D.A. Schwartz, H.J. Manz, and E.E. Lack, Stamford,
myiasis-producing flies, and these commonly appear in
Connecticut, 1997, Appleton & Lange; Ar Atlas of Protozoan
histologic sections. The mites are in the class Arachnida of
Parasites in Arirmal Tissues, by C.H. Gardiner, R. Fayer, and
the subphylum Chelicerata, and these creatures because of
J.P. Dubey, USDA Agriculture Handbook No. 651, U.S.
their small size and ability to colonize various mainly super-
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1988 and edi-
ficial body surfaces, e.g., skin and respiratory mucosae, also
tion 2, published by AFIP, American Registry of Pathology,
appear in sections of lesions. Ticks tend to remain superficial
Washington, DC; Diagnostic Pathology of Parasitic Infetions
to the host, attaching only long enough to feed, so typically,
with Clinical Correlations, edition 2, by Y. Gutierrez,
unless there is a strange clinical presentation or an interested
Philadelphia, 1990, Lea & Febiger; Parasites in Human
researcher, they do not appear in histologic sections. The
Tissues by T.C. Orihel and L.R. Ash, Chicago, 1995,
Pentastomids are a group of parasitic crustaceans that have
American Society of Clinical Pathology (ASCP) Press;
larval stages that parasitize vertebrates.
Parasitic Diseases, by J. Toft and M.L. Eberhard, in
Nonhuman Primates in Biomedical Research: Diseases,
Maggots
edited by B.T. Taylor, C.R. Abee, and R. Henrickson, San
Maggots in tissue are the larvae of dipteran flies and may
Diego, 1998, Academic; and Pathology of Infectious Diseases,
represent species that require a living host or species, causing
372
C H A P T' E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
373
FGURE 8-1. Cuterebra in the lung of a rabbit (x5). The internall
organs lie in a body cavity rather than in a parenchymatous
matrix; arrows indicate spines on the cuticle.
secondary myiasis such as caused by various Calliphora
FIGURE 8-3. Sarcoptes mites in the skin of a dog (x23O); arrows
and Sarcophaga. Both types of maggots will display similar
 indicate spines on the cuticle.
features, and the difficult part is making a generic diagnosis
based strictly on morphology. The spiracular plate is impor-
tant in identification of fly larvae and may need to be retrieved.
Mites
from the wet tissues or paraffin block (see Figure 2-22).
Mites tend to be rather small, millimeters or less in size.
Sections of maggots will display the typical features of
With many of the species, eggs, larvae (six legs) nymphs
an arthropod, i.e., body cavity (Figure 8-1), segmentation,
(eight legs), and adults (eight legs) are all found in section,
striated muscles attached at various points to the chitin-
 and in a section of an adult can be found all the component
ous exoskeleton, and tracheae, often with cuticular
 parts of a typical arthropod—i.e., segmented legs, spines,
rings (Figure 8-2). Some species have prominent spines
and hairs externally, and striated muscles, reproductive
(see Figure 8-2). Cuterebra larvae are obligate endoparasites
organs, intestine, yolk glands, and developing eggs intern-
of rodents and lagomorphs, and these larvae may invade
ally, may be seen in section. The mites that live in the
dogs, cats, and occasionally humans. Typically, they are
skin, Sarcoptes, Notoedres, Knermidocoptes, and Trixacarus,
found in the cervical subcutaneous tissues, but in dogs and
are very small and round in appearance, feed at the stra-
cats they migrate into the central nervous system with disas-
tum germinativum and dermis (Figure 8-3), and have
   i  as se o
spines on their dorsum (Figure 8-4). In some hosts such
Hypoderma larvae migrate extensively in cattle, and erratic
as the red fox, Vulpes vulpes, and pigs, sarcoptic
migration through the brain of horses has been reported.
(see Figure 8-4), and similar hyperkeratosis occurs in cats
with Notoedres infections (Figure 8-5). Hyperkeratosis
is also typical of mange caused by Chorioptes and
Trachea
Spine
FIGURE 8-4. Hyperkeratosis caused by Sarcoptes scabiei in the pig
(×22). The mites (arrows) are found in the deeper layers of the
FGURE 8-2. Cuterebra larva (bot) in the brain of a cat (x220).
greatly thickened epidermis.
374
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
FlGURE 8-5. Notoedres cati in the skin of a cat (x15O). These
mites lie in the stratum comeum.
Cheyletiella in certain hosts, but the mites lie more super-
ficially in the stratum corneum.
Demodex organisms are cigar-shaped mites found in hair
FGURE 8-7. Demodectic mange in a bull (x16). Demodectic
follicles or with associated sebaceous glands (Figure 8-6);
although some such as Demodex gatoi, Dermodex criceti, and
myriad mites and cellular debris in proportions depending on
Dermodex injai tend to be superficial. In dogs with severe
the age of the lesion.
demodectic mange, Demodex canis may be found in the
lymph nodes. In goats there can be very large nodular
lesions in the skin, as there can also be occasionally with
demodectic mange in cattle and swine (Figure 8-7).
Mites of the respiratory tract (e.g-, Pneumoryssus
and Sternostoma) have more delicate exoskeletons than
their ectoparasitic relatives. Pneumoryssus simicola and
Pneumonyssoides caninum of the primate lung and canine
nasal passages look very much superficially like any other
mesostigmatid mite (Figure 8-8).
Trombiculid larvae (chiggers) feed through a stylostome
or feeding tube extending into the dermis (Figure 8-9); very
typically the mites are dislodged and all that remains is the
very pruritic lesion.
Pentastomids
Pentastomids are so called because of the early belief that
they had five mouths; in reality, they possess one mouth
surrounded by four hooks (see Figure 2-100). The adults
of these bizarre crustaceans are wormlike parasites in the
respiratory passages of predaceous reptiles, birds, and
mammals that for the most part become infected when
they ingest nymphs encysted in the tissue of their prey.
It is in the vertebrate prey in which the nymphs appear in tis-
sue sections after the host has ingested an egg (Figure 8-10)
containing a larva with four or six appendages. The pseudo-
segmented body of the nymph has a spheric to oval shape
 covered by a thick cuticle with sclerotized openings, stomata
(Figures 8-11 to 8-13). Pentastomids have a complete diges-
tive system with a mouth and an anus, and in section the
FIGURE 8-6. Demodex canis in the hair follicle of the vulva of a ewe.
intestine is often surrounded by large acidophilic glands
Top, Larva. Bottom, Adult (x430).
(see Figures 8-11 and 8-12). These acidophilic glands are a
C H A P T' E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
375
FGURE 8-8. Pneumonyssus simicola in the lung of a rhesus monkey
FIGURE 8-10. Pentastomid eggs with developing embryos
(×160).
(x92). The mite contains a developing larva. The arrows indicate 
the legs, and the arrowhead indicates a palp. (Courtesy
Dr.Castleman.)
 good distinguishing characteristic for this group of organ-
isms; they stain bright pink with prominent blue nuclei in
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained sections. The muscu-
 lature is striated and located within the subcuticular region.
PROTOZOA
 Protozoa that are found in sections tend to be highly spe-
cialized individual cells with distinctive nuclei and other
FIGURE 8-11. Pentastomid nymph from near the bladder of a
FGURE 8-9. Walchia americana in the skin of a cat (x225). The
cynomolgus monkey (x94). The cuticle is marked by deep
stylostome or feeding tube extends to an area of dermis infil-
annulations, and the nymph contains large acidophilic glands
 trated with inflammatory cells.
(arrowheads).
376
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
hybridization methods that can be used for some infections
(e.g-, for Toxoplasma gondi, Neospora caninum, and Sarco-
cystis neurona) to make a definitive diagnosis as to a genus
or species of parasite in a particular case.
With a great many of the protozoa it is often difficult to
 distinguish even distantly related organisms purely on the
basis of the structures seen in sections because of prepara-
tion, because of the way they are fixed and stained, and
because one is working near the working resolution of
the light microscope. Therefore a group of amastigotes of
Trypanosoma cruzi may look very similar to a pseudocyst
of rounded zoites of T. gondii. This should be fairly straight-
forward because the amastigotes should be seen to contain
the identifying kinetoplast, but they may be visible in only a
portion of the organisms, and the typically elongate zoites of
T. gondi may appear simply as round small nucleated cells in
some sections. Often it is very helpful to also take into
account the history, clinical signs, and overall pathologic
changes seen in a case to aid in making a diagnosis.
Amebas
Amebas are extracellular parasites that feed through the
FIGURE 8-12. Pentastomid tissue showing pores (white arrows)
 process of engulfing bacteria, cell debris, or other cells as
 and acidophilic glands (black arrows) ( x290).
food material. The vast majority of these organisms are
free-living parasites or commensals living typically in the
structures that may occur singly or in “nests"’ either within
large intestine of animals. However, there are two forms
or external to the cells of the host. At the light microscope
that do cause disease. Primates are host to Entamoeba
level, it is often difficult to ascertain many of the details of
histolytica, which can colonize the bowel wall and move
the individual cells, and offen electron microscopy of mate-
to ectopic sites where the organisms establish cysts that
rial will provide the added detail required for a diagnosis.
most often include the liver, but they can also be found
Also, there are often immunohistochemical or in situ
 in lungs or brain tissue; reptiles have a similar pathogen,
Entamoeba invadens, which can cause serious disease in
these hosts with extraintestinal lesions. These amebas
tend to have nuclei typical of the genus with a central dot
of chromatin, the karyosome, endosome, or nucleolus,
with chromatin also being clumped around the inner sur-
face of the nuclear membrane. These parasites can also be
found to contain erythrocytes, sometimes several, in vari-
ous states of digestion. The other main group of disease-
causing amebas are facultative parasites that include the
genera Naegleria, Acanthamoeba, and Balamuthia, which
have infected dogs, sheep, cattle, primates, and horses
(Daft et al, 2005). These forms live in the environment
but can invade the tissue if they gain access through the
nose or through wounds with lesions typically ocurring
in the brain or skin, but they can be found elsewhere.
 In sections these amebas tend to appear in clear spaces
from artifactual contraction of the surrounding tissues
 during fixation and specimen preparation, to have foamy
cytoplasm, and to have characteristic nuclei that contain a
very dense endosome surrounded by a clear halo internal to
the nuclear wall (Figure 8-14).
Flagellates
The typical flagellates that occur in the tissues of vertebrates
FIGURE 8-13. Surface view of the cuticle of a pentastomid show-
are two that have what are known as amastigote stages that
ing the pores ( x440).
live within host cells. The amastigotes are small, round to
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
377
FIGURE 8-16. Leishmania amastigotes in a touch prep of an axil-
lary lymph node of a dog ( x690). The nucleus and kinetoplast are
FGURE 8-14. Acanthamoeba in the brain of a horse succumbing
clearly evident in several of the organisms.
to the infection (x1200); note the large nucleolus in the
nuclei of each of the ameba parasites. (Courtesy Dr. Govinda
 The amastigotes of Leishmania parasitize only one cell
Visvesvara.)
type in the vertebrate host, the macrophage, typically his-
tiocytes. Therefore they can be found in skin, bone marrow,
oval bodies measuring 1.5 to 4 mm in diameter (often
and visceral organs such as the spleen and Kupffer cells of
smaller after tissue processing) and contain a nucleus and
the liver (Figure 8-16). Again, the diagnostic organelle
a rod-shaped kinetoplast. They do not store PAS-positive
within the parasite is the kinetoplast, but diagnosing the
material. The two groups of organisms that have these
infection in tissue sections can be somewhat difficult
stages are T. cruzi and various species within the genus
because of the shrinkage of the cells during fixation that
Leishmania.
can make the visualization of the nucleus and kinetoplast
Both trypomastigotes and amastigote stages of T. cruzi
 challenging. One of the major differentiations to be con-
 Occur in the vertebrate host, but generally only the amasti-
sidered is whether one is dealing with leishmaniasis or an
gotes are seen in tissue sections; the trypomastigote stage is
infection with Histoplasma organisms. Needle biopsies or
found almost exclusively in the blood. T. cruzi amastigotes
impression touch preps from cutaneous lesions or lymph
are generally found in muscle cells of the esophagus, colon,
node and bone marrow aspirates may be prepared and
 and heart, where they may be responsible for megaesopha-
stained with Wright-Giemsa solution, and in these prepara-
 gus, megacolon, and myocarditis (Figure 8-15), respectively.
tions the full structure of the organism, including both the
nucleus and kinetoplast, is generally more clearly visible.
Ciliates
Balantidium coli trophozoites live within the contents of the
 cecum and colon of pigs but may secondarily invade the wall
of the large intestine of swine that have various forms of
enteritis. The trophozoites are characterized by their large
size and the presence of a macronucleus and a micronucleus
and cilia (Figures 8-17 and 8-18). Rumen ciliates may be
found in the lung as a result of terminal inhalation of ruminal
contents, in which case there is no evidence of inflammatory
reaction. Rumen ciliates may also be found in hepatic vessels
in cases of very severe enteritis (Figure 8-19). In horses with
severe enteritis, the extravagantly shaped ciliates normally
present in the large intestine may secondarily penetrate the
submucosa. These ciliates have large, offen polymorphic
macronuclei, and some have tufts of long cilia.
Apicomplexa
FGURE 8-15. Trypanosoma cruzi amastigotes in cardiac muscle of a
Coccldla
dog ( x1300). Both nucleus and kinetoplast can be seen in indi
The coccidia are members of the phylum Apicomplexa.
vidual organisms. (Courtesy Dr. Stephen C. Barr.)
 Included in this discussion are members of the genera
378
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
FGURE 8-19. Ciliate in vein in the liver of a goat with severe
suppurative lymphangitis (x 250).
Eimeria, Klossiella, Cystoisospora, Hammondia, Besnoitia,
Sarcocystis, Neospora, and Toxoplasma. The life history
and development of the major genera of coccidians are
FIGURE 8-17. Balantidium colf in the submucosa of the large intes-
described in Chapter 3. There seems to be a good deal of
tine of a pig (x280).
consensus around the placement of the genus Cryptospori-
dium within the gregarines rather than with the coccidia,
but for convenience, these species are still included in this
section. The genera Eimeria and Cryptosporidium seem to
be completely monoxenous, i.e., with transmission always
between members of one type of host without any paratenic
 or intermediate hosts, and almost all the stages seen in
section occur within the epithelium of the gastrointestinal
tract or rarely the gall bladder. Klossiella is also apparently
monoxenous, with direct transmission between 
hosts
and almost all stages being found in the epithelium of
the renal system. The other coccidia are either facultatively
(Cystoisospora and Toxoplasma) or obligatorily (Sarcocystis,
Hammondia, Neospora, and Besroitia) heteroxenous, i.e.,
having a paratenic or intermediate host. For the heteroxe-
 nous species of coccidia, the stages often seen in tissue are
 the stages causing disease in the prey animal that is serving
as the paratenic or intermediate host. A description of the
histologic appearance of the various stages follows, but
host specificity, site specificity, life cycle, and details of
 development characteristic of the genera and species of
 coccidia must also be taken into consideration in arriving
at a diagnosis.
Eimeria and Cystoisospora
Asexual stages
 The infective stage contained in the oocyst is the sporo-
zoite, which is a product of a reduction division that occurs
FIGURE 8-18. Rumen ciliates (x360).
in the oocyst (Apicomplexa are haploid except immediately
C H A P T' E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
379
FGURE 8-20. Emeria bovis tophozoite in an intestinal epithelial
cell of a cow (x1300).
FIGURE 8-22. Another young Emeria bovis schizont in an intestinal
after fusion of the gametes.). When a sporozoite enters a
epithelial cell of a calf ( ×400).
cell, it rounds up as a trophozoite in a membrane-lined
 parasitophorous vacuole (Figure 8-20). Not every species
of coccidian stays within a parasitophorous vacuole, and
Sexual stages
this fact can be a useful adjunct in generic and specific
 A merozoite produced by the final schizogonic generation
diagnoses.
 enters a fresh host cell and develops into either a male or a
Trophozoites multiply asexually within cells by sev-
female gametocyte. The female gametocyte enlarges, stores
eral processes. In the case of Eimeria they typically
food materials, and induces a hypertrophy of both the cyto-
undergo a special type of cellular division called schizogony
plasm and the nucleus of its host cell. When mature the female
(other terms that describe this form of division with various
gametocyte is called a macrogamete (Figure 8-23). The male
 nuances are merogony and endopolygeny). In this type of
gametocyte also induces hypertrophy of the cytoplasm and the
division the apical complex divides into numerous copies
san h se (ea aa s) ao iou sh jo san
 around the periphery of the cell, the nucleus lobulates with
repeated nuclear division and becomes multinucleate. Each
portions being associated with each apical complex, and
 nucleus is finally incorporated into a flagelated microgamete.
finally the cell membrane contracts and divides to form a
(The microgametes of Cryptosporidiurn species are without
few to thousands of individual organisms (Figures 8-21 and
flagela.) When a macrogamete is penetrated and fertilized
8-22). Depending on the species, schizonts may be found in
by a microgamete, it becomes a zygote. Wall-forming
enterocytes, biliary epithelial cells, endothelial cells, renal
bodies, already present in the macrogamete, then become
epithelial cells, or even uterine epithelial cells. Ordinary
clearly visible as large, spheric, eosinophilic granules in the
meronts contain from less than ten to hundreds of mero-
cytoplasm of the zygote (see Figure 8-23). These later coalesce
 zoites some meronts (megaschizonts) (see Figure 8-21) may
to form the 0ocyst wall (Figure 8-24).
contain over 100,000 merozoites.
FIGURE 8-23. Emeria auburmensis male gamonts surrounding a
FGURE 8-21. Emeria bovis schizonts in several stages of devel-
developing oocyst in the intestinal epithelial cells of a calf
opment in intestinal epithelial cells of a calf (x250).
(x1050).
380
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
FGURE 8-26. Oocyst of Cystoisospora canis developing in the
FIGURE 8-24. Eimeria oocysts developing in the intestinal epithe-
lamina propria of the colonic mucosa of a dog ( x900).
lium of a goat (×900).
Examples
Cryptosporidium
In the horse, Eimeria leuckarti forms large schizonts and
The minute (5 to 7 μm) stages appear as basophilic
very thick-walled and obvious oocysts (Figure 8-25). The
spheres on the luminal surface of epithelial cells of the
oocyst of Cystoisospora canis seem to develop within the
 gastrointestinal tract of vertebrates (Figure 8-29); on rare
lamina propria rather than the epithelial cells (Figure 8-26).
occasions, typically in the immunocompromised host,
Eimeria gilruthi is atypical in that it forms megaloschizonts in
infection of respiratory or gall bladder epithelia may also
the abomasum that are visible to the naked eye (Figure 8-27).
occur. The infection is very superficial and appears to pro-
Eimeria stiedae of the rabbit lives in and causes proliferation of
trude from the surface of the cell, but these are intracellular
the biliary epithelium and can produce a lethal hepatitis
parasites, and all the stages—schizonts, gametes, oocysts,
(Figure 8-28).
and so on—form underneath the host cell membrane.
Kossiella
A parasite of the equine kidney, Klossiella equi is usually
 an accidental histopathologic finding. Schizogony occurs in
8
the glomerular endothelium and in the proximal convo-
luted tubules of the kidneys. The distinctive sporonts
(Figure 8-30) in the renal tubular epithelium produce as
'sssnds ou dop u ssds o se au
each of which may contain eight to 15 sporozoites. There
is a similar species, Klossiella muris, which will show up in
histologic sections of murine kidneys.
Sarcocystis
The early schizonts of Sarcocystis occur in various endo-
thelial cells of different organs (Figure 8-31). Sarcocysts, the
stages found in the intermediate host, are found in skeletal
and cardiac muscle fibers (Figures 8-32 and 8-33); these vary
in size from a few micrometers in diameter to macroscopi-
cally visible objects, stain intensely with hematoxylin, and
are packed full of bradyzoites that are larger than those
of Toxoplasma. Septa subdivide the interior of the sarcocyst
but may escape notice because they stain poorly or not at
HOR
all with H&E. Often the cyst wall is described as hirsute
(hairy) because of the many prolongations that give
FIGURE 8-25. Eimeria leuckarti schizont and developing oocyst in
m ansn a io ps jurde sh i a
the intestinal mucosa of a foal from Switzerland (x250).
and the septa dividing the zoites within the sarcocysts are
(Courtesy Dr. Maja Suter.)
often diagnostic.
C H A P T E R 8Histopathologic Diagnosis
381
FIGURE 8-27. Emeria gilruthi megaloschizonts in the abomasum of a sheep (histosection on left,
x100; gross on right, x5).
Hammondia
been found to cause disseminated disease in immunosup-
Harmmondia appears very similar morphologically to
pressed or immunocompromised hosts.
Toxoplasma gondii; the distinctions are biologic and molec-
ular more than structural. The life cycle is obligatorily
Toxoplasima
heteroxenous, but stages very similar to those described
The stages that occur within the epithelial cells of the cat
for Toxoplasma in the next paragraph are found in the
are to a great extent comparable to what occurs with Eireria
tissues of many warm-blooded vertebrate animals that
and Cystoisospora (Figure 8-34). It is within the genus that the
serve as prey to dogs and cats. These parasites have not
names tachyzoite and bradyzoite were first used to describe
FGURE 8-28. Emeria stiedae developing in the bile duct epithe-
FIGURE 8-29. Cryptosporidium parvum. Developing stages (arrows) of
lium of a rabbit (x 100).
Cryptosporidium parvum on the mucosa of a naturally infected calf.
382
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
FIGURE 8-30. Sporonts of Kossiela equi in the renal tubular epi-
thelium of a horse ( x250).
the different life stages that occur in the paratenic hosts.
 FGURE 8-32. Sarcocyst of Sarcocystis muris in skeletal muscle of a
Within these hosts the only form of division that occurs is
mouse ( x200). (Courtesy Dr. Marguerite Frongillo.)
endodyogeny which is similar to schizogony, but only two
daughter cells are formed in each dividing organism. The only
schizonts seen with T. gondi occur in the intestinal epithelial
cells of felids (see Figure 8-34). Tachyzoites divide rapidly and
for the most part cannot withstand pepsin digestion for any
length of time. Bradyzoites divide slowly, are resistant to
 pepsin digestion, and form cysts in tissue that are most
easily observed in histologic sections of brain stained with
PAS, because the slowly dividing forms store PAS-positive
material. Cats can have cysts of bradyzoites throughout
their bodies just as other hosts (Figure 8-35). Tachyzoites
    ,   
HGURE 8-33. Sarcocysts of Sarcocystis cruzi (left) and Sarcocystis
bovifelis (right) in skeletal muscle of a cow ( ×x300). The cyst wall of
 S. bovifelis is thicker and appears striated.
FIGURE 8-31. Sarcocystis cruzi schizont (arrow) in endothelium of a
small artery of a calf with a fatal, naturally acquired infection 
FGURE 8-34. Toxoplasma gondii development stages in the intes-
( x800). (Courtesy Dr. Paul Frelier.)
tinal epithelia of an experimentally infected cat ( x800).
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
383
FGURE 8-35. Toxoplasma gondi bradyzoites in a cyst in the brain of
a cat (x800).
found in striated muscle fibers, might be confused with either
 sarcocysts or accumulations of T. cruzi amastigotes.
FIGURE 8-37. Besnoitia cyst in the lung of an opossum (x40).
Neospora
Using the light microscope, the cysts of N. canirurm are
almost indistinguishable from those of T. gondii. The major
and the asexual stages occurring in vertebrates, e.g., Plas-
distinction that was recognized in the early description of
modium, Theileria, Hepatocystis, and Leucocytozoon. With
this species was the thicker “cyst wall" that occurred
 most of these parasites there is a good deal of description
around bradyzoites (Figure 8-36).
relative to the stages that are found in the blood of the host,
whereas very little time is spent describing the various
Besnoitia
stages, typically schizogonous stages, that may occur in
Besroitia is mainly considered to be exotic to domestic
the viscera of hosts that can be seen in sections. Babesia
 animals in the United States, although wildlife such as opos-
infects only red blood cells, whereas Theileria infects ery-
sums can be infected. These organisms described as Besnoitia
throcytes and lymphocytes; because these are two of the
bernetti have been described from donkeys in the United
most important haemosporidians of domestic animals,
States (Dubey et al, 2005). The typical presentation is very
there is litle need to focus much attention on the schizont
large cysts without septa that are often found in the skin,
stages that occur in tissues. However, some other species do
although viscera may also be affected (Figure 8-37).
cause pathology and have stages in the tissuesschizonts
that can be quite large and damaging.
Hemosporldlans
A number of the Apicomplexa genera have heteroxenous
Leucocytozoon
life cycles with the sexual stages occurring in invertebrates
There are species in chickens, Leucocytozoon caulleryi
and Leucocytozoorn simondi, that produce megaloschizonts
in chickens and geese (Figure 8-38), respectively, that can
be highly pathogenic. These schizonts can be very large and
detrimental to the host.
Hepatozoon
Hepatozoonosis in the United States is associated with
Hepatozoon americanum, which has cystic stages in the
muscle of the host that are associated with chronic muscle
 pain in these animals. These stages are often used to assist
diagnosis, which is still often made as a result of muscle biopsy.
Cytauxzoon
Cytauxzoon is a parasite that kills cats, often very acutely.
FGURE 8-36. Neospora caninum bradyzoites in a cyst in the brain
There are large schizonts that occur within the macro-
of a dog (x1200).
phages and cause them to become enormous. This is the
384
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
Oral suckel
Pharynx
Gut.
FIGURE 8-38. Leucocytozoon simondf megaloschizonts in the liver
of a Canada goose (x100).
Ventral
 sucker
HGURE 8-40. Amphimerus pseudofelineus in the Small intestine of
an ocelot (x40). (Courtesy Dr. M. Dale Little.)
in tissues are typically those in which the adults live in other
tissues. Trematodes can be found throughout the bodies of
vertebrates, in bile ducts, pancreatic ducts, body cavities,
 FIGURE 8-39. Cytauxzoon felis. A pulmonary vein of a cat flled with
lungs, ureters, blood vessels, and so on. In a few cases larval
stages can also be found in domestic animals, where they
multiple, enlarged, mononuclear cells containing schizonts
(x100).
may or may not be causing disease.
The characteristics of trematodes in sections form a
reason for the name of the genus and what makes the infec-
composite group of useful features, but because often the
tion so deadly for cats. Sections throughout the body will
goal is to differentiate trematodes from cestodes, part of
have vessels plugged with these giant cells (Figure 8-39).
the characterization includes how they differ from cestodes.
 Of course, for almost every characteristic there is one group
that composes an exception. Trematodes have a solid but
HELMINTHS
spongy body that usually contains no large cavities and is
In terms of examining helminths in section, there are basi-
not divided into cortical and medullary layers as the body
 cally two types: solid bodied (the acoelomates) and bodies in
of cestodes is. Trematodes have an intestine that is usually
which tubes are suspended within a tube (the pseudocoelo-
bifurcate ending in a blind cecum. (An example of an
 mates). Trematodes and cestodes are of the solid body type;
exception are the Cyclocoelidae, which have a fusion of
o, a sr sudoe p spe
the posterior gut so that it forms a continuous loop
 body types. The problem can be that a trematode or cestode
[Figure 8-40.]) Unlike tapeworms, trematodes do not con-
may have all sorts of cavities in the various organs that give
tain calcareous corpuscles. The body is covered with the
them the appearance of having a pseudocoele, and nema-
syncytial integument that often has spines. There are mus-
todes may be so packed with organs and eggs or larvae that
cles below the integument, usually an outer circular layer, a
one starts to doubt whether one is looking at a nematode or
middle longitudinal layer, and an inner diagonal layer
not. The trematodes and cestodes are covered with a syncy-
(which may also be external to the longitudinal layer or
tial tegument, whereas the nematodes and acanthocephalans
absent) (Figure 8-41). There are sex organs in the adult
are covered with a secreted cuticle.
flukes, which are monoecious hermaphrodites except for
the Schistosomatidae that have separate males and females.
Trematodes
The eggs have typical shapes, and the shells are often brown
Most trematodes are parasites of the digestive tract, but
to golden in sections. There are typically two suckers,
these only rarely show up in tissue sections. The trematodes
one around the mouth and one ventral (often anterior
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
385
FGURE 8-41. Migrating larva (marita) of Fasciola hepatica in the
liver of a cow (x 40).
to midbody) (Figures 8-42 and 8-43; see also Figure 8-40),
and an excretory system that is difficult to see that empties
through a pore at the posterior end of the body.
Once a trematode is identified as such, the next step is
trying to determine the family or genus. This involves
FIGURE 8-43. Fasciola hepatica in the bile duct of a rat (x20).
calculating or guessing at the overall size and looking at
(Courtesy Dr. Helen Han Hsu.)
the arrangement of the sex organs, the types of sucker if
they are sectioned, and the extent and branching of the intes-
(see Figure 8-40), whereas a gut is lacking in cestodes.
tine and excretory system (Figure 8-44; see also Figure 8-40).
The ventral sucker of trematodes is not connected to a
If there are eggs, they can be very helpful once the size, shape,
 gut. Sections through the uterus may contain eggs, which
type of operculum, and state of development (with or with-
by their size, shape, and state of embryonic development
out a miracidium) (Figure 8-45) have been noted. The spines
may provide clues to the identity of the specimen (Figure
 on the surface of the body can also be very helpful in diag-
8-47). The arrangement of the sex organs and distribution
nosis, and they will have to be examined for their number,
of vitelline glands in the trematode body are a much-used
size, and location on the body of the fluke (Figure 8-46).
taxonomic characteristic (see Figures 8-44 and 8-46). For
Although both trematodes and cestodes have suckers,
example, these glands lie both dorsal and ventral to
the oral sucker of trematodes is connected to a gut
the gut in Fasciola, but all lie ventral to the gut in
Fascioloides. The body form of some trematodes is quite
distinctive. For example, heterophyids have small bodies
with distinct spines and tend to be inserted in intestinal
FGURE 8-42. Fasciola hepatica in the bile duct of a cow (x20).
FIGURE 8-44. Paragonimus kelicotti in the lung of a cat (x5).
386
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
FIGURE 8-45. Paragonimus kelficotti eggs in the lung of a cat
( x80o); note the seated operculum of the shell and the central
Zygote in the egg on the right.
HGURE 847. Dicrocoelium dendriticum in the bile duct of a sheep
(x40). The typical eggs of this parasite can be seen within the
crypts (Figure 8-48), whereas diplostomatids are divided
uterus of the fluke.
into a flattened forebody and a cylindric hindbody
(Figure 8-49). In the dioecious schistosomatids, the slender
are often rather small; sometimes they are encountered
female is enclosed in the gynecophoral groove of her stou-
singly, and other times numerous organisms are present.
 ter male partner (Figure 8-50). Adult trematodes lay eggs
They are, like adult trematodes, composed of a solid pa-
 that can persist in the tissues for long times, causing gran-
renchyma body with an outer tegument, but often little
ulomatous inflammatory reactions in tissues (Figures 8-51
other internal structure is seen (Figure 8-53). Because
and 8-52).
they are immature stages, no reproductive structures are
 Larval trematodes, specifically mesocercariae and meta-
cercariae, are not uncommonly seen in tissue sections. They
FGURE 8-48. Heterophyid fluke in the intestine of a raccoon
FIGURE 8-46. Paragonimus kelicotti, a pair of worms showing the
(×40); the spines on the anterior end are quite obvious, as is
spines on the cuticle and the vitelline glands (x800).
the relationship of the fluke to the intestinal mucosa.
C H A P T E R 8Histopathologic Diagnosis
387
FIGURE 8-51. Heterobiharzia americana eggs in the liver of a natu-
rally infected raccoon (x140).
FGURE 8-49. Alaria organisms in the small intestine of a dog
(×10). Aaria, typical of the family Diplostomatidae, is divided
into forebody and hindbody.
evident. No calcareous corpuscles are present, which helps
 distinguish them from larval tapeworms.
Cestodes
 Tapeworms seen in sections are most likely to be larval
forms, although there is always a chance of seeing a section
of a proglottid in an unusual location. Tapeworms, unlike
trematodes, have no intestine in any stage of the larvae or
 adults. Like trematodes, the internal organs of cestodes are
embedded in a parenchymatous matrix; there is no body
FIGURE 8-52. Heterobiharzia americana eggs in the intestine of a
cavity. There are two principal zones of nonstriated muscle
naturally infected raccoon (×58).
FGURE 8-50. Heterobiharzia americana in a pancreatic vein of a
beagle (x80). The smaller female is seen being held in the gyne-
FIGURE 8-53. Mesocercariae of an unidentified trematode in the
cophorous canal of the male.
lung of a raccoon (x125).
388
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
Osmoregulatory
canal
 Calcareous
corpuscle
FGURE 8-56. aenia taeniaeformis strobilocercus at higher power
showing calcareous corpuscles ( x100).
zone divides the parenchyma into a cortex lying outside a
longitudinal layer of fibers and a medulla lying within a
FIGURE 8-54. aenia taeniaeformis strobilocercus from a vole (×20).
transverse layer of muscle fibers; the medulla contains the
Cestodes have a solid spongy body with no body cavity and no
osmoregulatory ducts and reproductive organs if these
digestive system. The intemal organs of cestodes are embedded
are present. Calcareous corpuscles are typical of cestode
in a loose matrix, a parenchymal meshwork of loosely arranged cells
tissues and, especially in larvae, may provide the only
divided into distinct outer and inner portions by a system of longitu-
evidence that the specimen is a tapeworm (Figures 8-55
dinal subtegumental and transverse parenchymal muscle fibers.
and 8-56). Tapeworms are covered by a tegument formed
by the cytoplasmic projections of epidermal cells, which
fibers, subtegumental and parenchymal (Figure 8-54). It is
appears in histologic sections as a thick, homogeneous
through the tegument that tapeworms absorb their nutri-
noncellular external layer supported by a basal membrane.
ents from the host, and the syncytial surface, especially in
The larva of a tapeworm that is found in a vertebrate
adult forms, is thrown into numerous villuslike projections
host represents the precursor to the adult form and
for this purpose. Within the tapeworm, the parenchymal
typically bears the holdfast or scolex of the adult in some
rudimentary or embryonic form (Figures 8-57 to 8-68).
After the host is ingested, much of the larva will be digested
away and the small holdfast will attach to the intestinal
Tegument
mucosa and grow the adult strobila that contains all the
varied sexual organs and associated structures In veterinary
 medicine, although it often seems as though we are dealing
with a huge number of types and forms of bothria, scolices,
suckers, and hook shapes, the reality is that compared with
the large numbers of tapeworm families with different
forms of holdfasts occurring in a wide range of vertebrates
(e.g, the Trypanorhyncha or the Tetraphyllidea), we are
really dealing only with the few forms that occur in terres-
trial mammals. If one is lucky, the sections are through the
head of the larva, which aids greatly in being able to identify
the parasite beyond the simple designation of larval tape-
worm based on body structure and the presence of calcar-
eous corpuscles, but unfortunately much of the time one
n pue 'ar al jo Apoq a qano suos kuo s
the diagnosis, based simply on morphology, almost always
remains somewhat obtuse.
Because veterinary medicine until very recently focused
FIGURE 8-55. Taenia taeniaeformis strobilocercus at higher power
almost exclusively on the common domestic mammals
showing the subtegumental and parenchymal muscle layers ( x100).
used as food and human companions, the most common
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
389
FIGURE 8-59. Echinococcus vogeli from an agouti rat (Dasyprocta
leporina) in Brazil showing the typical clawhammer-shaped taenid 
hooks on the protoscolex (x400). (Courtesy Dr. M. Dale Little.)
FGURE 8-57. Echinococcus multiloculars alveolar hydatid (x10)
showing the multiple genminal areas within the cyst.
tapeworm larvae seen are those of the taenid tapeworms
Scolex with
hooks
that have a mammalian final host and a mammalian
 intermediate host. The typical taenid metacestode larvae
are the cysticercus (see Figure 8-60), the coenurus (see
Figure 8-62), the strobilocercus (see Figures 8-54 to 8-56
and 8-61), the unilocular hydatid (see Figures 8-59 and
8-64), and the alveolar hydatid (see Figures 8-57 and 8-58).
Sucker
 For information on hosts and site specificity, refer to the
 appropriate host-organ list and details in the previous chap-
ters. If the histologic section includes only the bladder wall of
the larvae, there will be little more than calcareous corpuscles 
to identify it as cestode tissue. A section through the scolex of
the larvae that includes the typical claw-hammer-shaped
 FIGURE 8-6o. Taenia solium cysticercus in the brain of a dog that
can be identified by the shapes and the measurement of the
hooks on the scolex (x5). (Courtesy Dr. M. Dale Little.)
FGURE 8-58. Echinococcus mutilocurlaris alveolar hydatid (×100)
FIGURE 8-61. Benia taeniaeformis strobilocercus encysted in the
showing a number of protoscolices.
liver of a meadow vole (x5).
FGURE 8-65. Mesocestoides tetrathyridium from the heart of a rice 
rat (Oryzomys sp.) from Colombia (×40); note the scolex without
FIGURE 8-62. aenia multiceps coenurus showing several scolices on 
hooks in the middle of the image.
a thin bladder wall ( x45); enlarged view shows the hooks on one of 
the scolices (x250). (Courtesy Ward's Biological Supply.)
 FIGURE 8-63. Taenia crassiceps. Cysticerci shown in a gross lesion in 
a naturally infected woodchuck. Sections through two cysticerci
showing each with an inverted scolex (x25o). This is an unusual
Suckers
cysticercus in that it proliferates by budding and may be found widely
 disseminated in various tissues of rodents. Inset, Gross specimen
of cysticerci (arrowhead) in woodchuck at necropsy.
HGURE 8-66. Mesocestoides tetrathyridium from the peritoneal
cavity of a baboon (Papio sp.); region of scolex shows two suckers 
-Brood capsule
(arrows) (×200).
Protoscolices
Laminated
membrane
FGURE 8-67. Mesocestoides tetrathyridium of Figure &-66 paren-
FGURE 8-64. Echinococcus granulosus hydatid cyst (×200).
chyma with large calcareous corpuscles (arrows) ( x250).
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
391
The remaining tapeworm larvae that are typically found
in the tissues in sections are solid-bodied wormlike threads
or ribbons (that can be very long) that course through the
tissues or peritoneal cavities of the host. These two larvae are
the tetrathyridium of the Mesocestoididae (see Figures 8-65
to 8-67) and the plerocercoid (or sparganum) of the pseu-
dophyllidean tapeworms (see Figure 8-68). Plerocercoids of
Spirometra organisms (see Figure 8-67) are ribbonlike larvae
that are unsegmented and undifferentiated. They have no
bladder, and the scolex is not always developed, so no sec-
tions through bothria may be forthcoming no matter how
many serial sections are prepared. Observation of calcareous
other structures may be the only feature on which to identify
a plerocercoid. Tetrathyridia of Mesocestoides organisms
differ from plerocercoids in that they possess four suckers
with no hooks (see Figure 8-66), and their calcareous cor-
puscles tend to be large but not as dense as those of other
larvae (see Figure 8-67). Tetrathyridia can undergo massive
asexual proliferation in the intermediate host (often seen
FGURE 8-68. Spirometra mansonoides plerocercoid from the subcu-
 in dogs), forming thousands of organisms that are atypical
taneous tissues of a mouse ( x108).
perhaps owing to the rapid multiplication and very difficult
to identify as anything other than tapeworm tissue.
hooks of this group (see Figure 8-59) identifies the specimen as
a taenid. Taernia saginata, the “beef tapeworm” of man, forms
Nematodes
 an exception in having hooks neither in the larval nor the
Living nematodes are pseudocoelomic animals that have
adult stages. Often the scolex of the tapeworm is inverted in
a fluid-filled body. The body externally is covered with a
the body and will not evert until the larva is ingested by
cuticle composed of collagen, and movement occurs by
the final host.
muscles cells in quadrants along the body wall working in
Tentative identification of species of taenid larvae
apposition to the cuticle, which allows the worms to move
may be based on their host and site specificity. For example,
sinusoidally. Nematodes typically have a mouth and an anus
a cysticercus attached to the peritoneal membranes of a
connected by a digestive tract. In sections the worms typi-
cottontail rabbit is very probably the larva of Taenia
cally appear round and to have the internal organs floating
pisiformis, whereas a cysticercus on the peritoneal mem-
within the pseudocoelomic cavity. The genital primordium
 branes of a ruminant of pig is most likely the larva of
appears in larvae, but it tends not to grow to any extent
Taenia hydatigena. Further evidence is provided by hook
until the worms reach the fourth larval stage. One feature
length measurements if both long and short hooks happen
of worms becoming adults after the fourth and final molt of
to lie in the plane of section or if they can be isolated from
their development is that the vulva of the female finally
the wet tissues. Verster (1969) may be consulted for hook-
opens through the cuticle (becomes patent).
length data. In the coenurus there is more than one scolex
 In sections (Figures 8-69 and 8-70) the nematode is in
connected to the same bladder wall. Taenia crassiceps
most cases divided into two dorsolateral and two ventro-
presents a source of confusion in this regard by forming
lateral quadrants by the hypodermis. There is a syncytial
 many cysticerci by budding. These all lie within the same
layer below the cuticle that secretes the cuticle. The hypo-
host cysts but are not attached to a common gladder wall
dermis tends to extend into the body of the worm in dorsal,
(see Figure 8-63). Strobilocerci of Taenia taeniaeformis
ventral, and lateral cords, which is what divides the body
are cysticerci that have precociously begun to elongate
into its four apparent sections. The nervous system of a
and segment as larvae and are found in the liver of rodents 
 nematode consists of a major nervous ganglion that typi-
(see Figures 8-54 to 8-56 and 8-61).
cally encircles the esophagus and that has major sets of
 Hydatid cysts manifest expansive growth and have thick,
fibers running through the ventral and dorsal hypodermal
laminated membranes separating the germinative layer,
cords. Nematodes also have an excretory-secretory system
which bears sessile small scolices (termed protoscolices) or
that usually empties through an excretory pore that is
brood capsules, from the surrounding host connective
located on the ventral side of the worm near the level of
-d om sil iso p als,  aeo ans
the nerve ring or more anteriorly. The excretory system
toscolices), the laminated membrane is the only diagnostic
may have columns that extend posteriorly in the form of
characteristic available. Alveolar hydatids have much thin
arms that extend into each of the lateral cords. In some
 ner laminated membranes, and their manner of growth is
adenophorean nematodes, there may be cords found in
invasive instead of expansive.
addition to the typical four. Also, in the Trichinelloidea
392
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
Muscle cell
forms large wings of cuticle called cephalic alae (when only
on the head), which may or may not be continuous with
Cuticle
lateral alae running the length of the worm. Some forms,
mainly the Trichostrongyloidea, have numerous additional
longitudinal ridges running the length of the body. Adult
Lateral
worms are liable to have all sorts of modifications on the
cord
anterior end that are usually less apparent in the larvae;
these consist of lips, large buccal capsules, teeth, and so
on. The cuticle may also have spines, striations, bosses
(thickened bumps), pores (in some Adenophorea), and so
*Hypodermis
on. In adult male nematodes with spicules, the spicules are
 composed of sclerotized cuticle and have a myriad of forms
Esophagus
 and shapes with some being spined.
 The muscle cells of the body that provide locomotion
FIGURE 8-69. Strongylus vulgaris. Cross-section through the esoph-
lie along the body underneath the hypodermal layer (Figure
ageal region of Strongylus vulgaris showing the division of somatic
8-71). These muscle cells have their long axis oriented along
musculature into dorsal and ventral fields by the lateral cords. In 
the length of the worm and vary in number and shape, and
this particular body region of S. vulgaris, the dorsal and ventral
the muscle cels of nematodes are unlike those of many
cords are exceptionally well developed, and these anatomically
separate their respective muscle fields into halves. However,
other organisms because the muscles send processes to
functional separation, expressed in terms of coordinated muscu-
the dorsal and ventral nerve cords rather than having the
lar activity, remains predominantly dorsoventral ( x62).
nerves extending to the muscle cells. When a section has
only a few muscle cells (about three to five) per quadrant,
this is termed meromyarian, and when there are more cells
the hypodermis tends to be organized into bacillary bands
the worms are described as being polymyarian. Muscle cells
rather than lateral cords, with one in Trichuris, two in
are also described as to their appearance. If the cells have
Trichinella, and three or four typical in the various capillar-
ids. From the bacillary bands, pores can be seen extending
from the band through the cuticle.
The cuticle covers the external surface of the worm, and,
to varying degrees in different groups, the lining of the
 esophagus, the posterior portion of the digestive tract, the
vagina, and the opening of the excretory system. The cuticle
 aisa s   a  
forms with thicker cuticles. The cuticle may have major
modifications above the lateral hypodermal cord where it
FGURE 8-71. Eustrongyloides sp. (x170) from a great blue heron.
Each somatic muscle cell is composed of a basement membrane
adjacent to the hypodermis, contractile muscle fibers, and a
delicate sarcoplasmic portion containing the nucleus. The coelo-
myarian muscle cells have a darkly staining contractile portion
FIGURE 8-70. Haemonchus contortus in cross-section at the level of
extending up the lateral sides of the muscle cell which
the intestine (x140). The entire circumference of the cuticle is
gives the cell a cylindric appearance, and an abundant, noncon-
marked by longitudinal ridges (arrows), and the prominent brush
border on the luminal surface of the gut is evident.
stains.
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
393
their contractile elements all oppressed to the hypodermis
with an empty cell body above them, they are termed platy-
myarian. If the cells have contractile portions that extend
up the side of the cell body, they are called coelormyarian.
Typically, cells that are platymyarian are few in number
per quadrant, hence meromyariar, whereas coelomyarian
muscle cels tend to be numerous per quadrant and
 polymyarian. The Ascaridida and Spirurida tend to have 
polymyarian, coelomyarian muscles; the Rhabditida,
Oxyurida, and Strongylida tend to have meromyarian,
platymyarian muscles. The Adenophorea are varied.
The digestive tract of the nematodes consists of an eso-
phagus, an intestine, and a rectum (in male nematodes this
is actually a cloaca, but the distinction is almost never
used). Many of the characteristics of the digestive tract of
FIGURE 8-72. Rhabditis (Pelodera) strongyloides in a hair follicle of a
the adult nematodes are also present in their respective
dog (×130). The inset is an enlarged view that shows the double
larvae stages. This can be a very useful asset in diagnosis
lateral alae ( x400).
using histologic sections.
The esophagus tends to be divided into a dorsal and two
subventral portions by a triradiate lumen that is typically
Rhabditlda
lined with cuticle. There are muscles within the esophagus 
Pelodera strongyloides larvae are found in the hair follicles of
that pull on the lumen to open the esophagus for feeding.
dogs, swine, and catle (Figure 8-72). They have double
Within the different sections there may also be various
lateral alae.
glandular elements. The esophagus may be muscular
Halicephalobus girgivalis is another normal saprophytic
throughout its length or may have an anterior portion
nematode that has been reported to invade mammalian
that is muscular and a posterior portion that is glandular.
tissue and disseminate to various sites, most notably the
The Rhabditida have a muscular esophagus typically
brain (Figure 8-73), with fatal outcome. The infection
divided into a distinct corpus, isthmus, and bulbus. The
has been reported widely in horses. These worms are
Oxyurida have a muscular esophagus with a large valved
small—adult females are 250 to 450 mm in length by no
bulb before the junction with the intestine. The Strongylida
more than about 25 mm in diameter—and only females
for the most part have a simple muscular esophagus.
and larvae have been reported in tissues, suggesting that
The Ascaridida have an esophagus that may have a large
 they are parthenogenetic. Distinctive features in section,
glandular area, the ventriculus, at its base, and they may
in addition to the small size and location, include the pres-
also have ventricular ceca. The Spirurida typically have
ence of a rhabditoid esophagus, a single genital tube, and a
an esophagus that is muscular anteriorly and glandular
thin body wall in which the cuticle, hypodermis, and
posteriorly. The Trichinelloidea tend to have a stichosome
muscle layers cannot be distinctly separated.
esophagus (described later), whereas the Dioctophymatoi-
Strongyloides is a group of parthenogenetic species, and
 dea have a muscular esophagus with many large branching
only female worms and larvae are found in the tissues. The
glands.
 adult parasitic female worms of this species are found deep
The intestine of nematodes is fairly simple in all nema-
todes; it is composed of a single layer of columnar cells that
have a microvillous border. In the Strongylida, the intestine
is lined with a very few cells (oligocytous) that are syncytial
and polynucleate, and it will often appear that only two
such cells line the lumen at any given section. In the
 Rhabditida, the intestine appears lined by only two cells
at each level. The Oxyurida, Ascaridida, and Spirurida
have many cells (polycytous) to myriad cells (myriocytous)
lining the intestinal lumen; these cells tend to be uninucle-
ate for the most part but can vary markedly in height
 around the lumen, especially within the Spirurida. In the
Adenophorea, those we are concerned with typically have a
 polycytous intestine with uninucleate cells. In most of the
nematodes we will see in section, the anus is subterminal,
i.e., there is a tail beyond the anus. The only group where
this is not the case is the Adenophorea, in which the anus is
FIGURE 8-73. Halicepharobus (Micronema) gingivalis in brain of
terminal.
horse (x200).
394
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
FIGURE 8-74. Strongyloides westeri in the mucosa of the small
intestine of a horse ( x250).
in the mucous membrane of the small intestine (Figure 8-74)
and are characterized by meromyarian and platymyarian
muscles, a simple intestine composed of only two cells,
and the eggs in utero, which are few in number, lined up
HGURE 8-76. Ostertagia ostertagi in the abomasal mucosa of a
 in single rows and often with developing larvae. Strongyloides
heifer (×25). (Courtesy Dr. Lois Roth.)
larvae (see Figure 7-28) have double lateral alae.
ruminants and a wide range of other hosts. Trichostrongylus
Strongyllda
axei fourth-stage larvae and juvenile adults are found
There
are
four
superfamilies:
Trichostrongyloidea,
between the basement membrane and epithelial cells of
Strongyloidea, Ancylostomatoidea, and Metastrongyloidea.
the abomasal mucosa. Ostertagia fourth-stage larvae and
juvenile adults are found in dilated gastric glands of the
Trichostrongyloidea
abomasum (Figures 8-76 and 8-77).
The adults of this group tend to be small worms that
typically inhabit the stomach or small intestine. In cross-
Strongyloidea
section they are characterized by the small number of platy-
 Most adult strongyles inhabit the intestinal tract and are
myarian muscle cells and an intestine composed of few cells,
larger than the trichostrongyles. In section they exhibit
often with prominent nuclei and a microvillus border. Most
trichostrongyles, with the exception of Trichostrongylus spe-
cimens, have marked longitudinal ridges on the surface of
the cuticle (Figure 8-75). Fourth-stage larvae are found
throughout the mucosa of the stomach and intestine of
FGURE 8-77. Ostertagia ostertagi in the abomasal mucosa (×200)
FIGURE 8-75. Molineus barbatus in the small intestine of a Cebus
showing the longitudinal cuticular ridges typical (arrowhead) of the
monkey (x200).
superfamily Trichostrongyloidea.
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
395
Spicules
FIGURE 8-80. Strongyius edentatus. Higher magnification of Figure
879, showing a section through the caudal end of the worm
FGURE 8-78. Strongylus edentatus. Cross-section showing the
(×100). Note the thick, multilayered cuticle, spicules, and prom-
thick, multilayered cuticle of this species (×220).
inent lateral cords. The cytoplasm of the meromyarian-platymyar-
ian muscle cells was lost in histologic processing (see also
Figure 8-75).
characteristic features, including platymyarian muscles and the
typical strongyle intestine. The cuticle is not adorned with
ridges. In the strongyles the presence of a large buccal capsule
intestinal wall. Strongylus vulgaris, Strongylus edentatus,
and specialized mouthparts is of great taxonomic value, but
and Strorgylus equinus migrate extensively and sometimes
 these features are often not seen in tissue sections.
erratically in the horse. S. edentatus tends to migrate retro-
 Some of the larval stages of strongyles are spent in tis-
peritoneally, and it is characterized by a thick, multilayered
sues other than the gut, whereas some form nodules in the
cuticle (Figure 8-78). S. equinus immature adults are
frequently found in the pancreas; sections through the
buccal capsule reveal the presence of teth at their base
(Figures 8-79 to 8-82).
Oesophagostomum and related worms are common
 parasites of livestock and monkeys and have worldwide
distribution. They are often referred to as nodular worms
because developing larvae produce remarkable nodular
abscesses in the intestinal wall of the vertebrate host
during development leading to the adult stage. Most
often seen in section as developing worms inside these
nodules (Figures 8-83 and 8-84), the larvae have a rela-
tively thick but smooth cuticle, prominent lateral chords,
and muscle cells that are platymyarian and meromyarian,
typically with only a small number of muscle cells
 per quadrant. The gut is composed of a small number
of multinucleate cells with a conspicuous microvillous
(brush) border.
Ancylostomatoidea
HGURE 8-79. Strongylus edentatus immature male in the lung
The Ancylostomatoidea, typically referred to as hook-
of a horse (x15). Two sections of worm are visible. The
worms, inhabits the gut as adults and have typical strongyle
upper is a cross-section near the caudal end of the worm
features in section (Figure 8-85). The larvae of hookworms
(see also Figure 8-77), and the lower is an oblique section
are relatively small, usually only 14 to 16 mm in diameter,
through the buccal capsule (see also Figure 8-78).
and have double lateral alae (Figure 8-86).
396
C H A P T E R 8Histopathologic Diagnosis
FGURE 8-83. Oesophagostomum sp. Section through a nodule in
wall of the large intestine of cynomolgus monkey containing two 
sections of 0esophagostomum larva ( x25).
FIGURE 8-81. Strongylus edentatus. Higher magnification of Figure
879, showing the buccal capsule (x100).
Metastrongyloidea
 Adult metastrongyles, often referred to as lungworms,
a s iq sn no s  d a
invade blood vessels or the central nervous system. In sec-
tion the body wall tends to be thin, the musculature is often
polymyarian and coelomyarian in nature, and the gut is the
typical strongyle type, although the microvilli are less
FGURE 8-84. Oesophagostomum sp. Higher magnification of Figure
883 showing a section through 0esophagostomum larva (×120).
Note the small number of platymyarian muscle cells and a prom-
 inent brush boarder on the epithelial cells of the gut.
 Teeth :
FIGURE 8-82. Strongyus equinus immature adult worm in the pan-
creas of a horse (×100). Although moribund, the teeth (arrows) in
FGURE 8-85. Ancylostoma caninum adult females from the intestine
the base of the buccal capsule are still readily visible and distin-
of a dog show the platymyarian muscles and the small number of 
guish this species from S. edentatus.
syncytial intestinal cells (×8O). (Courtesy Dr. M. Dale Little.)
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
397
Rightswer
FIGURE 8-88. Angiostrongylus vasorum in the pulmonary artery of a
dog (×100). (Courtesy Dr. M. Dale Little.)
Dogs can be infected with several lungworms, but they
 tend to live in markedly different locations, making diag-
nosis easier than it would be otherwise. Angiostrongylus
vasorum adults may be found in the right side of the
heart and pulmonary vessels of dogs, whereas the eggs
 FGURE 8-86. Ancylostoma caninum third-stage larvae within skeletal
and larvae are found in the lung parenchyma. This infec-
muscle fibers (x650). Note the double lateral alae. (From Lee KT,
tion was exotic to North America but has now appeared in
Little MD, Beaver PC: Intracellular [muscle-fiber] habitat of Ancylostoma 
the far east of Canada (Figure 8-88). Filaroides hirthi adults
caninum in some mammalian hosts, J Parasitol 61:589, 1975.)
are found in the lung parenchyma of the dog (Figures 8-89
and 8-90). Eggs contain first-stage larvae when laid, and the
prominent than in other strongyles. Many metastrongyles
eggs do not accumulate in the lung tissue. Autoinfection by
contain embryonated eggs or larvae in utero and shed these
 F. hirthi may lead to a state of hyperinfection in which lung
stages into the surrounding tissues.
tissue is almost completely replaced by adult worms and
Cats are typically host to only a single lungworm,
larvae may be found widely scattered in lymph nodes, pan-
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus. Adults, eggs in varying stages of
creas, intestinal tract, liver, and brain. Filaroides osleri
development, and larvae are found in nests in the lung
adults are found in fibrous nodules projecting into the
parenchyma (Figure 8-87). Diagnosis is usually fairly easy
lumen of the trachea and principal bronchi (Figures 8-91
because domestic cats have few other worms causing similar
and 8-92).
lesions; however, wild felids may be host to related forms.
FGURE 8-87. Aelurostrongylus abstrusus adults in section of a
FIGURE 8-89. Flaroides hirthi in canine lung tissue (x100). The
nodule in the lung of a cat (x250).
dark objects are eggs and larvae in the uterus of female worms.
398
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
FIGURE 8-90. Filaroides hirthi, enlarged view, showing the nature
of the intestine, composed of a very few cells (x200).
 Sheep and goats can be host to several species of lung-
worms. Muellerius capillaris is found in nodules in the lung
FGURE 8-92. Flaroides osleri, enlarged view, showing the nature
 parenchyma. These nodules contain adult worms, eggs
of the intestine and the very thin body wall ( x 180).
in varying stages of development, and larvae. If the tails
of larvae can be located in the tissue section, Muellerius
but their eggs and larvae, which are indistinguishable
organisms can be distinguished from Protostrongylus organ-
from those of Muellerius organisms, are found widely scat-
isms (see Figure 7-6i). Protostrongylus species. adults
 tered in the lung parenchyma rather than concentrated
may be found in either parenchymal nodules or airways.
in nests.
Dictyocaulus species (Trichostrongyloidea) adults are found
in airways. Parelaphostrongylus tenuis adults are found
Oxyurlda
in the meninges and nervous tissue of the spinal cord
The oxyurids are generally smallish worms that as adults
and brain of sheep and goats (Figures 8-93 and 8-94),
typically inhabit the large intestine or cecum. In section
most species have prominent lateral alae. The esophagus
has characteristic sections consisting of corpus, isthmus,
and terminal bulb which can occasionally be seen in sec-
tions. The musculature is platymyarian and meromyarian,
and generally only two or three muscle cells are located in
each quadrant (Figure 8-95). The intestine is variable but
is cuboidal to columnar with a single nucleus per cell.
The presence of typical eggs in utero often assists with
identification.
FIGURE 8-91. Flaroides osleri in fibrous nodules in the trachea of a
FGURE 8-93. Parelaphostrongyrus tenuis in the meninges of a
dog (x26).
goat (x25).
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
399
FGURE 8-94. Parelaphostrongylus tenuis (×290) illustrating the
nature of the intestine, with very few cells.
FIGURE 8-96. Cross-section of Ascars suum at the level of the
muscular esophagus (x25). The esophagus has a dorsal and
 two sublateral portions divided by the Y-shaped cuticular lining.
Ascarldlda
 The ascarids comprise a diverse group of worms, and as
The muscles are polymyarian. The lateral cords are prominent,
and also visible are the dorsal and ventral nerve cords and
adults, some, such as Ascaris and Parascaris organisms, are
the lumen of the excretory duct on the ventral cord. (Courtesy
the largest of the intestinal nematodes. In tissue section, in
Dr. M. Dale Little.)
addition to their large size, the ascarids characteristically
have a thick, multilayered cuticle, polymyarian-coelomyar-
ian muscles (often with cytoplasmic processes that extend
the base of each cell; prominent coelomyarian-polymyarian
into the body cavity), an intestine with numerous columnar
muscle; and typical eggs in the uterus that have a
epithelial cells and short microvilli, and large lateral cords
thick shell, often wrinkled or sculptured on the surface.
(Figures 8-96 to 8-98). The Ascaridida are often divided
Genera in Heterocheiloidea, such as Anisakis, Terranova,
 into two large groups or superfamilies. One, the Ascaridoi-
Contracaecum, and Porrocaecum, have much the same
dea, parasitize land-dwelling vertebrates, whereas the
features in section, except all in this group also have a
second group, the Heterocheiloidea, parasitize birds, fish,
cecum (anteriorly directed), a ventricular appendix (poster-
and marine mammals. Members of the Ascaridoidea, in-
iorly directed), or both. These may be obvious if sections
cluding the genera Ascaris, Parascaris, Toxocara, Toxascaris,
are cut through the level of the esophageal-intestinal
and Baylisascaris, have three simple lips on the anterior end;
junction.
a thick, multilayered cuticle; a club-shaped esophagus;
columnar epithelial gut cells with a single nucleus near
Intestine
~Uterus
Ovary
 Muscle cell
-Ventral nerve cord 
FIGURE 8-97. Ascaris suum female (x10) section through mid
body showing the many-celled intestine, the ovary with a central
FGURE 8-95. Aspicururs sp. in the intestine of a rat. This oxyurid 
rhachis, the uterus full of developing eggs, the ventral nerve cord,
(pinwonm) has platymyarian muscle cells and at this level of the 
and the cytoplasmic portions of the muscle cells extending to the
body lacks lateral alae.
ventral nerve cord. (Courtesy Dr. M. Dale Little.)
400
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
Excretory
 canal
Testis
FIGURE 8-98. Ascaris suum male ( x20) showing a section through
FGURE 8-100. Baylisascaris procyonis (x400) in the brain of a por-
the lateral cord with the prominent excretory canal and a section
cupine showing the large excretory columns, the intestine with a
through several loops of the testis. (Courtesy Dr. M. Dale Little.)
patent lumen, and lateral alae.
Splrurlda 
The order Spirurida consists of the superfamilies Gnathosto-
Those ascarids that parasitize mammals often have
matoidea, Physalopteroidea, Rictularioidea, Thelazioidea,
larvae that are capable of tissue migration, and larvae of
Spiruroidea, Dracunculoidea, and Filarioidea. The spirurids
genera such as Toxocara (Figure 8-99), Baylisascaris (Figure
represent an extremely diverse group of nematodes that para-
 8-100), and Lagochilascaris (Figure 8-101) cause “larval
sitize a wide range of hosts and anatomic locations in those
migrans" syndrome. Ascarid larvae have single lateral
hosts. As adults, spirurids range in size from thin and thread-
cuticular alae. They also have a single excretory cell with
like in the case of Gongylonema, to stout, robust worms such as
H-shaped anterior and posterior projections called excretory
Gnathostoma, to incredibly long in the case of Dracunculus.
columns. The presence of single lateral alae and paired
Some species localize in the lumen of the gut, others are asso-
excretory columns makes ascarid larvae relatively easy to
ciated with the wall of the gut, and others have moved away
distinguish in tissue sections (see Figures 8-99 to 8-101).
from the gut entirely. Despite this variability, there are a
Toxocara larvae migrating or arrested in somatic tissues
number of similarities in both biologic and morphologic
tend not to exceed 21 μm in diameter, but Baylisascaris
aspects. As a group the spirurids use insects as intermediate
larvae continue to grow as they migrate and may reach
hosts. In many species, small, thick-shelled eggs containing a
 55 to 70 μm in diameter.
well-developed larva are passed in the feces and ingested by
an insect intermediate host. In the Dracunculoidea, female
worms migrate to the surface and release first-stage larvae
FIGURE 8-99. bxocara canis larva (x650) in an experimentally
infected mouse, stained with a monoclonal antibody using immu-
noperoxidase to show the location of the large branches of the
excretory cell that extend posteriad from the single excretory cell
along each of the two lateral cords (right section). The section on
FGURE 8-101. Lagochilascaris sprenti (×100) larvae in an experi
the left is through the esophagus and is anterior to the branching.
mentally infected mouse. These ascarid larvae grow quite large,
and the central section is posteriad to the termination of the
and sections can be seen through the esophagus and through
excretory columns.
numerous levels of the many-celled intestine.
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
401
Intestine
Uterus
FIGURE 8-104. Spirocerca (upi (x50) sections through the region
of the glandular esophagus showing the lateral cords (arrows)
FGURE 8-102. Spirurid larva in a granuloma in the uterine wall of
projecting into the pseudocoelom and showing the nature of
a rhesus monkey (x36).
the intestine, with a prominent brush border and many cells
with nuclei lined up in a row and uterus filled with tiny eggs.
into water, where they are ingested by copepods. In the Filar-
in utero. This combination of features makes the spirurids
ioidea, not only have the adult worms moved away from the
relatively distinctive in sections.
 gut, but the female worms release motile larvae called micro-
Spirurid larvae are, on occasion, seen in tissue sections
flariae that either circulate in the blood or reside in the skin
and have some of the same morphologic features seen in
and are picked up by blood-sucking insects that serve as inter-
adult worms, including polymyarian-coelomyarian muscle
mediate hosts. Features of spirurids in tissues include a cuticle
cells, prominent lateral chords, and a distinctive intestine
 that often has some ornamentation, including spines, bosses,
composed of many tall columnar cells (Figure 8-102).
transverse striations, or longitudinal ridges. The esophagus
an
tends to be long and divided into an anterior muscular and
example of the superfamily Spiruroidea. The adults typi-
posterior glandular portion; the glandular portion is very cel-
cally are found in nodules in the wall of the esophagus and
lular and stains much more intensely. The general spirurid
stomach, and sometimes in the wall of the aorta or rectum.
 intestine is often large and folded on itself and is composed
In cross-section they are characterized by large lateral cords
of many cells, often with the nuclei arranged in a row, a prom-
that project into the body cavity, an intensely stained
inent brush border, but a rather weak basement membrane.
glandular esophagus (see Figure 8-104); an intestine with
The lateral cords are prominent, and the musculature is poly-
myarian-coelomyarian in nature. In most spirurids, female
worms conta in small, thick-shelled eggs containing a larva.
 In the case of the Dracunculoidea and Filarioidea, large
numbers of larvae or microfilariae, respectively, are contained.
Hook
Pleaserefer ta the printed publication
Comb
FGURE 8-103. Spirocerca lupi (x22) in a nodule in a dog. (Case
described in Georgi ME, Han H, Hartrick Dw: Spirocerca lupi
[Rudolphi, 1809] nodule in the rectum of a dog from
FIGURE 8-105. Spirocerca lupi egg with broken shellfrom which
Connecticut, Comell Vet 70:43, 1980.)
the larva projects (x 1800).
402
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
FIGURE 8-106. Gongylonema (×22), cross-section through gravid
female embedded in esophagus of stumptail macaque monkey.
 a prominent brush border and many cels with the nuclei
FGURE 8108. Dracunculus insignis (x6O). Cross-section of
 lined up in a row, which gives the appearance of three
Dracunculus insignis in the subcutaneous tissue of a raccoon. The
layers; a uterus flled with small eggs containing intensely
two lateral chords on either side of the body and heavy dorsal and
stained  larva; and coelomyarian-polymyarian  muscle
ventral muscle bands surrounding the uterine tube packed with
cells (see Figures 8-103 and 8-104). The larvae have
larvae are evident.
hooks and combs associated with the stoma, although
these structures require oil immersion microscopy to be
cervical alae and is covered with cuticular plaques or bosses
seen properly (see Figure 8-105).
on the anterior end, and the lateral cords are asymmetric
The genus Gongylonema,
another member of the
(see Figure 8-107).
Spiruroidea group, is encountered in the tissues of animals
 Dracunculus insignis, of the superfamily Dracunculoidea,
with some frequency and has several distinctive morphologic
s s ss pii r a pn s
features. Typically found threaded in the mucosa of the
dorsal and ventral muscle fields composed of coelomyar-
mouth, esophagus (Figure 8-106) or stomach, the members
 ian-polymyarian muscles, a very reduced intestine, and a
of Gongylonema have characteristic spirurid features in section,
large uterus filled with larvae (Figure 8-108).
including a divided esophagus, a polymyarian-coelomyarian
Members of the superfamily Filarioidea, although having
musculature, and the presence of small, thick-shelled, embryo-
many typical spirurid features in section, are relatively dis-
nated eggs (Figure 8-107). Gongylonema organisms are
tinct. Most distinctive is their location, as adults, in virtu-
distinctive, however, in that the anterior end has large
ally all tissues except the gut. Filarids range greatly in size,
from some that are only 1 or 2 cm in length to others such
as Dirofilaria immitis, where the female worm may reach
30 cm in length by 1 mm in diameter; however, all tend to
be slender. The cuticle may be thin or thick and in some
groups contains distinctive ridges or striations. The mus-
culature is coelomyarian-polymyarian, the esophagus may
be divided but is generally not as prominent as in other
spirurids, and the intestine is typically a simple tube. One of
the most characteristic features of filarids is the presence
of microfilariae filling the uterus. There are many species of
filaria that infect animals, and several examples will serve to
illustrate the group.
D. irmrmitis, the dog heartworm, is well recognized for the
disease it produces in canines, felines, and humans. The adult
worms live in the circulatory system, typically in the chambers
and great vessels of the heart. The worms, as just stated, are
large; have a thick, multilayered but smooth cuticle; have
FIGURE 8-107. Gongylonema (×125) at a higher magnification
prominent coelomyarian-polymyarian muscles; have broad
showing the presence of unequal lateral chords and embryonated
lateral cords; have a weak intestine; and, in the female,
eggs, many containing larvae.
have paired uteri flled with microfilariae (Figure 8-109).
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
403
FIGURE 8-111. Onchocerca cervicalis (×560) female in the nuchal
ligament of a horse. The outer circular cuticular ridges and striae
in the inner layer of the cuticle are evident. In O. cervicalis there are
four striae per ridge, one directly under and three between each 
FGURE 8-109. Diroflaria immitis ( x65) in the pulmonary artery of a
ridge.
dog. The thick, smooth cuticle, large coelomyarian-polymyarian
 muscles, small intestine, and paired uteri are evident.
amount of hypodermal tissue, even underlying the muscle
Many other Dirofilaria, such as Dirofilaria repens of the
cells (Figure 8-112). As far as it is known, adult Onchocerca
dog and Dirofilaria tenuis of the raccoon, live in subcutaneous
organisms inhabit dense connective tissue, are tightly
locations and are distinctive in that the cuticle has prom-
coiled, and, in some species, form distinct fibrous nodules.
 inent longitudinal ridges marked with transverse striations,
giving the external surface a beaded or corn-row appearance
Enopllda
(Figure 8-110).
Trichinelloidea
The genus Onchocerca, another common filarial infec-
This group contains the trichinelloids, the trichuroids,
tion of domestic animals, provides a good example of spe-
the capillarids, and the trichosomoids. In this group the
cific filarial anatomy in section. Adult female Onchocerca
most characteristic feature, both grossly and in section, is
 organisms are thin and extremely long and have distinctive
the stichosome esophagus, a small cylindric tube sur-
cuticular structures. These worms possess external circular
rounded by individual stichocytes that compose the sticho-
ridges and striae in the inner layer of the cuticle (Figure
some. The other distinctive feature of these worms in section
8-11l). These ridges and striae not only are specific to the
is the presence ofa bacillary band(s). The bacillary band is a
been shown to have great value in distinguishing various
species within the genus. Also distinctive of adult female
Onchocerca organisms are the muscle cells, which often
 appear to be weak and poorly developed, and a prominent
FIGURE 8-112. Onchocerca cervicalis (x340) female in cross-
section in the nuchal ligament of a horse. The thick cuticle, prom-
FGURE 8-110. Dirofilaria tenuis (×220), high-power cross-section
inent hypodemmal tissue between the cuticle and muscle layers,
through a portion of in the subcutaneous tissues of a raccoon.
and wispy muscle cells are all prominent, as are the paired uteri
The longitudinal ridges on the surface of the cuticle are evident.
and small intestine.
404
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
Esophageal
 lumen 
Bacillary
band 
FIGURE 8-113. Frichuris vulpis (x500) in the cecum of a dog show-
FGURE 8-115. Frichinella spiralis adult in the mucosa of the small
 ing a cross-section of the esophageal region.
intestine of a rat ( ×480). There are two cross-sections through a
female containing prelarvae and a longitudinal section through 
specialized section of the cuticle and hypodermis, including
the stichosome esophagus (arrows).
 specialized hypodermal gland cells. In Trichuris there is
a single bacillary band in the esophageal region (Figure
Adult Trichuris, as their common name whipworm sug-
8-113), whereas in Trichinella and capillarids there are two
-aue usedrum, u aul apoq padeus-drum e aaeq sisis
bacillary bands that run the length of the esophagus.
rior portion is threaded through the epithelium of the large
In addition, the female reproductive tract is a single tube,
intestine, whereas the stout “handle” portion normally lies
the anus is usually terminal, the muscles are coelomyarian-
free in the lumen (Figure 8-114). Immature Trichuris lie
polymyarian, and the eggs typically have bipolar promi-
entirely within the mucosa and are of uniform diameter.
nences (plugs) and are frequently in an unembryonated
Adult Trichinella are found threaded in the mucosa of
state when passed or seen in tissues. Occasionally, eggs may
the small intestine (Figure 8-115), and in tissue section the
develop and hatch in utero, as in the case of Trichinella.
adults resemble Strongyloides, except that they have a tubu-
The first-stage larva is typically the infective stage for
lar esophagus embedded in the stichosome, male worms
the definitive host. Most worms in this group display a
exist, and in female worms the uterus contains prelarvae
high order of site specificity and, except for Trichinella, a
instead of segmenting eggs. Trichinella larvae are found
high order of host specificity as well. The host-organ listings
characteristically coiled in a “nurse cell (Figure 8-116) in
should prove helpful in dealing with this group of parasites.
striated muscle, and they are characterized by stichocytes
surrounding the esophagus. Capillarids infecting the intes-
tinal mucosa are somewhat larger than Trichinella and have
eggs with bipolar plugs in their uteri.
FIGURE 8-114. Frichuris vurpis (×250) in the cecum of a dog show-
ing sections through the very small intestine and the thick-walled 
FGURE 8-116. Frichinella spiralis first-stage larvae in a skeletal
Uterus flled with typical Frichuris vulpis eggs.
muscle fiber of a cat ( x425).
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
405
FGURE 8117. Calodium (Capillaria) hepaticum in the liver of a rat
(×360). Eggs with bipolar plugs are visible in the tissue suround-
ing the worm.
FIGURE 8-119. Anatrichosoma buccalis. Higher magnification of
worm in Figure 8-114, illustrating stichocytes (astersks), bacillary
"(tx) saaa aun un (smue yots) sanid elod pue (smue buo) spuea
 The presence of single-celled eggs with bipolar plugs in
Acanthocephalans
the uterus is the best criterion for identifying capillarids in
Adult male and female Acanthocephala are pseudocoelo-
tissue sections (Figure 8-117). Trichuris species have larger
mates that live in the intestines of vertebrates where they
 eggs and are found only in the large intestine of mammals,
gain nutrients through their external covering, i.e., they
 practically the only epithelium in which capillarids will not
have no intestinal tract (Figure 8-121). Hosts include all
be found.
vertebrate classes, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and
Other common but less frequently seen members of this
mammals. Eggs passed in feces are ingested by the interme-
group include Aratrichosoma in the nasal mucosa or palate
diate host, an arthropod; and infection is acquired through
of primates and marsupials (Figures 8-118 and 8-119) and
the ingestion of the intermediate host. The wormlike adults
Trichosomoides in the bladder of rats (Figure 8-120). Both
 possess a spiny proboscis that is used for attachment to the
-seq auo 1o omi pue shnd 1eodnq m sisa paieane aau
intestinal mucosa and can be retracted inside the body, this
 illary band, respectively. Anatrichosoma, although occurring
why they are often called thorny or spiny-headed worms
in the same general location (i.e., mouth and throat) as
(Figure 8-122). The fluid-filled pseudocoelom contains
Gongylonerma, can easily be distinguished on morphologic
cells of the reproductive system, testes and cement glands
features, including smaller diameter, presence of sticho-
in males. Females have a reproductive system wherein balls
somes and bacillary bands in the anterior end, and polar
of ovarian tissue float about and sperm migrate into the
plugs in the eggs (see Figure 8-119).
pseudocoelom to fertilize the eggs. A “uterine bell" sorts
the eggs according to their developmental stage, and
FGURE 8-118. Anatrichosoma buccalis. Cross-section through
gravid female Anatrichosoma buccalis embedded in palate of opos-
FIGURE 8-120. Trichosomoides crassicauda in the urinary bladder
sum (x60).
mucosa of a rat (x480).
406
C H A P T E R 8 Histopathologic Diagnosis
Lacuna
Muscle
Hypodermis *
FIGURE 8121. Cross-section of a female acanthocephalan,
Neoechinorhynchus (x 150). "Eggs" are actually clusters of oogonia
called ovarian balls that float free in the body cavity.
FGURE 8-123. Macracanthorhynchus ingens. Cystacanth in skeletal
muscle of a golden hamster (Mesocricetus auratus) (x66).
 mature eggs, containing a larva called an acanthor, pass into
(Courtesy Dr. G.R. Fahnestock.)
the uterus, out of the body, and into the feces. The inter-
are no reproductive organs, but there are two lemnisci,
called a cystacanth develops; the cystacanth can sometimes
muscular and glandular structures that serve to evert and
use vertebrate paratenic hosts, and this is typically the stage
retract the thorny proboscis. The thick hypodermis lying
that will be seen in histologic sections (Figure 8-123).
external to the muscle layer provides the major clue as to
The body wall is thick and multilayered and very dis-
the identity of a cystacanth.
tinctive in histologic sections. There is an outer tegument
(outer plasma membrane and three fibrous layers that con-
REFERENCES
tain lacunae [channels] that may serve as a means of
Binford CH, Connor DH, eds: Pathology of tropial and extraordinary
moving nutrients around the body), a thin “dermis"
diseases, vols l and 2, Washington DC, 1976, Armed Forces Institute
layer, and a layer of circular and longitudinal muscle
of Pathology (AFIP).
tubules that highly are distinctive. In the cystacanth there
Chitwood MB, Lichtenfels JR: Identification of parasitic metazoa in tissue 
sections, Exp Parasitol 32:407, 1972.
Connor DH, Chandler FW, Schwartz DA, et al: Pathology of infectious
diseases, vols I and 2, Stamford, Conn, 1997, Appleton & Lange.
Daft BM, Visvesvara GS, Read DH, et al: Seasonal meningoencephalitis
in Holstein cattle caused by Naegieria fowleri, J Vet Diagn Invest
17:605, 2005.
Dubey JP, Sreekumar C, Donovan T, et al: Redescription of Besnoitia
bennetti (Protozoa: Apicomplexa) from the donkey (Equus asinus), Int
J Parasitof 35:659, 2005.
Gardiner CH, Fayer R, Dubey IP: An atlas of protozoan parasites in animal
tissues, Washington DC, 1988, AFIP, American Registry of Pathology.
Gutierrez Y: Diagnostic pathology of parasitic infections with clinical corre-
Iation, Philadelphia, 1990, Lea & Febiger.
Meyers WN, Neafie RC, Marty AM, Wear DI: Pathology of infectious
diseases, vol 1, Helmminthiases, Washington DC, 2000, AFIP, American
Registry of Pathology.
Orihel TC, Ash LR: Parasites in huran tissues, Chicago, 1995,American
 Society of Clinical Pathology (ASCP).
Toft ID, Eberhard ML: Parasitic diseases. In Taylor BT, Abee CR,
Henrickson R, eds: Nonhuman primates in biomedical research: diseases, 
San Diego, 1998, Academic.
Verster A : A taxonomic revision of the genus Taenia Linnaeus, 1758,
FIGURE 8-122. Neoechinorhynchus. Cross-section through the pro-
Onderstepoort, I Vet Res 36:3, 1969.
boscis showing hooks (arrows) (x320).
PPENDIX
Table A-1
 Ovine Parasiticides *
lctyocaulus
chost
matodrus
arshallagla
iostom
abertla
berla
ezla
rus
rongy
oldes
Jdes
he
Withholdlng In
Example Trade
Days
Aus
Actlve Ingredlent (Dose)
Name
Antiparasite
Mllk
Meat
+
 Ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg PO)
Ivomec Sheep Drench
NFMS
11
十
十
十
Moxidectin (0.2 mg/kg PO)
Cydectin Oral Drench
NFMS
7
+
+
for Sheep
Albendazole (7.5 mg/kg PO)
Valbazen
NFMS
7
+
Levamisole (8.0 mg/kg PO)
Levasole Sheep Wormer
NFMS
+
十
S
 Decoquinate (0.5 mg/kg daily
Deccox
NFMS
0
for >28 days PO)
Lasalocid (15 to 70 mg/head/day Bovatec
 Products
0
PO)
*FDA-approved labeling has been relied on for most of the drugs listed. For a comprehensive listing of off-label usage, see Chapter 6 and/or current 
literature.
FDA/CVM MUMS designation.
NFMS, Not for milking sheep; PO, orally.
407
408
PP
Table A-2
 Porcine Parasiticides *
N
D
loldes
2
Withholdlng
Actlve Ingredlent (Dose)
Example Trade Name
In Days
Doramectin (0.30 mg/kg IM)
Dectomax Injectable Solution
24
Ivermectin (0.30 mg/kg SC; 1.8 g
Ivomec
18
9
(starters, growers, and finishers) or
9.1 g (adult) per ton in feed
Fenbendazole (9 mg/kg for 3 to
Safe-Guard EZ Scoop
12 days PO)
Levamisole (8 mg/kg PO)
Levasole
3
十
 Piperazine base (110 mg/kg PO)
Wazine
21
+
 Pyrantel tartrate (in feed 800 g/ton 
Banminth 48
for treatment; 96 g/ton for
continuous control)
Dichlorvos (12.5 mg/kg PO)
Atgard Swine Wormer
0
Amitraz
T'aktic
3
*FDA-approved labeling has been relied on for most of the drugs listed. For a comprehensive listing of offlabel usage, see Chapter 6 and/or current literature.
Ivermectin Premix is effective against Ascarops and Stephanurus.
IM, intramuscularly; PO, orally; SC, subcutaneously.
Table A-3
Bovine Parasiticides *
Dictyo
ost
huns
ena
gla
om
yloides
llce
Withholdlng Perlod In Days
osto!
ng1
yius
Actlve Ingredlent (Dose)
Example Trade Name
Meat
Mllk
 Doramectin (0.2 mg/kg SC or IM)
 Dectomax Injectable
NFD
35
十
+
+
 Doramectin (0.5 mg/kg pour-on)
 Dectomax Pour-On
NFD
45
+
+
十
 Eprinomectin (0.5 mg/kg pour-on)
 Ivomec Eprinex Pour-On 0
0
+
十
Ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg SC)
 Ivomec Injection
NFD
35
十
Ivermectin (0.5 mg/kg pour-on)
Ivomec Pour-On
NFD
48
Moxidectin (0.2 mg/kg SC)
Cydectin Injection
NFD
21
Moxidectin (0.5 mg/kg pour-on)
Cydectin Pour-On
0
0
 Ivermectin/clorsulon (0.2 and 2 mg/kg
 Ivomec Plus Injection
NFD
49
+
SC)
Clorsulon (7 mg/kg PO)
Curatrem
NFD
Albendazole (10 mg/kg PO)
Valbazen
NFD
27
d
 Fenbendazole (5 or 10 mg/kg PO)
 Panacur/Safe-Guard
ot
8-13
E
Oxfendazole (4.5 mg/kg PO)
 Synanthic
NFD
7
Z
Levamisole (6 mg/kg SC or bolus)
Levasole
NFD
2-7
 Morantel tartrate (10 mg/kg PO)
Rumatel
0
14
Amprolium (prevention 5 mg/kg PO;
Puo
NFD
1
Anti
10 mg/kg treatment PO)
ipar
Decoquinate (0.5 mg/kg day PO)
Deccox
NFD
0
十
rasite
Lasalocid (100 to 360 mg/head/day PO)
Bovatec
NFD
0
X
Monensin (115 to 660 mg/head/day PO)
 Rumensin 80
0
十
 Sulfaquinoxaline (13 mg/kg/day PO)
Various
NFD
10
*FDA-approved labeling has been relied on for most of the drugs listed. For a comprehensive listing of off-label usage, see Chapter 6 and/or current literature.
4
10 mg/kg dose not for dairy cattle (NFD).
 Species
fNot all formulations are approved.
IM, Intramuscularly; NFD, not for dairy cattle; PO, orally; SC, subcutaneously.
605
410
Table A-4
 Feline Parasiticides *
IC
Z
D
tuD
X
Actlve Ingredlent (Dose)
Example Trade Name
Antipar
Ivermectin (0.024 mg/kg monthly PO)
Heartgard for Cats
Milbemycin (2 mg/kg monthly PO)
Interceptor
十
Moxidectin (1 mg/kg) and imidacloprid
Advantage Multi
+
(10 mg/kg) topical
 Selamectin (6 mg/kg monthly topical)
Revolution
+
Piperazine (55 mg/kg PO)
Pipa-T'abs
 Pyrantel pamoate (10 to 20 mg/kg PO)
Nemex
Praziquantel (5 mg/kg) and pyrantel pamoate
Drontal
(20 mg/kg PO)
 Praziquantel (5-10 mg/kg PO, SC, or IM)
Droncit
Emodepside (3 mg/kg) and praziquantel
 Profender
(12 mg/kg) topical
Epsiprantel (1.25 mg/kg PO)
Cestex
Lufenuron (30 mg/kg monthly PO)
Program
Lufenuron (10 mg/kg SC every 6 months)
 Program 6-Month Injection
 Dinotefuran and pyriproxyfen (topical)
Vectra
(Od Papaau se Aliep Sysu ) ueduan
Capstar
+
Imidacloprid (monthly topical)
Advantage
+
Fipronil (monthly topical)
Frontline
 Fipronil and methoprene (topical)
Frontline Plus
Metaflumizone (monthly topical)
Promeris
 Ivermectin (ear topical)
Acarexx
Milbemycin (ear topical)
Milbemite
*FDA-approved labeling has been relied on for most of the drugs listed. For a comprehensive listing of offabel usage, see Chapter 6 and/or current literature.
tPrevents heartworm infection.
tCommonly used in, but not FDA approved for use in, cats.
IM,Intramuscularly;PO,orally;SC,subcutaneously.
Table A-5
 Canine Parasiticides *
D
ca
Actlve Ingredlent (Dose)
Example Trade Name
Melarsomine (2.5 mg/kg IM)
Immiticide
 Ivermectin (0.006 mg/kg) monthly PO
Heartgard
十
Ivermectin (0.006 mg/kg) and pyrantel (5 mg/kg) monthly PO
 Heartgard Plus
Milbemycin (0.5 mg/kg) monthly PO
Interceptor
Milbemycin (0.5 mg/kg) and lufenuron (10 mg/kg) monthly PO
Sentinel
十
十
Moxidectin (2.5 mg/kg) and imidacloprid (10 mg/kg) monthly
Advantage Multi
topical
 Selamectin (6 mg/kg) monthly topical
 Revolution
Ivermectin (0.006 mg/kg) and pyrantel pamoate (5 mg/kg) and
 Iverhart Max
 praziquantel (5 mg/kg) monthly PO
Fenbendazole (50 mg/kg × 3 days PO)
Panacur
 Febantel (25-62 mg/kg) and praziquantel (5-12 mg/kg) and
d
 Drontal Plus 
 pyrantel pamoate (5-12 mg/kg) PO
Z
Pyrantel pamoate (5 mg/kg PO)
Nemex
Pyrantel pamoate (5 mg/kg) and praziquantel (5 mg/kg) PO
Virbantel
X
 Praziquantel (5 to 7.5 mg/kg PO, SC, or IM)
Droncit
Epsiprantel (5.5 mg/kg PO)
Cestex
Ant
 Piperazine (55 mg/kg PO)
 T'asty paste (and others)
ipar
Lufenuron (10 mg/kg monthly PO)
Program
asite
 Dinotefuran and pyriproxyfen and permethrin (topical)
Vectra 3D
Imidacloprid (monthly topical)
Advantage
 Imidacloprid and permethrin (monthly topical)
K9 Advantix
Nitenpyram (1 mg/kg as needed PO)
Capstar
Spinosad (30 mg/kg PO)
Comfortis
Spec
Fipronil (monthly topical)
Frontline
les
Fipronil and methoprene (monthly topical)
Frontline Plus
 Amitraz and metaflumizone monthly (monthly topical)
 Promeris
*FDA-approved labeling has been relied on for most of the drugs listed. For a comprehensive listing of offlabel usage, see Chapter 6 and/or current literature.
Melarsomine removes adult heartworm infections; all other products in this column prevent hearthworm infection.
IM, Intramuscularly; PO, orally; SC, subcutaneously.
412
Table A-6
Equine Parasiticides *
opf
Z
D
Actlve Ingredlent (Dose)
Example Trade Name
X
Ivermectint (0.2 mg/kg PO)
Eqvalan
Antipar
Ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg) and praziquantel
Zimecterin Gold
+
+
(1 mg/kg) PO
Moxidectin (0.4 mg/kg PO)
Quest
+
Moxidectin (0.4 mg/kg) and praziquantel
 Quest Plus
十
(2.5 mg/kg) PO
 Fenbendazole (5 mg/kg PO)t
Panacur
+
Fenbendazole (10 mg/kg PO)×5 dayst
 Panacur Paste 10% Powerpac
Oxibendazole (10 mg/kg PO)
Anthelcide EQ Equine Wormer
+
+
Piperazine (110 mg/kg PO)
Wonder Wormer for Horses
+
+
 Pyrantel pamoate (6.6 mg/kg PO)
Strongid T'
+
+
 Pyrantel tartrate (2.64 mg/kg; daily as
 Strongid C
+
top dress)
Tetrachlorvinphos (1.54 mg/kg
Equitrol
Cyromazine (300 mg/horse/day PO)
Solitude IGR
Diflubenzuron (0.15 mg/kg/day PO)
Equitrol I1
Nitazoxanide (25 mg/kg/5 days; 50 mg/kg/
Navigator
23 days PO)
 Ponazuril (5 or 10 mg/kg/28 days PO)
Marquis
 Sulfadiazine (20 mg/kg) and pyrimethamine
 ReBalance Antiprotozoal Oral Suspension
(1 mg/kg) PO for 90 to 270 days
*FDA-approved labeling has been relied on for most of the drugs listed. For a comprehensive listing of off-label usage, see Chapter 6 and/or current literature.
Please note that some generic preparations of ivermectin are not labeled for Oxyuris equi or Triodontophorus.
f10 mg/kg also recommended for foals with Parascaris.
sapioAuons Af Od /Bw gTs
Takes increased amounts of pyrantel; pyrantel tartrate seems to work.
 PO, Orally; EPM, equine protozoal myeloencephalitis.
APPENDIX
Antiparasite Products by Species
413
Table A-7
Commercial Antiparasite Vaccines *
Marshall W. Lightowlers
Vacclne
Marketing
Paraslte
Reclplent
Name
Company
Antlgen Type
Antiprotozoal
Babesia bovis
Cattle
Numeroust
Locals
Live attenuated
Babesia bigermina
Cattle
Numerous
Local
Live attenuated
Babesia canis
Dog
Pirodog
Merial
Subunit
B. canis; Babesia rossi
Dog
Nobivac Piro
Intervet
Subunit
Eimeria species
Chicken
Livacox, Paracox,
Biopharm,
Live attenuated
Eimeriavax
Schering-Plough,
 Bioproperties
Eimeria species
Chicken
CoxAbic
ABIC
Subunit
Giardia duodenalis
Dog/cat
GiardiaVax
Fort Dodge
Disrupted parasites
Animal Health
Leishmania donovani
B00
Leishmune
 Fort Dodge
Subunit
 Animal Health
Neospora caninum
Cattle
NeoGuard
 Intervet
Killed whole parasites
Sarcocystis neurona
Horse
Sarcocystis
Fort Dodge
 Killed whole parasites
Neurona
Animal Health
Vaccine
Theileria annulata
Cattle
Numerous
Local
Live attenuated
Toxoplasma gondi
Sheep
Toxovax
 Intervet
Live attenuated
Antihelminth
Dictylcaulus viviparus
Cattle
Dictol, Bovilis,
Intervet
Live attenuated
Huskvac
Antitick
Boophilus microplus
Cattle
TickGard, Gavac
Intervet, Heber
 Recombinant subunit
Biotec S.A.
*Marketing and availability of these vaccines are subject to commercial decisions at any time, and hence the list cannot be considered to be
accurate or comprehensive on an ongoing basis. These vaccines were being commercially marketed to some extent around the time of writing or in
delivered as the immunizing procedure, with or without subsequent drug treatment of the vaccines. Such procedures underlie some immunizing 
treatments for coccidiosis in poultry and for Theileria parva.
Marketing arrangements may lead to vaccines being sold under license in particular regions; hence the company specified may not be respon-
sible for marketing the indicated vaccine in some areas.
tvaccines prepared using similar methodologies in a number of countries.
SA number of different institutes or companies involved with manufacture and marketing.
up to seven different species of Eimeria may be included in a combined vaccine. Vaccines may be marketed in a number of diferent variants
containing different combinations of different species' oocysts.
This page intentionally left blank
A
Adenophorea, 221
Allocreadiidae, family, 128-130
Abdominal viscera, 311, 312
Adipate, usage, 282, 283
Alpacas, Eimeria infection, 97
Abomasal mucosa, Morocco leather
Adult Alaria organisms, mucous
Altosid,264
appearance, 161
 membrane attachment, 128
Alveolar hydatid, 388-391
 Abomasal parasites, anthelmintic medi
 Adult dairy cattle, subclinical parasitism,
cyst, 144
cation (susceptibility), 168
169, 170
second larval stage, 145
Abomasum
 Adulticidal products, application, 263
Alveolar hydatid disease, 145
 mucous membrane, edematous
Adult insects, body, 5, 6
Alveolar hydatids, 140
change, 167,168
Adult tapeworm infections 
Amastigote
nematodes, 340t
impact, 151
flagellum, absence, 84
Absolute lengths, measurement, 298, 299
treatment,151、152
vertebrate host macrophage, 86, 87
Acanthamoeba
Advantage Multi, 261
Amblyceran louse (Heterodoxus spiniger),
illustration, 377f
topical product, design, 286
220,221
trophozoites, 91f
Aedes aegypti, 261
Amblycera (suborder), 39
Acanthatrium oregonense,
Aedes sollicitans (mosquitoes), 7-9
characteristics, 39
metacercaria,247
Aelostrongylus species, Cooperia
Amblyomma,58
Acanthocephala eggs, 308, 309
(confusion),158
A.americanum,58
identification, 308,309
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, 187
illustration, 58f
Acanthocephalans, 405, 406
adults, 397f
presence,326
cross-section, 406f
illustration, 327f
A. cajennense, 58
egg,315,316
importance, 187
vector, importance, 245
identifcation,315,316
life history, 187
A.imitator,58
illustration, 309f
lung parenchyma parasite, 187
A. maculatum (Gulf Coast tick),
identification, 228
treatment,187
52f, 261
life history, 228
Aethina tumida (hive beetle), 48
identification, 106
Moniliformis,Prosthenorchis,
African clawed frog、 skin (worms), 225
presence,326
Homorhynchus, 47
African horse sickness (AHS), 243
bite wound, 59
pseudocoelomates, 405,406
African pygmy hedgehog (Atelerix
capitulum, 49f
Acanthocephala (thorny-headed worms)
albiventris), notoedric mange
characteristics, 58
characteristics, 227
(treatment),77
disease transmission, 58
phylum,227-229
African swine fever (ASF), 243
female, engorgement, 58f
Acarapis woodi (honeybee tracheal mite),
Agents, transmission, 3
hypostomes, 52
74、75
Agouti rat, Echinococcus vogeli, 389f
identification, 58
Acarexx, approval, 275
AHS (African horse sickness), 243
location, 58
Acaridae, family, 72
Ahsata group, 335
Amebas,317, 376
Acetylcholine, accumulation, 258
Alaria
 asexual reproduction, parasitic
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
A. americana,322
amebas, 91
inactivation, 259
A. canis (Diplostomatidae), 127f
characteristics, 376
inhibition, 258
A. marchianae
 clinical importance, 91
reactivation, 258
Diplostomatidae, life history, 129f
intestinal, 91
receptors, binding, 261
infection,3
rhizopoda, 91,92
Achatina fulica (giant African snail), 188
transmission, 128
 American bison, Ivermectin 
AChE (Acetylcholinesterase)
life history, 128
(usage), 274
inactivation, 259
organism, 387f
American dog tick {Dermacentor
inhibition,258
species (Diplostomatidae), small
variabilis),51,52,261
reactivation, 258
intestine attachment, 128f
characteristics, 57
receptors, binding、 261
Albendazole, 265
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever,
Acoelomates, 384
absorption, 265
transmission,57
Actinomadura roseorufa,269
teratogenicity,265
American screwworm fly (Calliphoridae
Acute fluke disease, occurrence, 120
Alces alces (moose), 58
hominivorax)
Acute hookworm disease, 183
Aleochara bimaculata (beetles), 48f
identification, 22
Acute Lyme borreliosis, 248
Alimentary canal, strongylids, 168, 169
myiasis, example, 24, 25
anthelmintics, 168
American Society for the Prevention of
fallearly winter treatment, 167、 168
Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA),
 Page numbers followed by f indicate figure;
resistance, 169
 National Animal Poison
t, table.
Aliphatic denivatives, 259
Center,255
415
416
I NDEX
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas'
Ancylostomatinae
Anthelcide EQ, administration, 280
disease),85,86
genera, inclusion, 179, 180
Anthelmintics (anthelmintic drugs),
Amidostomum, parasite, 160f
subfamily, 179
271-287
Amitraz, 260, 261
Ancylostomatoidea, 395
action mechanism, research, 271
availability, 261,261
anthelmintic medication, 180-182
administration, side effects, 168
LDso, 260
buccal capsule, dorsal aspect, 156f
approval, 254
warning、261
bursa/spicules, 157f
miscellany, 284, 285
Amitraz-resistant mange mite (cure),
identification, 179,180
resistance, development (deceleration/
Milbemycin oxime
life history, 180
cessation), 302
(usage),275
nomenclature, 395
usage, increase,271
Amphibla, ingestion, 127-130
superfamily、 155, 179-184
Anthrax {Bacillus anthracis), 14, 15
Amphidelphic branch, 157
Ancylostoma tubaeforme
Anthroponoses, 3
 Amphidelphic branch,
illustration, 327f
Anthropozoonosis, 3
nematodes,153
stoma,180f
Antimony,anthelmintic,284
Amphimerus pseudofelineus, 384f
Andersonstrongylus milksi. 1
Antiparasitics (antiparasitic drugs)
Amphixenosis, 3
Anemia
application, impact, 255
Amplifying host, 240
equine infectious virus, 244
development, 254, 255
Amprolium, 265,266
hookworms, impact, 182
environmental impact analysis, EPA
coccidiostatic activity, 265、266
Angiostrongylidae
requirement, 254
Anaplasma
characteristics, 187
literature, voluminousness, 255
A. marginale
family, 187-189
package label, requirement, 254
anemia impact, 245,246
Angiostrongylus cantonensis, 188
product development, early
illustration, 246f
frst-stage larvae, 188
phases, 254
importance,245
importance,188
replacement, failure, 255
pathogen, 245
life history, 188
resistance,169
A. phagocytophilum, 245,246
 pulmonary artery parasite, 187
screening,254
A. platys, canine platelet infection,
rat infection, 188
species differentition, 407-412
245,246
treatment, 188
Antiprotozoals, 265-271
species, 245,246
Angiostrongylus costaricensis, 188, 189
nonsulfonamides, 265-269
Anaplasmataceae, 245-247
characteristics, 188, 189
sulfonamides, 269-271
characteristics, 245
 mesenteric artery parasite, 187
Aonchotheca,225
family、244
Angiostrongylus vasorum, 187, 188
A. putori,226
 Anaplasmosis, mechanical transmission
frst-stage larvae, shedding, 187
identifcation, 329
deerflies, 14, 15
geographic migration, 187, 188
illustration, 327f
horseflies, 14, 15
illustration, 397f
sp..egg, 333f
Anatrichosoma,226,227
importance,187、188
Apes
A.buccalis, 405f
life history, 187
alimentary system, 368
cross-section, 405f
presence,324,324
acanthocephalans, 368
A. cynomolgi, 367f
treatment, 188
cestodes, 368
species, characteristics,226,227
Animal, zoologic name, 1
nematodes, 368
Ancylostoma,third-stage infective
Animal and Plant Health Inspection
protozoans,368
larvae, 315f
Service (APHIS),53
trematode, 368
Ancylostoma caninum
Annelida, phylum, 229, 230
blood,370
adult females, 396f
characteristics, 229, 230
nematode microflariae, 370
 buccal capsule
Anoplocephala
protozoans,370
dorsal aspect, 156f
A.magna
connective tissues, 370
 dorsoventral/lateral aspects, 180f
eggs,344f
cestode larvae, 370
buccal/esophageal regions,
parasite, harmlessness, 148
nematodes, 370
 dorsoventral/lateral
A.perfoliata
Enterobius vermicularis infection,197
aspects, 180f
Anoplocephalidae, 148f
feces, stages, 368-370
commonness, 271
eggs,344f
hair,370
e%g、312f
 parasite, harmlessness, 148
insects, 370
female, intestinal attachment, 321f
Anoplocephalidae
nematodes, 370
human enteric infections, 184
control,148,149
liver, 368,369
life history, 181f
family, 147-149
nematodes, 368, 369
presence,321、324
identification,147,148
protozoans,368
third-stage larvae, 397f
life history, 148
lungs,369,370
Ancylostomatidae
Anoplocephalidae,367f
arachnids,370
anthelmintic medication, 180-182
Anoplocephalids, life histories, 148
cestode larva, 369
family, 179-182
Anoplura, lice, 5, 6
nematodes, 369
identifcation, 179,180
 Anopluran louse, head/thorax, 34f
muscles, 370
life history, 180
Anorexia, 248
cestode larvae, 370
INDEX
417
Apes—cont'd
Arthropods—cont'd
Assassin bug (Triatomin bug)、 46、47
nematodes,370
disease transmission, 240
Astigmata
nematode parasites, 369f
features, 372
family, evolution, 72
nose, 369
groups, 372
suborder, 64-72
annelids, 369
organism group composition, 5
Astigmatid mites, 64-72
arachnids,369
vectors, 249
caruncle,64
nematode, 369
veterinary importance, 5
pedicel, 64
pancreas, 368,369
viral pathogen transmission, 241-244
sarcoptiform pretarsi, 64
nematodes,368,369
viruses, mechanical transmission,
tarsi, 64
protozoans,368
243、244
Aurimite, 256
parasites, 368-370
Ascaridia galli, 254
 Australian busy fly
respiratory system, 369, 370
Ascaridida, 399,400
Musca vetustissima
srous cavities, 370
anthelmintic medication, 199
identification, 15
acanthocephalans, 370
characteristics, 197, 399
life history/disease transmission,
cestode larvae, 370
identification, 197,198
15-17
nematode,370
order, 197-208
resemblance, 17
pentastomid nymphs, 370
Ascarid larvae, migrations, 198
Muscidae (family)、 15-20
skin, 370
lung lesions, formation, 198
Autochthonous infection, case
insects, 370
Ascaridoid egg, 303
confrmation, 247、248
nematodes, 370
identification, 303
Autochthonous visceral leishmaniasis,
throat, 369
illustration, 305f
foxhound report, 87
annelids, 369
 Ascarids
Avermectins, isolation, 273
arachnids, 369
anthelmintic medication, 199
Avian malaria, 109
nematode,369
characteristics, 197
complex,109
APHIS (Animal and Plant Health
identification,197、198
Avian red blood cells Haemoproteus sp.
Inspection Service), 53
infections, development, 200,201
(Giemsa stain), 110f 
Apicomplexa (Sporozoa), 92,111,
infective stage, development, 197
Avian spirochetosis, 248
377-384
 Piperazine, effectivenes, 283
Avian tuberculin, syringe, usage, 299
characteristics, 377,378
Ascaris,198,199
 genera, heteroxenous life cycles, 383
A.lumbricoides
B
Apis mellifera (European honeybee), 48
characteristics, 198
Babesia,106,107
Apophallus venustus322
eggs, hatching、 198
B.bigemina
Aquatic mammals
larvae, migration, 198
Giemsa-stained blood film, 107f
Sarcocystis, 106
A. suum
 impact, bovine piroplasmosis, 107
Toxoplasma,106
anthelmintic medication, 199
transmission, 52
Aquatic snails, control, 123、124
characteristics, 198
B.caballi, 107
Aquatic vegetation, encysting, 124
collection,198f
vector, equine piroplasmosis, 58
Arachnida (class), 5, 48-78
control efforts, 199
B. canis, 324
Arboviruses, 241
cross-section, 399f
B.conradae、107
Argas, 49,50
eggs,361f
B. gibsoni, canine erythrocytes, 251f
A. persicus, larvae infestation, 50
eggs, hatching、 198
B. ovis, 107
characteristics, 49
female, midbody section, 399f
B. trautmanni, 107
disease transmission, 50
larvae migration, 198
DNA, canine blood samples, 107
 dorsal aspect, 50f
lateral cord section, 400f
species, livestock impact, 107
eggs, laying, 49, 50
lips/stoma, 197f
erythrocyte apicomplexan parasites,
identification,49
male,400f
106,107
lateral aspect, 50f
mechanically hatched infective
Baboon, peritoneal cavity (Mesocestoides
life history, 49, 50
larva, 198f
tetrathyridium), 390f
spirochetosis, transmission, 50
pathologic effects, 198
Bacillary bands
ventral aspect, 50f
swine infection, 197,198
nematodes, 391,392
Argasidae (soft ticks), 49
characteristics, 198
T'richinelloidea, 403, 404
Arizona coyote {Canis latrans),
ASF (African swine fever), 243
Bacillus anthracis (anthrax), 14, 15
Oncicola sp., 229f
ASPCA (American Society for the
 Bacteria, arthropod mechanical
Arloingi group,335
Prevention of Cruelty to
transmission, 250
Armillifer armillata, infection, 3
 Animals), National Animal 
 Bacterial pathogens, vector transmissions,
Armillifer armillatus, 79f
 Poison Control Center, 255
247-250
impact,79f
Aspiculuris, 363f
Bacterial vector-borne diseases, 248t
 Arrested larvae, 166
A. tetraptera, anterior end, 366f
Baermann apparatus, 297f
Arsenic, anthelmintics, 284
J665 ^ds
 Baermann technique, advantage.
Arsenicals, 284
Aspidogastrea, order, 115
297, 298
Arthropods, 372-375
Assasin bug (T'riatomin bug), 46f
Balamuthia mandrilaris, 2、3
bacteria, mechanical transmission, 250
 predacious reduvid, 46
Balance, usage, 299
418
I NDEX
Balantidium coli, 92
Beta-cyfluthrin—cont'd
Bladderworm
characteristics, 92
LDso, 258
scolices, 140
large intestine location, 378f
Bile, adult trematodes (parasite), 126
tapeworm, relationship
presence,323
Binomen, defnition, 1
(recognition),140
trophozoite,92f
Biologic vector, 2, 3
Blattaria, order (cockroaches)、 47
characteristics, 318
definition, 9,10
Blister beetles (Epicauta species), 47
ulceration, 92
presence,240
striped, illustration, 48f
Banminth 48, usage, 282
Biotic potential, 166
Blood, microfilariae (fixation/
Barber pole appearance, 161
Bird lice, danger, 38
identification), 318, 319
Barr, S.C., 102
Birds
 Blood-borne rickettsia, direct mechanical
Bartonella
coccidiosis, 97
transmission, 245
B clarridgeiae,248,249
Cryptosporidium bayleyi.
 Blood-feeding arthropods, mechanical
B. elizabethae, canine pathogen, 249
presence, 99
transmission, 243,244
B.henselae,248,249
Cryptosporidium meleagridis,
Bloodsucking lice, 33-39
canine pathogen, 249
presence, 99
 Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), transient
B quintana, 248,249
fowlpox, 244
effects,263
canine pathogen, 249
 internal parasites, Astigmata
Blowflies
B.vinsonii
(evolution),72
Calliphoridae (family), 22-25
canine pathogen, 249
losses, myiasis (impact),24
muscoid third-stage larva/
subsp. berkhoffi, canine
trachea, Sternostoma mite
maggot, 16f
pathogen, 249
(presence),63f
Calliphorid flies, examples, 23f
species,248,249
Bitches
Cyclorrhapha (group), 6
Basis capituli, 51
Ancylostoma caninum infection,204
eggs, laying, 23、 24
Baylisascaris, 207,208
litter loss, Fenbendazole treatment,
identification,22
B. procyonis, 207
182,183
life history/injury, 22-25
哆g，208f
Toxocara canis infection, 204
myiasis,22-25
illustration, 400f
Biting midges (no-see-ums)
third-stage larvae, 22
infection, 3
(Ceratopogonidae)
Bluetongue disease, 243
infective egg, 208f
allergic dermatitis, 12
Bobcat (Lynx rufus), natural definitive
presence,321
bites, pain, 12
host,137
characteristics, 207
disease transmission, 12
Bollinger, Otto, 172
species,325
family,12
Borrelia
Beagle, pancreatic vein (Heterobilharzia
identification, 12
B. afzeli, 247
americana),387f
injury, 12
B. anserina (spirochetosis), 50
Bedbug (Cimex lectularius), 46f
life history, 12
B. burgdorferi, maintenance, 247
characteristics, 47
differences, 12
B. garinii, 247
cimicid, bite (infliction), 46
pathogens, vector, 10t
B. lonestari,248
Cimicidae, family,、 47
viruses, transmission, 12
B. miyamotoi, 248
Beef cattle, 60
Black disease, precipitation, 140, 141
species,247、248
face flies/houseflies, control, 18
Blackflies (Simulidae), 10-12
diseases, 248
louse infestations, treatment, 39, 40
breeding, 10
Bos indicus, parasites,34、 35
tick infestation, treatment/control, 60
characteristics, 10
Bos taurus, hybrids,34、35
Trichuris infections, 225
control,12
Botanic agents, 255, 256
Beetles {Aleochara bimaculata), 48f
disease transmission, 11
fifth-generation pyrethroids, 258
Beetles (Coleoptera, order),5, 6,47,48
female blackfly, bites, 10
Beta-cyfluthrin, 258
characteristics, 47
head,10f
frst-generation pyrethroids, 256
complete metamorphosis, 47
host reaction, 10, 11
fourth-generation pyrethorids,
elytra, 47
identification,10
257, 258
intermediate hosts, importance, 39
illustration,7f
Cyfluthrin,257
Benzimidazoles, 277-280
injury, 10,11
Cypermethrin, 257
Albendazole,277、278
life history, 10
Deltamethrin, 257
Febantel, 278
illustration, 11f
Lambdacyalothrin, 257, 258
Fenbendazole,278,279
multivoltine species, 10
pyrethrins, 256
Oxfendazole, 279, 280
obligate intermediate hosts, 11
pyrethroids, 256-258
Oxibendazole, 280
 pathogens
Rotenone, 255, 256
Thiabendazole, 280
transmission, 11
second-generation pyrethroids,
Benzyl benzoate, 262
vector,10t
256,257
Besnoitia, 106,328,329, 383
proleg、10
Phenothrin, 256, 257
identification, 328, 329
swarms, attack,12
Resmethrin, 257
Besnoitia, consideration, 383
univoltine species, 10
Tetramethrin, 257
Beta-cyfluthrin, 258
Black scours, 158, 159
third-generation pyrethroids, 257
isomer cyfluthrin subset, 256
Black spot disease, 125
Fenvalerate,257
INDEX
419
Botanic agents—cont'd
Bugs (Hempitera, order)—cont'd
Canis familiaris, Trichodectes canis
 Permethrin, 257
simple metamorphosis, 46
(impact), 34
Botflies, 25-33
Bull, demodectic mange, 374f
Canis latrans (Arizona coyote), Oncicola
Cuterebridae (family), 25-33
 BUN (blood urea nitrogen), transient 
sp.,229f
Cyclorrhapha (group), 6
effects,263
Cantharidin, release, 47
Gasterophilidae (family), 25-33
Bunostominae
Capillaria
Gasterophilus, 15
genera, inclusion, 179, 180
C. aerophilus, 226
Hypoderma,15
subfamily、179
C.boehmi, description, 226
Hypodermatidae (family), 21
Bunostomum
C.hepaticum, 226
Oestridae (family)、 25-33
B. phlebotomum,184
C. plica, 226
Bots
eggs, identification, 307
C.putorii,226
larvae, 15
sp.,179f
eggs, identification, 226
spiracles, 26f
Bunyaviridae, 241
 genus division, 225
Bovicola (Damalinia), 39
Bunyaviruses, 241-243
Capillariasis
Bovine borreliosis, 248, 248
Bursatti, 212, 213
bronchial, 226
 Bovine genital trichomoniasis, venereal
Buxtonella sulcata, egg, 309f
hepatic, 226
disease manifestation, 87, 88
intestinal,226
 Bovine piroplasmosis, babesia bigemina
C
nasal, 226
(impact),107
Cadaver, opening, 310, 311
symptoms,absence,226
 Bovine trichostrongylids, diagnosis, 296
Caddisflies (Dicosmoecus gilvipes)、 128
treatment,226
Bovine uterus, endometritis/exudate, 88f
Caddisflies (T'richoptera), 5, 6
urinary, 226
Brachycera, 13-15
adult, 6f
Capillarids, 225,226, 306f
classification, 7t
larvae, casing, 6
characteristics, 225
flies, pathogens (vectors), 15t
order, 6
identification, 225
life cycle stages, times (requirement), 8t
 Potomac horse fever vector, 6
Capstar, 261,262
Bradyzoites, 93
 veterinary importance, 6
Carbamates, 258-260,258, 259
cysts,occurrence、106
Calcareous corpuscles, 387, 388
Carbaryl, 258
infectiveness, 101,102
Calf
Methomyl,258,259
usage, 381-383
 intestinal epithelial cell, Eimeria
Propoxur,259
 Bridge vector, usage, 240
aubumensis,379f
usage, 258
 Broad-spectrum combinations, 285-287
 intestinal epithelial cell, Eimeria bovis
avoidance, 258
 Ivermectin/Clorsulon combination, 285
 development stage, 379f
Carbaryl, 258
 Ivermectin/Praziquantel combination,
shizont, 379f
LDso.258
285,286
mucosa, Cryptosporidium parvum
Caribou, Cephenomyia species
 Ivermectin/Pyrantel pamoate
development, 381f
infection, 27
combination,286
small artery (endothelium), Sarcocystis
Cats
 Ivermectin/Pyrantel pamoate/
cruzi (schizont), 382f
 adult tapeworm infections,
Praziquantel combination, 286
Calicophoron, 124
treatment, 151
 Milbemycin oxime/Lufenuron
Calliphoridae family (blowflies), 22-25
Advantage Multi, usage
combination, 286
Calliphoridae hominivorax (American
(avoidance), 286
Moxidectin/Imidacloprid
srewworm fy)、22
 Albendazole, approval (absence), 278
combination, 286
Calodium hepaticum, 226
alimentary system, 329, 330
Moxidectin/Praziquantel combination,
presence,323
Amprolium, usage, 266
286,287
Calves
Besnoitia,328,329
obtaining, process, 285
Cryptosporidium bovis, presence, 99
bile ducts, 330
 Pyrantel/Praziquantel combination, 287
strongylid burdens, acquisition, 166
nematodes,330
 Pyrantel/Praziquantel/Febantel
winter coccidiosis, 96
trematodes, 330
combination, 287
Camallanina, suborder, 208, 209
blood, 331
 Broilers, Amprolium (usage),266
characteristics, 208
nematode microflariae, 331
 Bronchial capillariasis, 226
Camels, Cephalopsis titillator infection, 27
protozoa, 331
Brown dog tick {Rhipcephalus
Canada goose, liver ( Leucocytozoon
brain
sanguineus),261
 simondi megaloschizonts),
Cuterebra larva, 373f
life history, 56f
384f
cyst, Toxoplasma gondi
Brown winter tick {Dermacentor
Canids, Spirocerca lupi, 211, 212
bradyzoites, 383f
nigrolineatus),58
Canine babesiosis, 107
bronchi, 330
 Bruce walk-through horn fly
/ trap,19
infection, 107
nematodes, 330
Brugia malayi, impact,213
Canine eye worm (Thelazia californiensis),
carbamates/organophosphates, 258
Buccal capsules, development, 155, 156
transmission,17
warning、258
Bugs (Hempitera, order), 46, 47
Canine heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis),
cat scratch disease, 248, 249
characteristics, 46
9,10
cestode eggs/segments, 328
development, 46
importance, 215, 216
Cheyletiella blakei, occurrence, 73
genera, North American absence, 58
Canine hookworm disease, forms, 182
coccidian cysts, 328f
420
I NDEX
Cats—cont'd
Cats—cont'd
connective tissue, 331
trematodes, 331
Aonchotheca putori, 329
insect larvae, 331
lungwom host, 397
Gnathostoma spinigerum,329
Cryptosporidium, 329
mesenteric veins,331
nematodes,329
identification, 329
trematodes, 331
Ollulanus tricuspis, 329
Cryptosporidium felis, presence,99
Mesocestoides infection, 151
Sulfadimethoxine, usage, 270
Cuterebra infection, 31, 32
Milbemycin oxime
systemic infections, Clindamycin
Cystoisosopora infection, 96
usage, approval, 275
treatment, 266
Cystoisospora, 328, 329
mite infestations, treatment, 75-77
T. gondi, ingestion, 102
Droncit, approval, 284
mouth, 329
Tetrachlorvinphos, usage, 259
Drontal, usage (approval), 287, 287
protozoa,329
tick infestation, treatment/control, 59,
ear, chigger、 75f
Trichomonas felistomae, 329
60, 59,60
esophagus, 329
nasal cavity, 330
Toxocara cati infection, 197, 198
Aonchotheca putori, 329
nematodes, 330
Toxoplasma, 328, 329
Gnathostoma spinigerum, 329
nematode eggs/larvae, 326-328
trachea, 330
nematodes, 329
nematode parasites, 327f
nematodes, 330
Ollulanus tricuspis, 329
nematodes, occurrence, 326-328
trematode eggs, 328
eyes, 331
nervous system, 331
urinary bladder, 331
protozoa,331
insect larvae, 331
nematodes, 331
feces, parasite stages, 326-329
nematodes, 331
urogenital system, 331
Fenbendazole, approval (absence), 279
 Nitenpyram, usage (avoidance), 262
vascular system, 331
flea infestation, diagnosis (difficulty),
pancreatic duct, 330
Cattle
42、43
nematodes,330
Albendazole
gallbladder, 330
trematodes,330
availability,277
nematodes, 330
parasites, 326-332
safety,277
trematodes, 330
host-organ listing, annotation, 329-
Amitraz, usage, 261
Giardia infections, treatment, 90
332
Amprolium, usage, 266
Giardia trophozoites, discovery, 89, 90
0ocyst dimensions, 329t
 anthelmintic, Fenbendazole (usage),
hair,331,332
sharing, 326
151,152
arachnids, 332
stages, 326-329
chorioptic mange, 69
insect larvae, 331,332
periodic antihelmintic medication,
chronic abomasitis, 161
insects, 331
146、147
clinical coccidiosis, treatment, 98
hair-clasping mites (Lynxacarus
Piperazine, administration, 283
Coumaphos, usage, 260
radovskyi),70
piroplasmoses, treatment, 108
Dichlorvos Vapona Concentrate,
Hammondia, 328,329
platyhelminths, eggs, 327f
usage、 259
heart, 331
Praziquantel
Dictyocaulus viviparus, 164
nematodes,331
approval, 284
Diflubenzuron, usage, 264
heartworm infection, 219
cestocidal drug, 151
distress, mosquitoes (impact), 7-9
hookworms, 179
pulmonary vein, Cytauxzoon felis
Doramectin, usage, 272
host-organ listing, annotation,
schizonts, 384f
ear canal parasite (Raillietia auris), 29
329-332
respiratory system, 330,331
Eimeria
intestinal epithelia, Toxoplasma gondii
Sarcocystis, 329
infection, 96
(development stages), 382f
identification, 329
unsporulated/sporulated oocysts,
Ivermectin
Selamectin, topical solution
339f
heartworm preventive,
(formulation),277
Eprinomectin, usage, 272
approval,275
skeletal muscles, 331
feces, culturing,298
liposomal formulation,
fber, Trichinella spiralis first-stage
Fenbendazole
approval,275
larvae, 379
availability, 278
kidneys, 331
nematode larvae, 331
warning、278、279
nematodes, 331
skin, 331, 332
horn flies, presence, 19
large intestine, 330
arachnids, 332
 Ivermectin
nematodes, 330
insect larvae, 331, 332
 pour-on formulation, availability,
liver, 329
insects,331
274
nematodes,330
Notoedres cati, 374f
toleration, 273、274
trematodes,330
Walchia americana,375f
usage, 273
louse infestations, treatment, 39
small intestine, 329, 330
Lasalocid, usage, 267
lung、 Aelurostrongylus abstrusus
acanthocephala,330
Levamisole hydrochloride
adults, 397f
cestodes, 330
administration, 280
lung, Paragonimus kellicotti, 385f
nematodes,329,330
warning,280
gs.386f
protozoa, 330
louse infestation, treatment, 39, 40
lung parenchyma, 331
trematodes,330
Monensin, usage, 268
nematodes, 331
stomach, 329
Morantel tartrate, 282
INDEX
421
Cattle—cont'd
Chabertidae—cont'd
Classification, inductive process, 1
Moxidectin
family, 176-179
Clindamycin, 266
injectable solution, usage, 276
identification, 176
availability, 266
 pour-on formulation, usage, 276
importance,177、178
metabolism, 266
 nematode parasites, infective third-
Chabertinae
usage,266
stage larvae (tails),335f
anthelmintic medication, 178
Clinical ascarosis, diagnosis, 199
Onchocerca gibsoni, 12
identification, 176
 Clinical illness, diagnosis, 303
Oxfendazole suspension,
importance、177、178
Clinical trichinosis, 223
administration, 280
subfamily、 176-179
Clonorchis sinensis (Opisthorchiidae), 120f
Parafilaria bovicola, 220
Chagas' disease, 3
Clopidol, 266
 parasites, discovery, 311
Chagas' disease (American
pyridinol coccidiostat, 266
Phosmet, usage, 260
trypanosomiasis),85,86
Clorsulon, 285
Piperazine, administration, 283
Chelicerae, 51
 benzene sulfonamide compound,
 prophylaxis, amprolium
Chewing lice, 33-39
effectiveness, 285
(administration), 98
characteristics, 38
 Clostridial organisms, multiplication/
psoroptic scabies, report, 77
Cheyletiella
toxin secretion, 120-123
 Pyrantel tartrate, FDA approval
C. blakei
Clostridium novyi, presence/absence, 120
(absence), 282
attack,77
Coccidia, 377-383
Sarcocystis cruzi, infection, 104
cat parasite, 304f
characteristics, 377、378
Sarcocystis infection, 106
feline occurrence, 73
Coccidian cysts, 328f
 strongyles, infective third-stage larvae
C. yasguri
Coccidian oocysts, 317
(measurements), 336t
anterior end, 73f
culture/sporulation, 298
Sulfadimethoxine, usage, 270
attack, 77
Eimeria macusaniensis, 309f
tapeworms,148,149
canine occurrence, 73
identification/diagnosis, 95、 96
Thelazia gulosa, 210
presence,326
illustration, 318f
Thelazia skrjabini, 210
Cheyletiella, mite infestations, 76、77
Coccidians, 93, 111
Toxocara vitulorum infection, 197, 198
Cheyletiellidae, family, 73
infection, self-limitation, 96
youth, treatment, 170
Chickens
 ontogeny, zoite (functional unit),、93
Cebus monkey, small intestine (Mollineus
 Piperazine, administration, 283
Coccidiosis, 92,93
barbatus),394f
 Praziquantel, approval (absence), 284
prevention, Decoquinate (usage),
Cecal coccidiosis (prevention), Nicarbazin
Chiggers (Trombiculid larvae),
266、267
(usage),268
feeding、374
result, 96
Cediopsylla, 41, 42
Chigoe (jigger), 45
treatment/control, 97、98
rabbit impact, 43f
Chipmunks, Cuterebra infection, 31, 32
Cochliomyia hominivorax
Cephalopsis titillator, infection
Chirodiscoides caviae female, 70f
control, 20
camels,27
Chirodiscoides caviae (guinea pigs), 70
 pigmented tracheae, 16f
dromedaries, 27
Chitin biosynthesis inhibition, Lufenuron
Cockroaches (Blattaria, order),47
Cephenemyia
(usage), 264
characteristics, 47
bots, presence (deer involvement), 27f
Chlorpyrifos (Dursban), 260
Cockroaches (Periplaneta americana), 47f
 species, infection (caribou/cervids/
formulation, 260
Coenurosis, 143
deer/elk),27
LDso, 260
Coenurus, 140, 388-391
Ceratopogonidae (biting midges), 10t
Chorioptes
Co-infection, risk, 240,241
Cercaria, characteristics, 115, 116
C. bovis, 68, 69
Coleoptera (beetles), 5. 6
Cervids, Cephenomyia species
characteristics, 68, 69
Collector host, 128
(infection),27
impact,69
Collies, Ivermectin (usage), 275
Cervus canadensis (Wapiti), 21
pretarsi, 68, 69
ComboCare, usage, 286, 287
Cestex, approval, 284
male/female, 69f
Comfortis, 262
Cestocides, isoquinolones
pretarsi, 65f
Commensalism, 1
(relationship), 283
Chorioptic mange (cattle), 69
condition,2
Cestoda, class, 115, 131-152
 Chromatin, appearance, 376
Commensals, 2
orders, 131
Chronic fluke disease, association, 123
Compensated hookworm disease, 183
Cestodes, 387-391
Chronic hookworm disease, 183
Complete metamorphosis, beetles, 47
eggs,308
Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium,256
Complex metamorphosis 
identification,308,328
Chrysops (deerflies)、 13f
(holometabolous
geographic distribution/biology, 131
Ciliates, 318, 377
metamorphosis), 6
larvae, teratologic development, 138
characteristics, 318, 377
Concentration egg counts, 301
Chabertia ovina
egg.309f
Cone-nose bugs (kissing bugs), 46, 47
 buccal cavity/anterior esophageal
symbiotic,92
Conoweberia
regions, lateral view, 177f
Ciliophora (ciliates), 92
C. apiostomum, 177, 178
 esophagus, oral end, 177f
Cimex lectularius (bedbug), 46f
C. stephanostomum,177、178
Chabertiidae
Citrate, usage, 282, 283
Cooperia,162
 anthelmintic medication, 178
Cittotaenia ctenoides,363f
characteristics, 162
422
I NDEX
Pluoadoo
Coxiella
identification, 162
C. burnetti, 245
Siphonaptera, order, 42f
importance,162
genera,244
Culex pipens, 261
larva, anterior end, 335f
Craterostomum acuticaudatum, 352f
Culicoides
spicules,163f
Creeping eruption, 184
C. bolitinos, 243
stomal end, 163f
cases,184
C. brevitarsis, 243
Copepod (Cyclops vernalis), 136f
Crenosorma sp.,. 186f
C. imicola, 243
Copepods,78,79
molluskan intermediate host
C.varipennis, 243
characteristics, 78, 79
requirement, 187
Cutaneous habronemiasis, 212, 213
male/female,78f
Crenosomatidae
Cutaneous larva migrans, 184
Coproantigens
family, 186、187
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
detection, 295
Fenbendazole, success, 186
autochthonous cases, 87
examination, 296
identification, 186
cause, 251
Copulatory bursa, 152, 153
life history, 186
Cutaneous myiasis, advanced cases, 23、 24
Strongylida, 156, 157
Crenosoma vulpis
Cuterebra,31-33
surficial/sagittal aspects, 152f
characteristics, 186
characteristics, 31
Copulatory spicules, 152, 153
presence,323
identifcation, 31
Coracidium, 135
treatment,186
imidacloprid/fpronil, topical
procercoid development, 136, 137
Crepidostomum, 128-130
application, 32、33
Co-Ral,260、260
Creptotrema,128-130
larvae
Co-Ral Plus, 260
Crustacea, class, 5,78、79
location, 31,32
Cornell-McMaster dilution egg counting
Cryptocotyle lingua, gul/tern parasite, 125
movement,32
technique, 299
Cryptosporidium, 329,380
life history/pathogenesis, 31, 32
Corn smut spores, 304f
characteristics, 380
rabbit infection, 31, 32
Cortex, location, 387,388
identification, 329
spiracles, 26f
Cosarcoptes, 66
Cryptosporidium, 99-101
treatment, 32、33
C. scanloni, 66
C. andersoni, oocysts, 100f
Cuterebra
 characteristics, 66
C. canis, 322
C. jellisoni, 32f
Cotton rat parasite (Sigmodon
C. parvum
larvae, 373f
hispidus),61
development, 381f 
characteristics, 373
Cotylophoron (rumen fluke), 124
oocysts, 99f
Cuterebriasis, treatment, 32, 33
Coumaphos, 260
clinical signs, 100
Cuterebridae, 32f
application, 40
coccidia relationship, 99
Cuterebridae (family), 25-33
LDso. 260
detection, 295
Cuticle, coverage, 392
lice control, 41
infection, 100
Cyathostoma (Syngamidae), buccal
Counting chamber
Kohler illumination, usage, 100
capsule,179f
loading, 300f
life history, 93
Cyathostominae
usage, 299
oocysts
Febantel, susceptibility, 175
Coverslip, support, 298
hunting、296
Fenbendazole, susceptibility, 175
Cowdria ruminantium, 246,247
observation, diffculty, 100
fourth-stage larvae, 174f
Cowdriosis (heartwater disease),
 phase contrast microscopy, usage, 100
identification, 174
246,247
proliferation, 99
importance,174
Cows
treatment, 100,101
Ivermectin, susceptibility, 175
abomasum (lesions), Ostertagia
Cryptostigmata, suborder, 72
juvenile adult small strongyles, 174f
ostertagi (impact), 340f
characteristics, 72
larvae, mucosal encysting, 174
Anaplasma marginale, transmission,
Ctenocephalides, 41-45
Oxibendazole, susceptibility, 175
245,246
identification, 41-43
Pyrantel pamoate, susceptibility, 175
bile duct, Fasciola hepatica, 385f
Ctenocephalides
subfamily、 174
chorioptic mange, 69f
C.canis
members, 350f, 351f, 352f 353f,
Cryptosporidium andersoni,
characteristics, 41, 42
354f, 355f, 356f, 357f, 358f
presence, 99
intermediate hosts, 44, 45
Cyathostorminae, infective third-stage
Cryptosporidium bovis, presence, 99
presence, 326
larvae, 346f
dorsal subcutis, Hypoderma bot, 25
C. felis, 220, 221
Cyclic depsipeptides, 282
intestinal epithelial cell, Eimeria bovis
characteristics, 41、 42
Emodepside, 282
trophozoite, 379f
cocoons, 44f
Piperazine, 282,283
Ivermectin, treatment, 169, 169
intermediate hosts, 44, 45
Cyclophyllidea, 131
liver, Fasciola hepatica (migrating
life history, 44f
information, 132-134t
larva), 385f
eggs, 43f
Cyclophyllidean cestodes, families,
lung, rumen ciliate, 378f
laying、41、42
137-147
Moniezia benedeni, presence, 341f
genus, cyclodevelopmental vector, 39
Cyclophyllidean egg, 314, 315
Rhipicephalus annulatus ticks,
infestations, treatment, 45
identifcation, 314, 315
attachment, 57f
larva, 43f
illustration, 308f
INDEX
423
Cyclophyllidean oncospheres,
D
Demo
development, 137,138
Dactylogyrus, pathogenic monogenean
treatment,76
 Cyclophyllidean strobila, segments 
parasite,115
Demodectic mange, treatment, 76
(genital pores)、137
Dags, 158, 159
Demodex,72、73
Cyclophyllidean tapeworms, 147-151
Dairy barns, fly control, 18
characteristics, 72
sgments, detachment, 313
 Dairy cattle
D. aries, appearance, 73
Cyclorrhapha, 15-33
louse infestations, treatment, 40
D. bovis, mites, 72、73
classification, 7t
oxfendazole, treatment, 169
D. brevis, 72
dipteran evolution, 15
Damalinia
D. caballi, harmlessness, 73
group, flesh flies, 6
D. caprae,39
D. caniculi,rarity,73
life cycle stages, times
D. equi, 39
D. canis, 72f
(requirement), 8t
Equus caballus, impact, 34
hair follicle presence, 374f
Cyclozoonosis, 3
Linognathus setosus, impact, 34
presence,72,326
Cydectin, usage, 276
D. Holokartikos crassipes goat
D. caprae,73
Cyfluthrin, 257
impact, 39
D.cati,72f
LDso, 257
D. limbata, 39
localization, 73
Cylicocyclus
D. ovis, sheep impact, 39
D. folliculorum, 72
C. auriculatus, 358f
Damalinia (bovicola), 39
D. ovis, commonness,73
C. brevicapsulatus, 358f
characteristics, 39
D. phylloides, presence, 73
Cynomolgus monkey, large intestine
DDVP (Dichlorvos), 259
evolution, 5
(Oesophagostomum spp.), 396f
LDso. 259
mite infestation, 76
Cypermethrin, 257
Decompensated hookworm disease, 183
organisms, characteristics, 374
LDso, 257
Decoquinate,266,267
Demodicidae, family, 72、73
Cyromazine,263,264
coccidiostatic drug approval, 266
Dermacentor, 57、58
Cysticerci (cysticercum), 388-391
indication,266,267
capitulum, 57f
observation, 311
warning、267
characteristics, 57
Cysticercosis, 140-143
Dectomax (Dectomax Pour-On), 272
D. albipictus (Winter tick), 58
Cysticercus, 140
Deer
D. andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood
Cystoisospora, 317, 378-380
Cephenomyia species, infection, 27
tick),57、58
asexual stages, 378,379
retropharyngeal pouch, Cephenermyia
presence, 326
examples, 380
bots (presence), 27f
transmission, 243
identifcation,317,317,328,329
Deerflies
D. nigrolineatus (Brown winter
 sexual stages, 379
anaplasmosis, mechanical
tick), 58
Cystoisospora, 94-99
transmission,14,15
D. nitens (Tropical horse tick), 58
C. burrowsi, 96
attacks, 14
D. occidentalis (Pacific Coast tick), 58
C. canis, 96
bites, pain, 14
D. variabilis (American dog tick), 51,
egg.312f
Brachycera (group), 6
52,261
oocyst, development, 380f
 characteristics, 13
E canis transmission, capability, 246
presence,322
Chrysops, 13f
nymphs, splenectomized parasitemic
C. felis,94
control,15
bobcat feeding,108
life history, 95f
disease transmission, 14, 15
presence,326
unsporulated oocyst, 95f
female maturation, blood meal
disease transmission, 57, 58
C. ohioensis, 96
(requirement), 13、14
female ticks, 57f
C. rivolta, 96
identification, 13
hypostomes, 52
characteristics, 94
injury、14
identification, 57
infection, 102
life history, 13,14
life history, 57, 58
oocysts, observation, 96
repellent/death, diffculty, 15
male, ornamented scutum, 57f
Cysts
Tabanidae (family), 13-15
 ventral aspects, 55f
fotation concentration, 296,297
Deerfly fever (Francisella tularensis),
Dermanyssidae, family, 60-62
identification, 303-309
14,15
chelae, 60
Cytauxzoon, 383,384
tularemia, 14, 15
chelicerae, 60
Cytauxzoon, 108
Deer ked (Lipoptena cervi), 20
mesostigmatid mites, 60
C. felis
dealate males/females, 21
Dermanyssus (Dermanyssidae), 60, 61
impact, 108
example,21f
characteristics, 60, 61
infection,3
Deer ticks (Ixodes scapularis), 261
Dermanyssus gallinae
merozoites, 251f
DEET,263
gnathosome,62f
organisms, presence, 108, 109
LDso, 263
parasitism, 60
shizonts, 384f
Definitive host, 2, 3
Dermatobia, 33
defining, 108
term, usage, 9, 10
characteristics, 33
Cytauxzoonosis, 108
Del-Phos Emulsifable Liquid, 260
eggs. carrying、33
treatment, parvaquone/buparvaquone
Deltamethrin, 257
identification, 33
(usage),、108, 109
LDso, 257
life history/pathogenesis, 33
424
I NDEX
Dermatobia hominis
P,luossnnmo
Diphyllobothrium latum
adult female fly, 33f
maturation, delay, 168
(Diphyllobothridae)—cont'd
larva, skin penetration, 33
life history, 164, 165
 mature segment, 135f
Dermatophilosis, Dermatophilus
reinfection, permanent protection
scolex, 135f
congolense (impact)、23
(absence),168
grooves,135
Diagnosis, 2
Dictyoptera (roaches), 5, 6
Diplomonada (Giardia), 89-91
availability,260
Didelphic branch, nematodes, 153
diagnosis,90
process, 2
Didelphostrongylus larva, 307f
treatment, 90,91
 Diagnostic categories, taxonomic
Diethylcarbamazine (Filaribits), 271
Diplopoda (millipedes), 5
consistency, 295
Diflubenzuron, 264
 Diplostomatidae
Diaminopyrimidine potentiators, 269
formulation,264,264
family、127、128
Diamphenethids, flukicide, 123
Digenea
identifcation, 127、128
Diapause, metabolic quiescence, 10
identification, 118, 119
Diptera (flies), 5, 6
Diazinon, 260
life history, 115-118
 Dipylidiidae
LDso, 260
metacercarial stage,117、 118
family,149
Dichlorophene, 285
order, 115-119
identification, 149
diphenylmethane, chlorinated
inclusion, 115
life history, 149
analogue, 285
 Digenean trematodes, host
Dipylidium caninum
oral administration, limitations, 285
discrimination, 117
cyclodevelopmental vector,
Dichlorvos (DDVP), 259
Dihydrochloride, usage, 282, 283
tapeworm, 39
AChE enzyme, phophorylation, 283
Dilution egg counts, 299, 300
cysticercoids,149
effectiveness, 283
materials, requirement, 299, 300
development time, 149
LDso, 259
procedure, 300
intestinal location, 322f
T'ask Capsules, 271
reliability, problems, 301
life history, 150f
Vapona Concentrate, 259
solution, proposal, 301
presence,322
Dicosmoecus gilvipes, 6
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),usage, 67
scolex,149f
caddisfies, 128
Dingleberries, 158, 159
characteristics, 149
Dicrocoelidae
 Dingo-infested areas, macropods
 Dipylidium caninum segments,
family、 126,127
(presence)、147
316f
identification, 126
 Dinotefuran, 261
Direct smear, 295
treatment,127、127
fea knockdown, 261
Dirofilaria, 213-219
Dicrocoelium dendriticum
 Di-N-propyl isocinchomeronate, 263
D. immitis
(Dicrocoelidae), 126f
LDso, 263
canine heartworm, 9, 10
dlinical illness, absence, 127
 Dioctophymatoidea, 221
canine importance,
importance,127
superfamily,221、222
215,216
life history, 127
Dioctophyme,221,222
cuticle,403f
presence,386f
D. renale, 221,222
females, fertilization, 215
treatment,127
infection, 3
flarid worms, 9, 10
Dictyocaulus, 164,165
presence,323
life cycle, 213-215
active immunity,168
specimens, 221f
life history, 214f
adult worm populations, 165, 166
Dipetalonema,220,221
microfilaria, 215f, 319f
bursa/spicules, 164f
D. perstans, dilarid parasite, 12
 prepatent period, 216
D.arnfieldi,164
D. reconditum, 220
presence,324
 donkey parasite, 165
diagnosis, 221
recognition,402,403
D. filaria, 164
microflariae, 221
third-stage larvae, 215f
first-stage larvae, 337f
microflariae, illustration, 319f
third-stage larvae, proboscis
life history, 165
recognition, 318
protrusion, 215f
D.viviparus
 D. streptocerca, dilarid parasite, 12
worms, molting,215
first-stage larvae, 337f
diagnosis, 221
D.tenuis,403f
infections, 165
life history,220,221
diagnosis, 216,217
life history, 165
presence,220
identifcation, 213
maturity、164、165
sp, stomal end,220f
importance, 215,216
environmental contamination, rate,
Diphyllobothridae
life history, 213-215
165
family, 135-137
mosquito intermediate host,
fourth-stage larvae, maturation, 165
identification, 135
involvement,213
host resistance, variation, 165
life history, 135-137
prevention,218,219
identification, 164
 Diphyllobothrid eggs, 315
treatment, 217,218
importance,165
identification, 315
Disease agent
infective larvae, control, 170
Diphyllobothrium latum
biologic vector, 240
 infective stage, development/survival.
(Diphyllobothridae)
primary vector, 240, 241
165,166,167
inpact,137
secondary vectors, 240,241
larvae, 166
larvae, piscine hosts, 2, 3
DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide), 67
INDEX
425
Dogs
Dogs—cont'd
Dogs——cont'd
adult tapeworm infections,
nematodes,325
heartworm prevention program
 treatment, 151
protozoa, 325
discussion, 218
Albendazole, approval (absence), 278
Wohlfahrtia opaca, 325
model, application (advantage), 218
alimentary system, 319-323
Wohlfahrtia vigil, 325
hookworms, 179
Amitraz, usage, 261
Crenosoma vulpis, presence, 186,187
arrested larvae, 183
Amprolium, usage, 266
Cryptosporidium canis presence, 99
clinical forms, 182, 183
axillary lymph node (touch prep),
Cuterebra infection, 31, 32
disease, 182-184
 Leishmania amastigotes, 377f
Cystoisospora infection, 96
environmental contamination,
Bartonella infections, transmission, 249
demodectic mange lesions, Demodex
183,184
Baylisascaris hosts, 208
canis infestations, 76
host resistance, resolution, 182
blood,324
diarrhea (initiation)、 Giardia
refractory egg shedder, 183
Babesia canis, 324
(exposure), 89, 90
intestine, Ancylostoma caninum (adult
nematode microflariae, 324
Dirofilaria immitis
females)、396f
protozoa,324
anthelmintics, usage, 217
Ivermectin
Trypanosoma cruzi, 324
 melarsomine dihydrochloride, usage
administration, 274
brain, 325
(approval), 217
oral dose,administration, 274,275
Baylisascaris species, 325
Droncit, approval, 284
subcutaneous injection, 275
cyst, Neospora caninum, 383f
E. chaffeensis infection, 246
kidneys, 325
nematodes, 325
egs, embryonic development, 313
Ancylostoma caninum,325
Neospora caninum, 325
61e rsnudosa
Dioctophyme renale, 325
protozoa,325
Gnathostoma spinigerum
nematode larvae, 325
Taenia solium cysticercus, 389f
(Spirurida), 319
nematodes, 325
bronchi, 323,324
nematodes,319
Toxocara canis, 325
Crenosoma vulpis,323
Physaloptera praeputialis
liver, 323
Eucoleus aerophilus, 324
(Spirurida), 319
Calodium hepaticum,323
Filaroides osleri,323
Physaloptera rara (Spirurida),319
Clonorchis sinensis, 323
nematodes, 323, 324
Spirocerca lupi (Spirudia), 319
Heterobilharzia americana,
carbamates/organophosphates, 258
eyes, 326
eggs,323
warning,258
nematodes, 326
Metorchis albidus,323
cardiac muscle, Trypanosoma cruzi
Thelazia californiensis,326
nematode larvae, 323
amastigotes, 377f
Toxocara canis, 326
nematodes, 323
cecum,322,323
febrile disease,E canis (impact), 246
Opisthorchis tenuicollis, 323
Balantidium coli,323
fecal sample, freshness, 313
Opisthorchis viverrini,323
Entamoeba histolytica,323
feces
Toxascaris leonina, 323
nematodes, 322、323
culture, 298
Toxocara canis, 323,323
protozoa,323
distribution, 207
trematodes,323
Trichomonas species, 323
stages, 312-318
louse infestations, treatment, 39
Trichuris vulpis,322,323
Fenbendazole
lung parenchyma, 324
Trichuris vulpis, illustration, 404f
granules, dose level, 279
Ancylostoma caninum,324
Cheyletiella yasguri occurrence, 73
therapy prolongation, 279
Angiostrongylus vasorum, 324
coccidiosis
flea infestation, diagnosis (difficulty),
Dirofilaria immitis, 324
therapy, controlled study, 270
42,43
Filaroides hirthi, 324
treatment/control, 98
giardiasis, treatment, 90
Filaroides milksi, 324
colon,322,323
hair, 326
nematode larvae, 324
Balantidium coli,323
adult dipterans, 326
nematodes, 324
Entamoeba histolytica,323
Amblyomma americanum,326
Paragonimus kellicotti, 324
nematodes, 322,323
Amblyomma maculatum. 326
 petechial hemorrhages, 324
protozoa,323
arachnids,326
Strongyloides stercoralis,324
Trichomonas species, 323
Cheyletiella yasguri, 326
Toxocara canis, 324
Trichuris vulpis,322,323
Dermodex canis, 326
trematodes,324
colonic mucosa (lamina propria),
Dermacentor andersoni,326
lung tissue, Filaroides hirthi, 397f
Cystoisospora canis oocyts
Dermacentor variabilis, 326
lungworm infection, 397
(development), 380f
follicle, Rhabditis (Pelodera)
Lyme borreliosis, 248
connective tissues, 325
strongyloides, 393f
 melarsomine dihydrochloride, usage
Cochliomyia hominivorax, 325
insects, 326
(approval),217
Cuterebra, 325
Ixodes species, 326
mesenteric/portal veins, 324
Diroflaria immitis, 325
nematode larvae, 326
Heterobilharzia americana,324
Diroflaria reconditum,325
Otodectes cynotis, 326
trematodes, 324
Dracunculus insignis, 325
Rhabditis strongyloides, 326
Mesocestoides infection, 151
Hepatozoon americana, 325
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 326
Metaflumizone, usage (approval), 263
insect larvae, 325
Sarcoptes scabiei, 326
Milbermycin oxime, usage, 275
426
I NDEX
Dogs—cont'd
Dogs—cont'd
Dogs—cont'd
Milbermycin oxime/Lufenuron, usage
protozoa,324
Plagiorchis species, 322
(approval),286
Trypanosoma cruzi, 324
protozoa,322
mite infestation, treatment, 75-77
Pyrantel pamoate, usage, 281
Sarcocystis cruzi, 322
mouth,319
 Pyrantel/Praziquantel, usage
Sellacotyle mustelae, 322
protozoa,319
(approval), 287
Strongyloides stercoralis, 321
Trichomonas canistomae
respiratory system, 323, 324
Taenia hydatigena, 321
(Mastigophora), 319
salmon poisoning, Neorickettsia
Taenia multiceps, 321
Moxidectin
helminthoeca (causative
Taenia ovis, 321
recall, 276
agent)、124
Taenia pisiformis, 321
toleration,276、277
sandflies biting, prevention, 13
Taenia serialis, 321
usage, 276
Selamectin, topical solution
Toxascaris leonina, 319-321
nasal passages, 323
(formulation), 277
Toxocara canis, 319-321
arthropods,323
Sentinel, usage, 286
trematodes, 322
Eucoleus boehmi, 323
skeletal muscles, 324-326
Trichinella spiralis, 321
Linguatula serrata, 323
nematode larvae, 324, 325
spinal cord, 325
nematodes,323
Neospora caninum, 324
Baylisascaris species, 325
Pneumonyssoides caninum, 323
protozoa,324
nematodes, 325
nematode eggs, 312, 313
Trichinella spiralis, 324
Neospora caninum, 325
nematode parasites
skin
protozoa,325
eggs, 312f
adult dipterans, 326
stomach,319
first-stage larvae, 314f
Amblyomma americanum, 326
Gnathostoma spinigerum,319
nervous system, 325
Amblyomma maculatum,326
nematodes, 319
 Nitenpyram, usage (avoidance), 262
arachnids, 326
Physaloptera praeputialis, 319
nodule, Spirocerca lupi, 401f
Cheyletiella yasguri, 326
Physaloptera rara,319
pancreas, 323
Ctenocephalides canis, 326
Spirocerca lupi, 319
Calodium hepaticum,323
Demodex canis, 326
straelensiosis, occurrence, 74
Clonorchis sinensis,323
Dermacentor andersoni,326
 Strongyloides stercoralis infection, 193
Heterobilharzia americana, eggs, 323
Dermacentor variabilis, 326
 Sulfadimethoxine, usage, 270
Metorchis albidus,323
Heterodoxus spiniger, 326
systemic toxoplasma infection,
Metorchis conjunctus, 323
insects, 326
Clindamycin treatment, 266
nematode larvae,323
Ixodes species, 326
testing、217
nematodes,323
nematode larvae, 326
Tetrachlorvinphos, usage, 259
Opisthorchis tenuicollis, 323
Otodectes cynotis, 326
tick infestation, treatment/control,
Opisthorchis viverrini, 323
Rhabditis strongyloides, 326
59,60
Toxascaris leonina,323
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 326
Toxocara canis infection, 197, 198
Toxocara canis, 323, 323
Sarcoptes mites, 373f
survey, 203
trematodes, 323
Sarcoptes scabiei, 326
trachea, 323,324
parasites, 312-326
Trichodectes canis, 326
Crenosoma vulpis, 323
host-organ listing, 319-326
small intestine, 319-322
Eucoleus aerophilus, 324
periodic anthelmintic medication,
acanthocephala, 322
fibrous nodules, Filaroides
146、147
Alaria americana,322
osleri, 398f
peritoneum/peritoneal cavity, 323
Alaria organisms, 387f
Filaroides osleri, 323
cestode larvae, 323
Ancylostoma caninum,321
nematodes, 323, 324
Dioctophyme renale,323
Apophallus venustus, 322
wrinary bladder, 325
Mesocestoides tetrathyridia, 323
Baylisascaris procyonis, 321
nematodes, 325
nematodes, 323
cestodes,321,322
Pearsonema plica, 325
Phaenicia sericata, 325
coccidia, 322
wrogenital system, 325
Piperazine, administration, 283
Cryptosporidium canis, 322
vascular system, 324
piroplasmoses, treatment, 108
Cystoisospora canis, 322
Virbantel, usage (approval), 287
 Praziquantel
Diphyllobothrium latum,322
visceral leishmaniasis, appearance, 87
administration, 284
Dipylidium caninum, 322
Domestic animals, lice (discovery), 33t
cestoicidal drug, 151
Echinochasmus schwartzi,322
Donkeys (Equus asinus), Dictyocaulus
preventive regimen, 217
Echinococcus granulosus, 321
arnfieldi, 165
preventives, receiving, 217
Echinococcus multilocularis, 321
Doramectin, 272
pulmonary artery, 324
flagellates, 322
Dorsal gutter, 171
Angiostrongylus vasorum, 324
Giardia canis, 322
Double Barrel VP (ear tags), 260
Angiostrongylus vasorum.
Mesocestoides species, 322
Dourine (equine venereal disease), 85
 illustration, 397f
Mesostephanus appendiculatum, 322
Dracunculus,208,209
Dirofilaria immitis, 324, 403f
Nanophyetus salmincola, 322
D. insignis
Diroflaria immitis infection, 142f
nematodes, 319-321
characteristics, 402
nematodes,324
Oncicola canis, 322
cross-section, 402f
INDEX
427
Dracunculus—cont'd
Eimeria—cont'd
discovery, 325f
 pastoral cycles, flowchart, 146f
E caprina, eggs, 335
frst-stage larvae, 209f
presence, 321
E caprovina, oocysts,335
infection,3
sylvatic cycles, establishment,
E faurei,eggs, 335
stomal end, 208f
145, 146
 E giliruthi megaloschizonts, 381f
D. medinensis infection, 208, 209
sylvatic cycles, flowchart, 146f
E leuckarti, 97
Draschia
E. vogeli, 389f
oocyst, development, 380f
D. megastoma,212f
 genus, taenid tapeworms, 139, 140
schizont, 380f
biologic vector, 15, 16
identifcation, 143、144
unsporulated/sporulated, 344f
characteristics, 212
life history, 144
E macusaniensis, oocyst, 309f
infection, 348f
Eclosion, 6
E magna oocysts, 95f
eggs, flotation diffculty, 346
EctoKyl IGR, 265
E. ovinoidalis,97
 Dromedaries, Cephalopsis titillator
Ectoparasites, 2、 3
E. stiedae, development, 381f
infection,27
Edema,248
E. zuernii, 96
Drontal, usage (approval), 287, 287
Eggs
examples, 380
 Drontal Plus, usage (approval), 287
concentration counts, 301
 illustration, 363f
 Dry dairy cattle, face flies/houseflies
 count data, applications, 302
 oocysts, development, 380f
(control), 18
count data, interpretation, 301,302
sexual stages, 379
Dung beetles, 47、 48
statistical considerations, 297
species
Dursban (Chlorpyrifos), 260
counting, 300
life history, 95f
formulation, 260
 techniques, application, 302
oocysts, characteristics, 335
LDso, 260
counts
sporulated oocysts, 360f
duplication, 302f
Elaephora, 221
elevation, 303
characteristics, 221
 Ear canker, rabbit impact, 68f
dilution counts, 299,300
E. boehmi, microflariae, 347f, 347,348
Ear mites
eggs per gram, calculation, 300
E. schneideri,14,15
Milbemite Otic Solution, approval, 275
embryonic development, 313
microflariae, 221
removal, 310
fotation concentration, 296, 297
Electric stir plate, usage, 300
 Selamectin, usage, 76
identification, 303-309
 Elephants, louse infestation
Earthworms
 length/width, ratio (determination),
(treatment),41
intermediate Stephanurus host, 178
298,299
ELISA values, 296
Metastrongylus species, development,
EHD (epizootic hemorrhagic
 Elk, Cephenomyia species infection, 27
184, 185
disease)、243
Elytra (beetles), 47
Ecdysis (molting),. 6
Ehrlichia
Embryophore, operculum opening, 135
Echidnophaga, 45
E canis
Emodepside, 282
E gallinacea (Siphonaptera), 42f
canine febrile disease, 246
cyclic depsipeptide, approval, 282
E gallinarum (sticktight flea)
importance, 245
Endemicity,3
presence,243
morulae, circulating monocyte, 246f
measure, prevalence, 3
Echinochasmus schwartzi,322
pathogen, 245
Endemic parasites, 3
Echinococcus, 143-147
E. chaffeensis, 246
Endemic typhus, 245
control, 145-147
transmission, 58
Endodyogeny, 381-383
E granulosus,143、144
E. ewingi, transmission, 58
Endoparasites, 2, 3
hydatid cyst, 145f, 390f
E. ewingi, 246
Endopolygeny, 379
illustration,144f
morula, 246f
Endosome, 376
parasite,144
E. phagocytophila, 245,246
Endosymbionts, 247
pastoral cycles, 145, 146
E platys, canine platelet infection, 245,
Enoplida
pastoral cycles, flowchart, 146f
246
characteristics, 221
presence, 321
E ruminantium,246、247
order,221-227
protoscolices, 145f
sp., N risticii (relationship), 128-130
Entamoeba
sylvatic cycles, establishment,
species,246、247
E. coli trophozoites, characteristics, 317
145,146
characteristics, 246
E gingivalis, characteristics, 317
sylvatic cycles, flowchart, 146f
Eimeria,93、378-380
E.histolytica
E granulosus (hydatid cyst), 144f
asexual stages, 378, 379
appearance,317
E multilocularis, 143
cysts, 304f
infections, treatment, 91、 91
alveolar hydatid, 146f
E. asheronae, oocysts, 335
large intestine parasite, 91
alveolar hydatid, germinal areas,
E aubumensis male gamont, 379f
presence,323
389f
E. bovis
transmission, 3
alveolar hydatid, protoscolices,
development stage, 379f
E. invadens, impact, 376
389f
life history, 94f
Enteric coccidiosis, 95, 96
alveolar hydatid cysts, second larval 
megaschizonts, 96
Enterobius vermicularis, 197
stage,145
shizont, 379f
ape infection, 197
pastoral cycles, 145, 146
trophozoite,379f
characteristics, 197
428
I NDEX
Enterobius vermicularis—cont'd
European honeybee (Apis mellifera), 48
Fasciolidae—cont'd
infection, 197
Eurytream procyonis, 127
importance,120-123
Enterocytes, Cryptosporidium
Eustrongyloides sp., 392f
life history, 120
(presence),100
Euzoonosis, 3
treatment/control,123、124
Environment, 60
Ewe, vulva hair follicle {Demodex
Fascioloides magna
tick infestation, treatment/control, 60
canis),374f
infection,3
 Environmental contamination, rates 
 Excretory-respiratory system, nematode,
liver parasite, 119, 120
(determination), 302
391, 392
presence,120
 Environmental impact analysis, EPA
Expiratory efforts (thumps),
problems, 123
requirement, 254
presence,198
redia, 118f
Enzootic, term (usage), 3
External parasites, Dichlorvos 
representation, 123f
Enzootic parasites, 3
(effectiveness),283
Fasciolopsis buski, small intestine parasite,
Epicauta species (blister beetles), 47
 Extrinsic incubation period, 241
119, 120
Epidemic,3
Eyepiece micrometer, calibration,
Feather mites, occurrence/abundance,
 Epidemic typhus, 245
298, 299
70-72
Epidermal hyperplasia, lesions, 296
illustration, 299f
Febantel, 278
Epizootic, term (usage)、 3
metabolism, 278
 Epizootic hemorrhagic disease
F
single entity formulation, availability
(EHD)、243
Face fly
(absence)、278
EPM (Equine protozoal
control,18
Fecal cultural techniques, qualitative
myelonencephalitis),105
equine control, 18
nature,298
Eprinomectin, 272
Musca autumnalis
Fecal examination, 295-303
scond-generation macrocyclic
identification, 15
qualitativeness, 295-299
lactone,272
introduction,16,17
 Fecal sedimentation techniques, 297
Epsiprantel, 284
life history/disease transmission,
 Fecal specimens, parasitologic
isoquinolone cestocide, approval, 284
15-17
examination, 303
warning, 284
pathogens, vector, 17f
 Fecal suspensions (preparation), mixing
Epsom salts, usage, 300
Muscidae (family), 15-20
apparatus (usage), 300f
Equids, Dictyocaulus arnfieldi, 164
Facultative amebiasis, 91, 92
Feces
Equimax, paste product, 285
characteristics, 91, 92
dilution egg count, 299
Equine ecephalitides, 241
Facultatively parasitic calliphorids, 22, 23
parasite antigens, detection,295,296
characteristics, 241
Facultative parasites, 2, 3
 puddling, 296
Equine infectious anemia virus, 244
FAMACHA,171
stages
Equine microflariae, identification,
chart, usage, 161,162
apes, 368-370
347,348
Fannia
cats, 326-329
Equine monocytic ehrlichiosis, 247
F. benjamini, 210, 211
dogs, 312-318
Equine piroplasmosis (Babesia caballi),
F. canicularis, 210,211
horses, 344-346
vector, 58
breeding,17
monkeys, 368-370
 Equine protozoal myelonencephalitis
Fannia, pathogens vector, 17f
numinants, 332-336
(EPM)
Fasciola
swine,360,361
 prevention, Nitazoxanide (usage), 268
F. giganta, 119, 120
weighing、300
Sarcocystis neurona, cause, 268
representation, 123f
Felicola subrostratus (Mallophagan
Sarcocystis neurona, identification, 105
F. hepatica, 3
louse), 34f
 Equine tapeworms, egs (flotation
adult flukes, characteristics, 115
characteristics, 39
difficulty),346
adult liver fluke, 117f 
 Mallophaga: Ischnocera, 40f
 Equine verminous arteritis (resolution),
cercariae,118f
Feline heartworm, 219
Albendazole (usage), 173f
Clorsulon/Curatram,
infection, 219
Equus asinus (donkeys)、Dictyocaulus
administration, 123
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 249
arnfieldi,165
eggs,117f, 117f
 Feline mange, Notoedres impact 
Equus caballus, 1
e哆gs, characteristics, 334,335
(absence), 66
Damalinia equi, impact, 34
life history, 115
 Feline parvovirus, 41
 Esophagus, dissection, 311
life history, discontinuity, 120
Felis catus, Felicola subrostratus
Esponja, 212, 213
life history, representation, 116f
(impact),34
Eucoleus, 225
metacercariae, 118f
Felis concolor coryi (Florida panther), 108
E aerophilus, 226
migrating larva, 385f
FeLV (feline leukemia virus), 249
eggs, recovery, 313
miracidium, 117f
Female sex cell (macrogamete), 93
presence,324
presence, 385f, 385f
Fenbendazole, 278, 279
E boehmi
representation, 123f
absorption, 278
description, 226
Fascioliasis, transmission (occurrence), 120
Benzimidazole, success, 278
eggs,312f
Fasciolidae
broad-spectrum anthelmintic, 278
哆gs, preparation,224f
family, 119-124
LDso. 278
presence,323
identification, 119,120
metabolism, 278
INDEX
429
Fenvalerate, 257
Fipronil,262,263
Foals—cont'd
LDso. 257
availability、262
intestinal mucosa, Eimeria leuckarti
 FEPCA (U.S. Federal Environmental
GABA-gated chloride channel
schizont/oocyst
 Pesticide Control Act of
antagonist, 262
(development), 380f
1972), 255
 methoprene, combination, 262,263
 strongylid infections, development,
Ferrets
 First-generation merozoites,
200,201
mite infestation, 77、78
production,93
 Strongyloides infection, development,
O. cynotis, Selamectin treatment, 77
First-generation pyrethroids, 256
200,201
Festoons, 51
First-generation schizont, 93
Folic acid, synthesis, 270
 Fifth-generation pyrethroids
First-stage Hypoderma larvae,
Fomite, 9,10
availability, 256
migration, 25
Formalin-acetate method, safety, 297
Beta-cyfluthrin,258
Flagellates, 84-91,318, 376,377
Formalin-ether method, avoidance, 297
Filaribits (diethylcarbamazine)、 271
characteristics, 84,318, 376,377
Formalin-fixed Giardia cysts,
Filariform, 192,193
Flaviviridae,241
sedimentation
third-stage larva, infection, 192, 193
Flaviviruses, 241
(appropriateness), 297
 Filarid nematode (Onchocerca
characteristics, 241
Formamidines, 260-262
gutturosa)、11
Fleas (Siphonaptera), 5,6,41-46
acaricidal compounds, effectiveness,
Filarid worms, Musca vectors, 17
 characteristics, 41
260
Filarid worms (Dirofilaria immitis), 9, 10
control
Amitraz,260,261
infection, 3、 4
alternatives,45
Dinotefuran, 261
Filarid worms (Paraflaria bovicola),
change,45
Imidacloprid, 261
vector,17
disease transmission, 44, 45
neonicotinoids, 261
Filarioidea, superfamily, 213-221
environmental control, 45
Nitenpyram, 261,262
characteristics, 213
feces, larval food, 43、 44
Spinosad, 262
Filarioids, characteristics, 213
Fipronil, usage, 45
Fourth-generation pyrethroids, 257, 258
Filaroidea, characteristics, 402
 insecticides, toxicants, 45
Cyfluthrin, 257
Filaroides
 life cycle stages, times (requirement), 8t
Cypermethrin, 257
F. hirthi, 190, 191
life history, 43,44
Deltamethrin, 257
Albendazole, administration, 191
metamorphosis, complexity、 43、44
Lambdacyalothrin, 257, 258
caudal ends, 157f
Methoprene, usage (success), 264
Fowlpox,244
frst-stage larvae, 190,191
topical control, 45
 Foxhounds, autochthonous visceral
first-stage larvae, infection, 298
Fleece rot, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
leishmaniasis (report), 87
illustration, 397f
(impact)、23
Fox squirrels (Sciurus niger), Notoedres
importance, 191
Flesh flies
douglasi (impact),、77
 infection, clinical signs
Cyclorrhapha (group), 6
Francisella tularensis (deerfly fever),
(absence),191
example,21f
14,15
lesions, induction, 191
Sarcophagidae (family)、 21, 22
 Free-living mites, 72
life history, 190, 191
Wohlfahrtia larvae, differentiation,
Fringed tapeworm (Thysanosoma
life history, illustration, 189f
22
actinoides), 147,148
presence,324
Flies (Diptera), 5, 6
Frontal suture, 15, 16
treatment/control,191
classification, 7t
Frontline Plus, 262, 263
view, enlargement, 398f
groups, 6
Frontline Spray, 262
F. milksi,1
life cycle stages, times (requirement), 8t
caudal ends, 157f
order, 6、33
G
presence,324
 oviparous characteristic, 6
GABA-gated chloride channel, Fipronil
F. osleri, 190
ovoviviparous characteristic, 6
antagonist,262
frst-stage larvae, infection, 298
Florida panther (Felis concolor coryi),
GABA-mediated neurotransmission,
illustration, 398f
 mononuclear cells
disturbance,271,272
importance, 190
(inoculation),108
belief, change, 273
life history, 190
Flukes
GABA neurotransmission (disruption),
nodules, 190f
liver fluke infection, clinical
Piperazine (usage),282
presence,323
syndromes, 120
Gadflies,27
treatment/control, 190
pigment, deposits, 341f
Game animals, Fenbendazole
view, enlargement, 398f
presence, impact, 123
administration (FDA
 species, lesions, 190f
Flukicides, list, 123
approval),279
Filaroididae
Fly control
Gametogony, 93
bursal lobes, 189, 190
 dairy barn control, 18
Gasterophilidae (family), 25-33
characteristics, 189
milk room control, 18
Gasterophilus, 28-31
family, 189-191
 Fly-strike, ovine prevention, 25
adult flies, resemblance, 28
identifcation, 189, 190
Foals
eggs, female deposit, 29
Filter-feeding shellfish, infection, 106
ascarid infections, development,
identification, 28, 29
Filth flies, control, 17, 18
200, 201
importance,31
430
I NDEX
Gasterophilus—cont'd
Glutamate-gated chloride channel,
Ground squirrels (Spermophilus
infection 
271,272
columbianus), myiasis
etiologic account, 31
binding、 273
(impact), 24
macrocyclic lactone, usage, 31
Glyciphagidae, family, 72
Grubs (larvae), 15
treatment, 31
Gnathostoma
Gubernaculum, 152、153
life history, 29-31
G. spinigerum, 209
Guidelines for the Diagnosis, Prevention,
oral lesions, larvae (impact), 31
identification,329
and Management of
third-stage larvae, 31
presence, 319
Heartworm (2005),217
treatment, 31
retrieval, 313f
Guinea pigs
Gasterophilus
Gnathostoma, stomal end, 209f
alimentary system, 367, 368
G. hemorrhoidalis, black eggs
Gnathostomatoidea, superfamily, 209
cestode, 367,368
(hatching),29
characteristics, 209
nematode, 367
G. intestinalis
Gnats (Nematocera group), 6
protozoa, 368
adult female, 28f
Goat Care-2X, mixture, 282
Cryptosporidium wrairi, presence, 99
bots, attachment, 348f
Goats
feces, Balantidium coli cyst, 366f
ggs, removal, 29,30
 Amprolium, usage, 266
Gliricola porcelli infestation, 367f
ggs, removal (illustration), 29f
coccidiosis prevention, decoquinate/
hair, 368
equine life history, 30f
monensin (usage), 98, 99
arachnids, 368
example,29f
Damalinia Holokartikos crassipes,
insects, 368
frst-stage larvae, 28, 29
impact,39
host-organ listing, annotation,
 predilection sites, 31f
Eimeria
367,368
G nasalis
presence, 97
Ivermectin treatment, 78
eggs deposit, 28
species, correspondence,339t
parasites
first-stage/second-stage larvae, 28, 29
Fenbendazole suspension, approval, 279
Chirodiscoides caviae, 70
 predilection sites, 31f
intestinal epithelium, Eimeria oocysts 
 host-organ listing, annotation,
third-stage larva, 29
(development),380f
367、368
Gasterophilus, 26f
liver vein, ciliate (presence), 378f
skin, 368
Gastrointestinal parasites,
lungworm infection, 398
arachnids,368
management, 271
meninges, Parelaphostrongylus tenuis,
insects, 368
Generation time, 166
398f
Gulf coast tick (Amblyomma
Genetic markers, detection, 296
 Monensin, usage, 268
maculatum),261
Giardia, 89-91
Morantel tartrate, mixture, 282
Gulls, Cryptocotyle lingua (parasite), 125
cysts, hunting, 296
nodular demodicosis, treatment, 77
Gurltia paralysans, leptomeningeal vein
detection, 295
 Piperazine, administration, 283
parasite,187
Dimetridazole, administration, 91
 Praziquantel, approval (absence), 284
Gyrodactylus, pathogenic monogenean
Diplomonada, 89-91
 Pyrantel tartrate, FDA approval
parasite, 115
Fenbendazole/Albendazole,
(absence), 282
Gyropus ovalis, guinea pig parasite, 39
administration, 91
suppurative lymphangitis, 378f
G canis,322
tapeworms,148,149
H
G. lamblia, transmission, 3
Teladorsagia, parasite, 159
Habronema
illustration, 363f
Golden hamster, skeletal muscle
eggs, flotation (diffculty), 346
infections
(Macracanthorhynchus
H. microstoma, characteristics, 212
control, 91
ingens),406f
H. muscae, 212f
feline treatment, 90
Gongylonema
biologic vector, 15, 16
isolation, 89
characteristics, 211
characteristics, 212
Metronidazole, effectiveness,
cross-section, 402f
Habronematoidea, superfamily, 212, 213
267,268
Gpulchrum, 211
identifcation, 212
micrographs, 110f
anterior end, 211f
importance,212,213
species, existence, 89
endoscopic view, 211f
Ivermectin/Moxidectin treatment, 213
trophozoites
G.verrucosum,211
larvae, hatching, 212
adaptation, 89
genus, encounter,402
life history, 212
characteristics, 318
lateral chords/embryonated
treatment,213
detachment, 110f
eggs、402f
Haemaphysalis.54
vaccines, 90, 91
Goniocotes sp. (Mallophaga:
H. bispinosa, 107
Giardiasis (treatment), Dimetridazole
Ischnocera), 39f
H. leporispalustris, larvae/nymphs, 54
(administration), 91
Goodwinol Ointment, 255
H. longicornis, 107
Glass slide, usage, 300
Gravid female, Gongylonema cross-
hypostomes, 52
Giricola porcelli (Mallophaga:
section, 402f
identification, 54
Amblycera), 41f
Gravitational force, usage, 297
life history, 54
guinea pig parasite, 39
Grazing cattle, Stomoxys (presence),19
 palpal segment, 54f
Globocephalus urosubulatus, 179f
Great blue heron, Eustrongyloides sp..
 palpi, laterally flared second
Glossina species (tsetse flies)、 19, 20
392f
segments,54
INDEX
431
Haematobia,19
Hard ticks (Ixodidae), 49, 51-53
Heterobilharzia americana
control,19 
 characteristics, 51
eggs,323
H. irritans (horn flies), 19
eggs laying, 51, 52
illustration, 387f, 387f
hosts, horsefly/deerfly dependence, 15
encephalitis, transmission, 243
female, holding, 387f
identification, 19
genera,53
life history, 130, 131
injury/disease transmission, 19
shield (scutum), 51
parasite problem, 130
life history, 19
Harpyrhynchidae, family, 73
presence,324
pathogens vector, 17f
characteristics, 73
Heterobilharzia americanum, infection,3
Haematomyzus elephantis (Mallophaga:
Haycocknema perplexum, 221,227
Heterocyclic derivatives, 259, 260
Rhynchophthirina), 41f
characteristics,227
development, 259, 260
treatment, 41
Hay itch mites (Pyermotes), 74
Heterodoxus spiniger (amblyceran louse),
Haematopinus, 34, 35
parasites, 74
220,221
characteristics, 34, 35
Heartgard-30 Plus, availability, 286
impact, 38
H. asini,35f
Heart muscle, amastigote stages, 85f
presence,326
H. eurystemus, 35f
Heartwater disease (cowdriosis), 246, 247
Heterophyes heterophyes, parasites, 125
H. quadripertusus, 34、35
Ehrlichia ruminantium,impact,
Heterophyes sp., 126f
H. suis,35f
246,247
Heterophyidae
Sus scrofa, impact, 34
 Heartworm-associated respiratory disease
family, 125
H. tuberculatus,34,35
(HARD), 219
identification, 125
water buffalo impact, 34, 35
Heartworms
Heterophyid fluke, 386f
Haemobartonella species,
arsenical therapy, usage, 217
Hexacanth embryo, growth/cavitation/
appearance,249
avermectin/macrocyclic lactone
differentiation, 140
Haemonchus,161,162
products, usage, 218
 Hexacanth embryo, oncosphere
H. contortus
endosymbiotic bacteria hosts, 217, 218
(component),131
cross-section, 392f
infection
HGE (human granulocytic ehrlichiosis),
impact, 2
increase, 216
245、246
pathogenic effects, 161, 162
prevention, 218
Hippobosca equina (horse louse fly), 20
resistance development,
 melarsomine dihydrochloride, usage
Hippoboscidae, family (keds), 20, 21
prevention, 171
(approval), 217
Hirudinea, class, 229,230
spicules, 161f
microfilariae (destruction), Milbemycin
characteristics, 229,230
stoma, en face view, 156f
oxime (usage), 275
Histomonas meleagridis
identification, 161
Moxidectin, usage, 276
parasite, 89
importance,161、162
prevention
trophozoites, discharge, 89
vulvar flap, 162f
CDC guidelines, 203
Hive beetle (Aethina tumida),48
Haemoproteus, 109, 110
 program, discussion, 218
Holdfast organ (scolex), 131
characteristics, 109, 110
Wolbachia host, 217, 218
Holometabolous metamorphosis
 species, Giemsa stain, 110f
Heat-labile toxin, presence, 96
(complex metamorphosis), 6
Hair-clasping mites (Listrophoroidea,
Heavy metals, anthelmintics, 284
Honeybee parasite (Varroa destructor),
superfamily)、70
Heel flies,27
63、64
Halarachindae, family, 31
 Heifer, abomasal mucosa (Ostertagia
Honeybee tracheal mite (Acarapis woodi ),
Halicephalobus, 192
ostertagia), 394f
74、75
H.deletrix,192
Helminths, 384-406
Hookworms
H. gingivalis, 2, 3
examination, 384
 anemia, 182
characteristics, 192
types, 384
 arrested larvae, 183
illustration, 393f
 Hemimetabolous metamorphosis (simple
eggs、 157, 158
saprophytic nematode, 393
metamorphosis),6
morula, development, 183
Halteres, 6
Hemiptera, 5,6
 erythematous formation, 184
Hammondia,328,329,381
order (bugs), 46, 47
infection, 180
appearance,381
Hemiuridae, family, 128-130
larvae
identification,328,329
Hemoflagellates (Kinetoplastida), 84-87
destruction methods, absence,
Hammondia,103,104
Hemolymph, usage、 24f
183,184
H. hammondi, life history, 103f
Hemosporidians, 106-111, 383, 384
development/hatching, 313
H. heydorni, 103,104
Hepatic capillariasis, 226
nomenclature, 395
Toxoplasma gondi, morphological
Hepatozoon, 383
refractory egg shedder, 183
similarity, 381
Hepatozoon,106
small intestine parasites, 179
Handbook of Trematodes of North America
H.americanum
species, commonness, 179
North of Mexico (Schell),
diagnosis, 106
Horn flies (Haematobia irritans)
118,119
gamont,251f
bovine presence, 19
Happy Jack Sardex II, 262
H. canis, 106
Bruce walk-through horn fly trap, 19
Happy Jack Tapeworm Tablets, 285
subclinical infections, 106
control, 19
HARD (heartworm-associated respiratory
impact, 106
head,18f
disease), 219
Heterakis gallinarum, 254
identifcation, 19
432
I NDEX
Horn flies (Haematobia irritans)—cont'd
Horses—cont'd
Horses—cont'd
impact. See Milk production 19;
face flies, control, 18
 host-organ listing, annotation,
Weight gains 19
feces, stages, 344-346
348-360
Horseflies
Fenbendazole, suspension/granules/
stages, recognition, 345, 346
 anaplasmosis, mechanical
 paste (administration), 279
pasture management, 176
transmission,14,15
flarid parasites, microflariae, 347f
peritoneum/peritoneal cavity, 358
attacks,14
hair, 360
nematodes, 358
bites, pain, 14
arachnids,360
Piperazine, effectiveness, 283
Brachycera (group), 6
insect larvae, 360
Praziquantel, tapeworm infection
characteristics, 13
insects, 360
usage, 284
control,15
 nematode microflariae/larvae, 360
Praziquantel, usage, 152
disease transmission, 14, 15
host-organ listing, 348-360
progenitors, 1
female maturation, blood meal
IgG examination, ELISA (usage),148
Pyrantel pamoate, availability, 281
(requirement)、 13、14
intestinal parasites, 344, 345
Pyrantel tartrate, feeding
identification, 13
Ivermectin
(continuation), 281,282
injury, 14
oral administration, 273
Quest Plus, usage (approval), 286, 287
life history, 13、14
usage, 273
renal tubular epithelium, Klossiella
repellent/death, diffculty, 15
kidneys, 359
equi sporonts,382f
T'abanidae (family), 13-15
nematode,359
respiratory system, 359
Horse louse fly (Hippobosca equina), 20
protozoa,359
Rhinoestrus purpureus, infection, 27
Horses, 60
large intestine, 348-351
Sarcocystis neurona infection, 105f
adult tapeworm infections,
cestode,350,351
skeletal muscles, 359
treatment,152
ciliates, 92f
 insect larvae, 359
alimentary system, 348-358
insects, 351
nematode microflariae, 359
antiprotozoal drugs, usage, 109
nematodes, 348-350
nematodes, 359
arteries, 359
Strongylidae, 348
protozoa,359
nematodes,359
lice, presence, 41
skin, 360
 avermectin resistance, absence, 176
Lipoptena cervi, attacks, 21
arachnids,360
blood, 359
liver, 351-358
insect larvae, 360
nematode microflaria, 359
cestode larvae, 358
insects,360
protozoa,359
nematode larvae, 351
small intestine,348
brain, 359
louse infestation, treatment, 41
cestodes, 348
Acanthamoeba,377f
lung, Strongylus edentatus (immature
insects, 348
Halicephalobus (Micronema)
male),395f
mucosa, Strongyloides westeri, 394f
gingivalis,393f
lung parenchyma, 359
nematodes, 348
insects,359
nematode,359
protozoa,348
nematodes,359
microflariae, identification, 347, 348
spinal cord, 359
protozoa,359
 mite infestation, 77
insects, 359
bronchi/bronchioles, 359
mouth, 348
nematodes, 359
nematode,359
insect larvae, 348
protozoa,359
 colonic mucosa, small strongyles
protozoa, 348
stomach, 348
(presence)、 174f
Moxidectin, usage, 276
bot, Gasterophilus intestinalis (life
ComboCare, usage (approval),
nematode microflariae/larvae, 360
history), 30f
286,287
nematode parasites, eggs, 345f
bots, attachment, 348f
connective tissues, 359
nervous system, 359
Gasterophilus, presence, 25
insect larvae, 359
nuchal ligament, Onchocerca cervicalis,
insect larvae, 348
nematode microflariae, 359
403f
nematodes, 348
nematodes, 359
cross-section, 403f
strongylid-contaminated environment,
protozoa,359
Onchocerca cervicalis, 12
creation, 175
Coumaphos, usage, 260
 Oxibendazole paste/suspension,
strongylid infections
Cyathostominae
administration, 280
anthelmintic resistance, 175,176
infection, 174,175
pancreas, 358
treatment/control, 174-176
management, 175
nematode,358
strongylids, infective third-stage
Cyromazine, usage, 264
 Strongylus equinus, immature adult
larvae, 346f
deworming、timing, 175
worm,396f
Strongyloides westeri 194
Diflubenzuron, usage, 264
Parafilaria multipapillosa,220
Strongylus edentatus, 172
Eimeria, presence, 97
paranasal sinuses, 359
Strongylus equinus, 172
Eimeria leuckarti, treatment, 99
insect larva, 359
Strongylus vulgaris, 172
EPM (prevention), Nitazoxanide
Parascaris equorum infection,
third-stage larvae, ingestion, 172
(usage), 268
197、198
 Sulfadiazine/Pyrimethamine treatment,
eyes, 360
parasites, 344-360
observation, 270
nematodes, 360
discovery, 311
Sulfadimethoxine, usage, 270
INDEX
433
Horses—cont'd
Hyalomma—cont'd
Hypodermis
testes, 359
characteristics, 58
bacillary bands, 391, 392
nematode, 359
Hyatid cysts, growth/characteristics, 391
quadrants, 391, 392
Tetrachlorvinphos, 259
Hydatid,140
Hypostome,51
Thelazia lacrymalis, 210
Hydatid cysts (Echinococcus
Thelazia skrjabini, 210
ganulosus)
tick infestation, treatment/control, 60
horse liver, 144f
Iatrogenic transmission, impact, 243,244
urogenital system, 359
pathogenic effects, 144
Ibaraki virus, 243
vascular system, 359
Hydatid sand, sediment (formation),
Identification, 2
worming, advice, 176
144,145
parasite identification, 2
Hosts
Hydrochloride, usage, 282, 283
process,2
definition,1
Hymenolepididae
IDEXX SNAP Giardia Test, 295
ixodid ticks, direct impact, 59
family, 149,150
 Imidacloprid, 261
life history/behavior, understanding, 153
species, occurrence, 149, 150
 chloronicotinyl insecticide, 261
Host-specific hosts, 2, 3
Hymenolepis
combination product, 261
Houseflies
H. diminuta
formulation, 261
control,18
egg,150f
Imidazothiazoles, 280, 281
Cyclorrhapha (group), 6
illustration, 363f
 nicotinic agonists, 280
Musca domestica
small intestine parasite, 149, 150
Imidocarb,267
eggs, laying, 15, 16
H. nana, 254
aromatic diamidine antiprotozoal
head,17f
illustration, 363f
agent,267
identification, 15
Hyoid apparatus, incision, 311
 Immiticide, availability, 284
life history/disease transmission,
Hyostrongylus
Incidence,3
15-17
anthelmintic medications, 164
Incubation period
pathogens, vector, 17f
Doramectin, usage, 164
extrinsic,241
Muscidae (family)、 15-20
 Fenbendazole, usage, 164
intrinsic,241
 House mouse parasite (Liponyssoides
gubernaculum, 162f
 Infections
sanguineus), 61
snpianH
production, 2,3
Human beings
characteristics, 163, 164
transovarially passage, 240
Cryptosporidium hominis, presence, 99
size,163,164
transstadially maintenance, 240
Drancunulus medinensis infection,
trichostrongyloid nematode,
 Infestations, 2、3
208,209
163,164
 Inhibited larvae, 166
Strongyloides stercoralis infection, 193
identifcation, 163
Inornate scutum, 51
trichina larvae ingestion, 223
 Ivermectin, usage, 164
Insecta (class), 5, 48
 Human beings, lice
life history, 163,164
life, division, 6
discovery, 33t
pathogenesis, 163, 164
structure, 5,6
infestation, treatment, 41
Hyperendemic parasites, 3
 Insect growth regulators (IGRs), 263-265
supervision, 41
Hyperenzootic, term (usage), 3
adulticidal products, application, 263
Human body louse (Pediculus humanus
Hyperinfection, 193
Cyromazine,263,264
humanus),34
Hypobiotic larvae, 166
Diflubenzuron, 264
hair, clinging, 37, 38
Hypoderma, 27,28
Lufenuron, 264
 Human cutaneous larva migrans, 184
eradication efforts, 28
Methoprene, 264
Human cysticercosis, rarity, 140, 141
identifcation,27
Phenothrin, combination, 256, 257
Human enteric infections, Ancylostoma
infection, 28
Pyriproxyfen,264,265
caninum, 184
life history/pathogenesis, 27, 28
safety, 263
Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (HGE),
 preventive treatment, neglect, 28
Insecticides, 255-265,262,263
245,246
species, relationship、 24
biologic activity, diversity, 255
Human head louse (Pediculus humanus
treatment/control, 28
botanic agents, 255, 256
capitis),37,38
Hypoderma
carbamates, 258-260
illustration, 38f
bot, bovine presence, 25
formamidines, 260-262
 Human lymphatic filariasis (Wuchereria
H. bovis
insect growth regulators, 263-265
bancrofti), 9, 10
example,27f
novel insecticides, 262, 263
 Human monocytic ehrlichiosis, causative
identifcation, 27
organophosphates, 258-260
agent, 246
life history/pathogenesis, 27, 28
overdose/toxicity, treatment, 255
Humans, Cuterebra infection, 31, 32
H. lineatum
pyrethroids, 256-258
Human sparganosis, cause, 137
identifcation, 27
structure, diversity, 255
Human toxocarosis, 207
larvae, presence/migration,
synergists,265
epidemiologic situation, 207
27、28
toxicity, diversity, 255
symptoms, absence, 207
life history/pathogenesis,
Instars, stages, 6
Human trichinosis, 223
27,28
 Intermandibular muscles, incision, 311
Hyalomma, 58
Hypodermatidae (family), 25-33
 Intermediate host, 2、 3
capitulum,59f
Hypoderma,26f
term, usage, 9, 10
434
I NDEX
Internal organs, internal pressure
Ixodidae (hard ticks),49
Lactating dairy cows, 60
(impact), 152
Ixodid ticks
Eprinomectin
 Internal parasites, Dichlorvos
attachment, 52
application, 169,170
(effectiveness), 283
bite wound, 59
topical application, 77
 Interstadial transmission, 52
blood loss/worry, 59
louse treatment application, 40
Intestinal amebas, 91 
direct host impact, 59
tick infestation, treatment/control, 60
 Intestinal arteries
transmission,245
Lagochilascaris
obstruction, bowel infarction
L. minor, infection,3
(fatality)、173
r
L. sprenti, 400f
occlusion, veminous thrombi/emboli
Jigger (chigoe) (Tunga penetrans), 45
Lagomorphs, mite infestation, 77、 78
(impact)、172
 Johne's disease bacteria, 4
Lambdacyalothrin, 257, 258
 Intestinal capillariasis, 226
Joyeuxiella species, scolex
LDso, 257, 258
 Intestinal coccidiosis (prevention),
characteristics, 149
Lambs
Nicarbazin (usage), 268
 Juvenile homone receptors, Diflubenzuron
parasitism, effects (study), 170
Intima, Strongylus vulgaris migration, 172
(nonbinding),264
strongylid burdens, acquisition, 166
Intracellular cysts, 381-383
Lamina, S. vulgarsi nonpenetration, 172
 Intrinsic incubation period, 241
K
Lancet, 161
Ischnocera (suborder), 38, 39
K9 Advantix, 261
 Large animal coccidiosis (treatment),
characteristics, 38
Karyosome, 376
sulfonamides (usage), 269
Isoquinolones, 283, 284
Keds
Large strongyles, 171, 172
cestocides, relationship、 283
characteristics, 20
Pyrantel, resistance, 176
Epsiprantel, 284
control,19,20
 Large wildlife, Fenbendazole
 Praziquantel, 284
 Coumaphos dips/sprays, 21
administration (FDA
 Iverhart Plus, availability, 286
Cyclorrhapha (group), 6
approval)、279
Ivermectin, 273-275
diazinon dips/sprays, 21
Larvae
 administration, teratism
Hippoboscidea (family), 20, 21
development, objective (teleologic
(production), 273
examples, 21f
sense),131-135
availability, 273
identification, 20
identification, 298, 303-309
Clorsulon, combination, 285
Kidney worm (Stephanurus dentatus), 178
stage,6
LDso, 273
Kids, strongylid burdens
Larval trematodes, 386, 387
 pour-on formulation, availability, 274
(acquisition),166
Larynx, dissection, 311
 Praziquantel, combination, 285, 286
Kinetoplast, 84
Lasalocid,267
approval,285,286
rod shape, 376, 377
inophore, monensin relationship, 267
Pyrantel pamoate, combination, 286
Kinetoplastida (hemoflagellates), 84-87
Latent larvae, 166
availability, 286
Kissing bugs (cone-nose bugs), 46, 47
Lateral alae, 392
Pyrantel pamoate/Praziquantel,
parasitic reduvid, 46
Lateral chords, 152
combination,286
Klossiella, 380
Law, James, 2
availability, 286
Klossiella, 106
Layers, Amprolium (usage), 266
usage, increase, 271
K equi
Leaf crowns, 171
 Ivomec Plus, injectable product, 285
histopathologic finding.
Lecithodendridae, family, 128-130
Ixodes
accident, 380
Lecithodendrid metacercaria,
bite wound, 59
renal epithelium parasite, 106
recovery, 130f
 bovine piroplasmosis vectors, 53
sporonts,382f
Leishmania, 86, 87
capitulum,54f
 K muris,renal epithelium parasite, 106
 Phlebotomine sand fly transmission, 86
disease transmission, 53、 54
Knemidocoptidae, family, 64, 67
Leishmania
eight-legged nymph, 53f
Knemidokoptes, 67
infection,3
European presence, 53
characteristics, 67
L. braziliensis, mucocutaneous
hypostomes, 52
K gallinae, impact, 67
leishmaniasis cause, 86
I holocyclus, 53
K jamaicensis, impact, 67
L. donovani, visceral leishmaniasis
impact, 59
K mutans, impact, 67
cause, 86
I. scapularis (deer ticks), 261
K pilae, impact, 67
L. infantum
nymphs, 53,54
male/female, 67f
cutaneous manifestation, 86f
identification, 53
Knott technique, modified, 318
macrophage, 86f
life history, 53,54
Krabbe, Harald, 147
recovery,87
North American presence, 53
Kutzerocoptes, 66
visceral leishmaniasis cause, 86
posterior ventral surface, anus/anterior
characteristics, 66
L. mexicana, cutaneous lesion cause, 86
anal groove, 53f
species, impact, 250, 251
six-legged larva, 53f
L
Leishmania amastigotes, 251f
species, 326
 Laboratory rabbits/rodents, parasites,
parasitism, 377
ticks, Anaplasma phagocytophilum
364-368
touch prep, 377f
transmission,245,246
 Lactating cows, insecticides
 Leishmanial organisms, amastigote
ventral aspect, 49f
(application), 18
existence, 86
INDEX
435
Leporacarus gibbus, 365f
Lucilia cuprina—cont'd
Magnesium sulfate, usage, 300
Leucocytozoon, 383
maggots, 23f
Magnetic stir bar, usage, 300
Leucocytozoon, 110,111
wool strike, impact, 23
Malarias, 109-111
characteristics, 110, 111
Lufenuron, 264
avian, 109
L. caulleryi, 383
chitin biosynthesis inhibition, 264
simian, 109
L. simondi,383
Lungworms, 169
 Male nematodes, female nematodes
megaloschizonts, 384f
infection,397、397、398
(comparison),152,153
species, blood smear, 110f
nomenclature,396,397
Mallophagan louse (Felicola subrostratus)
Levamisole, 280,281
 Lyme borreliosis
Felis catus, impact, 34
LDso, 280
causative agent, 247
mandibles, 34f
 subcutaneous injection, NOS
endemic transmission, 247,248
Mallophaga order (lice), 5. 6
advocacy, 281
Lyme disease, causative agent, 247
 Mammalian toxicity, preliminary
Lice
Lymphadenopathy, 248
estimate,254
Anoplura order, 5,6,33-39
Lynxacarus radovskyi
Mammomonogamus auris, 331f
characteristics, 33、34
adult, 71f
Man, flariid parasites, 12
bloodsucking lice, 33-39
egg/larva,71f
Mange
breeders,35
feline impact, 70
diagnosis, skin scrapings, 310
chewing lice, 33-39
Lynx rufus (bobcat), natural definitive
lesions, distribution/manner, 64
discovery
host, 137
Mange mites
 domestic animal presence, 33t
differentiation, 64
human being presence, 33t
M
irritation, impact, 77
head/thorax, Anopluran louse, 34f
Macaque lungs, Pneumonyssus simicola
Knemidocoptidae, family, 64
infestations, treatment, 39-41
lesions, 63f
Psoroptidae, family, 64
life cycle stages, times (requirement),
Macracanthorhynchus,228,229
Sarcoptidae, family, 64
characteristics, 228
Mange treatment, 262
 Mallophagan mandibles, 34f
M. hirudinaceus, 227f
 Mange treatment, Ivermectin (usage), 275
Mallophaga order, 5, 6, 33-39
characteristics, 228
Mansonella ozzardi, flarid parasite, 12
characteristics, 38
egg、361f
Margarops fuscatus (pearly-eyed thrasher
parasites, adaptation (ability), 34
M.ingens
nestlings), 24
sdentary habits, 34
acanthella,228f
Margaropus, 58
simple metamorphosis, 8t
adult, anterior end, 228f
characteristics, 58
changes, 33, 34
 cystacanth infective larvae, 229f
Marita, intestinal wall penetration,
Linguatula serrata,79
egg、309f
116,117
presence,323
egg, acanthor larva, 228f
Marquis, usage, 268
Linognathus,35,36
egg, illustration, 317f
Meadow vole, liver (Taenia taeniaformis
L. setosus, 36f
illustration, 406f
strobilocercus), 389f
Damalinia equi, impact, 34
intermediate host, 5
Mechanical transmitters, 240
treatment, success, 39
parasite, 5
Mechanical vectors, 2, 3
L.vituli, 36f
proboscis, 228f
definition,9,10
 species, infestation, 35, 36
treatment,229
Mecistocirrus, 162
Liponyssoides
Macrocyclic lactones, 271-277
characteristics, 162
Dermanyssidae, 61
Doramectin, 272
identification,162
characteristics, 61
emergence, 271
Mecistocirrus spp., 162f
L. sanguineus
Eprinomectin, 272
Medical entomology, 5
house mouse parasite, 61
impact,271、272
Medulla, location, 387, 388
parasitism, 60
Ivermectin, 273-275
Megalodiscus cercariae, encysting
Lipoptena cervia (deer ked), 20
Milbemycin oxime, 275
process, 124
Listeriosis, 143
Moxidectin,276,277
Melarsomine, 284
Little blue louse {Solenopotes
 parasitic treatment, revolution, 272
 Melarsomine dihydrochloride, arsenical
capillatus),36
Selamectin,277
anthelmintic (availability), 284
Littorina littorea, C.lingua
Macrogamete (female sex cell), 93
Melophagus
(development), 125
maturity, 379
characteristics, 20
Liver flukes
Macronucleus, presence, 377
M. ovinus (sheep ked), 21f
infection, clinical syndromes, 120
Macronyssidae, family, 60-62
host, Trypanosoma melophagium, 21
removal, Albendazole (indication), 123
chelae, 60
Menopon sp. (Mallophaga: Amblycera), 40f
Liver surface, examination, 311
chelicerae, 60
Merogony, 379
Livestock, babesia species, 107
 mesostigmatid mites, 60
Merogony (Schizogony), 93
Llamas, Eimeria infection, 97
 Macrophages, parasite dissemination, 87
Meromyarian section, 392, 393
Louping ill, 243
Maggots, 372, 373
 Mesocercaria, migration, 128
Louse-borne relapsing fever, 248, 248
arthropod features, 373
Mesocestoides
Lucilia cuprina
characteristics, 372, 373
 genus, life history, 151
life history, 24f
dipteran fly larvae, 372、373
infection, 151
436
I NDEX
Mesocestoides—cont'd
Mice—cont'd
Miracidium, 115
M. corti, parasite, 138
arachnids,367
Fasciola hepatica, 117f
species
insects, 367
movement, 115
gravid segment, 316f
host-organ listing, annotation, 367
rediae, growth, 115
presence,322
intestines, 367
Mitaban liquid, 261
solex, characteristics, 150
cestodes, 367
Mita-Clear, 256
scolex/segments, 151f
nematodes, 367
Mites, 373, 374
tetrathyridia (tetrathyridium), 323
protozoa,367
characteristics,373、 374
illustration, 390f, 390f, 390f
kidneys, 367
hair-clasping, 70
Mesocestoididae
protozoa, 367
infestations, treatment,75-78
family, 150, 151
Lagochilascaris sprenti, 400f
mesostigmatid, 60-64
identification, 150
mesocercariae, Alaria marcianae
Mixing apparatus, usage, 299
life history, 151
(transmission), 128
Molineus barbatus, 394f
Mesosterphanus appendiculatum,322
 myobid hair-clasping parasite
Molting (ecdysis), 6
Mesostigmata, suborder, 60-64
infestation,74f
Monensin,268
Mesostigmatid mites, 60-64
parasites, 36
production, 268
 peritreme, stigma connection, 60
host-organ listing, annotation, 367
Monieza
stigmata, location,60
illustration, 363f
infection, Fenbendazole (usage),
Metabolic quiescence (diapause)、 10
pinworms,366f
151,152
Metacercaria, formation, 115, 116
skeletal muscle, Sarcocystis
M. caprae, 147
Metacercariae, ingestion, 119-124
(sarcocyst),382f
M. expansa, 147
Metacercarial stage, Digenea, 117, 118
skin,367
Anoplocephalidae, mature 
Metaflumizone, 263
arachnids,367
segments, 147f
LDso、 263
insects,367
sp. (Anoplocephalidae), egg (ruminant
semicarbazone insecticide, 263
stomach,367
placement),147f
topical usage, approval, 263
cestodes, 367
Monieza benedeni,147
Metagonirmus yokogawai, parasite,125
nematodes, 367
egg、333f
Metastigmata (ticks), 49-60
protozoa, 367
intestinal presence, 341f
Metastrongylidae
subcutaneous tissues, Spirometra
Moniliformis, 229
anthelmintic medication, 185
mansonoides plerocercoid,
characteristics, 229
family, 185
391f
Monkeys
identifcation, 185
Toxocara canis larva, 400f
alimentary system, 368
life history, 185
Toxocara/ Toxascaris infection, role,
acanthocephalans, 368
Metastrongylidea, 396-398
206,207
cestodes, 368
larva, 307f
urogenital system, 367
nematodes, 368
 Metastrongyloidea
Vampirolepis nana, cyclophyllidean
protozoans, 368
bursa/spicules, 157f
parasite,131
trematode,368
caudal ends, 157f
Microflariae, 401f
blood,370
 representatives, 158
development, 213
nematode microflariae, 370
superfamily,155、184-191
differentiation, 318, 319
protozoans, 370
Metastrongyloids, characteristics, 184, 185
fixation/identification, 318, 319
connective tissues, 370
Metastrongylus
presence, diagnosis procedure, 318
cestode larvae, 370
M. apri, 185f
removal, Ivermectin (usage), 217
nematodes, 370
sp..egg, 361f
Microgamete, nucleus incorporation, 379
feces, stages, 368-370
Metazoonosis, 3
Micrometry, 298,299
hair, 370
Methomyl,258, 259
Micronema deletrix, 192
insects, 370
LDso. 258
Micronema gingivalis, 393f
nematodes, 370
warning,259
 Micronucleus, presence, 377
liver,368,369
Methoprene, 264
Microsporum canis, infection, 3, 4
nematodes,368,369
formulation, 264
Migrating lumps, subcutaneous
protozoans, 368
LDso, 264
myiasis, 28
lungs, 369, 370
success,264
Milbemite Otic Solution, ear mite
arachnid,370
Metronidazole, 267,268
treatment approval, 275
cestode larva, 369
absorption,267
Milbemycin oxime, 275
nematodes, 369
Giardia effectiveness, 267, 268
effectiveness, study, 275
muscles, 370
parabasalia IV administration, 89
Lufenuron, combination, 286
cestode larvae, 370
Mice
canine approval, 286
nematodes, 370
alimentary system, 367
macrocyclic lactone, 275
nematode parasites, 369f
brain, Toxoplasma gondi cyst, 101f
Milk production, horn flies (impact), 19
nose,369
Cryptosporidium muris, presence, 99
Milk rooms, fly control, 18
annelids, 369
Cuterebra infection, 31, 32
Millipedes (Diplopoda), 5
arachnids,369
hair, 367
Miracidia, development, 129f
nematode, 369
INDEX
437
Monkeys—cont'd
Muellerius, 185,186
P.1u0a1d00
pancreas, 368,369
M capillaris
M. musculinus
nematodes, 368, 369
characteristics, 185, 186
elimination, Ivermectin (usage),
protozoans, 368
female, 185f
77、78
parasites, 368-370
treatment, 186
male/female, 71f
respiratory system, 369,370
sp., first-stage larvae, 337f
rodent presence, 70
srous cavities, 370
Mules operation, 25
Myriocytous cells, 393
acanthocephalans, 370
Multivoltine species (blackfies),、 10
Myxomatosis virus, rabbit presence, 41
cestode larvae, 370
Murine typhus, 245
nematode,370
Murshidia dawoodi, 171f
N
 pentastomid nymphs, 370
Musca
Namatodirus, spine, 162f
skin, 370
genus, species, 15
Nanophyetus salmincola
insects, 370
M. autumnalis (face fly),210, 211
adults, parasitism, 124
nematodes,370
M.fasciata,220
presence,322
throat,369
M. hervei (Oriental face fly),210, 211
T'roglotrematidae, 125f
annelids, 369
M. lusoria, 220
vector, 247
arachnids,369
Muscidae (family), 15-20
Narasin, 268
nematodes,369
biologic control methods, parasitoid
ionophore coccidiostat, 268
Monocercomonas
wasps (usage), 18
Narceus (genus), 5
M ruminantium, rumen appearance,
insecticide, application, 17, 18
 Nasal bots, 27
88, 89
pathogens (vector), 17f
Nasal capillariasis, 226
 species, Trichomonas resemblance,
Muscoid spiracles, 22f
 National Animal Poison Control Center
88. 89
Muscoid third-stage larva/maggot,
(ASPCA), 255
Monocystis, 304f
Calliphoridae, 16f
National Opossum Society (NOS),
Monogenea, order, 115
Mutualism, 1
 Levamisole subcutaneous
Monohydrate, usage, 282, 283
host benefit/existence, 2
injection (advocacy), 281
Moose (Alces alces), winter tick
Mycobacterium avium subspecies
Natrix (water snake), natural
infestation,58
paratuberculosis, infection, 4
intermediate host, 137
Morantel, 281
Mycodex Pet Shampoo, 256
 Navigator, dosage determination, 268
pyrantel, 3-methyl analogue, 282
Mycoplasma
Necator americanus, 184
 Morantel tartrate, 282
M. conjunctivae, infection, 4
 Necropsy procedures, 310-312
 Moraxella bovis, mechanical vector,
M. haemocanis, tick transmission, 249
Nematocera, 7、13
16,17
M. haemofelis, feline transmission, 249
characteristics,7
Morula development, 158
M. haemominutum, feline
classification, 7t
Morula stage, 153
infection, 249
flies, pathogens (vector), 10t
Mosquitoes
M. mycoides, infection, 4
 life cycle stages, times
Aedes sollicitans, cattle distress, 7-9
species,249
(requirement), 8t
Dirofilaria infection, 215
appearance,249
Nematoda
Nematocera (group), 6
Myiasis, 6
excretory system, 152
vectors, 5, 9,10
advanced cases, cutaneous myiasis,
phylum, 152-227
Mosquitoes (Culicidae)
23、24
Nematodes, 391-405
antennae/mouthparts, 9f
blowflies, 22-25
amphidelphic branch,153
autogenous females, 7
Coumaphos, usage, 25
body form, 152
blood loss, 7-9
definition,22
caudal end, prodelphic branch, 153
characteristics, 7
 development, paretic canine presence,
characteristics, 391
disease transmission, 9, 10
23、24
cuticle,392
eggs,laying,7
larvae
cutting plates, 155, 156
family、 7、10
identification,33
division, 391,392
identification, 6
taxa, identification,33
eggs, 303-307, 312,313
injury, 7-9
primary、22
growth, nutrient agar plates
larva, 9f
rabbit impact, 24
(usage), 298
life history、7
secondary, 22
identification, 303
 pathogens, vector, 10t
treatment, 25
esophagus, 393
pupa, 6
Myobia musculi,74f
excretory pore, 391, 392
Mosquitoes (Culicoides) illustration, 12f
attack, 73
excretory-secretory system, 391, 392
Moxidectin,276,277
Myobidae, family, 73
female reproductive system, didelphic
 Imidaclopnid, combination, 286
characteristics, 73
branch, 153
Praziquantel, combination, 286, 287
 Myobid hair-clasping parasite, 74f
intestine,393
tapeworm treatment, approval, 287
Myobid mites, impact, 73
larvae,307、313
 Mucosal epithelium, Alaria canis
Myocoptes
concentration, Baermann technique
(specimen), 127f
M. musculi (elimination), Ivermectin
(usage),297,298
 Mucosoflagellates (Parabasalia), 87-89
(usage)、77、78
culture,298
438
I NDEX
Nematodes-—cont'd
0
 growth, nutrient agar plates
definitive hosts, 103
Obeliscoides cuniculi
(usage),298
description, 102, 103
egg、306f
identification, 307
presence,324,325
illustration, 363f
migrations,202
N. hughesi, 103
stomal end, 364f
lateral alae, 392
Neotrombicula
Obligate parasites, 2、 3
life histories, generalization, 153f
N autumnalis, larvae infestation, 74
Ocelot, small intestine (Amphimerus
meromyarian section, 392, 393
sp., scutum,76f
pseudofelineus), 384f
morula stage、153
Nervous coccidiosis, 96
Ochlerotatus triseriatus, 261
muscle cells, 392, 393
 Nervous system, nematode, 391, 392
Odocoileus virginianus, white-tailed deer
myriocytous cells, 393
 New Animal Drug Application, FDA
host, 21
nervous system, 391, 392
submission,254
Oesophagostominae
oligocytous cells, 393
New World monkeys (Cebidae),
anthelmintic medication, 178
one-cell stage, 153
parasites, 66
identifcation, 176
 ontogenetic development, stages/
Nicarbazin, 268
importance、177、178
transitions,153f
synthetic coccidiostat, 268
subfamily, 176-179
oral end, opisthodelphic branch, 153
Nippostrongylus brasiliensis,254
Oesophagostomins (nodular worms), 177
parasites
female, caudal end, 366f
Oesophagostormum
eggs, 312f
 male, bursa/spicules, 366f
commonness, 395
observation, 311
Nitazoxanide, 268
O.columbianum 176
polycytous cells, 393
thiazolide antiprotozoal agent, 268
 buccal/anterior esophageal regions
polymyarian section, 392,393
 Nitenpyram, 261, 262
dorsoventral view, 176f
prepatent period,154, 155t
availability, 261,262
lateral view, 177f
quadrants, 391, 392
neonicotinoid insecticide, 261
O. radiatum, 176
rays, 156、 157
usage, avoidance, 262
fourth-stage larva, 178f
teeth, 155,156
Nitroxynil, flukicide, 123
O. venulosum, 176
thermal death (relaxation), 298
N-octyl bicycloheptene
species, 396f
vermiform embryo stage, 153
dicarboximide, 265
effect, 177
Nematodirus, 162,163
MGK 264 designation, 265
egg,306f
characteristics, 162
 Nodular worms (oesophagostomins), 177
platymyarian muscle cells, 396f
eggs, identification, 307
 Nonhuman hosts, visceral larva migrans,
Oestridae (family), 25-33
identification, 162
207,208
Oestrus ovis
importance, 163
Nonlactating dairy cattle, 60
larvae
life history, 162, 163
louse infestations, treatment, 39, 40
impact, 26
N battus
tick infestation, treatment/control, 60
susceptibility, Ivermectin (impact),
infective larva, 162, 163
 Nonpathogenic trypanosomes, 85, 86
26、27
strongylosis, 163
 Nonpruritic rash (spots), appearance, 245
sheep nasal botflies, 25-27
species
Nonstriated muscle zones, 387, 388
Oestrus, 26f
%g、333f
No-see-ums (biting midges), 12
 Ohisthorchids, host specifcity, 126
infections,163
NOS (National Opossum Society),
Ohisthorchiidae
Nematospiroides dubius, 254
 Levamisole subcutaneous
family, 125,126
Neoechinorhynchus
injection (advocacy), 281
identification, 125, 126
cross-section, 406f
Notoedres,66
importance,126
female, cross-section, 406f
characteristics, 66
Praziquantel, impact, 126
Neonicotinoids, 261
infestation, treatment, 76
treatment,126
binding ability, 261
male/female, 66f
Ohisthorchis tenuicollis, life history, 126
Neorickettsia
N. cati, 66f
 Old World monkeys (Cercopithecidae),
N.helminthoeca
illustration, 374f
parasites, 66
canine causative agent, 124
Selamectin, topical application, 76
Oligocytous cells, 393
occurrence,247
Notoedric mange
Ollulanus, 164
vector,247
misdiagnosis, 66
anthelmintic medication, 164
N ristici, 6
Notoedres douglasi, impact, 77
identification, 164
impact,247
presence, 66f
importance,164
species, 247
Novel insecticides, 262, 263
life history, 164
Neorickettsia (genus), rickettsial pathogen
Benzyl benzoate, 262
O. tricuspis
rarity,247
Fipronil, 262,263
diagnosis, 164f 
Neospora, 383
metaflumizone,263
identification, 329
Neospora, 102,103
Nucleolus, 376
OmniTrol IGR, 265
N. caninum
 Nursling pups, A. caninum infection, 182
Omsk hemorrhagic fever, 243
bradyzoites, 383f
Nutrient agar plates, nematode eggs/
Onchiostyle, 221
cyst,103f
larvae growth, 298
Onchocerca, 219,220
cysts, examination, 383
Nuttalliellidae, 49
characteristics, 219
INDEX
439
Oriental face fly (Musca hervei), 210, 211
Oxyurida,398
filarial anatomy, example, 403
Orientia
characteristics, 195、398
 microflaricidal treatment, 220
genera,244
order, 195-197
O. cervicalis
O. tsutsugamushi, 245
Oxyurid egg, 303
characteristics, 219,220
Ormetoprim, 269
identification, 303
equine presence, 12
diaminopyrimidine potentiator, 270
illustration, 305f
female, 403f
 Sulfadimethoxine, combination, 270
Oxyuris equi, 196
female, cross-section, 403f
tablets, designation, 270
adults, recovery, 348f
microflariae, 347,347
Ornate scutum, 51
anterior end, 196f
O. gibsoni, bovine presence, 12
Ornithodoros, 50,51
characteristics, 196
O. gutturosa (filarid nematode)、 11
disease transmission, 50, 51
fourth-stage infection, 196
O. reticulata, microflariae,
identification, 50
fourth-stage larva, 196f
347、347
illustration, 50f
third-stage infection, 196
illustration, 347f
life history, 50
treatment,196
Oncicola, 229
O. hermsi, rodent parasite, 50
Oncicola canis, 322
 species sof ticks, transstadially
P
Oncicola sp., 229f
maintenance, 243
PABA (para-aminobenzoic acid),
Oncosphere (first-stage larva)
vectors, importance, 50, 51
sulfonamides (structural
development, 131
Ornithonyssus
analogues), 269
usage, 131
Macronyssidae, 61
Pacific Coast tick {Dermacentor
One-cell stage, 153
characteristics, 61
occidentalis),58
One-host ticks, 51, 52
O. bacoti, parasitism, 60
 Palps, 51
Oocysts, 309
O. bursa (tropical fowl mite), 61
Panacur, administration, 279
identification, 309
O. sylviarum
FDA approval, 279
release,93
illustration, 61f
 Pancreatic ducts, adult trematode
Operculate eggs, 316f
parasitism, 60
(parasite)、126
 Operculum, lice impact, 33, 34
X-shaped gut, 62
Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA),
Ophionyssus
Orthohalarachne attenuata,310f
sulfonamides (structural
Macronyssidae, 62
Ostertagia, 159-161
analogues), 269
characteristics, 62
identification, 159
Parabasalia (mucosoflagellates), 87-89
gnathosome,62f
importance,161
enrofloxacin, administration, 89
O. natricis (snake mite), 62
life history, 160,161
metronidazole, IV administration, 89
Opisthodelphic branch, nematodes, 153
O. ostertagi
treatment, 89
Opisthorchis
abomasal mucosa, 394f, 394f
Parafilaria, 220
O. tenuicollis, 323
impact, 161
characteristics, 220
O. viverrini, 323
 necropsy fndings, 161
P. bovicola,17,220
Opossum
spicules, 160f
impact, 220
Levamisole, usage approval
organism, tail, 160f
P. multipapillosa, 220
(absence), 281
overwintering,167
microflariae, 347f
lung, Besnoitia cyst, 383f
Otobius, 51
discovery, 347
palate,Anatrichosoma buccalis,405f
characteristics, 51
Parafilariosis (summer bleeding), 220
Organophosphates, 258-260, 259,
identifcation, 51
Paragonimus kellicotti, 125f
260,283
larvae, feeding, 51
eggs,386f
aliphatic derivatives, 259
life history, 51
living adult worm, 125f
availability, 259
O. megnini, 51f
occurrence,124,125
disappearance, 259
Otodectes
presence, 324,385f
Chlorpyrifos, 260
characteristics, 69, 70
spines, 386f
Coumaphos, 260
 infestation, treatment, 76
 Parametorchis sp. (Opisthorchidae), 126f
Diazinon,260
male/female, 70f
Paramphistomatidae
Dichlorvos, 259,283
O. cynotis, 69, 70
Clorsulon/Ivermectin,
heterocyclic derivatives, 259, 260
presence, 326
combination, 124
phenyl derivatives, 259
treatment、77
family, 124
Phosmet, 260
pretarsi, 65f, 69,70
identification, 124
Pirimphos, 260
 Selamectin, treatment approval, 76
life histories, 124
Tetrachlorvinphos, 259
Oxantel,281
rumen fluke, 124f
toxicity,259
Oxfendazole,279,280
treatment,124
usage,258
 broad-spectrum benzimidazole,
Paramphistomum,124
avoidance, 258
approval,279
eggs,124
 Organophosphorus insecticides, chronic
metabolism, 278
Paranoplocephala mamillana, 148
neurotoxicity, 258
Oxibendazole,280
Anoplocephalidae, 148f
Oribatid mites, 72
broad-spectrum benzimidazole, 280
Parascaris, 199,200
characteristics, 72
Oxyclozanide, flukicide,123
anthelmintic medication, 200
440
I NDEX
Parascaris—cont'd
Pasture management, 176
Physaloptera—cont'd
antigens, sensitization, 200
Pathogens
presence, 319
characteristics, 199
co-infection,risk, 240,241
P. rara, presence, 319
control, 200
mechanical transmitters, 240
sp.
P. equorum
transmission rate、241
anterior extremity, 210f
adult, 199f
Patriot (ear tags), 260
stoma/caudal extremity, 210f
 adult female, anterior end, 199f
PCR (polymerase chain reaction), 296
Physaloptera infections, 210
anthelmintic medication, 200
Pearly-eyed thrasher nestlings (Margarops
 Physalopteroidea, superfamily, 209, 210
characteristics, 199
fuscatus), mortality,24
identification, 209, 210
control, 200
Pearsonema, 225
life history, 210
哆gs, appearance,200
P. plica, 226
treatment,210
哆gs,counts,200
presence,325
Physocephalus sexalatus, 212f
eggs, number, average, 201f
Pediculus, 37,38
 Piglets, neonatal coccidiosis medication 
eggshell, protection, 200
Pediculus humanus capitis (human head
(futility)、99
equine infection, 197,198
louse),37,38
Pigs
infection, 200
Pediculus humanus humanus (human
Amprolium, usage, 266
 infective eggs, 200
body louse)、34
Cystoisospora infection, 97
 Ivermectin/Moxidectin resistance,
Pelodera,191,192
Eimeria infection, 97
reports, 200
P. strongyloides
Fasciolopsis buski, small intestine
 piperazine compounds, usage, 200
characteristics, 191
parasite、119,120
Parasites
illustration, 393f
hyperkeratosis, Sarcoptes scabiei
antigens, feces detection, 295, 296
larvae, 393
(impact), 373f
 chemical attack, continuation, 169
 Pentastomida (tongue worms), 79
large intestine submucosa, Balantidium
definition,1
parasites, 5
coli, 378f
diagnosis, resources, 372
Pentastomids (tongue worms), 79,
liver, lesions (infective egg exposure),
diagnostic stages, 2
374,375
362f
host, relationship, 2-4
characteristics, 374, 375
Strongyloides ransomi, 195
identification,2,303
cuticle, surface view, 376f
 Pine pollen, 304f
life history/behavior,
eggs,309,375f
 Pinworms, eggs, 305f
wnderstanding、 153
identification, 309
Piperazine, 282,283
pseudoparasites, contrast, 303
nymph,375f
availability, 283
resistance, development, 255
stoma/hooks, 78f
neuromuscular blockade, 282
Parasitic amebas, asexual
tissue, pores (illustration), 376f
Piperonyl butoxide, 265
reproduction,91
Pentatrichomonas, nonpathogenic species
LDso, 265
 Parasitic arthropods, consideration, 5
(occurrence), 88, 89
 Pirimiphos, 260
 Parasitic disease, macrocyclic lactones
 Pentatrichomoniasis, description, 88
formulation, combination, 260
(impact), 272
 Peptic digestion, usage, 361, 362
LDso. 260
Parasiticides
Peracute hookworm disease, 182
Piroplasmoses, 106-109
approval,254
sanitation/medication, 182
Piroplasmoses, treatment, 108, 109
resistance,255
treatment, 182
Pithesarcoptes, 66
 Parasitism, 1
Periparturient rise, 166
characteristics, 66
host relationship、 2
Periplaneta americana (cockroaches), 47f
Placoconus lotoris
year-round game, 170
 Peritoneum, examination, 311
buccal/esophageal regions, dorsoventral/
Parasitology, terms, 1
Permethrin,257
lateral aspects, 180f
Parasitophorous vacuole, trophozoite
LDso, 257
bursa/spicules, 157f
(presence), 378,379
Pesticides, users (legal responsibility), 255
Plagiorchis species, 322
Paratenic host, 2,3、 128
 Petechial hemorrhages, 324
Plague, 249, 250
environmental control, 206,207
 Phaenicia sericata, surgical maggots, 22, 23
cause,249、250
Parazoonosis, 3
Phenothrin, 256, 257
transmission, 46
Parelaphostrongylosis, 143
 Phenyl derivatives, 259
Plant hair, 304f
Parelaphostrongylus, 186
complexity,259
Plasmodium,109
P. tenuis
Philornis deceptivus larvae, infection, 24
characteristics, 109
characteristics, 186
 Phlebotomine sand fly, leishmania
identifcation, 109
illustration, 186f, 398f
transmission, 86
involvement, 109
infection,3
Phlebotomus (sandflies), 13f
life history, 109
 intestine, illustration, 399f
Phoresis, 2
P. cynomolgi, 109
Parenchymal zone, 387, 388
 Phormia regina, surgical maggots, 22, 23
P. falciparum, 110f
Paretic dogs, myiasis (development),
Phosmet, 260
P. gallinarum, schizonts, 110f
23,24
LDso. 260
P.knowlesi,109
 Parthenogenetic parasitic female, location,
Physaloptera
Platyhelminthes (phylum), 115-152
192、193
P.praeputialis
classes, 115
Passalurus ambiguus, 195f,363f
illustration, 329f
definition, 115
INDEX
441
Platynosomum fastosum, 127
 Prevalence, endemicity measure, 3
Pseudophyllidean segments, uterine
Dicrocoelidae, 127f
Preventef, 260
pore,135
eggs,328f
Primary myiasis, 22
 Pseudophyllidean tapeworms, 135-137
infection,3
Primary vector, 240,241
 Psorergatidae, family, 73
 Plerocercoid (sparganum), 391
Primates parasites, 367f
characteristics, 73
development, 136、137
Probstmayria vivipara, 196
Psorobia ovis (sheep itch mite), 73
third larval stage, 131
adult male, anterior end,196f
Psoroptes, 67,68
Pneumonyssoides, 63
characteristics, 196
characteristics, 67
characteristics,63
Procercoid
male/female, 68f
P.caninum,63f
development, 136, 137
P. cuniculi
mites,323f
second larval stage, 131
commonness,67
presence, 323
 Prodelphic branch, 157
presence, 67,68
Pneumonyssus,63
 Prodelphic branch, nematodes, 153
P. ovis, characteristics, 67
characteristics, 63
Proheart 6
pretarsi, 64f
P. simicola
FDA recall, 276
Psoroptic mange, ovine presence, 68f
illustration, 375f
toleration, 276,277
treatment, Ivermectin (usage)、 274
Macaque lung lesions, 63f
 Proleg, blackflies, 10
Psoroptidae, family, 64, 67-70
mites, presence,63
ProMeris, 263
Psychodidae (sandflies), 10t
Pneumospiruridae, family, 210
Propoxur,259
Pthirus,36、37
Pocket pets, mite infestation, 77, 78
LDso, 259
P. pubis (Anoplura),38f
 Poisson distribution, mean/variance
Prosarcoptes, 66
Ptilinum, 15,16
(equality),301
characteristics, 66
Pulex irritans (Siphonaptera), 43f, 46
 Polyarthritis, 248
Prosthenorchis, 229
adult male, lateral view, 42f
 Polycytous cells, 393
characteristics, 229
Pupal stage, 6
 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 296
P. elegans, 367f
Pupation, 6
Polymyarian section, 392, 393
 Prostigmata, suborder, 72-78
Pyemotes
Polyplax, 36
characteristics, 72
Hay itch mites, 74
P. serrata, 36
Prostigmatid mites, 72-78
P. tritici, 74
illustration, 37f
 Protein-losing nephropathy, 248
Pyemotidae, family, 74
P. spinulosa, 36,366f
 Protoscolex (protoscolices), 144
Pyrantel, 281, 282
attack, 37f
Echinococcus granulosus, 145f
Praziquantel, combination, 287
 Ponazuril, 268
 Protostrongylidae
 Praziquantel/Febantel, combination, 287
antiprotozoal product, 268
family, 185, 186
availability, 287
product, testing,268
identifcation, 185
tetrahydropyrimidine
Porcupine, brain (Baylisascaris
life history, 185
anthelmintics, 281
procyonis),400f
treatment,186
Pyrantel pamoate, availability, 281
 Pork products, freezing (safety), 224
Protostrongylus, 185
Pyrantel tartrate, feeding (continuation),
Porrocaecum, 305f
P. rufescens
281, 282
 Postparturient rise, 166
bursa/spicules, 157f
Pyrethrins, 256
Poteriostomum, infective third-stage
characteristics, 185
aerosols/fogs/sprays/powders,
larvae, 346f
sp., frst-stage larvae, 335f
usage, 256
 Potomac horse fever
Protozoa, 375-384
arthropod impact, 256
caddisfly vector, 6
characteristics, 375, 376
usage, ubiquity, 256
 clinical/hematologic disease,
distinguishing, diffculty, 376
warning,256
development, 6
 Protozoal encephalomyelitis organisms,
Pyrethroids, 256-258
Neorickettsia ristici, impact, 128, 247
105, 106
chemistry, research, 256
 Poultry
Protozoan cysts, 309
ffth-generation, 258
Cyromazine, usage, 264
identifications, 309
first-generation, 256
Lasalocid, usage, 267
 Protozoans, characteristics, 84
fourth-generation, 257, 258
Monensin, usage, 268
Pseudocoelom, 152
 insecticidal effect, increase, 256
Sulfadimethoxine, usage, 270
Pseudocoelomates, 384
second-generation, 256, 257
 Sulfadimethoxine/Ormetoprim
Pseudolynchia, example, 21f
synthetic pyrethrin-like substance, 256
combination, usage, 270
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, fleece rot
third-generation, 257
 Powassan encephalitis, 243
impact, 23
Pyrimethamine, 269
Pralidoxime chloride, action, 258
 Pseudoparasites, 304f
Pyrimethamine, Sulfadiazine 
 Praziquantel
identification, 303
(combination), 270
cestocidal drug、 151
parasites, contrast, 303
manufacturer recommendation, 270
isoquinolone cestocide, approval, 284
 Pseudophyllidea, 131
Pyriproxyfen, 264, 265
Preerythrocytic schizogony, 109
information, 132-134t
availability, 265
 Premunition, 166,167
 Pseudophyllidean holdfast, bothria, 135
formulation, 265
host resistance type, 170, 171
 Pseudophyllidean oncosphere, operculate
LDso. 264
 Prepatent period, 136, 137
shell, 135
registration, 265
442
I NDEX
Q
Raillietia—cont'd
Reoviruses, 243
Q fever,245
R auris
characteristics, 243, 243
Qualitative fecal examination, 295-299
bovine parasite, 62f
Repellents, 263
Quantitative fecal examination, 299-303
consideration, 62
DEET、263
Queensland itch, 12
Raillietidae, family, 62
Di-N-propyl isocinchomeronate, 263
Quest Plus, usage, 286, 287
Rams (exudative dermatitis), C. bovis
Reproductive capacity, 166
(impact),69
 Reservoir hosts, 3
R
Random distributions, 301
feeding、240
Rabbits
Rats
Resmethrin, 257
 alimentary system, 365
alimentary system, 365-367
LDso. 257
bile duct epithelium, Eimeria stiedae
bile duct, Fasciola hepatica, 385f
Respiratory tract, mites, 374
(development), 381f
hair, 367
Rhabditida, 393, 394
Cediopsylla, 43f
arachnids,367
characteristics, 191
Cheyletiella parasitivorax
insects,367
order, 191-195
occurrence,73
host-organ listing, annotation, 365-367
Rhabditiform larva,192,193
coccidiosis treatment, toltrazuril/
intestines, 365, 366
Rhabditis
ponazuril (usage), 99
Aspiculuris sp.,399f
Pelodera, 191,192
Cuterebra infection, 31, 32
cestode, 366
R. bovis, 191,192
ear、 Psoroptes cuniculi infestation, 365f
nematodes, 365, 366
R strongyloides
ear canker, 68f
protozoans, 366
characteristics, 191
response, Ivermectin (usage), 78
liver,366,367
illustration, 393f
Eimeria infection, 97
Calodium (Capillaria)
presence,326
hair, 365
hepaticum, 405f
rhabditiform larva, 192f
arachnids, 365
cestode larvae, 366
Rhabditoid egg 304, 305
host-organ listing, annotation, 365
nematode, 366
identification, 304, 305
intestine,365
protozoa,366,367
Strongyloides papillosus, 306f
cestode,365
strobilocerci Taenia
Rheighardia stemae,egg、78f
nematodes, 365
taeniaeformis,142f
Rhesus monkey
protozoa, 365
muscle, Trichinella spiralis cyst, 362f
lung, Pneumonyssus simicola, 375f
Lasalocid, usage, 267
parasites, 36
 uterine wall, granuloma (Spirurid
liver, 365
 host-organ listing annotation,
larva), 401f
cestode larvae, 365
365-367
Rhicephalus sanguineus (brown dog
protozoa,365
illustration, 363f
ticks)、261
losses, myiasis (impact), 24
skin,367
Rhinoestrus purpureus, equine
lungs,Cuterebra, 373f
arachnids, 367
infection, 27
myxomatosis virus, 41
insects, 367
Rhinonyssidae, family, 63
parasites,363f
small intestine, mucosa (Trichinella
Rhipicentor, 59
host-organ listing, annotation, 365
spiralis),404f
characteristics, 58
laboratory presence, 364-368
stomach, 365, 366
Rhipicephalus,54-57
peritoneal cavity, 365
cestode, 366
capitulum,54f
cestode larvae, 365
nematodes,365,366
disease transmission, 54-57
protozoa,365
protozoans,366
eggs, development, 54-56
skin, 365
urinary bladder mucosa,
hypostomes, 52
arachnids, 365
Trichosomoides crassicauda
identification, 54
stomach, 365
405f
life history, 54-57
nematodes, 365
urogenital system, 367
R annulatus,52
Raccoon
mematodes,367
Boophilus, former name, 56
Baylisascaris procyonis, 207
Rays, muscular processes, 156, 157
capitulum, 56f
hookworm, 157f
 ReBalance, usage, 270
life history, Brown dog tick
intestine
Red fox (Vulpes vulpes), sarcoptic mange.
(involvement), 56f
Heterobilharzia americana eggs, 387f
373、374
one-host tick transmission, 107
heterophyid fluke, 386f
Rediae, growth, 115
Rhipicephalus sanguineus,
liver, Heterobilharzia americana
Reduviidae (family),46, 47
difference,56
eggs,387f
Reduvids, charactenistics, 46,47
ticks, bovine attachment, 57f
lung, trematode mesocercariae, 387f
Refractory egg shedder, 183
R.decoloratus ticks, collection, 59
subcutaneous tissue
Refugia, 171
R microplus, one-host tick
Dirofilaria tenuis, 403f
Reindeer, Ivermectin (usage), 274
transmission, 107
Dracunculus insignis, 402f
Relapsing fever
R sanguineus, 106
Radfordia ensifera,attack,73
louse-borne, 248
larvae/nymphs/adults,
Rafoxanide, flukicide, 123
tick-borne, 248
characteristics, 54-56
Raillietia,62
Relapsing fever-like Borrelia species, 249f
presence, 326
characteristics, 62
Reoviridae, 241
scutum, posterior, 55f
INDEX
443
Rhipicephalus—cont'd
Ruminants—cont'd
Ruminants—cont'd
vector, inmportance, 245
nematodes, list,340t
 Metastigmata: Argasidae, 344
ticks, infection transmission, 248
protozoa, 340
Metastigmata: Ixodidae, 343, 344
ventral aspects, 55f
active immunity,168
nematodes, 344
 Rhizopoda (amebas), 91, 92
 adult tapeworm infections, treatment,
prostigmata, 344
Rhynchophthirina (suborder), 39
151,152
protozoa, 344
characteristics, 39
adult worm populations, 165, 166
hair, insects, 343
Rice rat, heart (Mesocestoides
alimentary system, 336-342
anoplurans,343
tetrathyridium), 390f
arteries, 342
dipteran adults, 343
Rickettsia
nematodes, 342
dipteran larvae, 343
genera, 244
blood, 342
 mallophagans, 343
R prowazekii
nematode microflariae, 342
siphonaptera, 343
causative agent, 245
protozoa, 342
heart, 342
spread,34
rickettsia, 342
cestode larvae, 342
R rickettsii (Rocky Mountain spotted
brain, 343
hookworms, treatment, 180-182
fever), 245
cestode larvae, 343
host age, 167
infection, severity, 245
insect larva, 343
host-organ listing, annotation,
transmission, 57
nematode,343
336-344
R typhi, murine typhus
protozoa, 343
host resistance, 165
transmission, 41
bronchi, 342
infective larvae, process, 166
species, importance, 245
nematodes,342
infective stage, development/survival,
Rickettsiaceae, 245
cadaver, arrangement, 310, 311
165,166,167
family, 244
cecum, 341
larvae, maturation (delay),168
Rickettsialpox, 245
nematodes, 341
liver, 341,342
Rift Valley fever, 241-243
protozoa, 341
cestode larvae, 341
 Risk Minimization Action Plan
cestode eggs, 332-334
cestodes, 341
(RiskMAP), FDA
identification,332-334
fukes, 123f
formulation, 276
Chorioptes, infestation,77
nematodes, 341
River blindness, 11
Eprinomectin, topical
trematodes,341,342
Roaches (Dictyoptera), 5, 6
application,77
lung parenchyma, 342
Robenidine, 269
coccidia,335
cestode larvae, 342
 synthetic coccidiostat, guanidine
coccidiosis, treatment/control, 98
nematodes, 342
(similarity), 269
colon, 341
lungworm larvae, 332
nematodes, 341
identifcation, 332
rickettsi), 245
protozoa, 341
lymph nodes, 342
transmission, 57
connective tissues, 342,343
pentastomids,342
Rocky Mountain wood tick {Dermacentor
cestode larvae,342,、343
meninges, 343
andersoni), 57,58
insect larvae, 343
cestode larvae, 343
Rodentolepis, 149, 150
mematodes, 343
insect larva, 343
 Rodents, parasite (Myocoptes 
protozoa,343
nematodes, 343
musculinus),70
Cryptosporidium, 335, 336
protozoa,343
 Rodents, parasites (laboratory presence),
Demodex, infestation,77
Monieza sp. (Anoplocephalidae),
364-368
eggs environmental contamination, 165
eggs,147f
 Rotational grazing, infective larvae
Eimeria cysts, 304f
mouth,336-340
control,170
esophagus, 336-340
cestode larvae, 338-340
Rotenone, 255, 256
cestode larvae, 338-340
insect larvae, 340
LDso, 255
insect larvae, 340
nematodes,340
usage, 255
nematodes, 340
protozoa,336
warning, 255,256
protozoa,336
trematodes,340
Roundworms
trematodes, 340
nasal cavity, 342
environmental control, 205-207
eyes, 343
insect larvae, 342
kennel areas, contamination, 205, 206
feces, stages, 332-336
nematodes, 343
paratenic hosts, 206,207
forestomachs,336-340
e8gs,332
soil pollution, 205
cestode larvae, 338-340
 parasites, observation, 311
 Rumen fluke (Cotylophoron), 124
insect larvae, 340
nervous system, 343
larval suspension, examination, 332
nematodes,340
paranasal sinuses, 342
 Paramphistomatidae, 124f
protozoa, 336
insect larvae, 342
representation, 124f
trematodes, 340
parasites, 332-344
 Ruminal contents, agonal inhalation, 378f
hair, 343, 344
eggs, 333f
Ruminants、77
hair, arachnids, 343, 344
host-organ listing, annotation,
abomasum, 340
astigmata,344
336-344
nematodes, 340
mesostigmata, 344
peritoneum/peritoneal cavity, 342
444
I NDEX
Ruminants—cont'd
Ruminants—cont'd
Sarcoptes—cont'd
cestode larvae, 342
nematodes, 342
infestation, treatment, 75、76
nematode, 342
trematode eggs, 334, 335
male/female, 65f
pentastomid nymphs, 342
identification, 334
pretarsi, 64f
phenotype, 167
trematode parasites, eggs, 338f
S. scabiei
premunition,167
Trichuris infection, 225
human infestation, 75、 76
protozoa,336
urogenital system, 343
presence,326
identification, 336
protozoans, 343
T. caviae, similarity, 67
 Psoroptes, infestation、 77
vascular system, 342
treatment, Benzyl benzoate
psoroptic scabies, 77
veins,342
(usage), 262
 reinfection, permanent protection
trematodes,342
Sarcoptic mange
(absence),168
 Ruminant trichostrongylids, temperate
characterization, 373, 374
respiratory system, 342
climate production, 170
initiation, 65
Sarcoptes, infestation,77
Russian spring-summer encephalitis, 243
Selamectin, usage, 75
sarcoptic mange, report, 77
Sarcoptidae, family, 64, 64-67
self-cure, 167,168
s
Sarcoptifom pretarsi, 64
skeletal muscles, 342, 343
Saccharomycopsis gluttulatus, 304f
Schell, S.C., 118, 119
cestode larvae, 342, 343
Safe-Guard, FDA approval, 279, 279, 279
Schistosoma
insect larvae, 343
Salinomycin, 269
S. haematobium, impact, 130
nematodes, 343
ionophore coccidiostat, product
S. indicum, impact, 130
protozoa,343
entry、269
S. japonicum,3
skin, 343,344
Salmon poisoning disease, 247
impact, 130
skin, arachnids,343,344
Salts of piperazine, anthelmintic usage.
infection, 3
astigmata,344
282,283
S. mansoni (Schistosomatidae)、 130f
mesostigmata, 344
 Salts of pyrantel, 281
impact, 130
Metastigmata: Argasidae, 344
Sandfies (Psychodidae)
transmission, 3
Metastigmata: Ixodidae, 343,344
biting, canine prevention, 13
Schistosomatiasis, cause, 130
nematodes, 344
characteristics, 12
Schistosomatidae
prostigmata, 344
control,13
family, 130,131
protozoa,344
disease transmission, 12
identification, 130
skin, insects, 343
eggs,laying、12
Schistosomatids, trematode contrast,
anoplurans, 343
family, 12、13
117, 118
dipteran adults, 343
identification, 12
Schizogony, synchronization, 109, 379
dipteran larvae, 343
Leishmania species, transmission, 12
Schizogony (merogony), 93
 mallophagans, 343
life history, 12
Scolex (scolices)
siphonaptera, 343
pathogens vector, 10t
bladderworm, 140
small intestine, 340, 341
Phlebotomus, 13f
holdfast organ, 131
cestodes, 340
Saprozoonosis, 3
release, 144, 145
nematodes, 340
Sarcocystis,317,329,380
size、137
nematodes, list, 340t
identification, 317,329
Screwworm
protozoa,340,341
Sarcocystis,104,105
American screwworm fy, 22
spinal cord, 343
characteristics, 104
larval development, 5
cestode larvae, 343
diagnosis, 105
maggots, impact, 24,25
insect larva, 343
host relationships, 104
Scrub typhus, causative agent, 245
nematode, 343
list,104t
Sea otters
protozoa,343
S. cruzi, 322
Sarcocystis, 106
strongyle infective larvae,
infection, 104
Toxoplasma, 106
identifcation, 332
sarcocysts, 382f
Secondary hookworm disease, 183
strongylid infections
schizont, 382f
Secondary myiasis, 22
anthelmintics, effciency/
S. muris, sarcocyst,382f
Secondary vectors, 240, 241
nontoxicity, 170
S. neurona,105
Second-generation pyrethroids, 256, 257
control, integration, 170,171
neurologic disease, 105
Phenothrin,256,257
control efforts, 170
shizonts, 105f
Resmethrin, 257
ecology/epidemiology, 165-168
 sporulated sporocysts, 105f
Tetramethrin, 257
resistance, 169
S. tenella sporocytes, infection, 104, 105
Sediment, rinsing, 311
treatment/control, 168-171
treatment, 105
 Sedimentation techniques, 297
Strongyloides papillosus, 195
Sarcocysts, skeletal/cardiac location, 380
Selamectin, 277
Tetrahydropyrimidines,
Sarcophagidae (family), flesh flies, 21, 22
Selective breeding, 170
metabolism, 281
Sarcophagid fly (Neobellieria citellivora),
Sellacotyle mustelae, 322
third-stage infective larvae,
myiasis impact, 24
Semduramicin, 269
identification, 332
Sarcoptes, 64, 65
ionophore coccidiostat, 269
trachea, 342
characteristics, 64, 65
Sentinel, usage, 286
INDEX
445
Setaria, 219
Sheep—cont'd
Spinosad, 262
characteristics, 219
 strongyles, infective third-stage larvae
availability, 262
S. equina
(measurements), 336t
blowfly/lice control, 262
characteristics, 219
subclinical parasitism, 170
structural classification, 262
stomal end,219f
subcutaneous injections, 25
Spiracles (stigmata)、 15
S. labiatopapillosa
tapeworms,148,149
bots, illustration, 26f
characteristics, 219
Teladorsagia, parasite, 159
muscoid spiracles, illustration, 22f
recovery, 219f
Teladorsagia species, 161
respiratory openings, 15
stomal end, 219f
Thysanosoma infection, Albendazole
Spirocerca lupi, 211,212
 Sexually transmitted trypanosomes, 85
(usage), 152
egg,312f
Sheep
treatment, 25
 shell, breakage, 401f
abomasum, Eimeria giliruthi
trichostrongylidosis, inherited
 glandular esophagus, 401f
megaloschizonts, 381f
resistance, 167
nodule, 401f
Albendazole
Sheep itch mite (Psorobia ovis), 73
presence, 319
fetal skeletal abnormalities,
Sheep nasal botflies (Oestrus ovis), 25-27
Spiruroidea superfamily example,
induction, 278
examples,26f
401, 402
suspension, FDA approval, 278
life history, 26
Spirochetosis, avian, 248
warning、278
 pathologic significance, 26
Spirochetosis (Borrelia anserina),
Amprolium, usage, 266
treatment, 26,27
transmission, 50
anemia, measurement, 161,162
Sigmodon hispidus (cotton rat
Spirometra mansonoides
apicomplexan encephalomyelitis, 105
parasite), 61
(Diphyllobothridae)
bile duct, Dicrocoelium
Simian malaria, 109
coracidium, 136f
dendriticum, 386f
transmission, 109
eggs, 136f, 328f
clinical coccidiosis, occurrence, 97
Simple metamorphosis (hemimetabolous
impact,137
coccidiosis, treatment/control, 98
metamorphosis), 6
infection,3
Damalinia ovis, impact, 39
bugs, impact, 46
larva, 137f
Dictyocaulus filaria,164
Simulidae (blackflies), 7f
life history, 138f
Eimeria
Siphonaptera (fleas), 5, 6
plerocercoids, 391f
presence,97
 Skin scrapings, mange diagnosis, 310
spargana, 137
species, correspondence, 339t
procedure, 310
procercoids, 137
unsporulated/sporulated oocysts, 338f
Skrjabinema、197
scolex,135
 Fenbendazole, oral administration, 279
characteristics, 197
specimen, 136f
feece, maggots, 23f
S. caprae,197
Spirurida, 400-403
fy-strike, prevention, 25
egg、341f
characteristics, 208
Haemonchus contortus,resistance
S. ovis, 197
order,208-221
development (prevention)、171
 Small animal coccidia (treatment).
 superfamily, constituents, 400, 401
 Ivermectin, usage, 274, 274
sulfonamides (usage), 269
 Spirurid egg, 304
ked (Melophagus ovinus)
 Small intestine
identification, 304
example,21f
adult hookworms, 179
Tetrameres, 306f
T. melophagium transmission, 85
Cryptosporidium parvum, presence, 99
Spirurid larva, 401f
Lasalocid, usage, 267
nematodes, 340t
appearance, 401
Levamisole
 Small intestine, nematode collection, 311
Spirurid nematodes (Spirura, Oxyspirura,
administration, 281
 Small strongyles, 174
Gongylonema)、47
warning、281
illustration, 174f
Spiruroidea, superfamily, 211,212
liver, Fascioloides magna infection, 341f
 Small strongylids, 174
Sporocysts, 317
lungworm infection, 398
anthelmintic resistance, effectiveness
formation,115
Monensin, usage, 268
(absence), 175, 176
66 huogo.1ods
Moxidectin, approval, 276
Snake mite (Ophionyssus natricis), 62
Sporozoa (Apicomplexa), 92, 111
nasal passages, bots (presence), 25
Snakes, Cryptosporidium serpentis
Sporozoites, 93
 nematode parasites, infective third-
(presence)、99
reduction division product, 378, 379
stage larvae, 334f
Soft ticks (Argasidae, family), 49, 49-51
Sporulated Monocystis, 304f
nostril, larva (deposit/movement), 26
characteristics, 49
Sporulation, 298
parasites, discovery, 311
 Solenopotes, 36
Spring rise, 166
Piperazine, administration, 283
Linognathus, contrast, 35,36
Spurious parasites, 303
Praziquantel, approval (absence), 284
S. capillatus, 36f
Squirrels
psoroptic mange, 68f
little blue louse, 36
Cuterebra infection, 31, 32
report,77
Solitude IGR, 264
ground squirrels, 24
 Pyrantel tartrate, FDA approval
Sparganosis, 137
Stable fly (Stomoxys calcitrans), 18
(absence), 282
Speciation, 2
attack,19
Sarcocystis tenella sporocytes, infection,
 Species, definition, 1
control,19
104,105
Spermophilus columbianus (ground
head,18f
self-cure, 167
squirrels)、24
life history、19
446
I NDEX
Stages (instars), 6
Strongylidae
Strongyloides-cont'd
Stephanoflaria,221
family, 171-173
 demonstration, dog feces
characteristics, 221
identification,171,172
culture,298
S. assamensis, 221
importance, 172
life stages, 194f 
S. stilesi, 221
 Strongylida (strongylids), 394-398
parasitic female, 192f
 Stephanuridae
biotic potential, 166
presence,321、324
anthelmintic medication, 178
bursate nematodes, 152, 153
zoonotic parasite, 193
family、 178
copulatory bursa, 156, 157
S. westeri, 194
levamisole/Fenbendazole, usage, 178
eggs,counts,200
Stephanurinae
Obeliscoides cuniculi, 306f
eggs, number (average), 201f
anthelmintic medication, 178
Oesophagostomum sp.. egg, 306f
illustration, 394f
subfamily, 178
Syngamus sp., 306f
third-stage infective larvae, 315f
Stephanurus dentatus, 178f
family, 1, 2
transmammary transmission, 193
characteristics, 178
generation time,166
treatment,195
larvae, migration, 178
 generic identifcation, 298
Strongyloid life history, 165f
 levamisole/Fenbendazole, usage, 178
host resistance, 167, 168
Strongylosis, 163
Sternostoma,63
infections
Strongylus
characteristics, 63
development, 200, 201
S.edentatus
mite (presence), avian impact, 63f
ecology/epidemiology, 165-168
buccal capsule, 396f
S. tracheacolum,63
treatment/control, 168-171
caudal end, 395f
Stichocytes, 222f, 403,404
morphology, 155-157
cross-section, 395f
Stichosome esophagus, 403, 404
nematode, life history, 222f
eggs, characteristics, 361
Sticktight flea (Echidnophaga
order, 144, 145
horse parasite, 172
gallinacea),45
reproductive capacity, 166
immature male, 395f
presence,244
stoma,155、156
infective third-stage larvae, 346f
Stigmata, 51
superfamilies, 155
life history, 173
Stilesia infections,treatment
uterus, horns, 157
third-stage larvae, 173
difficulty,152
Strongylinae
S.equinus, 155f
Stoma, Strongylida, 155, 156
identifcation, 171、172
horse parasite, 172
Stomoxys, 18,19
importance、172
immature adult worm, 396f
control,19
subfamily、 171-173
life history, 173
hosts, horsefly/deerfly dependence, 15
members, 349f
third-stage larvae, 173
identification,18
Strongyloidea, 394, 395
S. vulgaris
injury/disease transmission, 19
buccal cavity, 171
cross-section, 392f
life history, 19
illustration, 155f
fourth stage, illustration, 359f
palpi, 18
life history, 171
fourth-stage larvae, migration,
pathogens, vector, 17f
1oo
172,173
presence, grazing cattle impact, 19
ovijectors, representative, 153f
horse parasite, 172
S. calcitrans (stable fly)、18
spicules, 157
infective third-stage larvae, 346f
Straelensia cynotis, 76f
superfamily、1、2、155、171-174
intestinal lumen migration, 173
Straelensiosis, canine occurrence, 74
Strongyloides, 192-195
larvae, recovery, 200
Streptomyces
canine infection, 193
life history、 172、173
S. albus, Salinomycin product, 269
characteristics, 192
third-stage larvae, ingestion, 172
S. aureofaciens, Narasin product, 268
equine infection, 194
verminous arteritis/aneurysm,
S. cinnamonensis, Monensin
heterogonic offspring、 193
353f
product,268
homogonic ofspring, 193
taxa, hierarchy, 1、 2
Strigeidae, eggs, 308f
hyperinfection, 193
 Subcutaneous myiasis (migrating
Striped blister beetles (Epicauta sp.), 48f
identification, 192,193
lumps),28
Strobila, 131
importance,193
Subtegumental zone, 387, 388
Strobilocerci Taenia taeniaeformis, 142f
infection, development, 200, 201
Sulfa
Strobilocercus, 140,143, 388-391
life history, 193
products, availability, 269, 270
Strongid C, feeding (continuation),
parthenogenetic parasitic female,
usage, history, 269
281,282
location, 192,193
 Sulfadiazine, Pyrimethamine
Strongyles
parthenogenetic species, 393, 394
(combination), 270
control, methods,302
porcine infection, 195
Sulfadiazine, Trimethoprim
哆gs, 157,158, 305-307
ruminant infection, 195
(combination), 270
diagnosis, dilemma, 307
S.papillosus
manufacturer recommendation, 270
identification, 305-307
anterior end, 191f
potentiated sulfa, 270
illustration, 333f, 361f
egg,306f, 333f
Sulfadimethoxine, 270
 number, average, 201f
ruminant infection, 195
absorption, 270
larvae, percentage, 201f
S. ransomi, 195
ormetoprim,addition,270
larval stages, 398
S. stercoralis, 184
tablets, designation, 270
INDEX
447
 Sulfamethazine, 271
Swine—cont'd
Swine-cont'd
sodium salt, water administration, 271
hair, 364
Trichuris suis infections, 225
 Sulfamethoxazole, Trimethoprim
arachnids, 364
dichlorvos (Atgard)
(combination), 271
insects, 364
susceptibility, 225
availability, 271
host-organ list, annotation, 362-364
urine, stages, 361
 Sulfaquinoxaline, 271
intestinal protozoa, 360
urogenital systen, 364
approval, 271
Ivermectin
nematodes, 364
Sulfate, usage、282,283
availability, 274、274
Symbionts, 2
Sulfonamides,269-271
usage, 274
Symbiosis, process, 2
idiosyncratic reactions, 269
kidney worm {Stephanurus
Symbiotic ciliates, 92
large animal coccidiosis treatment, 269
dentatus),178
Synathic, administration, 280
 PABA structural analogues, 269
Levamisole
Synergists, 265
small animal coccidia treatment, 269
administration, 281
 N-octyl bicycloheptene
weak acids, absorption, 269
warning、281
dicarboximide, 265
Sulmet, usage, 271
liver, 362-364
Piperonyl butoxide, 265
 Summer bleeding (paraflariosis), 220
cestode larvae, 364
toxicity, consideration, 265
nodules, 347
nematode larvae, 362
Synergized pyrethins, application, 40
 Summer ostertagiosis, 160, 161
trematodes, 364
Synerkyl, 256
Summer sores, 212, 213
louse infestation, treatment, 41
Syngamidae
Sun, healing rays, 23, 24
 lung parenchyma, 364
characteristics, 179
Suppurative lymphangitis, 378f
cestode larva, 364
family, 179
Surgical maggots
nematode larva, 364
Syngamus sp.. egg, 306f
Phaenicia sericata, 22,23
trematode,364
Syphacia obvelata,254
Phormia regina, 22, 23
mite infestation, 77
male, 366f
Surra (Trypanosoma evansi)、 14,15
mouth, 362
Syringophilidae, family, 73
Sus scrofa, Haematopinus suis
nematodes,362
characteristics, 73
(impact), 34
neonatal coccidiosis, treatment, 99
 Systemic toxoplasma infection,
Sustain IIl, usage, 271
Oesophagostomum species, effect, 177
Clindamycin treatment, 266
Swamp cancer, 212, 213
pancreas, 362-364
Swimmer's itch, 130
cestode larvae, 364
→
Swine
nematode larvae, 362
Tabanidae (family), deerflies, 13-15
 alimentary system, 362-364
trematodes, 364
Tabanus fuscicostatus,contamination,
Amitraz, usage, 261
parasites, 360-364
14,15
Ascaris suum infection, 197, 198
eggs,361f
T'achyzoite, usage, 381-383
bronchi/bronchioles, 364
host-organ list, annotation, 362-364
Taenia, 139-143
nematodes, 364
 peritoneal cavity, 362-364
identification,139,140
cecum, 362
cestode larvae, 364
life history, 139-143
nematodes,362
nematode larvae, 362
segment,139f
protozoans,362
trematodes, 364
sp., holdfast/neck, 139f
colon, 362
Phosmet, usage, 260
T. asiatica, human being taenid
nematodes,362
 Piperazine, administration, 283
tapeworm,143
protozoans,362
Pyrantel tartrate
T. crassiceps
connective tissues, 364
usage, 282
cysticerci, 142f
cestode larvae, 364
warning、282
cysticerci, appearance, 142f
nematode larva, 364
respiratory system, 364
cysticerci, gross lesion, 390f
protozoa, 364
skeletal muscles, 364
parasite,138
trematode larvae, 364
cestode larvae, 364
T. hydatigena, 139,140
Coumaphos, usage, 260
nematode larva, 364
canine taenid tapeworm, 140, 141
Cryptosporidium suis, presence, 99
protozoa,364
cysticercus, 142f
Cystoisospora infection, 97
trematode larvae, 364
presence, 321
Dichlorvos
skin,364
T. multiceps, 139,140
formulation, 283
arachnids, 364
coenurus, 390f
warning,283
insects, 364
parasite,138
Doramectin, usage, 272
small intestine, 362
presence, 321
Eimeria infection, 97
acanthocephala, 362
T. ovis,139、140
esophagus, 362
nematodes,362
canine taeniid tapeworm, 142
nematodes, 362
protozoa, 362
presence, 321
feces
stomach, 362
T.pisiformis,139、140
eggs, discovery, 360, 361
nematodes,362
anterior ends, 321f
stages, 360, 361
Trichinae, examination, 361,362
anterior ends, attachment sites,
 Fenbendazole, feed additive
xquash preparation, 361
321f
approval,279
tissue digestion, 361, 362
canine taenid tapeworm, 142
448
I NDEX
Taenia—cont'd
Ternidens deminutus, 155f
Ticks (Metastigmata, suborder), 49-60
cysticerci, 365f
pathogenicity,177、178
bloodsucking parasites, 49
life history, 141f
Terns, Cryptocotyle lingua (parasite)、 125
infestation,treatment/control, 59,60
presence, 321
Tetrachlorvinphos, 259
paralysis, 50
T. saginata, human being taeniid
application,40
species, involvement, 59
tapeworm,143
LDso, 259
 populations, infection maintenance,
T. serialis, 139, 140
lice control, 41
50,51
coenurus,142f
Tetrahydropyrimidines, 281, 282
toxicosis, 59
presence, 321
inclusion, 281
veterinarian examination,52、53
taenid tapeworm, 143
Morantel tartrate, 282
Tick-transmitted viruses, 243
T. solium, 3,140
Pyrantel, 281, 282
characteristics, 243
armed taenid tapeworm, 143
T'issue secretions, parasites (microscopic
cysticercus, 389f
Tetramethrin, 257
identification),372
T. taeniaformis (Taenidae)
LDso, 257
Togaviridae, 241
gg、140f,328f
Tetramisole, discovery, 280
Tongue, dissection, 311
micrograph, 139f
Tetrathyridia (tetrathyridium), 151, 391
Tongue worms (Pentastomida), 5
strobilocercus, 388f
observation,311
Toxascaris, 201
strobilocercus, calcareous
Tetratrichomonas, nonpathogenic species
illustration, 320f
corpuscles, 388f
(occurence), 88, 89
T. leonina, 1
strobilocercus, encysting、 389f
Texas fever, 107
 characteristics, 201
strobilocercus, subtegumental/
elimination,107
eggs,312f
 parenchymal muscle layers,
Theiler, Arnold, 59
egs, development, 305f
388f
Theileria, 107,108
egs, infective stage
Taenidae, family, 139-147
T. parva, 107,108
development, 201
Taenid larvae, identification, 391
Thelazia
illustration, 327f
Taenid second-stage larvae, types, 140
sp, retrieval、 211f
life histories, alternatives, 202f
Taenid segment, 315f
T. callipaeda, 210,211
presence,319-321,323
dehydration, 315f
T. gulosa,210
tail,320f
Taenid tapeworm
T. lacrymalis, 210
Toxocara, 201-205
eggs, distinction,295,296
T. skrjabini, 210
characteristics, 201,202
second larval stage, 140
Thelazia californiensis
larva, 326f
Tapeworm (Dipylidium caninum),
canine eye worm, 17
T. canis, 1,202-205
cyclodevelopmental vector, 39
dog/sheep/mammal infection, 210
arrested larvae, clearance treatment,
Tapeworms
presence,326
203-205
eggs, 313, 314
Thelaziidae
canine infection, 197、198,203
 Anoplocephalidae, 308f
characteristics, 210
commonness,271
Cyclophyllidean, 308f
Doramectin, usage, 211
 Drontal Plus, usage, 203
illustration, 316f
family, 210, 211
eggs,312f
hosts, requirement, 131
life history,210,211
eggs, comparison,208
infections
treatment,211
eggs prevalence, 207
Moxidectin/Praziquantel, usage
Thelazoidea, superfamily, 210, 211
eggs, surface, 306f
(approval), 287
Theriotithasonosis, 4
Fenbendazole/Ivermectin, usage, 203
Praziquantel, usage, 284
Thiabendazole, 280
importance,202
information, importance, 132-134t
 broad-spectrum anthelmintic, 280
infection, 4
larvae,388
discovery, 277、280
 Ivermectin, administration,
observation, 388-391
LDso. 280
204, 205
 Praziquantel/epsiprantel, usage, 151
Thipicephalus sanguineus, 51、52
larva, 400f
 Pseudophyllidean tapeworms, 135-137
Third-generation pyrethroids, 257
lesions, 325f
segment,313
Fenvalerate, 257
life history, 202, 203
impact, 151
Permethrin, 257
life history, alternatives, 204f
Tarsonemidae, family, 74、75
Thoracic viscera, 311
medication, 203
Task Capsules (dichlorvos), 271
Thorny-headed worms
 Milbemycin oxime, usage, 203
Taxonomic classification, conventions, 1, 2
(acanthocephala), 227
nematode larvae, migration, 202
TBE (tick-borne encephalitis)、 243
Three-host ticks, 51, 52
 prenatal infections, 202
Technique of Knott, modified, 318
disease, transmission, 52
presence,319-321,323、324,325
Teladorsagia, 159-161
Thysanosoma
somatic migration, 202,203
identification, 159
infection, Albendazole (usage), 152
transplacental transmission, 203
importance, 161
T. actinoides (fringed tapeworm),
 transplacental transmission,
life history, 160, 161
147、148
impact, 203
parasites, 159
Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE), 243
treatment, 203
T. circumcincta, bursa/spicules, 156f
Tick-borne relapsing fever, 248, 248
worms, 321f
Telamon, 152, 153
Ticks in Veterinary Importance,53
worms, presence, 202
INDEX
449
P,luo—x
Trematodes—cont'd
Trichomonads, 87-89
T. canis-free dogs, term (implication),
identifcation, 307,308, 316,
Tnichomonads, characteristics, 87
203,204
317,328
Trichomonas
T. cati, 205
illustration, 317f
characteristics, 318
characteristics, 205
Stnigeidae, 308f
species,323
feline infection, 197,198
families, representation, 119-131
T. canistomae,319
illustration, 327f
family/genus, determination,385
T. felistomae,329
infection, 3, 4
identification, 118,119
T. gallinae, necrotic ulcerations, 88, 89
intestinal location, 329f
information, 121,122t
T. vaginalis, impact, 88, 89
life history, 205
larval, 386, 387
Trichoptera (caddisflies), 5, 6
life history, alternative, 206f
life history, water involvement, 127
Trichosomoides, 226
Praziquantel (Drontal), usage, 205
mesocercariae, 386, 387
characteristics, 226
stomal end, 205f
illustration, 387f
T. crassicauda, 226
treatment,205
metacercariae,386,387
eggs,227f
T. vitulorum, cattle infection, 197,198
 parasites, life history variations, 119f
illustration, 405f
tail, illustration, 320f
schistosomatids, contrast, 117、 118
uterus, 227f
ventriculus, illustration, 320f
suckers, 385, 386
Tnichostrongyloidea, 394
Toxoplasma, 101,102,328, 329,381-383
T'rench fever, 248, 249
bursa/spicules, 156f, 158f
characteristics, 381-383
T'riatomin bugs, T. cruzi transmission,
genera,162f
identification, 328,329
85,86
ovijectors representative, 153f
importance,102
Trichinae, examination, 361,362
parasite, 160f
life history, 101,102
squash preparation, 361
stoma, 160f
sporulated oocysts, rupture, 101, 102
tissue digestion, 361,362
en face view, 156f
treatment,102
Trichina larvae, human ingestion, 223
superfamily, 155, 158-165
Toxoplasma gondi
Trichinella,222-224
T'richostrongyloid nematodes, 158
bradyzoites, 383f
characteristics, 404
Trichostrongylus, 158, 159
cell destruction, 102
control, 224
identification, 158
cyst, mouse location, 101f
identification, 222
importance, 158,159
  ss pdoia
importance, 223
life history, 158
Hammondia, morphological
life history,222,223
organisms, size,158, 159
similarity,381
T. spiralis
species, survival, 158
infection,4
adult, 404f
T. axei
life history, 101f
cyst,362f
bursa/spicules, 158f
occurrence,319
first-stage larvae, 222
infection, 3、 4
oocysts, 101f
frst-stage larvae, illustration, 404f
T. circumcincta, chemical attack
shedding, 102
infection, diagnosis, 223
(continuation), 169
tachyzoites, 101f
infection, intestinal/adult phase
T. colubriformis, chemical attack, 169
Toxoplasmosis, contraction, 102
(variation),222, 223
Trichuris, 224,225
Trachea, dissection, 311
larvae,223f
 body, characteristics, 404
Transmammary transmission, 182, 193
male/female, 222f
Transmission rate, pathogens, 241
prelarva, 223f
identification, 307
Transovarially passage, 240
presence, 222、321、324
passage, 224
Transovarial transmission, 52
source,223
identification, 224
 Transplacental transmission, 203
treatment,223
inmportance,224,225
Transstadially maintenance, 240
Tnichinelloid, 306f
life history, 224
Trematoda, class, 115-131
egg、307
sp.,illustration, 224f
inclusion, 115
capillarid, 307f
species,152、153
orders, 115
identifcation, 307
spp.、327f
Trematode acquisition
Tnichinelloidea, 403-405
T.discolor,224f
amphibla/vertebrate paratenic hosts,
bacillary band,403, 404
egg,333f
ingestion, 127-130
characteristics, 222
T. giraffae
fish/crayfish/crabs, ingestion, 124-126
constituents, 403,404
stichosome esophagus, 222f
 intermediate hosts, ingestion, 124-126
superfamily, 222-227
T. ovis,egg、 333f
 metacercariae ingestion, 119-124
T'richodectes,39
T. suis
skin penetration, 130, 131
characteristics, 39
egg.361f
Trematodes, 384-387
Trichodectes canis, 39
infections, 225
anatomic structures, 118, 119
Canis familiaris impact, 34
T. vulpis
appearance, 384
fipronil/imidacloprid, treatment, 39
illustration, 404f, 404f
characteristics, 384, 385
Mallophaga: Ischnocera, 40f
infection, treatment, 225
digenean trematode host
presence, 326
posterior ends, 322f
discrimination, 117
 Trichomitus, nonpathogenic species
presence,322,323
eggs, 307、308,316,317
(occurrence), 88, 89
T. vulpis, eggs, 208f
450
I NDEX
P.luosruosoupda
Unilocular hydatid, 388-391
comparison,208
pseudocyst appearance,
cysts, types,140
fecal preparation, 224f
similarity、376
Unilocular hydatid disease, 144, 145
illustration, 312f
trypomastigote stage, 377
Univoltine species (blackfies), 10
survival,225
T. equiperdum, uniqueness, 85
Urinary capillariasis, 226
treatment/control,225
T. evansi (Surra)、 14, 15
U.S. Federal Environmental Pesticide
Triclabendazole, flukicide, 123
T. gambiense, African sleeping sickness
Control Act (FEPCA) of
Tri-Heart Plus, availability, 286
etiologic agent, 84
1972, 255
Trimenopon hispidum, guinea pig
T.melophagium
parasite, 39
harmlessness, 85
Trimethoprim, 269
M. ovinus host, 21
Valbazen, FDA approval, 278
Sulfadiazine, combination, 270
T. rhodesiense, African sleeping
Vampirolepis, 149,150
 manufacturer recommendation, 270
sickness etiologic agent, 84
Vampirolepis nana, cyclophyllidean mouse
 Sulfamethoxazole, combination, 271
T.theileri
parasite, 131
availability, 271
harmlessnesess, 85
Varroa,54
Triodontophorus,173、174
multiplication, requirement, 14, 15
characteristics, 63, 64
infective third-stage larvae, 346f
T. vivax, importance, 84, 85
Varroa destructor (honeybee parasite),
 species, migration limitations, 173、174
T'rypanosomes
63、64
Tritrichomonas
characteristics, 84
Varroa jacobsoni, 63, 64
T. foetus, 88f
nonpathogenic characteristic, 85
Varroidae, family, 63, 64
bovine uterus, endometritis/
sexual transmission, 85
Vector-associated bacterial infections, 249
exudate,88f
significance, tsetse-transmitted
Vector-borne Bartonella species,
lbcation, 87
trypanosomes, 84
infections, 248, 249
trophozoites, disappearance, 87, 88
transmission, dipteran vectors (usage),
Vector-borne disease, term
 Tritrichomonas, nonpathogenic species
84. 85
(reference), 240
(occurrence), 88, 89
T'rypomastigotes, demonstration
Vector-borne helminth diseases, 250t
Trixacarus caviae, 67
(diffculty)、86
Vector-borne helminths, 250, 251
characteristics, 67
Tsetse flies (Glossina species), 19, 20
Vector-borne protozoa, 250, 251
Ivermectin treatment, 78
biologic vector, role, 20
Vector-borne protozoal diseases, 250t
Sarcoptes scabiei, similarity, 67
Cyclorrhapha (group), 6
Vector-borne rickettsial diseases, 244t
Troglotrematidae
disease transmission, 20
Vectors, 2, 3
family, 124,125
eradications,20
associations, development, 240,241
identification, 124
head,20f
biologic、7
life histories, 124, 125
identification, 19
definition,9,10
Praziquantel, impact, 125
larval development, 19, 20
mechanical, 2, 3
treatment,125
life history, 19, 20
mosquitoes, 5
Trombiculidae, family, 74
localization, 19
Vector transmission, rickettsial pathogens,
characteristics, 74
release campaign program, 20
244-247
Trombiculid larvae (chiggers), feeding, 374
vectors, trypanosomes, 20
Vermiform embryo stage, 153
Trophozoites
T'setse-transmitted trypanosomes,
Vertebrates
demonstration, 90
significance, 84
amplifying host, 240
Giardia, 89
T'ularemia (deerfly fever), 14, 15, 249
paratenic hosts, ingestion, 127-130
presence, 378,379
clinical disease, presence, 249
R rickettsi, rodent reservoir, 245
Tropical fowl mite (Ornithonyssus
Tunga, 45
reservoir host, 240
bursa), 61
T. penetrans (jiggers),45
Viral-borne diseases, 242t
Tropical horse tick {Dermacentor
specimens,46f
Viral pathogens, arthropod transmission,
nitens)、58
Turbellaria (class), 115
241-244
Trypanosoma, 84-87
Turkeys
Viruses, mechanical transmission,
T. brucei
Amprolium, usage, 266
243,244
Giemsa-stained trypomastigote, 85f
Piperazine, administration,283
Visceral larva migrans, 207
multiplication, 84
Turtles, Milbemycin oxime (usage), 275
nonhuman hosts, 207,208
nagana disease, 84
Two-host ticks, 51, 52
Visceral leishmaniasis
T. cervi, identification, 85
disease, transmission, 52
canine appearance, 87
T. congolense, nagana disease, 84
Type II ostertagiosis, 160, 161
cause,250,251
T. cruzi, 85f
Type I ostertagiosis, 160, 161
Vole, Taenia taeniaformis
amastigotes,illustration, 377f
strobilocercus, 388f
amastigotes, stage, 377
U
Vulpes vulpes (red fox), sarcoptic mange.
amastigotes (multiplication), binary
Uncinaria stenocephala, 184
373,374
fission (usage), 86
buccal/esophageal regions,
Chagas' disease etiologic agent,
 dorsoventral/lateral
W
85,86
aspects, 180f
Walbachia americana, 75f
presence,324,324
egg,312f
Walchia americana, 375f
INDEX
451
Wapiti (Cervus canadensis)、 L. cervi
Wolbachia species, 247
Yearlings, treatment (profitability), 170
host, 21
endosymbionts, reports, 247
Yersinia pestis
Water buffalo (Bubalus bubalus),
Woodchuck, gross lesion (Taenia
impact, 249,250
Haematopinus tuberculatus
crassiceps cysticerci), 390f
plague transmission, 41
(inpact), 34、35
Wool strike, 23
Young cattle, treatment, 170
Water snake (Natrix), natural
fly (Lucilia cuprina), life history, 24f
intermediate host, 137
maggots, 23f
Z
Watson, Edward,85
treatment,25
Zimectrin Gold, paste product, 285
Weight gains, horn flies (impact), 19
Worms
Zinc sulfate, usage, 296
Werneckiella equi, impact, 39
count, interpretation, 311,312
 Zoo animals, Fenbendazole
West Nile virus, mosquito infection, 241
miscellany, 227-230
 granules, administration (FDA
Whipworms, 404
number, estimation, 311
approval)、279
White-tailed deer
Wuchereia bancrofti, 9, 10
safety trials, 279
Fascioloides magna, liver parasite,
human lymphatic flariasis, 9, 10
wildlife/game animals usage, FDA
119, 120
impact, 213
approval, 279
Odocoileus virginianus, L. cervi host, 21
Zooanthroponosis, 3
Wild animals (losses), myiasis
Zoomastigina, 84-92
(impact), 24
Xenopsylla (Siphonaptera), 42f, 46
Zoonosis,3
Winter coccidiosis, calf impact, 96
characteristics, 46
Zootherionosis, 3
Winter ostertagiosis, 160, 161
disease transmission, 46
Zootithasonosis, 3, 4
Winter tick (Dermacentor albipictus), 58
Zygote, appearance, 379
Wohlfahrtia larvae, differentiation,
Y
22
Yearling ponies, oocysts (oral
Wolbachia, heartwom hosts, 217, 218
administration)、97
This page intentionally left blank
Derivations of Some Scientific Names and Terms--cont'd
HELMINTH
worm
Ancylostoma tubaeforme
jadumi ugiens pue qinou paain
shape
PLATYHELMINTHES
flat worms
Angiostrongylus
vessel strongyle
Aonchotheca
sheath diminished in bulk
TREMATODA
like holes
Ascaris
worm in the intestine
Alaria
winged
Baylisascaris
 Baylis—famous parasitologist
Cercaria
tail
Bunostomum
mound mouth
Clonorchis
confused testicle
Coronocyclus
cyclic crown
Dicrocoelium
double-oared cavity
Craterostomum
mixing bowl mouth
Fasciola
small band
Crenosoma
notched body
Fascioloides
fasciola-like
Cyathostoma
cup-shaped mouth
Gastrodiscoides
stomach like a disk
Cyathostomum
ladle mouth
Heterophyes
different form
Dictyocaulus
latticework penis
Mesocercaria
time period between tail and
Dioctophyma
distended growth
 no tail
Dipetalonema reconditum
 two-petaled thread and hidden
Metacercaria
time period after the tail
Dirofilaria immitis
dread thread and inexorable 
Metorchis
posterior testis
Dracunculus
small dragon
Miracidium
small child
Filaroides
flarid-like
Nanophyetus
dwarf form
Globocephalus
ball head
Opisthorchis
poster genitalia
Gnathostoma
jaw mouth
Paragonimus
along side gonads
Gongylonema
 nematode with bumps
Paramphistomum
associated with mouths at
Habronema
delicate thread
 both ends
Haemonchus
blood spear
Platynosomum
flat disease causing
Hyostrongylus
hog strongyle
Redia
Redi—father of parasitology
Mammomonogamus
married to one spouse in mammals
Schistosoma
split body
Nematodirus
terrible nematode
sporocyst
seed cyst
Oesophagostomum
nou sneudos
Ollulanus
small jar anus
CESTODA
beltlike
Onchocerca
 barbed tail
Oncosphere
hairy ball
Physaloptera
bladder wing
 Strobilus or Strobila
anything twisted up
Setaria
bristles
Pseudophyllidean
false leaves
Skrjabinema
Skrjabin—famous parasitologist
Coracidium
little hooked engine of war
Spicule
small shaft
Diphyllobothrium
two-leaf trench
Spirocerca
coiled tail
Plerocercoid
in the shape of a complete tail
Stephanurus
encircling the urinary system
Procercoid
the shape before the tail
Streptopharagus
whirled chasm
swathing band
Strongyloides
roundlike
Spirometra
spiral uterus
Strongylus vulgaris
 round and common
Cyclophyllidean
round leaves
Syngamus
married together
Anoplocephala
unarmed head
Toxascaris
arrow ascaris
Coenurus
shared tail
arrowhead
Cysticercoid
shape of a tail with a cyst
Trichinella
small hairs
Cysticercus
tail with a cyst
Trichostrongylus
hair round
Dipylidium
two entrances
Trichuris
thread tail (original description
Echinococcus
spined kernel
thought to be skinny part the tail
Hydatid
pertaining to water
end)
Mesocestoides
in-between cestode
Triodontophorus
carrying three teeth
Strobilocercus
twisted tail
Uncinaria stenocephala
 hooked nose and narrow head
Taenia pisiformis
intestinal worm (in Latin) and
 pea-shaped appearance of the
ACANTHOCEPHALA
thorny head
proglottids
Macracanthorhynchus
giant thorny trunk
Taenia taeniaeformis
intestinal worm (in Latin) and
Neoechinorhynchus
new spiny nose
 tapeworm form of the adult
Prosthenorchis
 anterior strong testis
Tetrathyridium
four oblong shields
Thysanosoma
fringed body
NEMATODA
thread form
Aelurostrongylus
cat strongyle