Handbookof
Radiographic
Positioning
forVeterinary
Technicians
MargiSirois
Elaine Anthony
DanielleMauragis
Handbook of
Radiographic
Positioning
for Veterinary
Technicians
Margi Sirois
Elaine Anthony
Danielle Mauragis
This page intentionally left blank
Handbook of
Radiographic
Positioning
forVeterinary
Technicians
Margi Sirois, EdD, MS, RVT
 Program Director of Veterinary
Technology
 Penn Foster College
Scottsdale, AZ
Elaine Anthony, MA, CVT
St. Petersburg College
St. Petersburg, FL
Danielle Mauragis, CVT
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL
DELMAR
CENGAGE Learning
DELMAR
CENGAGELearning
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for
@ 2010 Delmar Cengage Learning
Veterinary Technicians
 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein
Margi Sirois, Danielle Mauragis, and Elaine
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means
Anthony
 graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying.
record ing, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks,
Vice President, Career and Professional
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under Section
Editorial: Dave Garza
107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written
Director of Learning Solutions: Matthew Kane
permission of the publisher.
Acquisitions Editor: Benjamin Penner
 Managing Editor: Marah Bellegarde
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
Senior Product Manager: Darcy M. Scelsi
Editorial Assistant: Scott Royael
For permission to use material from this text or product,
Vice President, Career and Professional
submit al requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Marketing: Jennifer McAvey
 Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
 Marketing Manager: Erin Brennan
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Marketing Coordinator: John Sheehan
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009905813
 Production Director: Carolyn Miller
Production Manager: Andrew Crouth
ISBN-13: 978-1-4354-2603-0
ISBN-10: 1-4354-2603-7
Content Project Manager: Allyson Bozeth
Art Director: Dave Arsenault
Delmar
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Leaming is a leading provider of customized leaming solutions with
of ce locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom,
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local of ce at: international.
cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Delmar, visit www.cengage.com/delmar
paaaid ino ie jo alois aaoo jeol inor ie snpoid ino jo fue aseupind
online store
www.ichapters.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein
formation contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly disclaims,
any obligation to obtain and include information other than that provided to it 
 by the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all
safety precautions that might be indicated by the activities described herein and 
to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions contained herein,
the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. The
publisher makes no representations or warranties of any kind, including but not 
limited to, the warranties of ftness for particular purpose or merchantability,
herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with respect to such material.
The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary
damages resulting, in whole or part, from the readers' use of, or reliance upon,
this material.
Printed in the United States of America
123 4567121110 0908
Table of Contents
PREFACE
vili
CHAPTERI
 General Principles of Small Animal Radiographic Positioning
 Patient Preparation
2
Directional Terminalogy
2
Positioning Aids
4
 Procedures for Radiographic Positioning
CHAPTER 2
Thoracic Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Thorax
10
VD Projection of the Thorax
12
DV Projection of the Thorax
14
Standing Lateral Projection of the Thorax
16
CHAPTER 3
 Abdominal Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Abdomen
20
VD Projection of the Abdomen
22
CHAPTER4
 Pelvic Radiographs
VD-Extended Hip Projection
26
VD Frog Leg Projection
28
Lateral Projection of the Pelvis
30
CHAPTER5
Forelimb Radiographs
CdCr Projection of the Shoulder
34
Lateral Projection of the Shoulder
36
CdCr Projection of the Scapula
38
Lateral Projection of the Scapula
40
 CdCr Projection of the Humerus
42
Lateral Projection of the Humerus 
44
CrCd Projection of the Elbow
46
Lateral Projection of the Elbow
48
 Hexed Lateral Projection of the Elbow
50
CrCd Projection of the Radius and Ulna
52
Lateral Projection of the Radius and Ulna.
54
Dorsopalmar Prajection of the Carpus 
56
Lateral Projection of the Carpus
58
Hexed Lateral Projection of the Carpus
60
 Extended Lateral Projection of the Carpus
62
Lateral and Medial Oblique Projections of the Carpus
64
Dorsopalmar Projection of the Metacarpals 
66
Lateral Projection of the Meta.carpals 
68
Dorsopalmar Projection of the Digits
70
Lateral Projection of the Digits
72
CHAPTER6
 Hindlimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Femur
76
Craniocaudal Projection of the Femur
78
vi
Table of Contents
Caudocranial Projection of the Stifle
80
Lateral Projection of the Stifle
82
Caudocranial Projection of the Tibia and Fibula
84
Lateral Projection of the Tibia
86
Dorsoplantar Prajection of the Tarsus
88
Lateral Projection of the Tarsus
90
Hexed Lateral Projection of the Tarsus
92
 Extended Lateral Projection of the Tarsus 
94
Dorsolateral/Plantaromedial Oblique Projection of the Tarsus
96
 Dorsomedial/Plantarolateral Oblique Projection of the Tarsus
86
Dorsoplantar Projection of the Metatarsus
100
Lateral Projection of the Metatarsus
102
Dorsopalmar Prajection of the Digits
104
Lateral Projection of the Digits
106
CHAPTER 7
Skull Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Skull
110
DV Prajection of the Skull 
112
VD Projection of the Skull
14
Rostrocaudal Sinuses Closed Mouth Projection
116
Rostrocaudal Foramen Magnum Projection
118
VD Rostrocaudal Nasal Open Mouth Projection
1 20
 Rostrocaudal Tympanic Bullae Open Mouth Projection
122
DV Tympanic Bullae Projection 
126
Lateral Oblique Tympanic Bullae Prajection
128
Lateral Oblique Temporomandibular Joint Prajection
130
DV Temporomandibular Joint Projection
132
CHAPTER 8
Dental Radiographs
Canine Upper Incisor Arcade
137
Canine Upper Canine Tooth
138
Canine Upper Premolars 
139
Canine Upper Fourth Premolars and Molars 
140
 Canine Lower Incisor Arcade
141
 Canine Lower Canine Tooth and Lower Premolar Arcade
142
 Canine Lower Premolar Arcade
143
Canine Lower Molars
144
Feline Upper Incisor Arcade
145
Feline Upper Canine Tooth 
146
Feline Upper Premolars and Molar
147
Feline Lower Incisor Arcade
148
 Feline Lower Canine Tooth
149
 Feline Lower Premolars and Molar Arcade
1 50
CHAPTER 9
 Spinal Radiographs
VD Cervical Spine Projection 
152
Lateral Cervical Spine Projection
1 54
Lateral Cervical Spine Extended Projection 
156
Lateral Cervical Spine Flexed Projection
158
VD Thoracic Spine Projection
160
Lateral Thoracic Spine Projection
162
VD Thoracolumbar Spine Projection
164
Lateral Thoracolumbar Spine Projection
166
VD Lumbar Spine Projection
168
Lateral Lumbar Spine Projection
170
VD Lumbosacral Spine Projection
172
Lateral Lumbosacral Spine Projection
174
VD Coccygeal (Caudal) Spine Prajection
176
Lateral Coccygeal (Caudal) Spine Projection
178
Table of Contents
vii
CHAPTER I0 Radiography ofAvian and Exotic Animals
General Principles of Restraint
182
Lateral View of the Avian Patient
184
Ventrodorsal View of the Avian Patient
186
Dorsoventral View of the Lizard 
188
Lateral View of the Lizard
190
Lateral View of the Lizard with the Horizontal Beam
192
Dorsoventral View of the Turtle
194
Lateral View of the Turtle with the Horizontal Beam 
196
Lateral View of the Rabbit Abdomen
198
Ventrodorsal View of the Rabbit Abdomen
200
Lateral View of the Rabbit Thorax 
202
Ventrodorsal View of the Rabbit Thorax
204
Lateral View of the Rabbit Skull
206
Dorsoventral View of the Rabbit Skull 
208
Lateral Oblique View of the Rabbit Skull 
210
Lateral View of the Ferret Abdomen 
212
Ventrodorsal View of the Ferret Abdomen
214
Lateral View of the Ferret Thorax
216
Ventrodorsal View of the Ferret Thorax
218
Lateral WWhole Body View of the Ferret
220
Ventrodorsal Whole Body View of the Ferret
222
INDEX
225
Preface
Radiographic evaluation is a valuable diagnostic tool, and the veterinary techni-
cian plays a vital role in providing high-quality images for evaluation by the clini-
cian. Proper patient. positioning is crucial to achieving diagnostic quality images.
This book provides detailed information on positioning of dogs, cats, birds, and
pocket pets for radiographic examination. Photographs are used to illustrate cor-
rect patient positioning for each radiographic image. The resulting radiograph
produced is also included, and diagrams are included for most images. Canine and
feline dental radiographic techniques are also included. Although not. meant. to
be a comprehensive radiology textbook, detailed information on patient position-
ing, positioning aids, and labeling of radiographic images is included. Positioning
techniques described are most useful for clinical locations in which patients are
sedated or anesthetized for radiographic procedures. However, all procedures can
also be performed while manually restraining the patient if needed. Positioning
techniques presented will provide diagnostic quality images when used with either
traditional or digital radiology systems. Readers are encouraged to consult a com-
prehensive radiology textbook for additional information on production of x-rays,
film processing, and safety issues related to the production of radiographs.
About the Authors
Dr. Sirois is the Program Director of Veterinary Technology at Penn Foster Col-
lege. She received her AAS degree in veterinary technology from Camden County
College, and also holds a BS and an MS in Biology and an EdD in instructional
technology and distance education. She is certified as both a veterinary techni
cian and laboratory animal technician, and has over 20 years' experience as a vet-
erinary technician educator in both traditional and distance education programs.
Dr. Sirois is a past president of the Association of Veterinary Technician Educators
and a member of the editorial board for Veterinary Technician.
Elaine Anthony is an associate professor of veterinary technology in both the on-
campus and online veterinary technology programs at St. Petersburg College, and is
employed part-time at a veterinary internal medicine clinic. She holds an AS degree
 in veterinary technology from St. Petersburg College. She also holds an AA in music, a
BS in elementary education, and MA in adult education. She is certified as a veterinary
technician and has earned a certificate in Veterinary Hospital Management. She has
for Nestle Purina and a member of the editorial board for Veterinary Technician.
Ms. Anthony and Dr. Sirois speak at several veterinary conferences each year, and
have published numerous journal articles and textbook chapters on a variety of
veterinary technology topics. Dr. Sirois has also authored and edited several veteri-
nary technology textbooks, including Principles and Practices of Veterinary Technology,
Laboratory Animal Medicine: Principles and Procedures, and Laboratory Procedures for
Veterinary Technicians, all published by Elsevier.
Danielle Futch Mauragis received her A.S. degree in veterinary technology from
St. Petersburg College. After working in private practice, she joined the Diagnos-
tic Imaging service at. the University of Florida Veterinary Medical Center. Her
duties include x-ray, CT, Nuclear Medicine, assisting in ultrasound, and teach-
ing physics, techniques, and quality control of radiology to veterinary students.
 shop Suuen si uoissed nau mq 'hums pue Adeiooud ae saqqou naH
vii
competition in agility. She shares her life with her husband
Dennis, daughter Savannah, 2 dogs, Flik and Fizzy, and
1 ex-research cat. name Pounce de Leon.
contrbutors
Lori A. Barnes, CVT
Avian & Animal Hospital of Bardmoor, Largo, FL
Vickie Byard, CVT, VTS (Dentistry)
Rau Animal Hospital Glenside, PA
Deborah L. Walker, CVT
Avian & Animal Hospital of Bardmoor, Largo, FL
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to our families for putting up with us while we focused on this book.
This book would not have been possible without your love and support. We are
Woody, and Flik. We are grateful for the guidance and support of Senior Product.
Manager, Darcy Scelsi, and to our contributors for all their hard work.
Reviewers
Mary H. Ayers, BBA, RT (R)
Virginia Medical Regional College Of Veterinary Medicine
 Blacksburg, VA
Karen Lee Hrapkiewicz, DVM
Wayne State University
Detroit, MI
Karl M. Peter, DVM
Foothill College
Los Altos Hills, CA
 Lois Sargent, DVM
Miami Dade College
Miami, FL
P. Alleice Summers, DVM
Cedar Valley College
Lancaster, TX
Frances Turner, RVT
McLennan Community College
Waco, TX
Dedication
To our students—-past, present, and future. You are our inspiration.
ix
This page intentionally left blank
HAPTER
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF SMALL ANIMAL
RADIOGRAPHIC POSITIONING
OVERVIEW
o oeue eou jo apamous sainba ludeoen oy sualed leue lis jo uuoiso
the species and descriptive directional terminology. When patients are not properly positioned,
naccurate interpretation of the radiograph and subsequent incorrect diagnosis of the patient
can occur. Proper patient positioning usually requires that the patient be immobilied, either
using chemical restraint (administration of sedatives and anesthetics) or mechanical
restraint (use of radiology positioning aids). Manual restraint should be avoided due to the risk
of increased exposure of the handler to ionizing radiation. When manual restraint is necessary, the
adoid sapnu suluoeiei uizuo o ansodxa au o suonead ae pinous sapuy
positioning, as well as moving as far as possible from the primary x-ray beam and wearing proper
safety apparel, including lead-lined gloves, apron, thyroid shield, and glasses.
2
Chapter I: General Principles of Small Animal Radiographic Positioning
PATIENT PREPARATION
The veterinary technician should ensure that all ani-
mals being radiographed have a clean, dry haircoat.
Wet hair and debris can cause confusing artifacts on
radiographs. If possible, remove all collars and leashes,
topical medications, bandages, and splints.
X-ray cassette
(a) Dorsoventral
Animals undergoing radiographic study must. be
properly restrained. Ideally, chemical restraint with
sedatives or anesthetics will be used so a handler does
not have to remain in the room. This will also minimize
the possibility of motion artifacts on the finished radio-
 graph as well as minimize the anxiety of the animals. In
some locations, laws prohibit manual restraint. When
 man ual restraint is necessary, it should be accompanied
by the use of positioning aids and the proper use of
(b) Ventrodorsal
lead shielding to minimize exposure of the technician
FIGURE I-I
to radiation. The comfort. of the patient must also be
Dorsoventral versus ventrodorsal positioning.
considered.
Careful planning and preparation will reduce the
total time that patients must remain in position on the
surface and exits the dorsal surface of the patient.
x-ray table. Identify all radiographic views needed, and
(Figure 1-1b).
prepare all supplies and equipment before placing the
Medial (M): This term refers to the direction toward
animal onto the x-ray table.
an animal's midline (Figure 1-2). The term is usu-
 ally used in combination with other directional terms
to describe oblique projections. For example, dor-
DIRECTIONAL TERMINOLOGY
somedial refers to the direction of the x-ray beam
A basic knowledge of directional terminology is required
from the dorsal surface toward the midline. Radio
for proper patient positioning and for use when describ-
 graphs of the limbs taken with the primary x-ray beam
ing radiographic projections. The American College
entering the medial surface of the limb and exiting the
of Veterinary Radiology (ACVR) determines standard
lateral may be referred to as mediolateral, although this
nomenclature for radiographic projections. The accepted
is normally shortened to simply L.
tions be named using only approved veterinary anatomi-
cal directional terms or their abbreviations. Radiographic
Midline
projections are described using the directional term that.
describes the penetration by the central ray of the pri-
n        
Anterior
from the point of entrance to the point of exit. ACVR
View
guidelines also include recommended nomenclature to
be used when combinations of terms are needed and
when oblique x-ray angles are used. In small animals, it is
Medial
location above the animal unless otherwise indicated.
Lateral
Commonly Used Directional Terminology:
Dorsoventral (DV): This term describes a radiograph
produced when the primary x-ray beam enters the
dorsal (topline or spinal) surface and exits the ventral
(sternal or thorax and abdomen) surface of the patient.
(Figure 1-1a).
FIGURE 1-2
Ventrodorsal (VD): This term describes a radiograph
produced when the primary x-ray beam enters the ventral
 Medial versus lateral
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
3
Lateral: The term describes a radiograph produced
Cranial (Cr): This relative directional term indicates a
when the primary x-ray beam enters from the side, away
structure located closer to the animal's head from any
from the medial plane or midline of the patient's body.
part of the body (Figure 1-3).
In the strictest use of ACVR nomenclature, a lateral pro-
Caudal (Cd): This relative directional term indicates
jection taken with an animal lying on its right side would
a structure located closer to the animal's tail from any
be referred to as left to right lateral. However, by con-
part of the body (Figure 1-3).
vention, this is usually shortened to simply right lateral,
 meaning that the patient is positioned in right lateral
Plantar: This term is used to describe the caudal (pos-
recumbency, indicating that the patient's right side is
terior) surface of the hindlimb distal to the tarsus; the
closest to the x-ray cassette. Similarly, a limb radiograph
correct term for the surface proximal to the tarsus is
obtained with the patient in right lateral recumbency
caudal (Figure 1-3).
with the affected limb placed against the x-ray table or
 Palmar: This term is used to describe the caudal (pos-
cassette and the x-ray beam penetrating from the me-
terior) surface of the forelimb distal to the carpus; the
dial to lateral direction is referred to as a right lateral
correct term for the surface proximal to the carpus is
projection.
caudal (Figure 1-3).
Proximal (Pr): This is a relative directional term that
Craniocaudal (CrCd): This term describes a radio-
 indicates a structure located closer to a point of attach-
graphic projection obtained by passing the primary x-
ment or origin from another structure or closer to the
ray beam from the cranial surface to the caudal surface
midline of the animal (Figure 1-3).
of a structure. It is most commonly used for radiographs
Distal (Di): This is a relative directional term that indi-
involving the extremities proximal to the carpus or tar-
cates a structure located farther from the point of at-
sus. Older veterinary literature may refer to this radio
tachment or origin of another structure or away from
graphic projection as anterior-posterior (AP).
the midline of the animal (Figure 1-3).
Caudocranial (CdCr): This term describes a radio-
Rostral: This relative directional term indicates a struc
graphic projection obtained by passing the primary x-
ture located closer to the nares from any point on the
ray beam from the caudal surface to the cranial surface
head (Figure 1-3).
of a structure. It is most. commonly used for radiographs
involving the extremities proximal to the carpus or tar
sus. Older veterinary literature may refer to this radio.
graphic projection as posterior-anterior (PA).
A
B
Dorsopalmar (Dpa): This term is used to describe ra-
diographic views distal to the carpus obtained by pass-
ing the primary x-ray beam from the dorsal direction
to the palmar surface of the forelimb. Older veterinary
literature may refer to this radiographic projection as
anterior-posterior (AP)
Palmar dorsal (PaD): This term is used to describe ra-
diographic views distal to the carpus obtained by pass-
ing the primary x-ray beam from the palmar surface of
the forelimb toward the dorsal surface of the body. Old-
er veterinary literature may refer to this radiographic
 projection as posterior-anterior (PA) .
C
Dorsoplantar (Dpl): This term is used to describe ra-
diographic views distal to the tarsus obtained by pass-
G
ing the primary x-ray beam from the dorsal direction
to the plantar surface of the hindlimb. Older veterinary
literature may refer to this radiographic projection as
an terior-posterior (AP) .
FIGURE I-3
Plantardorsal (PlD): This term is used to describe ra-
Common directional and positioning terminology. The arrows
diographic views distal to the tarsus obtained by passing
on this Boston terrier represent the following directional terms:
the primary x-ray beam from the plantar surface of the
A = cranial, B = caudal, C = ventral, D = dorsal, E = rostral,
forelimb toward the dorsal surface of the body. Older
F = proximal, G = distal, H = palmar, I = plantar.
4
 Chapter I: General Principles of Small Animal Radiographic Positioning
veterinary literature may refer to this radiographic pro-
jection as posterior-anterior (PA).
Oblique (O): This term refers to radiographic projec
tions taken with the primary beam entering at. an angle
    e  s  e 
est. Oblique projections are sometimes used to obtain
images of structures that might be superimposed over
other structures with standard 90-degree views. Nearly
all dental radiographs are obtained using oblique an-
gles. The angle used may vary depending on the site of
FIGURE I-4
interest. The specific angle should be included in the
Sandbags used for radiographic positioning
description of the radiograph along with the proper ter-
minology to describe the direction of the primary beam.
For example, a D60LMPaO indicates that the x-ray
Beanbags
beam entered the dorsal surface at a 60-degree angle
and exited at the medial area of the palmar aspect. of
Pads filled with polyester beads are commonly referred
the hindlimb. This nomenclature can become unwieldy
to as bean bags. They are similar in construction to sand-
and is often shortened for standardized oblique views
bags and available in a variety of sizes. Beanbags with
used in a particular setting.
vacuum hose connections are also available. This allows
the handler to mold the bag around the patient by re-
 moving the air from the bag while it. is in position on
the patient. Beanbags are usually composed of vinyl or
POSITIONING AIDS
similar materials.
 Radiology positioning aids are used to increase the pa-
tient's comfort as well as ensure proper positioning for
Foam Pads and Wedges
the radiographic evaluation. They may also allow for
patient. evaluation without a handler having to remain
Foam pads and wedges are available in a wide variety of
in the room. When manual restraint is needed, posi-
sizes and shapes (Figure 1-5). Triangular and rectangu-
tioning aids will assist the handler in maintaining the
lar foam blocks are most. common. Some foam wedges
animal in the correct position. Positioning aids should
and pads have heavy vinyl covers that are washable
be small and lightweight. to allow ease of use and stor-
 Plain foam pads and wedges cannot be easily disinfected
age. Most positioning aids leave some density shadows
and must be covered with disposable materials before
on the finished radiograph and should, therefore, not.
use. Foam positioning aids are usually radiolucent, al-
be placed over or under the area of interest. Position-
 though some that are covered with heavy fabrics may
ing aids made of plastic are radiolucent, meaning x-rays
leave density shadows on the finished radiograph.
must be waterproof, washable, and stain resistant. Reus-
Troughs
able positioning devices include sandbags, foam pads
and wedges, beanbags, troughs, and ropes. Disposable
U- and V-shaped troughs are commonly used position-
 positioning aids include porous nonelastic tape, plastic
ing aids. They are available in a variety of widths and
or latex tubing, and roll gauze.
lengths. Troughs are designed to maintain a patient
in dorsal recumbency. They are commonly composed
Sandbags
of clear plastic (Figure 1-6) or may be vinyl-covered,
Sandbags can be purchased commercially (Figure
1-4), or they can be made from materials purchased
 at. a craft store. Commercially prepared bags usually
come prefilled with clean silica sand and are perma-
nently sealed. They are commonly made of vinyl or
nylon with plastic linings. Empty bags with sealable
openings may also be purchased and filled with sand.
Canvas bags cannot be easily disinfected and should,
therefore, be wrapped in disposable plastic material
FIGURE 1-5
before each use.
Foam wedges.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
5
Other Positioning Aids
Rope, roll gauze, adhesive tape, and plastic tubing
make inexpensive and effective positioning aids. Adhe-
sive tape can serve many functions as a positioning aid.
It. can be used to extend a limb or widen the space
between the digits to increase visibility of the structures.
It can also be used to rotate limbs and hold them in
position to obtain oblique views, or maintain bones and
joints perpendicular to the x-ray beam. Rope and gauze
can be looped around a limb and used to extend the
limb. The end of the rope can be tied to the table or
FIGURE 1-6
can be held by the handler. Extending the limb by hold-
 Clear plastic V-trough.
ing the end of the rope or gauze increases the distance
of the handler to the primary beam, thereby reducing
exposure to ionizing radiation. Compression bands
 and paddles, wooden spoons, and Velcro can also be
trough-shaped foam (Figure 1-7). Plastic troughs are
used to assist in immobilizing patients. A plastic-mouth
radiolucent. Head troughs are also available that are
speculum may be useful for positioning of some dental
U-shaped and contain acrylic rods that can be used to
 and skull radiographs.
 maintain the position of the skull. When radiographing
Acrylic tubes are routinely used for immobilization
the thorax or abdomen using a positioning trough, the
 of exotic animals for radiography. Although chemical
length of the trough must be sufficient to allow the
restraint. is generally required for most. exotic animal
en tire area of interest to remain fully within the trough.
patients, paper bags and pillowcases may be used to
 If using the trough to position an animal for other
contain some exotic animal species. Detailed informa-
radiographic studies, such as the pelvis, the trough
tion on positioning aids used in exotic animals is pre-
must be fully outside the collimated area of the film.
sented in Chapter 10. A large number of specialized
If the trough is not a sufficient length or is positioned
radiographic positioning aids are also commercially
improperly, the finished radiograph may contain density
available for use in small animals.
artifacts representing the edges of the trough
PROCEDURES FOR RADIOGRAPHIC
POSITIONING
Specific protocols for positioning of animals for radio-
graphic evaluation vary depending on the anatomical
 area of interest. and the species. For nearly all radio-
 graphic studies, two views are needed, taken at right.
angles to each other. Patients are usually positioned
with the area of interest as close to the x-ray cassette
as possible. This decreases magnification and increases
detail. In some cases, magnification is desirable, and
the radiograph exposure will be made with the area of
interest. elevated off the x-ray cassette so that it is closer
to the x-ray tube. This is commonly performed when
obtaining radiographs of exotic animals. Except for
oblique views and some dental radiographs, the area of
 interest should remain perpendicular to the x-ray tube
to minimize distortion of the area of interest on the
resulting radiograph.
The patient should be placed on the x-ray table so
that the thickest part of the area of interest is placed
toward the cathode end of the x-ray tube. This takes
FIGURE 1-7
advantage of the heel effect, which refers to the greater
Vinyl-covered V-trough.
intensity of x-rays that originate from the cathode end
6
Chapter I: General Principles of Small Animal Radiographic Positioning
of the tube, and results in more even film density on the 
finished radiograph. When the x-ray beam is centered
finished radiograph.
correctly and the correct size cassette is used, it is usu-
ally only necessary to verify one surface landmark on
Centering and Collimation
the Cr/Cd aspect of the patient and one on the D/V
aspect.
The specific anatomical structures that must be
 In some cases, it is desirable to use an x-ray cas-
included on the finished radiograph are based on sur-
sette twice as large as needed and expose one view
face landmarks. These are fixed areas on the patient's
on each side of the film. This is commonly referred
body that can be seen or palpated. For example, the
 usn pausdoe si l 'aeid au uds, se oi
last rib, the angle of the mandible, and the scapula are
lead shield across half of the x-ray cassette to prevent.
useful palpable landmarks.
exposure of the film when taking the first view (Figure
Animals should always be positioned so that the
1-9). The lead shield is then moved to the other half
anatomical area of interest for the radiographic study
of the cassette, and the second view is exposed on the
is at the center of the x-ray film. For example, when
other half of the film. It is important that the patient.
survey radiographs of the abdomen are taken, the pri-
is oriented in the same direction each time so that the
mary x-ray beam is centered on the midline. However,
finished radiograph has the two views facing the same
if the anatomical area of interest is a canine patient's
direction.
spleen, the primary beam would be centered lateral to
the midline so that the center of the spleen is located in
Measurement
the center of the finished radiograph.
Radiographs should include a large enough area
A caliper is used to measure the patient so that the
to allow identification of the structures. For example,
correct settings can be chosen on the x-ray machine
radiographs of long bones must include the joints
(Figure 1-10). The measurement is obtained over the
proximal and distal to the bone, whereas radiographs
thickest part of the body in the area to be radiographed.
of joints must include 1/3 of the bones proximal and
Where there is a significant difference in size between
distal to the joint.
the cranial and caudal surface landmarks, it may be nec-
The cassette size chosen must. be slightly larger
essary to use two cassettes to obtain the needed views. In
than needed to accommodate the needed view. The
 that case, separate radiographs are taken of the cranial
collimator is then used to restrict. the size of the beam
and caudal portions of the area of interest. This is most.
(Figure 1-8). This results in a reduction of scatter
common in large, barrelchested dogs requiring ab-
radiation, thereby reducing exposure of the handler
 dominal or thoracic radiographic studies. When using
to the primary beam as well as improving the overall
a V-trough that will be positioned within the collimated
quality of the image. Properly collimated films will
area, the trough is included in the total measurement
have a clear, unexposed area on all four sides of the
 taken with the caliper
SID
72IN
180CM
40IN
100CM
FIGURE 1-8
FIGURE 1-9
Collimator.
Split plate.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
7
FIGURE I-11
Radiographic label imprinter.
FIGURE 1-10
Caliper used ta obtain body measurement.
FIGURE 1-12
Lead radiograph label tape on density filters.
Labeling
of the veterinarian or clinic, and the patient and cli-
There are several acceptable methods for labeling
ent name. In addition to the patient information, the
radiographs. Patient information may be written on
identification label may also designate the direction of
lead tape placed on the film before exposure or may
entry and exit of the primary beam. Radiographic pro-
be imprinted on the film in the darkroom. When an
jections of limbs may also be designated as forelimb
imprinter is used (Figure 1-11), the x-ray cassette must.
or hindlimb on the film label. The identification label
contain a lead blocker to shield a portion of the film
must be placed so that it does not overlap any anatomi-
from exposure. Printed cards are used that are pre-
cal area of interest.
 pared with the patient information. The imprinter is
Directional markers must also be included on all
used in the darkroom to flash white light through the
radiographs. These markers are added before making
previously unexposed area of the cassette to transfer
the exposure. Directional markers can be composed of
information from the printed card to the x-ray film.
a lead shield cut to an R or L shape, or can be obtained
Lead tape is used with density filters that are matched
to the exposure settings for that radiographic study.
is composed of metal with an R or L cut. out. Markers
In general, radiographic studies that utilize the grid
are used to designate the position of the patient on its
with the cassette under the tabletop require a green
right or left side as well as the limb being radiographed.
density filter, whereas exposures made with the cas-
 Markers on craniocaudal or caudocranial projections
sette on the tabletop utilize the white density filter
are placed on the lateral aspect of the limb. For lateral
(Figure 1-12). Digital systems usually utilize computer
 projections of limbs, the left or right marker is placed
software to imbed the patient information on the fin-
on the cranial aspect. For dorsoventral or ventrodorsal
ished radiograph. Minimal required information in-
 projections, the marker is used to indicate the right or
cludes the date the radiograph was exposed, the name
left side of the patient. Multiple types of markers are
8
available that can be used to designate detailed infor
mation on the patient position (Figures 1-13a—c).
Some radiographic contrast studies require expo-
sure of sequential radiographs. These flms must also
be designated with a time marker (Figure 1-14). This
usually refers to the elapsed time since the radiogra-
JM
phic study was started or can indicate the number of the
radiograph in the series. The designation can be made
on the lead tape identification label. Timer markers are
(a)
also available that contain a clockface with rotating dials
to indicate the elapsed time or the time the radiograph
was exposed. Gravity markers that. can be used to desig-
DV
 nate that the patient is standing are also available.
AP
CMO
ML
MLO
PA
(b)
FIGURE I-14
Elapsed time marker.
(c)
FIGURE I-13a-
Directional markers.
CHAPTER2
THORACIC RADIOGRAPHS
OVERVIEW
Thoracic radiographs are primarily utilized for evaluation of the soft tissues of the thoracic cavity
suspected pneumothorax, exposures are usually made during the expiratory pause. The most
commonly used positions are the right or left lateral recumbency and ventrodorsal (VD). If VD,
dorsoventral (DV), and right and left lateral views are needed, the DV and VD exposures should
be performed first to prevent positional collapse of the lungs.
For all thoracic projections, the forelimbs must be extended cranially to avoid overlap of
the shoulder muscles on the thoracic structures. For the DV and VD projections, the sternum
appears superimposed on the thoracic vertebrae. In properly positioned lateral projections,
the costochondral junctions of the ribs and the angles of the thoracic vertebrae are even
and superimposed in some areas. A horizontal beam may occasionally be used to identify the
presence of air or fluid within the thoracic cavity. Lateral, DV, and VD views may be exposed with
the horizontal beam.
The following pages illustrate the proper positioning and technique for thoracic radiographs
10
Chapter 2: Thoracic Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Thorax
Positioning:
* Right lateral recumbency is preferred.
*Forelimbs are extended cranially; hindlimbs caudally.
· Place a foam pad under the sternum to avoid rotation and to maintain horizontal alignment of
the stern um and spine.
*Neck is in natural position.
Centering:
+ Caudal border of scapula.
Collimation:
· Entire rib cage within collimated area.
+Cranial border: thoracic inlet.
· Dorsal border: spinous processes of spinal column.
*Ventral border: xiphoid.
Labeling:
*R/L marker within collimated area ensuring that marker does not obscure any anatomical structure.
*  Identification label in caudal region within collimated area.
Technique:
·Measure at highest area.
Comments:
*Broad-chested animals may not require foam padding to position sternum.
· Ensure that any sandbags are placed outside the collimated area.
FIGURE 2-1
Proper positioning for lateral projection of the thorax
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
FIGURE 2-2
Lateral projection of the thorax.
 Scapula
Descending aorta
Trachea
Diaphragm
Manubrium
Caudalvenacava
 of sternum
Humerus
Xiphoid
Cardiac
silhouette
FIGURE 2-3
Anatomical features and landmarks: cardiac silhouette, caudal vena cava, trachea,
descending aorta, scapula, diaphragm, humerus, manubrium of stermum, and
xiphoid.
12
Chapter 2: Thoracic Radiographs
VD Projection of the Thorax
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency.
·Forelimbs are extended cranially with nose between forelimbs.
+ Hindlimbs are extended caudally.
·Use a V-trough to superimpose the sternum and spine.
Centering:
* Caudal border of the scapula centered on midline.
Collimation:
+Cranial border: thoracic inlet.
*V-trough entirely within collimated area.
* Lateral borders: body wall.
Labeling:
·R/L marker cranial to axilla within V-trough.
· Iden tification label in cranial or caudal region within collimated area.
Technique:
● Measure at highest point (usually the last rib).
Comments:
* Foam pads may be needed to maintain alignment of the sternum and spine, and to avoid rotation.
 This position may also be used with horizontal beam x-ray and is referred to as the lateral decubitus view
(Figure 2-5). The patient is placed in lateral recumbency on top of a foam pad to elevate the patient off the
tabletop. The beam is then directed ventrodorsally.
FIGURE 2-4
FIGURE 2-5
Proper positioning for VD prajection of the thorax.
Lateral decubitus view.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians
13
FIGURE 2-6
VD projection of the thorax.
Scapulae
Dorsal spinous
processes
Cardiac silhouette
Caudalvenacava
Diaphragm
FIGURE 2-7
Anatomical features and landmarks: scapulae, cardiac silhouette,
caudal vena cava, diaphragm, and dorsal spinous processes.
14
Chapter 2: Thoracic Radiographs
DV Projection of the Thorax
Positioning:
*Sternal recumbency.
Forelimbs are extended slightly cranial with carpus at. level of ears.
·Hindlimbs are in natural flexed position.
·Superimpose sternum and spine.
Centering:
·Caudal border of scapula.
Collimation:
*Cranial border-thoracic inlet.
*Lateral borders-body wall.
Labeling:
●R/L marker caudal to axilla within collimated area.
+ Identification label in caudal region within collimated area.
Technique:
*Measure at highest point (usually the last rib).
Comments:
*Main tain alignment of stern um and spine.
*This position may also be used for horizontal x-ray beam.
FIGURE 2-8
Proper positioning for DV projection of the thorax.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
15
FIGURE 2-9
DV projection of the thorax.
Scapula
Cardiac silhouette
Caudal vena cava
Diaphragm
Stomach
FIGURE 2-10
Anatomical features and landmarks: scapula, cardiac silhouette,
stomach, diaphragm, caudal vena cava, dorsal spinous processes,
and rib.
16
Chapter 2: Thoracic Radiographs
Standing Lateral
Projection of the
Thorax Using the
Horizontal Beam
Positioning:
* Right lateral preferred.
+Natural standing position.
Centering:
* Caudal border of scapula.
Collimation:
FIGURE 2-11
 Entire rib cage within collimated area.
Proper positioning for standing lateral projection with horizontal
beam of the thorax.
+ Cranial border: thoracic inlet.
· Dorsal border: spinous processes of spinal col-
umn.
*Ventral border: stern um.
Labeling:
R/L marker cranial to axilla within collimated
area.
 Identification label in caudal region within colli
mated area.
Technique:
 Measure at highest area.
Comments:
Gravitational markers, such as the Mitchell marker,
should be used.
 Shoulder musculature is superimposed over the
cranial thorax.
FIGURE 2-12
 The horizontal beam can also be used for a recum-
Lateral recumbent view.
bent lateral view. The patient is positioned in ster-
nal recumbency on top of a foam pad with the fore-
limbs gently extended forward and the hindlimbs
in a natural crouched position (Figure 2-12).
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
17
FIGURE 2-13
Standing lateral projection with horizontal beam of the thorax.
Tracheal
Aorta
bifurcation 
Scapula
Trachea
Diaphragm
Humerus
Cardiac silhouette
FIGURE 2-14
Anatomical features and landmarks: tra.chea, aorta, tra.cheal bifurcation,
cardiac silhouette, scapula, humerus, and diaphragm.
HAPTER3
ABDOMINAL RADIOGRAPHS
OVERVIEW
Abdominal radiographs are primarily utilized for evaluation of the soft tissues of the abdomen
(kidneys, bladder, liver, intestinal tract). Abdominal radiographs are exposed after full exhalation
and before initiation of inspiration (expiratory pause). Lateral and ventrodorsal (VD) views are
commonly performed.
For large dogs, it may be necessary to take cranial and caudal views of the abdomen if large
cassettes do not allow the entire abdomen to be exposed on one film. Cranial views usually
require modification of the exposure settings to avoid overexposure of the flm.
o paise uaaq sey suaed aun ae paouad aq sn saipns pudeoipen aos
12 hours unless medical conditions contraindicate fasting. If necessary, a cathartic or enema
may be given 3-4 hours before radiography to clear the intestinal tract of fecal matter. This will
enhance visualization of structures within the abdominal cavity.
The following pages illustrate the proper positioning and technique for abdominal
radiographs.
19
20
 Chapter 3: Abdominal Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Abdomen
Positioning:
*Right lateral recumbency.
●Forelimbs are extended cranially; hindlimbs extended caudally.
* Use foam pads to main tain horizontal alignment. of sternum.
*Use foam pads between stifles to maintain alignment.
Centering:
*Slightly caudal to last rib.
Collimation:
*Cranial border: halfway between the caudal border of scapula and the xiphoid.
* Dorsal border: spinous processes of vertebral column.
*Ventral border: sternum.
Labeling
*R/L marker within collimated area in inguinal region.
·  Identification label in caudal region within collimated area.
Technique:
* Measure at highest. point (usually the last rib)
Comments:
· Collimated area should not extend beyond dorsal spinous processes, and caudal border must include the
cranial aspect of the greater trochanter. Should the patient be too large to include both cranial and caudal
landmarks, two radiographs must be taken so that both the cranial and caudal abdomen can be evaluated.
 Extension of hindlimbs is crucial to avoid superimposing of abdominal muscles, but hyperextension must be
 avoided because this may reduce visibility of abdominal organs.
●The standing or recumbent lateral views may also be used (see Figures 2-11 and 2-12 for patient positioning).
FIGURE 3-1
 Proper positioning for lateral prajection of the abdomen.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
21
FIGURE 3-2
Lateral projection of the abdomen.
Kidneys
 Small intestine
Diaphragm
Colon
Stomach
Bladder
Caudal
vena cava
Liver
Spleen 
FIGURE 3-3
Anatomical features and landmarks: liver spleen, stomach, kidneys, colon,
22
 Chapter 3: Abdominal Radiographs
VD Projection of the Abdomen
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
·Forelimbs extended cranially with nose between forelimbs.
+ Hindlimbs extended caudally.
·Use a V-trough to superimpose the stern um and spine.
Centering:
·Medial aspect of last rib centered on sternum.
Collimation:
*Cranial border: on midline halfway between the caudal border of scapula and the xiphoid.
* Lateral borders: abdominal wall within V-trough.
Labeling:
* R/L marker in V-trough within collimated area.
* Iden tification label in caudal region within collimated area.
Technique:
*Measure at highest point. (usually the last. rib).
Comments:
·Foam pads may be needed on lateral aspect of body wall to avoid rotation and maintain alignment of stern um
and spine.
·Edges of V-trough must be outside the collimated area.
● The VD projection with the horizontal beam may also be used (see Figure 2-5 for patient positioning).
FIGURE 3-4
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
23
FIGURE 3-5
VD prajection of the abdomen.
Liver
Stomach
Small
 Spleen
intestine
Kidney
Colon
FIGURE 3-6
Anatomical features and landmarks: stomach, spleen, kidney, colon,
liver, and small intestine.
This page intentionally left blank
THAPTER4
PELVIC RADIOGRAPHS
OVERVIEW
Pelvic radiographs are primarily utilized for visualization of the bones and joints that comprise
the hip. In patients with suspected hip dysplasia, a variety of specialied procedures are used. The
most common of these is the ventrodorsal (VD)-extended hip view utilized for certification by
the Orthopedic Foundation of America. Always consult the foundation for specific application
 procedures and requirements. Some practitioners use a diagnostic technique for hip dysplasia
known as the PennHIP method.This procedure requires specialized equipment, and can only be
 performed by those who have undergone additional training and certification.
a ya jo sai  ae sui sis e sui du aun suad iaad le ro
In addition to the VD-extended view, commonly performed projections of the pelvis include the
VD frog leg position and lateral.
The following pages illustrate the proper positioning and technique for pelvic radiographs.
25
26
 Chapter 4: Pelvic Radiographs
VD-Extended Hip
Comments:
Projection
Hindlimbs must both be extended evenly so that.
digits on both feet are even with each other.
A long piece of tape can be used to rotate femurs
Positioning:
 by applying tape sticky side up under the stifles,
excluding the tail. Pull each end of the tape to the
· Dorsal recumbency.
opposite side of the table, using the tape to pull
· Forelimbs extended cranially and evenly with nose
the femurs medially. Hold the ends of the tape in
between forelimbs.
place with sandbags, using the sandbag to place ad-
●Hindlimbs extended caudally and evenly into full
ditional pressure on the tape.
extension.
●V-trough with foam pads on lateral aspect of body
wall to superimpose stern um and spine.
* Femurs rotated medially so they are parallel to one
another and the x-ray table, and the patella is cen-
tered within the patellar groove over the stifle and
taped in place.
·Align tail with spine.
Centering:
●Midline between the left and right ischial tuberos-
ity.
Colfimation:
·Cranial border: caudal to the wing of ilium and dis-
tal to the patella.
+ Lateral borders: lateral to the ischium.
Labeling:
●R/L marker within collimated area away from bony
areas.
 Detailed permanent identification in caudal region
to include American Kennel Club-registered name,
number or case number, hospital or veterinarian
name, and date radiograph was taken.
Technique:
FIGURE 4-1
·Measure thickest part of pelvis.
Proper positioning for VD-extended hip.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
27
FIGURE 4-2
VD-extended hip projection.
7th lumbar
Wing of 
vertebra
the ilium
Obturator foramen
Ischium
Femur
Patella
FIGURE 4-3
Anatomical features and landmarks: femur, patella, obturator
foramen, wing of the ilium, ischium, and 7th lumbar vertebra.
28
 Chapter 4: Pelvic Radiographs
VD Frog Leg Projection
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency.
·Forelimbs are extended cranially
· Hindlimbs are in natural flexed position; in most normal patients, the femurs naturally assume an angle of
approximately 45 degrees to the spine. In some large dogs, the femurs may naturally assume a 90-degree
angle to the spine.
Centering:
*Midline between the left and right ischial tuberosity.
Collimation:
·Cranial border: cranial to the wing of ilium to caudal border of ischium.
* Lateral border: to include proximal third of femur.
Labeling:
·R/ L marker within collimated area away from bony areas
+Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
*Measure thickest. part of pelvis.
Comments:
+ Sandbags placed outside of collimated area on tarsus can be used to maintain symmetry.
FIGURE 4-4
Proper positioning for VD frog leg prajection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
29
FIGURE 4-5
VD) frog leg projection.
7thlumbar
Wing of
vertebra
the ilium
Femur
Obturator foramen
Ischium
FIGURE 4-6
Anatomical features and landmarks: femur, obturator foramen, ischium, wing
of the ilium, and 7th lumbar vertebra.
30
 Chapter 4: Pelvic Radiographs
Lateral Projection
of the Pelvis
Positioning:
●Right or left lateral recumbency (side of interest.
closest. to the cassette).
● Foam wedge placed between hindlimbs to super-
impose both sides of pelvis.
 Bottom leg extended cranially, top leg extended
caudally (scissor position).
Centering:
· Greater trochanter of femur.
Collirmation:
· Cranial edge of ilium to caudal border of ischium.
+ Dorsal border: dorsal to the wing of the ilium.
Labeling:
R/L marker to indicate which limb is closest to the
cassette.
FIGURE 4-7
 Place identification label in right cranial region
 Proper positioning for lateral pelvis prajection.
 or left. caudal region within collimated area to
avoid overlap of bone.
Technique:
· Measure highest. area at level of trochanter.
Comments:
* Limb furthest from cassette will be magnified.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
31
FIGURE 4-8
Lateral pelvis projection.
 7th lumbar vertebrae
llium
Sacrum
Obturator
Ischium
foramen
Femu
Femur
FIGURE 4-9
Anatomical features and landmarks: femur, ilium, sa.crum, 7th lumbar
vertebrae, obturator foramen, and ischium.
CHAPTER5
FORELIMB RADIOGRAPHS
OVERVIEW
Radiographic projections of the limbs of the thoracic girdle are often performed to detect
fractures. Careful positioning is needed to maintain the limb in a parallel plane against the x-ray
cassette to avoid magnification and distortion of the image.The x-ray cassette is normally placed
on the tabletop rather than under the table due to the relatively small measurement of dog
and cat limbs. Collimation includes joints above and below a bone for images of long bones.
Radiographic projections of joints generally include approximately one-third the bones proximal 
and distal to the joint.The beam is restricted to just the width needed to include all the necessary
Saed uau'arei aenb saual e ui snsau pue uoeien aess sasnpan sul sannss
are exhibiting signs of pain, a horizontal beam may be used to minimize the need to manipulate
the limb. Supporting the limb on a foam pad and placing the x-ray cassette perpendicular to the
tabletop accomplish the horizontal beam projection.
Radiographic evaluation of the forelimbs includes lateral and caudocranial (CdCr) images of
the scapula, humerus, shoulder, elbow joint, radius, and ulna. Dorsopalmar and lateral views are
usually taken of the carpus, metacarpus, and phalanges. Oblique views are often needed for the
carpus, and flexed views of the elbow and carpus are routinely performed.
33
34
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
CdCr Projection of the Shoulder CdCr
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency in a V-trough with affected limb down.
*Tape and extend both forelimbs cranially.
● Head is pushed laterally away from the dependent limb to avoid having the cervical spine superimposed
over joint.
Centering:
  e   s a r  a  s  r p rd  s
 palpated.
Collimation:
· Include the distal third of the scapula and proximal third of the humerus.
Labeling:
 Lateral to the joint.
Technique:
· Measure at the shoulder joint.
FIGURE 5-1
Proper positioning for CdCr prajection of the shoulder CdCr.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
35
FIGURE 5-2
CdCr projection of the shoulder CdCr.
Humerus
Humeroscapular joint
Spine of scapula
Scapula
FIGURE 5-3
Anatomical features and landmarks: scapula, spine of scapula.
humerus, and humeroscapular joint.
36
 Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Shoulder
Positioning:
* Lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
·Affected limb is extended cranially.
· Opposite limb is pulled caudally to eliminate superimposition.
·Head is pushed dorsally to avoid trachea overlying joint.
· Sandbags can be used to keep head in dorsal position.
Centering:
· Palpate proximal head of the humerus and the glenoid of the scapula.
· Center beam approximately 1 inch (2.5 cm) caudal from the front of the limb for a small dog and
approximately 2 inches caudal (5 cm) for a large dog.
Colfimation:
* Include the distal third of the scapula and proximal third of the humerus, excluding the upper leg that is
pulled caudally.
Labeling:
*Cranial to the joint.
Technique:
*Measure at the shoulder joint, being careful not to include the upper leg that is pulled caudally.
FIGURE 5-4
Proper positioning for lateral projection of the shoulder.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
37
DFM
R
FIGURE 5-5
Lateral projection of the shoulder.
Spine of scapula
Trachea
Scapula
Manubrium
Humerus
FIGURE 5-6
Anatomical features and landmarks: scapula, spine of scapula, humerus.
trachea, and manubrium.
38
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
CdCr Projection of the Scapula CdCr
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
V-trough to hold body straight with cranial half of thorax outside the trough.
* Legs extended forward individually.
·Head straight with spine.
·Back legs extended caudally to stabilize.
Centering:
* Center of the scapula.
Collimation:
* Lateral to the body and medial to the spine.
· Include the shoulder joint and the caudal border of scapula.
Labeling:
· Lateral to the scapula.
Technique:
Measure at cranial border of the scapula
FIGURE 5-7
Proper positioning for CdCr prajection of the scapula CdCr.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians
39
FIGURE 5-8
CdCr projection of the scapula CdCr.
Scapula
Acromion
Humerus
FIGURE 5-9
 Anatomical features and landmarks: hurmerus, acromion, and scapula.
40
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of
Comments:
● Scapula will be superimposed over the dorsal
the Scapula
 spinous processes. Lateral scapula view can also be
taken with the affected side down.
Positioning:
· Push the affected limb dorsally and secure with
sandbag.
●Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected scap-
●Pull the head ventrally to avoid superimposition of
ula up.
the cervical spine.
* Unaffected leg is extended forward.
* Extend the unaffected limb straight out and away
· Affected limb is pushed up dorsally and stabi-
from the body with the limb parallel to the table-
lized with sandbag to push the scapula above the
top, and then move the limb cranial as far as pos-
thoracic spine.
 sible to avoid superimposition.
· Skull and neck are pushed downward and stabi-
· The scapula is a bone density within air of the tho-
lized with sandbag, if necessary.
rax. The thoracic exposure technique is not suf-
ficient and bone technique will be too dark. The
Centering:
abdominal technique chart should be used when
calculating the exposure settings.
+Center of the scapula.
Collimation:
Proximal to the shoulder joint. to the caudal edge
of the scapula.
Labeling:
· Place dorsally and with marker to indicate the
affected limb.
Technique:
● Measure from the dorsal side from table to height.
of the scapula.
FIGURE 5-10
Proper positioning for lateral projection of the scapula.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
41
FIGURE 5-11
Lateral projection of the scapula.
Spine of scapula
Humerus
Scapula
FIGURE 5-12
Anatomical features and landmarks: humerus, scapula, and spine of scapula.
42
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
CdCr Projection of the Humerus
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency.
 Front legs are extended forward individually.
·If needed, tape legs together at. the elbows to align and straighten the humerus.
Centering:
Midshaft. of humerus
Collimation:
·Proximal to the shoulder joint to distal to the elbow joint.
Labeling:
+Place lateral to the affected limb.
Technique:
· Measure from table to midshaft humerus.
Comments:
·Patients with severe degenerative joint disease may not be able to tolerate this position.
● The alternative is to pull the humerus downward, and image cranial to caudal (Figures 5-14, 5-17, and 5-18). A
separate caudal to cranial shoulder projection may be needed.
FIGURE 5-13
FIGURE 5-14
Proper positioning for CdCr projection of the humerus.
Altemate positioning for CdCr projection of the humerus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
43
Olecranon (of ulna)
DEN
Humerus
Scapula
FIGURE 5-15
FIGURE 5-16
CdCr projection of the humerus.
Anatomical features and landmarks: scapula, humerus, and olecranon.
Humerus
Olecranon
Radius/ulna
FIGURE 5-18
FIGURE 5-17
 Anatomical features and landmarks: humerus, radius/ulna, and
 CdCr prajection of the humerus with altemate positioning technique.
olecranon.
44
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Humerus
Positioning:
* Patient in lateral recumbency with the affected limb down.
* The affected limb is extended down and forward.
·The skull and neck are moved dorsally and stabilized with sandbags if necessary.
·The unaffected top limb is extended up caudally to pull the shoulder off the affected limb.
Centering:
·Midshaft. of the humerus.
Collimation:
·Proximal to the shoulder joint to distal to the elbow joint.
Labeling:
·Place cranially.
Technique:
·Measure midshaft erring on the proximal side.
Comments:
 Larger dogs may need two views due to the thickness difference between the elbow and shoulder. Take
separate measurements for each of the two views at the thickest area.
FIGURE 5-19
Proper positioning for lateral projection of the humerus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
45
FIGURE 5-20
Lateral projection of the humerus.
Spine of scapula
Scapula
Glenoid cavity
Humerus
Humeral condyle
Olecranon
Radius
UIna
FIGURE 5-21
Anatomical features and landmarks: ulna, radius, humerus, scapula, glenoid cavity,
olecranon, humeral condyle, and spine of scapula.
46
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
CrCd Projection of
the Elbow CrCd
Positioning:
● Patient is in ventral (sternal) recumbency.
·Both front legs are extended forward individually.
· Head is extended laterally to the opposite side
 of the affected limb and stabilized with tape or
sandbag.
*V-trough can help stabilize caudal half of body.
● Back legs may be extended caudally to assist in
keeping spine straight.
Centering:
FIGURE 5-22
· Palpate and center on the humeral condyles
Proper positioning for CrCd projection of the elbow.
Collimation:
●From the distal third of the humerus to the proxi-
 mal third of the radius and ulna.
Labeling:
+Placed laterally.
Technique:
· Measure the thickest. part at the center of the
joint.
Comments:
· The horizontal beam projection is accomplished
by placing the limb on sponges to have the limb
extending straight. out from the body (Figures 5-25
and 5-26). Center the beam on the joint as would
be done in the ventral position. Tape or stabilize
 cassette with a sandbag.
*  An alternate image includes the CrCd pronated po-
sition used when evaluating for presence of OCD
lesions on the medial condyle, which requires a
10-15 degree oblique view.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians
47
Humerus
Olecranon
Radius/ulna
FIGURE 5-23
FIGURE 5-24
CrCd projection of the elbow.
Anatomical features and landmarks: humerus, radius/ulna, and
olecranon.
品
FIGURE 5-25
 Proper positioning for CrCd prajection of the elbow with the
horizontal beam.
FIGURE 5-26
CrCd projection of the elbow with the horizontal beam.
48
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Elbow
Positioning:
·  Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
*Extend affected limb cranially.
·Pull unaffected limb caudodorsally.
Centering:
· Palpate and center on the humeral condyles
Collimation:
Distal third of the humerus to the cranial third of the radius and ulna.
Labeling:
*Cranial to the joint.
Technique:
·Measure the thickest part at the joint.
Comments:
· May need to place sponge under shoulder dorsally to assist with making patient lateral.
 An alternate image includes the CrCd supinated position, which is used when evaluating for presence of elbow
dysplasia, which requires a 10-15-degree oblique view.
FIGURE 5-27
 Proper positioning for lateral projection of the elbow.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
49
DEW
FIGURE5-28
Lateral projection of the elbow.
Humerus
Humeralcondyle
Radius
Olecranon
UIna
FIGURE 5-29
Anatomical features and landmarks: humerus, radius, ulna, humeral condyle, and olecranon.
50
 Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Flexed Lateral Projection of the Elbow
Positioning:
·  Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
*Bend affected limb dorsally.
*Place paw under skull, and stabilize with sandbag or tape.
· Place sponge under shoulder to keep the elbow from moving medially when flexed.
Centering:
· Palpate and center on the humeral condyles.
Collimation:
· Center on joint, and include the distal third of the humerus and proximal third of radius and ulna.
Labeling:
*Place cranial to limb.
Technique:
 Measure thickest part at elbow joint. The flexed view will generally have a larger measurement. than the un-
flexed lateral.
Comments:
· This view is typically for younger patients when elbow dysplasia such as fragmented coronoid, ununited
anconeal, and osteochondrosis are suspected. Orthopedic Foundation of America certification requires this
flexed medial to lateral view.
FIGURE 5-30
Proper positioning for flexed lateral prajection of the elbow.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
51
DM
FIGURE 5-31
Hexed lateral projection of the elbow.
Humerus
Radius
UIna
Humeral condyle
Anconealprocess
Olecranon
FIGURE 5-32
Anatomical features and landmarks: humerus, radius, ulna, olecranon, anconeal process, and humeral condyle.
52
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
CrCd Projection of the Radius and Ulna
Positioning:
* Patient is in ventral (sternal) recumbency.
*Front legs are extended forward individually
·Head is extended laterally and to the opposite side of the affected limb, and stabilized with sandbag or tape.
+V-trough can help stabilize caudal half of body.
·Back legs may be extended caudally to assist in keeping spine straight.
Centering:
· Midshaft of radius and ulna.
Collimation:
·From proximal to the elbow joint and distal to the carpal joint.
Labeling:
+ Place lateral to radius and ulna.
Technique:
· Measure midshaft of radius and ulna.
Comments:
· The horizontal beam projection is exposed cranial to caudal by placing the limb on sponges to have the limb
extending straight out from the body (Figure 5-36). Position the beam and center on joint as would be done
in the ventral position.
FIGURE 5-34
Proper positioning for CrCd projection of the radius and ulna with
FIGURE 5-33
the horizontal beam.
Proper positioning for CrCd projection of the radius and ulna.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
53
FIGURE 5-35
CrCd projection of the radius and ulna.
Humerus
Radius/ulna
Carpus
Metacarpals
FIGURE 5-36
Anatomical features and landmarks: humerus, radius/ulna, carpus,
and meta.carpals.
54
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Radius and Ulna
Positioning:
* Patient in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
· Unaffected limb extended caudodorsally.
Centering:
*Midshaft of the radius and ulna.
Collimation:
· From proximal to the elbow joint and distal to the carpal joint.
Labeling:
Cranial to the radius and ulna.
Technique:
· Measure at midshaft of radius and ulna.
Comments:
●If working with a fixed (nonmovable) x-ray table, affected limb may be extended straight forward. A bend in
the elbow is an acceptable position for the radius and ulna.
FIGURE 5-37
 Proper positioning for the lateral projection of the radius and ulna.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
55
FIGURE 5-38
Lateral projection of the ra.dius and ulna.
Humerus
Carpus
Radius Ulna Humeral
condyle
Accessory
Metacarpuscarpal bone
FIGURE 5-39
Anatomical features and landmarks: humerus, humeral condyle, radius,
ulna carpus, accessory carpal bone, and metacarpus.
56
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Dorsopalmar Projection of the Carpus
Positioning:
· Patient is in ven tral (sternal) recumbency.
* Front legs are extended forward individually.
●Head is extended laterally and to the opposite side of the affected limb, and stabilized with sandbag or tape.
*V-trough may help stabilize caudal half of body.
Centering:
· Center on carpus joint.
Collimation:
● From distal third of radius and ulna to proximal third of the metacarpals. Including all digits would also be
acceptable.
Labeling:
* Lateral to carpus.
Technique:
* Measure carpal joint.
Comments:
· The horizontal beam projection may also be used. Place the limb on sponges to have the limb extending
straight out from the body. Position the beam and center on joint as would be done in the ventral position.
FIGURE 5-40
Proper positioning for the dorsopalmar prajection of the carpus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
57
DFM
FIGURE 5-41
Dorsopalmar projection of the carpus.
Radius
Ulna
Carpus
FIGURE 5-42
Anatomical features and landmarks: radius, ulna, carpus, and meta.carpus.
58
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Carpus
Positioning:
· Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
*Affected limb is extended down in natural position.
●Sponge is placed under elbow to make the limb even and assist with making carpus lateral.
Centering:
*Carpal joint.
Collimation:
 From distal third of radius and ulna to proximal third of the metacarpals. Including all digits would also be
acceptable.
Labeling:
 Lateral to carpal joint.
Technique:
·  Measure carpal joint.
FIGURE 5-43
Proper positioning for the lateral projection of the carpus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians
59
R
DFM
FIGURE 5-44
Lateral projection of the carpus.
Radius
Ulna
 Accessory carpal bone
Carpus
Metacarpus
FIGURE 5-45
Anatomical features and landmarks: radius, ulna, carpus, accessory
carpal bone, and metacarpus.
60
 Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Flexed Lateral Projection of the Carpus
Positioning:
·Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb extended down naturally.
*Flex carpus by bending toes caudally toward radius and ulna.
·Keep in flexion by taping in a figure-eight pattern around metacarpals and radius and ulna.
·Place sponge under elbow to assist with maintaining lateral position.
Centering:
*Carpal join t.
Collimation:
q oe pinm s le unu sdi go pa xd on eu pe sn jo pn peip un e
acceptable.
Labeling:
*Cranial to flexed joint.
Technique:
· Measure thickest part. of flexed joint.
Comments:
·May have to place sponge under shoulder dorsally to assist with maintaining lateral position of flexed carpus.
FIGURE 5-46
Proper positioning for the flexed lateral projection of the carpus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
61
R
DFM
FIGURE 5-47
 Hexed lateral projection of the carpus.
Radius
UIna
Accessory
carpal bone
Carpus
Carpus
FIGURE 5-48
Anatomical features and landmarks radius, ulna, carpus and accessory carpal bone.
62
Chapter 5 :Forelimb Radiographs
Extended Lateral Projection of the Carpus
Positioning:
· Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb extended down naturally
* Extend carpus by bending toes anteriorly.
● Keep in extension by taping in a figure-eight pattern around metacarpals and radius and ulna.
● Place sponge under elbow to assist with maintaining lateral position
Centering:
*Carpal joint.
Collimation:
aq ose pinom siip le sunu 'sedieeau jo pn xond oi eu pe sn jo pun peisp uid e
acceptable.
Labeling:
*Cranial to flexed joint.
Technique:
 Measure thickest part. of flexed joint.
Comments:
· May have to place sponge under shoulder dorsally to assist with maintaining lateral position of extended
carpus.
FIGURE 5-49
Proper positioning for the extended lateral projection of the carpus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
63
DFM
R
FIGURE 5-50
 Extended lateral projection of the carpus.
Radius
Ulna
Accessory carpal bone
Carpus
Metacarpus
FIGURE 5-51
Anatomical features and landmarks: radius, ulna, carpus, accessory
carpal bone, and metacarpus.
64
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Lateral and Medial Oblique Projections
of the Carpus
Positioning:
● Patient is in ventral (sternal) recumbency (oblique views are performed from the dorsal aspect of the joint).
* Both front legs are extended forward individually.
·Head is extended laterally to the opposite side of the affected limb and stabilized with tape or sandbag.
+V-trough can help stabilize caudal half of body.
● Hindlimbs may be extended caudally to assist in keeping spine straight.
 Lateral oblique: Pull elbow joint medially and stabilize with tape or sandbag.
● Medial oblique: Pull elbow joint laterally and stabilize with tape or sandbag.
Centering:
*Carpal joint.
Collimation:
·Distal third of radius and ulna and proximal third of metacarpals.
Labeling:
* Lateral and medial oblique markers are placed on the lateral side of both projections.
Technique:
● Measure over carpal joint
*Measurement should remain the same for both projections.
FIGURE 5-52
Proper positioning of the lateral and medial oblique projections of
the carpus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
65
DFM
DFM
A
FIGURE 5-53
Lateral and medial oblique projections of the carpus.
Radius
Ulna (superimposed
withradius)
Radial carpal bone
Accessorycarpal bone
Carpal bone 
Uinarcarpal bone
Carpal bone
Carpal bone :
Carpal bone :
Metacarpal bone 
Metacarpal bone Il
Proximal phalanx -
Metacarpal bone Ill
Distal phalanx 
Metacarpal bone IV
 Metacarpal bone V
Radius
UIna
Radial carpal bone
Accessorycarpalbone
Carpal bones -
- Uinar carpal bone
Metacarpal bones
B
FIGURE 5-54
Anatomical features and landmarks: A, radius, ulna, radial carpal bone, ulnar carpal bone, accessory carpal bone, carpal bones, and metacarpal
bones. B, radius, ulna (superimposed with radius), radial carpal bone, carpal bones, metacarpal bone, proximal phalanx, distal phalanx,
accessory carpal bone, ulnar carpal bone, metacarpal bone ll, metacarpal bone ll, metacarpal bone IV, and metacarpal bone V.
66
 Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Dorsopalmar Projection of the Metacarpals
Positioning:
* Patient is in ventral (sternal) recumbency.
* Front legs are extended forward individually.
·Elbow on affected limb is abducted sligh tly to straighten metacarpus.
· Head is extended laterally and to the opposite side of the affected limb, and stabilized with sandbag or tape.
+V-trough can help stabilize caudal half of body.
Centering:
●Halfway between carpus and phalanges.
Collimation:
·Distal third of radius and ulna to proximal third of the digits.
Labeling:
* Lateral to metacarpals.
Technique:
·Halfway between carpus and phalanges.
Comments:
 The horizontal beam is accomplished by placing the limb on sponges to have the limb extending straight out.
from the body. Position the beam, and center on joint as would be done in the ventral position. Typically the
metacarpals and digits are radiographed in a single view.
FIGURE 5-55
Proper positioning for the dorsopalmar projection of the metacarpals.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
67
FIGURE 5-56
 Dorsopalmar projection of the metacarpals.
Radius
Metacarpal bone IV
Metacarpal bone |
Metacarpal bone Il
Metacarpal bone V
 Metacarpal bone Ill
Sesamoids
FIGURE 5-57
Anatomical features and landmarks: radius, metacarpal bone l, metacarpal bone Il
 metacarpal bone ll, metacarpal bone IV, metacarpal bone V, and sesamoids.
68
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Metacarpals
Positioning:
* Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
·Affected limb is extended down in natural position.
Centering:
●Halfway between carpus and phalanges.
Collimation:
·From the distal third of radius and ulna to the proximal third of the digits.
Labeling:
* Dorsal to metacarpal joint.
Technique:
*Halfway between carpus and phalanges.
Comments:
·Typically the metacarpal and digits are radiographed in a single view.
FIGURE 5-58
Proper positioning of the lateral projection of the metacarpals.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
69
DFM
R
FIGURE 5-59
Lateral projection of the metacarpals.
Accessory carpal bone
Carpus
Metacarpus
FIGURE 5-60
Anatomical features and landmarks: carpus, accessory carpal bone,
and metacarpus.
70
 Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Dorsopalmar Projection of the Digits
Positioning:
·Patient is in ventral (sternal) recumbency.
* Front legs are extended forward individually.
●  Individually tape the medial toe (digit 2) and lateral toe (digit 5), and pull opposite of each other to spread the
toes. Alternatively, place cotton balls between each toe.
· Head is extended laterally and to the opposite side of the affected limb, and stabilized with sandbag or tape.
·V-trough can help stabilize caudal half of body.
Centering:
*Center just above digits.
Collimation:
· From the metacarpals proximally to the end of the digits distally
Labeling:
* Lateral to digits.
Technique:
+Measure midway between metacarpals and digits.
Comments:
· Taping the digits open provides better visualization of the individual bones. If the patient does not have a toe-
nail or it is very short, tape around the digit itself. Typically the metacarpal and digits are radiographed in a
single view. A horizontal beam projection may also be used.
FIGURE 5-61
Proper positioning for the dorsopalmar prajection of the digits.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
71
R
DFM
FIGURE 5-62
Dorsopalmar projection of the digits.
Phalanx 1 of digit I
Metacarpus
 Distal phalanx of
Phalanx 1 of digitV
 Phalanx 1 of digit Il
Phalanx 1 of digit IV 
Phalanx 1 of digit IIl
Phalanx 2 of digitV
 Phalanx 2 of digit Il
Phalanx 2 of digit IV
Phalanx 2 of digit IIl
Distal phalange
FIGURE 5-63
Anatomical features and landmarks: metacarpus, phalanx I of digit I, phalanx I
of digit Il, phalanx I of digit Ill, phalanx I of digit IV, phalanx I of digit V,
phalanx 2 of digit Il, phalanx 2 of digit Ill, phalanx 2 of digit IV, phalanx 2
of digit V, and distal phalanx of digits I, and distal phalanges.
72
Chapter 5 : Forelimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Digits
Positioning:
* Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
*Affected limb is extended down in natural position.
·Sponge is placed under elbow to make the limb even and assist. with making metacarpus lateral.
· Individually tape the lateral toe (digit 5) and medial toe (digit 2), and pull the lateral toe cranially and the
medial toe caudally.
Centering:
* Center just above digits.
Collimation:
·From the metacarpals to the end of the digits.
Labeling:
·Dorsal to the lateral toe (digit 5).
Technique:
·Measure midway between metacarpals and digits.
Comments:
a single view.
FIGURE 5-64
Proper positioning for the lateral prajection of the digits.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
73
R
DFM
FIGURE 5-65
Lateral projection of the digits.
Metacarpus
 Phalanx 1 of digit Il
Phalanx 1 of cligit V
Phalanx 1 of digit Ill
Phalanx 1 of dligit IV
Phalanx 2 of dligit Il
 Phalanx 2 of dligit V
Phalanx 2 of dligit Il
 Phalanx 2 of dligit IV
Distal Phalanges
FIGURE 5-66
Anatomical features and landmarks: metacarpus, phalanx I of digit ll, phalanx I of digit Ill, phalanx
I of digit IV, phalanx I of digit V, phalanx 2 of digit Il, phalanx 2 of digit ll, phalanx 2 of digit IV,
 phalanx 2 of digit V, and distal phalanges.
This page intentionally left blank
THAPTER
HINDLIMB RADIOGRAPHS
OVERVIEW
Radiographic projections of the limbs of the pelvic girdle are often performed to detect fractures.
Careful positioning is needed to maintain the limb in a parallel plane against the x-ray cassette
to avoid magnification and distortion of the image.The x-ray cassette is normally placed on the
tabletop rather than under the table due to the relatively small measurement of dog and cat
limbs. Collimation includes joints above and below a bone for images of long bones. Radiographic
projections of joints generally include approximately one-third of the bones proximal and distal to
the joint. The beam is restricted to just the width needed to include all the necessary structures
This reduces scatter radiation and results in a higher quality image.
aun aziwuu on pasn aq Ke weag ieuozuou e uid jo suais sunquyxa ane suaied uau
need to manipulate the limb. The horizontal beam projection requires supporting the limb on a
foam pad and placing the x-ray cassette perpendicular to the tabletop.
Radiographic evaluation of the hindlimbs includes lateral and caudocranial images of the
femur, stifle joint, tibia, and fibula. Dorsoplantar and lateral views are usually taken of the tarsus
metatarsus, and phalanges. Oblique views are often needed for the tarsus, and flexed and
extended views of the tarsus are routinely performed.
75
76
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Femur
Positioning:
·Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
· Unaffected limb is taped around stifle and tarsus, and abducted out of the way of the affected femoral head.
Centering:
·Midshaft of the femur halfway between the stifle and coxofemoral joint.
Collimation:
+ From the ischium on the unaffected limb.
Labeling:
·  Label affected limb cranially to stifle.
Technique:
*Measure at. the midpart of the femur.
Comments:
● The femur is a more difficult bone in relation to technique because the femoral head is surrounded by thick
muscle, and the distal stifle is thin.
·  Position the patient with the femoral head toward the cathode end of the x-ray tube.
 Another technique is to place a full-fluid bag over the distal stifle to mimic soft tissue and measure at the femo-
ral head. Note that the edges of the fluid bag will be seen on the film.
FIGURE 6-1
Proper positioning for lateral projection of the femur.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
77
FIGURE 6-2
Lateral projection of the femur.
Pelvis
Femur
Fabella
Fibula
Tibia
FIGURE 6-3
 Anatomical features and landmarks: femur, tibia, fibula, pelvis, and
fabella.
78
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Craniocaudal Projection of the Femur
Positioning:
* Patient is in V-trough in dorsal recumbency.
* Tape legs down individually to table.
● Place band of tape around femurs just proximal to the stifles, and pull femurs together to bring the patellas
straight over the distal femurs.
● Place sponge under tarsus to avoid rotation of the stifle.
Centering:
*Midshaft of the femur halfway between the stifle and coxofemoral joint.
Collimation:
·Cranial: from the greater trochanter to the proximal third of the tibia.
· Lateral: from the ventral midline to the body wall.
Labeling:
*Place label lateral to the body proximally or distally.
Technique:
· Measure at the midportion of the femur.
Comments:
tabletop because this will result in overexposure of the film.
FIGURE 6-4
 Proper positioning for craniocaudal prajection of the femur.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
79
FIGURE 6-5
Craniocaudal projection of the femur.
Pelvis
Femur
Patella
Fabella
Tibia
FIGURE 6-6
Anatomical features and landmarks: femur, patella, tibia, pelvis, and fabella.
80
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Caudocranial Projection of the Stifle
Positioning:
*Patient is in V-trough in ventral recumbency.
femurs together to bring the patellas straight over the distal femurs.
●Alternatively, flex the unaffected limb up next to the body if patient is more comfortable.
Centering:
*Center on stifle joint.
Collimation:
· Proximal to the distal third of the femur and distal to proximal third of the tibia.
Labeling:
*Place label lateral to the joint.
Technique:
·Measure at the center of the joint.
Comments:
● It is preferable to angle the x-ray tube head cranially approximately 10-15 degrees to obtain an image through
the stifle joint.
 The horizontal beam technique may also be useful (Figure 6-8). Place the limb on sponges so that the limb
extends straight from the body. Position the beam, and center on joint as you would in the ventral position.
FIGURE 6-8
FIGURE 6-7
The horizontal beam technique for the caudocranial projection of
Proper positioning for caudocranial prajection of the stifle
the stifle.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
81
FIGURE 6-9
Caudocranial projection of the stifle.
Femur
Fabella
Patella
Fibula
Tibia
FIGURE 6-10
Anatomical features and landmarks: femur, patella, tibia, fibula, and fabella.
82
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Stifle
Positioning:
*Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
·Unaffected limb is taped around stifle and tarsus, and pulled up and out of the way.
Centering:
*Center on stifle joint.
Collimation:
·Proximal to the distal third of the femur and distal to proximal third of the tibia.
Labeling:
·Place label cranial to joint.
Technique:
· Measure the center of the joint. Palpate indentation of joint (fat pad) on the dorsal aspect. of stifle. Center on
indentation.
Comments:
· It is important to include the soft tissues on the caudal aspect of the stifle joint to visualize the fascial stripe that.
runs proximally and distally. When this stripe is absent, it is a sign of joint effusion.
FIGURE 6-11
Proper positioning for lateral projection of the stifle.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians 
83
大品
FIGURE 6-12
Lateral projection of the stifle.
Femur
Patella
Fabella
Fibula
Tibia
FIGURE 6-13
Anatomical features and landmarks: femur patella, fabella, tibia, and
fibula.
84
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Caudocranial Projection of the
Tibia and Fibula
Positioning:
· Patient is in V-trough in ventral recumbency.
● Pull both hind limbs behind patient and place band of tape around femurs just. proximal to the stifles, and pull
femurs together to bring the patellas straight over the distal femurs.
· Alternatively, flex the unaffected limb up next to the body if patient is more comfortable.
Centering:
·Center on the midshaft of the tibia halfway between the stifle and tarsus.
Collimation:
*From proximal to the distal third of the femur to distal to the proximal third of the tarsus.
Labeling:
· Place label on the lateral side of the tibia.
Technique:
·Measure midshaft of the tibia.
Comments:
 The horizontal beam technique may also be useful (Figure 6-15). Place the limb on sponges so that the limb ex-
tends straight out from the body. Position the beam, and center on joint as would be done in the ventral position.
FIGURE 6-14
FIGURE 6-15
Proper positioning for caudocranial projection of the tibia and
The horizontal beam technique for the caudocranial projection of
fbula.
the tibia and fibula.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
85
DFM
y
FIGURE 6-16
Caudocranial projection of the tibia and fibula.
Femur
Patella
Fabella
Fibula
Tibia
Calcaneous
Tarsus
FIGURE 6-17
Anatomical features and landmarks: femur, patella, fabella, tibia,
flbula, calcaneous, and tarsus.
86
Chapter 6: Hindimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Tibia
Positioning:
*Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
· Unaffected limb is taped around stifle and tarsus, and pulled up and out of the way.
Centering:
Midshaft. of the tibia halfway between the stifle and tarsus
Collimation:
· From proximal to the distal third of the femur to distal to the proximal third of the tarsus.
Labeling:
Place label cranial.
Technique:
+ Measure midshaft of tibia.
FIGURE 6-18
Proper positioning for lateral projection of the tibia.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
87
R
DFM
FIGURE 6-19
Lateral projection of the tibia.
Femur
Patella
Fabella
Fibula
Tibia
Tarsus
FIGURE 6-20
Anatomical features and landmarks: femur, patella, fabella, tibia.
fibula, calcaneous, and tarsus.
88
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Dorsoplantar Projection of the Tarsus
Positioning:
·Patient is in dorsal recumbency in the V-trough.
*Place sponges under tarsus to bring cassette close to the tarsus.
+Tape affected tarsus to table.
Centering:
*Center on tarsal joint halfway between the distal tibia and the proximal metatarsals.
Collimation:
· Proximal to the distal third of the tibia and distal to the proximal third of the metatarsals.
Labeling:
*Place label lateral to the joint.
Technique:
*Measure the center of the joint.
FIGURE 6-21
Proper positioning for dorsoplantar prajection of the tarsus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
89
FIGURE 6-22
Dorsoplantar projection of the tarsus.
Tibia
Fibula
Calcaneous
Tarsus
Metatarsals
FIGURE 6-23
Anatomical features and landmarks: tibia, fibula, calcaneous, tarsus,
and metatarsals.
06
Chapter 6: Hindimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Tarsus
Positioning:
* Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
· Unaffected limb is taped around stifle and tarsus and dorsally
Centering:
*Center on tarsal joint halfway between the distal tibia and the proximal metatarsals.
Collimation:
· Proximal to the distal third of the tibia and distal to the proximal third of the metatarsals.
Labeling:
·Place label cranial to the joint.
Technique:
·Measure the center of the joint.
Tube Side
DFM
FIGURE 6-24
Proper positioning for lateral projection of the tarsus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
91
Di
FIGURE 6-25
Lateral projection of the tarsus.
Tibia
Calcaneous
Tarsus
Metatarsus
FIGURE 6-26
Anatomical features and landmarks: tibia, calcaneous, tarsus, and 
rmetatarsus.
92
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Flexed Lateral Projection of the Tarsus
Positioning:
· Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
+Unaffected limb is taped around stifle and tarsus dorsally
●Tape around caudal tibia and proximal metatarsus to achieve full flexion of the tarsus.
Centering:
· Center on tarsal joint between the stifle and metatarsals
Collimation:
·From the distal portion of the tibia to the proximal portion of the metatarsals.
Labeling:
+Place label cranial to the joint.
Technique:
*Measure to the center of the joint.
FIGURE 6-27
 Proper positioning for flexed lateral prajection of the tarsus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
93
R
DFM
FIGURE 6-28
Flexed lateral projection of the tarsus.
Fibula
Tarsus
Calcaneous
Metatarsus
FIGURE 6-29
Anatomical features and landmarks: fibula, calcaneous, tarsus, and
metatarsus.
94
Chapter 6: Hindimb Radiographs
Extended Lateral Projection of the Tarsus
Positioning:
· Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down
*Unaffected limb is taped around stifle and tarsus, and pulled dorsally.
● Pull affected limb straight out away from body for full extension.
Centering:
·Center on tarsal joint between the stifle and metatarsals.
Collimation:
· From the distal portion of the tibia to the proximal portion of the metatarsals.
Labeling:
·Place label cranial to the joint.
Technique:
*Measure the center of the joint.
FIGURE 6-30
 Proper positioning for extended lateral projection of the tarsus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
95
R
DFM
FIGURE 6-31
Extended lateral projection of the tarsus.
Tibia
Calcaneous
Tarsus
Metatarsus
FIGURE 6-32
Anatomical features and landmarks: tibia, calcaneous, tarsus, and
rmetatarsus.
96
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Dorsolateral/Plantaromedial Oblique
Projection of the Tarsus
Positioning:
* Patient is in dorsal recumbency in the V-trough.
· Place sponges under tarsus to bring cassette close to the tarsus.
·Tape affected tarsus to table.
 Tilt patient from you approximately 15-20 degrees to achieve an oblique angle of the tarsus with the medial
side facing the tube.
Centering:
+ Center on tarsal joint.
Collimation:
·From the distal portion of the tibia to the proximal portion of the metatarsals.
Labeling:
*Place label lateral to the joint.
Technique:
·  Measure at center of tarsal joint
Comments:
the medial side of the tarsus.
FIGURE 6-33
Proper positioning for dorsolateral/plantaromedial oblique
 projection of the tarsus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
97
FIGURE 6-34
 Dorsolateral/plantaromedial oblique projection of the tarsus.
Fibula
Tibia
Calcaneous
Tarsus
Metatarsus
FIGURE 6-35
Anatomical features and landmarks: tibia, fibula, calcaneous, tarsus,
and metatarsus.
98
Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Dorsomedial/Plantarolateral Oblique
Projection of the Tarsus
Positioning:
●Patient is in dorsal recumbency in the V-trough.
· Place sponges under tarsus to bring cassette close to the tarsus.
·Tape affected tarsus to table.
● Tilt patient. approximately 15-20 degrees to achieve an oblique angle of the tarsus with the lateral side facing
the tube.
Centering:
+Center on tarsal joint.
Collimation:
·From the distal portion of the tibia to the proximal portion of the metatarsals.
Labeling:
·Place label lateral to the joint.
Technique:
·  Measure at center of tarsal joint.
Comments:
the lateral side of the tarsus.
FIGURE 6-36
Proper positioning for dorsomedial/plantarolateral oblique projection
of the tarsus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
99
FIGURE 6-37
Dorsomedial/plantarolateral oblique prajection of the tarsus.
Tibia
Calcaneous
Tarsus
Metatarsus
FIGURE 6-38
Anatomical features and landmarks: tibia, calcaneous, tarsus, and
metatarsus.
100
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Dorsoplantar Projection of the Metatarsus
Positioning:
·Patient is in dorsal recumbency in the V-trough.
· Place sponges under metatarsus to bring cassetfe close to the metatarsus.
+ Tape affected metatarsus to table.
Centering:
· Center on the metatarsal joint.
Collimation:
· From the distal portion of the tarsus to the proximal portion of the phalanges. Collimation through the distal
phalanges is also acceptable.
Labeling:
*Place label lateral to the joint.
Technique:
· Measure the center of the joint.
FIGURE 6-39
Proper positioning for dorsoplantar projection of the metatarsus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
101
DF
FIGURE 6-40
Dorsoplantar projection of the metatarsus.
Calcaneous
Tarsus
Metatarsus
Sesamoids
FIGURE 6-41
Anatomical features and landmarks: calcaneous, tarsus, metatarsus,
and sesamoids.
102
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Metatarsus
Positioning:
*Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
* Unaffected limb is taped around stifle and tarsus, and pulled up and out of the way.
Centering:
*Center on metatarsal joint.
Collimation:
·  From the distal portion of the tarsus to the proximal portion of the phalanges.
Labeling:
·Place label cranial to the joint.
Technique:
·Measure the center of the joint.
DFM
FIGURE 6-42
Proper positioning for lateral projection of the metatarsus.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
103
R
DFM
FIGURE 6-43
Lateral projection of the metatarsus.
Tibia
Calcaneous
Tarsus
Metatarsus
Sesamoic
FIGURE 6-44
Anatomical features and landmarks: tibia, calcaneous, tarsus,
metatarsus, and sesamoid.
104
 Chapter 6: Hindlimb Radiographs
Dorsopalmar Projection of the Digits
Positioning:
·Patient is in dorsal recumbency.
●Hindlimbs are pulled caudally individually
● Individually tape the medial toe (digit 2) and lateral toe (digit 5), and pull opposite of each other to spread the
toes. Alternatively place cotton balls between each toe.
+V-trough can help stabilize cranial half of body.
Centering:
* Center just. above digits.
Collimation:
● Include metatarsus through the distal end of the digits.
Labeling:
* Lateral to digits.
Technique:
·Measure midway between metatarsus and digits
Comments:
● Taping the digits open provides better visualization of the individual bones. If the patient does not have a
toenail or it is very short, tape around the digit itself.
* Typically, the metatarsus and digits are radiographed in a single view.
· The horizontal beam technique may also be useful.
FIGURE 6-45
Proper positioning for dorsopalmar projection of the digits.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
105
DFM
FIGURE 6-46
Dorsopalmar projection of the digits.
Metatarsus
Phalanx 1 of digit Il
 Phalanx 1 of digit V
Phalanx 1 of digit Ill
Phalanx 1 of digit IV
Phalanx 2 of digit Il
Phalanx 2 of digit V
Phalanx 2 of digit Ill
Phalanx 2 of digit IV
。
Distal Phalanges
FIGURE 6-47
Anatomical features and landmarks: metatarsus, phalanx I of digit V, phalanx I of
digit IV, phalanx I of digit Ill, phalanx I of digit Il, phalanx 2 of digit V, phalanx 2 of 
digit IV, phalanx 2 of digit ll, phalanx 2 of digit Il and distal phalanges.
106
Chapter 6: Hindimb Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Digits
Positioning:
* Patient is in lateral recumbency with affected limb down.
* Affected limb is pulled down in natural position.
·Sponge is placed under stifle to make the limb even and assist. with making metatarsus lateral.
● Individually tape the lateral toe (digit 5) and medial toe (digit 2), and pull the lateral toe cranially and the
 medial toe caudally.
Centering:
* Center just. above digits.
Collimation:
· Include all the metatarsal and digits.
Labeling:
● Cranial to label the lateral toe (digit 5).
Technique:
·Measure midway between metatarsus and digits
Comments:
●Taping the digits open provides better visualization of the individual bones. If the patient does not have a toe-
nail or it is very short, tape around the digit itself.
· Typically the metatarsus and digits are radiographed in a single view.
R
FIGURE 6-48
Proper positioning for lateral prajection of the digits.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
107
DFI
R
FIGURE 6-49
Lateral projection of the digits.
Digit I
Distal Phalange
Metatarsus
 Phalanx 1 of digit V
-Distal Phalange
Phalanx 2 of digit V
Phalanx 1 of digit Il
 Phalanx 1 of digit IV
Phalanx 1 of dligit Ill
 Phalanx 2 of digit IV
Phalanx 2 of digit Il
Phalanx 2 of
dligit II1
Distal Phalanges
FIGURE 6-50
digit ll, phalanx I of digit IV, phalanx I of digit V, digit I, phalanx 2 of digit Il,
 phalanx 2 of digit ll phalanx 2 of digit IV, phalanx 2 of digit V, and distal phalanges.
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER7
SKULL RADIOGRAPHS
OVERVIEW
Indications for examination of skull radiographs include evaluation of the tympanic bullae, nasal sinuses, and
foramen magnum, as well as evaluation to detect bone lesions.The patient must be positioned precisely
because evaluation often focuses on symmetry between the two sides of the skull Nearly all patients
require general anesthesia for proper positioning. The endotracheal tube may need to be removed or
repositioned before obtaining the exposure depending on the purpose of the radiograph.
For most small animals, the skull is approximately the same width both laterally and dorsoventrally
Most skull radiographs use a single measurement representing the widest area of the cranium.
Measurements for radiographs of the nasal passages are taken at a point slightly rostral to the widest area
of the cranium to avoid overexposing the air-filled sinuses.
For most routine radiographic studies of the skull a lateral projection and either a ventrodorsal (VD) or
dorsoventral (DV) view are obtained. For evaluation of the tympanic bullae, a DV view, right and left lateral
lateral view, either a DV orVD view,a frontal (rostrocaudal) view, and an open mouth view. Commonly used
Aa e pue sma anbiqo eael yal pue uu apnu suiol engiueuooduan aun jo uoneneaa dog suoalod
view. Although the entire skull may be included for most views, to enhance detail, the radiograph should be
The following pages illustrate the proper positioning and technique for skull radiographs.
109
110
Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
Lateral Projection of the Skull
Positioning:
●Right or left lateral recumbency with the affected side toward the cassette.
● Foam pads placed under the mandible to maintain the sagittal plane of the skull in a position parallel to the
x-ray cassette.
Centering:
· Lateral canthus of the eye socket.
Collimation:
· Occipital protuberance to the tip of the nose.
· Dorsal right and ventral skull fully within collimated area.
Labeling:
·Mark the side against. the x-ray cassette as either left or right.
Technique:
·  Measure at the widest point of the cranium.
Comments:
● The rami of the mandible and tympanic bullae are superimposed on the finished radiograph. If nontrauma-
  a   n   e   n a  s ae   
Position the skull so that the eyes or canine teeth are even and parallel with the cassette.
FIGURE 7-1
Proper positioning for lateral prajection of the skull.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians 
111
FIGURE 7-2
Lateral projection of the skull.
Mandible 
 Zygomatic arch 
Frontal sinus
Parietal bone
Maxilla
Cervical
vertebra
Tympanic
bulla
Temporal
 Mandible
bone
FIGURE 7-3
Anatomical features and landmarks: tympanic bulla, temporal bone, mandible,
zygomatic arch, parietal bone, frontal sinus, maxilla and cervical vertebra l.
112
 Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
DV Projection of the Skull
Positioning:
*Sternal recumbency.
●Sandbag placed across the cervical region to maintain placement of the head against the x-ray cassette.
● Tape can be used across the maxilla to maintain vertical alignment of the head on the x-ray cassette.
Centering:
*Midway between the tip of the nose to just caudal to the occipital protuberance at the base.
Collimation:
· Occipital protuberance to the tip of the nose.
* Zygomatic arches fully within collimated area.
Labeling:
*Mark either left. or right. dependent. side, or both
Technique:
·Measure at. the widest. point. of the cranium just. caudal to the orbit.
FIGURE 7-4
Proper positioning for DV projection of the skul
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
113
FIGURE 7-5
DV projection of the skull
Nasal septum
Mandible
Mandible
Zygomatic arch
Zygomatic arch
Tympanic bulla
Tympanic bulla
FIGURE 7-6
Anatomical features and landmarks: tympanic bulla zygomatic arch, mandible.
and nasal septum.
114
 Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
VD Projection of the Skull
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency.
● Foam pad or sandbag is positioned under neck to maintain hard palate in parallel alignment with x-ray
cassette.
* A V-trough can be used to aid in maintaining vertical alignment.
· Forelimbs are secured caudally.
· Foam pad under head or tape across mandibles to avoid rotation of head.
Centering:
●Midway between the tip of the nose to just caudal to the occipital protuberance at the base.
Colfimation:
· Occipital protuberance to the tip of the nose.
●Zygomatic arches fully within collimated area.
Labeling:
●Mark either left or right dependent side, or both.
Technique:
· Measure at the widest point of the cranium just caudal to the orbit.
Comments:
●This view should be included in a nasal series because the nasal passages are on the dorsal portion of the skull
and closest. to the cassette.
FIGURE 7-7
Proper positioning for VD projection of the skull.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
115
KK
FIGURE 7-8
VD projection of the skull.
Nasal septum
Mandible -
Mandible
Zygomatic arch
Zygomatic arch
Tympanic bulla
Tympanic bulla
FIGURE 7-9
Anatomical features and landmarks: tympanic bulla, zygomatic arch, mandible.
 and nasal septum.
116
 Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
Rostrocaudal Sinuses Closed Mouth Projection
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
· Foam pad or sandbag is positioned under neck.
·A V-trough can be used to aid in maintaining vertical align ment.
*Forelimbs are secured caudally.
d pue aas aex a oi ruadiad aeed pe u on apne asu  oi azne o ade o
to the x-ray beam.
Centering:
*Between the eyes.
Collimation:
*Zygomatic arches fully within collimated area.
Labeling:
* Mark either left. or right dependent side, or both
Technique:
· Measure midpoint at the level of the eyes.
Comments:
·This view is commonly referred to as the “skyline" view.
FIGURE 7-10
Proper positioning for rostrocaudal sinuses closed mouth projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
117
FIGURE 7-I1
 Rostrocaudal sinuses closed mouth projection.
Frontal sinuses
Zygomatic
Zygomatic
bone
bone
Turbinates
FIGURE 7-12
 Anatomical features and landmarks: turbinates, frontal sinuses, and zygomatic bone.
118
 Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
Rostrocaudal Foramen Magnum Projection
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
· Foam pad or sandbag is positioned under neck.
*A V-trough can be used to aid in maintaining vertical alignment.
+Forelimbs are secured caudally.
●Tape or gauze to direct nose caudally approximately 30 degrees with the mandible close to the chest.
Centering:
*Between the eyes.
Collimation:
● Include all of occipital crest to tympanic bullae.
· Zygomatic arches fully within collimated area.
Labeling:
· Mark either left. or right dependent side, or both
Technique:
·Measure midpoint at the level of the eyes.
Comments:
*This view is also referred to as the "keyhole" or "town-crown" view.
FIGURE 7-13
Proper positioning for rostrocaudal foramen magnum projection
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
119
R
FIGURE 7-14
Rostrocaudal foramen magnum projection.
Lateral frontal sinus
 Foramen magnum
Tympanic bulla
Tympanic bulla
Zygomatic
Zygomatic
bone
bone
FIGURE 7-15
Anatomical features and landmarks: tympanic bulla, foramen magnum, zygomatic bone, and lateral frontal sinus.
120
Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
VD Rostrocauda
Labeling:
·Mark either left or right dependent side, or both.
Nasal Open Mouth
Technique:
Projection
·Measure at the thickest area near the commissure
Positioning:
of the lip.
·Angling the beam may not be necessary in feline
* Dorsal recumbency.
patients, or the x-ray beam may be directed at. a
· With the skull placed outside, place caudal portion
5-10 degree angle.
of patient. in V-trough to aid in keeping the skull
and body straight.
·Position head so that the hard palate is in parallel
 alignment with x-ray cassette, tape across maxillary
canines, and secure to the sides of the table.
· Place tape across or behind mandibular canines,
and pull mandible along with the tongue and en-
dotracheal tube to open the mouth. Secure tape to
the sides of the V-trough.
+ Pull forelimbs and secure caudally.
Centering:
● Tilt tube head caudally approximately 15 degrees,
centering on the back of the palate.
● If using the cassette/Bucky tray, line up tray and
collimator light. to account for the tilt.
Colfimation:
· Horizontally inside the zygomatic arches, and ver-
tically from the tip of the maxilla to the back of
the palate, beyond where the mandible will super-
impose over it.
FIGURE 7-16
Proper positioning for VD rostrocaudal nasal open mouth projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians 
121
FIGURE 7-17
VD rostrocaudal nasal open mouth projection
Nasal septum
 Nasal and
Nasal and
maxillary turbinates
maxillary turbinates
Coronoid process
Coronoid process 
of mandible
of mandible
Zygomaticbone
Zygomatic bone
FIGURE 7-18
Anatomical features and landmarks: nasal and maxillary turbinates, zygomatic
bone, nasal septum, and coronoid process of mandible.
122
 Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
Rostrocauda
Tympanic Bullae
Open Mouth Projection
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
+ Foam pad or sandbag is positioned under neck.
*A V-trough can be used to aid in maintaining verti-
cal align men t.
* Forelimbs are secured caudally.
FIGURE 7-19
 Tape or gauze around maxilla to pull nose approxi-
Proper positioning for rostrocaudal tympanic bullae open mouth
mately 10 degrees cranially.
projection.
· Tape or gauze around mandible to pull mandible
Centering:
 Beam is centered just above the base of the tongue
commissure of the mouth.
Collimation:
 Zygomatic arches fully within collimated area with
enough lateral to include the marker.
Labeling:
· Mark either left. or right dependent side, or both.
Technique:
· Measure at the commissure of the mouth.
FIGURE 7-20
Comments:
Proper positioning for rostrocaudal projection in cats.
●A plastic-mouth speculum may also be used to main-
tain the open mouth position, taking care not to
allow the weight of the speculum to rotate the head.
· A 1 mL syringe barrel with the plunger removed
works well if you do not have a speculum. Cut both
ends of the barrel (nail trimmers work well for
this), and place open ends on the upper and lower
canine teeth. Length can be modified accordingly.
The rostrocaudal projection in cats can also be
taken with the mouth closed and the skull tipped
cranially approximately 10 degrees (Figures 7-20, 7-23,
and 7-24). This is due to the fact. that. cat bullae are ana-
tomically farther caudal on the skull than dog bullae.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
123
FIGURE 7-21
 Rostrocaudal tympanic bullae open mouth projection.
Coronoid process
Coronoidprocess
 of the mandible
of the mandible
Zygomatic bone
Zygomaticbone
Tympanic bulla
Tympanic bulla
Foramen
magnum
FIGURE 7-22
Anatomical features and landmarks: tympanic bulla, foramen magnum, coronoid process of the
mandible, and zygomatic bone.
124
Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
R
FIGURE 7-23
Rostrocaudal projection in cats.
Tympanic bulla
Tympanic bulla
Atlas (C,) cervical vertebra
Axis (C,) cervical vertebra Il
FIGURE 7-24
Anatomical features and landmarks: tympanic bulla, atlas (C) cervical vertebra I, and 
axis (C2) cervical vertebra ll.
This page intentionally left blank
126  Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
DV Tympanic Bullae Projection
Positioning:
*Sternal recumbency.
● Sandbag is placed across the cervical region to maintain placement of the head against the x-ray cassette.
· Tape can be used across the maxilla to maintain vertical alignment of the head on the x-ray cassette.
Centering:
* Palpate the base of the ear to determine placement on the skull. Center the beam on the dorsal midline of the
skull between the ears.
Collimation:
+Palpate the ear, and collimate just cranial and caudal to the ear.
· Right and left side of skull is fully within collimated area.
Labeling:
· Mark either left or right dependent side, or both.
Technique:
·Measure at the widest point. of the cranium just caudal to the orbit and over the bullae.
Comments:
· DV position is preferred due to the bullae being closer to the cassette.
FIGURE 7-25
Proper positioning for DV tympanic bullae projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians 
127
FIGURE 7-26
DV tympanic bullae prajection.
Coronoid process
Coronoid process
of mandible
of mandible 
Zygomatic bone
Zygomatic bone
Tympanic bulla
Tympanic bulla
Atlas-cervical vertebra |
 Atlas-cervical vertebra I
Axis-cervical vertebra Il
FIGURE 7-27
 Anatomical features and landmarks: tympanic bulla, zygomatic bone, coronoid process of mandible.
atlas-cervical vertebra I, and axis-cervical vertebra ll.
128
Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
Lateral Oblique
Comments:
*The projection should have the dependent bulla
Tympanic Bullae
isolated and not superimposed over the skull.
Projection
This oblique projection can also be used to obtain
images of the mandible or maxilla by collimating
to include the entire mandible or maxilla. Both
Positioning:
right and left lateral oblique views are required.
·Place patient in lateral recumbency.
·Right lateral recumbency for left. oblique bulla.
· Left lateral recumbency for the right bulla
· From the lateral position, allow the skull to oblique
itself naturally down toward the table approximately
30-40 degrees. This projects the down bulla and
keeps it from being superimposed over the skull.
Centering:
· Palpate and center over the ear to include both
dorsal and ven tral skull.
Collimation:
* Slightly cranial and caudal to the ear.
Labeling:
* Label the projected bulla.
· The patient in right lateral recumbency will have
the right marker dorsal and the left marker ven tral.
The patient in left lateral recumbency will have the
left marker dorsal and the right marker ventral.
Technique:
● Measure at the widest point of the cranium just.
FIGURE 7-28
caudal to the orbit and over the bullae.
Proper positioning for lateral oblique tympanic bullae prajection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
129
FIGURE 7-29
Lateral oblique tympanic bullae projection.
Tympanic bullae
Atlas C1
Axis C2
Mandible
Tympanicbullae
FIGURE 7-30
 Anatomical features and landmarks: tympanic bulla, atlas-cervical vertebra,
and mandible.
130
Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
Lateral Oblique
Labeling:
Temporomandibular
· Label the dependent temporomandibular joint.
loint Projection
Technique:
· Measure just caudal to the orbit in front of the ear
Positioning:
over the joint.
 Place patient in lateral recumbency; normally, both
Comments:
right and left lateral oblique views are obtained
from each patient.
· When evaluating for potential luxation, an open
·Right lateral recumbency for the right temporo-
mouth oblique view of each temporomandibular
 man dibular joint.
joint might be required.
* Left. lateral recumbency for the left temporo-
man dibular joint.
 From the lateral position, allow the skull to oblique
itself naturally down toward the table approximately
10 degrees. This projects the temporomandibular
joint down and keeps it from being superimposed
over the skull.
● Place a small sponge to lift the rostral part of the
skull (at the nose) up approximately 10 degrees
 project the temporomandibular joint rostral and
keep it from being superimposed over the skull.
Centering:
· The beam is centered just cranial to the ear or
bulla.
Colfimation:
FIGURE 7-31
·Collimate just cranial and caudal to the joint.
Proper positioning for lateral oblique temporomandibular joint
projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians 
131
FIGURE 7-32
Lateral oblique temporomandibular joint projection.
TMJ Temporomandibular joint
Mandible
Tympanic bullae
FIGURE 7-33
 Anatomical features and landmarks: temporomandibular joint,
tympanic bulla, and mandible.
132  Chapter 7: Skull Radiographs
DV Temporomandibular Joint Projection
Positioning:
*Sternal recumbency.
● Sandbag is placed across the cervical region to maintain placement of the head against the x-ray cassette.
· Tape can be used across the maxilla to maintain vertical alignment of the head on the x-ray cassette.
Centering:
· Palpate the base of the ear to determine placement just rostral on the skull. Center the beam on the dorsal
midline of the skull just rostral to the bullae or ears.
Colfimation:
·Collimate just cranial and caudal to the joint.
·Right and left. side of skull fully within collimated area.
Labeling:
●Mark either left or right dependent side, or both.
Technique:
·Measure at the widest. point. of the cranium just caudal to the orbit and over the joint.
Comments:
● DV is preferred because the temporomandibular joint is located on the ventral portion of the skull and closer
to the cassette.
FIGURE 7-34
Proper positioning for DV temporomandibular joint projection
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
133
FIGURE 7-35
DV temporomandibular joint projection.
Coronoid process 
of mandible
Left temporo-
Right temporo-
 mandibular joint
mandibular joint
Articular process of
Articular process of
 mandibular ramus
 mandibular ramus
Zygomatic arch
Zygomatic arch
Tympanic bullae
Tympanic bullae
FIGURE 7-36
 Anatomical features and landmarks: tympanic bulla zygomatic arch, articular process of mandibular
ramus, and coronoid process of mandible.
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER8
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHS
OVERVIEW
pue arensre ue urergo ot sanbiuuoat suuonisod oynads sanban yaat aun jo uoneaa jadoid
sufficiently detailed view of the teeth. Skull radiographs are not of sufficient detail to be diagnostic
when evaluating oral pathology. Although standard x-ray machines can be used to position
patients for dental radiology, exposures can be most easily accomplished with a radiology unit
specific for dentistry.
Because the palate of dogs and cats is not arched as it is in humans, a bisecting angle technique
is used to position the head of the x-ray unit to create an exact image of the tooth on the film.
Because the roots are embedded in the maxillary bone,if the film was parall to the tooth in the
maxillary arcade, the image of the roots would not be on the film because the palate would get in
the way. To aid in understanding the bisecting angle technique, imagine a person standing in a flat
desert with nothing around. The sun (beam) is directly over the individual's head. A shadow (image)
would be a very undistinguishable blob on the ground (film). It would not reveal any important
information as to the shape and size of the individual. Alternatively,if the sun (beam) sat just above
se uoeoui alene kue aaie nou pinom ls pue uol aay oe aq pinom mopeus ayn uozoy au
to shape and size of the individual. If the sun was positioned exactly halfway between its location at
high noon and just before sunset, the shadow behind the individual would be as tall as the individual
135
136  Chapter 8: Dental Radiographs
and would represent accurate details about the
The following pages illustrate the proper positioning
individual's image. At this exact point,the sun is creatingfor dental radiographs. Note that there are slight
a beam that is hitting the bisecting angle perpendicularly. differences in the views taken for dogs and cats, so
Intraoral film is positioned so that the vertical
each species is described separately.Also note that 
axis of the tooth and the horizontal axis of the film
collimation for intraoral x-ray units is automatic, and
Treate an angle. Bisect that angle or cut that angle in
film identification labels are always placed on the dimple
half with an imaginary line. The x-ray beam is then
convex side of the film toward the x-ray tube so each
placed exactly perpendicular to that bisecting plane. If 
required position contains descriptive information for
the angle of the tube is too steep, the image will be
the patient positioning and centering of the x-ray beam.
foreshortened. If the angle of the tube is too shallow,
the image will be too elongated.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
137
Canine Upper
Incisor Arcade
Positioning:
*Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
 Center image so that two middle incisors are equi-
distant from edge of image and visualize at least
 3 mm periapical bone.
FIGURE 8-1
Proper positioning for canine upper incisor arcade.
FIGURE 8-2
Canine upper incisor arcade.
138
Chapter 8: Dental Radiographs
Canine Upper
Canine Tooth
Positioning:
· Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
Apex of tooth visible with at least 3 mm periapical
bone.
FIGURE 8-3
Proper positioning for canine upper canine tooth.
FIGURE 8-4
 Canine upper canine tooth.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
139
Canine Upper
Premolars
Positioning:
* Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
 Apex of teeth visible with at least 3 mm periapical
bone.
FIGURE 8-5
 Proper positioning for canine upper premolars.
FIGURE 8-6
Canine upper premolars.
140
Chapter 8: Dental Radiographs
Canine Upper
Fourth Premolars
and Molars
Positioning:
· Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
 Apex of teeth visible with at least. 3 mm periapical
bone.
· Swing tube head rostrally or distally to separate
superimposed mesial buccal and palatal roots of
fourth premolar.
FIGURE 8-7
Proper positioning for canine upper fourth premolars and molars.
FIGURE 8-8
Canine upper fourth premolars and molars.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
141
Canine Lower
Incisor Arcade
Positioning:
* Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
distant from edge of image and visualize at least
3 mm periapical bone.
FIGURE 8-9
Proper positioning for canine lower incisor arcade.
FIGURE 8-10
Canine lower incisor arcade.
142
Chapter 8: Dental Radiographs
Canine Lower Canine
Tooth and Lower
Premolar Arcade
Positioning:
● Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
· Apex of tooth visible with at least. 3 mm periapical
bone.
Comments:
·View may be taken with bisecting angle or parallel
technique.
FIGURE 8-11
Proper positioning for canine lower canine tooth and lower premo-
lar arcade.
FIGURE 8-12
Canine lower canine tooth and lower premolar arcade.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
143
Canine Lower
Premolar Arcade
Positioning:
* Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
 Apex of teeth visible with at least. 3 mm periapical
bone.
Comments:
· View is to be taken using parallel technique.
FIGURE 8-13
Proper positioning for canine lower premolar arcade.
FIGURE 8-14
Canine lower premolar arcade.
144
Chapter 8: Dental Radiographs
Canine Lower
Molars
Positioning:
Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
Apex of teeth visible with at least 3 mm periapical
bone.
Comments:
 View is to be taken using parallel technique.
FIGURE 8-15
Proper positioning for canine lower molars.
FIGURE 8-16
 Canine lower molars.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
145
Feline Upper Incisor
Arcade
Positioning:
*Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
distant from edge of image and visualize at least
3 mm periapical bone.
FIGURE 8-17
Proper positioning for feline upper incisor arcade.
FIGURE 8-18
Feline upper incisor arcade.
146
Chapter 8: Dental Radiographs
Feline Upper Canine
Tooth
Positioning:
Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
 Apex of tooth visible with at least 3 mm periapical
bone.
FIGURE 8-19
Proper positioning for feline upper canine tooth.
FIGURE 8-20
Feline upper canine tooth.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
147
Feline Upper
Premolars and Molar
Positioning:
· Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
Apex of teeth visible with at least 3 mm periapical
bone.
Swing tube head rostrally or distally to separate
superimposed mesial buccal and palatal roots of
fourth premolar.
FIGURE 8-21
veow pue seowaud jaddn aua, doj aujuogisod adoid
FIGURE 8-22
 Feline upper premolars and molar.
148
 Chapter 8: Dental Radiographs
Feline Lower ncisor
Arcade
Positioning:
* Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
 Center image so that two middle incisors are equi-
distant from edge of image and visualize at least.
3 mm periapical bone.
FIGURE 8-23
 Proper positioning for feline lower incisor arcade.
FIGURE 8-24
Feline lower incisor arcade.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
149
Feline Lower Canine
Tooth
Positioning:
*Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
Apex of tooth visible with at least 3 mm periapical
bone.
FIGURE 8-25
Proper positioning for feline lower canine tooth
FIGURE 8-26
Feline lower canine tooth.
150
 Chapter 8: Dental Radiographs
Feline Lower
Premolars and Molar
Arcade
Positioning:
Lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Centering:
 Apex of teeth visible with at least 3 mm periapical
bone.
FIGURE 8-27
Proper positioning for feline lower premolars and molar arcade.
FIGURE 8-28
Feline lower premolars and molar arcade.
CHAPTER
SPINAL RADIOGRAPHS
OVERVIEW
Radiographs of the vertebral column are used to detect bony lesions as well as evaluate intervertebral disc space. Careful
 positioning is necessary to maintain the vertebral column parallel to the xray cassete and to allow the vertebral column
to be placed as near to the x-ray cassette as possible. Positioning aids are used as supportive devices to maintain the spine
parallel to the tabletop. Placing a piece of tape along the spinal column before moving the patient onto the x-ray table
may aid in maintaining proper alignment (Figure 9-1)
Commonly obtained views of the vertebral
column include lateral and ventrodorsal (VD)
 projections of the cervical area, thoracic area.
thoracolumbar junction, lumbar area, lumbosacral
area, sacral area, and coccygeal (caudal) vertebrae.
Cervical spine evaluations may also require flexed and
extended views. To enhance detail, spinal radiographs 
are tightly collimated. Care must be taken to ensure
that directional and identification labels placed before
making the exposure are within the collimated area and
not overlapping any portion of the vertebral column.
The following pages illustrate the proper positioning and 
FIGURE 9-1
technique for spinal radiographs.
Use of tape to maintain proper alignment.
151
152
Chapter 9: Spinal Radiographs
VD Cervical Spine Projection
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency.
· Foam pad is placed under neck to maintain spinal column parallel to x-ray cassette.
*Forelimbs are secured evenly and caudally.
Centering:
· C4-C5 intervertebral space.
Collimation:
·Base of the skull to the spine of the scapula.
Labeling:
*R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas.
* Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
·Measure at. the area of the C4-C5 intervertebral space.
Comments:
· For very large patients, when there is a significant difference in measurement between the cranial and caudal
areas of the cervical spine, two views should be taken. The first view is centered on the C2-C3 space and col
limated from the base of the skull to C4. The second view is remeasured and centered on the C5-C6 space and
collimated to contain C4-T1.
FIGURE 9-2
Proper position for VD cervical spine prajection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
153
FIGURE 9-3
VD) cervical spine projection.
Skull
C1 (Atlas)
C2 (Axis)
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
FIGURE 9-4
Anatomical features and landmarks: skull, CI (atlas), C2 (axis), C3,
C4, C5, C6, and C7.
154
1Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
Lateral Cervical Spine Projection
Positioning:
*Right or left lateral recumbency.
● Foam pad is placed under mandible to maintain spinal column parallel to x-ray cassette and secured with a
san dbag.
* Forelimbs are secured evenly and caudally.
*Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column.
Centering:
* C4-C5 intervertebral space.
Collimation:
·Base of the skull to the spine of the scapula.
Labeling:
*R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas to indicate side facing closest. to x-ray cassette.
+Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
●Measure at the area of the C4-C5 intervertebral space.
Comments:
*Neck should be in a natural position, not. flexed or extended.
FIGURE 9-5
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
155
FIGURE 9-6
Lateral cervical spine projection.
Atlas
Axis
C3
Scapula
4
5
Occipital condyle
Neural canal
C6
C7
FIGURE 9-7
Anatomical features and landmarks: occipital condyle, atlas, axis, C3, C4, neural canal, C5,
and scapula.
156
 Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
Lateral Cervical Spine Extended Projection
Positioning:
*Right or left lateral recumbency.
● Foam pad is placed under mandible to maintain spinal column parallel to x-ray cassette and secured with a
san dbag.
· Forelimbs are secured evenly and caudally.
· Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column.
·The neck is extended or pushed dorsally.
Centering:
+ C4-C5 intervertebral space.
Collimation:
·Base of the skull to the spine of the scapula.
Labeling:
+R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas to indicate side facing closest. to x-ray cassette.
*Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
● Measure at. the area of the C4-C5 intervertebral space.
Comments:
*To be in true extension, it is not enough just to push the skull dorsally; the whole cervical spine from C7 cranial
 needs to be extended dorsally.
FIGURE 9-8
Proper position for lateral cervical spine extended projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
157
FIGURE 9-9
Lateral cervical spine extended projection.
Atlas
Axis
C3
Scapula
C4
5
 Occipital condyles
C6
FIGURE 9-10
Anatomical features and landmarks: occipital condyles, atlas, axis, C3, C4, C5, scapula,
and C6.
158
Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
Lateral Cervical Spine Flexed Projection
Positioning:
* Right or left lateral recumbency.
· Head is directed ventrally and caudally toward the humeri and can be secured with a sandbag to maintain
flexion on the dorsal part of the skull.
· Forelimbs are secured evenly and caudally
· Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column.
Centering:
* C4-C5 intervertebral space.
Collimation:
●Base of the skull to the spine of the scapula
Labeling:
●R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas to indicate side facing closest. to x-ray cassette.
* Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
·Measure at the area of the C4-C5 intervertebral space.
Comments:
· Take care not to hyperflex the neck. Flexion must be even throughout all cervical vertebrae starting at C7.
FIGURE 9-11
Proper position for lateral cervical spine flexed projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
159
FIGURE 9-12
Lateral cervical spine flexed projection.
Axis C2
C3
C4
C5
Atlas C1
FIGURE 9-13
Anatomical features and landmarks: atlas Cl, axis C2, C3, C4, and C5.
160
 Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
VD Thoracic Spine Projection
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
*Forelimbs extended evenly and cranially.
* V-trough or san dbags to maintain vertical alignment.
Centering:
· Caudal border of scapula at approximately the sixth or seventh thoracic vertebra.
Collimation:
· Halfway between xiphoid and last rib to spine of the scapula
* Must include C7-L1.
Labeling:
*R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas.
* Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
· Measure at highest. (thickest) point of sternum.
FIGURE 9-14
Proper position for VD thoracic spine projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
161
R
FIGURE 9-15
VD thoracic spine prajection.
Spinous
process
T1
of C7
2nd rib
Heart
FIGURE 9-16
Anatomical features and landmarks: LI, TI1 3, TI, C7, spinous 
process of C7, 2nd rib, and heart.
162
 Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
Lateral Thoracic Spine Projection
Positioning:
* Right or left lateral recumbency.
· Forelimbs are extended evenly and slightly cranially.
·Hin dlimbs are extended evenly and slightly caudally.
· Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column
Centering:
● Caudal border of scapula at approximately the sixth or seventh thoracic vertebra.
Collimation:
*Must include C7-L1.
Labeling:
●R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas to indicate side facing closest to x-ray cassette.
* Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
*Measure at the midpoint. of the xiphoid or the highest point of the thorax.
FIGURE 9-17
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
163
FIGURE 9-18
Lateral thora.cic spine projection.
6
T10
T13
L1
FIGURE 9-19
Anatomical features and landmarks: T1, T6, T10, T12, TI3, and LI
164
 Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
VD Thoracolumbar Spine Projection
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
· Forelimbs are extended evenly and slightly cranially.
·Hindlimbs are extended evenly and slightly caudally.
·Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column.
Centering:
●Halfway between collimation points.
Collimation:
·Xiphoid to last rib.
Labeling:
*R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas.
* Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
●Measure at the midpoint of the xiphoid or the highest point of the thorax.
FIGURE 9-20
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
165
R
EA
FIGURE 9-21
VD thora.columbar spine prajection.
T10
T13
ntevertebral disc
spacebetween T13 and L1
Spinous process
L2
FIGURE 9-22
Anatomical features and landmarks: TI0-L2, intervertebral disc space
between TI3 and LI, and spinous process.
166
Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
Lateral Thoracolumbar Spine Projection
Positioning:
* Right or left lateral recumbency.
● Forelimbs are extended evenly and slightly cranially.
*Hindlimbs are extended evenly and slightly caudally.
· Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column.
Centering:
·Halfway between collimation points.
Collimation:
·Xiphoid to last rib.
Labeling:
●R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas to indicate side facing closest. to x-ray cassette.
Technique:
·Measure at the midpoint. of the xiphoid or the highest point of the thorax.
FIGURE 9-23
Proper position for lateral thoracolumbar spine projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
167
FIGURE 9-24
Lateral thoracolumbar spine projection.
Neural canal
L1
Spinous process
T13
Transverseprocess
12th rib
13th rib
FIGURE 9-25
Anatomical features and landmarks: T13, L1, 12th rib, 13th rib, neural canal, spinous process
and transverse process.
168
 Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
VD Lumbar Spine Projection
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
· Forelimbs are extended evenly and slightly cranially.
·Hin dlimbs are extended evenly and slightly caudally.
· Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column.
Centering:
●Palpate xiphoid and the wing of the ilium, and place the center halfway between these two points.
Collimation:
·Xiphoid to acetabulum.
Labeling:
*R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas.
* Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
*Measure at mid-lumbar spine.
FIGURE 9-26
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
169
R
FIGURE 9-27
VD lumbar spine projection.
T13
Spinous
process
13th rib
L1
Spinous process
of L5
Wing of
ilium
FIGURE 9-28
 Anatomical features and landmarks: I3th rib, spinous process, TI3.
LI, spinous process of L5, L7, and wing of ilium.
170
 Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
Lateral Lumbar Spine Projection
Positioning:
* Right or left lateral recumbency.
* Forelimbs are extended evenly and sligh tly cranially.
*Hindlimbs are extended evenly and slightly caudally.
· Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column.
Centering:
*L3-4.
Collimation:
*Xiphoid to acetabulum.
Labeling:
●R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas to indicate side facing closest. to x-ray cassette.
Technique:
*Measure mid-lumbar spine.
FIGURE 9-29
Proper position for lateral lumbar spine projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
171
8
FIGURE 9-30
Lateral lumbar spine projection.
T13
Spinous process of L4
Wing of the ilium
13th Rib
L7
Sacrum
FIGURE 9-31
Anatomical features and landmarks: T13, I3th rib, spinous process of L4, wing of the ilium, L7.
and sacrum.
172
 Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
VD Lumbosacral Spine Projection
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency in V-trough.
* Forelimbs are extended evenly and slightly cranially.
*Hindlimbs are extended evenly and slightly caudally.
· Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column.
Centering:
· Palpate the wing of the ilium, and center just. caudal and midpelvis.
Collimation:
● Sixth lumbar vertebra to iliac crest
Labeling:
*R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas.
* Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
*Measure at the wing of the ilium.
FIGURE 9-32
Proper position for VD lumbosacral spine projection
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
173
R
DFM
FIGURE 9-33
VD lumbosa.cral spine projection.
6th lumbar
vertebra
Transverse
process
Illium
7th lumbar
vertebra
Sacrum
Coccygeal
vertebra
FIGURE 9-34
Anatomical features and landmarks: 7th lumbar vertebra, sacrum, coccygeal 
vertebra,ilium, 6th lumbar vertebra, and transverse process.
174  Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
Lateral Lumbosacral Spine Projection
Positioning:
*Right or left lateral recumbency.
· Forelimbs are extended evenly and slightly cranially.
· Hindlimbs are extended evenly and slightly caudally.
● Foam pad may be needed along the sternum to avoid rotation of the spinal column.
Centering:
·  Palpate the wing of the ilium and the dorsal spinous process of the lumbosacral region, and center just caudal
to the wing of the ilium. There is a distinct divot. at the lumbosacral junction.
Colfimation.
· Cranial to include L-6 lumbar vertebrae to iliac crest to include the first cranial caudal vertebrae (tail)
Labeling:
●R/L marker is within collimated area away from bony areas to indicate side facing closest to x-ray cassette.
of bone.
Technique:
·  Measure thickest. area just caudal to the wing of the ilium
Comments:
*Alternate views include flexed and extended views of the lumbosacral junction.
FIGURE 9-35
 Proper position for lateral lumbosacral spine prajection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
175
FIGURE 9-36
Lateral lumbosacral spine projection.
Wings of ilia
Spinous
Spinous
process of L5
process of L6
Spinous
process of L7
Sacrum
1st Coccygeal
 3rd Coccygeal
vertebrae
vertebrae
Transverse
process of L5
2nd Coccygeal
vertebrae
L5
L6
Transverse
L7
process of L6
llia (superimposed)
FIGURE 9-37
Anatomical features and landmarks: Ist coccygeal vertebrae, 2nd coccygeal vertebrae, 3rd coccygeal 
vertebrae, sacrum, spinous process of L7, spinous process of L6, spinous process of L5, transverse 
process of L5, transverse process of L6, L5, L6, L7, ilia (superimposed), and wings of ilia.
176
 Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
VD Coccygeal (Caudal) Spine Projection
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
*V-trough or sandbags to maintain dorsal recumbency.
●Hindlimbs in natural position.
*Tail extended caudally.
Centering:
● Midway from the sacrum to the tip of the tail.
Collimation:
· Cranial to the sacrum to the tip of the tail.
Labeling:
*R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas.
· Identification in caudal region.
Technique:
· Measure at thickest part of tail.
Comments:
●Tape may be used to maintain vertical alignment of the tail.
FIGURE 9-38
Proper position for VD coccygeal (caudal) spine projection.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians
177
FIGURE 9-39
VD coccygeal (caudal) pine projection.
Wing of ilium
Wing of ilium
Sacrum
1st coccygeal vertebra
 2nd coccygeal vertebra
 3rd coccygeal vertebra
 Femoral head
 4th coccygeal vertebra
Femoral
head
Ishium
: 6th coccygeal vertebra
7th coccygeal vertebra
lshium
 8th coccygeal vertebra
9th coccygeal vertebra
 10th coccygeal vertebra
11th coccygeal vertebra
FIGURE 9-40
Anatomical features and landmarks: sacrum, wing of ilium, Ist coccygeal vertebra.
3rd coccygeal vertebra, 2nd coccygeal vertebra, ischium, femoral head, 4th coccygeal
vertebra, 6th coccygeal vertebra, 7th coccygeal vertebra, 8th coccygeal vertebra, 9th
coccygeal vertebra, IOth coccygeal vertebra, and IIth coccygeal vertebra.
178
 Chapter 9 : Spinal Radiographs
Lateral Coccygeal (Caudal) Spine Projection
Positioning:
* Right or left lateral recumbency.
Centering:
●Midway from the sacrum to the tip of the tail.
Collimation:
·Cranial to the sacrum to the tip of the tail.
Labeling:
·R/L marker within collimated area away from bony areas
· Identification label in caudal region.
Technique:
+ Measure at thickest part. of tail.
Comments:
● Cassette may be elevated off the table to maintain alignment of the tail and spine, and bring the tail closer to
on the size of the patient.
* Tape may be needed to keep the tail in vertical alignment.
FIGURE 9-41
Proper position for lateral coccygeal (caudal) spine projection
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians
179
FIGURE 9-42
Lateral coccygeal (caudal) spine projection.
Cranialarticularprocesses
Coccygeal
Intervertebral
vertebralbodies
space
FIGURE 9-43
Anatomical features and landmarks: cranial articular processes, coccygeal vertebral bodies, and intervertebral space.
This page intentionally left blank
APTERO
RADIOGRAPHY OF AVIAN AND EXOTIC
ANIMALS
OVERVIEW
There are many unique aspects of radiology relating to obtaining diagnostic quality radiographs of birds, reptiles,
amphibians, and small mammals. The type of film and cassettes used, the focal point,collimation,exposure time,
and restraint procedures require modification from the standard techniques used for dogs and cats.
Mammography film and cassettes are routinely used for avian and exotic animal radiology.
si wly aul'sanassin uaauns uisuaui auis ae sanasin au pue uosina auis e si wly udeoue
placed in the cassette with the dark side of the film facing the dark side of the cassette, and the light side
facing the light side (Figure I0-1).
The cassette is placed on the tabletop and the x-ray tube head moved to achieve a focal-spot distance
of 40 inches (l00 cm).This results in a magnification of the image on the film and aids in evaluation of the
radiograph in these smallspecies. Close collimation around the area of interest will help decrease scatter
radiation and maximize detail
Exposure tirme and settings used will vary with the type of film and radiographic equipment available
300, exposure time of I/10 second, and a kilovolt peak (kVp) between 40 and 50 will generally yield a
second, and a kVp between 40 and 50 will achieve a good-quality film.
181
182
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
restraint. In some calm birds, physical restraint. using
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF
tape or commercial restraint devices can be used. Heavy
RESTRAINT
metal examination of avian patients can be quickly
hq iaded e u p ls e huend kq pause 
 Proper patient restraint is required to minimize or
(Figure 10-2). The bag is then placed directly on the
eliminate any movement that will result in a blurred
or low-quality image. This can be accomplished with
 x-ray cassette. Large birds can stand directly on the cas-
either physical restraint or chemical restraint.
sette, or the horizontal beam can be used and the bird
 In many avian patients, physical restraint is gener-
 placed in a perch.
Most lizards and turtles will quietly sit on the cas-
ally considered unacceptable, especially in large, pow-
erful birds, highly stressed or fractious birds, and birds
sette without any restraint for the dorsal-ventral view.
with injuries that can be exacerbated with struggling. In
More excitable reptiles can be restrained with the use of
these cases, chemical restraint is used. Inhalation anes-
tape, sandbags, or cotton ball Vetwrap hoods (Figures
10-3 and 10-4). The cotton ball Vetwrap hood helps
thesia (sevoflurane orisoflurane) is suitable for chemical
FIGURE I0-1
FIGURE 10-3
Proper flm placement in cassette.
 Restraint techniques for reptiles.
FIGURE I0-2
FIGURE 10-4
Radiography of birds.
 Restraint technique for reptiles.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning forVeterinary Technicians
183
calm the patient. Very fractious or aggressive patients
may need some form of chemical restraint.
Restraint of a snake can be challenging. Tape and
sandbag restraints prove to be ineffective. Generally,
manual restraint is the best. Manual restraint or the use
of acrylic tubes is the most common form of restraint.
for snakes (Figures 10-5 and 10-6).
 Rabbits and ferrets can be physically restrained with
techniques similar to those used with cats. Anesthesia
may be recommended in the rabbit or ferret that is frac-
tious or stressed.
FIGURE I0-5
 Restraint of snakes.
FIGURE 10-6
Radiography of snakes.
184
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral View of the Avian Patient
Positioning:
·Right lateral recumbency.
· Wings are extended dorsally and secured with tape at the carpal joint.
· Sternum should be parallel to the cassette.
* Legs are pulled caudally and secured with tape.
Centering:
+Midsternum.
Collimation:
Wholebody.
Labeling:
· Right marker within the collimated area in cranial aspect of the sternum.
Technique:
· Measure the thickest point of the chest.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
185
FIGURE10-7
 Proper positioning for lateral view of the avian patient.
FIGURE 10-8
Lateral view of the avian patient.
186
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Ventrodorsal View of the Avian Patient
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency.
· Neck is extended, and sponges are used to support the head, parallel to the cassette.
●Wings are extended lateral from the body and secured with tape at the carpal joint.
· Sternum should be placed directly over the spinal column.
* Legs are pulled caudally and secured individually with tape.
Centering:
*Midsternum.
Collimation:
Whole body.
Labeling:
R/L marker within the collimated area.
Technique:
*Measure the thickest point of the chest.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
187
FIGURE 10-9
 Proper positioning for ventrodorsal view of the avian patient.
FIGURE 10-10
Ventrodorsal view of the avian patient.
188
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Dorsoventral View of the Lizard
Positioning:
Ventral recumbency.
· Forelimbs and hindlimbs are gently placed lateral to the body.
· Tape may be used to secure in position.
Centering:
*Midbody region.
Collimation:
Whole body, include the head, legs, and cranial aspect of the tail.
Labeling:
·R/L marker within collimated area.
Technique:
· Measure the thickest point of the body.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
681
FIGURE 10-I1
 Proper positioning for dorsoventral view of the lizard.
R
FIGURE 10-12
Dorsoventral view of the lizard.
190
Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral View of the Lizard
Positioning:
 Right lateral recumbency.
· Forelimbs are pulled ventral and cranial of the body.
* Hindlimbs are pulled ventral and caudal of the body.
●Both forelimbs and hindlimbs can be secured with Vetwrap to minimize struggling (Figure 10-13).
* Secure limbs with tape.
● Tape across shoulders and hips to secure the body; sponges may be used to maintain horizontal position.
Centering:
*Midbody region.
Collimation:
·Whole body, include the head, legs, and the cranial aspect of the tail.
Labeling:
·R/ L marker within collimated area.
Technique:
· Measure the thickest point of the body.
办
FIGURE 10-13
Restraint of the lizard.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
191
FIGURE 10-14
Proper positioning for lateral view of the lizard.
FIGURE 10-15
Lateral view of the lizard.
192
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral View of the Lizard with
the Horizontal Beam
Positioning:
Ventrodorsal recumbency.
· Ensure that the body is as close to the cassette as possible.
Centering:
*Midbody region.
Collimation:
· Whole body, including head and cranial aspect of the tail.
Labeling:
·R/L marker taped to the cassette above the patient.
Technique:
*Measure the thickest. point of the body.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
193
ereal-heef
FIGURE 10-16
 Proper positioning for lateral view of the lizard with the horizontal beam.
FIGURE 10-17
Lateral view of the lizard with the horizontal beam.
194
 Chapter I0: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Dorsoventral View of the Turtle
Positioning:
Ventral recumbency.
·Forelimbs and hindlimbs are gently placed lateral to the body.
· Tape may be used to secure in position.
Centering:
*Midbody region.
Colfimation:
i aul jo ioadse eno pue sat 'eay aul apnu o aoum 
Labeling:
R/L marker within collimated area.
Technique:
· Measure the thickest point of the body.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
195
FIGURE 10-18
Proper positioning for dorsoventral view of the turtle.
FIGURE 10-19
Dorsoventral view of the turtle.
196
 Chapter I0: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral View of the Turtle with
the Horizontal Beam
Positioning:
Ventrodorsal recumbency.
· Ensure that the body is as close to the cassette as possible.
Centering:
Midbody region.
Collimation:
Whole body, including head and cranial aspect of the tail.
Labeling:
· R/L marker taped to the cassette above the patient
Technique:
·Measure the thickest point of the body.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
197
FIGURE 10-20
Proper positioning for lateral view of the turtle with the horizontal beam.
FIGURE 10-21
Lateral view of the turtle with the horizontal beam.
198
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral View of the Rabbit Abdomen
Positioning:
*Right lateral recumbency.
* Forelimbs are extended cranially and hindlimbs caudally; secure with tape.
● Sternum should be parallel to the cassette; this can be accomplished with the use of sponges.
Centering:
* Cen ter slightly cranial of the last. rib.
Colfimation:
*Slightly cranial of the xiphoid and slightly caudal of the pubis.
Labeling:
 R marker is placed in the inguinal area.
Technique:
·Measure at the last. rib.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
199
FIGURE10-22
Proper positioning for lateral view of the rabbit abdomen.
FIGURE 10-23
Lateral view of the rabbit abdomen.
200
 Chapter I0: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Anirmals
Ventrodorsal View of the Rabbit Abdomen
Positioning:
*Dorsal recumbency.
* The front portion is secured with sandbags to keep the trunk bilaterally symmetrical.
· The hind limbs are extended and secured with sandbags or tape.
Centering:
·Slightly caudal to the last. rib.
Collimation:
*Slightly cranial of the xiphoid and slightly caudal of the pubis.
Labeling:
 R marker is placed in the inguinal area.
Technique:
·Measure at the last. rib
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
201
FIGURE 10-24
Proper positioning for ventrodorsal view of the rabbit abdomen.
FIGURE 10-25
Ventrodorsal view of the rabbit abdomen.
202
 Chapter I0: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Anirmals
Lateral View of the Rabbit Thorax
Positioning:
*Right lateral recumbency.
* Forelimbs are extended cranially and hindlimbs caudally; secure with tape.
● Sternum should be parallel to the cassette; this can be accomplished with the use of sponges.
Centering:
·Center on sternum.
Colfimation:
*Slightly cranial of the thoracic inlet and slightly caudal of the last rib.
Labeling:
·R marker is placed just behind the forelegs.
Technique:
·Measure at the last rib
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
203
FIGURE 10-26
 Proper positioning for lateral view of the rabbit thorax.
R
FIGURE 10-27
Lateral view of the rabbit thorax.
204
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Ventrodorsal View of the Rabbit Thorax
Positioning:
·Dorsal recumbency.
*Forelimbs are extended cranially and hindlimbs caudally, secure with tape.
· Sternum should be placed directly over the spinal column.
Centering:
+Center on fourth intercostal space
Colfimation:
·Slightly cranial of the thoracic inlet and slightly caudal of the last. rib.
Labeling:
·R marker is placed just behind the forelegs.
Technique:
· Measure at the last rib
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
205
北
FIGURE 10-28
Proper positioning for ventrodorsal view of the rabbit thorax.
FIGURE 10-29
Ventrodorsal view of the rabbit thorax.
206
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral View of the Rabbit Skull
Positioning:
· Lateral recumbency.
●Use sponge wedges under the neck and nose to align to skull parallel to the cassette and prevent obliquity.
·Position the ears at. the top of the skull, ensuring they are away from the area to be viewed.
Centering
+Midskull.
Collimation:
Cranial of the nose and just caudal of the base of the skull.
Labeling:
· Just above the nose.
Technique:
+ Thickest. portion of the skull.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
207
FIGURE 10-30
Proper positioning for lateral view of the rabbit skull.
FIGURE 10-3I
Lateral view of the rabbit skull.
208
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Dorsoventral View of the Rabbit Skull
Positioning:
Dorsoventral recumbency.
*Secure to head flat to the cassette with tape at the base of the skull.
● Position the ears to the sides, ensuring they are away from the viewing area.
·Ensure that the skull is parallel to the cassette.
Centering:
*Midskull.
Collimation:
Cranial of the nose and just caudal of the base of the skull.
Labeling:
Beside thenose.
Technique:
+ Thickest portion of the skull.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
209
FIGURE 10-32
Proper positioning for dorsoventral view of the rabbit skull
FIGURE 10-33
Dorsoventral view of the rabbit skull.
210
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral Oblique View of the Rabbit Skull
Positioning:
· Lateral recumbency (right or left)
● Sponge wedges are placed under the skull, tilting the head at a 45-degree angle to the cassette.
·Position the ears to the sides, ensuring they are away from the viewing area.
Centering:
·Midskull.
Collimation:
Cranial of the nose and just caudal of the base of the skull.
Labeling:
·Beside the nose.
Technique:
· Thickest. portion of the skull.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
211
FIGURE 10-34
Proper positioning for lateral oblique view of the rabbit skull
FIGURE 10-35
Lateral oblique view of the rabbit skull
212
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral View of the Ferret Abdomen
Positioning:
·Right lateral recumbency.
* Forelimbs are extended cranially and hindlimbs caudally; secure with tape.
● Sternum should be parallel to the cassette; this can be accomplished with the use of sponges.
Centering:
·Cen ter slightly caudal of the last. rib.
Coffimation:
*Slightly cranial of the xiphoid and slightly caudal of the pubis.
Labeling:
 R marker is placed in the inguinal area.
Technique:
·Measure at the last. rib.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
213
FIGURE 10-36
 Proper positioning for lateral view of the ferret abdomen.
FIGURE10-37
Lateral view of the ferret abdomen.
214
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Ventrodorsal View of the Ferret Abdomen
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency.
*The front portion is secured with sandbags or tape to keep the trunk bilaterally symmetrical.
*The hind limbs are extended and secured with tape.
Centering:
·Center slightly caudal of the last rib.
Colfimation:
*Slightly cranial of the xiphoid and slightly caudal of the pubis.
Labeling:
R marker is placed in the inguinal area.
Technique:
·Measure at the last rib
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
215
FIGURE 10-38
Proper positioning for ventrodorsal view of the ferret abdomen.
FIGURE 10-39
Ventrodorsal view of the ferret abdomen.
216
Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral View of the Ferret Thorax
Positioning:
·Right lateral recumbency.
* Forelimbs are extended cranially and hindlimbs caudally; secure with tape.
●Stern um should be parallel to the cassette; this can be accomplished with the use of sponges.
Centering:
·Center on the xiphoid process.
Coffimation:
·Slightly cranial of the thoracic inlet and slightly caudal of the dorsal aspect of the last rib.
Labeling:
R marker is placed above the shoulders.
Technique:
·Measure at the last rib.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
217
FIGURE 10-40
Proper positioning for lateral view of the feret thorax.
R
FIGURE 10-41
Lateral view of the ferret thorax.
218
 Chapter I0: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Anirmals
Ventrodorsal View of the Ferret Thorax
Positioning:
·Dorsal recumbency.
* The front portion is secured with sandbags or tape to keep the trunk bilaterally symmetrical.
*The hind limbs are extended and secured with tape.
Centering:
· Center on the xiphoid process.
Collirmation:
·Slightly cranial of the thoracic inlet and slightly caudal of the dorsal aspect of the last rib.
Labeling:
R marker is placed above the shoulders.
Technique:
·Measure at the last rib.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
219
FIGURE 10-42
 Proper positioning for ventrodorsal view of the ferret thorax.
FIGURE 10-43
Ventrodorsal view of the ferret thorax.
220
Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Lateral Whole Body View of the Ferret
Positioning:
·Right lateral recumbency.
· Forelimbs are extended cranially and hindlimbs caudally; secure with tape.
● Sternum should be parallel to the cassette; this can be accomplished with the use of sponges.
Centering:
·Halfway between the dorsal aspect of the last. rib and the xiphoid process.
Coffimation:
*Slightly cranial of the thoracic inlet and slightly caudal of the pubis.
Labeling:
·R marker is placed in the inguinal region.
Technique:
·Measure at the last. rib.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
221
FIGURE 10-44
Proper positioning for lateral whole body view of the ferret.
FIGURE 10-45
Lateral whole body view of the ferret.
222
 Chapter IO: Radiography of Avian and Exotic Animals
Ventrodorsal Whole Body View
of the Ferret
Positioning:
* Dorsal recumbency.
●The front portion is secured with sandbags or tape to keep the trunk bilaterally symmetrical.
· The hind limbs are extended and secured with tape.
Centering:
*Halfway between the dorsal aspect. of the last rib and the xiphoid process.
Collimation:
Labeling:
·R marker is placed in the inguinal region.
Technique:
+Measure at the last rib.
Handbook of Radiographic Positioning for Veterinary Technicians
223
FIGURE 10-46
Proper positioning for ventrodorsal whole body view of the ferret.
FIGURE 10-47
Ventrodorsal whole body view of the ferret.
A
canine
rabbit skull, 208
radius and ulna, 54
lower canine tooth and 
turtle, 194
scapula, 40
 Abdomen
lower premolar
extended lateral projection of
shoulder 36
aua
arcade, 142
carpus, 62
skull, 110
lateral view, 212-213
lower incisor arcade, 141
extended lateral projection
stifle, 82
VD view 214215
lower molars, 144
of tarsus. 94
tarsus, 90
lateral projection, 20-21
lower premolar arcade, 143 
feline
thoracic spine, 162
rabbit, DV view 200-201
upper canine tooth, 138
lower canine tooth, 149
thoracolumbar spine, 166
radiographs, 19-23
upper fourth premolars and
lower incisor arcade, 148 
thorax, 10
VD prajection, 22
molars, 140
lower premolars and molar
tibia, 86
 Avian patient
upper incisor arcade, 137
arcade, 150
lateral view
lateral view, 184-185
upper premolars, 139
upper canine tooth, 146 
avian patient, 184
radiography 181-223
CdCr prajection
upper incisor arcade,
145
ferret abdomen, 212
VD view. 186-187
humerus, 42
upper premolars and
ferret thorax, 216
scapula, 38
molar; 147
with horizontal beam,
B
shoulder 34
flexed lateral projection
lizard, 192
stifle, 80
carpus, 60
with horizontal beam,
 Beanbags. 4 
tibia and fibula, 84
elbow. 50
turtle, 196
closed mouth prajection of
tarsus, 92
lizard, 190
C
rostrocaudal sinuses, 116
lateral and medial oblique
rabbit abdomen, 198
 CrCd projection 
 projections of carpus, 64 
rabbit skull, 206
Caliper 7
elbow, 46 
lateral extended projection of 
rabbit thorax, 202
 Canine lower canine tooth
femur; 78
cervical spine, 156 
whole body ferret, 220
and lower premolar
radius and ulna, 52
lateral flexed projection of
rostrocaudal open mouth 
arcade, 142
dorsolateral/plantaromedial
cervical spine, 158
 projection of tympanic
Canine lower incisor arcade, |41
oblique projection of 
lateral oblique projection of
bullae, 122
 Canine lower molars, 144 
tarsus, 96
 temporomandibular
rostrocaudal projection of
 Canine lower premolar
dorsomedial/plantarolaterall
joint, 130
foramen magnum, 1I18 
arcade, 143
 oblique projection of 
lateral oblique projection of
 standing lateral prajection of
Canine upper canine tooth, 138
tarsus, 98
tympanic bullae, 128 
thorax with horizontal
 Canine upper fourth premolars 
 dorsopalmar projection
lateral oblique view of rabbit
beam, 16
and molars, 140
carpus, 56
skull, 210
VD-extended hip
 Canine upper incisor
digits, 70
lateral projection 
 projection, 26
arcade, 137
metacarpals, 66
abdomen, 20
VD projection
 Canine upper premolars, 139 
dorsoplantar projection,
carpus, 58
abdomen, 22
Carpus
metatarsus, 100
 cervical spine, 154 
cervical spine, 152
 dorsopalmar projection, 56-57
Dpa prajection, digits 104 
coccygeal (caudal)
coccygeal (caudal)
extended lateral projection, 
Dpl projection, tarsus, 88
spine, 178
spine, 176
62-63
DV projection
digits, 72, 106
frog leg, 28 
flexed lateral projection,
skull, 112
elbow, 48
lumbar spine, 168
60-61
temporomandibular
femur; 76
lumbosacral spine, 172
lateral and medial oblique
joint, 132
humerus, 44
rostrocaudal open 
projections, 64-65
thorax, 14 
lumbar spine, 170
mouth, 120
lateral projection, 58-59
tympanic bullae, 126
lumbosacral spine, 174
skull 114
Caudal (Cd), 3
DV view
metacarpals, 68
thoracic spine, 160
Caudocranial (CdCr). 3
lizard, 188
metatarsus, 102
thoracolumbar spine, 164
Centering, 6
rabbit abdomen, 200
pelvis, 30
thorax, 12
224
Index
225
VD view
DV view
avian patient, 184
Dpa projection, 104-105
avian patient, 186
lizard, 188
ferret abdomen, 212
lateral projection, 72-73,
ferret abdomen, 214
rabbit abdomen, 200
ferret thorax, 216
106-107
ferret thorax, 218
rabbit skull, 208
lizard, 190
Directional markers, 8
rabbit thorax, 204
turtle, 194
rabbit abdomen, 198
Directional terminalogy 2-4
whole body ferret, 222
extended lateral
rabbit skull, 206
Distal (Di). 3
 Cervical spine
projection, 94
rabbit thorax 202
Dorsopalmar (Dpa), 3
lateral extended
carpus, 62
lateral view with horizontal
Dorsoplantar (Dpl), 3
projection, 156-157
flexed lateral projection
beam, lizard,
192
Dorsoventral (DV). 2
lateral flexed projection,
carpus, 60
lateral view with horizontal
158-159
beam, turtle, 196
E
elbow, 50
lateral projection, 154—155
tarsus, 92
lateral whole body view of
ferret, 220
 Elapsed time marker 8
VD projection, 152-153
lateral and medial oblique
Elbow
Chemical restraint, I
projections of carpus, 64
rostrocaudal open mouth 
projection of tympanic
CrCd projection, 46-47
Coccygeal (caudal) spine
lateral extended projection
flexed lateral projection,
lateral projection, 178-179
of cervical spine, 156 
bullae, 122
rostrocaudal projection of 
50-51
VD projection, 176-177
lateral flexed projection of
 foramen magnum, 118 
lateral projection, 48-49
Collimation, 6
cervical spine, 158
 Exotic animal radiography
CdCr prajection
lateral oblique projection of
 standing lateral projection of
thorax with horizontal
181-223
humerus, 42
temporomandibular
scapula, 38
joint, 130
beam, 16
VD-extended hip
f
shoulder 34
lateral oblique projection of
stifle, 80
tympanic bullae, 128
projection, 26
Feline lower canine tooth, 149
tibia and fibula, 84
lateral oblique view of
VD projection 
Feline lower incisor arcade, 148
 closed mouth projection of
abdomen, 22
rabbit skull, 210
 Feline lower premolars and
rostrocaudal sinuses, 1l6
lateral projection 
cervical spine, 152
molar arcade, 150
CrCd projection
abdomen, 20
coccygeal (caudal) spine, 176
 Feline upper canine tooth, 146
elbow, 46
frog leg, 28
carpus, 58
Feline upper incisor arcade, 145
femur 78
cervical spine, 154
lumbar spine, 168
Feline upper premolars and 
radius and ulna, 52
coccygeal (caudal)
lumbosacral spine, 172
molar 147
skull, I14
dorsolateral/plantaromedial 
spine, 178
Femur
oblique projection of
digits, 72, 106
thoracic spine, 160
CrCd projection, 78-79
tarsus, 96
elbow. 48
thoracolumbar spine, 164
lateral projection, 76-77
femur 76
thorax, 12
dorsomedial/plantarolateral
Ferret
VD rostrocaudal open mouth
oblique projection of
lumbar spine, 170 
lateral view of abdomen,
tarsus, 98
lumbosacral spine, 174
projection, 120
212-213
VD view
dorsopalmar prajection 
metacarpals, 68
lateral view of thorax,
avian patient, 186
carpus, 56
metatarsus, 102
216-217
ferret abdomen, 214
digits, 70
pelvis, 30
lateral whole body view.
metacarpals, 66
radius and ulna, 54
ferret thorax, 218
220-221
 dorsoplantar prqjection of 
rabbit thorax, 204
scapula, 40
VD view of abdomen,
whole body ferret, 222
metatarsus, 100
shoulder 36
214-215
Cranial (Cr). 3
Dpa projection of digits, 104 
skull, 110
VD view of thorax, 218-219
Craniocaudal (CrCd), 3
Dpl projection of tarsus, 88
stifle, 82
VD whale body view.
DV projection
tarsus, 90
D
222-223
skull, 112
thoracic spine, 162
Foam pads and wedges, 14
 temporomandibular
thoracolumbar spine, 166
Dental radiographs, 135-150
 Foramen magnum, rostrocaudal 
joint, 132
thorax, 10
Digits
projection, 118-119
thorax, 14 
tibia, 86
 dorsopalmar projection,
Forelimb radiographs, 33-73
tympanic bullae, 126 
lateral view
70-71
Frog leg projection, VD, 28-29
226
Index
G
tympanic bullae, 126
tibia, 86
DV view. 188-189
DV view
lateral view
lateral view, 190-191
Gravitational markers, 16
lizard, 188
avian patient, 184
lateral view with horizontal
rabbit abdomen, 200
ferret abdomen, 212
beam, 192-193
H
rabbit skull, 208
ferret thorax, 216
Lumbar spine 
turtle, 194
lizand, 190
lateral projection,
Hindlimb radiographs, 75-107
extended lateral
rabbit abdomen, 198
170-171
Hip projection, VD-extended, 
prajection, 94
rabbit skull, 206
VD projection, 168-169
26-27
carpus, 62
rabbit thorax 202
Lumbosacral spine
 Horizontal beam, standing
flexed lateral projection
lateral view with horizontal
lateral projection, 174—175
lateral prajection of 
carpus, 60
beam
VD projection, 172-173 
thorax, 16-17
elbow, 50
lizard, 192
Humerus
tarsus, 92
turtle, 196
M
CdCr projection, 42-43
lateral and medial oblique
lateral whole body view of
lateral projection, 44-45
 Measurement, 6
projections of carpus, 64 
ferret, 220
lateral extended projection
rostrocaudal open mouth
 Mechanical restraint, 1
L
of cervical spine, 156 
 prajection of tympanic 
Medial (M), 2
lateral flexed projection of 
bullae, |22
 Metacarpals
Labeling. 7-8 
cervical spine, 158
rostrocaudal projection of 
dorsopalmar projection,
CdCr projection
66-67
humerus, 42
lateral oblique projection of
foramen magnum, 118
lateral prajection, 68-69
scapula, 38
temporomandibular
standing lateral projection 
 Metatarsus
lainouss
joint, 130
of thorax with horizontal 
 dorsoplantar projection,
stifle, 80
lateral oblique projection of
beam, 16
101-001
tympanic bullae, 128 
VD-extended hip projection,
tibia and fibula, 84
lateral projection, 102-103
lateral oblique view of rabbit
26
closed mouth projection of
 Mitchell marker 16
rostrocaudal sinuses, 116
skull, 210
VD projection
 CrCd projection
lateral projection 
abdomen, 22
0
elbow, 46 
abdomen, 20
 cervical spine, 152
femur; 78
carpus, 58
coccygeal (caudal)
Oblique (O). 4
 CrCd prajection of radius and
cervical spine, 154
spine, 176
ulna, 52
coccygeal (caudal)
frog leg, 28
P
spine, 178
lumbar spine, 168 
dorsolateral/plantaromedial
 oblique prajection of 
digits, 72, 106
lumbosacral spine, 172
Palmar 3
tarsus, 96
elbow, 48
skull, 114
Palmar dorsal (PaD). 3
dorsomedial/plantarolateral
femur; 76
thoracic spine, 160
 Patient preparation, 2
oblique prajection of 
humerus, 44
 thoracolumbar spine,
Pelvic radiographs, 25-31
tarsus, 98
lumbar spine, 170
164
Pelvis, lateral projection, 30-31
dorsopalmar projection 
lumbosacral spine, 174 
thorax, 12
Pantar 3
metacarpals, 68
VD rostrocaudal open
carpus, 56
Pantardorsal (PID), 3
digits, 70
metatarsus, 102
mouth projection,
Positioning
metacarpals, 66
pelvis, 30
120
canine lower canine tooth
 dorsoplantar projection of
radius and ulna, 54
VD view
and lower premolar
metatarsus, 100
scapula, 40
avian patient, 186
arcade, 142
Dpa projection of digits, 104
shoulder 36
ferret abdomen, 214 
canine lower incisor
Dpl projection of tarsus, 88
skull, 110
ferret thorax, 218
arcade, 141
DV projection
stifle, 82
rabbit thorax, 204
canine lower molars, 144
skull, 112
tarsus, 90
VD whole body view of
 canine lower premolar
 temporomandibular
thoracic spine, 162
ferret, 222
arcade, 143
joint, 32
thoracolumbar spine, 166
Lateral, 3
canine upper canine
thorax, 14 
thorax, 10
Lizard 
tooth, 138 
Index
227
 canine upper fourth
feline upper canine tooth, 146 
rabbit abdomen, 198
lateral view of abdomen,
 premolars and molars,
feline upper incisor arcade, 145 
rabbit skull, 206
198-199
140
feline upper premolars and
rabbit thorax, 202
lateral view of skull, 206-207
canine upper incisor
molar 147
lateral view with horizontal
lateral view of thorax, 202-203
arcade, 137
flexed lateral projection
beam
VD view of thorax, 204-205
 canine upper premolars, 139
carpus, 60
lizard, 192
Radiographic positioning. 5-8 
 CdCr projection 
elbow. 50
turte, 196
eun pue snipey 
humerus, 42
tarsus, 92
lateral whole body view of
CrCd projection, 52-53
scapula, 38
lateral and medial oblique
ferret, 220
lateral projection, 54-55
shoulder 34
 prajections of carpus, 64
rostrocaudal open mouth 
 Restraint, avian and exotic
stifle, 80
lateral extended projection
projection of tympanic
animals, 182-183
tibia and fibula, 84
of cervical spine, 156
bullae, 122
Rostral, 3
closed mouth projection of
lateral flexed projection of 
rostrocaudal projection of
 Rostrocaudal nasal, VD open 
rostrocaudal sinuses, 116
cervical spine, 158
foramen magnum, 118
mouth projection, 120-121
CrCd projection 
lateral oblique projection
standing lateral projection of
 Rostrocaudal sinuses, closed
elbow. 46
 temporomandibular
thorax with horizontall
mouth projection, 116—117
femur 78
joint, 130
beam, 16
radius and ulna, 52
VD-extended hip
S
tympanic bullae, 128
dorsolateral/plantaromedial
lateral oblique view of rabbit
prajection, 26 
VD projection
 Sandbags. 4 
oblique projection of
skull, 210
abdomen, 22
Scapula.
tarsus, 96
lateral projection
cervical spine, 152
CdCr projection, 38-39
dorsomedial/plantarolateral
abdomen, 20
coccygeal (caudal)
lateral projection, 40-41
oblique projection of
carpus, 58
spine, 176
Shoulder
tarsus, 98
cervical spine, 154
frog leg. 28 
CdCr projection, 34-35
dorsopalmar projection 
coccygeal (caudal)
lumbar spine, 168
lateral projection, 36-37
carpus, 56
spine, 178
lumbosacral spine, 172
Skull
digits, 70
digits, 72, 106
skull, 114
DV projection, 112-113
metacarpals, 66
elbow. 48
lateral projection, I10-II1
dorsoplantar projection 
femur 76
thoracic spine, 160
thoracolumbar spine, 164 
rabbit
metatarsus, 100
humerus, 44
thorax, 12
DV view, 208-209
Dpa projection of digits, 104 
lumbar spine, 170 
VD rostrocaudal open mouth
lateral oblique view, 210-211
Dpl projection of tarsus, 88 
lumbosacral spine, 174
projection, 120
lateral view, 206-207
DV projection
metacarpals, 68
VD view
radiographs, 109-133
skull, 112
metatarsus, 102
VD projection, 114-115 
 temporomandibular
pelvis, 30
avian patient, 186
ferret abdomen, 214
Spinal radiographs, 151-179 
joint, 132
radius and ulna, 54
ferret thorax, 218
Split plate, 6
thorax, 14
scapula, 40
 Standing lateral projection,
rabbit thorax, 204
tympanic bullae, 126 
shoulder 36
VD whale body view of
thorax, 16-17
DV view
skull, 110
Stifle
ferret, 222
lizard, 188
stifle, 82
Positioning aids, 4-5
CdCr prajection, 80-81
rabbit abdomen, 200
tarsus, 90
Proximal (Pr), 3
lateral projection, 82-83
rabbit skull, 208
thoracic spine, 162
turtle, 194
thoracolumbar spine, 166
R
T
extended lateral
thorax, 10
projection, 94
tibia, 86
Rabbit
Tarsus
carpus, 62
lateral view
DV view of abdomen, 
 dorsolateral/plantaromedial
feline lower canine tooth, 149
avian patient, 184
200-201
 oblique prajection, 96-97
feline lower incisor arcade, 148
ferret abdomen, 212
DV view of skull, 208-209
dorsomedial/plantarolateral
 feline lower premolars and
ferret thorax, 216
lateral oblique view of skull, 
oblique prajection, 98-99
molar arcade, 150
lizard, 190 
 210-211
Dpl projection, 88-89
228
Index
extended lateral projection,
carpus, 62
ferret abdomen, 212
DV projection, 132-133
94-95
flexed lateral projection
ferret thorax, 216
lateral oblique projection,
flexed lateral prajection, 92-93
carpus, 60
lizard, 190
lateral projection, 90-91 
elbow, 50
rabbit abdomen, 198
Thoracic radiographs, 9-17
Technique
tarsus, 92
rabbit skull, 206 
Thoracic spine
CdCr projection
lateral extended projection of
rabbit thorax 202
lateral projection, 162-163
humerus, 42
cervical spine, 156
lateral view with horizontal
VD projection, 160-161
scapula. 38
lateral flexed projection of
beam
Thoracolumbar spine
shoulder: 34
cervical spine, 158
lizard, 192
lateral projection, 166-167
stifle, 80
lateral oblique projection of 
turtle， 196
VD prajection, 164-165 
tibia and fibula, 84
temporomandibular
lateral whole body view of
Thorax
closed mouth projection of 
joint, 130
ferret, 220
DV projection, 14-15 
rostrocaudal sinuses, 1l6
lateral oblique projection of
rostrocaudal open mouth
ferret
CrCd projection 
tympanic bullae, 128
projection of tympanic
lateral view, 216217
elbow. 46 
lateral oblique view of rabbit
bullae, 122
VD view 218-219
femur 78
skull, 210
rostrocaudal projection of
lateral projection, I0—1I
radius and ulna, 52
lateral projection
rabbit
dorsolateral/plantaromedial
abdomen, 20
 standing lateral projection of
lateral view 202-203
 oblique projection of 
cervical spine, 154
 thorax with horizontal
VD view, 204-205
tarsus, 96
coccygeal (caudal)
beam, 16
 standing lateral projection
dorsomedial/plantarolateral
spine, 178
VD projection
with horizontal beam, 
 oblique projection of 
digits, 72, 106
abdomen, 22
16-17
tarsus, 98
elbow, 48
cervical spine, 152
VD projection, 12-13
dorsopalmar projection 
femur; 76
coccygeal (caudal)
Tibia, lateral projection, 86-87
carpus, 56
humerus, 44
spine, 176
Tibia and fibula, CdCr projection,
digits, 70
lumbar spine, 170
frog leg, 28
84-85
metacarpals, 66
lumbosacral spine, 174
lumbar spine, 168
Troughs, 4-5
dorsoplantar projection of
metacarpals, 68
lumbosacral spine, 172
Turtle
metatarsus, 100
metatarsus, 102
skull, 114
DV view 194195
Dpa projection of digits, 104
pelvis, 30
thoracic spine, 160
lateral view with horizontal 
Dpl projection of tarsus, 88
radius and ulna, 54
thoracolumbar spine, 164
beam, 196-197
DV projection
scapula, 40
thorax 12
Tympanic bullae
skull, 112
shoulder 36
VD rostrocaudal open mouth
DV projection, 126-127
temporomandibular joint, 132 
skull, 110
projection, 120
lateral oblique prajection.
thorax, 14 
stifle, 82
VD view
128-1 29
tympanic bullae, 126
tarsus, 90
avian patient, 186
 rostrocaudal open mouth 
DV view
thoracic spine, 162
ferret abdomen, 214
projection, 122-124
lizard, 188
thoracolumbar spine, 166
ferret thorax, 218
rabbit abdomen, 200
thorax, 10
rabbit thorax, 204
rabbit skull, 208 
tibia, 86
VD whole body view of
turtle, 194
lateral view
ferret, 222
Ventrodorsal (VD). 2
extended lateral projection, 94
 avian patient, 184
Temporomandibular joint 
V-trough, 4 
IMPORTANT! READ CAREFULLY: This End User
to some or all of the Licensed Content, in the
License Agreement ("Agreement") sets forth the condi-
 event that the End User does not comply with any
tions by which Cengage Learning will make electronic
 of the terms and conditions of this Agreement. In
access to the Cengage Learning-owned licensed content.
the event of such termination by Cengage Learn-
and associated media, software, documentation, print-
ing, the End User shall immediately return any
ed materials, and electronic documentation contained
and all copies of the Licensed Content. to Cengage
in this package and/or made available to you via this
Learning.
product (the "Licensed Content"), available to you (the
"End User"). BY CLICKING THE “I ACCEPT" BUT-
3.0
PROPRIETARY RIGHTS
TON AND/OR OPENING THIS PACKAGE, YOU AC-
3.1
 The End User acknowledges that Cengage Learn-
 ing owns all rights, title and interest, including.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS, AND THAT YOU AGREE
 but not limited to all copyright rights therein, in
TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS, CONDITIONS, AND
and to the Licensed Content, and that the End
ALL APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOV
User shall not take any action inconsistent. with
ERNING THE USE OF THE LICENSED CONTENT.
such ownership. The Licensed Content is pro-
e o p    pa
1.0 SCOPE OF LICENSE
 copyright laws and by international treaties, in-
1.1
Licensed Content. The Licensed Content may
cluding the Berne Convention and the Universal
contain portions of modifiable content ("Modi-
Copyright Convention. Nothing contained in this
fiable Content") and content which may not be
Agreement shall be construed as granting the End
modified or otherwise altered by the End User
User any ownership rights in or to the Licensed
("Non-Modifiable Content"). For purposes of
Content.
this Agreement, Modifiable Content and Non-
3.2
Cengage Learning reserves the right at any
Modifiable Content may be collectively referred
time to withdraw from the Licensed Content
to herein as the "Licensed Content." All Licensed
any item or part of an item for which it no lon-
Content. shall be considered Non-Modifiable
ger retains the right to publish, or which it has
Content, unless such Licensed Content is pre-
reasonable grounds to believe infringes copy-
sented to the End User in a modifiable format.
right or is defamatory, unlawful, or otherwise
and it is clearly indicated that modification of the
objectionable.
Licensed Content is permitted.
1.2
2 Subject to the End User's compliance with the
4.01
 PROTECTION AND SECURITY
terms and conditions of this Agreement, Cengage
4.1
The End User shall use its best efforts and take
Learning hereby grants the End User, a nontrans
all reasonable steps to safeguard its copy of
ferable, nonexclusive, limited right to access and
the Licensed Content to ensure that no unau-
view a single copy of the Licensed Content on a sin-
thorized reproduction, publication, disclosure,
gle personal computer system for noncommercial,
modification, or distribution of the Licensed
internal, personal use only. The End User shall not.
Content, in whole or in part, is made. To the
(i) reproduce, copy, modify (except in the case of
extent that the End User becomes aware of any
Modifiable Content), distribute, display, transfer,
such unauthorized use of the Licensed Content,
sublicense, prepare derivative work(s) based on,
the End User shall immediately notify Cengage
sell, exchange, barter or transfer, rent, lease, loan,
Learning. Notification of such violations may be
resell, or in any other manner exploit the Licensed
made by sending an e-mail to infringement@
Content; (ii) remove, obscure, or alter any notice
cengage.com.
of Cengage Learning's intellectual property rights
 present on or in the Licensed Content, including.
5.0
MISUSE OF THE LICENSED PRODUCT
but not limited to, copyright, trademark, and/or
5.1
In the event that the End User uses the Licensed
patent notices; or (i) disassemble, decompile,
Content in violation of this Agreement, Cengage
translate, reverse engineer, or otherwise reduce
Learning shall have the option of electing liqui-
the Licensed Content.
dated damages, which shall include all profits
 generated by the End User's use of the Licensed
2.0 TERMINATION
Content plus interest computed at the maximum
2.1
Cengage Learning may at any time (without preju-
a e saa  le pe ae a pad ai
dice to its other rights or remedies) immediately
-   a a a sasaa
terminate this Agreement and/or suspend access
forcing its rights, plus penalties.
6.0
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CLIENTS
Content, and may permit the End User to access
6.1
 Except as expressly authorized by Cengage Learn-
and use, subject to the terms and conditions of
ing, Federal Government clients obtain only the
this Agreement, such modifications, upon pay-
 ment of prices as may be established by Cengage
rights specified in this Agreement and no other
rights. The Government acknowledges that (i) all
Learning.
software and related documen tation incorporated
8.3
 No Export. The End User shall use the Licensed
in the Licensed Content is existing commercial
Content solely in the United States and shall
computer software within the meaning of FAR
not transfer or export, directly or indirectly, the
27.405(b) (2); and (2) all other data delivered in
Licensed Content outside the United States.
whatever form, is limited rights data within the
8.4
 Severability. If any provision of this Agreement is
 meaning of FAR 27.401. The restrictions in this
-d e    'a a
section are acceptable as consistent with the Gov-
plicable statute or rule of law, the provision shall
ernment's need for software and other data under
be deemed omitted to the extent that it is invalid,
this Agreement.
illegal, or unenforceable. In such a case, the re-
DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES
mainder of the Agreement shall be construed in
7.0
AND LIABILITIES
a manner as to give greatest effect to the original
intention of the parties hereto.
7.1
 Although Cengage Learning believes the Licensed
8.5
Waiver. The waiver of any right or failure of ei-
Content to be reliable, Cengage Learning does not
ther party to exercise in any respect any right.
guarantee or warrant. (i) any information or materi-
als contained in or produced by the Licensed Con-
tent, (i) the accuracy, completeness or reliability
not be deemed to be a waiver of such right in the
future or a waiver of any other right under this
of the Licensed Content, or (iii) that the Licensed
Content is free from errors or other material de-
Agreement.
fects. THE LICENSED PRODUCT IS PROVIDED
8.6
Choice of Law/Venue. This Agreement shall be in-
"AS IS," WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY OF ANY
terpreted, construed, and governed by and in ac-
KIND AND CENGAGE LEARNING DISCLAIMS
cordance with the laws of the State of New York,
ANY AND ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESSED OR
applicable to contracts executed and to be wholly
IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITA-
preformed therein, without regard to its principles
TION, WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
governing conflicts of law. Each party agrees that any
OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
 proceeding arising out. of or relating to this Agree-
IN NO EVENT SHALL CENGAGE LEARNING BE
ment or the breach or threatened breach of this
LIABLE FOR: INDIRECT, SPECIAL, PUNITIVE
Agreement may be commenced and prosecuted in a
OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES INCLUDING
court in the State and County of New York. Each par-
FOR LOST PROFITS, LOST DATA, OR OTH-
ty consents and submits to the nonexclusive personal
ERWISE. IN NO EVENT SHALL CENGAGE
jurisdiction of any court in the State and County of
LEARNING'S AGGREGATE LIABILITY HERE
New York in respect of any such proceeding.
UNDER, WHETHER ARISING IN CONTRACT,
8.7
Acknowledgment. By opening this package and/or
TORT, STRICT LIABILITY OR OTHERWISE,
by accessing the Licensed Content on this Web
EXCEED THE AMOUNT OF FEES PAID BYTHE
site, THE END USER ACKNOWLEDGES THAT
END USER HEREUNDER FOR THE LICENSE
IT HAS READ THIS AGREEMENT, UNDER-
OF THE LICENSED CONTENT.
STANDS IT, AND AGREES TO BE BOUND
BY ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS. IF YOU
8.0
GENERAL
DO NOT ACCEPT THESE TERMS AND CON-
8.1
Entire Agreement. This Agreement. shall constitute
DITIONS, YOU MUST NOT ACCESS THE
the entire Agreement between the Parties and
LICENSED CONTENT AND RETURN THE
supercedes all prior Agreements and understand-
LICENSED PRODUCT TO CENGAGE LEARN-
 ings oral or written relating to the subject matter
ING (WITHIN 30 CALENDAR DAYS OF THE
hereof.
END USER'S PURCHASE) WITH PROOF OF
8.2Enhancements/Modifications of Licensed Content.
PAYMENT ACCEPTABLE TOCENGAGE LEARN-
From time to time, and in Cengage Learning's
ING, FOR A CREDIT OR A REFUND. Should
sole discretion, Cengage Learning may advise
the End User have any questions/comments re-
the End User of updates, upgrades, enhance-
garding this Agreement, please contact Cengage
ments and/or improvements to the Licensed
Learning at Delmar.help@cengage.com.
System Requirements for: Back of Book (BOB) Flash
· An Internet connection, Firefox 2 or Safari 3 for
Shell CD/DVD-ROMs
In ternet based content.
Minimum System Requirements:
PC Setup Instructions:
 1. Insert disc into CD-ROM drive. The program should
PC:
start automatically. If it does not, go to step 2.
· Operating System: Windows 2000 w/ SP4, XP w/ SP2,
2. From My Computer, double-click the icon for the
Vista
CD drive.
· Hard Drive space: 200MB
 3. Double-click the start.exefile to start the program.
· Screen resolution: 1024 x 768 pixels
Mac Setup Instructions
· 8x CD-ROM or DVD-ROM drive
1. Insert disc into CD-ROM drive. The Cengage icon
· Sound card and listening device required for audio
pnous mopum e pue donsap inok uo dn dod 1m
features
pop up with a file called start. If it. does not, go to
· An Internet. connection, Firefox 2 or Internet Explorer
step 3.
6 & 7 for Internet. based content.
 2. Double-click the start file, to start. the program.
· Microsoff Word is required to edit. the Instructor's
3. Click on the Cengage icon on your desktop. Go to
Manual and Microsoff. PowerPoint is required to
Step 2.
edit the presentations
Technical Support:
Mac:
Telephone: 1-800-648-7450
8:30 AM - 6:30 PM Eastern Time
● Operating System: Mac OS X 10.4 and 10.5
E-mail: delmar.help@cengage.com
●Microsoft Office? 2004 or greater (for viewing files)
· Hard Drive space: 200 MB
Microsoff, Microsoft Office, Microsoft PowerPoint,
● Minimum Screen resolution: 1024 x 768 pixels
Microsoft Word, Windows, Windows Xp and Windows
· 8x CD-ROM or DVD-ROM drive
Vista? are trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation.
● Sound card and listening device required for audio
Mac and Mac Os X are trademarks of Apple Inc., reg-
features
istered in the U.S. and other countries.