Pathology&
Parasitology
forVeterinary Technicians
SecondEdition
Leland S.Shapiro
Pathology
1&
Parasitology
for Veterinary
1 Technicians
Second Edition
This page intentionally left blank
Pathology
&
Parasitology
for Veterinary Technicians
Second Edition
Dr. Leland S. Shapiro
Contributing Author: Patricia Mandel
DELMAR
CENGAGE Learning
Pathology and Parasitology for
 2010, 2005 Delmar, Cengage Learning
Veterinary Technicians, Second Edition
 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein may
Dr. Leland S. Shapiro
be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means graphic,
Vice President, Career and Professional
electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, recording,
Editorial: Dave Garza
scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or informa-
Director of Learning Solutions:
Matthew Kane
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written permission of the
Acquisitions Editor: Benjamin Penner
 publisher.
Managing Editor: Marah Bellegarde
Senior Product Manager: Darcy M.Scelsi
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Editorial Assistant: Scott Royael
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
Vice President, Career and Professional
For permission to use material from this text or product, submit
 Marketing: Jennifer McAvey
 all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Marketing Director: Debbie Yarnell
 Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
Marketing Manager: Erin Brennan 
permissionrequest@cengage.com
 Marketing Coordinator: Jonathan Shee
han 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009925002
Production Director: Carolyn Miller
Production Manager: Andrew Crouth
ISBN-13: 978-1-4354-3855-2
 Content Project Manager: Katie Wachtl
ISBN-10: 1-4354-3855-8
Senior Art Director: Dave Arsenault
Delmar
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions
with offce locations around the globe, including Singapore,the United Kingdom,
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at:
international.cengage.com/region
 Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Delmar, visit www.cengage.com/delmar
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred online
store www.ichapters.com
NOTICetO the reader
 Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or
 perform any independent analysis in connection with any of the product informa-
tion contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly disclaims, any
obligation to obtain and include information other than that provided to it by the
manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety
 precautions that might be indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid
all potential hazards. By following the instructions contained herein, the reader will-
ingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. The publisher makes no
representations or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the warran-
ties of fitness for particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representa-
tions implied with respect to the material set forth herein, and the publisher takes
 no responsibility with respect to such material. The publisher shall not be liable for
any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or part, from
the readers' use of, or reliance upon, this material.
 Printed in the United States of America
1234513121110 09
Dedication
To my parents (Murray and Shirley), who gave me life; to my children (Ilana
and Aaron), who showed me life and taught me how to live; and to Lori, who
taught me how to feel alive.
This page intentionally left blank
Table of Contents
Part One: Pathology
Chapter 1: Introduction to Pathology
What Is Pathology? 3
History and Development
5
Review 7
Chapter 2: Cell Injury and Cell Death
Disease in Relation to Cell Injury
9
Necrosis and Patterns of Necrosis
10
Adaptations of Cells in Response to Injury
12
Pathological Mineralization and Pigmentation14
Review20
Chapter 3: Inflammation and Healing.
22
Inflammation 23
The Acute Inflammatory System25
Chronic and Granulomatous Inflammation  28
Healing of Injured Tissue  30
Review35
vii
vili
Table of Contents
Chapter 4: Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances.
37
Revierw of the Circulatory System38
Blood40
Complete Blood Count and Differential WBC Count 41
Chemistry Profle42
Fluid Homeostasis  42
Hemodynamic Disturbances43
Fluid Imbalances 48
Review 52
Chapter 5: Neoplasia: An Introduction to Tumors .. .. . . . 55
Classification of Tumors  56
Behavior of Tumors  56
Chemical Carcinogenesis  58
Malignant versus Benign
60
The Morphology of Tumors  61
Cancer Research  63
Review 65
Chapter 6: Immunological Diseases
67
Immunity68
Autoimmunity
68
Mechanisms of Tissue Damage in Autoimmune Disease 69
Disturbances in Immune Function 71
Neoplasms of Lymphoid Cells
72
Review 76
Chapter 7: Mechanisms of Infections
and Causes of Infectious Disease
78
Infection79
The Fate of the Infecting Organism
79
Sources of Infection  79
Infection and Contagion
18
Properties of Pathogenic Organisms 82
Mechanisms of Disease Production by Pathogenic
Organisms   82
Pathogenesis of Parasitic Infections  84
Tolerance in the Host-Parasite Relationship
86
Review88
Table of Contents
ix
Chapter 8: Genetic Disorders
06
Genetic Technology  91
Categories of Genetic Disorders  92
Molecular Diagnosis 94
Review 98
Chapter 9: Environmental and Nutritional Diseases. . . . . 100
Environmental Impact on Health 101
Air Pollution102
Chemical and Drug Injury
102
Physical Injury
103
Nutritional Disease
104
Nutritional Excesses and Imbalances
106
Review107
Chapter 1o: Zoonoses and Safety on the Job
109
Zoonoses  110
Responsibility of the Veterinary Staff and Public Health
112
Parasitic Diseases 113
Bacterial Diseases 113
Viral Diseases
117
Protozoal Diseases
118
Tichborne Diseases
118
Revierw
121
Part Two: clinical Parasitology
Chapter 11: The Variety of Parasites
124
Infestation versus Infection
125
Types of Parasites  125
Review128
Chapter 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals 
129
Common Ectoparasites
130
Ectoparasites of Cattle
134
Ectoparasites of Sheep
142
Ectoparasites of Szwine
145
Ectoparasites of Horses
146
Review150
Table of Contents
Chapter 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals
151
Ectoparasites in Companion Animals
152
Ectoparasites of Dogs and Cats  152
Ectoparasites of Rabbits and Rodents
160
Ectoparasites of Ferrets, Foxes, and Mink
166
Ectoparasites of Reptiles 167
Ectoparasites of Chickens, Turkeys, and Other Birds 168
Review172
Chapter 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals.
174
Endoparasites of Laboratory and Farm Animals175
Endoparasites of Ruminants (Cattle, Sheep, and Goats)
221
Endoparasites of Srwine and Pet Pigs 185
Endoparasites of Horses 190
Review196
chapter 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals 
198
Endoparasites of Dogs and Cats
199
Endoparasites of Ferrets 212
Endoparasites of Rodents and Rabbits
212
Endoparasites of Reptiles  213
Endoparasites of Poultry and Other Birds215
Review 221
Appendix I: Important Techniques
for Veterinary Technicians
。。223
Hore to Do a Staining for Cytologic Preparations
and Bacteria Eramination
224
Horw to Prepare an Ear Cytology
and Microbiological Examination 225
How to Do a Fine-Needle Aspiration226
Table of Contents
Xi
How to Do a Cellophane Tape Preparation
for Lice or Mites 226
How to Do a Skin Scraping  227
How to Do a Direct Smear for a Fecal Eram 227
How to Do a Fecal Flotation228
Horw to Use the Modified Knott's Technique forHeartreorm
(Dirofilaria immitis and Dipetalonema
reconditum) 229
How to Use the Filter Technique for Heartzeorm (Dirofilaria
immitis and Dipetalonema reconditum) 229
How to Use the Buffy Coat Method for Microflariae232
How to Do a Fungal Culture Using Dermatophyte
Testing Media  232
How to Do a Blood Smear233
Horw to Use a Hemacytometer for a White Blood Cell
Count 234
How to Do a Urinalysis 234
How to Do a Quantitative Fecal Egg Count 236
Appendix Il: Common Diseases
242
Mice and Rats
242
Guinea Pigs
244
Rabbits 246
Cats 248
Dogs  250
Primates 253
Cattle, Sheep, Goats, and Horses 255
Appendix l: Narrative Guide for the Image Library . .. . 260
Internal Parasites of Domestic Animals
261
Identification of External Parasites 268
Types of Animal Diseases  276
Glossary
285
Index
295
Preface
This book is intended for students studying veterinary technology, animal pro-
duction, and pre-veterinary sciences. A basic understanding of animal anatomy
and physiology will assist the student in identifying sites and mechanisms of
injurious agents and predicting the effects of the injury.
Veterinarians attempt to prevent disease or make diagnoses of disease every day
of their professional lives. A disease occurs because the normal functioning of a
cell or organ is affected by some injury. In other words, all diseases are due to
Xoojouied jo aouaos ayi s! snsau si pue funfu! lao jo fpnis aui funfui ueinao
You must become familiar with pathology in order to appreciate the effects dif-
ferent diseases have on animals. The inforrmation you'll learn pertaining to how
cells respond to injury can help you make predictions about how the affected
animals will act. It's this understanding of injury and response that will aid you
while working as a veterinary technician.
The veterinary technician should be able to:
· Explain what happens to cells and tissues when the cells die, and how in-
 jured tissues heal.
· Describe how tissues protect themselves using the inflammatory response.
· Explain how a single cell can become “immortal" and cause cancer.
· Describe the mechanisms of infection and the causes of infectious diseases.
The purpose of this text is not to make its reader a diagnostician of animal
   i    e    t  
out of the veterinary setting, that will help promote overall quality anirmal care
and health. The basic understanding of veterinary pathology and parasitology
will enable this teamwork to be accomplished and will increase the competency
of the veterinary technician in working directly with the veterinarian. With
this second edition we incorporated several of the recommendations of previous
users of our text, both faculty and students, to make it more “user friendly”" and
L.S. Shapiro
2009
xii
Acknowledgments
The writing of this text could not have been undertaken without the assistance of
thank Patty Mandel, a former student and graduate of our registered veterinary
technician program at Pierce College. Patty's assistance in writing the case studies
and in editing my first edition of this text was instrumental in creating a very
hands-on oriented guide to the veterinary technician. Dr. Fret Lucero, also a former
ad saunpanond iuauno pue fonouied Aeuaiaa ui asadxa su iual 'uanis
formed in the veterinary clinic and hospital. Dr. Frank Lavac, Wilshire Anirmal
Hospital; Dr. Jim Peddie, professor emeritus of Moorpark College Exotic Anirmal
Training and Management Program; Dr. Monica Silvers, a Pierce alumnus and
currently a practitioner in Austin, Texas; and Drs. Kalie Pasek, Rebecca Yates, and
Jana Smith of Los Angeles Pierce College's RVT Program, and Elizabeth White,
director of Los Angeles Pierce College's RVT Program, all played a part in provid-
ing review, critique, and valuable information for this text.
 In addition, I would like to thank the following individuals at Delrmar Cengage
Learning who helped in the development of this manuscript: Darcy Scelsi, Senior
Product Manager; David Arsenault, Art Director; Katie Wachtl, Content Project
Manager; Andrew Crouth, Production Manager; and Scott Royael, Editorial
Assistant. The author and Delmar would like to thank those individuals who re
Pennsylvania; Tanya LeRoith, DVM, PhD, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg;
Mary O'Horo Loomis, DVM, State University of New York, Canton; Frances
Turner, RVT, McLennan Community College, Waco, Texas; Brenda R. Woodard,
DVM, Director of Veterinary Technology, Northwestern State University of
Louisiana, Natchitoches; Darwin R. Yoder, MS, DVM, Director of Veterinary
Technology Sul Ross State University, Alpine, Texas; Betsy A. Krieger, DVM,
Front Range Community College, Fort Collins, Colorado; John L. Robertson,
DVM, PhD,VA-MD Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Blacksburg,
Virginia; and Kay M. Bradley, CVT, Madison Area Technical College, Madison,
Wisconsin.
Finally, I want to thank my children (Ilana and Aaron) and wife, Lori, who sac-
rificed countless hours away from their father and husband, while I researched,
wrote, and edited this text.
xili
About the Author
 Dr. Leland S. Shapiro is the director of the pre-veterinary science program
 33 years and is a member of the American Dairy Science Association, Dairy Shrine
Club, Gamma Sigma Delta Honor Society of Agriculture, and Association of
Veterinary Technician Educators, Inc. Dr. Shapiro was a dairy farmer for almost
two decades, holds a California State pasteurizer's license, and for 14 years was
a certification instructor for artificial insemination. Professor Shapiro has ac-
tively served on the college's ethics and work environment committees and has
completed two post-doctoral studies in Bio-Ethics. Dr. Shapiro is a University
of California Davis “Mentor of Veterinary Medicine” and the recipient of sev-
eral local college teaching awards as well as the prestigious National Institute
for Staff and Organizational Development Community College Leadership
Program (NISOD) Excellence in Teaching Award, in Austin, Texas. Dr. Shapiro
has authored 16 books in the veterinary and animal sciences including Applied
Animal Ethics 2nd edition.
About the Contributing Author
Patricia Ann Mandel is a registered veterinary technician and licensed veteri-
nary technician. In addition, she is a member of the Much Love animal rescue
 organization and a mermber of the California Veterinary Medical Association.
She is the author and editor of veterinary books and educational manuals.
Xiv
PART ONE
Pathology
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Pathology
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
Explain the basic areas of pathology.
Describe the main characteristics of an injurious agent allowing the
prediction of the effects of the injury.
Identify common causes and classes of cell and tissue lesion.
CHAPTER 1: Introduction to Pathology
KEY TeRMS
biopsy
What Is Pathology?
diagnosis
Pathology is the scientific study of disease. The word pathology is derived from two
differential diagnoses
etiology
'the study of." This study of disease may be divided into four main parts:
humors
1. The study of the cause, or etiology of disease, which may be genetic or
acquired. Genetic etiologies arise from changes within genes, whereas
lesions
acquired etiologies refer to disease caused by outside sources, such as
necropsy
bacterial or viral infections or metabolic or nutritional disorders.
pathology
2. The study of mechanisms in the development of disease, or pathogenesis.
pathogenesis
This describes the sequence of events—the progression of changes from
virology
their inception—at the cell and tissue level as a disease expresses itself.
Pathogenesis includes factors that influence the development of a disease,
such as the immune status of an animal.
3. The study of lesions, or morphological alterations in tissues that occur with
disease. Lesions give rise to functional disturbances. These disturbances serve
to distinguish one disease from another and occasionally may be diagnostic of
an etiological agent. The alteration of tissue is studied by gross examination
 and by microscopic examination (Figure 1-1). To appreciate changes in tissues
or organs that are a result of disease, you must know the normal condition of
those tissues or organs. Changes are described according to size, color, shape,
consistency and weight (if possible). The surgical removal of lesions within
organs and tissues, primarily for the purpose of examination, is known as biopsy.
4. The study of the functional consequences of these lesions, which give rise
to physical signs or symptoms of disease. A diagnosis is achieved when
the precise nature of the lesions causing the syrmptoms is recognized.
A list of observations based on a necropsy, which is the examination of an
animal's body after death, can help lead to diagnosis.
FIGURE 1-1
Lesions are often studied microscopically to aid the diagnosis of disease
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Our understanding of normal tissues and organs can help in the determination
of disease. Although a great number of things can cause cell injury, cells have a
limited number of ways they can respond to injury, regardless of its cause. The
 proportions of cells and cell materials determine the makeup of tissue.
Different types of tissues will adapt to injury as a result of their compositions. Any
nof j 'aseasip sasneo idepe ot Auqe sui speaoxa pue anssl uodn sioe ieul suabe
know the mechanism and site of something that injures tissue, you can predict the
effects of the injury For example, the chemical carbon tetrachloride is known to
damage the DNA of liver cells.! The damage to DNA is the mechanism, and because
it's targeting liver cells, the liver is the site. Genetic damage of liver cells suggests
that the effect of an injury from carbon tetrachloride will be the development of
liver cancer. Knowing the structural and functional changes of the tissue allows
the veterinarian to predict the clinical manifestations, or the signs, that an animal
will exhibit. Animals can breathe in carbon tetrachloride at or near manufacturing
plants or waste sites, drink contarminated water near the sarme, or eat contarminated
soil at waste sites.
Table 1-1 lists some of the most common causes and classes of cell and tissue
lesions. Becoming acquainted with these categories will be crucial to your un-
derstanding of animal pathology in general.
and functional changes the liver undergoes. It's not always possible to make a spe-
cific diagnosis for disease, as many agents can cause similar signs. Liver cancer can
TABLE 1-1 Cell and Tissue Lesions at a Glance
Causes of Cell or Tissue Lesions
Classes of cell or Tissue Lesions
1. Genetic
1. Disruptive
 2. Congenital
 2. Degenerative
3. Toxic
3. Blood vessel/circulatory defects
4. Infection
4. Inflammatory
5. Trauma
5. Growth and differentiation defects
6. Degenerative
6. Developmental
7. Immunologic
8. Neoplastic
 9. Nutritional
10. Metabolic
11. latrogenic
12. Hypoxia (lack of oxygen)
Anoxia (absence of oxygen in the
blood or tissues)
Ischemia (deficiency of blood in
an area due to obstruction or
constriction of a blood vessel)
Iwai, S., et al. (2002, May 8). Cancer Letters, 179(1), 15-24.
CHAPTER 1:Introduction to Pathology
occur from things besides carbon tetrachloride, and yet the signs of liver cancer
are almost always the same. Clinical manifestations and the complaints that are
presented will allow one to make differential diagnoses, or a list of possible diseases
possessing the same or similar symptoms.
History and Development
From the fossil record, we've learned that even prehistoric creatures fell prey
to disease (Figure 1-2). For instance, arthritis was common in cave bears and
dinosaurs. Veterinary practice was known to occur in ancient Mesopotamia. It
may have been handled by lower-class barbers or the upper-class asu, or priests,
,          s  
of God." The oldest medical text is a cuneiform tablet from Mesopotamia. Yet
Egyptian medical writings from about 3,ooo years ago refer to far older texts.
Special schools for training physicians were cormmonly attached to temples. By
the time of Hippocrates (ca. 460-370 B.C.E.), the Greeks had developed a system
of illness based on the four cardinal humors—-blood, phlegm, yellow bile (choler),
and black bile (melancholy). Any imbalance of these resulted in disease. A healthy
person, ideally, had a balance of these four humors. Hippocrates wrote many
medical books, covering such subjects as anatomy, physiology, surgery, therapy,
and general pathology, where disease was determined to be the result of either
FIGURE 1-2
Prehistoric remains have aided
scientists in establishing the types of
disease that animals suffered from in
ancient times.
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
internal dificulties or outside infuences that upset the humors. Hippocrates is
particularly remembered for the Hippocratic oath and the Hippocratic method.
The Hippocratic oath contains affirmations, or pledges to the gods, teachers, and
future students, and prohibitions, or rules, such as the follwing:
· Do not harm the patient.
· Do not administer deadly drugs.
· Keep confidences concerning the patient.
In a similar way, the Hippocratic method outlines a philosophy that has become
the basis of modern medicine: Observe all, study the patient (not the disease),
evaluate honestly, and assist nature.
Although physicians throughout history have relied on autopsies for inforrmation,
the procedure didn't become a major focus of medicine until the 19th century. The
development of treatment based on pathological changes in tissues occurred at this
time, and the idea of "humors" was dismissed. In addition, the 19th century brought
about the discovery of bacteria as the cause of disease. Louis Pasteur (1822-1895)
demolished the theory of spontaneous generation and established the germ theory.
Robert Koch (1843-1910) further revolutionized the science of bacteriology.
-uo aueoaq fojouied Asdoine jo sidaouoo pue sanbiuyoai funuao yoz ai ui
andanui pue siuaed uo paaoau aa pinoo sdues ansst leoend fi
to determine a diagnosis, a course of therapy, and a prognosis. Pathologists also
began to study the chemicals of the body, which led to the development of clini-
cal and experimental pathology.
It wasn't until the 19th and 2oth centuries that veterinarians became recognized,
certifed professionals. Many advancerments in veterinary medicine have had a
direct impact on human medicine. Among these was the establishment of the
field of virology in 1898, when Friedrich Loeffler and Paul Frosch demonstrated
that foot-and-mouth disease in cattle was caused by a filterable virus. With the
pathology has continued to further our understanding of the disease process in
both humans and animals.
Summary
Pathology, the scientific study of disease, includes the study of the cause, the
development, the morphological changes, and the functional consequences of
disease. A basic understanding of anatomy, physiology, chemistry, and micro-
used to understand human disease, and the applications in the study and treat-
ment of human disease have allowed us to make considerable advancements in
veterinary medicine. Veterinary pathologists specialize in recognizing the cause
of disease not only by examining the anirmal but also by studying the organs,
tissues, cells, chemicals, molecules, and genes. Laboratory fndings, surgical
biopsies, and necropsies help the pathologist deterrmine what the disease is and
how it is transmitted and prevented. Thus, it is essential for the veterinary tech-
nician to have a basic understanding of pathology to assist the veterinarian in
the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of animal disease.
CHAPTER 1: Introduction to Pathology
REVIEW
 FILL IN THE BLANKS
1. The prefix pathos is Greek for
 2. The suffix fogos is Greek for
 3. The field of 
was established in 1898 from research
conducted in cattle.
4. The surgical removal of lesions within organs and tissues is known as
5.
is the study of the cause of disease.
6. The study of the mechanisms in the development of disease is known as
 is the examination of the organs, tissues, and cells of a
dead animal to determine the cause of death or to study the pathological changes.
 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. what are the four areas of pathology?
2. what two characteristics of an injurious agent allow you to predict the effects of the injury?
3. List three prohibitions contained in the Hippocratic oath
4. Research and discuss with your teacher examples of causes of cell or tissue lesions listed in Table 1-1.
CHAPTER 2
Cell Injury and Cell Death
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
 Describe the differences between repair and regeneration of
tissue/cells.
State the main components of the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
List the main causes of cell injury.
Define and differentiate between hypertrophy and hyperplasia and
give examples of each.
 Define and differentiate between metaplasia and dysplasia and give
examples of each.
Describe how cells respond to injury.
CHAPTER 2: Cell Injury and Cell Death
9
KeY TerMS
Disease in Relation to Cell injury
agenesis
aplasia
The underlying principle of pathology is that all disease processes have a cel-
apoptosis
lular basis, or, stated more simply, all disease is due to cell injury. Changes in the
arrangement, structure, or products of cells are of fundamental importance in
atrophy
diagnostic pathology
calcification
Cellular injury can be lethal (fatal), causing necrosis, or cell death. It can also
cell degeneration
be sublethal, meaning the cell or tissue function is altered but the cell isn't de-
cell membrane
stroyed. Deterioration of cell function can occur following nonlethal cell injury.
cellular morphology
This alteration is referred to as cell degeneration.
dysplasia
Cellular degenerations can be reversible, in which case the cells either return
dystrophic calcification
to normal or, if the injury is progressive, the cells degenerate until the injury
becomes lethal. Cells that undergo nonlethal or degenerative injury experience
endoplasmic reticulum
proliferative changes. In nonlethal injury there is a balance between degenera
hypercalcemia
       so ad   
hyperplasia
increase in cell size or number.
hypertrophy
As you learned earlier, there are many causes of cellular injury. Although the
hypoplasia
specifc mechanisms are numerous, most injuries are the result of one or more
ions
of the following occurrences:
ischemia
· Interference with membrane function
labile cells
· Interference with energy production
lethal
· Interference with protein synthesis
lysosomes
· Lysosomal changes
metaplasia
· Interference with operation of the genorme
metastatic calcification
Charged particles, or ions, exist in different concentrations and proportions in-
mitochondria
side and outside a cell. cell membranes keep the environment inside and outside
 necrosis
sodium ions out of a cell to maintain water balance. The pump can fail if the cell
neoplasia
isn't getting enough oxygen (anoxia), or energy (adenosine triphosphate (ATP)),
nucleus
in which case water rushes in and the cell swells up. Although such swelling may
pathological mineralization
permanent cells
the cell membrane is damaged from free radical attack or from exposure to a
proliferation
other structures within the cell to swell. These structures include the nucleus,
proliferative responses
where deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is stored and converted to ribonucleic acid
sodium pump
(RNA); the mitochondria, which produce ATP for energy; and the endoplasmic
reticulum, which makes proteins (Figure 2-1).
stable cells
sublethal
Lysosomal change can also result in cellular damage. Lysosomes contain chemi-
cals that are able to dissolve food particles, foreign invaders, and even the
cells themselves. If lysosomes break open because of damage done to (1) the
membrane, (2) the energy production mechanism, or (3) the protein synthesis
mechanism, the cell will self-destruct.
10
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
FIGURE 2-1
Among the structures commonly
WUUUU
affected by damage to the cellular
PLASMAMEMBRANE
membrane are the nucleus, the
mitochondria, and the endoplasmic 
reticulum.
ENDOPLASMIC
RETICULUM
MITOCHONDRIA
NUCLEAR
MEMBRANE
NUCLEUS
Reactions to cell injury tend to follow a limited set of patterns that can be ob-
served microscopically. Since these are degenerations, the injuries are reversible
if the cell is able to heal itself. These degenerations include:
· Cloudy swelling—the result of a defective sodium pump
·Hydropic degeneration (cell swelling)a more severe form of swelling, due to
the cells absorbing excess fluid in the cell cytoplasm
·Fatty degeneration or fatty change (steatosis)the accumulation of fat in cells
· Hyaline degeneration (hyalinosis)referring to processes that affect tissues
and various cells, resulting in droplets that are acidophilic, homogeneous,
and translucent
· Mucoid degeneration—a conversion of any of the connective tissues into a
gelatinous or mucoid substance (such as a mucopolysaccharide)
·Amyloid degeneration or amyloidosis—an accumulation of amyloid between
cells and fibers of tissues and organs
A cell that's swollen is in danger of having additional internal machinery malfunc
tion or even bursting. Remember, any foreign material that accurulates inside or
outside a cell can physically interfere with the norrmal function of that cell or tissue.
Necrosis and Patterns of Necrosis
Necrosis, as mentioned previously, is the final stage of an irreversible degen-
e jo uood e slao ao ho auo oi padde Aensn si uai aui ssaond aaea
-aip aq pinous sisouon yieap peoidoouied ui sunsau 'uesio ue ao 'snss
entiated from apoptosis, which is endogenous programmed cell death that oc-
curs normally in both adult and developing tissues. You should understand that
CHAPTER 2: Cell Injury and Cell Death
11
studying a dying cell is like examining a single snapshot, when in fact you could
learn a lot more from a video or DVD recording.
There are many things that will cause necrosis:
· Ischemia (involving a deficiency of blood to an area and therefore a lack of
oxygen)
· Toxicity (a result of poison)
· Physical damage (a result of heat, cold, radiation, ultraviolet light, trauma)
· Infection and infectious agents
· Genetic abnormalities
· Altered metabolism
Damaged cells, which undergo necrosis, exhibit changes in their appearance,
nuclear changes that are easy to detect (Figure 2-2):
·Pyknosis. The nucleus shrinks and becomes very dense.
· Karyolysis. The nucleus dissolves with a loss of its affinity for basic stains.
This occurs more commonly in necrosis.
·Karyorrheris. The nucleus breaks into small fragments and the chromatin
breaks up into unstructured granules.
Cytoplasmic changes are more difficult to detect. Here, ribosomes detach from
the endoplasmic reticulum, and the staining properties of the cell change.
FIGURE 2-2
CELL
CELL
MEMBRANE
NUCLEOLUS
Types of nuclear changes within a cell.
MEMBRANE
NUCLEUS
NUCLEOLUS
-NUCLEUS
NORMALCELL
PYKNOSIS
CELL
CELL
MEMBRANE
MEMBRANE
NUCLEOLUS
NUCLEUS
NUCLEUS
KARYOLYSIS
KARYORRHEXIS
12
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Cells are known to undergo several types of necrosis:
tissues feel firm and dry. The cell membranes remain intact and, micro-
scopically, you can see “ghost outlines of cells."
· Liquefaction necrosis. This type is more commonly known as pus. However,
 there are two types of liquefaction necrosis: (1) Regular pus consists of
m au pue pyanb Aeed are ieue sllo anss sup pue peap a
blood cells (primarily neutrophils) the body makes to “clean up the mess."
Pus is usually associated with bacteria. An abscess occurs when the pus
develops in pockets and puts pressure on the surrounding tissue. The
tissue responds by walling off the pus with fibrous connective tissue.
(2) Liquefaction necrosis of the central nervous system is more watery
because of the higher water and fat content of nerve cells.
· Caseous necrosis. Due to the slow, progressive destruction of cells during
this type of necrosis, a high response of white blood cells never occurs.
Caseous necrosis results from the effects of hydrolytic enzymes and other
substances released from the macrophages and other inflammatory cells in
response to the persistence of microorganisms. This results in an outpour-
 of the structural details of the tissue are lost with the production of a dry,
white, cheesy, granular material. Caseous necrosis is common in rabbits,
birds, reptiles, and animals with tuberculosis.
· Fat necrosis. This type usually occurs as a result of injury to fat as in pan-
creatitis. Cellular injury to the pancreatic acini leads to the release of en-
zymes that damage fat. Fatty acids are converted into soaps by reactions
with calcium, magnesium, and sodium. The digested fat attracts a large
amount of white blood cells, resulting in pain and discomfort.
· Gangrenous necrosis. This type is a combination of ischemia and a super-
isoou snouaue go sadi oml ae anaui uoaut leaioea pasod
(1) Dry gangrene consists of the mummified skin from coagulation
necrosis. Tissues are usually dark because the dead blood cells release
pigments which become iron sulfides, or rust. (2) Wet gangrene consists
of liquefaction necrosis and bacteria that invade to feed on the dead tissue
The bacteria produce an abundance of gases and poisons that can kill an
affected animal. Severe wet gangrene is also called gas gangrene because of
the large amount of gas bubbles that are produced.
Adaptations of cells in Response to Injury
The factors that control the growth and differentiation of cells are both environ-
mentally and genetically controlled. Abnormalities of these two functions are
call these abnormalities proliferative responses.
CHAPTER 2: Cell Injury and Cell Death
13
Disorders of growth are based on the growth potential of cells. With regard to
growth potential, cells are divided into three types—labile cells, stable cells, and
perrmanent cells. Labile cells divide frequently to replace lost cells. These cells
are found in the bone marrow, skin, and gut. stable cells are fully differentiated
cells that don't divide often (unless they are induced to do so). These cells are
found in liver and kidney tissue. Permanent cells lose the ability to divide after
birth. Muscles and neurons are examples of permanent cells.
Abnormalities of cell and tissue growth and differentiation are common responses
to cellular injury. This facet of pathology also introduces you to a unique vocabulary
with which you must become familiar. (Remermber, growth can mean a decrease or
diminution as well as an excess.)
Hypertrophy is an increase in cell size without an increase in cell numbers
Hypertrophic cells show an increase in size of the cytoplasm and in the numbers
of cellular organelles and occasionally an increase in the size of the nucleus. An
example is what happens to skeletal muscle when you exercise. Since these are
permanent cells, skeletal muscle cells get larger rather than divide. Hypertension
the left ventricle of the heart (cardiac muscle). These heart cells contain more
myofilaments, allowing them to contract more efficiently.
Hyperplasia is an increase in cell number, a phenomenon that can result from
cal cause is estrus, a condition in which hormones cause the cells lining the
uterus to divide. A similar example can be cited in the male. The prostate gland
enlarges as a result of continued testosterone stimulus. Thus, castration and
subsequent loss of androgen stimulation lead to atrophy of prostate tissue. An
example of a pathological cause is the removal of a piece of liver, which would
stimulate the remaining cells to divide and replace the absent tissue.
A common example in humans is the congenital absence of the brain's corpus
callosum—the massive formation of nerve fibers bridging the two cerebral hemi-
spheres. Renal agenesis is also common and can be unilateral or bilateral. Its etiol-
lho ue jo ann leot ai oi fiogods uaau sisule jo adi e si eisid
conditions occur during development. Reproductive aplasia commonly occurs
leaving a genetically programmed male with female gonads. In the absence of
thus promotes the female reproductive systerm.
Hypoplasia also occurs during development, the result of a deficiency of growth
and a diminution of size. Hypoplasia can be viral induced (feline panleukopenia—
ud piouui Xieinid jo eisedody) peualuoo o (paunis ane eoy ielaaa
e edayo si eisdody peno uooo e go adexa u (auy sea
condition that's characterized by a small liver. With canine distemper virus, it is
also common to see hypoplasia of the young dog's (2 to 6 months of age) dental
enamel upon examination of the oral cavity.
14  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Atrophy occurs after full development from physiological or pathological causes;
use atrophy causes the withered appearance of an arm or leg (muscle cell down-
regulation) after a cast is removed.
other type where normally it is not found. For example, columnar epithelium in
ing. If the stimulus that caused metaplasia stops, it is generally reversible. If the
stimulus is continual, the metaplasia may progress to dysplasia.
Dysplasia is the abnormal diferentiation or development of a tissue with disor-
dered architecture. This condition may be the precursor of a neoplasia.
Neoplasia is a pathological formation or growth of an abnorrmal tissue. The term
is sometimes used interchangeably with cancer when the neoplasm is malignant
Neoplasia comes from the Greek neos + plasia meaning “new formation." However
it is much more serious in that it represents a pathological uncontrolled and pro
gressive overgrowth of cells or tissue. These tissues can be srmall, solid masses or
highly diffuse and infiltrative lesions.
Pathological Mineralization and Pigmentation
Pathological mineralization, or calcification, refers to the abnormal deposition
of calcium salts together with small amounts of iron, magnesium, and other
processes.' You should recall that necrosis sometirmes results in mineralization
Pathological mineralization is divided artificially into dystrophic, metastatic,
and the less common calcinosis calcification.
Dystrophic Calcification
When calcium is deposited in injured, degenerating, or dead tissue, it's termed
dystrophic calcification. This is the most common form of abnormal calcification.
 proteins bind calcium salts. Usually irreversible, the clinical significance of dys-
trophic calcification depends on what tissues are affected. For example, calcifi-
cation of the pericardium, or the sac that surrounds the heart, can make heart
contraction more difficult and result in heart failure. Calcification can be seen in
lesions of tuberculosis, trichinosis, and caseous lymphadenitis
Metastatic Calcification
Metastatic calcification is the deposition of calcium in soft tissues that aren't the
which is an elevation of blood calcium levels. Causes of hypercalcemia include
'Miller, S. (200 1, January). Pathologic mineralization in aquatic animals.
Erotic DVM, 3(1), 12-13.
CHAPTER 2: Cell Injury and Cell Death
15
excessive parathyroid activity (the parathyroid is the endocrine gland that con-
trols blood calcium levels), neoplastic involvement of the bone, hypervitamino-
sis D (vitamin D allows calcium to be absorbed from the intestine), bone atrophy,
and increased alkalinity in tissues, which lowers the solubility of calcium. The
clinical significance, as with dystrophic calcification, depends upon the tissue
being affected.
Other Forms of Mineralization
Calcinosis can occur in normal or injured tissue and is usually found in skin or
subcutaneous tissue. There are two forms:
· Calcinosis circumscripta consists of localized deposits, usually found on the
extremities (such as the elbows of large dogs) as a result of the pressure
 put on these areas.
·Calcinosis universalis is widespread calcification.
cartilage; it occurs with metastatic or dystrophic calcification. Arterial calci-
fication, also known as arteriosclerosis, is the result of high cholesterol levels.
which bind calcium (Figure 2-3). Lithiasis refers to the formation of pigment or
FIGURE 2-3
Arterial calcification can cause
block age within blood vessels.
ENDOTHELIUM
VESSELWALL
CALCIFICATION
16  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
apnioui salduexa rsueso monoy u! pusy fue jo sninojeo e o .sauois, uaiond
gallstones and kidney stones
Pathological Pigmentation
Pathological pigmentation is an accumulation or deposition of abnormal amounts
of pigment in tissue cells or tissue fuids. Colored materials or pigments are nor-
mally present (such as in the eye's iris) or deposited in a number of conditions in
the skin or in the internal tissues. There are two classes of pigmentation.
The first class, erogenous pigmentation, results in conditions that fall under the
category of “occupational hazards." Although most of these “environmental
hazards" traditionally have not been seen in companion anirmal veterinary med-
icine, they are discussed briefly here for a better general overall understanding
of pathology and to better prepare the RVT/CVT/LVT working in research
institutions. In addition, many companion animals follow their owners into
hazardous areas and thus are capable of contracting all of these occupational
hazards as listed:
· Silicoszs: resulting from the inhalation of silica dust
· Sideroszs: resulting from the inhalation of iron dust
· Asbestosis: resulting from the inhalation of asbestos
· Argyria: an accumulation of silver in the skin or other tissue
· Plumbism: an accumulation of lead in the skin or other tissue (especially
seen in avian practices)
The second class of pigmentation, endogenous pigmentation, refers to the three
:aue fauL Xpoq aui fq paonpoud juauaid jo sadfi uieu
· Melanin. Made by cells called melanocytes, this is a brown-black pigment
normally found in the skin, hair, and pigmented coat of the retina and
inconstantly in the adrenal glands, and parts of the brain. Its presence
is associated with cancer, such as malignant melanoma, or signified by
lsuseae uooaioud s sieuueu ul asodund sii .'shods uas!l, pue ,salou,
solar ultraviolet radiation. In lower vertebrates, it is thought to be protec
tive in inflammation.
· Lipochromes (lipofuscin and ceroid). These consist of a yellow-brown
pigment made from the breakdown of fatty acids and cell membranes.
Lipofuscins increase with advancing age and tend to develop in neurons,
thyroid epithelium, and muscle cells. One autosomal recessive congenital
disorder (neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis) is seen in cattle, sheep, cats, dogs,
andhumans.
·Hemoglobin derivatives. Hemoglobin is the pigment within red blood cells
is released and generally broken down into amino acids, iron, and bilirubin,
which is converted into bile by the liver. Alterations of this breakdown can
produce a number of pigments, such as the following:
CHAPTER 2: Cell Injury and Cell Death
¥17
 Hemosiderin is a golden brown pigment that's found inside cells of the
spleen and bone marrow. It is produced by the phagocytic digestion of
hematin. The production of hemosiderin is the body's way of storing
iron. However, excessive amounts may accumulate with increased red
blood cell destruction.
 Hematin is a bluish black, amorphous substance containing iron in the
ferric or Fe+* form. Normally heme contains the iron in the ferrous or
puscles their oxygen-carrying ability along with their red color.
 Methemoglobin is a bluish chocolate-brown pigmented product of Fe+s.
 Methemoglobinemia occurs when the iron that is part of the hemoglobin
is altered such that it does not carry oxygen well. Certain compounds
introduced into the bloodstream can cause this oxidation. The iron in
hematin is Fe+* instead of Fe+*(ferrous iron). The Fe+* (ferric iron) does
not combine with oxygen, forming methemoglobin instead of hemoglo-
bin. Certain chemicals (nitrates, chlorates) also produce methermoglobi-
nemia. Cattle grazing highly fertilized forage develop nitrate poisoning
and cause the formation of methemoglobin. Livestock consuming certain
weed killers that contain chlorates do so as well.
 Porphyrins are pigments found in both animal and plant life which can
make urine, bones, tissues, and teeth red in appearance. Porphyrins act
 like chlorophyll. They are light sensitive; thus, people with excess por-
an enzyme required for norrmal hemoglobin synthesis. This results in
sitive. Thus animals tend to be hypersensitive to light for unpigmented
areas of the skin. Porphyria has been reported in cattle, swine, cats, and
humans. Animals with porphyria excrete abnormal uroporphyrins and
exhibit brown discoloration of their teeth.
Bilirubin is a red pigment formed from hemoglobin during both normal
 and abnormal destruction of erythrocytes by the reticuloendothelial
system. In healthy animals, after 3 to 4 months, red blood cells are
destroyed by this system releasing hemoglobin into the blood.
Macrophages engulf the cellular debris; iron is recycled to form new red
blood cells or sent to the muscles to form myoglobin. The remaining
product after the protein and iron are stripped away from the hemoglobin
is called biliverdin. Biliverdin eventually is reduced to bilirubin and trans-
ported to the liver and then to the gallbladder in the bile. An excess of
bilirubin in the blood causes the skin and mucous membranes to appear
disease, occlusion of the bile ducts, or excessive red blood cell destruction.
 Hematoidin is another golden brown pigment that's probably com-
posed of the same chemical as bilirubin, differing only in its site of
origin. Hematoidin is frequently found in scars and necrotic debris. It
contains no iron.
18
PART ONE:PATHOLOGY
CASE STUDY
Rat Poisoning: Rodenticide Toxicity (Cell Damage)
A black Labrador (canine) was presented with vomiting, lethargy, and ataxia. The
black Lab also had pale mucous membranes. The owner had noticed a container of
rat poison chewed open in her garage, which the dog had access to from the dog
can depress the production of the clotting factors (factors I, Il, Vll, IX, and x) in
the liver for 7 to 10 days. The second generation, such as bromadiolone, can
depress the clotting factors for 3 to 4 weeks. The rodenticides inhibit the vitamin
K-dependent coagulation factors by blocking the activity of vitamin K in forming
carboxylated proteins (clotting factors), which is the conversion of vitamin K to
its active form. Clinical signs start to show after the depletion of active clotting
poison.
Hepatocytes are metabolically active cells that serve many functions. For example,
they take up glucose, minerals, and vitamins from portal and systemic blood and
situation.
Buipaalg paguoloid 'uixol aut oi ainsodxa jo Aioisly aui uo paseg sl sisougeia
times determined by the PlvKA (Thrombotest), and the response to vitamin K
after the initial treatment. Two other options for diagnosis are the activated partia
thromboplastin time (APTT) and activated coagulation time (ACT) tests.
TREATMENT
Inducing vomiting (if not contraindicated) can be done within a few hours of
ingestion. Administering activated charcoal, such as Toxiban, is another option. In
clotting factors and red blood cells if the animal is anemic. if the animal is not
anemic, fresh frozen plasma can be used to replenish the clotting factors. Vitamin
animal.
After blood work was performed, the Labrador presented severely depressed
the nose).
CHAPTER 2: Cell Injury and Cell Death
19
Summary
Cell injury can be progressive, sublethal, or lethal if leading to cell death.
Reactions to cell injury can be observed microscopically. Factors that affect
how injured cells respond to injury include both the environment and genetics.
Examining the type and location and the extent of cell injury and the expo-
sure of the animal to various environmental toxins and cell irritants can aid the
veterinary staff in diagnosing and treating animal disease. Tissue necrosis is
classified based on cytoplasmic changes and by cause. Pathological mineraliza-
 ss i p suop e  sn  o 
in various body tissues. Pathological exogenous pigmentation can result from
environmental hazards.
20
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
REVIEW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
is a brown-black pigment normally found in the skin,
adrenal glands, and parts of the brain.
2
is an accumulation of extracellular, proteinlike sub-
 stances in tissues and organs.
3.
is the pathological death of one or more cells.
 is a red bile pigment formed from hemoglobin during
destruction of red blood cells and found in the blood; an excess causes the skin and mucous membranes to appear
yellow or jaundiced.
5
is the reduction in size of a fully developed tissue.
is a localized collection of pus in tissue.
 is endogenous programmed cell death or normal
>
tissue.
8
is a cheeselike necrosis that typically involves the
slow, progressive destruction of cells and that prevents a high response of leukocytes.
9.
is a condition in which animals tend to be hypersensi
tive to light for unpigmented areas of the skin and in which the animal has an inability to produce an enzyme required 
 for normal hemoglobin synthesis.
10.
is a type of necrosis that involves a deficiency of blood
 to an area and therefore a lack of oxygen.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Name three of the six types of cellular degeneration
2. what are the five types of cellular necrosis?
3. what are the two basic cellular responses to injury?
CHAPTER 2: Cell Injury and Cell Death
21
4. By what methods can exogenous pigments gain entry into the body?
CHAPTER 3
Inflammation and Healing
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
List the cardinal signs of inflammation.
List the main components of acute inflammation.
Describe the inflammatory response.
 Cite the functions of leukocytes at the sites of inflammation.
22
CHAPTER 3:Inflammation and Healing
23
Key terMS
Inflammation
abscess
adhesions
According to Stedman's Medical Dictionary,' inflammation is defined as “a funda-
anastomosis
mental pathologic process consisting of a dynamic complex of cytologic and his-
tologic reactions." These reactions occur in affected blood vessels and adjacent
bacteremia
tissues in response to an injury or abnormal stimulation caused by a physical,
calor
chemical, or biological agent, including (1) the local reactions and resulting
catarrhous (or catarrhal)
morphological changes, (2) the destruction or removal of the injurious material,
exudate
aul saieuisnll I-g aunltg bueay pue uedau ot peal ieul sasuodsau aul (s) pue
visible elements of inflammation that result from a simple fesh wound.
cellulitis
The four main cardinal signs of inflammation are rubor, or redness; calor, or heat
chemotaxis
(warmth); tumor, meaning swelling; and dolor, or pain. A fifth sign, functio laesa,
dolor
which refers to inhibited or lost function, is sometimes included as well. Redness
emigration
and warmth result from an increased amount of blood in the affected tissue, which
is usually congested. Swelling ordinarily occurs from this congestion or migration
erosion
of fuid from vessels and from exudation. Pressure on (or the stretching of) nerve
exudation
endings, as well as changes in osmotic pressure and pH, may lead to pain. Finally.
fibrinopurulent exudates
a disturbance in function may result from the discomfort of certain movements
fibrinous exudate
or the actual destruction of an anatomical part. All of the preceding signs may be
observed in certain instances, but no one of them is necessarily always present.
 granulation tissue
granuloma
Inflammation literally means "burning." This symptom is the body's most impor-
tant and useful host defense mechanism and the most common cause of tissue in-
hemodynamic
jury as well. A significant number of animals die from inflammatory disease every
hemorrhagic exudate
year. The processes of inflammation, healing, and repair all occur at the same
histamine
incision
inflammation
GLASSSHARD
SWELLING
keloid
leukocytosis
DISCOLORATION
BLOODFLOW
leukopenia
lymphocytosis
lymphokines
mediator
monocytosis
BLOOD
VESSEL
neoplasm
phagocytosis
phlegmon
FIGURE 3-1
prostaglandin
The right-hand illustration shows the local reactions to an injurious agent (a piece of glass) and
pseudomembranous exudate
the morphological changes that occur at tissue and blood levels.
purulent or suppurative
'Stedman's medical dictionary (26th ed.). (1995). Baltimore: Williams and
exudate
Wilkins.
24  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
KEY TeRMS (continued)
time or lead into one another This is because inflammation involves a reaction of
living tissue to local injury The reaction involves changes in the following:
pyrogen
· Vascular bed (blood vessels and capillaries)
regeneration
· Blood (the liquid component as well as the cells)
repair
· Connective tissue
resolution
rubor
The processes, which occur in these three tissues, are designed to eliminate the irri-
tant and repair the damaged tissue. As stated previously, inflammation is a process
scarring
involving multiple participants on the cellular, humoral (blood), and tissue level. It
septicemia
occurs only in living tissue, because only living tissue is vascularized. The series of
serotonin
 overlapping events that occur during inflammation end in the healing or destruc
tion of the tissue. Even though these events occur in an orderly fashion, the process
serosanguineous exudate
can restart itself repeatedly Inflamrmation is an evoked response, meaning that it's
serous exudate
called into action by the body itself. This process is known as cause and effect.
systemic
asn aui uui pney ao aq aenioe u asuodsau Aoienut s poq au
toxemia
of the inflammation. This response is fundamentally a defense reaction, always
tumor
following the same steps regardless of its cause. The amount of time that each
 si o a are  a o as ae p pxa si ds
ulcer
vary among instances. Most of the body's reactive components are in the blood.
vascular permeability
Certain chemical factors exist that help control inflammatory reaction.
vasodilatation
Three terms are used to describe the severity of an infammatory reaction: mild,
vasodllation
moderate, and severe. A mild inflammatory reaction involves little or no tissue
destruction and only slight evidence of vascular involvement. T'here's also little
exudation. Exudation refers to the presence of fuids and the migration of inflam-
matory cells into an inflammatory lesion.
A moderate inflammatory reaction involves some tissue damage and a visible
host reaction. The host reaction refers to the presence of inflammatory cells and
vascular phenormena. A severe inflamrmatory reaction exhibits considerable tis-
sue damage and abundant exudation.
A number of terms are used to describe the location of lesions within an organ
or tissue. Becoming familiar with these terms will make it easier for you to de-
scribe the gross appearance of inflammation:
·Focal pertaining to a single abnormality, or focus
· Multifocal: meaning there are many scattered foci (plural of focal)
· Locally ertensive: meaning that all of the tissue within a particular zone is
affected
· Diffuse: involving an entire organ or tissue
Inflammatory processes can last for a short period of time or lag on indefinitely
They can also have different onsets:
· Peracute: inflammatory episodes usually caused by a potent stimulus and
becoming apparent rapidly
· Acute: inflammatory episodes occurring 4 to 6 hours following the stimulus
and remaining fairly constant in appearance
CHAPTER 3: Inflammation αnd Healing  25
· Subacute: inflammatory reactions that are characterized by a decrease in the
redness of the tissue and fuid accumulation
· Chronic:a clinical concept referring to the existence of a persistent inflam-
() suodsau aunul ue (l) fg paueduoooe Aensn snnus Aoie
evidence of repair (such as scarring), and (3) certain types of infammatory
cells found within the lesion
The Acute Inflammatory System
An acute inflammatory event is the response of living tissue to a local injury in
which the reaction has a fairly rapid onset and a clear and distinct end. It's basi-
cally an exudative phenomenon, with blood fuid and cells entering the affected
tissue. Rermermber, exudation refers to blood cells and fuid oozing through the
blood vessel wall and into the tissue. An exudate is thus high in protein, cells, or
solid materials derived from these cells. The term erudate comes from the Latin
prefix et meaning “out" and the Latin suffix sudo meaning “to sweat."
Vasodilatation (also known as vasodilation), or the dilation of blood vessels, re-
sults in increased blood fow to the affected area and, in turn, the onset of heat
and redness. An increase in vascular permeability, or “leakiness" of the blood
vessels, occurs as a result of the stretching of cells lining the blood vessels and
fuid, which causes swelling. Increased sensitivity or pain occurs at the affected
area due to pressure or irritation. Along with these signs, there may be a de-
crease or loss of function.
Vascular changes in Tissue
During inflammation, vascular changes occur in every organ system. Initially there's
an increase of blood fow, due primarily to the dilation of arterioles (small arteries),
capillary beds, and venules (small veins). These are known as hemodynamic changes.
Increased vascular permeability follows, primarily in the venules and then the
capillaries. Norrmal low venous pressure is insufficient to return blood back to the
Sudund ao suiess e sdnonl aosnu pnaays uaamiaq sed suiaa sy la
action is produced. This and one-way valves within the venous system ensure
the blood flows in one direction: toward the heart. However, because of their
pumping action, venules are less likely to drain; this allows fluid to escape from
the vasculature. The fuid leakage and changes in the amount of dissolved salts
in the leaked fuid can cause the blood fow to slow or even stop. Endothelial
cells contract, allowing even more leakage.
blood cells (WBCs) and red blood cells (RBCs), may stop or tumble out of the af-
fected vessels. Certain WBCs marginate, meaning they stick to the inside lining
of the blood vessel wall. A clumping of many cells in the vessel can also occur,
possibly due to an electrical charge.
Emigration, which refers to cells leaving the blood vessels to enter tissue, may
occur as a response to chermical cues. chemotaxis is the chemical process by
26
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
which cells orient themselves and “home in" on a target; this process directs
migration in the tissues. Phagocytosis, the ingestion of such things as dead cells,
foreign particles, or bacteria by WBCs, occurs when WBCs enter the infamma-
tion site (Figure 3-2). As mentioned earlier, this accumulation of cellular debris,
aM ssunoo jo snd paleo si 'soaM pue saazua ofioaioud Aq paganb
peui suabe aui se llem se sllao peap ho pebeuep fue Suiaoau loy fuessaoau ane
caused the inflammation.
FIGURE 3-2
BACTERIA
Phagocytosis is said to occur when a
white blood cell “consumes" bacterial
and foreign particles or dead cells.
The white blood cell membrane
accomplishes this by enveloping the
bacteria within its walls.
WHITEBLOOD
CELL
CELL MEMBRANE
Factors Influencing the Acute Inflammatory Response
The body organizes inflammatory reactions like a well-rehearsed play. There are
- aui ane sioan uas oeuai aul pue siauo Aq Aed saem
ponents that help control the inflammatory reaction.
Chemical mediators include chemicals such as vasoactive amines, which are combi-
nations of nitrogen and chemicals that can constrict or dilate blood vessels. Among
the more common vasoactive amines are histamine and serotonin. Histamine dilates
blood vessels and increases vascular permeability. When you have a head cold,
your nose runs because of the inflarmrmation and release of histamines. Histarmine
dilates the blood vessels in your nose, increasing their “leakiness"; this dilation
results in a runny nose. That's why you would take an antihistamine to counteract
the histamine. serotonin is found in high concentrations in sorme areas of the central
nervous system. It is released, however, by blood platelets (thrombocytes) during
 the inflammatory response and is responsible for stimulating smooth muscles and
inhibiting gastric secretion. Serotonin is a vasoconstrictor.
group include a group of chemicals called cormplement and coagulation factors
CHAPTER 3: Inflammation and Healing  27
Prostaglandins form the third chemical group and are the most important vaso-
dilators. Drugs such as aspirin help inhibit prostaglandins, lessening the sever-
ity of headaches by decreasing the inflammation in the head. The last group
of chemicals is the lymphokines. The most important of these, the interferons,
are being developed to treat a number of diseases because of the way they
affect cells, particularly WBCs. Lymphokines are hormone-like peptides; they
oaiul aui aiouod pue aeinlar oi diay pue saiooydudl ,i fg paonpod ae
tion of cells within the immune system.
The lymphatic system is utilized to help drain fluids away from sites of inflam-
mation. The cells that make up the walls of these capillaries get stretched apart,
allowing fuid to fow in and away from the inflamed area.
Types of Inflammation Based on the Nature of Exudate
As you learned earlier, an exudate consists of the fuid that collects within tis
sues that are experiencing infammation. This fuid comes from leaky blood
vessels, which are the result of hemodynamic changes and increased vascular
permeability. T'he nature of exudate can allow us to classify inflammations in a
different manner. The following list organizes the types of exudate that are cur-
rently known to exist:
· serous exudate is a fuid low in dissolved protein; it has no clotting factor
and a low number of cells. Cutaneous blisters are examples of sores that
contain serous exudate.
· serosanguineous exudate is a fuid containing both serum and blood. It is a
thin, watery exudate.
· Purulent or suppurative exudate is a cloudy yellow, white, or green fuid
containing many leukocytes; it's often referred to as “pus"
nd pue ugy uiod suo aui uueuo ping e si aenxa annougt .
snd huyoel inq uqy Suuieiuoo aoueisqns e oi shajau aepnxa snoua -
because of a severe necrotizing infection. Fibrinous exudate is seen in
"hardware disease" in cattle.
· Hemorrhagic exudate contains many RBCs—essentially, blood
· Catarrhous (or catarrhal) exudate contains mucus.
· Pseudomembranous exudate is found in the respiratory and gastrointestinal
tract; it consists of areas of tissue that mat together (due to fibrin) and
appear membranous.
Types of Inflammation Based on Location
 In addition to “naming" infammatory processes by duration and exudate, we
can also name them by location:
inspissate.
· Cellulitis is an infammation of cellular or connective tissue
28  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
· ulcers constitute the loss of a superficial layer of an organ or tissue, with
acute inflarmmation at the base of the lesion.
· Erosion is a shallow ulcer usually limited to the mucosa with no penetra-
tion of the muscularis mucosa
Systemic Reactions to Inflammation
Because of the variety of tissues that make up a living creature as well as the num-
ber of different cells and chemicals involved in an infammatory reaction, a number
of reactions can occur that are systemic in nature. systemic means that they occur
throughout the entire body. Fever is a common systemic reaction. Substances called
Leukocytosis is an increase in the total leukocyte count of the blood and is one
This can occur when certain infammatory processes “consume" more leuko-
ui ssedans do ym dn day ue fpo aui fn aunionuu ue poq aui ueui sao
demand for leukocytes, lymphocytosis (an increase in lymphocytes) and mono-
cells help to influence the inflammatory response.
  n dy o n si o     e i a
culating into the blood. Some bacteria make toxins (poisons). If the bacteria and
their poisons get into the blood, a condition known as septicemia develops. If
just the toxin circulates, this is known as a toxemia.
chronic and Granulomatous Inflammation
The chronic infammatory response is primarily caused by an increase in the
number of reactive cells, as opposed to the fuid generated in an acute inflam-
  s         s
The three factors that induce the reaction are (1) the extent of the inflammation,
nput jo ale ayi (o) pue Xisuaiui au (o)
Again, the swelling in chronic inflammation is due to large numbers of cells,
ized by contraction and distortion of the tissue or organ. The location of the
inflammation can affect organ function as well. For example, a narrowing of the
colon can result in the formation of adhesions (a result of chronic infammation),
which in turn affects the animal's ability to have a bowel moverment. Adhesions
are simply the union of apposing inflammatory bands of tissue.
The initial cause of chronic inflammation may be difficult to identify due to time lag
Repeated or continuous traurma is frequently involved. Some common examples
CHAPTER 3:Inflammation and Heαling
29
of these are bladder or kidney stones, a sore tooth, bacterial or viral infections,
anatomical abnormalities, injuries, and rheumatoid arthritis. Figure 3-3 shows the
severe intestinal infammation brought about by Johne's disease in calves.
FIGURE 3-3
 A normal intestine (top) and an
intestine from a calf with Johne's
disease (bottom). Johne's disease is
the result of a bacterial infection that
causes severe inflammation and a
widespread thickening of the intestine
itself.
One type of chronic inflammation, granulomatous infammation, consists of
focal inflammatory lesions in which the tissue reaction is primarily of chronic in-
fammatory cells. Chronic inflammatory cells include macrophages, giant cells,
pooa pue pinn jo aaeyel reinosea siseiouay pue 'sheo eseid 'sanrooydal
cells is usually minimal or absent.
a foreign body, which in turn is surrounded by zones of chronic inflammatory
cells. Older granulomas tend to contain more collagen, a type of connective tis-
sue, and may eventually be represented by fibrous nodules in which there's little
or no evidence of the original cause of inflammation.
A common cause of granulomas in cattle is the inhalation of feed particles that
(a type of leukocyte and the body's first line of defense against infection), monocytes
(which become macrophages), foreign-body giant cells (from the fusion of mac-
rophages), epithelioid cells, lymphocytes, plasma cells (B-cell lymphocytes that are
“turned on" and produce antibodies), a proliferation of fibroblasts, and eosinophils
(a type of leukocyte often associated with parasites and inflamrmation).
The gross morphology of a chronic inflammatory lesion is a discrete white-
 gray, roughly spherical mass that's well defined. These lesions may be difficult to
detect in the lung. They're often focal and small—sometimes only one millimeter
in diameter. If the infammation occurs over a large area, individual foci are no
longer discrete, and the lesion may come to resemble a neoplasm, or tumor.
Throughout a normal course of events, the reaction subsides, collagen in the
periphery contracts, and the central area may calcify. In our example of a cow
inhaling feed particles, the bacteria are destroyed, the dead cells in the center
30  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
of the lesion are removed, and the core solidifies with calcium. When the sur-
rounding collagen contracts, the result is a tiny ball of scar tissue surrounding
a solid nugget of “stone"—-the calcium.
Healing of Injured Tissue
a o spl fat 'u no e si uout sn pl aa non
healing of injured tissue. Healing relies on the ability of different tissues to
often crucial to the survival of the mammal itself. But these two processes differ
from one another in their final results.
During regeneration, the tissue in question undergoes restructuring by the cells
that belong there. An example of this is the lizard that breaks off its tail to
escape an enemy. The tail eventually regrows and resembles the original tail.
Repair is the replacement of destroyed tissue by connective tissue. An example
of repair is a puppy that has its tail docked at birth; the stump can't regenerate.
So instead, the end heals with the formation of a scar.
Two other terms you should becorme familiar with at this point are resolution
and granulation tissue. Resolution is the absorption or breaking down and re-
moval of the products of inflammation. Granulation tissue is another name for
vascular connective tissue.
The length of time it takes for healing to occur is an important factor in deter-
mining if repair or regeneration will occur. The longer the inflammatory reac-
tion goes on, the more collagen and scar tissue is produced. Scar tissue implies
a process of repair, because it takes up the space where cells that belong in the
tissue would normally be found.
Many factors stimulate cell growth and influence healing. These include the
following:
· Epidermal growth factor
· Platelet-derived growth factor
· Fibroblast growth factor
· Macrophage-derived growth factor
· The presence of fibrin and fibrin-degradation products
· The loss of contact inhibition
· Inhibitory substance loss (chalones, which are mitosis-inhibiting factors)
The action of steroids is often assumed to stimulate cell growth; however, steroids
variety of mechanisrms and contribute to faster healing of an inflammatory lesion
 In the course of their work, veterinarians often find it necessary to operate on
animals. This requires making deliberate wounds in an animal known as incisions.
u uoeinuea uys pue hauialot pasodde aue saapa aui uoisioun ueap e ui
start in 24 to 48 hours. A healthy immune system, antibiotics, and a sterile surgery
CHAPTER 3:Inflammation and Heαling
31
field help to ensure that no infection results from the wound (incision). Because
these wounds are kept clean and sutured to ensure that no infection develops, they
heal faster than other injuries, such as untreated cuts from broken glass.
A surgical incision that's sutured forms a primary union. The healing of such
a wound is terrmed first intention. Healing by second intention occurs when
there's an extensive dermal wound with complete loss of the epithelium. The
healing process is identical in both, but faster in the first intention process and
without much scarring because of the small size of the epithelial destruction.
Let's examine the healing process of a clean surgical wound over a period of
5 days:
· Day I: The defect fills with fibrin. A blood clot, or scab, forms
· Day 2: Neutrophils release lysosome contents to break down the clot.
Neutrophils phagocytize bacteria, dead cells, and debris
· Day 3: Macrophage infiltration occurs in order to remove the fibrin and
other cellular debris (Figure 3-4). With contaminated wound sites this
phase can last for several weeks.
· Day 4: Capillary bud ingrowth begins at the ends of the damaged vessels
They grow from about 0.1 to 0.3 mm per day.
· Day 5: Activated fibroblasts produce collagen after 5 days, forming
fibrovascular tissue (Figure 3-5 A and B). This is known as epithelial
regeneration.
The initial injury causes a breakdown of collagen during the first 4 to 5 days
due to enzyme release. Collagen is then produced over a 2-month period in the
wound, a plateau is reached, and the wound regains its maximum strength.
However, only 80 to 85 percent of the original structure now remains.
FIGURE 3-4
 Macrophages infiltrate the wound to
"clean it out" in preparation for repair.
T,
FIBROBLAST
MACROPHAGES
32
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
FIGURE 3-5
The collagen deposited by activated
fibroblasts re-forms the wounded
tissue (top). As time passes, the
tissue undergoes further repair and
strengthening until the wound is
completely healed (bottom).
NEWCOLLAGEN
EPITHELIAL
REGENERATION AND
PROLIFERATION
Sometimes a keloid, an abnormally large scar, forms due to excess collagen produc
tion. Horses, for instance, will frequently exhibit a tumorlike mass of collagen and
granulation tissue. Nerves show little regeneration, although there may be some
innervation to vessels. Epithelial cell proliferation allows any gaps to be bridged
after the scab is removed by the leukocytes. Structures such as hairs or sweat glands
 are re-formed if rermnants were originally present. Decreased cellularity follows,
as well as resolution of any ederma. Anastomosis, or a uniting of the capillaries, fol-
lows. The lesion becomes smaller as exudate lessens and the fibroblasts contract.
Breakdown of collagen and restructuring occurs, with a scar being the final result.
CHAPTER 3:Inflammation and Healing
33
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
CASE STUDY
(Mammary Tumor Neoplasia)
A 9-year-old mixed-breed Labrador female dog was presented for evaluation
of mammary tumor, hematuria, and gingivae that bleed easily. The CBC results
showed a decrease in platelets and a high count of wBCs. The cytology showed
neutrophils that look toxic (Dohle bodies) and have basophilic vacuolated 
cytoplasm. Dohle bodies (toxic neutrophils) in the blood smear suggested bacterial
infection, poisoning, or endotoxin. The mixed-breed Labrador had a prolonged
the decision to euthanize his dog since she was suffering from neoplasia (cancer)
and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DiC)
DIAGNOSIS
The veterinarian initially made a clinical diagnosis as regenerative anemia
Platelet decrease with schistocytes suggesting Dic. The mammary tumor
neoplasia was primary and the Dic was secondary to the cause. Dic is not a
bacterial, viral, protozoal, or parasitic diseases; heat stroke; burns; neoplasia;
or severe trauma (shock). To confirm DiC, coagulation screening tests such
as prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and an activated
coagulation time are performed. In the case of Dic, death is generally caused by
extensive microthrombosis or circulatory failure, which leads to single or multiple
Suiapuni asneo Aewjd aui piemot paioaip Allensn sl uaweall 'ainley uesio
imperative to maintain effective circulating volume within the body. Prognosis is
usually poor, especially if Dic is not detected early.
Schistocytes (RBC fragments)
FIGURE 3-6
Arrows point to numerous schistocytes (RBC fragments)
34
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
CASE STUDY
Johne's Disease (Paratuberculosis)
A rancher notices that four of his calves have had thick diarrhea for a few weeks
The four calves are bright and alert with great appetites, but they are losing
feedlot rancher has poor management skills. The pen where the calves are being
housed is contaminated with feces. The calves are being infected by nursing
calves have ingested the causative organism known as Mycobacterium avium
paratuberculosis (Mycobacterium paratubercufosis).
DIAGNOSIS
Because there is not one single test for Johne's disease, a combination of a
few tests are performed to diagnose the disease. A microscopic exam of a
fecal sample using Ziehl-Neelsen stain can be used to diagnose mycobacteria
in heavy shedders of the disease. Cultures, serological test, and Enzyme-
linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELisA) test are other forms that can be used for
diagnosis. The intradermal Johnin test (cell-mediated immunity) detects infected
animals before an outbreak occurs. Mycobacteria lesions can be found in the
stain, Ziehl-Neelsen, can help to reveal these lesions. The ileum is thickened by
granulomatous inflammation. This leads to the clinical signs of diarrhea and weight
absorption is impaired and excess protein is lost in the feces). The result can be
measured as subnormal levels of total serum proteins.
Johne's disease is incurable, but it can be controlled with good sanitation and
positive animals are slaughtered. vaccines are available but are usually not
recommended due to their efficacy and the uncertainty of the antigens of this
organism.
Summary
Inflammation consists of a complex of both cytological and histological reac-
tions resulting in morphological changes that can be identified by the veterinary
technician. There are many mediators that help animals control the inflamma-
tory reaction. These chemical compounds include histamines, prostaglandins,
tion and by their nature of exudate. The healing process follows a structured
of wound site with microorganisms, the animal's immune system, and several
other mitigating factors
CHAPTER 3: Inflammation and Healing
35
REVIEW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
is a nodular inflammatory lesion containing a necrotic
 core with a foreign body surrounded by chronic inflammatory cells.
2.
is an obsolete term meaning discharge pus.
3.
is an inflammation of cellular or connective tissue.
4.
 is a term that describes fluid that collects within tis-
sues that are experiencing inflammation.
5.
 are one type of chemical produced by the body as a
vasodilator. The effects of this particular endogenous chemical are mediated by the use of aspirin.
6.
is a vasodilator released by thrombocytes which
 stimulates smooth muscle and inhibits gastric secretion.
7
dilates the blood vessels, increasing their permeability
8.
is the ingestion of such things as dead cells or bacte-
ria by white blood cells.
9.
 are localized collections of pus in tissue.
10.
 is a condition by which the body is unable to keep
bacteria from circulating into the blood.
11.
 are inflammatory bands that connect opposing
serous tissues.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. what are the three levels on which an inflammatory response occurs?
2. what important task do white blood cells perform at sites of inflammation?
(continued)
36
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
REVIEW
(continued)
3. what are the main signs of inflammation? The main causes?
4. Explain the difference between repair and regeneration.
5. what is the relationship of histamines to the inflammatory response?
6. Are there any beneficial effects of inflammation on the body?
7. What are the main harmful effects of inflammation on the body?
8. What is keloid formation and what causes it?
CHAPTER 4
Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader shouid be able to:
Trace the flow pattern of blood through the heart and body.
List the blood components and explain their basic functions.
 Describe the distribution of fluid between the intracellular.
extracellular intravascular, and interstitial compartments.
 Define hemodynamic disturbances and give examples both of a
 physiological and pathological nature.
 Define and list clinical symptoms of hemorrhage.
Describe the steps of hemostasis.
 Define and explain the pathogenesis of shock, emboli, and edema.
37
38  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
KeY terMS
Review of the Circulatory System
basophil
blushing
The circulatory system's function includes transportation of cells, antibodies,
complete blood count (CBC)
nutrients, waste products, hormones, and gases throughout the body. There is
a normal range for each of these products that can be measured and assessed in
congestion
a clinical setting. The heart serves as a pump for this system. There are three
dehydration
major types of blood vessels. Arteries take blood away from the heart, veins
ecchymosis
bring blood back toward the heart, and capillaries allow the exchange of these
edema
products between the extracellular fluid and the blood.
embolism
embolus
veterinary technician in detecting abnorrmalities which can occur and which may
be monitored by various examination procedures (Figure 4-1).
endothelium
Blood enters the heart on its right side through two large veins: the cranial
eosinophil
and caudal venae cavae. Blood is returned to the heart after picking up carbon
epistaxis
dioxide and exchanging it with oxygen. Thus this oxygen-poor blood must be
erythrocyte
reoxygenated before returning to the body. The vena cava brings blood into the
fibrin
right atrium. As the right atriurm contracts, it forces blood through a one-way
valve known as the tricuspid or right atrioventricular valve (RAV), and into the
hematemesis
right ventricle. When the right ventricle contracts, the RAV closes—forcing
hematoma
blood through another one-way valve, the pulmonary semilunar valve, and into
hematuria
the pulmonary artery. This oxygen-poor blood eventually reaches the pulmo-
hemopericardium
nary capillaries for exchange of carbon dioxide with oxygen.
hemoperitoneum
Oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart from the lungs via pulmonary veins
hemoptysis
entering the heart at the left atrium. The left atrium contracts, forcing blood
through the bicuspid valve, also known as the left atrioventricular valve (LAV)
hemorrhage
or mitral valve. Blood leaves the heart when the left ventricle contracts. The
hemostasis
LAV closes, forcing the newly oxygenated blood through a one-way valve, the
hemothorax
aortic semilunar valve, and into the largest of the body's arteries—the aorta.
hyperemia
Each heartbeat starts without any outside nerve stimulus. The heart's pacemaker,
hypotension
also known as the sinoatrial node (SA), located within the right atrium and close
to the vena cava, controls the heart's rhythmic contractions. In order for the
hypovolemic shock
infarction
There is a second node located at the junction of the atrium and ventricle, the
interstitial
atrioventricular (AV) node. It receives input from the two atria. Its function is to
slow the signals and allow the ventricles to fll before they contract. The AV node
intracellular
prevents rapid conduction to the ventricles in cases of rapid atrial rhythms. The
intraintestinal
contraction irmpulse then continues to the bundle of His-Purkinje conduction
intravascular
system which spreads across the two ventricular walls.
leukocyte
 po  e  ss  s   so oss 
lymphocyte
heart. More specifically trained staff may pick up abnormal sounds that might
indicate problems with the heart valves, skipping heartbeats, or the addition of
melena
extra heartbeats. As part of the physical exam the chest should be auscultated
monocyte
to determine if a heart murmur, arrhythmia, mufled heart, and lung sounds
myocardial infarction
(pulmonary crackles and wheezes) are present.
CHAPTER 4: Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances
66
KEY TERMs (continued)
neutrophil
 normovolemic shock
petechia
Cranial Vena Cava
Arch of Aorta
plasma
Right Pulmonary Artery
Left Pulmonary Artery
platelet
Right Pulmonary Veins
 Left Pulmonary Veins
platelet plug
Pulmonary
purpura
Semilunar Valve
Left Atrium
Right atrium
Aortic Semilunar
shock
Valve
Atrioventricular Valve
thrombocytopathy
 Atrioventricular Valve
Left Ventricle
thrombocytopenia
Right ventricle
thrombus
Septum
vasoconstriction
Caudal Vena Cava
water intoxication
Aorta
A.
Capillaries of
/Head and
Forelimbs
Cranial Vena Cava
Pulmonary Artery
Systemic Circulation
Pulmonary Artery
Capillaries
of Left Lung
Capillaries
of Right Lung
Right
Atrium.
Left
Atrium
Pulmonary
Pulmonary
③
Circulation
 Circulation
5
Left
Heart
Right
Pump
Heart-
Pulmonary Vein
Pump
10
Pulmonary vein
Right Ventricle
Left Ventricle
Caudal Vena Cava
 Systemic Circulation
Aotra
 Capillaries of
Abdominal Organs
and Hind Limbs
Oxygen-poor BloodOxygen-rich Blood
B.
FIGURE 4-1
A. The internal structure of the heart. B. The fow of blood through the body. (Diagram
courtesy of Lawhead and Baker, Introduction to Veterinary Science. 2oos. Delmar Publishers.)
40  PART ONE:PATHOLOGY
Blood
Blood consists of a fuid portion called plasma and the cellular portion composed
of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. The plasma constitutes greater
than one-half of the blood volume and is 9o percent water. The remaining
inn aun day diau yom sinoa uaiod aiel eo pasooo si suad oi
within the vascular system, electrolytes, antibodies, nutrients, waste products, and
clotting factors. Red blood cells account for 99 percent of the cellular portion.
Blood can be separated into its major components by centrifugation. The heavier
(eseid) uood auol aul pue uonq aui oi saol (sllo pooa pai) uood
rises to the top of the hermatocrit tube. A very thin middle layer is composed of
white blood cells and platelets
The portion of whole blood volume that is occupied by red blood cells is the
hematocrit (Hct), also known as the packed cell volume (PCV). Low PCV values
may indicate anermia whereas elevated PCV values can be caused by stress, dehy-
dration, splenic contraction, as well as other factors.
The red blood cells (erythrocytes) are the most numerous of the cells. They carry
a molecule of hemoglobin which increases the carrying capacity of oxygen. In
most mammals, red blood cells are shaped like biconcave disks and contain no
nuclei. In birds, reptiles, and fish they are normally nucleated and egg shaped.
Members of the camelid family (camels, llamas, and alpacas) generally reside
s      p  r  e 
more elliptically. The thinner cell walls and elongation are theorized to assist in
passing through small capillaries, minimizing the likelihood of sludging when
the viscosity of the blood increases during dehydration. The life span of the red
blood cell varies with the species and is outlined in Table 4-1.
TABLE 4-1Life Span of Red Blood Cells in Various Species
Species
Life Span of Red Blood Cells
(in days)
Horses
140-145
Cattle 
130
Humans
120
Dogs
100-115
Cats
73
Mice
43
Dietary factors, endoparasites, ectoparasites, genetics, and other factors may
shorten the life span of the red blood cell within species.
White blood cells (WBCs), leukocytes, serve to fight infection. There are five
major white blood cell types; each has its own functions. Identifying and quan-
tifying these five types of cells is an inmportant portion of the complete blood
out turoy ui alou suapudaui ue seu lo go adi yog (a) sunoo
Three of the WBC types have granules visible within their cytoplasm. They
are thus called granulocytes. They include the neutrophils, acidophils (eosino-
phils), and basophils. The agranulocytes (those WBCs without granules in their
CHAPTER 4: Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances
41
cytoplasm) include the lymphocytes and monocytes. Identifying abnormal
numbers of the individual types assists the veterinary staff in their diagnosis.
The most numerous WBC is the neutrophil. Neutrophils are so named because
their granules do not pick up either eosin, a red acidic stain, or methylene blue,
a basic or alkaline stain. They are the body's chief defense against bacterial in-
fection. Neutrophils have the capacity of leaving the vasculature and migrating
to areas of infection or tissue damage to phagocytize microorganisms and other
foreign material. Band neutrophils are immature neutrophils. Both neutrophils
and band neutrophils increase with acute bacterial infections. Viral and some
causing neutropenia.
Eosinophils increase in numbers in response to parasitic infections, allergies,
pregnancy, and sometimes with neoplasia. Basophils are much more rare.
Basophil granules contain both histamine and heparin, have receptors for
  s    s (i  o
and participate in the degranulation of WBCs that occurs during allergic reac-
isou aue faun sanoed ubiauoy Sunsaaul jo alqedeo aue faui yanouiv suo
commonly associated with acute allergies and with mast cells. Both heparin and
histamine heighten the movement of WBCs to infammatory sites. Identifying
an absolute basophilia is important in that it may indicate the presence of a
   i     
tion is to react with an antigen and, together with monocytes, mediate the im-
mune response. They include B and T cells. The B cells produce antibodies that
attack both bacteria and toxins. The T cells attack body cells that have been
taken over by viruses, intracellular parasites, or cells that have become cancer-
ous. T cells are important in antigen recognition
Monocytes are the largest (in size) of the WBCs. The monocyte is capable of
leaving the blood and entering the tissues, where it matures into a macrophage.
Macrophages and monocytes both function as phagocytes. They ingest microbes
and cellular debris. The monocyte-macrophage system plays a major role in the
body's immune response.
Thrombocytes or platelets are fragments of megakaryocytes. They are an es-
o Aioue uy sle ul oo oi fie spoonq aui jo suuoduo pius
disease of the platelets is called a thrombocytopathy. It is characterized by dys-
functional platelets resulting in prolonged bleeding time, defective clot forma-
tion, and increased hemorrhaging. The causes are varied and include nutritional
factors, complications with viruses, and inherited thrombocytopathies. One such
genetic disorder is von Willebrand's disease, which is most commonly reported
in dogs but also observed in swine, horses, cattle, and cats.
complete Blood Count and Differential WBc Count
The complete blood count (cBc) evaluates the red blood cell (RBC) count, platelet
count, hemoglobin concentration, and WBC count. It also provides a breakdown
42
PART ONE:PATHOLOGY
WBC count). The CBC is important from a clinical standpoint as identifying
changes in numbers and percentages to aid in diagnosing anemia and certain
cancers of the blood, and to monitor blood loss, infection, and inflammatory
Jo buoiuou no/pue sisoueip aun ul sueodui si sunoo jalaeld au saseas
bleeding and clotting disorders.
Chemistry Profile
Blood chemistry panels are an essential part of any thorough examination. Most
veterinary clinics have access to in-house testing or a local lab that analyzes the
serum portion of the patient's blood. The concentration of the various chemical
elements of the blood is maintained within strict limits. These normal parameters
and a complete blood count. The chemistry panel should evaluate levels of
glucose, electrolytes, protein, liver and pancreatic enzymes, bilirubin, creatinine,
ouny auoopua pue jeuape faupy oeaoued aaiT ulouu eaun poola pue
eiep asaui uim paenieaa ialaq aue aheuep alosnu pue snieis uoeupfy fuon
The urinalysis includes examination of color, pH level, specific gravity, chemical
analysis for blood proteins, glucose and microscopic examination of RBC and
WBC, and bacteria. This additional testing aids in diagnosing kidney and bladder
infections.
Fluid Homeostasis
The concentrations and volumes of body fluids are maintained within nar-
row limits. These fuids are compartmentalized, or restricted to certain
spaces within the tissues, organs, or the cells themselves. The three compart-
ments are (1) intravascular, meaning within blood vessels; (2) interstitial, or be-
tween the cells; and (3) intracellular, meaning within the cells. Sometimes, the
fuid found within the digestive system forms a fourth compartment, called
ntraintestinal
In disease, significant alterations of the fuid volumes may occur. There are no
oq aul jo siuaeduoo snoe aui uoe haem jo suuao aui oi sia
Therefore, it's the quantity of solute, or materials dissolved in the fuid, rather
than the amount of solvent, or body of fluid, that defines the size of each compart-
ment. Each body compartment contains at least one solute that, because of its
basic restriction to that compartrment, determines the size of the space. Table 4-2
shows the divided amounts that rmake up each compartment.
TABLE 4-2Compartmentalization of Total Body Water
 Intracellular
Two-thirds of total
Extracellular
One-third of total
Intravascular
25-33% of compartment
Interstitial
 67-75% of compartment
CHAPTER 4: Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances
The cells and tissues of the body are dependent on a normal fluid environment
and an adequate blood supply. Fluid imbalances (which include edema, dehy-
dration, and water intoxication) and hemodynamic disturbances (which include
active hyperemia, passive congestion, hemorrhage, thrombosis, embolism, and
infarction) are comrmon and may cause death in certain pathological states.
All mammalian hearts, including human hearts, are basically the same, so the
same terminology should apply across species. The various cardiac pathologies
are also basically the same. There are some conditions, however, that will usu-
ally occur in only one species, such as *"hardware disease" in cattle. Any animal
(including humans) can suffer from cardiac puncture but the terms used to
 o n sd o    saosp  sis re 
terminology used to describe the same condition will also vary depending on
the practitioner's experiences, background, and prejudices. Dogs are the usual
victim of heartworm, but cats may also contract the parasite. There are also
breed predispositions for various conditions.
An infarction occurs when the blood supply is cut off from any portion of any
organ or tissue by any etiology long enough for the tissue to die. It usually
appears as a pale triangle, since the blood comes in at a single vessel and then
branches out several times to the capillaries. If this happens in the heart rmuscle,
it is a myocardial infarction. If enough heart muscle dies, the animal dies.
 Depending on the practitioner, different terms will be used to describe the same
illness and/or clinical signs (heart attack, cardiac arrest, cardiac failure). The only
thing different about veterinary medicine from hurman medicine is that hurmans have
they can't talk, even though these signs are the same as those found in humans.
Hemodynamic Disturbances
Alterations of the fuid fow are known as hemodynamic disturbances; two
specific types of hemodynamic disturbances are hyperemia and congestion.
Hyperemia is an active process in which the arterioles fill with blood. congestion
is a passive process in which venules engorge with blood. Arterioles are under
direct pressure from the pumping of the heart; venules are not.
the result of an increase in blood flow through the vessels. Inflammation, as we
learned earlier, involves the increased blood fow of a vascular component. The
Hyperemia and congestion are also described according to their duration, extent,
and mechanism. Durations can be acute (a quick onset) or chronic (developing
slowly). “Extent" refers to the amount of tissue affected; it is localized (restricted
to the process itself Hyperemia, as stated previously, is active, whereas conges-
tion is passive. We use this information to describe the process by way of an
anatomical-mechanistic classification system.
44
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
First, let's examine hyperemia in more detail. Hyperemia is an excess of blood
within vessels, and particularly tissues. During hyperemia, the arterioles are like 
a river that's swollen with foodwaters from an increased inflow. Thus, active
hyperemia is an increase in arterial blood in the microvasculature, caused by
 physical, chemical, or biological injury.
You'll recall that many chemicals, called mediators, are released during inflam-
mation. Unfortunately, these chemicals can dilate the arterioles. (Infammation, as
you'll also recall, can be local, but not generalized or diffuse.) Hyperemic tissues
appear bright red and are warm from the increased blood fow. The clinical termi-
nology for this condition is acute local active hyperemia.
Congestion is passive because it involves the venules. While hyperemia is cormpa-
rable to a swollen river, congestion resermbles the buildup of water behind a dam
(Figure 4-2). Congestion may be associated with an obstruction of venous outflow,
also called a thrombus. Thrombus is the proper term for a blood clot within a vessel.
FIGURE 4-2
The effect of congestion on a
network of venules. The blood clot,
or thrombus, causes outflowing blood
to “dam up" and engorge the blocked
vessel with blood.
AREA OF
CONGESTION
CLOT
(THROMBUS)
The heart, which is the pumping mechanism for the entire vascular system,
can also cause congestion if it fails to maintain adequate cardiac output. A
problem with outfow is called local congestion. When the heart is diseased
and blood builds up throughout multiple organs or the entire body, you have
what is called generalized congestion.
Acute, subacute, and chronic describe the duration of congestion. Acute local
passive congestion, for example, occurs in a tissue as the result of a clogged
CHAPTER 4: Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances  45
   s  s   
from a condition such as coronary artery disease, which slowly kills the heart
Qnsodxa pue siad ano ui fiisqo ui aseauoui ue ym sueuny ui fuooo ao
of our pets to similar environmental hazards, toxins, and microbes, veterinarians
are seeing an increase in sirmilar circulatory disorders in dogs and cats
Because all blood in the body must How through the heart and lungs, general-
often leads to escape of fuid from the circulatory system.
A hemorrhage is the escape of blood from the cardiovascular system. Any part of
laries, venules, or veins. Hemorrhaging can also occur within the skin, mucous
membranes, serous cavities, or any tissue. The causes of hemorrhage are many
and include trauma, poisoning, vitamin K deficiency, liver disease (because the
bocytopenia, which is a deficiency of platelets in the blood
The amount of blood lost is a crucial factor in determining the severity of the
hemorrhage. Up to one-fourth the total volurme of blood can be lost with no sign
of illness. A loss of one-third of the total blood can cause shock, and losing one-
half of the total blood supply can result in death. Quick loss of blood can cause
hypovolermic shock, whereas a slow loss may allow the body to replace some of
the blood at the same time.
into the abdominal cavity, although bad, doesn't cause a major problem. This
is because the blood that is lost isn't compressing any vital tissues or becorming
trapped in an organ. On the other hand, bleeding even a small amount of blood
into an organ such as the brain could be fatal. The following medical terms refer
to the different sites in which bleeding can originate:
· Epistaxis: bleeding from the nose
· Hemoptysis: blood coughed up from the lungs
· Melena: blood in the feces
·Hematemesis: vomited blood
· Hematuria: blood in the urine
· Hemothorax, hemopericardium, hemoperitoneum: an effusion of blood in the
abdominal or peritoneal cavity
There are also definitions regarding what the blood looks like in the tissues:
· Petechiae: small, pinpoint hemorrhages (Figure 4-3)
· Ecchymoses: larger, more spread-out areas (Figure 4-4)
blood confined within an organ, tissue, or space
· Purpura: results when ecchyrmoses combine with each other
46
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
FIGURE 4-3
The kidneys of this dog are speckled
with numerous pinpoint hemorrhages,
or petechiae, which in this instance
were brought about by canine herpes
virus infection.
FIGURE 4-4
Ecchymosis is very similar to
petechiae, only larger in size.
Ecchymosis
A discussion of hemorrhages wouldn't be complete without a discussion of
hemostasis, or clotting. Clotting disorders can result in the hemodynamic dis-
turbances of thrombosis, embolism, and infarction.
Hemostasis is the blood coagulation that occurs to prevent blood loss. The pro-
cess occurs step by step, starting with vasoconstriction to reduce blood fow. A
platelet plug then forms to block the damaged blood vessel. Next, a cascade of
coagulation chemicals, termed chemical hemostasis, occurs. Chemical hemostasis
is a complex mechanism because of the large numbers of chemicals involved and
the way in which they react with each other.
The ultimate result of the coagulation cascade is the formation of fibrin, a chemi-
cal that solidifies and sticks to platelets and tissues, forming a clot. The formation
of fibrin occurs in what we refer to as the common pathway of the coagulation
cascade. This pathway can, in turn, be triggered by the extrinsic or intrinsic
pathway of the coagulation cascade.
CHAPTER 4: Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances
eyi asoddns .saoint anssi,jo asealau aui fq paualui si emuied oisuixa au
blood vessel cells are damaged and leak their contents. These juices trigger the
pathway.
The intrinsic pathway is activated by the exposure of collagen. If an injury
scrapes cells lining the blood vessel free from the underlying basement mem-
ao pue sialaieid sioie uaseoo pasodxa sti pasodxa si uaselloo 'suena
The result is a blood clot, which the body will eventually remove by resorption
or replace with connective tissue.
A thrormbus forrms as a result of injury to the endothelium (the cells that line
blood vessels), alterations in normal blood fow, or hypercoagulability of the
blood. A thrombus can also break loose from the blood vessel in which it is
formed to circulate throughout the bloodstream. This transported material is
called an embolus. Most emboli are solid, but fat globules and gaseous emboli
also exist. An embolism is an impaction too large to complete the circulatory
route of the embolus. If an embolism blocks off the blood supply or venous
drainage of a tissue, the result is an infarction. The sudden reduction of oxygen
to a tissue as the result of an infarction causes coagulation necrosis
 Infarctions (or infarcts) are classified according to their color and the presence
or absence of bacterial contamination:
· White infarcts (little blood is present in the tissue)
· Red infarcts (there is hemorrhage in the tissue)
· Bland infarcts (no bacteria are present)
· Septic infarcts (bacteria are present)
Infarcts heal by a process known as organization. The clot is converted into
fibrous tissue. The tissue that died is also replaced by scar tissue; healing occurs
aul do lueay aul se yons uesio ue ul aoeld ayet pinous iouejul ue JI iedau eia
brain, the animal may die before healing can occur.
shock is a syndrome resulting from hypotension, or decreased blood pressure,
which is caused by acute generalized circulatory failure of the capillary bed and/
zeauas, iasuo yoinb e sayulis ,ainoe, seue mouy am poona jo suood 1o
refers to the whole body, and capillaries are the networks of small blood ves-
sels in tissues where oxygen exchange takes place. If all of the capillaries in the
body should suddenly allow blood to flow through them at once, blood pressure
too small to fill the entire vascular system.
Several types of shock can occur. Hypovolemic shock is due to a loss of blood vol-
ume. Lack of oxygen to the tissues will cause the capillaries to dilate, decreasing
blood pressure and inducing shock. Normovolemic shock can occur with a normal
quantity of blood. A heart attack, or myocardial infarction, can damage the heart
muscle, causing a decrease in blood output. This decrease in blood supply to the
tissue causes a lack of oxygen, which also causes the capillaries to dilate, and
blood pressure to go down.
48  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Normovolemic shock may also occur another way. Overwhelming bacterial
infections can cause blood to collect in the infected area, effectively removing the
blood from circulation and mimicking hypovolemic shock. This phenomenon is
known as peripheral pooling.
Fluid Imbalances
Edema is an excess of fuid in the interstitial fuid compartment of the body. The
o pazieol aq ueo slleo au uamiaa pinu ssaoxa su aouaadxa ieue sanss
generalized throughout the body.
Fluid is kept in the blood vessels by three mechanisms: (1) an intact functioning
circulatory system, (2) a normal functioning lymphatic system, and (3) albumin
(a protein made by the liver) in the serum. The Starling equilibrium is a math-
most of the fluid in blood vessels. All edema results from an imbalance in one or
more of these three mechanisms. Fluid then leaks into the tissue space by one
of four ways:
· A decrease of albumin in the blood allows more fuid to leak out of arteri-
oles because of osmotic pressure changes.
· An increase in blood pressure can force fuid from the blood vessels
· Lymph vessels drain the small amount of fuid that normally leaks into
the tissues back into the circulatory system. If the vessels become blocked
(a condition known as lymphatic obstruction) the fuid in the tissues increases.
When this happens, the cells lining the blood vessels form gaps between
each other and allow more fluid to escape from the circulatory system
 Dehydration and water intoxication are the two remaining types of fuid imbal-
ances. Water is one of the largest constituents of the body. It varies in amount
aunon ql uomau e ui suad o o aans pusuy e ui suad og uog
have a lower percentage of water. Dehydration is due to the loss of water from the
the body weight or as little as 10 to 12 percent of the water in the body) may lead
to death. Problerms such as diarrhea and kidney failure can cause the body to lose
 e  la  si      q   a 
mouth, dry-looking eyes, reduced urine output, reduced feed consumption, and
diarrhea can lose 10 percent of its body weight in water. This would require 10 lb
or more in fuid replenishment depending on how long the diarrhea continues.
skin is picked up and released (Figure 4-5). It normally will return within
1 second. As an animal becomes dehydrated the skin loses some of its elasticity,
causing it to return more slowly (Table 4-3). This test is less accurate in obese,
emaciated, or very old animals
CHAPTER 4:Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances
49
FIGURE 4-5
 A registered veterinary technician
conducting the skin turgor test.
TABLE 4-3 Skin Turgor Test
Degree of Dehydration
Clinical Signs
Less than 5%
Cannot be detected clinically.
5-6%
Doughy skin and tacky mucous membranes.
6-8%
Slightly sunken eyes, dry mucous membranes.
and inelastic skin.
10-12%
Increased skin turgor (no elasticity; the
skin will stay up in the air after it is pulled
up). Very sunken eyes and dry mucous
membranes. Status of this animal is poor.
12-15%
Shock, low temperature, and prolonged
capillary refill time. Status of this animal is
grave.
Water intoxication usually occurs with salt loss or when animals are on limited
salt intake and are allowed unlimited access to water. If an animal that lacks salt
drinks an excessive amount of water, the animal develops tremors, incoordi-
 nated movement, and convulsions. The animal's brain cells can swell, along with
its RBCs, and kill the animal. This is common in both humans and in calves that
drink large amounts of water after a short period of deprivation.
50
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
CASE STUDY
Toxicity
A 2-year-old tabby cat was found playing with an opened bottle filled with pills
The owner found a few pills on the floor but did not think that her cat ate any
of the pills. The cat seemed to be acting normally. Several hours later, the cat
became depressed. His face was a little puffy and he was starting to have trouble
breathing. The owner took her cat to the veterinarian.
The diagnosis was acetaminophen (Tylenol) toxicity. Acetaminophen acts as an
oxidant of hemoglobin, resulting in the formation of Heinz bodies (Figure 4-6). The
of the pills. Emesis could not be performed to eliminate the toxin, since the cat
ingested the pills several hours earlier. An emetic can be administered within 2 to
is a clinical sign of toxicity. The cat was placed on oxygen therapy for dyspnea.
revealed Heinz bodies (Figure 4-7). At least 80 percent of the erythrocytes were
affected. To confirm the Heinz bodies, new methylene blue stain was used, after
the regular wright's stain was used on the slide.
Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is contraindicated in cats. Severe hematuria,
methemoglobinemia, and icterus can be seen. when injury or toxicity occurs in the
body, agents convert a large amount of hemoglobin into methemoglobin, which
 ap punodo e si uogoa la uaxo ue se uoung ou sao
hemoglobin by oxidation of the iron atom from the ferrous to the ferric state.
Ascorbic acid was administered to treat the methemoglobinemia. Acetylcysteine
(Mucomyst) was also administered to provide building blocks for glutathione, which
serves as a reducing agent in most biochemical reactions. The erythrocytes are
protected from oxidation and hemolysis or deficiency when glutathione is reduced.
The 2-year-old tabby's prognosis was grave. It died soon thereafter. Generally the
paisaus sunowe aut uodn supuadap panoidwl aq pinom l inq lood si sisousoid
(50 to 100 mg/kg, 1 to 2 tablets, can be fatal) and how quickly emesis can be performed
Heinz bodies - Oxidized hemoglobin
FIGURE 4-6
Heinz bodies, oxidized hemoglobin, using new methylene blue stain
CHAPTER 4: Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances
51
CASE STUDY
Toxicity (continued)
FIGURE 4-7
Heinz bodies.
Summary
Understanding the normal fow pattern of blood through the heart assists the
veterinary technician in detecting abnormalities which can occur and which
 may be monitored by various examination procedures. Homeostasis of body
fuids must be maintained within narrow limits to preserve normal health of
 the animal. Various blood and urine tests are routinely performed to help di-
agnose and assess various pathologies. The same disorders that affect human
hearts can affect the hearts of animals living longer lives and experiencing
similar environmental stressors that we humans experience. Modern veteri-
nary medicine allows us to observe or detect changes within the cardiovascu-
lar system, warning us of abnormalities and treating these clinical signs thus
ex tending the lives of our companion animals. Hemodynamic disturbances in-
clude hyperemia, hemorrhage, and congestion. Through proper nutrition and
animal management, our companion and livestock species can live longer and
more productive lives similar to their human counterparts.
52
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
REVIEW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
is the excess of fluid in the interstitial fluid
compartment and/or the body cavities.
2
is a term meaning blood in the urine.
is a thrombus that breaks loose from the blood
vessel in which it's formed in order to circulate throughout the bloodstream.
4
is a term meaning blood in the feces.
5.
is the result of an embolism blocking off the blood
supply or venous drainage of a tissue.
6.
is a general term describing low blood pressure.
is an active process in which the arterioles fill 
with blood.
8.
is the dilation of the blood vessels.
9
is the process by which overwhelming bacterial
infections cause blood to collect in an infected area, effectively removing the blood from circulation and mimicking
hypovolemic shock.
10.
is the proper term for a blood clot within a vessel.
11.
 is a condition in which there is a deficiency of
platelets in the blood.
12.
is a condition in which there is bleeding from
the nose.
13
is a localized collection of extravasated blood that is
from a vessel and is confined within an organ, tissue, or space.
14.
is a term meaning vomited blood.
15
is one way to estimate the state of hydration (fluids)
or degree of fluid loss or dehydration.
16. A/an
occurs when the blood supply is cut off from
any portion of any organ or tissue by any etiology long enough for the tissue to die.
17.
(general term for type of blood vessel) carry blood
toward the heart.
18. Another name for the pacemaker is
19. Another name for hematocrit is
CHAPTER 4: Fluid and Circulatory Disturbances
53
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. what are the three fluid compartments of the body?
2. with what condition will you always observe hyperemia of the tissues?
3. Describe fibrin.
4. what three mechanisms keep fluid in the blood vessels?
6. What is the difference between neutrophils and band neutrophils?
7. What additional information might a practitioner discover from a blood chemistry panel over a CBC?
(continued)
54
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
REVIEW
(continued)
8. what might an increased basophil count indicate?
9. List several contributing factors that might shorten the normal life span of a red blood cell within a given species.
CHAPTER 5
Neoplasia: An Introduction
to Tumors
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
 Define neoplasia, tumor, cancer, metastasis, and neoplasm.
 Cite differences between benign and malignant tumors.
 Describe abnormal histological differences in a tumor cell compared
to normal tissue.
55
56
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Key terMS
classification of Tumors
anaplasia
The term tumor originally referred to any swollen tissue. Currently, tumor is
benign
commonly used as a synonym for neoplasm. Tumors are caused by abnormal
cancer
regulation of cell division. Tumors are classified as benign (slow growing and
carcinogen
usually harrmless) or malignant (faster growing and usually able to spread to
carcinoma
einllao fq smoua 1eul anss!t euouqe ue si wseidoau y (4poq aul jo shued hauio
proliferation more rapidly than normal and continues to grow after the stimuli
descriptive classification
that initiated the new growth cease (Figure 5-1). Neoplasia is the pathological
 system
process that results in the formation and growth of a neoplasm.
karyotypic
Cancer is the term used to indicate the various types of malignant neoplasms. It is
malignant
characterized by the uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells. Malignant refers to the
ability of a neoplasm to invade and spread (metastasize) to rermote sites in the body.
melanoma
metastasis
monoclonal
NEOPLASM
neoplasia
neoplasm
osteoma
parenchyma
 practical classification
system
regional classification system
stroma
tissue classification system
TNM classification system
RESPIRATORY
BLOOD
CONNECTIVE
SMOOTH
LYMPH
EPITHELIUM
VESSEL
CANCER
TISSUE
CELLS
MUSCLES
GLAND
tumor
FIGURE 5-1
characterized by their nonresponsiveness to normal growth regulation.
Behavior of Tumors
To understand the behavior of tumors, you must first learn the ways in which
tumor cells behave differently from normal cells. The differences between nor-
Tumor cells have unregulated proliferation. In other words, the body isn't able
to “turn off" the division of tumor cells.
Most tumors are clonal, resulting from the progeny of a single somatic cell, by
the time they are diagnosed. Tumor growth is a balance between proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis, and necrosis. Tumors are classified by their histogen-
esis and their behavior.
supply, and nutrients and hormonal and growth factor availability. Unless they
CHAPTER 5: Neoplasia: An Introduction to Tumors
are removed or are killed by the body's defenses, chemotherapy, radiation ther-
01 uaisfs aunu s,Apoq aui Suisn) fdeuaun jeoilonoiq Xdeaun auouoy fde
fight the cancer), or photodynamic therapy, the cells will go on dividing forever
until the anirmal dies. The most difficult aspect of tumor behavior to understand
is loss of contact inhibition. Normal cells divide until they come in contact with
cells completely surrounding therm. This signals to the cells that there's no more
uo juau og sllao houni Suipiaip dons pinous faui ieui pue puedxa ot uoou
dividing no matter how crowded conditions become.
Morphological Differences
examination. These changes are called morphological diffrences. For example,
normal cells are programmed to be of certain types--bone, skin, kidney, and so
on. Tumor cells, because they divide so rapidly, never fully mature in the normal
sense and they lack the ability to differentiate among different parts of the body
This failure within a cell to differentiate is called anaplasia. Anaplasia is seen in
most, but not all, malignant tumors.
As previously mentioned, tumor cells also have a monoclonal origin. This means
that the entire tumor, no matter how large, arose from a change in a single cell
Karyotypic changes are changes in chromosome number or shape. Abnormal cells
will often rearrange the genetic material in their nucleus, making the chromo-
somes appear different.
Metastasis
o o e ym u s d    ymo n si siss
      sh       o
the host's vasculature.
There are several pathways for metastasis:
lymphatics (Figure 5-2).
· Hematogenous spread is a tumor's use of the bloodstream as a route.
copulate. Warts can also be transplanted among many animals in many
different species.
· Direct seeding of body cavities or surfaces occurs whenever a malignant
cavities.
They normally do not have the capacity to infiltrate, invade, or metastasize
to distant sites. Most malignant tumors are invasive and can be expected to
penetrate the wall of the colon, or uterus, for example, or fungate through the
surface of the skin. 'They recognize no normal anatomical boundaries. Some
58
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
FIGURE 5-2
Squamous cell carcinoma, a common
malignant tumor of the feline oral
cavity, is an example of a neoplasm that
often spreads to the lymphatic system.
tumor cells are more mobile, produce more enzymes, or are less adhesive than
others and easily grow into normal tissue. Individual cells or small clumps may
ermbolize, or be moved by the circulatory system to new sites. The cells may
prefer localization, growing in certain new areas, which can be explained by the
route of blood flow or as a result of gradual selection by the cells. In any event,
once the cells stop, or are arrested at the new site, they can leave the blood vessel
and grow into a new tumor at the new location.
chemical carcinogenesis
Carcinogens are physical agents, viruses, or chemicals that can cause mutation,
resulting in tumor forrmation. Tumor cells are different from normal cells and
tissues (Figure 5-3).
DNA
MUTATED
CHEMICALS
COMPLETED
RADIATION
DAMAGETO
DNA
MUTATION
DNA
DNA
VIRUSES
DNA
DAMAGED
AND
MUTATED
UNREGULATED
HEREDITARYDEFECTS
GROWTH
DNA
MUTATED
FIGURE 5-3
This drawing illustrates the ultimate effect of carcinogens. Once mutated, the stricken cells are unable to control their growth.
CHAPTER 5: Neoplasia: An Introduction to Tumors
¥59
Tumors are composed of living cells and have the ability to create new blood
vessels (angiogenesis) to maintain growth and metastasize. Tumors don't have
their own lymphatics, but a tumor may be drained by local lymphatics. A tumor
is able to subvert host tissue stroma and reprogram the stroma's activity to its
own advantage. A stroma is a normal body tissue that acts as a framework and
grows the blood vessels, which nourish the tumor.
A well-defined, discrete, fibrous tissue layer known as a capsule surrounds some
oo lusixa uijo fydoe aunssad fq paoy ae sainsde suoun uaug
invade and grow at sites away from the original tumor.
ferentiation control. Tumors are known from an almost infinite variety of cell
types, including fbroblasts, renal tubular epithelium, chondroblasts, islet cells.
hepatic cells, and astrocytes. Essentially, any cell capable of dividing can become
a tumor.
Some tumors may resemble norrmal tissue but with some important differences
For instance, abnormalities exist in a tumor cell's:
·Size
· Shape
· Staining properties
· Spatial arrangements
Tumors often exhibit a decrease or total loss of specialized functions or a de-
sh suoouny as aui uoad f lo oni y suoouny mau jo sudo
 o peou alus e se ino sheis oni Aiaaa 'puouu fisnonad sy
only when the cell “goes haywire" and no longer responds to controls over its
division that it is considered neoplastic. The evolution of a tumor represents the
however, cellular proliferations that are induced by viruses may be reversible
after the viral infection is elirminated.
Cellular proliferation, or growth, is the most conspicuous feature of cancer.
A tumor cell divides into two; further division continues to occur until a large
cell. Neoplasia differs from normal cell division and hyperplasia in that the
tumor's growth never attains normal equilibrium. When normal cells reach their
adult size, equilibrium between cell birth and cell death occurs. With neoplasia,
cells continue to divide until such time as their growth is inhibited by limits in
blood supply and/or nutrients. The growth can be slow or rapid and is almost
always progressive. Tumors rarely undergo regression, so their continued
growth is very destructive.
60  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Malignant versus Benign
Foremost and unique of these is invasion and spread (metastasis), or the ability
to infiltrate and destroy normal tissue. Benign tumors contain well-differentiated
 o an s g s as e l aon is an e s
tained in a capsule composed of compressed connective tissue. Cells of a malignant
tumor, on the other hand, are not restrained by a capsule. If a capsule were present,
it might help to contain the growth of the tumor.' Norrmally, benign tumor cells do
not cause death unless their location interferes with normal vital functions.
Metastasis forrmation, as discussed earlier, is the development of secondary cen-
ters of tumor growth at a distance from the prirmary site. The malignant tumor
can spread by breaking off pieces that are able to grow in a new location, often
in a completely different organ. For example, melanoma is a type of cancer that's
frequently triggered by exposure to the sun. It can originate in the skin (a good
reason for sunscreen) and then spread, or metastasize, to the brain and liver by
way of blood vessels.
Classification and Appearance of Tumors
Classifying tumors makes it easier to discuss the presence of disease within an
animal. Tumors are composed of two types of tissue: parenchyma and stroma.
connective tissues. The stroma provides support for growth and survival of the
tumor. The parenchyma determines the behavior of the tumor and is the com-
ponent for which the tumor is most often named. Tumors are usually given the
benign tumor of the bone would be given the name osteoma.
We classify tumors to understand them and their behaviors more clearly. The
Tissue Classification System is one method for categorizing tumors. The princi
os sase ouni aui ytum wony anss jo adi aui si uaisas sn jo siseq led
examples of these turmors and the tissues they attack include the following:
· Squamous cell carcinoma or papilloma (epithelium tissue)
· Fibroma (connective and muscular tissue)
· Leukemia (hemopoietic tissue)
·Astrocytoma (nervous tissue)
· Tumors of more than one type of tissue (such as a teratoma or mixed
fue oiul iy 1uop eql shouni jo sadfi snoaueaosu pue (iouni fueuueu
of the preceding four groups (such as melanoma)
The Practical classification System is based on a number of the tumor's criteria (man-
Barr, L. C., Carter, R. L., & Davies, A. J. S. (1988, July 16). Encapsulation
of tumors as a modifed wound healing response. Lancet, 135-137
CHAPTER 5: Neoplasia: An Introduction to Tumors
61
already discussed, including encapsulation, invasion, and metastasis. T'here are two
basic categories in the practical classification system: benign and malignant
The Regional classification System classifies tumors according to where they
occur within or on the body. However, because different kinds of tumors may
arise in the same part of the body, this system can be awkward to use. The sig-
sites of the body. For instance, white cats tend to get a malignant tumor of the
skin, squamous cell carcinoma, on the tips of their ears. This tumor is found
there more frequently than other types of tumors. Thus, whenever a tumor is
located in this area, there's every reason to be concerned.
The Descriptive Classification System is based on the gross or microscopic
appearance of a tumor, often utilizing eponyms. Eponyms constitute an ineffective
way to classify tumors, because they name a disease based on the name of the
person who discovered or described it. An example of this is Hodgkin's disease
From the name alone, you would never know it was a tumor of lymphoid tissue
The TNM classification System was created by the International Union Against
       e e   
Stage Reporting (AJCCS). This system classifies neoplasia based on the extent
of the primary tumor (T), the involvement of the regional lymph nodes (N), and
the extent of metastatic involverment (M). This system is used by many cancer
facilities in providing information regarding the prognosis of the disease, as well
as the progress and success of treatrment.
The Terminology of Tumors
As previously mentioned, most turmors end in the suffix -oma, an ending that usually,
sh anss puda jo honi uiun t usdou uuq e su same pou ing
a papilloma or adenoma, whereas a malignant tumor is called a carcinoma. Benign
tissue to -oma; malignant tumors are named the same way, except with the ending
sarcoma. For example, a benign tumor of cartilage (Greek = chondros) is a chondroma
whereas a malignant tumor of cartilage is a chondrosarcoma. In addition, certain
carcinormas have special names. A liver carcinoma is often called a hepatoma.
The Morphology of Tumors
Jo sseu do dunl e se sueadde i! 'jeuue ue uo.y paaouau houni e aujuexa nof j1
tissue that consists of turmor cells, materials that the cells produce, and the stroma.
The principal function of the stroma is to provide nutrients to the turmor by way of
a blood supply and remove metabolic waste. Without a stroma, the tumor would
die. The stroma is provided by the norrmal tissues of the body. Connective tissues
near the tumor form new vessels and new collagenous tissue for the proliferating
ture of the stroma determines the texture and consistency of the turmor.
Tumor cells may secrete a variable quantity of material specific to the type of
cells that they are. For example, connective tissue tumors are identified by the
material they produce.
62
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
pue aleis aul asouaeip suauood sdiay fsonoydiou ouni ul atueqo au
 development of the cancer. The arrangements of tumor cells help determine the
-atp palueue aq oi pual sleo ouni e jo aoueeadde oidoosouoiu pue ssois
ently in different kinds of tumors (Figure 5-4). In epithelial tumors, cells tend
to form clumps, or groups. Tumor trauma or massage tends to increase total
tumor cells and clumps released into the effluent.2 Within any clump, each cell
is fastened to the next. Connective and muscular tissue tumors are character
os se ussue snfoodufi po useldou e si eoesoyduft soydufi no
FIGURE 5-4
Cell arrangement in different types of
tumors.
SKIN LAYER
EPITHELIALTUMOR
(CELLS ARE CLUMPED TOGETHER)
STROMA
SKIN LAYER
CONNECTIVE/MUSCULARTUMOR
(CELLS LIE IN SINGLE ROWS
SEPARATED BY STROMA)
STROMA
SKIN LAYER
HEMOPOIETICTUMOR
(CELLSARECLUMPED,BUT
SEPARATEFROM EACH OTHER)
Liotta, L.A., et al. (1976). The significance of hematogenous tumor cell
clumps in the metastatic process. Cancer Research, 36(3), 889-894.
CHAPTER 5: Neoplasia: An Introduction to Tumors
63
neoplasms of hematopoietic cells but originate in the bone marrow.
Tumors may be of many shapes. Surface-type tumors tend to be flat plaques,
indurations (hardened areas), or bodies that stand above the surface. Of the lat-
ter group, stalked tumors are known as polyps; those with fronds, or leafike
extensions, are called papillary (papillomas are warts); and those with a broad
attachment are said to be fungating. Malignant tumors may form an ulcer or
ulcerate, which is the development of a sore open to the body surface or a body
cavity. Some benign tumors (i.e., histiocytomas in dogs) may also ulcerate.
Cancer Research
Animals suffer from many types of neoplasms including bone, skin, and breast
(mammary) cancer and leukemia. In particular, cattle suffer from cancer eye and
lymphosarcoma; cattle, horses, dogs, and cats suffer from squamous cell carcinoma;
and dogs and cats suffer from malignant melanoma." Cancer is responsible for al
most half of the deaths in pets older than age 1o. Anirmal medicine has become much
and other cancer-treating regimens similar to what is offered to humans. Cancer
of thousands of anirmals to live and to have a more norrmal life after treatment.
The nude mouse, a mouse without hair and without a thymus gland, is used in can-
cer research. Because the mouse has the ability to maintain human tissue (does not
have functioning T cells that would cause the animal to reject cancerous grafts)
it has been used successfully in this regard. This research, in turn, has provided
many tools used by veterinarians today in treating similar cancers in domestic
animals. The study of tumor growth in companion and lab animals has helped
of cancer in companion animals utilizes many of the same methods available in
human medicine. Many animal facilities are using a combination of chemotherapy.
part of the arsenal assembled to fight cancer in the pet animal.
Most clinical research trials investigating new methods of cancer diagnosis or
treatrment are conducted at colleges of veterinary medicine using laboratory and
companion animals. Once these new treatments have proven safe and effective
other animal patients. Many naturally occurring cancers in pet animals closely
   s  d    g
to benefit both humans and animals. Many times specimens obtained from
these clinical trials (blood, urine, and/or tumor samples) are provided to basic
researchers to gain additional information that may benefit present and future
human and animal cancer patients.
Verhaert, L. (2001). Oral proliferative lesions in dogs and cats. Presented
at the 26th World Small Animal Veterinary Association World Congress,
Vancouver.
64
 PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
CASE STUDY
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
A cat with white hair and a thin coat had a lump on the tongue. The owner of this
white cat noticed that her cat was losing weight. She had also noticed that her cat
had bad breath.
dysphagia, and weight loss. Some of the common areas that squamous cell
carcinoma presents itself are on the tongue, gingiva, eyelids, and the tips of the
ears (especially in white cats). A squamous cell carcinoma lesion/mass is pink in
color with irregular margins. Squamous cell carcinomas are the most common
and uncontrolled recurrence. A fine-needle aspiration is the method used to obtain
epithelial cell may be single, too. The nuclei can be small and condensed or large
with anisokaryosis (inequality in the size of the nuclei from what is normal for the
tissue) and prominent nuclei. Sunlight can be a probable influence regarding the
pathogenesis.
Surgical excision is the treatment of choice, but the 1-year survival rate is usually
less than 10 percent in felines.4.5 The tumors are controlled locally in only
25 percent of the animals 1 year after surgical resection or radiation therapy. The
prognosis is poor. The cancer takes a rapid course. The cat with white hair lived
for 15 months after he had surgical excision of the tumor. He had difficulty eating
toward the last month of life.
Summary
A neoplasm is an abnormal tissue that grows by cellular proliferation more rap-
mau aul paieut ieue tnus aui hae moa oi sanuuoo pue peou uu fi
growth cease. Benign neoplasms grow expansile masses that remain localized to
their site of origin. The terrm cancer is used to describe any of a variety of malig-
nant neoplasms. Due to animal research that was searching for preventions and
treatrments of human cancers, many animal cancers are now often preventable
and treatable. The key to a successful cancer treatment is in identifying it before
Assi on ae asn ane sna aisis on ao e s 1!
opportunities in cancer prevention and treatment should continue to provide
+Fossum, T.W. (1997). Small animal surgery (p. 226). St. Louis: Mosby.
"Aiello, S.E. (1998). The Merck veterinary manual(8th ed., p. 690).
Whitehouse Station: Merck & Co.
CHAPTER 5: Neoplasia: An Introduction to Tumors
65
REVIEW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
1.
is a tumor that does not invade surrounding tissue or
 spread to other parts of the body.
2.
is a general term meaning difficulty in swallowing.
3.
is a type of laboratory animal used in cancer re-
 search that is hairless, lacks a normal thymus gland, and has a defective immune system.
4.
 when describing tumors means that they were pro-
duced by or are composed of cells derived from a single cell
5.
is the chromosomal characteristics of a somatic cell.
6.
is the failure within a cell to differentiate parts of
the body.
7.
is a nerve-tissue tumor.
8.
 is a type of cancer that is frequently triggered by
 exposure to the sun.
9.
is a name of a disease based on or derived from the
name of a person.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is the difference between chondroma and chondrosarcoma?
 2. What is metastasis?
3. what are carcinogens?
(continued)
66
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
REVIEW
(continued)
4. Tumors are composed of what three tissues or tissue types?
5. Name the six tumor types using the Tissue Classification System
6. Define neoplasm, polyps, stroma, and sarcoma.
7. why are tumors sometimes considered to be "immortal"?
8. How do neoplasms metastasize?
9. what is an example of an eponymic tumor?
11. How would you explain (from an ethical viewpoint) to a client the use of this research that could save a pet's life?
CHAPTER 6
Immunological Diseases
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
 Define and differentiate between acquired and passive immunity.
 Define antigen, antibody. and retrovirus.
List an autoimmune disease in animals and describe its pathogenesis.
 Define the function of mast cells.
67
68
 PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
KeY TerMS
Immunity
acquired immunity
active immunity
antigen
from smallpox was resistant to any future attacks of the disease. Many centuries
later, the English physician Edward Jenner created a smallpox vaccine from cowpox
autoimmune reaction
colostrum
heparin
sure to the disease) is called acquired immunity or active immunity. The body's imrmune
histamine
uaiue uaiaiog aui oi saipogue oyoads aonpond oi si asuodsau
hypersensitivity reaction
When a newborn anirmal consumes colostrum (first milk) rich in antibodies, its
consumption provides passive or temporary irmrmunity to the young. Likewise, if
mast cell
a horse that was vaccinated against tetanus has its partially purified blood serum
passive immunity
 injected into another animal (i.e., tetanus antitoxin) the antibodies in the serum
opsonization
provide passive or temporary immunity to the animal. Passive immunity does not
retrovirus
stimulate antibody production by the recipient animal since only the antibodies
borns are lacking) and tirme (2 to 3 weeks in most cases for the start of antibody
 doaaap on sieo pu soop jo spn iso hou sym gi on zi pue uonpod
Jo sueu Aeodun e si fun aaisd snui (uisfs aunu huyuom aa
In addition, passive imrmunity interferes with the development of active imrmunity
during the first few weeks of life. Thus, vaccination of a newborn (even if the new.
born had a mature immune system) would not stimulate production of antibodies
Autoimmunity
Coating the outside of an animal's cells are different types of chemicals with all
types of necessary functions. If we could strip these chemicals off, place them in
be recognized as foreign. The second animal's body would mount an immune
response against them, the same as if the animal were injected with bacteria.
However, if the syringe were injected into the animal that we purified them
from, there would be no immune reaction.
Because these chemicals have the ability to cause an immune reaction, they are
living cells produce self-antigens by simply performing their normal functions
of self-tolerance, or the body's ability to recognize its own chemical agents.
However, the body isn't always able to make this distinction.
Some tumors are perceived as foreign when they change the chemicals described
previously; the tumors are then recognized as nonself cells. These nonself cells
But under certain circumstances, even normal cells can provoke the formation
of autoantibodies, or autoreactive T cells, which results in the destruction of
 normal tissues. This is known as autoimmune reaction.
CHAPTER 6: Immunological Diseases
69
FIGURE 6-1
Each of these antigens is a chemical
body that provokes an immune
response in animals.
VIRUS
BACTERIUM
PARASITES
Certain lymphocytes, the immune cells that make antibodies, are reactive to
the normal tissue antigens, or self-antigens, that are always present. Common
self-antigens include DNA, IgG (an antibody), phospholipids, erythrocytes (red
blood cells), and lymphocytes.
The antibodies rmade can react with normal tissue and have no effect. This is because
the antibodies are regulated. It's when this regulation breaks down that imrmune dis-
eases can result. Regulation is affected by a variety of problems. For instance, norrmal
considered abnormal too. This is known as cross-reactivity with microorganisms.
Most autoimmune disorders likely occur as a result of irmmune cells that had pre-
viously been suppressed by normal control mechanisms of the body. When these
cells are no longer suppressed, they attack normal cells. Viruses, particularly those
that infect lymphoid tissue, are sometimes capable of interfering with the irmmune
system's control of recognizing “self." The result is autoimmune disease.
Mechanisms of Tissue Damage
in Autoimmune Disease
Tissue damage results from a hypersensitivity reaction, which is an inflammatory
response of immunological origin. There are four types of hypersensitivity
reactions
and IgG attach to mast cells, which then bind antigen and release histamine
(Figure 6-2). Mast cells are found in loose connective tissue surrounding blood
vessels. They produce and release both histamine and heparin. Histamine causes
local acute infammation by dilating blood vessels. Heparin is an anticoagulant.
If all mast cells release histamine at the same time, acute systemic anaphylaxis,
or shock, is the result.
An example of autoimmune disease with type I hypersensitivity is milk allergy
Imagine a cow with a milk-swollen udder. Calves will butt the udder to start
the milk flowing. But the head-butting can cause milk to leak into blood vessels
There are many fats and proteins in cow's milk that are not generally found in the
circulation. Thus, the cow's body thinks it's being exposed to something foreign,
and antibodies are created against some of these substances. The next time the
cow gets head-butted and milk leaks into the blood, the antibodies can bind with
the mast cells and cause the hypersensitivity reaction, possibly killing the cow.
70
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
FIGURE 6-2
Type I hypersensitivity involves the
?
release of histamine from mast cells.
?
HISTAMINE
MAST
CEL
The second kind is called type II hypersensitivity, or cytotoxic hypersensitivity.
Cells that are destroyed by antibodies or by other chemically assisted means that
result in their lysis may initiate an acute inflammatory response. This response
is due to the release of biologically active cell-breakdown products. Let's exarm-
ine this phenomenon in more detail.
Autoimrmune hemolytic anemia, which is the destruction of RBCs, occurs when
there are autoantibodies directed against RBC surface antigens, causing their dis-
integration. For some reason, the body causes antibodies to be produced against
RBCs, to which they stick. A special type of white blood cell (WBC) can bind to
the antibodies stuck to the RBCs and can, in turn, cause the RBCs to be destroyed.
When this occurs, the RBCs release chemicals that trigger inflammation. And as
becomes so bad that the destruction of RBCs continues and the animal can die.
The third category of hypersensitivity is type III hypersensitivity, or immune
complex hypersensitivity Immune cormplexes are clumps of antibodies (or another
s ai    on o ae n  pn 
doesn't “like" immune complexes and attempts to destroy them. Defense and
attack irmmune cells called neutrophils are attracted because of the activation of
the cormplerment. Neutrophils release proteolytic enzymes (chemicals that break
down proteins), resulting in tissue destruction. This in turn activates more com-
 plement. The total effect is acute inflamrmation and cormplete tissue destruction.
Rheumatoid arthritis is an example of type III hypersensitivity. Within joints
are found antigens that resermble the antibodies attracted to joint cartilage. The
antigens cause the formation of antibodies, which stick to them. The result is an
irmmune complex within the joint capsule and close to or attached to the cartilage.
Neutrophils are sent to destroy the immune complexes and, in the process, release
their proteolytic enzymes, which also damage the joint. Painful, swollen joints are
the result.
long time it takes to develop. Type IV reactions are imrmune cell-assisted reactions
CHAPTER 6: Immunological Diseases
71
  t sno ta   p e n  d 
mum intensity. They are caused by the release of chemicals (such as histarmine),
which allow inflammatory cells to enter the tissue. Once there, these inflamrma-
tory cells begin to slowly kill normal cells in the tissue. Ulcerative colitis is a com-
around them. T'he remaining cells don't divide rapidly enough to replace the killed
ois fpoona pue uoeoaap inuied sussneo snsau suaoin pue so
Disturbances in Immune Function
Disturbances in immune function include deficiencies that arise as a result of
inherited defects in the development of the imrmune system, defects secondary to
other causes, or tumors of the immune system. Defects are usually made apparent
by an increased susceptibility to infectious diseases. But it's irmportant to be able
pue eo e Suifnq aue nof asoddns fouaoyap e pue ioajap e uaamiaq ysinsulsip ol
the one you are interested in has the wrong carburetor on its engine. As a result, it
runs poorly. This is an example of a defect. However,if the car were actually miss-
ing the carburetor, it wouldn't operate at all. This is an example of a deficiency.
Inherited Defects in Antigen Processing
The diseases that occur due to defects fall into two major classes: failure of
opsonization and failure of intracellular killing. opsonization is a way the
or antibody, in order to make it easier for immune cells to phagocytize them.
Problems of this sort are unknown in animals. However, there are cases of
antigen-processing defects in animals that fall into the category of failure of
intracellular killing. Under this type of defect, cells that have engulfed antigens
are unable to destroy them.
Inherited Deficiencies in the Immune System
With deficiencies of this type, actual members of the immune system are missing.
Deficiencies in the immune system have helped confirm the “arrangement”" of
the immune system and allow us to understand how it works. Most immunode-
types—or the lack of certain antibodies.
Secondary Immunological Defects and Deficiencies
The immune system may become suppressed or defective because of an outside
influence. Four of these influences can have a negative effect on the body's ability
to fight disease.
Mainutrition
In general, severe nutritional deficiencies reduce immune cell function and
impair immune cell responses. This can allow increased severity of bacterial
infections. Because viruses require healthy cells in which to replicate, malnutri-
72  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
susceptible to viruses.' Several research studies on obesity have demonstrated
significant increases in circulatory, locomotion, skin, reproductive, neoplastic
and hepatic diseases.?3.4
Virus-induced Immune Disorders
Viruses are divided into two groups depending on how they attack the immune
Fabricius, Peyer's patches), and those that attack secondary lymphoid tissue
(lymph nodes, spleen, bone marrow, tonsils). Some viruses, such as canine dis-
temper, feline panleukopenia, simian (monkey) AIDS, infectious bursal disease
of chickens, mouse thymus herpes virus, and Newcastle disease of birds, can
phoid neoplasia, such as Marek's disease of chickens, feline leukemia, bovine
leukemia, lymphosarcoma, and mouse leukemia.
Toxin-induced Immunosuppression
nyls, iodine, lead, cadmium, methyl mercury, and DDT have a suppressive effect
on the immune system. Mycotoxins are chemicals produced by fungi. Being
biological in origin, they can also suppress the immune system.
Other Secondary Immunodeficiencies
the formation of antibodies difficult. Other secondary causes of immunodefi-
ciency include chronic diarrhea, the chilling of newborn puppies (hypothermia)
rapid weaning, prolonged transportation, crowding, trauma (and destruction of
Iymphoid tissue), and certain endocrine disorders.
Neoplasms of Lymphoid cells
plished through rigorous surveillance and destruction of abnormal cells, a
lated, neoplasia of the immune system is the result. Since the immune system
regulates cell replication, any failure or suppression of the immune system can
have a bad effect on an animal. Immunosuppressed mammals have an increased
rate of cancer as a result of the immune system's failure to regulate cells.
'Lewis, L.D., et al. (1994). Small animal clinical nutrition Ill. Mark Morris
Institute.
*Chandra, R.K. (1980). Cell mediated immunity in genetically obese mice.
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 33, 13-16.
*Newberne, P.M. (1966). Overnutrition and resistance of dogs to distemper
virus. Federation Proceedings, 25, 1701.
4Williams, G.D., & Newberne, P.M. (1971). Decreased resistance t0
Salmonella infection in obese dogs. Federation Proceedings, 30, 572
CHAPTER 6:ImmunologicalDiseases
73
Canine lymphosarcoma, a neoplasm of lymphocytes, is responsible for 57 percent
of all canine malignancies (Figure 6-3). Classified by site of origin and by cell
type, this is a disease of the immune cells and differs from lymphoid leukermia
only if there are circulating malignant cells.
FIGURE 6-3
 Cutaneous lymphosarcoma is a type of 
canine malignancy that almost always
spreads to internal organs.
Feline leukemia is caused by an oncogenic (cancer causing) retrovirus causing
proliferative and degenerative conditions. Retroviruses are potent disease agents.
Included in this family of viruses is the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
that causes hurman AIDs. Some retroviruses cause neoplasms, as in the case of
feline leukemia. Proliferative conditions include lymphosarcoma and leukermia
cytopenia (a decrease in all circulating blood platelets, erythrocytes, and leuko-
cytes). Another immune system neoplasm, Marek's disease, is a virus-induced
tumor found in chickens.
74
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
CASE STUDY
Feline Infectious Peritonitis (FIP)
A 5-month-old kitten was adopted from the shelter. The new owner noticed that the
um nuied pue unop 'papuaisip sem uawopge s,uahy aul iea iupinom ua
kitten was placed on antibiotics to help with the infection and fever. Unfortunately,
the fever did not respond to the antibiotics. The kitten died overnight
Diagnosis was based on the history, clinical signs, and the laboratory results. A
complete blood count (CBC) and chemistry was performed with results indicating
leukocytosis with neutrophilia and lymphopenia. A necropsy was performed to confirm
wet FiP. The fluid was a thick yellow pyogranulomatous exudate. The specific gravity
and the total protein were high. Granulomatous lumps were found on the surface
of the kidneys, and the liver had some focal pale lesions. Kittens raised in infected
their new homes before the clinical signs start showing, weeks or months later.
replicates in the tonsils or intestinal epithelium. Macrophages and monocytes
lnsia pue sall uaalds se yons 'suealo Ared aun oi sna aun hodsuen
of the disease. The two forms are effusive or noneffusive. The clinical signs of
noneffusive FiP are weight loss, ocular and central nervous system (CNs) signs,
There is no treatment for FiP, once the clinical signs start to show. Most felines
    s is e s  s as 
kitten more comfortable, or possibly extend its life by several months. Supportive
treatment, including anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs, can be
given to felines that are in good physical condition, show good appetites, have
no neurological signs, and do not have Feline leukemia virus (FeLv)-induced
A modified live virus intranasal vaccine can help prevent FiP. Efficacy is 40 to
80 percent in kittens over 16 weeks of age that are not already infected with
feline enteric corona virus (seronegative). However, vaccination alone should not
be relied upon to control Fip. Isolation of felines that are tested positive, weaning
kittens earlier, good sanitation, and use of a virucidal disinfectant all help to
reduce exposure to this disease.
CHAPTER 6: Immunological Diseases
75
Summary
oxa sumo usfs aun umo sjee ue fq pau si aun aa
sure to foreign proteins or antigens. Passive immunity is conferred by the admin-
istration of preformed antibodies in either serum or colostrum. For most animals,
active immunity is not possible for several weeks after birth. The anirmal's immune
 ansoxa Aq ao fuonu fiuo poe fsaape aq uo sas
environmental toxins or microbes. Autoimmune disorders are diseases caused by
an irmmune response that is directed against the animal's own tissues. They most
commonly occur as a result of immune cells previously suppressed by norrmal con-
trol mechanisms of the body. Disturbances in immune function include deficien-
cies that arise as a result of inherited defects, tumors of the imrmune system, and
effects that are secondary to other causes.
76
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
REVIEW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
is a neoplasm of lymphocytes that is responsible for
1
57 percent of all canine malignancies.
2
are toxic chemicals produced by fungi.
3.
are cells found in loose connective tissue along blood
vessels that respond to injury by producing and releasing both heparin and histamine.
4
is a histopathological term meaning inflammation
process in which there is infiltration of polymorphonuclear white blood cells into a more chronic area of inflammation
characterized by mononuclear cells, ymphocytes, and macrophages.
5.
 is a chemical or substance that has the ability to
cause an immune reaction within the body.
causes local acute inflammation by dilating blood vessels.
7. Mycotoxins are produced by
8.
is a process by which the immune system coats anti-
gens with chemicals, such as complement or antibody, in order to make it easier for immune cells to phagocytize them.
9. A/an.
is a virus that contains RNA and reverse transcriptase.
The virus transcribes its RNA into a complementary DNA (cDNA) provirus that is then incorporated into the host cell
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. what is an autoimmune reaction?
2. Name the three causes of disturbance in immune system function.
3. Explain the phenomenon of cross-reactivity among cells.
CHAPTER 6:Immunological Diseases
77
4. Name four outside “influences" that can prevent the body from fighting disease.
5. Give an example of an animal retrovirus
6. List three lymphoid tissues of the body
7. List three examples of animal diseases that destroy lymphoid tissue
8. How can obesity in dogs (overfeeding your dog) lead to higher incidence of viral infections in the animal?
9. why can't you vaccinate a newborn and expect immediate protection from a disease?
10. what is the difference between passive and active immunity?
11. what is colostrum and its importance in immunity?
CHAPTER 7
Mechanisms of Infections and
Causes of Infectious Disease
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
Describe methods by which parasites are capable of causing disease.
Describe means by which an organism can be affected by the animal
itself.
Describe how a virulent organism can be attenuated to stimulate
antigenicity and not disease.
List several common sources of infection in animals.
Explain why an infectious disease doesn't have to be contagious
but a contagious disease must be infectious.
78
CHAPTER 7: Mechanisms of Infections and Causes of Infectious Disease
KeY TerMS
Infection
asymptomatic carrier
attenuation
When living agents enter an animal's body and disturb the function of any part,
bacteremia
infection is said to have occurred. An infectious disease, therefore, is one caused
bacteriophage
by the presence in or on an animal body of a foreign living organism, which cre-
ates a disturbance that leads to signs of illness. Most infections are caused by
carrier
 o ss as ae  psa a n sso
contact carrier
Most infecting organisms are destroyed by the host tissue. This is because the
contagious
host-parasite relationship isn't natural. But in some instances, the animal's resis-
convalescent carrier
tance may not be sufficient to prevent growth. When this occurs, infection is
endotoxin
and the body's persistent attempt to destroy or contain it. An acute or peracute
entrapment
infection occurs when resistance is overwhelmed.
exotoxin
fomite
The Fate of the Infecting Organism
iatrogenic
Infecting organisms are eliminated in secretions or excretions of the host. These
immunosuppression
include pus, respiratory secretions, feces, and urine. Chronic infections can result
immune carrier
in large numbers of these organisms being eliminated from the body The escape
inert
route from the body may be peculiar and specific to certain organisms, such as
saliva for the rabies virus.
infection
infectious disease
If a disease is fatal, many infecting organisms are destroyed with the carcass.
However, improper disposal of the body can result in outbreaks. In some
nosocomial
instances, the organism is arrested, or inactivated; in other words, although the
parasite
organism is unable to cause serious damage, the host is unable to eliminate it.
pathogenicity
Animals who exhibit fare-ups of disease or who appear altogether normal may
phytotoxin
also discharge organisms in excretions. These anirmals are known as carriers.
septicemia
A convalescent carrier is one who has had a recognized disease but has not rid itself
of the infecting agent. mmune carriers, or asymptomatic carriers, are animals
superinfection
synergism
from the disease. contact carriers are animals that may harbor and eliminate
thermolabile
dangerous organisms that were picked up from contact with other anirmals.
toxemia
Sources of Infection
toxoid
vector
The sources of infection are often indirect and complicated. Here are 10 examples
virulence
1. Direct or immediate contact with a diseased animal. This involves actual con-
zootoxin
tact between a diseased and normal animal surface. Some specific examples
of direct contact infections are ringworm, venereal infections, and bites.
2. Contact with fomites. Fomites (the plural of fomite, also known as fomes)
needle on another could transfer the disease. The needle would serve as
a fomite. This used to be a common occurrence in immunizing cattle on
80
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
the range and still occurs with some frequency Hairbrushes for grooming
dogs, beds, water troughs, and blankets for horses, cats, and dogs can all
act as fomites in the transmission of infection.
 3. Contact with disease carriers. Remember, carriers may appear normal even
though they're shedding an organism. This can result in direct or indirect
infection (Figure 7-1).
FIGURE 7-1
As normal as these dogs appear, one of
them could easily be contaminating the
others with an infectious organism.
4. Infection from soil. Certain spore-bearing organisms that live in the soil are
able to produce disease if they are carried into tissues, usually through
wounds. Clostridium tetani (the organism that causes tetanus) enters the
body when an animal steps on a rusty nail or cuts itself on a dirty can.
5. Infection from food or water. Although this is a factor to keep in mind, con-
animals. Dogs and cats are commonly infected with Giardia from drinking
water out of ponds, streams, puddles, and public fountains.
6. Airborne infections. Infectious agents use a variety of ways to enter the body
when airborne. These include droplets of moisture (saliva and other excre-
tions) that are sneezed or coughed, dust particles, and spores.
7. Infections from bloodsucking arthropods. Insects, mites, and ticks are examples
of arthropods. Arthropods can be biological vectors, in which they are nec-
essary to part of the infective organism's development, or they may simply
as mechanical vectors. vectors are simply organisms that carry pathogens
from one host to another
CHAPTER 7: Mechanisms of Infections and Causes of Infectious Disease
81
that's already found in the body can cause disease, possibly mediated by
immune depression. These infections can be diagnosed by serological
surveys. The host's immune status, antibody response, and other factors
however, these infections are still quite important because they serve as an
unrecognizable source for the spread of viruses that may interfere with the
animal's overall immune system.
9. Infections acquired in the laboratory or hospital (nosocomial infections). Isolation
wards, quarantine times and areas, foot baths, rodent control, control of
arthropods, and general aseptic techniques minimize the spread of disease
in the laboratory and veterinary clinic. It is estimated that 5 to 10 percent
of hospitalized patients become ill due to nosocormial infections. There are
many factors that predispose the hospital or clinic patient to nosocomial
antimicrobial therapy). These and other factors need to be considered when
treating, handling, or housing patients (see Chapter 10 for zoonotic diseases)
medicine. For instance, administering penicillin to someone who's allergic
to it will cause a severe, even life-threatening reaction.
Infection and contagion
An infectious organism that can be transmitted from one body to another by direct
or indirect contact is said to be contagious. All contagious diseases are infectious
But an infectious disease isn't necessarily contagious. How contagious something
tunity of reaching another body. A highly contagious disease is likely to infect
another animal, a slightly contagious disease poses some risk of infection, and
1uom fiqeqoud aheo aues aui u iday spuq aulo snooaul fuay s! ll asneoag
get malaria from the infected bird, though, because it is not contagious. A bite
from an infected mosquito is required to spread the disease.
A superinfection is a fresh infection in addition to one already present. The term
is also used for a reinfection. The infection may have been passed from the same
d si so ao uu a fi ds se e o no so go sds
ent, we have a mixed infection. A secondary infection is a type of mixed infection
 For example, puppies that get Parvovirus have a suppression of their immune sys-
tem. Since the imrmune cells can no longer fight off foreign invaders, bacteria are
able to infect the puppy as well. T'he bacteria are secondary infectors.
ther could bring about alone. For example, an organism called Treponema (anaero-
na peou yim sioui i uum inq si fq snouaup fiaa iust (eoe o
microbes in pigs, the result is swine dysentery, or inflamrmation of the intestine.
82  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Properties of Pathogenic Organisms
virulence refers to the disease providing the power or malignancy of an infec-
tious organism. We call this pathogenic power (the ability to cause disease in
susceptible animals). Virulence can be altered. Attenuation is the process by
which virulence is diminished. Methods of attenuation include:
· Cultivating an organism at unfavorable temperatures
· Heating an organism to below the thermal death point.
· Cultivating an organism on an unfavorable medium
· Selecting a nonvirulent strain.
· Injecting the organism into a resistant species. This is most commonly
used when developing vaccines for viruses. Rinderpest virus was first
Suyom e dojaaap oi shqeu ul laiel pue sieol ut ymoa fq panenuae
vaccine for cattle. The development of a rinderpest vaccine devoid of
residual virulence was thus developed.
paieadau aramoy 'saseo auos ui) uoneidepe pue sbessed pareaday ·
 passage can also increase virulence.)
aaessed paieadau pue yimoua aul si sasnui jo uoenuaie jo pouiau hauiouy
of the virus through eggs. Rabies vaccine for dogs and cats is developed by this
method. This high egg passage vaccine (HEP) has 178 passages in eggs and
thus is completely safe for both dogs and cats.
oud Aeuouqe ue ui paddeni si (aaau "at) anss ho uelho usuelho ue ytum
duced anatomical or physiological site. The characteristic clinical features of most
metastatic disease is the unrestricted growth which leads to local infiltrates and
entrapment of structures. The growth can in turn “influence" the second struc
ture or organism. Bacteriophages, viruses that infect bacteria, are able to transfer
genes to bacteria in order to change their virulence.
The pathogenicity of an organism can also be afected by the animals themselves.
Many diseases are not as pathogenic as they once were. This is due to factors
such as herd immunity, better nutrition, better hygiene, and genetic factors. Our
ability to alter the pathogenicity of organisms has allowed us to develop vaccines,
which we can then use to provide protection against deadly forms of the same dis-
ease. If we can create bacteria that lack the ability to cause disease, we can inject
these bacteria to cause an irmmune reaction (Figure 7-2). That way, if an animal
ever gets infected with the actual disease-causing organism, it will be protected.
Mechanisms of Disease Production by
Pathogenic organisms
The ability of an organism to produce disease depends on two properties of the
organism:
1. The ability to multiply in tissues or on body surfaces. Once established in the tis-
sues, a localized or generalized infection can result. Generalized infections,
CHAPTER 7: Mechanisms of Infections and Causes of Infectious Disease
83
FIGURE 7-2
Vaccines play a large part in warding
off infectious diseases in humans and
animals.
also called systemic infections, are the result of metastasis and spread via
the circulation. Bacteremia means that bacteria are circulating within the
culating in the blood. A toxemia results when a bacterial toxin enters and
circulates in the blood.
2. The ability to form tocins. Toxins come in a variety of types. Phytotoxins are
produced by plants, an example being mushroom poison. zootoxins include
poisons such as snake venom (Figure 7-3). Then there are the bacterial tox-
ins, chermicals produced by bacteria, which can cause disease or even death.
These toxins usually exhibit specific tissue preferences; as such, they can act
upon nerve tissue, blood, or WBCs. Endotoxins are made within the bacteria
and may be structural components of the organism. Endotoxins are some-
 times released when the bacteria die and break open or are extracted.
Exotoxins are secreted or excreted. Exotoxins are primarily proteins that are
produced within some gram-positive bacteria and secreted into the surround-
ing media. Clostridial toxins are examples of exotoxins. Diseases they produce
would include botulism, tetanus, malignant edema, blackleg, and overeating dis-
ease. Exotoxins are very antigenic and potent.
FIGURE 7-3
Toxins formed by bacteria on the
cellular level are comparable to such
common zootoxins as snake venom.
84  PART ONE:PATHOLOGY
Toxins have a number of irmportant properties. Certain toxins have the follow-
ing qualities:
·Are thermolabile, or destroyed by heat
· Consist of large molecules
· Require a period of incubation (Because they're big, toxins often need time
to diffuse through tissues.)
· Deteriorate with age
Being large in size, a toxin consists of several parts. As it ages, the poisonous
part of the toxin disappears frst, leaving behind a toxoid. Although a toxoid
isn't poisonous, it is antigenic. Because the toxoid is antigenic, injection of one
will cause an antibody reaction. (Toxoids are used, and sometimes specifically
made, as vaccines.) And since it isn't poisonous, injection of a toxoid won't cause
disease. For instance, every time you get a tetanus shot, you are being given an
tect you in the event that you become infected by tetanus bacteria.
d a  si a o a  so o  
genic bacteria. These include coagulase, which accelerates clotting of plasma;
fibrinolysin, which breaks down fibrin and allows bacteria to move more readily
through tissue; and hyaluronidase, which is a spreading or diffusing factor.
Pathogenesis of Parasitic Infections
ishment from that other organism. The anirmal being parasitized is called the
unrecognizable, or they may be very obvious. Healthy animals can be host to
hundreds of parasitic worms with no indication of stress or illness. Or they
may be in danger of death from anermia, unthriftiness, or retarded development.
Pathogenic effects fall into one of four categories.
The first category, trauma, involves the destruction of cells, tissues, or organs.
Trauma can be mechanical or chemical. Examples of mechanical trauma include
roundworm or hookworm larvae burrowing through lung tissue, adult hook-
worms performing mucosal grazing in the intestine, Capillaria (parasitic nema
tode) causing hepatitis and gastroenteritis, Trichuris (whipworrms) destroying
tapeworm larvae tunneling through the dermis, creating thousands of cavities.
The digestion of the intestinal mucosa by Entamoeba (an amoeba) is an example
of chemical trauma.
The diversion of host nutritive substances constitutes the second category
tems (Figure 7-4). They can absorb significant amounts of food from the host
shop Supnjoui) sieuueu Suea-yu jo uomaden e unuogouda ausau!
cats, and humans), absorbs vitamin B,, which is necessary for RBC production
A lack of this vitamin can cause anemia. Ascaris also consumes a good deal of the
food ingested by the host. Giardia, a protozoan, covers the intestinal cells and
CHAPTER 7: Mechanisms of Infections and Causes ofInfectious Disease
85
FIGURE 7-4
 Once the tapeworm attaches itself to
the host's intestine, it can steal away
important nutrients for itself.
 prevents normal absorption. This interferes with normal intestinal absorption,
and the unused nutrients are passed uselessly
Toxin production is the third category. Reactions in the host can be directly
due to toxin release or toxin release coupled with an immune reaction.
Trypanosoma cruzi, a protozoan, causes cells in cardiac and smooth muscle to
rupture and release a neurotoxic substance. This substance in turn attacks
autonomic ganglion cells, ruining nervous control of peristalsis and heart
contraction. Trypanosoma brucei gambiense produces a neurotoxin that causes
severe brain damage. Plasmodium, the parasite that causes malaria, prolifer-
ates in RBCs, which can rupture simultaneously and release the parasites
waste products. This often induces a characteristic malarial fever. Verminous
intoxication, caused by the waste products of tapeworms, can cause dizzi-
uxon e Suonpoud fq asdeloud penoan asneo ueo sunu easnu pue ssau
that affects the nervous control of the intestinal muscles. Reactions due to
toxin release combined with an immune reaction include examples such as
Onchocerca larvae, which wander into the retina of the eye, where they die
and elicit a powerful immune response. This combination of foreign pro-
tein and WBC invasion destroys the retina, causing blindness. Wuchereria
(a filarial worm), which normally lives in the lymphatics, may elicit an immune
reaction by releasing larvae in aberrant sites, resulting in elephantiasis.
The fourth category consists of serving as vectors for other disease agents.
As you learned earlier, vectors are organisms that carry a disease pathogen from one
animal to another. The salmon-poisoning fuke carries a rickettsia (Neorickettsia
helminthoeca), which produces salmon poisoning in dogs that eat infected fish
(salmon, trout, or Pacific giant salamanders). Heterakis, a nematode worm of
pathogenic in birds.
86
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Tolerance in the Host-Parasite Relationship
Successful parasites evolve to avoid the protective immune response of the host.
  s   s   e  n
invisible to the host. One method of becorming inert involves finding immune
"blind spots." When this happens, the parasite is able to mimic the host in some
way—essentially masking itself—so as to avoid a defensive response (i.e., the
host's creation of antibodies).
A nonpathogenic parasite has adaptive value. For one thing, it doesn't destroy
the host and can continue to reproduce. As previously stated, the parasite is
able to manufacture antigens that don't cause an immune reaction. In fact, some
parasites have the ability of antigenic variation. These parasites are able to
continually change their surfaces to keep the immune system from mounting an
effective immune response.
Immunosuppression is another method by which a parasite can cause the host to
tolerate its presence. During inmmunosuppression, parasites can killimmune sys-
suppressive chemicals to inhibit the immune system from mounting a defense.
CHAPTER 7: Mechanisms of Infections and Causes of Infectious Disease
87
Case Study
Parvovirus
saep s noge lapaaig pieryoeg e wot pauiergo sem Addnd aui 'eauieip pue
did not show any signs of illness for the first 4 days. The dog is being fed generic
dog food that is being fed to the other two dogs in the household. Vomiting and
anorexia started one day ago. The owner describes one bout of diarrhea the
morning of presentation when it was noticed that the diarrhea had a foul smell.
This can be attributed to an increase of protein in the feces.
On physical examination the dog appears depressed, mucous membranes are
pale, yet capillary refill time (CRT) is delayed by more than 2 seconds (normal is
1 to 2 seconds). The heart and lungs sound normal. The abdomen is tender upon
thermometer. Abdominal radiographs reveal intussusception—a consequence of
Parvo infection.
The primary differential diagnosis for this case, based on the history and the
physical examination, is Parvovirus. Other differentials that should be considered
intussusception.
Diagnostic tests that are run on this pup include a Parvo Cite test (in house)
by obtaining some feces followed by an ELisA test that is sent to an outside
laboratory for testing of antigens. Another test that is helpful is a CBC. Results
indicate a + Cite test and a leukopenia. A diagnosis of Parvovirus can be made.
sini al aredoidde uo paoeld sl leue aul aaloddns sl oaied lot suaueain aus
to support the severe diarrhea caused by the denuded and necrotic intestinal
lining. (See Animal Disease 6 and 7 from Appendix Ill.) For support the animal
is also kept NPo (nothing per os-—which means nothing by mouth) to allow the
intestinal lining to heal. Antiemetics and broad-spectrum antibiotics are used to
treat the vomiting and secondary septicemia respectively. Most dogs can recover
Summary
 Infectious disease is caused by the presence of one or more foreign living organ-
isms that create a disturbance leading to signs of illness. The fate of the infect-
ing organism, the sources, and the method of contamination and infection all
determine its identification, prevention, and treatrment. Sources of infection
can include fomites and vectors. Infections can be acquired in a hospital set-
ting, on the farm, by consumption of contaminated food and water, and by
airborne sources. Virulence refers to the power or strength of infectious capability
Organisms can produce disease by multiplying in animal tissues or on body sur
suxoi Suiseajau pue Suonpod fg pue saoep
88
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
ReVIeW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
1.
is a term that describes a malignant growth in the
 presence of another organism
2.
are viruses that infect bacteria.
3.
 is also known as a fresh infection or reinfection.
4
 means that bacteria and their toxins are circulating in
the blood.
5.
are toxins produced by plants.
are substances that resemble bacterial toxins in
 antigenic properties but are actually found in an animal's fluids such as snake venom.
7.
 is a toxin that has been treated or aged to destroy its
 toxic properties but retain its antigenicity.
8
are organisms that live on or in another organism,
9.
tolerance occurs when the parasite becomes immu-
nologically inert.
10.
are nonliving objects that possibly harbor or are
capable of transmitting disease.
11.
is the condition or ability to cause disease.
12.
is a disturbance in the function of any part of an 
animal's body caused by the entering of living agents into that body—-the presence of endoparasites in a host.
13.
are organisms that carry pathogens or infective agents
from one host to another.
 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. what is the relationship between a mixed infection and a secondary infection?
2. what is a fomite (fomes)?
CHAPTER 7:Mechanisms of Infections and Causes ofInfectious Disease
89
3. what is meant by a convalescent carrier?
4. Name three of the four methods by which parasites are capable of causing disease
 5. What is the difference between an infection and being contagious?
6. Define and give an example of an iatrogenic infection
7. Describe the differences between endotoxins and exotoxins
CHAPTER 8
Genetic Disorders
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
Describe the fundamental differences between genetic, nutritional,
 and microbial disorders.
 Discuss dominant versus recessive traits and their relationship to
genetic disorders.
Describe common genetic disorders in horses, dogs, cats, and
livestock.
90
CHAPTER 8: Genetic Disorders
91
KEY TeRMS
Genetic Technology
congenital
cytogenetic
Today's current progress in medical genetics is directly due to progress in the
dominant
field of molecular biology, involving recombinant DNA technology. Recombinant
DNA is DNA that's made in the laboratory when new DNA sequences are inserted
gene tracking
via chemical or biological means (Figure 8-1).
genetics
All diseases have a molecular basis. Molecular biology has helped to solve
genome
genetic diseases using several techniques. The classical approach to genetic dis-
hereditary
orders was to identify an abnormal gene product so that the normal gene could
hermaphrodite
be found and the changes within it deterrmined. Today, scientists have developed
inheritance
 animal to localize mutant genes. Transgenics is the exciting new technology in
mutation
which this recombinant DNA is placed into an animal. Once there, it can trigger
 pseudohermaphrodite
the production of unique proteins or “knock out" other proteins that the anirmal
recessive
would normally produce. Knockouts are animals that have been “engineered" to
lack a gene they normally have.
recombinant DNA
As our discussion turns to genetic disorders, several definitions become important.
reverse genetics
The term hereditary refers to a trait derived from one's parents and transmitted
transgenics
in the genes through the generations. Since the trait is passed down through
families, it's also called a familial trait. Similarly, the term congenital means “born
with." Thus, we can say that certain individuals possess congenital hereditary
traits. Homozygous means having identical genes at the same location on paired
chromosomes. Heterozygous means having nonidentical genes at the same loca-
tion on paired chromosomes.
FIGURE 8-1
Today, scientists are able to engineer recombinant DNA in the laboratory.
92  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Mutations are permanent changes in DNA. Genome mutations involve the loss or
gain of an entire chromosome. Chrormosome mutations are the result of a rear-
rangerment of genetic material and give rise to the visible structural changes in
chromosomes. Gene mutations are partial or complete deletions of genes on the
chromosomes. Mutations interfere with protein synthesis. When proteins are
not made properly, disease is the result
Categories of Genetic Disorders
There are four major categories of genetic disorders:
- Mendelian, in which mutant genes have a large effect
· Multifactorial, in which multiple genes and the environment infuence the
disorder
· Cytogenetic, which result from chromosomal disorders
· Nonclassical inheritance, in which a single-gene disorder with a
nonclassical pattern of inheritance exists
Let's examine each of these in more detail
Mendelian Disorders
There are over 4,5oo Mendelian disorders, all the result of an expressed mutation
in a single gene that has a large effect. There are several transmission patterns
for inheriting this type of single-gene disorder.
With autosomal dominant disorders, only one copy of the gene is necessary,
and the disorder becomes relevant because it's the dominant gene. Dominant
genes always express themselves in the first generation. Recessive genes have
their traits hidden or masked in the heterozygous condition. Autosomal
recessive disorders are those in which the disease does not usually affect
the parents; however, one in four offspring will be affected when he or she
inherits two copies of the gene, one from each parent. X-linked disorders
involve daughters as carriers of a disease, while sons suffer the disease's
effects (Figure 8-2).
The inheritance of one of the many colors of cats is a classical example of sex-
linked inheritance in domestic animals. The heterozygous offspring of a pure-
bred black bred to a purebred orange cat will exhibit a tortoiseshell coloring
(mixing of black and orange hair) in female offspring. The male offspring will
be black (if black is dominant). The expression of this trait is thus linked to the
sex of the offspring-
The biochermical and molecular basis of single-gene disorders is a result of
either defective enzymes, defects in receptors and transport systerms, or altera-
tions of nonenzyme proteins. Defective enzymes can cause an accumulation of
material that's normally broken down, a decrease in the amount of a product
that's supposed to be produced, or the failure to deactivate tissue-damaging
substances. Several diseases due to defects in enzymes are seen in animals and
CHAPTER 8: Genetic Disorders
86
FIGURE 8-2
MOTHER
FATHER
In this illustration, a gene that carries
disease is passed from the mother to
both the female and male offspring.
Because the disease is an X-linked
disorder, only the male offspring 
exhibits traits of the disease; the female
offspring is merely a carrier.
FEMALE OFFSPRING
MALE OFFSPRING
=DEFECTIVEGENE
include lysosomal storage diseases, mucopolysaccharidoses, and glycogen stor-
age disease (glycogenosis). Any disorder associated with defects in proteins that
regulate cell growth could result in the growth of tumors.
Multifactorial Disorders
Multifactorial disorders are due to the combined action of the environment
and two or more mutant genes having an additive effect. An example was
previously discussed when describing renal agenesis. Heart disorder, diabetes,
and cancer are additional examples of multifactorial disorders. Currently,
these disorders and the interactions of the environment and genetics are not
well understood. Animals differ genetically in their nutritional requirements.
Animals also differ in their abilities to withstand nutrient deficiencies and
toxicities. The White Leghorn chicken, for example, thrives on a diet that
aa po sa fuen asauu (uoi ad saed) udd o fuo suuo
Rhode Island Red chicken need as much as 50 ppm to prevent the disorder
perosis. Zebu cattle are able to perform well at 46°C, whereas Holstein cattle
have elevated respiration rates, increased body temperature, and lowered
performance at 36°C.
Cytogenetic Disorders
These disorders are due to chromosome mutations in which there may be an
abnormal number of chromosomes or alterations in the structure of one or
 more chromosomes. An abnormal number of chromosomes can be expressed as
94   PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
euploid, where the number present is an exact multiple of the normal number.
For example, humans normally have 23 chromosomes; therefore, if someone
had 46 (2 X 23), he or she would be termed euploid. An aneuploid individual
possesses a number of chromosomes that's not an exact multiple of 23, such
as24.
Along with abnormal amounts, cytogenetic disorders involve abnormal altera-
tions in the structure of one or more chromosomes. For example, a deletion is
the loss of a portion of a chromosome. A translocation occurs when a segment
of one chromosome is transferred to another. Isochromosome formation results
when one chromosome arm is lost and the remaining arm duplicates itself to
make up for the missing piece. Ring chromosomes result when the ends of a
chromosome fuse with each other. And inversion occurs when the chromosome
breaks into three pieces and one piece reverses its position before joining back
with the remaining pieces.
The most obvious results of a cytogenetic disorder are those that involve the sex
chrormosomes. Hermaphrodites, animals that have both ovarian and testicular
tissue, are the result of cytogenetic disorders, as are pseudohermaphrodites. A
female pseudohermaphrodite has ovaries but has the external appearance of a
male, whereas a male pseudohermaphrodite has testicular tissue but outwardly
resembles a female.
Nonclassical Inheritance
Disorders of this sort include triplet repeat mutations (or fragile X disease),
mutations in mitochondrial genes, and genomic irmprinting. Fragile X syndrome
is the most common inherited cause of mental retardation in humans. The full
mutation occurs 1 in 3,6oo males and 1 in 5,ooo females. The mutation occurs
in the FMR1 gene on the X chromosome. Fragile X is not the result of a single
change in a base. It is a trinucleotide repeat disorder in which there is a multi-
plication of part of the genetic information. Researchers have developed a fragile
X syndrome anirmal model that has been associated with cognitive deficits. The
studies involve the brains of wild-type and FMR1 knockout mice. Fortunately,
none of these disorders are common in anirmals.
Molecular Diagnosis
disease. Genetic diseases and their effects can be deterrmined only if you under-
stand gene structure, and molecular biology has allowed us to do that. Gene
tracking is a process that helps determine whether mermbers of the same family
have inherited a defective gene. Animals identified in this manner can then be
prevented from breeding. Other diagnostic applications of recombinant DNA
techniques help aid in the diagnosis and understanding of cancer and how it af-
fects cells, forensics, and infectious disease diagnosis. Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) analysis can determine the actual size of repeat sections in individuals
with the permutation. Cytogenetic tests have been around since the 198os to
help in diagnosing carriers of various genetic disorders
CHAPTER 8: Genetic Disorders
95
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID, formerly known as just CID) in
Arabian horses and in basset hounds is an autosomal recessive disease. The
If two carriers are mated, there is a 25 percent chance that the resulting off-
spring will be affected and a 50 percent chance the resulting offspring will be a
carrier. Affected foals with SCID usually die before 2 months of age to second-
ae jo syaam ai oi 9 un pu seadde s ym siddnd suoau Ane 
The most common cause of death in SCID puppies is from canine distemper
due to routine immunization with modifed live virus distemper vaccine. Until
recently, molecular diagnosis of a carrier of SCID was very difficult. Today
 o qs d o  s  d o s p   si 
blood sample is used. For ethical reasons no carriers should be used as breed-
ing animals.
96
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
CASE STUDY
Canine Panosteitis
An 8-month-old male German shepherd shows lameness that started in the
left foreleg and migrated to the right foreleg. The puppy's legs were painful on
palpation. The veterinarian requested radiographs and routine blood work (CBC/
biochemistry) to rule out any other possible diseases due to the prolonged fever.
Radiographs showed a mottled density in the medullary cavity of the diaphysis
may e log jaaay apei-mol e pey Addnd aul 'auog paioae aut jo (auog suol)
anti-inflammatory drug (NsAID) to minimize pain and decrease inflammation.
The lameness lasted for 3 weeks and the puppy made a full recovery.
CLINICAL SIGNS AND DIAGNOSIS
but German shepherds are predominantly affected by panosteitis, which strongly
suggests an inheritable basis for this disease. Panosteitis is a self-limiting, painfu
condition that can affect one or more of the long bones in young, medium- to
of the disease, radiographic lesions fall into three phases. In the early phase
the ends of the diaphysis become more prominent, but may appear blurred and
granulated. The middle phase has patchy sclerotic opacities, which appear around
the nutrient foramen and later throughout the diaphysis. In the late phase the
overall opacity of the medullary canal diminishes toward normal pattern, but some
CASE STUDY
Hip Dysplasia
A 12-month-old male Golden Labrador had normal hips at birth.As the dog
head of the femur in the hip joint. This caused the cartilaginous dorsal rim of
the acetabulum to become distorted. During the later months the acetabulum
ossified into a distorted shape (shallow). The dog started to have difficulty getting
up and lying down. He did not play ball with the owner as much as he used to.
The owner noticed that the dog was reluctant to climb the stairs. The veterinarian
future, due to the financial considerations of the owner. Since the owner had a
pool, the veterinarian recommended that his dog go swimming to maintain joint
mobility while minimizing the weight bearing on the dog's hips.
An orthopedic exam and radiographs were performed. Ortolani's sign was elicited
as a guide to estimate the degree of rotation. Orthopedic Foundation of America
CHAPTER 8: Genetic Disorders
97
severity. Hip dysplasia is the malformation and degeneration of the coxofemoral
joints. This disease is a developmental defect initiated by genetic predisposition to
subluxation of the immature hip joint. weight control, NSAiDs, and surgery are the
recommended treatments. Rapid weight gain can cause the disease to progress.
The dog should not be used for breeding due to the hereditary condition of this
disorder. The surgical considerations depending on the severity of joint laxity and
the presence or absence of degenerative joint disease are triple pelvic osteotomy.
total hip replacement, and excision arthroplasty. Most dogs can lead a normal life
CASE STUDY
Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis (HYPP)
shortly after exercising in the arena. A few minutes later the horse is lying down
on his side. The owner mentions that her horse has done this a few times before-
each time after exercising
Diagnosis can be made based on the clinical signs presented, along with the gene
probe test for the HPP type sodium channel DNA. An electromyogram, which
in diagnosing the disorder. All affected horses can trace their ancestry to the
American Quarter Horse sire Impressive
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is due to an inherited mutation of the sodium
channel gene. The disorder is caused by a failure of the sodium ion transport
across the skeletal muscle cell membrane. The frequency of the attacks can be
controlled with medication such as acetazolamide (a potassium-wasting diuretic)
Emergency treatment includes intravenous administration of 5 percent dextrose
with sodium bicarbonate or 23 percent calcium gluconate. The dextrose and
bicarbonate solution will help move potassium back into the cells, while the
Summary
The common use of recombinant DNA, transgenics, and other subdivisions of
molecular biology requires a basic understanding of genetics by the veterinary
technician. Molecular biology is helping to solve many genetic disorders of ani-
mals and humans alike. Multifactorial disorders are due to the combined action
of the environment and two or more mutant genes having an additive effect. It
is important for the veterinary staff to understand and to help educate animal
owners of the risks of genetic disorders in breeding animals, and the care, pre-
vention, and treatrment of the same. New advances in detection of inherited or
defective genes perrmit a greater opportunity for prevention.
98
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
REVIEW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
 is an animal that has both ovarian and testicular tissue.
2
are disorders caused by chromosome mutations in
 which an abnormal number of chromosomes or alterations in the structure of one or more chromosomes have occurred.
3
is an individual that possesses a number of 
chromosomes that is not normal for that particular species.
4
are permanent changes to the DNA that are
 perpetuated in subsequent divisions of the cell.
5. A/an
 disease is one the animal was born with.
6.
is a common genetic immunodeficiency disorder in
the Arabian horse.
7
is a gene that hides or masks the effect of another
 gene in the same allelic series
8
is the transmission and reception of genetics from one
 generation to the next.
9.
 occurs when there are permanent changes in the
 DNA altering the genetic message carried by that gene
10.
gene is one that expresses a hidden characteristic
when in the homozygous state.
11.
12.
involves placing recombinant DNA, or cloned genetic
13
are animals that have been engineered to lack a gene
 they normally have.
14.
means having nonidentical genes at the same location
on paired chromosomes.
15
is a chromosome number that is a multiple of the
haploid number of chromosomes.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Name three factors that can result in a single-gene disorder.
CHAPTER 8:Genetic Disorders
99
2. what is gene tracking?
4. Explain the difference between translocation and deletion.
5. why would you expect to find more cases of perosis in Rhode Island Red poultry when compared with the white
Leghorn breed? How is this problem related to genetics?
CHAPTER 9
Environmental and
Nutritional Diseases
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
List several common types of physical injuries of animals.
List the fat-soluble and common water-soluble vitamins.
Describe how secondhand smoke can be dangerous to a domestic cat.
 Discuss global warming and its effects on animal welfare, the
environment, and humankind.
 Discuss animal obesity and the consequences on animal health.
100
CHAPTER 9:Environmental and Nutritional Diseases
101
Key terMS
adverse drug reaction
Environmental Impact on Health
antimicrobial agent
When disease is not genetic, it's usually the result of environmental factors.
antineoplastic agent
These factors can include infectious agents, nutrition, trauma, or pollutants that
contaminate the animal's environment. The World Health Organization (WHO)
carcinogens
believes that climate change is one of the largest health challenges facing us
global warming
today. The effects are wide-ranging and have mostly adverse impacts on health.
hyperthermia
One of the most frightening possibilities is that with, global warming. diseases of
hypothermia
animals that were once considered tropical may be able to get a foothold in the
southern United States (Figure 9-1).
immunosuppressive agent
obesity
undernutrition
e5e
FIGURE 9-1
Global warming may prove to have a negative efect on the disease susceptibility of many animals.
          
because human beings are the ultimate consumers, most discussions have been
concentrated largely on the environment's effects upon people. It's safe to
say that if people are suffering from these effects, animals are surely suffering
as well.
102  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Air Pollution
In many anirmal environments, indoor air is becoming more of a problem than
outdoor air. This is because indoor air is not regulated, there may be poor
circulation of air, air is often contaminated with particulates, and many indoor
nod jo aailap aul auaap on pannsea nou ae shueinod
Tobacco smoking is a major contribution to disease. Smoke contains carcinogens.
cell irritants and toxins, carbon monoxide, and nicotine. Coronary heart disease
is the number one cause of death in humans in the United States, followed by
lung and other cancer and strokes. In addition, involuntary smoke exposure
(secondhand smoking) can retard physical and mental maturation, increase the
rate of myocardial infarctions, and increase the number of respiratory infec-
tions an individual will get.' As a result, we are certain to see more of these
ldy sieo pue shoa llam se sieue poane oi uaq suouo paneian-lusyous
S  s  oa s  s  ss  sn
can. Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common malignant cell type in both
cats and humans. Research shows a substantial increase in respiratory infec-
tions, allergies, and related illnesses in animals and in humans kept indoors with
smokers. Tobacco-related pollutants contaminate the fur of household cats, put-
ting them at a greater risk for oral squamous cell carcinoma and lymphoma.?
Cats exposed to 5 or more years of secondhand smoke have five times the risk
for oral squamous cell carcinoma. The survival rate for these diagnosed felines
m s  l si s n n   e sd oe  s 
sal aanul ueul aiou pey Aep e sanaueio jo yoed e iseal ie payous sueunu
the risk of developing lymphoma than cats in nonsmoking houses, cats living
with one household smoker had almost twice the risk, and cats living with two
or more smokers in a household had nearly four times the risk of developing
lymphoma cancer.
Chemical and Drug Injury
Industrial exposure and accidental and, in humans, self-administered drug use
Aissod pue aggensapun 'snoas e si uoeau np asaape uy fanfui oi pean le u
life-threatening response to a drug, sometimes occurring at doses normally used
for prevention, diagnosis, or treatment (Figure 9-2). Adverse reactions require
intervention from a veterinarian. Side effects are defined as secondary reactions
to a drug that are usually predictable and not life threatening. Therefore, twc
Dunn, A., et al. (1997, September). Health effects of exposure to environmental
 tobacco smoke (Final Report). California Environmental Protection Agency.
Villalobos, A. (20os, May). Animal Oncology Consultation Service.
Personal comrmunication.
*Bertone, E.R., et al. (2002). Environmental tobacco smoke and risk
of malignant lymphoma in pet cats. American Journal of Epidemiology, 156
268-273.
CHAPTER 9:Environmentaland Nutritional Diseases
103
FIGURE 9-2
Veterinary professionals must always
be prepared for adverse drug reactions
in an animal.
adverse reaction to the drug. According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) an adverse reaction is unexpected in intensity or in kind—distinct from
expected side effects. As previously mentioned, side effects are largely predictable
reactions and thus easier to deal with. Adverse reactions often occur when the
drug invokes an immune reaction or has an unanticipated toxicity.
Therapeutic agents, such as antineoplastic agents, immunosuppressive agents, and
antimicrobial agents, can all cause problems. Antineoplastic agents act on divid-
ing cells and can cause bone marrow suppression, lead to irmmunosuppression, or
while antimicrobials can provoke hypersensitivity or even lead to resistant infec-
 o  o go q o lm si nd so go s
as a veterinary technician, as few animals are known to be ethyl alcohol abusers.
However, heavy metal poisoning from lead or zinc is common in pet birds and
can be seen in other pets, such as dogs, when exposed to old paint.
Environmental and occupational carcinogens include arsenic, asbestos, ben-
zene, cadmium, chromium, nicotine, nickel, nitrites, uranium, and vinyl chloride
Street drugs, such as marijuana, cocaine, crack, and heroin, can be ingested by
pets when made available by drug-abusing owners.
Physical Injury
There are five types of physical injuries:
· Injuries induced by mechanical force. These include fractures, abrasions,
lacerations (which, unlike incisions, are irregular tears), contusions due to
blunt force, and gunshot wounds (Figure 9-3).
· Injuries related to changes in temperature. Also called hyperthermic injuries,
these include first-, second-, and third-degree burns and systemic
hyperthermia, or heat stroke. Abnormally low temperatures (hypothermia)
can also cause local reactions, such as frostbite, or indirect reactions,
such as circulatory changes, and may be life threatening.
illness, blast injury from close exposure to explosives, air or gas
embolism, and decompression disease.
104  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
FIGURE 9-3
Veterinarians are called on to treat
all types of physical injury, including
fractures and lacerations sustained
through mechanical force.
· Electrical injuries. Anirmals that bite electrical cords can receive severe
burns or sustain injuries to the nervous system that may affect other
body systems, including normal heart function and death (electrocution).
· Radiation injuries. In these cases, the mechanism of action can be a direct,
or target, effect, in which the exposed tissue is intentionally killed, or an
indirect effect, which can cause cell water to boil and release free radicals,
sia may develop. It is thought that an improper balance between the forma-
tion and destruction of free radicals may play a role in degenerative disease
and in aging.
Nutritional Disease
Undernutrition was once the most prevalent of nutritional diseases. For example,
in addition to starvation, protein deficiency results in calorie undernutrition due
eut aienbapeu u snsa uue e uoissaidap aaddy aadde passdap e ol
of carbohydrates, fats, vitamins, and minerals. We still see seasonal nutritional
differences in livestock species related to drought, overcrowding of anirmals on
limited resources, and other factors. With the traditional companion animals
(dogs and cats) it is quite rare to see nutritional deficiencies in healthy pets.
Where pet owners try to concoct their own anirmal diets, or feed old or generic
feeds to older, younger, or ill pets we still see several deficiency disorders. In
pets are suffering nutritional deficiencies due to owners not understanding what
and how to feed them. However, our main topic here will be the different types
of vitamin deficiency. Vitamins are divided into two groups: those that are fat
soluble and those that are water soluble.
Fat-Soluble Vitamins
Among fat-soluble vitamins, problems involving vitamins A and D are most
common. Vitamin A deficiency causes vision problems and alters the mucus
secretion of cells. Excessive vitamin A can cause headaches, nausea, vomiting.
D deficiency causes rickets, softening of the bones, and calcium-deficiency trem-
ors. Excessive vitamin D can cause metastatic calcification and kidney stones
CHAPTER 9: Environmental αnd Nutritional Diseases
105
Vitamin E and K problems are less common. Vitamin E deficiency causes
spinocerebellar degeneration, skeletal muscle changes, white muscle disease of
ruminants, and anemia (Figure9-4). Excessive vitamin E can cause gastrointestinal
disturbance. Vitamin K deficiency leads to clotting disorders and bleeding in var-
ious tissues. Excessive vitamin K, though rare, induces hemolytic anemia.
FIGURE 9-4
The leg of this calf reveals a disorder
known as white muscle disease, which is
the result of a deficiency of vitamin E.
aa
e5e5
Water-Soluble Vitamins
Water-soluble vitamin imbalances in humans primarily involve thiamine
nq u aqaq asn u iap au  ua ue (a ua)
and avian polyneuritis in poultry. There are no serious consequences of exces-
 Aq psn ass e si (eieioiedaouood) ood daaus un aue aass
deficiency of thiamine and is seen most commonly in lambs on high-grain diets.
Aaui shuui oiui dunq lm squet ssaupua si aseasip aul jo uais isuy au
ordinarily would see and avoid. If the first symptom of blindness is missed, the
lamb will begin to appear wobbly in the rear end. This may be misdiagnosed as
lameness. A day later, the lamb may be unable to get up but can still sit up and
will be found on his side and unable to hold his head up. Finally, the lamb will die
in convulsions. The course of the disease from the first sign of blindness to death
will take approximately 5 days if not treated. The further in the disease course
the treatment occurs, the longer it will take the larmb to recover. An injection of
3 cc of thiamine in the muscle will correct the condition. Generally, it will take
10 days before the lamb will begin to eat again.
iron levels, induce low blood pH, and cause RBC lysis in infants. There is more
excess consumption of vitamin C.+ Dietary vitamin C is not required for livestock
*Shapiro, L.S. (2002). Animal Nutrition, Ag 505 (4th Rev. ed.).
1O6  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
 sid  sd   sx s o s o
perhaps hamsters). Vitamin B, deficiency can cause anemia in both animals and
humans. It is common to see these signs in livestock grazing cobalt-deficient land.
Cobalt is a component of vitamin B,. Rurminants can normally produce all of their
required vitamin B, so long as they have sufficient cobalt in their diet. Without this
requirement they develop “wasting disease," characterized by severe ermaciation
  e s     o     s
cause irreversible damage to the retina (leading to blindness) and to the heart
(causing death) due to a taurine deficiency. Cats require nutrients that cannot
be obtained from plant sources (taurine and vitamins A and D, for example)
Supplementing vegetarian diets with chemically made taurine and vitamin A
and vitamin D adds to what some perceive as an already excessive consump
snu ane sieue uonueduoo fue siad ano on sleuuo jo annsoxa do uo
exposure and neoplasms in animals.
Nutritional Excesses and Imbalances
u  s   d a   si as
tional deficiency. An animal is considered obese when it is 15 percent more than
optimum. Obesity can have severe consequences, including diabetes, hyperten-
sion, and heart and liver disease. Diet can also encourage systemic diseases, such
as arteriosclerosis from a diet rich in cholesterol and/or saturated fats. Obesity
can lower resistance to infectious diseases, including viral and bacterial disorders
such as canine distemper and salmonella.&  Finally, diet and cancer are frequently
linked. The ingestion of carcinogens, the synthesis of carcinogens from ingested
chemicals, and the lack of protective factors can all lead to neoplasia.
Summary
The environment, including nutritional aspects, greatly affects the overall
our health (cigarette smoke, heavy metals, and carcinogens) also cause havoc on
the overall health of our livestock, exotic, and companion animals. Nutritional
excesses and deficiencies as well as nutritional imbalances are common in ani-
mal diets prepared by inexperienced and undereducated animal caretakers. The
veterinary technician can be a major positive influence in the well-being of ani-
 mals by first learning sound nutritional guidelines and then, under the direction
of the veterinarian, disseminating this information to clients. Understanding
how environmental pollutants, including cigarette smoke, affect our companion
incidence of several disorders, including certain types of cancer.
*Williams, G.D., & Newberne, P.M. (1971). Decreased resistance to
Salmonella infection in obese dogs. Federation Proceedings, 30, 572.
virus. Federation Proceedings, 25, 1701.
CHAPTER 9:Environmentaland Nutritional Diseases
107
ReVIEW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
1. According to the wwO, one of the largest health challenges facing us today is
2. Vitamin
lao pue sueny ul Aunos sasneo ouaogap
primates.
3. Vitamin
deficiency causes rickets in young animals.
4. The
is an example of a companion animal that is also
a true carnivore.
5. Wasting disease in cattle and sheep is caused by a deficiency of the mineral
6.
is a greater veterinary problem among companion
animals than nutritional deficiency.
7. The mineral
 is a component of vitamin B2?
8. Feeding cats a vegetarian diet may cause irreversible damage to the retina (leading to blindness) and to the heart
(causing death) due to a/an
deficiency.
9.
 is the gradual increase in the earth's surface tempera-
ture theorized to be caused by either an increase in atmospheric (Co,) levels or by the sun geting hotter.
10. Cats exposed to 5 or more years of secondhand smoke have five times the risk for
11.
is a response to a drug that is serious, undesirable,
and possibly life threatening. These reactions occur at dosages normally used for prevention, diagnosis, or treatment.
12.
 agents are a group of specialied drugs used primarily
to treat cancer. However, they can also cause bone marrow suppression or immune suppression, or even induce cancer
in some cases
13.
is a condition of abnormally high body temperatures
caused by factors such as heat stroke and burns
14. An animal is considered obese when it is
 percent
more than its optimum weight
15. Increased cases of polioencephalomalacia are seen in young lambs consuming a diet high in
16. white muscle disease is the result of a deficiency of
17. Vitamin 
deficiency leads to clotting disorders and
bleeding in various tissues.
18. Avian polyneuritis can be caused by a deficiency of dietary
(continued)
108
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
REVIEW
(continued)
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. what are the five physical injury agents?
 2. Name three adverse conditions that antineoplastic agents can cause
CHAPTER 10
Zoonoses and safety on the Job
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
 Define and give examples of common zoonotic disorders.
 Describe the major functions of osHA.
 List ways of decreasing risk of injury in the veterinary workplace.
109
110  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
KEY TeRMS
Baylisascaris procyonis
Zoonoses
brucellosis
As a veterinary technician, it's important for you to become familiar with those
bubonic plague
diseases that you are in danger of contracting while on the job and methods
chlamydiosis
used to prevent their spread. zoonoses are diseases that anirmals can pass on to
people and vice versa. Over 150 zoonoses are known to exist. Examples of these
leptospirosis
 diseases include rabies, tuberculosis, the plague, hantavirus pulmonary syn-
ornithosis
drome, ringworm, giardiasis, tetanus, West Nile virus, cat scratch disease, and
ringworm
human by direct contact with infected dogs, cats, cattle, and rodents or by indi-
salmonellosis
rect contact with fomites. Zoonoses are easily transmitted to humans via animal
tetanus
bites or simple contact with infected areas of skin. Zoonotic disorders may also
zoonoses
ing as vectors), or by aerosol means.
Obviously, you will be working closely with animals as a veterinary technician.
Thus, it's important for you to remain aware of the different types of zoonotic
u sanp fep-on-fep anof inouanouui uaut dog pueng uo aq sfemle pue saseasp
addition, it's equally important for your employer to provide a safe and sterile
working environment.
employers “furnish...employment and a place of employment which are free
physical harm." The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is
exposure to infected animals, it's crucial that the veterinarian you work for abide
by standard safety practices. This should include going over with you the most
sou ueo nof mou pue aoo aui ynoui ssed ieui saseasp oouooz uouuon
effectively protect yourself from them.
The most common injury among workers at veterinary clinics/hospitals oc-
tal in transmitting zoonotic diseases that are sometirmes life threatening. Every
employee at the veterinary establishment should be trained in the procedures,
policies, and protective equipment needed for restraint and capture of any spe
cies of animal that he/she is expected to handle. The American Animal Hospital
Association (AAHA) has training videos and workbooks that may help in this
regard. OSHA requires each workplace to conduct a hazard assessment for each
job to determine the exact protective equipment and training required.
As a minimum, exam gloves, masks, and restraint equipment for teeth and claws
are needed to protect employees when handling stray, wild, or unvaccinated
'AAHA - (800) 252-2242. American Animal Hospital Association, 12575
W. Bayaud Ave., Lakewood, Colorado, USA 80228. http:/ /www.healthypet.com/
library_view.aspx?ID=81.
CHAPTER 1o: Zoonoses αnd Safety on the Job  111
animals. In addition to direct contact with the animal, zoonotic diseases can be
spread by contact with blood, feces, urine, and other laboratory cultures. Each
practice should have a written guideline for the employees on animal handling,
equipment, and protection against zoonotic disorders. Veterinary professionals
gnd ueny poate fe eyi saseasip paoadsns fue puodau oi mel fg pauinbau ae
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), regulates which diseases are
reportable on a federal level. Individual state guidelines are usually monitored
and regulated by the state's Department of Health or Department of Food and
Agriculture
Brucellosis is a major concern among zoonotic disorders in a veterinary practice.?
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) publish guidelines to help prevent the transmission of viral and
with anirmal restraint, are concerns of these organizations.
OSHA has also listed anesthetic gases, hazardous chemicals, medical waste, and
compressed gas cylinders as common occupational hazards for veterinary em-
procedures are essential:
· Provide written safety plans for all employees. These should include fire
 prevention; emergency procedures for fire, earthquakes, foods, and storms;
and chemical safety.
· Provide training materials. These should include hazardous materials and
conditions at the workplace, warning labels, how and when to use protec-
e (s dunut) sni aeay Aeo pue l oi moy 'suainba aan
employees' rights and responsibilities.
· Conduct routine safety inspections. Inspections should include safety drills
storage, labeling, and handling of chemicals; and general housekeeping.
· Ensure that protective equipment is used when appropriate. This includes
goggles, safety glasses, face shields, aprons, vinyl sleeves, work shoes or
boots, eyewash station, earmuffs (in some situations), work gloves, lead
shielding (gowns, gloves, thyroid shields, glasses), and nitrile gloves
(protection from chemicals).
*Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), AAHA, AVMA.
Ettinger, Stephen J.; Feldman, Edward C. (1995). Textbook of Veterinary
 Internal Medicine (4th ed.). W.B. Saunders Company; http:/ /www.avma.org/
reference/zoonosis/znbrucel.asp; http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol1ono4/
03-0805.htm; Compendium of Veterinary Standard Precautions for Zoonotic
Disease Prevention in Veterinary Personnel National Association of State
Public Health Veterinarians Veterinary Infection Control Committee 2008
Biosafety in microbiological and biomedical laboratories (BMBL) (4th ed.)
(1999, May). U.S. Government Printing Ofice
112  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
· Provide Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials
that anirmals or employees might come in contact with at the workplace.
These will include drugs, pesticides, anesthetic gases, disinfectants, and all
other cleaning materials.
- Prepare a written pregnancy policy including special safety measures to
protect the fetus and the pregnant employee. Safety procedures should
include, but not be limited to, the following:
· Exposure to chemicals or hormones that may cause birth defects
· Exposure to radiation
· Movements and postures that would cause prolonged periods of physical
and/or mental fatigue
· Contact with blood and other body fuids, infected animals, laboratory
cultures, feed, and water that may prove to be injurious to the fetus or the
employee
· Exposure to various microbes (bacteria, viruses, protozoa, molds, fungi)
Responsibility of the Veterinary Staff
and Public Health
The veterinarian and his or her staff are required to report diseases that affect
the public's health. Thus the veterinary staff must be able to recognize the trans-
education of these concerns to the public.
Transmission of zoonotic disorders may occur by several means. The fol-
lowing is a partial list of some of the more common disorders and means of
transmission:
· Bites and scratches—rabies, cat scratch fever
· Fecal contact—-Campylobacter, salmonellosis, Baylisascaris procyonis (raccoon
roundworm), cryptosporidiosis (protozoa)
·Arthropod transmission—Lyme disease, ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spot-
ted fever, tularemia, West Nile virus
· Inhalation—psittacosis, blastomycosis (fungus)
· Direct contact—-ringworm, scabies, orf, leptospirosis, cutaneous and visceral
larval migrans (roundworms)
·Ingestion of contaminated foodtoxoplasmosis
Infectious agents need a place to survive and an environment in which to
mate (human, plant, anirmal) or inanirmate (such as soil, air, dust, fomites, and
water). The registered veterinary technician (RVT) should assess both the source
of infection and the reservoir in helping to minirmize these and other types of
infection.
CHAPTER 1o: Zoonoses and Safety on the Job  113
Parasitic Diseases
Larva Migrans Syndrome
Ascarids ( Tococara canis, T. cati ) and hookworms (Ancylostoma spp.) are common
Se      s   sd s
lle jo sieo pue saop ul punoy aq ueo inq siad Sunof ul Ajuouuoo auou anooo
ages. In humans, they can cause larva migrans syndrome. Young children play-
soil containing infective eggs and larvae.
The signs and symptoms in humans are dependent on the tissues and the organs
damaged during the larval migration. Most commonly, the eyes, brain, lungs.
and liver are affected by ascarids. Hookworm larvae may penetrate the skin
causing cutaneous larva migrans or be ingested and cause disorders related to
the digestive tract.
Cerebrospinal Nematodiasis (Larva Migrans)
qoud yeaq e sasneo fjaueu ahseued su seaue uequn Aueu ui suooooeu jo aiou
lem to the raccoon. However, it can cause serious problerms to humans, dogs, and
17 other species of mammals and birds. Transmission is generally by skin penetra-
tion or oral ingestion of the eggs. The larvae migrate into the eye, brain, or spinal
cord and can cause blindness, central nervous system disease, and even death.
The veterinary staff can play an inmportant role in preventing human transmis-
sion of these internal parasites. Most pet owners are unaware of the danger of
these parasites, means of transmission, detection, prevention, and treatrment
The veterinary staff should recommend regular fecal examinations, provide
sanitation guidelines (including prompt collection and disposal of pet feces), and
recomrmend proper anthelmintic treatrments when necessary.
When handling feces, especially raccoon feces, use disposable gloves. Deworm
all incoming raccoons. The ova of raccoon roundworms are resistant to many
disinfectants. It is recommended, therefore, to autoclave cages and carriers that
have been occupied by raccoons
Bacterial Diseases
Mycobacterum tubercufosis, M. bovis
Historically, one of the more common causes of transmission of tuberculosis
from anirmal to human was by the consumption of raw infected dairy products
Most industrialized nations have greatly reduced if not eliminated this particu-
was tuberculosis free in 2005. However, in July of 2008, 4,800 dairy cattle were
ordered to be slaughtered and another 16,ooo put in quarantine when a routine
inspection found a slaughterhouse cow to have TB lesions on its lymph nodes
DNA testing revealed that two of the cows that eventually tested positive shared
a strain of the bacteria that originated in Mexico. California's State Department
of Food and Agriculture issued a warning against contact with cattle of Mexican
114  PART ONE:PATHOLOGY
origins, and the USDA placed additional restrictions on the transportation of
California cattle across state lines without testing by a veterinarian.
occasionally to carnivores. Exotic and wild anirmals still remain an occasional
source of infection of M. bovis. Veterinary technicians, veterinarians, and animal
handlers in the zoo must be cognizant that seals, rhinoceros, elk, and elephants
can be sources for M. bovis exposure, too.
M. tuberculoszs is more comrmonly associated with tuberculosis in humans. It has also
 s        s   
California from Illinois were shown to have tuberculosis from M. tuberculosis. Of
22 animal handlers from the farm where the animals were raised and boarded,
 M. tuberculosis. These and subsequent tests showed a human to animal transmis-
sion of M. tuberculosis. Regular skin testing is recommended for animal handlers,
keepers, veterinary technicians, and veterinarians working with these and other
exoticanimals.
Anthrax (woolsorter's Disease)
Anthrax is a highly infectious and fatal disease caused by a large spore-forrming
bacterium called Bacillus anthracis. It is an ancient disease described in the Old
vive more than 60 years in arid conditions. Anthrax infection occurs in three
common forms: cutaneous (skin), gastrointestinal, and inhalation. In the 19th
endospores causing what became known as woolsorter's disease.
Today most human cases are cutaneous. The bacterial spores enter a wound or
abrasion on the skin and develop ulcers and swelling around the wound site.
This type of anthrax is easily treated with antibiotics. The inhalation anthrax
symptoms resemble that of the comrmon cold initially. After several days with.
 out treatment the symptoms progress, causing severe respiratory problems and
shock. In the fall of 2001, 45 percent of inhalation anthrax bioterrorist attack
cases were fatal. Intestinal anthrax results from the consumption of contami-
nated or undercooked meat. Symptoms include vomiting of blood, severe diar
rhea, and swelling about the neck. Mortality rates as high as 60 percent are
common
In cattle most outbreaks occur in areas where animals have previously died of
sion from a normal appearance to death in a matter of hours. Bloody discharges
a full immunity requires 10 to 14 days postvaccination. The cattle vaccine is a
+Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1994). Guidelines for pre-
venting the transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care facilities
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,43,63-64.
CHAPTER 1o: Zoonoses αnd Safety on the Job  115
live anthrax vaccine that stimulates imrmunity but does not cause disease. It is
referred to as the Sterne spore vaccine. This is not the same vaccine approved
for use in humans. The human vaccine requires a number of initial injections fol-
lowed by yearly boosters. It is a cell-free filtrate vaccine, which means it contains
no dead or live bacteria in the preparation.
In the United States, anthrax is a reportable disease. The National Center for
 Infectious Diseases and both local and state health departments should be noti-
fied immediately if anthrax is suspected. For all potentially exposed humans a
physician should be immediately contacted for preventive antibiotics.
Brucellosis (Undulant Fever)
'pa snss pog ym iouoo q snoo ds oaa go uosss
urine, vaginal discharges, or the fetuses of infected animals. There are three
primary Brucella species of concern to food animal veterinarians. Brucella suis
predominantly affects swine and reindeer, but it can also affect cattle and bison;
 Brucella melitensis affects goats but is currently not present in the United States;
and Brucella abortus is the most common cause of brucellosis affecting cattle
Brucellosis is a highly contagious disease that was once spread by the consump-
tion of raw milk from cattle infected with the bacteria. The disease is also known
as contagious abortion or Bang's disease in livestock. In humans, it is known
as undulant fever because of the interrmittent fever accompanying infection. It
is one of the most serious diseases of livestock, because it spreads so rapidly
and it is transmissible to humans. Vaccination of cattle (calves) and slaughter of
infected animals are the chief methods of control.
In cattle and in bison, the disease usually localizes in the reproductive organs
or the udder. Bacteria are comrmonly shed with the aborted fetus and afterbirth
and other discharges from the reproductive tract. Brucellosis is also transmit-
ted by consumption of raw milk or coming into contact with a contaminated
environment.
The veterinary staff should wear protective gear, including disposable gloves when
handling suspected or infected animals and when vaccinating using live or modi-
fied live vaccines. Heifers are usually vaccinated when they are 4 to 6 months of
age. A tattoo is applied in the ear at the time of vaccination. States are designated
brucellosis free when no cattle or bison are found to be infected for 12 consecutive
months.
Bubonic Plague
While assisting in the treatrment of wild rodents, rabbits, and marmmals, the
veterinary staff needs to be cognizant of parasitic feas that may carry Yersinia
pestis (the infectious agent causing the bubonic plague). Hurman mortality can be
as high as 60 percent if untreated. Veterinary staff has been killed by this disease.
Currently bubonic plague is in endemic proportions in parts of the southwestern
United States.
The veterinary staff should avoid contact with feas from wild rodents and
ground squirrels in particular. Deflea all incoming wild animals.
116  PART 0NE: PATHOLOGY
Leptospirosis
sodo suooooeu 'syunys shop siid aiheo jo aseasip uoone ue st sisousoidai
sums, rats, mice, and many other domestic mammals. It is spread in the urine
of infected animals and can be absorbed through small cuts or abrasions on the
skin or ingested. In humans it may cause fever, chills, nausea, malaise, abortion,
and myalgia. In severe cases it can cause meningitis.
It is important to avoid urine contamination of feed, water, or soil and to prac-
tice good personal hygiene, especially when handling urine from wild animals
or suspect animals. There are several vaccination products; however, there are
more than 200 serovars of leptospirosis and vaccines for only 8 of them.
Chlamydiosis (Psittacosis, Ornithosis)
Chlamydia psittaci causes spontaneous abortion in cattle. In birds, chlamydiosis is
a reportable, zoonotic disease. It is found in more than 1o0 species of wild and
domestic birds. In psittacine birds (birds with a curved beak, like parrots and
parakeets) it causes a disease known as parrot fever or psittacosis. In other birds
and in humans it is known as ornithosis. Humans exposed to air- or dustborne
A dust mask, plastic face shield, and gloves should be worn when working with
wild birds or suspect domestic birds. Veterinary staff members, bird banders
and rehabilitators need to practice good sanitation procedures when working
with pigeons, caged birds, and wild birds, or when examining dead birds.
Salmonellosis
There are many species of salmonellae that cause salmonellosis and other dis-
 sn u sis sn n s  sdan n u ss
clude diarrhea, vomiting, mild fever, and septicemia. Its transmission to humans
occurs primarily through contaminated drinking water, milk, meat, eggs, and
birds and ingesting the bacteria because of poor sanitation.
An estirmated 2 million Americans contract this disorder annually. Symptoms in
humans include gastroenteritis, headaches, high fever, dehydration, septicemia,
Tetanus (Lockjaw)
ao aun q pnd surxo q psn aseas ano ue st snuea
Clostridium tetani. C. tetani is typically found in heavily manured soils. Horses
and humans are the most susceptible to this disease whereas dogs, cats, and
birds are relatively resistant. When untreated the mortality rate reaches levels
of 80 percent or more. Those who survive do not normally develop protective
immunity to future exposure to C. tetani. Active imrmunization with tetanus tox-
oid can provide protection to humans for this disorder. In humans, spasms of the
muscles of the head (lockjaw) making it difficult to eat occur. It is a very painful
CHAPTER 1o: Zoonoses αnd Safety on the Job  117
heart rate and rapid breathing, muscle spasms, and respiratory failure (often
the cause of death). Infection usually results following a puncture wound, or a
surgical procedure such as docking or castration. Young goats and lambs should
be treated with tetanus antitoxin providing passive immunity or protection at
the time of the aforementioned surgical procedures. Horses should receive the
C. tetani toxoid annually for maximum protection
Viral Diseases
While in several foreign and developing nations there is still a growing threat of
can have the greatest effect in preventing the zoonotic disorder rabies.
Rabies
A rhabdovirus is the infectious agent that causes rabies. Rabies is one of the oldest
communicable diseases of humans. It is spread by bite wounds, by infected saliva
entering cuts or skin abrasions, and by inhaling aerosol in bat caves containing
their infected saliva. In North America, the skunk, fox, bat, and raccoon are the pri
mary carriers of this viral disease. However, any marmmal can be infected, includ.
ing humans. Cats, dogs, coyotes, and cattle are also frequently infection species.
Wild carnivores and bats present the most serious risk of exposure of rabies
uo jeue suunaa le jeui papuon faul si i sunq o
phylaxis. The veterinary and animal control staff should develop procedures to
avoid being bitten by all animals.
The normal transmission of the rabies virus is through the bite of an infected
animal. The virus is generally present in the saliva. The virus may also be in-
troduced into fresh wounds or through intact mucous membranes. The incuba
St poad uoieqnoui aui shop ui saoads Suoue pue uaamiaq sauen poad uo 
approximately 20 to 80 days postexposure. Once clinical symptoms are visible,
death is quite rapid (10 days or less)
Clinical signs of rabies include anorexia, irritability, behavioral changes, and
 paralysis. Treatment of rabid animals is usually not attermpted due to its high
fatal nature and its zoonotic capabilities.
Protection of veterinarians or assistants who may handle strays, wildlife, or ani-
mals exhibiting rabid characteristics or who may work in labs handling tissue
from rabid animals includes the following:
· Obtain pre-exposure vaccination for rabies (series of three vaccines for the
veterinary staff).
e Aq pauoieuos io uaina si ieur leue paieuio fisnoiaaud Aue aieuiol -
wild, carnivorous mammal or bat and observe for clinical signs for 45 days.
· Euthanize the animal if it develops any signs of rabies during the quaran-
tine period and submit the brain for rabies testing.
118  PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
Protozoal Diseases
Giardiasis
Giardiasis is a chronic intestinal protozoal infection that occurs in most do-
mestic and wild mammals, in birds, and in humans. Giardia lamblia is found in
beavers, muskrats, and waterfowl. It is spread to humans and domestic animals
by the fecal-oral route. A zinc sulfate fotation (fecal foat) is commonly used to
identify Giardia in dogs. In humans an ELISA test can be used to detect Giardia
antigen in the feces. Symptoms in humans include chronic diarrhea, abdominal
cramps, bloating, and weight loss. Prevention is by proper sanitation measures,
especially avoiding hand-to-mouth contact while handling any wildlife species.
Toxoplasmosis
Toroplasma gondii is found in the house cat, in birds, in wild animals, and in
humans. Members of the cat family, however, are the only known definitive hosts
for this protozoan. They are the only animal that can pass infective oocysts in
their feces. Transmission occurs through ingestion of uncooked meat containing
can pass the parasite to their fetus. In the United States, more than 3,ooo babies
are born every year with ocular lesions produced from T. gondii. Humans with
goats, and pigs, T. gondii can cause abortion and stillbirth.
To prevent toxoplasmosis in humans:
· All meat should be thoroughly cooked.
o iad oi pay aq sou pinous seau payoooun -
· Litter boxes should be cleaned daily.
· Hands should be washed thoroughly after changing the litter box
· Pregnant women should avoid handling cats and cleaning their litter boxes
Tickborne Diseases
Lyme Disease
Deer ticks are responsible for transmitting Borrelia burgdorferi to humans, caus-
ing the disorder Lyme disease. In humans, early signs include an expanding
bull's-eye ring skin lesion, malaise, myalgia, fatigue, fever, headache, and joint
 e o iso s s  so  s  s
effective during the early stages. Tick avoidance is the best preventive measure
for Lyme disease. Killed and whole cell bacterins have been used in dogs to
prevent Lyme disease; however, their efficacy is being questioned. There is cur-
  s  de a o s
CHAPTER 1o: Zoonoses and Safety on the Job
119
CASE STUDY
Ringworm Dermatophytosis
A 3-month-old kitten was presented with scaling, crusting, and alopecic lesions
in the haired regions of her abdomen and neck. The lesions appeared to be
erythemic at the edges. The kitten seemed to be a little itchy, but it was not
intense. The little girl who lives with this kitten had a circular lesion on her arm,
which could be related to the lesions on the kitten.
The following tests were performed for diagnosis. A wood's lamp was used
to check if the area fluoresced a bright yellow-green. A fungal culture was
done by using a few plucked hairs at the periphery of the lesion and placing
when the amber media turns red and the sample has fluffy, light-colored
dermatophyte colonies. A stained slide preparation of a wet mount or Scotch tape
Dermatophytosis is a fungal infection. The most common one that affects dogs and
cats is called Microsporum canis, which occurs in young or immunosuppressed
sheep and goats the infectious ringworm is called 7. verrucosum.
Topical medications such as miconazole (Conofite) or ketoconazole are suggested
for treatment. Medicated shampoos containing chlorhexidine, ketoconazole, or
miconazole are also recommended. Animals with a thick, heavy coat will have to
be shaved. A systemic version of griseofulvin given orally can be used to decrease
children. This disease requires diligent cleaning, bleaching, and washing of clothes,
bedding, towels, or anything else that comes in contact with the infected animal.
Ringworm (Figures 10-1 and 10-2) is zoonotic, by direct contact as well as fomites,
such as hairbrushes, blankets, and clothing
FIGURE 10-1
Ringworm near the eye of an infected animal.
(continued)
120
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
CASE STUDY
Ringworm Dermatophytosis (continued)
Microscopic view - Ringworm spores
FIGURE 10-2
Microscopic view of ringworm spores
Topical miconazole was used to treat the kitten, and the kitten was bathed
weekly with a miconazole shampoo until the lesions cleared up. The kitten's
environment and bedding were bleached weekly as well. The lesions cleared up
after approximately 4 weeks of treatment.
Summary
Zoonotic disorders and other work-related injuries are a major concern to the
veterinary practice. OSHA and other government and professional organiza-
tions have created guidelines and laws to help maximize the safety of all veteri-
nary employees. There are more than 150 zoonotic disorders, diseases that can
pass between human and animal. In addition, working with animals that bite,
scratch, kick, or crush you requires specific training and equipment to minimize
injury. The veterinary staff is obligated to safeguard not only the animals in its
care but also the staff employed at the facilities and the public who is dependent
 on the educated veterinary employee for its safety.
CHAPTER 1o: Zoonoses and Safety on the Job
121
REVIEW
 FILL IN THE BLANKS
1. Under the .
, veterinarians are obligated to provide
safe and sterile working environments.
2. Psittacosis in humans is called .
 3. The bubonic plague is spread to humans by fleas primarily found on.
and.
4. Brucellosis in cattle is
in humans.
5. The infectious agent Baylisascaris procyonis is carried by the
6.
is the only definitive host for Toxoplasma gondii.
7.
are the most susceptible of domestic animals to tetanus.
8. Dermatophytosis is a fungal infection commonly known as
9. Deer ticks are responsible for causing
disease in humans.
MATCHING
1. Bacillus anthracis
a. ringworm
2. Brucelfa abortus
b. ornithosis 
3. Chlamydia psittaci
C. undulant fever
4. Yersinia pestis
d. woolsorter's disease
5. Giardia lamblia
e. Lyme disease
6. Borrelia burgdorferi
f. ringworm
7. Microsporum canis
g. intestinal protozoan
 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Name five diseases that are considered zoonoses.
(continued)
122
PART ONE: PATHOLOGY
REVIEW
(continued)
2. How are zoonoses transmitted from animals to humans?
3. Discuss methods practiced in a veterinary clinic to prevent zoonoses to both clients and staff
4. what are the most common animals to carry the rabies virus in the United States?
PART TWO
clinical Parasitology
Notice: The material in this
study unit includes suggested 
treatments and procedures for
 controlling parasite infections.
This information is presented
to help veterinary technicians
become familiar with how
veterinarians manage such
infections. Veterinary technicians
should never make a diagnosis
or treat any animal except under
the direct orders or supervision
 of the veterinarian.
123
CHAPTER 11
The Variety of Parasites
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
Define parasites and parasitology.
Explain the different types of animal parasites.
List the six major parasitic groups affecting domestic animals
Identify the ectoparasites of both large and small animals: describe
their life cycles and range of hosts; and summarize their diagnosis.
 treatment, and prevention.
Identify the endoparasites of both large and small animals: describe
their life cycles and range of hosts; and summarize their diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention.
124
CHAPTER 11: The Variety of Parasites 125
Key terMS
ectoparasite
Infestation versus Infection
endoparasite
A parasite is an organism that lives on or within another living organism. The or-
flukes
 ganism that gives a parasite a home is called its host. Whether parasites cause an
host
infestation or an infection depends on what part of the host they occupy Parasites
are metabolically dependent on the host. Parasites that live on their host are
infestation
called ectoparasites (external parasites), and their presence is called an infestation.
insects
They may live on the surface or in pores of the skin, or they may attach them-
parasite
selves to the anirmal's hair. Some external parasites spend only a short time on
their hosts; others stay a lifetime. Lice are an example of a parasite that infests
protozoan
Parasites that live in their hosts are called endoparasites (internal parasites); their
roundworms
presence is called an infection. Each type of endoparasite occupies a particu
lar place within the body. Hookworrms are an example of an endoparasite that
infects or lives in the gut.
Infections and infestations can be barely noticeable or quite pronounced. A single
parasite produces only a mild disease, and the host does notappear sick. In most cases
ssaul ue jo suais moqs o isou au oy sanseied Aueu jo aouasa.id aul sayen 1!
Types of Parasites
Most of the important parasites that affect domestic anirmals corme from six groups
· Insects (lice, feas, ants, bees, wasps, yellow jackets, beetles, cockroaches)
·Arachnids (mites, ticks, spiders, scorpions)
· Nematodes (roundworms)
· Cestodes (tapeworms)
·Trematodes (fukes)
· Protozoans (single-cell organisms such as coccidia, Giardia, amoebae, ma-
larial organisms, and piroplasms)
is, periods of a parasite's life when it lives apart from a host. Understanding the
parasite's life cycle is crucial to controlling parasite infestation and infection
insects
Insects are both internal and external parasites. The characteristics that identify
an adult insect are three pairs of legs and three body parts (head, thorax, and ab-
domen). Insects can also carry parasites or other disease organisms from one host
to another. (An animal that transfers an infective agent from one host to another is
lnpe pue ednd 'eauel 'dha :sabeis anoy sey apofo al sioasui uy (uoioaa e palleo
Arachnids
Spiders are familiar arachnids—animals whose adults have eight legs and two
a sabeis anoy sey aofo al puyoe aui (uauope pue peay) shued fpoq 
126  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
larva, nymph, and adult. The larval arachnid is unusual because it has only six
legs. Most parasitic arachnids are ectoparasites
Nematodes
Nematodes, also called roundworms, are relatively small, wormlike organisms
covered by a tough skin called a cuticle. The nematode life cycle has three stages:
egg, larval, and adult. The larval stage can be subdivided into four stages:
· First-stage larva (ready to hatch) sheds it external cuticle to grow to the
next stage. The shedding of this outer layer is called molting.
· Second-stage larva eventually molts into the next stage.
· Third-stage larva is also known as the infective stage because it is infective
for the definitive host.
· Fourth-stage larva occurs when the third stage molts within the definitive
host. It eventually develops into the sexually mature adult stage.
Parasitic nematodes are endoparasites. However, the first three larval stages can
develop either in the external environment or within the intermediate host.
Cestodes
Tapeworms, also known as cestodes, are flat, ribbonlike worms with no digestive
tract. The tapeworm has a head, called a scolex, and a body made of many seg-
and adult. All tapeworms are endoparasites, and the adult tapeworm always lives
tapeworm) may also cause pathology in the intermediate host. The intermedi-
ate host harbors the larval, juvenile, immature, or asexual stages of the parasite.
The intermediate host may be a fea, a grain mite, or a rabbit. Some tapeworms
may have more than one intermediate host. Cattle can serve as an intermediate
humans in other livestock as well. The definitive host harbors the adult, sexual,
or mature stages of the parasite
Trematodes
Trematodes, sometimes called fukes, are flat, leaf-shaped worms that have a
mouth and gut but no anus. The free-living Planaria is an example of a trema-
tode. The parasitic trermatode life cycle is complex: egg, several larval stages
(some of which are endoparasites of snails), and adult. Most adult parasitic
trematodes are endoparasites. Exceptions include the monogenetic trematodes,
which are ectoparasites of fish, amphibians, and reptiles. Platynosomum concin-
mum, a fluke infecting cats, has a land snail and a lizard as intermediate hosts.
Protozoans
di suauap Aueu jo dn ape dnoa ael e ae sieue lo-aluis suod
of organisms. Each type has a different life cycle, ranging from one to many
stages. Parasitic protozoans are endoparasites as adults.
CHAPTER 11: The Variety of Parasites  127
CASE STUDY
Lyme Disease: Ixodes dammini and Ixodes pacificus Ticks
The Jack Russell terrier was not acting like himself. This usually energetic and
frisky dog only wanted to sleep. The owner also told the veterinarian that the dog
did not want to play ball anymore; after a few throws, he started to limp on his
front right limb. The veterinarian asked the owner if she and her husband had gone
camping recently. The answer was yes. The next question the veterinarian asked
was if their Jack Russell terrier had come in contact with any ticks. The husband
confirmed that he found some ticks on the dog when they took him camping.
The veterinarian decided to run some diagnostic tests for Lyme disease,
percent neutrophils. The rest of the cells were primarily monocytes with a few
lymphocytes. An ELisA serology test indicated the presence of Lyme disease. Dogs
that have been vaccinated with the Lyme bacterin may be positive on the ELiSA
test. The antibodies will remain high for about 18 months whether or not the dog
may be showing clinical signs. A western blot test can help distinguish between
vaccine-induced antibodies and the Lyme disease antibodies. A spirochete called
Borrelia is the tick ixodes pacificus on the West Coast of the United States and
lnoip s! uolieios! aiayooids ing 'ingdiay ag ueo (ainino poolg e) uoielos!
The clinical signs are lameness due to inflamed joints, sometimes fever,
lymphadenopathy, anorexia, and lethargy. The infection is often self- limiting,
controversial, because the infection is self-limiting and many dogs never
show clinical signs of infection. Ampicillin, amoxicillin, and tetracycline are the
antibiotics of choice. Lyme disease may be prevented by removing ticks as quickly
as possible. Frontline is a product used for keeping ticks off pets. A Lyme disease
bacterin is available for dogs, but its efficacy has not been validated by research
The vaccination can result in antibodies that interfere with the detection of Lyme
disease when using the ELiSA test.
This Jack Russell was successfully treated with antibiotics, and the owners were
instructed to purchase a good tick product such as Frontline to apply to their dog,
especially prior to any camping trips.
Summary
  i  p so   o o a ss
the host. Ectoparasites live on their host, while endoparasites live within. An
infection is caused by large numbers of endoparasites, whereas an infestation is
the result of large numbers of ectoparasites. Most parasites affecting domestic
animals fall under one of six groups: insects, arachnids, nematodes, cestodes,
trematodes, or protozoans. Understanding the various life cycles of parasitic
organisms helps determine diagnosis and treatment.
128
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
REVIEW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
1. The animal in which a parasite lives is known as a/an
2. A/an
is a parasite that lives on the skin of an animal.
3. A parasite that lives inside an animal is known as a/an
4. The vector for Borrelia is
 on the west Coast of the
United States and 
elsewhere.
matches the description.
5. Adult parasite with six legs and three body parts
6. Flat, ribbonlike worm with no digestive tract
7. Single-cell animal
 8. Adult parasite with eight legs and two body parts
9. Leaf-shaped worm with a mouth
10. Small, cylindrical worm covered with a cuticle
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. why is it more difficult to design drugs that will kill parasites but won't harm the animals they reside in or on when
 compared with bacteria or viruses?
MATCHING
1. arachnid
a. fluke
2. protozoa
b. tick
3. nematode
c. roundworm
4. tapeworm
d. Giardia
 5. trematode
e. cestodes
6. insect
f. yellow jacket
CHAPTER 12
Ectoparasites of Large Animals
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader shouid be able to:
List the common ectoparasites of large animals.
 Describe the life cycle of the fly. flea, louse, mite, and tick
 Describe the common diseases spread by these common ectoparasites.
 Describe briefly methods of prevention, treatment, and diagnosis.
129
130  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
KEY TERMS
anemia
Common Ectoparasites
anthelmintic
Most common ectoparasites are either insects or arachnids. Although parasi-
arachnid
tologists generally refer to any parasitic insect or arachnid as an ectoparasite,
babesiosis
mange mite (arachnid), for instance, lives just under the top layer of the skin;
bot
the larval horse bot, a fy (insect), lives in a horse's stomach. These insect and
grub
arachnid parasites could be called endoparasites; this chapter, however, groups
them with the ectoparasites because their life cycles closely resermble those of
insects
mange
those for other ectoparasites.
mite
myiasis
nsects
nit
Insects have three pairs of jointed legs and usually two pairs of wings. Some,
however, are wingless. Important insect parasites come from three groups: flies,
 tabanids
feas, and lice.
warble
Flies
the head. Many types of flies are external parasites of animals; most, but not all
(bots, Cuterebra) are parasitic only as adults. The expression “wouldn't hurt a
fly" suggests that the fy is a harmless annoyance, but fies damage their hosts in
several ways. The annoyance itself is far from harmless, since the energy a host
uses in chasing or running away from flies often causes weight loss. Flies that
 they transmit bacterial, viral, and parasitic diseases.
Mosquitoes, which are among the most important parasitic flies, have a typi-
cal insect life cycle (Figure 12-1). They lay their eggs on water or on a surface
pue haiem aul ul aal adnd aul pue aeaiel aui sueu ll uaum iam siaa ieul
are free-living organisms, as are adult males. Only adult females are parasites.
 Mosquitoes are vectors for many diseases, including heartworm disease.
Fleas
Fleas are small, narrow insects about 4 mm long. Their back legs are designed for
jumping on and off their hosts. Fleas are parasitic only during their adult stage.
the flea (egg, larva, and pupa) greatly resemble the free-living stages of the fy The
adult female fHea lays her eggs on the host. The eggs then fall offthe host. The larva,
which hatches from the egg, eats all sorts of organic material but prefers the feces
of adult feas that fall off the host. Like the fy pupa, the flea pupa is enclosed in a
hard case and does not eat. The life cycle of a flea is illustrated in Figure 12-2.
Lice
Lice (singular, louse) spend their entire life cycle on their host. There are two
types of lice. Chewing lice (Mallophaga), also known as biting lice, have mouth-
parts made for chewing their food. They feed on skin or hair. They have rounded
heads and are usually yellow in color. Biting lice infect dogs, cats, cattle, sheep.
CHAPTER 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals
131
FIGURE 12-1
ADULT
Life cycle of a fly.
PUPA
EGGS
LARVA
FIGURE 12-2
Life cycle of a flea.
ADULT
PUPA
EGGS
LARVA
132
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
goats, and horses. Sucking lice (Anoplura) have mouthparts designed for suck-
ing blood. Their heads are narrower, and they are red to gray in color. Both
types of lice are small (1-2 mm) and fat, with claws on the ends of their legs.
These claws grip the hair of their host.
All stages of lice live on the host. The life cycle of lice (Figure 12-3) differs from
that of other insects in that lice undergo no larval or pupal stages. Instead, they
undergo several nymphal stages. The nymph looks just like the adult but is small-
er. The female louse glues her eggs, called nits, to the hairs or feather shaft of the
host. When the nits hatch, the nymphs emerge and develop into adults in 2 or 3
weeks. The adults live for about 1 month. Lice usually move to another host only
when an infested host comes in close contact with an uninfested host. Nymphs
and adults do not live longer than 7 days if they are removed from the host.
FIGURE 12-3
Life cycle of a louse.
ADULT
EGG
(NIT)
HAIR
NYMPHS
Arachnids
Arachnids are arthropods with four pairs of legs and simple eyes. A typical para-
sitic arachnid lives on or in its host's skin. Ticks and mites are the most preva-
lent parasitic arachnids.
Ticks
Ticks are the largest parasitic arachnids. There are two important families of
ticks in the veterinary feld: hard (ixodid) and soft (argasid) ticks. An example of
the hard tick is the brown dog tick, and an example of the soft tick is the fowl tick.
Larval, nymphal, and adult ticks are ectoparasites, and all are bloodsuckers. They
hold on to their hosts much tighter and longer than other parasites by inserting
CHAPTER 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals
133
their mouthparts into the skin and staying there, sucking blood until they fll up.
This process may take an adult tick anywhere from 1 to 3 weeks. When female
ticks are feeding, they may increase in size from 3 to 10 mm or more. There are
four major stages of development in ticks: egg, larva, nymph, and adult.
All ticks lay their eggs on the ground, but the nurmber of hosts they feed on varies.
A one-host tick spends all three of its feeding stages on one host. A two-host tick
 stays on one host for two of its life stages and then feeds on a second host during
its third feeding life stage. A three-host tick feeds on three different hosts—one
for each life stage. Larva, nymph, and adult may all feed on the same type of host,
or the host may change. For example, the adult American dog tick (Dermacentor
 variabilis) feeds on dogs, but the larva and nymph feed on mice and other rodents.
One-host ticks are the easiest to control because they are the easiest to find.
Figure 12-4 illustrates the various stages in the life cycle of a three-host tick.
FIGURE 12-4
Life cycle of a three-host tick.
DROPSOFFHOST,
MOLTS,FINDS
NEWHOST
EGGS
ADULT
NYMPH
EIGHT
LEGS
FINDS
ISOH
LARVA
DROPS OFF HOST,
MOLTS,FINDS
NEW HOST
SIX LEGS
Mites
Mites, the other comrmon parasitic arachnid, are small, external parasites
The adult is about 0.25 to 1.3 mm long—so small that it cannot be seen with
ui yo shal aui ahu se umouy aseasip uys e asneo ueo san 'afa payeu au
mange mite are very short, and spines stick out from the side. Sarcoptiform
mites have pedicels or stalks on the tips of their legs. The pedicel can be long
 or short or jointed. This description is used in identifying the type of mite. The
 p y sa au sa  l oi s a oi mn s s
134
 PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
larvae come to the top of the skin and wander around. All of this activity causes
intense itching in the skin of the host.
The mite life cycle (Figure 12-5) is similar to that of the tick, except that mites
may undergo more than one nymphal stage. The developmental stages of the
mite are an egg stage followed by a six-legged larval stage, an eight-legged
nymphal stage, and finally the eight-legged adult stage.
FIGURE 12-5
Life cycle of a mite.
NYMPHS
ADULT
EIGHT
EGGS
LEGS
LARVA
SIXLEGS,MISSING
ONESETOFBACKLEGS
Ectoparasites of cattle
All of the ectoparasites discussed in this section prey on cattle. Some also attack
other animals as noted.
Flies
Tabanids (Tabanus species)
Tabanids (Figure 12-6) are large flies comrmonly called horseflies, deer fies, or
green-head fies. Only the female fy feeds on blood, and it prefers the blood of
large mammals such as horses, cattle, deer, and humans. Tabanids ingest too little
blood to harm their hosts, but their bite is very painful. Since the host instantly
tries to dislodge it, the fy must attack several times to get sufficient blood to pro-
duce her eggs. A horse or cow fighting off tabanids stops grazing. Many tabanids
 in a grazing area can reduce a herd's weight gain and lower milk production.
Tabanids are also disease vectors. Because the host drives the female tabanid
away before she is full, she will likely feed on several different hosts in rapid
CHAPTER 12:Ectoparasites of Large Animals
135
FIGURE 12-6
Tabanids have clear wings with
characteristic veins that may be used to
tell them apart from other related flies.
succession. If one of the hosts has a bloodborne disease, the fy may carry the
disease to its next host. Tabanids are vectors for such bloodborne diseases as
anthrax, tularemia, bovine anaplasmosis, and equine infectious anemia.
Because tabanids need water to complete their life cycle, they usually live near
rivers, streams, and swamps. The female fy lays her eggs on plants near the
water. When the eggs hatch, the larvae fall into the water, where they develop
while feeding on insects, snails, and other anirmals. Adult fies die during the
winter, but the larvae survive by hibernating. In the spring and summer, when
the larvae are completely developed, they crawl out of the water and onto dry
land. They then burrow a few inches underground and develop to the pupal
stage, which lasts for 1 to 3 weeks. Within the pupal cocoon, they transform to
 the adult stage. When conditions are right, the adult tabanids emerge.
Tabanid control is very difficult. The flies do not stay on the host long enough
for pesticides to have rmuch effect. Pasturing horses and cows far from swampy
areas and streams may not be practical, and tabanids are strong fiers. Tabanids
will not feed indoors, so some people keep their animals indoors during the
times of day when tabanids are most active. Fly traps can be used when other
control measures are not practical.
Stable Fly (Stomoxys calcitrans)
The stable fy (Figure 12-7) is a blood-feeding fy that looks like a housefy. Both
male and fermale stable flies suck blood; they usually bite the lower part of a horse's
or cow's legs. Stable flies feed indoors, as their name suggests, but they also feed
 on pastured animals. Like the tabanids, the stable fy is unlikely to take a complete
blood meal before the host chases it away The fly therefore attacks the same host
or several hosts many times before it is full. These attacks, especially when there
are many fies in the area, can so annoy horses and cattle that they stop grazing.
Experts estimate that in grazing areas with many stable flies, fly annoyance can
cause meat and milk production to decline by 20 percent. The stable fy can also
carry such diseases as bovine anaplasmosis and equine infectious anemia.
136  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 12-7
The stable fly looks much like a
common housefly It is gray and
approximately 6 to 8 mm long. Its
mouthparts form a stout needle that
the fly thrusts through the skin of
its host.
The female stable fy lays her eggs in moist plant material like manure and damp
hay, which she prefers. The larvae and pupae live where they hatch. Control
measures include keeping hay dry and removing and drying manure. It also
helps to put screens on stable and barn windows.
Horn Fly (Haematobia irritans)
The horn fy, a gray bloodsucking fy about half the size of a housefly, is an ec-
toparasite of pastured cattle. Both male and fermale horn flies suck blood, taking
up to 20 small blood meals a day. They tend to feed on the backs and sides of
flies on a cow, their constant biting causes a condition known as fy worry, so
named because the cow spends its time shooing off the fies instead of grazing.
A cow with fy worry will not gain weight as fast as it should.
uo pay aaiel au anu ysay u fuo sila hay sei fn uou aly au
the manure; the pupae live either in the manure or in the soil near it. Several
measures control the horn fy. Because the flies are unwilling to leave the cow,
insecticide applied to the cow's skin kills them. Other insecticides can be fed to
the cattle to kill the horn fy larvae in the manure. Thus, there will be no new
adult horn flies to bother the cattle.
Face Fly (Musca autumnalis)
The face fy (Figure 12-8) looks much like a housefy. The male face fly feeds on
fowers, and the female feeds mainly on cattle, although it also feeds on horses.
This fy does not bite; instead, it laps up fuids, especially those around the host's
eyes, nose, and mouth. As its name suggests, the face fy hovers around the cow's
face. A cow will not eat if too many face flies are feeding around its eyes. The
face fy's habit of fying from cow to cow makes it an excellent vector of bovine
pinkeye, which can lead to blindness.
Face flies are a parasite of pastured cattle; they enter buildings only in the au-
tumn when they are looking for a place to spend the winter. Like the horn fy.
the female face fy lays her eggs in fresh manure. Thus, insecticides fed to cattle,
spend most of their tirme off the host, insecticides applied to the cow's skin have
little effect.
CHAPTER 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals
137
FIGURE 12-8
Face flies feed on the secretions in and
around the face of their host.
Screwworm Fly (Cochliomyia hominivorax)
Adult screwworm flies are blue-green and twice the size of a housefly. The adult
screwworm fy is not parasitic, but causes myiasis, a disease caused by larval
flies. The female fy lays her eggs at the edge of a wound on a warm-blooded
animal. Cattle, pigs, sheep, and goats are this fy's favorite hosts. The larvae
hatch and move into the wound to feed on the tissue around it. This enlarges the
wound and makes it give off a bad smell, which attracts other fies, which then
lay their eggs near the wound.
The first screwworm fly may be drawn to a small wound caused by a tick or tabanid
bite. Once larvae enter this wound they grows rapidly In suficient numbers, screw-
worrm fly larvae can do great damage. Cattle have lost ears, tails, and even hooves to
screwworm fly larvae. After feeding in the wound for about a week, the larvae drop
Scientists eradicated the screwworm fy from the United States in the 1950s.
s   s an ms a ui  n ui uo 
entists released millions of sterile male flies in areas where the screwworm fly
was a problem. This made sterile males far outnumber normal males, so female
flies usually mated with the sterile ones and produced eggs that did not hatch.
Several years of this sterile breeding eliminated the screwworm fy from the
United States, but it still lives in South and Central America and occasionally
travels into the United States with cattle imported from these areas. Wounds left
by husbandry practices such as branding, dehorning, and castration expose ani-
mals to the screwworm fy Therefore, these procedures should be done during
the winter or dry season, when the number of screwworm fies is lowest.
Catfle Grub (Hypoderma lineatum and Hypoderma bovis)
Cattle grubs (Figure 12-9) look like large bees but belong to a group of flies
known as botflies. Bots are maggots of flies that infest animals. Only the mag-
gots are parasitic; adult cattle grubs do not feed. Although cattle grubs live only
138  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 12-9
The females of the species Hypoderma
bous lay their eggs on the hair shafts
of a cow. Larvae developing from these
eggs penetrate the skin and migrate in
the connective tissue, where they grow
and develop.
Cat Mo.9o6 Fisher Scientific Company 
a few days, that is enough time for the female to attach her eggs to the hair of
cattle. She prefers to lay her eggs on the hair of the legs, and she prefers young
cows to older ones. Although the egg-laying process is painless, the cattle in-
stinctively fear this fy and try to run away from an adult cattle grub buzzing
around their legs, a behavior called gadding. Gadding interrupts grazing and
may result in lower weight gains and decreased milk production among cattle
that graze in areas with many cattle grub adults. These cows may also hurt
 themselves while blindly running around in panic.
The adult fy interferes with grazing, but only the larval cattle grub is truly para-
sitic. When the eggs hatch, the larvae crawl down the hair shaft and burrow into
the skin. Unlike screwworm fly larvae, cattle grub larvae can penetrate intact skin.
The larvae then migrate through the body of the cow, feeding on host tissue as they
go. Hypoderma lineatum larvae spend the winter in the wall of the cow's esophagus;
H. bovislarvae live in the fat around the spinal cord. The larvae that spend the win-
ter inside the cow are about one-half inch long. In late winter, the larvae migrate
they make a small breathing hole in the skin. The skin over the larva swells, pro-
ducing a lurmp called a warble. The larvae grow in the warble for 1 or 2 months and
change in color from white to dark brown. The full-grown larva, about 1 inch long,
emerges through the breathing hole and drops to the ground. Once on the ground,
the larva pupates; about a month later, the adult fy emerges.
The damage the larvae in the warble do can cause the cattle rancher problems.
The inflammation that forms around the larva destroys some meat, thus decreas-
ing the value of the carcass. The holes left by the emerging cattle grubs heal but
leave scars that decrease the hide's value. Insecticides kill larval cattle grubs, but if
the larvae die in the esophagus or spinal cord, the dead larvae cause inflammation.
Inflammation around the esophagus could make eating dificult; inflammation
around the spinal cord could paralyze the cow. The time to treat cattle with insec-
ticide is just after the adult flies have finished laying eggs. Another good time is in
the spring, after the larvae leave their winter homes but before warbles forrm.
CHAPTER 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals
139
Ticks
A number of different ticks parasitize livestock. Ticks are an irmportant livestock
cattle. Heavy tick infestations may also cause anemia, a disease in which there
is insufficient blood to carry enough oxygen to support the tissues of the body.
Some of the most significant cattle ticks follow.
Spinose Ear Tick (otobius megnini)
The spinose ear tick is a one-host soft tick, which spends its larval and nymphal
stages in a cow's ear (Figure 12-10). Adult ear ticks live on the ground and do
not feed. Like all other ticks, the ear tick lays its eggs on the ground. The larvae
hatch and climb to the top of grass or weeds. When the cow comes to graze on
the grass, the larvae detach themselves from the plant and attach thermselves to
the cow. They then make their way into the cow's ears, where they feed on blood.
The larvae stay in the ears and molt to the nymphal stage. The nymphs also feed
on blood. When ready to molt, the nymph leaves the ear and drops to the ground
In response to the irritation of feeding larvae and nymphs, the cow shakes and
rubs its head, trying to rid itself of the ticks. An ear with too many ticks may
become infamed. This inflammation may damage the eardrum, resulting in deaf-
ness. Feeding ticks may also leave wounds prone to bacterial infection. If the cow
has only a few ear ticks, they can be removed by hand. An infestation of more than
a few ear ticks may require application of an approved pesticide.
FIGURE 12-10
The spinose ear tick is a soft tick
most often found in the ears of many
domestic animals, including dogs,
horses, cows, goats, pigs, and cats.
Cattle Tick (Boophilus annulatus)
The cattle tick is a one-host hard tick, which has been eliminated from much of
  sie sx ui  o dn sn ss inq s pn a
cattle in Mexico and travels to Texas on deer and stray cattle. This tick trans-
mits Babesia bigemina, which causes bovine babesiosis, a protozoal disease also
called tick fever or Texas cattle fever. A single application of a veterinarian-
approved pesticide kills all stages of one-host ticks in cattle and slows the repro-
duction of the entire tick population. This widespread pesticide treatrment is the
strategy that eliminated the cattle tick from the United States. If diagnosed, this
disease-spreading tick must be reported to both federal and state authorities
14O  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
B. annulatus is still found in Mexico and can easily come across the border with
livestock, feral animals, pets, and humans.
Cattle that cross legally from Mexico must be treated to elirminate ticks. However,
stray or smuggled livestock from Mexico, and the native and exotic wildlife that
cross back and forth, can carry fever ticks. If these animals cross the river carry-
ing ^hot" fever ticks that complete their life cycle on the U.S. side, the potential
exists to introduce a highly virulent disease into a cattle population unprepared
to handle it.
In 2oo8, Mexico reported acaricide-resistant ticks. The Texas Anirmal Health
Commission (TAHC) has devoted much of its resources trying to keep the cattle
fever tick contained within the permanent quarantine zone along the Rio Grande,
   s  s   d po p  e 
Mexico. At one time, cattle fever ticks spread north to Kansas and east to Southern
 n s aos    t o e se a s so 
joint efforts of the USDA's cattle tick eradication program, the veterinary profes-
sional can assist in the elirmination of this threat to our livestock industry
Lone Star Tick (Amblyomma americanum)
The lone star tick is a three-host hard tick that feeds on small marmmals and
birds as a larva and a nymph. The adults prefer to feed on large mammals such
as cattle and horses. This tick is named for a single white dot in the center of
the adult female's back. Adult ticks prefer to feed on the cow's neck and on the
area where the cow's legs meet its body. It has long mouthparts, which can
cause deep, irritating wounds. If enough ticks are feeding on a cow, the cow can
develop anemia
Guif coast Tick (Amblyomma maculatum)
The Gulf Coast tick is a three-host hard tick. As its common name suggests, it
lives in the United States along the Gulf of Mexico. The larva and nymph prefer
to feed on such ground-dwelling birds as quail. The adult ticks feed on cattle,
horses, and other large mammals. They prefer to feed in and around the base of
the ears. Like the lone star tick, the Gulf Coast tick has long mouthparts that
cause a nasty wound.
Rocky Mountain Wood Tick (Dermacentor andersoni)
The Rocky Mountain wood tick is a three-host hard tick that lives in the western
United States. The larva and nymph feed on wild rodents, while the adult prefers
large animals such as cattle and horses. The adults prefer to feed on the host's
belly. This tick is a vector of bovine anaplasmosis, a bacterial infection character
ized by fever, jaundice, and emaciation. As it feeds, the Rocky Mountain wood
fjeued Suipeauds e 'sisfieued you asneo Keu reul (uosiod) uixoi e sioalui yo
sis that may eventually impair the muscles involved in breathing. Fortunately
tick paralysis rapidly subsides once the tick is removed. Not every feeding tick
causes paralysis, but no one knows why some Rocky Mountain wood ticks cause
paralysis and others do not.
Winter Tick (Dermacentor albipictus)
The winter tick is a one-host hard tick that feeds on large marmmals like cat-
tle, horses, moose, and deer. The larval winter tick begins to seek a host in
CHAPTER 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals  141
drop off to lay their eggs by February or March. Heavy winter tick infestations
may severely weaken their hosts and may be difficult to detect under the thick
winter coats of horses and cattle
Deer or Blacklegged Tick (lxodes scapularis and Ixodes pacificus)
The deer tick is a three-host hard tick that feeds on birds and srmall mamrmals as
larvae and nymphs (Figure 12-11). Adults feed on large mammals such as cattle,
horses, dogs, and deer The adult ticks have long mouthparts, which can cause
considerable damage while the tick feeds. The adult blacklegged ticks usually
feed on the head or neck of their host, where there is good blood supply. These
ticks can be vectors of bovine anaplasmosis and Lyme disease. They may also
cause tick paralysis.
FIGURE 12-11
The deer tick is a hard tick associated
with the transmission of Lyme disease
Left, the adult deer tick. Right, the deer
tick in its larval stage.
春
Veterinarians treat light infestations of ticks on cattle by removing the ticks one
at a time. Heavier infestations need approved pesticides applied to the cattle.
a more thorough approach because not all of therm are on the cattle. To kill
three-host ticks on their cattle, ranchers apply three-host tick pesticides every
for all pesticides used. To kill ticks that are off the cattle, ranchers often burn
pastures during the dry season, till pastures, or rotate pastures (move cattle to a
new pasture until the old pasture's ticks die).
Mites
Mites that cause mange in cattle, sheep, and goats are Sarcoptes, Demoder,
Chorioptes, and Psoroptes. The life cycles of the Sarcoptes and Demoder are covered
in Chapter 13.
easip snoas fuiod e (sess) a odoes sasneo  sorg a
of cattle characterized by intense itching and a large loss of hair in the affect-
ed areas. Veterinarians treat it with a single injection of ivermectin, a broad-
spectrum anthelmintic (a substance destructive to worms). Scabies is highly
142
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
contagious and can be spread by direct contact and by fomites. Because it is so
highly contagious and is a zoonotic disorder, it is a reportable disease. Diagnosis
'yoq ho Xsdotq uys ho shudeaos uys fq apu s!
Demodet mites (Figure 12-12) cause demodectic mange, a disease characterized by
the formation of small nodules (growths) in the skin. Though veterinarians rarely
treat demodectic mange, ivermectin kills the Demoder mites. When there is an in-
crease in numbers of these mites, the clinical disease is called dermodicosis. Demodet
 mites are host specific and most commonly infect dogs with low irmmune systerms.
FIGURE 12-12
Demodex mites.
Demodex mites
Psoroptes is a nonburrowing mite that can also harm cattle. All the stages of this
mite live on the host's skin. Psoroptes mites have chewing mouthparts, which
severely damage the host's skin and cause psoroptic mange, a disease of cattle
characterized by vesicles (small blisters) on the skin that cause intense itch-
ing. The itching makes cattle so restless that they gain weight very slowly
Ivermectin also kills psoroptic mites. Even though this disorder is not zoonotic,
it is still a reportable disease.
e fae aeo un aeo isui osie uo s (au bal) au sdo
found in the tail region as well as the hind legs. Similar to the Psoroptes mange
mite, the Chorioptes mite does not burrow and spends its entire life cycle on
the host. Chorioptic mange is like psoroptic mange, but usually much milder
Ivermectin kills chorioptic mites. Chorioptic mange is also a reportable disease
but does not affect humans. It is the most common type of mange in cattle in the
United States. These mites can be identifed by their short, unjointed pedicels
with suckers on the ends of some of their legs.
Ectoparasites of sheep
Flies
Sheep Ked (Melophagus ovinus)
The sheep ked (Figure 12-13) is a wingless fy that spends its entire life cycle
on the sheep. The fermale fy lays a fully developed larva in the sheep's wool
CHAPTER 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals143
FIGURE 12-13
The sheep ked has heavy claws on
stout legs, which it uses to hold on to
the sheep.
The larva pupates almost irmmediately, gluing the pupal case to the wool in the
process. The pupa develops into an adult fly in about 3 weeks. Contact between
sheep spreads the sheep ked.
Adult flies of both sexes suck blood, which causes sheep a good deal of irrita-
paa spay daaus aaym seaue aul ie qnu pue ahiq oi buizeia dois uano daaus uo
Thus, a sheep infested with sheep keds may not gain weight and will damage
its wool, which is also devalued by the pupae glued to it. Heavily infested sheep
may become anemic.
Veterinarians who notice sheep scratching themselves check the wool for the easily
visible sheep keds and pupae. Spring shearing removes many sheep keds. Approved
insecticides applied to the sheep's wool and skin also kill adult sheep keds.
Sheep Nasal Botfly (oestrus ovis)
Like other botfies, the sheep nasal botfly's larva is parasitic. The adult nasal
botflies do not feed. The female nasal botfly squirts a stream of fuid into a
sheep's or goat's nasal opening. This fuid contains up to 25 small (1 mm) larvae
(Figure 12-14), which migrate deeper into the nasal passages, feeding on mucus
 ss e sa i  aao su ae  so l  oi e s
ity, where it matures in about 1 month. The mature larva then leaves the sinus,
migrates out of the nose, and drops to the ground, where it pupates. The adult
ua yotum sio esu leaet suu z ot I ui aseo iednd ui uoy shaa f
a sheep's nose in late autumn, stay the entire winter and can remain in the sheep
attack from nasal botflies. Recognizing the adult flies, the sheep bunch together
aul ouo ho daaus hauio isuese uaun Suusnd fq sasou uiaul apiy on fun pue
ground. While the sheep hides its nose, the fy cannot lay its larva in the nostril,
but a sheep hiding its nose cannot eat.
Most infections from botflies are light and cause sheep to sneeze and rub their
noses on fences or other objects. Sheep with heavy infections are unthrifty (do
144  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 12-14
Larvae of the nasal botfly can damage
the nasal passage and sinuses, making
it difficult for the sheep to breathe.
not put on weight), may be uncoordinated, and may have trouble breathing.
The larval nasal bots irritate the lining of the nose, causing a runny nose and
sneezing. The sinus where the larva is growing may fill up with pus. Sheep nasal
botfies are difficult to control, though ivermectin kills the larvae.
Blowfly (Phormia, Lucilia, Calliphora, and Phaenicia species)
Adult blowflies are metallic black or green. They feed on moist, decaying matter
(like dead animals), open festering wounds, and soiled wool. The female lays her
eggs in these sites. The blowfy larvae hatch and start feeding, in some cases in-
vading the skin. Ranchers call the larvae in a sheep's decaying wool feeceworms
on the skin's moisture, this causes sheep a major problem: The wool rots and
falls out, and the rotten odor that feeding larvae produce attracts other blowflies
to the sheep kills the larvae. The ranching practices of docking (removing the
tail) and crutching (shaving the wool away from the area below the tail) aim to
rermove the sites most likely to become soiled. These measures and any others
Mites
Demodectic, sarcoptic, and psoroptic mange mites all occur on sheep. Refer
to the section on cattle mites previously in this chapter for descriptions of
these mites.
 Demodectic mange of sheep is a mild disease and very rare. Sarcoptic mange of
sheep normally starts on the face or other areas that have little wool. Infested
sheep suffer intense itching and tend to lose weight because of the time and en-
aeu osie si daaus ul alueu odooues shoalqo isuieae Suiqqnu puads faui fbia
Psoroptic mange, also known as sheep scab, is the most important mange of
sheep. It is also a reportable disease. Similar to the psoroptic mange that cattle
suffer, this disease causes itching so intense that sheep rub the wool from large
areas of their bodies. They are so restless that they may lose weight. The worst
cases of sheep scab usually occur during the winter. Psoroptic mange of sheep is
rare in the United States.
Veterinarians diagnose the type of mange by identifying the mites from skin
scrapings. Dipping the sheep—submerging the animal in a bath containing a
CHAPTER 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals  145
but it is not licensed everywhere for this purpose. Sarcoptic mange and demo-
dectic mange of goats are similar to the diseases in cattle. Psoroptic mange in
 goats is usually limited to the ears, face, and neck. Pesticides, recommended by a
veterinarian, can be applied to goats to control mange.
Ectoparasites of swine
Flies
No fy is a particular problem for swine. Mosquitoes and horseflies feed on swine
turn up in the skin of hogs and pet swine (Figure 12-15). The best treatment is
surgical removal.
FIGURE 12-15
The rodent botfly is large, about 20
mm or more in length, with a beelike
body and tiny mouthparts.
Lice
The hog louse (Haematopinus suis), a large (6 mm) sucking louse,is the only louse
that feeds on swine. Heavy hog louse infestations cause irritation that may lead
to a poor weight gain. This louse is easy to see with the naked eye. Veterinarians
diagnose hog louse infestation by finding the lice or their eggs. They treat in-
fested pigs by spraying them with an insecticide or giving them ivermectin.
treatments.
Fleas
The cat fea (Ctenocephalides felis) sometimes feeds on swine, especially pet pigs
that share a home with dogs or cats. The infested pig should be treated with an
insecticide, and its holding area should be frst cleaned and then treated with
an insecticide. Refer to the section on dog and cat fleas in Chapter 13 for more
information about this fea.
Ticks
The spinose ear tick, the Gulf Coast tick, the lone star tick, the blacklegged tick,
and the American dog tick all feed on pigs. Refer to the sections on cattle ticks
(previously, in this chapter) and dog ticks in Chapter 13 for details on the life
cycles of these ticks.
146
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
If the infestation is light, the individual ticks can be removed as described in
Chapter 13 for dog and cat ticks.
Mites
The sarcoptic mange mite (Sarcoptes scabiet), the most important ectoparasite
 of commercially raised swine, is a fairly common ectoparasite of pet pigs. The
section on mites of the dog and cat in Chapter 13 describes this mite's life cycle.
This mite causes pigs intense itching in the infested area. The infested skin
thickens and forms a scablike crust. The sarcoptic mange mite usually infests
pigs on the face or around the neck. Two doses of ivermectin, given 2 weeks
apart, treat sarcoptic mange mites in pigs. An infested herd should be treated
shid mau llv sid piea Susauau uog shid paieaun suaaaud oi hauaon
should be examined and treated for sarcoptic mange before they are added to
the herd.
Ectoparasites of Horses
Flies
Many of the flies that attack cattle, such as the horsefly and the stable fly, also
attack horses. (Refer to the section on cattle flies previously in this chapter to
review these fies.) Mosquitoes are usually a minor annoyance to horses but
can carry equine encephalitis, a severe viral brain disease. The most pathogenic
viruses for horses are Eastern equine encephalomyelitis virus, Western equine
encephalomyelitis virus, Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis virus, and West
Nile virus.
The nonfeeding adult horse botflies (Gasterophilus sp.) attach their eggs to the
hairs of a horse's forelegs (Figure 12-16). The horse nose bot places her eggs
around the horse's lips, while the horse throat bot places hers under the horse's
oiey ioq asuoy uouuoo aui jo shha aul yaam e inoqe u yorey saha aui mel
when the horse licks its legs; the newly hatched larvae (Figure 12-17) burrow
FIGURE 12-16
The adult horse botfly is brown and
hairy. The adult female lives only a
short time, during which she deposits
her eggs on the hairs of a horse.
CHAPTER 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals  147
FIGURE 12-17
The larvae of the horse bot are
parasitic maggots that attach
themselves to the stomach lining of
horses.
No.9-o16 Fisher Scientific Company &
into the tongue. The eggs of the nose and throat bots hatch without the horse's
the tongue. As the larvae grow, they move from the tongue to the spaces between
the horse's upper molars. The larvae stay in the mouth for 3 to 4 weeks and then
move to the back of the mouth and are swallowed. The swallowed larvae attach
themselves to the stomach wall (nose bot larvae to the small intestine wall) and
grow. They remain attached for 10 to 12 months, growing 1 to 2 cm long. When
the larvae mature, they detach themselves from the stomach and pass out with
the feces. They pupate on the ground; adults emerge in 1 to 2 months. Adult
horse botflies live only a few days.
Because the throat and nose bots lay their eggs on the horse's head, they annoy
the horse more than the common bot does. The horse's grazing is interrupt-
ed by the adult botfly annoyance. If this annoyance persists, it may affect the
can cause stomach ulcers. Although larvae in the stomach cannot be diagnosed,
botfly eggs on the horse's hairs mean the horse has bots.
Certain drugs (iverrmectin being the most effective) kill the larval bots in the
stomach. The best time to treat the horse is in the winter, when adults have died
and all the eggs should have hatched. In the summer or autumn, eggs on the
horse's legs can be killed with warm water containing an insecticide. The warm
water hatches the eggs, and the insecticide kills the emerging larvae.
Lice
Two types of horse lice are the Bovicola equi and the Haematopinus asini. B. equiis
a chewing louse; H. asiniis a sucking louse. Both types irritate the horse. A horse
heavily infested with either of these lice will rub or bite at the infested area and
damage its hair. Many tirmes a horse is infested with both lice at the same time
Heavy infestations usually occur during the winter when the horse has a longer
coat. Diagnosing these lice involves combing the horse and looking for them
148 PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
The infested area is treated with an application of an insecticide. Horses infested
Fleas
The cat fea (Ctenocephalides felis) sometimes feeds on young foals. The infested
horse should be treated with insecticide. The stable should be cleaned first and
 then treated with insecticide. Refer to the section on dogand cat feas in Chapter 13
for more information about this flea.
Ticks
The blacklegged tick, the Rocky Mountain wood tick, the winter tick, the Gulf
Coast tick, and the lone star tick all infest horses. Refer to the section on cattle
Mites
eases similar to those that dogs and cattle suffer. Demoder mange mites also feed
on horses, but like those on cattle, they cause little harm.
CHAPTER 12: Ectoparasites of Large Animals
¥149
CASE STUDY
Cattle Grubs: Hypodermosis of Cattle
A wyoming cattle rancher has noticed hypodermal rashes on the backs of his
cattle. Six of the steers are having dysphagia (difficulty eating) and are drooling
DIAGNOSIS
During the third stage, the larvae of cattle grubs can be differentiated between
the two species, H. fineatum and H. bovis. The H. fineatum has spines on the tenth
segment and a flat spiracular plate. The H. fineatum is also smaller. The H. bovis
Heel flies in the pastures or around the legs of the cattle can be a good indicator.
TREATMENT
The first important treatment is control of the heel fly population. Systemic
insecticides such as ivermectin are used but are contraindicated in lactating dairy
treatments. Sprays and dips such as coumaphos and phosmet can be used for
control of cattle grubs. Ivermectin injected subcutaneously or given as an oral
paste has proven effective against cattle grub larvae. The larvae wander through
the subcutaneous connective tissues, including areas of the spinal canal. it is
important not to use systemic insecticides during the time the larvae are in the
region of the spinal canal. if they die while in this region, they could cause severe
effects is as soon as possible after the end of the heel fly season. Cattle should
not be treated later than 8 to 12 weeks before the anticipated first appearance of
grubs in the backs.
Summary
The most common ectoparasites of large animals are insects or arachnids. Flies
are two-winged insects that are capable of transmitting bacterial, viral, and par-
asitic diseases to livestock. Several parasitic flies also infest livestock, causing
millions of dollars in lost production every year. Fleas are jumping, bloodsuck-
ing insects. Ticks are the largest parasitic arachnids and can be one-host, two-
host, or three-host species. The mite causes the skin disease known as mange.
reduce disease-causing levels of parasites that comrmonly exist within and near
our borders.
150
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
REVIEW
FILL IN THE BLANKS
1. To reduce the stages of the tick population that is off the host, a rancher can
Or
 the pasture.
 2. when the female cattle grub fly tries to lay her eggs on a cow, the cow may try to avoid the fly, a behavior known as
 3. If a horse is treated only once a year for horse bots, it should be treated during the
4.
 an animal is a process whereby the animal is sub-
merged in a bath containing a recommended pesticide
5
is the shortening of the tail in sheep and helps prevent
6
is the ectoparasite associated with causing bovine
babesiosis.
MATCHING
1. horn fly
a. mange
2. tabanid
b. fly worry
3. face fly
c. fleeceworms
4. Sarcoptes
d. vector of bovine anaplasmosis
 5. blowflies
e. vector of bovine pinkeye
CHAPTER 13
Ectoparasites of Small Animals
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
List the common ectoparasites of small animals
 Review the life cycle of the fly. flea, louse, mite, and tick from
Chapter 12.
 Describe the common diseases spread by these common ectoparasites.
 Describe (briefly) methods of prevention, treatment, and diagnosis.
151
152PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
KEY TERMS
acaricides
Ectoparasites in companion Animals
Anoplura
Persistent ectoparasites do not restrict themselves to large animals. Their effect
chigger
on the host, however, can be surprisingly different. Some seemingly innocent
ectoparasites can be quite dangerous to small animals. Others that sound dan-
demodicosis
gerous actually are not. As we encroach upon and reduce our available wildlife
ectotherms
areas, there will be an increase in cross-infestation from wildlife to companion
erythema
animals. It is important to educate the companion animal owner/caretaker about
Mallophaga
the irmportance of separating wildlife areas from our pet population.
pediculosis
Ectoparasites of Dogs and cats
pruritus
pustules
Flies
scabies
Most flies cause few problems for dogs and cats. Tabanids and other bloodsuck-
ing fies may feed on dogs and cats. The larvae of some fies may cause myiasis in
dogs and cats. One such fly is Cuterebra. Cuterebra larvae (also known as wolf or
wolf worm) infest the skin of rabbits, rats, mice, squirrels, chipmunks, dogs, and
cats. In cats, which are not a natural host for the botfy, the larvae usually find
their way from the nose lining to the area under the skin. There they grow nor-
mally. In some cases, though, the larvae get lost in the cat and may end up in the
brain or in other tissues. In the brain, the larvae may cause enough damage to
kill the cat. Rodent botfy infestation is almost impossible to diagnose unless the
larva ends up under the skin. Bots under the skin of any animal leave a breathing
hole. Treatment consists of surgically removing the bot from its pocket under
the skin. Care must be taken not to crush the bot as it can cause anaphylaxis to
the animal itself. Some drugs kill the larvae, but the dead bots cause an inflam-
 matory reaction that may prove more harmful than the live parasite.
Cuterebra infections are rare in indoor cats and even rarer in dogs. The larvae of
fesh flies sometimes infest wounds in the skin of dogs and cats and in cats and
dogs seeking out rodent prey in their burrows. The stable fly (Stomorys calcitrans)
also known as the biting housefly, feeds on domestic animals. In particular, they
and German shepherds. Both the male and fermale fy are avid blood feeders
Myiasis (Fly Strike)
Fly larvae (larval dipterans) may develop in the subcutaneous tissues of the skin of
domestic and wild animals. Flies are attracted to moist wounds, skin lesions, soiled
hair coats, dead anirmal tissue, and feces. The hatched eggs (maggots) ingest dead
cells and secretions and sometimes travel through healthy layers of skin, produc
ing exudates of their own. Thousands of maggots can occupy large cavities in the
skin. The animal may die of shock, intoxication, histolysis, or infection if the infes-
tation is not arrested. This condition is known as fy strike or facultative myiasis.
Lice
Both sucking or Anoplura lice (Linognathus setosus, Figure 13-1A) and bit-
ing or Mallophaga (Trichodectes canis, Figure 13-1B) lice feed on dogs. Eyes in
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals
¥153
FIGURE 13-1
A. The sucking louse has a head that
is more slender than its thorax, with
mouthparts designed to suck its host's
tissue, body fuids, and blood. B. The
biting louse has no eyes, and its body
js broad and flat. The head of a biting
louse is wider than its thorax and as
wide as its abdomen. The mouthparts
of a biting louse are designed to bite
and chew. They feed on debris on the
surface of the skin rather than suck like
the other group of lice.
(A)
(B)
Mallophaga are either absent or reduced, and the mandibles are developed for
chewing. Only a biting louse (Felicola subrostratus) feeds on cats. These lice travel
from host to host by direct host contact or fomites (grooming clippers, brushes,
blankets, bedding). Heavy sucking lice infestations can cause anemia. The dog-
skin irritation and itching on both cats and dogs. Pets with a heavy infestation
of biting lice may scratch so much that they rermove their hair and cut the skin.
Sucking lice can ingest enough blood to cause severe anemia packed cell volume
aol fq uoneisaui (sjeuue Sunof ul juaouad oz se yonu se fq doup ueo Aod)
pue) sieo ho shou 'sisoinsipad se oi paajau si (suyons ho buna) adfi hauie jo
sometimes humans) can be the definitive host to Dipylidium caninum (the cucum-
ber or “double-pored" canine tapeworm), and the fea or louse the intermediate
host. The dog's or cat's perianal region becomes contaminated with eggs of the
do bop aul pue sasa aui sisaui asnol do eau auL passed aue saoay se uuomadel
cat ingests the fea or louse. Although it is much more common with feas, the
louse is still an important intermediate host to consider.
A dog or cat that scratches constantly should be examined for adult lice or nits
attached to the hairs. Powders or shampoos containing an insecticide can treat
treatment. The dog or cat must be retreated after 2 weeks because pesticides do
not kill the nits. In 2 weeks, the nits hatch; retreatrment kills the nymphs before
they develop into egg-laying adults. Shaving a cat before treating it reduces the
number of eggs, which are found on the hairs.
Fleas
Ctenocephalides felis (Figure 13-2) is by far the most common fea on dogs and
cats. C. canis (Figure 13-3) also feeds on dogs and cats but is rare. Although
fleas lay eggs on the dog or cat, the eggs soon fall off. When the eggs hatch
154
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 13-2
This fea is similar to the dog fea in
Aensn st a hnouiv 'aoueeadde
unnecessary to differentiate between
the dog fea and the cat flea, it may be
done by examining the size and shape
 of the head and the size of the spines
on the mouth comb.
FIGURE 13-3
This dog flea is small(4 mm long),
Budun y shat Inamod ym
in 1 or 2 weeks, the larvae feed on organic material. The larval fea eventually
spins a silklike cocoon and becomes a pupa. The time from the hatching of the
egg to the hatching of the adult from the cocoon may be as short as 3 weeks in
hot weather or as long as 2 years in very cold weather.
The adult fea jumps onto a dog or cat, where it lives up to 2 months. Because
many eggs drop where the animal spends a lot of time and the larval fea stays
close to where it hatches, most adult feas do not have long to wait before a host
comes along.
Once on the host, the adult flea keeps moving, stopping only for a few minutes at
a time to take a blood meal. This constant moving around and feeding irritates
the host and causes it to scratch. As with lice infestations, the host's constant
scratching can remove hair and cut the skin. Heavy fea infestations can cause
anemia, which can be fatal to kittens and puppies. Some pets develop an allergy
to the fea's saliva. The bite of even a single fea can cause severe itching in an
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals
155
allergic dog or cat. The fea saliva contains proteolytic enzymes and histamine
like substances that cause pruritus and hypersensitivity to the bite. Flea allergy
dermatitis (FAD) is the most common derrmatological disease of domestic dogs
in the United States.
On pets, feas are more difficult to control than lice. Like lice, adult feas on the
host succumb to shampoos and powders that contain insecticides; fea collars
contain a slow-release insecticide that kills feas on the pet for several months;
and other insecticides placed on the pet's back kill adult feas for 1 to 3 months.
But killing adult feas on the host solves only half the problem. The insecticide
applied to the pet does not kill eggs, larvae, and pupae not on the host. Drugs
be prescribed by the veterinarian.
'anuany aul hapun sae pue sinu llv suppaq siad aue Aioadsa 'iad aui to
as well as cracks and crevices in the foor, should be vacuumed, and insecti-
cide should be applied to these areas. Ultimate fea control may require several
applications of insecticides to both the pet and its surroundings.
Ticks
Brown Dog Tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineus)
The common dog tick (Figure 13-4) feeds on dogs as a larva, a nymph, and an
adult. The parasite's host, however, is a different dog in each stage. The larval
tick feeds and then drops off the dog. The larva molts on the ground and be-
shiem pue ysnq ho sseil jo apeiq e jo dot aui oi squo uaui ii ydufu e sauo
for another dog to come along. After the nymph finds a host and feeds, it repeats
the process. The adult tick finds a third dog. Adult ticks mate on the dog. After
feeding, the female tick drops off to lay her eggs on the ground. Unfed larval,
nymphal, and adult ticks can survive for months while waiting for a host.
FIGURE 13-4
The brown dog tick is a hard tick with
a hard dorsal shield and a rather plain
appearance.
156PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Ticks can harm their hosts beyond the blood loss of feeding; they commonly
irritate the skin around their bite, causing the dog or cat to scratch much as it
would if it had fleas or lice. Ticks can also carry serious diseases. Because a tick
parasitizes several hosts during its life cycle, it can readily transmit viruses, bac-
teria, and protozoan parasites. T'he brown dog tick is an intermediate host for
Babesia canis, the etiological agent that causes canine piroplasmosis (babesiosis),
a protozoan disease, and canine ehrlichiosis, a bacterial disease. It also causes
tick paralysis in some dogs.
Removing the ticks with tweezers controls a light infestation of adult ticks.
u uoy plnd ae sheduino sh pue pey sh oi aso adsea si yot yog
skin. The tick is removed without squeezing its head to avoid injecting parasitic
agents into the host. Larval and nymphal ticks are small and difficult to find, so
tweezers do not control them effectively. To control infestations involving larval
and nymphal ticks or heavy infestations of adult ticks, a pesticide or tick collar
should be used. Because female ticks normally lay eggs outdoors, pesticides are
not normally used indoors. However, kennels do use pesticides indoors to con-
tick can thrive in kennels. A kennel with an infestation should be treated with a
pesticide along with its dogs, with treatrment repeated regularly until the infes-
tation is under control.
Blacklegged or Deer Tick (lxodes scapularis)
The blacklegged tick is another important vector of disease in the United States.
(Review its life cycle in the section on cattle ticks in Chapter 12.) Both the nymph
and adult of this tick feed on dogs.
The darmage this tick causes is the same as that caused by the brown dog tick. It
can transmit Lyme disease, a bacterial disease, from mice to dogs. Lyme disease
the number of human Lyme disease victims in the northeastern United States.
Blacklegged tick infestations are usually light in dogs or cats, so individual ticks
can be removed with tweezers. Pesticides (acaricides) in collars or applied to the
American Dog Tick (Dermacentor variabilis)
The American dog tick (Figure 13-5) is a three-host hard tick. The larvae and
the nymphs prefer to feed on rodents and rabbits. The adults feed on dogs, cats,
and such wild carnivores as foxes and coyotes.
American dog tick infestations are usually light and cause damage similar to that
of the brown dog tick. The American dog tick carries canine piroplasmosis (babe-
siosis) and Rocky Mountain spotted fever, a bacterial disease. Infestations of the
yll paayoeiq aul jo asoui se Aem aues aul ui panean ane yon bop ueoa
Mites
All mites commonly affcting dogs and cats spend their lives (egg, larva, nymph,
and adult) on one host. Mites can transfer from one host to another during close
contact.
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals
157
FIGURE 13-5
The American dog tick is most
dauns pue uds au u snoaun
months, since it needs moisture in the
environment to survive.
Demodectic Mange Mite (Demodex canis)
Demoder canis (Figure 13-6), a common mite of dogs, is cigar-shaped and lives
in hair follicles. Suckling transmits these mites from the mother dog to her
Demodicosis is the clinical disease caused by many of these mites infecting the
fauna of the skin.
Demodectic mange can be a mild, localized disease or a serious, generalized
disease with lesions covering large areas of the body. The localized disease may
cause slight hair loss, usually on the muzzle, face, and forelimbs. These mild le-
sions should still be treated. Cats have Demoder mites but rarely get demodectic
mange. When they do, it is usually the localized type on the face.
FIGURE 13-6
 The demodectic mange mite lives in
the hair follicles and sebaceous and
sweat glands in the skin of the dog.
158  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Generalized demodectic mange occurs in dogs whose immune system is sup-
pressed. This is common when confounded with another disease, a genetic defect,
or drugs given to the dog for a different condition. Imrmunosuppressed dogs with
this more serious mange have hair loss and thickening of the skin in the area of
the lesions. If these lesions become infected with bacteria, pustules (pirmple-like
growths containing pus) may form. These lesions cause little or no itching.
Veterinarians diagnose demodectic mange by scraping the skin in the area of the
lesions and finding larval, nymphal, and adult mites. Demoder mites are present
in norrmal dogs, but the presence of many different stages indicates that the mite
 population is increasing rapidly and therefore causing the lesions.
Treatment of demodectic mange (demodicosis) is a difficult and long process.
The mites are so deep in the skin that pesticides may not reach and kill them im-
(Mitaban) dips are usually done for 4 to 6 weeks at 2-week intervals. Antibiotics
are given for prevention of secondary infections.
Sarcoptic Mange Mite (Sarcoptes scabiei)
Sarcoptes scabiei (Figure 13-7) is a small, round mite that can also cause mange
(scabies) in dogs and other animals. Humans can also become infected with this
mite. Thus, scabies is a zoonotic concern. In humans, it causes papules or vesi-
cles to appear on the trunk, arms, abdomen, face, and genitalia. The lesions are
u d s odos si ui a si a o ai s nd x
skin of the face, ears, and forelimbs, but in heavy infestations they can be found
anywhere on the body.
FIGURE 13-7
Sarcoptic mites are round to oval
in shape and have short legs with
spines that stick out from the sides.
The pedicel can be long or short, it is
unjointed, and a sucker is on the end of
some of the legs.
The life cycle from egg to adult takes about 17 days. The adult burrows into the
skin, forming a tunnel. The female lays eggs there, and the larvae and nymphs
stay there until the adult stage The female dies after laying her eggs. The larvae
    s a f  he  s ais  
and wander on the skin. Each larva makes a small pocket in the skin in which it
feeds and molts. This burrow becomes the start of a new tunnel when the mite
becomes an adult. While the larvae are on the skin, they can be transferred to
a new host.
The first lesions of sarcoptic mange are usually seen on the edges of the ears. The
lesions are usually crusted over, and the hair is lost from the area. The burrowing
of the adult mites causes an intense itching, unlike in demodectic mange. Sarcoptic
mange is very contagious; infested dogs rmust be kept away from other animals.
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals159
Veterinarians diagnose S. scabiei mites by finding them from a skin scraping of
the host's lesions. Some treatment is still similar to that of demodectic mange.
It was generally recommended (for the treatment of scabies) to use lindane,
an effective pesticide, weekly for 4 weeks to kill newly hatching larvae. The
National Pediculosis Association and the FDA now recormmend using it only as
nant or nursing women. Ivermectin also treats sarcoptic mange, but it is not
hair, removing the crusts and dirt, and providing a soaking with a good antiseb-
effective in treating S. mange.
Notoedric Mange Mite (Notoedres cati)
Notoedres cati (Figure 13-8) causes mange in cats. A small mite, it looks and acts
like Sarcoptes scabiei. Notoedric mange, marked by dry, encrusted lesions and
thickened skin, usually shows up on the ears and the back of the neck.
FIGURE 13-8
The notoedric mange mite causes
mange-like skin irritations usually
around the ears and neck but may
extend to the face and feet of the cat.
正
Like sarcoptic mange, notoedric mange causes intense itching and is very conta-
gious. Since many pesticides are toxic to cats, the veterinarian should prescribe
the most appropriate treatment. There are several options:
- Dipping in lime sulfur baths (but it leaves an objectionable smell on the cat)
·Amitraz (Mitaban) dips
· Ivermectin injected weekly for one month
this use
Ear Mite (otodectes cynotis)
The ear mite (Figure 13-9) lives deep in the ear, usually both ears, of dogs and
cats. Its feeding causes skin irritation and an increase in ear wax, and a crusty
material (which looks something like coffee grounds) builds up in the ear. The
animal may scratch at its ears and shake its head as it tries to get rid of the
irritation. Scratching the ear can lead to swelling (hermatoma) and infections
This mite can cause convulsions in cats
160  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 13-9
The ear mite, which infects both dogs
and cats, burrows into the skin of the
ear canal, causing intense irritation,
redness, and swelling.
l aui Suipuy fq pue adoosoo ue jo asn fq satu hea asouaeip sueueuaiaa
in material removed from the ear and examining the debris under a microscope.
body can resemble a bell pepper.
Treatment involves fushing out debris (along with the mites) and putting in
ear medication specifically formulated for that purpose. The medications usually
contain anti-inflammatories to help reduce the inflammation in the ears, antibi-
kill the mites. It sometimes helps to put mineral oil in the ear to loosen the wax
and crusty material before using the medication. Ivermectin also treats ear mites
but is not labeled for this use. Other common treatments include the following:
· Frontline spray (fipronil) with drops placed into the ear canal
· Acarexx (0.o1% iverrmectin) applied twice to the ear canal
The mosquito is an important dog and cat ectoparasite because it carries heart-
worm disease. (Chapter 15 covers heartworm disease.)
Ectoparasites of Rabbits and Rodents
Flies
Rodent Botffy (Cuterebra species)
The adult rodent botfly is a large (1 inch long), hairy fy that looks like a bumble-
bee. The female fy lays her eggs near a rodent's burrow. When these eggs hatch,
the small larvae (1-2 mm) wait for a host. When a small mammal comes by, the
larva attaches itself to the host's hair and moves toward the nose and mouth.
The larva enters either the nose or mouth of the host and burrows through the
lining. It then moves to a position under the skin and cuts a small breathing hole
in the skin. The larva stays in this space for 2 to 3 weeks, growing to more than
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals
¥161
1 inch. The mature larva enlarges the hole in the skin and leaves the host. The
adult flies live only a few days, the pupa can survive the winter.
The rodent botfy can infest mice, rats, chipmunks, squirrels, rabbits, and many
other mammals. Rodent botfies commonly infest pet rabbits kept outside. Even
cats and (rmore rarely) dogs have been infected. The bots do little harm to their
host while under the skin, but their ermergence from the skin leaves an open
(sqqeu u! feloadsa) sioseu ot pue uooaju leuaioeq ot suoud punom
Flesh Flies (Sarcophaga species and Wohlfahrtia vigil)
The adults of these flies are large (up to % inch long) and feed on decaying meat
(Figure 13-10). The female fesh fy produces live larvae, which she usually lays
on dead animals. The larvae feed on the rotting meat for about a week and then
move to the ground, where they pupate. In some cases, the fesh fy lays her
larvae in a wound or sore on any kind of animal. The larvae then feed on the
tissue surrounding the wound and may end up under the skin.
Flesh fly infestations are treated by removing as many of the larvae as possible and
putting an approved insecticide on the wound. Immediately treating all wounds
and applying an insecticide approved for wound treatment prevents infestation.
FIGURE 13-10
Sarcophaga
This Sarcophaga has a gray
checkerboard pattern on its abdomen.
It feeds and flies around during the day
and can cover long distances because
of its strong flying ability.
Lice
Rabbit Louse (Haemodipsus ventricosus)
The rabbit louse is a member of the insect order Anoplura (the sucking lice)
The adult rabbit louse usually feeds on the rabbit's back, sides, and groin. The
bloodsucking activity of this louse causes an intense itching. The rabbit rubs
and scratches, often removing all hair from the areas where the lice are feed-
ing. The rabbit louse prefers young rabbits as its host. A heavy infestation on a
young rabbit may lead to poor growth. Although Haemodipsus ventricosus is not
considered a zoonotic louse, it does carry Francisella tularensis, the etiological
agent of tularemia, a bacterial disease of both rabbits and humans.
162  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Insecticides applied to the rabbit kill the adult and nymphal lice; an infested rab-
bit must be isolated during treatment because the lice travel through direct host
snyl pue 'shep 4 ul yoiey ey shqqeu ayl oi payoeie ae yotym 'saag ioeiuoo
some insecticidal treatrments require repeat applications weekly for 2 or 3 weeks.
The rabbit's cage must be cleaned to remove eggs that may be attached to the
hair the rabbit scratched off.
Guinea Pig Lice (Gliricola porcelli and Gyropus ovalis)
The guinea pig lice belong to the insect order Mallophaga (the chewing or bit-
ing lice). These are normal-sized lice; adults measure about 1 to 1.5 mm long
Gliricola porcelli is known as the “slender guinea pig louse"; its head is longer
than it is wide, and its abdomen is only slightly wider than its head. Gyropus
ovalis is called the “oval guinea pig louse" because its abdomen is much wider in
the middle than at either end. These lice feed on skin debris and generally cause
their host no problems. Guinea pigs with heavy infestations may scratch infested
spots bald.
Veterinarians diagnose guinea pig lice infestations by finding either the lice or
their eggs in the host's fur. Guinea pig lice are species specific and thus do not
cross-infect other animal species, including humans. Treatrment is the same as
for the rabbit louse.
Different species of Polyplar (anopluran or sucking lice) and Hoplopleura feed on
mice and rats, but these lice are grouped together because their life cycles are sim-
ilar and their treatrment is the same. Infested rats and mice appear restless, have
ruffled fur, and may constantly scratch. A heavy infestation of these bloodsuck-
ing (insect order Anoplura) lice may cause anemia and even death. The rat louse
carries endemic typhus (an acute infectious disease caused by Rickettsia typht) and
Rat and mouse lice are treated the same as rabbit lice: The infested rodents are
isolated and treated with an insecticide weekly for 2 or 3 weeks. The cages are
 ae s a s a as a re p
Ticks
Although many ticks feed on wild rodents and rabbits during their larval and
nymphal stages, ticks rarely turn up on pet rabbits and rodents because these
animals are not allowed to run free through the areas where ticks lurk. Rabbits
moved by a veterinary technician or veterinarian (their skin is fragile and can
tear easily).
Mites
Fur Mifes of Mice (Myobia musculi and Radfordia affinis)
Fur mites are comrmon on wild and pet mice. These mites, which live on the skin
and in the fur, feed by sucking fuids from the skin. Light infestations cause the
mouse no problems. Heavy infestations may cause hair loss, itching, and damage
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals  163
to the skin from the mouse's scratching. Eggs, attached to the bottom of hairs,
take about 8 days to hatch. The fur mite travels from mouse to mouse through
direct contact.
Veterinarians diagnose fur mite infestations by finding the mite or its eggs in the
ped si adei aueudonao jo asn aui fq paaouau ang o ny payonid iny sasno
in a drop of mineral oil on a glass slide and examined for mites or mite eggs (see
( xipaddy ur s o art o uodad adei aueudo e oa oi mo,
The infested mouse must be isolated to prevent transmission to other mice and
 must be continued for at least 4 weeks as the eggs resist treatment and they must
 hatch. Alternatively, the mouse can be dosed with iverrmectin. This drug also fails
to kill the eggs, so ivermectin should be given twice, about 2 weeks apart.
Rat Fur Mite (Radfordia ensifera)
Like the fur mites of the mouse, the rat fur mite spends its entire life on its
host. Transmission occurs when two rats are in direct contact. Rats with heavy
infestations may scratch so much that they damage their skin. The measures
that control mouse fur mites also work for rat fur mites.
Guinea Pig Fur Mite (chirodiscoides caviae)
Like the rat and mouse fur mites, the guinea pig fur mite spends its entire life
cycle on its host. Transmission is by direct contact between an infested guinea pig
qoud ou Sid eauins aui asneo flensn aiuu syn fq suoneisau isoy mau aul pue 
lems. They may go undetected until the owner notices these small mites walking
 on the fur On rare occasions, heavy infestations may cause hair loss and itching.
Veterinarians diagnose mites by fnding them in the fur and by microscopic
every week for 3 weeks. Ivermectin may also be used for guinea pig fur mites.
Fur Mite of Rabbits (cheyletiella parasitovorax)
This mite, like the fur mites of rodents, spends its entire life cycle on its host
and travels by direct contact between hosts. This mite's life cycle takes about 2
weeks to complete. The rabbit fur mite (Figure 13-11) usually feeds on the skin
of the rabbit's back and shoulder region. Occasionally it turns up on the skin of
the belly. Light infestations have no clinical signs; heavy infestations may cause
hair loss and scaliness.
FIGURE 13-11
The fur mite of rabbits has a small,
round body, less than I mm in size.
164  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Veterinarians diagnose this infestation by finding the mite in the rabbit's fur and
also by microscopic examination. Infested rabbits are treated with a pesticide,
with treatment repeated in a week to allow the eggs time to hatch. Because some
of the stages of this mite can survive off the rabbit for a few days, the rabbit's
cage should be cleaned at the same time as the rabbit is treated.
Mouse Mange Mife (Myocoptes musculinus
and Myocoptes romboutsi)
These mites are common on wild and pet mice. Many mice have both fur and
mange mites at the same time. T'he mouse mange mites feed on the mouse's skin
tissue, and all stages live on the mouse. It takes about 2 weeks for mouse mange
mites to complete their life cycle. Diagnosis and control of these mites is the
same as that for the mouse fur mites.
Mange Mite of Guinea Pigs (Trixacarus caviae)
This mange mite is similar in both life cycle and appearance to the sarcoptic mange
mite. Itlives in the skin of guinea pigs and may cause hair loss, crusty skin, and itch-
ing. It travels by direct contact between hosts. Veterinarians diagnose infestation
by finding the mite or its eggs in a skin scraping of the infested area. Treatment
guinea pig. Although this infestation of humans will cause an itchy rash, it will go
away without treatment, because the guinea pig mange mite cannot complete its
life cycle on hurmans. Eventually all of the mites on the human will die off.
Demodectic Mange Mites of Gerbils (Demodex meroni) and
Hamsters (Demodex criceti and Demodex aurati)
The dermodectic mange mites are uncommon on gerbils and hamsters. Even
mange mite live on their host. Transmission is by direct contact between hosts,
Ansn si aaui auno buons ot aqiou uoy uaq anou Aieud aui um
no cross-species contamination. Like the demodectic mange mite of dogs, both
 Demoder meroni of the gerbil and D. auratiof the hamster live in the hair follicles.
D cricetis unusual in that it lives in small pits in the skin instead of in hair fol-
licles. In the gerbil, D. meroni can cause hair loss and scaly skin on the tail and
and scaly skin. Usually these signs appear on the infested hamster's back.
s ae fo s   a   isi  ss
diseased areas. The mites live deep in the hair follicles and sebaceous glands.
Mitaban (Amitraz) dips (in a diluted dosage) are sometimes effectively used in
treating gerbils.
Ear Mange Mites of Rodents (Notoedres muris
and Notoedres notoedres)
The ear mange mite of the rat (Notoedres muris) and the ear mange mite of the
hamster (N. notoedres) are small mites that look like the ear mite of cats. They
live in the skin of a rat's or hamster's ears, nose, and tail. All stages of these mites
 o  e e       s h s   
its life cycle; the mite in the rat takes an additional week. These mites travel by
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals165
direct contact between hosts. Infestations with the ear mange mite of rats cause
the rat's skin to become red and thickened. There may be wartlike growths on
the rat's ear or nose. The disease in the hamster is the same as in the rat.
Veterinarians diagnose infestation by scraping the affected areas of the skin
This scraping contains all stages of the mite from eggs to adults. The infested
rat or harmster is treated with injections of iverrmectin and rmust be kept from
other animals during treatment to prevent transmission of the mite.
Ear Mite of Rabbits (Psoroptes cuniculi)
The ear mite is the most common ectoparasite of rabbits. This mite lives mainly
in the rabbit's ear, but in heavy infestations it may travel to the skin of the
head and neck. All stages of the mite live in the rabbit's ear. Transmission is by
direct contact between rabbits. This mite irritates the skin of the ear, causing
tissue fuids to leak through the skin. The mite feeds on these fuids, causing a
dry, crusty material (coagulated serum) to build up in the rabbit's ear. The ear
becomes very itchy; the rabbit may shake its head and scratch its ears. This
scratching may cause cuts prone to bacterial infection. Most commonly associ
ated as a secondary infection with these mites is Pasteurella multocida (pasteurel-
losis, also known as snuffles).
Veterinarians diagnose rabbit ear mites by finding them in some of the crusty
material taken from the rabbit's ears. The standard treatment for infestations of
the rabbit ear mite is to clean the crusty material out of the rabbit's ears and put
mineral oil in the ear daily for about 3 to 4 weeks. The mineral oil smothers the
mites. Heavier infestations may require medicated ear drops. Ivermectin has also
been shown effective for ear mites. Any scratches are treated with an antibiotic
cintrment. Since the crusty material from the ear may contain mites or mite eggs,
the rabbit's cage must be cleaned to eliminate any of this material that the rabbit
may have scratched out of its ear.
Tropical Rat Mite (Ornithonyssus bacoti)
The tropical rat mite lives on rats, mice, hamsters, and many other mammals
even some birds. The larvae and adults of this mite suck blood. When not suck-
ing blood, these mites leave the host and hide in the bedding or elsewhere in the
cage, where they lay their eggs. The life cycle takes about 2 weeks to complete
Heavy tropical rat mite infestations can result in anemia and even death from
blood loss. In the wild, this mite often carries murine (pertaining to or affecting
mice or rats) typhus (Rickettsia typhi) and plague (Yersinia pestis). These mites
attack humans who handle an infested rodent. Some humans are allergic to the
tropical rat mite's painful bite.
Veterinarians diagnose rat mites by finding them on the rodent or in its cage.
These mites are large (about 1 mm long) and white. Engorged with blood, they
become red to black in color.
Tropical rat mite extermination concentrates on the animal's environment since
the mite spends much of its time off the host. To kill any feeding mites on the in-
fested animal, the anirmal is treated as one would an animal infested with mouse fur
mites. The treated animal is moved to a clean cage at the start of treatrment. The old
cage and the area around it are cleaned thoroughly and treated with a pesticide
166PART TWO:CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Ectoparasites of Ferrets, Foxes, and Mink
Flies
The fox maggot fy (Wohifahrtia vigil) is a fesh fy that lays larvae on the intact
skin of young foxes and mink. The larvae can penetrate the skin and feed inside
the host. As few as five larvae in a body cavity will kill a young fox. Mink and
ue Sund fq syoene ioleu xoy juaaud ueo fau ieui punoy aaey siayoueu xoy
insecticide in the animal's bedding. The young fox or mink rolls around in its
bedding, distributing the insecticide throughout the fur. The insecticide then
kills any larvae the fesh fy lays on the skin. Placing screening around the ani-
aui ui sieuue Sunof aue uoy fp noleu xoy snpe aui daay sdiay saeo sieu
first place.
The rodent botfy (Cuterebra species) infests ferrets and often feeds on mink and
foxes. The treatment and control measures are the same as those for infestations
of the rabbit.
Fleas
Ferrets can be infested with the same feas (Ctenocephalides species) as dogs and
cats. (Refer to the earlier section on ectoparasites of dogs and cats for the life
cycle of these feas.) A ferret infested with enough feas has scaly skin and shows
of its body. Ferret fea infestations are treated like those of cats. Both the animal
and the house should be treated. A mild flea shampoo or powders can be used for
dusting the ferret, but do not use a collar containing dichlorvos (an insecticide)
and anthelmintic, which can be toxic to ferrets. The skin of the ferret is sensitive,
and thus the ferret can become toxic easily.
Ticks
The same ticks that infest dogs and cats can also infest ferrets, foxes, and mink.
Ferrets allowed to roam outside are more likely than an animal kept indoors to
get ticks. Careful, regular examination of the ferret's fur will reveal any attached
tick. The ticks can be removed manually.
Mites
Ferrets are susceptible to the ear mite (Otodectes cynotis) and the sarcoptic mite
(Sarcoptes scabiet), which also feed on dogs and cats. Ferrets pick up these mites
 s  s ra ri s s  pe ri  
same clinical signs as cats do; others show no outward signs. A ferret infested
with ear mites, however, has a buildup of brownish black wax in its ears. Ferrets
infested with sarcoptic mites develop itchy, scabrous skin lesions that cause hair
loss. These lesions appear on the body (sometimes in just a few places, some-
times covering the body) or only on the feet. Severe mite infestations on the feet
can make the ferret's claws fall out.
The infested animal should be isolated during treatment to keep the mites from
spreading to other animals. The same pesticides used in cats work with ferrets,
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals  167
au siauay lou ares aq oi uaaoud jou aue auos asneoq uayel aq pinous aueo ing
lesions caused by the sarcoptic mite can be treated with corticosteroid ointment
to stop the itch.
Ectoparasites of Reptiles
Flies
Adult fesh fies of turtles (Cistudinomyia cistudinis) look like houseflies. The adult
female fy lays live larvae into wounds in the turtle's skin; a favorite site is the
hole left by a tick. The larvae feed on the turtle's skin, eventually growing to
15 mm in length. The larvae feed on the turtle for about 2 months before they
drop off and pupate on the ground. The darmage these larvae do to the turtle's
skin can be considerable and can kill the turtle. This fy is common in the south-
eastern United States. Live larvae can be found on box turtles, painted turtles,
and gopher turtles in this region. To treat fesh fy infestations, the larvae must
be rermoved from the skin wound. The wound is washed with an antiseptic and
or in a fly-proof cage.
Cutaneous myiasis is frequently caused by the botfly in turtles. The fy creates a
cutaneous wound and lays its eggs, which then hatch and mature in the wound
site. Veterinary technicians or veterinarians should remove the bots with for
ceps, fush the wound site, and apply antibiotic ointrment. Prevention is similar
to that described previously for fesh flies
Ticks
Iguana Tick (Amblyomma dissimile)
This hard tick attacks only ectotherms (cold-blooded animals). The iguana tick
often turns up on iguanas caught in the wild and also on rattlesnakes, gopher
snakes, and eastern fence lizards caught in the southeastern United States. This
tick is seen rarely in domestic iguanas.
This tick irritates the skin and may leave an open wound. It is removed by grasp-
ing it with blunt forceps as close to the head as possible and pulling straight out.
Treating the wound with antibiotic ointment prevents infection.
Gopher Tortoise Tick (Amblyomma tuberculatum)
This is one of the largest hard ticks. It lives on mammals and birds as a larva
and on the gopher tortoise as a nymph and adult. Gopher tortoises captured in
n yo t  i      on o  y 
tick irritates the skin and may leave an open wound. Treatment is the same as
Hard ticks of the genus Aponomma often turn up on snakes and lizards imported
 so    e i   s o   oy
168PART TWO:CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
tortoises imported from southern Europe. All of these ticks can irritate the skin.
Mites
Snake mites (Ophionyssus natricis) are found on many captive snakes. This mite
sucks blood as a nymph and adult, when it lives under the scales and around the
eyes of its host. The fermale adult mite lays her eggs on the ground, where the
larvae hatch and live. The complete life cycle takes 2 to 3 weeks. These mites
irritate the snake; heavy infestations may cause anemia or even death. T'his mite
also carries Aeromonas hydrophila, which causes a bacterial disease
Veterinarians diagnose snake mites by finding them on the snake or in their
water dish; the first tipoff is usually the mite's white feces. An infested snake is
treated with ivermectin. Its cage must be thoroughly cleaned to eradicate eggs
and larvae, and all beddings and shavings must be disposed of
Ectoparasites of chickens, Turkeys, and other Birds
Flies
Although fies are not generally a problem with chickens, many bloodsucking
flies (like black fies and mosquitoes) feed on birds and can transmit disease.
Flesh fies lay their eggs around wounds on birds, and the larvae can cause
myiasis. If fies present a problem, chickens and other birds should be kept in
screened cages.
Lice
Chicken Body Louse (Menacanthus stramineus)
This chewing louse is common on chickens, which transmit it by direct contact
with each other. It lives and feeds on the skin of the breast, thighs, and anus
region. The female glues its eggs in masses around the base of the feathers
The chicken body louse sometimes chews through the skin and causes bleed-
ing. Infested chickens do not gain weight as fast because of the mite's irrita-
tion. Heavy infestations may kill the chicken. Veterinarians diagnose infestation
by finding the louse or its eggs on the chicken. Infested birds are isolated and
treated with an insecticide (dusting powder, sprays, and ivermectin).
Shaft Louse (Menopon gallinae)
The shaft louse is a common ectoparasite of chickens and other fowl. It lives on
lems, but heavily infested birds may become restless. Shaft louse infestations are
treated the same as chicken body louse infestations.
Fleas
The stick-tight Hea (Echidnophaga galinacea) turns up on chickens and turkeys
in the southern United States, usually in older, poorly managed poultry houses
This fea can also feed on dogs and cats that live in or near a ranch farrmhouse
Stick-tight fleas are small—less than 2 mm long. The female attaches itself
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals  169
permanently to the chicken, usually around the bird's eyes, comb, and wattles.
The eggs of the female stick-tight fea fall to the ground, where they hatch. The
case, wait for a host to come by and then jump onto it. The embedded fea can
cause skin irritation and localized swelling. If enough feas infest a chicken's eye
area, this tissue reaction can cause blindness. Heavily infested chickens can also
suffer anemia and decreased egg production.
     e  s  s
embedded on the host's head. To control stick-tight fea infestations, infested
birds are treated with an insecticide (dusting powder). The chicken house foor
necessary until all eggs have hatched or been removed.
Ticks
The fowl ticks (Argas species) are soft ticks that feed on chickens and other birds
The larval fowl ticks feed for about 1 week on the bird. The larvae then drop
off and molt into nymphs. Both nymphs and adult fowl ticks feed on the bird at
night and then leave it to hide in nearby cracks and crevices during the day. The
adults may feed up to eight times (this may be over several days as they are pre-
paring to reproduce). The female lays a batch of eggs in the hiding place after
each blood meal. The fowl tick can live 2 to 4 years without a blood meal.
The feeding ticks annoy the birds, causing egg production to decrease. The fowl
tick also causes anemia; heavy infestations may even kill the bird. The adult fowl
spirochetosis (Borrelia anserina), a bacterial disease of birds. Veterinarians diag-
nose fowl ticks by finding the feeding ticks on the bird. Since the nymphs and
adults feed at night, the veterinarian may have to examine under the bird's wings,
the nest, or any cracks or crevices near the bedding in order to find the ticks.
Chickens are treated with pesticides to kill any larval fowl ticks on them. The
chicken house is cleaned and treated with a pesticide to kill the adults and
nymphs. Particular attention should be paid to the cracks and crevices of the
chicken house. Since the eggs take from 1 to 3 weeks to hatch, treatment may
have to be repeated several tirmes.
Mites
Northern Fowl Mite (omithonyssus sylviarum)
This mite, the most common ectoparasite of U.S. poultry, feeds on domestic fowl
and wild birds. The adults are about 1 mm long and dark red when engorged
with blood. The entire life cycle takes place on the host over the course of about
1 week. Female mites glue their eggs to the feathers; these eggs may hatch in
1 or 2 days. The larvae do not feed. Adult mites may not be on the host if the
bird is heavily infested. An adult northern fowl mite can survive off the host for
about 1 month. They feed intermittently off the host.
The northern fowl mite likes to feed around the vent of the bird. The feathers
in this area become matted and discolored. Heavily infested chickens may show
170  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
a decreased egg production, anemia, and scabs in the area where the mites are
feeding. Infested chickens are treated with a pesticide; if the infestation is heavy,
the chicken house should be treated as well. Wild birds, which may be infested
with this mite, should be kept away from the chicken house. Farmers often en-
close the chicken house with screen for this purpose.
Chicken Mife (Dermanyssus gallinae)
This bloodsucking mite attacks poultry and many different wild birds. Only the
nymphs and the adult chicken mites feed on birds. This mite lives off the host
during the day returning to the bird at night to feed. Like the northern fowl
mite larva, the chicken mite larva does not feed. The chicken mites live in cracks
and crevices of the chicken house during the day and they lay their eggs here as
well. This mite may also feed on rats and other rodents if birds are not present.
The chicken mite will also bite humans. Chickens infested with this mite may
have decreased egg production and anemia. Heavily infested chickens, especially
young birds, may die. Like the fowl tick, the chicken mite carries Borrelia anserina.
Veterinarians diagnose chicken mite infestation by finding the mites on the birds
at night. To control the chicken rmite, the chicken house is cleaned and treated
with a pesticide.
Scaly-Leg Mite (Knemidocoptes mutans)
The scaly-leg mite lives on poultry and domestic and wild birds. All stages of
this mite live on the bird; it travels from bird to bird by direct contact between
hosts. This is a small mite that looks like Sarcoptes scabiei. The scaly-leg mite
all stages live in these tunnels. The burrowing mites cause irritation, which
leads to swollen legs with crusts on their surface. If untreated, this irritation
 may deform the leg and cause lameness.
Veterinarians diagnose the presence of the scaly-leg mite by loosening the crust
on the leg with warm vegetable oil, scraping the crust, and finding the mites.
 Infested birds are treated by applying warmer vegetable oil and removing as
much of the crust as possible, then treating the infested area with a pesticide.
Birds should be isolated and treated with ivermectin. This treatrment is repeated
7 days later.
Turkey Chigger (Neoschoengastia americana)
A chigger is a larval mite that feeds on animals. As this ectoparasite's name sug-
gests, only its larvae feed on turkeys; all other stages are free-living organisms.
The chigger feeds on the turkey for 4 to 6 days and then drops off. Turkey chig-
doup faui day shum aui lapun pue sybiui pue iseaq aui uo paay oi dajad siat
off, scabs may develop where they fed. The larval stage is the only developmen
tal stage of the chigger that can cause parasitic disorders in domestic animals
 o so nsn so re sa andoad pe sie 
soil where the adults and nymphs live. A pesticide is applied to the turkey yard
CHAPTER 13: Ectoparasites of Small Animals 171
CASE STUDY
Canine Demodicosis (Demodex)
A 5-month-old puppy from the pound has bald spots by its ear, eye, and right
shoulder and it is very thin. The owner, who just adopted the puppy, is concerned
crusting and redness by the bald spots.
DIAGNOSIS
A skin scraping is done to check for eggs, nymphs, and adult Demodex mites.
Scraping should be done until the capillary blood oozing is seen because these mites
i apis e uo paoeid si alds aui 'spuei snoaogas pue saioillog liey aui ui daap aa
mineral oil and examined under the microscope for eggs, nymphs, and adult mites
The clinical signs of demodicosis are alopecia, crusting, and erythema (redness of the
skin due to capillary dilatation) of the skin. In severe cases, there may be secondary
pyoderma. There are two types of demodicosis. In localized Demodex, the clinical
signs are in just a few places, such as the head, forelimbs, ears, or trunk of the dog.
Alnsn ssop asayi Xpog sop aut jaao le ag Aew suoisal 'xapowag pazilelauag ui
The immunosuppression allows the mites to increase in numbers. Demodex mites
are part of the normal fauna of the skin. Demodex is not contagious. The mother can
transfer the mites to the puppies within the first 3 days of life. Stillborn puppies will
not have mites. in this case study, the owner of the puppy cannot get Demodex.
Large animals will have nodular lesions, which should be incised with a scalpel.
mineral oil. A cover slip is used to cover the sample on the slide and examined
microscopically for Demodex eggs, nymphs, and mites.
TREATMENT
follicular flushing action (flush out the mites and debris), which can help prevent
secondary bacterial infection. Antibiotics can be used in cases with secondary
pyoderma. A miticidal dip, amitraz (Mitaban), is done every 2 weeks for 6 weeks. This
Summary
Although many of the same parasites that infest large animals also infest small-
to owners and their families. There are many new diagnostic procedures and
treatments available for parasitic infestations of small anirmals. Powders, sham
poos, as well as topical, injectable, and oral compounds are used to control many
ectoparasite infestations. Separating wildlife from companion animals will also
greatly reduce reinfestation.
172
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
REVIEW
MULTIPLE CHOICE
1. Maggots found under the skin, near an open wound, on a rabbit are probably the larvae of a
a. flesh fly.
b. horn fly.
C. botfly.
d. rodent botfly.
2. The best way to treat guinea pig lice is to
a. apply insecticide to the guinea pig weekly for 2 or 3 weeks.
b. pick off visible lice and apply insecticide.
 C. apply insecticide to the guinea pig and isolate it for 2 or 3 weeks.
3. The deer tick can be the vector of
a. Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
b. Lyme disease.
C. cycle fever.
d. sarcoptic mange.
4. A dog with mange has alopecia only on its face. The mite infesting the dog is most likely
a. Demodex canis.
b. Otodectes cynotis.
C. Sarcoptes scabiei.
d. Notoedres cati.
FILL IN THE BLANKS
mange in dogs is not contagious in an animal with a
healthy immune system.
2.
is the most common ectoparasite of u.s. poultry.
3. A favorite laying site for the adult flesh fly of turtles is a hole left by a/an
4
is the most common ectoparasite of rabbits.
 5. Cuterebra larvae, also known as
. are a newly hatched
form of a large, hairy fly that looks like a bumblebee.
 are pimple-like growths containing pus.
CHAPTER 13:Ectoparasites of SmallAnimals
173
7.
is a larval mite that feeds on animals.
8.
is an abnormal redness of the skin caused by
dilatation of blood vessels.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. To control fleas on a dog that spends most of its time in the house, is it sufficient to kill the adult fleas on the dog? why
or why not?
CHAPTER 14
Endoparasites of Large Animals
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
Describe the life cycle of the nematode, cestode, trematode, and
Giardia.
 Describe common diseases caused by endoparasites in large animals
Describe common diagnostic tools and procedures for endoparasites
in large animals.
Describe common treatments and preventive measures for
 endoparasites in large animals.
174
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals  175
KEY TeRMS
arrested larvae
Endoparasites of Laboratory and Farm Animals
ascarid
An endoparasite lives inside its host. Although many endoparasites live in the gut
cestode
 the body. The level of internal parasitism can vary from year to year depending
coccidia
on various weather and feeding patterns. Realizing that diagnosing and deworm-
cryptosporidium
ing procedures can be costly to livestock producers, the veterinary staff needs to
cyst
be cognizant of the economics and economic benefits with each recommendation
fluke
made. Advice should be based on sound scientific data made about a producer's
Giardia
lungworm
production and reduce the cost related to the deworrming program.
nematode
 Fecal egg counts estimate pasture contamination and the need for deworming
Ostertagia
and/or pasture rotation. The McMaster slide technique is one of several tests
proglottid
-iaa isou oi alelieae anbiuuoai fsea ue s! ll siunoo ada auuaiap oi pasn
strongyles
nary clinics.
tapeworm
Nematodes
threadworm
Nematodes, or roundworms, are generally small, wormlike organisms with a tough
trematode
trophozoite
the most common area, the intestines. The nematode life cycle (Figure 14-1) has
whipworm
Ke shnpe saoads aui uo buspuadaa 'lnpe pue 'jeaiel-inoy ssa :saseis aanu
 measure from 2 mm up to 30 cm long. Nematode larvae grow to the next stage
by molting. Parasitic nematodes are endoparasites as adults.
Tapeworms
Tapeworms, or cestodes, are flat, ribbonlike worms with no digestive tract. The
tapeworm has a head, or scolex, and a body composed of many segments called
proglottids. The tapeworm life cycle (Figure 14-2) has three stages: egg, larva,
uu g uouy aunsau feu uomaden linpe ue 'saioads aui uo supuada 'lnpe pue
in their life cycle: the intermediate host, where the larval tapeworm lives, and
the definitive host, where the adult tapeworm lives. The adult tapeworm always
lives in its host's intestines. Tapeworm proglottids have muscles that help them
to move about.
Trematodes
Trematodes, or flukes, are flat, leaf-shaped worms with a partial digestive tract
They have a mouth and an intestine but no anus. They have a complex life
cycle (Figure 14-3): egg, several larval stages (some of which are endopara-
sites of snails and crayfish), and adult. The adult trematode can be from 2 mm
to 10 cm long. Most are endoparasites. A few adult trematodes are ectopara-
sites of fish. Gyrodactylus, which lives on the skin of fish, is an example of
an ectoparasite trematode. G. salaris resides on the skin of Atlantic salmon,
176
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 14-1
Life cycle of a nematode.
ADULTS
OUTWITHFECES
EGG
MOLTS
FOURTH
FIRST
LARVAL
STAGE
LARVAL
MOLTS
MOLTS
STAGE
EATEN
MOLTS
BYHOST
SECOND
BLADEOFGRASS
LARVAL
THIRD
STAGE
LARVAL
DROPOFDEW
STAGE
WITH MANY THIRD
(INFECTIVE
STAGELARVAE
FOR HOST)
THIRDSTAGELARVA
FIGURE 14-2
INSIDEINTESTINE OFHOST
Life cycle of a tapeworm.
ADULT
INTERMEDIATE
HOSTEATENBY
DEFINITIVE HOST
PROGLOTTID
WITH EGGS
EATENBY
INTERMEDIATE
m
ISOH
LIVER
TISSUE
EGG
LARVA
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals
177
FIGURE 14-3
ANIMAL
Life cycle of a trematode.
INGESTSCYST
ADULTSLAY
EGGS
EGGS
EGGS HATCH
ATTACHES
INTO LARVA
TOPLANT
CYST
LARVA
LEAVES SNAIL
LARVAINFECTS
AS CYST
SNAIL
SNAIL
rainbow trout, lake trout, and grayling. It receives its nourishment from epi-
thelial cells and mucus on the skin surface. It destroys the skin surface, and
eventually the host dies.
Protozoans
 Protozoans, single-cell animals, comprise a large group of organisms made up of
many different types. Most protozoans are microscopically small. Each type of
protozoan has a different life cycle, ranging from one to many stages. Figure 14-4
shows the life cycle of a Giardia. Because protozoans are only one cell, they have
no adult or egg stages. The ameboid, vegetative, or asexual stage of a protozoan
is sometimes called a trophozoite and the infectious stage is sometimes called a
cyst. Parasitic protozoans are endoparasites. A fecal foat using zinc sulfate is
sometimes used to detect protozoan cysts (Figure 14-5). Lugol's iodine can be
used to aid in the visualization of the internal structures of trophozoites and
cysts (Figure 14-6).
Endoparasites of Ruminants (cattle, Sheep,
and Goats)
Because the major endoparasites of cattle, sheep, and goats include a num-
ber of parasites that infect all three types of animals, these hosts are grouped
together.
178
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 14-4
Life cycle of Giardia (protozoan).
EXCYSTATION
INFECTIVECYST
INGESTEDBYHOST
CYSTDIVIDES
EXITSHOSTAS
INHOST
TROPHOZOITE
ANDCYST
FIGURE 14-5
 A fecal float using zinc sulfate is
 sometimes used to detect protozoan
cysts.
Nematodes
Abomasal Worms (Haemonchus sp., Ostertagia sp.,
and Trichostrongylus sp.)
Ostertagia, Haemonchus, and Trichostrongylus are important endoparasites of the
abomasum (stomach) of cattle, sheep, and goats. The life cycles of these three
nematodes are similar. The first- and second-stage larvae are free-living organ-
isms. The host eats the third-stage larvae, starting the infection. Adults of all
three worms live on the surface of the mucosa (the lining of the stomach)
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals
179
FIGURE 14-6
Lugol's iodine can be used to aid in the
visualization of the internal structures
of trophozoites and cysts.
Both the larvae and adults of Haemonchus suck blood. A thousand Haemonchus
adults can suck 50 ml of blood per day, causing severe anemia. A heavy Haemonchus
infection (20,000-30,000 worms) can kill a sheep very quickly. Sheep and goats
of all ages are susceptible to Haemonchus infection; cattle over the age of 2 usu-
ally resist it.
Trichostrongylus larvae greatly damage the stomach's mucosa. The young adults
may cause bleeding and small ulcers when they break out of the stomach lin-
ing. Heavy infections cause diarrhea and weight loss. Even light infections can
decrease growth and diminish appetite.
sl o s  o    si 
Ostertagia larvae invade the stomach's gastric glands. There the worms molt
and develop and then return to the stomach. The larvae and young adults de
stroy some gastric gland functions, including acid production. Without acid, the
stomach cannot digest food. Severe diarrhea and a large loss of weight are signs
of Ostertagia infection. Heavy infections may be fatal. To survive harsh condi-
tions that exist outside their host, the fourth-stage Ostertagia larvae may slow
States and Canada, Ostertagia larvae arrest just before winter and resume devel-
opment in the early spring. In the southern United States, the larvae arrest in
the late spring and resume development in the autumn. These patterns of arrest
ensure that adults do not lay eggs when free-living larvae would be unable to
survive: in the cold winters of the North or the hot, dry summers of the South.
I adai aseasip rarist jo sadi omi ul snsau suaned peudonaaap asau
and the more severe type II.
Type I disease is caused by unarrested larvae, a few at a time, destroying the
gastric glands. It normally occurs during the first grazing season.
180PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Type II disease is caused by a group of arrested larvae destroying the gastric
glands upon resuming their development. Type II normally occurs in older ani-
mals during the northern spring and the southern autumn.
Ostertagia, Haemonchus, and Trichostrongylus infections often occur sirultaneous-
ly in an animal. Since their life cycles are similar, control measures for all three
prophylactic doses of anthelmintics, timed to prevent heavy buildup of larvae on
the pasture. In the northern United States and Canada, for example, veterinar-
to midsummer. This ensures that adult worms die before they lay eggs; thus, no
arrested larvae hatch the following spring. Another control method is to move
pasture do not survive long enough to infect a host.
Intestinal Strongyles (Cooperia sp. and Nematodirus sp.)
The free-living portion of this nematode's life cycle resembles that of the
aul 4lim ino ssed sssa aul (ing aul ul sssa Ael fauL sapoieuau jeseuoqe
eats the third-stage larvae, starting the infection. Adult nematodes live in the
host's small intestine. These parasites do not usually cause their hosts many
problems, but heavy infections, especially in a host with other parasites, may
cause diarrhea and weight loss. Veterinarians diagnose strongyles by finding
the eggs in the feces. Anthelmintics treat the infection. The control measures
and prophylactic treatments for abomasal nematodes also work for intestinal
nermiatodes
Lungworms (Dictyocaulus sp., Protostrongylus rufescens,
and Muellerius capillaris)
All three types of lungworm live in sheep and goats, but only Dictyocaulus is found
in cattle. Adult lungworms live in the host's lungs. Dictyocaulus is a large nema-
tode, up to 8 cm long. Protostrongylusis a moderate-sized worm, up to 3 cm long.
Both of these lungworms live in the bronchi (lung's air passages). Muellerius is
also known as hair lungworm of sheep and goats. Muellerius, at about 2 cm, is
also a moderate-sized worm; it lives in the lung tissue. All these lungworms
lay eggs that hatch in the host's lungs. The first-stage larvae migrate up or are
coughed up the trachea (windpipe). When they reach the back of the mouth (the
ssed uaui aaiel aheis-isuy aui waui smoems isoy aui (eayonl aul jo dol
through the gut and exit the animal with the feces.
Dictyocaulus larvae grow and molt on the ground until they become third-stage
larvae. Third-stage larvae climb up onto a blade of grass, to be swallowed by the
-isty aue iea 'sseia uo supaa aum sheus ho shnis sseia aui siea ii uaum isou
stage Protostrongylus and Muellerius larvae. The larvae grow and molt inside
inadvertently eats the slug or snail as it feeds. Digestion frees the third-stage
lungworm larvae from their intermediate host. They burrow into the intestinal
wall and get into a blood vessel. The blood eventually carries them to the lungs,
where they break out of the blood vessel and develop to adult lungworms
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals  181
 In cattle, light lungworm infections usually cause few problems. The cow may
cough a little and breathe faster than usual. Heavy infections usually happen only
to calves. Heavily infected calves may have trouble breathing because the large
worms may block the air passages of the lungs. The calf will breathe rapidly and
ay lou saop i ieui Suluiuq alqnoui yonu os aaey feu ll pue fjuanbauy yonon
time to feed. Lungworrm infections in sheep and goats are usually light and cause
few problems. Goats sometimes suffer heavy Muellerius infections. A goat with a
heavy lungworm infection may have a persistent cough and trouble breathing.
Veterinarians diagnose lungworm infection by finding the first-stage larvae in
the feces. In a heavily infected calf, the worms may block the air passages be-
fore they lay eggs. In these cases, diagnosis depends on the signs (coughing
and rapid breathing) alone. The veterinarian can give the infected animals an-
thelmintics to kill the adult worms. Control of snails and slugs on the pasture
may prevent Protostrongylus and Muellerius infection. Calves can be protected
aaq lou seq jeui aunised e ui uaun suoeid fq suooau uomluni faeaq uoy
 grazed in the current year. Such a pasture should have few, if any, larvae.
Tapeworms
Tapeworms have two hosts in their life cycle: the intermediate host, where the
larval tapeworrm lives, and the definitive host, where the adult tapeworm lives
 Ruminants are the definitive hosts for some tapeworms and the intermediate
hosts for others.
Ruminant Tapeworm (Moniezia sp.)
The adult ruminant tapeworm lives in the small intestine of cattle, sheep, and
goats. It is a large worm—up to 600 cm long and 2.5 cm wide. Like most of
the other cormmon tapeworrms, its last proglottid, when full of developed eggs,
up, releasing its eggs, as the host passes the feces. The feces thus have both in-
tact proglottids and eggs. Free-living mites, which are the ruminant tapeworm's
intermediate host, eat the eggs on the ground. These mites live on the ground
and on blades of grass, where a ruminant inadvertently eats them as it grazes. If
adult stage in the ruminant's small intestine. The ruminant tapeworm turns up
in young animals during their first grazing season.
This tapeworm usually causes its host no serious problems. Heavily infected
young animals may be unthrifty and suffer diarrhea. Veterinarians diagnose tape-
worms by finding the eggs or proglottids in the ruminant's feces. Anthelmintics
treat tapeworms. Farmers and ranchers with ruminant tapeworm problems
sa au s suisu shl jo Au uy 'le aui ul aunisd aui mod uao
that grows back the following spring will have few infected mites to be ingested
by the new calves, lambs, or kids.
Taeniid Tapeworms (Taenia sp.)
definitive host is usually a dog. The typical larval taenid, about the size of a
182 PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
humans is a taeniid tapeworm whose larvae reside in cattle muscles. As the name
suggests, adult taenid tapeworms can live in humans as well as dogs.
The taeniid tapeworm reaches its definitive host as follows: A ruminant inadver
tently eats the taeniid's eggs or proglottids; then a dog (or a human in the case
of the beef tapeworrm) eats raw meat infected with the larvae. Tapeworm adults
develop in the definitive host's small intestine. Proglottids and eggs pass out of
the definitive host in the feces.
Although the larvae of these tapeworms cause ruminants no problems, meat
inspectors condemn larva-infested meat, making it worthless. Worse, a taenid
tapeworm of sheep has a larva that travels to the sheep's brain, where it can
'smoa 1 se anssh ureaq sfosap 2iel stu 'leq jot e Jo azis aun on mona
eventually affecting the sheep's moverment. The circling and lack of balance that
result are called true gid.
Since there is no easy way to diagnose larval tapeworms before slaughter and no
treatrment for the infection, the farmer or rancher must try to prevent the prob-
lem. Since the dog is the definitive host for most of these taeniid tapeworms, dogs
not needed to herd sheep should be kept off the pasture; this keeps the tapeworm
proglottids and eggs they may carry off the pasture as well. Dogs needed for
sheepherding respond well to prophylactic treatment for the adult tapeworm, as
do humans. Treating infected cowhands before they go to the pasture has virtu-
Hydatid Tapeworm (Echinococcus granulosus)
humans that inadvertently eat the hydatid tapeworm's eggs all serve as its
interrmediate host. Sheep raised on pasture with sheepherding dogs are prone
aui aleis jeanel shl hoy pau si uomade sui 'uooaui peay leaiel on
ssuni uo uaal aun u Aleoidfi leq paly-ping (uo oi oi dn) aluel e isfo pepfy
of the intermediate host. The small larvae grow on the inside wall of this cyst.
are condermned at slaughter.
oead ou sey 'uomaden piuaet aui ayll 'isfo pepfy au aniseied aul loy ysu
as an yim panuand aq uo sisfo ppfy inq suunu ul suueann po
measures that prevent taeniid tapeworm infections.
Trematodes
Liver Fluke of Ruminants (Fasciola hepatica)
This large trematode can grow up to 3 cm long. Liver fuke adults, as their name
suggests, reside in the liver, specifically the bile ducts, of a ruminant, horse, or
human. Trematode eggs (Figure 14-7) travel with the bile to the intestine, even-
tually leaving the host in the feces. The eggs hatch only in water, where the first
'us isoy aui ui saheis euaaas yanoui ot aeaiel au lus e sioajui aheis pea1e]
multiplying at each stage. Many larvae then leave the snail, find a plant growing
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals  183
FIGURE 14-7
The trematode egg is spindle shaped
with a lid on one end (arrow). It has a
smooth, thin shell.
=
a cyst. A ruminant feeding on plants at the pond's edge eats the cysts along with
the plants. The cysts hatch in the ruminant's small intestine and burrow through
the intestinal wall They travel to the liver, penetrate it, and move through the
liver until they find a bile duct, where they mature to adulthood.
A sheep can suffer fatal liver damage ifiteats many cysts in a short time. Fortunately,
this rarely happens. Most sheep and other ruminants suffer only minor damage
as a few larvae at a time move through the liver. Over time, however, many larvae
move through the liver, leaving scar tissue that takes up much of the liver and
reduces its function. The larval fuke can also transmit black disease, a bacterial
liver infection. Meat inspectors condermn fuke-infected livers at slaughter.
Veterinariansdiagnose the liver fuke by finding itseggsin the feces. Anthelmintics
kill liver fukes. Wet areas where the interrmediate host snail lives can be fenced
off to prevent ruminants from eating cyst-carrying plants.
Deer Liver Fluke (Fascioloides magna)
The deer liver fuke has the same life cycle as the liver fuke of rurminants. The
deer liver fuke makes its home in deer, cows, and sheep and behaves differently
in each. The large (up to 10 cm long) adult fHukes live in cysts attached to a
deer's bile ducts. In the cow's liver, these cysts do not attach themselves to the
bile ducts. In the sheep, the larva wanders through the liver, growing but never
because the larva grows large and continually moves through the sheep's liver,
destroying much of the liver tissue. It is difficult to raise sheep in areas where
deer are infected with this fuke.
do not come out with the cow's bile, and no eggs form in the sheep. Some anthel-
mintics kill the adult fluke in deer and cattle. This parasite is controlled as you would
184  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
 ui sd uo aa o idy aq u yisaa snu jo arn haail a
carry the cysts, and efforts can be made to keep deer from the livestock pastures
Protozoans
coccidia (Eimeria sp.)
The coccidia of ruminants live in the cells of their host's intestine. There are
several different species of coccidia, which can live in each of the different ru-
minants. Some of these cause disease; others do not. All coccidia are species
specific—that is, an Eimeria species that infects cattle does not infect any other
host, and the same is true for the coccidia of other anirals.
apeaul pue saaeis Aueu qanouui oi faui apofo al paneoduoo e aaey eipioo
many different cells of the host's intestine. During most of these stages, the coc-
Jo suo ii smoa peui uoou ue pis u eipioo ma e os fidn e
 3 e  a ae e    s e  o s 
accidentally eats it, the oocyst hatches in the new host's small intestine and then
invades the cells of the intestinal wall.
Coccidiosis usually turns up in younger anirmals, especially those under stress.
 Disease outbreaks commonly strike cattle in feedlots and sheep just after ship-
 ping. Severe winter weather may be all it takes to turn a calf with a light coccidia
infection into a calf suffering from bloody diarrhea. Infected sheep and goats
may develop diarrhea, but it is usually bloodless. At greatest risk are young
goats; heavy coccidia infections can kill them.
Veterinarians diagnose coccidial infection by finding the oocysts in the feces.
Because the diarrhea may occur before oocysts are being shed, however, a vet-
erinarian may diagnose coccidiosis based on only the age of the host and the
diarrhea. Several drugs treat coccidiosis. Veterinarians give them to young ru-
minants about to be stressed (shipped or put into a feedlot, for example) to
prevent disease.
Cryptosporidium
Cryptosporidium (Figure 14-8) is another coccidian parasite that infects many
different mammals, including ruminants, horses, and humans. It has a compli-
cated life cycle during which it lives in cells of its host's intestine.
Infected animals may suffer a very watery diarrhea. The oocysts that leave the
host in the feces are small. Examination by a direct fecal smear using a modi-
fied acid-fast stain is helpful to see the oocysts and parasite ova. A fecal float is
also used to detect sporulated oocysts. Currently no good treatrment exists for
dosis are helpful in recovery efforts.
Tritrichomonas foetus
This protozoan parasite lives in a cow's vagina and uterus and on a bull's penis.
Like all other protozoans, it multiplies in its host. Even one organism can lead to
a heavy infection. Transmitted during sexual intercourse, this protozoan does
not harm the bull but can cause the cow to suffer early abortion and infertility
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals  185
FIGURE 14-8
Cryptosporidium is a protozoan parasite
of the intestine of large animals. It
causes severe diarrhea.
Veterinarians diagnose Tritrichomonas foetus by finding it on the bull's penis,
in the cow's vagina, or in an aborted fetus's tissues. The drugs that kill this
p sased may aul jo auo si siui shnq ui yuom shemie nou feu ueozoiud
which there is a vaccine. The anirmal should receive the vaccine before it is first
bred. Cows artificially inseminated with semen from an uninfected bull do not
contract this parasite, since it is a sexually transmitted disease. If artificial in-
semination is not an option, the rancher should use a young bull to service the
herd. Young bulls are less likely to be infected.
Giardia
Giardia, described in more detail in Chapter 15 in the section on the protozoans
of dogs and cats, can live in a ruminant's small intestine and can cause diarrhea
in young animals.
Sarcocystis
Sarcocystis is a protozoan that lives in the muscles of ruminants. It uses the rumi-
nant as an interrmediate host. The dog is the definitive host for Sarcocystis. (See
the section in Chapter 15 on the protozoans of dogs and cats.)
Endoparasites of Swine and Pet Pigs
Nematodes are the major endoparasites of swine. The ascarid (roundworm), the
whipworm, and the nodular worm of pigs are the most common endoparasites of
pet pigs. Commercially raised swine have few parasites because they are raised
indoors on hard foors, and their feces and urine are removed daily
Nematodes
Pig Ascarid (Ascaris suum)
Ascaris suum (Figure 14-9) has a life cycle almost identical to the Parascaris equo-
rum of horses. In heavy infections, the larvae migrating in the liver may cause
186  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 14-9
The egg of Asaris suum is brown and
contains a central mass (more easily
seen at higher magnification, as on the
bottom).
se asuoy aul se aauel se aue suom inpy aoeuns shi uo headde ot shods aiu
carid and can compete with the pig for food. A heavily infected pig does not put
 on weight as easily as a healthy pig.
Sid aul llas oi Suful hauey aui ‘uey alll isoy shl sasneo unns 'y yanou
for food wants to maximize its body weight and prevent spots on its liver.
 Prevention is important from the farmer's point of view. If the pigs are being
raised on concrete, it is easy to remove feces before the eggs become infectious.
Several anthelmintics kill the pig ascarid, which may be a problem for young
 pet pigs raised with older infected pigs. Older pet pigs are usually the only pig
in the household; thus, they are unlikely to become infected since they do not
encounter the worm's eggs.
Trichinella spiralis
Trichinella spiralis (Figure 14-1o) is another economically irmportant nema-
tode parasite of swine. This parasite causes the disease trichinosis in humans
and other mammals. Adult Trichinella live in the mucosa of the small intestine.
Female worms give birth to first-stage larvae, which enter blood vessels, travel
to the body's muscles, and penetrate a skeletal muscle cell. There the larvae coil
up and may live for many years. The larvae enter a new host's digestive tract
when the host eats this muscle. The host digests the muscle tissue, thereby free-
ing the larvae. The larvae molt four times and then become adults.
 i    a e m e a 
Infection spreads through the herd in a nurmber of ways. Infected meat can come
uo papmoo ul pasie siid pay ane auims auos aheque payoosun aui uo
tions may bite off and eat each other's tails. They may eat other pigs that have
died in the pen. Finally, pigs may eat live or dead infected rats.
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals
187
FIGURE 14-10
A crushed piece of muscle tissue in
which two larvae of Trichinella spiralis
of pigs are encysted (arrows).
Trichinella infections are normally light, causing the pig little harm. But farrmers
cannot afford to allow Trichinella into the herd, since pork containing Trichinella
larvae is not fit for human consumption. Anthelmintics kill Trichinella, but in-
fected pigs are hard to identify since the infection causes the pig no problems.
Rat control helps prevent this infection; so does cooking garbage to kill any
larvae it contains before pigs eat it. T. spiralis is not a problem in pet pigs.
Noduiar Worm of Pigs (oesophagostomum sp.)
pig eats food off the ground and inadvertently consumes the infective larvae.
The larvae burrow into the wall of the large intestine and cause nodules to form
in the wall. The larvae live in these nodules for about a week. Then they emerge
from the nodules and develop to adults in the intestine. Eggs pass out with the
saeis susall-aay leaaas yanouui sao eauel aui punoua aui uo yoieu pue saoay
before it becomes infective.
Light to moderate infections of the nodular worrm cause the pig few problems.
Heavy infections can cause diarrhea and anorexia (the pig does not want to eat).
Young pigs with heavy infections may show severe signs; some may die. This
nodular worms by seeing the clinical signs and finding the eggs in the feces. The
infection responds to anthelmintics. The same anthelmintics prevent infection
in pigs sharing an area with infected pigs.
Pig Whipworm (Trichuris suis)
The whipworm is a common parasite of livestock and pet pigs raised outside.
The adult whipworms are moderate-sized nematodes (5 cm) that live in the large
intestine. The adult whipworm is so named because its thick back (one-third
of its body) and narrow front (the remaining two-thirds) make it resemble a
whip: The back is the whip's "handle," the front its “lash." The adult whipworm
burrows into the intestinal wall until only its ^handle" remains in the intestine
188 PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
The whipworm feeds on blood frorm the intestinal wall. The whipworm's eggs,
ul pue umouq aue faui iazruosau oi fsa ane 'snay aui ui ino ssed youm
aul lun punoua ayi uo aunieu sasa aul pua haula uo Snjd e aaey pue 'padeys
infective larvae develop inside the egg. When the pig inadvertently eats the egg
off the ground, the egg hatches in the intestine, and the larva develops into an
adult in 6 to 7 weeks.
Whipworm infections can cause diarrhea and blood in the feces. The infection
responds to anthelmintics. Because the eggs can survive on the ground for sev-
Lungworm of Pigs (Metastrongylus sp.)
The adult pig lungworm is a moderate-sized nematode (3-5 cm long) that lives
aui yoym 'sasa sfel uuomgunl aut 'auaul Buni s,aid aut jo sabessed uie ayl ul
pig coughs up and swallows. The eggs pass out of the pig with the feces. The
larvae in the eggs on the ground develop only when eaten by the lungworm's
intermediate host, an earthworm. In the earthworm, the larvae develop to the
 e  e e       
years. When the pig eats the infected earthworm, the larvae enter the intestinal
wall and get into the blood. The blood carries them to the lungs, where they
break out of the blood vessels and go to the air passages.
Pig lungworm disease is usually mild. The pig may cough and become unthrifty.
The lungworm, since it needs an earthworm intermediate host, turns up only
in pigs raised outside on dirt. Veterinarians diagnose lungworrm infection by
finding the eggs, each of which has a larva, in the feces. Anthelmintics killlung-
worms. Lungworm infections can be prevented by keeping the pig away from
earthworms.
Stomach Worm of Pigs (Hyostrongylus rubidus)
The adult stomach worm is a small nematode (7-10 mm long) that lives in a pig's
aui uo yoiey shha aui saoay aul yhim ino ssed zeui shsa sfel ll auaym 'yoeois
ground. The larvae undergo two free-living stages and then become infective.
The pig inadvertently eats the infective larva, which enters the wall of the pig's
stomach and develops to adulthood. The adult worm comes out of the stomach
wall and lives in the stomach, where it sucks blood from the stomach wall.
pue Surull yoeuois ayl aheuep feu aeauel pappaqua pue shinpe Supaay aui
cause ulcers. Heavily infected pigs may be unthrifty and may have diarrhea. The
infection responds to anthelmintics. Stomach worm infections are prevented by
raising pigs off dirt and removing the feces regularly.
Kidney Worm of Pigs (Stephanurus dentatus)
The adult of the kidney worm is a moderate-sized nematode (3-5 cm) that lives
in the kidney and walls of the ureters, the vessels that drain the urine from the
saheis Suia-aay aui auun ayi ut Sid ayl jo ino ssed saha uom faupry faupy
are the same as those of the stomach worm. The infective larva may enter the
pig by accidental ingestion or by burrowing through the skin. No matter how
than 3 months while they mature. Once mature, the larvae travel from the liver
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals  189
they mature to adulthood. This process may take anywhere from 6 to 19 months
because of the long time the larvae spend moving through the pig.
liver while moving through it. Liver damage can lead to unthriftiness and, in heavy
infections, to ascites (fuid in the peritoneal cavity). If mature worms are present,
n   sa   q e m    sg
The long developmental period and the damage done by the larvae, however, may
result in unthrifty pigs with no eggs in their urine. In these cases, veterinarians
base their diagnosis on the history of the herd: If the kidney worm has turned up
previously, it may still be in the pigs. This infection responds to anthelmintics.
Free-living larvae are killed by drying out the soil in which they live.
Threadworm of Pigs (Strongyloides ransomi)
The parasitic adult threadworm is a small (3-4 mm) nematode that lives in the
small intestine. Parasitic adult threadworms are all female; they do not need
males to produce fertile eggs. Threadworrms have an unusual life cycle for a
parasitic nematode. Eggs pass out in the feces and hatch. Threadworms grow to
male and female adults in moist soil. These free-living adults lay eggs that hatch
larvae break out into the air spaces and then migrate up the trachea. When they
reach the back of the mouth, the pig swallows them. In the small intestine, the
infective larvae mature into female adult worms. Dormant larvae in a pregnant
neu sniay auijo ausu! leus aui oiul fem liaul puy pue dn ayem, feu bid
"wake up," make their way to the mammary gland, and enter the piglet in the
milk. Larvae passed in the milk go right to the small intestine and mature.
The adult worms in the intestine can cause diarrhea and anorexia, especially in
young piglets. Heavy infections can kill suckling pigs. Veterinarians diagnose
threadworm infection by finding the egg in the feces. The threadworm egg has
a larva in it when it is passed in the feces. There are anthelmintics that kill the
adult threadworms in the small intestine but none that kills dorrmant larvae. If a
they kill the larvae that have awakened and started moving toward the fetus or
the mammary gland. Since free-living threadworms need moist soil, pigs raised
on a dry surface do not suffer from threadworm infection.
Tapeworms
There are no important tapeworms that live in the pig as adults. One tapeworm of
humans, the pork tapeworm ( Taenia solium), however, uses the pig as an interme-
pe ue se sunu jo aunsu ls aui ui saai uomaden yod aui isou aie
ing the eggs or proglottids with eggs in them. The proglottids are found in the
feces of infected humans, who get infected by eating raw pork. This infection in
pigs is rare in the United States, since good sanitation facilities prevent the swine
from encountering the proglottids. The infection in pigs causes them no problem
190 PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Veterinarians cannot diagnose larval infection in a living pig, nor is there any
Protozoans
The coccidia of pigs (Eimeria species and Isospora suis) have life cycles like the
coccidia of the ruminants. Also like the ruminant coccidia, not all of the coccidia
veterinarians diagnose coccidia by finding the oocysts in the feces, sometimes a
newborn's diarrhea occurs before the oocysts are shed. In those cases, finding
the oocysts in the mother pig's feces or in the feces of other pigs in the same
area may explain what is happening to the newborn pigs. There are drugs that
 treat coccidia infections in pigs. Good sanitation and sufficient living space help
preventsevere disease.
Endoparasites of Horses
Nematodes
Ascarid of Horses (Parascaris equorum)
Parascaris equorum, the ascarid of horses, is very large. Males may be up to 30 cm,
and females can grow to 50 cm. Adults of P equorum live in the horse's small
intestine, following a life cycle similar to that of dog and cat ascarids.
Eggs develop on the ground for 10 to 14 days. Eggs containing the second-stage
larva can infect the horse that eats them. The roundworm eggs hatch in the small
intestine. The larvae then burrow through the intestinal wall and into a blood
The larvae break out of the lungs and migrate up the trachea, where the horse
swallows them. Back in the small intestine, the larvae develop into adults.
Adult horses usually develop imrmunity to ascarids and rarely have more than a
few worms in their intestines. Roundworms usually cause disease only in young
horses. The larvae migrating through the lungs and trachea may cause coughing.
Moderate to heavy ascarid infections are a major cause of unthriftiness in foals.
The adult ascarids are so large and numerous that they rob the foal of enough
food, causing weight loss. In rare cases, there may be so many adult ascarids in
the foal that they block the passage of food through the small intestine.
To diagnose infection, veterinarians depend on finding P equorum eggs
(Figure 14-11) in the feces. Many different anthelmintics kill the adult ascarids.
Manure is promptly removed before the eggs become infective.
paseajau aq pinous faut aunised uo ind aq oi fpeau aue jeoy pue aueu aul uaum
on a clean pasture—one on which no infected horses have grazed. Parascaris
dunised ueapo finul e Supuy os daaamoy suead peuaaas loy aaiauns feu sasa
phylaxis, with anthelmintics adrministered when the foal is 4 weeks old and the
medication repeated once every 6 weeks until the foal is 2 years old.
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals
¥191
FIGURE 14-11
The egg of Parascaris equorum is round
and usually brown.
Strongyles
The strongyles, another group of nematodes, are also important internal para-
sites of horses. Strongyles come in two groups: large (2-5 crm) and small (less
than 1.5 cm). The large strongyles cause more harm. Adult strongyles, small
and large, live in the large intestine and cecum (a pouch at the beginning of the
large intestine) of horses. They feed by biting off pieces of mucosa. A horse with
a strongyle infection usually has a mixture of large and small strongyles.
The worrm lays eggs in the intestine, which pass out with the feces and hatch on
the ground. The first- and second-stage larvae are free-living organisms. The
third-stage larvae can infect the horse. They migrate onto the blades of grass
that the horse eats. At this point, the life cycles of the various strongyles begin
to differ. Once swallowed, the larvae of all the small strongyles, and one of the
large strongyles, molt in the large intestine and then invade the intestinal wall.
The fourth-stage larvae live in the intestinal wall. The larvae eventually come
back out into the intestine and becorme adults.
The life cycles of the three large strongyles are all slightly different. Strongylus
vulgaris is the most important large strongyle. Once the horse swallows the
third-stage S. vulgaris larvae, the larvae penetrate the wall of the large intestine
and molt. The fourth-stage larvae enter small arteries and migrate to the cranial
mesenteric artery, which supplies the large intestine with blood. The larvae live
in this artery for several months before they molt to the adult stage. Through
the artery, the young adults return to the wall of the large intestine. There, a
nodule forms around the worm. This nodule eventually ruptures, releasing the
adult into the intestine.
Neither of the other two large strongyles—S. edentatus and S. equinus—enter
 blood vessels. After penetrating the intestinal wall, one migrates in the ab-
dominal cavity, while the other stays in the intestinal wall. In both cases, the
young adults live in nodules. These nodules rupture, releasing the worm into
the intestine.
Both larval and adult strongyles cause disease in horses, usually minor. The lar-
vae of S. vulgaris, however, can cause great harm. During their migration in the
cranial mesenteric artery, the larvae can damage the blood vessel. Its wall can
thicken, and blood clots can form. This damage can lead to colic (severe pains in
the abdominal region), bloat, and even death. By feeding on mucosa, small and
192
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
large strongyle adults can cause ulcers in the large intestine. These ulcers may
cause blood loss, which may lead to anemia. Both larval and adult strongyles
cause unthriftiness.
Horses of any age that graze on pasture can be infected with strongyles. Foals,
however, usually have more strongyles in their large intestine than do older horses.
 By the end of the summer, the pasture on which infected foals have been grazing
should, if possible, graze on pasture the previous year's foals have not used.
Veterinarians diagnose strongyle infection by examining the feces for strongyle
eggs (Figure 14-12). The eggs of all large and small strongyles look the same;
they resemble the hookworm egg (Figure 14-13). The best way to control
strongyles is to give prophylactic drugs. The anthelmintics dichlorvos and iver-
mectin kill both roundworms and horse bots. All horses should receive these or
other anthelmintics every 4 to 6 weeks to control strongyle infections.
FIGURE 14-12
The egg of Strongylus vnuigarisis
similar to any other strongyle-type
egg.
FIGURE 14-13
Compare this hookworm egg to the
strongyle egg in Figure I4- 12.
Pinworms (oxyuris equi)
The pinworm is another nematode that lives in a horse's large intestine and
somud a qnoun yul ui uo oi o moa  suomud aag unm
rarely grow larger than 1 crm. Horses becorme infected by eating eggs containing
third-stage larvae. The eggs hatch in the small intestine; then the larvae move
to the large intestine. There, the larvae molt, and the fourth-stage larvae feed on
 the mucosa. In heavy infections, this may irritate the intestinal wall. Fourth-stage
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals  193
larvae molt and develop into adults, which feed on the contents of the intestine
Females migrate to the anus to lay eggs. They extend their bodies to the outside
and lay eggs on the skin around the anus. The irritation caused by the movement
of the female and the itching caused by eggs stuck around the anus are the major
harm that pinworms bring. The infected horse tries to scratch by rubbing against
its stall or other objects. Tail hair may break, and hair around the rump may rub
off. Scratching may also damage the skin of the rump.
Veterinarians diagnose pinworm infection by observing the horse's scratching
 behavior and finding eggs around its anus. Sometimes the eggs turn up in the
feces. The same anthelmintics that kill ascarids and strongyles kill pinworms
m se somund my sauons no seose log sinp jo sasop ooenudoid
The stable area should be cleaned regularly to remove pinworm eggs.
Threadworm of Horses (Strongyloides westeri)
The threadworm of horses has a life cycle much like that of the threadworm
fetus. The major problems threadworms cause happen to foals infected through
the milk. The infected foal may develop severe diarrhea. Heavy threadworm
infections can kill foals. Adult horses generally have very light infections and
show no clinical signs. The same anthelmintics that kill ascarids also kill thread-
worrms. Feces must be removed from the foal's stall to reduce the free-living
to reduce the number of larvae they pass to the foal through the milk
Tapeworms
Horse tapeworms (Anoplocephala perfoliata, A. magna, and Paranoplocephala
mamillana) are short tapeworms (5-80 cm) that live in a horse's small intestine
A. perfoliata lives at the junction between the small and large intestines and
sometimes in the large intestine. The life cycle of these tapeworms is the same
as that of the rurminant tapeworm.
P mamillana does not cause disease in the horse. Heavy infections with A. magna
or A. perfoliata can cause bleeding ulcers in the small intestine. Heavy infections
with these two worms can cause unthriftiness, colic, and diarrhea. Veterinarians
diagnose such infections by finding the eggs (Figure 14-14) or proglottid in the
feces. There are anthelmintics that treat horse tapeworm infections. Prophylactic
 a d  s  s
Protozoans
Coccidia of Horses (Eimeria leuckarti)
The life cycles of the horse coccidia and the ruminant coccidia are the same. Heavy
infections of these coccidia may cause diarrhea in young horses. Veterinarians
diagnose coccidia infection by finding the oocyst in the feces. The oocyst of
these coccidia does not float in a saturated salt flotation, so veterinarians or
veterinary technicians must use a sugar or zinc sulfate fotation or centrifuge
may be warranted.
194
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 14-14
Eggs of the horse tapeworm. Notice
 the triangular shape, with the rounded
corners.
Giardia and Cryptosporidium
Both of these protozoans can be found in horses. Giardia life cycle is described
in Chapter 15. Cryptosporidium life cycle is described earlier in this chapter.
young horses.
CHAPTER 14: Endoparasites of Large Animals
195
CASE STUDY
Roundworms in Pigs (Ascaris suum)
weight loss, difficult respiration, and unthriftiness. The farmer has two pigs with
pneumonia, and one pig had died. The pig that died was icteric (yellow)
DIAGNOSIS
Ascaris suum (roundworm) are among the most destructive parasites of swine
sign in young pigs is their difficulty in respiration during the A. suum prepatent
A necropsy of a pig would show immature worms in the intestines, lung tissue,
or bile ducts. The adult worms cause icterus in the pig by migrating into and
occluding the bile ducts, causing liver damage.
TREATMENT
is based on anthelmintic treatments, such as ivermectin, pyrantel, dichlorvos,
levamisole, or benzimidazoles. The anthelmintics can be placed in their feed.
Summary
The endoparasites of large animals are vast in both number and variety.
Nematodes or roundworms, tapeworms, flukes or trematodes, and various pro-
tozoans are a few of the common groupings of endoparasites in livestock. Many
of the endoparasites suck blood and can thus cause severe anemia when present
in large numbers. Other parasites invade the lung, liver, heart, and stomach. The
veterinary staff is well equipped to diagnose the particular parasite and then
 prescribe appropriate treatment. Fecal floats are just one comrmon tool used in
diagnosing the parasite.
196
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
REVIEW
MULTIPLE CHOICE
1. All but
 are nematodes found in the abomasums of the cow.
a. Haemonchus
b. Leuckarti
c. Ostertagia
d. Trichostrongylus
 2. The deer liver fluke poses the greatest threat to
a. deer.
b.horses.
C. sheep.
d. humans.
 3. A nematode that can be transmitted to a foal in its mother's milk is the
a. threadworm.
b. ascarid.
C. pinworm.
d. tapeworm.
MATCHING
Match the parasite on the left with the problem it causes on the right.
1. Ostertagia
a. coughing in calves
2. Dictyocaulus
b. broken tail hair on a horse
3. Tritrichomonas foetus
C. destroyed gastric glands of the stomach
4. pinworms
d. diarrhea
 5. Cryptosporidium
 e. infertility in cows
FILL IN THE BLANKS
1. The
has a head, or scolex, and a body composed
of many segments called proglottids.
2.
 are flat, leaf-shaped worms with a partial
digestive tract.
3.
are single-cell animals and thus have no adult
 or egg stages.
CHAPTER 14:Endoparasites of Large Animals
197
4
is probably the most important roundworm parasite of
livestock.
 5. The hydatid tapeworm's definitive host is the
6.
 are the major endoparasites of swine.
is an accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity.
8. One tapeworm of humans, Taenia sofium, uses the
as
 an intermediate host.
9. Pigs infected with Trichineffa spiralis are difficult to identify. To minimize infection the veterinary staff should recommend
CHAPTER 15
Endoparasites of small Animals
OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this chapter, the reader should be able to:
Compare the life cycle of the nematode, cestode, trematode, and
Giardia in small and large animals.
 Describe common diseases caused by endoparasites in small animals.
Describe common diagnostic tools and procedures for endoparasites
 in small animals.
Describe common treatments and preventive measures for
endoparasites in small animals.
198
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals  199
Key TerMS
ELISA
Endoparasites of Dogs and Cats
heartworm
-sao sapoteau) sdnoua aay lle uouy auoo sieo pue shop jo saliseed sueiodu
hookworm
todes, trematodes, protozoa, insects) of the parasitic animals discussed in earlier
chapters. Some of these parasites are host specific—that is, they infect only one
host
type of host. Others are not host specific and live in both dogs and cats.
prepatent
trematode
Nematodes
A number of nematodes can infect dogs and cats. Gastrointestinal nematodes are
some of the most important dog and cat parasites.
Ascarids of Dogs and cats (Toxocara canis, Toxocara cati,
and Toxascaris leonina)
aul ul aa!l reul (uo si-s oi dn) sapoieuau aauel aue sieo pue shop jo splueosy
small intestine of dogs and cats. Torocara canis (Figure 15-1) lives in the dog,
and T. cati (Figure 15-2) lives in the cat. T. leonina (Figure 15-3) can be found in
both dogs and cats.
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 15-1
A and B. The egg of Torocara canis, which measures about 80 μm (micrometers). The egg in B
focuses on the surface of the egg's shell The egg of Torocara cati, the ascarid of cats, looks exactly
like that of Torocara canis, except that it is a little smaller, about 7o μm. The eggs are round to
slightly oval in shape. They have a rough shell and a brown central mass that fills most of the shell.
Animals become infected when they eat a Torocara egg that contains a second-
stage larva. An egg with a first-stage larva is not infective and does not become
infective until it is outside the host for 4 weeks. It reaches the outside by means
of the host's feces. An egg eaten before the 4 weeks are up does not develop into
a second-stage larva
The life cycle of Torocara differs according to the age of the host. In young pup
pies and kittens, usually under 3 months of age, the process is as follows:
1. Infective eggs hatch in the small intestine.
2. Second-stage larvae burrow through the intestinal wall and enter a vein
200
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 15-2
The anterior (front) end of Tarocara
cati. Note the wide “wings" that run
along the side of the head.
FIGURE 15-3
The egg of Tocascaris leonina has the
same shape as that of Toxocara, but the
surface is smooth and the central mass
does not fill all of the space in the shell.
 3. Blood carries the larvae through the liver and into the lungs.
'ael ais-piui aonaq pue ssuni aui ul so aael aui 't
5. The third-stage larvae crawl from the lungs up the trachea.
6. The larvae reach the throat, and the host swallows therm.
7. The Torocara return to the small intestine and stay there. They molt two
 more times and become adults.
It is important for the veterinary technician to understand the prepatent period.
This is the time from the point of infection until a specific diagnostic stage can
be identified. The veterinary technician is usually the individual who will ex-
plain to the client the cycles involved with these parasites. The prepatent period
sep 7L s! 11 nuzuo  uoy pue ‘shep g6 01 17 si szu0 L 1oy
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals  201
The adults mate in the small intestine. Veterinarians diagnose the infection by
finding eggs in the feces. In older animals, most of the second-stage larvae do
not molt in the lung. Instead, the blood carries them to any of several different
organs. The second-stage larvae usually stay in that organ until they die. Some
larvae do molt in the lung, however, and an older anirmal may have a few adult
ascarids in its small intestine.
Second-stage larvae that get into the mammary glands of a nursing mother
molt to third-stage larvae and then pass with the milk into the suckling pup
uisssue fesu paeo si alessd peanel jo addi sui uy do
Transmammary-transmitted third-stage larvae do not invade the pup's intesti-
nal wall. Instead, they develop into adults in the intestine.
If the second-stage larvae migrate into the uterus of a pregnant dog, they can
adults in the small intestine. This is known as prenatal transmission.
Cats and dogs may become infected with Torocara by eating its transport host,
an infected rodent or bird. When a rodent or bird eats infective eggs, the second-
stage larvae migrate to various organs, where they stay and do not develop.
When a cat or dog eats the infected rodent or bird, the second-stage larvae
develop into adults in the new host's small intestine. These larvae do not travel
to other body tissues.
Light to moderate Torocara infections cause little damage to the host. In heavy
infections, larvae passing through the lungs may make the host susceptible to
pneumonia. Coughing is one of the symptoms of this stage of the infection
Adult worms may irritate the intestine, causing diarrhea. Young puppies or kit-
tens with heavy infections may appear potbellied, and they may not gain weight
l aq fe siinsan ieui ooo ho uonsqo jeusaun pinous faui se isy se
threatening to young puppies.
A fecal fotation and a direct smear are used to detect Torocara eggs. Torocara
is zoonotic. Children are susceptible to infection because of their habit of put-
ting objects in their mouths and thus predisposing themselves to eating dirt
or soil. When they ingest the soil or dirt that contains roundworrm eggs, they
have a great risk of developing visceral larval migrans (VLM). The zoonotic
potential to human adults is rare but can happen, resulting in VLM as well. The
death. The larvae do not develop into adults in humans. Ocular larval migrans
o  s o a h    l ae a s
human exposure to roundworms.
Anthelmintics kill adult worms. Pups and kittens should be treated at 2 and 4
weeks of age to eliminate prenatally acquired worms and again at 2 months of age
be treated at the same time as the pups. In addition, feces should be removed and
pets prevented from eating transport hosts. Some common examples of effective
antel plus praziquantel (Vercom), and milbemycin oxime (lnterceptor)
2O2 PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Hookworms (Ancylostoma species)
The hookworm is another important gastrointestinal roundworm parasite of
dogs and cats. Ancylostoma caninum is the hookworm of dogs, raccoons, wolves,
foxes, and coyotes. A. tubaeforme is the hookworm of cats (both wild and do-
mestic). A. braziliense infects both dogs and cats. Uncinaria stenocephala is the
northern canine hookworm, which also occurs in dogs, cats, foxes, coyotes, and
wolves. Hookworms, which are small nematodes (1-2 cm), get their name from
 e o  e o   e sa  r   
The hookworm's life cycle begins when the egg (Figure 15-4), containing an
embryo, passes onto the ground in the feces and hatches. The first- and second-
stage larvae are free-living; the third-stage larvae are infective. These larvae can
penetrate the skin of the host.
FIGURE 15-4
The egg of a hookworm of dogs and
cats has a thin shell and a mass of cells
in the center. Hookworm eggs measure
55 to 77 mm in length.
 In the skin, the third-stage larvae enter a blood vessel and travel to the lungs,
where they molt and become fourth-stage larvae, which migrate up the trachea.
The host swallows them, and the larvae then attach themselves to the lining of
the small intestine and suck blood. The larvae molt and become adults, which
also suck blood.
Hook worm infections in cats always start with penetration of the skin by third-
sop aun on ol aeauel aseis-puul uaum suaddey sul uoissusueu Aueu
dog becomes pregnant, these larvae “wake up" and go to the mammary glands;
mammary transmission with either A. tubaeforme or A. braziliense.
Hookworm infections in cats are not as severe as those in dogs. A heavy infec-
tion can cause severe anemia, which can be fatal in both kittens and puppies.
Hookworms can also cause diarrhea that contains blood and mucus. Hookworm
infection is diagnosed when eggs are found in the feces. Anthelmintics are given
every 2 weeks until 2 weeks after the pup is weaned. Commonly used anthelmin-
tics include fenbendazole (Panacur), albendazole, ivermectin and praziquantel, and
pyrantel pamoate. This kills the worms that entered the pup by the transmammary
route. Because they are also treating for ascarids at the same time, veterinarians
use an anthelrmintic that kills both hookworms and ascarids.
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals  203
Whipworms (Trichuris vulpis)
Whipworms are the other major gastrointestinal nematode of dogs. Adult dog
whipworms look like pig whipworms, and their life cycle is the same. Cats are
rarely infected with whipworms.
Heavy infections can irritate the large intestine and cause diarrhea, sometimes
with blood in it. Veterinarians diagnose infection by finding whipworm eggs
(Figure 15-5) in the feces. Anthelrmintics kill the adult worm. To ensure that
the infection does not return, the dog must be kept away from contaminated
 soil. Whipworm eggs can survive for up to 2 years on the ground. A dog that
keeps getting reinfected with whipworms should be put on prophylaxis. Since
the whipworm has a 3-month prepatent period and the anthelmintics kill only
the adult worms, the dog should be treated prophylactically every 3 months.
FIGURE 15-5
The surface of the shell of a whipworm
egg, which is smooth.
Threadworms (Strongyloides stercoralis)
Like the threadworm of swine, this nematode is very small (2 mm), and its adult
females live in the small intestine. Strongyloides stercoralis infects dogs, foxes,
cats, humans, and nonhuman primates. The S. stercoralis life cycle differs from
ls aui ui yey saa aun 'isiy shem aanui ui uompaun auims al jo iu
intestine, and first-stage larvae (Figure 15-6) leave the host in the feces. Second,
some of the larvae may develop to the infective stage while they are in the host's
large intestine. These larvae can burrow through the intestinal wall and find
their way back to the small intestine, where they become adult females, a process
called autoinfection. Finally, there are no dorrmant larvae in the dog's tissues.
In addition, infective larvae that enter a nursing dog may find their way to the
 mammary glands and be passed in the milk to the puppy.
In cats and dogs over 6 months old, threadworm infections are mild, autoinfec-
tion usually does not take place, and the host's irmmune system kills the worms
FIGURE 15-6
The first-stage larva of Strongyloides
stercoralis. Note the tapered tail and
the oval-shaped group of cells near the
center of the worm (arrow).
wIe
2O4  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
in about 3 to 4 months. In puppies, however, autoinfection takes place. The
migrating larvae may damage the lungs, causing bleeding into the air spaces
Many adult worms eventually develop and damage the intestinal wall, causing
diarrhea. Veterinarians diagnose threadworm infection by finding the larvae in
and means of transmission but generally is from 8 to 14 days. Animals become
infected initially via the skin, the transmammary route, or across the placenta
A number of anthelmintics kill the adult worms. Since these anthelmintics do
not kill the autoinfective larvae, however, the puppy must be retreated in 7 to
10 days.
Heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis)
saui womeau aui si shop go saliseied apoieau snonauep isou aul jo auos
long, slender worms (20-30 cm) live in the host's pulmonary artery. In heavy
infections, they migrate to the right ventricle of the heart. Cats rarely get heart-
worm; when they do, it is a serious disease.
Female worms release embryos, known as microfilariae (Figure 15-7), into the
blood. These microflariae are taken up by a mosquito and develop into first-
stage larvae. After molting twice, the larvae move to the mosquito's mouth-
parts. When the mosquito bites a dog or cat, the third-stage larvae enter the
anirmal's skin. In the tissues under the skin, the larvae molt twice over several
months. The young adult worms then move into veins and travel to the heart
(Figure 15-8). In the pulmonary artery, they grow into full-sized adults. The
prepatent period in dogs can be as long as 6 months.
FIGURE 15-7
A direct blood smear containing the
microfilaria of Diroflaria immitis,
which is fairly large (s00-s20 mm
long) (arrow).
 In heavy infections, the worms in the pulmonary artery may block the fow of
blood to the lungs. Because the heart must work harder to get the blood to the
lungs, heart failure may occur. Signs of heartworm infection in dogs include
listlessness, breathing difficulty after exercise, and coughing. Veterinarians con-
firm heartworm infection by finding the microfilaria in the blood, but sometirmes
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals  205
FIGURE 15-8
Young adult worms move into veins
and travel to the heart.
microflariae are not visiblein the infected dog's blood. Inthese cases, veterinarians
complete a serological test (a test performed on blood serum) to diagnose the
disease by finding heartworm antigens. A modified Knott's technique can detect
microflariae and allow for the differentiation between the Diroflaria immitis and
Dipetalonema reconditum.
Treating heartworm infection is very difficult. Anthelmintic drugs do kill the
adult worms, but dead worms can block the blood vessels of the lungs. The
veterinarian must keep a close eye on the dog after treatment, so dogs being
treated for heartworm often stay in the hospital until the treatment is completed.
Heartworms can also be removed by surgery. After the adult worms are killed,
the microfilariae must be killed. Although the microfilariae have no effect on the
dog, they may live for a year or more. As long as they are present, they can infect
mosquitoes. Many different anthelmintics kill microfilariae.
Control of heartworm is best achieved by the use of prophylactic drugs given
during the mosquito season to kill the third- and fourth-stage larvae before they
get to the heart. Three prophylactics that veterinarians use for this purpose
are diethylcarbamazine, ivermectin, and milbemycin. Diethylcarbamazine must
be given daily and ivermectin and milbemycin once a month from 1 month after
the onset of mosquito season to 1 month after the end of the season. In temper-
ate areas, these medications can be used year-round as a preventive
Dipetalonema reconditum
The adult Dipetalonema are 1 to 3 cm long and live in the skin of the dog. Like
the heartworm, this worm produces microfilariae (Figure 15-9), which circulate
in the blood. A fea (Ctenocephalides) feding on the dog picks up the microfi-
lariae. In the fea, the microfilariae develop to the infective stage in about 1 week
A fea with the infective larvae infects a dog by injecting the larvae into the skin
as it bites. The larvae then grow to the adult stage in the dog.
206
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 15-9
The microfilaria of Dipetalonema
reconditum.
Dipetalonema causes no problems for the dog. The only problem this parasite
causes is for the veterinarian. Because the microfilariae of Dipetalonema live in
the blood, they can be confused with the microfilariae of heartworm. It is dif-
ficult to tell which species a single microfilaria belongs to; this is a job for a
uo paseq aaamoy 'ssanl paieonpa ue ayeu sueeuaiaa lradxa rlooiisered
the following information. Heartworm microfilariae in 1 ml of blood usually
number in the hundreds of thousands, whereas Dipetalonema microflariae usu-
ally number fewer than 1oo. D. immitis (heartworm) microflariae move in place
without directional motion. D. reconditum do have directional motion and will
move across the viewing field of the slide. In addition, they have a distinguish-
 ing cephalic hook, a blunt anterior end, and in formalin fixed specimens, a “but-
tonhook" tail. Heartworm microfilariae are generally longer and wider than the
Dipetalonema. Also, the serology tests for the antigen of the adult heartworm
cannot detect an infection with Dipetalonema. Therefore, a dog with a few micro-
filariae in its blood and a negative heartworm antigen test falls into one of the
following groups:
· It has Dipetalonema.
· It had heartworm, but the adults have died.
· It has a heartworm infection that is just becoming patent. If the dog re-
tests negative for heartworm antigen about 2 weeks later, then the veteri-
narian knows it does not have heartworm.
There are anthelmintics that kill both Dipetalonema and D. immitis microfilariae.
To prevent infection with Dipetalonema, the dog must be kept free of fleas, as
described in the section on dog and cat feas in Chapter 13.
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animais  207
Trematodes
A few trematodes infect dogs and cats, but these infections are rare in the United
States. Some anthelmintics kill trematodes, but infection can be prevented by
keeping the pet from hunting or fishing situations, where the pet may encounter
the trematode's intermediate host.
The lung fuke ( Paragonimus kellicotti) is a trematode whose adults inhabit cysts in
the lungs of dogs, cats, and wild carnivores. The adults are about 1 cm long; their
cysts open into the air passages of the lungs. The host coughs up and swallows
the eggs, which pass out with the feces and hatch in water. Lung fuke hatchlings
undergo several larval stages in snails and then a final cyst stage in crayfish. The
dog or cat becomes infected by eating an infected crayfish or snail.
A pet with adult lung fukes may cough and wheeze, or have no signs at all, or
die of fatal lung hemorrhage. The infection responds to anthelmintics. It is pre-
vented by keeping pets from raw crayfish and snails.
Tapeworms
Tapeworms usually live in the small intestines of dogs and cats. Adult dog and
cat tapeworms are large, anywhere from 50 to 60 cm long, but cause minimal
h au uo go suis ou mous fu siad pnon isou u oi 
indication is usually individual proglottids on the pet's feces or around its anus
Double Pore Tapeworm (Dipylidium caninum)
pue sealy sieo pue shop yiog jo uomaden uouoo aui si unuu unpda
occasionally dog-chewing lice are this tapeworm's intermediate hosts. Fleas be-
come infected when the larval fea eats the tapeworm egg. Lice can become
infected at any feeding stage in their life cycle. The dog or cat infects itself by
swallowing the infected fea or louse.
The larval double pore tapeworm emerges from the digested insect and devel-
ops to adulthood in the host's small intestine. The adult tapeworm attaches to
the intestinal wall by hooks and suckers on its scolex. Through its skin, the
tapeworm soaks up its host's digested food. As the tapeworm grows, its end
segments fill with eggs and break away from the worm. The eggs of D. caninum
group together in packets of 20 to 30 (Figure 15-10). The proglottids encasing
J (ll-gi aunli) ausanul aul ul shayoed sa asaul asealau pue yeauq feu uaul
uo spoioid aui saoa aue yim ino ssed faun yeanq nou op spiooud al
move under the power of their own muscles, and they leave the feces. Eventually
they die and release their egg packets, which larval fleas eat.
d o siad a uug fq uooue uu  asop sun
glottids in the host's feces. The egg packets each contain 20 to 30 ermbryos.
Proglottids are white and look like cucumber seeds. A number of anthelrmintics
kill adult tapeworms. To prevent reinfection, the feas and lice on the pet and in
its home must be killed.
Taeniid Tapeworms (Taenia taeniaeformis and Taenia pisiformis)
Taenia taeniaeformis is a common tapeworm of cats. Its intermediate hosts
S so  d   si s  s    n
208
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 15-10
The eggs of Dipylidium caninum are
distinctive because they are found in
packets of 20 to $0 eggs. All tapeworm
eggs contain six small hooks.
FIGURE 15-11
Proglottids of Dipylidium caninum.
 Note the two genital openings on
each segment of proglottid, one on
each side. These openings can be seen
more easily in the specimen on the left
(arrows).
intermediate host is the rabbit. Several other taenid tapeworms of dogs use the
sheep as an interrmediate host. These taenid tapeworms are common only in
dogs that are fed raw sheep or that eat sheep feces.
ul lou aue qom) sasa Bupuy fq suomaden puael asouaep sueeuaiaa
packets) or proglottids in the feces (Figures 15-12 and 15-13). The proglottids
of Taenia are white and bell shaped. Anthelmintics kill Taenia adults. To prevent
reinfection the pet should be kept from hunting situations.
Hydatid Tapeworms (Echinococcus granulosus
and Echinococcus multilocularis)
Adult hydatid tapeworms are very small (about 5 mm long) and live in the de-
finitive host's smallintestine. Echinococcus granulosus adults live in dogs; the lar-
vae live in ruminants. The section on the tapeworms of ruminants in Chapter
14 describes the life cycle of this parasite. E. multilocularis adults typically live
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals
209
FIGURE 15-12
The egg of Taenia measures about
35 μm and has a thick shell that
contains striations or stripes.
FIGURE 15-13
Proglottids of the cat tapeworm Taenia
taeniaeformis. The segments are usually
found singly, not in a chain, as seen
on the left. Notice the shapes of the
different proglottids. Each proglottid
has only one genital opening, as shown
in the stained segment on the right
(arrow).
in foxes but infect cats and dogs that eat its interrmediate host, the mole or other
rodents. Infections with either of these two tapeworms are rare in the United
 'oey ui 'snoid ou sieo pue sop sasn omadei piepdy lnpe aui saieis
dog may carry thousands in its small intestine and show no clinical signs. The
biggest threat this parasite poses is to the pet's owner: Either species of hydatid
tapeworm can hatch and grow in the liver, lung, or other internal organs of a
human who swallows its egg.
-oud) sasa aui Supuy fq uoui uomaden pepfy asousep sueueuia
pue piepfy aui jo sasa aul 'saoay siad aul u! (ioaiap ol leus ool aue spilio
Si oun yoq aua ly shnp as aui inq 'ss aui yol somadet pua
prevented by not feeding dogs raw meat and keeping pets from hunting rodents
and eating feces.
Protozoans
Coccidia (lsospora canis, Isospora rivolta, and Isospora felis)
coccidia have life cycles similar to the coccidia of ruminants. Both can infect the
210
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
host as oocysts (Figure 15-14), but unlike the coccidia of ruminants, the dog and
cat coccidia can use transport hosts. If a mouse or other rodent eats an oocyst, the
coccidia invade its tissues and become a cyst. The dog or cat eats the rodent, and
the cyst hatches to release coccidia into the cells of the pet's intestine.
FIGURE 15-14
The oocyst of Isospora canis, which
js very similar to the oocyst
of Isospora felis.
Coccidia usually cause their hosts little harm. Heavy infections (coccidiosis) in
kittens and puppies, however, can cause severe diarrhea. Veterinarians diagnose
coccidia infection by finding the oocysts in the suspect pet's feces. The pre-
patent period varies from 7 to 14 days depending on the species. The infection
-ou shi Sununy uouy siad Suidaay fq patuaaaud aq ueo inq sonup oi spuodsa
dent transport hosts.
Toxoplasma gondii
Toroplasma gondii is another common coccidian of cats. Its life cycle resembles
'supou :sisoy lodsuent snoea sey rusdora seue idaoxa saf riodsosi jo seul
birds, cows, sheep, and pigs. Coccidia can invade any cell in the body of a trans-
port host that eats their oocyst (Figure 15-15). If a pregnant woman eats an
oocyst, for example, that coccidian may invade the cells of the fetus and cause
birth defects. Thus, this is a zoonotic disorder. To avoid Toroplasma infection,
 pregnant women should avoid being around cat feces and eating rare meat like
FIGURE 15-15
The oocyst of Taroplasma gondis
similar to the oocyst of Isospora, but
it is very small (1o mm) and tends to
be round.
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals  211
beef or pork. Gardening with gloves and washing all fruits and vegetables (es-
Toroplasma infection in women
s e s s o se     so  o e si o g
of infection for pregnant women and their fetuses. Occasionally veterinarians
lod sn uoy fey aui ianond o ie sey aui azuuina oi pyse ae
disorder. It is thus very important that the veterinary staff be prepared to pro-
vide education to the client on how to protect the family and care for the cat
Someone other than the pregnant woman (preferably a man) should clean and
ermpty the cat's litter box daily. This will help elirminate the exposure of the
woman to the sporulated oocysts. Sandboxes should be kept covered to prevent
the cats from using them as litter boxes. (This zoonotic disorder as it relates to
humans is discussed more fully in Chapter 10.)
t e si li uisas aunn hood e yim isoy iodsun e on yeap penuaa
threat to people with AIDS, cancer, or any other cause of immunosuppression.
ly dividing cysts, but not the “resting cysts," in the transport host, so the host's
should be kept from hunting and not fed raw meat
Sarcocystis
Sarcocystis, a coccidia-like protozoan mentioned in the section on other proto-
2oan parasites of ruminants in Chapter 14, lives in the cell lining of dog and cat
intestines. Ruminants, deer, and rodents play intermediate host to different spe-
cies of Sarcocystis, whose cyst stage lives in its intermediate host's muscles. The
intermediate host infection is difficult to diagnose.
Veterinarians diagnose dog and cat Sarcocystis by finding the oocyst in the pet's
feces. Although Sarcocystis can sometimes cause its intermediate host muscle
pain, it causes no dog or cat disease and has no treatment. Dog and cat infections
cat and dog feces should be kept off pastures and out of stored food. Current re-
search indicates that Sarcocystis may also cause problems in immunosuppressed
Pinous aisfs aun assap e um sieniaipun suond e sy suosad
follow extra precautions similar to those outlined for T. gondii.
Giardia lamblia
The protozoan Giardia also lives in the small intestine of dogs and cats. It is a
microscopic, pear-shaped organism (sometimes described as looking like a ten-
 e       s i   s e  ( 
 intestine. It does not invade the intestinal wall but reproduces by dividing in the
intestine. Large numbers can develop from one organism. Giardia occurs in twc
forms: the rarely observed trophozoite (feeding stage) and the more commonly
water with Giardia cysts (Figure 15-16). When an anirmal swallows the water,
the cysts pass to a new host. Humans and many domestic and wild animals can
also be infected with Giardia lamblia.
212
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
FIGURE 15-16
These cysts of Giardia can be found in
both dogs and cats.
Large numbers of Giardia in the intestine may cause chronicdiarrhea. Veterinarians
diagnose infection by finding the small cyst in the host's feces (standard fecal fo.
tation). Several drugs treat Giardia infections. To prevent infection, pets should
be kept from drinking such potentially contaminated water sources as streams
and puddles
Endoparasites of Ferrets
Many parasites that infect cats and dogs also infect ferrets: Torocara cati,
Torascaris leonina, hookworm, heartworm, double pore tapeworm, lung fuke,
Giardia, Sarcocystis, and Cryptosporidium. Ferrets can be infected with ferret coc-
cidia. The life cycle, clinical signs, diagnosis, treatment, and control measures
are all the same as those for the particular parasite in dogs or cats.
Endoparasites of Rodents and Rabbits
Nematodes
The pinworms (Syphacia sp., Aspiculuris tetraptera, Passalurus ambiguus) are nema-
todes of rodents and rabbits. Like the pinworm of horses, the rodent pinworms
(Syphacia sp., A. tetraptera) and the rabbit pinworm (P ambiguus) live as adults in
the cecum and large intestine of their hosts. The host gets the infection by ac-
cidentally eating an egg. The egg hatches, and the larvae develop to adulthood
in the intestine.
Infections with pinworms are common, although these worms usually cause
their hosts no problems. Veterinarians diagnose pinworm infections by finding
the eggs in the feces or on the skin around the anirmal's anus. Anthelmintics
kill the adults, but eggs in the cage make reinfection common. Therefore, the
cage of an animal being treated should be cleaned thoroughly. The treatment and
cage cleaning may need to be repeated several tirmes to eliminate the infection.
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animais  213
Tapeworms
Wild rodents and wild rabbits can be intermediate hosts for several dog and cat
tapeworms. Larval tapeworms seldom turn up in rodents and rabbits raised as
pets or as laboratory animals, but a few adult tapeworms do.
intestine. A four beetle is usually the intermediate host. Normally, these tape-
worms cause their host no problem; however, very heavy infections may block
food from moving through the intestine. Veterinarians diagnose Hymenolepis
To prevent infection, flour beetles must be kept out of the rodent's food.
Protozoans
Three protozoans live in rodent and rabbit intestines: Giardia, Tritrichomonas, and
tions go untreated. The Giardia of rodents and rabbits cannot infect humans.
The Eimeria coccidian is one of the few intestinal protozoan parasites that cause
disease in rodents and rabbits. Like all other coccidia, the species of Eimeria that
infect rodents and rabbits are exclusive to their host species.
The life cycle of both rodent and ruminant coccidia is the same. Several species
of Eimeria infect the rabbit's intestine, and their life cycles are the same as those
of ruminants. The rabbit, however, also has a species of coccidia (Eimeria stiedae)
that infects its liver. The rabbit eats an oocyst of the liver coccidian, which
hatches in the small intestine. The liver coccidia invade the intestinal wall and
enter the blood. The bloodstream carries therm to the liver, where they invade
the bile duct cells. Like the intestinal coccidia, the liver coccidia multiply many
times before forming oocysts. The oocysts accompany the bile to the intestine
and then leave the host in the feces.
 Rodents and rabbits with light to moderate coccidia infections generally suffer no
problems. Heavy infections may cause diarrhea and anorexia. A rabbit severely
infected with liver coccidia may die. E. stiedae infection is among the most com-
mon causes of rabbit death. Veterinarians diagnose it by fnding the oocysts in
the feces. The Eimeria oocysts look so much alike that only an expert can distin-
guish liver coccidia oocysts from those of other rabbit coccidia. Drugs (such as
sulfaquinoxaline) have been used to treat rodent and rabbit coccidia, but drugs
do not always work once clinical signs of infection have appeared. Veterinarians
isolate a sick rodent or rabbit with oocysts in its feces, treat its infection, and pro-
phylactically treat the other animals it may have been in contact with. Coccidia
oocysts need several days outside the host to become infectious, so removing
feces daily and cleaning cages frequently prevent heavy infections. Animals that
recover from even a light coccidian infection are usually immune to reinfections
Endoparasites of Reptiles
Reptiles caught in the wild have many diferent endoparasites; those bred in
captivity generally have few. Because many reptile parasites use an intermediate
214  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
host, they do not infect meat-eating snakes whose diet is restricted to mice raised
away from snake feces.
Nematodes
Snake Ascarids (ophidascaris species)
Adult snake ascarids live in the wall of the esophagus and stomach. Their eggs
pass out with the feces. Amphibians are this parasite's intermediate hosts. When
the larvae burrow into the stomach wall and develop to adulthood. Heavy ascarid
infections may cause the snake to vomit. Reptile-safe anthelmintics treat this
infection. Captive-bred snakes will not contract it if they don't eat amphibians
Lungworm of Snakes and Lizards (Rhabdias species)
Adult snake lungworms are all females. They live in the snake's lungs, where
they lay eggs that the snake coughs up and swallows. The eggs pass out with
the feces and hatch on the ground. The larvae go through two free-living stages
and then become infective. The snake either eats the infective larvae accidentally,
or the larvae burrow through the snake's skin. The larvae then return to the
snake's lungs, where they develop into adult females.
Lungworms can cause severe disease in snakes and lizards. The presence of lung-
worms makes it easier for bacteria to infect the lung. The animal may gape (hold
its mouth wide open), a sure sign that it is not getting enough air. Veterinarians
diagnose lungworm infection by finding the eggs in the feces. Lungworm in-
fections respond to anthelmintics. Veterinarians usually give antibiotics at the
same time to kill any bacteria infecting the lung. The cage of a reptile infected
with lungworm should be cleaned and its feces removed daily.
Tapeworms
Snakes caught in the wild may carry a number of tapeworm larvae. No known
anthelmintics kill larval tapeworms in reptiles. Several varieties of adult tape-
worrm infect reptiles; most cause their host no problems. Although certain drugs
kill the adult tapeworms in snakes, a snake fed only animals raised away from
reptile feces will not become infected.
Protozoans
The amoeba of snakes (Entamoeba inoadens) is a protozoan that infects reptiles.
The trophozoite stage of this protozoan lives in the intestine of turtles, snakes,
Aupiooe isfo y aaoau s saoa aui ut passed 'seis iso au spiezll pue
eaten by a reptile will hatch in the reptile's intestine. The trophozoite repro-
duces by dividing in two.
Most turtles are not severely affected by an intestinal amoeba infection, but it
can kill snakes and lizards. Some of the clinical signs are anorexia and diarrhea.
Veterinarians diagnose the infection by finding the cysts in the feces. Amoeba in-
fection responds to drugs. As with lungworm infections, veterinarians treat amoe
ba infection with an antibiotic to kill accompanying bacteria that cause a separate
disease. Turtles should never be housed with snakes or lizards. Though turtles do
not get sick from this armoeba, they can still pass the cysts in their feces.
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals  215
Endoparasites of Poultry and other Birds
Nematodes
common Ascarids of Poultry (Ascaridia species)
Adult ascarids are medium-sized (5-11 cm) nematodes that live in the host bird's
small intestine. Eggs pass out with the feces. An infective larva develops in the
egg in 5 days. The eggs enter birds in several ways:
o ae o poo tua am a ai dn syid pg au -
· The egg sticks to the foot of a fy that the bird eats.
· An earthworrm eats the egg, and the bird eats the earthworm.
The egg hatches in the bird's stomach and, a week later, the larva burrows into
the intestinal wall. The larva eventually returns to the intestine and matures
to the adult stage. The ascarids cause disease mainly in young birds. The lar-
vae may damage the intestinal wall and cause bleeding. Light infections usually
cause no problems, but heavy infections may cause unthriftiness, anemia, and
diarrhea. Veterinarians diagnose ascarid infection by finding the eggs in the
feces. Ascarid infections respond to anthelmintics. Poultry raised on wire have
raised on litter should have the litter changed weekly The litter should be kept
 dry to slow the developrment of the eggs.
Cecaf Worm (Heterakis gallinae)
The adult cecal worm is a small (1 cm) nematode that lives in the cecum of
many different types of poultry. The eggs pass out with the feces and take about
2 weeks to become infective. The eggs get into the poultry the same ways
ascarid eggs do. The larvae hatch from the eggs in the intestine and then
develop to the adult stage in the cecum.
The cecal worms cause no disease in poultry but are the vector of blackhead, a
disease of poultry caused by a protozoan. Veterinarians diagnose cecal worm
Jo asoui ayl yonu yool sasa aui saoay aul ul sasa aui bupuy q uononu
the common ascarid of poultry. Fortunately, the same anthelmintics and control
measures work against both parasites.
Gapeworm (Syngamus trachea)
The adult gapeworm is a small nematode that lives in the trachea of many
different birds. The male gapeworm is much smaller (5 mm) than the female
(2 cm). The male remains permanently attached to the female by clasping
her with his tail near the front of her body. This arrangement results in
saa ay sael uomae aeuy au ads A e Suoy suom omi a
 e e   a e or  e a sa r  
in twoways:
· The bird accidentally eats the egg while eating food from the ground
· An earthworm or slug eats the egg, the egg hatches in these intermediate
hosts, and the larva burrows into the tissues.
216  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
The larva can live in the intermediate host for several years. When the bird eats
the intermediate host or the egg, the larva comes out in the intestine. The larva
burrows into the intestinal wall and travels through the blood to the lungs. In
the lungs, the larva breaks out into the air passages and moves to the trachea.
where it develops to adulthood.
Heavy gapeworm infections may block the trachea, cutting off the bird's air
supply. Younger birds, because they have smaller tracheas, are more prone to
is go u s sh g pu os si oma a od s
bird gaping while trying to get more air. Heavily infected birds may smother.
Veterinarians diagnose gapeworm infection by its clinical signs and by finding
the eggs in the feces. A number of anthelmintics kill the gapeworm. Infection
um loeiuoo oiui auoo jou op faui os auim uo spuq busieu fq panuaaand aq ue
the eggs or interrmediate hosts. Because the larvae live so long in the intermedi-
ate hosts and because it is not possible or desirable to kill all the earthworms
aq pinoqs spuiq yons ysu ie sfemle aue punoug aul uo pasieu spuiq ‘eae ue u
treated prophylactically with an anthelmintic every 3 weeks. Since wild birds
carry this parasite, efforts should be made to prevent their feces from falling on
 the ground where poultry is being raised.
Capillaria species
 Capillaria are small nematodes (1-2 cm) that live in the crop, intestine, or cecum
aul pue 'gha aul siea puiq e saioads auos ul saoay aul ul ino ssed sasg spua jo
or cecum of a bird that has eaten the Capillaria egg. Other species develop to the
ausaiul o douo aul ul aheis linpe aui ot uaul pue uomuiuea ue ui aleis jeaiel
of a bird that eats the worm. The predilection site (crop, intestine, or cecum)
Birds with a heavy Capillaria infection lose weight and may have diar-
rhea. Veterinarians diagnose the infection by finding the eggs in the feces.
Anthelmintics kill Capillaria; gapeworm control measures may also help prevent
Capillaria infections.
Tapeworms
Davainea proglottina is a small tapeworm (3 mm) of the chicken. Raillietina are
larger (12-25 cm) tapeworms that infect chickens and many other types of birds.
D. proglottina uses a snail as the intermediate host. The Raillietina species use
such insects as ants, flies, and beetles as intermediate hosts. The poultry tape-
worms live in the small intestine of birds.
Unlike most other adult tapeworms, the adults of the poultry tapeworms can
cause severe disease. Heavy D. proglottina infections can be fatal. The clini-
  sl  s  e dn   sis 
Veterinarians diagnose infection by finding the eggs or proglottids in the feces.
Jo dnpnq an suad o) uous poo pue somaden ly suu
infected intermediate hosts) helps prevent heavy infections
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animais  217
Protozoans
Coccidia (Eimeria species)
The coccidia are the most important parasite of poultry, but other birds can also
be infected with coccidia. The coccidia of birds, like the coccidia of other animals,
are host specific. The coccidia of birds live in the small intestine, large intestine,
and cecum of birds. The life cycles of the bird coccidia are the same as those of
ruminant coccidia. Only some bird coccidia species cause severe disease. There
are, for example, six species of Eimeria found in chickens. Four cause severe
disease, and two do not. Clinical signs of severe disease, which usually occurs
in young birds and can be fatal, include bloody diarrhea and weight loss. Even
those species that do not cause severe disease can cause the birds to be unthrifty
Veterinarians diagnose coccidia infection by finding the oocysts in the feces. The
oocysts from diferent species look alike, but an expert parasitologist can tell
them apart. If a bird dies, the location of the damage in the intestine may help
identify the Eimeria species that infected the bird.
A number of drugs treat coccidia in birds, but since the coccidia have often
i  ae sis  a a a aq ap sd inom
that no drug remains in the meat, the farmers switch to nonmedicated feed sev-
Trichomonads (Trichomonas gallinae and Trichomonas gallinarum)
Trichomonas gallinae is a protozoan that lives in the upper portion of the diges-
u suayoo pue shayuni suoalid jo (snseydosa pue douo 'xufieyd) soeun aal
pigeons, it causes a condition known as canker. T. gallinarum lives in the cecum
and large intestine of poultry and occasionally is found in the liver and blood
fected bird transmits Z. gallinae when it drinks from the water dish and some of
the trichomonads from its throat get into the water. An uninfected bird takes a
drink from the same water and swallows the released trichomonads. An infected
into the water or on the food that other birds swallow.
A bird infected with Z gallinae looks drowsy, has foul-smelling breath, and may
drool. Severe T. gallinae infections kill. Infected birds may be unthrifty; severely
infected birds suffer depression and diarrhea. Both of these trichomonads cause
ing the trophozoites in the feces or on a swab of the back of the mouth. There are
drugs (such as dimetridazole) that kill Trichomonas in birds. This drug, however,
is no longer available for this purpose in the United States. To reduce the risk of
infection, wild birds should be prevented from sharing the fock's water source.
Blackhead (Histomonas meleagridis)
sitic protozoan infects the cecum and liver of turkeys, chickens, and other fowl
218  PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
It causes the most severe disease in turkeys. Like the trichomonads, Histomonas
has only the trophozoite stage in its life cycle. It has an unusual mode of trans-
mission: It uses another endoparasite, the cecal worm, as a vector. The cecal
worm, feeding in the cecum, takes in Histomonas trophozoites with its food
These trophozoites then get into the cecal worm's egg before it is laid. The cecal
worm egg hatches in the bird's intestine, freeing the trophozoite, which multi-
cecum, but some may invade the wall of the cecum and feed on the bird's tissues.
Some of the trophozoites may travel to the bird's liver and eat liver tissue
Turkeys (especially young turkeys) with blackhead disease become anorexic and
have yellow, semisolid feces. They usually die about a week after the clinical signs
appear. The name blackhead resulted because the combs on some turkeys' heads
turn dark blue because of a lack of oxygen in the blood. This occurs in only a few
birds, so the absence of a discolored comb does not rule out the disease. Chickens
can be infected with blackhead, but they rarely show any clinical signs unless
they are very young. Even young chickens usually recover from the infection.
    ss  se  n  s
Histomonas trophozoites in a dead bird's cecum. Because the trophozoites do not
survive for long in the feces, they do not turn up on a fecal exam. The presence
of cecal worm eggs and the symptoms of blackhead, however, aid diagnosis
Drugs kill the Histomonas trophozoites in the bird. Because approved drugs are
changed frequently, current information on the regulatory status of anthel-
mintic drugs for poulry should be checked by the veterinarian and regulatory
authorities.
To prevent blackhead infections, the turkeys should be given medicated feed
until just before they are sent to market. Turkeys should also be regularly treat-
ed for cecal worms to prevent blackhead transmission. Moreover, chickens and
protozoan and the cecal worm.
Giardia
Giardia live in many different birds. The life cycle of bird Giardia is the same
as that of dog and cat Giardia. The Giardia of birds do not infect mammals.
saod fue spua aul asneo iou op Aleuaul Anod ui suooaui vpio
but these infections can cause serious disease in pet birds, such as budgerigars.
Giardia infections are more severe, even fatal, in young birds. In these birds, the
clinical signs include weight loss, depression, and diarrhea. There are drugs that
kill Giardia in birds. Infections in overcrowded birds tend to be more severe, so
birds should be kept sufficiently spaced. A bird to be added to a cage of birds
should be checked for Giardia and treated if necessary.
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals  219
CASE STUDY
Heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis)
A 2-year-old cocker spaniel canine from Florida is coughing, especially after his walks
 in the park, and he is lethargic. The owner is concerned, especially since his dog
lo xeoun aut jo sudeioipel pue yiom poolg sisasns ueeuaian aue uoeuiexa
and the serological test identifies adult D. immitis antigen. The radiographs present
The cocker spaniel is hospitalized during the adulticide administration and
observed for thromboembolic complications. There are no complications after
24 hours. The owner takes the cocker spaniel home with instructions for cage
confinement for 3 weeks and restriction of activity for 4 weeks
The prognosis is good. An antigen test performed 12 weeks after the adulticide
CLINICAL SIGNS AND DIAGNOSIS
Heartworm disease is directly related to the amount of worms the animal is infested
with, duration of the infection, and the animal's (host) response. Animals can often
be asymptomatic. Clinical signs are exercise intolerance and coughing. Cachexia,
syncope, and ascites can be seen in severely affected dogs. This is due to pulmonary
are performed by taking a blood sample. Since the dog was showing clinical signs,
radiographs were taken, even if the test came back negative. The radiographs might
show enlarged pulmonary arteries, increased size on the right side of the heart,
veterinarian may be able to visualize them within the main pulmonary artery, or in
the right side of the heart, during an ultrasound of the heart and lung area of the dog.
TREATMENT
i a d   s    
is limited to a short walk on a leash to defecate or urinate. Dogs are usually
hospitalized for at least 24 hours to monitor side effects or complications, which
include fainting spells called syncope, fever, coughing, and heart failure.
Microfilariae should be eliminated after the treatment of adulticidal therapy
is completed, which is usually 3 to 4 weeks later. Ivermectin or milbemycin is
used for this treatment. The dog should be monitored following treatment of a
 s  u s     a   r i
occurs due to the rapid death of microfilariae producing systemic side effects.
Three weeks after microfilaricidal treatment, a blood sample should be evaluated
The dog can be put on preventive medication for heartworm if the test is negative
If the test is positive, he should be retreated and tested again 2 weeks after
Heartworm preventives are ivermectin or milbemycin, diethylcarbamazine, and
annual retesting if the animal is at risk of infection.
220
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
Summary
The life cycle of the various endoparasites of both small and large animals is
an important informational tool in the diagnosis and treatment of infestations
and large animals, wildlife and domestic animals, requires the understanding of
more than just small animal endoparasites by the companion animal technician.
The veterinary technician must become familiar with the common diagnostic
tools and procedures and be able to describe the cormmon endoparasites to both
panion and food animals need to be addressed with the client as part of an over-
all comprehensive health strategy.
CHAPTER 15: Endoparasites of Small Animals
221
REVIEW
MULTIPLE CHOICE
larvae can infect kittens via transmammary transmission.
a. Giardia
b. Toxocara
C. Sarcocystis
d. Both b and c
 2. The coccidia that infects many different animals but produces only oocysts when it infects a cat is
a. Toxoplasma gondil.
b. Giardia lamblia.
C. Sarcocystis.
d. Dipetalonema reconditum.
3. Control of Davainea proglottina, a poultry tapeworm, can be achieved by preventing the chickens from eating
a. feces.
 b. untreated corn.
C. snails.
d. minnows.
MATCHING
Match the parasite on the right with the host site it inhabits on the left.
 1. pulmonary artery
a. The adult of the dog hookworm
2. pharynx
b. The adult of the dog heartworm
 3. trachea
C. The adult of the rabbit pinworm
 4. small intestine
d. The adult of the gapeworm of birds
 5. cecum
e. The trophozoite of Trichomonas galinae of pigeons
FILL IN THE BLANKS
1.
is an ascarid found in both dogs and cats.
2. The
is the time from the point of infection until a
specific diagnostic stage can be identified.
3. Dirofilaria immitis is commonly known as
222
PART TWO: CLINICAL PARASITOLOGY
4. The
 is the only definitive host for T. gondil.
5. The adult
 (Syngamus trachea) is a small nematode
that lives in the trachea of many different birds
6.
are the most important parasite of poultry.
APPENDIX I
Important Techniques for
Veterinary Technicians
to evaluate urine, blood, parasites, feces, exudates, bacteria, and other body
fuids.
There are two types of microscopes: a monocular microscope, with one eye-
piece, and a binocular microscope, with two eyepieces. The ocular lens is
located within the eyepiece(s). The eyepieces magnify the view field 10 times
on most binocular microscopes, which increases the clarity. Some of the less
expensive microscopes magnify the view field only 5 times. The microscope
used for veterinary hospitals or laboratories should have at least three objec-
tive lenses. The 10X is used for scanning the slide. The 10X is known as
the low-power lens. The 40X is used to identify fungus, parasites, and cells.
The 4oX is known as the high dry lens. The 1ooX, also known as the oil
immersion lens, is used to differentiate bacteria and cytologies and confirm
the morphology of cells.
The platform where the slide is placed for viewing the specimen is known as the
'pasuaaan pue umop apisdn headde sioalqo 'adoosoioju punoduo e uo abeis
The left side of the specimen is seen as the right side. The slide, when moved
by the mechanical part of the stage, is reversed. The specimen appears to be
moving to the right when it is actually moving to the left. There are two knobs,
one located inside the other, on the microscope. The outer (larger) knob is the
coarse-focus knob, and the inner (smaller) knob is the fine-focus knob. The focus
knobs bring the specirmen into focus.
The microscope's light condenser delivers a concentrated beam of light to the
specimen. The condenser is located under the stage. The condenser can be raised
or lowered to focus the light source on the specirmen being viewed and to pre-
vent haloes and fuzziness around the specimen. The iris diaphragm controls the
amount of light illuminating the specimen by manually opening or closing the
diaphragm to the armount needed to view the specimen.
223
224 APPENDIX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
Operating the microscope begins by lowering the stage all the way down,
H dn apis hadond aue yiim apis aut suioeid pue anos suail aui uo uiims
frosted tip slides are used, the frosted side should face upward. If clear slides
are used, the side on which the specimen was placed must be marked. The
specimen will look out of focus if the slide was placed on the wrong side, even
after focusing. The lens is moved by holding on to the turret, not the lens. The
turret is located above the lens. Scanning begins using low-power 1oX, then
moving the lens to 4oX high dry. Oil must not be used on the slide with this
lens. When using the 1ooX, focus is first on 1oX. Then the lens is moved to
100X oil immersion. Prior to adjusting the 1ooX in place, a drop of immer-
H uaded sual ylim sual aul do padim st uaul pue apis ayl ot pappe s! lo uois
touch of alcohol can be placed onto the lens paper if there is buildup of oil on
the lens.
How to Do a Staining for Cytologic Preparations
and Bacteria Examination
Following are a few examples of the many stains used in pathology and many
variations in technique.
Romanowsky Stains
Romanowsky stains are used for cytologic preparations. Some of the most
common Romanowsky-type stains are Diff-Quik, DipStat, and Wright's stains.
Romanowsky stains are inexpensive, easy to prepare, easy to use, and have
Aqm st seui lao aui jo useldoifo pue susuo buuis hoy finenb sunxa
they are used for cytology in most practices.
ag pap-ie aq isn faui panedad ane sionoifo pue sreas aul a
staining with a Romanowsky stain. (Air-drying the smear helps to make the
cells adhere to the slide.) Each stain has its own recommended staining proce-
dure and techniques. There are a few variations in staining quality, but consis-
of Romanowsky stains: (1) the fixer solution, which is usually clear; (2) the eosin
ROMANOWSKY STAINING
Fixer solution
 Methanol
Acid dye
Eosin
 Basic dye
 Methylene blue
 Buffer
1.  Prepare smear or cytology and air-dry.
3.  Transfer, without rinsing or drying, to the acid dye solution and stain for
15 to 30 seconds. Gently agitate.
4.  Transfer, without rinsing or drying, to the basic dye solution and stain for
15 to 30 seconds. Gently agitate.
5.  Rinse briefly in buffered water and allow to dry
APPENDlX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians  225
stain, which is an orange color; and (3) the methylene blue stain, an oxidative
product of methylene blue (azure), which is a purple-blue color.
New Methylene Blue Stains
New methylene blue stain is a useful adjunct to Romanowsky stains and gives
excellent nuclear and nucleolar detail. It can be applied directly to a slide that
has been air-dried. This stain is used for bacteria, fungi, mast cells, and the
 presence of nucleated cells, such as reticulocytes.
Gram's Stains
 Gram's stains are used to categorize bacteria. These categories are gram-positive
and gram-negative, based on their cell wall structure. Once the smear has dried
on the slide, it is ready to be heat-fixed. Heat-fixing is done by passing the slide
through a fame two or three times with the specimen side up. Care must be
taken so as not to overheat the slide. The slide should feel warm, not hot. Heat-
fixing helps prevent the specimen from washing off It also helps preserve cell
morphology.
Follow these steps:
1. Place the slide on a staining rack over a sink if possible.
60 seconds. Rinse gently with tap water. (Some cytologists and doctors
prefer distilled water to rinse off the slide.)
 3. Pour the second solution, Gram's iodine, onto the smear (slide). Wait 30 t0
60 seconds. Rinse gently with tap water.
4. Rinse the smear with a decolorizer until the solvent flows colorlessly from
 rm a sn ue asu sps oi oi g syn ansn stu s au
water.
5. The last solution to pour onto the smear (slide) is the safranin
counterstain. Wait for 30 to 60 seconds. Rinse with tap water.
6. Place the slide on a rack to air-dry or blot dry.
7. Examine microscopically under 1ooX lens (oil immersion).
The gram-positive bacteria retain the crystal violet iodine complex and appear
take up the secondary stain, safranin, and appear red.
How to Prepare an Ear Cytology and
Microbiological Examination
A drop of mineral oil is placed on a clean glass slide. An ear swab contain-
ing the ear debris is suspended in the mineral oil. If the debris is thick, the
o uo poid si ds aaoo y  ae dn yeq o f ps si axn
of the debris and mineral oil and examined on low power for the presence
of ear mites (Otodectes). This method is done especially if the debris is brown
and flaky.
226 APPENDlX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
Next, another sample is taken using a new ear swab, which is gently rolled along
a clean glass slide to allow cells and organisms to adhere. Heat-fixing the slide
before staining will help fix the proteins to the slide. Some of the stains used
are Diff-Quik, Wright's stain, and Gram's stain. Yeast and bacteria are the most
common abnormal findings.
How to Do a Fine-Needle Aspiration
snoaueino jo saldues uieiqo oi pasn aunpood e st ( tNd) uoeudse alpaau-au
tissue masses and lymph nodes for cytology evaluation. The size of the syringe
used for external masses can be 3, 6, or 12 ml (the most common size is 12 ml).
The size of the syringe used is influenced by the consistency of the tissue being
aspirated. The samples are collected with a 22- to 25-gauge needle. A few clean
slides (dust free and no fingerprints) will be needed to place the sample on. It is
best to use frosted edge slides so the samples can be labeled. Another advantage
to frosted edge slides is that one side of the edge is frosted and the other side
is not, so it is easy to tell which side of the slide the sample has been placed on,
especially after staining.
First, the mass is swabbed with alcohol. (Some veterinarians choose not to swab
the mass with alcohol.) The mass should be stabilized between the fingers to
aid penetration of the skin and mass. The needle is inserted into the center of
the mass. Strong negative pressure is applied by withdrawing the plunger of the
syringe to about three-fourths the volume of the syringe. Several core samples
 s  a s   ar    a
s  s os   s an   o si ss a s
does not become contaminated. After the sample is collcted, the negative pres-
sure is relieved from the syringe, and the needle is withdrawn from the mass.
The needle is removed from the syringe, and air is drawn up into it. The needle
is replaced on the syringe.
The contents in the needle are squirted onto the middle of the slide. A second
slide is used to smear the contents. It is a good idea to make a few sample slides.
A permanent marker should be used to label the slides so that the identification
will not come off during the staining. The slides are allowed to air-dry, before
fixing with the appropriate stain (Romanowsky stains). Slides for in-house
cytology can be stained; slides that will be submitted to an outside laboratory
should not be stained.
How to Do a Cellophane Tape Preparation
for Lice or Mites
olo on budeaos uys e jo peaisul pasn aq ueo uoeedand adei aueydolao v
lice or mites that live on the surface of the skin (in the keratin layer) and in the
hair coat of the host—for example, Cheyletiella (walking dandruff), which is most
commonly seen on rabbits and cats.
sp pida dn yid o us aui oi pde si ei uudoao eap jo aoaid 
lice, or mites. A strip of mineral oil is placed on a clean slide. Then the tape with the
APPENDIX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
227
sample is placed on the slide so that the adhesive side of the tape touches the min-
 eral oil. A cover slip is not necessary but can be used to keep the tape from getting
wrinkled. The slide is ready to be examined microscopically for ectoparasites.
How to Do a Skin Scraping
A skin scraping requires a #10 scalpel blade, three or four slides, and some min-
eral oil. It is best to get a sample from three or four different lesions if possible.
The lesions are not prepped. First, the lesion is squeezed to bring the mites
to the surface (Figure A-1). Sorme are deep in the hair follicles and sebaceous
glands. A small amount of mineral oil is placed on the blade to help the sample
uo ul si suideios uoisal aul ol hejnoiuadiad piay s apeiq au 'l ol yos
direction only, usually away from the body to avoid irritation or cutting into the
skin. The periphery of the lesion is scraped until capillary blood oozing is seen
Remember, Demoder mites live deep in the hair follicles and sebaceous glands
and Sarcoptes live in surface debris. One drop of mineral oil is placed on the slide,
and the sample is transferred on the blade to the slide. Some veterinarians add
a cover slip at this point. The slide is now ready for examining the mites under
the microscope's low power.
FIGURE A-1
Two registered veterinary technicians
7eo e uo hurdeaos uys e huruoad
How to Do a Direct Smear for a Fecal Exam
The materials needed for a direct smear are a container of saline, an applicator
stick, a microscope, slides, and a cover slip. Lugol's iodine (optional) can be used
cysts and trophozoites.
A drop of saline is placed on the slide, and an equal amount of feces is mixed in
thoroughly using the applicator stick until there is a hormogeneous emulsion on
228
3APPENDIX 1: Important Techniquesfor Veterinary Technicians
the slide. The smear on the slide should be thin enough to read newspaper print
through the smear. Any large pieces of feces are removed. If the ermulsion on the
slide is not homogeneous, another drop of saline can be added and the sample
rermixed. The cover slip is placed over the smear The entire smear is examined
av (g-t1 aunatg aas) aeaiel o sisa ahiseued oy sual aaoalao xoi aui suisn
examining the entire smear, the 1oX objective lens is changed to a 40X objective
lens for motile protozoal organisms, such as Giardia and Isospora (coccidians)
The smear is examined again. More sophisticated methods using rapid assay test
kits are also used to detect Giardia.
How to Do a Fecal Flotation
A fecal fotation is used to examine feces. The flotation is known as the concen-
aeu oiseed pue sqap leoay aui jo Aiiaeia oyroads uo paseq pouiau uoe
rial. Flotation kits are common in veterinary practice. A test tube or a vial can
still be used with a cover slip if a fotation kit is not available. The flotation kits
have a vial with a filter and prepared zinc sulfate or sometirmes sodium nitrate
solution (Figure A-2)
FIGURE A-2
Preparation and steps for a fecal
flotation.
About 1/2 teaspoon of feces is placed in the vial or cup, and the fotation solution
(zinc sulfate) is added to the line on the cup. If a kit is not being used, 20 ml of
flotation solution is added to the vial. The stick applicator is used to mix the so-
lution and feces together, especially if the fecal sample is a little hard. The strain-
er is added to the cup, and more solution is added until a meniscus is formed.
A cover slip is placed on top of the cup. If a kit is not being used, cheesecloth can
be used as a strainer. The cheesecloth is placed over the top of the vial, and the
mixture is poured through the cheesecloth into another vial until a meniscus is
formed. A cover slip is placed gently on top of the second vial.
The cup or vial is allowed to sit undisturbed for 10 to 20 minutes, depending
 on the type of solution or kit being used. Parasite eggs in the feces fotation cup
ds laao aui dno aui daao paoeld dis aaoo aul ot yons pue dot aui oi ieou 
is removed (after the appropriate tirme) by picking it straight up. The cover slip
is placed on a slide with the wet side adjacent to the slide, and the microscopic
exam is done using the 1oX objective lens.
APPENDlX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians  229
How to Use the Modified Knott's Technique for
Heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis and Dipetalonema
reconditum)
The sample of blood used for this test must be uncoagulated blood. Heparin
or other anticoagulants such as EDTA may be used to prevent the blood from
coagulating.
1. Place 1 ml of uncoagulated blood into a 15-ml centrifuge tube and add
9 ml of 2 percent formalin.
2. Invert the sample to mix, and shake gently to lyse the red blood cells.
3. Centrifuge the sample for 5 minutes.
4. Pour off the supernatant by inverting the centrifuge tube once to let it
drain.
5. Add 2 drops of methylene blue stain to the sedirment on the bottom of
the tube.
6. Gently tap the tube to mix the sediment with the stain.
the tube and place it on the slide.
 8. Place a cover slip on the slide and examine under (1oX) objective lens for
microfilariae.
Diroflaria species coil and uncoil, whereas the Dipetalonema species may
sometimes glide across the slide. By using the modified Knott's technique, the
concentrates “relax" and stain the microflariae while lysing the red blood cells,
allowing for easier visibility of the microfilariae. The most accurate way to
differentiate between Diroflaria and Dipetalonema microflariae is to measure the
How to Use the Filter Technique for Heartworm
(Dirofilaria immitis and Dipetalonema reconditum)
The filter technique is the most common in veterinary practices today An
example of the membrane filtration test kits is Di-Fil (EVSCO). The kits come
with lysing solution, stain, and filters. The membrane filtration test is similar to
the Knott's test, but the difference is that a millipore filter is used to concentrate
the microflariae. The flter test requires 1 ml whole blood and 1o ml of lysing
solution. If the test is going to be performed immediately, an anticoagulant is
not necessary. Heparin or EDTA anticoagulants should be used if the test is
performed at a later time.
First, 1 ml of whole blood is drawn up into a 12-ml syringe. The needle is removed
01 payone si ahufs aui padim si aluufs aul jo d aui pue stuufs ayi uo
the nozzle port of the lysing solution bottle, and 1o ml of the lysing solution is
drawn up (Figure A-s). The whole blood and lysing solution are mixed together
by inverting the syringe a few times.
230
APPENDIX 1: Important Technigues for Veterinary Technicians
FIGURE A-3
Filter technique for heartworm. Attach
the syringe to the nozzle port of the
dn meap pue anoq uonnjos buisfl
I0 ml of the lysing solution.
The cap to the filter is unscrewed and the O-ring removed from the filter. A new
filter is placed on the mesh wire screen that is inside the filter. The dividing
paper found between each of the membrane filters is discarded. The O-ring is
B
FIGURE A-4
Filter technique for heartworm.
Place a new filter onto the mesh wire
screen that is inside the filter. Remove
the O-ring from the filter. Place the
O-ring onto the filter membrane.
C
Next, 10 ml of water are injected into the filter holder to remove excess fragments
(Figure A-5).
The filter cap is unscrewed and the filter membrane removed using thumb
forceps. The flter membrane is placed on a clean glass slide. A drop of stain,
which comes with the kit, is added to the center of the mermbrane. A cover slip
is placed over the stained flter membrane (Figure A-6).
231
凸
FIGURE A-5
Filter technique for heartworm. Inject
I0 ml of water into the filter holder to
remove excess fragments.
A
B
FIGURE A-6
Filter technique for heartworm.
Unscrew the filter cap and remove the
 filter membrane using thumb forceps.
Place the filter membrane onto a clean
glass slide. Add a drop of stain, which
comes with the kit, to the center of the
membrane. Place a cover slip over the
stained filter membrane.
The sample is examined under (1oX) objective lens for microfilariae (Figure A-7).
The flter holder must be rinsed thoroughly with water after each use.
FIGURE A-7
 Filter technigue for heartworm.
Examine under (1oX) objective lens 
for microfilariae. Rinse the filter holder
thoroughly with water after each use.
232 APPENDlX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
How to Use the Buffy Coat Method for Microfilariae
This method is not as common in veterinary practices. A microhematocrit tube
is used the same way as for collecting a blood sample for a PCV/TP (packed cell
been evaluated, but before the TP is evaluated. To mark the tube, a fle or glass
cutter is used to scratch the microhematocrit tube at the buffy coat level. The rmi
crohermatocrit tube is snapped to break it. The section of the tube containing the
suuiau jo doup auo pue aues jo doup auo apis aui otuo paddet si jeoo Ang
blue stain are added to the buffy coat on the slide. A cover slip is placed on top and
the sample is examined under the (1oX) objective lens for microfilariae.
How to Do a Fungal culture Using Dermatophyte
Testing Media
The most common cause of dermatophytosis, a fungal infection, is Microsporum
canis. The three species of fungus that cause this condition are Trichophyton
mentagrophytes, Microsporum canis, and Microsporum gypseum. The dermatophyte
testing media is made of a Sabouraud dextrose agar, which is a more convention-
al medium for culture of dermatophytes. T'he Sabouraud dextrose agar comes in
doi mauos e yim uef apufo punou e do lauieiuoo joeduoo auenbs e :suoy oml
The media is amber in color prior to use.
To collect a specimen for the dermatophyte testing media (DTM), a pair of
hemostatic forceps is used. The forceps are rinsed with water if they have been
so that the specimen will not stick to them.
Some veterinarians prefer to clean the area of the lesion with alcohol to kill
saprophytic fungi. Allow the area to dry before collecting the specimen. This
procedure should be used with pigs, since specimens from pigs are usually con-
taminated with saprophytic fungi. Most veterinarians do not clean the area with
alcohol because they feel it could interfere with the collection of the specirmen.
The hairs at the periphery of the lesion are plucked, and the hairs and scales
(specirmen) are pressed onto the media gently, taking care not to bury the hairs
Pinous haaoo aui moul oi uasrxo spaau snuny aui asneoaq eipau aul oul
remain on the container loosely to allow aeration. The DTM should incubate
at room temperature and be examined daily for color changes (red) and growth
(white or cream fluffy). The red color media should appear simultaneously with
the fuffy white or cream dermatophyte colonies. Colonies that have a green or
black coloration should be noted as a contaminant. The media has a phenol red
pH indicator. The fungi utilize the protein in the media, which produces alkaline
metabolites that turn the media red.
The information is recorded in a DTM log daily for 1o days, unless the DTM
lightly onto the fuffy white or cream colony. The fuffy dermatophyte colony
APPENDIX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
233
will adhere to the sticky side of the cellophane tape. (Sorme practitioners prefer
to collect samples with forceps.) A drop of new methylene blue or lactophenol
blue stain is placed onto a slide. The stain helps to identify the dermatophytes.
-exa oidoosoo y apis pue ueis auijo dot uo paoeid si adei auudolao au
yoiy aui uaui pue (xor) sual aaloalqo amod-moi aui yiim isuy auop si uoeu
dry power objective lens (4oX).
How to Do a Blood smear
A blood smear must be done as soon as possible before the blood clots. Cells are
smeared onto the slide making the thickness a one-cell layer. (The slides rmust be
clean and dust free.) If the slides are frosted, the frosted side rmust face the technician.
A good way to check is to feel both sides: One side will be smooth and the other side
rough to the touch. A small amount of blood is placed on the end of the slide. (The
most comrmon problem with making slides is that too much blood is applied to the
slide.) The second slide (the one with no blood on it) is used to make the smear (see
Figure A-8A). The slide is held at a 30-degree angle over the slide lying on a fat
surface (slide with the blood). The slide is drawn back to touch the drop of blood
(Figure A-8B). Now the blood should spread along the width of the spreader slide
(slide without the blood). The spreader slide is moved forward (Figure A-8C), mak-
ing a feather effect (Figure A-sD). If it goes off the slide, too much blood has been
used. The slide must be air-dried quickly to freeze those cells as they are.
A
B
FIGURE A-8
How to do a blood smear.
234
How to Use a Hemacytometer for a
White Blood Cell Count
The manual Unopette hemacytometer method of counting WBCs is the leuko-
cyte test most commonly used in veterinary hospitals. Unopette WBC test kits
contain diluting reservoirs and capillary pipettes for making a 1:1oo dilution of
blood in ammonium oxalate or acetic acid, both of which lyse erythrocytes. Cells
are counted using a hemacytometer and cover slip (Figure A-9). Unopette is
FIGURE A-9
INSERT SAMPLE HERE
How to use a hemacytometer.
COVER SLIP
SQUARE CHAMBERS
COVER SLIP SUPPORT 
1. Add the appropriate amount of blood (microhematocrit tube amount) to
the diluent (lysing solution).
2. After 10 minutes, shake the reservoir to mix the cells evenly and convert to
a dropper assembly.
3. Carefully clean the hemacytometer and cover slip to ensure they are free
of dust and fingerprints. Cover slips for counting chambers are specially
must be heavy enough to overcome the surface tension of a drop of liquid.
4. Apply the cover slip to the hemacytometer, and load the solution into each
groove of the hemacytometer located in the middle on each side. The solu-
o pinn soxa ou ieue auns ae ds haaoo aue yreaua peads llm us
into the grooves between chambers. If this happens or if air bubbles can be
seen on the counting chambers, the filling procedure must be repeated.
5. Place the hemacytometer under the microscope using 4X objective. There
is a counting grid comprising 9 primary squares with 16 tiny squares
contained within each of these primary squares (Figure A-1o). Count the
cells in one of the 16 tiny squares using 10X objective. The number of
cells counted is multiplied by the dilution and volume factors. Counts are
sd punoo slo leot pooa go (i haouu ad sllao se passaxas
10 percent of those counted, multiplied by a dilution factor of
100 (80 + 8 = 88 × 100 = 8800/μl)
How to Do a Urinalysis
A urinalysis provides information on the condition of the kidneys and the animal's
ability to filter and excrete metabolites norrmally. When there are disturbances
APPENDIX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
235
FIGURE A-10
Bmm
The counting grid.
1mm
in the animal's body, such as the metabolic or endocrine system (diabetes mel-
litus, for example), a urinalysis shows abnormalities.
aq louueo ajdues aul jl 'alqissod se uoos se pazfjeue aq pinous aldues auun y
analyzed within 30 minutes of collection, the sample should be refrigerated
Urine that is left out at room temperature for a longer period of time will lose
valid information due to degenerative changes. Urine can be refrigerated up to
6 t0 12 hours. Refrigeration will help preserve urine constituents. Refrigerated
urine must be warmed to room temperature for evaluation. A gross examination
is an observation that can be done prior to and without the aid of a microscope
or chemical reagents.
First, the sample is labeled with the animal's identification. Part of the sample is
centrifuged immediately for cytologic evaluations. Next, 5 ml of urine is poured
into a test tube and centrifuged for 5 minutes at a low speed (1500-2000 rpm).
The supernatant is poured off leaving only the sediment on the bottom of the
test tube. The sediment is resuspended by tapping the bottom of the test tube
gently. It is now ready for cytologic evaluation. A drop of urine sediment is
placed on a glass slide. A sediment stain can be added to the urine if desired.
A cover slip is placed on top of the drop. The sediment is examined on low
power (10X) frst and then on high power (40X) for cast, crystals, cells, and bac.
on it. Information on how the sample was collected is recorded (cystocentesis,
catheterization, free catch, or ex pressing the bladder).
Specific gravity is used to evaluate the renal tubule's ability to concentrate
or dilute fltrates from the glomerulus. A refractometer measures the specific
gravity. A drop of urine is placed on the prism glass, and the cover is closed. To
deterrmine specific gravity, the refractometer is pointed toward the light and the
scale is read on the right-hand side. The measurement at the boundary of the
light to dark is read and the specific gravity is recorded on the lab sheet.
236 APPENDlX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
The color is recorded. The color of the urine usually correlates with specific
gravity. If the urine is lighter in color, the specific gravity is lower (diluted).
If the urine is darker in color, the specific gravity is higher (concentrated)
Urochromes are pigments in the urine that make it yellow. Urine is normally
light yellow to amber in color. Rabbits have orange to reddish brown pigments
of bile pigments.
The transparency is recorded. Norrmal urine is clear Norrmal equine urine is cloudy
due to calcium carbonate crystals. The terms cloudy, clear, and focculent (particles
seen with the naked eye) are used to describe the transparency of the urine
sweet-fruity odor. This indicates ketones, which are commonly found in animals
that have diabetes mellitus, acetonemia in cows, and pregnancy disease in ewes.
An ammonia odor can indicate cystitis, caused by bacteria, which produces ure-
ase that has metabolized urea to ammonia.
The biochermical evaluation is conducted using a reagent strip. The strip is dipped
objects.) Each pad is read at the appropriate time, comparing color changes to
the chart provided with the reagent strips. The information is recorded on the
lab sheet. Reagent strips are commonly used to deterrmine pH, ketones, and glu-
cose. The pH expresses the hydrogen ion concentration of the urine (assess the
body's acid-base balance). Ketones, which are produced during fat metabolism,
cate that the body is using more fat and fewer carbohydrates to metabolize into
energy, which results in catabolism and ketonuria. The ketone concentration in
other pads on the reagent strip test for protein, bilirubin, and blood in the urine
sample. Nitrite, urobilinogen, leukocytes, and SG (specific gravity) pads are also
available. Care must be used in the evaluation of urobilinogen. The urobilinogen
a pinous 'uasud g 'sat faea oyiads aui shonp ala go fouaied o sapos
ignored because it never matches with the refractometer.
The microscopic examination of the sediment is usually performed by taking
a drop of the sediment, also known as supernatant, left at the bottom of the
tube after decanting the urine in the tube that was centrifuged for 5 minutes at
is added. The sediment is examined on low-power objective (ioX) assessing
for casts, cells, and crystals. It is examined on high-power objective (4oX) to
identify morphology of cells and elements and to detect bacteria. The results
arerecorded.
How to Do a Quantitative Fecal Egg Count
Two common quantitative fecal egg count techniques are the McMaster and
isid Sueinio u suo pue senb umo sil seu yoeg uuang
APPENDIX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
237
eggs per gram (EPG) of a feces sample. It is increasingly important to be able to
identify controlling populations of endoparasites on the pasture and rangelands
where our equine and food-producing anirmals reside
Modified McMaster Technique
The MeMaster technique is used for demonstrating and counting helminth eggs
 e aa a sa oe su a s a s p 
etched onto the upper surface. When flled with a suspension of feces in flotation
fuid, much of the debris willsink while eggs foat to the surface, where they can
easily be seen and those under the grid counted. There are several commercially
available kits. The Paracount-EPG is a fecal analysis kit designed to assist the
veterinary staff in making recommendations for parasite control within a herd
or flock of grazing livestock/horses and is also routinely used in monitoring the
parasite control of individual horses. The McMaster technique is the most widely
employed method for this purpose Its touted capabilities include the following:
 1. Determining the presence/absence of strongyle and ascarid eggs
expressed as EPG
2. Determining the efficacy of a dewormer drug
 3. Tracking the required interval between dewormings
4. Determining the relative contaminative potential of an individual animal
1e sunoo Ddg ue ueiuieu pue houou oi aq pinous jeol s.geis fieuaiaa au
Jo ueues aeidae ueuie oi aneudodde uum uomap i pue siaaal mon
the animals' pastures, water sources, and corrals (Figure A-11)
FIGURE A-11
Students preparing the McMaster test.
TIVE
NTACT
URAGED
238
3APPENDIX 1: Important Techniquesfor Veterinary Technicians
Equipment Needed (in addition to the Modified McMaster kit)
1. Microscope (total 10oX power) with mechanical stage
2. Flotation solution (use a commercial brand of sodium nitrate with a
specific gravity 1.2) or zinc sulfate (1.8 sp.gr.)
3. Paracount-EPG kit which includes:
a. Two McMaster slides with standard grid
b. Two mixing vials
c. Two transfer syringes
Collection of sample
Fresh samples are preferred (best results if samples are taken within a few hours
at room temperature). The storing of samples should be in a sealed container in
the refrigerator.
Procedures (Figures A-12a, A-12b, A-13, A-14)
1. Add 26 ml of fotation solution to calibrated vial (provided with kit).
2. Add feces to bring volume up to 30 ml level.
3. Stir/mix thoroughly.
4. Charge one McMaster slide chamber with first sample.
5. Charge the second chamber with a different sample.
6. Count the eggs under each grid promptly, utilizing grid lines
 7. Calculate EPG. Add the numbers of eggs for both grids. Multiply their sum
by 25. The result is equal to the EPG for this sample, using the 26.4 ml ratio
of fotation solution to feces. There may be a slight variance in the above
formula for species other than horses or cattle. For sheep or goats check with
the manufacturer of the particular kit purchased for modifications based on
species diferences in EPG calculations and initial fecal sample dilutions.
FIGURE A-12a
Adding feces to the flotation solution.
APPENDlX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
239
FIGURE A-12b
Adding enough fecal sample to
total s0 ml.
FIGURE A-13
Charging the chamber.
When to Test
 Sheep and goats are generally tested 7 to 10 days after treatment; horses and
 made after determining efficacy based on this test.
Baermann Technique
The Baermann technique is used to separate nematode larvae frorm fecal material.
It requires more time, equipment, and finesse than the McMaster. It is especially
Filaroides, Crenosoma, Muellerius, Protostrongylus) or threadworm (Strongyloides
canine species. Use extra precaution when handling feces of suspected animals.
240
APPENDIX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians
FIGURE A-14
Counting the EPG.
Although there is no standard equipment for performing the Baermann tech-
nique, some commonly used equipment can be used as each laboratory modifies
its procedures to fit its own specific needs.
Equipment Needed
Microscope (total 10oX power) with mechanical stage
Centrifuge
 Funnel and ring stand
 Rubber or plastic tubing
 Pinch clamp or clip
Cheesecloth
Metal rod or thin stick
 Strainer or wire screen
15-ml centrifuge tubes
Scissors
 Spatula
Rubber band
Flask
Iodine
Pasteur pipette
Setting Up Equipment
Attach 3 to 4 inches of rubber tubing to the narrow portion of the funnel. Place
the funnel in the ring stand. Make a tight seal using the pinch clamp at the end
of the rubber tubing.
APPENDlX 1: Important Techniques for Veterinary Technicians  241
Procedures
1. Measure approximately 5 to 10 grams of fecal material and place in
the center of the cheesecloth (using several layers). Only use enough
cheesecloth to make a small pouch containing the sample.
2. Bind the stick or metal rod to the cheesecloth pouch with the rubber band.
3. Suspend the pouch containing the fecal sample in the funnel with the
metal rod.
4. Fill the funnel with lukewarrm water covering the entire sample and let
stand for 24 hours.
5. Draw off 3 to 4 ml of fuid from the stem of the funnel and place into a test
tube.
6. Centrifuge at 1oo0 rpm for 2 minutes
7. Use a Pasteur pipette to transfer a small droplet of the sedimented fuid to
a microscope slide.
8. Add one drop of iodine to fix the larvae to the slide, and gently cover with
a cover slip.
APPENDIX II
Common Diseases
This appendix outlines the more common diseases of certain select species. It is
by no means a complete list. The diseases are arranged according to the portion
of the body that is affected and specific symptoms
Mice and Rats
Signs of ill health are frequently reflected in the external appearance of mice
and rats. The coat becomes ruffled, and the anirmals often remain immobile even
when handled. Soiling of the perineum, the area between the genital opening
and the anus, may occur if diarrhea is present. In addition, nasal or ocular dis-
the most common cause of ill health.
Skin Disorders
1. Skin wounds/abscesses—often occur in males that are housed together
a. Lesions: small puncture wounds or abscesses
b.  Areas of hair loss and ulceration: often self-inficted due to stress
2. Ringworm—scaly areas of hair loss; reddened and pruritic patches
3. Mammary glands
a. Mastitis: infrequent inflammation of the mammary gland
b.  Neoplasia: usually malignant in mice; frequently benign in rats
Gastrointestinal Disorders
1. Malocclusions—overgrowth of incisors resulting in inappetence, or loss of
appetite, and weight loss
242
APPENDIX Il:Common Diseases
243
organisms:
a. Protozoa: large numbers may cause inflammation of the gastrointesti-
nal tract
b.Entamoeba murisi, Trichomonas murisi, Giardia, Eimeria (sp.): common
ood ui iday aue siue ji aseasip asneo ueo inq dupuy leuaiouio
conditions
C.Helminthes: cestodes (Hymenolepis) and nematodes (Syphacia obvelata,
Aspiculuris sp.) can result in loss of condition and diarrhea. Syphacia can
cause rectal prolapse in mice.
d. Bacteria: may lead to generalized loss of condition or sudden death in
addition to diarrhea
-eauh ui shnsau osie sofid snra fq pasn aseasip s lazzai a
ized illness and death
Respiratory Disorders
These constitute the most common problems in mice and rats. Respiratory
disorders often produce extensive pneumonic lesions at necropsy; however, the
affected animal may be asymptomatic.
1. Signs
a. Dyspnea
b.  Weight loss
c.Rhinitis
d. Abnorrmal respiratory sounds
e. Hunched appearance
2. Causes
a.Viral
i. Sendai virus
ii.Pneumonia virus of mice
b.Bacterial
i. Mycoplasma pulmonis
ii.Pasteurella pneumotropica
ii. Bordetella bronchiseptica
c.  Environmental
i. Stress
ii. Overcrowding
ii. Unclean housing
244  APPENDIX Il: Common DiseaseS
Neurological Disorders
1. Central nervous disease
a.Viral: can cause paralysis in mice; occurs rarely
i. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis: zoonotic and usually asymp-
tomatic, but death with or without paralysis can occur
ii. Mouse (Theiler's disease) encephalitis virus: rare progressive
paralysis of hindquarters; produces general signs of ill health
b.Bacterial: rolling disease (Mycoplasma neurolyticum) due to exotoxin;
causes roll in 1 to 2 hours and death within 4 hours
2. Middle (inner) ear disease
a. Signs
i． Head tilt
i. Circling
ii. Loss of balance
b. Causes
i. Bacterial
ii. Mycoplasmal
Guinea Pigs
Skin Disorders
1. Skin wounds/abscesses—localized abscesses, scratches, and bite wounds;
caging may damage skin and cause localized infection)
a.Hair loss (without obvious itching)
i. Hair chewing, either by other guinea pigs or self-inflicted
ii. Alopecia: deficiency of hair growth; frequently found in females
during late pregnancy
b. Ectoparasites
i. Mites (commonly Sarcoptes): cause extensive pruritus, or itching;
diagnosed by skin scraping
ii. Lice: rarely cause pruritus unless infestation is severe
2. Ringworm—fairly common, producing patches of hair loss; affected skin
usually scaly, but may be markedly infamed and pruritic (example: zoonotic
Trichophyton mentagrophytes)
3. Mammary glands—conditions such as mastitis can be avoided with
improved hygiene and frequent cage cleaning
APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases  245
4. Cervical lymphadenitis, or "lumps"—-lymph nodes of neck often burst and
a. Often results in Streptococcus zooepidemicus, a secondary infection
b.  Can become enzootic (the disease is sporadic but in the population)
c. Chronic abscessation most common; some animals die suddenly with
septicemia
5. Pododermatitis—bacterial infection of the feet, producing swelling and ul-
ceration of foot pads
a. Often occurs with Staphylococcus aureus
b.Associated with rough, infrequently cleaned fooring
Gastrointestinal Disorders
1. Malocclusions—-can occur in the incisor or cheek teeth; once one group
of teeth has become affected, the abnormal jaw position tends to allow the
other group of teeth to overgrow; results in anorexia and excessive drool
2. Diarrhea—-relatively common problem in guinea pigs; often of unknown
etiology
a. Protozoa: often a secondary problem, developing as a sequel to initial
intestinal disorder
b. Helminthes (of little clinical significance)
C.Bacteria
i. Salmonella: can cause acute enteritis and sudden death, abortion, or
generalized loss of weight and condition
ii.Yersinia pseudotuberculosis: causes diarrhea and weight loss; death
after 3 to 4 weeks (some animals die acutely in 24—48 hours or
develop nonfatal infections restricted to cervical lymph nodes)
The condition is zoonotic; chronic disease may cause enlarged
mesenteric and abdominal lymph nodes.
d. Nonspecific: follows stress or dietary change
e. Antibiotic-induced: may kill normal gut fora, allowing overgrowth of
Clostridium (sp.) that produce fatal enterotoxin
Respiratory System Disorders
Respiratory disease is relatively common in guinea pigs and may be caused by a
variety of agents.
1. Signs
a. Dyspnea, or shortness of breath
b. Abnormal respiratory sounds
246
APPENDIX Il: Common DiseaseS
C. Sneezing
d. Nasal discharge
e. Weight loss
f.  Inappetence
g.Depression
h.Death
2. Causes (Bordetella bronchiseptica is the most common cause)
Musculoskeletal System
1. Hypovitaminosis C (scurvy)—signs develop within 2 to 3 weeks of
restricted vitamin C intake
a. Joints swollen, painful; animals refuse to move; loss of condition; hair
scruffy, teeth loose
b. Multiple hemorrhages in muscles and around joints
Miscellaneous Conditions
ing first 4 days postpartum; abnormal carbohydrate metabolites develop in
blood, causing depression, anorexia, and often dyspnea (labored breathing);
death usually rapid; obese animals more susceptible
2. Conjunctivitis—may be associated with respiratory infection but usually
appears secondary to local trauma or irritation
Rabbits
Skin Disorders
1. Skin wounds/abscesses—-result from cage mates and fights with other
animals
a.Hair loss (without obvious itching)
b. Ectoparasites
C.  Mites: can cause severe pruritus
i. Psoroptes cuniculi: usually involves the ear canal, but can also in-
clude the pinnae (the external ear); canal becomes reddened, ulcer-
ated, and plugged with brownish exudate
ii. Cheyletiella parasitivora.r: causes loss of hair in tufts with an accu
mulation of skin fakes and debris at base of hair; underlying skin
reddened and sore
ii. Sarcoptic and notoedric mange
2. Ringworm—produces areas of hair loss with scaling of the skin; severe
pruritus may result, and the lesion may be encrusted with exudate
APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases  247
3. Mammary glands—-mastitis can develop when female's litter is abruptly
weaned; poor husbandry increases incidence
4. Necrobacillosis—necrotic skin lesions; condition progresses gradually,
rabbit losing condition, eventually becoming severely emaciated and dying
bottom surface of the hind feet; due to trauma or constant exposure to
damp and dirty solid floors
6. Bacterial dermatitis—areas of reddened and ulcerated skin on the ventral
abdomen and groin region of rabbits housed under poor conditions
a.Staphylococcus(sp.)
b.Pseudomonas (sp.)
Gastrointestinal Disorders
1. Malocclusions—-result in impaired appetite and drooling
2. Gastric hairball—excessive grooming and ingestion of hair may lead to
doaaap uao pue suaddeui ae sieue (lequey aliel e jo uoonpod aui
diarrhea due to secondary digestive tract disturbance
3. Diarrhea—a range of different factors can produce diarrhea or enteritis
a.Protozoa: Eimeria magna, E. media, E. perforans, and E. irresidua may be
primary causes of diarrhea
 b. Helminthes: in large numbers, the nematode Passalurus ambiguus may
cause diarrhea
C.Bacteria
i. Salmonella typhimurium may cause enteritis with high mortality in
young rabbits (zoonotic)
i.Bacillus piliformis, also known as Clostridium piliforme(Tyzzer's
disease), results in anorexia and diarrhea with high mortality or a
chronic form with progressive loss of condition
iii. Enteritis complex: caused by a wide range of factors, including
poor husbandry, diet, and bacterial, parasitic, and fungal agents;
causes depression, fecal staining of perineum, and a watery-feeling
abdomen
4. Pseudotuberculosis—leads to loss of condition and development of caseous
nodules in the abdomen; zoonotic
5. Hepatic coccidiosis—caused by Eimeria stiedae; parasitizes the bile ducts
and produces severe liver damage; signs are absent or nonspecific (poor
 growth, loss of condition)
Respiratory Disorders
Pasteurella multocida, found in the respiratory tract, produces a clinical
248  APPENDIX Il: Common DiseaseS
disease triggered by stress, pregnancy, and lactation; can be chronic and
result in sudden death due to the rapid onset of severe bronchopneumonia
a. Secondary conditions, rhinitis and conjunctivitis; purulent discharge
 most common sign of either
b. Remission can occur following treatment
2. Bordetella bronchiseptica—causes acute bronchopneumonia
Neurological Disorders
multocida
2. Encephalitozoon (Nosema) cuniculi—parasite that affects the CNS and kid
neys; rarely causes clinical illness, but generalized CNS disturbances or
renal dysfunction (interstitial nephritis) may be seen
3. Totoplasma gondiicauses toxoplasmosis, paralysis, or convulsions follow.
yieap fq pamolloy aouaiaddeul pue uoissaidap jo pouad e gul
4. Posterior paralysis—damage to the lumbar spine
Miscellaneous Conditions
to developrment of purulent conjunctivitis with swelling of the eyelids and
periorbital tissue, often causing partial closure of the eye; subcutaneous
swelling then occurs on the head, neck, and anogenital region, with death
in 11 to 18 days following onset of signs
2. Rabbit syphilis—caused by Treponema cuniculi; produces inflammation and
ulceration of the genital region and possible secondary lesions on the face
and paws; usually self-limiting
3. Pregnancy toxemia—rare condition that results in collapse, dyspnea, and
sudden death during last few days of pregnancy
oui eiui hae sfep g uo sainpu Aisno alreosip peseu asngod
the cat
cats
Skin Disorders
1. Bite wounds and abscesses
2. Eosinophilic granuloma complex
3. Ringworm—significant endemic problem, occurs in 70 percent of all kit-
m sap leioey siduod (shaeo suaneddui se aaas sinpe) sut
circular areas of hair loss, scaly patches, or raised and reddened plaques
with protruding stubbled hair; condition may affect feet as well
APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases  249
a.Trichophyton mentagrophytes
b. Microsporum canis
4. Mammary glands
a.  Mastitis: not common in the queen
b.  Metritis: follows parturition; may be due to retained placental mem-
branes or lack of aseptic technique during assisted delivery
5. External parasites
a. Otodectes cynotis: ear mites
b.  Ctenocephalides canis/felis: dog and cat Heas
Gastrointestinal Disorders
1. Panleukopenia (feline infectious enteritis)——a parvoviral illness found es-
pecially in kittens; may cause death or progressive anorexia, dehydration,
diarrhea, vomiting, and panleukopenia; infected pregnant queens may ex-
perience abortion, stillbirth, and neonatal death; cerebellar hypoplasia can
Occur in kittens exposed in utero
2. Salmonella
3. Enteric parasites
a. Torocara cati and Torascaris leonina: roundworm
b.Dipylidium caninum: tapeworm
c.Toroplasma gondii: toxoplasmosis
Respiratory System
1. Feline viral rhinotracheitis (FVR)—known as herpesvirus and responsible
invasion; sneezing, coughing, fever, and hypersalivation are frst signs, fol-
lowed by photophobia, chemosis, serous ocular and nasal discharge, and de-
 pression; ocular and nasal discharge may become purulent and form crusts
2. Feline calicivirus (FCV) of the Caliciviridae family—responsible for 40 to
wide differences in pathogenicity of strains; conjunctivitis, rhinitis, and tra-
cheitis not usually seen
 a. Mildest: causes fever and ulcers on tongue, hard palate, and nasal
commissure
b.  Most virulent: causes severe pneumonia, complicated by secondary
bacterial pneumonia
3. Feline pneumonitis (FPn)—caused by Chlamydia psittaci and responsible
coughing, serous and mucopurulent ocular and nasal discharge, and fever
4. Reovirus—-usually mild, consisting of mild conjunctivitis and possible
pharyngitis
25O  APPENDIX Il: Common DiseaseS
Neurological Disorders
1. Rabies—Rhabdoviridae family; Lyssavirus genus
vestibule of the ear")
Miscellaneous Conditions
1. Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)—infects cats of all ages; initial infection
asymptomatic or manifest as mild upper respiratory disease; characterized
by chronic weight loss, depression, and fever that is nonresponsive to anti-
biotics; causes inflammatory lesions of the blood vessels involving the liver,
kidney, pancreas, eyes, brain, heart, and lungs
a.  Peritoneal exudate: found in most all clinical cases
b.  Pleural and peritoneal exudate: found in some clinical cases
2. Feline leukermia virus, or FeLV (Retroviridae)a type C oncovirus, can
pue fydoiie oufui dojaaap feu suany fuonoqe pue uodosan peiay asne
immunological incompetence; chronic FeLV causes a variety of bone and
bone marrow disorders, inflammation of the kidney, anemia, and neoplasia;
suoued hauo on fadaosns paseaoui oi speal uissaaddnsoun!
3. Kitten mortality complex (KMC)etiology unknown, though FeLV or
FIP may be implicated; causes high frequency of reproductive failures
(fetal resorption, abortion, stillbirths) and kitten deaths in successive
pregnancies; kittens born weak and die soon after birth or, after seeming
healthy for a few weeks, become anorectic and depressed, lose weight, and
die; some kittens and adults die of acute congestive cardiomyopathy
4. FIV (Retroviridae)—lentivirus discovered in 1986; initial clinical phase
of lymphadenopathy includes fever, malaise, and leukopenia intervening
with normal clinical phase; terminal phase due to secondary opportunistic
infection and FIV-associated neurological involvement; chronic unrespon-
sive stomatitis, inflammation of the upper gastrointestinal tract found in
found in remaining percentage
Dogs
skin Disorders
1. Tooth root abscesses
 2. Flea bite dermatitis
3. Ringworm—Microsporum canis, M. gypsum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes
4. Parasites
a.Fleas: Ctenocephalides canis/felis
b. Sarcoptes scabiei: sarcoptic mange
C. Demoder canis: demodectic mange
APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases  251
 5. Mammary glands and related structures
a.  Metritis: an inflarmmation of the uterus that usually occurs in the first
week postpartum; toxemic bitch is depressed, anorectic, febrile, with
decreased milk production; excessive or abnormal vaginal discharge,
usually fetid, watery, and red (green to black if placenta is retained)
b. Mastitis: occurs when nursing ceases abruptly and the mammary
glands become engorged; purulent milk can be threatening to puppies'
health
C. Neoplasia: usually benign
6. Pustular dermatitis—-occurs in pups before weaning, usually affecting en-
tire litter; staphylococci usually colonize skin on account of high humidity
Gastrointestinal Disorders
1. Parvoviral enteritis (CPV)-serious threat to young puppies, mortality
high in 5- to 12-week-old puppies; symptoms include lethargy, anorexia,
depression, diarrhea, and vomiting with rapid dehydration; panleukopenia
or lymphopenia may be present in early course of disease; produces villous
 atrophy and crypt epithelial necrosis in the small intestine (crypts lined
with large, irregularly shaped epithelial cells); also causes lymphoid necro-
sis of the spleen and lymph nodes and Peyer's patches; acute death brought
on by nonsuppurative myocarditis
2. Coronavirus enteritis—similar to parvovirus, but without panleukopenia
or lymphopenia
3. Diarrhea and vomiting—common following weaning; most likely related
to dietary change and stress
4. Parasites
a. Torocara canis: roundworms
b.Ancylostoma caninum, Uncinaria stenocephala: hookworms
C.Trichuris oulpis: whipworrms
d. Dipylidium caninum: tapeworms
e.Giardia
Respiratory Disorders
dogs exhibit mucopurulent nasal discharge, conjunctivitis, coughing, dyspnea,
depression, and anorexia. T'he condition can progress to bronchopneumonia
1. Canine distemper—-Morbillivirus; major pathogen; most infections fatal
inq sualoqied jualeaaud nsou aul jo auo snuiaoxfueed-ezuanguieied 7
not a major one
252  APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases
3. Canine adenovirus I (infectious canine hepatitis)—also causes liver, lym-
 phatic tissue, and vascular endothelium damage
4. Canine adenovirus II—one of the most prevalent pathogens but not a
major one
5. Tracheobronchitis (kennel cough)—synergy of Bordetella bronchiseptica and
aaaas aq ueo 'shop laplo u! pu fensn yonoue ezuanguieued aulueo
in pups; secondary invaders may cause life-threatening disease; produces
euounaud 'yonoo aaiionpoud e ot ssauboud ueo jeyi yanoo Buyoey Xap e
and nasal or ocular discharge
6. Streptococcus zooepidemicus—acute necrotizing pneumonia; clinical course
often peracute, resulting in death without clinical signs; less severely af-
fected dogs exhibit coughing and moist rales, often with purulent nasal
discharge and tonsillitis; produces diffuse hemorrhagic pneumonia and
septic thrombi in kidneys, lymph nodes, spleen, brain, and adrenal glands
7. Other
a.  Reovirus type I, feline reovirus types 1 and 3—causes conjunctivitis,
photophobia, and lacrimation. The virus spreads rapidly by contact.
growth failure.
b. Canine herpesvirus—acute fulminant disease found in puppies 1 to 3
weeks old with sudden onset, constant crying, cessation of nursing,
and death within several hours; adults remain unaffected or show mild
upper respiratory signs
C. Minute virus of canines—canine parvovirus is closely related to feline
 panleukopenia virus (FPV). Parvovirus affects rapidly dividing cells
such as intestinal crypt epithelium.
d. Canine coronavirus—infects mature villus epithelium
u ui auoq Aud si li adi snoa-ill pue l adi snoy 'a
ture. Reovirus type III is the most pathogenic reovirus of laboratory
-uoo e se st  adi snioan jo auou fred au shuo
nant of transplantable tumors and cell lines.
f.Filaroides hirthi: filarid lung worm; coprophagy responsible for
transmission
Neurological Disorders
Rabies Lyssavirus (Rhabdoviridae)—affects dogs, cats, and other carnivores, but
all warm-blooded mammals are susceptible to the virus. Opossums are the least
susceptible. T'he virus can be spread by inhalation as well as from bite wounds.
Miscellaneous Conditions
1. Brucellosis (Brucella canis)suspected when history of abortion, infertil-
ity, testicular abnormalities, or lymphadenopathy exists; may provoke
prolonged bacteremia (2 years) without fever; symptoms in males include
APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases  253
epididymitis, orchitis, prostatitis, testicular atrophy, and lymphadenopathy;
fermales abort or have early embryonic death, along with prolonged vaginal
nopathy; condition is zoonotic
2. Toxemia and septicemia ("toxic milk syndrome")associated with uterine
pue sdnd plo-fep-t1 oi -t ur Suneolq pue Sufio asneo Aeu fuonjoauiqns
red, edematous rectums; bitch may exhibit signs of metritis; septicemia
characterized by crying, bloating, cessation of nursing with resultant hy-
pothermia, hypoglycemia, and dehydration; visceral congestion and intesti-
nal distention with gas can occur
Primates
skin Disorders
1. Dermatitis—self-inficted by bored or stressed animals or brought on by
deficiency of fatty acids in diet
2. External parasites
a. Sarcoptic mange
 b. Pediculus longiceps: sucking lice
3. Ringworm—causes lesions in debilitated animals
a.Microsporum(sp.)
b.Trichophyton (sp.)
Gastrointestinal Disorders
1. Loose stool—can be caused by fright, stress, or incorrect feeding
2. Diarrhea—-changes in environment can turn a latent carrier of enteric or-
 ganisms into a clinical case
a. Protozoa: several species are commonly found and are frequently the
cause of persistent or recurring diarrhea
i.Entamoeba histolytica (Balantidium coli.): produces a variety of
helminthes (nematodes, filariae, cestodes) and can cause enteritis
ii.Strongyloides and Trichostrongylus (Prosthenorchis): damage
intestine
ili. Enterobius vermicularis (peri): causes anal irritation
b.Bacteria
3. Herpesvirus simiae (B virus)—-primarily seen in Rhesus monkey; produces
vesicles on tongue and lips that progress to ulcers; rarely causes systemic
illness; z0onotic
4. Hepatitis—-highly zoonotic; easily transmitted to humans from recently
caught asymptomatic chimpanzees and several species of monkeys
254  APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases
Respiratory Disorders
1. Tuberculosis—Mycobacterium tuberculosis occurs in both apes and monkeys,
running a course of up to 6 months; usually remains occult until it be
comes terminal
a.Signs
i. Chronic cough
ii. Weight loss
ili. Intractable pneumonia
b.  Lesions: found on lungs, liver, and spleen
2. Herpesvirus T—exists subclinically in squirrel monkeys and certain other
species but may be fatal in marmosets and owl monkeys; produces rhinitis,
pneumonia, and hepatitis, with death occurring in 2 to 7 days
3. Measles—often reported in monkeys (though a rash is not always present);
some cases are fatal; transmitted from humans; common signs are rhinitis,
pneumonia, facial edema, rash, anorexia, and diarrhea
4. Infuenza—young chimps and other species are susceptible to acute
rhinitis, which is self-limiting; may produce a cough that leads to fatal
bronchopneumonia
Neurological Disorders
Rabies—rhabdovirus; acute viral encephalomyelitis
Musculoskeletal Disorders
2. Dental conditions
a. Facial abscesses: due to tooth-root infection, usually of the canine tooth
b. Dental caries: common if fed sugary, man-made food
c.  Abnormal tooth eruption and “foating teeth": usually secondary to nu
tritional bone disease
 3. Nutritional bone disease—a common condition; signs include lethargy,
sheuep peuqaiuaa pue dunf oi Aiqeu! ,'sisfjeued aseo, 'ued
a. Rickets or osteomalacia: often present, dependent on age
b.Pathological fractures
 C. Rarefaction of bone shafts; old, healed fractures; and distorted bones
d. Predisposition to secondary infection
Miscellaneous Conditions
1. Pseudotuberculosis (Yersinia pseudotuberculosis)involves sudden loss
of condition, anorexia, collapse, and possible enlarged abdominal lymph
APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases  255
nodes; lesions produced by focal necrosis in spleen and liver; stress can
cause condition to fare up
2. Marburg disease—comparatively rare, febrile condition that is usually
fatal; few clinical signs show until 24 to 48 hours before death; zoonotic
3. Soft tissue injury-caused by deep, gaping wounds sustained during fight-
ing with other primates; best to leave wounds on hands and feet open
(snbu) sd aos u pousuoennnne poo onod yaan t
5. Edematous swelling/bright coloration of the perineal region—normal
signs of estrus in some species
Cattle, Sheep, Goats, and Horses
Skin Disorders
1. Clinical signs in ruminants include primary lesions (papules, vesicles, pus-
tules, nodules) and secondary lesions (scales, crusts, and alopecia)
2. Secondary lesions often result from self-trauma or superimposed bacterial
infections
in canine. Horses, cattle, pigs, sheep can also carry Demoder species but
rarely cause disease.
a.  Itch mites—contagious but slow spreading in the surface layers of the
skin of wool sheep
b.  Chorioptes mites—cause foot, rump, tail mange in horses, sheep, dairy cows
C.  Sarcoptes mites—cause skin reddening and pustules. Found in the pig,
sheep, horses, cattle. In cattle, found predominantly in the head, neck,
and udder regions. Is contagious to dogs, cats, and humans
d.  Psoroptes mites—cause pustules, yellowish sticky scabs and crusts
Found in sheep, cattle, horses
4. Pox lesionsacute viral diseases acquired by either inhalation or through
the skin, or mechanically (arthropod bites)
xoddaays eo ayi ur xodeo (sueny ul o) eyioa snoieuo e
widespread skin eruption in sheep (related to lumpy skin disease in cattle)
b. Swinepox—papules, pustules on face, ears, inside of legs, abdomen;
transmitted primarily by biting louse
C. Lumpy skin disease— nodules on the skin of cattle; related to sheep-
pox virus
d. Pseudocowpox, cowpox, bovine papular stomatitis
i. Pseudocowpox—-related to contagious ecthyma; small red papules
on the teats or udder, scabbing; characteristic horseshoe or circular
ring of small scabs
256  APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases
ii. Cowpox—a benign, contagious disease of cows characterized by
pox lesions, pustules, and scabs on teat and udder skin
iii. Bovine papular stomatitis—-reddish, raised, ulcerative lesions on
the lips, muzzle, mouth. Clinically disease is mild, importance lies
in the need to differentiate it from foot-and-mouth disease. Been
reported in sheep, goats, and hands of milkers (humans)
tion. Also common symptom of scrapies or TSE (sheep), BSE (cattle), insect
bites (ticks, lice, feas, and blackflies) in donkeys, cattle, horses, sheep, goats.
6. Alopecia—endocrine disorders, bacterial skin diseases, burns, irmune-
mediated, inflammatory, nutritional deficiencies (protein).
a. Horses, sheep—temporary alopecia during pregnancy, lactation
b. Cattle—alopecia anemia, a congenital disorder in polled Hereford cattle
c.  Goats, sheep——zinc or selenium deficiency
d.Wool eating disease in sheep—-deficiency of calcium, phosphorus, so-
dium chloride, copper, zinc, manganese, cobalt, vitamin E, and/or a
protein deficiency
Gastrointestinal Disorders
1. Malocclusions—faulty bite
a. In horses, incisor and/or cheek teeth malocclusions—interfere with
 grasping or chewing food and prermature loss of teeth. Require remov-
u se haddn uo apa hano au uo siuod dus go bus to e
inner edge on lower molars (foating the teeth). Unbalanced incisors
result in poor function and wear of the molars.
b. As horses age, an ongoing wear of teeth causing animal to not prop-
erly masticate (chew) hay or grain
c. Homozygous dwarfism in beef cattle—-malocclusions common with
this disorder
d. Brachygnathism (abnorrmal shortness in mandible) and pragmatism (where
either mandible or maxillae project forward)occur frequently in goats
2. Scours (diarrhea)
a. Protozoa—Coccidiosis (Eimeria zurni, Eimeria bovis) affects goats,
swine, horses, cattle, sheep, poultry, rabbits
b.Bacteria—Escherichia coli (Colibacillosis), Salmonella, Enterototemia
(Clostridium perfringens), Johne's disease (M. paratuberculosis), Equine
monocytic ehrlichiosis (Potomac horse fever)
C. Viruses—Rotavirus Scours, Coronavirus Scours, Bovine Virus Diarrhea,
Bovine kobuviruses
d. Nutritional—anything that disrupts norrmal nursing habit (strong wind,
APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases  257
with bottle/bucket feeding), bottle feeding of milk too cold (especially
during first 3 weeks of life)
e. Helminthes (cestodes, nematodes)
i. Cattle—Ostertagia ostertagi, Trichostrongylus atei, and Haemonchus
spp. Diarrhea more common in calves than in adult cattle
ii. Horses—Cyathastomes, Strongyles
ili. Sheep——Trichostrongylus a.cei
iv. Pigs—Stomach worms (Hyostrongylus sp.)
v.Goats—Haemonchus contortus, Teladorsagia circumcincta
f.  Miscellaneous
i. Horses—-gastric ulceration; more common in horses fed fewer
times/day
Respiratory Disorders
1. Signs
a. Horses—dyspnea, fared nostrils, coughing, and strange noises during
exercise
b. Cattle—-noisy, open mouth breathing, frothing, infrequent coughing,
separation from herd, anxiety, death
C Sheep, goats—dyspnea, tachypnea, rapid tiring (especially with exercise),
cyanosis, abnormal sounds with breathing, nasal discharge, coughing
2. Causes
a.  Viral—caprine arthritis, encephalitis virus (goats), chronic progressive
pneumonia (sheep, goats), Parainfuenza virus-3 (PI-3) (cattle, sheep,
goats), bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRsV), equine herpesvirus 1
(EHV-1) and EHV-4
b.  Bacterial—contagious caprine pleuropneurmonia (goats), chlamydial pneu-
monia (calves, lambs, goats), shipping fever pneurmonia (cattle), Streptococcus
equi(strangles in horses), atrophic rhinitis (B. bronchiseptica) in pigs
c. Environmental
i. Airborne particles—dust, soot, mold and fungal spores, grain and
hay dust, ammonia (from urine), ozone
ii. Exercise-induced pulmonary hemorrhage (EIPH) in racehorses
ili. Heatstroke
d.Nutritional
1. Cattle “fog fever" (acute bovine pulmonary edema and emphysema)
i. Sheep, goats—pregnancy toxemia (ketosis)
e. Parasitic—lungworms (Dictyocaulus), nose bots (Oestrus ovis)
258  APPENDIX Il: Common DiseaseS
Musculoskeletal System
Lameness is the third most important problem on many modern dairy farms
after mastitis and reproductive failure. In swine, musculoskeletal problems are
the second highest cause of culling. In horses, pain (both weight-bearing and
     s s i 
lameness (restriction lameness).
Causes include:
Cattle—sole ulcer, sandcracks, heel erosion, footrot, interdigital derrmatitis,
fractures, dislocations, arthritis
Goats—mineral imbalances (Ca:P), lack of vitamin D, excess protein, excess
Fe, Cu deficiency, Se or vitamin E deficiency
Bacterial—joint ill, footrot, Mycoplasmosis
Viral—-caprine arthritis and encephalitis
Trauma—fractures (jumping, getting caught in fences)
Pigs—footrot and joint-ill (related to environment), abnormal bone growth
Sheep—-Lambs: joint-ill, tetanus, white muscle disease, enzootic ataxia
intoxication (e.g., sneezeweed), and contagious ecthyma. Adults: mastitis,
epididymitis, and mineral and trace element imbalances, erysipelas,
laminitis, bluetongue, ulcerative dermatosis, foot-and-mouth disease, and
dermatophilosis
Horses—fbrotic myopathy (stringhalt), stress fractures, fatigue, bone cysts,
bog and bone spavin, bruised soles, navicular disease, osselets, puncture
wounds, ringbone, sandcrack, sidebone, thrush, osteochondrosis dessicans,
tying-up syndrome (recurrent erertional rhabdomyolysis, or Monday morning
disease), degenerative joint disease
Neurological Disorders
Signs of neurological disorders are sometimes confounded with other systems
(musculoskeletal). In goats signs include excessive bleating, resistance or over-
reaction to touch, fear or aggression, compulsive walking or running, grind-
ing of teeth, and/or futtering of the eyelids. In most animals these disorders
are indicative of inflammation of the brain (encephalitis). Livestock will tend
to stagger, have personality changes, appear disoriented, and make vocalization
(distressed sounds).
Causes include:
Goats—nutritional: thiamine deficiency (polioencephalomalacia), pregnancy
toxemia, grass tetany (hypomagnesemic tetany)
Microbial—rabies, pseudorabies, Borna disease, cowdriosis, and bacterial
meningoencephalitis
Toxic agents—-organophosphates, chlorinated hydrocarbons, cyanide, ni-
lueid (eopint ho 'uouonq) olofoo aui pue sueangouiu 'eaun saneil
(Karwinskia humboldtiana)
APPENDIX Il: Common Diseases
259
Cattle, sheepconsiderable degree of overlap between the neurological diseas
es of sheep and cattle. Intoxications are more common in cattle, and para-
sitic and microbial are more common in sheep. Hypoderma bovis (cattle) can
deficiency and swayback are more of a problem in lambs as is the slow
virus disease of sheep (Maedi-visna and caprine-arthritis-encephalitis virus
and scrapie) whereas bovine spongiform encephalopathy is found in cattle
Horses—equine encephalitides (arboviruses, Sarcocystis neurona, Neospora sp.,
West Nile virus). Both cervical vertebral myelopathy (CVM, or wobblers)
and osteochondrosis dessicans are anatomical deformities that can either
pinch or cause inflammation of the spinal cord affecting the signals from
the brain to the nerves controlling the legs.
APPENDIX III
Narrative Guide for
the Image Library
 Note: In this supplement the
Contents
genus and species names
Intemal Parasites of Domestic Animals
are given for many of these
How to Identify the Diagnostic Stage
parasites. These names are
 Parasites of Small Animals
given in italics, with the species
Parasites of Large Animals
name following the genus name.
Identification of Extemal Parasites
A genus name should always
External Parasites—Cause and Carriers of Disease
be followed by a species name.
Types of Animal Diseases
However, when an unidentified
 Detecting Illness
species is referred to, this is 
 Canine Diseases
designated by the abbreviation
Feline Diseases
sp. following the genus name.
Large Animal and Avian Diseases
when no species name is given
with the genus, all species within
that genus are being referred to.
260
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library  261
Internal Parasites of Domestic Animals
How to Identify the Diagnostic Stage
The purpose of the Internal Parasite Photo Cards included with this supple-
ment is to familiarize the reader with how veterinarians can visually recognize
the diagnostic stage of the common internal parasites of domestic animals, both
small and large. This diagnostic procedure is difficult, as many of the parasite
eggs look alike. In many cases, the treatment for different parasites will vary;
can be performed only by a licensed veterinarian. A veterinary assistant would
under no circumstances be involved in identifying the diagnostic stages of in-
ternal parasites. Nevertheless, a veterinary assistant who has visually examined
the various diagnostic stages should be better able to understand the effect that
parasites have on the health of an animal.
The diagnostic stage of a parasite is the life cycle stage that the veterinarian uses
to identify the parasite that has infected an animal. In the case of parasites that
live in the gastrointestinal tract, the diagnostic stages are the eggs of the worms
circulatory system, the stages found in the blood are used for diagnosis.
Photos of parasites also show a lot of plant debris that may resemble parasite
eggs. There are a few general rules to help determine what is being viewed.
Parasite eggs and cysts have a regular outline and contain an embryo or cells
Nematode larvae have a head and tail and contain an intestine as well as other
organs. Hairs and plant spines do not show the internal detail seen in a larva.
Most of the pictures in this collection were taken usinga microscope. Microscopes
have various magnifying capabilities. The various magnification settings on a
jective would magnify the object 4o times its normal size.
The microscope objective used to view an object is dependent on the size of the
object. The smaller the object, the higher the microscope objective must be to
view the object. Because many eggs and cysts are colorless and hard to see, iodine
is often used to stain the fecal smear to provide some contrast. Iodine stains many
eggs and cysts and colors them from a yellow to a dark brown, making them easier
has been stained. Several stains in addition to iodine are used to color the diagnos-
tic stages of parasites, thus highlighting features that may aid in the identification
of the parasite. Most of these stains are a combination of red and blue dyes.
Parasites of Small Animals
Some of the eggs of the nematodes of small animals are similar in appearance,
even though the worms are very different. The first four eggs covered fall into
thisgroup.
Internal Parasite 1
On the left is an egg of Torocara canis(T. canis), an ascarid or roundworm of dogs
This egg measures about 80 μm (micrometers). The egg of 7. cati, the ascarid of
262  APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
cats, looks exactly like that of T. canis, except that it is a little smaller (70 μm)
Torocara eggs are round (as in this photo) to slightly oval in shape. They have a
rough shell and a brown central mass that fills most of the shell.
On the right is the egg of Torascaris leonina, an ascarid that can be found in both
dogs and cats. This egg has the same shape as that of Torocara, but the surface is
smooth and the central mass does not fill all of the space in the shell. The dark
brown color of the egg on the right is due to staining with iodine. If it was un-
stained, it would be the same color as the egg on the left (4oX objective).
Internal Parasite 2
The egg on the left is Torocara canis. Here the focus is on the surface of the egg's
shell. The texture is rough and pitted. On the right is the smoother surface of
the Torascaris leonina egg (40X objective).
Internal Parasite 3
 There are two different eggs in this photo that look very much alike. The egg
on the left is that of the whipworm of dogs, Trichuris vulpis. It is a symmet-
rical lemon-shaped egg with a plug at either end. The whipworm egg has a
uomsunl aul jo bsa ayi s! 1uau aul uo buol um o8 1noqe s! pue 1ays yioous
Capillaria aerophila, which is found in both dogs and cats. This egg is more oval
and less symmetrical than that of the whipworm. It is also slightly smaller
(65 μm long) and has a rough, pitted shell. It is irmportant to be able to tell these
two eggs apart, because the treatment is different for each infection (40X objective,
unstained).
Internal Parasite 4
This photo focuses on the surface of the shells of the whipworm (left) and the
lungworm (right) eggs. The whipworm egg has a smooth shell, while that of the
lungworm is pitted. This difference is most easily seen on the area of the shell
between the plug and the central mass (4oX objective).
Internal Parasite 5
This is the egg of the hookworm of dogs and cats (Ancylostoma). The shell is
very thin, and a mass of cells is in the center. Hookworm eggs measure 55 to
75 μm in length. This egg has been stained with iodine; the cell mass of an
unstained egg would appear colorless (40X objective). Occasionally when a cat
or dog vomits, a nematode will be found in this discharge. In order to treat the
animal, the veterinarian must identify the worm.
Internal Parasite 6
This photo shows the heads of the most common nematodes that may be found
in the stomach contents of small animals. On the left is the anterior (front) end
of Torocara catt. Wide "wings" run along the side of the head. The other ascarids
of dogs and cats also have these wings, but they are not as wide. On the right is
the anterior end of Physaloptera, the stomach worm of dogs and cats. This worm
into the body, forming a collar. 'The stomach worm is the only worm that has
this collar. Both worms in this photo have been decolorized to take this picture
using the 4X and 1oX objectives, respectively
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library263
Larval nematodes are sometimes found during fecal exams of dogs and cats.
These larvae, if found in fresh feces, can be of Strongyloides stercoralis or one of the
lungworms. In feces over 24 hours old, hookworrm larvae may have hatched from
their eggs. Therefore, it is important to examine fresh feces if at all possible.
Internal Parasite 7
This is the first-stage larva of Strongyloides stercoralis, a nematode that lives in the
 group of cells is near the center of the worm (arrow). These two characteristics are
enough to tell this larva from that of the lungworm (4oX objective, unstained)
Internal Parasite 8
 s   o s   e po   o 
in the tail (arrow), which differentiates them from Strongyloides (40X objective,
unstained).
There are two genera of tapeworrms commonly found in dogs and cats. Dipylidium
caninum is very common in dogs and may also be seen in cats. Tapeworms of
the genus Taenia are common in cats and are often seen in dogs as well. In both
Taenia and Dipylidium infections, the terminal segment of the worm (proglot-
tid), which contains the eggs, drops off and passes out with the feces. Unless
this segment breaks apart while in the feces, no eggs will be seen during a fecal
eggs but also the proglottids.
Internal Parasite 9
containing 10 to 30 eggs. The entire packet measures 100 to 200 μm, depending
on the number of eggs in it. Individual eggs measure 30 to 50 μm in width. All
tapeworm eggs contain six small hooks (4oX objective, unstained).
Internal Parasite 10
These are proglottids of Dipylidium caninum. The proglottid on the left was
recovered from the surface of a stool sample. The white color and the curved
sides make this segment resemble a cucumber seed. These proglottids range in
size from 5 to 15 mm. There are two genital openings on each segment, one on
 ds s ar  sa a  an  so sr s 
the right (arrows). The identity of the tapeworm can be confirrmed by crushing
the proglottid between a cover slip and a slide. This will release any egg packets
paup sey ieyl puojboud y fjuapi ol Asea aue sasa asayl pue 'uieiuoo feu 1!
out should be placed in some water and allowed to soften before crushing it (un-
stained proglottid, 2X objective; stained proglottid, 4X objective).
Internal Parasife 11
This is the egg of Taenia sp. The eggs of Taenia taeniaeformis,a tapeworm of the cat,
and those of Taenia sp., Multiceps sp., and Echinococcus sp., which are found in the
 aaeu pue apim un gs inoqe aunseau sasa adi-ozuani ssa sui ayll yool lle sop
thick shell that contains striations or stripes. The embryo within the shell contains
six hooks. The hooks are not visible in this photograph (40X objective, unstained)
264 APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
Internal Parasite 12
These are proglottids of the cat tapeworm Taenia taeniaeformis. Taenia segments
are usually found singly, not in a chain, as seen on the left. (The segments on the
left are still attached to the worm.) The segrments of a Taenia-type tapeworm
are as wide (or wider) as they are long (just the opposite of those of Dipylidium).
There is only one genital opening on each proglottid, as can be seen in the
stained segment on the right (arrow). (The stained segment was photographed
using a 4X objective, the unstained using a 2X objective.)
aue sieo pue shop jo ioeut leulsaiulouse aul ioaju 1eql eozoioud jo sisfo au
much smaller than the eggs of parasitic nematodes. Many of these protozoan
cysts are too small to see with the 10X objective; the 40X objective must be
used to find therm.
Internal Parasite 13
 su s  s q e  e  r g sis  
Moue aul qoqm on isfo aui ui 'adeqs u! leao pue (buoi um o1 inoqe) neus ae
is pointing, two nuclei (just below the arrow), as well as some other structures,
can be discerned. This photograph was taken with the 1ooX oil objective, and
 the cysts were stained with iodine. Unstained cysts are colorless.
Internal Parasite 14
This is the oocyst of Isospora canis, a coccidian parasite of dogs. There are many
species of Isospora that infect cats and dogs. All of the oocysts of the different
of 1. canis is one of the largest, measuring about 40 μm long. Isospora oocysts
uao pue 'm isfo un seus ta sii uoi m ot oi oi uo azis ui alu
siso aplo saoa ysany ut isfooo ueipioooo e jo aoureadde peoidai aul aue ss
may have two central masses (4oX objective, stained with iodine).
Internal Parasite 15
This is the oocyst of Toroplasma gondi, a coccidian parasite of cats. It is similar
to the oocyst of Isospora but very small (1o μm) and tends to be round. Like
Isospora, there is only a single central mass in a young cyst and two masses in
older (24-48 hours) cysts (40X objective, unstained).
Internal Parasite 16
Trichomonas sp., seen in this photo, is a protozoan that lives in the large intestine
of cats and dogs. This parasite has no cyst stage. The only way to diagnose this
protozoan is to make a direct smear of diarrhea. Trichomonas sp. measures 15 t0
20 μm long and is pear shaped. It has several fagella (hairlike projections) com-
ing out of its front end and an undulating membrane running the length of the
body (arrow). When this parasite is seen alive, the flickering of this membrane
identifies it as Trichomonas sp. (1ooX oil objective, stained).
Some protozoan parasites are found in the blood of small animals. These may be
seen when a blood smear is being examined for white blood cells. Two of these
protozoan blood parasites are seen in photo 17.
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library  265
Internal Parasite 17
On the left are two red blood cells infected with Babesia canis (arrow). This or-
ganism, which lives inside the red blood cells of the dog, is very small (1-2 μm).
They usually occur in pairs within the red blood cell. On the right are blood cells
of a bird, some of which are infected with a protozoan parasite (Haemoproteus
o aui ui ll (smoe) eozoioud aui snaonu e aaey sllao pooia pau pua ll (ds
toplasm of the red blood cells, next to the nucleus. Both of these parasites were
Other parasites that can be found in the blood of the dog are the heartworm
(Diroflaria immitis) and the filarial worm Dipetalonema reconditum. The microfi-
lariae of D. immitis and D. reconditum are found free in the blood; they are not in
the blood cells. Both of these worms are nermatodes.
Internal Parasite 18
The microfilaria of the dog heartworm, D. immitis, can often be seen in a direct
smear of the blood of an infected dog. Although the numerous red blood cells
may hide part of the worm, the movement of the microfilaria is easy to see. As
seen in this photo of a direct blood smear, the microfilaria is fairly large (300-
320 μm long) (arrow) (1oX objective, unstained).
Internal Parasite 19
Because the heartworm microfilaria may be present in numbers too few to be
seen in a direct smear, the blood is usually concentrated before being exam-
ined. There may be two different microfilariae in smears of the concentrated
blood from which the red cells have been removed. Diroflaria immitis lives in
the hearts of dogs and causes a serious disease that is hard to treat. Dipetalonema
to distinguish these two parasites is important.
The microfilaria on the left is that of Diroflaria immitis, the dog heartworm
When killed in formalin (part of the concentration process), these microfilariae
have a straight or slightly curved body. The tail is also straight and the head
tapers slightly (arrow). The heartworm microfilaria and the white blood cells
On the right is the microfilaria of D. reconditum. Formalin-killed microfilariae of
this worm tend to have a curved body. Their tail may also curve, and the head
is blunt (arrow). Also, Dipetalonema microfilariae are shorter than those of D
oo xot) (  snsnaa  g)amou pue (u oo sna  ga)s
unstained).
Because these mmicrofilariae look so much alike, several worms should be exam-
ined before making a decision. D. reconditum is not as common as D. immitis.
Parasites of Large Animals
Many of the nematode parasites of large animals have eggs that are similar to
those found in small animals. Whipworms of pigs, sheep, and cows have eggs that
resemble those of Trichuris vulpis from the dog (Internal Parasite 3). Strongyloides
sp. of the horse, Ostertagia sp. of the cow, cattle hookworm, and many other
266 APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
gastrointestinal nematodes of large animals all have eggs that look very much
like those of the dog hookworm Ancylostoma caninum (Internal Parasite 5). The
ose aul jo asoui oi teus Aiaa aue ieui sasa aaeq shid pue sasuou jo spleose
ids of small animals (Internal Parasite 1). Similarly, the oocysts of the coccidian
parasites of large animals look like those of Isospora canis (Internal Parasite 14)
The Giardia of large animals produce cysts that are similar to those seen in
small animals (Internal Parasite 13).
Internal Parasite 20
The eggs of the horse parasite Strongylus vulgaris, and any nematode egg that re-
sembles it, are known as strongyle-type eggs. The hookworms of dogs and cats
have a strongyle-type egg. In the horse, both large and small strongyles have
this type of egg. In cattle and sheep, Ostertagia, Haemonchus, Trichostrongylus,
Nematodirus, and hookworms all have strongyle-type eggs.
luede i! lei oi sinoup s! il inq 'szunajna sngrouazs' jo 1eui s! yal aui uo sha au
from the dog hookworm egg (Internal Parasite 5) or any other strongyle-type
egg. These eggs have an oval shape, are 60 to 90 μm long, and have a thin shell
and a central mass of cells (4oX objective, unstained).
cattle. Although this is a strongyle-type egg,it can usually be identifed as that
of Nematodirus. It is a large egg (greater than 130 μm in length), much longer
than that of the other strongyle-type eggs. Also, the ends of the egg tend to be
more pointed than those of the other worms (4oX objective, unstained).
Internal Parasite 21
The eggs of the ascarid of pigs (Ascaris suum) and the ascarid of horses ( Parascaris
equorum) are very similar.
On the left in the photo is the egg of Parascaris equorum. It is round, about
aq isnf ueo jeqi sseu peuun e suieiuoo ii tojoo ul umouq flensn pue 'ssouoe um g6
made out in this photograph (1oX objective, unstained).
The egg of Ascaris suum is on the right. This egg is smaller than that of the horse
11 (oog) peao ful!s ho (doi) punou hayia aq Aeu pue (un og inoqe) pueose
too is brown and contains a central mass (more easily seen at higher magnifica-
tion, bottom) (top: 1oX objective; bottom: 40X objective; both unstained)
Internal Parasite 22
obtained for examination from the perianal skin or the feces. Oryuris equi eggs
are about 90 μm long, they are an elongated oval in shape, and they have a plug
at one end (arrow) (4oX objective, unstained).
Internal Parasite 23
Unlike Strongyloides stercoralis of small animals, the Strongyloides sp. found in
horses, sheep, cattle, and pigs lay eggs that pass out in the feces. These eggs
resemble strongyle-type eggs, except that they contain a larva rather than a cell
said pue sas.iou Jo suuomsunT 4laual ul um g inoqe sa.unseau Saa s!uL sseu
(paureisun aaoalqo xot) eauel e suieiuoo ieui ssa adfi-alfsuos e aey ose
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library  267
Internal Parasife 24
The nematode Trichinella spiralis of pigs does not lay eggs. Instead, the female
worm gives birth to first-stage larvae, which quickly penetrate a muscle cell
and encyst. In order to diagnose a Trichinella infection in a pig, a piece of muscle
must be crushed between two slides and examined for larvae. At slaughter, a
piece of the diaphragm is most often used for this purpose. This photo shows a
crushed piece of muscle tissue in which two larvae are encysted (arrows). When
the larvae encyst, they coil up as seen here (1oX objective, unstained).
Internal Parasite 25
The trematode (flatworm) Fasciola hepatica lives in the liver and bile ducts of cattle
m ot1 inoqe) ahuel si sha au shop ul punoy aq Ae n Xjeuoisooo daays pue
long) and spindle shaped and has a lid at one end (arrow). The thin shell is smooth,
and the contents of the egg fill most or all of the shell (4oX objective, unstained).
Internal Parasite 26
The tapeworm of horses (Anoplocephala) and that of sheep and cattle (Moniezia)
have square- to triangular-shaped eggs. The eggs in this photo are those of
the horse tapeworm, but the eggs of Moniezia would look similar. They have a
triangular shape with rounded corners. These eggs measure 50 to 80 μm. The
xis sureuo ofuqua su (moe) sla uonoq aui ui aluio e se sheadde ofuqua
hooks, although they cannot be seen in this photograph (4oX objective, stained
with iodine)
Internal Parasite 27
Cryptosporidium is a protozoan parasite of the intestine of large anirmals and
causes severe diarrhea. This parasite is related to the coccidia and produces an
oocyst that passes out in the feces. The oocyst of Cryptosporidium is very small
(about 4 μm) and is just visible when viewed with the 4oX objective of the mi-
croscope. Even with the oil (1ooX) objective, it is difficult to distinguish these
oocysts from yeast. The left side of this photo shows an unstained oocyst (arrow)
(100X oil objective).
When a special staining procedure is used (acid-fast staining),these oocysts will
stain red, while yeast will stain blue. The right side of this photo shows the oo-
cysts (red) that have been stained with the acid-fast stain (1ooX oil objective).
Internal Parasite 28
snaonu aaiiousip aui pue (un og inoqe) alhel Auaa si aiseed sul jo isfo au
helps to identify it (40X objective, stained).
There are many things in a fecal sample that may resemble parasite eggs and
cysts but are actually plant material. Also, eggs of free-living organisms may
enter an animal with its food and pass out, undamaged, in the feces.
Internal Parasife 29
The eggs on the left in this photo were seen during a fecal exam of a dog.
Although they resemble hookworm eggs, they are about twice the size (110 μm)
of hookworm eggs. These are the eggs of a free-living mite that the dog ingested
268APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
with its food. The legs of the developing larval mite can be seen in one of the
eggs (arrow) (1oX objective, stained with iodine).
The cyst on the right was found in cat feces and is that of a parasitic amoe-
   o u  e  so sd s  o (d) 
infected mouse, and the amoeba cysts had passed through the cat unharmed.
ae pauuexa Susaq leuue aui loajul iou op reul saniseued jo sisfo do sasa au
aaloalqo lo xooi) apim um oi inoqe s! isfo su saniseued snounds se umou
stained with iodine).
imternal Parasite 30
 In this photo are some common plant materials that may be mistaken for para-
sites during a fecal exam.
soa apoieuau jo ahueu azis aul ul sl 1eul auods sueld e s! yual doi aul uo
However, the nick at one end, where the spore once was attached to the plant,
aaiel jo saoay aui ul uouoo aue saods asaui aha ue pou si stui eul saieoipu
animals (40X objective, stained with iodine).
The object on the bottom left is a plant spine. It resermbles the head end of a nem-
atode larva. Nematode larvae rarely break apart, and thus the abrupt ending of
this spine indicates it is not part of a worm (4oX objective, stained with iodine)
The two objects on the top right that resermble strongyle-type eggs are actu-
ally plant cells. Their cell walls have an irregular outline, whereas the shells of
strongyle-type eggs have a smooth, oval outline (1oX objective, stained with
iodine),
On the bottorm right are two different types of objects that may be confused
with parasite eggs. The two round objects at the top (arrows) are fat globules,
and the object at the bottom (arrow) is pine pollen. There is nothing inside the
fat globules—-parasite eggs would have cells or an embryo inside. Pine pollen
is easy to recognize; it is made up of a circular central part to which two half
circles are attached (4oX objective, stained with iodine).
ldentification of External Parasites
External Parasites-Cause and Carriers of Disease
 s n   e o  s  sn  i sd 
effect on or disease in that organism. The organism on or in which the parasite
lives is the host. External parasites live on their host and may also be called
ectoparasites.
External parasites, like internal parasites, live in a particular place on the host,
tire life on the host—on the skin, in the pores of the skin, attached to the hair, or in
The presence of an external parasite on a host is referred to as an infestation.
All external parasites affect their hosts in some way. Often, the level of infesta-
tion of the host will determine the severity of the effect. When there are only a
few parasites on the host, they may go unnoticed; however, the presence of many
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library  269
O Aanfu soau asne salseued euaixa asaui Aeu fjuo ion aseasip asneo feu
their hosts, but they may also serve as vectors for other diseases, such as those
caused by viruses, bacteria, or internal parasites. A vector carries the microor-
 ganism, or internal parasite, from one host to another. When the internal para-
site, or microorganism, must spend time developing within the external parasite
before it can infect an animal or a human, the external parasite is termed an
interrmediate host. The veterinarian identifies the presence of external parasites
so that the disease they cause or transmit may be prevented or cured.
 ro p       s  g
to veterinary medicine, that is, those that cause problems for the domesticated
animals that people protect and raise. In all cases, the scientific name of the para-
site, its common name, the host it infests, the type of disease that it causes, and
how the parasite is identified are noted.
External Parasite 1
Fleas are ectoparasites of both dogs and cats. This photo shows the dog fea
Ctenocephalides canis. Fleas are insects that are small (4 mm long), narrow, and
dark in color, with powerful legs for jumping. They spend most of their life off
the host, but when on the host, they are found most commonly around the tail
and hind end of the dog.
Fleas of dogs may infest cats and vice versa. Some ectoparasites, however, may
infest only one host; they are host specific. Others, such as the feas of dogs and
cats, may infest more than one host and are nonhost specific.
External Parasite 2
This cat fea is very similar to the dog fea in appearance. Identification is made
by analyzing similar features. Although it is usually unnecessary to differentiate
between the dog flea and the cat flea, it may be done based on the size and shape
of the head and the size of the spines on the mouth comb
External Parasite 3
This photo shows a male mosquito of the genus Anopheles. Mosquitoes are clas-
sified in the order Diptera, which contains all of the true fies, mosquitoes, and
gnats. Mermbers of this group have one pair of wings and reproduce. The stages
'aeaiel sasa aul shinpe pue aednd 'seaiel saha aue apofo all sdnous siy1 jo
and pupae are found in still or running water or moist soil. The eggs are laid in
groups or singly, while the larvae have a breathing tube and hang from the water's
ae sieuue pue suenq oi aouefouue seaut asneo jeul shinpe ayl s! ll 'aoeuns
The adult mosquito is small (3-4 mm in length) and quite delicate in appearance.
The mouthparts form a slender tube through which blood is taken directly from
blood vessels. The thorax contains two wings; the abdomen is slender and may
 be banded. Blood may often be seen in the abdomen of an engorged female after
 a blood meal. The male feeds on plant juices and may be distinguished from the
   a a e    si p as a  a
termed plumose; those of the female are slender and less fluffy.
The adult female prefers to suck blood from certain hosts at specific times of
the day. Therefore, the mosquito makes a very good vector for the transmission
of disease from one host to the next. Anopheline mosquitoes transmit the dog
270 APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
heartworm Diroflaria immitis. In this case, the mosquito serves as an intermedi-
el aeis-puooas e oi ateis-isuy e oy sdonaaap alseed aui aouis 'isou ane
in the gut of the mosquito. When the mosquito bites a dog and sucks blood,
the infective third-stage larvae of the dog heartworm are injected into the skin
and begin migrating to the heart of the dog. The bite alone of the mosquito car
cause great annoyance to its host. When the mosquito bites, it injects saliva into
the area around the bite to allow the blood to flow more readily. This saliva is
very irritating and can cause large bumps on the skin, which is a form of allergic
response.
External Parasite 4
This photo shows the Culer mosquito. Although not clear in this photo, the Culex
mosquito has horizontal bands across the abdomen like those of the anopheline
mosquito. This mosquito can transmit Diroflaria immitis to dogs, as well as
western and eastern encephalitis viruses to horses.
External Parasite 5
This photo shows a Cuterebra sp. fy. These flies are large (2o mm or more in
length), with beelike bodies and tiny mouthparts. Their larvae cause problems
in animals. These fies lay their eggs in the soil, usually close to rodent or rab-
bit burrows. The larvae hatch and penetrate the skin of the baby animals. Dogs
and cats near the area may be infested as well. The larvae are large (25 mm in
length), stout, dark in color, and covered with bands of spines. The larvae feed on
 the tissues of their host and cause tissue damage and skin irritation. The puppy,
kitten, or rabbit that is bitten will have a large swelling on the skin around the
larvae. This condition is most often seen in the warm summer months. The best
treatment is surgical removal, and animals usually do well.
Infestation with Cuterebra larvae is a form of myiasis, a condition in which the
larvae of fies enter the host through a wound in the skin, through the nose, or
by direct penetration of the skin and feed on the tissues of the host while they
develop to the next stage.
Exfernal Parasife 6
The stable fy, Stomorys calcitrans, looks very much like the common housefly. It
e uoy sluedyinou sil yibual ui uu 8 ol 9 Ajateuixoudde pue hojoo ul fei8 s!
stout needle that is thrust through the skin. The end of these mouthparts has
a rasping apparatus that lacerates the tissues, causing a pool of blood to form.
The fly then sucks in this blood. The common housefly Musca domestica can be
differentiated from the stable fy because it does not have these piercing mouth-
parts. The housefly prefers instead to sponge up fuids. The stable fy can cause
annoyance to all domesticated animals and may transmit worm parasites of the
eye and stomach (such as Thelazia and Habronema) in the horse.
External Parasite 7
Musca autumnalis looks identical to the common housefly (Musca domestica). This
fly feeds in the same way as the common housefy, by sponging up blood and tis-
sue juices from its host. It causes most problems to the host because it prefers
to feed from the secretions in and around the face of the host. These flies are
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library  271
often seen crawling around the eyes of cattle, horses, and dogs, where they can
produce swelling and irritation. They frequently carry bacteria and viruses from
the eyes of one animal to another, because they repeatedly go from one host to
another. They are also associated with dirty conditions around the barnyard,
close to areas where manure is stored.
Exfernal Parasife 8
The horsefly, or Tabanus sp, is a large, sturdy fy with powerful wings and large
eyes. Tabanids have clear wings with characteristic veins that may be used to
tell them apart from other related flies. The female is known for the deep, pain-
ful wounds she inflicts in the skin of a horse when she feeds. These fies have
bladelike mouthparts that they use to slash the skin of the host, causing a pool
of blood to form. Later, other flies may be attracted to these large wounds in
asuou aui oi aouefouue pue uied uaulun Suisneo pue auaui Suauiea 'uys aui
These fies may mechanically transmit bacteria and viruses from a horse or
other animal to another one in the area. When blood from the large pool sticks
to the legs or mouthparts of these fies, it is then spread on or injected into the
next host on which the flies feed.
External Parasite 9
The Chrysomere sp. fy is a medium-sized fy with banded wings that are at an
angle. The antennae are made up of three segments of equal length. The female
 fy feeds on many animals and causes much damage to the skin due to the biting
mouthparts. Flies of these and other species may be controlled to some extent
by the application of chemicals to the skin of the host. These either repel or kill
the fies when they come to feed. Pyrethrins are chemicals that have often been
used to protect horses and cows. They usually come in an oily spray that is ap-
plied to all areas of each animal's skin except around openings such as the eyes,
nose, and genital organs.
External Parasite 10
The fesh fy, Sarcophaga sp., is a medium-sized fy with a gray checkerboard
pattern on its abdomen. It feeds and fies around during the day and can cover
long distances because of its strong fying ability. Larvae and pupae of this fy
are most often found in decaying matter in the environment, but occasionally
the fesh fy infests wounds of animals at pasture and lays eggs in the wounds.
 u sa ar o dona rue and pue aael au suadey sn u
a lot of tissue destruction. Also, because these fies frequent dirty areas where
there is dead material present, they can carry any bacteria and other pathogens
mechanically on their bodies and deposit them into the wounds when they lay
their eggs.
Exfernal Parasife 11
The Callitroga hominivorax fies are often called metallic fies or blowflies. They
have a metallic greenish blue color, with an orange face and three dark stripes on
the abdomen. As adults, they feed by sponging up fuids from the host and there-
aao uoseau aul asodand sut oy pandepe aue ieui shuedqinou aaey auog
hominivorar fies are important in veterinary medicine is that they develop only
in living tissues. The females lay their eggs on the edge of a fresh wound; then
272APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
 punoia ayi ot lei Aayi 'punom ayl wo paai aeael ayt pue 'yoiey sasa aut
these flies are cattle, horses, and pigs; but dogs, humans, and birds may also be
affected. Because of these metallic flies, it is advisable to postpone elective sur-
geries on farm animals to the colder months when such fies are not present.
Exfernal Parasife 12
The ox warble, or Hypoderma bovis, fy is a beelike fy. These flies are from the
family Oestridae and characteristically look like bees. They are hairy, with eyes
that are set wide apart and mouthparts that are not used to bite the host. Instead,
the females lay their eggs on the hair shafts of a cow. Larvae, as shown in this
photo, develop from these eggs, penetrate the skin, and migrate into the connec-
 po  e e su   s r o e  nss 
cow's back and fall on the ground to pupate. The major problem caused by these
flies is not disease, since they are well tolerated by the cow. Rather, they create
an economic problem: The larvae make many holes in the hide, destroying its
value as leather.
External Parasite 13
The sheep nasal fy, or Oestrus ovis, is another of the beelike flies. The adult fy
has a dark gray color, with small black spots on the thorax, and it is covered
develop in the nose and sinuses. The larvae cause a great deal of damage to these
larvae that might be found in the nose of a sheep. Frequently, the larvae grow
Keu faui aseo e yons ui adeosa ot alqeun aue faui ieui sasnuis aul ui aluel os
die, causing infections in the nasal and sinus passages of the sheep. In the parts
of the country where this fy exists, sheep farrmers have a hard time protecting
their focks from this pest.
External Parasite 14
The horse botfly, or Gastrophilus sp., is a beelike fy The adult flies are brown and
hairy and have nonfunctional mouthparts. The only stages of this ectoparasite that
feed are the larval stages. The adult female fy lives for only a short time, during
which she deposits her eggs on the hairs of a horse. The horse may ingest these
eggs in grooming or scratching itself Then the eggs hatch, and the larvae pen-
etrate the tissues of the mouth. They finally develop and are swallowed, attaching
themselves to the wall of the stormach and developing further. They rermain inside
the horse for 1o to 12 months and may cause irritation to the stomach.
External Parasite 15
This photo shows the larvae of the horse botfy Gastrophilus sp. They are par-
asitic maggots made up of 12 segments, of which the first two are fused to-
gether. By means of mouth hooks, which they usually have, the larvae attach to
the stomach lining. Many of the species have rows of spines on each segment.
Organophosphate worm medication is usually effective in getting rid of these
larvae from the stomach of the horse, but the infection may be prevented by
removing the eggs from the hair shafts as soon as they are laid.
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library273
External Parasite 16
The black fy, or Simulium sp., is a small fy (1 mm-5 mm in size), dark gray
to black in color, with a humped thorax, short hornlike antennae, broad, clear
wings, and short legs. The female fy sucks blood from many animals, especially
cattle and horses, but dogs, humans, and birds may be attacked also. T'he bites
are very painful and cause toxic and allergic reactions in the skin, as well as
considerable blood loss.
In particular these fies are frequently found in the ears of horses, where they
cause an annoying dermatitis, especially in the spring. The eggs of these flies are
laid in fast-moving streams, frequently near rapids, thus becoming particularly
annoying to animals in these areas.
External Parasite 17
Culicoides sp. fies are frequently called no-see-ums because of their very small
size. They are so small that they can pass through ordinary window screen
These flies may be recognized by their small size, their humped thorax, and
proboscis (rmouthpart), with jaws that act like scissors to break the skin of the
animal they are attacking. The females of this group attack humans and animals
to get blood and can be very annoying. Their bites are irritating, causing swell-
ing and itching that often must be treated. This type of allergic reaction is fre
quently seen in the horse, where fy bites from Culicoides sp. can cause swelling
and itching of the horse's belly during the summer months.
External Parasite 18
The sheep ked, Melophagus ovinus, which is found in most parts of the world, is
wingless and hairy, with a leathery appearance, and is about the size of a tick
(4-6 mm long). The head is short and broad, the thorax brown, and the abdo-
 uo ploy oi sasn il ieqi shal inois uo smelo faeay sey 1h 'umoq ystdeig ua
the sheep. This ectoparasite may be easily spotted on white sheep due to the
can open wounds in the skin. These wounds may make the sheep susceptible to
attack by flies, or they may become infected with bacteria or protozoa. The sheep
sabeurep ll asneoaq fuisnpul daays aui oi ssol oiuouosa jeaua asneo osje Aeu pay
the sheep's wool.
External Parasite 19
Lice are flat and wide and have no wings. They are pale in color and about 2 to 3 mm
long. The sucking louse, Linognathus setosus, has a head that is more slender than
blood. This louse has stout legs that are used for grasping the hairs of the host;
it has no eyes. The louse pictured here is an ectoparasite of dogs and foxes. It
causes the host a great deal of irritation and itching and is transferred by direct
contact with an infested animal. It can also be transferred by combing an in-
fested animal and then using the same comb on another animal.
External Parasite 2o
 l  a soi eo ad s o  e si s 
sucking louse. It has no eyes, and its body is broad and fat. However, the head
274APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
of the biting louse is wider than the thorax and as wide as the abdomen. The
They are designed to bite and chew, and they feed on debris on the surface of
the skin rather than suck like the other group of lice. Trichodectes canis has been
shown to transmit the internal parasite Dipylidium caninum, the dog tapeworm,
from one dog to another
External Parasite 21
Ticks are divided into two groups: hard ticks (Ixodidae) and soft ticks (Argasidae),
depending on whether they have a shield on their backs. The hard ticks have the
 dorsal shield. There are many complex characteristics that are used to identify
S r e p  e o  i e s  o ss 
cannot be identifed based on their size, because their size changes greatly, de-
pending on whether they have sucked any blood. Also, the young nymph ticks
look much like the adults, but they are very small.
Ticks spend a great deal of their life off the host but they are dependent on the
host for a blood meal, which allows them to reproduce. Each species of tick has
different feeding habits. Sorme feed on only one host, others feed on two hosts,
and still others feed on three hosts. The greater the number of hosts from which
one host to the next.
The Rhipicephalus sanguineus tick is an Arachnida tick. This brown dog tick is
a three-host tick, which means that it feeds on three hosts during its life cycle,
but it is found mainly on the dog. This is a hard tick, having a hard dorsal shield
and a rather plain appearance. T'his tick has eyes and festoons, which are small,
squared-off grooves on the back edge of its shell. The hypostomes, or mouth-
parts, are short, as are the palps, which the tick uses to feel where it is in space.
This tick can spread many diseases from one host to the next, such as, for ex-
ample, the virus Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
External Parasite 22
The deer tick is a hard tick from the group Ixodidae. This tick does not have
eyes or festoons. The most important characteristic that distinguishes this tick
from other hard ticks is the ring that surrounds the front of its anus. The anus
of the tick is found by turning the tick over and looking for a small opening in
the middle of the abdomen. A distinct groove surrounds the opening. Irodes
dammini is very important to veterinarians because it can transmit the Rickettsia
that causes Lyme disease in humans and dogs. This is a disease that has become
 sasno ieun uah aui saieis piun aul jo iso isg aun uo uooo
disease is Borrelia burgdorferi. This disease is serious in both dogs and humans,
causing fever and pain in the joints. Dogs and humans are at risk for getting the
External Parasite 23
Dermacentor variabilis, the American dog tick, is very common in dogs in the
United States. This tick is ornate and has eyes, plus festoons on the back of
its shell. As in Rhipicephalus, the palps are short. This tick is most numerous
in the spring and summer months, since it needs moisture to survive in the
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library 275
environment. However, all stages of this tick are able to survive the cold tem-
peratures of winter. The dog tick is also a three-host tick and can spread Rocky
Mountain spotted fever
External Parasite 24
s aun  r ia sds  shi sia iue yn s e si u s
where it is most likely to be found on its hosts. This tick is found on many do-
mestic animals, including dogs, horses, cows, goats, pigs, and cats. The larval
and nyrmph stages of these ticks are ectoparasites of these animals. The adults
tick, meaning that whatever host it chooses to take blood from, it will remain on
that host and not move to another host.
     t o  si  s  p d  
feed, which causes great pain and annoyance to the host. Dogs that have these
ticks will shake their heads and scratch their ears. The veterinarian will usually
find a waxy or bloody material in the ear canal. The ticks must be removed by
hand from the ear of the animal.
External Parasite 25
Mites are the second most important group of arachnids that causes problems
       l    s s  
naked eye. The mange mite, Sarcoptes scabiei, is one of the most common of the
mites. It is small (o.2-0.5 mm long) and has a round body. The legs of the mange
mite are short, and spines stick out from the side. The female mites burrow into
the skin to lay their eggs. The eggs hatch, and the larvae come out to the top of
the skin and wander around. All of this activity causes intense itching in the skin
of the dog. The skin becomes very red, and the dog will bite and scratch until
much of the hair has been removed from the body. The best way a veterinarian
can tell if the dog is infected with this mite is by taking a scalpel blade and scrap-
ing the skin until a small amount of blood is seen. This scraping is then placed
on a slide under the microscope to examine it for the mite.
External Parasite 26
Demoder canis is a mite that lives in the hair follicles and sweat glands in the skin
of the dog. It belongs to a group of mites that is very specialized in its selection
of a site in which to live. This means that a Demoder mite from a dog cannot
live in the skin of a horse and vice versa. The body has a long cigar shape. It is
small, about 0.25 mm long, with short, stumpy legs located in the front half of
the abdomen. This mite also causes mange in the dog. It is found in the skin of
healthy dogs, however, and causes disease only when the dog's immune system is
does ym shop se fuoni se nou ane ahu sui aay seui shoa pasoudon
mange, but there is thickening of the skin, redness, scaling, and loss of hair. This
mite and other skin mites in the dog may be killed with organophosphate dips ap-
plied to the surface of the skin. The veterinarian must find the underlying cause
of the mite infestation so that it will not return when the treatment is ended.
External Parasite 27
Notoedres cati is the mite that infests the skin of the cat. It causes mange-like
skin irritations that are usually seen around the ears and neck but may extend
276 APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
to the face and feet of the cat. It is very small and looks similar to the sarcoptic
mite in the dog, with a round body, short, stumpy legs, and bristles that extend
from the rear of the body. This mite can also infest rabbits and foxes and causes
very itchy skin in all of these. If a cat is infected, the treatment a veterinarian
pioe aui oi auods e yiim dip angns aul fidde oi s! puaoou fiqeqoud lm
eul spunoduo aieqdsoydouelio aul jo fueu aiealot pouueo jeo aui aouis 'eae
are used in other species.
External Parasite 28
The ear mite, Otodectes cynotis, infests both the dog and the cat. It burrows into
the skin of the ear canal, causing intense irritation, redness, and swelling. The
ear responds by making lots of dark black wax. Because of the intense irritation,
animals react by scratching and shaking their heads. The mite itself is about the
 l sd e t ig o   i  d  s  a
much longer. Identification may be made by taking a swab of the material in the
ear canal, smearing it on a slide, and looking at it under the microscope on low
power. To treat the animal for this mite infestation, the veterinarian first cleans
the ear with a mild antiseptic solution. Then the veterinarian recommends to
the owner to place a solution of oil with the drug thiabendazole and an antibiotic
in the ear canal for several days in a row. Since this condition is very contagious,
spreading from one animal to another when they touch each other, all animals
living together in one household at the same time must be treated.
External Parasite 29
Cheyletiella is a mite that causes a condition called walking dandruff in rabbits,
cats, and dogs. It is so called because it looks like dandruff that is moving, espe-
cially along the fur on the back of the host. This ectoparasite may infest people
who come in contact with infested anirmals. The mite itself has a small, round
body less than 1 mm in size. It has a hooklike structure on the head and char-
acteristic bristles and combs on the legs. These mites do not burrow into the
skin, but the hook on their head pierces the skin while they are feeding on tissue
asneo fjureu faul inq uys aul jo bueos pue ynupuep asneo ueo faul sping
itching.
Types of Animal Diseases
Detecting Illness
This part, in conjunction with the Animal Disease Photo Cards, shows what a
veterinarian sees when diagnosing canine and feline diseases, including tumors.
When diseases are not discovered, the resulting health problerms can cause seri-
ous consequences for the animals—severe illness and even death.
Canine Diseases
Animal Disease 1
Malignant melanoma is the most common malignant tumor of the canine oral
cavity. Disease 1 shows a dark brown to black lobulated mass involving the
front of the jaw of a dog. This melanoma arises in the gums and invades locally.
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library 277
sometimes destroying bone. The tumor often spreads to the nearby lymph nodes
and lungs.
Anima! Disease 2
The skin of this dog contains numerous scaly, firm, raised patches. This is one
form of cutaneous lymphosarcoma, a tumor made up of sheets of lymphoid cells.
sao peuasul oi speands semle ssoe soesoudfi snouin
Anima! Disease 3
The histiocytoma shown here is an extremely common benign tumor, usually
uoo aul aouay-aoueueadde pensn shi smous oioud stui shop Sunof ui bussue
mon name of “button tumor." These tumors usually regress on their own.
Animal Disease 4
The kidneys of this neonatal dog are speckled with numerous pinpoint hermor-
rhages (petechiae), caused by canine herpesvirus infection. Herpesvirus typi-
cally affects dogs less than 2 weeks old, resulting in necrosis (death of cells) and
isoue s! 11 sfaupiy pue daa! 'shuni Suipnjoui 'suelio Aueu ul aheyuouay
 invariably fatal. Dogs in groups, such as in breeding colonies or kennels, are at
most risk.
Animal Disease 5
This dog's liver has many irregular nodules separated by fibrous bands. This is
the appearance of cirrhosis, which is the final result of many insults to the liver,
including toxic necrosis or chronic active hepatitis. Damaged hepatocytes are
replaced by fibrous connective tissue, while undamaged hepatocytes multiply
leading to new nodules.
Animal Disease 6
In parvoviral enteritis, the parvovirus attacks rapidly dividing cells. The cells
lining the crypts of the intestine are especially vulnerable, leading to the necro
sis and red discoloration present in this photo. Lesions in the intestine are often
segmental.
Anima! Disease 7
d go us se go peidai suoied safad no-pauound, aue smous ooud s
voviral enteritis of the intestine. Peyer's patches are localized lymphoid tissues
of the intestine that become depleted when infected with parvovirus.
Animal Disease 8
Calcinosis circumscripta is a nodular lesion seen in the skin and tongues of
has the consistency of granular toothpaste. The cause is unknown. The cure is
to completely remove, or cut out, the lesion.
Animal Disease 9
uuo ls e) fpoq ooe aui uoy sase jeui houn e si houni aseq jueay au
at the base of the heart that senses the amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
the blood). Brachycephalic breeds, such as Boston terriers and boxers, are most
prone to developing this tumor, which often results in hydropericardium (excess
278APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
Animal Disease 10
The coronary vessels in this photo show the yellow plaques characteristic of
atherosclerosis. This accumulation of fat within the vessel walls is rare in the
dog, but when it occurs, it is almost always associated with hypothyroidism (de-
ficient activity of the thyroid gland).
Animal Disease 11
The stife joint of this dog is replaced by a large tumor. Osteosarcoma, a malig-
invariably spreads to the lungs.
Animal Disease 12
The interstitial cell tumor, the most common testicular tumor of the dog, is en-
capsulated. It is colored yellow and red. It is benign and cured by castration.
Animal Disease 13
Hemangiosarcoma is a common tumor of German shepherds, golden retrievers,
and Irish setters. It is a malignant tumor of blood vessels, and it often arises in
the spleen, right atrium of the heart, liver, and lung. Dogs may die from severe
hemorrhage associated with the bloody masses.
Animal Disease 14
 aaissale fiaauixa aue shop jo slsuot aui jo seuouioueo lo snoenbs
 asu so pei pe su yi u on pds m so
Animal Disease 15
This photo shows an opened colon heavily infested with Trichuris vulpis, the
festations may result in death due to intestinal bleeding and dehydration from
uncontrollable diarrhea.
Animal Disease 16
Lung lobe torsion is a rare condition in which one or more lobes of the lung may
become twisted at the base, cutting off blood fow into or out of the lobe. The
affected region remains engorged, and necrosis occurs due to lack of oxygen.
Animal Disease 17
This photo shows a skin tag, an elevated piece of excess skin often found in older
dogs. It is of unknown cause. The cure is to excise it, that is, to cut it out.
Animal Disease 18
This photo of the opened left ventricle of a dog's heart shows irregular, warty
e ,suoeialaa, asaun saoueisu fu un uay pue euaioeq 'sheo fronee
the result of bacteria circulating in the blood from an infection elsewhere in the
body. The disease is called vegetative endocarditis.
Animal Disease 19
The circular regions in this kidney are regions of infarction—localized necrosis
due to vascular blockage. In this case, the blockage is due to bits of the “veg-
etations" on the mitral valve that have broken off, circulated in the blood, and
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library  279
eventually lodged in renal arterioles. If these septic infarcts damage enough of
the renal tissue, renal failure may occur.
Animal Disease 20
This photo is of an opened urinary bladder with attached ureters and transected
kidneys. There is a gray, plaquelike growth at the neck (trigone) of the bladder.
Transitional cell carcinoma usually occurs in older female dogs. This malignant
tumor may block the ureters, preventing urine outfow. The result is dilated
ureters and dilated renal pelvis.
Anima! Disease 21
As shown in this photo, there are numerous well-defined, often wedge-shaped,
gray-brown areas rirmmed in black along the edge of the spleen. These are in-
farcts, localized areas of necrosis associated with loss of blood to these areas.
Many older dogs have splenic infarcts. Most are of unknown cause; however,
some are associated with tumors that may fill or disrupt blood vessels.
Animal Disease 22
This photo shows two cross sections of a brain with a pituitary adenoma, which
 st o o  se rno sr p sy  ssn
nign, the compression of structures in the area may lead to a variety of clinical
signs. Brachycephalic breeds, such as boxers and Boston terriers, are the most
commonly affected.
Animal Disease 23
Two ovaries with attached uterine horns are shown in this photo. Each ovary
has numerous thin-walled cysts, called ovarian cysts, which contain clear fuid.
Some cysts may secrete excess estrogen or progesterone.
Animal Disease 24
This photo shows the consequences of some ovarian cysts. Excess horrmones
from the cysts lead to excess growth of uterine glands, often with cyst forrma-
tion. The opened uterus shown here has cystic endometrial hyperplasia. This
the uterus with pus formation).
Animal Disease 25
In this photo are shown a normal fetus and a littermate with anasarca, general-
ized ederma. The excess fluid gives the animal its swollen, wet look. The cause of
fetal anasarca is unknown, but it is incompatible with life. The anirmal dies late
in gestation.
Animal Disease 26
The tan-red lobulated mass shown in this photo surrounds the molars of a dog's
jaw. This mass, or acanthomatous epulis, is a tumor of the tissues that make up
the teeth and their surrounding tissues. It is locally invasive and often results in
bone destruction. Removal of a large portion of the jaw is usually necessary to
prevent recurrence.
Animal Disease 27
The mitral valve of this dog's heart is diffusely thickened and nodular, result-
ing in endocardiosis, a degenerative change seen commonly in old dogs. When
280 APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
severe, endocardiosis may lead to valvular insufficiency (failure of the valve to
completely close) and heart failure.
Animal Disease 28
This photo shows a cross section of a dog's eye. At the lower edge is a black
mass extending from the iris to the back of the eye. This tumor, known as a
uveal melanoma, has arisen from melanocytes of the anterior uvea (iris and/
or ciliary body). The majority of melanomas arising in this site are only lo-
cally invasive and necessitate removal of the eye. A few spread to internal
organs.
Animal Disease 29
This photo gives a close-up view of the inside of a dog's rib cage, showing the
between the ribs. This uremic mineralization is common in animals with chronic
renal disease and is thought to result from the toxins associated with uremia
(urine in the blood).
Feline Diseases
Animal Disease 30
This photo shows the organs from the thorax of a cat with dyspnea (a condi-
Yuid paqoi-fueu 'siel e si auaui (uyieanq u Ainop fq pazuaioeyo uo
mass involving the cranial mediastinum and surrounding the base of the heart.
This is a common tumor of lymphocytes in the cat, known as cranial mediastinal
lymphosarcoma.
Animal Disease 31
The tip of one lobe of the liver shown here has a well-rounded, many-lobed mass
with numerous small, thin-walled cysts. The biliary cystadenoma is a common
the cure.
Animal Disease 32
Two thyroids from a cat are shown, each containing markedly enlarged white-tan
parathyroids. (In the cat, normal parathyroids are not usually visible.) Bilateral
parathyroid hyperplasia is seen in all vertebrates and is refective of calcium-
Animal Disease 33
This photo shows cross sections of a norrmal feline heart (above) and a heart with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (below). The increased thickness of the left ven-
tricular wall is evident, as is the obliteration of the lumen. The cause of this lesion
Animal Disease 34
 Shown in this photo is an opened distal aorta at the branch into the external iliac
arteries. A cylindrical red-purple embolus has lodged at this site, cutting off the
blood supply to the distal extrermities. (An embolus is a piece of a fixed blood clot
that has broken off and circulated in the blood.)
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library  281
Animal Disease 35
This cat's trachea is exposed, showing a large, irregular, many-lobed thyroid
(the larger brown bulb) next to a smaller-than-normal thyroid (the smaller
brown bulb). The large thyroid has undergone adenomatous hyperplasia, with
production of excessive thyroid hormones. The resultant hyperthyroidism is
manifested by weight loss, polyphagia, and increased heart rate. This lesion is of
unknown cause and may involve one or two thyroids.
Animal Disease 36
In this photo, the cat's kidneys are infected with a coronavirus, leading to the
disease feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). Many organs may be affected, with the
formation of nodules composed of inflammatory cells. This disease is most often
seen in cats less than 2 years of age and is usually fatal.
Animal Disease 37
anguoi aui yiauaq yimona si fiaeo peno auy aul jo houni suuu uou
makes it difficult to remove surgically. Tumor cells often spread to lymph nodes
and lungs.
Animal Disease 38
The liver in this photo is discolored yellow and is greasy to the touch due to he-
patic lipidosis. Sections of this liver float in water. The individual liver cells are
is of uncertain cause; however, this syndrome is often seen in obese cats that go
off feed for extended periods of time. Many cats die but some survive with long-
term supportive therapy.
Animal Disease 39
This colonic mesentery of a cat contains numerous smooth, oval structures that
the cat, called pacinian corpuscles.
Animal Disease 40
These kidneys contain several soft, bulging, pink-gray masses. This is a typical
presentation of renal lymphosarcoma in the cat. Other organs may be similarly
affected. Irmpression smears would show sheets of neoplastic lymphocytes.
Animal Disease 41
This photo shows that the thoracic cavity of this cat is filled with a thick brown
fuid and the lungs are covered by a creamy tan exudate. This is an example
of pyothorax, or pus in the thoracic cavity, usually caused by Actinomyces sp. or
Nocardia sp. These bacteria are often carried into the chest by the penetration or
inhalation of foreign bodies.
Animal Disease 42
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) may affect neural tissue as well as other or-
 gans. One classical lesion is FIP ventriculitis, shown here as a bluish accumula-
tion of fibrin-rich fuid in the ventricles of the brain.
282 APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
Animal Disease 43
Portions of the abdominal and subcutaneous (beneath the skin) fatty tissue of
called steatitis, is an inflammation of the fat associated with increased polyun-
saturated fats in the diet, resulting in a relative vitamin E/selenium deficiency.
There is resultant necrosis and inflammation of the fat. This disease is usually
very painful.
Large Animal and Avlan Diseases
Animal Disease 44
This photo shows the opened abdominal cavity of a calf. A region of small in-
testine has twisted 36o degrees around its mesenteric root, resulting in lack of
blood flow into or out of the area. As in this case, intestinal volvulus leads to
necrosis of the involved portion of gut and to the death of the animal due to the
toxins released from the damaged gut wall.
Animal Disease 45
This mammary gland from an adult cow has areas of red and green-brown dis-
teria. Staphylococcus sp. is the most common cause of gangrenous mastitis, the
disease shown in this photo.
Animal Disease 46
a poxvirus. The lips of the sheep in this photo are covered by scabby growths.
Similar lesions may be seen on the face and feet. The viral infection is not life
threatening; however, young animals that are affected will not suckle or graze,
leading to possible body deterioration.
Animal Disease 47
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, also called heaves, is a serious disease of
horses because of the increased respiratory effort seen in affected animals. This
photo shows the cut surface of the lung with numerous distended airways (bron-
chiectasis). The cause is uncertain, but allergic responses to inhaled substances are
considered to be an important component in the development of this disease.
Animal Disease 48
The skin and muscles have been removed from the jawbone of this cow to reveal the
moth-eaten appearance of the skeleton. The animal became infected with Actinomyces
bovis, which led to the inflarmmation of the bone and the disease actinomycosis. The
Affected animals often have difficulty eating and are destroyed.
Animal Disease 49
This horse kidney has a single, well-defined white mass, or renal adenoma,
within the cortex. Renal adenomas are not uncommon in horses. They are be
nign tumors of no clinical significance and are usually an incidental finding at
postmortem
APPENDlX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library283
Animal Disease 50
This photo presents the opened colon from a pig showing a marked narrowing
of the rectum a few centirmeters from the anus. This lesion is preceded by in
fammation of the area, caused by the bacteria Salmonella typhimurium. Because
of poor vascular supply to this area, healing leads to rectal stricture. Intestinal
obstruction and death result.
Animal Disease 51
The leg of this calf shows the regional white discoloration typical of nutritional
  s  s e    o
tures deficient in vitamin E and selenium will have multifocal necrosis of skel-
etal and cardiac muscle. Severe cardiac involvement may result in death
Animal Disease 52
This lesion involving the vulvar lips of a horse is called coital exanthema and is
uo punoy aue sainisnd pue suaisq fuaiem s adfi snuia sadiay auinba fq pasneo
the genital organs of mares and stallions. The lesions usually heal by themselves
within a few weeks after infection, leaving areas of pigment loss.
Animal Disease 53
This photo shows a normal intestine (above) and an intestine from a calf with
Johne's disease (below). Infection with Mycobacterium paratuberculosis results in
severe inflammation, leading to the widespread thickening evident here. Young
animals are most commonly affected and have profuse watery diarrhea, which
may lead to dehydration and death
Animal Disease 54
The cross sections of the noses of three pigs are shown here to demonstrate
the progression of lesions seen in atrophic rhinitis. With time, there is mod-
erate to severe atrophy and loss of the cone-shaped bones in the nasal cavity
This disease occurs commonly in young pigs and is a major cause of economic
loss in pig-raising areas of the world. The cause is uncertain, but it appears
to be related to infection by Bordetella bronchiseptica and Pasteurella multocida.
saam g fq zuapiaa flnsn aue suais fuoieidsau haddn pue fup peioed
of age.
Animal Disease 55
This chicken's trachea contains a white plug of dead tissue and inflammatory
cells. Infectious bronchitis is caused by a coronavirus and results in mild to mod-
erate upper respiratory infections. The infections are not usually life threatening
but result in decreased egg production.
Animal Disease 56
This opened horse's stomach reveals two common lesions. Bots is the lay term
for the larvae of the botfly of the genus Gasterophilus. These larvae spend a por
tion of their life cycle in the stomach of the horse. Severe infestations may result
in chronic inflammation and ulceration. The raised area with four burrow marks
is caused by a Habronema nematode. These nematodes usually cause only mild
gastric inflammation.
284APPENDIX Ill: Narrative Guide for the Image Library
Animal Disease 57
Ventricular septal defects are the most common heart defects in the newborn
bovine. The calf in this photo had a defect (the large, open hole) just below the
aortic valve. Most of these defects are clinically insignificant and are incidental
findings at postmortem.
Animal Disease 58
The muzzle of this cow is ulcerated and reddened. Although nonspecific, this
change is typically seen in malignant catarrhal fever, a disease of worldwide
importance. In Africa, the disease is caused by a herpes virus. The virus results
in vascular necrosis, resulting in lesions involving the skin and many other
organs.
Animal Disease 59
This cockatoo has marked feather loss, which in this case is due to self-mutilation.
Feather picking may be associated with boredom, or it may be a reflection of
internal diseases such as endocrine imbalances.
Animal Disease 60
This opened jejunum from a calf reveals the classic plug of tissue, or "cast," seen
in intestines infected with Salmonella sp. The disease is intestinal salrmonellosis,
tory cells. Severe infections often lead to death.
GLOSSARY
A
adaptation tolerance: The characteristic
This glossary gives the
abomasal worms (Ostertagia,
of a parasite that makes it
immunologically inert, or invisible to
definitions of all important
Haemonchus, and Trichostrongylus):
 Important endoparasites of the
the host.
key words in this book. Take a
stomach of cattle, sheep, and goats.
adhesions: Infammatory bands that
abomasum: Fourth compartment of the
connect opposing serous tissues.
moment to study the terms you
 stomach of a cow, sheep, goat, or deer
adverse drug reaction: A response to
a drug that is serious, undesirable,
have just learned. Then be sure
(ruminant).
 and possibly life threatening. These
abscess: A localized collection of pus in
to review these words and their
tissue.
reactions occur at dosages normally
acaricides: Pesticides that kill ticks and
used for prevention, diagnosis, or
definitions before taking an
mi tes.
treatment.
agenesis: The absence or imperfect
examination or quiz.
acquired immunity: Exposure to an
 antigen that results in antibody
development of a part of the body due
 production in response to that
to deficient growth.
American dog tick (Dermacentor
antigen; also known as active
immunity.
uriabilis): A three-host hard tick. The
active immunity: Exposure to an
larvae and the nymphs prefer to feed
antigen that results in antibody
on rodents and rabbits. The adults
feed on dogs, cats, and such wild
production in response to that antigen;
also known as acquired immunity.
carnivores as foxes and coyotes.
 acute infection: Type of infection
amyloidosis: An accumulation of
that occurs when resistance is
amyloid between cells and fibers of
overwhelmed. Also known as a
tissues and organs. Also known as
peracute infection.
amyloid degeneration.
acute infammation: An infammatory
anaplasia: The failure within a cell to
episode occurring 4 to 6 hours
differentiate parts of the body.
following the stimulus and remaining
anastomosis: A joining of the capillaries.
fairly constant in appearance.
anemia: A disease in which the blood
acute infammatory event: The
cannot carry enough oxygen to
reaction of living tissue to a local
support the tissues of the body.
injury in which the reaction has a
aneuploid: Possessing an abnormal
fairly rapid onset and a clear and
number of chromosomes that is not a
distinct end.
multiple of 23 (such as 24).
285
286
GLOSSARY
Anoplura: An order of insects that
autosomal recessive: A type of
bot: Larvae of botfy which infest the
includes bloodsucking lice.
Mendelian genetic disorder
stomach and intestines of the horse.
anorexia: A condition in which an
in which the disease does not
bovine anaplasmosis (Anaplasma
animal will not eat due to a loss in
 generally affect the parents; instead,
marginale): A bacterial infection
appetite.
 one in four offspring are affected
characterized by fever, jaundice,
anthelmintic: A substance destructive
upon inheriting two copies of the
and emaciation and commonly
to worms.
 gene—one from each parent.
transmitted by ticks.
antigen: Chemical that has the ability
bovine babesiosis: A protozoal disease
to cause an immune reaction within
B
of cattle. Also called tick fever.
the body.
 babesiosis: A disease caused by
 bronchi: Air passages in the lungs.
antimicrobial agent: A therapeutic
infection with the protozoan
brucellosis: Infectious and highly
 agent that tends to destroy microbes
parasite Babesidae.
contagious abortive disorder
or prevents their growth or
bacteremia: A condition by which the
 affecting cattle, dogs, goats, pigs,
 pathologic action.
body is unable to keep bacteria from
and humans.
aplasia: A type of agenesis, referring
circulating into the blood.
 bubonic plague: An acute infectious
specifically to the total failure of an
bacterial toxin: A chemical produced
disease caused by the bacterium
 organ to develop.
by bacteria that can cause disease
Yersinia pestis. Transmitted to
apoptosis: Endogenous programmed
and even death.
 humans by feas infesting rodents.
cell death.
bacteriophage: A virus that infects
arachnid: An animal in which the
bacteria.
c
adult has eight legs and two body
basophil: White blood cell; respond to
calor: Heat of the skin and extremities
 parts (head and abdomen); an
allergic reactions.
caused by movement of blood from
arthropod such as a spider, scorpion,
Baylisascaris procyonis: A large
the body's core to those areas.
mite, or tick.
roundworm found in the raccoon and
calcification: Abnormal deposition of
arrested larvae: Larvae with slowed
 one of the causative agents of human 
calcium salts together with small 
development. Also known as larval
VLM (visceral larva migrans).
amounts of iron, magnesium, and
quiescence.
 beef tapeworm of humans (Taenia
other mineral salts.
ascarid: Round worm.
 saginata): A taenid tapeworm whose
cancer: A general term frequently
ascites: Fluid in the peritoneal cavity.
larvae reside in cattle muscles.
used to indicate any of the various
asymptomatic carrier: An animal that
Adult taeniid tapeworms can live in
types of malignant neoplasms.
has eliminated a virulent infection
humans as well as dogs.
canine ehrlichiosis: A bacterial
 but that was never stricken with the
 benign: Lacking the ability to invade
disease of dogs that may cause tick
disease.
and grow at sites away from the
paralysis.
 atrophy: The reduction in size of a
original tumor.
canine piroplasmosis (babesiosis): A
fully developed tissue.
bilirubin: A substance found in the
protozoal disease of dogs.
attenuation: A dilution process
blood, an excess of which causes
Capillaria: Small nematodes that live
in the manufacture of vaccine,
the skin and mucous membranes to
in the crop, intestine, or cecum of
used to diminish the virulence
 appear yellow or jaundiced.
birds.
 of an organism but retaining its
biopsy: The surgical rermoval of
capsule: A well-defined, discrete,
antigenicity.
lesions within organs and tissues,
fbrous tissue layer that surrounds
autoimmune hemolytic anemia: The
 primarily for the purpose of
most benign tumors.
destruction of red blood cells.
examination.
carcinogens: Physical agents, viruses,
autoimmune reaction: Process by
black disease: Infectious necrotic
 or chemicals that can cause
which normal cells provoke the
hepatitis, a bacterial liver infection.
changes in cells, resulting in tumor
formation of autoantibodies, which
 blackhead: A disease of poultry
formation.
results in the destruction of normal
caused by a protozoan (Histomonas
carcinoma: Malignant tumor from
tissues.
me leagridis).
 epithelial tissue.
 autoinfection: A process by which
blacklegged tick: See deer tick.
carrier: An infected animal that
first-stage larvae of threadworms
blowfies: Metallic black or green flies
is capable of transmitting the
 develop to the infective stage while
that feed on moist, decaying matter.
infectious agent but shows no
 they are in the host's large intestine
blushing: Sudden and brief redness
 apparent signs of the disease.
and then burrow through the
of the face and neck usually caused
caseous necrosis: A type of necrosis
intestinal wall and find their way
by overactivity in the sympathetic
involving the slow, progressive
back to the small intestine, where
nervous system; physiological
 destruction of cells that prevents a
they become adult females.
hyperemia.
high response of white blood cells.
GLOSSARY
287
cattle grub (Hypoderma species): A
chronic inflammation: A clinical
cuticle: The tough skin that covers
fy that looks like a large bee but
concept referring to the existence of
nematodes.
belongs to a group of flies known as
 a persistent infammatory stimulus.
cyst: A closed sac containing fuid.
botflies.
clotting factors: Chemicals in the
cytogenetic: A type of genetic
cattle tick (Boophilus annulatus): A
blood that allow clotting to occur.
disorder that results from
one-host hard tick, which has been
coagulation necrosis: A type of
chromosomal disorders.
eliminated from much of the United
necrosis in which the cytoplasm of
States but sometimes turns up on
the cell coagulates (thickens or gels)
D
cattle in Texas. Common on cattle
and details within the cell are lost.
deer liver fuke: A fuke that makes its
in Mexico and travels to Texas on
Coccidia: A protozoa that lives in the
home in deer, cattle, and sheep, and
 deer and stray cattle.
cells of the host's intestine.
behaves differently in each.
cecal worm (Heterakis gallinarum):
colic: Severe pains in the abdominal
deer tick (Ixodes scapularis): Blacklegged
A worm whose adult is a small
region.
tick; a three-host hard tick that feeds
nematode that lives in the cecum of
 collagen: A type of connective tissue.
on birds and small mammals as
many different types of poultry.
colostrum: The first milk secreted
larvae and nymphs. Adults feed on
cell degeneration: An altering of a cell.
following parturition.
large mammals such as cattle, horses,
cell membrane: The structure that
compartmentalized fuids: Fluids
 dogs, and deer. It may transmit
keeps the environment inside and
that are restricted to certain spaces
 anaplasmosis and tularemia.
outside a cell balanced and separate.
within tissues, organs, or cells.
definitive host: The host that harbors
cell proliferation: An increase in cell 
complete blood count (CBC):
the adult, sexual, or mature stages
size or number.
Test that evaluates red blood cell
of a parasite.
cellular morphology: The outward
count, platelet count, hemoglobin
 degeneration: A sometimes reversible
appearance of a cell.
concentration, and white blood cell
 retrogressive pathological change
cellulitis: An infammation of cellular
count.
in a cell or tissue that results in its
or connective tissue.
 congenital: Born with abnormalities.
 function often being impaired or
cestode: Tapeworm.
congestion: A passive process in 
destroyed.
chemotaxis: The chemical process by
which venules engorge with blood.
dehydration: Loss of water from the
which cells orient themselves and
contact carriers: Animals that may
body.
home in on a target.
 harbor and eliminate dangerous
deletion: The loss of a portion of a
chicken body louse (Menacanthus
organisms that they picked up from
chromosome.
stramineus): A chewing louse
contact with other animals.
demodectic mange (demodicosis):
common on chickens, which
contagion: The transmission of any
A disease characterized by the
transmit it by direct contact with
infectious organism from one body
formation of small nodules in the
each other.
to another by direct or indirect
 skin (large animals) and alopecia in
chicken mite ( Dermanyssus gallinae):
contact.
small animals.
 A bloodsucking mite that attacks
convalescent carrier: An animal that
 demodectic mange mite: A common
poultry and many different wild
has had a recognized disease and
mite that lives in the hair follicles
birds.
has not rid itself of the infecting
 and sweat glands in the skin of the
chigger: A larval mite that feds on
agent.
&op
animals.
 cranial mesenteric artery: The artery
 demodectic mange mite of
 chlamydiosis: Disorder caused by the
 that supplies the large intestine
gerbils: A rarely found mite that
 bacterium Chlamydia (of which there
with blood.
occasionally attacks gerbils and
 are several genera).
cross-reactivity: A phenomenon
hamsters.
chorioptic mange (Chorioptes bovis):
by which normal cells appear
demodicosis: Condition caused by
Common mange in cattle and
indistinguishable from infected cells.
demodectic mites (mange).
horses. Also called leg mange as it
crutching: Shaving the wool away
Descriptive Classification System:
Usually causes scabs and irritation
from the area below a sheep's
 A system that classifes tumors
in that area of the body.
tail; a ranching practice aimed at
according to their gross or
chromosome mutations: Changes that
removing the site most likely to
microscopic appearance.
are the result of a rearrangement of
become soiled with blowflies.
diagnosis: Identification of the cause
genetic material.
Cryptosporidium: Microorgani sm
of a disease.
chronic infection: The persistent
responsible for diarrhea in humans.
dichlorvos: An insecticide.
presence of an organism and the
Usually spread through fecal-
differential diagnoses: Systematic
body's persistent attempt to destroy
contaminated water. This protozoan
method of diagnosing a disease that
or contain it.
also infects ruminants.
 lacks unique clinical signs.
288
GLOSSARY
dipping: A practice of submerging
embolus: A thrombus that breaks
fat necrosis: A type of necrosis that
an animal in a bath containing a
loose from the blood vessel in which
usually occurs as a result of injury
recommended pesticide to control
it is formed in order to circulate
to the pancreas.
mange.
throughout the bloodstream.
fatty degeneration: The accumulation
docking: Removing the tail of a
emigration: The movement of blood
of fat in cells.
sheep; a ranching practice aimed
cells from the blood vessels and into
fibrin: A chemical that solidifies and
at removing the site most likely to
tissue.
sticks to platelets and tissues,
become soiled with blowfies.
endemic typhus: An acute infectious
enabling blood to clot.
dolor: Pain.
 disease carried by rat and mice lice.
fibrinopurulent exudate: A fuid
 dominant: A gene that hides or masks
endo: A prefix meaning “inside."
containing the clotting protein
the effect of another gene in the
endoparasites: Parasites that live in
fbrin and pus.
same allelic series.
their hosts; internal parasites.
fbrinous exudate: A liquid containing
double pore tapeworm ( Dipylidium
endoplasmic reticulum: A cellular
fibrin but lacking pus because of a
caninum): The common tapeworm
substance that creates proteins.
severe necrotizing infection.
of both dogs and cats. Also called
endothelium: Cells that line the blood
first intention: The healing of a
cucumber seed tapeworm.
vessels.
primary union.
dysplasia: The abnormal
endotoxin: A poison made within the
fleeceworms: A term ranchers use
differentiation or development of
 bacteria; may contain structural
for the larvae blowflies in a sheep's
a tissue; may be the precursor of a
components of the organism.
 decaying wool; wool maggots.
neoplasia.
entrapment: A malignant growth
flesh fies: Large fies that feed on
dystrophic calcification: When
 causing a pathology where an
 decaying meat.
calcium is deposited in injured,
organism, organ, or tissue becomes
fuke: A parasitic fatworm
degenerating, or dead tissue.
abnormally trapped.
(trematode).
 eosinophils: A type of white blood cell
fy worry: A condition caused by
E
often associated with parasites and
many horn flies on a cow; so named
 ear mange mites of rodents: Small
infammation.
because the cow spends its time
mites that live in the skin of a rat's
epistaxis: Bleeding from the nose.
shooing offthe flies instead of 
or hamster's ears, nose, and tail.
equine encephalitis: A severe viral
grazing.
ear mite (Otodectes cynotis): A mite
 brain disease of horses.
fomite: An inanimate object that
that lives deep in the ears of dogs
erosion: Shallow ulcer usually limited
carries infections from one animal
 and cats. Its feeding causes skin
to the mucosa with no penetration
to another.
irritation and an increase in ear wax,
of the muscularis mucosa.
fox maggot fly: A flesh fly that lays
and a crusty material builds up in
erythema: An abnormal redness of
 larvae on the intact skin of young
the ear.
the skin caused by dilation of blood
foxes and mink.
ear mite of rabbits ( Psoroptes cuniculi):
vessels.
free-living stage: That period of a
The most common ectoparasite of
erythrocyte: Red blood cell.
 parasite's life when it lives apart 
rabbits. Lives mainly in the rabbit's
estrus: A condition in which hormones
from a host.
ear, but in heavy infestations may
cause the cells lining the uterus to
free radicals: Chemicals that help
travel to the skin of the head and
divide.
induce neoplasia.
neck.
 etiology: The study of the cause of
fur mite of rabbits (Cheyletiella
ecchymosis: Blood in tissue that is
disease.
species): A mite that spends its
larger and more spread out.
 euploid: Any chromosome number
entire life cycle on its host and
 ectoparasites: Parasites that live on
that is a multiple of the haploid
travels by direct contact between
their hosts; external parasites.
number of chromosomes.
hosts.
ectotherms: Cold-blooded animals.
exotoxin: Proteins produced within
fur mites of mice (Myobia musculi and
edema: An excess of fuid in the
some bacteria.
Radfordia affinis): Common parasites
interstitial fuid compartment of the
exudation: The presence of fuids and
of both wild and pet mice. These
body.
the migration of inflammatory cells
mites live on the skin and in the fur
ELISA: Enzyme-linked
into an inflammatory lesion.
 and feed by sucking fuids from the
immunosorbent assay test used
skin.
 for detecting human exposure to
F
roundworms.
face fy (Musca autumnalis): A parasite
G
embolism: An impaction in some
that looks very much like a housefly;
gadding: A behavior in cattle in which
part of the vascular system of an
it laps up fuids, especially those
they try to run away from an adult
 embolus too large to complete the
around the host's eyes, nose, and
cattle grub buzzing around their
circulatory route.
mouth.
legs.
GLOSSARY
289
 gangrene: Localized death of living
guinea pig louse (Gliricola porcelli and
hermaphrodite: An animal that has
cells or tissues.
Gyropus ovalis): An insect that feeds
both ovarian and testicular tissue.
 gangrenous necrosis: A type of
on skin debris. Generally causes its
heterotopic bone formation: The
necrosis that combines ischemia
host no problems.
formation of bone where there is
with a superimposed bacterial
Gulf Coast tick (Amblyomma
normally cartilage.
infection.
maculatum): A three-host hard tick
Hippocratic method: A philosophy
that lives in the United States along
of care that has become the
 a condition caused by lungworms.
the Gulf of Mexico. The larva
basis of modern medicine. The
gapeworm (Syngamus trachea): A
and nymph prefer to feed on such
Hippocratic method consists of
worm whose adult stage is a small
 ground-dwelling birds as quail. The
several important points: observing
nematode that lives in the trachea of
adult ticks feed on cattle, horses,
all, studying the patient (not the
 many different bird species.
and other large mammals.
disease), evaluating honestly, and
 gene mutations: Partial or complete
assisting nature.
deletions of genes on the
H
histamine: A naturally occurring
chromosomes.
heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis): One
 cellular chemical released during an
gene tracking: A process that helps
of the most dangerous nematode
 allergic reaction.
determine whether members of
parasites of dogs, associated with
hog louse (Haematopinus suis): A large
the same family have inherited a
heart failure and pulmonary artery
(6 mm) sucking louse; the only louse
defective gene.
 disease with hypertension.
that feeds on swine.
generalized congestion: A condition
hematemesis: The vomiting of blood.
hookworms (Ancylostoma caninum, A.
in which the heart is diseased,
hematin: A rare golden brown,
tubaeforme, A. braziliense, Uncinaria
causing blood buildup throughout
granular pigment associated with
stenocephala): Gastrointestinal
multiple organs or the entire body.
massive red blood cell destruction
roundworm parasites of dogs and
 genetics: Biology of heredity and
or transfusion reactions.
cats.
variation in organisms.
hematoidin: A golden brown pigment
horn fy (Haematobia irritans): A gray
genome: The complete DNA sequence
 probably composed of the same
bloodsucking fy about half the size
of an animal.
chemical as bilirubin, differing only
of a housefly.
genome mutations: Changes
in its site of origin.
host: The organism that gives a
involving the loss or gain of an
hematoma: A collection of blood
 parasite a home; the animal being
entire chromosome.
within soft tissues resulting in
parasitized in a parasite-host
Giardia: A fagellate protozoan
swelling.
relationship.
responsible for causing giardiasis.
hematuria: Blood in the urine.
host reaction: The presence of
global warming: Belief that an
hemodynamic disturbances:
inflammatory cells and vascular
increase in atmospheric CO,
Alterations in fuid fow.
phenomena at the site of
levels is causing air temperatures
hemoglobin: A pigment within red
inflammation.
throughout the world to rise.
blood cells responsible for the
host specific: A parasite that infects
gopher tortoise tick ( Amblyommα
transport of oxygen.
only one type of host.
tuberculatum): One of the largest
hemopericardium: Presence of blood
humors: Body fuids such as blood,
hard ticks; lives on mammals and
in the heart sac.
phlegm, yellow bile, and black
birds as a larva and on the gopher
hemoperitoneum: Presence of blood
bile.
tortoise as a nymph and adult.
in the abdominal cavity.
hydatid tapeworm (Echinococcus
gramulation tissue: Vascular
 hemoptysis: The coughing up of blood
granulosus and Echinococcus
connective tissue.
from the lungs.
multilocularis): A tapeworm
 granuloma: A tumor cormposed of
hemorrhage: The escape of blood from
whose definitive host is the
 granulation tissue.
the cardiovascular system.
dog and intermediate hosts are
 granulomatous inflammation: A type
hemorrhagic exudate: A liquid rich in
ruminants, horses, and humans
of chronic inflammation, consisting
red blood cells.
that accidentally eat the hydatid
of focal inflammatory lesions in
 hemosiderin: A golden brown pigment
e au shaa suomad
which the tissue reaction is primarily
found inside cells of the spleen and
tapeworm lives in the definitive
of chronic inflammatory cells.
bone marrow.
host's small intestine.
grub: Maggot of the heel fy (H. bovis
hemostasis: Clotting.
hydropic degeneration: A severe form
and H. lineatum).
hemothorax: Presence of blood in the
 of cell swelling.
guinea pig fur mite (Chirodiscoides
chest.
hypercalcemia: An elevation of blood
caviae): A mite that spends its entire
heparin: An anticoagulant.
calcium levels.
life on its host. Infestations usually
 hereditary: A trait derived from one's
hyperemia: An active process in which
cause the guinea pig no problems.
parents.
the arterioles fill with blood.
290
GLOSSARY
hyperplasia: An increase in cell number.
inheritance: Transmission and
knockouts: Animals that have been
hypersensitivity reaction:
reception of genetics from one
engineered to lack a gene that they
 Infammatory response of
generation to the next.
normally have.
immunological origin.
insect: An animal with three pairs of
hyperthermia: Abnormally high body
legs and three body parts (head,
L
temperatures caused by factors such
thorax, abdomen); includes lice,
labile cells: Cells that divide
as heat stroke and burns.
feas, ants, bees, wasps, yellow
frequently to replace lost cells.
hypertrophy: An increase in cell size.
jackets, beetles, and cockroaches.
larva: An immature free-living
hypoplasia: Deficiency of growth and
intermediate host: The host that
invertebrate post-hatching and prior
a diminution of size, occurs during
harbors the larval, juvenile,
to metamorphosing into an adult.
development.
immature, or asexual stages of a
leptospirosis: An infectious
hypotension: A decrease in blood
parasite.
disease caused by Leptospira and
pressure.
 interstitial: Between cells.
transmitted to humans, livestock,
hypothermia: Abnormally low body
 intestinal strongyles: Nematodes that
 and other domestic animals by
temperatures.
lay eggs in the gut. Adults live in
infected urine.
hypovolemic shock: Shock that occurs
the host's small intestine.
lesion: A morphological alteration in
from a loss of blood.
 intracellular: Within a cell.
tissue that occurs with disease.
intraintestinal: Fluid-flled
lethal: Deadly or fatal.
 compartment in the digestive systerm.
leukocyte: White blood cell.
iatrogenic: A negative response to
intravascular: Within the blood vessels.
leukocytosis: An increase in the total
therapy or medicine.
inversion: A genetic phenomenon that
white blood cell count of blood.
iguana tick: A hard tick that attacks
occurs when the chromosome breaks
leukopenia: A decrease in the total
only cold-blooded animals.
into three pieces and one piece
number of circulating white blood
 immune carrier: An animal that has
 reverses its position before joining
cells.
eliminated a virulent infection,
back with the remaining pieces.
 life cycle: The developmental stages
though it has never actually suffered
ion: A charged particle.
of a parasite's life.
from the disease.
ischemic: A type of necrosis that
 liquefaction necrosis: A type of
immunity: The ability to resist disease.
involves a deficiency of blood to an
necrosis more commonly known
immunosuppression: A method by
 area and therefore a lack of oxygen.
as pus.
which a parasite can cause the host
isochromosome: Formations that
lithiasis: The formation of pigment or
to tolerate its presence. During
occur when one chromosome arm
'sueaho moou u! sauois, uanond
 immunosuppression, parasites can
is lost and the remaining arm
such as gallstones and kidney stones.
kill immune system cells, stimulate
duplicates itself to make up for the
liver fluke of ruminants (Fasciola
cells until the supply is exhausted,
missing piece.
hepatica): A large trematode that
 or even release immunosuppressive
ivermectin: A broad-spectrum
resides in the liver, specifically the
 chemicals to inhibit the immune
anthelmintic (a substance
bile ducts, of a ruminant, horse, or
system from mounting a defense.
destructive to worms).
human.
immunosuppressive agent:
 local congestion: Problems with the
Therapeutic agent; can cause
K
heart's outflow.
immune system problems.
karyolysis: A nuclear cellular change
lone star tick (Amblyomma
 incision: Cut into the body.
in which the nucleus dissolves.
αmericanum): A three-host hard tick
inert: Parasite invisible to the host.
karyorrhexis: A nuclear cellular
that feeds on small mammals and
infarction: The result of an embolism
change in which the nucleus breaks
 birds as a larva and a nymph.
blocking off the blood supply or
into small fragments.
lung fuke ( Paragonimus kellicottt): A
venous drainage of a tissue.
 karyotype: The chromosomal makeup
trematode whose adults inhabit
infection: A disturbance in the
of a somatic or body cell. It is the
cysts in the lungs of dogs, cats, and
function of any part of an animal's
photomicrograph of an animal's
wild carnivores.
 body, caused by the entering of
chromosomes.
lungworms (Filaroides osleri, F hirthi,
living agents into that body; the
 karyotypic changes: Changes in
F milksz): Nematodes whose adults
presence of endoparasites in a host.
chromosome number or shape.
are found in the air passages of their
infestation: The presence of
keloid: An abnormally large scar.
hosts.
ectoparasites on a host.
kidney worm of pigs (Stephanurus
Lyme disease: A zoonotic bacterial
inflammation: Swelling with heat and
dentatus): A worm whose adult stage
disease transmitted by ticks.
 pain caused by congestion of blood
lives in the kidney and walls of the
lymphocytes: The immune cells that
vessels.
ureters of pigs.
make antibodies.
GLOSSARY
291
lymphocytosis: An increase in
mitochondria: The portion of a
nit: The eggs of a female louse.
lymphocytes and mononuclear cells.
cell that produces adenosine
nodular worm of pigs
lymphokines: A cytokine involved
triphosphate (ATP) for energy.
(Oesophagostomum dentatum): A small
with cell-mediated irmmunity.
mixed infection: An infection
nematode that lives in the large
lysosome: A chemical body that is able
involving more than one organism.
intestine of a pig.
to dissolve food particles, foreign
molting: The shedding of an outer
nodules: Growths.
invaders, and even cells.
layer, as when a nematode sheds its
nonclassical inheritance: A type
cuticle.
of genetic disorder consisting
M
monoclonal: Derived from a single
of a single-gene disorder with a
maggot: The legless soft-bodied larva
clone.
 nonclassical pattern of inheritance.
of an insect.
 monocyte: Cells with one nucleus.
nonpathogenic parasite: A parasite
malignant: The ability of a neoplasm
mouse mange mite ( Myocoptes
that does not destroy its host and
to invade and spread to remote sites
musculinus): A mite common on both
can continue to reproduce.
in the body.
wild and pet mice that feeds on the
normovolemic shock: A type of shock
 Mallophaga: Order which includes
mouse's skin tissue.
in which blood volume is normal;
biting lice.
mucoid degeneration: A conversion
however, oxygen is lacking.
mange: Contagious skin disease causing
of any of the connective tissues into
northern fowl mite (Ornithonyssus
inflammation, itching, and hair loss.
a gelatinous or mucoid substance
sylviarum): The most common
Causative organism is the mite.
(such as a mucopolysaccharide).
ectoparasite of U.S. poultry; feeds
mange mite of guinea pigs ( Trizacarus
mucosa: The lining of the stomach.
on domestic fowl and wild birds.
caviae): A mite that lives in the skin
multifactorial: A type of genetic
 nosocomial: Disease acquired at the
of guinea pigs and may cause hair
disorder in which multiple genes
hospital or clinic.
loss, crusty skin, and itching.
 and the environment exert a large
notoedric mange mite (Notoedres catz):
mast cell: Large connective tissue cell
infuence.
A mite that causes mange in cats.
that contains heparin, histamine,
 murine: Pertaining to or affecting mice
mucleus: The portion of a cell in which
and serotonin, which are released
or rats.
DNA is stored and converted to RNA.
in response to allergies, injury, or
mutation: Permanent changes in DNA.
infammation.
mycotoxins: Chemicals produced by
0
mediators: Components that help
fungi.
 obesity: State of being fat.
control infammatory reactions.
myiasis: Disease caused by larval fies.
one-host tick: A parasite that spends
melanin: A brown-black pigment 
myocardial infarction: The inability
all three of its feeding stages on one
normally found in the skin, adrenal
of oxygen to reach the myocardial
host.
glands, and parts of the brain.
opsonization: A process by which the
melanoma: Skin cancer.
commonly known as a heart attack.
immune system coats antigens with
melena: Blood in the feces.
chemicals, such as complement or
Mendelian disorder: A type of genetic
N
antibody, in order to make it easier
disorder in which mutant genes
 necropsy: The examination of an
for immune cells to phagocytize
play a large part.
animal's body after death.
(eat) them.
metaplasia: The change of one fully
necrosis: Cell death.
 ornithosis: Parrot fever, psittacosis.
differentiated tissue into another
nematode: Roundworm; small,
OSHA: Occupational Safety and
type of tissue.
wormlike organism covered by a
Health Administration. Part of the
metastasis: A growth away from
tough skin called a cuticle.
 federal government (Department 
the primary site in which a tumor
 neoplasia: A pathological formation
 of Labor) responsible for ensuring
originates.
or growth of an abnormal tissue.
worker safety and health within the
metastatic calcification: The
This term is sometimes used
United States.
deposition of calcium in soft tissues
interchangeably with cancer when
osteoma: A benign tumor of the bone.
that are not the site of previous
the neoplasm is malignant.
Ostertagia: Roundworms or nematode
damage.
 neoplasm: An abnormal tissue that
genus occurring in the ruminant
microfilaria: Embryos released by
 grows by cellular proliferation more
digestive tract.
female heartworms.
rapidly than normal and continues
microhepatia: A condition
to grow after the stimuli that
P
characterized by a small liver.
initiated the new growth cease.
 parasite: An organism that lives on
mite: A minute arachnid, some of
neutrophils: Type of white blood cell
 or in another organism, geting
which are responsible for causing
that serves as a first line of defense
its nourishment from that other
mange.
 against infection.
organism.
292
GLOSSARY
 parathyroid: The endocrine gland that
plasma: One half of the blood volume,
psoroptic mange: Sheep scab
controls blood calcium levels.
90 percent water.
(Psoroptes ovis); the most important
 parenchyma: Tumor tissue
plasma cells: B-cell lymphocytes
mange of sheep. Also found in
representative of the functional
that are "turned on" to produce
cattle ( Psoroptes bovis), where it is
tissue of organs.
antibodies.
characterized by vesicles on the
 passive immunity: Produced by the
platelet: Particle that makes up the
skin that cause intense itching, and
transfer of living lymphoid cells
composition of blood.
horses (Psoroptes equz), where it
from an immune animal; doesn't
 platelet plug: Platelets sticking
affects the base of the mane and tail.
stimulate antibody production and
together at the site of vascular
purpura: Blood in the tissue that
thus is short termed.
injury.
 results when ecchymoses combine
 pathogenesis: The study of
 porphyria: A congenital disorder
with one another.
mechanisms in the development of
involving abnormal hemoglobin 
 purulent (suppurative) exudate: A
disease.
 synthesis and resulting in
cloudy yellow fuid rich in white
 pathological mineralization: The
hypersensitivity to light.
blood cells. Often referred to as pus.
abnormal deposition of calcium salts
 prenatal transmission: A condition
 pustules: Pimple-like growths
together with small amounts of
in which the second-stage larvae
 containing pus.
 iron, magnesium, and other mineral
 migrate into the uterus of a
pyknosis: A nuclear cellular change
salts. Also called calcification.
 pregnant dog, invade the lungs of
in which the nucleus shrinks and
pathological pigmentation: An
the fetus, and molt into third-stage
becomes very dense.
accumulation or deposition of
larvae just before the pup's birth.
 pyrethrins: Flower-based insecticides.
 abnormal amounts of pigment in
They complete their life cycle in the
tissue cells or tissue fuids.
 newborn puppy and become adults
 pathology: The scientific study of
in the small intestine.
R
disease.
prepatent: Evident, latent, or prior
rabbit louse (Haemodipsus ventricosus):
 pediculosis: Condition or disorder
to the shedding of an infectious
An insect in which the adult usually
caused by lice infestation.
agent.
feeds on a rabbit's back, sides, and
peracute inflammation: An
 primary union: A surgical incision
groin.
 inflammatory episode usually
that has been sutured.
rat and mouse louse (Polyplar serrata
 caused by a potent stimulus and
 proglottid: A body segment of a
 and Polyplar spinulosa): An insect
 becoming apparent rapidly.
tapeworm.
that feeds on rats and mice. Infested
peripheral pooling: The process
 proliferation: An increase in the
animals appear restless, have ruffled
 by which overwhelming bacterial
number of cells as a result of cell
fur, and may constantly seratch.
infections cause blood to collect
division and cell growth.
rat fur mite ( Radfordia ensifera): A
in an infected area, effectively
 proliferative response: Cell injury
 mite that spends its entire life on its
 removing the blood from circulation
and tissue adaptation that results
host.
 and mimicking hypovolemic shock.
 in hyperplasia and growth
recessive: Gene whose expression
 permanent cells: Cells that lose the
abnormalities.
is hidden by a dominant gene and
 ability to divide after birth.
prostaglandin: Hormone-like
is only expressed when in the
 petechia: Small, pinpoint
substance found in several body
homozygous state.
hemorrhages.
tissues and produced in response to
recombinant DNA: DNA that is made
phagocytosis: The ingestion of such
trauma or stress.
in the laboratory when new DNA
things as dead cells or bacteria by
 proteolytic enzymes: Chemicals that
sequences are inserted by chemical
white blood cells.
 break down proteins.
or biological means.
 phlegmon: A suppurative
 protozoa: A single-cell animal.
regeneration: The restructuring of
inflammation of subcutaneous
pruritus: Itching.
tissue by the cells that belong
connective tissue. Also known as
pseudohermaphrodite: A female
there.
discharge pus.
who has ovaries but the external
Regional Classification System:
phytotoxin: A toxin produced by
appearance of a male; a male who
A system that classifes tumors
plants.
has testicular tissue but externally
according to where they occur
pig whipworm ( Trichuris suis): A
 appears to be a female.
within or on the body.
 common parasite of livestock and
pseudomembranous exudate: A
repair: The replacement of destroyed
 pet pigs raised outside.
 liquid found in the respiratory and
tissue by connective tissue.
pinworm (Ozyuris equz): A nematode
gastrointestinal tract, consisting
resolution: The absorption or
that lives in a horse's large intestine
of areas of tissue that mat together
 breaking down and removal of the
and cecum.
and appear membranous.
 products of inflammation.
GLOSSARY
293
retrovirus: Virus that contains two
screwworm fy (Cochliomyia
stable cells: Fully differentiated cells
 single strand linear RNA molecules
hominivoraz): Blue-green fies twice
that do not divide often unless
per virion, such as HIV, FeLV, and
the size of a housefy. The adult
induced to do so.
SIV.
screwworm fy is not parasitic but
stable fy (Stomorys calcitrans): A
reverse genetics: Marker genes are
causes myiasis.
blood-feeding Hy that looks like a
placed to localize mutant genes.
second intention: The healing of
housefly.
ring chromosome: A type of
an extensive dermal wound with
stick-tight fea (Echidnophaga
chromosome that results when the
complete loss of the epithelium.
 gallinacea): A fea found on chickens
ends of the chromosome fuse with
secondary infection: A type of mixed
and turkeys in the southern United
each other.
infection in which the first organism
 States, usually in older, poorly
ringworm: Fungal infection of the skin
makes a favorable environment for a
managed poultry houses.
caused by dermatophytes.
second organism.
stomach worrm of pigs (Hyostrongylus
Rocky Mountain wood tick
septicemia: Bacteria and their toxins
rubidus): A stomach worm whose
(Dermacentor andersonz): A three-
in the blood.
adult stage lives in a pig's stomach,
host hard tick that lives in the
serological test: A test performed on
where it lays eggs that pass out
western United States. The larva
blood serums.
with the feces.
and nymph feed on wild rodents,
serosanguineous exudate: A fuid rich
stroma: A normal body tissue that
while the adult prefers large
in serum and red blood cells.
 acts as a framework and develops
animals such as cattle and
serotonin: Vasoconstrictor.
the blood vessels that nourish a
horses.
serous exudate: A fuid low in
tumor.
rodent botfly (Cuterebra spp.): A
dissolved protein; it has no clotting
 strongyles: Common nematode
large (1 inch), hairy fy that looks
factor and a low number of cells.
infecting the cecum and colon of
like a bumblebee. The female fly
shaft louse (Menopon gallinae): A
horses.
lays her eggs near a rodent's
common ectoparasite of chickens
subacute infammation: An
burrow.
 and other fowl.
inflammatory reaction characterized
roundworm: Small, wormlike
sheep ked (Melophagus owinus): A
by a decrease in the redness of
organisms with a tough skin;
wingless fy that spends its entire
tissue and fuid accumulation.
nematodes.
 life cycle on the sheep.
sublethal: An injury that alters cell or
rubor: Redness.
sheep nasal botfly (Oestrus ovis): A
tissue function without destroying
ruminant tapeworm ( Thysanosomα
parasite of sheep. The female nasal
the cell.
actinoides): A tapeworm. The adult
botfy squirts a stream of fuid into
 superinfection: A fresh infection or
lives in the small intestine, bile
Suuado [eseu s ieol ho s daaus e
reinfection.
ducts, and pancreatic ducts of cattle,
This fuid contains up to 25 small
 synergism: A phenomenon that
 sheep, and goats.
 larvae, which migrate deeper into
 occurs when the action of two or
the nasal passages, feeding on
more agents produces a result that
s
mucus as they go.
neither could bring about alone.
salmonellosis: Disease caused by
sheep scab (Psoroptes ovis): Psoroptic
systemic: Occurring throughout the
ingestion of salmonella bacteria.
mange; the most important mange
entire body.
sarcoptic mange (Sarcoptes scabiei var.
 of sheep.
bovis): A potentially serious disease
shock: A condition caused by acute
T
of cattle characterized by intense
 generalized circulatory failure of
tabanids: Large fies commonly
itching and a large loss of hair in
the capillary bed.
called horsefies (Tabanus species),
the affected areas.
side effect: Predictable reactions to a
deer flies (Chrysops species),
sarcoptic mange mite (Sarcoptes
drug that are not life threatening.
 or green-head flies (Tabanus
scabiei): A small, round mite that
sodium pump: A mechanism that
americanus)
can cause mange in dogs and
forces sodium ions out of a cell to
taeniid tapeworms, canine ( Taeniα
other animals. The variety canis is
maintain water balance.
 pisiformis): A common tapeworm of
zoonotic.
 species specific: An organism that
dogs and cats.
scabies: Sarcoptic mange.
infects only one species and does
taeniid tapeworms, cattle ( Taenid
scaly-leg mite (Cnemidocoptes pilae): A
not infect any host from another
ae sumade(
mite that lives on poultry and wild
species.
ruminants as intermediate hosts,
birds.
spinose ear tick (Otobius megninz):
living in the ruminant's internal
 scar: Mark left by the healing of
A one-host soft tick that spends
organ or muscle.
injured tissue.
its larval and nymphal stages in a
tapeworm: Cestode; fat, ribbonlike
scolex: The head of a tapeworm.
cow's ear.
worm with no digestive tract.
294
GLOSSARY
tetanus: An acute disease caused by
transmammary transmission: A
vasoconstriction: Decrease in the
toxins produced by the bacterium
condition in which second-stage
diameter of blood vessels.
Clostridium tetani.
larvae get into the mammary glands
vasodilatation: Dilation of the blood
thermolabile: Destroyable by heat.
of a nursing mother, molt to third-
vessels.
threadworm: Nematode whose adult
stage larvae, and then pass with the
vasodilation: Dilation of the blood
females live in the small intestine of
milk into the suckling pup or kitten.
vessels.
dogs, humans, and occasionally cats.
trematode: Fluke; fat, leaf-shaped
vector: An organism (usually an
threadworm of horses (Strongyloides
worm that has a mouth and gut but
 arthropod) that carries pathogens
westerz): A parasite with a life cycle
no anus.
or infective agents from one host to
much like that of the threadworm
trophozoite: A term used for the
another.
 of pigs. This threadworm does not
feeding stage of a protozoan.
vesicles: Small blisters.
infect the fetus. Rather, the major
tropical rat mite (Ornithonyssus bacotz):
virology: The study of viruses.
 problems threadworms cause
A mite that lives on rats, mice,
virulence: The power or malignancy
happen to foals infected through
hamsters, and many other mammals
 of an infectious organism.
the milk.
and some birds too.
threadworm of pigs (Strongyloides
 true gid: The circling and lack of
Y
ransomz): A parasite whose adult
balance that results when a taenid
warble: A lumpy abscess under the
 stage lives in the small intestine of
tapeworm of sheep travels to the
hide of cattle caused by a grub.
pigs.
 sheep's brain and destroys brain
water intoxication: Intake of an
three-host tick: A parasite that feeds
tissue as it grows.
excessive amount of water resulting
on three different hosts—one for
tularemia: A bacterial disease
from salt loss or limited salt intake.
each life stage.
(Francisella tularensis,formerly
whipworm ( Trichuris vulpis): A major
thrombocytopathy: Abnormality or
known as Pasteurella tularensis) of
gastrointestinal nematode of dogs.
disease of the platelets.
rabbits and humans, carried by
winter tick ( Dermacentor albipictus):
thrombocytopenia: A deficiency of
ticks and sometimes the rabbit
A one-host hard tick that feeds on
platelets in the blood.
louse.
large mammals like cattle, horses,
thrombus: The proper term for a
tumor: A swollen tissue.
moose, and deer. Also called moose
blood clot within a vessel.
two-host tick: A parasite that stays
tich.
tick paralysis: A spreading paralysis
 on one host for two of its life stages
wool maggots: A term ranchers
that may eventually impair the
and then feeds on a second host
use for the larvae of blowfies in a
muscles involved in breathing.
during its third feeding life stage.
 sheep's decaying wool; fHeeceworms.
Tissue Classification System: The
most widely used method for
Y
X
[d  s zn
ulcer: The loss of a superficial layer
X-linked disorder: A type of genetic
basis of the system is the type of
of an organ or tissue, with acute
 disorder in which daughters are
tissue from which the tumor arises.
infammation at the base of the
carriers of the disease, while sons
toxemia: Toxins in the blood.
lesion.
suffer the disease's effects.
toxin: Poison.
 Undernutrition: Not getting enough
toxoid: An antigenic substance that is
nutrients from one's diet to sustain
z
not toxic.
normal life functions.
zoonoses: Diseases shared or
trachea: Windpipe.
 unthrifty: Not putting on weight.
transmitted between animals and
transgenics: A new technology in
ureters: The vessels that drain the
humans.
which recombinant DNA is placed
urine from the kidney.
zootoxin: Poisons from animals.
within an animal which can either
 produce proteins the animal needs
V
or get rid of proteins the animal
vascular permeability: "Leakiness" of
doesn't need.
the blood vessels.
translocation: Occurs when a segment
vasoactive amines: Combinations of
of one chromosome is transferred to
 nitrogen and other chemicals that
another.
can constrict or dilate blood vessels.
INDEX
A
Anastomosis, 32
Words in italics are genus and
Abomasal worms, 178-179
Ancylostoma braziliense, 202
Ancylostoma caninum,202
species names. F indicates figure.
Abscesses, 27
Acarexx, 160
Ancylostoma sp., 1 13
Ancylostoma tubaeforme,202
Acaricides, 156
Acetaminophen toxicity, 50
Anemia, 127
Acidophils, 40
Aneuploid, 94
Acquired etiology, 3
 Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Acquired immunity, 68
Service (APHIS), 111
Active immunity, 68
Animals, used in research, 63
Acute infection, 79
Anoplocephala magna, 193
Acute infammation, 25-28, 70
Anoplocephala perfoliata,193
Acute local active hyperemia, 44
Anoplura lice, 152-153
 Acute systemic anaphylaxis, 69
Anthelmintic, 130
Adenoma, 61
Anthracosis, 16
Adenosine tri-phosphate (ATP), 9
Anthrax, 114-115
Adhesions, 28
Antibody, 68-75
Adverse drug reaction, 102, 103
Antieoplastic agents, 103
Aeromonas hydrophilia,168
Antigen, 68, 69f, 71-72
Antimicrobial agents, 103
Agenesis, 13
Agranulocytes, 40-4 1
Aplasia, 13
Air pollution, 102
Aponomma sp.,167
Amblyomma americanum,128
Apoptosis, 10
Amblyomma dissimile,167
Arachnids, 125-126, 130, 132-134
Amblyomma maculatum,128
Argas sp., 169
Amblyomma tuberculatum,167
Argyria, 16
American Animal Hospital Association
Arrested larvae, 179
(AAHA), 110
Arterial calcification, 15
American dog tick, 133, 145, 156
Arteriosclerosis, 15
Arthropods, 132
Amitraz (Mitaban), 159, 164, 171
Amoeba, of snakes, 214
 Arthropods, as infectors, 80
 Amyloid degeneration, 10
Asa (king), 5
Amyloidosis, 10
Asbestosis, 16
Ascaridia sp., 215
Anaplasia, 57
295
296
INDEX
Ascarids
Borrelia anserina, 169
membranes of, 9
of dogs and cats, 199-201
Borrelia burgdorferi, 118, 127
morphology of, 11
of horses, 190
Bots,137-138,143-144,147,152,167
nonself, 68
as parasites, 113
Bovicola equi, 137
 pathological pigmentation in,
of swine, 185-186
Brown dog tick, 136-146
16-17
Ascaris, 84
Brucella sp., 115
response to injury, 12-14
Ascaris suum, 185-186
Brucellosis, 111, 115
Cellulitis, 27
Aspiculuris tetraptera,212
Bubonic plague, 115
 Cerebrospinal nematoiasis (larva
Astrocytoma, 60
Buffy coat method, 232
migrans), 113
Asymptomatic carrier, 79
Ceroid, 16
Atmospheric pressure, and 
c
Cestodes, 126
injuries, 103
Calcification, 14
Chemical carcinogenesis, 58-59
Atrioventricular (AV) node, 38
Calcinosis circumscripta,15
Chemical hemostatis, 46
Atrophy,14
Calcinosis universalis, 15
Chemotaxis, 25-26
Attenuation, 82
Calliphora, 133
Chewing lice (mallophaga), 130
Autoantibodies, 68-69
Calor (heat), 23
Cheyletiella, 226
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, 70
Cancer, 56
Cheylitiella parasitovorax, 163
Autoimmunity, 68-71
Cancer research, 63
Chickens
 Autopsy, and pathology, 6
Canine
ectoparasites of, 168-170
Autoreactive T cells, 68-69
demodicosis, 171
endoparasites of, 215-218
Autosomal recessive disorders, 92
lymphosarcoma, 73
mites of, 170
 panosteitis, 96
Chigger, 170
B
piroplasmosis, 156.
Chirodiscoides caviae, 163
Babesia bigemina, 128
See also Dogs
Chlamydia psittaci,116
Babesia canis, 156
Capillaria sp., 216
Chlamydiosis, 116
Babesiosis, 156
Carbon tetrachloride, 45
Chondroma, 61
Bacillus anthracis, 114
Carcinogens, 58, 102, 103, 106
Chondrosarcoma, 61
Bacteremia, 28, 83
Carcinoma,61
Chorioptes, 131, 137
Bacterial diseases, zoonotic, 113-117
Caseous necrosis, 12
Chromosome mutations, 92, 93-94
Bacteriophages, 82
Catarrhous (catarrhal)exudate, 27
Chronic generalized passive
Baermann technique, 239-241
Cats
congestion, 45
Basophils, 40, 41
carcinomas in, 58f, 63-64, 102
Chronic infection, 79
Baylisacaris procyonis, 113
Ctenocephalides felis, 134, 137, 153
Chronic inflammation, 25, 28-30
Benign tumor, 56, 57, 59, 60-61
diseases of, 248-250
Circulatory system, 38-39
Bilirubin, 17
feas in, 134
Cistudinomyia cistudinis,167
Biopsy, 3
Isopora felis, 209-210
Clinical pathology, 6
Biting lice, 152-153
nutritional disorders of, 106 
Clostridium tetani, 80, 116,130
Black bile (melancholy), 5
Toxocara cati, 113, 199-201, 212
Clot, 46
Blackhead, 217-218
Toroplasma gondii, 118, 210-211
Coagulase, 84
Blacklegged ticks, 129-130,
Cattle
Coagulation, 46
134, 137,156
anthrax in, 114—115
Coagulation necrosis, 12
Blood
brucellosis in, 115
Cobalt, 106
chemistry profles of, 42
diseases of, 255-259
Coccidia,184,193,209-210,217
circulation of, 38-39
ectoparasites of, 122-131
Coccidiosis, 184, 210
fuid homeostasis in, 42-43
endoparasites of, 177-185
Cochliomyia hominivorax, 137
as humor, 5
grubs in, 137-138, 138
Collagen, 29, 31-32, 47
makeup of, 40-41
ticks in, 128
Colostrum, 68
Blood smear, 233
Cecal worm, 215
Common ascarid, of poultry, 215
Blushing, 43
 Cellophane tape preparation,
Companion animals, 16, 63, 104, 106,
Body fuid
226-227
152, 171
blood as, 5, 38-43
Cells
Complement, 70
distribution of, 42-43
degeneration of, 9, 10
Complete blood count (CBC), 28,
hemodynamic disturbances in, 43-46
 growth, healing of, 9, 30
41-42
imbalances in, 48-49
injuries to, 4, 9-11, 18, 19
Congenital hereditary traits, 91
Boophilus annulatus, 128
lesions of, 34
Congestion, 43-45
INDEX
297
Contact carrier, 79
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
of reptiles, 214
Contact inhibition, loss of, 57
(DIC), 33
of rodents, rabbits, 212-213
Contagious vs. infectious disease, 81
Dogs
Endoplasmic reticulum, 9, 10f
Convalescent carrier, 79
Ctenocephalides canis, 153
Endothelium, 47
Cooperia sp., 180
diseases of, 250-253
Endotoxins, 83
Cross-reactivity, 69
ectoparasites of, 152-160
Entamoeba invadens, 214
Cryptosporidium, 184, 194, 212
endoparasites of, 199-212
Entrapment, 82
Ctenocephalides canis, 153
Isopora canis, 209-210
Environmental diseases, 102-104
Ctenocephalidesfelis, 134, 137, 153
Torocara canis, 113, 199-201
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Cutaneous lymphosarcoma, 73f
See also Canine
(ELISA), 87, 201
Cutaneous myiasis, 167
 Dolor (pain), 23
Eosinophils, 40, 41
Cuterebra, 130, 152, 160-161, 166
Dominant genes, 92
Epistaxis, 45
Cyst, 177
Double pore tapeworm, 207
Erosion ulcers, 28
Cytogenetic disorders, 93-94
Dysplasia, 14
Erythema, 171
Cytogenetic tests, 94
Dystrophic calcification, 14
Erythrocytes, 40
Cytotoxic hypersensitivity, 70
Etiology, 3
E
Euploid, 94
D
Ear cytology, 225-226
 Exogenous pigmentation, 16
Davainea proglottina, 216
Ear mange mites, of rodents,
Exotoxins, 83
Deer liver fuke, 183
164-165
 Experimental pathology, 6
Deer tick, 129-130, 156
Ear mites, 159-160, 164-165
Extrinsic pathway, 47
Dehydration, 48-49
Ecchinococcus granulosus, 182
Exudate, 23, 25, 26, 27
Delayed hypersensitivity, 70-71
Ecchymoses, 45, 46f
Demodetic mange, 130, 157-158
Echidnophaga gallinacea, 168
F
Demodetic mange mite, 164
Echinococcus granulosus, 208-209
Face fy, 136
Demodex,130-131, 137, 171,227
Echinococcus multilocularis, 208-209
Farm animals, endoparasites of,
Demodex αurati, 164
Ectoparasites, of companion
175-177
Demodex canis, 157
animals, 152
Fasciola hepatica, 182-183
Demodex criceti, 164
 Ectoparasites, of large animals 
Fascioliodes magna, 183
Demodex meroni, 164
of cattle, 134-141
Fat necrosis, 12
Demodicosis, 131, 157
of horses, 135-137
Fat-soluble vitamins, 104—105
Deox yribonucleic acid (DNA), 4, 9
of sheep, 131-133
Fatty degeneration, 10
Dermacentor albipictus, 129
of swine, 133-135
Fecal egg count, 237-241
Dermacentor andersoni, 129
Ectoparasites, of small animals
Fecal flotation, 178f, 228
Dermacentor variabilis, 133, 156
of chickens, turkeys, birds, 168-170
Felicola subrostratus, 153
Dermanyssus gallinae, 170
of dogs and cats, 152-160
Feline. See Cats
Dermatophyte testing media (DTM),
of ferrets, foxes, mink, 166-167
Feline infectious peritonitis (F1P), 74
232-233
of rabbits, rodents, 160-165
Feline leukemia, 73
Descriptive Classification System, 61
Ectotherms, 167
Ferrets, endoparasites of, 212
Diagnosis, 3
Edema, 48
Fever, 28
Dichlorvos, 192, 195
Eimeria leucharti, 193
Fibrin, 46
Dictyocualus sp., 180-181
Eimeria sp., 184, 190,213, 217
Fibrinolysin, 84
 Differential diagnosis, 5
Eimeria stiedae,213
 Fibrinopurulent exudate, 27
Differential WBC count, 41-42
Electrical injuries, 104
Fibrinous exudate, 27
Diffuse inflammation, 24
Embolus, embolism, 47
Fibroma, 60
Dipetalonema reconditum,205-206,
Emigration, cell, 25
Filter technique, for heartworm,
229-231
Endogenous pigmentation, 16-17
229-231
Diphyllobothrium, 84
Endoparasites, of large animals
Fine needle aspiration (FNA), 226
Dipylidium caninum,153,207
of horses, 190-193
 Flea allergy dermatitis (FAD), 155
 Direct smear, for fecal exam,
 of laboratory, farm animals, 175-177
Fleas
227-228
of ruminants, 178-185
of chickens, turkeys, birds, 168-169
Diroflaria immitis, 204-205, 206,
 of swine, pet pigs, 185-1890
of dogs and cats, 154-156
219,229-231
Endoparasites, of small animals
 of ferrets, foxes, mink, 166
Disease, cellular basis of, 9
 of dogs and cats, 199-212
of horses, 137
Disease production, 82-83
of ferrets, 212
ofswine, 134
 Diseases, image guide for, 276-284
of poultry, birds, 215-218
Flesh fies, 161, 167
298
INDEX
Flies
Gulf Coast tick, 128-129, 134, 137
ectoparasites of, 135-137
of cattle, 134-138, 135-136
Gyrodactylus salaris, 175
endoparasites of, 190-194
of chickens, turkeys, birds, 168
Gyropus ovalis, 162
tapeworms of, 193, 194f
of dogs and cats, 152
Host-parasite relationship, 86
of ferrets, foxes, mink, 166
H
Humors, cardinal, 5-6
of horses, 135-136
Haematobia irritauns, 136
Hyaline degeneration, 10
of rabbits, rodents, 160-161
Haematopinus asini, 137
Hyalinosis, 10
of reptiles, 167
Haemodipsus ventricosus, 161
Hyalomma aegyptium, 167-168
 of sheep, 131-132, 134
Haemonchus sp., 178-180
Hyaluronidase, 84
Fluid imbalances, 43, 48-49
Hamsters, 164
Hyatid tapeworm, 182, 208-209
Flukes, 126, 175, 177,182-183
Healing, of injured tissue, 30-32
Hydropic degeneration, 10
Fly strike, 152
Heartworm, 204-205, 219, 229-231
Hymenolepsis tapeworms, 2 13
Focal infammations, 24
Heavy metal poisoning, 103
Hyostrongylus rubidis, 188
Fomite, 79
Heinz bodies, 50, 51f 
Hypercalcemia, 14-15
Fowl ticks, 169
Hemacytometer use, 234
Hyperemia, 43-44 
Foxes, ectoparasites of, 166-167
Hematemesis, 45
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
 Fragile X syndrome, 94
Hematin, 17
(HYPP), 97
Francisella tularensis, 162
Hematocrit, 40
Hyperplasia, 13
Frontline spray (Fipronil), 160
Hematoidin, 17
Hypersensitivity reactions, 69-71
Frosch, Paul, 6
Hematoma, 45
Hyperthermia, 103
Functio laesa,23
Hematuria, 45
Hyperthermic injuries, 103
Fungal culture, 232-233
Hemodynamic changes, 25
Hypertrophy, 13
Fur mites, 163
Hemodynamic disturbances, 43-46
Hypoderma bovis, 137-138, 138
 Hemoglobin derivatives, 16-17
Hypoderma lineatum, 137-138, 138
G
Hemopericardium, 45
Hypodermosis, of cattle, 138
Gangrene, 12
Hemoperitoneum, 45
Hypoplasia, 13
Gangrenous necrosis, 12
Hemoptysis, 45
Hypothermia, 103
Gapeworm, 215-216
Hemorrhage, 45
Hypovolemic shock, 47
Gasterophilus sp., 135
Hemorrhagic exudate, 27
Gene mutations, 92
Hemosiderin, 17
Genetic etiology, 3
Hemostasis, 46
latrogenic response, 81
Genetics, disorders of, 91-95
Hemothorax, 45
Iguana tick, 167
Genome mutations, 92
Heparin, 41, 69
Immediate hypersensitivity, 69
Giardia
Hepatoma, 61
Immune carrier, 79
and absorption, 84-85
Hereditary traits, 91
 Immune complex hypersensitivity, 70
in birds, 218
Hermaphrodites, 94
Immune function disturbances, 71-72
in dogs, 211, 213
Hetaheris gallinae, 215
Immunity, 68
in horses, 194
Heterahis, 85
 Immunodeficiencies, secondary, 71-72
illustrated, 178f, 212f
Heterotopic bone formation, 15
Immunological diseases, 68-73
means of infection, 80
 Heteroxygous, 91
Immunosuppression, 86
in rodents, 213
High egg passage vaccine (HEP), 82
 Immunosuppressive agents, 103
in ruminants, 185
Hip dysplasia, 96-97
 Incision, surgical, 30-32
testing for, 118, 228
Hippocrates, 5-6
Infarction (infarct), 43, 47
Giardia lamblia, 118, 211—212
Hippocratic Method, 6
 Infecting organism, 79
Giardiasis, 118
Hippocratic Oath, 6
Infection
Gliricola porcelli, 153
Histamine, 26, 41, 69, 70f
and contagion, 81
Global warming, 101
Histomonas, 85
defined, 79
Goats, 177-185, 255-259
Histomonas meleagridis, 217-218
organisms of, 79
Gopher-tortoise tick, 167-168
Hog louse, 134
 pathogen properties, 82
Gram's stains, 225
Homoxygous, 91
sources of, 79-81
Granulation tissue, 30
Hookworm, 113,202
Infectious disease, 79
Granulocytes, 40
Hopopleura sp., 162
 Infectious vs. contagious disease, 81
Granulomatous infammation, 28-30
Horn fy, 136
Infammation
Guinea pig fur mite, 163
Horses
acute,25-28
Guinea pig lice, 162
botfies of, 135-136
 chronic and granulomatous, 28-30
Guinea pigs, diseases of, 244-246
diseases of, 255-259
defined, 23
INDEX
299
exudate-based, 27-28
Leukemia, 60
Menopen gallinae, 168
gross appearance of, 23
Leukocytes, 40-41
Metaplasia, 14
 and healing of injured tissue, 30-32
Leukocytosis, 28
Metastasis, 57-58, 60
location-based, 26, 28
Leukopenia, 28
Metastatic calcification, 14-15
 onset and duration, 24-25
Lice
Metastrongylus sp, 188
reaction of tissue to, 23f, 24
 of chickens, turkeys, birds, 168
 Methemoglobin, 17
signs of, 23
of dogs and cats, 152-153
Mice, diseases of, 242-244
 systemic reactions to, 28
of horses, 137
Microfilariae, 203
Injuries, physical, 103104
as pests, 130-131
Microscope use, 223-224
 Injury, adaptation to, 4
of rabbits, rodents, 161-162
Microscopic examination, 3f
Insects, 125
of swine, 134
Microsporum canis,232
 Insterstitial compartment, 42
Lingonathus setosus, 152-153
Microsporum gypseum,232
Interferons, 27
 Lipochromes, 16
Milk allergy, 69
Intestinal strongyles, 180
Lipofuscin, 16
Mineralization, pathological, 14—15
Intracellular compartment, 42
Liquefaction necrosis, 12
Mink, ectoparasites of, 166-167
Intracellular killing, 71
Lithiasis, 15-16
Mitaban, 159, 164, 171
Intraintestinal compartment, 42
 Liver cancer, 4-5
Mites
 Intravascular compartment, 42
Liver fuke, of ruminants, 182-183
of cattle, 130-131
Intrinsic pathway, 47
Lockjaw, 116
of chickens, turkeys, birds, 169-170
Invermectin, 130, 133, 135, 136, 159,
Loeffer, Friedrich, 6
described, 133-134
163,192,195,219
Lone star tick, 128, 134, 137
of dogs and cats, 156-160
 Inversion, of chromosomes, 94
Lucila, 133
of ferrets, foxes, mink, 166-167
Ions, 9
Lugol's iodine, 177, 179f, 227
of horses, 137
Ischemia, 11, 12
Lung fukes, 207
 of rabbits, rodents, 162-165
Isochromosome formation, 94
Lungworms
of reptiles, 168
Isopora, 228
of lizards, 214
of sheep, 133
Isopora canis, 209-210
of pigs, 188
of swine, 134-135
Isopora felis, 209-210
of ruminants, 180-181
Mitochondria, 9, 10f
Isopora rivolta, 209-210
of snakes, 214
Modifed McMaster technique,
Isopora suis, 190
Lyme disease, 118, 127, 130
237-239
Ixodes dammini,127
Lymphatic obstruction, 48
 Molecular diagnosis, of genetic
Ixodes pacificus, 127, 129
Lymphatic system, 27
disorders, 94-96
Ixodes scapularis, 127, 129, 156
Lymphocytes, 41
Moniezia sp., 181
Lymphokines, 27
Monoclonal tumor cells, 57
J
Lysomes, 9
Monocytes, 41
Jenner, Edward, 68
 Morphology, of tumors, 61-63 
Johne's disease, 29f, 34
M
Mosquitoes, 118, 160, 203
Macrophages, 30-31
Mouse, nude, 63
K
Malignant tumor, 56, 57-58, 60-61
Mouse mange mite, 164
Karyolysis, 11
Mallophaga, 152-153
Mucoid degeneration, 10
Karyorrhexis, 11
Malnutrition, 71-72
Muellerius capilaris, 180-181
Karyotypic changes, 57
 Mammary tumor neoplasia, 33
Multifactorial disorders, 93
Keloid, 32
Mange, 130, 133
Multifocal infammation, 24
Kidney worm, of pigs, 188-189
Mange mite, of guinea pigs, 164
Musca autumnalis, 136
Knemidocoptes mutans, 170
Marek's disease, 73
Mutations, 92
 Knott's technique, modifed, 229
Mast cells, 69, 70f
Mycobacterium bovis, 102, 114
Koch, Robert, 6
Material Safety Data Sheets
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 113-114
(MSDS), 112
Myiasis, 137, 152
Mechanical force injuries, 103
Myobia musculi, 162-163
Mediators, chemical, 26, 44
Myocardial infarction, 47
Labile cells, 13
Laboratory animals, endoparasites of,
Melanin, 16
Myocoptes musculinus, 164
175-177
Melanoma, 60
Myocoptes romboutsi, 164
Larva migrans syndrome, 113
Melena, 45
Leptospirosis, 116 
Melophagus ovinus, 131
N
Menacanthus stramineus, 168
Necropsy, 3, 6
Lesions, 3-4, 24
Lethal cellular injury, 9
Mendelian disorders, 92-93
Necrosis, 9, 10-12
300
INDEX
Nematodes
Porphyrins, 17
P
described, 126
Poultry. See Chickens, Turkeys
of dogs and cats, 199-206
 Packed cell volume (PCV), 40
Practical Classification System,
of horses, 190-193
 Papilloma, 61
60-61
 of laboratory, farm animals,
Paragonimus Kellicotti, 207
Prepatent period, 200, 204
Paranoplocephala mimillana, 193
175,176f
Primates, diseases of, 253-255
of poultry, birds, 215-216
Parascaris equorum, 185, 190
Proglottids, 175
of reptiles, 214
Parasites
Proliferation, of cells, 9, 12
of rodents, rabbits, 212
defined, 84
Prostaglandins, 27
of ruminants, 178-181
image guide for, 260-276
Protein-losing enteropathy, 34
 of swine, pet pigs, 185-189
inert, 86
 Proteolytic enzymes, 70
Nematodirus sp., 180
infections of, 84-85
Protostrongylus rufescens, 180-181
Neoplasia, 14, 56, 72-73. See αlso
tolerance of, 86
Protozoal diseases, 118
Tumors
zoonotic, 113
Protozoans
Neorichettsia helminthoeca, 85
Paratuberculosis, 34
of dogs and cats, 209-212
Neoschoengastin americana, 170
Parenchyma, 60
of horses, 193
Neutrophils, 40, 41, 70
Parvovirus, 87
 of laboratory, farm animals, 177
New methyline blue stain, 225
Passalurus ambiguus, 212
as parasites, 126
 Nodular worm, of pigs, 187
Passive immunity, 68
of poultry, other birds, 217-218
Nonclassical inheritance, 94
Pasteur, Louis, 6
of reptiles, 213-214
 Nonpathogenic parasites, 86
Pasteurella multocida, 165
of rodents, rabbits, 214
 Pathogenesis, 3
Nonself cells, 68
of ruminants, 184-185
Pathogenicity, 82
Normovolemic shock, 47-48
of swine, pet pigs, 190
Northern fowl mite, 169-170
Pathological mineralization, 14 
Pruritus, 155
Noscomial infection, 81
Pathology, 3-4, 6
Pseudohermaphrodites, 94
Nothing per os (NPO), 87
Pediculosis, 153
Pseudomembranous exudate, 27
Notoedres cati, 159
Peracute infection, inflammation, 24
Psittacosis, 116
Notoedres muris, 164-165
 Peracute infection,inflammation, 79
Psoroptes cuniculi, 165
Notoedres notoedres, 164165
Permanent cells, 13
Psorptes, 130, 131, 137
Notoedric mange mite, 159
Petechiae, 45, 46f
Public health, responsibility for, 111,
Nucleus, 9, 10f
Pet pigs, 185-190
112
Nude mouse, 63
Phaenicia,133
Purpura, 45
Nutritional disease, 84-85,
Phagocytosis, 26
Purulent exudate, 27
104-106
 Phlegm, 5
Pus, 12
 Phlegmon, 28
Pustules, 158
Phormia,133
Pyknosis, 11
0
 Physical injury, 103-104
Pyrogens, 28
Obesity, 106
Phytotoxin, 83
Occupational Safety and Health Act
Pig ascarid, 185-186
(OSHA), 110-112
 Pigmentation, pathological, 16-17
R
Oesophagostomum sp., 187
 Pigs. See Pet Pigs, Swine
Rabbit louse, 161
Oestrus ovis, 132
Pig whipworm, 187-188
Rabbits, 161-165,212-213, 246-248
Onchocerca larvae, 85
Pinworms, 192-193,212
Rabies, 117
Ophidascaris sp., 214
Planaria,126
Racoon roundworm, 113
Ophionyssus natricis, 168
Plasma, 40
Radfordia affnis, 162-163
Opsonization, 71
 Plasma proteases, 26-27
Radfordia ensifera,163
Ornithonyssus bacoti, 165
Plasmodium, 85
 Radiation injuries, 104
Ornithonyssus sylviarum,169-170
Platelet plug, 46
Raillietina sp, 216
Ornithosis, 116
Platelets, 40, 41
Rat and mouse lice, 162
Osteoma,60
Platynosomum concinum,126
Rat fur mite, 163
Ostertagia sp., 178-180
Plumbism, 16
Rats, diseases of, 242-244
Otobius megnini, 137
 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
 Recessive genes, 92
Otodectes, 225
analysis, 94
Recombinant DNA, 91
Otodectes cynotis, 159-160, 166
Polyplax sp., 162
Red blood cells, 40, 70
Oxygen, cellular, 9
 Polyps, 63
Regeneration, 30
Oryuris equi, 192-193
 Porphyria, 17
Regional Classification System, 6 1
INDEX
301
 Repair, tissue, 30
Siderosis, 16
in reptiles, 214
Reptiles, parasites of, 167-168,
Silicosis, 16 
in rodents, rabbits, 213
213-214
 Single-gene disorders, 92-93
in ruminants, 181-182
Resolution, 30
Sinoatrial node (SA), 38
in swine, pet pigs, 189-190
 Retrovirus, 73
Skin scraping, 227
taeniid, 181-182, 207-208
 Reverse genetics, 91
Skin turgor, 48, 49f, 49t
Teratoma, 60
Rhabdias sp., 214
Snake mites, 168
Tetanus (Lockjaw), 116
Rhabdovirus, 104
Sodium pump, 9, 10
Thermolability, 84
Rheumatoid arthritis, 70
Spinose ear tick, 127-128, 134
Threadworms, 189, 193, 203
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 155
 Squamous cell carcinoma, 58f, 61,
Thrombocytes, 41
Ribolucleic acid (RNA), 9
64, 102
Thrombocytopathy, 41
Rickettsia typhi, 162, 165
Stable cells, 13
Thrombocytopenia, 45
 Ring chromosormes, 94
Stable fy, 135-136
Thrombus, 44, 47
 Ringworm dermatophytosis, 119-120
 Staining techniques, 224-225
Tick-borne diseases, 118
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 156
Starling equilibrium, 48
Ticks
Rocky Mountain wood tick, 140, 148
Steatosis, 10
in cattle, 127-130
Rodent botfy, 160-161
Stephanurus dentatus, 188-189
in chickens, turkeys, birds, 169
Rodenticide toxicity, 18
Steroids, 29
described, 132-133
Rodents, 161-165, 212-213. See αlso
Stick-tight fea, 168-169
in dogs and cats, 127, 155-156
Mice, diseases of; Mouse, nude;
Stomach worm, of pigs, 188
in ferrets, foxes, mink, 166
Rats, diseases of
Stomorys calcitrans, 135-136
in horses, 137
Romanowsky stains, 224-225
Stroma, 59, 60, 61
in rabbits, rodents, 162
Roundworms, 126, 195
Strongyles, 191-192
in reptiles, 167-168
Rubor (redness), 23
Strongyloides ransomi, 189
in swine, 134
Ruminants, diseases of, 255-259
Strongyloides stercoralis, 203
Tissue
Ruminant tapeworm, 181
Strongyloides westeri, 193
 classification system for, 60
Strongylus edentatus, 191
healing of, 30-32
S
Strongylus equinus, 191
 and hypersensitivity reaction, 69-71
Safety, procedures for, 110-118
Strongyius vulgaris, 191-192
in pathology, 3-5
Salmonellosis, 116 
 Subacute infammation, 25
vascular changes in, 25-26
Sarcocystitis, 185, 211
 Sublethal cellular injury, 9
TNM classification system, 61
Sarcophaga sp, 161
Sucking lice (Anoplura), 132, 152-153
Tobacco smoking, 102
Sarcoptes,141,146,148
Superinfection, 81
Tolerance, of parasites, 86
Sarcoptes scabei, 134, 158-159, 166, 170
Suppurative exudate, 27
Torascaris leonina, 191, 199-201, 212
Sarcoptic mange mite, 158-159
Swine, 133-135, 185-190, 255-259.
Toxemia, 28
 Sarcoptic mange (scabies), 130, 158
See also Pet pigs
Toxicity, 50
Scabies, 130, 158
Synergism, 81
Toxin formation, production,
 Scaly-leg mite, 170
Syngamus trachea, 215-216
83-84,85
 Scarring, 28, 32
Syphacia sp., 212
 Toxin-induced immunosuppression, 72
Schistocytes, 33
Toxocara canis, 113, 199-201
Screwworm fy, 137
T
Toxocara cati, 113, 199-201, 212
 Secondary infection, 81
Tabanids, 134-135, 152
Toxoid, 84
Selamectin (Revolution), 159, 160
Tabanus sp., 134
Toroplasma gondi, 118, 210-211
Self-antigens, 68-69
Taenia pisiformis, 207208
Toxoplasmosis, 112, 118
Septicemia, 28, 83
Taenia saginata, 126
Transgenics, 91
Serosanguineous exudate, 27
Taeniα solium, 189-190
Trauma, of parasites, 84
Serotonin, 26
Taenia sp., 181-182
Trematodes
Serous exudate, 27
Taenia taeniaeformis, 207-208
described, 126, 175
 Severe combined immunodefciency
Tapeworms
of dogs and cats, 207
(SCID), 95
 diverting nutritive substances,
illustrated, 177f
Sex-linked inheritance, 92
84, 85f
as parasites, 126
Shaft louse, 168
in dogs and cats, 207-209
in ruminants, 182-184
 Sheep, 131-133, 177-185, 255-259
in horses, 193
Treponema, 81
Shock, 47
in laboratory, farm animals, 175, 176f
Trichinella spiralis, 186-187
Side effects, 102-103
in poultry, other birds, 216
Trichodectes canis, 152-153
302
INDEX
Trichomonads, 217
Undulant fever, 1 15
Wohlfahrtia vigil, 161, 166
Trichomonas gallinae, 217
Urinalysis, 234-236
Woolsorter's Disease, 114-1 15
Trichomonas gallinarum, 217
World Health Organization, 101
Trichophyton mentagrophytes,232
V
Wuchereria,85
Trichostrongylus sp., 178-180
Vaccines, 82, 83f
Trichuris, 85
Vascular permeability, 25
X
Trichuris suis, 187-188
Vasoconstriction, 46
X-linked disorders, 92, 93f
Trichuris vulpis, 203
Vasodilatation (vasodilation), 25
Tritrichomonas,213
Vectors, 80, 85
Y
Tritrichomonasfoetus,184-185
Veterinarians, 6
Trizacarus caviae, 164
Veterinary vs. human medicine, 43
Yellow bile (choler), 5
Viral diseases, 117
Yersina pestis, 115, 165
Trophozoite, 177
Tropical rat mite, 165
Virology, 6
Trypanosoma brucei
Virulence,87
z
gambiense, 85
Virus-induced immune disorders, 72
Zoonoses
Trypanosoma cruti, 85
Visceral larval migrans (VLM), 201
and animal bites, 110
Tuberculosis, 113-114
Von Willebrand's disease, 41
bacterial diseases, 113-117
Tumors, 23, 56-63
defined, 110
Turkey chigger, 170
Y
 parasitic diseases, 113
Turkeys, 168-170, 215-218
Warble, 127
protozoal diseases, 118
Wasting disease, 106
tick-borne diseases, 118
U
Water intoxication, 49
Torocara sp., 201
Ulcerative colitis, 71
Water-soluble vitamins, 105
Toroplasma gondi, 2 10-211
Ulcers, 28
Whipworm, 187-188, 203
transmission of, 112
Uncinaria stencephala,202
White blood cells, 40-4 1, 70
viral diseases, 117
Undernutrition, 104
Winter tick, 129, 137
Zootoxins, 83
IMPORTANT! READ CAREFULLY: This End User License
End User shall not take any action inconsistent with such own-
Agreement ("Agreement") sets forth the conditions by which Cengage
ership. The Licensed Content is protected by U.S., Canadian and
Learning will make electronic access to the Cengage Learning-owned
other applicable copyright laws and by international treaties,
licensed content and associated media, software, documentation,
including the Berne Convention and the Universal Copyright
printed materials, and electronic documentation contained in this
Convention. Nothing contained in this Agreement shall be con-
package and/or made available to you via this product (the “Licensed
strued as granting the End User any ownership rights in or to
Content"), available to you (the “End User"). BY CLICKING THE
the Licensed Content.
"1 ACCEPT" BUTTON AND/OR OPENING THIS PACKAGE,
3.2 Cengage Learning reserves the right at any time to withdraw
YOU ACKNOWLEDGE THAT YOU HAVE READ ALL OF
from the Licensed Content any item or part of an item for which
THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS, AND THAT YOU AGREE
it no longer retains the right to publish, or which it has rea-
TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS, CONDITIONS, AND ALL
sonable grounds to believe infringes copyright or is defamatory.
APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE
unlawful, or otherwise objectionable.
USE OF THE LICENSED CONTENT
4.0 PROTECTION AND SECURITY
1.0 SCOPE OF LICENSE
4.! The End User shall use its best efforts and take all reasonable
I.!  Licensed Content. The Licensed Content may contain portions
steps to safeguard its copy of the Licensed Content to ensure
of modifiable content ("Modifable Content") and content which
that no unauthorized reproduction, publication, disclosure,
may not be modified or otherwise altered by the End User
modification, or distribution of the Licensed Content, in whole
("Non-Modifiable Content"). For purposes of this Agreement,
or in part, is made. To the extent that the End User becomes
 Modifiable Content and Non-Modifiable Content may be collec-
aware of any such unauthorized use of the Licensed Content,
tively referred to herein as the “Licensed Content." All Licensed
the End User shall immediately notify Cengage Learning.
Content shall be considered Non-Modifiable Content, unless
Notification of such violations may be made by sending an
such Licensed Content is presented to the End User in a modif-
e-mail to infringement@cengage.com.
able format and it is clearly indicated that modification of the
Licensed Content is permitted.
5.0 MISUSE OF THE LICENSED PRODUCT
1.2 Subject to the End User's compliance with the terms and con-
5.! In the event that the End User uses the Licensed Content in
ditions of this Agreement, Cengage Learning hereby grants
violation of this Agreement, Cengage Learning shall have the
the End User, a non-transferable, nonexclusive, limited right
option of electing liquidated damages, which shall include all
to access and view a single copy of the Licensed Content on a
 profits generated by the End User's use of the Licensed Content
 plus interest computed at the maximum rate permitted by law
Xdoo 'aonpouda () sou leys hasn pug aul Xjuo asn jeuos.ad
and all legal fees and other expenses incurred by Cengage
modify (except in the case of Modifiable Content), distribute,
Learning in enforcing its rights, plus penalties.
display transfer, sublicense, prepare derivative work(s) based
6.0 FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CLIENTS
on, sell, exchange, barter or transfer, rent, lease, loan, resell, or
in any other manner exploit the Licensed Content; (i) remove,
6.1
Except as expressly authorized by Cengage Learning, Federal
eoaanui sturuneat aaehua jo aonou Aue lane do 'annosgo
Government clients obtain only the rights specified in this
Agreement and no other rights. The Government acknowledges
ing, but not limited to, copyright, trademark, and/or patent
that (i) all software and related documentation incorporated in
notices; or (ii) disassemble, decompile, translate, reverse engi-
the Licensed Content is existing commercial computer soft-
 neer, or otherwise reduce the Licensed Content.
ware within the meaning of FAR 27.405(b)(2); and (2) all other
data delivered in whatever form, is limited rights data within
2.0 TERMINATION
the meaning of FAR 27.401. The restrictions in this section are
2.1 Cengage Learning may at any time (without prejudice to its
acceptable as consistent with the Government's need for soft-
other rights or remedies) immediately terminate this Agreement
ware and other data under this Agreement.
and/or suspend access to some or all of the Licensed Content,
in the event that the End User does not comply with any of
7.0 DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES AND LIABILITIES
the terms and conditions of this Agreement. In the event of
7.！
 Although Cengage Learning believes the Licensed Content to
such termination by Cengage Learning, the End User shall im-
be reliable, Cengage Learning does not guarantee or warrant
 mediately return any and all copies of the Licensed Content to
() any information or materials contained in or produced by the
Cengage Learning.
Licensed Content, (i) the accuracy, completeness or reliabil-
ity of the Licensed Content, or (jii) that the Licensed Content
3.0 PROPRIETARY RIGHTS
is free from errors or other material defects. THE LICENSED
3.1 The End User acknowledges that Cengage Learning owns all
PRODUCT IS PROVIDED "AS IS," WITHOUT ANY
rights, title and interest, including, but not limited to all copy-
WARRANTY OFANYKIND AND CENGAGELEARNING
right rights therein, in and to the Licensed Content, and that the
DISCLAIMS ANY AND ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESSED
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION,
of the Agreement shall be construed in a manner as to give
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
greatest effect to the original intention of the parties hereto.
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT SHALL
8.5 Waiver. The waiver of any right or failure of either party to
CENGAGE LEARNING BE LIABLE FOR: INDIRECT,
uaaay sun ui papraond yua Aue oadsa Aue ui asiaxa
SPECIAL, PUNITIVE OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
in any instance shall not be deemed to be a waiver of such
INCLUDING FOR LOST PROFITS,LOST DATA,OR
right in the future or a waiver of any other right under this
OTHERWISE. IN NO EVENT SHALL CENGAGE
LEARNING'S AGGREGATE LIABILITY HEREUNDER,
Agreement.
WHETHER ARISING IN CONTRACT, TORT, STRICT
8.6 Choice of Law/Venue. This Agreement shall be interpreted,
LIABILITY OR OTHERWISE, EXCEED THE AMOUNT
construed, and governed by and in accordance with the laws of
OF FEES PAID BY THE END USER HEREUNDER FOR
the State of New York, applicable to contracts executed and to
THE LICENSE OF THE LICENSED CONTENT
be wholly preformed therein, without regard to its principles
-paood Aue sey sanae Aued yoeg mel yo sioguo Suuaa
8.0 GENERAL
ing arising out of or relating to this Agreement or the breach
8.1 Entire Agreement. This Agreement shall constitute the en-
or threatened breach of this Agreement may be commenced and
tire Agreement between the Parties and supercedes all prior
prosecuted in a court in the State and County of New York.
Agreements and understandings oral or written relating to the
Each party consents and submits to the nonexclusive personal
subject matter hereof.
jurisdiction of any court in the State and County of New York
 in respect of any such proceeding.
8.2 Enhancements/Modifications of Licensed Content. From time
to time, and in Cengage Learning's sole discretion, Cengage
8.7 Acknowledgment. By opening this package and/or by ac-
Learning may advise the End User of updates, upgrades, en-
cessing the Licensed Content on this Web site, THE END
 hancements and/or improvements to the Licensed Content, and
 may permit the End User to access and use, subject to the terms
AGREEMENT, UNDERSTANDS IT, AND AGREES TO BE
and conditions of this Agreement, such modifications, upon
BOUND BY ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS. IF YOU DO
 payment of prices as may be established by Cengage Learning.
NOT ACCEPT THESE TERMS AND CONDITIONS, YOU
MUST NOT ACCESS THE LICENSED CONTENT AND
8.3 No Export. The End User shall use the Licensed Content solely
RETURN THE LICENSED PRODUCT TO CENGAGE
 in the United States and shall not transfer or export, directly or
LEARNING (WITHIN SO CALENDAR DAYS OF THE
indirectly, the Licensed Content outside the United States.
END USER'S PURCHASE) WITH PROOF OF PAYMENT
8.4 Severability If any provision of this Agreement is invalid,
ACCEPTABLETO CENGAGE LEARNING, FORA CREDIT
illegal, or unenforceable under any applicable statute or rule of
OR A REFUND. Should the End User have any questions/
law, the provision shall be deemed omitted to the extent that it
comments regarding this Agreement, please contact Cengage
is invalid, illegal, or unenforceable. In such a case, the remainder
Learning at delmar.help@cengage.com.
Minimum System Requirements:
PC:
* Operating System: Windows 2000 w/SP4, XP w/SP2, Vista
* Hard Drive space: [20oMB]
* Screen resolution: 800 X 600 pixels
* CD-ROM drive
PC Setup Instructions:
I. Insert disc into CD-ROM drive. The program should start automatically If it does not go to step 2.
2. From My Computer, double-click the icon for the CD drive.
3. Double-click the start.exe file to start the program.
Technical Support:
Telephone: 1-800-648-7450
8:30 AM - 6:s0 PM Eastern Time
E-mail: delmar.help@cengage.com