Ericka A. Pestana · Sandor Belak
Adama Diallo · John R. Crowther
Gerrit J. Viljoen
Early, Rapid and
Sensitive Veterinary
Molecular Diagnostics
-Real Time PCR
Applications
Springer
IAEA
JointFAO/IAEA Programme
lucn
Early, Rapid and Sensitive Veterinary Molecular
Diagnostics - Real Time PCR Applications
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Ericka A. Pestana · Sandor Belak · Adama Diallo
John R. Crowther · Gerrit J. Viljoen
Early, Rapid and Sensitive
Veterinary Molecular
Diagnostics - Real Time PCR
Applications
 Springer
Dr. Ericka A. Pestana
Prof. Sandor Belak
Department of Nuclear Sciences
Swedish University of
and Applications
Agricultural Sciences
Intermational Atomic Energy
 Department of Virology
Agency (IAEA)
SE-750 07 Uppsala
A1400 Vienna, Austria
Sweden
E.A.Pestana-Delgado@iaea.org
sandor.belak @bvf.slu.se
Dr. Adama Diallo
Dr. John R. Crowther
Department of Nuclear Sciences
Department of Nuclear Sciences
and Applications
and Applications
Intermational Atomic Energy
Intermational Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA)
Agency (IAEA)
A1400 Vienna, Austria
A1400 Vienna, Austria
adama.diallo@iaea.org
j.crowther@iaea.org
Prof. Gerrit J. Viljoen
Department of Nuclear Sciences
and Applications
Intemational Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA)
A1400 Vienna, Austria
G.J.Viljoen@iaea.org
ISBN 978-90-481-3131-0
e-ISBN 978-90-481-3132-7
DO1 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7
Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg London New York
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009938825
B.V., Dordrecht 20 10. All Rights Reserved.
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
anymeans,electronic,echanical,photocopyingmicrofilming,recordingorotherwise,without written
of being entered and executed on a cormputer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.
Printed on acid-free paper
Foreword
The Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture is
involved in agricultural research and development and assists Member States of
FAO and IAEA in improving strategies to ensure food security through the use
of nuclear techniques and related biotechnologies, where such techniques have a
valuable and often unique role. In particular, nuclear and nuclear related molecular
diagnostic methods have rapidly evolved in the past 20 years, since the advent of the
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). They are used in a wide range of agricultural
areas such as, improving soil and water management; producing better crop vari-
eties; diagnosing plant and animal diseases; controlling insect pests and improving
food quality and safety.
The uses of nucleic acid-directed methods have increased significantly in the
past 5 years and have made important contributions to disease control country
programmes for improving national and intemational trade. These developments
include the more routine use of PCR, Real-Time PCR and PCR-Sequencing as
diagnostic and characterization tools in veterinary diagnostic laboratories. However,
there are many problems associated with the transfer and particularly, the applica-
tion of this technology. These include lack of consideration of the establishment
of quality-assured procedures, the required set-up of the laboratory and the proper
training of staff. This can lead to a situation where results are not assured.
This book gives a comprehensive account of the practical aspects of real-time
PCR and strong consideration is given to ensure its optimal use in a diagnostic labo
ratory environment. This includes the basic principles, setting-up of a Real-Time
PCR laboratory; Good Laboratory Practice and Standard Operating Procedures;
Diagnostic Implementation, Execution and Interpretation, Analysis and Problem
Solving. Examples of Standard Operating Procedures as used in individual special-
ist laboratories and an outline of training materials necessary for Real-Time PCR
technology transfer are presented. The difficulties, advantages and disadvantages
in PCR and Real-Time PCR applications are explained and placed in context with
Other test systems.
Emphasis is placed on the use of Real-Time PCR for detection of pathogens.
with a particular focus on diagnosticians and scientists from the developing world.
vi
Foreword
It is hoped that this book will enable readers from various disciplines and levels of
expertise to better judge the merits of early and rapid nuclear and nuclear related
 molecular diagnostic approaches and to increase their skills and knowledge in order
to assist in a more logical, efficient and assured use of these technologies.
Liang Qu
Director:
Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture
Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the following people and Institutions for their
contributions, suggestions and penmissions:
 Donald King and the Institute of Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, United
Kingdom; Sharon Hietala and the Califormia Animal Health and Food Safety
Laboratory; Ian Brown and the Veterinary Laboratories Agency, Surrey-United
 (-a) n sod a a  samd zr 
Sandringham-Johannesburg, for their valuable contributions on specific proce-
dures for disease diagnostics. Bio-Rad, Roche Diagnostics GmbH; PE Biosystems;
Thanks to the people at the SVA-SLU Virology R&D Division, at the MOD
section of SVA VIP and at Uppsala University (the groups of Professors Jonas
Blomberg and Ulf Landegren).
Many thanks to Anne-Lie Blomstram et al. and Lihong Liu et al. (see refs) for
providing figures.
The authors also would like to acknowledge SVA and SLU, FORMAS, AGRIA.
KBM, as well as the European FP6 and FP7 projects and their research consortia:
LAB-ON-SITE (SSP3-513A 645), CSF&WILD-BOAR (SSP1-501599),EPIZONE
(FOOD-CT-2006-016236), FLUTEST and FLUTRAIN.
Special thanks to Marcus Neusser from Bio-Rad, for his advice and help on
completing this venture, and to all those who peer reviewed this book
vii
Contents
1
Background
1.1
Aims of This Book
1
1.2
What Is PCR?
1.3
What Is the Use of PCR?
3
1.4
 PCR and Infectious Diseases - The Veterinary Picture
4
1.5
Laboratory Diagnostic Technology
6
Bibliography .
7
2
Traditional PCR
9
2.1
 Traditional PCR
9
2.2
 PCR Reaction
10
2.2.1
Primer Specifications
11
2.2.2
DNA Template
12
2.2.3
dNTPs
13
2.2.4
Magnesium Chloride
13
2.2.5
DNA Polymerase
13
2.2.6
 Polymerase Buffer
14
2.2.7
Cycling Conditions
14
2.3
 PCR Set Up and Optimization 
16
2.3.1
Optimizing a PCR Reaction
17
2.4
 The PCR Plateau Effect
17
2.5
 Radioisotope-PCR Based Methods
18
2.5.1
Radioisotopic-Based Methods
19
Bibliography
22
3
Real-Time PCR - The Basic Principles .
27
3.1
Traditional PCR Versus Real Time PCR
27
3.1.1
PCR Kinetics
28
3.2
 Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction
29
3.2.1
Primer Sets and Probe Design
29
3.2.2
 PCR Components and Assay Optimization .
31
3.2.3
 Real-Time Fluorescense Reporters
32
3.2.4
Melting Curve Dissociation Analysis
35
3.2.5
Probe-Based Chemistry
36
ix
Contents
3.2.6
FRET-Based Hybridisation Probes .
38
3.2.7
 Scorpion Primers
40
3.2.8
LAMP
42
Bibliography
43
 4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology
of Viral Diseases
47
4.1
Background
48
4.1.1
Costs of Disease
48
4.1.2
Global Factors
49
4.1.3
 Other Diseases
49
4.1.4
Major Problems 
50
4.1.5
 Need to Improve Diagnosis
50
4.1.6
Harmonization of Responses
51
4.1.7
Application of Various PCR Methods in Routine
Diagnostic Virology
51
4.1.8
Multiplex PCR in Routine Diagnosis .
54
4.1.9
Simultaneous Detection of Viruses and the
Complex Diagnosis, Development of "Multi
PCR" Assays Simplify Diagnosis
54
4.1.10
 Robots are Accelerating Molecular Diagnosis
and Provide Better Safety
55
4.1.11
Isothermal Amplification and the Use of Simple
Thermo Blocks Can Replace Costly PCR Machines .
55
4.1.12
Portable PCR Machines .
56
4.1.13
Studies of Molecular Epidemiology
56
4.1.14
 The OIE Rules for the Intermational
Standardization and Validation of the PCR-Based
Diagnostic Assays
57
4.1.15
 OIE Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines
for Terrestrial Animals 2004, 2008
58
4.1.16
Validation and Quality Control of Polymerase
 Chain Reaction Methods Used for the Diagnosis
of Infectious Diseases (Chapter I.1.4. of the OIE Manual)
58
4.2
 PCR Methods Used in Routine Molecular Diagnostics
58
4.2.1
 OIE Collaborating Center for the Biotechnology-
Based Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases in
Veterinary Medicine
58
4.2.2
Recent Developments in the Field of Diagnostic
Virology at the OIE Collaborating Center for the
Biotechnology based Diagnosis of Infectious
Diseases in Veterinary Medicine
59
4.2.3
Ultra Rapid Nucleic Acid Amplification and
Nucleotide Sequencing Analysis
63
Contents
xi
4.2.4
Proximity Ligation, Novel Means of Protein
Detection by Nucleic Acid Amplification
64
4.2.5
A Simple Magnetic Bead-Based Microarray for
Detection and Discrimination of Pestiviruses
64
4.2.6
Detection of an Emerging Pestivirus in Cattle
and Further Characterization by Means of
Molecular Diagnostics and Reverse Genetics
65
4.2.7
Molecular Epidemiology, New Approaches
66
4.2.8
Further Trends, New Directions in Molecular
Diagnostic Virology . .
66
4.2.9
Viral Metagenomics, Search for Unknown Viruses
68
4.2.10
 Summary and Recommendations .
69
Bibliography .:
69
5
Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific
Procedures for Important Veterinary Pathogens . .
73
SOP 1.
Detection of Avian Infuenza A Matrix Gene by
Real Time TaqMan RT-PCR
76
SOP 2.
H7 Eurasian Real Time PCRs for the Detection and
 Pathotyping of Eurasian H7 Avian Infuenza Isolates
83
SOP 3.
 One Step RT PCR for Detection of H5 & H7 Avian
Influenza and Cleavage Site Sequencing . 
94
SOP 4.
Eurasian H5 Avian Influenza Real Time PCR
102
SOP 5.
Detection of Rift Valley Fever Virus by Real-Time
Reverse Transcription-PCR
109
SOP 6.
Swine Vesicular Disease (SVD) Virus One-Step RT-LAMP
113
SOP 7.
 Detection of African Swine Fever Virus DNA Using
the Isothermal
117
SOP 8.
Real-Time PCR Detection and Quantification of
Porcine Viruses Using Molecular Beacons .
121
SOP 9.
Swine Vesicular Disease Virus PriProET Two-Step
Real-Time PCR
125
SOP 10.
Slope/End Point Analysis of Invader Data System
129
SOP 11.
African Horse Sickness TaqMan RT-PCR
132
SOP 12.
 Bluetongue SYBR?-Green RT-PCR
136
SOP 13.
BTV Serotype 4 SYBR? GREEN RT-PCR
140
SOP 14.
Real-Time Duplex Detection of Avian Infuenza and
Newcastle Disease Viruses . .
144
SOP15.
Realtime RT PCR Detection of Influenza Virus
Matrix Gene Realtime RT PCR Detection of
Velogenic Newcastle Disease Fusion Protein
147
SOP 16.
 Preparation of Silica Particles for Nucleic Acid Extraction
169
SOP 17.
Boom-Silica RNA Extraction (GuSCN, phenol, Silica)
172
SOP 18.
Mab Based Competitive ELISAs for H5 and H7
Antibody Detection in Avian Sera
177
xii
Contents
SOP19.
Type A, H5, and H7 Avian Infuenza Antigen
Detection ELISAs
183
SOP 20.
 Ribonucleic Acid Extraction from Samples Using
TRIzol Reagent .
188
SOP 21.
Ambion Magnetic Beads Extraction (96-well)
194
SOP 22.
Svanodip? FMDV-Ag Penside Test .
200
SOP 23.
FMDV PLA Assay
203
SOP 24.
 Procedure for Using the Molecular Diagnostics Suite
206
SOP 25.
 One step TaqMan? RT-PCR for Diagnosis of
FMDV and Related Vesicular Viruses.
215
SOP 26.
Operation of the Stratagene Mx4000/Mx3005P for
 Real-Time PCR. One-Step RT-PCR Amplification
of RNA from Vesicular Disease Viruses
222
SOP 27.
Differentiation of Sheep and Goat Poxviruses by
Real Time PCR
230
6 PCR Laboratory Set-up
235
6.1
Establishment of a PCR Laboratory
236
6.1.1
 Minimum Layout Requirements for a Basic PCR
Laboratory
236
6.1.2
 Ideal Physical Arrangement for a PCR Laboratory 
236
6.1.3
 Ideal Physical Arrangement for a Real-Time
PCR Laboratory.
237
6.1.4
Reagent Preparation - Area 1 
237
6.1.5
DNA/RNA Extraction - Area 2 .
238
6.1.6
Amplification (PCR) and Detection - Area 3
240
6.1.7
 Contamination and Sources
241
6.1.8
Establishment of a PCR Assay
243
6.1.9
Validation of the Assay . :
243
6.2
Quality Assurance Programme or Accreditation
244
6.2.1
Proficiency Testing
245
..
6.2.2
PCR Controls
245
Bibliography
246
7
Analysis and Troubleshooting
247
7.1
 How to Design Primers for Real-Time PCR Applications
247
7.1.1
 TaqMan ? Probes and Primer Design .
249
7.1.2
 Storage of Primers and TaqMan? Probes
250
7.1.3
SYBR? Green Assays .
250
7.1.4
Optimisation of Primer Concentration
252
7.1.5
Multiple Bands on Gel or Multiple Peaks
in the Melting Curve
253
7.1.6
 Effect of Magnesium Chloride and Primer Concentration
254
7.1.7
Molecular Beacons Assays
254
7.2
 Assay Performance Evaluation Using Standard Curves
254
7.2.1
Threshold Selection.
255
Contents
xiii
7.2.2
Quantification of Gene Targets with the
Quantitative Real Time PCR: Absolute and
Relative Gene Quantification .
256
7.2.3
Relative Quantification
256
7.3
Most Common Problems When Performing Real-Time PCR
257
7.3.1
PCR Amplifcation Problems .
257
7.3.2
Control Samples
258
7.3.3
Signal Problems in Real Time PCR
258
7.3.4
Amplification Plots .
259
7.4
 Summary: Optimised Real-Time PCR Assay .
260
Bibliography
261
8  Specifications for PCR Machines
265
Glossary of Terms
279
Index
307
Chapter 1
Background
Contents
1.1 Aims of This Book .
1.2 What Is PCR?
1.3 What Is the Use of PCR?
1.4 PCR and Infectious Diseases - The Veterinary Picture
4
1.5Laboratory Diagnostic Technology
6
Bibliography . .
7
1.1 Aims of This Book
The Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture
(NAFA)and Nuclear Sciences and Applications Laboratories(NAAL) arejointly
involved in research and development in the fields of agriculture with particular
responsibilitytothediagnostic laboratoriesoftheirMemberStates.Nuclearrelated
technigues play anincreasinglyvaluableandoftenunigueroleinagricultural
research and development.They have been applied in a wide range of disciplines
including improving soil and water management; producing better crop varieties;
diagnosing animal diseases; controlling insect pests and improving food quality
and safety.The temperature template amplification technologies -Polymerase Chain
Reaction (PCR). with their already proven value and massive potential, are at the
forefront ofdebate andinterest to a widerange ofscientistsin developing and
developed countries alike.It is relevant to note that real-time PCR (rt-PCR) and
guantitative PCR(gPCR) are derivatives of the polymerase chain reaction.This
book extends the information of a previous publication by the IAEA (Molecular
Diagnostics PCR Handbook,Viljoen,G.J.,Nel,L.H.,and Crowther, J.R.,Springer,
2005) and deals with the basic principles of both PCR and real-time PCR with a
viewto their use forthe early and rapid diagnosis of harmful pathogens of animals
and those of zoonotic nature origintoform thebasis ofreal-timePCRtechnologies
and applications.
E.A. Pestana et al., Early, Rapid and Sensitive Veterinary Molerular Diagnostics -
Real Time PCR Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7_1,
Copyright @ International Atomic Energy Agency 2010
Published by Springer Science+Business Media B.V, Dordrecht 2010. All Rights Reserved.
2
1Background
The transfer of PCR technology is challenging and often made without adequate
consideration of the way it is set up; the training of staff and as to exactly how it is
to be used. Implementation of this modem tec hnology, that promises so much, holds
many dangers and conventional techniques should never be ignored at the expense
of the PCR alone. A well-considered argument as to why PCR should be set up,
along with considerations of the cost benefit in the short and long term, is necessary.
This book is intended to give a concise overview of the practical aspects of PCR
considering its best use in terms of laboratory practice; the setting up of laboratories
to perform PCR; and GLP and standardisation of PCR protocols. Difficulties, as
well as advantages in PCR application, are highlighted dealing with more recent
advances in methods and putting the PCR in context of other tests. It is hoped
that the book will appeal to readers of all disciplines and levels so that they can
better judge the merits of the techniques and develop the technology in a more
logical and efficient way. The book is detailed in many areas as a direct help to
those involved in everyday PCR. Specific examples are given of protocols used as
standard operating procedures (SOP's) in individual laboratories; routine uses; latest
developments and potential of PCR technologies and training material necessary for
PCR technology transfer. Specific emphasis is placed on the use of PCR for diag-
nosis of infectious diseases, aimed at diagnosticians and scientists of the developing
world. All patents and licences, directly or indirectly related to the technologies and
processes addressed in this book should be respected.
1.2 What Is PCR?
Molecular biology has been revolutionised by PCR, a method that efficiently
increases the number of DNA molecules in a logarithmic and controlled fashion.
dinary. Kary Mullis conceived PCR in 1983 and the first PCR publication appeared
in 1985. Every year thereafter, the number of papers on PCR has risen exponentially
and Taq polymerase, the enzyme essential to PCR's success, as "molecule of the
year". In 1993, Kary Mullis received the Nobel prize for chemistry. The advent of
PCR meant that insufficiencies in the quantity of DNA were no longer a limita-
tion in molecular biology research or diagnostic procedures. It is indeed diffcult
to find publications in the biological sciences that do not describe the applica-
tion of PCR in some or other way. The chemistry involved in PCR depends on
the complementarities (matching) of the nucleotide bases in the double-stranded
DNA helix. When a molecule of DNA is sufficiently heated, the hydrogen bonds
holding together the double helix are disrupted and the molecule separates or dena-
tures into single strands. If the DNA solution is allowed to cool, the complementary
base pairs can reform to restore the original double helix. In order to use PCR, the
exact sequence of nucleotides that fank (lay on either side of) the area of interest
(the target area that needs to be amplified), must be known. This is the absolute
minimum data necessary before a typical PCR reaction can be used. This data is
1.3 What Is the Use of PCR?
necessary for the design of PCR primers that are 5'-3' oligonucleotides of about
20 nucleotides in length. These are designed to be complementary to the fanking
sequences of the target area, as mentioned previously. Thus, the researcher has to
either use previous data (known information of sequences) or, if this is unavailable,
determine the sequence of these regions experimentally. The two primers (primer
pair) can then be synthesized chemically and will then serve as leaders or initia-
tors of the replication step. The key to the replication reaction is that it is driven
by a heat-stable polymerase molecule that reads a template DNA in the 3'-5' direc-
tion and synthesises a new complementary template in the 5'-3' direction, using
free dideoxy nucleoside triphosphates (dNTP's = nucleotide bases) as building
blocks.
1.3 What Is the Use of PCR?
PCR is primarily a method to spectacularly amplify a desired DNA fragment (piece
of DNA) in order to increase the target DNA to detectable levels. This has had a
profound effect on all molecular studies including those in the diagnostic area. It
suddenly changed the way sensitivity was defined, as we are now able to detect very
animals more easily, detect mixed populations of pathogens in an infection and to
determine pathogen load. The method has found numerous related applications in
molecular biology and now forms the fundamental basis of most studies involving
genetic material.
As illustration of this umiqueness, PCR can be used very effectively to modify
DNA. Such modification may include the addition of restriction enzyme sites (in
order to facilitate cloning requirements) or regulatory elements (e.g., the addition
   o a a  (si a e  saas d go
the generation of desired site-directed mutations in a gene, inclusive of sequence
alterations, additions or deletions. Cycle-sequencing, a modification of the classical
di-deoxy sequencing method pioneered by Fred Sanger in the early 1980s, uses the
principles of PCR to rapidly perform sequence reactions in a thenmal cycler. Equally
often used is the sensitive protein-DNA or protein-RNA interaction analysis (e.g.
for the activation of Polymerase type II promoters) approach of the Maxim and
Gilbert sequence reactions, using nuclear applications to study protein and nucleic
acid interactions on a molecule by molecule basis. The way in that PCR has dramati-
cally impacted on diagnosis of genetic and infectious disease is one of the foci of this
book. For PCR-directed diagnostics it is possible to work with crude samples and
minute amounts of material that may include degraded templates, blood, sperm, tis-
sue, individual hairs, etc. In related applications, PCR plays a central role in genetic
typing and molecular characterization of organisms or individuals and molecular
ogy are given in Table 1.1 and specific focus is given to the diagnostic uses of this
technique in further sections of the book.
1 Background
Table 1.1  General applications of PCR
1. Diagnosis of pathogens
(a) PCR
(b) Nested PCR
(c) Quantitative PCR
(d) Multiplex PCR
(e) Differential on-line and real time PCR
 2. Typing genetic markers
(a) RFLPs
(b) AFLPs
(c) Short tandem repeat polymorphisms
(d) SNPs
3. DNA template for
(a) Genomic mutation screening
intron-specific primers fanking exons
(b) RT-PCR cDNA used as templates for
pairs of exon-specific primers to
generate overlapping fragments
4. Detecting point
(a) Restriction site polymorphisms
mutations
(b) Allele specific amplification
5. cDNA cloning
(a) DOP-PCR
(b) RACE
6. Genomic DNA cloning
New members of a DNA family
(a) DOP-PCR. Whole genome or
subgenomic amplification
(b) DOP-PCR
(c) Linker-primed PCR
7. Genome walking
(a) Inverse PCR
(b) Bubble linker (vectored) PCR
(c) IRE-PCR
8. DNA templates for
(a) ssDNA by asymmetric PCR
DNA sequencing
(b) dsDNA for direct sequencing or for
cloning followed by sequencing
9. In vitro mutagenesis
(a) 5′ add-on mutagenesis to create a
recombinant PCR product
(b) Mispaired primers to change a single
predetermined nucleotide
1.4 PCR and Infectious Diseases - The Veterinary Picture
Infectious diseases can be caused by microbial pathogens, include agents of fun-
gal, protozoan, bacterial, clamydial, rickettsia and viral nature. Despite many
advances in diagnostics and vaccinology, infectious diseases still have devastating
consequences for agricultural, economies, worldwide.
Three examples of devastation with regard to animal husbandry since the 1990s,
include the emergence of the prion, bovine spongifonm encephalopathy (BSE); the
1.4 PCR and Infectious Diseases - The Veterinary Picture
huge outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) in Europe and avian infuenza
(AI) in Asia and elsewhere. A great many of these infectious diseases can be
such zoonotic diseases are known. Infectious diseases are typically transmitted
through the skin or eyes (direct contact, insect vectors, bite wounds, sexual con-
tact). In other cases agents are airborme and infect the epithelial cells lining the
respiratory tract from where further systemic infection may proceed. Additional
sources of infectious microorganisms are contaminated food and water with a route
of infection through the mouth and alimentary tract, or through the respiratory
system.
 Infectious diseases can be considered new, emerging, re-emerging or resurgent.
These are diseases that have been described in the last 10-30 years, or that are
caused by specific modifications of agents already present in the environment;
e.g., in a different host reservoir). These agents evolve, mutate or are otherwise
epidemiologically affected by changing conditions or other selective advantage.
Typically, re-emerging diseases are those that have persisted at a subdued level in
the population and recur as a result of antimicrobial drug resistance or other changes
that might favor dramatic increases in disease incidence. Re-emerging diseases can
also be described as resurgent, referring to an abrupt increase in incidence or geo-
graphic distribution of the particular disease. The emergence and re-emergence of
diseases are clearly related to changes in the infectious pathogen, the vector or
transmission system and the host population.
Apart from drug resistance, other epidemiologically important changes include
mutations that lead to increased virulence; changes in the distribution or activity
of vectors; globalization and increased travel; war, population explosions; climatic
and ecological changes; geographical displacement of species; movement into pre-
viously uninhabited areas; poverty and breakdown of animal or healthcare systems;
and changes in agriculture and industrialisation.
The quest for improved diagnostic methods to combat infectious diseases has
become ever more demanding. As our knowledge of the structure and func-
tion of pathogens and of the immunological responses of a host to infection or
antigenic stimulation expands; approaches to both disease diagnosis and to immu
nisation has changed from empirical methodologies to procedures undertaken in
 a much more informed manner. These approaches have enabled diagnostic assays
to become more specific and better standardized and in the development of safer
and more effective quality controlled vaccines. Advances in laboratory technol-
ogy have enabled diagnostic assays to be performed and analysed with a greater
However, some of these advances have come at an increased cost and it is therefore
straints of most developing countries. We now have the scientific knowledge and
technical skills available to make very significant further advances in the diagno-
sis of, and immunisation against, specific diseases. Such expected advances will
also be highlighted in the following discussion concerming laboratory diagnosis and
technology.
6
1Background
1.5 Laboratory Diagnostic Technology
The detection of the presence, or absence, of a pathogen and its subsequent
identification and characterization
The detection of the pathological effect of, or immunological response to,
infection by a particular pathogen
ism by light or electron microscopy, either directly in specimens from the affected
animal or following culturing.
Altermatively, serological procedures are used where a specific antigen is detected
using characterized antibodies and sigmificant advances have been made in such
serological procedures. There have also been enonmous advances in our understand-
ing of immunology. With a few exceptions, immunological approaches to infectious
disease diagnosis are directed towards serological procedures, i.e., the detection of
interactions between antigens unique to the pathogen and specific antibodies elabo-
rated against them. Grouping or typing of pathogens through serology has played a
major role in pathogen classification and in epidemiological studies.
More recently with the advances in molecular biology, the analysis of the genetic
material of pathogens has complemented or even replaced serological methods for
diagnostics, epidemiology and taxonomy. Fragments of DNA or RNA, produced by
nuclease digestion, can be separated by electrophoresis to form bands whose posi
tion in a gel is dictated by their molecular size. The patterms obtained for digests
from different sources can be compared by running them in parallel. Greater dis-
crimination can be obtained by running gels in two dimensions, under conditions
producing separation in the first dimension on the basis of charge and in the second
on the basis of size. Characteristic patterms are obtained (fingerprints) that can be
compared visually. This can be used for comparing isolates of a particular pathogen.
There are significant advantages in the ability to indicate a pathogen's presence
by the detection of its DNA or RNA. Successful bacterial or viral isolation is depen
dent on the presence of live or viable pathogen in a specimen and is generally time
consuming and expensive. It also requires the presence of live pathogen. Antigen
detection procedures are limited by the amount and quality of antigen present in
specimen. Nucleic acid is more resistant to denaturation than protein and can survive
long period of time (even centuries) under appropriate conditions. The limitation
on nucleic acid detection has been due to the very small amounts available for
detection. Notwithstanding, nucleic acid hybridisation techniques have been used
to probe specimens, using complementary strands of DNA or RNA appropriately
labelled with an enzyme or a radioisotope. Specific base pairing produces a hybrid
between the probe and the target that can be detected through the specific label.
 Such nucleic acid probes have been developed and used for the detection of many
pathogens.
PCR represents an entirely new technology. In vitro bacterial or viral culture
is widely used to isolate and multiply pathogens, so that the organism itself, or
Bibliography
its antigens, can be more readily detected, by being present in greater quantity and
generally with fewer contaminants. PCR technology permits the same principle (i.e.,
in vitro amplification) to be applied to the detection of specific sequences of nucleic
acid. There are enormous benefits to this approach.
The application of PCR to disease diagnosis has been somewhat restricted to
amounts of extraneous DNA may produce false positive results. Often this means
that separate rooms and/or laminar fow cabinets must be used with careful disinfec-
tion protocols to avoid cross-contamination. Equipment costs are high but become
justifiable to more laboratories as the range of applications increase.
Methods are becoming better standardised so that training of staff in appropriate
techniques can be rationalised. Certain standard reagents and consumables, such as
Taq DNA polymerase, are expensive and not readily available in some countries.
Nevertheless, it can be expected that these limitations will be progressively (prob-
ably rapidly) addressed and that this technology will be applied to an increasing
extent.
The application of PCR and other hybridisation techniques to diagnostics is
be targeted and the regions chosen for complementary primer production must
be conserved within the genotypic range of the pathogen. Thus the challenge for
many laboratories is have access to specific primers and oligonucleotide detection
probes. While these can be synthesised in suitably equipped laboratories, for most
laboratories in developing countries there will be a dependence on having these
reagents custom made by commercial sources or accessing them from intemational
or national reference laboratories.
A large number of specific diagnostic PCR methods have been made available
in the public domain though publications in scientific jourmals, websites and the
like. It is beyond the scope of this book to provide a comprehensive list of such
methods. However, a few diagnostic assays for important veterinary diseases for
which established standard operating procedures (SOPs) have been described and
which are widely implemented, have been included in Chapter 5. These include
detailed methods for Avian Influenza, Swine vesicular disease, African swine fever
Rift valley fever (RVF), African horse sickness (AHSV), Bluetongue (BTV), CSFV
and foot and mouth disease (FMD).
Bibliography
1.Armstrong, RM, Samuel, AR, Carpenter, WC, Kant, R, Knowles, NJ. 1994. A comparative
study of serological and biochemical methods for strain differentiation of foot-and-mouth
disease type A viruses. Vet. Microbiol., 39, 285-98
2 Chamberlain, RW, Wamwayi, HM, Hockley, E, Shaila, MS, Goatley, L, Knowles, NJ,
Barrett, T. 1993. Evidence for different lineages of rinderpest virus refecting their geographic
isolation. J Gen. Virol., 74,2775-80
8
1Background
3.Dedieu, L, Mady, V, LeFevre, PC.1994. Development of a selective polymerase chain reaction
assay for the detection of Mycoplasma mycoides subsp. mycoides S.C. (contagious bovine
pleuropneumonia agent). Vet. Microbiol., 42, 327-39
4. Donn, A., Martin, LA, Donaldson, AI. 1994. Improved detection of persistent foot-and-mouth
disease infection in cattle by the polymerase chain reaction. J. Virol. Meth., 49, 179-86
5. Dunn, CS, Donaldson, AI. 1997. Natural adaptation to pigs of a Taiwanese isolate of foot-
and-mouth disease virus. Vet. Rer., 141, 174-5
6. Forsyth, MA, Barrett, T. 1995. Evaluation of a polymerase chain reaction for the detection
and characterisation of rinderpest and peste des petits ruminants for epidemiological studies.
Virus Res.,39,151-63
7.Harding, MJ, Prud*homme, I, Gradil, CM, Heckert, RA, Riva, J, McLaurin, R, Dulac, GC,
Vydelingum, S. 1996. Evaluation of nucleic acid amplifcation methods for the detection of
hog cholera virus. J. Vet. Diagrn. Irnvest., 8, 414-9
8.Ireland, DC, Binepal, YS. 1998. Improved detection of capripoxvirus in biopsy samples by
PCR. J Virol. Meth., 74, 1-7
9.King,AMQ, Underwood, BO,McCahon,D, Newman, JWI, Brown, F. 1981. Biochemical
identification of viruses causing the 1981 outbreaks of foot and mouth disease in the UK.
Nature, 293, 479-80
10. Meyer, RF, Brown, CC, House, C, House, JA, Molitor, TW. 1991. Rapid and sensitive detec-
tion of foot and-mouth disease virus in tissues by enzymatic RNA amplification of the
polymerase gene.J. Virol. Meth., 34,161-72
11. Palmenberg, AC. 1989. Sequence alignments of picornaviral capsid proteins. In: Molecular
Aspects of Picornaviral Infection and Detection. Eds. Semler, BL. and Ehrenfeld, E. American
Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC. pp. 211-41
12. Saiki, RK, Gelfand, DH, Stoffel, S, Scharf, SJ, Higuchi, R, Horn, GT, Mullis, KB, Erlich, HA
1998. Primer-directed enzymatic amplification of DNA with athermostable DNA polymerase.
Srience,239,487-91
Chapter 2
Traditional PCR
Contents
2.1 Traditional PCR
9
2.2 PCR Reaction
10
2.2.1 Primer Specifications .
11
2.2.2 DNA Template
12
2.2.3 dNTPs
13
2.2.4 Magnesium Chloride
13
2.2.5 DNA Polymerase
13
2.2.6 Polymerase Buffer
14
2.2.7 Cycling Conditions
14
2.3 PCR Set Up and Optimization .
16
2.3.1 Optimizing a PCR Reaction .
17
2.4 The PCR Plateau Effect
17
2.5 Radioisotope-PCR Based Methods
18
2.5.1 Radioisotopic-Based Methods
19
Bibliography .
22
2.1 Traditional PCR
Polymerase chain Reaction (PCR) was a method invented by Kary Mullis. who
was awarded the NobelPrizein Chemistry in1993for his innovation.In the
1980s, Mullis, who was working at Cetus Corporation, imagined a way to start
and stop a polymerase's action at specific points along a single strand of DNA.
Cetus scientists eventually succeededin artificially multiply DNA through repeated
cycles of duplication driven by an enzyme called DNA polymerase.A polymerase
is a naturally occurring enzyme,a biological macromolecule that catalyzes the
formation and repair of DNA (and RNA); activity scientists have leamed to
manipulate.
E.A.Pestana et al.,Early, Rapid and SensitiveVeterinary Molecular Diagnostics -
Real Time PCR Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7_2,
Copyright @ International Atomic Energy Agency 2010
Published by Springer Science+Business Media B.V., Dordrecht 2010. All Rights Reserved.
10
2  Traditional PCR
Science Magazine named PCR and the polymerase “"Molecule of the Year"’ in
1989, the editor, Daniel Koshland Jr., defined what PCR is as follows, "The starting
material for PCR, the ‘target sequence,' is a gene or segment of DNA." In a matter
of hours, this target sequence can be amplified a million fold. The complemen-
tary strands of a double-stranded molecule of DNA are separated by heating. Two
small pieces of synthetic DNA, each complementing a specific sequence at one end
of the target sequence, serve as primers. Each primer binds to its complementary
sequence. Polymerases start at each primer and copy the sequence of that strand.
Within a short time, exact replicas of the target sequence have been produced. In
subsequent cycles, double-stranded molecules of both the original DNA and the
Aod au pue sauanbas Auaaduo cn ue p sad rpandas are saio
merase replicates them. At the end of many cycles, the pool is greatly enriched in
the small pieces of DNA that have the target sequences, and this amplifed genetic
information is then available for further analysis.
2.2 PCR Reaction
When performing a PCR reaction, several components are needed. The frst one is
the DNA template, which contains the region of the DNA fragment to be amplified.
to be amplified by the DNA polymerase, are designed. The DNA polymerase, then
will built a new DNA strand, and to that may need of other components such as PCR
Buffer, which provides a suitable chemical environment for the polymerase to per-
form the amplification; dNTPs (deoxyiribosenucleotides), which are the monomers
that DNA polymerase uses to form DNA; and a co-factor to increase the yield of the
reaction (magnesium Chloride). Each of these PCR components will be discussed
later on detail.
Basic elements of reaction mixture for PCR
Template DNA
105-106 target molecules
Primer
Between 0.1 and 0.5 μM each
10x Buffer
As supply with the enzyme
MgCl2
1.5 mM
dNTPs
200 μM of each dATP, dCTP, dGTP and dTTP
Heat-stable DNA polymerase
1-2 Units
The PCR process consists of a series of 20-30 cycles. Each cycle consists of
three steps:
2.2 PCR Reaction
11
(1) The double-stranded DNA has to be heated to 94-96°C in order to separate
the strands. This step is called melting; it breaks apart the hydrogen bonds that
connect the two DNA strands. Prior to the first cycle, the DNA is often melted
for an extended time to ensure that both the template DNA and the primers have
completely separated (single-strand).
(2) After separating the DNA strands, the temperature is lowered so the primers
can attach themselves to the single DNA strands. This step is called anmealing.
The temperature of this stage depends on the primers and is usually 5?C below
their melting temperature (45-60°C). A wrong temperature during the annealing
step can result in primers not binding to the template DNA at all, or binding
at random.
(3) Finally, the DNA-Polymerase has to fill in the missing strands. It starts at
the annealed primer and works its way along the DNA strand. This step is called
elongation. The elongation temperature depends on the DNA polymerase. The time
for this step depends both on the DNA polymerase itself and on the length of the
DNA fragment to be amplified; which is usually 1 min per 1000 bp. After the PCR
reaction is complete, PCR products can be identified by its size using agarose gel
electrophoresis. As a result, the smaller DNA strands move faster than the larger
strands through the gel toward the positive current. The size of the PCR product can
be determined by comparing it with a DNA ladder, which contains DNA fragments
of known size, also within the gel.
2.2.1 Primer Specifications
PCR requires a DNA template and a pair of primers fanking the target DNA.
An important parameter to be considered when selecting PCR primers is the
ability of the primers to form a stable duplex exclusively with the specific site
to be targeted on the DNA molecule. The melting temperature of the primers,
which is defined as the temperature below which the primer will anneal to the
DNA template and above which the primer will dissociate (break apart) from
the DNA template; usually depends on the length of the primer designed. The
length of the primers should be usually between 18 and 24 bp. If the primers are
designed too short, the probability of them annealing at different region on the
DNA template usually increases; whereas if primers are too long, their melting
temperature would also increase, and thus having a tendency for secondary anneal-
ing. Primers with melting temperatures in the range of 52-58°C generally produce
the best results. The concentration of each primer should be between 0.1 and 0.5
μM. For most applications 0.2 μM produces satisfactory results. Too high primer
concentrations increase the chance of mispriming, which results in nonspecific
PCR products. Limiting primer concentrations result in extremely inefficient PCR
reactions.
12
2 Traditional PCR
Primer design guidelines
GC-content (the number of G's and C's in the primer as a percentage of the total
bases) should be between 40-60%
Tm for both primers used in the reaction should not differ >5°C and the Tm of
the amplification product should not differ from primers by >10°℃.
GC Clamp formation. More than 3 G's or C's should be avoided in the last 5
bases at the 3' end of the primer.
Secondary Structures. Hairpins (intramolecular interaction within the primer),
self-dimers (intermolecularinteractions between the two (same sense) primers),
and cross-dimers (intermolecular interaction between sense and antisense
primers) should be avoided.
Inner self-complementary hairpins of >4 and of dimers >8 should be avoided.
Repeats should be avoided because they produce mispriming. A maximum
number of di-nucleotide repeats acceptable are 4 di-nucleotides.
3'terminus is should be carefully considered - it must not be complementary to
any region of the other primer used in the reaction and must provide correct base
matching to template.
2.2.2 DNA Template
The DNA template used for PCR is often overlooked when compared with the effort
put into primer design.
The most commonly used parameters that relate to the DNA template are
the PCR product size and the Tm of the product. However, it is known that
DNA templates with a very high or very low GC/AT ratio can be diffcult to
amplify.
Usually the amount of template DNA used on a PCR reaction is in the range of
0.01-1 ng for plasmid or phage DNA and 0.1-1 μg for genomic DNA, for a total
reaction mixture of 50 μL. Higher amounts of template DNA usually increase the
yield of non-specific PCR products.
Too much template may also decrease efficiency due to contaminants in the DNA
 preparation. These include urea, the detergent SDS (whose inhibitory action can
be reversed by nonionic detergents), sodium acetate, and, sometimes, components
carried over in purifying DNA from agarose gels.
Inhibition of PCR by impurities on the template
Substance
Inhibitory concentration
SDS
>0.005% (w/v)
Phenol
>0.2% (v/v)
Ethanol
>1% (v/v)
Isopropanol
>1% (v/v)
Sodium acetate
>5 mM
Sodium chloride
>25 mM
EDTA
>0.5 mM
2.2PCR Reaction
13
2.2.3 dNTPs
The concentration of each dNTP (dATP, dCTP, dGTP and dTTP) in the reaction
mixture is usually 200 μM. Too high concentrations of dNTPs usually inhibit PCR
reactions.
It is very important to have equal concentrations of each dNTP (dATP, dCTP,
dGTP, dTTP), as inaccuracy in the concentration of even a single dNTP dramatically
increases the misincorporation errors.
2.2.4 Magnesium Chloride
The concentration of Magnesium chloride can have a particular effect on the speci-
ficity and yield of the PCR reaction. Its concentration must be optimized for every
 primer/template system. Usually few Mg2+ ions result in a low yield of PCR prod-
uct, on the other hand too many increase the yield of non-specific products and
promote misincorporation errors (see fi gure below). When the DNA samples contain
EDTA or other chelators, the MgCl2 concentration in the reaction mixture should
be raised proportionally. Many components of the reaction bind magmesium ion,
 including primers, template, PCR products and dNTPs. The main 1 :1 binding agent
for magnesium ion is the high concentration of dNTPs in the reaction. Because it
is necessary for free magnesium ion to serve as an enzyme cofactor in PCR, the
total magnesium ion concentration must exceed the total dNTP concentration. For
example if in the optimization process we start with a concentration of 1.5 mM mag-
nesium chloride in the presence of 0.8 mM total dNTPs; it would mean that there is
still about 0.7 mM free magnesium left to be bind to the DNA polymerase. In gen-
eral, magnesium ion should be titrated in a concentration series from 1.5 to 4.0 mM
in 0.5 mM steps.
1.5 mM
2.5 mM
3.5 mM
2.2.5 DNA Polymerase
The PCR reaction conditions and reaction times depend on the type of DNA
polymerase used. Usually, when using Tag DNA polymerase, the recommended
14
2 Traditional PCR
merase concentrations may cause synthesis of non-specific products. However, if
inhibitors are present in the reaction mix (e.g., if the template DNA used is not
highly purified), higher amounts of Taq DNA polymerase (2-3 u) may be necessary
to obtain a better yield of amplification products.
2.2.6 PolymeraseBuffer
All DNA polymerases are supplied with their own optimal polymerase buffer. The
standard buffer usually includes 10-50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3-8.8), and up to 50 mM
KCl may be included to facilitate primer annealing.
Some suppliers of DNA polymerases have added NH4+ ions to their buffers. It
has been shown that the presence of NH4+ ions results in a high specificity of the
primer-template binding over a broad temperature range. Others also contain NaCl,
which is usually used for GC rich templates (>60%).
Although, little is known of the exact role of these chemicals in PCR, good
results have been also obtained by the addition of glycerol, DMSO (5-20%),
formamide (5-20%) or tetramethylammonium chloride (0.01-10 mM) to the
reactionmix.
2.2.7 Cycling Conditions
thenmocycler and primers and template.
2.2.7.1 Initial Denaturation Step
The complete denaturation of the DNA template at the start of the PCR reaction is of
key importance. Incomplete denaturation of DNA results in the inefficient utilization
of template in the first amplification cycle and in a poor yield of PCR product. The
initial denaturation should be performed over an interval of 1-3 min at 95?C if the
GC content is 50% or less. This interval should be extended up to 10 min for GC-rich
templates.
2.2.7.2 Denaturation Step
Usually denaturation for 0.5-2 min at 94-95°C is sufficient, since the PCR prod
uct synthesized in the first amplification cycle is significantly shorter than the
template DNA and is completely denatured umder these conditions. If the ampli-
fied DNA has a very high GC content, denaturation time may be increased up to
3-4 min. Altematively, additives facilitating DNA denaturation - glycerol (up to
a u1 'pasn ag p[nous (%s o dn) apiueuuoy 1o (%01 o dn) 0sq (%[oA 51-01
2.2 PCR Reaction
15
presence of such additives, the annealing temperature should be adjusted experimen-
tally, since the melting temperature of the primer-template DNA duplex decreases
significantly when these additives are used. The amount of enzyme in the reaction
mix should be increased since DMSO and formamide, at the suggested concentra-
tions, inhibit Taq DNA Polymerase by approx. 50%. Altermatively, a common way
to decrease the melting temperature of the PCR product is to substitute dGTP with
7-deaza-dGTP in the reaction mix.
2.2.7.3 Primer Annealing Step
Usually the optimal annealing temperature is 5?C lower than the melting tempera-
ture of primer-template DNA duplex. Incubation for 0.5-2 min is usually suffcient.
However, if non-specific PCR products are obtained in addition to the expected
product, the annealing temperature should be optimized by increasing it stepwise
by 1-2?C. As seen in the picture, the effect of the annealing temperature is critical
on the success of the PCR reaction. Several annealing temperatures for the same
primer pair, were tested. Lower annealing temperatures give raise to unspecific and
poor PCR products, whereas using the correct annealing temperature (line 8) a clear
PCR product could be resolved.
2.2.7.4 Extension Step
Usually the extension step is performed at 72?C. The rate of DNA synthesis by Tag
DNA polymerase is highest at this temperature. Recommended extending time is
1 min for every Kb to be synthesised. When larger DNA fragments are amplified,
the extending time is usually increased by 1 min for each 1000 bp.
2.2.7.5 PCR Amplification Cycle Number
Cycle number vs. starting material concentration
Number of target molecules
Number of cycles
3 × 105
25-30
1.5 × 104
30-35
1 × 103
35-40
50
40-45
16
2Traditional PCR
The number of cycles necessary to obtain a sufficient amount of PCR prod-
[ e un  a a go u  u ns sp in
PCR, the maximum amount of product is approx. 1ol2 copies of the template.
Starting from one copy, the most efficient PCR would reach this level in 40 cycles.
Depending on the nature of the DNA template, as a rule of thumb 25 cycles should
be sufficient for plasmid DNA and 30-35 cycles for genomic DNA. Too many
cycles can increase the amount and complexity of non-specific background prod-
ucts (see Plateau Effect). Of course, too few cycles will produce low PCR product
yield.
2.2.7.6 Final Extension Step
After the last amplification cycle, samples are usually incubated at 72?C for
 5-15 min to fill-in the protruding ends of newly synthesized PCR products. Also,
during this step, the terminal transferase activity of the Taq DNA polymerase adds
extra A nucleotides to the 3'-ends of PCR products. This step is important when
PCR fragments are to be cloned into T/A vectors; if so, this step can be prolonged
to up to 30 min.
2.3 PCR Set Up and Optimization
The master mix typically contains all of the components needed for PCR except the
template DNA. Before starting the PCR, all components should be gently mixed and
centrifuge before proceeding to the mixing. The table below shows a typical PCR
reaction composition for a final volume of 50 μL
FCR component
50 μL master mix Final concentration
Sterile deionized water
Variable
10X Taq buffer
5μL
1X
2 mM dNTP mix
5μL
200 μM of each dNTP
Primer I
Variable
0.1-0.5 μM
Primer II
Variable
0.1-0.5 μM
Taq DNA Polymerase
Variable
1-1.5 u
25 mM MgCl2
Variable
1-4 mM
Template DNA
Variable
10 pg-1 μg
Should Magnesium chloride be added to the reaction, the following table pro-
vides a selection of concentration to be used during titration, using a stock solution
of 25 mM MgCl2.
2.4 The PCR Plateau Effect
17
Final concentration of MgClg in
1.01.251.51.752.02.5
3.0
4.0
50 μL reaction mix (mM)
Volume of 25 mM MgCl2 (μL)
¥2個2.5個3個
3.5個4個５個6
2.3.1 Optimizing a PCR Reaction
Some companies offer a PCR optimization kit that may be use to simplify the PCR
optimization procedure. In addition, approaches such as the touchdown PCR also
an a m paxa a gn soa d go undo ds-a ads s
optimal with regard to primer/template homology.
As a general rule, however, any PCR that will become an established assay in the
laboratory should be properly optimized by a titration method. As described above.
PCR conditions are unique for each assay and are influence by all the components
present on the reaction mix.
Although, the key to successful PCRs lies in the design of appropriate primers
the parameters described above for each PCR component (dNTPs, Mg+², and
enzyme) may also play an important role on the optimization of the PCR.
2.4 The PCR Plateau Effect
Theoretically, the amount of PCR product doubles during each cycle of the PCR
reaction, but, in reality, beyond a certain number of cycles, the efficiency of ampli
fication decreases with increasing cycle number, resulting in the plateau effect, as
shown in Fig. 2.1.
A number of factors may cause the plateau effect, including,
1. Degradation of nucleotides or primers.
2. Inactivation of the DNA polymerase enzyme (half-life is 40 min at 95°C).
be extended.
4. Substrate excess where there is more DNA than the amoumt of enzyme available
to replicate it in the allotted polymerization time.
 5. Competition by non-specific amplification products.
6. Accumulation of inhibitors of polymerase activity, such as pyrophosphates.
The number of PCR cycles at which the plateau effect occurs varies greatly with
the particular DNA sequence being amplified. Length, GC content, and the presence
of any secondary structure in the sequence to be amplified are all important, as is the
initial total quantity and concentration of the target DNA. As a result, the number
of cycles at which the plateau effect occurs must be individually and empirically
determined for each target sequence.
18
2 Traditional PCR
10°
103
10
10-2
10-
10
20
30
40
50
Number of PCR cycles
Fig. 2.1 The plateau effect in PCR
The end-point or Plateau phase should not be used to compare differences in
target quantities, because differences observed in the amount of detectable product
after the plateau effect has been reached are frequently artifacts and may show little
relationship to the quantity of starting target material. Therefore, end point quantifi-
cation of PCR products in plateau phase is unreliable. Only during the exponential
phase of the PCR reaction is it possible to extrapolate back to determine the start-
ing quantity of the target sequence contained in the sample. This is the attribute of
PCR that makes Real-Time Quantitative PCR so necessary. This important differ-
ence between Traditional vs. Quantitative Real Time PCR will be discussed in the
next chapter.
is that an initially low concentration of non-specific products resulting from mis-
priming events may continue to amplify preferentially. Therefore, optimizing the
number of PCR cycles is the best way to avoid amplifying background products.
2.5 Radioisotope-PCR Based Methods
PCR together with other molecular biology techniques is being extensively
used on the identification of molecular markers for disease detection or more
specifically pathogen detection and diagnosis; development of diagnostic tests,
gene expression (i.e. cytokines, growth factors, transcription factors, etc.),
allelic discrimination (detection of single nucleotide polymorphism, SNP) and
genotyping
2.5 Radioisotope-PCR Based Methods
19
Ever since the invention of molecular biology techniques, radionuclide based
methods have been an integral component of their development and they are
molecular techniques have proved to be highly sensitive, specific, robust and cost
effective in various application contexts.
Radioisotopes are used particularly during the detection step, when a need for
high sensitivity and specificity on a test are required. This is due to the fact that
radioisotopes allow detection of minimal quantities of DNA (0.1 pg). They are also
needed when specificity and sensitivity are required during hybridization, a widely
use technique in molecular biology. Moreover, radioisotopes provide a high sensitiv -
ity (125-fold) compared for example with the popular staining systems in molecular
biology, such as ethidium bromide. Also, compared to fuorescent or enzymatic
labels, radioisotopes provide a good "signal to noise"’ ratio and higher specifcity.
The strong signal emitted by radiolabels stands out against the background as com-
pared to the signal emitted from a fuorescent probe. The innate fuorescence in
many biological samples may also lead to high backgrounds in hybridization exper-
iments, e.g., due to the presence of biotin in tissues, when using for example a
 biotinylated probe with streptavidin, a problem of poor signal-to-background ratio
usually occurs.
Several PCR-based molecular biology techniques e.g., dot blot assay, restriction
phism (SSCP), amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP), differential-
display reverse transcription-PCR, mismatch cleavage assay, heteroduplex tracking
assay (HTA), DNA sequencing, microsatellite detection, macroaray chip technol-
ogy, make use of isotopes.
Many radioisotope-based methods can be described as important tools for animal
diseases research and diagnosis. Despite the emergence of altermative methods, as
explain above radioisotopes still offer a better chance when sensitive and specific
assays are required.
2.5.1 Radioisotopic-Based Methods
Various molecular biology methods that use isotopes are described in this section.
They are based on PCR amplification in order to work with a measurable amount of
DNA.
2.5.1.1 PCR Dot-Blot Assay
Dot-blot is a method quite similar to Southerm or Westem Blot, but simplified. As
the technique does not require an electrophoresis step, samples are transferred or
blotted after PCR onto a single membrane as separate dots. The membrane is then
treated with an appropriate radioactive single stranded DNA probe under conditions
favouring the hybridization. Dots having the appropriate DNA or RNA sequence
20
2Traditional PCR
will hybridize with the radioactive probes. These dots are detected by autoradiogra-
phy; the intensity of dot in the autoradiograph corresponds fairly well with the extent
 saa s s n-o s  u sa si  o n m o
for determining the sex of a variety of species of birds, diagnostics of types HIV-1
and HTV-2, and SNP discrimination.
LabelledProbe
032
Membrane
Film
2.5.1.2 DNA Sequencing
In 1975, Sanger introduced his "plus and minus" method for DNA sequencing. This
was a critical transition technique leading to the moderm generation of methods that
have completely dominated sequencing over the past 30 years.
The key to this advance was the use of polyacrylamide gels to separate the
increasing chain length. The method analyzed the products of DNA polymerase
reactions that extended a primer annealed to a single-stranded DNA template.
DNA synthesis to extend the primer was carried out in two sequential DNA poly-
merase reactions. The first was carried out under conditions where synthesis was
slow and asynchronous, resulting in a population of all possible products extend-
ing 1,2,3... up to a few hundred bases. A 32P labelled nucleotide was incorporated
at this step. This product was then divided into eight aliquots and used to prime a
second round of DNA polymerase reactions. In these reactions, synthesis was ter-
triphosphates ("plus" reactions), or else three of the four ("minus" reactions). The
2.5 Radioisotope-PCR Based Methods
21
eight reactions were electrophoresed in adjacent lanes of a 12% acrylamide, 8 M
urea denaturing gel. Following electrophoresis the gel was placed in contact with
molecules differing by a single nucleotide in length could be resolved as discrete
bands on the resulting autoradiograph. This allowed a sequence of 50 bases to be
deduced in a single experiment. The main problem with the method is the difficulty
ning and end of such runs are produced, but no bands are produced for positions
intemal to runs, so run lengths must be estimated from band spacing in the gel. This
becomes unreliable for longer runs.
Maxam and Gilbert developed a DNA sequencing method that was similar to
the Sanger and Coulson method in using polyacrylamide gels to resolve bands
that tenminated at each base throughout the target sequence, but very different
in the way that products ending in a specific base were generated. Their method
started with a double-stranded DNA restriction fragment radiolabeled at one end
s  a  a    a e 
One reaction cleaves at both purines (the "A + G" reaction), one preferentially
at A ("A > G"), one at pyrimidines ("C + T") and one at cytosines only ("C").
Unlike the plus and minus method, the chemical method produced bands for every
sequence position, including those within homopolymer runs. This advantage led
to early widespread adoption of the chemical method following its publication in
February 1977.
The problems with the plus and minus method were solved when Sanger devel-
oped "the dideoxy method" and published it in December 1977. The underlying
concept was to use chain-terminating nucleotide analogs rather than subsets of the
four natural dNTPs to cause base-specific termination of primed DNA synthesis.
 In the original implementation both arabinoside triphosphates and 2',3'-dideoxy
nucleoside triphosphates were tried. These analogs are incorporated in a sequence-
specific manner by E. coli Pol I, but the enzyme is unable to further extend the
growing DNA strand (in the case of the ddNTPs simply because of the lack of a
 3' hydroxyl group). Synthesis was carried out in the presence of all four dNTPs,
one of which was α-32p labelled. Four reactions were set up, each doped with a
chain-terminating analog of one of the dNTPs, at an appropriate concentration. If
the concentration of ddATP, for example, was adjusted so that it was incorporated in
place of the normal dATP ~1 % of the time then a series of chain-terminated prod-
ucts were produced, each ending with an A. Some molecules in the product ended
at each of the A residues in the sequence. When such a product was electrophoresed
on a denaturing 12% acrylamide gel, a series of bands representing the positions of
all A's in the sequence were displayed. Unlike the plus and minus method, bands
were produced for each A within runs of consecutive A residues. When the four
-100 nt in most cases. The dideoxy sequencing method as originally described
was therefore greatly enhanced when Messing and collaborators developed meth-
ods for cloning into the single-stranded phage Ml3. During this period the useful
22
2Traditional PCR
read length of dideoxy sequencing increased from about 100 up to about 400. This
improvement was mainly the result of (i) the use of very thin sequencing gels and
energy of the emitted B particles. Sequencing capacity was also increased by the use
of gels with narrow lanes, typically 48 lanes on a 20 by 45 cm gel. Sequencing reac-
tions could be done manually in 96-well plates with handheld repetitive pipetting
devices. During this period a single person could run 8 gels on a single day, each
with 12 sequence ladders, and obtain some 30 kb of primary sequence data. But it
was difficult to do this more than about twice a week (Fig. 2.2).
Strand tobe sequenced
G
Prepare fourreactionmixtures;
includeineacha different
replication-stopping nucleotide
Replication
productsof
"C"reaction
Separate
productsby
gelelectrophoresis
Primer
Primer
8?
Primer
Read seqenceas
complementof bands
G
ATTCAGCAGGACTA
containing labeledstrands
modified radio-labelled dNTPs that terminate the reaction when they are incorporated into the
nascent strand. The radio-labelled fragments produced are then separated using polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis
Bibliography
1. Bell, DA, DeMarini, DM. 1991. Excessive cycling converts PCR products to random-length
higher molecular weight fragments. Nucleic Arids Res., 19, 5079.
2 Breslauer, KJ, Frank, R, Blbcker, H, Marky, LA. 1986. Predicting DNA duplex stability from
the base sequence. Pror. Natl. Arad. Sri. USA, 83,3746-50.
Bibliography
23
3. Cheng, S. 1994. Long PCR. Nature, 369, 684-5
4. Cheng, S. 1995. Template integrity is essential for PCR amplification of 20- to 30-kb
sequences from genomic DNA. PCR Methods Appl., 4 (5), 294-8
5. Cheng, S. 1994. Effective amplification of long targets from cloned inserts and human
genomic DNA. PNAS., 91, 5695-9
6.Chou, Q, Russell, M, Birch, DE, Raymond, J, Bloch, W. 1992. Prevention of pre-PCR mis
priming and primer dimerization improves low-copy-number amplifications. Nucleic Acids
Res., 20, 1717-23
7. Cobb, BD, Clarkson, JM. 1994. A simple prcedure for optimizing the polymerase chain
reaction using modified Taguchi methods Nucleic Arids Res., 22 (18), 3801-5
8. D'Aquila, RT, Bechtel, LJ, Videler, JA, Eron, J, Gorczyca, P, Kaplan, JC. 1991. Maximizing
sensitivity and specificity of PCR preamplification heating. Nucleic Arids Res., 19, 3749
9. Demmler, GJ, Buffone, GJ, Schimbor, CM, May, RA. 1988. Detection of cytomegalovirus in
urine from newborns by using polymerase chain reaction DNA amplification. J. Infect. Dis.,
158, 1177-84.
10. Eckert, KA, Kunkel, TA. 1991. The fidelity of DNA polymerases used in the polymerase chain
reactions. In PCR A Practical Approach; Eds. Mcpherson MJQuirke PTaylor GR, IRL Press,
Oxford.
11. Erlich, HA, Gelfand, D, Sninsky, J. 1991. Recent advances in the polymerase chain reaction.
Srience, 252, 1643-51
12. Foord, O. 1994. Long-distance PCR. PCR Methods Appl., 3 (6), S149-S161
13. Fujiwara, H. 1995. PCR with deoxyinosine-containing primers using DNA polymerases with
proofreading activity.PCR Methods Appl., 4 (4), 239-40
the Taq DNA polymerase: A high yield protocol. BioTechniques, 10, 35-39
15. Gelfand, DH. 1989. TaqDNA polymerase. In PCR Technology Principles and Applications
for DNA Amplification; Ed. Erlich HA, Stocktom Press, New York, NY
16.Gelfand, DH, White, TJ. 1990. Thermostable DNA polymerases. In PCR protocols a guide to
methods and applications; Eds. Innis, MAGelfand, DHSninsky, JWhite, TJ, Academic Press,
NewYork
17. Her, C. 1995. Rapid Restriction Mapping by use of long PCR. BioTechniques, 19 (4), 530-2
18. Holland, PM, Abramson, RD, Watson, R, Gelfand, DH. 1991. Detection of specifc poly-
merase chain reaction product by utilizing the 5′ -> 3' exonuclease activity of Thermus
aquaticus DNA polymerase. Proc. Natl. Arad. Sri., USA, 88, 7276-80
19. Hoof van Huijsduijnen, RAM, Ayala, G., DeLamarter, F. 1992. A means to reduce the
complexity of oligonucleotides encoding degenerate peptides. Nucleic Arids Res., 20, 919
20. Innis, MA, Gelfand, DH, Sninsky, JJ (eds), 1995. PCR Strategies. Academic Press, Inc,
Califomia, USA.
21.Innis, MA, Mayambo, KB, Gelfand, DH, Brow, MAD. 1988. DNA sequencing with Thermus
aquaticus DNA polymerase and direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction-amplified
DNA.Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci., USA,85, 9436-40
22. Jones, DH, Winistorfer, C. 1992. Sequence specific generation of a DNA panhandle permits
PCR amplification of unknown flanking DNA. Nucleic Arids Res., 20, 595-600
23. Koike, K, Urata, Y, Koike, M. Human Pyruvate Dehydrogenase beta-subunit-gene, complete
cds. Un published data, EMBL accession number D90086
24. Kwok, S. 1991. A guide to the design and use of mismatched and degenrate primers. PCR
Methods Appl.,3 (4),S39-S47
25. Kwok, S, Kellogg, DE, McKinney, N, Spasic, D, Goda, L, Levenson, C, Sninsky, J.
1990. Effects of primer-template mismatches on the polymerase chain reaction: human
immunodeficiency virus type I model studies. Nucleic Acids Res., 18, 999-1005
26. Lawyer, FC, Stoffel, S, Saiki, RK, Mayambo, K, Drummond, R, Gelfand, DH. 1989. Isolation.
characterization, and expression in Escherichia coli of the DNA polymerase gene from
Thermus aquaticus. J Biol. Chem., 246, 6427-37
24
2 Traditional PCR
27. McPherson T. PCR with highly degenerate primers PCR: A Practical approach. Ed.
McPherson T. 1991, Oxford University, New York, pp. 171-86
28. Mertz LM. 1994. Nucleotide imbalance and PCR: Effects on DNA amplification and synthesis
of high specific activity radiolabeled DNA probes. Anal. Biochem., 221, 160-65
29. Mezei, LM. 1990. Efect of oil overlay on PCR amplifcation. Amplifications a Forum for
PCR Users, 4, 11-13
30. Mullis, KB. 1991. The polymerase chain reaction in an anemic mode: How to avoid cold
oligodeoxyribonuclear fusion. PCR Methods Appl., 1, 1-4
31. Mullis, KB, Faloona, FA. 1987. Specific synthesis of DNA in vitro via a polymerase-catalyzed
chain reaction. Methods Enzymol., 155, 335-50
32. Peterson MG, Tjian R. 1993. Cross-species polymerase chain reaction: Cloning of TATA box-
binding proteins. Methods Enzymol., 218, Anonymous Academic Press, 493-507.
33. Rappolee, DA. 1990. Optimizing the sensitivity of RT-PCR. Amplifications A Forum for PCR
Users, 4, 5-7
34.Reischl, U, Wittwer, C, Cockerill, F. (eds), 2002. Rapid cycle real-time PCR. Methods and
applications. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.
35. Roux, K. 1994. Using mismarched primer-template pairs in touchdown PCR. BioTechniques,
16 (5), 812-4
36. Roux, K. 1995. Optimization and troubleshooting in PCR. PCR Methods Appl. 4 (5),
S185-S194
37. Rolfs, A, Schuller, I, Finckh, U Weber-Rolfs, I. (eds), 1992. PCR: Clinical diagnostics and
research. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.
38. Ruano, G, Brash, DE, Kidd, KK. 1991. PCR: The first few cycles. Amplifications A Forum
for PCR Users, 7, 1-4
39. Rychlik, W. 1995. Priming effciency in PCR. BioTechniques, 18 (1), 84-90
40. Rychlik, W, Spencer, WJ, Rhoads, RE. 1990. Optimization of the annealing temperature for
DNA amplification in vitro. Nucleic Acids Res., 18, 6409-12
41. Rychlik, W, Rhoads, RE. 1989. A computer program for choosing optimal oligonucleotides
8543-51
42. Saiki, RK, Gelfand, DH, Stoffel, S, Scharf, SJ, Higuchi, R, Horn, GT, Mullis, KB, Erlich, HA.
1988. Primer-directed enzymatic amplification of DNA with a thermostable DNA polymerase.
Srience,239,487-91.
43.Saiki,RK,Scharf, S,Faloona,F, Mullis,KB,Horn,GT, Erlich,HA,Arnheim, N. 1985.
Enzymatic amplification of B-globin genomic sequences and restriction site analysis for
diagnosis of sickle cell anemia. Srienre, 230, 1350-54
44. Sambrook, J, Fritsch, EF, Maniatis, T. 1989. Molecular cloning. A laboratory manual,
2.Edition, CSH
45. Shibata, D, Martin, WJ, Appleman, MD, Causey, DM, Leedom, JM, Arnheim, N.1988.
Detection of cytomegalovirus DNA in peripheral blood of patients infected with human
immunodeficiency virus. J Infect. Dis., 158, 1185-92
46. Sommer, R, Tautz, D. 1989. Minimal homology requirements for PCR primers. Nucleic Acids
Res., 16,6749
47. Steffen, C. (ed), 1999. PCR Applications Manual, 2nd edition. Roche Diagnostics GmbH,
Mannheim, Germany.
48. Taylor, GR. 1991. Polymerase chain reaction: basic principles and automation. In PCR a
practical approach; Eds. Mcpherson, MJ, Quirke, P, Taylor, GR, IRL Press, Oxford
49. Thein, SL, Wallace, RB. 1986. The use of synthetic oligonucleotides as specific hybridisation
Eds. Davis K.E. IRL Press, Herndon, Virginia
50. Tindall, KR, Kunkel, TA. 1988. Fidelity of DNA synthesis by the Thermus aquaticus DNA
polymerase. Biochemistry,27,6008-13
Bibliography
25
51.
Walsh, P. 1992. Preferential PCR Amplification of Alleles: Mechanisms and Solutions. PCR
Methods Appl., 1 (4), 241-50
52.
temperatures.NucleicAcids Res.,19,1713
53. White, BA.(ed), 1993. PCR protocols. In Methods in Molecular Biology, volume 15. Humana
Press, New Jersey
Chapter 3
Real-Time PCR - The Basic Principles
Contents
3.1 Traditional PCR Versus Real Time PCR
27
3.1.1 PCR Kinetics
28
3.2 Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction . .
29
3.2.1 Primer Sets and Probe Design .
29
3.2.2 PCR Components and Assay Optimization . .
31
3.2.3 Real-Time Fluorescense Reporters . .
32
3.2.4 Melting Curve Dissociation Analysis
35
3.2.5 Probe-Based Chemistry
36
3.2.6 FRET-Based Hybridisation Probes
85
3.2.7 Scorpion Primers
40
3.2.8 LAMP
42
Bibliography . .
43
3.1 Traditional PCR Versus Real Time PCR
Conventional PCR is a powerful technique that allows exponential amplification
of DNA sequences. A PCR reaction needs a pair of primers that are complemen-
tary to the sequence of interest. Primers are extended by the DNA polymerase. The
copies produced after the extension,so called amplicons,are re-amplified with the
same primers leading thus to an exponential amplification of the DNA molecules.
After amplification,gelelectrophoresis is used to analyse the amplified PCRprod
ucts and this makes conventional PCR time consuming;since the reaction must
finish before proceeding with the post-PCR analysis.Real Time PCR overcome this
problem, because of its ability to measure the PCR amplicons at early states of
the reaction as they are accumulate in a “Real Time Detection" mode thus mea-
suring the amount of PCR product where the reaction is stillin the exponential
phase (QPCR).
E.A. Pestana et al., Early, Rapid and Sensitive Veterinary Molecular Diagnostics -
27
Real Time PCR Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7_3,
Published by Springer Science+Business Media B.V, Dordrecht 2010. All Rights Reserved.
28
3 Real-Time PCR - The Basic Principles
Real Time PCR allows detection and quantitative measurement of products gen-
erated during each cycle of the PCR process that are directly proportional to the
amount of the template DNA before the start of the PCR process. Such chemistry
requires the use of a method to detect the product formed on each cycle and of a
thenmocycler that is adapted to record the results obtained on each amplification
cycle in a Real Time manner.
3.1.1PCRKinetics
Differences between conventional PCR and QPCR are much easier to understand
when the kinetics of the PCR reaction are examined. Let us imagine we have
three replicates. As such all samples will begin the PCR cycling process with the
same conditions: the same quantity of all PCR components and the same DNA
concentration.
A conventional PCR reaction usually steps into 3 phases: the exponential, the
non-exponential and plateau or end-point phase (Fig. 3.1).
At the beginning of each PCR reaction, all components are present in a suffi-
and fresh components are present, amplification occurs in an exponential manner.
that is the reaction proceed doubling the quantity of initial DNA with every other
cycle. As the cycles progress and reagent components of the reaction start to be
depleted, the reaction will begin to slow down and the PCR product will no longer
be doubled in every cycle, and the non-exponential amplification occurs where sam-
ples begin to diverge in their quantities. After several rounds of amplification, the
PCR reaction will no longer generate template due to the lack of critical components
 in the reaction, what it is commonly known as the plateau phase or end-point of the
PCR reaction.
0.3
Exponential phase
 Non-exponential
plateau phase 
.2
0.1
CT value
Threshold line
0
20
30
40
Cycle
Fig. 3.1 Amplification plot. Baseline fuorescence is subtracted
3.2Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction
29
All samples that started with the same quantity of all PCR components and DNA
concentration at the beginning of the reaction will end up at different points in
the plateau phase, due to the different kinetics each sample had during cycling.
Therefore, it is more precise to take measurements during the exponential phase.
where the replicates samples are amplifying exponentially. In conventional PCR, the
products are analyzed by size-fractionation of the amplicons by gel electrophoresis
and ethidium bromide. This process therefore will measure the final DNA obtained
during the PCR reaction, which can be compared to measuring the DNA in the
since the PCR gives essentially the same amount of product independently of the
initial amount of DNA template molecules that were present.
Note that End-point detection is very time consuming since we must wait until
the PCR reaction is finished to load it onto a gel for quantification. In this sense,
Real time Quantitative PCR is also more effective than conventional PCR since no
post-PCR processing of PCR products is needed, and thus chances of carryover
contamination are reduced and efficiency is achieved in a high throughput manner.
Since its invention, PCR has evolved from being monitored on gel electrophore
sis, to a reliable and easy to used method for detection and quantification of nucleic
P  (  a no    a a ans r
PCR, allows PCR product accumulation being measured via different fuorescent
chemistries that arises during the amplification process. Such chemistries will be
analyzed in detail later on.
3.2 Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction
3.2.1 Primer Sets and Probe Design
The first step in designing a primer is to obtain the sequence of the gene of interest.
Several numbers of public databases, such as the NCBI, offer help to achieve that.
After the sequence is obtained, software to design primers is used to simplify and
maximize the success for the design process. Softwares are coupled with the rules
making this process simple and reliable. Software programs can be easily and freely
obtained from Intermet or through most oligonucleotide vendors.
The next step is to consider carefully the area of the gene to be used
as the detection template. Regions with secondary structures or long repetitive
nucleotides should be avoided. When coding regions are considered as targets,
it is advisable to design primers that allow differentiation between the ampli-
fed product of cDNA and an amplified product derived from contaminating
genomicDNA.
There are two approaches on designing the required primers. The first one is to
design primers that anneal to sequences in exons on both sides of an intron. With
w uey ael n aq lm n onuoag uoy paydue ponpod Aue 'sad yns
product amplified from intronless mRNA. The second altemative is to make primers
that span exon/exon boundaries on the mRNA, in that way amplification of genomic
30
3 Real-Time PCR -The Basic Principles
DNA is avoided. Chemical treatment of the sample with DNAse prior to the RT step
is also a good approach.
Primers and probes should be selected in a region with G/C contents of 20
80%. Lower G/C content is preferred. Generally, higher performance is achieved
when the region spanned by primers is between 50 to 150 bp in length for probe-
based chemistries, and between 100-400 bp in length if SYBR? Green I is used.
When using probe based chemistries, the target for amplification should be keep as
Green I, which binds to double strand, shorter targets are also advantageous in
tenms of an efficient amplification, however, longer fragments will produced higher
Huorescent signal, due to more dye molecules binding and will improve detection
sensitivity.
As in a conventional PCR set up, primers should be between 15 to 30 bp in
length, and the theoretical Tm between the primers should not exceed 2 degrees
between them. It is also advisable to avoid any secondary structures such as G/C
clamps at the 3'end of the primers to avoid self-folding or non-specific anmealing.
The five bases at the 5' terminal end should not contain more than two guanines
 o  s           s n
pyrimidines are adjacent. Since thymidine tends to miss-prime more readily than
the other bases, a 3' terminal T should be avoided if possible. The 5' end of
the primers should also not contain an inverted repeat sequence that would allow
it to fold on itself. Finally, it is important to check all primers and probes to
make sure they do not anneal with other targets, and thus to avoid false positive
results.
3.2.1.1 Primer Secondary Structures
Hairpin: △G = - 3.1 kcal/mol
CGTAGTGT - 5'
A
GCATCACGCACAC - 3'
Hairpins are formed by intra-molecular interaction within the primer. These
structures should be avoided when designing Real-Time PCR primers.
Primer Self-dimer: AG = 6.59 kcal/mol
5'-GGGAAAATTCCAGGATCTAGC-3
三三三
5'-CGATCTAGGACCTTAAAAGGG- 5'
Self dimers are formed by intermolecular interactions between the two (same
sense) primers, where the primer is homologous to itself. When this structures are
present, large amount of primers are needed in PCR, and thus the product yield is
reduce.
3.2Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction
31
Cross-dimer: AG =6.59
5'-TGTGATGCAGCATCACGCACAC -
11I1
3' - CTACGTCGACTCTGATAGCTACG -
Cross dimers are fonmed by intenmolecular interaction between sense and
antisense primers, where they are homologous.
3.2.2PCR Components and Assay Optimization
 s a ss  a s ss   a 
when optimizing a conventional PCR reaction. The variations are according to the
chemistry selected to detect the newly amplified DNA. Detailed information for
optimisation of each of the components is detailed below. Starting with the most
important component for the successfulness of the QPCR reaction, the steps usually
follow for standardisation are:
· Optimization of primers sets and probes, Identification of the correct concentra-
tion and evaluation of possible secondary structures (SYBR?) green I).
· Magnesium chloride and nucleotide concentration.
● Assay efficiency: Analysis of the slope of a DNA standard dilution series.
· Assay precision: Replicate number (Triplicates are always recommended).
There are a number of companies that offer QPCR master mixes, but PCR
reagents can be also purchased separately and in this case optimisation plays an
important role on the success of the reaction. PCR components can be bought from
efficiency and speed of amplification, and according to the type of chemistry to
 s  s     axa  a    a
chemistry, then a polymerase with 5' to 3' exonuclease activity is required. Usually
proofreading enzymes are not needed, and should not be used with probe base chem-
istry because they use a 3' to 5' exonuclease activity to eliminate miss-incorporated
bases, and thus they can digest the probe
To start with the validation and optimisation, the first element to be taken into
consideration is a good starting control template. Most commonly purified PCR
fragments, genomic DNA, or cDNAs can be used as controls. Once a control source
has been identified, it is time to play with the rest of the PCR components.
The first component that needs to be evaluated is the PCR primer concentra-
tion. Primer concentrations need to be adjusted according to the template used
on the reaction, and the chemistry being used on each assay. For SYBR green
I, usually low primer concentrations are needed to avoid primer-dimer formation.
Most SYBR? green assays use primer concentrations from 50 to 300 nM. For
 Fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) probes, such TaqMan or Molecular
Beacons, ranges from 50 to 600 nM should be enough for standardisation of the
probe.
32
3 Real-Time PCR -The Basic Principles
Primer optimisation can be easily achieved by the use of SYBR? green I.
SYBR? green I is a double strand binding dye. When SYBR? green I is added 
to a QPCR reaction, the generation of specific and unspecific products is visualized
 on the melting curve formed after the amplification is finished. As a result, SYBR?
              
also primer specificity at different concentrations. When performing an assay with
TaqMan technology, primer pairs should be design to contain no secondary struc
tures that can jeopardize the reaction later. In this sense SYBR green I can help to
determine primer performance before ordering the probe. This is an important asset
since redesigning the primers would also imply the redesigning of the probe, and
therefore running this assay prior ordering the probe is highly recommended.
When analyzing different primer combinations, the primer concentration indi-
cating the lowest Ct values should be chosen. Melting curves should generate a
single peak of PCR product. The overall performance of the QPCR is determined
by the use of serial dilutions of a template control, procedure known as standard
curve. Standard curves help to determine the efficiency, accuracy and sensitivity of
the primers and probes. Standard curves are generated diluting the template control
into two to ten fold dilution series. Dilution series in triplicates are recommended to
evaluate reproducibility and possible pipetting errors.
After QPCR amplification, efficiency is calculated by using the slope of the stan-
dard curve. Thriving efficiency is achieved when the amount of template control is
doubling with each cycle. The standard curve plot of the log of starting template
vs. PCR cycles should also generate a linear fit with a slope between -3.1 and -3.6,
thus this results indicating reaction efficiency of 96- 110%.
If, after primer and probe standardization the assay is still not performing well,
concentrations within a range of 3.5-5.5 mM are suitable for TaqMan and Molecular
Beacons assays. For SYBR green I 1.5-3.5 mM range of Magnesium chloride is
recommended. If the reaction is still not performing as desired, primers are probes
should be redesign.
3.2.3Real-TimeFluorescenseReporters
Most commonly used chemistries available for QPCR are SYBR? Green I,
TaqMan, Molecular Beacons, and Scorpions. The chose of a particular chem
istry will depend on the experimental design and objectives of the experiment.
Each fuorescence reporter has its own advantages and shortcomings. To simplify
the explanation of each technology, we will divide the available chemistry into
two groups. The DNA binding dyes, and the Probe-based chemistries. All these
chemistries will allow the detection of newly PCR products formed via the fluoresce
signal generated. Classical intercalators such as SYBR? Green I are non-specifc
labelers; as they bind to any double-stranded DNA. Sequence specific probes such
as TaqMan, Molecular Beacons and Scorpions use the presence of a Fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) probe as a reporter system, and the 5’ exonucle-
ase activity of the DNA polymerase to detect PCR amplification in Real-Time. We
will examine all of them in detail.
3.2 Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction
3.2.3.1 DNA Binding Dyes, SYBR? Green I
Advantages
The fuorescence intensity measured is proportionate to the amount of PCR
products produced.
Can monitor the amplification of any dsDNA
Since no specific probe is required, the set-up time and costs are reduced
Disadvantages
Is a non-specific dye, binds to any dsDNA, therefore can generate false positive
signals coming from primer-dimer formation or non-specific products
Requires the analysis of the melting curve at the end of the amplifica-
tion reaction to check for possible primer-dimer or non-specific product
formation
SYBR? green I is a cost effective dye, compared to other chemistry's, and easy
to use, which allows the initial optimization of primers for any QPCR chemistry.
When SYBR? green I is free in solution displays relatively low fuorescence lev-
els, but when dsDNA is added, the fuorescence increases over 1000-fold. As the
accumulation of newly PCR amplicons increases with the reaction cycles, the inten-
to the dsDNA, and thus the accumulation of product can be measured on real time
(Fig. 3.2).
Unbound SYBR GreenI
Bound SYBR GreenI
PCR
Fig. 3.2 DNA binding dyes in Real time PCR. Fluorescence dramatically increases when the dye
molecule binds to DNA. (Courtesy of Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.)
34
3 Real-Time PCR - The Basic Principles
SYBR? green I assays depend exclusively of the designed primers. If the primer
pairs are designed not to produce non-specific-binding, secondary structures or
dimers, then optimization of the amplification efficiency and specificity are straight-
forward steps. As sometimes non-specific signal cannot be avoided, it is important
after every assay to analyse the melting curve. The ability of the SYBR? green I
to bind dsDNA, and be free in the reaction as ssDNA is formed, it is used to allow
the formation of the melting curve. During denaturation, PCR products are melted
(ssDNA) to allow the polymerase to anneal. During this step as the temperature
rises, the fuorescence recorded will also decrease. The melting temperature (Tm)
depends in part of the base composition of the product formed. All PCR products
for a particular primer set should have the same melting temperature, unless there
is a contamination, mispriming, or primer-dimer artefacts. As mentioned before,
SYBR? green I has not the capability to distinguish between one DNA and another,
and thus observing similar melting curves at the end of the PCR is important. If
the PCR molecules formed are homogeneous in length, a single thermal transition
should be detected (a single curve). On the contrary, if more than one of the PCR
products formed are not homogeneous; multiple thenmal transitions will be observed
(Fig. 3.3).
After Real-Time PCR is finished, the thermocycler can be adapted to perfonm
a melting curve by means of increasing the temperature by a fraction of a degree
and the measuring of the change in fuorescence. At the melting point, the two
strands of DNA separate and the signal fuorescence decreases. The software
plots the rate of change of the relative fuorescence units (RFU) with the time (T)
A
B
180
160
140
120
R
02
5254565860626466687072747678808284868890929496
Temperature, Celsius
Fig. 3.3 Melt-curve analysis of reaction product from a SYBR? Green assay. The melt curve
analysis function of real-time instruments can be used to distinguish specific products from non-
specific products. A. The negative first derivative of the change in fuorescence is plotted as a
function of temperature. The two peaks indicate the Tm values of the two PCR products. B. Gel
analysis of the PCR products. Lane 1, AmpliSize 50-2000 base pairs (bp) molecular ruler. Lanes
2 and 3, two replicates of PCR product from the reaction shown in A. The two PCR products are
revealed as separate bands in the gel. (Courtesy of Bio-Rad)
3.2 Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction
5E
(-d(RFU)/dT) on the Y-axis versus the temperature of the X-axis, and this will peak
at the melting temperature (Tm). The sensitivity of detection with SYBR?-Green
I may be compromised by the formation of primer-dimers, lack of specificity of
the primers, primer concentration (which can be limiting) and the formation of
secondary structures in the PCR product. All of these factors could lead to the
creation of unexpected double-stranded DNA product, which would incorporate
SYBR?-Green I and register a fuorescent signal. For example, if a curved is
formed at the left side of the main melting curve, this, in most cases indicates the
presence of primer-dimmer artefacts, giving a peak with lower melting temperature,
as the formed artefact is a very short DNA.
Optimisation of the primer concentration is therefore essential. Primer concen-
tration is usually determined to be optimal when specific amplification relative to
primer-dimers is maximal in a positive versus negative control experiment. The
primers should be selected to give a product (amplicon) of 100-400 bp. SYBR@
Green dye fuorescence depends on the presence of double-stranded DNA, there-
fore products should not be too short. If necessary, primers that generate amplicons
as small as 100 bp may also be acceptable. The concentration of the primers should
not be so high; usually it is advisable to start with low primer concentrations to avoid
both mispriming and dimerization. Template regions with obvious secondary struc-
tures or long runs of the same nucleotide should be avoided when designing primers.
It is advisable to avoid a 3' tenminal T on primers if possible. The reason for this is
that thymidine tends to misprime more readily than other bases, and thus annealing
of the primer at other_places on the genome can occur giving race to non-specific
amplification. SYBR green is usually used for optimization of primers prior to
ordering the sequence specific probe. As the probe is expensive, it is advisable to
always check the efficiency of the primers.
3.2.4 Melting Curve Dissociation Analysis
During the PCR reaction, amplicons that are being formed are going through cycles
of denaturaturation (usually at 95°C) and annealing (usually around 50-55°C), and
they are subject to gradual increases in temperature to give increases I amplicon
through denaturation, These gradual increases are monitored as changes in fuores
cence (as SYBR@ green will intercalate at 55°C and dissociate at 95°C) and are
recorded and plotted against the temperature.
When analysing a melting curve one should focus on two aspects, the presence
of a single melting product and in evaluating the NTC sample for primer dimmer
formation. If these two parameters are reliable, then the CTs obtained can be trusted
as accurate.
The SYBR? Green I dye chemistry can be used for the following assay types:
· One-step RT-PCR for RNA quantitation
● Two-step RT-PCR for RNA quantitation
· DNA/cDNA quantitation
36
3 Real-Time PCR - The Basic Principles
3.2.5 Probe-Based Chemistry
Probe-based chemistries are more specific for detection due to the fact that they
of interest. All probes rely on the close proximity of a quenching dye to the
reporter dye. The effect is called Foerster Resonance Transfer or Fluorescence
tion causes an increase in fuorescence that is proportional to product formation.
However, FRET probes rely on the formation of a quenching interaction and
quantification relies on measuring an increase in Huorescent signal ongoing with
PCR product amplification. Compared to SYBR? Green, all probes are more
 ona ao anba Aa pu aisudxa a an an ng 'rgs
optimization.
3.2.5.1 FRET-based Hydrolysis Probes, TaqMan Probes
Advantages of TaqMan Chemistry
Specific hybridization between probe and target is required to generate fuores
cent signal.
Probes can be labelled with different, distinguishable reporter dyes, which
allows amplification of multiple distinct sequences in one reaction tube.
Post-PCR processing is eliminated, which reduces assay labor and material
costs.
Disadvantages of TaqMan Chemistry
TaqMan chemistry requires the synthesis of different probes for different
sequences, making the assay specific, but at the same time expensive.
Probe-based assay design can be more challenging than SYBR green assay
set up.
TaqMan probes consist of a single-stranded oligonucleotide that is complemen-
tary to a sequence within the target template. The probe has a fuorescent dye at
its 5' end, whose signal is silenced by a quencher dye molecule, e.g. the Black
Hole Quencher (BHQ), at the 3' end. TaqMan probes use a FRET (Fluorescence
Resonance Energy Transfer) as a quenching device, so as long as the quencher and
the fuorescent dye are on close proximity, quenching will occur. Soon after the
TaqMan probe hybridizes to one of the strands on the template, it is digested by
the 5' exonuclease activity of the Tag DNA polymerase as it extends the amplifica-
tion primers. Cleaving of the probe releases the fuorescent dye from the quencher,
resulting in an irreversible increase in the fuorescence signal. Fluorescence will
increase as the PCR cycles progress, proportional to the rate of probe cleavage and
ideally proportional to the rate of amplified DNA.
3.2 Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction
37
3.2.5.2 TaqMan Probe Design Guidelines
1. Probes should not contain more than 3 consecutive runs of the same base, and
should contain more C than G nucleotides, due to the strong interaction that
G displays with itself. Guanine is a very effective fuorescent quencher and
therefore, should not be adjacent to the reporter dye.
2. TaqMan probes should be place as close as possible towards the 5' end of the
amplicon. The reason for this is that the closer the probe to the 5' end, the sooner
the probe will be cleaved thus giving an immediate signal.
3. The size of the probe should be between 20 and 30 bp in length, and have balance
GC content. Tn requirements of the probe are most often dictating the specific
%GC; TaqMan probe Tm and the Tm targets without the primers annealing at the
same time, so this step is performed at a temperature too high for the primers to
anneal. When the temperature of the reaction is at the anneal step, the primers
will extend and cleave off the probe (Fig. 3.4).
During annesling,theTeqMan prcbe bindsto the
tergetsequence
Extersion
During extensicn,the prcbeispertielly diepleced
and therepcrteris cleaved.Thefreerepcrter
flucresces
R
R
Repcrter
Q
Cuencher
Fig.3.4 TaqMan Assay (Courtesy of Bio-Rad)
The advantage of using a TaqMan probe is the high specificity, the high signal to
noise ratio and the ability to detect multiple sequences in one reaction. This might
be of impact and quite benefitial when the DNA material is very rare.
3.2.5.3 MGB TaqMan Probe
This is a variant of the original TaqMan chemistry, with the addition of a Minor
Groove Binder (MGB) at the 3' end that stabilise the Tm of the probe, and thus
a shorter probe can be used (from 30 down to 13 bp), which makes them bet-
ter suited for allelic discrimination applications so called SNPs (single nucleotide
polymorphism).
38
3 Real-Time PCR -The Basic Principles
The TaqMan chemistry can be used for the following assay types:
Quantitation, including:
One-step RT-PCR for RNA quantitation
Two-step RT-PCR for RNA quantitation
DNA/cDNA quantitation
Allele discrimination: SNP genotyping assays
3.2.6FRET-BasedHybridisationProbes
3.2.6.1 Molecular Beacons
Advantages
Lower background, greater specificity
Disadvantages
More difficult to design and optimize
Molecular beacons are single-stranded oligonucleotide hybridization probes that
form a stem and a loop structure. The loop contains a probe sequence that is com-
plementary to a target sequence, similar to the TaqMan probe. The stem structure is
formed by addition of 5-6 bases forming complementary arms that are located on
either side of the probe sequence, and are annealing to each other. A fuorophore
is covalently linked to the end of one anm and a quencher is covalently linked to
the end of the other arm. The stem keeps these two moieties in close proximity to
each other, causing the fuorescence of the fuorophore to be quenched by energy
transfer.
Since the quencher moiety is a non-fuorescent chromophore and emits the
energy that it receives from the Huorophore as heat, the probe is unable to fuo-
resce. When the probe encounters a target molecule, it forms a hybrid that is longer
and more stable than the stem and its rigidity and length preclude the simultaneous
existence of the stem hybrid. Thus, the molecular beacon undergoes a spontaneous
conformational reorganization that forces the stem apart, and causes the fuorophore
and the quencher to move away from each other, leading to the restoration of
fuorescence.
Molecular Beacons do not rely on the exonuclease activity of the Taq polymerase,
and so traditional 3 steps PCR is suitable for this purpose. During the extension
step at 72?C, the Taq polymerase will extend the sequence to where the molecular
beacon probe is annealed, displacing the probe, and so once in solution the probe
will reassume its stem-loop conformation.
When designing the probe two issues should be carefully considered. The stem
structure should not be too stable, otherwise target hybridization can be inhib-
ited. The stem-loop structure should always be refolded in the same stem-loop
conformation after displacement. When this process does not occur, the fuo-
rochome and quencher will not quench proper, and signal is always observed
(Fig. 3.5).
3.2 Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction
39
Molecularbeeccns are haipinprobeswith
reporter and quencher
During anneeling.the probebinds to the
target sequence to seperatereporter and
quencher.Thereporterflucresces
Repcrter
Quencher
Fig. 3.5 Molecular Beacons (Courtesy of Bio-Rad)
3.2.6.2 Probe Design
Molecular Beacons are design to anneal at 7-10?C higher than the primers, to allow
hybridization before the primers are extended.
The stem sequence should be of about 5-7 bp long and should have a similar
Tm to the melting temperature of the probe region in the loop. There is a general
consensus about the size of the stem sequence and the Tm that will be generated.
Usually, 5 bp long stem will have a Tm of 55-60°C, 6 bp long stems have a 60-65°C
Tm, and 7 bp long stems will have a 65-70?C Tm. It is also advisable to check the
correct folding or stem-loop structure of the Beacon in a simulation folding program
like "'mfold'. Typically, the Beacon is designed to anneal in the middle of the target
sequence (which is the region comprise between the two primers). This is important
 to guarantee that in an event of any low-activity extension by the Taq polymerase,
during the annealing step, will not displace the probe before the fuorescence reading
is taken.
Molecular Beacons can be used for the following assay types:
·SNP analysis
· Real-time Nucleic acid detection
●Real-time PCR quantification
●Allelic discrimination
● Multiplex assays
●Diagnostic clinical assays
40
3 Real-Time PCR - The Basic Principles
3.2.7 Scorpion Primers
Advantages
Lower backgroumd, greater specificity.
Scorpions do not depend upon enzymatic cleavage and, therefore, rapid PCR
cycling is possible.
Disdvantages
Much more difficult than TaqMan or Molecular Beacons to design and optimize.
Scorpion-probe chemistry is very similar to the ones described in the Molecular
Beacon section, they consist of a stem-loop or hairpin loop configuration when
they are not hybridised. The stem sequences that are keeping the hairpin loop
configuration are located on the 5' and 3' sides of the probe. Additionally, a fu-
orophore is attached to the 5'-end and is quenched by a moiety attached to the
 3'-end of the loop. The loop contains the specific probe sequence. The difference
between Beacons and Scorpions lies on that there is no need for a separate probe.
Scorpions incorporate 2 new elements: a PCR primer and a non-amplifier monomer
  a a a    s    
the system needed for detection (primer and probe) are contained in one single
element.
After extension of the Scorpion primer, the specific probe sequence is able to
bind to its complement within the same strand of DNA. This hybridization event
opens the hairpin loop so that Huorescence is no longer quenched and an increase in
signal is observed. The non-amplifier monomer prevents read-through, which could
lead to opening of the hairpin loop in the absence of the specific target sequence
Such read-through would lead to the detection of non-specific PCR products, e.g.
primer dimers or mispriming events.
Since the annealing of the loop sequence with the PCR product is an intramolec-
ular interaction, it is kinetically more favorable than probe systems that contain
two separated molecules that interact (probe and template). This is the reason why
Scorpion usually result in higher fuorescence signal when compared to TaqMan
and Molecular Beacons. Since Scorpions don't use the 5'-3' exonuclease activity, a
three step PCR cycling protocol is usually preferred.
3.2.7.1 Probe Design Specifications
Scorpion probes should be of approximately 17-30 bp length and it is advisable to
place the probe no more than 11 bp upstream of the complementary target sequence.
Usually when the complementary sequence is located too far away downstream, the
ns doo s a go "y a mo n said noa un mn  
to be 5-10°C higher than the Tm of the primer sequence to the target. Moreover, this
3.2 Optimising a Real-Time PCR Reaction
41
The Scorpions primer acts as a prcbe.
The intactprimerfome ahairpin so thatthe
quenched reporter doesnotfluoreece
During anneaing.the hairpin primerbinds
to the template, and is then extended
During subsequent denaturation,the reporter
separates from thequencherand the lcop
sequence binds to the internal targetsequence.
The reporter on the eortended Scorpions primer
fuoresces
R
Reporter
Quencher
PCRblocker
Fig. 3.6 Scorpion probes (Courtesy of Bio-Rad)
will allow the Gibb's free energy (G) to be negative enough to allow proper folding
of the stem loop (Fig. 3.6).
Scorpions can be used for the following assay types:
QPCR (Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction): As explained above, the sys-
tem consists of one Scorpion primer containing a primer and probe linked to each
other and one compatible primer to target the other strand of the target are designed
simultaneously.
ASO (Allele Specific Oligonucleotide) Scorpion: ASO-Scorpions are designed
to discriminate between two alleles. Two Scorpions, one for each allele, and one
compatible primer to target the other strand of the target of both alleles are designed
simultaneously. The primer part of both Scorpions is identical; however the probe
differs by one nucleotide, so that one will only bind to one of the alleles and the
other only to the other allele.
ARMS (Amplification Refractory Mutation System) Scorpion: ARMS Scorpions
are also used to amplify and discriminate between two possible alleles. Once again,
two Scorpion primers are designed, one for each allele, and one compatible primer
to target the other strand of both alleles are being designed (common primer). The
probe parts of both Scorpions are identical; and the primer parts of the Scorpions
are used to discriminate between the two alleles.
42
3Real-Time PCR -The Basic Principles
3.2.8 LAMP
"LAMP" stands for Loop-mediated Isothermal Amplification, is a simple, rapid,
specific and cost-effective nucleic acid amplification method solely developed
by Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd. LAMP technology uses 4 different primers par-
ticularly designed to recognize 6 distinct regions on the target gene and the
uads puns susn aadan usun e e spod ssnd uo
reaction.
 ds as e u pa g  a e go unp  ud
incubating the mixture of samples, primers, DNA polymerase with strand displace-
ment activity and substrates at a constant temperature (about 65°C). It provides high
amplification efficiency, with DNA being amplified 109-1010 times in 15-60 min.
Because of its high specificity, the presence of amplified product can indicate the
presence of the target gene.
Advantages of LAMP
· There is no need for a step to denature double stranded into a single stranded
form.
· The whole amplification reaction takes place continuously under isothermal
conditions.
· The amplification efficiency is extremely high.
· By designing 4 primers to recognize 6 distinct regions, the LAMP method is able
 s  a n  a     o   o
sophisticated equipments.
· The amplified products have a structure consisting of altermately inverted repeats
of the target sequence on the same strand.
· Amplification can be done with RNA templates following the same pro-
cedure as with DNA templates, simply through the addition of reverse
transcriptase
3.2.8.1 Primer Design
Four types of primers are design based on the 6 distinct regions of the target gene
the F3c, F2c and F1c regions at the 3' side and the B1, B2 and B3 regions at the 5'
side.
FIP: Forward Inner Primer (FIP) consists of the F2 region (at the 3' end) that is
complementary to the F2c region, and the same sequence as the F1c region
at the 5' end.
F3 Primer: Forward Outer Primer consists of the F3 region that is complemen-
tary to the F3c region.
Bibliography
43
BIP: Backward Inner Primer (BIP) consists of the B2 region (at the 3' end)
that is complementary to the B2c region, and the same sequence as the B1c
region at the 5' end.
B3 Primer: Backward Outer Primer consists of the B3 region that is comple
mentary to the B3c region.
FIP
BIP:BackwardInnerPrimer
......
F3
5
B3
B2
Prob
3
3’
B3c
B2c
B3
B2
4....
FIP:Forward InnerPrimer
3.2.8.2 Primer Design Specifications
· The distance between 5' end of F2 and B2 is considered to be 120-180 bp, and
the distance between F2 and F3 as well as B2 and B3 is 0-20 bp.
· The distance for loop forming regions (5' of F2 to 3' of F1, 5' of B2 to 3' of B1)
is 40-60 bp.
· The Tm of the primers should be of about 60-65?C in the case of GC rich and
about 55-60°C for AT rich.
· G-C content should be of about 50-60% in the case of GC rich and Normal, about
40-50% for AT rich.
● Primers should be designed so as not to easily form secondary structures. 3' end
sequence should not be AT rich or complementary to other primers.
Bibliography
1.Heid, CA, Stevens, J, Livak, KJ, Williams, PM. 1996. Real time quantitative PCR .Genome
Res., 10, 986-94.
2. Nolan, T, Hands, RE, Bustin, SA. 2006. Quantification of mRNA using real-time RT-PCR.
Nat. Protor., 1, 1559-82.
3.Mhlanga, MM, Malmberg, L. 2001. Methods, 25(4), 463-71.
4. Chandler, DP, Wagnon, CA, Bolton, H Jr. 1998 Reverse transcriptase (RT) inhibition of PCR
at low concentrations of template and its implications for quantitative RT-PCR. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol., 64(2), 669-77.
5.de Silva, D, Wittwer, CT. 2000. Monitoring hybridization during polymerase chain reaction.
J. Chromatog. Biomed. Sri Appl., 741(1), 3-13.
6. de Kok, JB, Hendriks, JC, van Solinge, WW, Willems, HL, Mensink, EJ, Swinkels, DW. 1998.
Use of real-time quantitative PCR to compare DNA isolation methods. Clin. Chem., 44(10),
2201-04.
44
3 Real-Time PCR -The Basic Principles
7.Boulay, JL, Reuter, J, Ritschard, R, Terracciano, L, Herrmann, R, Rochlitz, C. 1999. Gene
dosage by quantitative real-time PCR . Biotechniques, 27(2), 228-30.
8.Ferre, F. 1992. Quantitative or semi-quantitative PCR: Reality versus Myth. PCR Methods
Appl. 2, 1-9.
10.Jung,R, Soondrum, K, Neumaier, M. 2000. Quantitative PCR. Clin. Chem. Lab.Med., 38(9),
833-36.
11.Kainz P. 20o0. The PCR plateau phase - towards an understanding of its limitations. Biochim.
Biophys. Arta., 1494(1-2), 23-27
12. Mannhalter,C,Koizar,D, Mitterbauer, G. 2000. Evaluation of RNA isolation methods and
reference genes for RT-PCR analyses of rare target RNA. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med., 38, 171-77.
13. Morrison, TB, Weis, JJ, Wittwer CT. 1998. Quantifcation of low-copy transcripts by
continuous SYBR? Green I monitoring during amplification. Biotechniques, 24(6), 954-58.
14. Souaze, F, Ntodou-Thome, A, Tran, CY, Rostene, W, Forgez, P. 1996. Quantitative RT-PCR:
Limits and accuracy. Biotechniques, 21, 280-85
15. Wittwer, CT, Garling, DJ. 1991. Rapid cycle DNA amplifcation: time and temperature
optimization. Biotechniques, 10(1), 76-83.
preparation and analysis of RNA and DNA in samples as small as one cell. BMC Bioterhnol.,
5(1), 2.
17. Costafreda, MI, Bosch, A, Pinto, RM. 2006. Development, evaluation, and standardization of
a real-time TaqMan Reverse Transcription-PCR assay for quantification of Hepatitis A virus
in clinical and shellfish samples. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72(6), 3846-55.
18. Abd-Elsalam, KA. 2003. Bioinformatic tools and guideline for PCR primer design. Afr. J.
Biotechnol.2(5), 91-5.
19. Freeman,WM,Walker, SJ, Vrana, KE.1999.Quantitative RT-PCR: pitfalls and potential
BioTechniques. 26, 112-25.
20. Giulietti, A, Overbergh, L, Valckx, D, Decallonne, B, Bouillon, R, Mathieu, C. 2001. An
overview of real-time quantitative PCR, applications to quantify cytokine gene expression.
Methods.25,386-401
 21. Ginzinger, DG. 2002. Gene quantification using real-time quantitative PCR, An emerging
technology hits the mainstream. Exp Hematol., 30, 503-12.
22. Hartshorn, C,Anshelevich,A,Wangh, LJ. 2005. Rapid, single-tube method for quantitative
   a se ls se ses   e  o sise e d
5, 113.
23.Heid, CA, Stevens, J., Livak, KJ, Williams, PM. 1996. Real time quantitative PCR. Genome
Res.,986-94
24. Mackay, IM, Arden, KE, Nitsche, A. 2002. Real-time PCR in virology. Nucleic Acids Res.
30,1292-305
25. Mhlanga, MM, Malmberg, L. 2001. Using molecular beacons to detect single-nucleotide
polymorphisms with real-time PCR. Methods, 25(4), 463-71.
PCR primer and probe database. Nucleic Arids Res., 31, 122-3.
monitoring of DNA amplification reactions. Biotechnology, 11, 1026-30.
28. Tichopad, A, Dzidic, A, Pfaff MW. 2002. Improving quantitative real-time RT-PCR repro-
ducibility by boosting primer-linked amplification efficiency. Biotechnol. Lett., 24, 2053-56.
29. Niesters, HG. 2002. Clinical virology in real time. J. Clin. Virol., 25 (3), 3-12.
30. Niesters, HG. 2004. Molecular and diagnostic clinical virology in real time. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect., 10, 5-11.
31. Whitcombe, D, Theaker, J, Guy, SP, Brown, T, Little, S. 1999. Detection of PCR products
using selfprobing amplicons and fuorescence. Nat. Biotechnol., 17, 804-07.
Bibliography
45
32. Wittwer, CT, et al. 1997. The LightcyclerTM a microvolume multisample fuorimeter with
rapid temperature control. Biotechniques, 22, 176-81.
33. Wittwer, CT, Herrmann, MG, Moss, AA, Rasmussen, RP. 1997. Continuous fuorescence
monitoring of rapid cycle DNA amplification. Biotechniques, 22, 130.
34. Holland, PM, Abramson, RD, Watson, R, Gelfand, DH. 1991. Detection of specific poly-
merase chain reaction product by utilizing the 5'-3'exonuclease activity of Thermus aquaticus
DNA polymerase . Pror. Natl. Arad. Sri. USA, 88, 7276-80.
35. Tyagi, S, Kramer, FR. 1996. Molecular beacons-probes that fuoresce upon hybridization. Nat.
Biotechnol., 14, 303-08.
36. Newton, CR, et al. 1989. Analysis of any point mutation in DNA. The amplification refractory
mutation system (ARMS). Nucleic Arids Res., 17, 2503-16.
37. Kiss, I, German, P Sami, L, Antal, M, Farkas, T, Kardos, G, Kecskemeti, S, Dan, A, Belak,
S. 2006. Application of Real-Time RT-PCR utilising Lux (Light upon extension) Fluorogenic
Primer for the rapid detection of avian infuenza viruses. Acta. Veterinaria Hungarica, 54(4),
525-33.
38. Tapp, I Malmberg. L, Rennel, E, Wik, M, Syvanen, AC. 2000. Homogeneous scoring
of single-nucleotide polymorphisms, comparison of the 5g-Nuclease TaqMan assay and
molecular beacon probes. BioTerhniques, 28, 732-8.
39. Zhou, L, Wang, L, Palais, R, Pryor, R, Wittwer, CT. 2005. High-resolution DNA melting
analysis for simultaneous mutation scanning and genotyping in solution. Clin. Chem., 51 (10),
1770-7.
40. Palais RA., Liew MA., Wittwer CT. 2005. Quantitative heteroduplex analysis for single
nucleotide polymorphism genotyping. Anal. Biochem., 346(1) 167-75
41. Lyon, E. 2001. Mutation detection using fuorescent hybridization probes and melting curve
analysis.Expert Rev Mol. Diagn., 1(1), 92-101.
42. Bustin, SA, Nolan, T. 2004. Pitfalls of quantitative real-time reverse-transcription polymerase
chain reaction. J Biomol. Tech., 15(3), 155-66.
43. Wong, ML, Medrano, JF. 2005. Real-time PCR for mRNA quantitation. Biotechniques, 39(1),
75-85.
44.Reynisson,E, Josefsen, MH, Krause, M, Hoorfar, J. 2006. Evaluation of probe chemistries
and platforms to improve the detection limit of real-time PCR . J. Microbiol. Methods, 66(2),
206-16.
45. Mackay, IM. 2004. Real-time PCR in the microbiology laboratory. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.,
10(3),190-212
46.Yuan,JS, Reed, A,Chen, F, Stewart, CN.2006. Statistical analysis of real-time PCR data.
BMC Bioinformatics, 7, 85.
47. Ririe, KM, Rasmussen, RP, Wittwer, CT. 1997. Product differentiation by analysis of DNA
melting curves during the polymerase chain reaction. Anal. Biochem., 245(2), 154-60.
48. Vet, JA, Marras, SA. 2005. Design and optimization of molecular beacon real-time poly-
merase chain reaction assays. Methods Mol. Biol., 288, 273-90.
49. Vet, JA, Van der Rijt, BJ, Blom, HJ. 2002. Molecular beacons, colorful analysis of nucleic
acids. Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn., 2 (1), 77-86.
50. Abravaya, K, Huff J, Marshall R., et al. 2003. Molecular beacons as diagnostic tools,
technology and applications. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med., 41 (4), 468-74.
51. Tan, W, Wang, K, Drake, TJ. 2004. Molecular beacons. Curr Opin. Chem. Biol., 8(5), 547-53.
52. Kubista, M, Andrade, JM, Bengtsson, M, Forootan, A, Jonak, J, Lind, K, Sindelka, R, Sjoback.
R, Sjogreen, B, Strombom, L, Stahlberg, A, Zoric, N. 2006. The real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Mol. Aspects. Med., 27(2-3), 95-125.
53. Notomi, T, Okayama, H, Masubuchi, H, Yonekawa, T, Watanabe, K, Amino, N, Hase, T. 2000.
Loop-mediated isothermal amplification of DNA. Nucleic Arids Res., 28, 63.
54. Norihiro, T, Yasuyoshi, M, Hidetoshi, K, Tsugunori, N. 2008. Loop-mediated isothermal
Protocols, 3, 877-82.
46
3 Real-Time PCR -The Basic Principles
55. Hiyoshi, M, Hosoi, S. 1994. Assay of DNA denaturation by polymerase chain reaction-driven
fuorescent label incorporation and fuorescence resonance energy transfer. Anal. Biochem..
221 (2), 306-11.
56. Chen, X, Zehnbauer, B, Gnirke, A, Kwok, PY. 1997. Fluorescence energy transfer detection
as a homogeneous DNA diagnostic method. Pror. Natl. Arad. Sri., U S A., 94 (20), 10756-61.
 57. Holland, PM, Abramson, RD, Watson, R, Gelfand, DH. 1991. Detection of specifc poly-
merase chain reaction product by utilizing the 5'-3' exonuclease activity of Thermus aquaticus
DNA polymerase . Pror. Natl Arad. Sri. U S A., 88(16), 7276-80.
 58. Philip, SB, Richard SA, James, PK, Wittwer, CT. 1998. Homogeneous multiplex genotyping
of hemochromatosis mutations with fuorescent hybridization probes. Am. J. Pathol., 153,
1055-61.
59. Ririe, KM, Rasmussen, RP, Wittwer CT. 1997. Product differentiation by analysis of DNA
melting curves during the polymerase chain reaction. Anal. Biochem., 245(2), 154-60.
60. Pfaff, MW. 2001. A new mathematical model for relative quantification in real-time RT-PCR.
Nucleic Acids Res., 29(9), 45.
Chapter 4
New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular
Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
Contents
4.1Background
48
4.1.1
Costs of Disease
48
4.1.2
Global Factors
49
4.1.3
Other Diseases
49
4.1.4
Major Problems
50
4.1.5
Need to Improve Diagnosis
50
4.1.6
Harmonization of Responses.
51
4.1.7
 Application of Various PCR Methods in Routine Diagnostic Virology .
51
4.1.8
Multiplex PCR in Routine Diagnosis . . . ·
54
4.1.9
Simultaneous Detection of Viruses and the Complex Diagnosis,
Development of "Multi PCR" Assays Simplify Diagnosis.
54
4.1.10 Robots are Accelerating Molecular Diagnosis and Provide Better Safety . .
55
4.1.11 Isothermal Amplification and the Use of Simple Thermo Blocks
Can Replace Costly PCR Machines
55
4.1.12 Portable PCR Machines .
56
4.1.13 Studies of Molecular Epidemiology
56
4.1.14 The OIE Rules for the International Standardization
and Validation of the PCR-Based Diagnostic Assays .
57
4.1.15 OIE Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines
for Terrestrial Animals 2004, 2008.
58
4.1.16 Validation and Quality Control of Polymerase Chain Reaction
Methods Used for the Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases (Chapter
L1.4. of the OIE Manual)
85
4.2 PCR Methods Used in Routine Molecular Diagnostics .
58
4.2.1
OIE Collaborating Center for the Biotechnology-Based Diagnosis
of Infectious Diseases in Veterinary Medicine .
58
4.2.2
Recent Developments in the Field of Diagnostic Virology at the
OIE Collaborating Center for the Biotechnology based Diagnosis
of Infectious Diseases in Veterinary Medicine .
59
E.A. Pestana et al., Early, Rapid and Sensitive Veterinary Molecular Diagnostics -
47
Real Time PCR Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7_4,
Copyright @ International Atomic Energy Agency 2010
Published by Springer Science+Business Media B.V, Dordrecht 2010. All Rights Reserved.
48
4 New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
4.2.3
63
4.2.4
Proximity Ligation, Novel Means of Protein Detection
by Nucleic Acid Amplification . . . . .
64
4.2.5
A Simple Magnetic Bead-Based Microarray for Detection and
Discrimination of Pestiviruses . ..
64
4.2.6
 Detection of an Emerging Pestivirus in Cattle and Further
Characterization by Means of Molecular Diagnostics and Reverse Genetics .
65
4.2.7
Molecular Epidemiology, New Approaches . .
66
4.2.8 Further Trends, New Directions in Molecular Diagnostic Virology . . .
66
4.2.9  Viral Metagenomics, Search for Unknown Viruses . . . .
68
4.2.10 Summary and Recommendations . .
69
Bibliography . .
69
4.1 Background
Despite intensive worldwide control programmes against infectious diseases,
including vaccination programmes with the use of DIVA vaccines; mass culling
(stamping out policies) and regulation of animal movements;various virus diseases
still have averyhigh negative impact on animalhealth andwelfare.Theintensifi
cation of animal husbandry; centralisation of large groups of animals in industrial
production units; globalization of trade in live animals and/or animal products,
bedding and feeds; as well as increased tourism, are all considerable factors in the
threat of devastating infectious diseases word-wide. The opening of borders between
many countriessuch asintheEuropeancontinentcontributesgreatlytothehigh-
risk situation, where infectious agents may easily travel thousands of miles and then
suddenly appear in areas where they areunexpected and probablyevenunknown.
The sudden and unexpected appearance of any infectious disease in a new region.
be it a country ora continent, may lead to a delayed or innaccurate diagnosis result-
ing in the uncontrolled spread of the disease agent to other susceptible populations
of animals over large geographic areas. Recent major examples are incidences
offoot-and-mouthdisease(FMD)in theUK,theextensionofrinderpest into the
Somali plains and Rift Valley fever (RVF) spread into the Arabian Peninsula. The
latest major problem is the occurrence, re-occurrence and rapid spread of infuenza
virus.Alltheseexemplify theseriouseconomicandsocial impactoftheofhighly
contagious transboundary animal diseases(TADs).
4.1.1 Costs of Disease
The costs in dealing with TADs should be viewed both in terms of efforts to bring
the disease under control and the consequent loss of livelihoods. As an example,
the UK FMD outbreak in 2001 had a cost to the public sector estimated at around
4.5 billion Euros, and to the private sector at over 7.5 billion Euros. In considering
such situations, the European Commission Scientific Committee on Animal Health
4.1Background
49
and Animal Welfare report (adopted 24-25th April 2003) states, "Recent outbreaks
of foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), classical swine fever (CSF) and avian infuenza
(AI) have occurred in several member states and resulted in the slaughter of large
numbers of animals as well as severe economic consequences". The ethical prob.
lems arising as a consequence of current eradication strategies, as well as the social
problems caused by the slaughter of large numbers of animals, must also be taken
into account when considering the overall effects of TAD outbreaks.
4.1.2GlobalFactors
Global climatic changes have had a direct measureable effect on the emergence and
spread of viral diseases, in particular those transferred by insect vectors. This is
clearly illustrated by the northward spread of bluetongue in Europe that reached
Scandinavian countires by 2007. African horse sickness virus, a close relative to
bluetongue virus in the Orbivirus genus of the Reoviridae family, has shown a
similar patterm in spreading toward regions of the world where this disease was pre-
viously unknown. The main reason for this is that the insect vectors of the viruses
favourably. Other vector-bome viral diseases, such as African swine fever, show
similar tendency of expansion in infected territories.
4.1.3 Other Diseases
 In addition to TADs, there is a range of other viral diseases in our animal pop-
ulations with a more restricted or endemic geographical character, but these still
have a high economic and socio-economic impact. Despite intensive eradication
programmes, these diseases still cause severe problems due to direct or indirect
losses in the animal populations; increased treatment costs and decreased produc
tion rates. Diseases caused by viruses such as bovine herpesviruses, adenoviruses.
bovine viral diarrhoea virus, bovine respiratory syncitial virus and bovine coro-
naviruses to name a few, are still commonly found in cattle populations all over
the world and their eradication remains an important task. Pig populations in most
of the world suffer from a high variety of viral diseases. Classical swine fever.
African swine fever, Aujeszky's disease, foot-and-mouth disease, swine vesicular
disease and other well-known and characterised viral diseases of swine are perma-
nent targets of eradication programmes worldwide, with varying rates of success.
For example, classical swine fever has been eliminated from the domestic pig herds
of the EU, but wild boar populations are still infected in several countries, pos-
ing a high risk, though re-infection, for the whole continent. African swine fever is
spreading, as previously indicated and there are no potent vaccines available. New
variants of the virus have recently emerged in Africa, while in Sardinia remains
infecected. Porcine respiratory and reproductive syndrome (PRRS) is a commonly
occurring disease caused by an emerging arterivirus, first detected first in 1991 in
50
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
the Netherlands, after which it rapidly spread all over the world. Other diseases
(PMWS) or Porcine Dermatitis and Nephropathy Syndrome (PDNS), were the asso-
ciation with porcine cirvovirus type 2 was found, however, several questions are still
unanswered in aetiology, pathogenesis and many other important factors of these
diseases of swine.
4.1.4MajorProblems
Viral diseases of transboundary and/or endemic character are creating large prob-
lems in a high range of domesticated and wild animals worldwide. Due to the
restricted space of this chapter, only a few examples are dealt with in detail in order
to illustrate the role of viral diseases in the issue of animal health and welfare. In
this context the emergence of "new” diseases is a very important issue, which needs
special attention and focus. In addition to examples already given, a long list of
emerging or re-emerging diseases in various host species, including humans could
be drawn up; these include, diseases caused by Hantaviruses, Japanese Encephalitis
Virus, HTV, Dengue Viruses, Menangle Virus, Australian Bat Lyssavirus, Ebola
virus, Avian fu variants H5N1, SARS coronavirus, Nipah virus and Hendra Virus.
Several of these diseases are of very serious global zoonotic concem.
4.1.5Need to Improve Diagnosis
The above examples indicate that there is necessity to develop and use improved
diagnostic methods to keep worldwide track of viral infections, both in human
and animal populations. Powerful new methods have to be developed, which allow
the prompt detection and identification of the viruses, supporting the animal health
authorities and organizations for combating the viral diseases more effectively.
With regard to the global importance of viral diseases, including the emerg-
ing and re-emerging TADs, the intermational organisations such as the World
Organisation for Animal Health (OlE, previously known as Office Intermational des
Epizooties), the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) and the Intermational
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are helping to combat the diseases at the intema-
tional level. Simultaneously, the EU, the USDA and other intermational and national
programmes and grants are supporting the work for the improved detection and con-
trol of TADs. As an example, in 1994 the FAO established an Emergency Prevention
System (EMPRES) for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases in order
to minimize the risk of such emergencies developing. In the "Animal Diseases"
      e    
epidemic animal diseases, such as contagious bovine pleuropneumonia, foot-and-
mouth disease, contagious caprine pleuropneumonia, peste de petit ruminants, RVF
and lumpy skin disease. T'hese are among the most contagious maladies and place 8
serious burden on the economies of the countries in which they occur.
4.1Background
51
4.1.6HarmonizationofResponses
In order to try and harmonise the efforts to combat TADs in a total of 172 Member
Countries and Territories, the OIE organises work in the following structures of
expertise, Specialist Commissions, Collaborating Centres, Reference Laboratories,
OFFLU Working Groups and Ad hoc Groups. The OIE Collaborating Centres (OIE
ing to the management of general questions on animal health issues (for example
epidemiology or risk analysis). In its designated field of competence, an OIE CC is
providing expertise intermationally. For details see www.oie.int, in OIE Mandate and
Intermal Rules for Collaborating Centres. Currently, the OIE has 24 CCs all over the
world, dealing with many aspects of animal health, such as diagnosis, animal dis-
ease surveillance, risk analysis, epidemiology, food safety, animal welfare, vaccine
evaluation, control of infectious diseases and veterinary medicinal products. A large
part of work of the OIE CCs focuses on new and emerging diseases, and on national
and intemational training (see: www.oie.int).
The National Veterinary Institute (SVA) in Uppsala was nominated and reg-
istered by the OIE as a CC in 2005. At present, our institute is tenmed, "OIE
Collaborating Centre for the Biotechnology-based Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases
in Veterinary Medicine'". Our tasks involve biotechnology-based diagnosis; inter-
national standardisation and validation of the diagnostic methods and national and
intermational training. These are summarized on the website of the CC: http://sva.se/
oie-cc.
The previous research and development activities and molecular routine diag-
nostic activities of the CC have been summarised in review articles. More recent
achievements in molecular diagnosis are summarized here; references are provided
and strategies outlined as an updated report on the work of our OIE CC to further
improve the conditions of animal health, welfare and food safety. This also serves
as their basis for the use of the Standard Operation Procedures (SOPs), published in
Chapter 5.
4.1.7ApplicationofVariousPCRMethodsinRoutine
Diagnostic Virology
4.1.7.1 Gel-Based and Real-Time PCR Assays as Novel Tools
of Molecular Diagnosis
Shortly after the description of the PCR principle in 1985, our laboratory was one
of the first to adapt the technique to diagnostic purposes and to develop routine
diagnostic PCR assays. The first generation "gel-based or classical" PCR assays
provided novel tools for the improved diagnosis of a high variety of TADs, as
summarised in the reviews in the reference section.
52
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
4.1.7.2 Various Real-Time PCR Assays Are Further Improving
the Diagnostic Facilities
From the middle of the 1990s a wide range of real-time PCR assays were devel-
oped and applied to the diagnosis of TADs and other infectious diseases, as well
to the improved detection of pathogens in food and feed. Various real-time PCR
(PriProET), Scorpion Primers, dual probe systems such as those utilized in the
LightCycler? (Roche), dye-labelled oligonucleotide ligation (DOL) and SYBR?
Green; showed high sensitivity and specificity for the detection both of viral and
bactertial pathogens.
Compared to the classical single or nested PCR methods, the new real-time PCR
assays have a number of important advantages:
· Faster and higher throughput of tests.
· Real-time-PCR sensitivity close to or equal to traditional nested PCR even though
a non-nested set-up is used.
· Amplified products detected by measuring fuorescence through the lid of the
contamination from laboratory environment, or carryover into nearby samples.
· Post-PCR handling of the products is not needed.
● The result of the PCR is not only either "'positive" or "negative", but the real-time
PCR assays allow a quantitative estimation of target nucleic acid in the sample.
· Real-time quantitative PCR is more accurate and less labour-intensive than
current quantitative PCR methods.
· The hands-on time is greatly reduced, compared to traditional detection in
agarose gels followed by ethidium bromide or GelRed staining.
· The principle of the real-time PCR allows automation of the procedure, and the
use of a 96-well microtiter plate format, without the need for nested PCR, which
makes it very practical to automate.
· Diagnosis can be further automated by using robots for DNA/RNA extractions
and pipetting.
· Probes for real-time PCR can be labelled with a number of different fluorophores.
which function as individual reporter dyes for different primer sets thus, real-time
PCR is very suitable for the development of multiplex PCR systems
● Lower costs per detected agent, if the equipment can be used with a large enough
number of samples.
Compared to the previous gel-based, classical, amplification assays, the real-time
PCR techniques have a further advantages in that they allow the quantitative assess-
where the number of viral particles or the viral loads of porcine circovirus type 2
(PCV2) have to be determined.
4.1Background
53
Currently, TaqMan and MB are the most commonly used real-time PCR meth-
ods in routine diagnostic laboratories consequently the SOPs in this book cover
and mostly recommend these techniques. Simultaneously, other approaches, like the
PriProET system, and LUX PCR are also under development in many laboratories
and frequently applied. Recently other real-time PCR methods, such as the LATE
PCR are also considered as robust, reliable assays for improved detection of vari-
ous viruses, especially when adapted to simple tools, like portable PCR machines
allowing on site diagnosis of the viral diseases, (see later).
It is very important to note that as diagnosticians we should not refer to "real-
time PCR" in general, but should specify the method of real-time PCR precisely, as
can be seen from the examples above. Thus the specification of the variant of real.
time PCR, such as TaqMan or MB, is very important, considering that the various
methods have different strengths and weaknesses, such as detection range, sensi-
tivity, and specificity. It is also very important to understand that even within the
same variant of the real-time PCR, significant differences can occur. As an example,
various TaqMan methods developed for the detection of the same virus, can differ
strongly in diagnostic specificity, sensitivity and other important parameters. Note
the term diagnstic here, describing both sensitivity and specificity. Diagnostic refers
 a si  y a  s ,      a 
the exact real-time PCR method used is clearly specified with very exact references
4.1.7.3 Importance of Determining the Diagnostic Sensitivity and Specificity
of the Real-Time PCR Assays, as Well as the Target Detection Range
of the targeted viruses. This indicates very high analytical sensitivity. Concerming
specificity. the majority of the assays are able to detect and amplify entirely
the selected target nucleic acids and no cross-reactivity is disturbs the diagnosis.
ne 'asn un ose an sesse d eauas, ro .-ued, 'unoads apim, 'aaamo
methods are for example the "pan-pesti" PCR assays, which amplify very conser-
vative regions of the pestivirus genomes (e.g., selected regions from the 5'NCR),
and are able to amplify all tested pestiviruses, such as bovine viral diarrhoea virus
(BVDV), classical swine fever virus (CSFV) and Border disease virus (BDV).
4.1.7.4 The Simultaneous Use of Various Real-Time PCR Methods, Allowing
Wide-Range and More Specific Detection
Diagnostic work is effective and well organised when the laboratory is using an
arsenal of wide-range ("general") real-time PCR assays for preliminary screening
of the samples. Subsequently, the exact identification of the detected pathogens
the exact identification of the virus variants(s), but allow the studies of molecular
epidemiology.
54
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
4.1.8 Multiplex PCR in Routine Diagnosis
The multiplex PCR methods are based on the use of multiple primers to allow ampli-
fication of multiple templates within a single reaction, for example, analysis of a
plex PCR, we seek to diagnose all possible pathogens which can be considered to
be causing the disease complex. In general the multiplex PCR assays are useful for
diagnostic purposes, providing the diagnostician the ability to detect more than one
infectious agent(s) in a single assay. The gel-based PCR assays allow the devel-
opment of multiplex PCR; however, the real-time PCR is even more suitable for
multiplexing. The reason is that the individual probes for the component assays can
be labelled with different fuorophores, each of which functions as a specific colour
reporter dye for one set of primers. Since the fuorescent probes emit at different
colour wavelengths, it enables an easy multiplexing of the assays.
Compared to the single-target PCR techniques, the construction of multiplex
assays can be rather complicated, considering the large number of primers required.
The various primers might compete with each other, as they have to be placed in the
same reaction mix of the classical nested PCR.
As stated above, the real-time PCR assays (using only single primer pairs)
provide better possibilities for the construction of multiplex systems with mul-
tiple target components. Considering the diagnostic advantages of this principle,
various multiplex PCR assays were developed at our laboratory, partly based on
our own developments or in collaboration with EU project partner laboratories
(http://www.multiplex -eu.org/ and http://www.labonsite.com/). For example, a mul-
tiplex (duplex) real-time PCR assay was developed and is now used in routine
diagnosis for the simultaneous detection of bovine respiratory syncytial virus and
complexes of young calves. We have found that multiplex real-time PCR has the
potential to produce considerable savings in time and effort, without compromising
the robustness and sensitivity of the virus detection assays. However, as mentioned
above, the competition of primers frequently hinder the development of potent mul-
tiplex PCR assays and the development trials may require long time and high costs,
with uncertain success.
4.1.9 Simultaneous Detection of Viruses and the Complex
Diagnosis, Development of "Multi PCR" Assays
SimplifyDiagnosis
Primer-competition might cause serious problems, not only in time and costs.
but also in other aspects. For example, the levels of specificity and sensitivity of
the PCR assay may strongly drop and in certain cases the system is simply not
working at all in a multiplex arrangement. Our experience is that in such cases it
is more practical not to force the co-amplification in the same reaction vessel, but
rather to amplify the various viruses side-by-side on a microplate. This system is
4.1Background
55
also multiplex, since the various viruses are simultaneously detected from a tested
clinical sample. We term this approach "multi'" PCR. By using automated systems,
the multiplex and rapid detection of the various pathogens is achieved very rapidly
in multi PCR. Various multi PCR assay are regularly used in our routine diagnostic
section, providing reliable results. The use of such systems is highly recommended.
4.1.10 Robots are Accelerating Molecular Diagnosis and Provide
BetterSafety
a o das pn e si spie ianu lea pan a jo uoedaid iadoid aun a
molecular diagnostic procedures, the introduction of nucleic acid extraction robots
is a common practice today. The use of the robots is significantly accelerating the
diagnostic procedures and provide more safety. Realizing the high need for these
equipments, the industry is producing a wide range various types of the nucleic acid
purifying robots. For example, the GenoVision M48 extraction robots (Biorobot
M48 station, Qiagen, Norway), utilize magnetic separation of the target molecules.
By comparing the results of nucleic acid preparations of the robot with manual
procedures, we found the robot more efficient and reliable. This robot purified the
nucleic acids simultaneously from 48 samples, within 2.5 h. The products were
clean enough to be amplified directly in the PCR. In addition to high speed, robust-
ness and low labour-input, a further advantage of the robots is the reduced risk of
cross contamination between specimens. By the introduction of special tools labora-
tory practices and intermal controls (mimics) it was possible to reduce the danger of
false positivity and false negativity rather soon in the history of the diagnostic PCR
The closed and automated systems of the robots provide strong safety for the
PCR-based diagnostic assays. It is advisable to automate as many steps as possible
in the diagnostic procedures. By simultaneously using nucleic acid extraction and
pipetting robots with the real-time PCR machines, the laboratory can establish an
automated diagnostic chain. Such chains have been established at our laboratory
for the detection of several viruses. By the introduction of robots, high through-
put and robust diagnostic assays have been established, with reduced manipulation
requirement, less contamination risk and a very rapid diagnosis time, which is short-
ened from hours to minutes. Interestingly, the nucleic acid-based diagnosis will be
similar to the ELISA-based diagnostic chains, using automated systems, which pro
vide rapidity, robustness, low costs, reduced labour-requirement and an increased
reliability of diagnosis.
4.1.11IsothermalAmplificationandtheUseofSimpleThermo
Blocks Can Replace Costly PCR Machines
Besides PCR, altermative methods of nucleic acid amplification are in progress. Such
methods are for example the Invader or the LAMP technologies, which became
recently common, providing nucleic acid amplification based diagnosis to less
56
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
sophisticated and equipped laboratories. Without the need for costly PCR machines
the isothermal amplification methods use only simple thermo-blocks, which are
affordable to moderately equipped laboratories and even to simple field laborato-
ries. Thus, the isothermal amplification methods are optimal in poor countries and
for bringing the diagnostic facilities closer to the outbreaks.
4.1.12PortablePCRMachines
Portable PCR machines are constructed to bring the laboratory facilities closer to
the feld cases. Several companies are producing and optimising such machines
today, which can easily be used under field conditions; run on batteries and that
allow complete disinfection of the equipment, providing simple sample preparation
and rapid results, without the need for specific training. For example, the machines
of the Smiths Detection's Portable Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory addresses the
issue by avoiding any transportation of samples to a laboratory. With this system
the laboratory is taken into the field. It has been designed with field veterinarians in
mind, comprising a portable briefcase-sized PCR instrument and a disposable sam-
ple preparation unit. Together they provide rapid on-site identification, in a wide
range of weather conditions, by veterinarians or other workers in animal health,
who require no technical understanding of the PCR methodologies, just raise the
questions about the suspicion of the occurrence of a viral disease.
Smiths Detection uses an advanced PCR chemistry called Linear After the
Exponential PCR or LATE-PCR. This is an advanced form of asymmetric PCR
that efficiently generates single-stranded amplicons under controlled conditions.
LATE-PCR is further enhanced by additional technologies that improve sample
preparation, suppress amplification errors, improve probe design for rapid high-
resolution analysis of the amplified product, make multiplexing easier, allow for
rapid DNA sequencing, and enhances data analysis. The combination of the simple
portable PCR machines and LATE PCR provides simple facilities for the on site
diagnosis of viral diseases.
4.1.13Studies of Molecular Epidemiology
Assays involving PCR yield specific DNA products that can be investigated and
detennined through nucleotide sequencing. The obtained nucleic acid sequences
can be analysed and compared with each other and with previously described
sequences, obtained from large intermational databases, such as the GenBank.
epidemiology". Molecular epidemiological studies were conducted, for example,
when genetic variants of classical swine fever virus (CSFV) were identified in
several countries of Central Europe and when it was hypothesised that EU and US
genotypes of the porcine respiratory and reproductive syndrome virus (PRRSV)
4.1Background
57
evolved from a common ancestor, which is suspected to originate from Eastem
Europe. Also, a molecular epidemiological approach was implemented as part of the
 Swedish BVD-control programme as a tool to facilitate the identification and tracing
of routes of transmission of bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV) between herds
PCR amplification and comparative nucleotide sequence analysis allow not only
the direct detection of the viruses but also retrospective genetic analysis of biological
products and clinical samples. For example such approach can be applied to deter-
mine the identity of virus strains used for vaccine production. In one of our recent
BVDV vaccine. The results of this work emphasize that the contamination of com-
mercially available live vaccines with exogenous virus strains (such as BVDV strain
originating from foetal calf serum or from bovine cells) is a real risk factor in the
bioindustry. Considering this risk, unequivocal analysis, including molecular meth-
ods, is needed to verify the authenticity of biological products, such as vaccines,
foetal calf serum batches, cell lines, etc.
Molecular epidemiology is providing a considerable help to the animal health
authorities, when combating various viral diseases. The occurrence of virus vari-
ants is detected; the spread of various variants is traced, allowing epidemiological
analysis, cutting of ways of infection, implementation of prevention rules and other
measures to control the spread of the diseases.
4.1.14TheOIERulesfor theInternationalStandardization
and Validation of the PCR-Based Diagnostic Assays
Considering the frequent occurrence of the viral diseases worldwide and the very
intensive R&D development in the field of molecular diagnosis, there is a high need
for the intermational standardization and validation of the developed assays. It is
important that the veterinary diagnostic laboratories use identical, validated tech-
miques, providing comparable results and allowing the same conclusions in different
regions of the world.
This is the only way to combat TADs and endemic diseases effectively from
a global aspects, following the "one world, one health" principle. National and
intermational authorities require rigorous proof that the assays, used in various
laboratories, are as reliable as possible and give identical results. Intermational agen-
cies like the OIE, the Joint FAO/IAEA Division, national research institutions and
The OIE regularly publishes standards for the validation of diagnostic assays.
Validation and intermational standardization of nucleic acid amplification-based
diagnostic methods (like PCR) is the major task for the animal health authorities.
The usual practice is that the specificity and the sensitivity of the newly devel-
oped PCR assays are compared to conventional assays, like virus isolation. The
"in house" PCR assays will soon have to be replaced by validated and standard-
ized procedures. The validation, standardization and quality control of PCR-based
diagnostic techniques, which are now in progress, are a major task.
58
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
4.1.15 OIE Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines
forTerrestrialAnimats2004,2008
ommended and approved by the OIE, by the OIE Reference laboratories and
Collaborating Centres. The Manual is available both in printed and in online forms,
for the later see: http://www.oie.int/eng/normes/mmanual/A_summry.htm
Several chapters of the online version were updated in 2005 and 2006. Both
versions will be completely updated and re-published in 2008.
4.1.16Validation and Quality Control of Polymerase Chain
Reaction Methods Used for the Diagnosis of Infectious
Diseases (Chapter I.1.4. of the OIE Manual)
This chapter is available on: http://www.oie.int/eng/nonmes/mmanual/A_00014.htm
the text from the OIE Manual, "The purpose of this chapter is to extend the rules to a
direct method of infectious agent detection, i.e. to adapt the principles of validation
to the PCR assays. The experiences of the last decade indicate that the PCR tech-
niques will eventually supersede many of the classical direct methods of infectious
agent detection. It is clear that the PCR is replacing virus isolation or bacteria cul-
tivation for the detection of agents that are diffcult or impossible to culture. There
are several reasons for this trend, including that virus isolation requires, i) the pres-
ence of replicating viruses; i) expensive cell culture and maintenance facilities; iii)
as long as several weeks to complete the diagnosis; and iv) special expertise, which
is missing or diminishing today in many laboratories. Although PCR assays were
initially expensive and cumbersome to use, they have now become relatively inex
pensive, safe and user-friendly tools in diagnostic laboratories. The sensitivity and
4.2 PCR Methods Used in Routine Molecular Diagnostics
4.2.1 OlE Collaborating Center for the Biotechnology-Based
Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases in Veterinary Medicine
Our laboratory, in collaboration with other intermational partners has been actively
involved in the validation processes, by following the stages of assay validation as
suggested by the OlE. This is one of the reasons that the OlE granted our institute the
title "OIE Collaborating Center for the Biotechnology-based Diagnosis of Infectious
Diseases in Veterinary Medicine'"
4.2 PCR Methods Used in Routine Molecular Diagnostics
59
The tasks and mandate of the OIE CC are summarised in http://sva.se/oie-cc. One
of the main tasks of the OIE CC is to contribute to the Manual of Diagnostic Tests
and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals, which is summarising the recommended diag-
nostic methods and procedures: http://www.oie.int/eng/publicat/en_standards.htm.
A further task is to collaborate with intermational agencies, first of all with the
Animal Production and Health Section, Joint FAO/IAEA Division, which is the
Collaborating Centre of the OIE for ELISA and Molecular Techniques in Animal
Disease Diagnosis. The two sister CCs of the OIE have joint efforts to conduct
research in diagnostic development and in dissemination of results. By providing a
view of the recent developments in molecular diagnostic virology and a collection
of reliable SOPs, this book is a result if this collaboration.
4.2.2 Recent Developments in the Field of Diagnostic Virology at
the OlE Collaborating Center for the Biotechnology based
Diagnosis of Infectious Diseases in Veterinary Medicine
This book is providing a comprehensive collection of SOPs, developed for the
improved diagnosis of viral diseases and recommended to diagnostic laboratories.
To complete the range of the proposed methods, to show further possibilities and
to provide a wider view on the recent developments, the following paragraphs are
summarising several very recent directions of diagmostic development in molecular
diagnosis of viral diseases. Some of these methods are already used in the diagnostic
laboratories, the other open new trends for the diagnosis in the near future.
4.2.2.1 Improved Detection of Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus (FMDV)
with a Novel, Robust Real-Time PCR
Since the simultaneous detection of various serotypes of the virus is an important
task in the field, the "Multiplex PCR" EU project developed a novel, robust quanti-
tative real-time PCR assay for the simultaneous detection of all the seven serotypes
of FMDV. This method is based on the Primer-Probe Energy Transfer (PriProET)
efficacy to detect all the seven known FMDV serotypes. The test method was linear
over a range of at least seven orders of magnitude and the detection limit was below
the equivalent of 10 genomic copies of the virus. Analysing recent African probang
samples the method was able to detect FMDV in materials from both cattle and buf
falo. When compared to traditional virus cultivation, the virus detection sensitivity
was similar but the PriProET method can provide a laboratory result much faster
than virus cultivation. Thus, a complex diagnosis of a foot-and-mouth-disease out-
break can be accomplished within several hours, providing a powerful new tool for
the animal health authorities.
60
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
4.2.2.2 Solid Phase Microarrays in Veterinary Diagnostie Virology, Based
onPadlockProbes
A solid phase microarray system was developed for the simultaneous detection of
foot-and-mouth disease,vesicular stomatitis and swine vesicular diseaseviruses,
using padlock probes. The application of padlock probes for detection of pathogens
is a very recent trend in molecular diagnosis. Padlock probes are circularizable
oligonucleotides useful for highly multiplex genetic studies. These probes have
the capacity to detect simultaneously thousands of different target sequences in a
single multiplex array system. Each viral nucleic acid serves as template for a pad-
lock probe equipped with a unique sequence (tag) associated to that specific target.
Circularized probes are amplified with a single universal primer pair and the fuores.
cently labelled products are then sorted, using the tag sequences, on a microarray.
The assay principle is straightforward comprising a few intermally controlled reac-
tion steps in a single vessel. Run-times were comparable to real-time PCR, but
with the benefit that the presence of several viruses and their various serotypes
can be analyzed within the same reaction. Although the cost for oligonucleotides
and array slides is higher than that for conventional PCR assays, it is reduced
in proportion to the number of assays made. In this format, multiplex detection
using padlock probes and microarrays could have implications in more effective
screening for viruses causing similar vesicular symptoms and in turm facilitate rapid
counteractions, especially in case of FMD outbreaks.
4.2.2.3 Padlock Probes for Broad-Range Detection and Subtyping of Avian
Influenza Viruses
Using padlock-probe chemistry for multiplexed preamplification and microarray for
detection, we developed an assay for the simultaneous detection and subtyping of
avian influenza viruses (AIV). The assay has the outstanding feature to identify both
the hemagglutinin (HA) and the neuraminidase (NA) surface antigens of AIV from
a single reaction. We tested 77 infuenza strains, representing the entire assortment
of HA and NA, and 100% (77/77) of the samples were identified as AIV and 97%
(75/77) were correctly subtyped. The specificity of the assay was determined testing
heterologous pathogens. The results indicate that the assay is a useful and robust tool
for high throughput rapid detection and typing of AIVs, with advantages compared
to conventional methods.
In summary, the padlock probes, adapted to microarray formats, provide novel
means of powerful and very complex novel molecular diagnosis. Compared to real-
time PCR assays, the padlock probe based microarrays are inferior in sensitivity, but
they allow a very multiplex diagnosis and the simultaneous analysis of thousands of
specimens in the same system.
4.2.2.4 Novel TaqMan? and Primer-Probe Energy Transfer Assays
for the Improved, Universal Detection of Hepatitis E Virus
in countries with poor sanitation, but recently it is getting more frequent also in
4.2 PCR Methods Used in Routine Molecular Diagnostics
regions of the world where the health services are of high standard. Previously the
disease cases were observed in connection to travelling, recently zoonotic transmis-
sion is also suspected, i.e., a direct route of infection, from animals to humans. For
the improved detection of the virus, two real-time PCR methods were developed
and compared, a TaqMan?) and Primer-Probe Energy Transfer (PriProET) assay
These robust, highly sensitive methods provide valuable diagnostic tools to investi-
gate zoonotic transmission, to detect the virus in the food chain. They are used in
research related to the potential of hepatitis E virus to cross the species barrier. By
using the two novel PCR assays a broad range of viruses were detected, representing
all the four genotypes of HEV. On comparison, the TaqMan? assay showed higher
Hluorescence values for positive samples. On the other hand, the PriProET better tol-
erated the point mutations in the target nucleic acids. Thus, the PriProET provides
             
are useful novel tools for virus detection and for molecular epidemiology. In addi
tion, the assays provide novel tools to study the biology of the viruses, including the
transmission between various species and the zoonotic aspects of HEV infections.
4.2.2.5 Development of a Real-Time PCR Assay Based on Primer-Probe
Energy Transfer for the Detection of Swine Vesicular Disease Virus
Based on primer-probe energy transfer (PriProET), we developed a real-time PCR
assay to detect swine vesicular disease virus (SVDV). The assay was highly sensi-
tive with a detection limit corresponding to five copies of viral genome equivalents.
and had a high specificity demonstrated by testing of heterologous viruses. A major
advantage of the PriProET chemistry is tolerance toward mutations in the probe
region. Melting curve analysis directly after PCR, with determination of probe melt-
ing point, confinmed specific hybridisation of the SVDV strains. Eight of twenty
SVDV strains tested, revealed shifted melting points that indicated mutations in the
probe region, which were confirmed by nucleotide sequencing. With the PriProET
system there is a chance to identify phylogenetically divergent strains of SVDV,
which may appear negative in other probe-based real-time PCR assays. Moreover,
any difference in melting points may provide an indication of divergence in the
probe region. The described SVDV PriProET assay, with high sensitivity, speci-
ficity, and tolerance toward mutations in the probe region, provides a powerful tool
for the improved and rapid detection of SVDV. Furthermore, it allows a reduced
turmaround time and the use of high-throughput, automated technology.
4.2.2.6 Simple and Rapid Detection of Swine Vesicular Disease Virus
with a One-Step Reverse Transcriptase Loop-Mediated Isothermal
AmplificationAssay
LAMP) assay was developed recently for the improved detection of swine vesicular
disease virus (SVDV). The assay provided a wide SVDV detection range, since all
the 28 tested isolates of this virus were tested positive. Simultaneously, it yielded
62
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
high specificity; because all tested heterologous viruses gave negative results, such
as foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV).
Since SVDV, FMDV and VSV cause very similar symptoms, the highly spe-
cific detection and identification of SVDV is very important. By testing RNA from
clinical samples including nasal swabs, serum and faeces, the performance of the
RT-LAMP was compared to a real-time PCR assay. When testing nasal swabs and
serum, the sensitivity of the assays was approximately equivalent. Interestingly,
by testing faecal samples the RT-LAMP assay performed better. According to our
hypothesis, inhibitory substances probably less infuenced the RT-LAMP assay and
this could be the reason of the better performance.
The RT-LAMP assay has several strong features, which prove the applicability
as a powerful new tool of SVDV detection, these include:
(i) As an isothermal amplification method, this does not require costly PCR
machines, just a simple thenmoblock.
(ii) Rapidity, since results are obtained within 30-60 min.
(ii) It can be highly specific and sensitive, as described above
(iv) Test reading is simple since the results are visualised either by gel- elec-
trophoresis or by the naked eye through the addition of SYBR? Green
(Fig. 4.1)
a)
b)
Fig. 4.1 Simple detection of swine vesicular disease virus (SVDV) by loop-mediated isother.
mal amplification assay (LAMP) assay. By applying isothermal amplification, no expensive PCR
machines are needed, only a simple thermo-block. The reading of the results is also simple by
running a gel-electrophoresis (a) or by naked eye through the addition of SYBR? Green, in order
to show the positive results by green colour (b). Three positive samples are seen on the left and
the very left. Picture b) kindly provided by AL Blomstrom
4.2 PCR Methods Used in Routine Molecular Diagnostics
63
Since the RT-LAMP can easily be performed in modestly equipped field labora-
tories and it can be adapted to mobile diagnostic units, it provides novel tool for the
"front line” diagnosis of swine vesicular disease, an important TAD. Considering the
above-listed advantages of the RT-LAMP technology, we are adapting this method
to the improved diagnosis of a range of viral diseases in various host species.
including cattle.
4.2.2.7 Subtyping and Pathotyping of Avian Infuenza Viruses
with a One-Step Real-Time SYBR? Green RT-PCR Assay
For the rapid subtyping and pathotyping of avian infuenza viruses (AIV) a one-
step real-time SYBR(? Green RT-PCR assay was developed. Primers were selected
to target highly conserved nucleotide stretches that fank the cleavage site of the
haemagglutinin (HA) gene of AIVs. By sequencing the amplifed PCR products,
 an go a a uaa sans  g as u  ans a o
AIV can rapidly be identified. By testing 27 strains of AIV and nine heterologous
pathogens, including influenza B and C, and various avian viruses, the specificity
of the assay was confirmed. Since the subtype and pathotype determination were
completed within approximately 6 h, the SYBR? Green RT-PCR assay provides a
powerful new too in the arsenal of infuenza diagnostics.
4.2.3UltraRapidNucleicAcid Amplification andNucleotide
Sequencing Analysis
Considering that during the TAD outbreaks one of the most important requirements
is the prompt diagnosis, a one-step real-time PCR assay was developed at our OIE
A a u sans  jo uongn a uo pas si ss a 
gene, for the rapid and simultaneous detection of a broad spectrum of influenza
viruses, including highly pathogenic avian influenza variants. Several prototypes of
real-time PCR systems, which use the superconvection principle ("Superconvection
QPCR"; Alpha Helix, Uppsala, Sweden), were used both for amplification and
for cycle sequencing reactions (Figure 4.3). Identification and differentiation of
pathogenicity variants of AIV (HPAI or LPAI) were determined, based on sequenc-
ing of HA gene and the results were obtained in less than 2 h. The procedures
included 30 min for RNA purification, 30 min for superconvection QPCR, cycle
20 min for sequencing reactions with superconvection and 20 min for sequencing
by capillary electrophoresis (up to 700 bases). The wide screening of different sub-
types of avian infuenza in a single QPCR, followed by rapid sequencing that covers
cleavage site of HA gene, allow monitoring the viral load of infuenza strains in
wild birds and in farmed poultry. Furthermore, the method could provide a very
rapid and highly reliable molecular diagnosis in a possible pandemic influenza A
scenario.Further optimization is in progress.
64
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
4.2.4 Proximity Ligation, Novel Means of Protein Detection
by Nucleic Acid Amplification
Proximity ligation is based on the following principle: The recently established
proximity ligation mechanism enables sensitive high-capacity protein detection,
identification and measurement by converting the detection of specific proteins to
the analysis of DNA sequences. Proximity ligation enables a specific and quanti-
tative transformation of proteins present in a sample into nucleic acid sequences.
As pairs of so-called proximity probes bind the individual target protein molecules
at distinct sites, these reagents are brought in close proximity. The probes consist
of a protein specific binding part coupled to an oligonucleotide with either a free
3'- or 5'-end capable of hybridizing to a common connector oligonucleotide. When
the probes are in proximity, promoted by target binding, then the DNA strands can
be joined by enzymatic ligation. The nucleic acid sequence that is formed can then
be amplified and quantitatively detected in a real-time monitored polymerase chain
reaction. This convenient assay is simple to perform and allows highly sensitive
protein detection.
Our partner laboratories (OLINK and SVANOVA, Uppsala) reported that detec.
tion sensitivities similar to those of nucleic acid-based detection reactions were
achieved for the rapid detection of foot-and-mouth disease virus.
Compared to AgELISA, the sensitivity of proximity ligation proved to be higher
in several approaches. Thus, proximity ligation of proteins can be of great value for
early diagnosis of infectious disease and in biodefense.
At present, we are adapting the proximity ligation technique to the detection of
surface antigens of various viruses, such as avian influenza virus.The combination
of nucleic acid and antigen detection approaches will hopefully yield a more com-
plex, multilateral diagnosis of TADs. In addition, replacement of Antigen-ELISA
with more sensitive assay would be a great step in the diagnosis of infectious
diseases.
4.2.5 A Simple Magnetic Bead-Based Microarray for Detection
and Discrimination ofPestiviruses
A novel assay was developed for the rapid detection and discrimination of pes-
tiviruses, i.e., BVDV types 1 and 2, CSFV and BDV, by using magnetic bead
detection of PCR products on microarrays. After amplification, the PCR products
are hybridized onto an array, followed by visualization with streptavidin-coated
with the naked eye or a microscope, and makes this novel assay suitable for use in a
modestly equipped laboratory.
A panel of pestiviruses comprising members of all the four accepted species
was used to evaluate the assay. Other post-PCR detection methods (e.g, gel
electrophoresis and suspension microarray) were used as comparisons for the deter-
mination of the detection sensitivity of the assay. The results clearly indicate that
4.2PCR Methods Used in Routine Molecular Diagnostics
65
the assay provides a novel, robust and highly sensitive and specific method for the
improved detection and discrimination of viral pathogens. Considering the simplic-
ity of the assay, and the very simple detection procedure in particular, this magnetic
bead-based assay offers a powerful and novel technology for molecular diagnostics
invirology
4.2.6 Detection of an Emerging Pestivirus in Cattle and Further
Characterization by Means of Molecular Diagnostics
and Reverse Genetics
During a study on Bovine Viral Diarrhoea (BVD) epidemiology in Thailand, by
using indirect antibody ELISA, an antigen ELISA and PCR, a pestivirus was
detected in heat-inactivated serum sample of a calf.
The PCR products were sequenced and the comparative nucleotide sequence
analysis showed that this virus was closely related to a recently described atypi-
cal pestivirus (D32/00_“HoBi') that was frst isolated from a batch of foetal calf
serum collected in Brazil (Fig. 4.2).
BVDV-1
NADL
BVDV-2
BVDV-3?
178003
890
TKK
Hobi
Alfort
Giraffe
Bres
Reindee
137/4
Moredur
BDV
Fig. 4.2 Molecular epidemiology, identification of new pestiviruses, including TKK. Unrooted
each known species within the genus Pestivirus, including the tentative pestivirus of giraffe, the
D32/00_'HoBi’ and Th/04_KhonKaen (TKK). The sequences of pestivirus reference strains and
previously described strains were obtained from the GenBank. The phylogram shows the phy-
logenetic position of the newly detected pestiviruses Hobi and TKK as new variants of BVDV
(BVDV-3?), see more in Liu et al. [26]
66
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
It was also demonstrated that the Thailand virus (called Th/04_KhonKaen, or
TKK) was circulating in the herd. The study was the first to report a natural infection
The data suggested that these viruses might be spread in cattle populations in var-
ious regions of the world. If so, these atypical bovine pestiviruses can have important
implications for BVD control and for the biosafety of vaccines and other biological
products, produced with foetal calf serum.
To study these important issues, we needed a "live'"' virus, which can be replicated
and studies from various aspects. Since the serum was inactivated, virus isola-
tion was not possible. Thus, we applied methods of reverse genetics, in order to
"reconstruct"’ the inactivated virus from the inactivated serum sample.
By using transfection of the viral nucleic acids, the virus was reconstructed
and re-gained its capacity to grow in cell cultures. Full-genome characterization
of the new virus was perfonmed after recuperation of the inactivated virus through
transfection.
This characterization, and phylogenetic analysis based on the full genome
sequence, demonstrated that the virus was closely related to BVDV, suggesting that
TKK and other HoBi-like pestiviruses constitute a third genotype of BVDV, i.e.
BVDV type 3 (BVDV-3).
4.2.7 Molecular Epidemiology, New Approaches
Recently we can see a considerable progress not only in the development of various
nucleic acid detection methods, but also in molecular epidemiology. Traditionally.
inferring molecular phylogeny used to be performed by distance-based method, i.e.
neighbour joining for single genes
In a recent study at our OIE CC, a Bayesian approach was exploited to ana-
lyze five genetic regions of BVDV genome (5-UTR, Npr°, E2a, E2b, and NS3) for
68 taxa retrieved from GenBank. The best performance of the method was achieved
when analyzing a genetic region with appropriate proportions of conserved and vari
able sites or a combined dataset composed of all five genetic regions. In the future.
Bayesian method combined with other traditional tree-building methods can be used
to estimate a more reliable viral phylogenetic tree and to study the emerging and/or
occurrence new variants of BVDV.
4.2.8FurtherTrends,NewDirectionsinMolecular
Diagnostic Virology
The listed examples provide a short view about recent developments in molecular
diagnostic virology. This field is developing rapidly and many novel approaches of
virus detection and characterization are improving the means of virus detection and
characterisation. T'here is no space to list many approaches, just several examples
4.2 PCR Methods Used in Routine Molecular Diagnostics
67
4.2.8.1Full-Genome Amplification ofViral Genomes
To systematically identify and analyze the viral genomes, e.g., the15 HA and 9
NA subtypes of influenza A virus, we need reliable, simple methods that not only
characterize partial sequences but analyze the entire infuenza A genome.
By the selection and construction of specific sets of primers, it is possible to gen-
erate full-length cDNAs, to subtype viruses, to sequence their DNA, and to construct
expression plasmids for reverse genetics systems.
4.2.8.2 Full-Genome Sequencing of Viral Genomes
By the use of new sequencing machines, such as the 454 sequencers (Roche,
http://www.454.com/), 30-60 million nucleotides can be sequenced within several
hours. The technique is extremely important in the genetic research, including the
mation can be obtained about the full-length sequences of the tested viral genomes.
These long sequences provide more reliable data for determination of evolution-
ary aspects, relationships of viruses, viral subpopulations and many other important
aspects of molecular virology (Fig. 4.3).
In order to facilitate the detection of such viruses a range of molecular methods
in vitro replication or the use of virus-specific reagents. In the recent metagenomic
Fig. 4.3 Rapid sequencing of the viral genomes. QuanTyperTM 48, from AlphaHelix Molecular
Diagnostis AB, is the frst real-time thermo cycling instrument utilizing SuperConvectionTM to
speed up the cycling process.This is achieved by subjecting the samples to high g-force,(via
centrifugation), while cycling the temperature. The result is an increased mixing of the sample fuid
that improves both the temperature homogenization and the kinetics of the reaction. This makes the
QuanTyper-48 very fast but also very fexible with a vast sample volume range, accommodating
reactions from 20 to 200 μL in volume using standard PCR-tubes. Typically a 20 pL real-time
PCR assay is ready within 15 min while a 200 μL reaction takes up to 50 min to complete. Since
such viruses can also be important factors in various diseases, it is important to work on methods,
which facilitate their detection
68
4  New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
studies viral particles were detected in uncultured environmental and clinical sam-
ples, by using random amplification of their nucleic acids, prior to subcloning and
sequencing. Already known and novel viruses were then identified by comparing
A wide range of specimens was tested by viral metagenomic approaches, such
shore sediments, etc. Selection of samples with high viral loads, purification of viral
particles, removal of cellular nucleic acids, effcient sequence-independent ampli-
fication of viral RNA and DNA, recognizable sequence similarities to known viral
sequences and deep sampling of the nucleic acid populations through large scale
sequencing can all improve the possibilities to detect new viruses and to increase
unbiased characterization of the viral populations in various organisms and envi-
ronments. For example, such techniques led to the detection of new parvoviruses,
termed bocaviruses, in lower respiratory tract infections of children.
4.2.9 Viral Metagenomics, Search for Unknown Viruses
Characterization of hitherto unknown viruses is often hindered due to reasons
such as,
●Inability or very poor capacity to grow in cell cultures
identification of the virions with electron microscopy
· Being a minor part of mixed viral infections, where the co-infecting other viruses
are dominant
· Limited antigenic/serological cross-reactivity, hindering the detection by antigen
antibody assays, such as AgELISA, immunofuorescence or immunohistochem
istry
● The lack of nucleic acid identity or similarity to known viral sequences, thus,
remaining undetected in nucleic acid hybridization assays
· Remaining undetected even by PCR assays, due to unique genome structures, etc.
By detecting a range of new viruses recently, viral metagenomics have broad-
ened the range of known viral diversity and opened a very interesting new area
in virological research and diagnosis. It is worth to mention, that the above.
because they are frequently used together, in a complex assay. For example, full
 length amplification and full-length sequencing of the viral genomes is a logical
combination.
Here only very few examples were given for the new trends. This area is
extremely rapidly expanding in the recent days and a wide range of techniques
Bibliography
69
is under development to conduct research in viral metagenomics and to detect
umknown viruses.
4.2.10 Summary and Recommendations
This chapter gives a short summary from the OIE Collaborating Center for the
Biotechnology-basedDiagnosisofInfectiousDiseases inVeterinary Medicine,sum
marising briefy several of the recent developments in molecular diagnostic virology.
The purpose is to provide a view and a basis for the better understanding of the
SOPs, provided in the subsequent chapters of this book.
Various aspects of diagnosis of viral diseases are shortly discussed are brief rec-
ommendations are given. Technical facilities are outlined and selected references are
provided. This guidance is helping the reader to see the background of the SOPs and
to follow the technical suggestions, in order to diagnose the viral diseases rapidly
and effectively, following the rules of intermational standardisation and validation of
the diagnostic assays.
Bibliography
1.Ackermann, M, Engels, M. 2006. Pro and contra IBR-eradication. Wt. Microbiol., 113,
293-302. Review.
Sanchez-Vizcaino, JM. 2004. A highly sensitive and specific gel-based multiplex PCR assay
for the simultaneous and differential diagnosis of African swine fever and classical swine
fever in clinical samples. Vet. Res., 35, 551-563.
3.Allander, T, Tammi, MT, Eriksson, M, Bjerkner, A, Tiveljung-Lindell, A, Andersson, B. 2005.
Cloning of a human parvovirus by molecular screening of respiratory tract samples. Pror.
Natl. Acad. Sri. USA., 102, 12891-6. Erratum in Proc. Natl. Acad. Sri.,USA, 102, 15712
4. Balint, A, Baule, C, Palfi, V, Belak, S. 2005. Retrospective genome analysis of a live vaccine
strain of bovine viral diarrhoea virus. Vet. Res., 36, 89-99.
Landegren, U, Belak, S. 2007. Microarray-based molecular detection of Foot-and-mouth dis-
ease, Vesicular stomatitis and Swine vesicular disease viruses,using padlock probes. J. Virol.
Methods, 143, 200-06.
6.Belak,S. 2005. The molecular diagnosis of porcine viral diseases, a review. Acta. Vet. Hung..
53,11324.
7. Belak, S. 2007a. Experiences of an OIE Collaborating Centre in molecular diagnosis of
transboundary animal diseases, a review. Dev. Biol. (Basel), 128, 103-12.
8. Belak, S. 2007b. Molecular diagnosis of viral diseases, present trends and future aspects a
view from the OlE Collaborating Centre for the Application of Polymerase Chain Reaction
Methods for Diagnosis of Viral Diseases in Veterinary Medicine. Vaccine, 25, 5444-52.
9. Belak, S, Hakhverdyan, M. 2006. Recent achievements and trends in the molecular diagnosis
of bovine viral diseases - a view from the "OlE Collaborating Centre for the Application
of Polymerase Chain Reaction Methods for the Diagnosis of Viral Diseases in Veterinary
Medicine".Dtsch.Tierarztl Wochenschr,113,129-33
10. Belak, S, Thoren, P. 2o01. Molecular diagnosis of animal diseases, some experiences over the
past decade. Expert Rev Mol. Diagn., 1, 434-43.
70
4 New Trends in the Diagnosis and Molecular Epidemiology of Viral Diseases
11. Belak, S. 2004. Validation and quality control of polymerase chain methods used for the diag-
nosis of infectious diseases. Office International des Epizooties (OTE), Manual of Diagnostic
Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals (mammals, birds and bees). Fifth Edition, Chapter
1.1.4., 3036
12.Blomstrom,AL,Hakhverdyan,M,Reid,SM, Dukes,JP,King,DP,Belak,S,Berg,M.2008.
rapid detection of swine vesicular disease virus. J. Virol. Methods, 147, 188-93
13.Chan,CH.,Lin KL.,Chan,Y, Wang,YL, Chi, YT, Tu,HL,Shieh, HK, Liu,WT.2006
Amplification of the entire genome of infuenza A virus H1N1 and H3N2 subtypes by
14. Crowther, JR, Unger, H, Viljoen, GJ. 2006. Aspects of kit validation for tests used for the
diagnosis and surveillance of livestock diseases, producer and end-user responsibilities. Rev.
Sri. Tech., 25, 913-35. Review.
15. Delwart, EL. 2007. Viral metagenomics. Rev. Med. Virol., 17, 115-31.
16. Farkas, T, Antal M, Sami L, German P, Kecskemeti S, Kardos G, Belak S, Kiss, I. 2007.
Rapid and simultaneous detection of avian infuenza and Newcastle disease viruses by duplex
polymerase chain reaction assay. Zoonoses Public Health, 54, 38-43.
17. Fernandez, J, Agiero, M, Romero, L, Sanchez, C, Belak, S, Arias, ML, Sanchez-Vizcaino.
JM. 2008. Rapid and differential diagnosis of foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), swine vesicular
disease (SVD) and vesicular stomatitis (VS) by a new multiplex RT-PCR assay, analysing
clinical samples. J. Virol. Methods, 147, 301-11.
18. Gyarmati, P, Mohammed, N, Norder, H, Blomberg, J, Belak, S, Widen, F. 2007. Universal
detection of hepatitis E virus by two real-time PCR assays, TaqMan and Primer-Probe Energy
Transfer. J. Virol. Methods,146,226-35
19.Gyarmati, P Conze,T, Zohari, S,LeBlanc, N, Nilsson, M,Landegren,U,Baner, J, Belak.
S. 2008. Simultaneous genotyping of all hemagglutinin and neuraminidase subtypes of avian
infuenza viruses using padlock probes. J. Clin. Microbiol.,46, 1747-51.
20. Hakhverdyan, M, Rasmussen, TB, Thoren, P, Uttenthal, A, Belak, S. 2006. Development
of a real-time PCR assay based on primer-probe energy transfer for the detection of swine
vesicular disease virus. Arrh. Virol., 151, 2365-76.
21.Hjertner, B, Meehan, B, McKillen, J, McNeilly, F, Belak, S. 2005. Development of invader
squared assay for the detection of African swine fever DNA and comparison to PCR based
assays. J. Virol. Methods, 124, 1-10.
22. Hoffmann, E, Stech, J, Guan, Y, Webster, RG, Perez, DR. 2001. Universal primer set for the
full-length amplification of all influenza A viruses. Arrh. Virol., 146, 2275-89.
S. 2006. Application of LUX (light upon extension) fourogenic primer utilizing real-time
RT-PCR for the rapid detection of avian influenza viruses. Arta. Vet. Hung., 54, 525-33
 24. Larsen, LE. 2000. Bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV), a review. Acta. Vet. Scand., 41,
1-24.
25. LeBlanc, N, Gantelius, J, Schwenk, J, Stahl, K, Blomberg, J, Andersson-Svahn, H, Belak, S
2008. Development of a magnetic bead microarray for the simultaneous and simple detection
of four pestiviruses. J. Virol. Methods, in press.
26. Liu, L, Kampa, J, Belak, S, Baule, C. 2oo8. Identification of a new species of pestivirus as
genotype-3 Bovine Viral Diarrhoea Virus (BVDV-3) based on full-length genome sequence
analysis. Submitted
27.McKillen, J, Hjertner, B, Millar, A, McNeilly, F, Belak, S, Adair, B, Allan, G. 2006. Molecular
beacon real-time PCR detection of swine viruses. J. Virol. Methods, 140, 155-65.
28. Moennig. V, Houe, H, Lindberg. A. 2005. BVD control in Europe, current status and
perspectives. Ani. Health Res. Rev., 6, 63-74.
Grazioli, S, Landegren, U, Merza, M. 2008. Evaluation of a novel proximity ligation assay for
the sensitive and rapid detection of foot-and-mouth disease virus. Vet Microbiol., 127, 227-36.
Bibliography
71
30.Rasmussen, T, Uttenthal, A, de Stricker, K, Belak,S, Storgaard, T. 2003. Development of
a novel quantitative real-time PCR assay for the simultaneous detection of all serotypes of
foot-and-mouth disease virus. Arch. Virol., 148, 2005-21.
31. Sami, L, Ursu, K, McKillen, J, Kecskemeti, S, Belak, S, Kiss, I. 2007. Simultaneous detection
of three porcine viruses by multiplex PCR. Arta. Vet. Hung., 55, 267-76.
32.Sanchez,JA,Pierce,KE, Rice,JE,Wangh,LJ. 2004.Linear-After-The-Exponential (LATE)-
PCR, An advanced method of asymmetric PCR and its uses in quantitative real-time analysis.
Pror.Natl.Acad.Sri.USA.,101,1933-38
33. Segales,J, Calsamiglia, M, Olvera,A, Sibila, M, Badiella, L, Domingo, M. 2005.
Quantification of porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2) DNA in serum and tonsillar, nasal, tracheo-
bronchial, urinary and faecal swabs of pigs with and without postweaning multisystemic
wasting syndrome (PMWS). Vet. Microbiol., 111, 223-9.
34. Spatz, SJ., Rue, CA. 2008. Sequence determination of a mildly virulent strain (CU-2) of Gallid
herpesvirus type 2 using 454 pyrosequencing. Vrus Genes. 36, 479-89.
35. Stadejek, T, Stankevicius, A, Storgaard,T, Oleksiewicz, MB, Belak, S, Drew, TW, Pejsak,
Z. 2002. Identification of radically different variants of porcine reproductive and respiratory
viruses.J. Gen.Virol., 83, 1861-73
36. Stahl, K, Kampa, J, Alenius, S, Persson Wadman, A, Baule, C, Aiumlamai, S, Belak, S. 2007
Natural infection of cattle with an atypical 'HoBi'-like pestivirus - implications for BVD
control and for the safety of biological products. Vet. Res., 38, 517-23.
37. Stahl, K, Kampa, J, Baule, C, Isaksson, M, Moreno-Lopez, J, Belak, S, Alenius, S, Lindberg.
A. 2005. Molecular epidemiology of bovine viral diarrhoea during the final phase of the
Swedish BVD-eradication programme. Prev. Vet. Med., 72, 103-8; discussion 215-9.
38.Vilcek, S, Belak, S.1998. Classical swine fever virus, discrimination between vaccine strains
and European field viruses by restriction endonuclease cleavage of PCR amplicons. Arta. Vet.
Srand., 39, 395-400.
39. Xia, H, Liu, L, Wahlberg, N, Baule, C, Belak, S. 2007. Molecular phylogenetic analysis of
bovine viral diarrhoea virus, a Bayesian approach. Virus Res., 130, 53-62.
40.Yacoub, A., Kiss, I, Zohari, S, Hakhverdyan, M, Czifra, G, Mohamed, N, Gyarmati, P
Blomberg, J, Belak, S. 2009. A simple assay for rapid subtyping and pathotyping of avian
infuenza viruses.In preparation.
Chapter 5
Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR
Specific Procedures for Important Veterinary
Pathogens
This chapter provides SOPs for the following processes and diseases,
Detection of Avian Influenza
10. Slope/end point analysis of
A matrix gene by real time
Invader data.
TaqMan RT-P CR.
11. African Horse Sickness
H7 Eurasian Real Time PCRs
TaqMan RT-PCR.
2
for the detection and
12. Bluetongue SYBR-Green
pathotyping of Eurasian H7
RT-PCR.
 avian influenza isolates.
13. BTV Serotype 4 SYBR@
One Step RT PCR for detection
GREEN RT-PCR.
of H5 & H7 avian influenza &
14. CSFV Specific Real Time
cleavage site sequencing.
RT-PCR.
4.
Eurasian H5 avian influenza
15. Realtime RT PCR detection of
Real Time PCR.
Influenza virus matrix gene
5.
Detection of Rift Valley fever
Realtime RT PCR detection of
virus by Real-Time Reverse
velogenic Newcastle Disease
Transcription -PCR.
fusion protein
Swine vesicular disease virus
16. Preparation of Silica particles
6
one-step RT-LAMP.
for nucleic acid ex traction.
7.
Detection of African swine
17. Boom-silica RNA extraction
fever virus DNA using the
(GuSCN, phenol, Silica).
isothermal ASFV vp72 655T
18. Mab based competitive ELISAs
Invader squared assay.
for H5, and H7 antibody
8.
Real-time PCR detection and
detection in avian sera.
quantification of porcine
19. Type A, H5, and H7 Avian
viruses using molecular
Influenza antigen detection
beacons
ELISAs.
Swine vesicular disease virus
20. Ribonucleic acid extraction
PriProET two-step real-time
from samples using TRIzol
PCR.
Reagent.
E.A.Pestana et al.,Early,Rapid and SensitiveVeterinary Molecular Diagnostics -
73
Real Time PCR Applications,DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7_5,
Copyright @ International Atomic Energy Agency 2010
Published by Springer Science+Business Media B.V, Dordrecht 2010.All Rights Reserved
74
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
21. Ambion Magnetic Beads
26. Operation of the Stratagene
Ex traction (96-well).
Mx4000/Mx3005P for
22. Svanodip@ FMDV-Ag
 real-time PCR. One-step
penside test.
RT-PCR amplification of
23. FMDV PLA assay.
 RNA from vesicular disease
24. Procedure for using the
viruses.
Molecular Diagnostics Suite.
27. Differentiation of sheep and
25. One step TaqMan? RT-PCR
goat poxviruses by real time
for diagnosis of FMDV and
PCR
 related vesicular viruses.
Introduction
Standard Operating Procedures
The aim of this book is to show developments in PCR, particularly those involv-
ing real time and real time on-line applications. This Chapter deals with a variety
of PCR systems in order to illustrate such developments. The evolution of meth-
ods involves many stages and applied analyses and inevitably different stages are
reflected in publication of operating procedures or protocols. This is true in the
following descriptions which, although called Standard Operating Procedures
(SOP), reflect the aforementioned variation in validation stages reached to fully
merit the term standard.
The key to useful operating procedures is to define the "fitness for purpose" of
a test in whatever format. It seems obvious, but the exact purpose of a test has to
be clearly defined before an SOP is relevant to anyone seeking, or adopting, such
a method. Often the SOP describes a method that is employed as a routine test
procedure, working well, but without vigorous and proper validation. Often a test
 is without a defined purpose or target application and often a test is devised firstly
as a research tool and then adapted for routine or diagnostic use. These "un-
validated" SOPs are often the "best'" procedures, or the only ones we have, but
they should be regarded as useful guidelines which will require proper validation
before adapted as definitive SOPs. It is to be expected that, in the case of a defined
purpose, these laboratory protocols will undergo the robust validation sooner than
later.
It must be strongly emphasised that there are few systems involving real time
and real time on-line PCR that are validated to a sufficient degree to be acceptable
as routine tests (i.e. the procedure can be repeated in your lab without much
"tweaking'" to produce the same level of result confidence) and that can be repro-
duced from an SOP in an intermational range of laboratories. In the main, this
Introduction
75
situation will stay with us in the short term, although there are intermational moves
to review methods which have similar fitness for purpose and this should lead to
better "standards" and harmonisation at least, where needed. The situation should
improve since the usage of real time PCR is becoming common-place and more
methods are being applied which will require at least comparative assessments
(i.e. intermal and extemal quality assurance and ring testing) of diagnostic sensitiv.
ity and specificity.
It should be expected (and is on the whole true) that reference laboratories pro-
vide the “best" SOPs since they have a mandate to develop tests fit for purpose
and they have enough material (samples) and experience to allow validation prin-
ciples to be fulfilled to eventually to define systems that are proven to work under
a set of defined criteria. For diagnostic purposes this could involve a portfolio of
several "near to validated", or "validated", set of laboratory procedures to address
a specific purpose. In this book we target foot-and-mouth disease as example.
Here the vital areas of the test are the sample frame, sample taking and handling
(transport, storage), the receiving. the extraction, the testing. the reporting and the
actions taken. In short we have a defined fitness for purpose involving all situa-
tions from field to laboratory reporting. The PCR testing is only one component of
the SOP. The greater complexity of describing needs is illustrated in the chapter.
The SOPs here reflect a good cross section of what is mentioned above. In fact
SOPs covering more than the real time PCR are included since they are used in
tandem with PCR methods to provide a test system which better fits the fitness for
 purpose needs. This illustrates that SOPs should be geared to fitness for purpose
 and that there may be two or more tests adding up to fulfil the criterion.
The SOPs published are as given by the various contributors and reflect differ-
ent styles. There is no intermationally accepted format for showing SOPs and this
the quality ofSOPwriting.
Readers with further interest in SOPs quoted should always contact the named
person for further information and clarification. It should also be noted that often
there is a great deal more information available from the donor of the SOP than is
shown or indicated in the SOP and this is often the validation data held intermally.
The publication of validation data is a difficult area and although the OIE has a
mechanism for test registration there is a need for an information exchange for the
routine updateable dissemination of methods and data.
The SOPs have kindly been provided from various sources. There are differ-
ences in layout; font and style most of which have been preserved in this book. In
practice, as already stated, there is no accepted standard for SOP presentation.
The reader will get protocols for tests from other sources and will be subjected
to different degrees of detail and explanation. It is worth repeating that wherever
possible a contact person should be ascribed to answer questions on the protocol
given and who is also responsible for updating or altering the protocol.
76
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 1. Detection of Avian Influenza A Matrix Gene
by Real Time TaqMan RT-PCR
SOPV1493Edition218/09/07
This protocol is the standard operating procedure used by the avian influenza CRL
at the Veterinary Laboratories Agency.
If you have any technical queries please contact aiwrl @ vla.defra.gsi.gov.uk
1 Introduction
1.1 Purpose/Scope of This Protocol
To rapidly detect influenza RNA extracted from clinical and chick embryo ampli-
fied samples and provide an early warming for the presence of influenza virus in a
sample.
1.2 Background Information
Real time PCR is a method that has been introduced relatively recently. The tech-
nology combines DNA amplification with detection of the products in a single
tube. In the case of influenza A viruses an extra reverse transcriptase step is re-
quired to convert the RNA into cDNA. This fonmat is highly beneficial as it re-
moves the significant contamination risk caused by opening tubes for post-PCR
manipulation. It is also less time consuming than gel based analysis and can sup-
ply a quantitative result. Current detection methods are based on changes in fluo-
rescence proportional to the increase in product. Fluorescence is monitored during
each PCR cycle to provide an amplification plot, allowing the user to follow the
reaction.
The PCR is based on detection of a conserved region of the influenza A virus
matrix gene using fluorogenic hydrolysis type probes and will detect all influenza
A subtypes.
SOP 1. Detection of Avian Influenza A Matrix Gene
77
2 Materials
2.1 Chemicals and Reagents
2.1.1 Primers and Probe
Sep 1
AGA TGA GTC TTC TAA CCG AGG TCG
Sep2
TGC AAA AAC ATC TTC AAG TCT CTG
SePRO
FAM-TCA GGC CCC CTC AAA GCC GA-TAMRA
2.1.2 Real Time PCR Master Mix
This utilises the Qiagen Onestep RT-PCR kit (Cat No. 210212). Reagents not con-
tained in the kit can be obtained from other suppliers. Volumes indicated below
will be sufficient for 10 × 25 μL reactions.
DEPC treated water
Ambion or similar
137.5 μL
(x5) Qiagen 1 step RT PCR buffer
50 μL
Rox ref dye (pre diluted 1:500
in DEPC water)
Stratagene or similar
3.75 μL
Qiagen dNTP mix
10μL
Sep1(50 μM)
Sigma or similar
2μL
Sep2(50 μM)
Sigma or similar
2μL
SePRO(30 μM)
Sigma or similar
2.5 μL
 25 mM magnesium chloride
 Promega or similar
12.5 μL
RNAsin (40 U/μuL)
Promega or similar
1μL
Qiagen 1 step RT PCR enzyme mix
10 μL
2.1.3  Real Time PCR M Gene Standards
These are quantified RNA standards extracted from infected allantoic fluid of
known titre.
2.2 Equipment
●Microcentrifuge tubes (1.5 mL)
-18°C or lower freezer
+-70°C or lower freezer
●Vortex mixer
 Pipettes
●Microcentrifuge (with rotor for 2 mL tubes)
●Sterile, Rnase-free pipette tips with aerosol barrier
78
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
●Mx 3000/4000 real time RT-PCR quantitative machine
●Mx 3000/4000 real time RT-PCR plates/strips
●Mx3000/4000 real time RT-PCR plate caps
3 Procedure/Method
3.1 Preparation of PCR Master Mix and Loading
3.1.1 Preparation of PCR master mix and loading of real time plate/strip(s) to be
carried out in the PCR clean room.
3.1.2  Make up master mix sufficient for the number of samples to be tested.
3.1.3 Thoroughly mix the master mix and centrifuge for 30 s to remove bubbles.
3.1.4 Aliquot 23 μL of master mix per well of the real time plate/strip(s).
3.1.5 Loosely place the plate caps on the plate.
All wells will need to be covered even though only a portion of the plate
may be used.
 3.1.6 Bring the plate/strip(s) out of the clean room and place on ice before addi-
tion of sample RNA and RNA standards
3.2 Preparation of RNA Standards
3.2.1 Extract RNA using appropriate method
3.2.2 Carefully prepare dilutions of RNA in water in the range 10", 10', 10", 10,
of each dilution so that a number of aliquots of each dilution will be made.
Aliquot in volumes that the RNA does not have more than 3 freeze/thaws.
Store aliquots at -70°℃.
3.2.3 Each standard to be run as indicated on the worksheet
3.3ManuatAdditionofSamptesandStandards
3.3.1 Referring to plate layout, add 2 μL of the sample RNA to the 23 μL of
master mix.
 Take care to avoid cross contamination of samples at this stage.
Change gloves frequently and do not hold tips containing RNA above the
incorrect wells.
SOP 1. Detection of Avian Influenza A Matrix Gene
79
3.3.2 Add 2 μL of real time PCR standards to appropriate wells based on your
worksheet layout. Also include a no template control (NTC) well as a nega-
tive control, using 2 μL water as your template. Re-apply caps to the rest of
the plate/strip(s).
3.3.3 Once RNA is added, fit caps to all wells.
It is important that the caps are fitted firmly and correctly onto the wells
before being used on the real time machine.
3.3.4  If the real time plate/strip(s) are not to be loaded onto the real time machine
straight away, keep the plate/strip(s) on ice until ready to test.
3.4ReverseTranscriptaseandPCR
3.4.1  Place the real time plate/strip(s) in the appropriate real time machine.
3.4.2 Incubate the reactions with the following thermocycling profile
RT step
50°C for 30 min
95°℃ for 15 min
PCR step (x 40 cycles)
95°Cfor 10 s
60°C for 20 s
o a sn dns ae o a unp p asn o
and FAM filters and the endpoint read option with 2 reads if using the
Mx4000. The Mx3000 will only allow one reading per 20 s.
3.4.3 Note that the lamp on both real time machines requires 20 min to warm up.
Open a new file on the machine and use the real time quantitative
PCR(multiple standards) option for the experiment type. The thermocycle
profile and plate setup can be re-entered for each experiment or imported
from previous experiments if desired.
3.4.4 When the plate setup and thermoprofile windows have been entered, select
run to start thermocycling. A storage window will automatically open. Save
the file in an appropriate folder on the hard drive of the computer.
    s    i  s    s
not being used by anyone else after you, select the option to tum the lamp
off at the end of the run as the lamps have a limited lifespan.
4 Results
4.1 Analysis and Display of Results
4.1.1 The fluorescence data can be viewed during, and after, the PCR reaction
using the raw data plots tab in the run section.
80
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
4.1.2 When the run is complete make a record of the file name and its storage lo-
cation and save a backup of the file in a separate location.
4.1.3 To analyse the data select the Analysis section button and select the wells
to be examined in the Analysis/Setup window.
4.1.4 To view the results click on the Results tab in the Analysis section and
view the amplification plots.
T'here are four options for analysing the fluorescence:
+R (Multicomponent view) displays the raw fluorescence in arbitrary units.
·dR displays the baseline-corrected fluorescence.
As all reactions and wells will start with a slightly different fluorescence
reading this option sets a baseline value of 0 to all plots. This correction is
determined by the fluorescence values obtained during the initial rounds of
the PCR. The adaptive baseline algorithm calculates the best baseline for
each plot individually.
·Rn displays the fluorescence normalised to the passive reference dye
(ROX).
This allows for fluctuations in fluorescence, which are not due to cleavage
of the Taqman probe.
 dRn displays the baseline-corrected normalised fluorescence.
The dRn option with the ROX channel switched on is the most appropriate
option for analysis of the data.
4.2 Interpretation of Results
4.2.1 Analyse the data by comparing the results obtained for the positive stan-
dards and NTC.
4.2.2 Construct a standard curve with the positive standards. As a guideline the
curve should have the following criteria:
Efficiency >80%
Slope between -3.1 and -3.8
R2 value >0.980
4.2.3Check the Ct values for any robot extraction controls.
These should reproducibly amplify with a Ct value ±2 Ct's either side of
their predetermined Ct value of 30.Greater deviations from the predeter-
mined Ct value suggest that,
·The M gene positive control may have degraded (if Ct greater than pre-
determined value).
SOP 1. Detection of Avian Influenza A Matrix Gene
81
●Software setings on the instrument are inaccurate/inappropriate and the
fluorescence cut-off level excessively high/low and is affecting the Ct
value of the predetermined M gene positive control. It may be possible
to reset the software after the experiment to restore the expected Ct
value provided the other controls are in order.
·Deviation (±2 Cts) may also occur where software settings on the in-
strument are inaccurate/inappropriate and the fluorescence cut-off level
excessively high/low and is affecting the Ct value of the predetermined
M gene positive control. It may be possible to reset the software after
the experiment to restore the expected Ct value provided the other con-
trols are in order.
4.2.4 If all controls are within acceptable limits analyse the data for the test
samples.
4.2.5 An increase in fluorescence will be observed at an early stage for positive
samples. The NTC and negative samples should not result in an increase in
fluorescence above the baseline.
            s
follows,
●Ct value <30 - samples are M gene positive.
●Ct value 30-35 with sigmoidal/logarithmic appearance - samples are
weak positive.
●Ct value >35 samples are negative if the amplification plot has a linear
u no uonpap aqond snonds nuasadan Ae snond asau 'adus
specific fluorescence.
4.2.7  All positive results are repeated and confirmed by use of virus isolation
or conventional gel based PCR and sequencing before reporting in order to
establish the subtype of influenza A virus detected.
5Bibliography
1. Chang-Won L, Suarez, DL. 2004. Application of real time RT-PCR for the quantification and
competitive replication study of H5 and H7 subtype avian influenza virus. J. Virol. Methods,
119, 151-8.
2. Spackman, E, Senne, DA, Myers, TJ, Bulaga, LL, Garber, LP, Perdue, ML, Lohman, K.
Daum, LT, Suarez, DL. 2002. Development of a real time reverse transcriptase PCR assay for
type A influenza virus and the avian H5 and H7 haemagglutination subtypes. J Clin. Microbiol.,
40, 3256-60
82
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
6 Appendix 1
Testing New Batches of Reagents
New batches of probe and primers should be tested when they are first re-suspended.
Probe and primers should be aliquoted once re-suspended to avoid repeated freeze
thawing.
Test new reagents in the same real time PCR as the current reagents using the
positive standards and NTC according to this protocol. If the new reagents are fit
for purpose both sets of reagents should give equivalent results.
SOP 2. Detection and Pathotyping of Eurasian H7 Avian Influenza Isolates
83
SOP 2. H7 Eurasian Real Time PCRs for the Detection
and Pathotyping of Eurasian H7 Avian Influenza Isolates
SOPV1.536Edition411/04/07
This protocol is the standard operating procedure used by the avian influenza
CRL at the Veterinary Laboratories Agency.
If you have any technical queries please contact aiwrl @ vla.defra.gsi.gov.uk
1 Introduction
1.1 Purpose/Scope of This Protocol
This protocol provides the details required to (i) detect Eurasian isolates of H7
avian influenza virus (AIV) by RealTime PCR and also to (ii) pathotype any H7
1.2 Background Information
1.2.1 Two H7 RealTime PCRs are presented in this document. Both are rapid,
sensitive and specific method for the detection of Eurasian H7 AIV iso-
lates. In brief, the two H7 RealTime PCR methods differ as follows,
    i  ss     ,  
be the more sensitive of the two H7 detection methods, amplifying a
product within the HA2 region of the H7 gene. Detection utilises a H7-
specific hydrolysis ("T'aqMan") probe with fluorescence emission in
RealTime.
1.2.3 Cleavage Site ("CS") H7 RealTime PCR, While validation studies have
shown this to be the less-sensitive of the two H7 RealTime PCRs, this
method amplifies a product which spans the H7 gene cleavage site (CS)
region. Sequencing of this H7 CS amplicon allows for successfulpatho
typing of the H7 AIV as either low pathogenic (LP) or highly pathogenic
avian influenza (HPAI).
1.2.4 Validation at VLA has revealed both H7 RealTime PCR approaches to
be effective in detecting H7 AI directly from clinical specimens, ie there
is no need to first isolate the suspect H7 isolate in embryonated eggs by
growth to a high titre. H7 RealTime PCR has been described previously [1],
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
but here primer and probe design was tailored for the detection of N
American H7 AI isolates.
1.2.5 For the methods described in this protocol, haemaglutinnin (HA) gene
sequences from Eurasian H7 isolates (mainly 1995-2005) were aligned.
This served to optimise primer and probe design for the detection of
Eurasian H7 AIV isolates. The HA2 H7 RealTime PCR was designed at
VLA, while the CS H7 RealTime PCR was designed by Mr John Voer-
mans and Dr Guus Koch at CIDC-Lelystad in the Netherlands.
1.2.6 In this protocol there is considerable commonality for both the HA2 and
CS H7 RealTime PCRs as regards Materials (Section 3), Procedure/
Method (Section 4) and Results (Section 5). However, it is important to
note the differences between these two H7 RealTime PCRs as regards (i)
Chemicals and Reagents (3.2) for primers and probes, and (i) the results
interpretation guide for the two methods, i.e. Sections 5.2.5 and 5.2.6.
1.2.7 In addition, the CS H7 RealTime PCR provides the additional opportu-
mity to pathotype by amplicon sequencing as stated in Procedure/Method
(Section 4.6). Examination of this H7 CS amplicon sequence will deter-
mine whether the H7 specimen is low pathogenic (LP) or highly patho-
genic avian influenza (HPAI)
2 Safety
It is your laboratory's responsibility to ensure all work described in this protocol
is conducted to a high safety standard. This includes an awareness of risks relat-
ing to eg dangerous or toxic chemicals, potentially hazardous procedures etc.
Here local safety rules in your laboratory should be understood by all relevant
members of staff.
3 Materials
3.1DocumentationandSoftware
Worksheet for RealTime plate layout.
Instruction manual for RealTime PCR platform and software in use in your
laboratory.
SOP 2. Detection and Pathotyping of Eurasian H7 Avian Influenza Isolates
85
3.2 Chemicals and Reagents
LH6H75'-GGC CAG TATTAG AAA CAA CAC CTA TGA-3
RH4H75'-GCC CCG AAG CTA AAC CAA AGT AT-3
H7pro115FAM-CCG CTG CTT AGT TTG ACT GGG TCA ATC T-BHQ-3
H7R
5'-GAC CTTCCC ATC CAT TTT CA-3'
3.2.2 HA2 H7 RealTime PCR Master Mix
This utilises the Qiagen OneStep RT-PCR kit (Cat No. 210212).
Reagents not contained in the kit can be obtained from other suppliers.
Volumes indicated below will be sufficient for 10 x 25 μL reactions, i.e., di-
vide the Master Mix into 10 × 23 μL volumes and add 2 μL extracted RNA to
each.
DEPC treated water (ie.RNAse-free)
Ambion or similar
139 μL
(x5) Qiagen 1 step RT PCR buffer
50 μL
Rox ref dye (pre-diluted 1:500 from
Stratagene or similar
3.75 μL
Stratagene stock in DEPC water)
Qiagen dNTP mix
10μL
LH6H7 (50 μM)
Sigma or similar
2μL
RH4H7 (50 μM)
Sigma or similar
2μL
H7pro11 (30 μM)
Sigma or similar
1.25 μL
25mM magnesium chloride
Promega or similar
12.5 μL
RNAsin (40 U/μL)
Promega or similar
1μL
Qiagen 1 stepRT PCR enzyme mix
10μL
3.2.3 CS H7 RealTime PCR Master Mix
This utilises the Qiagen OneStep RT-PCR kit for the HA2 H7 RealTime PCR.
The only differences are the choice of primers and probe.
The reagents below will be sufficient for 10 x 25 μL reactions, i.e., divide
the Master Mix into 10 x 23 μL volumes and add 2 μL extracted RNA to each.
86
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
DEPC treated water (ie RNAse-free)
Ambion or similar
139 μL
(x5) Qiagen 1 step RT PCR buffer
50 μL
 Rox ref dye (pre-diluted 1:500 from Stratagene stock in 
 Stratagene or similar
3.75 μL
DEPC water)
Qiagen dNTP mix
Sigma or similar
10 μL
H7F (50 μM)
Sigma or similar
2μL
H7R (50 μM)
Sigma or similar
2μL
H7-TM1 (30 μM)
Sigma or similar
1.25 μL
25mM magnesium chloride
 Promega or similar
12.5 μL
RNAsin (40U/uL)
Promega or similar
1 μL
Qiagen 1 stepRT PCR enzyme mix
10μL
3.2.4 H7 Controls
●Negatives
Include at least two “"no template controls" (NTCs) where 2uL RNase free
water are added.
●H7 extraction control (positive)
E.g., an aliquot of inactivated H7 virus from your repository. This should
serve as an RNA extraction control (manual or robotic). The Ct value of this
extracted RNA should be predetenmined earlier according to your decision,
but a "low positive" titre is advisable eg a Ct value of approximately 30.
This is because a low titre extraction control is much more likely to indicate
problems with RNA extraction, whereas a high titre (ie lower Ct) extraction
may not indicate this. Higher titre extraction controls may also risk contami-
nating neighbouring reaction wells. Ideally use in duplicate for each H7
RealTime experiment. Enter as "unknown" (or equivalent) during experi-
mental set-up using the software on the RealTime instrument.
●H7 RNA dilution series ("standards')
Use any other Eurasian H7 RNA preparation from extracted egg fluid as x10
fold dilution series (at least 4 dilutions). Ideally this should be a duplicate di-
lution series. This series (entered appropriately as "standards'" with relative
quantities indicated by using the software while setting up the RealTime ex.
periment) can be used to determine the H7 RealTime PCR efficiency. It is
important to include low positive H7 controls which correspond to approxi-
mately 10 EIDs/mL and 100 EIDs/mL of H7 AIV in the sample prior to
RNA extraction - this will relate to defining the H7 RealTime PCR posi-
tive/negative cutoff, where the corresponding Ct value will differ in the HA2
and CS versions (Sections 5.2.5 and 5.2.6, below).
Quantification of H7 positive controls
The H7 positive control material may have been quantified by using classi-
cal virus titre determination in embryonating chickens’ eggs or by using
SOP 2. Detection and Pathotyping of Eurasian H7 Avian Influenza Isolates
87
M-gene RealTime in quantitative mode with a series of standards which had
themselves been obtained from AIV of known titre.
3.3 Equipment
●Microcentrifuge tubes (1.5 mL)
●Correctly functioning RNA extraction robot
●-70°C or lower freezer
●20 μL robot barrier tips
·Pipettes
-18°℃ or lower freezer
 Sterile, Rnase-free pipette tips with aerosol barrier
Vortex mixer
●Appropriate plasticware for the RealTime PCR platform of your choice
●Microcentrifuge (with rotor for 2 mL tubes)
●RealTime PCR platform of your choice, where you are satisfied that both
the instrument are in correct working order.
4 Procedure/Method
4.1 Preparation of PCR Master Mix and Loading
4.1.1 Preparation of PCR master mix and loading of RealTime plasticware for
reactions to be carried out in the PCR clean room.
4.1.2 Make up master mix sufficient for the number of samples to be tested.
4.1.3 Thoroughly mix the master mix and centrifuge for 30 s to remove bubbles.
4.1.4 Aliquot 23 μL of master mix per well of the RealTime plate/strip(s).
NB: Ensure the plasticware (ie plates/strips and covers/caps) is appropri-
ate for the chosen RealTime PCR platform.
4.1.5 Use plasticware to loosely cover the plate/strips accordingly
4.1.6 Bring the plate/strip(s) out of the PCR clean room and place on ice be-
fore addition of sample RNA and controls.
4.2 Preparation of H7 RNA Controls
4.2.1 H7 positive and negative controls are as described above in Section
3.2.5.
88
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
4.2.2 Extract H7 RNA manually or robotically according to the manufacturer's
instructions.
4.2.3 Include H7 RNA positive controls "standards" (ideally in duplicate) as a
dilution series in each H7 RealTime PCR experiment (Section 3.2.5,
Paragraph 3).
4.3Manual AdditionofSamples andStandards
4.3.1 Referring to plate layout, add 2 μL of the sample RNA to the 23 μL of
master mix. Where possible, use a dedicated multi-channel pipette to
load multiple samples e.g., eight samples per strip.
NB: Take care to avoid cross contamination of samples at this stage.
Change gloves frequently and do not hold tips containing RNA above the
been filled with caps (strip covers) to further minimise the risk of cross
contamination.
4.3.2  Add 2 μL of RealTime PCR controls to appropriate wells based on the
worksheet layout. Re-apply covers to the rest of the plate/strip(s).
4.3.3 Once RNA is added, fit caps (strip covers) to all wells.
the wells before insertion into the RealTime instrument.
4.3.5 If the RealTime plate/ strip(s) are not to be loaded into the instrument
immediately, keep the plate/strip(s) on ice until ready to test.
4.4 Robotic Addition of Samples
4.4.1 Gloves to be wom at all times.
4.4.2 Work according to the manufacturer's instructions in order to extract
RNA from specimens.
4.4.3 At VLA we prefer to add extracted RNA to the RealTime plate manually
by using a multichannel pipette. Once addition of RNA is complete, re-
seal the plate containing the eluted RNA and store at -70'C.
4.4.4 Manually add 2 μL of RealTime PCR controls (positive and negative)
to appropriate wells as described in 4.3.2.
4.4.5 Ensure that the caps/strip covers are completely flat across the whole
plate.
          i    
4.4.7 If the plate is not to be loaded into the RealTime instrument immediately.
keep plate on ice until required
SOP 2. Detection and Pathotyping of Eurasian H7 Avian Influenza Isolates
89
4.5 Reverse Transcription(RT) and PCR
4.5.1 Place the RealTime plate/strip(s) in the appropriate RealTime instrument.
4.5.2 The thermocycling profile is identical for both the HA2 and CS H7 Real-
Time PCRs.
These are also identical to that used for the H5 RealTime PCR which en
ables more than one of these assays to be ran simultaneously in one plate
RT step
50'℃ for 30 min
95'C for 15 min
PCR step (x40 cycles)
95'C for 10 s
54'C for 30 s
72'℃ for 10 s
NB: Collect fluorescence data at end of 54C step using the ROX and
FAM filters.
 4.5.3 Open a new file using the instrument software to define all the necessary
RealTime PCR experimental parameters. This is conducted according to
the manufacturer's software instructions.
4.5.4 Ensure that the software files are distinguished ie HA2 or CS H7 Real-
Time PCR. If running both H7 RealTime PCRs and/or the H5 RealTime
PCR (4.5.2, above) in the same experiment, then name the file appro-
priately.
 a  sn  u z e sn  a  s
tothe make of instrument. If the machine is not booked for immediate use
by another colleague upon completion of the run, select the option (if
available) to turm off the lamp at the end of the run. T'his is because cer-
tain makes of lamp have a limited lifespan.
4.6 Molecular Pathotyping by Sequencing the CS H7 RealTime
PCR Amplicon
- a  d aa   a a   a  rt
rectly purified from the reaction mix after completion of this RealTime
PCR. There is no need to electrophorese this H7 amplicon through an
is as described by protocol "OneStep RT PCR for detection of H5 &
H7 avian influenza and cleavage site sequencing", with the difference
that primers H7F and H7R (3.2.2, above) are used to prime the BigDye
sequencing reactions. The assembled sequence from the CS H7 RealTime
06
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
amplicon is then used to determine the H7 sample as being either low
5 Results
5.1 Analysis and Display of Results by Using the RealTime
Instrument's Software
 5.1.1 Conduct this after familiarising yourself with your RealTime PCR soft-
ware and instructions.
5.2 Interpretation of Results in Both H7 RealTime PCRs
5.2.1 Analyse the data by comparing the results obtained for the negative (NTC)
and H7 positive controls.
5.2.2 Negative Controls (NTCs)
     i  a   o, a os s 
wells with a linear character (e.g. >38) and giving a very low level final
fluorescence (ie little greater than the initial “"flare" fluorescence values
at early cycles) suggest that probe degradation may have occurred, eg the
probe has been excessively frozen and thawed. Although such observa-
tions may not invalidate the experiment, it is advised to discard the ali-
uanbasqns iog aqod h nuaaau aun jo jonbie ysay e gno-meun pue gonb
experiments and note result
If the late Ct value (>38) has a logarithmic/sigmoidal character where
clear final fluorescence values are observed, then contamination of the
NTC wells with H7 RNA may be considered. It is also possible that such
very late Ct signals may occasionally occur spuriously. Repeat the H7
RealTime PCR experiment.
5.2.3 H7 Positive Controls
1. H7 extraction control (3.2.5, Paragraph 2),
Quantified specimens should reproducibly amplify with a Ct value ±2
Cts either side of their predetermined Ct value. Greater increases above
the predetermined Ct value suggest that
● RNA extraction from the specimens has been suboptimal. Repeat.
SOP 2. Detection and Pathotyping of Eurasian H7 Avian Influenza Isolates
91
·It is also possible that the H7 positive control may have degraded if
stored incorrectly e.g., 4'℃, excessive freeze-thawing etc.
·Deviation (±2 Cts) may also occur where software settings on the in-
strument are inaccurate / inappropriate and the fluorescence cut-off
level excessively high / low and is affecting the Ct value of the prede-
termined H7 positive control.
*It may be possible to reset the softw are after the experiment to restore
2. H7 RNA dilution series "standards'" (3.2.5, Paragraph 3)
     s    s  -s
correspond to H5 RealTime PCR efficiency in the range 80-110%.
Deviation from these conditions may not on its own invalidate the
test, provided the low positive standards have given Ct's within 2 Cts of
the expected value (see Sections 5.2.5 and 5.2.6 below).
       a 
deviation may reflect eg (i) inaccurate RNA addition (ii) degradation of
the RNA standards by inappropriate storage or (ii) inefficient thermo-
cycling/fluorescence reading due to an instrument problem. This indi
cates a need to address these matters for subsequent H7 RealTime PCR
experiments.
5.2.4 If all controls are within acceptable limits, analyse the data for the test
samples.
5.2.5 Criteria for assessing results on test samples are as follows in the HA2
H7 Realtime PCR when used on Stratagene Mx3000 series RealTime in-
of RealTime PCR platform:
1. Examine the H7 RNA dilution series. Note the Ct value of the control
RNA extracted from a Eurasian H7 sample at a titre of 10 EIDs/mL
(this Ct being an average of duplicate testing) - refer to Section 3.2.5
te auu aun ui anea n e piai pinous stu (aaoqe) e yde.ered
by both H7 RealTime PCRs. In this example, where Ct 36 is obtained
from the 10 EIDs/mL RNA control, a Ct < 36 in the HA2 H7 Real-
Time PCR is considered clearly H7 positive, while a specimen re-
cording "No Ct” value is clearly negative.
2. Samples with Ct >36 in the HA2 H7 RealTime PCR, but with a
logarithmic/sigmoidal character giving clear final fluorescence
greater than that observed during early cycles. These are generally
considered as "inconclusive", however the following two paragraphs
positive"or "H7 negative'
92
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3. Check the Ct value when the same RNA extract was tested by the M
gene RealTime PCR protocol. A Ct value of 34-37 by M gene Real-
Time PCR suggests that this may be a very weak positive HA2 H7
RealTime result. A reproducible result obtained after re-extraction of
RNA from the same clinical material by HA2 H7/M gene RealTime
PCRs would tend to confinm this. However, it is unlikely that such
“late Ct risers" (particularly those from field submissions) would
H7 PCRs due to their lower sensitivity.
 4. However, if HA2 H7/M gene ReaITime PCR retesting of re-extracted
RNA yields a "No Ct" result then such specimens are considered
negative.
5.2.6 Criteria for assessing results on test samples are as follows in the CS H7
RealTime PCR when used on Stratagene Mx3000 series RealTime in-
struments.
The example below of Ct values may not apply to other makes of Real-
TimePCR platform:
1. These criteria are similar in principle to those listed in the above four
paragraphs of Section 5.2.5. However, validation with clinical speci-
mens has shown the CS H7 RealTime PCR may be less sensitive (up
to x10 fold) in comparison to the HA2 RealTime PCR, and this dis-
RNA dilution series. The 100 EIDs/mL extracted RNA standard
typically gives a Ct value of 32 (±2) in the CS H7 RealTime. In this
example, a Ct <32 in the CS H7 RealTime PCR is considered clearly
H7 positive, while a specimen recording “No Ct" value is clearly
negative.
2. It is possible that CS amplification plots (ie with a sigmoidal/
logarithmic character) may be observed in the Ct range 32-38. Sam-
ples which give such inconclusive results should be re-tested and/or
reconsidered with the results of another RealTime PCR (eg M gene
and/or HA2 H7) as outlined for the HA2 version, Section 5.2.5, Para-
graphs 2-4 (above).
5.2.7 All H7 positive results from a potential new case of AI are repeated and
for an index case should be confinmed by use of virus isolation in accord
with current OIE/EU guidelines. For the latter conventional H7 PCR and
sequencing before reporting is crucial in order to confinm the H7 subtype
and pathotype.
5.2.8 Other considerations for the two H7 RealTime PCRs.
Both H7 RealTime PCRs described in this protocol were designed, opti-
mised and validated to detect recent Eurasian H7 isolates. Because of
SOP 2. Detection and Pathotyping of Eurasian H7 Avian Influenza Isolates
93
      am s  i
was not considered likely the former H7s would be detected reliably by
the two H7 RealTime PCRs described in this protocol. Results from the
validation work affinmed this supposition.
5.2.9 Primer and probe considerations for Eurasian H7 isolates
As Eurasian H7 viruses continue to evolve, it is possible that new iso-
lates will emerge which will be less efficiently detected by the two de-
scribed H7 RealTime PCR methods, or possibly not detected at all. Revi-
sion of H7 primer/probe sequences may be necessary and this will be
reflected in any future updated versions of this protocol.
6Bibliography
1. Spackman, E, Senne, DA, Myers, TJ, Bulaga, LL, Garber, LP, Perdue, ML, Lohman, K,
Daum, LT, Suarez, DL. 2002. Development of a real time reverse trancriptase PCR for
type A influenza virus and the avian H5 and H7 haemagglutination subtypes. J. Clin. Mi-
crobiol., 40, 3256-60.
b6
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 3. One Step RT PCR for Detection of H5 & H7 Avian
Influenza and Cleavage Site Sequencing
SOP VI.545 03/09/07
This protocol is a copy of the standard operating procedure used by the avian in-
fluenza CRL at the Veterinary Laboratories Agency.
If you have any tec hnical queries please contact aiwrl @ vla.defra.gsi.gov.uk
1 Introduction
1.1 Purpose/Scope of This Protocol
This protocol provides details required to determine and analyse the nucleotide
sequence of samples of H5 & H7 avian influenza (AI) submitted for statutory se-
quencing. PCR conditions outlined below include those which have been success-
ful in generating amplicons from RNA directly extracted from clinical specimens.
1.2 Background Information
1.2.1  As described in the OIE diagnostic manual, determination of the nucleotide
sequence (and the deduced amino acid sequence) of specific regions of the
genomes of these viruses allows an estimation of their pathogenicity to be
made.
2 Safety
2.1 Local Safety Procedures
It is your laboratory's responsibility to ensure all work described in this protocol is
conducted to a high safety standard. This includes an awareness of risks relating to
e.g., dangerous or toxic chemicals, potentially hazardous procedures etc. Here lo-
cal safety rules in your laboratory should be understood by all relevant members
of staff.
SOP 3. Detection of H5 & H7 Avian Influenza and Cleavage Site Sequencing
95
3 Procedure/Method
3.1 RNA Extraction
This should be carried out (i) manually or (ii) robotically.
3.2 OneStep RT PCR (Qiagen Kit)
3.2.1 The protocol below is designed round the OneStep RT-PCR kit (Qiagen,
cat # 210212).
Prepare the master mix for 50 μL reaction volumes where (i) cDNA is syn-
thesised followed by (ii) PCR in the same tube.
Final
Vol (μL) Required for One Reaction
Total
Reagent
concentration (50μL)
(μL)
RNase-free water
28.8 μL
PCR Buffer 5X from Qiagen 1X
10 μL
OneStep RT-PCR kit
dNTPs Mix 10mM each
0.4mM each
2μL
(from Qiagen kit)
Forward primer 50 pmol/μL 1 μM 
1μL
(50μM)
Reverse primer: 50 pmol/μL
1 μM
1μL
(50μM)
RNase Inhibitor 40 U/μL
8U
0.2 μL
(Promega)
 One Step RT-PCR Enzyme
2μL
Mix (Qiagen kit)
Volume minus target
45 μL
Volume extracted RNA
5 μL for clinical specimens, but 2.5 μL
RNA plus 2.5 μL RNase-free water
should suffice for egg-grown AI
Final reaction volume
50 μL
3.2.2
Optional Variation
Addition of "Q-Solution" has been suggested by the manufacturer for the
above kit protocol (Qiagen) to assist in the amplification of difficult tem-
plates/specimens. Here 10 uL (x5) Q-Solution can be included into each 50
μL reaction volume. The manufacturer's protocol shows ex amples where in-
clusion of Q-Solution can sometimes help overcome problems in generat-
ing H5 AI amplicons, but recommends that reactions both with and without
Q-Solution should be run in parallel.
96
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3.3H5PCRPrimers
3.3.1 It is important to note the following when working with these two conven-
tional H5 PCR approaches. Results from VLA and from collaborating EU
laboratories in the AVTFLU project have revealed the following:
+H5KHA PCR
Produces approx 300 bp amplicon. This appears to be highly sensitive and
successfully amplifies H5 RNA directly extracted from clinical specimens.
However, some non-H5 clinical samples can produce a band(s) of similar
mobility, where amplicon sequencing is the only means of establishing
whether these are derived from H5 or other microbes.
·J3/B2a PCR
Produces approx 300 bp amplicon. This is less sensitive than the KHAH5
PCR, but can produce H5 amplicons from higher-titre clinical specimens.
H5 specificity and general robustness appears to be better than for the
KHAH5 PCR conditions. Preferable to use this PCR rather than H5 KHA
(above) when amplifying RNA extracted from H5 AI which has been har-
vested from egg fluid.
· S1/B2a PCR
Produces approx 1200 bp amplicon which spans the HA1 region including
the cleavage site sequence. Normally used to amplify H5 RNA extracted
from egg-grown H5 AI, but may also amplify from very high titre clinical
specimens.
3.3.2H5 Primer Sequences
H5-kha-1 CCT CCA GAR TAT GCM TAY AAA ATT GTC
H5-kha-3 TAC CAA CCG TCT ACC ATK CCY TG
Note, the inclusion of degenerate nucleotides indicated above in bold.
J3
GAT AAA TTC TAG CAT GCC ATT CC
B2a
TTT TGT CAA TGA TTG AGT TGA CCT TAT TGG
S1
AGC AGG GGT ATA ATC TCT C
B2a
As above
SOP 3. Detection of H5 & H7 Avian Influenza and Cleavage Site Sequencing
97
3.4 H7 PCR Primers
3.4.1
● GK7.3/GK7.4: Produces an approx 200-230 bp amplicon which spans the
cleavage site. These are the most sensitive primer pair which can amplify
from H7 clinical specimens.
● 397/391 and H7.5/391. These two primer pairs produce an approx 600 and
1100 bp amplicons respectively. These span the HA1 region including the
 cleavage site sequence. Normally used to amplify H7 RNA extracted from egg-
grown H7 AI, but may also amplify from very high tire clinical specimens.
3.4.2 H7 Primer Sequences
397
ACATACAGTGGGATAAGAACC
391
TCTCCTTGTGCATTTTGATGCC
GK7.3
ATGTCCGAGATATGTTAAGCA
GK7.4
TTTGTAATCTGCAGCAGTTC
3.5 Cycling Conditions and Amplicon Detection
3.5.1 This Should Be Carried Out as Follows for the Two Primer Pairs
H5KHA cycling conditions
30 min at 50°℃
94°℃ for 15 min
40 cycles of 94°C for 30 s
58°℃ for 1 min and 68°℃ for 2min
and a final extension at 68°C for 7 min
NB: Note the above caveat concerming possible non-H5 amplicons with this
H5KHA PCR.
J3/B2a cycling conditions
30 min at 50°C
95°C for 15 min
35 cycles of 94°C for 45 s
50°C for 45 s and 72°C for 2 min
and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min.
S1/B2a; 397/391; GK7.3/GK7.4 & H7.5/391 cycling conditions: precisely as for
J3/B2a PCR above.
98
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3.6NucleotideSequencing
This should be carried out by a method of choice in your laboratory, eg ABI
BigDyes, Beckman etc.
● Respective primers used for H5/H7 PCR as above, and/or
● In the case of the larger amplicons (ie S1/B2a and H7.5/391), use addi-
both the cleavage site and the HA1 region of the respective H5/H7 genes
For H5: S1/B2a amplicon would require J3 and B2a for sequencing
For H7: H7.5/391 amplicon would require 397 and 391, and /or GK7.3 and GK7.4
for sequencing.
4 Results
4.1  The nucleotide sequence data should be analysed using appropriate sequence
analysis software of your choice, eg Lasergene (DNAstar). The common cleavage
site nucleotide sequences (and amino acid motifs), and points for their interpreta-
tion are listed in Appendix 1.
4.2 Sequencing Results, Fitness for Purpose
-o uuanas a paodua si nsauo uuanbas ap guansan araun
tograms which span the cleavage site region should be assessed critically. Two
examples are shown below. The top chromatogram represents a single sequencing
run (ie in one orientation) where in places the quality of the data is poor (ie super
( a) pau go uand pnoyog au e 'leuis auo un a go syad pasou
 a a  ss s  an   an  s s (ns
ous nucleotide call at the cleavage site, and likely errors among neighbouring nu-
cleotides which upon translation results in poor aminoacid sequence data at the
cleavage site. Such a result would be considered “unfit for purpose" unless there
clearly superior quality.
SOP3.DetectionofH5&H7AvianInfluenza
99
80
06
100
110
120
130
AAATAGCCCTCAAGGAGAKATAAGAAGAAAAAAGAGAGGACTATTTGGAGCTATAC
LYS
gAsnSerProGlnGly?
??IleArgArgLysLysArgGlyLeuPheGlyAlaIler
luIleAlaLeuLysGlu???
GluGluLysArgGluAspTyrLeuGluLeu
GCTATA
 The next example (below) consists of two complementary sequencing runs in
opposite orientations. Compare the quality of the two below chromatograms with
the above, ie clear and discrete peaks which agree in both orientations. There are
no superimposed peaks nor is there any underlying background, and translation
imto amino acid sequence is perfectly reliable in giving a polybasic highly patho-
genic AI cleavage site in this example. Clearly the below data is "fit for purpose'.
390
400
410
420
430
AGCCCTCAAGGAGAGAGAAGAAGAAAAAAGAGAGGACTATTTGGA(
SerProGlnGlyGluArgArgArgLysLysArgGlyLeuPheGlyi
eAlaLeuLysGluArgGluGluGluLysArgGluAspTyrLeuGl
ProSerArgArgGluLysLysLysLysGluArgThrIleTrpSt
GAGAGGACTA
AGCCCTC
5 Bibliography
1. Slomka, MJ, Coward, VJ, Banks, J, Londt, BZ, Brown, IH, Voermans, J, Koch, G, Handberg.
KJ, Jorgensen, PH, Cherbonnel-Pansart, M, Jestin, V, Cattoli, G, Capua, I, Ejdersund, A,
Thoren, P, Czifra, G, 2007a. Identification of sensitive and specific avian influenza PCR
methods through blind ring trials in the European Union.Avian Dis.51, 227-34.
100
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Appendix 1
Interpretation of H5 Cleavage Site Results
An avian influenza virus is considered HPAI if there are multiple basic (argenine
- R or lysine- K) amino acids at the HA cleavage site. Most HPAI virus HAs have
the sequence motif R-X-R/K-R-G (X can be any amino acid) although there are
exceptions. In practice any motif with more than two basic amino acids should be
considered HPAI or to be at risk of becoming HPAI. The cleavage site always be-
gins with a proline - P and ends with RGLF.
Table 5.1 Examples of H5 AI amino acid sequences across the cleavage site (not inclusive)
H5 cleavage site motifs
Virus
Subtype
Motif
Pathogenicitya
Numerous LPAI Eurasian viruses
H5N*
PQRET----·RGLF
A/turkey/Kfar Vitkin/71
H5N2
PQREA----RGLF
A/turkey/Ramon/73
H5N2
PQREA----RGLF
A/laughing gull/AK/296/75
H5N3
PSIGE---RGLF
A/arctic tem/AK/300/75
H5N3
PSIGE---RGLF
A/mallard/Alberta/271/88
H5N3
PEKQT----RGLF
一
A/chicken/Italy/RA9097/98
H5N9
PQKET---RGLF
A/chicken/Scotland/59
H5N1
PQRKK----RGLF
A/tem/South Africa/61
H5N1
PQRETRRQKRGLF
+
A/turkey/Ontario/7732/66
H5N9
PQRRKK---RGLF
+
A/chicken/PA/1370/83
H5N2
PQKKK--.RGLF
A/duck/Ireland/113/83
H5N8
PQRKRKK--RGLF
+
A/turkey/Ireland/1378/83
H5N8
PQRKRKK--RGLF
+
A/turkey/England/91
H5N1
PQRKRKT--RGLF
A/chicken/Pueblo/94
H5N2
PQRKRKT--RGLF
A/chicken/Queretaro/20/95
H5N2
PQRKRKRKTRGLF
+
A/chicken/Hong Kong/990/97
H5N1
PQRERRRKKRGLF
+
A/Hong Kong/156/97
H5N1
PQRETRRKKRGLF
+
A/Hong Kong/486/97
H5N1
PQRRRRKK-RGLF
+
A/poultry/Italy/97
H5N2
PQRRRKK-RGLF
+
A/chicken/Italy/1487/97
H5N2
PQRRKKR-RGLF
+
A/chicken/Thailand/04 (1, 2, 3)
H5N1
PQRERRRKKRGLF
+
A/avian/Texas/04
H5N2
PQRKKRGLF
A/ostrich/ZA/N227/04
H5N2
PQREKRRKKRGLF
+
*Pathogenicity of viruses as determined by IVPI or equivalent tests. + = HPAI, - = LPAI
* Tables 5.1 and 5.2 demonstrates the similarities and differences between be H5 and H7 avian
influenza isotypes ranging from low pathogenicity to high pathogenicity. This illustrates that
single nucleotide changes within the cleavage site can result in a pathogenicity change for a
particular virus isolate. Both H5 and H7 isotypes are reportable to OIE
SOP 3. Detection of H5 & H7 Avian Influenza and Cleavage Site Sequencing
101
Table 5.2 Examples of H7 AI amino acid sequences across the cleavage site (not inclusive)
Virus
Subtype
Motif
Pathogenicitya
Numerous American viruses
H7N*
PENPK---TRGLF
Numerous American and
H7N*
PEIPK----GRGLF
Eurasian
58/59/IN/auosum Appn
H7N3
PEKPK----TRGLF
A/duck/OH/10/88
H7N8
PESPK---TRGLF
Afinch/CA/28710-8/93
H7N8
PEIPK---ERGLF
A/pekin robin/CA/30412-5/94
H7N1
PEIPK---RRRGLF
-
A/FPV/Brescia/02
H7N1
PSKKR---KKRGLF
+
A/FPV/Dobson/27
H7N7
PELPK-KRRKRGLF
+
A/FPV/Dutch/27
H7N7
PPKKR---RKRGLF
+
A/FPV/Rostock/34
H7N1
PEPSK-KREKRGLF
+
A/FPV/Weybridge
H7N7
PELPK-KRRKRGLF
+
A/FPV/Egypt/45
H7N7
FSKKR---RKRGLF
+
A/turkey/England/63
H7N3
PETPK--RRRRGLF
+
A/chicken/Victoria/76
H7N7
PEIPK-KKEKRGLF
+
A/duck/Victoria/76
H7N7
PEIPK---KRGLF
一
A/turkey/England/199/79
H7N7
PEIPK-KREKRGLF
+
A/chicken/Leipzig/79
H7N7
PEIPK--KKGRGLF
+
A/goose/Leipzig/192/79
H7N7
PEIPKKKKKGRGLF
+
A/chicken/Victoria/1/85
H7N7
PEIPK-KREKRGLF
+
A/chicken/Pakistan/447/94
H7N3
PETPK-RKRKRGLF
+
A/chicken/Pakistan/547-99/95
H7N3
PETPK--RRNRGLF
+
A/chicken/Pakistan/1369/95
H7N3
PETPK--RRKRGLF
+
A/Teal/Taiwan/19.2-37-2/98
H7N1
PEIPK-GRGLF
A/poultry/Italy/1999
H7N1
PEIPKGSRVRRGLF
+
Italy/7159-V02/02
H7N3
PEIPKGRGLF
Pakistan/various/01
H7N3
PETPK--RRKRGLF
+
Pakistan/27/01
H7N3
PEIPKGRGLF
、
Pakistan/33/ 01
H7N3
PETPKRRKRGLF
+
A/poultry/Chile/2002
H7N3
PEKPKTCSPLSRCRETRGLF
+
A/poultry/Chile/2002
H7N3
PEKPKTRGLF
A/chicken/NL/2003
H7N7
PEIPKRRRRGLF
+
A/turkey/NL/2003
H7N3
PEIPKGRGLF
PEIPKGSRVRRGLF
+
A/ck/Pakistan/03
H7N3
PETPK-RRKRGLF
+
102
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 4. Eurasian H5 Avian Influenza Real Time PCR
S0PV1.492Edition418/09/07
This protocol is a copy of the standard operating procedure used by the avian in-
fluenza CRL at the Veterinary Laboratories Agency.
1 Introduction
1.1 Purpose/Scope of This Protocol
This protocol provides the details required to detect Eurasian isolates of H5 avian
influenza (AI) by RealTime PCR.
1.2 Background Information
This is a rapid, sensitive and specific method for the detection of H5 AI. Valida-
tion at VLA has revealed it to be effective in detecting H5 AI directly from clini-
a 1 (o i an  e  o g s p
PCR has been described previously [1], but validation was restricted to a largely N
American collection of H5 AI isolates. For the method described in this protocol,
haemaglutinnin gene sequences from Eurasian H5 isolates (mainly 1996-2004)
were aligned. Here the H5 primer and hydrolysis probe sequences of Spackman et
al. [1] were modified to ensure effective detection of recent Eurasian H5 isolates.
2Safety
It is your laboratory's responsibility to ensure all work described in this protocol is
conducted to a high safety standard. This includes an awareness of risks relating to
e.g., dangerous or toxic chemicals, potentially hazardous procedures etc. Here lo-
cal safety rules in your laboratory should be understood by all relevant members
of staff.
SOP 4. Eurasian H5 Avian Influenza Real Time PCR
103
3 Materials
3.1 Worksheet for RealTimePlate Layout
Instruction manual for RealTime PCR platfonm and software in use in your
laboratory.
4 Chemicals and Reagents
4.1 Primers andProbe(NoteDegenerateNucleotidesShown
in Bold)
HSLH1
ACA TAT GAC TAC CCA CAR TAT TCA G
H5RH1
AGA CCA GCT AYCATGATT GC
H5PRO
FAM-TCW ACA GTG GCG AGT TCC CTA GCA-TAMRA
4.1.1 H5 RealTime PCR Master Mix
This utilises the Qiagen OneStep RT-PCR kit (Cat No. 210212). Reagents not
contained in the kit can be obtained from other suppliers. Volumes indicated be-
low will be sufficient for 10 x 25 μL reactions, i.e. divide the Master Mix into 10
x 23 μL volumes and add 2 μL extracted RNA to each.
DEPC treated water(ieRNAse-free)
Ambion or similar
137.5 μL
(x5) Qiagen 1 step RT PCR buffer
50L
Rox ref dye (pre-diluted 1:500 from Stratagene
sock in DEPC water) Stratagene or similar
3.75 μL
Qiagen dNTP mix
10L
H5LH1 (50 μM)
Sigma or similar
2μL
HRH1 (50 μM)
Sigma or similar
2μL
HPRO (30 μM)
Sigma or similar
2.5μL
25 mM magnesium chloride
Promega or similar
12.5 μL
RNAsin (40 U/μL)
Promega or similar
1u
Qiagen 1 step RT PCR enzyme mix
10μL
4.1.2 H5 Controls
Negatives
Include at least two "no template controls" (NTCs) where 2 μL RNase free water
is added to each well.
104
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Positives
Quantified H5 specimen e.g., aliquot of inactivated freeze-dried H5N
A/chicken/Scotland/59 should serve as an extraction control (manual or robotic).
The Ct value of this extracted RNA has been predetermined earlier, and ideally
equivalent) during experimental set-up using the software on the RealTime in-
strument.
 Use any other H5 RNA preparation from extracted egg fluid which has been di-
luted into a xl0 fold dilution series (at least 4 dilutions). Ideally this should be a
duplicate dilution series. This series (entered appropriately as "standards" with
relative quantities indicated by using the software while setting up the RealTime
experiment) can be used to determine the H5 RealTime PCR efficiency.
5 Procedure/Method
5.1 Preparation of PCR Master Mix and Loading
5.1.1 Preparation of PCR master mix and loading of real time plate/strip(s) to be
carried out in the PCR clean room.
 5.1.2 Make up master mix sufficient for the number of samples to be tested.
5.1.3 Thoroughly mix the master mix and centrifuge for 30 s to remove bubbles.
NB: Ensure the plasticware (i.e., plates/strips and covers/caps) is appropriate for
the chosen RealTime PCR platform.
5.1.5 Loosely place the plate/strip caps on the plate/strip(s). All wells will need
5.1.6 Bring the plate/strip(s) out of the clean room and place on ice before addi-
tion of sample RNA and controls.
5.2 Preparation of H5 RNA Controls
5.2.1 H5 positive controls are as described above in Section 3.2.3.
5.2.2 Extract RNA as per the manufacturer's protocol
5.2.3 Include H5 positive controls (ideally in duplicate) in each H5 RealTime
experiment.
SOP 4. Eurasian H5 Avian Influenza Real Time PCR
105
5.3ManuatAdditionofSamptesandStandards
5.3.1 Regardless of whether RNA extraction has been conducted manually or ro-
botically (VI 537), at VLA we manually add 2 μL of the sample RNA to
the 23 pL of master mix. A dedicated multichannel pipette is convenient
for adding robotically extracted RNA
Take care to avoid cross contamimation of samples at this stage. Change
gloves frequently and do not hold tips containing RNA above the incorrect
wells.
5.3.2 Add 2 μL of RealTime PCR conrols to appropriate wells based on your
worksheet layout. Re-apply caps to the rest of the plate/strip(s).
5.3.3 Once RNA is added, fit caps to all wells.
 a o  n  p a s a  n s i
before insertion into the RealTime instrument.
5.3.4 If the RealTime plate/strip(s) are not to be loaded into the instrument im-
mediately, keep the plate/strip(s) on ice until ready to test.
5.4Reverse Transcription(RT)andPCR
5.4.1 Place the real time plate/strip(s) in the appropriate real time machine.
5.4.2 Incubate the reactions with the following thermocycling profile
RT step
50°C for 30 min
95°C for 15 min
PCR step (x 40 cycles)
95°C for 10 s
54°C for 30 s
72°C for 10 s
NB. Collect fluorescence data at end of 54°C step using the ROX and FAM
filters.
5.4.3 Open a new file using the instrument software to define all the necessary
RealTime PCR experimental parameters. This is conducted according to
 the manufacturer's software instructions. Provide the file an appropriate H5
RealTime PCR name.
5.4.5 The complete run takes approximately 2 h, but this may vary according to
the make of instrument. If the machine is not booked for immediate use by
able) to tum off the lamp at the end of the run. This is because certain
makes of lamp have a limited lifespan.
106
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
6 Results
6.1 Analysis and Display of Results
6.1.1 Conduct this after familiarising yourself with your RealTime PCR software
and instructions.
6.2InterpretationofResults
6.2.1 Analyse the data by comparing the results obtained for the negative (NTCs)
and H5 positive controls.
6.2.2 Negative Controls (NTCs)
All NTCs should give "No Ct' as their final result. High Cts in all NTC wells with
a linear character (e.g. >38) and giving a very low level final fluorescence (i.e. lit-
and thawed. Although such observations may not invalidate the experiment, it is
advised to discard the aliquot and thaw-out a fresh aliquot of H5 probe for subse-
quent experiments and note result.
If the late Ct value has a logarithmic/sigmoidal character where clear final fluores-
cence values are observed, then contamination of the NTC wells with H5 RNA must
be considered. Repeat the experiment.
6.2.3 H5 Positive Controls
Quantified specimens that serve as an extraction control (e.g. A/chicken/
Scotland/59 (H5N1), Section 3.2.3) should reproducibly amplify with a Ct value
±2 Cts either side of their predetermined Ct value of e.g. 30. Greater deviations
from the predetermined Ct value suggest that:
·The H5 positive control may have degraded (if Ct greater than predeter-
mined value).
fluorescence cut-off level excessively high/low and is affecting the Ct
value of the predetermined H5 positive control. It may be possible to reset
the software after the experiment to restore the expected Ct value provided
the other controls are in order.
·Deviation (±2Cts) may also occur where software settings on the instru-
ment are inaccurate/inappropriate and the fluorescence cut-off level ex-
cessively high/low and is affecting the Ct value of the predetermined H7
SOP 4. Eurasian H5 Avian Influenza Real Time PCR
107
positive control. It may be possible to reset the software after the experi-
ment to restore the expected Ct value provided the other controls are in
order.
Ten-fold dilution series of RNA should yield a straight line with R' value of 0.975
(ideally >0.985), slope in the range of -3.0 to-3.9 which should correspond to H5
RealTime PCR efficiency in the range 80-110%.
6.2.4 If all controls are within acceptable limits analyse the data for the test
samples.
6.2.5 Criteria for assessing results on test samples are as follows
1.Samples with Ct <33 H5 positive.
2.Samples with Ct >33 but with a clear logarithmic/sigmoidal character giving
clear final fluorescence greater than that observed during early cycles. At the
time of writing these are considered inconclusive by H5 RealTime PCR. How-
ever, it is important to consider the results of other tests e.g. virus isolation in
embryonated eggs (followed by typing with reference amtisera) and/or H5 conven-
tional PCRs and sequencing which may reveal a H5 positive result for the
specimen.
3. Samples with Ct >33 but with a linear character giving final fluorescence
which is approximately the same as that observed during early cycles.
a) As noted above in Section 5.2.2, such a result may be due to H5 probe deg-
radation. Resort to using fresh aliquot of probe.
b) Altematively, other possible explanations include inefficient hybridisation
at late cycles to non-specifically amplified nucleic acid of host origin in the
RNA sample.
c) Such results are most likely to be H5 negative, but consider the results of
other tests e.g. virus isolation in embryonated eggs (followed by typing)
and/or H5 conventional PCRs to exclude a H5 positive result for the
specimen.
4.No Ct value,H5 RealTime PCR negative.
6.2.6  All H5 positive results from a potential new case of AI are repeated and for
an index case should be confirmed by use of virus isolation in accord with
current OIE/EU guidelines. For the latter conventional H5 PCR and se-
quencing before reporting is crucial in order to confirn the H5 subtype of
detected AI.
6.2.7  Other considerations for the Eurasian H5 RealTime PCR
This H5 RealTime PCR was designed and validated to detect recent Eurasian H5
isolates. However, there is some evidence that certain American lineage H5s may be
detected by this procedure. However, it must be stressed that detection of American
H5 isolates by this Eurasian H5 RealTime PCR has not been validated.
108
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
6.2.8 Primer and probe design for Eurasian H5 isolates
As these viruses continue to evolve, it is possible that new isolates will emerge
which will be less efficiently detected by the above method, or even not detected
at all. Revision of primer/probe sequences will be necessary and this will be re-
7Bibliography
1. Slomka, MJ, Pavlidis, T, Banks, J, Shell, W, McNally, A, Essen, S, Brown, IH. 2007. Vali-
dated H5 Eurasian real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and its applica-
tion in H5N1 outbreaks in 2005-2006. Avian Dis., 51, 373-7.
SOP 5. Detection of Rift Valley Fever Virus
109
SOP 5. Detection of Rift Valley Fever Virus by Real-Time
Reverse Transcription-PCR
Courtesy of Janusz T. Paweska,
Head Special Pathogens Unit,
 National Institute for Communicable Diseases of the National Health Laboratory
Service,
Private Bag X4, Sandringham-Johannesburg, 2131,
Modderfontein Road 1, Gauteng,
SOUTH AFRICA
Responsible scientist: Janusz Paweska
E-mail: januszp@nicd.ac.za
1 Detection of Rift Valley Fever Virus by Real-Time Reverse
Transcription -PCR
1.1 Equipment
Micropipettes
10 μL, 100 μL, 1000 μL
 Micropipettes filter tips
10 μL, 100 μL, 1000 μL
Microcentrifuge
Biohazard flow cabinet
LightCycler instrument
Ice machine
2 RNA Isolation
2.1 Material and Reagents
QIAamp viral RNA Mini kit
LightCycler RNA Amplification Kit HybProbe
Primers
Probe
110
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
2.2 In Extraction Room
For the extraction of RNA from
Plasma
Serum
Cell- free body fluids or Cell culture supermnatants- use the QIAamp viral RNA
 Mini kit according to the instructions of the manufacturer (QIAgen, Germany,
catalogue number 52906, 250 reactions).
2.3 Primers and Taqman Probe
Primers 5'-3'
RVS (sense primer)
5' AAAggAACAATggACTCTggTCA 3
RVAs (antisense primer) 5'CACTTCTTACTACCATgTCCTCCAAT 3'
Probe 5'-nuclease probe labeled with 6-carboxyfluorescein at the 5'end and with
6-carbox y-N,N,N',N'-tetramethylrhodamine at the 3' end.
RVP
5'-6FAM-AAAgCTTTgATATCTCTCAgTgCCCCAA--TMR
3 RT-PCR Method
3.1 In PCR Mix Room
Use the LightCycler RNA Amplification Kit HybProbe (Roche, catalogue number
12 015 145 001, 96 reactions).
In a 1.5 mL reaction tube on ice, prepare the PCR mix for one 20 μL reaction
by adding the following components
Component
Volume
 Final conc.
LightCycler RT-PCR reaction
5μL
1x, MgCl 3mM
mix HybProbe 5x conc. (vial 2)
Mg,Cl stock solution (vial 3)
2μL
2 mM
Primer RVS (10 mM)
1.25 μL
0.5 μM
Primer RVAs (10 mM)
1.25 μL
0.5 μM
Probe RVP (10 mM)
0.5 μL
0.2 μM
RT-PCR enzyme
0.5 μL
Water (vial 4)
9.5
Total volume
20 μL
SOP 5. Detection of Rift Valley Fever Virus
111
To prepare the PCR Mix for more than one reaction, multiply the amount in the
"Volume" column above by z, where z = the number of reactions to be run + one
additional reaction
·Mix gently by pipetting up and down. Do not vortex.
● In the PCR mix room, pipet 20 μL PCR mix into each LightCycler Capillary.
● In the extraction room, add 5 μL RNA template. Seal each capillary with a
stopper.
● Place the adapters (containing the capillaries) into a standard benchtop
microcentrifuge.
● Place the centrifuge adapters in a balanced arrangement within the centri-
fuge.
● Centrifuge at 700xg for 5 s (3000 rpm in a standard benchtop microcentri-
fuge).
● Transfer the capillaries into the sample carousel of the LightCycler Instru-
ment.
·Cycle the samples as described below.
112
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Program for lightcycler
Reverse transcription
Cycles
1
Analysis mode
None
Temperature targets
1
Target temperature
45°C
Incubation time (h:min:s)
00:30:00
Temperature transitionrate
20°C/s
Secondarytargettemperature
Step size
口
Step delay (cycles)
Acquisition mode
None
Denaturation
Cycles
1
Analysis mode
None
Temperature targets
Target temperature
95°℃
Incubation time (h:min:s)
00:05:00
Temperature transition rate
20°C/s
Secondarytarget temperature
Step size
Step delay (cycles)
Acquisition mode
None
Amplification
Signal analysis F1/F2
Cycles
45
Analysis mode
Quantification
Temperature targets
1
2
Target temperature
D.56
57°C
Incubation time (h:min:s)
00:00:05
00:00:35
Temperature transition rate
20°C/s
20°C/s
Secondary target temperature
0
Step size
Step delay (cycles)
Acquisition mode
None
Single
Cooling
Cycles
1
Analysis mode
None
Temperature targets
1
Target temperature
30°℃
Incubation time (h:min:s)
00:00:30
Temperature transition rate
20°C/s
Secondarytargettemperature
Step size
0
Step delay (cycles)
Acquisition mode
None
SOP 6. Swine Vesicular Disease (SVD) Virus One-Step RT-LAMP
113
SOP 6. Swine Vesicular Disease (SVD) Virus One-Step
RT-LAMP
Courtesy of Mikhayil Hakhverdyan, Anne-Lie Blomstrom
National Veterinary Institute,
Department of Virology,
Ulls vag 2B
SE-751 89 Uppsala
SWEDEN
Responsible scientist Mikhayil Hakhverdyan
E-mail: mikhayil.hakhvedyan@ sva.se
Created 2008-02-24
Updated 2008-02-25
1 Introduction
Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) is a method used to amplify
RNA and DNA. Two or three primer pairs are used to amplify the template which
gives a long stem- loop product under isothermal conditions. This report describes
a one-step reverse transcriptase (RT) LAMP assay for the sensitive (50 viral RNA
ease virus (SVDV). The results can be visualized either by gel electrophoresis or
by the naked eye through the addition of SYBR@Green. For more information
about the assay development and validation see Blomstrom et al., 2008, J. Virol.
Methods, 147, 188-193. This RT-LAMP assay provides a number of benefits for
the diagnosis of SVD, since the assay is sensitive and rapid, and the isothermal
amplification strategy used is not reliant upon expensive equipment it is particu-
larly suited for "front line" diagnosis of SVD in modestly equipped laboratories,
 in field stations or in mobile diagnostic units.
2 RNA Extraction
Manual TRIZOL (Sigma, USA) extraction of SVDV isolates, which were of cell
culture origin, was used according to the manufacturer's instructions. The clinical
Acid Isolation Kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) according to the manufacturer's
protocol and eluted in 50 μL.
114
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3 RT-LAMP
3.1 General Aspects
a)  The highly conserved 3D polymerase gene was chosen as target for the
primer design.
b) The RT-LAMP reaction is carried out in a 25 μL mixture.
c) After production of the master mix, 23 μL portions are filled into each re-
action tube and 2 μL template are added.
3.2 Master MixPreparation
a) The volume of the master mix depends on the number of extracted samples
plus the number of positive and negative controls (water).
b) Before dividing up the master mix into portions of 23 μL per tube, the mas-
ter mix must be homogenised thoroughly.
c) The RT-LAMP reaction is carried out in a 25 μL mixture containing 1x
Thermo buffer (New England Biolabs, Beverly, MA, USA), 0.54x First
strand buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 1.12 mM dNTPs (GE
Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden), 0.2 μM each of F3 and B3, 1.6 μM each of
FIP and BIP, 0.8 μM each of Floop and Bloop, 0.8 μM betaine (Sigma),
4.5 U cloned AMV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA)
and 8U Bst DNA polymerase, Large Fragment (New England Biolabs)
3.3 Addition of Template RNA
a) 2 μL template RNA is added to each tube with 23 μL master mix, except
for the negative control for which water is added.
b) After addition of template RNA, close the reaction tubes and run LAMP.
3.4 Thermodynamic Profile
Reverse Transcription/incubation
60 min
Inactivation
80°℃
2 min
SOP 6. Swine Vesicular Disease (SVD) Virus One-Step RT-LAMP
115
3.5AnalysisofResults
a) Run 5 μL of the RT-LAMP product on a 1.5% agarose gel.
b) Digest 2 μL product with BspHI (New England Biolabs) for 1 h at 37°C
before analysis by gel-electrophoresis to confirm the result.
c) Add 0.5 μL 10x SYBR@-Green Gel Stain I 10,000 x concentration (Mo-
lecular Probes, Leiden, the Netherlands) to 10 μL RT-LAMP product to
visualised the result. After a short vortex a colour change can be seen if the
sample is positive.
4 Appendix Primer Mixes
F3
ACC AAT TCA GAA TGA TTG CA
B3
GGA TGG ACC AAA AAY GGG TA
FIP
BIP
CAG CAG ATA AAG GCG AGT GTT TTT TTT CAT CTG CCC TAA ART ACC T
Floop
AGG CAT CGA TRG GCC ACG
Bloop
ACC TGG ACA AAC GTG ACC T
5 Abbreviations
F3 - forward primer
B3 - backward primer
FTP - forward intermal primer
BIP - backward intermal primer
Floop - forward loop primer
Bloop - backward loop primer
116
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Protocol
Transmittal /laboratory number ...
 Transmittal date....
RT-LAMP run number.
Date.
Executing person
Time.
Running file saved .....
Comments
Pipetting
Master mix components
Colour
SVDV RT-LAMP
steps
code
1x
xN
1.
RNase free water
2.2 μL
2.
 10× Thermo buffer
2.5 μL
3.
5x First strand buffer
2.7 μL
4.
 10mM dNTPs
2.8 μL
5.
F3 primer (10 μM)
0.5μL
6.
B3 primer(10 μM)
0.5 μL
7.
FlP primer (20 μM)
2μL
8.
FIP primer (20 μM)
2μL
9.
Bloop primer (10 μM)
2μL
10.
 Floop primer (10 μM)
2μL
11.
Betaine (5 μM)
2.5 μL
12.
Cloned AMV reverse transcriptase (15 U)
0.3 μL
13.
Bst DNA polymerase, Large Fragment
1μL
(8000 U/ml)
Mastermix total volume
23μL
6.
Addition of template RNA
per 2 μL
Field samples
NTC (add RNase free water)
Totalreactionvolume
25 μL
Plate assignment
 Temperature profile
Results....
RT/incubation
60 min 63°℃
Inactivation
2min
SOP 7. Detection of African Swine Fever Virus DNA
117
SOP 7. Detection of African Swine Fever Virus DNA Using the
Isothermal
ASFVvp72655TInvaderSquaredAssay
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Bermt Hjertner
The Queen's University of Belfast,
Department of Veterinary Science,
Stoney Road, BT4 3SD Belfast
United Kingdom.
1 Scope of SOP
This SOP describes the sensitive and specific detection of African swine fever vi-
rus DNA using the isothermal ASFV vp72 655T Invader squared assay. The In-
vaderTM assay is a linear, isothermal (63'C) signal amplification system able to ac-
The assay is a good altermative to PCR as it can be used with simple and inex-
pensive equipment. This particular procedure describes the ASFV Invader assay
amd its use in conjunction with the iQTM5 multicolor real-time PCR detection sys-
tem (Bio-Rad). It has a detection limit around 2500 copies. The somewhat lower
sensitivity as compared to PCR is compensated by the possibility to use it as an
end point assay. Possible targets could include extracted genomic material, cDNA.
ex isting PCR product or crude/purified plasmid.
The kit described in this protocol, ASFV VP72 655T, include vials contains
VP72 655T Oligo Mix (0.25 μM Invader, 2.5μuM Probe)
Cleavase XI Enzyme, FRET mix
Control target VP72 655T
No Target Control (tRNA).
For more information on the chemistry behind the tecchnology and the develop-
ment of the assay please consult the Instruction sheet "INVADERTM ASSAY:
VP72 655T 345 detection from viral DNA Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer
118
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
(FRET) Detection Fonmat (Third Wave Agbio) and Hjertner et al. 2005 J. Virol.
Methods 124, 1-10, respectively.
2 Samples and DNA Extraction
The samples were extracted using the to "Boom-silica nucleic acid extraction pro-
     r  a     
used.
# Include following controls
Extraction controls
Negative control sample material, NCS, processed the same way as the
clinical samples.
         s
with positive control oligo).
3 Isothermal Reaction
3.1 General Aspects
a) The Cleavase enzyme is not a hot start enzyme so the reactions have to be
kept on ice the whole time. The master mix should not be left sitting for
long as this can increase background.
b) Include the following Invader controls from the kit. No target blank and
positive control oligo (NTB and PCO).
c) After making the master mix 7.5 μL portions are filled into each reaction
tube and 7.5 μL template is added.
3.2 Master Mix Preparation
a) The volume of the master mix depends on the number of extracted samples
plus the number of controls and possible standards.
b) Before dividing up the master mix into portions of 7.5 μL per well, the
master mix must be homogenised thoroughly
3.3 Addition of Template DNA
a) Template DNA is boiled for 10 min and chilled on ice. To each well con-
taining 7.5 μL master mix another 7.5 μL template DNA is added.
SOP 7. Detection of African Swine Fever Virus DNA
119
b) For quantification of DNA a standard curve must be generated. Six dilu-
tions of positive genomic ASFV DNA are produced in the range 1x10° to 1
× 10' copies/ μL
c) After addition of template DNA mix thoroughly and overlay with 15 μL
spectroscopically clear mineral oil.
d) Close the reaction tubes and spin down the PCR preparation.
3.4 Cycler Program
The programme consists of a 4 h incubation at 63'C measuring fluorescence every
2.5 min.
# Read Fluorescence chanmel FAM.
# If not using a real-time instrument incubates in heatblock/water bath and
measure fluorescence every hour.
3.5Analysis of GeneratedFluorescenceData
a) Ensure that NCS is negative and SCS is positive with a slope value or end
point read (see separate SOP) similar to PCO.
b) If NCS or SCS deviate from this repeat the ex traction.
dois paodxa u m aanisod si od ng aanau si n e ansg (s
value or end point read.
d)  If the NTB or PCO control deviates repeat the Invader reaction.
tained can be statistically differentiated from the NTB using Students
TTEST (see separate SOP).
f)The analysis of field samples is possible if all controls respond as expected.
g) Select all standards and analyse the slope rates or end point data as de-
scribed in separate SOP. -
h) If a linear standard curve is achieved with an R-squared value of 0.95 or
greater use it to quantify the clinical samples.
4 Appendix. Oligos
Invader oligo
Probe oligo
5' acggacgcggagAACGTTTGAAGCTGACC 3'
Positive control oligo
5'CCATGGTCAGCTTCAAACGTTTCCTCGCAACGGATATGACTGGGACAACCAAA 3'
The underlined 5' end of the probe oligo (=FLAP, is released by target specific
cleavage) is complementary to a generic FRET cassette provided with the kit. This
cassette when cleaved generates the fluorescence.
120
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Protocol
Transmittal /laboratory number ..
Transmittal date.
Real-time PCR run number...
.Assay.
Executing person..
Date.
Running file saved.
T ime.
Comments.
Pipetting
Master mix components
Volume
steps
1x
Nx
1.
Oligo mix (0.25 μM lnvader, 2.5 μM Probe)
3.0 μL
2.
FRETmix(FRET cassette)
3.5μL
3.
CleavaseXl Enzyme
1.0μL
Master mix total volume
7.5L
4.
addition of template DNA
7.5 μL
Field samples, NCS, SCS
Standards, NTB, PCO
Totalreactionvolume
15L
Pate assignment
Temperature profile
1 cycle equilibrating
1 min
63°℃
99 Cycles
soak
2.5 min
63°℃
Results...
SOP 8. Detection and Quantification of Porcine Viruses Using Molecular Beacons
121
SOP 8. Real-Time PCR Detection and Quantification of Porcine
Viruses Using MolecularBeacons
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of John McKillen
The Queen's University of Belfast
Department of Veterinary Science
Stoney Road, BT4 3SD Belfast
United Kingdom
1 Introduction
This SOP describes the sensitive and specific detection of Aujeszky's disease vi-
rus (ADV), African swine fever virus (ASFV), porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2)
and porcine parvovirus (PPV).
The assays target the gD gene (ADV), the 9GL gene (ASFV), the Rep gene
(PCV2) and the VP2 gene (PPV), amplifying PCR products of 110, 264, 263 and
130 bp respectively.
Each assay has a detection limit of 20 copies. They have been evaluated on
whole blood, serum and tissue samples. For more information about the assay de-
velopment and evaluation with clinical samples see McKillen et al. 2007. J. Virol.
Methods 140, 155-65.
2 Samples and DNA Extraction
For details of tested samples see McKillen et al. 2007. J. Virol. Methods 140,
155-65. Purify nucleic acid from whole blood, serum or 10% tissue homogenates
in MEME using the Qiagen DNA blood mini Kit according to the manufacturer's
instructions.
# Include following controls
Extraction controis
Negative control sample material, NCS, processed the same way as the
clinical saples.
122
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Positive spiked control sample material, SCS, (negative control sample
spiked with relevant positive amplicon).
3 Real-Time PCR
3.1 General Aspects
a) The amplification is based on the JumpStart Taq mix (SIGMA-Aldrich)
with a total reaction volume of 25 μL.
b) Include the following PCR controls, Negative and positive control (NC and
PC).
c) After making of the master mix 23 μL portions are filled into each reaction
tube and 2 μL template is added.
3.2 Master Mix Preparation
a) The volume of the master mix depends on the number of extracted samples
plus the number of controls and possible standards.
b) Before dividing up the master mix into portions of 23 μL per tube, the mas-
ter mix must be homogenised thoroughly.
3.3 Addition of Template DNA
a)Two μL template DNA are added to each tube with 23 μL master mix.
-Ua aq snut aaino piepuens e 'saldues piay u vN jo uonesgnuenb ioh (q
10° to 1 × 10' copies/μL.
c)  After addition of template DNA, close the reaction tubes and spin down the
PCR preparation.
3.4 Cycler Program
ando yasa  a uo pn aq mn pasdo an s u a
real time thermal cycler.
Activation of Taq
95'C
2 min
 Denaturation
94'℃
30 s
Annealing
x℃
30 s
40 cycles
Elongation
72'℃
30 s
# Read Fluorescence channel FAM (ADV, ASFV, PCV2) or HEX (PPV).
# Fluorescence data are collected in the annealing phase.
SOP 8. Detection and Quantification of Porcine Viruses Using Molecular Beacons
123
3.5 Analysis of Generated Fluorescence Data
a) Ensure that NCS is negative and SCS is positive with a CT value similar to
PC.
b) If NCS or SCS deviate from this repeat the extraction.
c) Ensure that NC is negative but PC is positive with an expected CT value.
d) If the NC or PC control deviates repeat the PCR.
e) A sample is considered positive if a CT value is obtained and the sample
shows a typical sigmoidal curve.
f) If the CT value is lower than the detection limit of the assay used additional
tests are recommended.
g) The analysis of field samples is possible if all controls respond as expected.
h) Select all standards and analyse the standard curve for linearity and efficiency
according to guidelines of the manufacturer of the PCR platform.
i)If a linear standard curve is achieved with a PCR efficiency of 95% or greater
use it to quantify the clinical samples.
4 Appendix. Primers, Probes and Reaction Conditions
Primers
ADV gd F429-445
CGCACCACGCCGATGTG
ADV gd R519-538
CGGTACTGGCCCTCGTTGAA
ASFV 9GL F77
CGGGAGACGTTGTTTTAT
ASFV 9GL R340
CGCCTTTTCGTATCTTAC
PCV GrFor 283-300
CTTCTGCGGTAACGCCTC
PCVll R529Match GFor
TTACCCTCCTCGCCAACA
PPV VP2 F112-132
GGGTTGGTGTGTCTACAGGT
PPV VP2 R190-210
GTATGAGTCTTGATGCGTGTGC
Probes
ADV gd MB462-25
ASFV 9GL MB162-25
cgctcgGGCTCCAATAAAGTCGGTTTTCCCAcgagcg
PCV2 MB25 394-418
gcgagcCACCTCAGCAGCAACATGCCCAGCAgctcgc
PPV VP2 MB156-25
cgctcgTCAATACTTGGGGGAGGGCTTGGTTcgagcg
Reaction conditions
T(C)
Mg2t
F primer conc
R primer conc
Beacon conc
(mM)
(μM)
(μM)
(μM)
ADV
50
4
0.75
0.75
0.5
ASFV
51
5.5
0.5
0.5
1.0
PCV2
50
4
0.5
0.5
0.5
PPV
52
4
0.5
0.5
0.5
124
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Primers, size and T, for standard amplicons
Amplicon
Primer sequence
T,(°C)
size (bp)
ADV F375-394a
TTTATCGAGTACGCCGACTG
52
248
ADV R604-622a
CGGGCGAACGGGCACTCTT
ASFV 9GL F77
CGGGAGACGTTGTTTTAT
264
ASFV 9GL R340
CGCCTTTTCGTATCTTAC
PCV2 SG 181F
AAGATGCCATTTTTCCTT
50
689
PCV GROUP 852-871R
CCCGCTCACTTTCAAAAGTT
PPV VP2 F112-132
GGGTTGGTGTGTCTACAGGT
52
130
PPV VP2 R190-210
GTATGAGTCTTGATGCGTGTGC
Protocol
Transmittal /laboratory number..
Transmittal date..
Real-time PCR run number....
Assay....
Executing person..
Date..
Running file saved.
Time.
Comments.....
Pipetting-
 Master mix components 
volume
steps
1x
Nx
1.
PCR gTade water
To 23μL
2.
2x S1GMA jumpstart master mix12.5 μL
3.
 10 μM Molecular beacon probe
1.25 μL (ASFV: 2.5 μL)
4.
100 μM primermix
0.125 μL (ADV: 0.1875 μL)
5.
25mMMgCl2
L
Master mix total volume
23L
6.
addition of template DNA
2μL
Field samples, NCS, SCS
Standards, NC, PC
Totalreactionvolume
25L
Plate assignment
Temperature profile
Activation/denaturation
2min
95°
40 Cycles
Denat.
30 s
94°℃
Annealing
30 s
...℃
Elongation
30 s
72°℃
Results...
SOP 9. Swine Vesicular Disease Virus PriProET Two-Step Real-Time PCR
125
SOP 9. Swine Vesicular Disease Virus PriProET Two-Step
Real-Time PCR
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Mikhayil Hakhverdyan
National Veterinary Institute
Department of Virology
Ulls vag 2B
SE-751 89 Uppsala
SWEDEN
Responsible scientist Mikhayil Hakhverdyan
E-mail: mikhayil.hakhverdy an @ sva.se
Created 2008-02-15
Updated 2008-02-18
1 Introduction
 This SOP describes a two-step protocol for PriProET real-time PCR amplification
of swine vesicular disease viruses (SVDV).
The assay amplifies the 3D-gene of any of SVDV strain while heterologous vi-
rus strains including Coxsackievirus B5 remain negative.
The sensitivity of assay is five copies of viral genome equivalents. A key point
of the assay is tolerance toward mutations in the probe region. Melting curve
analysis directly after PCR, with detenmination of probe melting point, confinms
specific hybridisation of the SVDV strains
More details can be found in the published article, Hakhverdyan, M, et al.
2006.Arch. Virol. 151 (12), 2365-76.
The protocol was optimised using ABI 7700 instrument (Applied Biosys.
tems, USA), but later was adopted for RotorGene (Corbett Research, Austra-
lia). Both instruments works well with the system, but RotorGene, like many
other moderm real-time PCR machines, has friendly user format and simplifies
amalysis of results
126
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
2 RNA Extraction
Manual TRIZOL extraction according to the manufacturer's instructions was used
in the current protocol, but any isolation method that gives good RNA yield could
be used instead.
3 cDNA Synthesis
cDNA was produced in 25 μL reaction volume using 5 μL RNA, 1 μL random
hexamers (pdN6, 0.02 U, Amersham, Uppsala, Sweden), 2.5 μL dNTPs (2 mM), 5
pL 5X First Strand Buffer, 1 μL RNAguard (1000 U, Amersham Bioscience,
USA), and 1 μL M-MLV reverse transcriptase (200 U, Ambion, Austin, Texas,
USA). The reaction was incubated for 5 min at 22 C, followed by 90 min at 37 C
and the enzyme was finally inactivated by heating for 5 min at 95'℃.
4 Real-Time PCR
4.1 General Aspects
a) The amplification is based on the TITANTUM Taq DNA polymerase kit
(Clontech) with a total reaction volume of 25 μL.
b) Controls, PC (positive control), NTC (no template control)
c) After production of the master mix, 23 μL portions are aliquoted into each
reaction tube and 2 μL of template is added.
4.2MasterMixPreparation
a) The volume of the master mix depends on the number of extracted samples
plus the number of controls (PC; NTC) plus one-two extra reactions.
b) Before dividing up the master mix into portions of 23 μL per tube, the mas-
ter mix must be mixed thoroughly and pulse spanned for 5 s.
4.3 Addition of Template cDNA
a) 2 μL template cDNA is added to each tube with 23 μL master mix and
close the reaction tubes.
b) Spin down reaction mix (optional).
SOP 9. Swine Vesicular Disease Virus PriProET Two-Step Real-Time PCR
127
4.4 Cycler Program
 Preliminary denaturation -95°℃
2min
Denaturation
95°℃
15 s
Annealing
D.09
15 s
55 cycles
Elongation
72°℃
15 s
Denaturation
95°℃
15 s
Probe melting profile
96 cycles of [50'C for 10 s with
auto-increments of 0.5'C] for
ABI 7700 or 40'℃ →95'C
for RotorGene.
# Fluorescence channel is FAM for ABI 7700. Filter set for RotorGene is
470nm/610hp (emission/detection)
# Fluorescence data are collected in the annealing phase and during the probe
melting profile
4.5 Analysis of Generated Fluorescence Data
General aspects
a) A Ct value of approx. 25 should be detectable for PC and a specific probe
 melting point of 57.5-72.5°C (depends on the number of mutations in the
on 5'C.
b) No Ct value or melting point should be detectable for NTC.
c) The analysis of field samples is possible if all controls respond as expected.
d) A suspected SVDV sample is considered as positive in the real-time PCR,
if a Ct value is detected for the sample and/or if the FAM fluorescence in-
creases significantly over the base level.
e) For confirmation of a positive SVDV specific real-time PCR result the
probe melting profile has to display a specific probe melting point of
70°C+2.5'C corresponding to a perfect probe match, while T. =65+2.5'C
and T, =60+2.5'C corresponding to one or two mutations, respectively.
5 Appendix. Primer /Probe Mixes
SVDV-3D-6511-F-FAM (10 μM)
5'FAM-TCAACCCGGGCATCGTTAC 3'
SVDV-3D-6617-R (10 μM)
5'TGAATAGTCAAACGCTATGAGATGTC 3'
SVDV-3D-6553-P-probe (10 μM)
5'GGGTCACACCCAACGGCGCT-Texas Red 3"
Predicted amplicon size is 107 bp
128
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Protocol in ABI7700 or RotorGene 3000/6000
Transmittal /laboratory number .....
..Transmittal date...
Real-time PCR run number....
.Date..
Executing person..
.Time.
Running file saved..
Comments.
Pipetting
Mastermixcomponents
Colour
SVDV PriProET
steps
code
1x
Nx
1.
DNasefreewater
16.25μL
2.
10X TITANIUM Taq PCR buffer
2.5μL
3.
4X dNTPs
1.25 μL
4.
SVDV-3D-6511-F-FAM (10 μM)
1.25uL
5.
SVDV-3D-6617-R (10 μM)
0.5μL
6.
SVDV-3D-6553-P-probe(10μM)
0.75 μL
7.
50X TITANlUM Taq DNA Polymerase
0.5μL
Mastermix totalvolume
23μL
8.
Addition of template cDNA
per 2μL
Field samples,
PC, NTC (add DNase free water)
Total reactionvolume
25L
96-well plate or 36/72-well rotor assignment
Temperature profile (amplification)
2min
95°C
Activation/denaturation
55 Cycle
Denaturation
15 s
95°℃
Annealing
15 s
60°℃
Elongation
15 s
72°℃
Temperature profile(meltingcurve)
Denaturation
15 s
95°℃
Probe Melting
96 cycles of [50°℃ for 10 s with auto-
Profile
increments of 0.5°C] for ABI 7700 or
40°C->95°C for RotorGene.
The melting curve is obtained directly following the amplification
SOP 10. Slope/End Point Analysis of Invader Data System
129
SOP 10. Slope/End Point Analysis of Invader Data System
LAB-ON-SITE EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Bemt Hjertner
The Queen's University of Belfast,
Department of Veterinary Science,
Stoney Road, BT4 3SD Belfast,
United Kingdom.
1 Introduction
This SOP describes the analysis of invader data generated using either a real-time
PCR instrument or an ordinary fluorescent plate reader.
As there exist no platform with built in capability to analyze any data generated
using an Invader based protocol it has to be extracted and analyzed manually.This
can be based on either reaction slopes (from real-time data) or end point measure-
ments.
This protocol describes the calculations/manipulations necessary to get a quanti-
fied and statistically verified analysis of any sample. This is done using the Excel
template “DNA invader analysis template" available by request from
b.hjertner @qub.ac.uk.
For further information on Invader assays please refer to the Instruction sheet
*"INVADERTM ASSAY VP72 655T 345 detection from viral DNA Fluorescence
Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) Detection Format (Third Wave Agbio) and
Hjertner et al. 2005. J. Virol. Methods 124, 1-10.
2 Data Extraction
a) For data retrieval please refer to the manual describing the platfonms used
to generate the data.
b) Paste the data in an empty excel sheet so that cycle numbers start in column
A and continue down, the samples starting in column B and onward.
130
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3 Determining Slope Rate
Mark column B, right-click and chose insert. In the inserted column add the time
points.
a) Copy the entire row (A) in the top outlining your wells and paste the whole
sample.
b) Usually, only the data range corresponding to up to 10% of the strongest
scoring sample is used for each sample. This is chosen as follows. Place the
cursor between the brackets in the "10%MAX" box. Delete the × by hitting
backspace. Now mark the entire data field and hit enter.
c) Go back and mark the entire data field again and chose conditional format-
ting under format. Choose "Cell value is" and "greater than or equal to" and
aa xoe  uo  q pmong y anop xog  a u
Then click on format and under color chose red. Click on ok and again ok.
All data points higher than 10% of the strongest data point are now marked
red.
d) Now start a slope rate row under your sample definition row. For the first
well write "= slope(,)". Place the cursor before the comma and mark all black
data points for that sample. Likewise, place the corresponding time points af-
ter the comma. Repeat this for all the samples.
3.1Statistical Analysis(Slope Rates)
          s
matrix for duplicate samples and ten known standards.
b) In the matrix the following are calculated. Average, Standard deviation
(SD), Coefficient of variation (CV), Fold over 0, Net signal, Ttest to
meighbour and Ttest to 0.
             g
and hit insert. Repeat this for every extra repetition.
d) If more than 10 samples are analyzed copy the area comprising the values
and all calculations and place the curser in the first adjacent empty square.
pasting.
e) Check all squares containing calculations to make sure that the new repeti-
sary.
  o ands au g a ados a ao  p mn m o mo (
SOP 10. Slope/End Point Analysis of Invader Data System
131
3.2MakingaStandardCurve(StopeAnatysis)
a)  Mark the Net signal values and click on the table icon in the toolbar select-
ing "XY (scatter)" followed by Next.
b) Choose the tab series and put cursor in the X values box and then mark
the copy number series in the matrix.
c) Click Next and in the following display put in chart title and values for X
and Y axis. Click Next followed by finish.
d) Place cursor over one of the data points and right click followed by "add
-do, u uonenba pue anea y Aedsp pue ,adi, u yeaul asoou 'auuan
tions'.
dus umouyun Aue nuenb o uogenba ay asn (a
4 Statistical Analysis (End Point Analysis)
a) Find the row displaying the time point of interest. Right click the entire row
and copy it. Paste the row below, under the row of samples.
b) Next steps are identical to slope end analysis. Follow description from
3.1.a. It is not necessary to use the paste special.
4.1 Making a Standard Curve (End Point Analysis)
132
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 11. African Horse Sickness TaqMan RT-PCR
LAB-ON-SITE EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Belen Rodriguez
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Departamento de Sanidad Animal
Facultad de Veterinaria
Avda Puerta de Hierro s/n
28040 Madrid
Spain
Responsible scientist: Belen Rodriguez
E-mail: lbelenrodriguez @ sanidadanimal.inf
Created 2008-02-18
Updated 2008-02-18
1 Introduction
This SOP describes the detection by one-step RT-PCR with a TaqMan probe of all
s isn  um uaai paas e nn sad a ASH yo sadas as
ment. The PCR product expands 210 bp. The set of primers and the FAM-labelled
probed used in this protocol has been designed by Partner 4, UCM, Madrid. We
use Trizol Reagent for RNA extraction.
2 RNA Extraction
RNA isolation is performed with Trizol Reagent, following the manufacturer's in-
structions.
SOP 11. African Horse Sickness TaqMan RT-PCR
133
3 Real-Time RT-PCR
3.1 General Aspects
a) The amplification is based on the Brilliant? QRT-PCR Master Mix One-
Step kit (Stratagene) with a total reaction volume of 25 μL.
b) Controls, PC (positive control), NTC (no template control).
c) After production of the master mix, 23 μL portions are aliquoted into each
reaction tube and
d)  2 μL of template is added.
3.2 Master Mix Preparation
a)  The volume of the master mix depends on the number of extracted samples
plus the number of controls (PC; NTC) plus two extra reactions.
b) Before dividing up the master mix into portions of 23 μL per tube, the mas-
ter mix must be mixed thoroughly.
3.3 Addition of Template RNA
b) After addition of template RNA, close the reaction tubes and spin down the
solution.
3.4 Cycler Program
Reverse Transcription
48°℃
30 min
Inactivation RT /Activation Taq
95°℃
10 min
Denaturation
D.S6
30 s
Annealing-Elongation
58°℃
30 s
40 cycles
# Fluorescence channels are ROX (negative control) and FAM.
# Fluorescence data are collected in the annealing phase and during the probe melt-
ing profile
3.5 Analysis of Generated Fluorescence Data
General aspects
ROX channel can be used for normalisation of the FAM fluorescence
FAM channel
A Ct value of approx. 20 should be detectable for PC
No Ct value should be detectable for NTC
134
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
The analysis of field samples is possible if all controls respond as expected.
value is detected for the sample and/or if the FAM fluorescence increases signifi-
cantly over the base level.
4 Appendix. Primer /Probe Mixes
AHSV-F (20 μM)
5'GTTGACCTCGCTCTGCTTGAC3
AHSV-R (20 μM)
5'GTTGACCTCGCTCTGCTTGAC3'
TAQ_AHSV (probe) (20 μM) 5FAM-GTTGACCTCGCTCTGCTTGAC-BHQ3'
SOP 11. African Horse Sickness TaqMan RT-PCR
135
Protocol in Stratagene Mx 3000p
Transmittal /laboratory number.
Transmittal date.
Real-time RT-PCR run number...
..Date..
Executing person.
Time.
Running file saved...
Comments..
Pipetting
Master mix components
Colour
Pan-SIV PriProET
steps
code
1x
Nx
1.
Brilliant QRT-PCR Master Mix
12.5 μL
2.
PCR-quality water
9.2125μL
4.
AHSV-F (20 μM)
0.625 μL
5.
AHSV-F (20 μM)
0.3μL
6.
TAQ_AHSV (20 μM)
0.3μL
7.
 Enzyme Mixture
0.0625 μL
Master mix totalvolume
23μL
8.
Addition of template RNA
per 2 μL
Field samples,
PC, NTC (add RNase ffee water)
Totalreactionvolume
25μL
Plate assignment
Temperature profile (amplification)
RT
30min
48°℃
Activation/denaturation
10 min
95°℃
40 Cycle Denaturation
30 s
95°℃
Annealing-Elongation
30 s
58°℃
136
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 12. Bluetongue SYBR?-Green RT-PCR
LAB-ON-SITE EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Belen Rodriguez
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Departamento de Sanidad Animal
Facultad de Veterinaria
A vda Puerta de Hierro s/n
28040 Madrid
Spain
Responsible scientist : Belen Rodriguez
E-mail: belenrodriguez @ sanidadanimal.info
Created 2008-02-18
Updated 2008-02-18
1 Introduction
The SOP described here allows the detection of most of BTV serotypes reported
in the Mediterranean basin by one-step RT-PCR.
6 pe 8 t '7 '1 sadAoas o suuoaq suaas IsN ayn um da2L e '1ey os
described here is still ongoing. The set of primers used in this protocol has been
designed by Partner 4, UCM, Madrid.
2 RNA Extraction
RNA isolation is performed with Trizol Reagent, following the manufacturer's
instructions.
SOP 12. Bluetongue SYBR@-Green RT-PCR
137
3 Real-Time RT-PCR
3.1 General Aspects
a) The amplification is based on the SYBR? Green QRT-PCR Master Mix
One-Step kit (Stratagene) with a total reaction volume of 25 μL.
b) Controls, PC (positive control), NTC (no template control)
c) After production of the master mix, 23 pL portions are aliquoted into each
reaction tube and 2 μL of template is added.
3.2 Master Mix Preparation
The volume of the master mix depends on the number of extracted samples plus
the number of controls (PC; NTC) plus two extra reactions.
a) Before dividing up the master mix into portions of 23 μL per tube, the
master mix must be mixed thoroughly.
3.3 Addition of Template RNA
x ras gr z im aqm ya on pppe st vn aeidan t z (e
b) After addition of template RNA, close the reaction tubes and spin down
the solution.
3.4 Cycler Program
 Reverse Transcription
48℃
30 min
Inactivation RT /Activation Taq
95°℃
2 min
Denaturation
95°℃
30 s
Annealing
56°℃
30 s
40 cycles
Elongation
72°℃
30 s
 Denaturation
95°℃
5 min
 Probe melting profile
D.S6<-D.09
# Fluorescence channels are ROX (negative control) and SYBR@ GREEN.
# Fluorescence data are collected in the annealing phase and during the probe
melting profile
3.5 Analysis of Generated Fluorescence Data
General aspects
ROX channel can be used for normalisation of the SYBR? Green fluorescence
138
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SYBR? Green channel
a)A Ct value of approx. 20 should be detectable for PC and a specific probe
melting point of 78°C should be observed.
b) No Ct value or melting point should be detectable for NTC.
c) The analysis of field samples is possible if all controls respond as ex-
pected.
d) A suspected BTV sample is considered positive in the real-time RT-PCR,
if a Ct value is detected for the sample and/or if the SYBR? Green fluo-
rescence increases significantly over the base level.
e) For confinmation of a positive BTV specific real-time PCR result, the
probe melting profile has to display a specific probe melting point of 75-
78°C.
4 Appendix. Primer /Probe Mixes
BTVNS1-F (20 μM)
5'CACATTCACCGCTGGATTAGAG 3
BTVNS1-R (20 μM)
5'CGTCCAAGCATGAAAATACC 3'
SOP 12. Bluetongue SYBR@-Green RT-PCR
139
Protocol in Stratagene Mx 3000p
Transmittal /laboratory number
Transmittal date ..
Real-time RT-PCR run number...
Date..
Executing person....
Time.
Running file saved..
Comments.
Pipet-
 Master mix components
Colour
 Pan-SIV PriProET
ting
code
steps
1 x
Nx
1.
SYBR@ Green QRT-PCR
12.5 μL
Master Mix
2.
PCR-quality water
9.4375μL
4.
BTVNS1-F (20 μM)
0.5 μL
5.
BTVNS1-R(20μM)
0.5μL
6.
Enzyme Mixture
0.0625μL
Mastermix totalvolume
23L
addition of template RNA
per 2 μL
Field samples,
PC, NTC (add RNase ffee water)
Total reaction volume
25L
Plate assignment
 Temperature profile (amplification)
Denaturation
5 min
95°℃
RT
30 min
48°℃
Activation/denaturation
2 min
95°℃
Probe Melting Profile 60°C->95°C
40 Cycle
Denaturation
30 s
95°℃
The melting curve is obtained directly follow-
Annealing
30 s
56°℃
ing the amplification
Elongation
30 s
72°℃
Temperature profile (melting curve)
140
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 13.BTV Serotype 4 SYBR? GREEN RT-PCR
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Belen Rodriguez
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Departamento de Sanidad Animal
Facultad de Veterinaria
Avda Puerta de Hierro s/n
28040 Madrid
Spain
Responsible scientist   Belen Rodriguez
E-mailbelenrodriguez@ sanidadanimal.info
Created 2008-02-18
Updated 2008-02-18
1 Introduction
This SOP describes a one-step protocol for SYBR? Green RT-PCR amplification
of bluetongue virus (BTV).This new RT-PCR has been developed by Partner 4,
UCM, Madrid, for the specific detection of BTV serotype 4. The pair of primers
described here target a sequence within the VP2 segment which contains dele-
 da thi si nnd d a 'aans ta u pqs A sns
2 RNA Extraction
S  e  n   n s 
imstructions.
SOP 13. BTV Serotype 4 SYBR@ GREEN RT-PCR
141
3 Real-Time RT-PCR
3.1 General Aspects
a) The amplification is based on the SYBR? Green QRT-PCR Master Mix
One-Step kit (Stratagene) with a total reaction volume of 25 μL.
b) Controls, PC (positive control), NTC (no template control)
c) After production of the master mix, 23 μL portions are aliquoted into each
reaction tube and 2 μL of template is added.
3.2 Master MixPreparation
a) The volume of the master mix depends on the number of extracted sam-
ples plus the number of controls (PC; NTC) plus two extra reactions.
b) Before dividing up the master mix into portions of 23 μL per tube, the
master mix must be mixed thoroughly.
3.3 Addition of Template RNA
a) 2 μL template RNA is added to each tube with 23 μL master mix.
b) After addition of template RNA, close the reaction tubes and spin down
the solution.
3.4 Cycler Program
Reverse Transcription
48℃
30 min
Inactivation RT /Activation Taq
De56
5 min
Denaturation
95°℃
45 s
Annealing
58°℃
45 s
 55 cycles
Elongation
72°℃
30 s
Denaturation
95°℃
5s
Probe melting profile
60°℃->95°℃
# Fluorescence channels are ROX (negative control) and SYBR@ Green.
# Fluorescence data are collected in the annealing phase and during the probe
melting profile
3.5Analysisof GeneratedFluorescenceData
General Aspects
ROX chammel can be used for nonmalisation of the SYBR@ Greenfluorescence
142
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SYBR@ Green channel
a) A Ct value of approx. 20 should be detectable for PC and a specific probe
melting point of 78°C should be observed.
b) No Ct value or melting point should be detectable for NTC.
c) The analysis of field samples is possible if all controls respond as ex-
pected.
d) A suspected BTV sample is considered positive in the real-time RT-PCR,
if a Ct value is detected for the sample and/or if the SYBR? Green fluo-
rescence increases significantly over the base level.
e) For confirmation of a positive BTV specific real-time PCR result, the
probe melting profile has to display a specific probe melting point of
78°C.
4 Appendix Primer /Probe Mixes
BTVVP2_F (20 μM)
5"TAGATTCCATCCCGGTGATTCT3'
BTVVP2_R (20 μM)
5'AGGTACATTCACTCCACCCTGC3
SOP 13. BTV Serotype 4 SYBR@ GREEN RT-PCR
143
Protocol in Stratagene Mx3005p
Transmittal /laboratory number
Transmittal date.
Real-time RT-PCR run number
Date.
Executing person.
Time.
 Running file saved.
Comments.
Pipetting
Master mix components
Colour
Pan-SIVPriProET
steps
code
1 x
Nx
1.
SYBR? Green QRT-PCR
12.5 μL
Master Mix
2.
PCR-quality water
9.4375
μL
3.
BTVVP2-F(20μM)
0.5uL
4.
BTVVP2-R (20 μM)
0.5μL
6.
 Enzyme Mixture
0.0625
μL
Mastermixtotalvolume
23山
7.
Addition of template RNA
per 2 μL
Field samples,
PC, NTC (add RNase free water)
Totalreactionvolume
25L
Plate assignment
Temperature profile (amplification) RT 30min @ 48°℃
Activation/denaturation;5min@95°
40 Cycle, Denaturation
45 s @ 95°℃
Annealing 45 s @ 58°℃
Elongation 30 s @ 72°℃
Temperature profile (melting curve) Denaturation 5 min 95°C . Probe Melting Profile 60°C @ 95°C
The melting curve is obtained directly following the amplification
144
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 14. Real-Time Duplex Detection of Avian Influenza and
Newcastle Disease Viruses
LAB-ON-SITE - EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-51364
e-mail: istvan.kiss @sva.se or sandor.belak @bvf.slu.se
National Veterinary Institute,
Department of Virology.
Ulls vag 2B
SE-751 89 Uppsala
SWEDEN
1 Introduction
The AIV/NDV duplex LUX (Light upon extension) assay is qualified for the sen-
sitive and specific real-time detection/discrimination of AIV/NDV strains originat-
ing from various sources. For the published description of the separate assays see
Kiss, I. et al. 2006. Acta Vet Hung., 54, 525-533., and Antal, M., et al. 2007. J.
Vet. Diagn. Invest. 19, 400-04.
The LUX assay does not require oligonucleotide probe and quencher molecule,
instead, it uses only two primers - like conventional PCR - one of which is
labelled with a fluorophore molecule. This set-up enables melting curve analysis
on completion of the amplification, which provides a convenient and reliable way
for confirming its specificity. The assay is capable of rapidly detecting a broad
range of influenza A and Newcastle disease viruses. Its specificity, sensitivity and
cost-efficiency make the assay a useful tool for AI/ND diagnostics.
2 RNA Extraction
s u d am) oe ' ioe  i  Pxa si 
water) feces  suspensions/organ  homogenates or  lyophilized virus  strains
reconstituted in distilled water with the QiAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen,
Valencia, CA) as recommended by the manufacturer. RNA is eluted in 60 μL of
elution buffer and 1 μL per reaction is used as template for the one-step RT-PCR
SOP 14. RT Duplex Detection of Avian Influenza and Newcastle Disease Viruses
145
3 Real-Time RT-PCR
3.1 Primers Used in the Assay
ForwardprimerAIV
Reverse primer AIV
name
sequence(5'-3')
name
sequence (5'-3')
AI-For-
gacctGATGAGTCTTCTAACCGAGGTC
AI-Rev-
TGTCTTTAGCCAYTCCATGAG
37
181
T (in bold) next to the 3'end C is labelled
with 6-carboxyfluorescein (FAM), the
lower case letters indicate the nucleotides
added to the target-specific sequences in
order to form hairpin
Forward primer NDV
Reverse primer NDV
name
sequence(5'-3')
name
sequence(5'-3)
ND-
catctt AGT GGC AGT TGG GAA GATG
ND-845R
GTG GYC CGA ATA CTG TAG
703F-
JOE
the T next to the 3'end G is labeled with
the fluorophore JOE,6-carboxy-4,5-
dichloro-2,7-dimethoxyfluorescein; lower
case letters indicate the nucleotides added
to the targetspecific sequences to form
hairpin
Both PCRs yield an appr. 145 bp PCR product
3.2 Real-Time RT-PCR
The Qiagen one-step RT-PCR kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) is used for the PCR as-
says in a final volume of 25 μL.
The assay set-up is the following
Component
Cycling
Time
Function
temp.
(°C)
Name
Amount (μL)
50
60min
RT
5x buffer
5
95
15 min
Activation
MgCl, (25 mM)
1
94
15 s
45 cycles for
H,O
12.6
58
35 s
30 s
 amplification
Rnase inhibitor (25 U/μL)
0.2
72
dNTP（10mM)
1
72
1 min
Forward primer (10 μM)
0.6 + 0.6
Reverse primer (10 μM)
1+1
Enzyme
1
sample
1
146
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Melting points are at 88.5 ± 0.5'C 85.5±0.5'C for AIV and NDV, respectively.
In no-template controls distilled water served as target. As intermal amplifica-
tion controls (IAC) pSP73 vector derived (Promega) constructs are used.
In the AIV specific assay, the IAC, which contains plasmid borm sequences be-
tween the AIV LUX primer binding sites yields a 256 bp PCR product upon am-
plification.
The same type of IAC is used for NDV but it carries a resistance marker
flanked by the NDV LUX primer binding sites and yields a 978 bp PCR product.
The analytical sensitivity is appr. 20 plasmid copies for both assays.
Reading of fluorescence for FAM and JOE is performed after the synthesis
step. Having completed the PCR a melting point analysis is done on both chan-
nels.
 The assay was tested on the following instruments, iCycler? Bio-Rad), ABI
7500 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), and Ro-
torGene 3000 (Corbett Research, Mortlake, NSW, Australia.
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
147
SOP 15. Realtime RT PCR Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix
Gene Realtime RT PCR Detection of Velogenic Newcastle
Disease Fusion Protein
Courtesy of Sharon Hietala and Beate Crossley
Califomia Animal Health and Food Safety Laboratory
University of Califormia,
Davis
United States of America.
Email: skhietala@ucdavis.edu
The SOP is formatted to include procedural information for performance of real-
time RT PCR for surveillance and diagnostic specimens in a single tube or 96-well
high-throughput format.
The infonmation includes
1. Establishment and Monitoring of Quality Control Specimen Perfonmance Lim-
its
2. Handling and Storage of realtime PCR Primer and Probes
3. Performance of real time RT PCR, Avian Influenza virus matrix gene and viru-
lent marker/fusion protein for Newcastle disease virus.
a) Single tube extraction using commercial spin column technology, suitable
for testing small numbers of specimens.
b)Manual high-throughput extraction using commercial 96-well magnetic
bead technology. The approach allows a single technician to extract RNA
 pg eoe un suas tr u siseue d uanasqns i
without robotic technologies.
4. Guidance document for response to assay failures
1 Procedure
1.1 Establishment and Monitoring of QC Specimen Performance
Limits
1.2 Purpose
The performance ranges obtained for the realtime PCR Quality Control specimens
are used to determine the pass/fail status of the diagnostic assays performed, as
well as to continuously monitor and improve assay performance. Quantitative val-
ues obtained from replicate testing of the Quality Control specimens are recorded
148
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
with each use, statistically evaluated over time, and performance ranges are up-
dated on a regular basis.
1.3 Scope
This protocol describes the steps used to establish the acceptable performance
range of Quality Control specimens used for realtime PCR assays.
1.4 Definitions and Acronyms
Ct value, real time PCR Cycle threshold value.
Armored RNA (AR)
An RNA virus mimic comprised of assay-specific target ribonucleic acid se-
quences encapsulated in a protein coat.
Quality Control (QC)
Extraction Control
Specimen used to assess extraction efficiency for realtime PCR assays.
The extraction control can be the infectious agent, a clinical specimen contain-
ing the agent of interest, or assay-specific AR.
PCR Control
Previously extracted agent-specific nucleic acid stored at -70C and tested with
 a a  s  a d sss   s ag
assay.
Mean
Sum of data point values divided by number of data points.
Standard Deviation
Quantifies the dispersion of the data point values around the mean, and is used to
set limits for acceptable performance ranges. 1 standard deviation from the mean
will include 68.3% of the values assuming a normal Gaussian distribution, 2 stan-
dard deviations from the mean will include 95.5%, and 3 standard deviations will
include 99.7% of the values assuming a normal Gaussian Distribution.
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
149
Coefficient of Variation (%CV)
An altermate measure of variability expressed as a percentage. The %CV is used
for precision (reproducibility) testing of multiple replicates (minimum of 5 repli-
cates) of the same specimen.
1.5 Materials Required
Continuous (numerical) data is recorded using an assay specific tracking system,
such as an Excel spreadsheet or equivalent QC tracking form used for recording
the mean, standard deviation, and %CV of assay control specimens.
1.6 Procedure/Detail
To establish the acceptable performance range for quality control specimens (Cy-
cle threshold values)
1. Use a minimum of 10 data points from independent assay runs to calculate the
mean Ct value for each QC specimen.
a. For establishing imitial QC specimen performance evaluations; calculate
%CV and proceed only if the control specimen used has a %CV less than
15. It is permissible to exclude statistical outliers prior to proceeding to
next steps, however additional data to allow a minimum of 10 data points
for analysis are required.
b. For assays with previously determined acceptable perfonmance ranges (de-
fined as mean ±2 standard deviations) and target performance range (de-
ance range every 10-20 runs by adding new QC data to existing data. For
the statistical analysis exclude data points from failed runs, defined as as-
axa ae ss adxa  aegxa  a aam  s 
any Or a combination of QC specimen realtime PCR Ct values beyond the
accepted performance range due to pipetting errors, dilution errors, and
etc.). Verify extreme Ct values (outliers) using the original values to iden-
tify and correct potential data entry errors (example, QC values range be-
tween 25.5 and 28.5Cts, and one of the values was documented as 2.85 Ct).
2.Calculate the mean and standard deviation of the valid data points.
 an g s s  i s  S  an sg 
value. Example
a. mean value 21.5 Ct
b. standard deviation 0.89 Ct
c. Ct quality control assay acceptance range 21.5 ± 0.89 = 19.72 to 23.28 Ct
4. Record the established QC values on Quality Control tracking form for the
specific assay.
150
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Note. To assist tracking and updating of QC specimen values, mark the final
data entry where the QC range was established (e.g. in the spreadsheet insert a
colored row at the last entry used in the calculation), and note the prior accept-
able range at this point (mean value ± 2 standard deviations). With continued
assay use and additional data points, the acceptable performance range should
progressively show less variability (smaller standard deviation) before becom-
assay design, e.g. lack of primer-dimers, GC content of the target region, other
assay interference resulting from choice of nucleic acid sequences, as well as
sample matrices used in the assay with tissues generally showing more innate
variability than fluids.
Acceptable performance ranges are established, monitored, and updated for QC
specimens to include at least,
a) Extraction controls.
b) Anmored RNA controls.
c) PCR controls.
d) Negative extraction and PCR control values without armored RNA
e) Negative extraction and PCR control values with armored RNA
5. Both negative and positive QC is recorded with every assay performed.
6. QC values from failed are tracked and investigated to assess source and fre-
quency of assay failure, identify failures as random or systematic error, and re-
a asudsa ann esse on raai auad esse un spuan mn puods
line).
Exceptions
1. For assays where PCR and Extraction controls are used as matched controls
(the PCR control and the Extraction control are prepared from the same initial
stock infectious agent dilution and are used together each time the assay is per-
criteria is monitored and used to accept assay performance; e.g., the Ct value
for the PCR control is valid, the Ct value for the paired Extraction control is
constant (example, Extraction control CT - PCR control Ct ≤ 3 Ct.).
2. For assays where AR is used as an intermal control, a valid range is established
for the expected AR Ct values. If AR is added to the negative extraction con-
trol preparation, QC performance ranges must be established.
Note. Armored RNA is added as an intermal control to clinical specimens and
is optimized to show Ct values near the detection limit of the assay. Where a
clinical sample tests strong positive for the target RNA, the armored RNA may
values obtained in positive clinical specimens should be neglected during the
calculation of the acceptable AR Ct range. Note. This situation can be avoided
by using weak positive specimen as the extraction control, dependent on the
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
151
availability of that specific source material. Document all false AR negative
values with Ct of positive sample to update efficiency measure calculations.
3. For assays that are validated for either of two or more extraction methods and
are to be compared for performance reporting or assessment of detection limit,
mathematical correction must be applied before the QC range is established,
e.g. extraction using a spin column (e.g. silica gel column A) uses a different
clinical specimen start volume and results in a different elution volume com-
pared to a magnetic bead extraction method (e.g. bead-based method B). The
ues for each new method before the acceptable performance ranges for the QC
specimen can be determined.
1.7 Appendices
Mean:x=
where x is the data value and n is the number of data
points.
Standard Deviation (SD)
∑[x-x]²
n
 = standard deviation
∑= sum of
X = each value in the data set
X = mean of all values in the data set
n = number of value in the data set
Coefficient of Variation (CV%) = (Standard Deviation divided by the mean)
times 100.
1.8 Bibliography
1. Donia, D, et al. 2005. Use of ammored RNA as a standard to construct a calibration curve for
real-time RT-PCR. J Virol. Methods, 126 (1-2), 157-63.
2. Pasloke, BL, et al. 1998. Amored RNA technology for production of ribonuclease-resistant
viral RNA controls and standards. J. Clin. Microbiol., 36 (12), 3590-4.
3.Westgard, JO, et al. 1990. Selection of medically useful Quality Control procedures for indi-
vidual tests done in a multitest analytical system. Clin. Chem., 36, 230-3.
152
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
2 Procedure - Preparation of Stock Primer and Probes
2.1 Scope
PCR assay primer and probe (dye-labeled hydrolysis probes) inventory is main-
tained in100uM aliquots; 10uM aliquots are prepared from the Stock PCR reagent
(so>) as un-s p asn ss og uao
2.2 Materials Required
suppliers.
2. Tris-EDTA (TE) Buffer (10 mM Tris, 1mM EDTA; pH 8.0)
3. Amber-colored microtubes or foil wrapped microtubes to protect probe fluo
rescent dyes from light-associated decay.
2.3 Procedure/Detail
For 100 μM Stock Solution
1. Use the "total nmoles" value supplied by the manufacturer and multiply by 10
to detenmine the volume of diluent in microliters required, example, "totat
nmoles" × l0 = μL volume of diluent added.
Example, 13.57 mmoles × 10 = 135.7 μL of TE buffer added to tube
Add 135.7 μL TE buffer to tube. Vortex well. Pulse centrifuge to insure no liq
uid is adherent to the cap.
10 μM Working Solution
1. To make a single 50 μL aliquot of 10 μM working solution (1:10 dilution of
stock solution), add 5 μL of 100 μM stock solution to 45 μL of TE buffer.
Vortex and pulse spin.
2. To make more than one aliquot, dilute in one tube and then aliquot to the re-
maining tubes. Example, To make 6, 50 μL tubes of a 10 μM working solutior
(300 μL total volume).
C.V,=CV; V, = (CV)/C,
C,= 100 μM , V,= μL of stock solution
C=10 μM,  V,=300 μL
V,=(C,V,)/C,=(10 × 300)/100=30 μL of stock solution
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
153
3. Pipette 270 μL of TE buffer in a tube, then add 30 μL of the stock solution.
Vortex and pulse spin.
Aliquot 50 μL into individual storage tubes.
4. Label tube with primer or probe name and tube sequence number. Label each
tube with the concentration and date prepared for Quality Assurance and
inventory tracking purposes.
 5. New lots and working solution of primers and probes must be tested three
times side-by-side with the previous lot for Quality Assurance purposes. The
Ct results are documented; and performance limits must be verified as within
the performance range previously established for each probe and/or primer sets
(Mean Ct ± standard deviations).
2.4 Document and Record Requirements
A reagent inventory identifying stock reagents by name, concentration, date pre-
pared, lot number and tube sequence number is maintained for quality assurance
and laboratory management purposes. Aliquots associated with documented assay
failure that is tracked to lot number, stock concentration aliquots, or working con-
centration aliquots are destroyed.
3 Procedure- Realtime RT PCR Detection of Influenza Virus
Matrix Gene, Realtime RT PCR Detection of Velogenic
Newcastle Disease Fusion Protein Gene
3.1 Purpose
The SOP describes the procedures used for realtime PCR detection of the Avian
Influenza virus matrix gene and velogenic Newcastle Disease virus fusion protein
gene, including RNA recovery followed by realtime PCR amplification and detec-
tion performed in a single tube format used for testing small numbers of samples
or in a manual (non-robotic) high throughput 96-well format for testing large
numbers of samples.
3.2 Scope
Realtime RT PCR detection of the Influenza virus matix gene and velogenic
Newcastle Disease virus fusion protein gene markers are used for surveillance and
diagnostic screening of clinical materials, including oral-pharyngeal swabs,
154
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
tracheal swabs, tissues, culture media, and allantoic fluids. The Influenza matrix as-
s aa as n m sn a   s-sas n si 
The Newcastle disease virus fusion protein target is specific to poultry species.
3.3 Materials Required
Isopropanol, 100%
Ethanol, 100% analytic grade
10% bleach solution, freshly-made, for disinfection/disposal of pipette tips
Influenza Matrix gene forward primer, 5'-AGA TGA GTC TTC TAA CCG AGG TCG-3'
Influenza Matrix gene reverse primer, 5'-TGC AAA AAC ATC TTC AAG TCT CTG-3
Influenza Matrix gene probe, 5'-FAM-TCA GGC CCC CTC AAA GCC GA-BHQ1-3'
(TaqMan or Molecular Beacon with FAM/Blackhole Quencher labels; Integrated
DNA Technology, Inc or equivalent).
Newcastle disease fusion protein gene forward primer,
5'-GGT GAG TCT ATC CGG ARG ARG TA CAA G-3
Newcastle disease fusion protein gene reverse primer,
5'-AGC TGT TCG AAC CCC AAG-3'
Newcastle disease fusion protein velogenic marker probe.
5'-FAM-AAG CGT TTC TGT CTC CTT CCT CCA-BHQ1-3′
TaqMan or Molecular Beacon with FAM/Blac khole Quencher labels; fntegrated
DNA Technotogy, Inc or equivalent).
3.3.1 Single Tube PCR
Spin Column for RNA recovery; Qiagen Inc, Ambion/Asuragen Inc., Roche Inc.,
Or equivalent commercial kit. Kit components are prepared according to the manu-
facturer's instructions.
Beta-mercaptoethanol
70% Ethanol, molecular grade
100% Ethanol, molecular grade
Equipment
Vortex
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
155
Microfuge
Sterile 1.5 mL microfuge tubes, test tube racks (autoclaved or chemically disin-
fected)
Pipettor (10 μL, 200 μL, 1000 μL) and disposable filter (aerosol-resistant) tips
Cepheid Smartcycler II or equivalent thermoycler and 25 μL reaction tubes (Cepheid
#900-0022), Cepheid reaction tube rack (Cepheid #900-0087), chilled to 4°C
Cepheid Microfuge
3.3.2 RT PCR Buffers and Enzymes
 )    
a. Qiagen OneStep RT Enzyme Mix (Reverse transcriptase, Polymerase)
b. 5X Qiagen OneStep RT PCR Buffer
c. dNTP Mix
d.RNase-free water
e. RNasin (Promega #N211 or equivalent)
f. MgCl, 50mM (Invitrogen or equivalent)
 g. 10mM forward primer, reverse primer, probe
3.3.3 96-Well Magnetic Bead for RNA Recovery (Manual Method)
MagMax-96 kit (Ambion/Asuragen Inc. #1835 or 1836-4 or equivalent)
Kit components are prepared according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Equipment
a. Magnet Stand (Ambion/Asuragen Inc, #10027 or 10050)
b.Vortex
c. 96-well Plate Shaker (Lab-Line Instrument Inc or equivalent)
d. Matrix Impact Equalizer 12-channel 250 μL and 1250 μL pipettors or equivalent.
e. Disposible pipet filter (aerosol-resistant) tips (250 μL, 1250 μL).
f.96-well polystyrene round bottom plates for extraction steps (Evergreen, Inc.
#222 8032-R1K or equivalent).
g. Foil plate sealer (Diversified Biotech #ALUM-1000). Foil sealed microtiter
plates with mastermix can be stored for up to 7 days at -70°℃.
h. Bio-Rad/Opticon thermocycler or equivalent for 96-well realtime PCR.
i.Hard-Shell? thin-wall 96-well skirted PCR plates, white shell, white well (Bio.
Rad,#HSP-9655).
j.Optical flat 8-cap strips (Bio-Rad, #TCS-0803).
156
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3.3.4 RT PCR Buffers and Enzymes
a.RNAse free water (Ambion/Asuragen Inc or equivalent)
b. Invitrogen RNA viral detection One-Step qRT-PCR UltraSense, #11732-101
(contains enzymes, Mg", dNTPs, buffer concentrate)
c.100 mM forw ard primer, reverse primer, probe
3.5Precautions
Beta-mercaptoethanol is toxic and should be dispensed in a chemical fume hood.
3.6Procedure/Detail
Disinfect all equipment prior to starting the assay by gently wiping with 10% bleach
solution, followed by wiping with 70% ethanol to remove any bleach residue.
3.7 Single Tube RNA Extraction and Realtime RT PCR
Prepare PCR Reagents and Buffers prior to handling clinical specimens and ex-
tracted nucleic acids.
Preparation of realtime RT PCR mastermix (buffers and enzymes),
1. Calculations for the volume of each reagent and enzyme needed are performed
using a pre-programmed spreadsheet or manually-calculated worksheet.
2. Remove reagents and enzymes needed from -20* storage, quickly thaw, vor-
tubes on ice.
3. Working in a PCR-reagent clean biosafety cabinet, prepare mastermix by add-
ing the appropriate volumes of each reagent as calculated for the number of
samples to be tested (add 2 additional specimens to calculations to assure ade-
   d s      a l s
Note.Theprobeshouldalwaysbethefinalreagentadded.
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
157
Avian Influenza virus Matrix gene Single-tube Worksheet
QiagenEnzymeMix-Smarteycler qRT-PCR
Date
Number of sample to be tested + 2
Enter number
Batch #
Initials
Add in following order
Master Mix
Lot #
1 Rxn
Final Conc.
Nuclease-free water
7.11
7.11
H,0
5X Buffer
5
IX
5.00
5X Buffer
50 mM MgC1
0.63
3.75 μM
0.63
50 mM MgCI
AI matrix Forward Primer (I0 μM)
0.4 μM
1.00
For Primer
AI matrix Reverse Primer (10 μM)
1
0.4 μM
1.00
Rev Primer
dNTP's
0.8
320 μM
0.80
dNTP's
 RNasin 40 U/uL
0.17
6.65
0.17
Rnasin
Enzyme Mix
1.00
Enzyme Mix
AI matrix Probe ( 10 μM)
0.3
0.12 μM
0.30
Probe
17
山 per Rxn
17.00
Total Volume
158
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
vNDV fusion gene - Single tube Worksheet
Date
Invitrogen One-step - Smarteycler qRT PCR
Batch #
Initials
Enter the number of samples
1
(Add reagents in following order)
Master mix
Lot#
1 Rxn
Final Conc.
μL
Nuclease-free water
1.00
Water
5X Rxn Mix
4
4.00
5X Rxn Mix
yNDV-Forward primer (10 μM)
3
1.2 μM
3.00
yNDV-For
yNDV-Reverse primer (10 μM)
1.5
0.6 μM
1.50
vNDV-Rev
Enzyme Mix
1.00
Enzyme Mix
ND Virulence marker Probe (10 μM)
0.5
0.2 μM
0.50
Probe
11
μL per Rxn
11.00
μL Total Volume
4. Vortex, then pulse spin (centrifuge) the mastermix tube. Wrap the tube in foil to
 protect from light and transfer to the area where the RNA will be added to the
mastermix.
Note: To avoid contamination of PCR reagents it is critical that nucleic acids and
clinical material not be handled in the PCR-reagent area, or that pipettors and
equipment in this area never be used with clinical materials or nucleic acids.
3.8RNAExtractionisPerformedPerKit Manufacturer's
Instructions
Extract the clinical specimens, including the designated Positive Extraction Con-
trol and the Negative Extraction Control with each extraction run. For Quality
Control purposes, it is critical that the ex traction controls be handled and extracted
at the same time and using the same reagents as the clinical specimens.
Total RNA testing should be initiated within 4 h following extraction. Within
that time period, total RNA is stored at 4'C. Should the testing delay exceed 4 h,
RNA is stored at -70'C or lower.
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
159
3.9PCR Amplification and Detection
1. Place reaction tubes in the chilled tube rack, handling the tubes by the neck or
lid rather than the sides to avoid contact with the "reading windows". Label the
cap on the individual tubes to insure they are kept in the correct sequence.
 2. For AI add 17 μL of mastermix to each reaction tube. For ND add 11 μL mas-
termix to each reaction tube.
3. For AI add 8 μL of each specimen RNA, closing the cap firmly before moving
to the next tube. For ND add 14 μL of each specimen RNA. Include the posi-
tive extraction control, the negative extraction control. The positive PCR con-
trol and the negative PCR control with each assay (one or more specimens
tested at the same time).
4. Centrifuge the reaction tubes using the Cepheid microfuge for 3-5 s.
5. Load the reaction tubes into the thermocycler; start the AI matrix run using
50'C for 3 min
95'C for 15min
2 - temperature cycling for a total of 45 cycles
94'C for 1 s
60'℃ for 20 s
Load the reaction tubes into the thermocycler; start the vNDV run using
48'C for 30 min
95'℃ for 2 min
 3 - temperature cycling for a total of 40 cycles
94'C for 15 s
58'℃ for 30 s
72'C for 15 s
3.10 96-Well Magnetic Bead for RNA Recovery (Manual Method)
andRealtimeRTPCR
3.11 Prepare PCR Reagents and Buffers Prior to Handling Clinical
Specimens and Extracted Nucleic Acids
3.12 Preparation of Realtime RT PCR Mastermix (Buffers and Enzymes)
1. Calculations for the volume of each reagent and enzyme needed are performed
using a pre-programmed spreadsheet or manually-calculated worksheet,
160
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
 2. Remove reagents and enzymes needed from -20°C storage, quickly thaw, vor-
tex to mix, pulse spin to remove any liquid adherent to the cap, and place the
tubes on ice.
3. Working in a PCR-reagent clean biosafety cabinet, prepare mastermix by add-
ing the appropriate volumes of each reagent as calculated for the number of
samples to be tested (plus +5 specimens or altermately 16% volume to assure
adequate final volume). Work in the same order as provided on the worksheet.
Note.The probe should always be the final reagent added.
AIV matrix gene 96-well
Invitrogen ultrasense-opticon
Date made
Enter the number of samples to be tested +5:
Enter number
Total made
Initials
(Add reagents in this order)
Plate #
Master mix
Lot #
IRxn
Final Conc.
正
RT-PCR Water
11.65
11.65
Water
5X Rxn Mix
4
4.00
5X Rxn Mix
Forward primer ( I00 μM)
0.15
0.6 μM
0.15
MA-For Primer
Reverse primer (100 μM)
0.15
0.6 μM
0.15
MA-Rev Primer
Enzyme mix
1
1.00
Enzyme Mix
Probe (100 μM)
0.05
0.2 μM
0.05
MA Probe
17
μ per Rxn
17.00
μL Total Volume
I) Aliquot 17 μL of Master Mix to each reaction tube.
2) Add 8 μL of target RNA.
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
161
vNDV fusion protein gene 96-well
 Invitrogen UltraSense - Opticon
Date made
Enter the number of samples:
1
农
Total made
Initials
(Add reagents in this order)
Plate #
Master mix
Lot#I Rxn
Final Conc.
UI
RT-PCR H20
5.5
6.38
RT-PCR H2O
5X Rxn Mix
4
4.64
5X Rxn Mix
vNDV-Forward primer ( 100uM)
0.3
1.2 μL
0.35
vNDV-For
vNDV-Reverse primer (100uM)
0.15
0.6 μM
0.17
vNDV-Rev
Enzyme Mix
1.16
Enzyme Mix
Virulence marker Probe (100uM)
0.05
0.2 μM
0.06
VFP Probe
μ per Rxn
12.76
μL Total Volume
*includes I6% additional volume
a) Aliquot II μL of Master Mix to each reaction tube.
b) Add I4 μL of target RNA.
 4. Pipette master mix into the Bio-Rad white 96-well plate. Using a Matrix pipet-
tor, load 250 μL mastermix and dispense the assay-specific μL volume into
each well.
 5. Cover plates with foil plate sealers to protect from light and evaporation; sealed
plates with mastermix can be stored for up to 7 days at -70’C.
162
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3.13RNAExtractionIsPerformedPerKit Manufacturer's
Instructions
Extract the clinical specimens, including the designated Positive Extraction Con-
Control purposes, it is critical that the extraction controls be handled and extracted
at the same time and using the same reagents as the clinical specimens.
Total RNA testing should be initiated within 4 h following extraction. Within
that time-frame, total RNA is stored at 4C. Should storage exceed 4 h, RNA is
stored at -70'C or lower.
3.14 Specimen Preparation
Specimens should be in a standardized tube size to facilitate multi-channel trans
fer, example 2 mL vials 0r tubes (Sarsted #72.694.006) or equivalent
1. Vortex samples gently prior to RNA extraction. Do not centrifuge.
2. Working with 1 row (12 specimens) at a time, uncap and place tubes in a sepa-
rate rack dedicated to the extraction process.
a.Transfer 50 μL of each row of specimens to the corresponding row of the
96-well plate.
b. Between rows, replace the cover on the microtiterplate.
C.Cap the tubes and transfer to the storage box before moving to the next row
of samples.
Note. Because multiple specimens are handled in sequence, it is good lab prac-
tice to check gloved fingertips for any evidence that fluid from the caps or
tubes has not contaminated your gloves. If any moisture is dedicated, decon-
taminate with 10% bleach and dispose of gloves. Wipe the tubes, rack, and
immediate work area with 10% bleach and again with ethanol before continu-
ing.
3. Quality Control specimens are located in wells interspersed with diagnostic
specimens to appropriately control for cross-contamination during extraction
and amplification steps, e.g. row C well 3, row F well 8.
a.  Pipette 50 μL of negative extraction control into the designated well.
b. Dispose of pipette tip in bleach solution.
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
163
Pipette 50 μL of positive extraction control (LPAI or armored RNA
UCD#3) into two designated wells. Dispose of tip in bleach solution.
d.QC specimen vials are disinfected by wiping with 70% alcohol after each
use.
e. Leave wells H11 and H12 empty for PCR positive and negative controls,
which will be added directly to the wells containing PCR mastermix im-
mediately prior to qRT PCR amplification.
4. Use care to keep the microtiter plate flat. Store the microtiter plate containing
specimens at -20'C if not proceeding immediately to RNA extraction steps.
3.1596-WellRNAExtractionGeneralRecommendations
· To remove fluid, program Matrix pipettor to slow speed, add fluid to the 96-
well plate with pipettor programmed on medium speed.
· To remove fluid from the 96-well plates during the extraction and wash
steps, leave the plate on the magnetic stand; To add extraction and wash flu-
ids to the wells, remove the plate from the magnetic stand.
· Magnetic beads used in the extraction process should be suspended after
adding the elution solution, pipette gently if the beads are clumped or not
suspended.
3.16 Total RNA Isolation
Preparation. Place bead solution on vortex and shake on setting 3 for 2 min.
1. If samples have been pre-plated and the 96-well plate frozen, thaw in a bio-
safety cabinet with the plate covers off to prevent condensation from running
onto plate surface.
2. Double check the 96-well plate for loading errors (empty wells, excessive vol-
ume in wells), and for missing plate numbers/missing bar codes.
3.17 RNA Binding Using a Programable Matrix or Equivalent
Pipettor
1. Add 101 μL Lysis/Binding solution into each well, and shake for 5 min.
Shakerdialposition,Mediumspeed
Fill1250pl/dispense101μL
164
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
2. Add 20 μL beads/binding mix in each well of a U-bottom plate, and shake for 4 min.
Shakerdialposition,Mediumspeed
Fill250μL/dispense 20pL
3. Move the U-bottom plate onto the Magnetic Stand, wait 2 min for beads to
pellet. Slowly remove supermatant.
Fill240pL/dispense240piL
4. Add 100 μL prepared Wash Solution I, shake for 1 min (it is possible that the
beads won't break up, there is not a negative effect on RNA quality or yield).
Shakerdialposition,Mediumspeed+
Fill1250pL/dispense100μL
5. Move the U-bottom plate on to the Magnetic Stand, wait 1 min to pellet beads
Remove supermatant.
Fill240pL/dispense240pL
6. Add 100 μL prepared Wash Solution II, shake for 30 s.
7. Move the U-bottom plate on to the Magnetic Stand, wait 30 s to pellet beads
Remove supermatant.
Fill240pL/dispense240ul
8. Add 100 μL prepared Wash Solution II, shake for 30 s.
Shaker dial position,Medium speed+
Fill1250pL/dispense100pL
9. Move the U-bottom plate on to the Magnetic Stand, wait 30 s to pellet beads.
Slowly remove supermatant. Shake plate for 2 min dry to help the evaporation
RNA Elution
10. Add 30 μL Elution Solution to each well, shake for 4 min. Beads should be
suspended, otherwise use a manual 200 μL pipettor to re-suspend the beads by
pipetting up and down.
Shaker dial,High speed
Fill 250μL/dispense30pL
11. Transfer of RNA to a 96-well plate containing the assay-specific qRT-PCR
mastermix. If the RNA will not be used for PCR amplification within 4 h,
transfer the RNA into a clean plate (place the U-bottom plate on the Magnetic
Stand, wait 1 min to pellet the beads. Transfer the supermatant into a clean
plate (25 pL per well), cover with an adhesive plate sealer, wrap with
aluminum foil and freeze the plate at -70 C.)
Note. Manual 12 and & channel pipettors are not as efficient for the extraction
based on slower and less forcefuldispensing of fluid, which is needed to help
disperse the magnetic beads.
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
165
3.18PCRAmplification andDetection
1. To perform the Avian Influenza matrix gene RT-PCR, 8 μL of extracted RNA
is pipetted into each well of the AI matrix mastermix plate containing 17 μL
per well of master mix using the Matrix Equalizer pipettors.
2. Positive and Negative PCR control RNA (8ul) is added respectively to the last
two wells of each microtiter plate.
3. Load the reaction plates into the thermocycler; start the run using
48'C for 30 min
95'C for 2 min
3-step cycling for a total of 45 cycles
94'C for 15 s
60'℃ for 30 s
72'℃ for 15 s
4. To perform the vNDV fusion protein gene RT-PCR, 11 μL of extracted RNA is
pipetted into each well of the AI matrix mastermix plate containing 17 μL per
well of master mix using the Matrix Equalizer pipettors.
5. Positive and Negative PCR control RNA (8ul) is added respectively to the last
two wells of each microtiter plate.
6. Load the reaction plates into the thermocycler; start the run using
48'C for 30 min
95'℃ for 2 min
 3-step cycling for a total of 45 cycles
94'℃ for 15 s
60'C for 30 s
72'℃ for 15 s
3.19 Expected Values
In order for the assay to be valid
1. The extraction and PCR negative control must have no Ct crossing the thresh-
old.
2. The Virus extraction and PCR positive controls must give a Ct within 2 stan-
dard deviations of the expected value (see example, AI qRT PCR).The target
Ct for optimum assay precision is the expected value ± 1 Ct for the controls.
Validated Armored RNA controls can replace positive extraction controls.
3. The difference between the extraction control and PCR positive controls must
be within 3 Ct of the expected value. Optimum performance is within 1.5 Ct of
the expected value.
4. The difference between the two extraction controls must be less than 2 Ct.
166
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Example, values are established for each reference control lot produced*
Expected
Mean
Ct Std
Target Ct
Acceptabte
value
dev
(±1Ct)
(±2SD)
Al extrac-
18.2
1.6
17.2-19.2
15-21.4
tion
AIPCR
17.6
1.4
16.6-18.6
14.8-20.4
Difference
0.6
0.15
≤1.6
0.3-0.9
*Expected Ct value for new lots of extraction and paired PCR controls are based on triplicate
side-by-side testing with established controls. Current values are recorded in the QC form.
 g  zi g si ss a x nz an go i  s
A specimen is identified as positive for target sequence when a positive Ct is
detected, and the resulting realtime PCR fluorogram shows a log-linear increase in
fluorescence. Post-analytic procedures are used for Ct >35 and where the fluoro-
3.20 Post Analytical Procedures
The realtime PCR amplification procedure may be followed by 4% agarose gel
electrophoresis for confinmation of amplicon size. Confinmation of amplicon size
is not required, but is an additional practice used for RNA viruses where sequence
variability and mutability of the RNA genome may result in changes in assay per-
formance over time or geographic region. Gel electrophoresis verification of am-
plicon is recommended for all specimens with a Ct of 35 or greater cycles, to aid
in differentiating weak positive realtime PCR results from late cycle probe decay.
3.21 Bibliography and Related Documentation
96-well extraction and PCR
1. http://www.ambion.com/techlib/posters/thruput_mag_0402.htmL (03-2005)
2.http://www.ambion.com/techlib/prot/fm_1830.pdf (03-2005)
3. Crossley et al., High-throughput realtime RT PCR assay to detect exotic Newcastle disease
virus during the California 2002-2003 outbreak
SOP 15. Detection of Influenza Virus Matrix Gene
167
3.22 Primer and Probe Design and Performance
influenza virus and the avian H5 and H7 hemagglutinin subtypes. J. Clin. Microbiol., 40 (9)
3256-60.
5. Spackman et al. 2008. Detection and identification of the H5 hemagglutinin subtype by real-
time RT-PCR. Methods Mol. Biol., 436, 27-33.
PCR. Methods Mol. Biol., 436, 19-26.
7. Aldous EW., et al. 2001 Rapid pathotyping of Newcastle disease virus (NDV) using fluoro
genic probes in a PCR assay. Vet Microbiol., 80 (3), 201-12.
8. Creelan et al. 2002. Detection and differentiation of pathogenicity of avian paramyxovirus se
rotype 1 from field cases using one-step reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
Avian Patho., 31 (5), 493-9.
4 Guidance Document- Assay Failure Response
4.1 Assay Performance
Numerous factors contribute to the reliability, repeatability, and reproducibility of
molecular-based diagnostic tools, including but not limited to;
1. Envirommental conditions
 2. Variation in acceptable ranges of performance for different pieces of equipment
or equipment platforms
 3. Measurement traceability
 4. Pre-test sampling and handling of specimens
5. Reagent performance variability
6. Human error
It is diagnostic service policy to track QC sample performance over time and es-
tablish expected performance ranges (e.g. 95% confidence interval, standard de-
viation from the mean, % coefficient of variation). Once established, the perform-
ance expectations are monitored and recorded for every assay performed where
diagnostic specimens are included and results reported.
4.2 Assay Failure
If one or more assay controls fail on a assay or assay run; the technician will consult
with the section supervisor or designee as to further action. Regardless of follow-
up approach used, all assay runs are recorded, and values for failed QC samples
are documented and tracked. Where an explanation for the failure is possible, that
168
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
is additionally documented and linked to the QC sample values obtained for the
failed rum.
ability and human error are the most likely source of assay failure.
If assay controls fail on sequential assays (at least 2 sequential runs), or a spe-
cific assay has a patterm of >10% failure over time, the techmical staff will initiate
an assay failure investigation including documentation, which may include but is
not limited to:
1. Altermate vial or lot of assay control(s)
2. Altemate technician
 3. Altermate vial or lot of specific reagent(s) (e.g. primer, probe, DNase, and etc.)
4. Altermate but equivalent extraction method
5. Altermate but equivalent piece of equipment or equipment platform (e.g. pipet-
tor, thermocycler, etc.)
6. Altermate aliquot of specimen if available
4.3 Performance Troubleshooting Guidelines
· 4 or more consecutive control values exceed the mean ± 1 standard deviation
 Performance is within the acceptable range, but the trend is often an indicator
 of need for equipment maintenance or reagent decay.
● 2 or more consecutive control values exceed the mean ± 2 Standard deviations
suggests systematic error.
● Any control value exceeds 3 standard deviations within an individual run sug-
 gests random error.
● 10 consecutive control values are on the same side of the mean serves as an in-
dicator of need for equipment maintenance or reagent re-calibration (e.g. stock
reagent dilution error).
SOP 16. Preparation of Silica Particles for Nucleic Acid Extraction
169
SOP 16. Preparation of Silica Particles for Nucleic Acid
Extraction
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-51364
Courtsey of Thomas Bruun Rasmussen
National Veterinary Institute, Technical University of Denmark,
Department of Virology,
Lindholm DK-4771 Kalvehave
Denmark
Responsible scientist
Thomas Bruun Rasmussen
E-mailthb@ vet.dtu.dk
Created 2008-02-04
Updated 2008-02-04
1 Introduction
This SOP describes the preparation of Silica particles for the extraction of nucleic
acids. DNA and RNA bind efficiently to acid-washed Silica particles [1]. This pro-
cedure rescues the nucleic acids from the main part of debris and interfering agents
in serum and organ materials. The current method is used at DTU Vet [2]
1.1 Principle
Silica particles are sedimented twice in water, to remove the particles with a
suboptimal size. Finally HCl is added to the suspension.
1.2 Safety
This procedure involves 32% HCl
Risks involved, C; R-34, R-37
170
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
1.2.1 Virus Safety
No virus is used in this procedure, however, it is essential to perfonm the proce-
dure in a clean area.
1.3 Equipment
Glass cylinder, 27.5 × 5 cm
Pipettes
Wide bottomed polyethylene-bottle for storage of stock
Eppendorf tubes for aliquots
Parafilm
 Disposable gloves
1.4 Reagents
SiO, (Sigma S-5631).
Milli-Q water.
32% HCI
1.5WasteTreatment
All waste from this procedure can be disposed of without further precautions.
2 Procedure
b. Add Milli-Q water to a total volume of 500 mL.
c. Seal with parafilm and tum the glass tube several times until Silica particles are
in suspension.
d. Leave to sediment 24 h at RT.
e. Pour carefully (or use suction) 440 mL supermatant off.
f. Resuspend by adding Milli-Q water to 500 mL, mix as in "3".
g. Leave to sediment for 5 h at RT.
h. Use suction to remove 440 mL supermatant. Leave 60 mL of residual volume,
this will contain aprox. 50 vol% Silica.
i. Shake well and add 600 μL 32% HCl.
SOP 16. Preparation of Silica Particles for Nucleic Acid Extraction
171
j. Keep the stock in a high density polyethylene or glass bottle in the dark at RT,
sealed with parafilm to reduce evaporation. This stock will keep for years.
k. Make 200-500 μL aliquots in Eppendorf tubes for everyday use. Mark date of
stock production.
 1. Vortex thoroughly before use. Is it essential that the Silica is in suspension be-
fore use.
3 Bibliography
1. Boom, R, Sol, CJ, Salimans, MM, Jansen, CL, Wertheim-van Dillen, PM, van der Noordaa, J.
1990. Rapid and simple method for purification of nucleic acids. J. Clin. Microbio., 28, 495-
503.
2. Oleksiewicz, MB, Botner, A, Madsen, KG, Storgaard, T. 1998. Sensitive detection and typing
of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus by RT-PCR amplification of whole
viral genes. Vet. Microbiol., 64, 7-22.
172
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 17. Boom-Silica RNA Extraction (GuSCN, phenol, Silica)
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Thomas Bruun Rasmussen
National Veterinary Institute, Technical University of Denmark,
Department of Virology,
Lindholm DK-4771 Kalvehave
Denmark
Responsible scientist
Thomas Bruun Rasmussen E-mail thb@ vet.dtu.dk
Created 2008-02-04
Updated 2008-02-04
1 Introduction
This SOP describes extraction of nucleic acids from serum or organ material for
subsequent RT-PCR analysis. The content of PCR-interfering agents is reduced
thus resulting in an increased sensitivity of the PCR. Detection of RNA viruses by
PCR is often hampered by the interference of organic materials on the efficacy of
PCR (Konet et al., 2000).
2 Definition
RT-PCR - reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
GuSCN - guanidine isothiocyanate
RT - room temperature
μL - microliter
3 Principle
This procedure combines several steps each reducing the interference of organic
            
SOP 17. Boom-Silica RNA Extraction (GuSCN, phenol, Silica)
173
isothiocyanate (GuSCN) to avoid RNAse activity and to inactivate virus in the
sample. Organ materials are extracted with acid phenol (for RNA viruses, here
classical swine fever) and 1-Bromo-3-chloropropan. The nucleic acids are subse-
quently isolated by binding to acid-washed silica particles [1]. Following washes
in GuSCN/citrate and ethanol, nucleic acids are eluted in RNAse free water and
are now ready for the RT-PCR procedure.
4 Safety
All procedures in this description must be performed in a flow-hood
GuSCN , Xn; R20/21/22, R 32
Phenol , Tx, C; R24/25, R34
1-Bromo-3-chloropropan (C3H6BrCl), Xn; R 22, R 40
4.1 Virus Safety
Any virus will be inactivated by the high molar GuSCN used. However, to reduce
the risk of contamination the procedure is performed in a clean area, i.e. PCR lab
outside (mastermix extraction and preparation area). Changing of clothes and
showering before entering the lab is required. All waste materials are incinerated
immediately on the island.
5 Equipment
Safety laminar air flow hood (must be approved for work with
1-Bromo-3-chloropropan and phenol)
Disposable gloves
Pipettes
Plugged tips only
Positive displacement pipette for 1-Bromo-3-chloropropan
Eppendorf tubes (1.5 and 2 mL)
PCR tube rack
Mini centrifuge
Rotating spear
Heating block
174
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
6 Reagents
6.1 5 M GuSCN (produced at the Pharmacy of the Royal Vet University)
GuSCN (Fluka 50990) 591 g
Distilled water up to 1 L
Keep in a dark bottle, at RT'.
6.2 1 M Citric acid pH 5,2 (produced at the Pharmacy of the Royal Vet University)
Citric acid monohydrate (Merck 1.00244) 4.90 g.
Sodiumcitrate dihydrate (Merck 1.06448) 23.52 g.
Sterile water up to 100 mL.
Autoclave and store at +4°C.
6.3 GuSCN/citrate (working solution of GuSCN)
30 mL 5 M GuSCN + 936 μL 1 M citric acid, pH 5.2
Store at +4°C, shelf life 1 month.
6.4 Elution buffer
600 μL nucleasefree water + 20 μL PRIME RNase inhibitor.
70%EtOH
31.5 mL 99.9% EtOH + 13.5 mL Milli-Q water
6.5 2 M NaOAc, pH 4.2, biotechnology grade (Amresco E 502), store at RT
6.6 Phenol pH 4.3 (Amresco), store at +4 °C
6.7 1-Bromo-3-chloropropan 24 parts + 1 part isoamylalcohol (Amresco X 205),
store at RT
6.8 Nuclease free water (Amresco), stored at -20°C in aliquots of 1 mL
6.9 PRIME RNAse inhibitor (5 prime - 3 prime, Inc., Boulder, (CO), USA)
6.10 99.9% EtOH (Danisco distillers, Aalborg, Denmark)
6.11 Milli-Q water.
SOP 17. Boom-Silica RNA Extraction (GuSCN, phenol, Silica)
175
7 Procedure
7.1Pretreatment ofSamples
Add 96 μL serum to 304 μL GuSCN/citrate, vortex well.
At this stage the material may be stored at -20°C.
If the material causes debris (organ suspensions, semen or full blood) centrifuge
and transfer supematant to clean tube.
7.2 Phenol/1-Bromo-3-chloropropan Extraction of Samples
Steps 2-4 are only relevant for organ materials
Thaw the samples, vortex and spin down, each tube is treated as follows,
Add 40 μL of NaOAc.
Add 400 μL of cold acid phenol; mix by tuming the tubes several times.
Add 120 μL 1-Bromo-3-chloropropan, use positive displacement pipette. Shake
the tubes vigorously to mix the material.
Spin the tubes at 11,300 g for 2 min.
Transfer the supermatant (400 μL) to clean 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes.
The tubes may be frozen at this step or go immediately to Silica binding.
7.3 Binding ofRNA toSilicaParticles
Add 2.5 μL Silica [AI-1.01.602] to each pretreated sample.
Vortex briefly and leave the tubes for 20 min at RT on a rotating spear.
Prepare washing solution, set the heating block for 65°C, take 1 mL nuclease free
Amresco water from the freezer.
Spin at 2400 xg for 20 s, remove the supermatant carefully using a pipette.
Wash Silica twice using 475 μL GuSCN/citrate (vortex, spin 20 s, 2400 g, and
-snsai oi si es an nun ruassa si ai (nadid e Aq guans aun aaoa
 pended after each pelleting.
Wash Silica twice using 475 μL 70% EtOH (vortex, spin 20 s, 2400 g, and re-
move the supermatant by a pipette).
Wash Silica once using 475 μL 99.9% EtOH (vortex, spin 20 s, 2400 g, and re-
aadid e Aq guuadns an aao
176
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Spin the dried sample again (2400 g for 10 s) and remove as much supermatant as
possible.
Let the Silica dry for 5-10 min in the flow hood.
Resuspend the pellet in 22.5 μL elution-buffer, vortex thoroughly to completely
resuspend the Silica.
Incubate the tube for 5 min at 65°C in the heating block.
Spin tubes at 11,300 g for 2 min, transfer the supermatant to new Eppendorf tubes,
the RNA samples are now ready for cDNA synthesis. Discard of the tubes con-
taining pellets.
8 Bibliography
1. Boom, R, Sol, CJ, Salimans, MM, Jansen, CL, Wertheim-van Dillen, PM, van der Noordaa,
J. 1990. Rapid and simple method for purification of nucleic acids. J. Clin. Microbiol., 28,
495-503.
2. Konet, DS, Mezencio, JM, Babcock, G, Brown, F. 2000. Inhibitors of RT-PCR in serum.
J. Virol. Methods, 84, 95-8.
3. Uttenthal, A, Storgaard, T, Oleksiewicz, MB,de Stricker, K. 2003. Experimental infection
with the Paderborn isolate of classical swine fever virus in 10-week-old pigs, determination
of viral replication kinetics by quantitative RT-PCR, virus isolation and antigen ELISA. Vet.
Microbiol., 92 (3), 197-212
SOP 18. ELISAs for H5 and H7 Antibody Detection in Avian Sera
177
SOP 18. Mab Based Competitive ELISAs for H5 and H7
Antibody Detection in Avian Sera
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-51364
Courtesy of Paolo Cordioli
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia Romagna
Reparto Biotecnologie - Centro Nazionale di Referenza per le Malattie
Vescicolari
Via Bianchi, 9
25124 Brescia
Italy
Responsible scientist Paolo Cordioli
E-mail paolo.cordioli @bs.izs.it
Created 2008-02-13
Updated 2008-02-15
1 Introduction
This SOP describes two ELISA assays to detect antibodies against H5 and H7
avian influenza viruses (AIV) in avian sera. These tests were developed by Partner
7, IZSLER, Brescia. The principle of the two assays is the same; it is a competitive
ELISA that uses the H5 and H7 partially purified AIVs coated to the plate and the
conjugated Mabs specific for H5 (5D8) and H7 (7A4) respectively. The ability of
test sera to inhibit the binding of peroxidase-conjugated MAbs to the antigen is
then evaluated.
178
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
2 Reagents
2.1 ELISABuffers
2.1.1 Coating Buffer (0.05 M Carbonate-Bicarbonate Buffer, pH 9.6)
Na,CO,
1.59 g
NaHCO,
2.93 g
Distilled water to
1000 mL
Store at +4°C
2.1.2 Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS), pH 7.4
Normal strength
x10 strength
NaCl
8.0g
80g
KH,PO,
0.2 g
20 g
Na,HPO,.12H,O
2.9 g
29g
KCl
0.2g
2g
Distilled water to Store at RT
1000 mL
1000 mL
2.1.3 Washing Buffer (PBS-Tween)
PBS (normal strength) + Tween 20 (PI379 Sigma) 0.05%.
Store at RT.
2.1.4 Sera and Conjugate Diluent Buffer
PBS-Tween 20 + yeast extract 1%
Prepare the minimum needed volume every day and use it fresh.
2.1.5 Chromophore/Substrate Solution
OPD (orthophenylendiamine- Sigma) 0.5 mg/mL in phosphate-citrate buffer
Phosphate-citrate buffer, pH 5
Citric Acid 0.1 M
98.6 mL
Na,HPO, 0.2 M
101.4 mL
Store at 4°℃
Dissolve tablets of OPD (SIGMA) in the appropriate volume of buffer (e.g. one
tablet of 60 mg OPD in 120 mL of phosphate-cytrate buffer, pH 5). This solution
SOP 18.ELISAs for H5 and H7 Antibody Detection in Avian Sera
179
can be stored at -20°C in appropriate aliquots (6, 12, 18 or 24 mL aliquots, suited
respectively for 1, 2, 3 or 4 plates) in the dark. Immediately before use add H,O,at
0.02% final concentration (e.g. H,O, 30% 4 μL H,O, per 6 mL OPD) potential car-
cinogenic agent R45.
2.1.6 Blocking Solution (H,SO, 2N)
H,SO, 96%
56 mL
Distilled water  944 mL
Store at room temperature.
3 Biological Reagents
3.1 Antigens
3.1.1 H5 AIV
strain A/Tk/En/28/73 H5N2 LPAI.
3.1.2 H7 AIV
Allantoic fluid from SPF chicken embryonated eggs infected with the field strain
A/Tk/It/2676/99 H7N1 LPAI.
3.1.3 Antigen Production
Viruses are inoculated into 9-11-day-old embryonated SPF eggs. After 3 days of
incubation at 37°C, allantoic fluids (AF) are collected and then inactivated with B-
propiolactone. Viruses are concentrated and partially purified by centrifuging the
AF at low speed (3000g for 20min), then layering it on 25% (w/w) sucrose
gradient and pelleting the virus by centrifugation at 100.000g at 4°C for 2 h.
The pellet is re-suspended in PBS (100X) and finally mixed with glycerol 50%
aa  a-ad s vsit g un u d o- e ps p
180
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3.2 Positive Control Sera
3.2.1 Positive H5 Control Serum
Sera from SPF chickens experimentally infected with A/Tk/It/90302/05 H5N2
LPAI.
3.2.2 Positive H7 Control Serum
Sera from SPF chickens experimentally infected with A/Tk/It/2676/99 H7N1
LPAI.
3.2.3 Negative Control Serum
SPF chicken sera.
3.3 Conjugated Mab
Peroxidase-conjugated Mabs anti-H5 (5D8) and anti-H7 (7A4).
They can be mixed with glycerol 50% and stored at -20°C or pre-diluted in
stabilizing buffer and stored at +4°C.
Prepare working conjugate dilution immediately before use.
Mabs 5D8 and 7A4 were produced by IZSLER.
4 Assay Procedure
4.1 Antigen Coating
diluted in carbonate buffer pH 9.6, and incubated overmight at 4°C.
4.2 Washing
Wash the ELISA plates three times (3 min/wash) by filling wells with 150-200
SOP 18.ELISAs for H5 and H7 Antibody Detection in Avian Sera
181
4.3 Sera
Distribute 50 μL/well of test sera and control sera, diluted in PBS-Tween
containing 1% yeast extract. 42 test sera (2 duplications/serum) can be examined
in one plate, they are usually distributed and diluted directly in antigen coated
wells, according the enclosed scheme (Fig. 5.1).
●Deliver 80 μL of diluent buffer in wells of the rows A, C, E, G (excluding
wells A12, C12, E1, G1) and 50 μL in wells A12, C12, E1, G1
●Add 20 μL of test sera in wells of the rows A, C, E, G (excluding wells A12,
B12, C12, D12, E1,F1, G1, H1, and G11, G12).
● Add 20 μL of each positive and negative control sera, following the scheme
 in Fig. 5.1, in wells G11 G12
● Mix using either a multichannel pipette or a shaker, obtaining the dilution
1/5
● Using a multichannel pipette tranfer 50 μL from wells of rows A, C, E, G
(excluding wells A12, B12, C12, D12, E1, F1, G1, H1) to the corresponding
wells of rows B, D, F, H to duplicate the dilution 1/5.
Serum
10
11
12
dilution
1/5
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
8
9
10
11
100%
1/5
1
5
6
7
8
10
11
100%
1/5
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
100%
1/5
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
100%
1/5
E
100%
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
1/5
100%
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
1/5
Q
100%
34
35
36
37
38
6
40
41
42
C+
C-
1/5
H
100%
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
C+
C
Fig. 5.1 Micro plate layout (scheme of sera distribution)
1-42:
 Test sera; dilution 1/5, two duplications/serum
C neg Negative control serum, dilution 1/5, two duplications/serum
C pos H5 or H7 positive control serum, dilution 1/5, two duplications/serum
100% Reaction control wells (0% inhibition)
182
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
4.4 Distribution of Conjugates Mab, Without Washing
Add 25 μL /well of peroxidase-conjugated Mabs H5 or H7, diluted in PBS-Tween
with 1% yeast extract.
Cover and incubate plates for 1 h at 37°C (possibly on a rotary shaker).
4.5Washing
As above
4.6Substrate
The colorimetric reaction is developed by distributing 50 μL/well of the substrate
solution (OPD 0.5 mg/mL in phosphate-citrate buffer pH 5, 0.02% H,O); after 10
min. at room temperature, the reaction is stopped by adding 50 μL/well of H,SO
2N.
4.7Reading
Absorbance values are read at 492 nm wave-length, using a micro plate reader.
5 Evaluation of Results
The pre-determined optimal dilutions of peroxidase-conjugated Mabs are expected
to give spectrophotometric readings included in the range 1.5± 0.5 absorbance
units (average of 8 wells 100% reaction = 0% inhibition) in control wells
s
follows,
% inhibition = 100 -(serum OD / 100% OD) × 100
The negative control serum usually inhibits less than 50%
The positive control serum is expected to give ≥ 75% inhibition
Test sera are considered
Positive when the arithmetic mean of the two replicates produces an inhibition
≥75%
Negative when arithmetic mean of the two replicates produces an inhibition
≤75%.
183
SOP 19. Type A, H5, and H7 Avian Influenza Antigen Detection
ELISAS
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Paolo Cordioli
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia Romagna
Reparto Biotecnologie - Centro Nazionale di Referenza per le Malattie
Vescicolari
Via Bianchi, 9
25124 Brescia
Italy
Responsible scientist Paolo Cordioli
E-mail paolo.cordioli @bs.izs.it
Created 2008-02-13
Updated 2008-02-15
1 Introduction
This SOP describes three ELISA assays to identify type A, H5 and H7 avian in-
fluenza viruses using monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) specific for the nucleoprotein
A (NPA), and H5 and H7 haemoagglutinin antigens, respectively. These tests
were developed by Partner 7, IZSLER, Brescia. The principle of the three ELISAs
is the same and is based on the use of capture Mabs specific for NPA, H5, and H7
AIVs respectively, coated onto 96 wells ELISA microplates, the addition of sam-
ples from allantoic fluids of infected embryonated eggs, and, finally, the addition
of the same capture Mabs labelled with HRP. The wells where AIV antigen has
been captured and then reacted with the specific conjugate are identified by mean
of a OPD staining.
184
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
2 Reagents
2.1 ELISA Buffers
2.1.1 Coating Buffer (0.05 M Carbonate-Bicarbonate Buffer, pH 9.6)
Na,CO,
1.59 g
NaHCO,
2.93 g
 Distilled water to
1000 mL
Store at +4°℃
2.1.2 Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS), pH 7.4
Normal strength
X10 strength
NaCl
8.0 g
80g
KH,PO
0.2 g
20g
Na,HPO.12H,O
2.9 g
29g
KC1
0.2g
2g
distilled water to store at room temperature.
1000 mL
1000mL
2.1.3 Washing Buffer (PBS-Tween)
PBS (normal strength) + Tween 20 (PI379 Sigma) 0.05%.
store at room temperature.
2.1.4 Sample and Conjugate Diluent Buffer
PBS-Tween 20 + yeast extract 1%
Prepare the minimum needed volume every day and use it fresh.
2.1.5 Chromophore/Substrate Solution
OPD, orthophenylendiamine (Sigma) 0.5 mg/mL in phosphate-citrate buffer
 Phosphate-cytrate buffer, pH 5
Citric Acid 0.1 M
98.6 mL
Na,HPO, 0.2 M
101.4 mL
Store at 4°℃
Dissolve tablets of OPD (SIGMA) in the appropriate volume of buffer (e.g. one
tablet of 60 mg OPD in 120 mL of phosphate-citrate buffer, pH 5). This solution
SOP 19. Type A, H5, and H7 Avian Influenza Antigen Detection ELISAs
185
can be stored at -20°C in appropriate aliquots (6, 12, 18 or 24 mL aliquots, suited
respectively for 1, 2, 3 or 4 plates) in the dark. Immediately before use add H,O, at
0.02% final concentration (e.g. H,O, 30% 4 μL H,O2per 6 mL OPD) potential car-
cinogenic agent R45.
2.1.6 Blocking Solution (2N- H,SO)
H,SO, 96%
56 mL
Distilled water
944 mL
Store at RT.
3 Biological Reagents
3.1 Catching Mabs
The solution of the catching Mabs (Mab anti-NPA, 5F10, Mab anti-H5, 5D8, and
Mab anti-H7, 7A4) is a semi-purified concentrated Mab prepared in PBS
containing glycerol 50% and stored at -20°C. Final dilution range 2-5 μg/mL
depending on MAb.
Prepare working dilution immediately before use.
Mabs 5F10, 5D8 and 7A4 were produced by IZSLER.
3.2 Conjugated Mabs
Peroxidase-conjugated Mabs anti-NPA (5F10), anti-H5 (5D8) and anti-H7 (7A4).
They can be mixed with glycerol 50% and stored at -20°C or pre-diluted in
stabilizing buffer and stored at +4°C.
Prepare working conjugate dilution immediately before use.
Mabs 5D8 and 7A4 were produced by IZSLER.
3.3 Positive Controls
Positive AIV control sample
H1N1 infected allantoic fluid inactivated with B-propiolactone (BPL).
Positive H5 control sample
H5N2 infected allantoic fluid inactivated with BPL.
186
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Positive H7 control sample
H7N1 infected allantoic fluid inactivated with BPL
3.4 Negative Control Sample, SPF Allantoic Fluid
Positive and negative control samples should be stored at -20°C in appropriate
aliquots (200μL is suitable for one plate).
4 Assay Procedure
4.1 Coating
Nunc 96 wells microplates are coated overmight at 4°C with the capture Mabs anti
NPA, anti-H5 and anti-H7 respectively, optimally diluted in coating buffer.
4.2 Washing
Washing the ELISA plates three times (3 min/wash) by filling wells with 150-200
μL/well of washing buffer at appropriate dilution.
4.3 Samples
Addition of 50 μL/well of allantoic fluids. Samples have to be tested in
duplicate and it is recommended to test two dilutions (undiluted and /2) for each
sample. For each plate, a AIV or H5 or H7 positive control and negative control
have to be included.
Incubate plates for 1 h at 37°C.
4.4 Washing
Wash plates as described above.
SOP 19. Type A, H5, and H7 Avian Influenza Antigen Detection ELISAs
187
4.5 Conjugated Mabs
Addition of 50 μL/well of the appropriate dilution of NPA or H5 or H7 specific
conjugate respectively. Incubate for 1 h at 37"C.
4.6 Washing
As above.
4.7 Substrate
The colorimetric reaction is developed by distributing 50 μL/well of the substrate
 o %o  d g    o ) o
10 min. at room temperature, the reaction is stopped by adding 50 μL/well of
H,SO, 2N.
4.8 Reading
Absorbance values are read at 492 mm.
4.9 Evaluation of Results
The reactivity of AIV, H5 and H7 control antigen is expected to be higher than 0.2
OD value.
Allantoic fluid are considered:
+
positive when producing reactivity ≥ 0.2 OD.
negative when producing reactivity < 0.2 OD
188
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 20. Ribonucleic Acid Extraction from Samples Using
TRIzol Reagent
Courtesy of Donald King and Scott Reid
Institute of Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, United Kingdom
Responsible Scientists: Donald King (Donald.king@bbsrc.ac.uk) and Scott Reid
(Scott.reid@bbsrc.ac.uk)
1 Introduction
1.1 Purpose
This SOP describes a simple and reliable extraction technique using commercial
cific PCR amplification. Samples suitable for testing include field samples and
cells suspected to contain RNA viruses of vesicular disease. Extraction of total
RNA from such samples is necessary to facilitate the processes of reverse tran-
scription and polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) amplification.
This SOP was reviewed in August 2008. This version of the SOP was prepared
forIAEA.
2 Risk assessment
If this SOP is not followed, the risks include, but are not limited to:
·Compromising the Quality Management System.
●Failures in the Quality Management System go undetected.
·Failures that are detected, are not corrected or there is undue delay.
● The importance of the processes is not recognised.
● Failing to deliver product, e.g. scientific publication, new diagnostic tests,
reports, etc., that is fit for purpose and not in keeping with customer
requirements.
●Lack of traceability of working practices.
● Lack of credibility of data.
Note: This procedure does not involve handling of inactivated virus. Work with
inactivated viruses (such as the processing of samples and preparation of lysed
material suitable for RT-PCR analysis) is described in further IAH documentation.
SOP 20. Ribonucleic Acid Extraction from Samples Using TRIzol Reagent
189
2.1 Health and Safety: and Other Risks
Under the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 a suitable
and sufficient assessment of the risks to the health and safety of employees must
be carried out on all work procedures, e.g. SOP, method, protocol. Control meas-
ures must be put in place to minimise any hazards associated with the work that
may endanger the health and safety of employees, as far as reasonably practicable.
and consideration should be given to including these control measures in the SOP.
 Only trained, competent and qualified personnel may perform the procedures as
documented in training records.
· Disposable gloves and a laboratory coat should be wom to avoid contact
with skin and clothes when using TRIzol Reagent as it contains phenol.
Tubes containing waste TRIzol Reagent must be placed into a suitable con-
tainer for appropriate disposal.
● RNA extraction must be carried out in a location separate from areas where
 n  n  s s g 
for use of Molecular Diagnostic Suite).
· Disposable gloves must be wom throughout the technique as RNases from
the skin have an adverse affect on RNA. Precipitated extracted RNA pellets
may be very small or invisible; care must be taken to avoid accidental
discard. Extracted RNA should be stored at -90 to -50'C in a monitored
freezer.
Additional issues that may need to be considered include, but are not limited to:
·Pathogens infective to humans.
·Use of Personal Protection Equipment (PPE).
●Cat IMI handling.
●Environmental impact.
●Animal welfare.
●Receipt of parcels.
·COSHH.
·Generation of aerosols (by centrifugation, sonication, etc.).
● Large volumes (in excess of 100ml) of virus/liquid waste produced
3 Responsibilities
3.1. Personnel using this SOP are responsible for ensuring that they have read
and understood the contents, and the procedure is followed. They must be
suitably trained and competent, as documented in their training records. It is
190
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
the duty of the Head of Division/Department/Group (or nominee) to ensure
that staff are aware of this responsibility.
3.2. Health and Safety: This SOP should be used in accordance with the current
Health and Safety Policy and other relevant instructions as issued by the In-
stitute for Animal Health. Due consideration must be given to National
standards and regulations.
4 Materials
Refrigerated microfuge
Heraeus Biofuge fresco or one of similar perfonmance
Vortex mixer
Clifton Cyclone or one of similar performance
Vacuum pump
L2C CAPEX (Charles Austen Pumps) or similar
Disposable gloves
medical examination gloves, any supplier
Tubes and caps
2ml skirted and 1.5 ml conical, sterile (Sarstedt or
similar)
Calibrated pipettes
single channel, volumes as appropriate, any supplier
Aerosol resistant tips
Molecular Bioproducts ART? or similar
Refrigerator
+1 to 8'C (PCR +4'C)
Freezer
-30 to -5'C (PCR -20'C Number 1)
Freezer
-90 to -50'C (top shelf, "Diagnostic PCR samples
only" in WRL 50)
Medical sharps container
Cinbin or similar
5 Chemicals
Disinfectant
See current Disease Security Manual, store at
approximately 22'C
TRIzol Reagent
 Invitrogen, stored between +1 and 8'C (1 ml aliquots in
refrigerator PCR +4'C in WRL12a
Chloroform
BDH Analar, store at approximately 22'C
 Isopropyl alcohol
BDH Analar, store at approximately 22'C
Ethanol
BDH Analar, store at approximately 22'C
6 Reagents
0.2 M Glycogen
Roche or similar, store between -30 and -5'C.
drawer 3 in freezer PCR CLEAN ROOM -20 C
in WRL12a
Nuclease-free water
 Promega or similar, store at approximately 22'C
Sterile distilled water
Store at approximately 22'C
SOP 20.Ribonucleic Acid Extraction from Samples Using TRIzol Reagent
191
7 Media
Not applicable
8 Organisms
Not applicable
9 Documentation
This SOP is a component of a larger laboratory system that describes an integrated
 approach for the diagnosis of vesicular diseases. Therefore, in order to undertake
receipt, testing and reporting of samples, it may be necessary to consult further
SOP documentation that describes these activities.
10 Procedure
10.11
Ensure any samples frozen and previously stored in TRIzol are thawed.
 Incubate for 5 min at approximately 22'C (room temperature).
10.2
2Label a fresh 2 mL skirted Sarstedt tube corresponding to each test sample
to be processed; add 200 μL of chlorofonm to each 2 mL tube followed by
1.0 mL of the TRIzol solution containing the sample.
10.3
Vortex mix each tube for 10-15 s.
10.4
Centrifuge the tubes for 15 min at 13,000 rpm at 2-8'C.
10.5
Label a fresh 1.5 mL conical tube for each test sample and add 1.0 μL of
glycogen to each.
10.6
(from stage 5.4) and add to the corresponding glycogen-containing tubes.
Add 500 μL of isopropyl alcohol to each tube.
10.7
Vortex mix each tube for a few seconds
10.8
 Incubate the tubes at approximately 4'C (on ice) for 10 min.
10.9
 Orientate the tubes in the centrifuge using the tube label so that the RNA
pellet will be in an expected position. Centrifuge the tubes for 10 min at
13,000 rpm at 2-8'C.
10.10 Discard the supermatant from the tubes and then add 1.0 mL of 70%
ethanol to each one.
10.11 Vortex mix the tubes for a few seconds.
10.12 Orientate the tubes in the centrifuge as in stage 5.9 and centrifuge for
10 min at 13,000 rpm at 2-8 C.
192
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
pipetting) without disturbing the RNA pellet. Air dry each tube for 2-3 min
at approximately 22'C. Resolubilise each RNA pellet by adding 20 μL of
nuclease-free water to each tube and gentle mixing.
10.14 Maintain the RNA samples on ice and immediately proceed with RT-PCR
or store them at -90 to -50'C until required.
11 Storage of Samples
RNA samples should be stored for at least 3 months to allow the one-step RT
PCR assay to be repeated (if necessary). These should be kept at -90 to -50'C on
the top shelf of the "Diagnostic PCR samples only” freezer).
12 Results
Results will only become known after analysis of the subsequent reverse transcrip-
tion and PCR amplification procedures (See SOP: Operation of the Stratagene
Mx4000/Mx3005P for real-time PCR. One-step RT-PCR amplification of RNA
fromvesicular diseaseviruses).
13 Troubleshooting
Not applicable: Results will only become known after analysis of the subsequent
subsequent SOPs for guidance)
14 Bibliography
1. Chomczynski P, Sacchi, N. 1987. Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid guanidinium
thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. Anal. Biochem.126, 156-9.
2. Simms, D, Cizdziel, PE, Chomczynski, P. 1993/1994. TRIzol: a new reagent for optimal sin-
gle-step isolation of RNA. Focus 15, 99-102.
SOP 20. Ribonucleic Acid Extraction from Samples Using TRIzol Reagent
193
15. Tracking Sheet Used for Manual (TRIZOL) Extraction of RNA
Molecular DiagnosticsTracking Sheet
QAU Form 233 03/06
 Manual RNA extraction/manual one step RT-PCR for Vesicular viruses
TEST NUMBER
SAMPLE DETAILS:
G
18149 20 2 2 23
17
10
11213
14
15
16
Reagent
Batch numbers
 Pipette serial nurmbers
STEP 1: RNA EXTRACTION
[WRL021]
vol (nL)
TRIZOL reagent
1000
Chkroform
 -
Glycogen
Operator:
queous phase
Isopropanol
Date:
Ethanol
Nuclease-free Hz0
20
STEP 2: RT-PCR SET-UP[WRL 026]
Operator
Nurmber of wells:
Date:
vol (nL)
2x reaction mix
12.5
SSIlI/Taq mix
0.5
Nuclease-free H20
1.5
ol (L1
FORWARD
ol (L)
REVERSE
ol (L)
PROBE
MDV- 5UTR
MDY-30
2
sVDV-2B-IR
vESV
 Plate spin [1 min @ 1,000 rpm) 
(Check box)
STEP 3: THERMOCYCLING
[EQL 790]
Operator:
Thermocycler used:
Date:
Results fle name:  N:Vesicular Dis Grp/quality/Archive/Molecular biology/per/RT-PCR results/
194
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 21. Ambion Magnetic Beads Extraction (96-well)
Courtesy of Sharon Hietala and Beate Crossley
Califormia Animal Health and Food Safety Laboratory
University of Califormia
Davis
United States of America.
Email: skhietala@ucdavis.edu
1 Purpose
This procedure provides instructions for high-throughput 96-well RNA extraction
using micro-sphere bead-based RNA isolation technology manufactured by Am-
bion/Asuragen Inc.
2 Scope
This procedure follows the work-instructions for loading 96-well plates
(DBio_02-043). After completion, a quantitative reverse transcription real time
PCR procedure is followed (for example, DBio_02-011 or DBio_02-012)
3 Definitions and Acronyms
qRT PCR, quantitative/real time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
4 Specimen Information
1. Tissue culture fluid, allantoic fluid, swab fluid, or media (50 uL) pre-loaded in
a 96-well plate per DBio_02-043.
2. Loaded plates are stored at 4'C for up to 4 h, or frozen at -20'C until use.
3. Plates that show evidence of spilling or contamination in the form of visible
droplets on the lid or on the edge of the plate must be discarded in 10% bleach.
SOP 21. Ambion Magnetic Beads Extraction (96-well)
195
5 Reagents and Media
Media
 Kit components are prepared according to manufacturer's instructions
(DBio_02-048)
Isopropanol, 100%
Ethanol, 100% analytic grade
6 Supplies and Equipment
Magnet Stand (Ambion, #10027 or 10050)
Vortex GenielI or equivalent (8-speed settings)
Titer Plate Shaker (Lab-Line Instrument Inc or equivalent)
Matrix Impact Equalizer 12-channel 250 μL and 1250 μL pipettors or equivalent
Disposible pipet tips (250 μL, 1250 μL)
96-well polystyrene round bottom plates (Evergreen 222-8032-R1K or equivalent)
7 Special Safety Precautions
Extraction procedure has to be performed in a Class 2 biosafety cabinet until the
lysis buffer is added. After addition of the lysis buffer, the extraction process can
be completed on the bench using standard biosafety level 2 practices (personal
protective wear, autoclave disposal of waste, and chemical decontamination of
area).
8 Equipment Calibration and Maintenance
Regular maintenance, see DBIO_02-038 and DBio_02-036.
9 Quality Control
1. RNA extraction efficiency is monitored during PCR using a positive control
sample included with each assay run or batch. Performance limits of the posi-
tive extraction control are noted in the QC requirements for the individual di-
agnostic PCR assays.
196
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
2. Quality Control values are recorded using the corresponding Quality Control
tracking Excel sheets. A QC form accompanying each assay run or batch is
used to record assay information unique to the specific run for QC purposes;
including reagent lot-numbers, control IDs, performing technician, Quality
Control values, and any technical observation made during the assay set-up.
3. Temperatures and volume measurements provided in the SOP are within the
10 Test Method Instructions
10.1 General Recommendations
adid m pin pe 'paads mons on oadid uond pin aaoan o ●
programmed on medium speed.
● To remove fluid leave plate on magnetic stand; To add fluid remove plate
from the magnetic stand.
· Beads should be suspended after adding elution solution
10.2Total RNAIsolation
Place bead solution on vortex and shake on setting 3 for two min.
If samples have been pre-plated and the 96-well plate frozen, thaw in a laminar
flow hood with the lids off to prevent condensation from running onto plate
surface.
Double check the 96-well plate for loading errors (empty wells, excessive
volume in wells), and for missing plate numbers/missing bar codes.
10.2.1 RNA Binding
1. Add 101 μL Lysis/Binding solution into each well.
2. Shake for 5 min - shaker dial position 5.
3. Fill 1250 μL/dispense 101 μL
4. Add 20 μL beads/binding mix in each well of a U-bottom plate.
5. Shake for 4 min - shaker dial position 5.
6. Fill 250 μL/dispense 20 μL.
7. Move the U-bottom plate onto the Magnetic Stand, wait 2 min for beads to
pellet. Slowly remove supermatant.
8. Fill 240 μL/dispense 240 μL.
SOP 21. Ambion Magnetic Beads Extraction (96-well)
197
beads won't break up, there is not a negative effect on RNA quality or yield)
Shaker dial position 5.5.
Fill 1250 μL/dispense 100 μL.
Move the U-bottom plate on to the Magnetic Stand, wait 1 min to pellet beads.
Remove supermatant.
Fill 240 μL/dispense 240 μL.
Add 100 μL prepared Wash Solution II, shake for 30s.
Shaker dial position 5.5
Fill 1250 μL/dispense 100 μL.
Move the U-bottom plate on to the Magnetic Stand, wait 30 s to pellet beads.
Remove supematant.
Fill 240 μL/dispense 240 μL
Add 100 μL prepared Wash Solution II
Fill 1250 μL/dispense 100 μL.
Move the U-bottom plate on to the Magnetic Stand, wait 30 s to pellet beads.
Slowly remove supematant.
Shake plate for 2 min dry to help the evaporation of EtOH (part of the washing
solution) - shaker dial position 9.
10.2.2 RNA Elution
1. Add 30 μL Elution Solution to each well, shake for 4 min. Beads should be
suspended, otherwise use a manual 200 μL pipettor to resuspend the beads by
pipetting up and down. Shaker dial 9.
2. Fill 250 μL/dispense 30 μL.
3. Transfer plate to chemistry room (rm#1213), store in the refrigerator under-
neath the BL-2 hood until transfer of RNA to RT-PCR master mix.
4. If the RNA will not be used for PCR within 4 h, transfer the RNA into a clean
beads.
5. Transfer the supermatant into a clean plate (fill 25 μL /dispense 25 μL), cover
with an adhesive plate sealer, wrap with aluminum foil and freeze the plate at -
70C.)
198
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
11 Calculations
N/A: protocol provides sample for subsequent PCR assay.
11.1 Expected Values
N/A: protocol provides sample for subsequent PCR assay
11.2 Interpretation of Results
N/A: protocol provides sample for subsequent PCR assay.
11.3 Method Limitations
Validated only for samples identified.
11.4 Post Analytical Procedures
RealTime PCR, see DBio_02-011 and DBio_02-012
12 Bibliography and Related Documentation
1. http://www.ambion.com/techlib/posters/thruput_mag_0402.htmL (as of 03_2005)
2. http://www.ambion.com/techlib/prot/fm_1830.pdf (as of 03-2005).
3. Crossley, et al., High-throughput realtime RT PCR assay to detect exotic Newcastle disease
virus during the California 2002-2003 outbreak
13 Appendices
Work instructions (didacted protocol).
14 Purpose
Work instruction for 96-well bead volume, time, and shaker speed (SOP = DBio-
02-005).
SOP 21.Ambion Magnetic Beads Extraction (96-well)
199
15 Procedure
1.
Transfer 50 μL sample into each well.
2.
Add 101 μL Lysis/Binding Mix to inactivate virus.
3.
Add 20 uL Beads/Binding Mix and shake 4 min.
Shaker dial position 5.
4.
Pellet beads 2 min and remove supermatant.
5.
Add 100 uL Wash Solution I Mix and shake for 1 min.
 Shaker dial position 5.5.
6.
Pellet beads I min and remove supermatant.
7.
Add 100 μL Wash Solution HI Mix and shake 30 s
Shaker dial position 5.5.
8.
Pellet beads 30 s and remove supermatant.
9.
Add 100 uL Wash Solution I Mix and shake for 30 s.
Shaker dial position 5.5.
10.
 Pellet beads 30 s and remove supermatant.
11.
Shake vigorously for 2 min to briefly dry the beads.
Shaker dial position 9.
12.
Add 30 μL Elution Solution (room temp) and shake for 4 min.
Shaker dial position 9.
13.
 Pellet beads for 2 min and transfer RNA into storage plate or qRT PCR
plate.
200
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 22. Svanodip? FMDV-Ag Penside Test
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Ann Nordengrahn
SVANOVA Biotech AB,
Dag Hammarskjolds vag 32A
751 83 Uppsala,
Sweden
Responsible scientist Ann Nordengrahn
E-mail ann.nordengrahn @ svanov a.com
Created 2008-02-06
1 Introduction
The FMDV-Ag test is a simple direct test for the detection of all seven serotypes
the farm. In this assay FMDV antigen specific antibodies have been bound to col-
   s  sa   s  m   
FMDV antigen binds to the gold conjugate forming an immune complex. The
complex then migrates by capillary action along the membrane until it reaches the
immobilised antibody. The complex will bind to the immobilised antibody, result-
ing in an accumulation of colloid gold (a red/purple line) visible by eye. A band in
the Test (T) window indicates a positive result. No band in the Test (T) window
indicates a negative result. The antibody in the Control (C) window always binds
colloid gold-antibody, regardless of FMDV viral presence. This C-band ensures
correct test performance.
2 Contents
The Svanodip@ FMDV-Ag penside test can be purchased from Svanova Biotech
AB, Uppsala Science park, Sweden. +4618654900
SOP 22. Svanodip@ FMDV-Ag Penside Test
201
2.1 The Kit Contains
● 20 Test devices pre-packed in sealed foil bags with desiccant.
●Bottles with dropper containing sample dilution buffer.
· Plastic pipettes.
·Test (Eppendorf) tubes with lid.
·Swabs (two in each pack).
2.2 The Sample Preparation Kit Contains
· 20 Bottles with ball bearings.
●Bottle containing sample dilution buffer.
● Plastic pipettes.
3 Procedure
3.1 Specimen Collection and Processing
3.1.1 Vesicular Fluid
A small volume of vesicular fluid is collected by a syringe and the amount is
calculated.
paxju pue aldues au m pappe si anq uonnp adues jo junoue [enba uy
3.1.2 Epithelium
Approximately 0.2 g of epithelium (the size of the nail on a little finger) is
collected from the surface or margins of vesicles.
Best results will be achieved with fresh and friable material.
Add 2 mL of sample buffer into the glass bottle.
Place the epithelium into the glass bottle and vigorously shake four times over a 5
min period, with the aim of liquidizing the material.
3.2 Precautions
1. Carefully read and follow all instructions.
2. Store the kit and all reagents at +4°C to +28°℃ (39 to 82°F).
202
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3. All reagents should equilibrate to room temperature 18°C to 25°C (64 to 77°F)
before use.
4. Handle all materials as though capable of transmitting infectious disease.
 5. Do not mix components or instruction booklets from different test kits.
6. Care should be taken to prevent contamination of kit components.
7. Do not use test kit beyond expiratiopn date.
8. Do not eat, drink, or smoke where specimens or kit reagents are handled.
9. Use a separate pipette tip for each sample.
10. Bum all unused biological materials before disposal.
3.3 Procedure
1. Make sure that the device is at ambient temperature before opening the bag.
2. Remove the test device from the bag and place on a flat surface.
3. Use the pipette to take prepared sample solution (see point 3.1) up to the mark
on the pipette. Hold vertically and slowly add five drops (approximately 200
μL) of the sample solution to position "S" on the test device.
4. Read results within 5-10 min. Disregard any lines which appear after 45 min.
4 Interpretation of the Results
1. A line in the Control (C) window shows that the test has worked correctly. Any
device that has not produced a control line at 10 min must be classified as void.
2. A line in the Test (T) window indicates a positive result and that the sample
contains FMDV antigen. If no line appears in the Test (T) window the test is
negative for FMDV antigen (see figure below).
3. A difference in the intensity may occur between the line in the Test (T) and
Control (C) window but this does not affect the interpretation of the result.
Positive
Negative
C
SOP 23. FMDV PLA Assay
203
SOP 23.FMDV PLA Assay
LAB-ON-SITE
EU PROJECT
SSPE-CT-2004-513645
Courtesy of Ann Nordengrahn
SVANOVA Biotech AB,
Dag Hammarskjolds vag 32A
751 83 Uppsala,
Sweden
Responsible scientist Ann Nordengrahn
E-mail ann.nordengrahn @ svanova.com
Created 2008-02-06
1 Introduction
The Proximity ligation assay (PLA) can be used for detection of different
pathogens such as FMDV virus. The basis of the PLA is that pathogen specific-
antibodies binding target proteins are coupled to non-sense oligonucleotide strands
(proximity probes). These proximity probes can be joined by ligation when two or
more such reagents are brought into proximity by binding to the same target
molecule or target molecule complex (Fig. 5.2). The DNA ligation products are
subsequently detected by PCR amplification using fluorogenic probes to detect the
amplified product. The assay shows a high sensitivity and specificity that is in line
with RT PCR. For more information about the assay development and evaluation
on clinical samples see Nordengrahn et al., Vet Microbiol 2008, 18;127 (3-4),
227-236.
2 Preparation of Proximity Probes
2.1 Biotinylation of Antibody
1. D-biotin-N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (Roche Diagnostics Corp. Germany) is
mixed with the antibody in a 10-fold molar excess and with a volume ratio of
1:10.
 2. The solution is left for 4 h incubation at room temperature and at constant
agitation.
204
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
3. The biotinylated antibody is dialysed against Phosphate buffered saline (PBS.
pH 7.4) and stored at -20'C until use.
2.2 Construction ofProximity Probes
1. Streptavidin conjugated oligonucleotides 3' and 5' (Olink Bioscience, Uppsala
mixed with 30 nmol/L oligonucleotide 3' and 5' respectively in a final volume
of 5 μL and left for 1 h at room temperature.
2. The proximity probes are diluted to a final concentration of 1.2 mmol/L in a
 probe dilution buffer and stored at +4'℃ until use.
2.2.1 Probe Dilution Buffer
PBS, 10 g/L Bovine serum albumin (BSA), 16 mg/L sheared polyA bulk nucleic
acid (Sigma), 1 mmol/L D-biotin (Molecular Probes)
3 Assay Procedure
3.1 Detection of FMDV by Homogenous Phase PLA
1. Dilute the samples 1 in 5 in PBS (or any other dilution factor of choice).
2. Mix 1 μL of diluted sample with 4 μL of a solution containing both proximity
proximity probes (each diluted to a concentration of 24 pM in probe dilution
  I e n  (h ss i) s d gdo ui (ag
37C.
3. Add 50 μL of the ligation and TaqMan PCR mix and incubate for 5 min at
room temperature.
Ligation and TaqMan mix
50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 3.15 mM MgCl, 0.4 Weiss units of T4
DNA ligase (Fermentas), 400 nM connector oligonucleotide (Olink Bioscience,
Uppsala Sweden), 80 μM ATP, 200 μM each of the deoxynucleoside triphos-
phates, 100 nM primers forward and reverse (Olink Bioscience, Uppsala Sweden),
100 nM TaqMan? MBG probe (Applied Biosystems), 1.5 U Platinum Taq DNA
polymerase (Invitrogen).
4. Transfer the tubes to a real-time PCR instrument and use the following tem-
perature profile, 95'℃ 2 min, 45 cycles, 95'℃ 15 s and 60'℃ 2 min.
SOP 23. FMDV PLA Assay
205
4 Interpretation of Results
The assay cut-off value is set to two standard deviations (S.D.) over the back-
ground signal (CT value).
Samples with values below this threshold are considered to be negative while
samples with values higher than the threshold are positive.
Incubation of sample
with proximity probes
Instant Ligation
PCRamplification anddetection
Fig. 5.2 One step proximity ligation and detection
This figure has been published by Nordengrahn et al., in Vet. Microbiol. 2008, 18;127 (3-4),
227-36.
206
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 24. Procedure for Using the Molecular Diagnostics Suite
Courtesy of Donald King and Scott Reid
Institute of Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, United Kingdom
Responsible Scientists: Donald King (Donald.king @bbsrc.ac.uk) and Scott Reid
(Scott.reid@ bbsrc.ac.uk)
1 Introduction
Molecular assays such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are important tools
for diagnostic and research work. These assays are highly sensitive and are able
to detect only a few copies of the target template in a sample. Unfortunately,
methods such as PCR are prone to contamination, which can generate false
contaminating template is previously amplified material which is transferred by
aerosols, clothing, hands or equipment.
In order to minimize the risk of contamination, it is important that the various
steps of the PCR process (TEMPLATE RNA/DNA EXTRACTION -
MASTERMIX PREPARATION - ASSEMBLY OF PCR REACTION - POST
PCR WORK) are segregated. In particular, care should be taken not to bring
post-PCR material into contact with un-amplified template or any of the
components of the PCR master-mix.
2 Purpose of SOP
The aim of this SOP is to outline the correct use of the molecular diagnostics
suite. This suite comprises 4 dedicated rooms for (1) template RNA/DNA extrac-
tion, (2) preparation of PCR master-mixes, (3) assembly of PCR reactions and (4)
all post-PCR work involving amplified samples and other high-risk material con-
taining target template such as bacterial clones and plasmids. The location of
these rooms is shown in Fig. 5.3. Together, the aim of this suite is to minimise the
risk of the occurrence of PCR contamination.
This SOP was reviewed in August 2008. This version of the SOP was pre-
pared for IAEA.
3 Risk Assessment
If this SOP is not followed, the risks include, but are not limited to:
· Compromising the Quality Management System.
·Failures in the Quality Management System go undetected
SOP 24. Procedure for Using the Molecular Diagnostics Suite
207
●Failures that are detected, are not corrected or there is undue delay.
+ The importance of the processes is not recognised.
● Failing to deliver product, e.g. scientific publication, new diagnostic tests,
reports, etc., that is fit for purpose and not in keeping with customer
requirements.
·Lack of traceability of working practices.
·Lack of credibility of data.
· Lack of accountability and responsibility.
Note: no inactivated virus is allowed in the template extraction room, master-mix
preparation room and PCR assembly room.Use of inactivated viruses is
permitted in the post-PCR room under the guidelines outlined in BSEC-REG-019
3.1 Health and Safety: and Other Risks
Under the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 a suitable
and sufficient assessment of the risks to the health and safety of employees must
be carried out on all work procedures, e.g. SOP, method, protocol. Control
measures must be put in place to minimise any hazards associated with the work
cable, and consideration should be given to including these control measures in
the SOP. Only trained, competent and qualified personnel may perform the pro-
cedures as documented in training records.
Additional issues that may need to be considered include, but are not limited
to:
·Pathogens infective to humans.
●Use of Personal Protection Equipment (PPE).
●Cat III handling.
●Environmental impact.
●Animal welfare.
· Receipt of parcels.
+COSHH.
●Generation of aerosols (by centrifugation, sonication, etc .).
●  Large volumes (in excess of 100ml) of virus/liquid waste produced
3.2 Responsibilities
3.3. Personnel using this SOP are responsible for ensuring that they have read
and understood the contents, and the procedure is followed. They must be
suitably trained and competent, as documented in their training records. It
208
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
is the duty of the Head of Division/Department/Group (or nominee) to en-
sure that staff are aware of this responsibility.
3.4. Health and Safety: This SOP should be used in accordance with the current
Health and Safety Policy and other relevant instructions as issued by the In-
stitute for Animal Health. Due consideration must be given to National
standards and regulations.
4 Materials
 Personal protective equipment to be worm while working in the rooms and
reagents required.
4.1.1 Template Extraction Room: Dedicated Laboratory Coat (WHTTE) and
gloves (any disposable).
4.1.2 Master-Mix preparation Room: Dedicated Laboratory Coat (YELLOW),
Gloves (any disposable), Overshoes (Scientific Laboratory Supplies).
4.1.3 PCR Assembly Room: Gloves (any disposable), DNAzapl and DNAzap2
(Ambion) or similar reagent.
4.1.4 Post-PCR Room: Dedicated Laboratory Coat (BLUE), Gloves (any
disposable) and Overshoes (Scientific Laboratory Supplies).
5 Procedure
5.1 Template Extraction Room
Function of room: This room is used to prepare RNA/DNA template for the di-
agnostic assays to detect foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV), swine vesicular
disease virus (SVDV), African swine fever virus (ASFV), bluetongue virus
    as a  s  r  (
other uses. If other areas are used, their use should, where possible, follow
guidelines similar to those outlined in this document. (NB: the MagNA PURE
cDNA template).
5.1.1 Use of Room
STEP 1: Before entering room, discard any gloves that you are already wearing
STEP 2: Put on dedicated Laboratory coat (this coat should NOT be wom
outside of this room).
SOP 24. Procedure for Using the Molecular Diagnostics Suite
209
STEP 3: Put on fresh gloves (if required) before using the equipment in the
room. Change gloves frequently, especially if they are suspected of be-
coming contaminated with solutions containing template DNA/RNA.
STEP 4: Work areas should be cleaned up after use. In the event of a spillage
involving template RNA/DNA, the workstation should be thoroughly
cleaned using DNAzap (or similar suitable product).
5.2 Master-Mix Preparation Room
Function of Room: This room should be used for the storage of all the com-
ponents (except RNA/DNA template) of reverse transcriptase and PCR master-
mixes.  The room contains OMNI PCR workstations that are used for the
preparation of reaction master-mixes. These units contain main and exhaust
HEPA filters providing a clean airflow over the work surface and providing
protection to the operator. These units meet the clean air requirement to ISO
14644-1 1999 class 6.
5.2.1Entry/Exit into Room.
Entry:
STEP 1: Remove any lab coat and discard gloves already being wom. Hooks for
labcoats are available outside of the PCR assembly room.
STEP 2:Enter Lobby
STEP 3: Put on Gloves
STEP 4: Put on Dedicated YELLOW labcoat
STEP 5: Open inner door, Put on overshoes as the threshold boundary is crossed
Note: Do not bring anything into room, including protocols and lab-books, ice
buckets, racks, tubes and RNA/DNA template
Exit:
STEP 1: Open Inner door
STEP 2: If required, place tubes containing reaction mix on the other side of
threshold boundary.
STEP 3: Step out of room, removing overshoes and placing them into recycle
bin. These overshoes can be recycled for use in the Post-PCR room
(see below).
STEP 4: Remove dedicated labcoat and glove(s)
STEP 5: Exit Lobby with the prepared master-mix
210
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
5.2.2PREPARA TION of Reaction Master-Mixes
These can be prepared according to your SOPs or methods sheets. These can be
viewed and printed using the Networked computer terminal in the room. Master-
mixes should be prepared in the class I hoods using the dedicated micro-pipettes
(with aerosol-resistant pipette tips) for all liquid handling steps. Chilled master-
mixes can be prepared using 96-well aluminium blocks which are stored in the
freezer (these blocks should be returmed to freezer after use).
Note: Gloves should be worm at all times while in the room
5.2.3RECEIVING New Materials for Storage in Freezers/Fridges in
Master-Mix Preparation Room
STEP 1: One person to enter room (as above)
STEP 2: Second person to remain in the lobby and open all secondary/extemal
packaging
STEP 3: Person inside room should reach over the threshold boundary and take
hold of the items to be brought into the room. Care should be taken not
to touch the outside packaging.
STEP 4: Material can then be stored in fridge or freezer (as appropriate).
Note: Where possible, no extermal packaging should be brought into the room
5.3 PCR Assembly Room
Function of Room: This room should be used for the final assembly of reverse
transcription or PCR reactions. RNA/DNA template is added to the reaction
master-mixes (prepared as above). This activity can be performed manually us-
ing the dedicated micro-pipettes or using suitable protocols on the Qiagen
BR3000. The intended use for this room is restricted to un-amplified RNA/DNA
template (i.e. that obtained directly from clinical samples and similar material).
If RT or PCR is to be perfonmed on previously amplified template (such as that
bled in the Post-PCR room (see below).
NB: The pipettes supplied in the room should NOT be used for work involving
RNA standards (such as those used in quantitative RT-PCR applications). A
separate room with different micro-pipettes should be used for the manual
transfer of this type of material.
SOP 24. Procedure for Using the Molecular Diagnostics Suite
211
5.3.1 Use of Room
STEP 1: Discard any gloves already being wom.
STEP 2: Put on fresh gloves (if required) before using the equipment in the
room. Change gloves frequently, especially if they are suspected of
becoming contaminated with solutions containing template DNA/RNA
STEP 3: Area should be cleaned up after use. In the event of a spillage involving
template RNA/DNA, the workstation should be thoroughly cleaned
using DNAZap (or similar suitable product). DNAZap consists of two
solutions that are innocuous by themselves, but which become a potent
nucleic acid degrading solution when mixed. This mixture is able to
degrade high levels of contaminating DNA and RNA from surfaces
instantaneously. All contaminating nucleic acid is degraded  to
nucleotides, preventing any chance of false positive amplification. The
use of DNAZap is outlined in the protocol from Ambion
(http://www.ambion.com/techlib/prot/bp_9890.pdf).Briefly, spray or
apply Solution l on the surface that requires cleaning followed by
water and wipe dry with clean paper towel.
NB: Wear Gloves at all times since Solutions 1 and 2 are acidic/corrosive, can
cause irritation and areharmful ifswallowed.
5.4Post-PCRRoom
Function of Room: This room is to be used for any laboratory activity involving
post-PCR material. Examples of this type of work include gel electrophoresis,
clean-up of PCR and restriction enzyme fragments from gels, cloning and
preparation of sequencing reactions. These activities are segregated from other
laboratory work in an attempt to minimise the potential introduction of this post-
PCR material into the PCR reactions or contamination of the master-mix compo-
nents.
5.4.1
Entry/Exit
Entry:
STEP 1: Enter Lobby
STEP 2: Remove any lab coat and discard gloves already being wom.
STEP 2: Put on Gloves (to be worm at all time)
STEP 3: Put on Dedicated BLUE labcoat
STEP 4: Open inner door, Put on overshoes as the threshold boundary is crossed
212
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
Exit:
STEP 1: Open Inner door
STEP 2: Step out of room, removing overshoes and placing them into bin.
STEP 3: Remove dedicated labcoat.
STEP 4: Remove and discard gloves
STEP 5: Exit Lobby
Note: Where at all possible - nothing is to be removed from the post-pcr room
5.4.2
Removal of Waste from Post-PCR Room
All waste is to be placed into tins and autoclaved.
1:Template
2:Master mix
exractionroom*
Preparationroom
3:PCR
assembly
room
4:Post-
PCR
room
Fig. 5.3 Location of the rooms comprising the Molecular Diagnostics suite in the Epidemiology
building. L denotes lobby changing areas for master-mix preparation and post-PCR rooms
NB: * other areas maybe appropriate for the preparation of RNA/DNA template by different users 
SOP 24. Procedure for Using the Molecular Diagnostics Suite
213
6 Results
No system can completely eliminate the risk of cross-contamination during PCR.
Therefore, it is important that negative ("no template RNA/DNA") controls
which contain all reaction components except the template are included and run
m parallel to the samples in the PCRs. Presence of bands (or high fluorescence
signal, for real time PCRs) in these samples could indicate that cross-
contamination has occurred. In the event of concerm regarding cross-
contamination during PCR, corrective action listed in the "troubleshooting'
section should be implemented
7Maintenance
7.1 Routine Cleaning
Institute cleaning staff are not allowed to clean the following areas: 1: Master-
mix preparation room or 2: Post-PCR room. For these rooms, dedicated cleaning
 (na   s-g   do o) a
situated in the rooms. Weekly mopping of the floors is performed by laboratory
staff according to a rota. Users of the room are responsible for ensuring that
bench-tops are kept clean after use.
7.2Maintenance of Equipment
Engineers must only enter these rooms as described above in the SOP. Where
possible, they should only take essential tools and equipment into these rooms.
In common with the scheme for sample management, tools should not be taken
directly from the Post-PCR room to other areas in the Epidemiology building.
8 Troubleshooting
The following steps are a guide if cross-contamination of PCR is suspected. This
is most usually evident if bands (or fluorescence signal) appears in negative ("'no
template') control samples.
STEP 1: Repeat PCR assay, in case tubes were mislabelled.
STEP 2: Repeat assay without any template.
214
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
STEP 3: Thoroughly clean pipettes in the PCR assembly room and discard all
working stocks of primers, dNTPs etc used to make up the master-mix --
RepeatAssay.
STEP 4: If a serious degree of contamination is suspected (such as presence of
DNA/RNA template in stock PCR master-mix components in the
Master-mix preparation room), it is important that other users of the
molecular diagnostics suite are informed. Effective corrective action
may require the co-ordination between all users of the facility.
9Bibliography
Not applicable
SOP 25. Diagnosis of FMDV and Related Vesicular Viruses
215
SOP 25. One step TaqMan" RT-PCR for Diagnosis of FMDV
and Related Vesicular Viruses
Courtesy of Donald King and Scott Reid
Institute of Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, United Kingdom
Responsible Scientists: Donald King (Donald.king@bbsrc.ac.uk) and Scott Reid
(Scott.reid @bbsrc.ac.uk)
1 Introduction
1.1 Purpose of activity: To describe the preparation of one-step TaqMan? RT-
PCR assays for the amplification of vesicular virus RNA (foot-and-mouth
disease virus, swine vesicular disease virus and vesicular exanthema of
swine virus).
1.2  Background: TaqMan RT-PCR is a sensitive method used for the laboratory
detection of vesicular disease viruses. The basis of this method is the use of
present on the viral genomes of interest. The assay uses a dual-labelled
fluorogenic (TaqMan@) probe which allows the assay to be performed in a
closed-tube format minimising the potential for cross-contamination of
post-PCR products.
plates. An additional SOP (Operation of the Stratagene Mx4000/Mx3005P
for real-time PCR.One-step RT-PCR amplification of RNA from vesicu-
lhar disease viruses) outlines the use of the real-time PCR machines suitable
for performing the RT-PCR.
This SOP was reviewed in August 2008. This version of the SOP was prepared
for IAEA.
2 Risk Assessment
If this SOP is not followed, the risks include, but are not limited to:
●Compromising the Quality Management System.
●Failures in the Quality Management System go undetected.
●Failures that are detected, are not corrected or there is undue delay.
+ The importance of the processes is not recognised.
· Failing to deliver product, e.g. scientific publication, new diagnostic tests,
reports, etc., that is fit for purpose and not in keeping with customer
requirements.
216
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
· Lack of traceability of working practices.
·Lack of credibility of data.
·Lack of accountability and responsibility.
Note: This procedure does not involve handling of inactivated virus. Work with
inactivated viruses (such as the processing of samples and preparation of lysed
material suitable for RT-PCR analysis) is described in further IAH docu-
mentation.
● PCR set up and master-mix preparation must be carried out in dedicated
areas to avoid contamination of stock reagents.
● Disposable gloves must be wom throughout the technique as RNases from
the skin have an adverse affect on RNA. Precipitated extracted RNA pellets
may be very small or invisible; care must be taken to avoid accidental
discard. Extracted RNA should be stored at -90 to -50'C in a monitored
freezer.
3 Responsibilities
 3.1  Personnel using this SOP are responsible for ensuring that they have read
and understood the contents, and the procedure is followed. They must be
suitably trained and competent, as documented in their training records. It
is the duty of the Head of Department/Group (or nominee) to ensure that
staff are aware of this responsibility
3.2 Health and Safety: This SOP should be used in accordance with the current
Health and Safety Policy and other relevant instructions as issued by the In-
stitute for Animal Health. Due consideration must be given to National
standards and regulations.
3.3 Gloves must be wom whenever PCR plates are handled and must be
changed frequently. A clean laboratory coat (dedicated for PCR-related
work only) must be worm at all times in the isolated area. Appropriate
reagent tracking sheets must be filled in (see examples at the end of this
document).
SOP 25.Diagnosis of FMDV and Related VesicularViruses
217
4 Materials
4.1Equipment(unless otherwise stated,all equipment located in
WRL 44/WRL12a)
Disposable gloves
 medical examination gloves, any suitable
supplier
PCR workstation
ASTEC
Optical reaction plates and caps
Stratagene (Mx4000 or Mx 3005P)
PCR plate
ABgene or other suitable supplier
 Roller (for secure fastening of
Applied Biosystems
optical caps onto plate)
Microcentrifuge tubes
1.5 ml, any manufacturer
Calibrated pipettes
single channel, volumes as appropriate,
 any manufacturer, dedicated for PCR only
Aerosol resistant tips
Molecular Bioproducts ART? or similar
Freezer
-30 to -5°C (PCR -20'C Number 1)
Refrigerator
+1 to 8°C (PCR +4'C)
Large capacity centrifuge
SORVALLRC 3C PLUS or one of
similar performance, located in WRL 51
Ice bucket with ice
4.2 Chemicals
 Not applicable
4.3 Reagents
Nuclease-free water
Promega or other suitable supplier, store
at +1 to 8°C - PCR clean room
Superscript II RT/Platinum
Invitrogen, store at
Tag 2X reaction mix
-30 to -5'C - PCR clean room
Superscript III RT/Platinum
Invitrogen store at
Tag Enzyme
-30 to -5C- PCR clean room
Forward primers, reverse primers
Applied Biosystems, Sigma
and fluorogenic probes
Genosys other suitable supplier,
made to specified sequences.
Forward and reverse primers and probes must be diluted to a "working dilution"
(see Table 5.3) in nuclease-free water. Stock primers and probe (and additional
218
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
aliquots of "working dilutions" of primers) are stored at -30 to -5°C, working di-
lutions are kept at +1 to 8°℃.
Table 5.3 Primers and Probes used for One step RT-PCR of vesicular disease viruses
Working
Oligo name
Sequence (S'-3')
(pmols/uL)
SA-IR-219-246F
CAC YTY AAG RTG ACA YTG RTA CTG GTA C10
Primer
Reverse
SA-IR-315-293R
CAG ATY CCR AGT GWC ICITGT TA
10
DV
SAmuli2-P-IR-292-269R
CCT CGG GGT ACC TGA AGG GCA TCC
5
PROBE
Forward
Callahan 3DF
ACT GGG TTT TAC AAA CCT GTG A
10
Reverse
Callahan 3DR
GCG AGT CCT GCC ACG GA
10
e
Taqman
2
Callahan 3DP
TCC TTT GCA CGC CGT GGG AC
5
PROBE
Forward
Primer
SASVD-2B-IR-252-27SF
CGAGAAACCTAGTACCACCATGAA
10
Reverse
28
SASVD-2B-IR-332-312R
CGG TGACTC ATCGAC CTG ATC
10
VDV
SASVD-2B-IR-289-309P
TCG CTC CGC ACA ACC CCA GTG
5
PROBE
Forward
Vesivirus forward primer 1GAY GAC GGT GTY TAC ATY GTY C
Primer
10
Reverse
Vesivirus reverse primer 1(
Primer
GGGAYIGGCGTTATYTCAGCRT
10
Taqman
Vesivirus probe 1
CTG AAR CCG ACY CGG ACC GAC A
5
PROBE
4.4Media
Not applicable
4.5 Organisms
Not applicable
SOP 25. Diagnosis of FMDV and Related Vesicular Viruses
219
4.6Documentation
This SOP is a component of a larger laboratory system that describes an inte-
grated approach for the diagnosis of vesicular diseases. Therefore, in order to
undertake receipt, testing and reporting of samples, it may be necessary to consult
further SOP documentation that describes these activities.
5 Procedure
5.1 Manual Preparation of One-Step RT-PCR Reaction Plates
5.1.1 Prepare a plan showing the layout of test and control RNA samples on the
optical reaction plate. Diagnostic RNA samples should be tested in
duplicate.
5.1.2 In the PCR clean room, prepare the one-step RT-PCR reaction mixture
described in Table 5.4 in a clean tube. Prepare the reaction mixture in
sufficient volume for the total number of samples to be assayed (x) plus
one (x+1).
Table 5.4 Composition of reaction mixes for One-step RT-PCR
Volume added to reaction mix (μL)
Reaction component
For each reaction
 2x reaction mix
12.5
Nuclease-free water
1.5
Forward primer
2
Reverse primer
2
TaqMan probe
1.5
0.5
Total Volume
20
           
WRL10, then add 5 μL of RNA, changing the tip between each sample.
5.1.4 Securely cover each well with a cap in the safety cabinet using a roller.
 a n i   I  d      
capacity centrifuge to mix the contents of each well.
220
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
6 Results
The results from each step must be printed and appended to the other paperwork
for the RT-PCR assay. These documents are archived together in the WRL
diagnostic assays folder.
os go ss e sd ss ad e go d sg m st dos ss
describing RNA extraction, RT-PCR amplification and analysis and interpretation
of the data. The assay performance of the test and control samples can only be
Stratagene Mx4000/Mx3005P for real-time PCR. One-step RT-PCR amplifica-
tion ofRNA from vesicular disease viruses)
7Bibliography
1. Oleksiewicz, MB, Donaldson, AI, Alexandersen, S. 2001. Development of a novel real-time
RT-PCR assay for quantitation of foot-and-mouth disease virus in diverse porcine tissues.
J. Virol.Methods,92,23-35.
2. Reid, SM, Ferris, NP, Hutchings, GH, Zhang, Z, Belsham, GJ, Alexandersen, S. 2002. De-
polymerase chain reaction assay. J. Virol. Methods, 105, 67-80.
3. Reid, SM, Grierson, SS, Ferris, NP, Hutchings, GH, Alexandersen, S. 2003. Evaluation of
automated RT-PCR to accelerate the laboratory diagnosis of foot-and-mouth disease virus.
J. Virol. Methods, 107, 129-39.
SOP 25. Diagnosis of FMDV and Related Vesicular Viruses
221
8 Tracking sheet used for manual (TRIZOL) extraction of RNA
Molecular Diagnostics Tracking Sheet
QAU Form 233_03/06
 Manual RNA extraction/manual one step RT-PCR for Vesicular viruses 
TEST NUMBER
SAMPLE DETAILS:
9
17
10
18
1 12 13 14
19
20
21
22
15
23
16
24
Reagent
Batch numbers
Pipette serial numbers
STEP 1:RNA EXTRACTION
[WRL 021]
ol (nL)
TRIZOL reagent
000L
Chloroform
200
Glycogen
1
Operator
Aqueous phase
009
lsopropanol
Date:
Ethanol
1000
Nuclease-free HO 
20
STEP 2: RT-PCR SET-UP[WRL 026]
Operator
Number of wells:
0
Date:
vol (nL)
2x reaction mix
12.5
SSI1II/Taq mix 
0.5
Nuclease-free H20
vd (L)
FORWARD
d (L)
REVERSE
al (L)
PROBE
FMDV - 5UTR
FMDV -3D
SVDV-2B-IR
vESV
 Plate spin (1 min @ 1,000 rpm)
口
(Check box)
STEP 3:THERMOCYCLING
[EQL 790] 
Operator
 Thermocycler used:
Date:
222
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 26. Operation of the Stratagene Mx4000/Mx3005P for
Real-Time PCR. One-Step RT-PCR Amplification of RNA from
Vesicular Disease Viruses
Courtesy of Donald King and Scott Reid
Institute of Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, United Kingdom
Responsible Scientists: Donald King (Donald.king@bbsrc.ac.uk) and Scott Reid
(Scott.reid@bbsrc.ac.uk)
1Introduction
1.1 Purpose of activity: To describe the procedure to operate a Stratagene
Mx4000 or MX3005P thenmal cycler for real-time RT-PCR amplification of
RNA for the diagnosis of vesicular and related viruses.
1.2  Background: Real-time PCR (TaqMan) allows the rapid and sensitive de-
tection of viral nucleic acid using PCR, detecting the amplified product by
the fluorescence produced due to the cleavage of a sequence-specific probe.
1.3 Rationale: The Stratagene Mx4000 and MX3005P instruments carry out the
96 samples in optical reaction plates. The basic steps required to set up am-
plification reactions in the instrument are described in this SOP.
This SOP was reviewed in August 2008. This version of the SOP was pre-
pared for IAEA.
2 Risk Assessment
If this SOP is not followed, the risks include, but are not limited to:
·Compromising the Quality Management System.
● Failures in the Quality Management System go undetected.
●Failures that are detected, are not corrected or there is undue delay.
● The importance of the processes is not recognised.
● Failing to deliver product, e.g. scientific publication, new diagnostic tests,
reports, etc., that is fit for purpose and not in keeping with customer
requirements.
· Lack of traceability of working practices.
·Lack of credibility of data.
·Lack of accountability and responsibility.
SOP 26. Operation of the Stratagene Mx4000/Mx3005P
223
Note: This procedure does not involve handling of inactivated virus. Work with
inactivated viruses (such as the processing of samples and preparation of lysed
material suitable for RT-PCR analysis) is described in further IAH documentation.
● PCR set up and master-mix preparation must be carried out in dedicated
areas to avoid contamination of stock reagents.
● Disposable gloves must be worm throughout the technique as RNases from
the skin have an adverse affect on RNA. Precipitated extracted RNA pellets
may be very small or invisible; care must be taken to avoid accidental
discard. Extracted RNA should be stored at -90 to -50C in a monitored
freezer.
3 Responsibilities
3.1
Personnel using this SOP are responsible for ensuring that they have read
and understood the contents, and the procedure is followed. They must be
suitably trained and competent, as documented in their training records. It
is the duty of the Head of Department/Group (or nominee) to ensure that
staff are aware of this responsibility
3.2
Health and Safety: This SOP should be used in accordance with the current
Health and Safety Policy and other relevant instructions as issued by the In-
stitute for Animal Health. Due consideration must be given to National
standards and regulations.
3.3
Gloves must be wom whenever PCR plates are handled and must be
changed frequently. Appropriate reagent tracking sheets must be filled in
(see Appendix 1).
4 Materials
4.1 Equipment (Unless Otherwise Stated, All Equipment Located
in WRL 51)
Real-time PCR machine
Mx4000,Stratagene,
or
Real-time PCR machine
Mx3005P, Stratagene,
Large capacity centrifuge
SORVALL?RC 3C PLUS or one of similar performance
Disposable gloves
medical examination gloves, any suitable supplier
4.2 Chemicals
Not applicable
224
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
4.3 Reagents
 Not applicable
4.4Media
Not applicable
4.5 Organisms
Not applicable
4.6Documentation
This SOP is a component of a larger laboratory system that describes an integrated
approach for the diagnosis of vesicular diseases. Therefore, in order to undertake
receipt, testing and reporting of samples, it may be necessary to consult further
SOP documentation that describes these activities.
Additional documentation that requires consultation:
Stratagene Mx4000 Sequence Detection System User's Manual (2003)
Stratagene Mx3005P Setup and user's guide
MxPro QPCR Software instruction manual
5 Procedure (Alternative Procedures Are Described for the
Mx4000 and Mx3005P Machines)
The following procedure is an outline of the steps required to operate the Mx4000
thermal cycler for one-step RT-PCR of FMDV (and other vesicular disease vi-
ruses).
5.1 (Mx4000)  Switch on the Mx4000 at the back of the instrument. It is
advisable to do this some time in advance as it takes time for the
computer to link-up with the instrument.
5.2 (Mx4000)
Switch on the computer and log on.
5.3 (Mx4000)
icon.
SOP 26. Operation of the Stratagene Mx4000/Mx3005P
225
5.4 (Mx4000)
(Multiple standards)" and click OK.
5.5 (Mx4000)
If the lamp is switched off (red bulb), switch on the lamp to
warm-up by clicking on the bulb on the task bar
5.6 (Mx4000)
Click on the “open door"’ button on the task bar. Wait for the door
to open.
5.7 (Mx4000)
Place the PCR plate containing the reactions securely into the 96-
well block, ensuring that well Al is located at the far-left comer.
5.8 (Mx4000)
Click on the "close door" button on the task bar. The door will
close.
5.9 (Mx4000)
 In the File menu open the file "WRLprofile Mx4000.mxp'" from
the
N:IVes
Dis
GrpQuality\Archive\Molecular
Biology\PCRIWRLStratageneprofilel... Confinm that thermo-
cycling program is the same as shown in Fig. 5.4 below.
5.10 (Mx4000) In the “File" menu, select “Import Well Names" followed by
"from an Excel File"
5.11 (Mx4000) Select the appropriate Excel file containing the well names from
thefile
N:Ves
Dis
 Grp\QualitylArchive\Molecular
Biology\PCR\Tracking Sheets; select the relevant tracking sheet
according to assay (WRL ...) number and click "Open".
5.12 (Mx4000) Decline the option to open the "Full screen view" by clicking
"No".
5.13 (Mx4000) Ensure the FAM filter channel is displayed and that data will be
collected from this channel.
5.14 (Mx4000) Save the run by selecting "Save As" in the "File" menu. Save the
file in the "WRL" folder located in the "C:\Program
Files\StratageneMx4000StoragelWRL\..."' folder, naming the
file with the assay number (i.e. WRL....). This stores the data in a
local directory on the attached computer thus avoiding potential
problems due to network failures.
5.15 (Mx4000) Click the “Run"' tab at the top right of the screen.
5.16 (Mx4000) Click the “Start" button on the pop-up "Run status"' box.
5.17 (Mx4000) Check the "Turm lamp off at end of run" box in the pop-up box.
5.18 (Mx4000) The machine should now begin the thernal protocol
5.19 (Mx4000) Click on the dye buttons towards the bottom left of the screen to
s sap asn ss a  asn an sa a  ma
be “greyed-out".
The following procedure is an outline of the steps required to operate the
Mx3005P thermal cycler for one-step RT-PCR of FMDV (and other vesicular dis-
ease viruses).
226
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
5.1 (Mx3005P)  Switch on the Mx3005P at the back of the instrument. It is
advisable to do this some time in advance as it takes time for the
5.2 (Mx3005P)
）Switch on the computer and log on
5.3 (Mx3005P)
icon
5.4 (Mx3005P)
In "New Experiment Options'", select "Quantitative PCR
(Multiple standards)" and click OK
5.5 (Mx3005P) If the lamp is switched off (red bulb), switch on the lamp to
warm-up by clicking on the bulb on the task bar
5.6 (Mx3005P)
 Place the PCR plate containing the reactions securely into the
96-well block, ensuring that well A1 is located at the far-left
comer
5.7 (Mx3005P) In the File menu open the file “WRL profile Mx3005P.mxp"
from the N:Ves Dis GrplQualityArchiveMolecular Biologyl
PCRIWRLStratageneprofile...  Confirm   that   thermocycling
programme is the same as shown in Fig. 5.4 below.
5.8 (Mx3005P)
 oe sa a , s  ae,   
"from an Excel File".
5.9 (Mx3005P)  Select the appropriate Excel file containing the well names from
the file
N:VesDis
Grp\Quality\Archive\Molecular
Biology\PCR\Tracking Sheets; select the Relevant tracking
sheet according to the assay (WRL ...) number and click
"Open"
5.10 (Mx3005P) Decline the option to open the “Full screen view" by clicking
"No".
5.11 (Mx3005P) Ensure the FAM filter channel is displayed so that data will be
collected from this channel.
5.12 (Mx3005P) Save the run by selecting "Save As" in the “File" menu. Save
e a,    e ,   a 
naming the file with the assay number (i.e. WRL....). This
stores the data in a local directory on the attached computer thus
avoiding potential problems due to network failures.
5.13 (Mx3005P) Click the "Run"' tab at the top right of the screen.
5.14 (Mx3005P) Click the “Start" button on the pop-up “Run status" box.
5.15 (Mx3005P) Check the "Turm lamp off at end of run" box in the pop-up box.
5.16 (Mx3005P) The machine should now begin the thermal protocol.
5.17 (Mx3005P) Click on the dye buttons towards the bottom left of the screen to
view only the dyes being used in the assay. Unused dyes should
be "greyed-out".
SOP 26. Operation of the Stratagene Mx4000/Mx3005P
227
100
10:00
00:15
95°
95*
75
E.HD
01:00
Se gmem 1
Segment 2
Segment 3
1Cycle
1Cycle
50 Cycles
Fig. 5.4 Thermocycling programme used for one-step RT-PCR amplification of vesicular virus
RNA
6 Results
In the "Analysis Selection/setup" module of the Mx4000/MxPro software
"Analysis'' tab, select the appropriate wells for analysis.
6.2 Click the “Results" tab.
s s a g  d a  o a m , a  o
"Amplification plots". A screen will display the amplification plots for all of
the wells that are selected. Double-click on the blue background and change
the Y axis scale from "Linear"' to "Log"'. Click "OK".
6.4 Adjust the threshold line using the mouse so that it cuts the amplification
plots during the log (straight) phase of the amplification plot.
6.5
Print the amplification plots via the "File"' menu.
6.6
 Select "Text Report" in the top right of the screen in "Area to analyze".
6.71
From the list of check boxes in the bottom right of the window, uncheck all
options with the exception of "Well", "Well Name", "Ct" and “Dye". By
clicking on the "Well Name'" tab at the top of the column the software will
automatically sort the samples making viewing much easier.
6.8 Print the text report via the "File" menu.
228
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
 o, a t  aq s a  d d an a ia
button on the task bar, removing the plate and closing the door using the
"close door"' button on the task bar.
6.11 In "My Computer', make a copy of the file and store it in the "N:AVesicular
Dis Grp\quality\ARCHTVEMolecular biology \pcrART-PCR results" folder.
6.12 Log off the computer and switch off the Mx4000/Mx3005P.
7 Analysis
7.1 Positive control samples should have values consistent with those of the
daily monitor (within 2 standard deviations of the "current'" mean Ct at the
Ct" values. The perfonmance of positive control samples can be monitored
by reference to the daily monitor records (QAU Form 262)
7.2  Results Interpretation (for one-step RT-PCR)
Samples with Ct values of <32.0 are considered positive
Samples with Ct values of "No Ct"’ are considered negative
Samples giving mean Ct values of ≥32.0-<50 are "inconclusive'" and repeat
testing (see below) may be required to define a result.
These cut-offs are based on data generated from testing epithelial suspen-
sions [3]. Samples producing Ct values between 32.0 and 50 should be re-
tested (in duplicate) in order to establish a clear positive or negative result
Primary material (prior to RNA extraction step) should be used for this re-
testing: the samples are designated negative if both wells yield a "No Ct"
signal, while a positive result could be reported if both wells generated Ct
values that were in close agreement even if they were >32.0. In some cir-
cumstances, retesting is not required: such as if the samples are submitted
from premises already known to be infected. Final interpretation of these re
sults should be made by the PCR test manager (or deputy) in discussion with
the Head of the Vesicular Disease Laboratory.
8  Trouble Shooting
8.1 Positive and negative sample controls are always included within each batch
of samples processed in each assay.
8.2  The quantitative PCR results are saved after each PCR amplification (Ct val-
ues and amplification plots showing the derived threshold line) so that results
SOP 26.Operation of the Stratagene Mx4000/Mx3005P
229
can easily be retrieved and re-assessed. Similarly,lists of sample orders can
be retrieved from the MagNA Pure LC if required for consultation.
8.3 Technical problems or performance issues with the Mx4000/Mx3005P
3281) or email: QPCR @stratagene.com. At the time of writing, firms and
contact telephone number(s) were correct. However, these may change so
companies currently responsible for maintenance and repair can be found on
QAU Fonm 158.
9Bibliography
1.Reid, SM,Ferris, NP, Hutchings, GH, Zhang,Z,Belsham, GJ, Alexandersen, S. 2002. Detec-
tion of all 7 serotypes of FMDV by real-time, fluorogenic RT-PCR. J. Virol. Methods, 105,
67-80.
2. Reid, SM, Grierson, S, Ferris, NP, Hutchings GH, Alexandersen, S. 2003. Evaluation of
automated RT-PCR to accelerate the laboratory diagnosis of FMDV. J. Virol. Methods, 107,
129-139.
3. Shaw, AE, Reid, SM, Ebert, K, Hutchings, GH, Ferris, NP, King, DP. 2007. Implementation
of a one-step real-time RT-PCR protocol for diagnosis of foot-and-mouth disease. J. Virol.
Methods, 143(1): 81-85.
230
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
SOP 27. Differentiation of Sheep and Goat Poxviruses by Real
Time PCR
Courtesy of Charles Euloge LAMTEN and Mamadou LELENTA
Animal production Unit,
Animal Production and Health Subprogramme,
FAO/IAEA Agriculture and Biotechnology Laboratory,
JointFAO/IAEA Division,
IAEA Laboratories
A-2444 Seibersdorf, Austria
Contact email: C.Lamien @iaea.org
1. Purpose
This procedure describes how to detect and differentiate sheep poxvirus from goat
poxvirus using Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) assay with linear
probes.
2. Scope
Sheep pox and goat pox are both economically important animal diseases and are
imcluded in the list of serious transmissible animal diseases to be notified to the
World Organization for Animal Health, the OIE. They are caused by two viruses:
Aa ae sasa omi asau (AddS) saxod daaus p (AdiD) sxod eos
closely related and together with Lumpy skin disease virus (LSDV), a pathogen of
cattle, they form the genus Capripoxvirus within the Poxvirus family.GTPV grows
readily in both sheep and goat, and SPPV behaves similarly in sheep and goat.
However, the pathogenicity of the virus for the host may differ from one species
to another according to the virus origin: goat strains being more pathogenic in goat
than in sheep and vice versa. However, it is impossible to differentiate clinically a
pox disease caused by either GTPV or by SPPV. It is also impossible to differenti-
ate the viruses serologically. However, phylogenetic studies based on partial se-
quences and complete genomes suggest that they are distinct from each other and
from LSDV. Indeed, in our laboratory, a phylogenetic study of capripoxviruses
strains based on their chemokine gene sequence has shown that they can be sepa-
rated into 3 clusters composed of respectively SPPV, GTPV and LSDV strains.
The real time PCR described here was designed based in relation to the chemokine
231
gene and was proven to be able to differentiate GTPV from SPPV based on the
melting curves in the FRET technology. The limit of sensitivity of the assay is 20
DNA genome copies per PCR reaction.
3.  Samples and DNA Extraction
The Qiagen AllPrep DNA/RNA extraction kit is used. Infected tissues are
homogenized in PBS using a tissue homogenizer (for example Dispomix, HDV
life science). Both homogenized tissues or infected cell culture supermatant are
mixed with the extraction kit lysis buffer, RLT plus (200 μL samples + 800 μL
RLT plus). The DNA is extracted according to the manufacturer instructions. The
extracted samples are eluted in 50 μL of the elution buffer included in the same
Kit.
4.Real Time PCR
4.1Adaptation of iCycler to the FRET Chemistry
The iCycler is not designed to have a FRET channel and the machine was adapted
for this task requiring a suitable filter positioning for the FRET experiment. A
FRET assay needs an excitation of the reporting fluorophore (CY5) by a donor
fluorophore (FAM). In the iCycler, we have replaced the Cy5 excitation filter
(635/30X) with a FAM excitation filter (490/20X). In the plate set up. the
the detection of the amplifications.
4.2PreparationofWellFactorforFRETExperiments
The iCycler needs a fluorophore for calibration: in the Bio-Rad iQ SYBR Green
Supermix ROX is included but the iQ Supermix does not contain any
dye/fluorophore for calibration. When using the iQ supenmix, a so called well
factor plate (a plate containing a dye fluorophore for calibration) is needed.
Ethidium bromide can be used to prepare the well factor plates.
Ethidium bromide (15 μL) is added (10 mg/mL stock) to 5 mL of 1X PCR
buffer to give a final concentration of 300 μg/mL. A well factor plate is then
'xi siu po Iamyr oz suppe Ag paedad
232
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
4.3 Procedure
The following primers and probes are used:
Primers
CpRt forward:
 5'-gatagtatcgctaacaatgg-3'
CpRt reverse:
5'-atccaaaccaccatactaag-3'
Probes
Cp-LNA-FAM1:
5'- acctagcTgtA gttcaCccagtaaa -3'-FAM*
Cp-Cy5:
* The upper characters represent Locked Nucleic Acid.
PCR mix
PCR is carried out in a volume of 20 μL containing the following components:
Volume (μL)
Final corcentration
Primer CpRt forward (5 pmol/μL)
0.4
100 nM
Primer CpRt reverse (5 pmol/μL)
1.2
300 nM
Probe Cp-LNA-FAM1 (5 pmol/μL)
1.2
300 nM
Probe Cp-Cy5 (5 pmol/μL)
1.2
300 nM
iQ Supermix 2x
10
1x
Water
4
DNA
Variable
Total
18
Add 2 μL of extracted or positive control DNA to the corresponding tube and 2
pμL of water to the No Template Control tube.
Thermal cycling protocol
Cycles
Repeats
Temperature
Time
Remarks
1
1x
D.56
3 min
2
40x
95°℃
10 s
46°℃
30 s
(data collection (DC)
72°℃
30 s
3
1x
D.56
30 s
40°℃
30 s
4
50
40-90°℃
10 s
1°℃ (Temperature
increment) DC
SOP 27. Differentiation of Sheep and Goat Poxviruses by Real Time PCR
233
 (  s       s
enabled at the end of the annealing step (46°C).
Cycle 4: Melting analyses
Increase from 40°℃ by 1°℃ for 10 s up to 90°℃ (50 repeats from 40°C).
Melt curve data collection and analysis are enabled at each temperature point.
The data obtained are analyzed with the iCycler 3.1 Optical System Software or
the BioRad iQ5 2.0 standard Edition Optical System Software.
5.
 Results
The T, of the acceptor probe with GTPV is 66°C and that with SPPV sequence is
49°C (Fig. 5.5).
appropriate Capripoxvirus chemokine is prepared and amplified. The standard
curve is derived by plotting the cycle threshold (Ct) against the Log copy number.
Altermatively, a DNA can be extracted from serial dilution of tissue culture titrated
SPPV or GTPV and amplified. The Cts are plotted against the Log TCID。 values.
The efficiency calculated on the basis of the serial dilution of plasmids or DNA
extracted cell culture titrated virus should be at least 80% and with an R? value of
at least 0.98.
Fig. 5.5 Melting curves of sheep poxvirus and goat poxvirus
234
5 Disease Diagnosis Using Real-Time PCR Specific Procedures
6 Appendix
6.1 Material
All DNA/RNA prep(Qiagen)
B-Mercaptoethanol
Ethidium bromide (10 mg/mL), Sigma
iQ Supermix, BioRad (Cat N. 170-8860)
Multiplate PCR plates 96 wells white, BioRad (Cat N. MLP 9651)
PCR sealers microseal B film, BioRad (Cat N. MSB 1001)
PCR water
Probes and primers
Chapter 6
PCR Laboratory Set-up
Contents
6.1Establishment of a PCR Laboratory
236
6.1.1 Minimum Layout Requirements for a Basic PCR Laboratory
236
6.1.2 Ideal Physical Arrangement for a PCR Laboratory . .
236
6.1.3 Ideal Physical Arrangement for a Real-Time PCR Laboratory
237
6.1.4 Reagent Preparation - Area 1 . .
237
6.1.5 DNA/RNA Extraction - Area 2
238
6.1.6 Amplification (PCR) and Detection - Area 3
240
6.1.7 Contamination and Sources
241
6.1.8 Establishment of a PCR Assay
243
6.1.9 Validation of the Assay . .
243
6.2 Quality Assurance Programme or Accreditation .
244
6.2.1 Proficiency Testing ..
245
6.2.2 PCR Controls
245
As discussed in previous chapters,PCR is a powerful technique for amplifying very
smallamounts ofnucleicacid templates,and also itis knownfor being avery sen
sitive technigue.Thus,even afew moleculesof template DNA can be amplified to
billions of copies in a single reaction. Therefore,it is important that only the tem-
platewe wish to amplify enters in the reaction.Unfortunately.thePCRchemistry
has one drawback that is the susceptibility to contamination from its own prod-
uct and also from external sources. That is why it is important to keep in mind a
good laboratory scenario in which the necessary precautions and equipments are
set and placed on the right position to avoid unnecessary delays in experiments,
and undesirableorfalseresults.Thischapter will bededicated to draw apicture
on how a typical PCR laboratory should be handled and set up to obtain reliable
and contamination-free results.Also. general guidelines for the establishment and
the maintenance of a clean environment will be addressed. Courtesy is given to
Viljoen et al,2005.MolecularDiagnostics PCR Handbook.,Springer,2005
E.A. Pestana et al., Early, Rapid and Sensitive Veterinary Molerular Diagnostics -
235
Real Time PCR Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7_6,
Copyright @ International Atomic Energy Agency 2010
Published by Springer Science+Business Media B.V, Dordrecht 2010. All Rights Reserved.
236
6PCRLaboratory Set-up
6.1 Establishment of a PCR Laboratory
The arrangement or design of a PCR laboratory is of great importance in maintain-
ing a high standard of perfonmance. For that propose, three distinct laboratory areas
are required, the reagent preparation area (1); the specimen preparation area (2), and
the PCR detection area (3).
The specific technical operations, reagents, and personnel considerations for each
of these areas will be discussed below.
6.1.1 Minimum Layout Requirements for a Basic PCR Laboratory
Fig. 6.1 Showing the three
LAB 3
distinct laboratory areas
required for a basic PCR
Amplification
Analysis
laboratory set-up
laboratory
laboratory
+OUT
Area
Area
LAB2
LAB 1
Extraction
Master mix
IN
Area
Area
6.1.2 Ideal Physical Arrangement for a PCR Laboratory
LAB 3
LAB 4
LAB 5
Offices
RT-PCR
PCR/Ampli
Analysis
General Area
Laboratory
Laboratory
Laboratory
Area
Area
Area
LAB 6
Nested-PCR
Laboratory
Area
LAB 2
LAB 1
Extraction
Master-mix
Laboratory
Laboratory
Area
Area
INOUT
6.1Establishment of a PCR Laboratory
237
6.1.3 Ideal Physical Arrangement for a Real-Time PCR Laboratory
LAB3
LAB4
LAB5
Offices
Real-timePCR
Real-timePCR
Analysis
General Area
Laboratory
Laboratory
Area
Area
Area
Store
LAB2
LAB1
Extraction
Master-mix
Off
Laboratory
Laboratory
Area
Area
INOUT
6.1.4 Reagent Preparation -Area 1
Area 1 is devoted to the first steps followed to set up a PCR reaction. In this area,
on  m ue padad ae slea (saai uue x as
Prepared master mix and controls are then added to the PCR reaction tubes.
Therefore, Area I must be maintained clean and free of all sources of contamination.
It is advisable to divide this area into two spaces so as to keep the control DNA
away from the master mixes.
6.1.4.1 Equipment Required in Area 1
Each room must have its own separate set of equipment, including pipettors,
reagents, pippetor tips, racks and other necessary instrumentation. Each of these
should remain on each area, and not be removed from this. If possible equipment
should be labelled and used in that location only. Lab coats should also remain dedi-
cated for each area. Pipettors are the most important instrument on PCR preparation
and post-handling, therefore, it is important that each pipettor remains devoted to
each area, and labelled if possible.
Any standard Area 1 should count on with the following equipment:
● If using one room, a dead-air box with an optional ultraviolet (UV) light or, if
using two rooms a clean, dedicated area.
· Freezer/Fridge and ice-boxes.
●Dedicated micropipettes with plugged (aerosol-barrier) tips (25, 50, and 100 μL).
10
● Dedicated positive-displacement pipette and tips. A repeat pipettor (optional).
238
6 PCR Laboratory Set-up
· PCR System reagents (Taq Pol, buffer etc), and consumables (tubes, caps, base.
tray, and retainer).
·Microcentrifuge.
· Lab coat.
· Gloves.
6.1.4.2 Important Considerations Applicable to Area 1
· With PCR diagnostics, always work in a one-way direction from Area 1 to Area
· Area 1 should be located as far away from Area 3 as possible.
● Area 1 should not be in close proximity to the centrifuge area (Area 2) to avoid
possible aerosol contamination.
· Clean, dedicated area working surface must be decontaminated prior to use with
10% bleach solution (freshly made daily) followed by a 70% ethanol rinse or
equivalent.
● If a UV box is used, for your own safety, you must tum ofthe ultraviolet light in
the box before placing your arms and hands into the working area.
● Master Mix and controls are to be prepared in this area.
● Prepared master mix and controls will be added to PCR reaction tubes and capped
in this area.
● Dedicated pipettes with plugged (aerosol-barrier) tips or positive-displacement
tips, or a repeat pipettor are required in Area 1 and should not be transferred to
either Area 2 or Area 3.
· Lab coats designated to wear in Areas 1 and 2 should never be wom into Area 3
to avoid carryover contamination of amplified product from Area 3 back to Area
1 or Area 2; disposable coats may be worm over a cloth coat
· Gloves must be worm at all times for your safety as well as for control of
contamination from one area to another.
· Gloves are to be changed at each of the three work areas
● Gloves wom in Area 3 must never be wom in Area 1 or Area 2.
6.1.5 DNA/RNA Extraction-Area 2
This area is devoted exclusively to the sample preparation only. Tissue cultures,
tissue specimens, and serum samples are all brought into this room and processed
for the extraction of RNA and DNA, depending on the application to be pursued
Aerosols are the main problem when processing samples therefore; it is advised to
centrifuge samples prior opening the tubes. DNA samples should be manipulated
over of aerosols created during pipetting. Personnel protection such as lab coats and
gloves must be a prerequisite when handling samples on Area 2.
6.1Establishment of aPCR Laboratory
239
After the specimens are prepared in this area, they are considered ready to be
used in amplification.
6.1.5.1 Equipment Required in Area 2
· Biological cabinet, fow cabinet, dead area space.
· Standard clinical table top centrifuge and/or microcentrifuge (max RCF
16,000g).
● Dedicated micropipettes with plugged (aerosol-barrier) tips (25, 50, and 100 μL).
10
● Dedicated positive-displacement pipette and tips.
·Repeat pipettor (optional).
· Balance/Scale.
·Spectrophotometer.
·Vortex mixer.
●Dry-heat temperature block.
● Sterile calibrated transfer pipettes.
· All reagents and chemicals.
· All consumables.
●Lab coat (different coat to Area l)
●Gloves (new pair).
6.1.5.2 Important Considerations Applicable to Area 2
·Working surface in cabinet must be decontaminated prior to specimen prepara-
tion with 10% bleach solution (freshly made daily) followed by a 70% ethanol
rinse or equivalent.
· Cabinet must be on 30 min before specimen preparation procedure.
· All pipettors, pipettes, bulbs, and other equipment used in specimen preparation
should be kept in this cabinet at all times.
· Specimens must be stored separately from reagents-two separate refrigerators are
required.
· Dry baths are preferred over water baths water baths can contaminate specimens
through seepage into poorly stoppered tubes.
·A set of pipettes should be dedicated exclusively to be used for specimen
preparation.
· To avoid specimen-to-specimen contamination, plugged (aerosol-barrier) pipette
tips or positive-displacement tips, must be used in Area 2.
·Lab coats designated for wear in Areas 2 should never be wom into Area 3 or 1
to avoid carryover contamination.
· Gloves must be worn at all times for your safety as well as for control of contam-
ination from one area to another. Gloves are to be changed at each of the three
work areas.
240
6  PCR Laboratory Set-up
6.1.6 Amplification (PCR) and Detection -Area 3
specimens undergo PCR and the PCR products (amplicons) of this PCR are then
detected.
After the PCR reaction is ready, the samples need to be analysed and results needs
to be interpreted. Area 3 as mention before should be located as far as possible from
area 1. The reason is that the DNA product obtained from previous PCR reactions,
arising as micro-aerosols produced during handling of the PCR products, can travel
to other Areas (2, 1) if the personnel, or devices from this Area are mixed to another.
This area should also be divided into two areas if possible, Amplification area, and
Analyses area.
6.1.6.1 Equipment Required in Area 3
· PCR Thermal Cyclers.
· Dedicated micropipettes with plugged (aerosol-barrier) tips (25 and 100 μL) or
de dicated positive-displacement pipette and tips.
· Multichannel pipettor, Repeat pipettor, Nonplugged pipette tips (all optional)
● Electrophoreses apparatus and power supplies.
●Microcentrifuge.
· Disposable reagent reservoirs.
●Incubator (37"C ± 2"C) with or without CO2
· Microwell plate reader, Microwell plate washer. Key for microwell strip removal
●UV trans-illuminator.
·Gel documentation system (computer hardware/software & printer).
· Lab coat (different from the one wom in Areas 1 and 2).
●Gloves (new pair).
· Balance/Scale and microwave oven.
6.1.6.2 Important Considerations Applicable to Area 3
·Area 3 should be kept as far away as possible from Areas 1 and 2 to avoid aerosol
contamination.
● Incubator temperature should be kept stable.
● Traffic in and out of incubator should be reduced to a minimum.
· Area 3 pipettes should never be used in Areas 1 or 2.
ueuap Sumadid roy pasn ae sdn (ranea-losoan) passnnd um sanadid ●
solution into PCR tubes and denatured amplified product into microwell plates.
· Non-plugged tips may be used for all other reagent additions a pipette con-
results plugged tips therefore are required to prevent this potential carryover
contamination.
6.1Establishment of a PCR Laboratory
241
·As this is a one-way workffow, the lab coat wom in Area 3 must never be wom in
Areas 1 and 2.
· Gloves must be worn at all times for your safety as well as for control of con-
tamination from one area to another. Gloves are to be changed at each of the
three work areas. Gloves wom in Area 3 must never be worm in Area 1 or
Area 2.
6.1.7ContaminationandSources
As discussed above, PCR contamination is a very big issue when dealing with PCR
performance and accuracy. If the test sample has even the smallest contamination of
  a   s        
identification. For example, in an assay containing 1000 samples, each sample must
be run with another set of negative controls when contamination is observed. The
lack of amplification product within the PCR negative control is not determinative
of a positive PCR result in a sample in which contamination is rare. This kind of
sporadic contamination is especially problematic in an extremely large throughput
assay in which 5-10 negative controls are run for approximately every 1000 sam-
ples. Statistically, the likelihood of sporadic contamination in, for example, 1000
samples will not be detected in only 5 negative controls.
Previously, we have discussed the procedures to follow in each laboratory area,
in order to avoid in-situ contamination and carryover contamination. In this sec-
tion we will discuss in more detail possible sources of contamination and also give
guidelines how to avoid them.
6.1.7.1 Amplicon Aerosols
Amplicon aerosols are generated by the same PCR product that has been previously
amplified. This sort of contamination is usually produced during post-PCR analysis
(Area 3). To eliminate aerosol contamination it is advisable to use filter tips as a
solution to address this issue. These tips have a porous filter positioned inside the
tip. During pipetting, air flows through the filter, which captures aerosols, preventing
contact with the pipette's shaft and, subsequently, sample carryover.
6.1.7.2 Template Contaminants
If the PCR is designed to be very sensitive, or if the PCR is used for diagnostics,
possible contamination must be eliminated because it can greatly have an impact
on the results. Contaminating template or contaminating DNA can come from 3
sources, DNA from other test samples, DNA from experimental materials, such as
Therefore, it is advised to always include negative control reactions. Other me asures
to be considered to control template contaminants are listed below.
242
6 PCR Laboratory Set-up
· Use of dedicated pipetting devises, and tips containing aerosol barrier
· After PCR is performed it is recommended to clean the surfaces used i.e. bench
cleaning with sodium hypochlorite, 10% bleach solution or 70% Ethanol.
●Preparation of a Master Mix to reduce the number of pipetting steps.
· Always assemble the PCR reaction in a separate Area containing a laminar fow
hood with UV light (as discussed above).
● Amplify the PCR with the minimum of cycles required to avoid amplification of
non-desire template or false positives.
· Irradiation of the Master Mix prior to the adding of DNA template to be ampli-
fied. DNA is sensitive to UV light but primers and dNTPS are more resistance.
The logic within this approach is that if there is any source of contamination in
the pre Mix, this will be diminished by the UV light.
● Use of DNAse I in the master mix prior to the adding of the target template will
have the same effect as the UV light if any DNA contaminant is present.
· The use of the Uracil glycosylase (UDG) decontamination method, which con-
sists on substituting PCR product DNA with uracil (dUTP) bases in place of
thymine (dTTP). After amplification, the DNA produced will contain uracil
bases. If the enzyme uracil DNA glycosilase (UDG) is added to those products,
will result on the removal of the urasil sites, making the PCR product labile and
not able to further undergo re-amplification. Here the principle is that if the lab-
oratory routinely uses the uracil incorporated templates, all templates produced
will have uracil, but new DNA template to be used will not. Before a new sample
is processed, will be first exposed to UDG enzyme. If UDG come across with
contaminating U-containing DNA strands from a previous amplification, the U's
are cleaved, leaving the strands with gaps. During cycling heating, the strands
will fall apart and will not be amplified.
· After PCR it is recommended that samples are centrifuge prior opening to avoid
aerosol formation. It is also suggested that a good way to control aerosol is to
open the samples when frozen.
● Always wear disposable gloves.
6.1.7.3 Real Time PCR Systems and Contamination
The use of Real Time PCR systems greatly decreases the risk of contamination on
the PCR, due to the fact that post-PCR handling is no more required; when the PCR
is finished detection and analysis are also completed, and so reaction tubes do not
need to be reopen thus eliminating amplicon escape.
The practices mention above should be followed more tightly when using fuo-
rogenic 5' nuclease chemistries (TaqMan) or SYBR? Green I dye chemistry. In the
case of SYBR? Green I, potential contamination can be introduced to the samples,
and since this dye has non-specificity, any double-stranded DNA will be labelled
and detected. Therefore, it is recommended to always check for non-specific product 
formation by using dissociation curve or gel analysis. Care must be taken to avoid
contamination with target DNA, i.e. gene expression assays that span exon-exon
junctions minimise the effect of genomic DNA contaminants.
6.1 Establishment of a PCR Laboratory
243
 In the case of TaqMan assays, UDG pre-treatment can prevent the re-
amplification of carryover PCR products (carryover contamination). There are
available master mixes in the market containing the UDG component. The same
principle can be applied to SYBR? Green I amplification protocols when suspicion
of carryover contamination is present.
6.1.8 Establishment of a PCR Assay
The selection of a PCR assay must be based on factors including scientific and
intermational acceptance, cost, available resources, nature of the intended use, sen-
sitivity and specificity, number of tests to be done and availability of standard
reagents.
Development and optimization of the assay must then be performed and
should include a series of experimental procedures and the evaluation of the
data generated. Analysis should determine a fixed protocol for use, the nature
equipment.
The optimisation of the PCR should be followed by evaluation of the test. This
will include a period of testing samples with known histories.
6.1.9 Validation of the Assay
Validation establishes the performance standards of the assay (e.g., sensitivity.
specificity, accuracy, precision, positive/negative cut-off criteria etc.), using appro-
priate statistical methods.
Validation can include a comparison with other methods, with reference stan-
dards, collaborative studies with other laboratories using the same test procedure.
experimental challenge studies or reproduction of data from accepted standard
methods or a reputable publication.
Validation has to main components
·Specifcity is the ability of the assay to exclusively detect the agent of interest
· Sensitivity is described as the ability to precisely detect small quantities of the
test agent.
6.1.9.1 Validation Pathway or Steps Followed for Assay Validation
Stage1
Involves the development of the assay performing a feasibility study to determine
whether the assay can detect a range of agents (e.g., virus concentrations, virus
serotypes/genotypes), without background activity.
244
6PCR Laboratory Set-up
This stage include all aspects of development and optimisation of the test,
including the identification of the test, the detenmination of the target tem-
plate(s), the sequence determination of the primers and the test conditions and
criteria.
Stage 2
Involves the evaluation of the test against a panel of known positive and negative
template samples to determine the analytical sensitivity and specificity
Stage 3
This involves the detenmination of diagnostic sensitivity and specificity, i.e.
involving field samples in 2 parallel tests (classical vs PCR).
Diagnostic sensitivity (DS) and specificity(DP)
DS determines the proportion of known infected reference animals testing pos-
itive [TP/(TP+FN)], while DP determines the proportion of uninfected reference
animals that test negative [TN/(TN+FP)]. (TP = true positive; FN = false negative;
TN = true negative; FP = false positive).
DS - how many false negatives you get.
DP - how many false positives you get
Stage4
 Entails the continued monitoring of the validity of assay performance in the field
by calculating the predictive value of positive or negative results based on esti-
Stage5
Involves the maintenance of validation criteria using intermal quality controls.
Frequent monitoring for repeatability and accuracy are needed. The OlE also rec-
ommends biannual ring-testing to determine reproducibility between laboratories,
although annual testing is also described.
6.2 Quality Assurance Programme or Accreditation
The intention of accreditation or the formal recognition of a quality assurance pro-
gramme by an independent third party is to ensure that GLP, QA (QC - IQC/EQC)
is in place within the diagnostic laboratory. Specific standards are used (e.g. ISO
17025) in accordance with the requirements of the inspecting body (e.g., the South
African National Laboratory Accreditation Service).
Requirements will include a quality policy, a quality manual, procedures for
evaluating and reviewing new and exciting test methods and protocols, the use of
blind quality assurance within and between laboratories, monitoring of equipment,
ongoing training, an audit programme, regular review of the quality system and doc-
umentation and records of all quality activities and evaluations. Standard operating
procedures (SOP's) will be required for not only the test methods used, but also for
the calibration and maintenance of instrumentation and equipment used.
6.2Quality Assurance Programme or Accreditation
245
6.2.1 Proficiency Testing
Proficiency testing is the means used to determine the capability of a laboratory to
perform the assay and effectively detect the agent (intermal proficiency testing).
Such testing will also contribute to ensuring that within or between laboratories
performing routine diagnostic services, a specific assay is performed according to
established intermational standards (extermal proficiency testing)
6.2.2PCRControls
6.2.2.1 Positive Control Samples
These should include,
· Specimen material with a low concentration (preferably the lowest limit routinely
detected, or preferably the lowest amount of detectable target agent present in
sample material by conventional means and by reported PCR data.
· Specimen material with expected pathogen concentration in an infected case (not
essential).
● Extracted positive DNA/RNA can be used only if the above are not available.
In the case of a proficiency testing process, specimen material spiked with a
dilution series of virus (e.g., 10-1 to 10-10) should also be included. Virus titre
would have been established by means of a golden standard assay.
6.2.2.2 Negative Control Samples
RNA - this should confinm absence of amplicon or agent itself or other cross
reactive.
· A negative specimen control sample (allantoic fuid, buffer, tissue), if available,
which will undergo nucleic acid extraction to confirm absence of contamination
 in the extraction procedure.
· Extracted nucleic acid derived from pathogen-free sample material obtained pre-
viously (e.g., tissue or other medium normally submitted, including tissue, blood,
buffer) - should confirm that no non-specific binding to virus-free specimen
DNA/RNA has taken place (eukaryotic and prokaryotic genomic DNA or RNA
present in sample). Not essential.
· In the case of RT-PCR, an additional negative control consisting of all reagents
as well as the extracted sample nucleic acid, but without "reverse transcriptase'
included, this should confinm absence of DNA or amplicon contaminants in both
reagentsandtestmaterial.
246
6 PCR Laboratory Set-up
Bibliography
1. Cone, WR, Fairfax, MR. 1993. Protocol for ultraviolet irradiation of surfaces to reduce PCR
contamination. PCR Methods Appl., 3, Supplement, S15-17.
2 Dieffenbach, CW, Dveksler, GS. 1993. Setting up a PCR laboratory. PCR Methods Appl., 3,
Supplement, S2-7.
Primer. A Laboratory Manual. pp. 7-16. (Eds. Dieffenbach, CW, Dveksler, GS). Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, New York.
4. Dragon, EA. 1993. Handling reagents in the PCR Laboratory. PCR Methods Appl., 3,
Supplement: S8-9.
5. Dragon, EA, Spadoro, JP, Madej, R. 1993. Quality control of polymerase chain reaction. In
Diagnostic Molecular Microbiology: Principles and Applications. pp. 160-8. (Eds. Persing.
DH, Smith, TF, Tenover, FC, White, TJ). American Society for Microbiology, Washington
D.C.
6. Hartley, JL, Rashtchian, A. 1993. Dealing with contamination: enzymatic control of carryover
7. Lee, KW, Liu, BHY. 1982. Experimental study of aerosol filtration by fibrous filters. Aerosol
Sri. Technol., 1, 35-46.
8. Lee, KW, Liu, BHY. 1982. Theoretical study of aerosol filtration by fbrous filters. Aerosol
Sri. Technol., 1, 147-62.
9. Madej, R, Scharf, S. 1990. Basic equipment and supplies. In PCR Protocols: A Guide to
Methods and Applications. pp. 455-59. (Eds. Innis, MA, Gelfand, DH, Sninsky, JJ, White,
TJ).Academic Press, London.
10. McCreedy, BJ, Callaway, TH. 1993. Laboratory design and work fow. In Diagnostic
Molecular Microbiology: Principles and Applications. pp. 149-59.(Eds. Persing, DH, Smith,
TF, Tenover, FC, White, TJ). American Society for Microbiology, Washington D.C.
11. Miffin, TE. 2007. Setting up a PCR Laboratory. Cold Spring Harbour Protocol, 1, 5-14.
12. Orrego, C. 1990. Organizing a laboratory for PCR work. In PCR Protocols: A Guide to
Methods and Applications. pp. 447-54. (Eds. Innis, MA, Gelfand, DH, Sninsky, JJ, White,
TJ). Academic Press, London.
13. Renoux, A, Boulaud, D. The aerosols: physics and metrology (Lavoisier Technique et
Documentation,Paris,1998).
14. Tetzner, R, Dietrich, D, Distler, J. 2007. Control of carry-over contamination for PCR-based
DNA methylation quantification using bisulfite treated DNA. Nucleic Acids Res., 35(1), 4.
15. Viljoen, GJ, Nel, LH, Crowther, J. 2005. Molecular Diagnostics PCR Handbook., Springer.
Chapter 7
Analysis and Troubleshooting
Contents
Bibliography.
246
7.1 How to Design Primers for Real-Time PCR Applications
247
7.1.1 TaqMan@ Probes and Primer Design
249
7.1.2 Storage of Primers and TagMan@ Probes
250
7.1.3 SYBR? Green Assays .
250
7.1.4 Optimisation of Primer Concentration
252
7.1.5 Multiple Bands on Gel or Multiple Peaks in the Melting Curve
253
7.1.6 Effect of Magnesium Chloride and Primer Concentration
254
7.1.7 Molecular Beacons Assays . . ..
254
7.2 Assay Performance Evaluation Using Standard Curves
254
7.2.1 Threshold Selection
255
7.2.2 Quantification of Gene Targets with the
Quantitative Real Time PCR: Absolute and Relative
Gene Quantification
256
7.2.3 Relative Quantification
256
7.3 Most Common Problems When Performing Real-Time PCR
257
7.3.1 PCR Amplification Problems
257
7.3.2 Control Samples ..
258
7.3.3 Signal Problems in Real Time PCR
258
7.3.4 Amplification Plots
259
7.4 Summary: Optimised Real-Time PCR Assay
260
7.1 How to Design Primers for Real-Time PCR Applications
When designing primers, it is of initial importance to define the target area,
and secondly the type of application. The BLAST function from the National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) will help to identify the most suit-
able gene sequence to be used. There are many software programs; some free on
E.A. Pestana et al., Early, Rapid and Sensitive Veterinary Molecular Diagnostics -
247
Real Time PCR Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7_7,
Published by Springer Science+Business Media B.V, Dordrecht 2010. All Rights Reserved.
248
7Analysis and Troubleshooting
websites/pages on the intermet, dedicated to primer design and primer optimisation.
In this chapter the most important factors that need to be taken into consideration
when designing and optimising primers are highlighted.
As a rule of thumb, the following guidelines should be followed when designing
primers:
· Primers and probes should be selected in a region with a GC content lower than
80%.
· The amplicon size recommended for real-time PCR applications is between 50
and 150 bp. Do not exceed the amplicon size of 300 bp when desigming primers
as time efficiency is paramount as it will have a delayed effect on the Cr.
When dealing with cDNA or mRNA amplification procedures - it is advisable
to design a primer or probe which crosses one exon junction, thus in the case of
 genomic DNA contamination the latter will not be amplifed. (Fig. 7.1 and Fig. 7.2)
· Primers should be 15-30 mer in length.
Avoid the presence of secondary structures or primer-dimer formation, as they
can interfere with the amplification, particularly in SYBR? green applications.
PCRProduct
GenomicDNA
Exon1
atront
Exon2
Intron2
I→
mRNA
Exon1
Exon2
▼
rt-PCRproduct
Fig. 7.1 Primers aligning to exons fanking an intron. Any product amplifying gDNA will be
much larger than a product amplified from intronless mRNA
PCRProduct
NoPCRProduct
←
GenomicDNA
Exon1
Exon2
Intron2
mRNA
Exon1
Exon2
Exon3
→
rt-PCRproduct
Fig. 7.2 Primers that bridge an exon-exon junction on mRNA. No amplification of gDNA
7.1How to Design Primers for Real-Time PCR Applications
249
Secondarystructures:
Hairpin:△G=-3.1kcal/mol
CGTAGTGT-5
Hairpinsareformed byintra-molecular
interaction within theprimer.This
A
structures should beavoidedwhen
designing Real-Time PCRprimers.
GCATCACGCACAC-3'
PrimerSelf-dimer:△G=6.59kcal/mol
5'-GGGAAAATTCCAGGATCTAGC-3
Self-dimer.isformed byintermolecular
5'-CGATCTAGGACCTTAAAAGGG-5
interactionsbetweenthetwo(same sense)
primerswheretheprimerishomologoustoitself
Whenthis structuresarepresent,largeamountof
primers areneededinPCR,and thustheproduct
yieldisreduce
Cross-dimer:△G=6.59kcal/mol
5'-TGTGATGCAGCATCACGCACAC-3'
1
CrossDimer:Cross dimers are
3'-CTACGTCGACTCTGATAGCTACG-5'
formedbyintermolecularinteraction
between sense andantisense primers,
where they arehomologous.
Fig. 7.3 Secondary structures to be avoid during primer design. When Primer-dimer presence is
observed, it is advisable to redesign the primers, try to increase the annealing temperature, or try
to decrease the primer concentration
The rules stated above are general rules to be followed when designing any PCR
primer and are applicable to all chemistries. There are however, specific guidelines
 and recommendations to be followed for each chemistry or technology application
and they will be discussed below.
7.1.1 TaqMan? Probes and Primer Design
5'TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTPTTTTTPTTPTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTFPTFTTTTTTPTPTTTTTTTTTT甲3'
Primer2
Primer1
5'TTTTYPTYPTTT3'
3
TaqPol.
Fig. 7.4 TaqMan probe and primers design and specifications
250
7  Analysis and Troubleshooting
· The melting temperature (Tm) of the probe should be between 68°C and 70°C.
Probes with lower Tm's or with Tm's close to that of the primer-pairs, might
not hybridise or bind to the target strand (to be amplified strand), and that can
interfere with the intensity of the probe (reporter/quencher) signal.
● The Tm of the probes should be about 10° C higher than that of the primers, to
allow for the probe to bind first.
· The primers should be designed as close to the probe as possible. The reason for
this is that if the primers are close the probe will be degraded faster and the signal
will appear soon after the elongation step has started.
● The G/C contents of the primers should be about 55-60%.
● Primers Forward and Reverse should have the same annealing temperature.
● Runs of identical nucleotides should be avoided, particularly at the 3' end of the
primer. Repetitions should always be avoided for two reasons: (i) possibility of
mispriming; (i) possibility of secondary structure formation.
· Avoid the presence of too many Gs in the 5' end of the primer.
· Having a G or a C as last nucleotide at the 3' end may improve specificity.
· Always try to select the strand that contains more Cs than Gs. A higher number
of Cs produces a high kinetic hybridization and higher annealing profile.
· For the TaqMan amplification technology, the probe is of paramount importance.
So before ordering it, it is advised to test first the primers to be used for the
amplification to make sure they will work.
· Please look at Chapter 3 for all the primer criteria
7.1.2 Storage of Primers and TaqMan Probes
Once the primers and probes are reconstituted and/or diluted, it is recommended to
distribute them into single-use aliquots and store them at -20°C. Making single-use
aliquots limits freeze-thawing and therefore extends their life. It is also important
 e rd a d   a un s  as n
damage the probe.
7.1.3 SYBR? Green Assays
As discussed in Chapter 3, SYBR? Green chemistry detects all double stranded
DNA. When designing primers for this methodology, it is critical to avoid:
· the secondary structures formation mentioned above;
· the non-specific product formation. An excess of free magnesium reduces the
Taq polymerase fidelity and may increase the level of nonspecific product
amplification.
7.1How to Design Primers for Real-Time PCR Applications
251
7.1.3.1 SYBR? Green I Behaviour During Real Time PCR
SYBRGreen
Primer
In solution, the unbound dye exhibits very little fuorescence. Fluorescence is
 greatly enhanced upon DNA-binding. (Courtesy of Roche Diagnostics, GmbH).
EmittedLight
AANLUAUAUAOUAAUCAN
Fluorescent dye SYBR? Green I bind to the minor groove of the DNA double
helix. (Courtesy of Roche Diagnostics, GmbH).
252
7  Analysis and Troubleshooting
Polymerase
During elongation, more and more dye molecules bind to the newly synthesised
DNA. Upon denaturation of the DNA for the next heating cycle, the dye molecules
are released and the fuorescence signal falls. Fluorescence measurement at the end
 of the elongation step of every PCR cycle is performed to monitor the increasing
amount of amplified DNA. (Courtesy of Roche Diagnostics, GmbH).
In Fig. 7.5 the graphs show fuorescence vs. the number of cycles for differing
initial amounts of template copies. When template concentration is high, amplifica-
tion of specific DNA is observed during early heating cycles. In case of very few
copies of starting template, unspecific products here in green, usually due to primer-
dimer formation, can mask the specific signal (blue graph). Here the reduction of
magnesium will may help eliminating this unspecific product fonmation.
104Copies
3.0
2.5
10 Copies
Fluorescence
2.0
1.5
OCopies
1.0
0.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
AmplificationCycles
Fig. 7.5 Fluorescence vs. Number of amplification cycles for differing amounts of initial template
copies (Courtesy of Roche Diagnostics, GmbH)
7.1.4 Optimisation of Primer Concentration
Primer pairs can be adjusted independently to identify the best Tm and concentration
needed to perfonm the best assay. The concentration of primer in the PCR reaction
should be between 0.1 and 0.5 μM. For most PCR applications, including rt-PCR
assays and the amplification of longer PCR products, 0.2 μM of each primer pro-
duces pleasing results. Primer concentrations which are too high increase the chance
7.1How to Design Primers for Real-Time PCR Applications
253
80
160
140
120
100
626068898828088494424048999929098S95S2S
Temperaure,Celius
100
90
Primerdimer
0018696626068898828088922008999929098952505
TemperatureCesius
Fig. 7.6 SYBR? Green is a very helpful tool to find out if primers are forming dimer or sec-
ondary structures. For that, the amplifed product melting curve analysis is carried out as shown
in figure. The formation of one single curve will be indicative of the absence of secondary struc.
tures, or non-specific products. Primer-dimers will be most prevalent in the No Template Contro?
(NTC) wells and sample wells containing low concentrations of template. In the fgures, plots
are showing the change in fuorescence as the temperature decreases and the SYBR? Green is
freed in the solution. Next to the plots, gel analysis of qPCR products can be observed. (Courtesy
of Bio-Rad)
of mispriming. Subsequent extension of misprimed molecules results in nonspecific
PCR products.
It is important, especially in Green DNA dye I based real time PCR applica
tions, to minimize the formation of non-specific amplification products. Especially
tration without compromising the efficiency of PCR. The optimal concentration of
primer pairs is the lowest concentration that results in the lowest Cr and an ade-
quate fuorescence for a given target concentration, with minimal or no formation
of primer-dimer. Primers can be effciently optimised by using SYBR? Green.
7.1.5 Multiple Bands on Gel or Multiple Peaks
in theMelting Curve
Agarose gel electrophoresis or melting curve analysis may not always reliably mea-
amplicons (> 200 bp) even when the PCRs are specific. The observed heterogeneity
254
7  Analysis and Troubleshooting
in melting temperature is due to intermal sequence in homogeneity (e.g. independent
melting blocks of high and low GC content) rather than non-specific amplicon. On
the other hand, for short amplicons (<150 bp) very weak and fussy bands migrating
ahead of the major specific bands are sometimes observed on agarose gel. These
weak bands are super-structured or single-stranded versions of the specific ampli
cons in equilibrium state and therefore should be considered specific. Although
gel electrophoresis or melting curve analysis alone may not be lo0% reliable, the
combination of both can always reveal PCR specificity.
7.1.6 Effect of Magnesium Chloride and Primer Concentration
Advice
Most laboratories have already standardized set of conditions for rt-PCR. Since
what is needed is mostly reproducibility and fastness, most scientists usually do
not spend enough time in optimizing their specific PCR. In case of SYBR? Green
for example, the best way is to design dilution series of the sample to be analyzed
using a standard protocol that works in your laboratory (minor modifications can be
used, i.e. annealing temperature or slightly different extension time depending on
the length of the amplicon). If the reaction plot is not good, adjustment of cycling
parameters, e.g. annealing temperatures, can be made. If after these adjustments
the plots still are unsatisfactory, then it is better to order new primers. It is much
cheaper than wasting reagents and time trying to optimize the reaction at this point
im time.
7.1.7MolecularBeacons Assays
Low signal-to-background ratio: poor stem fonmation. In that case, the assay
medium may contain insufficient salt. 1 mM MgClz in the solution, usually ensures
the stem fonmation. The molecular beacon may fold into an altermate conformation,
which results in a sub-population that is not quenched well. To solve this problem it
is advised to change the stem sequence (and probe sequence, if necessary).
Incomplete restoration of fuorescence at low temperatures. If the stem of a
molecular beacon is too strong, at low temperatures it may remain closed while the
aisap Auo u nans pn ao was e ui snnsan en undq n sg
Change the sequence at the edges of the probe and the stem sequence to avoid this
problem.
7.2 Assay Performance Evaluation Using Standard Curves
Theoretically, during the exponential growth phase, there is a quantitative relation-
7.2Assay Performance Evaluation Using Standard Curves
255
at any given cycle. This relationship can be measured by the use of the following
formula:
3 + 1)x= “x
Where X, is the amoumt of the target sequence at cycle n, Xo is the initial amount
of the target, and E is the amplification efficiency. The E values are included between
0 (no amplification) and 1 (every amplicon is replicated every cycle).The emission
of fluorescence either by the DNA binding dyes or by the probes in the amplification
mix allow the construction of the amplification curves by plotting the increase in
fuorescence versus the cycle number. Every amplification curve has three phases: an
exponential phase, a non-exponential phase and a plateau. With real-time PCR, the
quantitative information is deducted from the exponential phase of the amplification
curve.
7.2.1 Threshold Selection
The Threshold line is the level of detection or the point at which a reaction attains a
fuorescent intensity above the background. The threshold line is usually set in the
exponential phase of the amplification.
The threshold cycle (CT) indicates the fractional cycle number at which the
amount of amplified copies reaches a fixed threshold. In simple words, CT is defined
as the first cycle in which there is a significant increase in fuorescence above the
background. At this point the amount of product is defined as:
XT = Xo(1 + Ex)CT,x
Where XT is the threshold number of copies, CT,X is the threshold cycle, Xo the
intial number of template copies, and Ex the efficiency of target amplification.
A similar equation for the endogenous reference, a housekeeping gene for
fied sample in the endogenous reference control reaction at its Threshold
cycle:
Rr = Ro(1 + ER)Ct.R
Where R is denoted as the quantity corresponding to the endogenous reference
gene at its Threshold cycle, Ro is the initial number of copies of the endogenous
reference gene, ER is the efficiency of amplification of the endogenous reference
gene, and CT,r is the threshold cycle number for the endogenous reference gene.
where the amplified reference exceed the threshold value.
256
7  Analysis and Troubleshooting
7.2.2 Quantification of Gene Targets with the Quantitative Real
Time PCR: Absolute and Relative
Gene Quantification
7.2.2.1 Absolute Quantification (Standard Curve Method)
This method calculates the copy number of a gene by relating the PCR signal to
a standard curve.It uses DNA Standards of known quantity for the quantification
(e.g. Plasmid DNA or purified amplification products) amplifed in a dilution
series.
The CT values for the unknown samples will be calculated from the correlation
curve of the standards. This method is very error prone since the results are very
much relying on the technical quality of the standard curves. Pipetting errors for the
samples and the dilution series will cause very meaning full errors in quantification
using this method. Common real-time PCR applications that employ absolute quan-
tification include chromosome or gene copy number detenmination and viral load
detenmination.
7.2.3RelativeQuantification
Relative quantification estimates the change in mRNA expression levels by com-
paring the PCR signal of the target transcript to that of a control (a so-called
housekeeping or reference gene).Various mathematical models exist to carry out
relative quantification, and some have been incorporated into different software
packages for data analysis (e.g. REST, GeNorm, qBasePlus).
Basically a mathematical quantification model transforms Ct values into nor-
malized relative quantities. The first model [10] assumes optimal (100%) PCR
efficiency for both the target of interest and the reference targets. But PCR effi-
ciency is not always optimal and the PCR efficiencies of the target and reference
are not always equal. Michael Pfaffl improved the model by correcting for dif-
ferences in PCR efficiency. The most advanced approach from Jo Vandesompele
additionally incorporates more than one reference gene for more accurate
normalization.
7.2.3.1 Livak Method 2-AACT Method
Unlike the Standard Curve method, the Delta-Delta CT method is an approximation
of transcription based on the change in threshold values for control vs. target cells
(the cycle number at which Huorescent signaling crosses the "threshold" of loga-
rithmic increases in cDNA concentration.) This method assumes that either there is
a minimal correction for the reference gene or reference and target genes have sim-
ilar efficiencies. Dilution curves are used to ensure that the DCts do not change in
7.3 Most Common Problems When Performing Real-Time PCR
257
order to validate these assumptions. This method is a convenient way to analyze the
A drawback of this method is that it assumes ^l00% efficient target and standard
gene PCR reactions which is usually not the case.
7.2.3.2 Pfaffl Method
Like the Standard Curve Method, this method provides a means for quantification
xa a a  a    n d a  e gs
sion ratio is calculated only from the real-time PCR efficiencies and the crossing
point deviation of an unknown sample versus a control. Unlike the Standard Curve
Method this model needs no calibration curve, as control levels are included within
the model. High accuracy and reproducibility (<2.5% variation) may be reached
using this method of data analysis
7.2.3.3 Vandesompele Method
i a   aa  sxa a  a
Vandesompele outlined a robust and innovative strategy to identify the most sta-
bly expressed control genes in a given set of tissues, and to determine the minimum
ric mean of multiple carefully selected housekeeping genes was validated as an
accurate normalization for accurate RT-PCR expression profiling, which, among
other things, opens up the possibility of studying the biological relevance of small
expression differences
7.3 Most Common Problems When Performing Real-Time PCR
7.3.1PCRAmplificationProblems
Little or no PCR product. Poor quality of PCR templates, primers, or reagents may
lead to PCR failures. Inclusion of the appropriate PCR controls to eliminate these
possibilities is essential. In the case of mRNA detection, it should be borm in mind
that some genes are expressed transiently or only in certain tissues. The PCR result
being dependant of the gene level expression, it is advised to review the literature
for the gene expression patterms.
Primer-dimer. Primer-dimer may be occasionally observed if the quantity of tar-
get nucleic acid is very low in the starting material. If this is the case, increasing the
s  a      
Non-specific amplicons. Non-specific amplicons give false positive real-time
PCR results. They can be identified by both gel electrophoresis and melting curve
analysis. To avoid this problem, please make sure to perfonm hot-start PCR and
use at least 60?C as annealing temperature. However, not all hot-start systems are
258
7  Analysis and Troubleshooting
a n das as  snp An asaod sssans e sana na
non-specific amplicon is persistent, you have to choose a different primer pair for
the amplification of the gene of interest.
7.3.2 Control Samples
In any diagnostic test, negative and positive controls are essential.
7.3.2.1 Non Template Control (NTC)
Primer-dimer presence in the reaction can also be confused with contamination. To
probe the presence of primer-dimers, especially when SYBR? green is not used,
a serial dilution of the template followed by an electrophoretic analysis of the final
PCR products can help identifying the primer-dimers or the contaminant. In a typ-
ical reaction, the higher the concentration of the sample input in PCR is, the lower
will be the intensity of the primer-dimer formation. If it is proven that primer-dimer
formation is not present but an increase of signal is still observed in a reaction with-
out template, this means that the reaction has been contaminated. In that case, it
is advisable to dispose of all the reagents and to replace them with new ones. It
usn ,xiu sas, aa vna au u suauodu uonau aun nonbe on pasape s
filter tips at all times to avoid carry over contamination.
7.3.2.2 Positive Controls
When performing Quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR (qRT-PCR), two positive
controls should always be included in the reaction in order to measure both the
efficiency of the reverse transcription (RT) step and the PCR amplification step.
When no fuorescence is detected in the RT-PCR control, but the PCR amplification
control emits fluorescence, this indicates the failure of the RT step. The same occurs
when no fuorescence is encountered in the PCR amplification step but it is present
in the RT step - that would be an indication of failure in the PCR step.
7.3.3SignalProblems inRealTimePCR
1. Poor amplijfication of the Target. Poor amplification of the target can be due to
dures to ensure that the sample is as pure as possible (260/280 ratio at around
1.8 for a DNA) and without inhibitors. In the case of RNA as starting material,
including a control RNA in the test will give an indication in the efficiency of the
 a  a  n  s p  (  an
of the input RNA is good or that the concentration of the RNA used to generate
cDNA is not too concentrated or too diluted. It is also important to make sure
that the RT-PCR conditions used are optimal
7.3 Most Common Problems When Performing Real-Time PCR
259
2. Poor amplification of Target when using TaqMan probes. This can be due to no
annealing of the probe to the target DNA. This may happens if the annealing
temperature is too high. Therefore it is advisable to recalculate the Tm of the
probe.
3. Amplification of the Target in the NTC. This result indicates the contamination
of the reagents and they should be discarded and replaced by new ones.
dependent on the PCR efficiency. A reasonable efficiency should be at least 80%.
Poor primer quality is the leading cause for poor PCR efficiency. In this case, the
PCR amplification curve usually reaches the plateau early and the final fuores-
cence intensity is significantly lower than that of most other PCRs. This problem
forming Real-Time PCR, a slope value of -3.32, is equivalent to 100% effciency.
Poor slope can be due to several reasons, particularly: (i) incorrect dilutions, (ii)
presence of inhibitors in the reaction and (ii) improper reaction conditions.
5. Standard curve: Bad correlation coefficient. This can be due to: (i) incorrect
baseline and threshold settings, (ii) improper pipetting or (ii) incorrect dilutions.
7.3.4AmptificationPtots
A good amplification plot should contain all the PCR 3 phases: the exponential
phase, the non-exponential phase and the plateau or end-point phase.
1. Signal from replicates and control groups do not exhibit a uniform profile. this
can be a result of contamination. The samples should be re-made and the blocks
cleaned.
2. Absence of growth in the amplification plots. This could indicate (i) a pipetting
  n  n    a     a  (  
mix.
 3. Well-to-well variance. Variance between samples can be due to the poor quality
of the optical sealing material. Optical clear sails for PCR plates or optical clear
cups for sealing of the tubes specifically for fuorescence applications should be
used. Well-to-well variance can be seen if the PCR machine is not calibrated.
efficiency. Many reasons can be at the origin of this poor efficiency:
· Sample evaporation. Always close the seal in a proper and tight way, and if
possible avoid the use of cormer wells. Always use good quality seal material
as this might interfere with the Huorescence uptake.
using the SYBR? green melting curve to make sure that there is no primer-
dimers presence. In case they are present, it advised to redesign the new
primers.
260
7  Analysis and Troubleshooting
· Wrong annealing temperature. The annealing temperatures of primers and
probes should be as close as possible to optimum.
· Primer concentration: Use the recommended primer concentrations as dis-
cussed in Chapter 3 that would be suitable for your particular chemistry.
7.4 Summary: Optimised Real-Time PCR Assay
Theory given in this and previous chapters will help to determine if your real-time
naa uaua suaadxa ano ui padde aq o Apeai pue pasndo si Aesse d
ating a new real-time PCR assay, it is advised to make a test with known template:
prepare a simple dilution series of a known template concentration and compare this
with your unknown sample concentration. The standard curves which are generated
in this test will help detenmining the reliability and robustness of the new assay.
Standard curves are constructed by plotting the log of the starting concentration of
unknown template against the Cr value obtained during the amplification of each
 Of your dilutions of the known template. When using a correct dilution factor, the
spacing of the fuorescence curves will be doubled with each amplification cycle.
There are 3 main parameters to be considered when assessing the performance
of a realtime PCR assay:
1. The linear standard curve: correlation coefficient (r) and coefficient of determi-
nation (R'):
These two values represent the linearity of the experimental data, and thus mea-
sure the variability across the replicates, and whether the amplification efficiency is
the same in the different dilution series (different starting template concentrations).
Slight differences in the CT values between replicates will lower r or R2 values. A
good standardised assay will normally produce an r whose absolute value is >0.990
or an R2 value >0.980.
2. Amplification efficiency (E):
Amplifcation effciency is calculated by using the formula: E = 10-l/slope
Ideally, a PCR reaction in the exponential phase will double its amplicon amount
above, 2 = 10-1/slope, the optimal slope of the standard curve will be -3.32. In most
by using the following formula:
%01 x (1 - 3) = ua14%
An efficiency close to 100% is a good indicator of a reliable, reproducible and
robust assay. In practice good % E values vary between 90% and 105%. Usually low
efficiencies are caused by poor primer design or poorly optimised reaction condi-
tions. Higher % E values (>105%) would be an indicator of (i) pipetting errors when
performing the dilution series, (ii) or co-amplification of non-specific products (iii)
or presence of primer-dimers.
Bibliography
261
A
4500
500
4000
4000
3500
3000
000
2500
500
2000
000
00S1
1000
1000
50
500
6810 12 14 16 1820222426283032343638404244 46485052
Cycle
B
-3.436X+40.055
Log Starting Quantity, copy number
Fig. 7.7 Generating a standard curve to assess reaction optimization. A standard curve was gen-
erated using a 10-fold dilution of a template amplified on the iCycler iQ real-time system. Each
dilution was assayed in triplicate. A, Amplification curves of the dilution series. B, Standard curve
with the Cr plotted against the log of the starting quantity of template for each dilution. The equa-
tion for the regression line and the r value are shown above the graph. The calculated amplification
efficiency was 95.4%. (Courtesy of Bio-Rad)
Presence of inhibitors in the reaction could be refected by an increase in the
efficiency values - by causing a delay in the C figure, decreasing the absolute
value of the slope, and therefore the calculated efficiency increases (Fig. 7.7).
3.Replicates:
It is recommended the use of triplicates when performing Real Time PCR, and
the results obtained should be consistent. Representation of evenly distributed
amplification curves, and linear standard curve are showed in Fig. 7.7.
Bibliography
1.Hellemans, J, et al. 2o07. qBase relative quantification framework and software for man-
agement and automated analysis of real-time quantitative PCR data. Genome Biol., 8(2),
R19.
2.Vandesompele, J, De Preter, K, Pattyn, F, Poppe, B,Van Roy, N, De Paepe, A, Speleman,
F. 2002.Accurate normalization of real-time quantitative RT-PCR data by geometric averag-
ing of multiple internal control genes. Genome Biol., 3(7), research0034.1-research0034.11
262
7 Analysis and Troubleshooting
monitoring of DNA amplification reactions. Biotechnology, 11, 1026-30.
4. Morrison, TB, Weis, JJ, Wittwer, CT.1998. Quantification of low-copy transcripts by contin-
uous SYBR? Green I monitoring during amplification. BioTechniques, 24, 954-62.
5.Malinen, E, Kassinen,A, Rinttila,T, Palva,A. 2003. Comparison of real-time PCR with
SYBR? Green I or 5'-nuclease assays and dot-blot hybridization with rDNA-targeted
oligonucleotide probes in quantification of selected faecal bacteria. Microbiology, 149,
269-77.
6. Bustin, SA. 20o0. Absolute quantification of mRNA using real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction assays. J Mol. Endocrinol., 25, 169-93.
7. Vandesompele, J, De Paepe, A, Speleman, F. 2002. Elimination of primer-dimer artifacts and
genomic coamplification using a two-step SYBR green I real-time RT-PCR.Anal. Biochem.,
303,95-8
8.Souaze, F, Ntodou-Thome, A, Tran, CY, Rostene, W, Forgez, P. 1996. Quantitative RT-PCR:
limits and accuracy. BioTechniques, 21,280-5.
9.Giulietti,A,Overbergh,L,Valckx,D, Decallonne,B,Bouillon, R,Mathieu, C. 2001.An
Methods,25,386-401
10. Livak, KJ, Schmittgen, TD. 2001. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time
quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) method. Methods, 25, 402-8.
11. Marino, JH, Cook, P Miller, KS. 2003. Accurate and statistically veriffed quantification of rel-
ative mRNA abundances using SYBRW Green I and real-time RT-PCR. J Immunol. Methods,
283, 291-306.
12.Pfaff, MW. 2001. A new mathematical model for relative quantification in real-time RT-PCR
Nucleic Acids Res., 29,45.
13. Freeman, W-M, Walker, SJ, Vrana, KE. 1999. Quantitative RT-PCR: pitfalls and potential.
BioTechniques,26,112-15.
14. Peirson, SN, Butler, JN, Foster, RG. 2003. Experimental validation of novel and conventional
approaches to quantitative real-time PCR data analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 73.
15. Klein, D. 2002. Quantification using real-time PCR technology: applications and limitations.
Trends Mol. Med., 8, 257-60.
16. Pfaff, MW, Horgan, GW, Dempfle, L. 2002. Relative expression software tool (REST) for
group-wise comparison and statistical analysis of relative expression results in real-time PCR
Nucleic Arids Res., 30, 36.
17. Ririe, KM, Rasmussen, RP, Wittwer, CT. 1997. Product differentiation by analysis of DNA
melting curves during the polymerase chain reaction. Anal. Biochem., 245,154-60.
18. Lekanne Deprez, RH, Fijnvandraat, AC, Ruijter, JM, Moorman, AF. 2002. Sensitivity and
accuracy of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction using SYBR green I depends
on cDNA synthesis conditions. Anal. Biorhem., 307, 63-69.
19. Wu, DY, Ugozzoli, L, Pal, BK, Qian, J, Wallace, RB. 1991. The effect of temperature
and oligonucleotide primer length on the specificity and efficiency of amplification by the
polymerase chain reaction. DNA Cell Biol., 10, 233-8.
20. Tichopad, A, Didier, A, Pfaff, MW. 2004. Inhibition of real-time RT-PCR quantification due
to tissue-specific contaminants. Mol. Cell Probes, 18, 45-50.
21. Yuan, JS, Feng Chen, AR, Stewart, CN. 2006. Statistical analysis of real-time PCR data. BMC
Bioinformatics,7, 85.
22. Sabek, O, Dorak, MT, Kotb, M, Gaber, AO, Gaber, L. 2002. Quantitative detection of
T-cell activation markers by real-time PCR in renal transplant rejection and correlation with
histopathologic evaluation. Transplantation, 74(5), 701-7
23. Troubleshooting
 24. http://www3.appliedbiosystems.com/cms/groups/mcb_support/documents/generaldocuments
/cms_042997.pdf
 25. http://www.abgene.com/downloads/Guide_QPCR-probe.pdf
Bibliography
263
26.
http://www.protocol-online.org/prot/Molecular_Biology/PCR/Real-Time_PCR/
27.
http://www.ambion.com/techlib/tn/102/17.html
28.
Chapter 8
Specifications for PCR Machines
Note: SYBR is a trademark of Invitrogen Corporation. Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc. is licensed by
Invitrogen Corporation to sell reagents containing SYBR Green I for use in real-time PCR, for
research purposes only.
E.A. Pestana et al., Early, Rapid and Sensitive Veterinary Molerular Diagnostics -
265
Real Time PCR Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7_8,
Copyright @ International Atomic Energy Agency 2010
Published by Springer Science+Business Media B.V., Dordrecht 2010. All Rights Reserved.
266
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
more accurate quantitation
 DNA engine opticon@ 2
Up to 3°C/s
Peltier block
96 LEDs
PMT
or 2
7
x
一
√ (can be changed on site by
/-Gene expression macro
3.3*C/s heating and 2.0°C/s
Tungsten-halogen lamp
for more accurate
iQTM5 (V2.0)
quantitation
customer)
Peltier block
cooling
Up to 5
√-Gene Expression macro for
 more accurate quantitation
3.3"C/s heating and 2.0°C/s
Tungsten-halogen lamp
MyiQTM (V2.0)
Peltier block
Bio-RAD
cooling
CCD
Multiple reference gene
 Interchangeable filters
Emission (detection)
Adjustable ramp rate
Excitation channels 
Gradient function 
 normalisation
Maufacturer
Appearance
Light source
channels
Ramp rate
Detector
Model
Targets
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
267
 2 Photomultiplier tubes (PMT)
96-well LED aIray illuminated
96-well plate or 12 × 0.2 mL
 DNA engine opticon@ 2
1 well at a time (3 s for
96-well plate read)
10-100μL
8-tube
29 kg
imultaneous (data collected
 Comparison of up to 5000
CCD Camera+intensifier
from all wells at same
MyiQ/iQ5 Soft 2.0 (SE)
(highest sensitivity/
"All Candidates"
iQTM5 (V2.0)
96-well plate
functionality
15-100 μL
accuracy)
samples
(wy
17.6 Kg
X
Simultaneous (data collected
from all wells at same time)
"All Candidates" functionality
 Comparison of up to 5000
MyiQ/iQ5 Soft 2.0 (SE)
CCD camera (highest
sensitivity/accuracy)
MyiQTM (V2.0)
 96-well plate
15-100μL
Bio-RAD
17.6 Kg
samples
 method/accuracy/uniformity
ROX reference dye needed
Sample volume range
Detection method
Additional features
Heating/cooling
Sample format
Data collection
Maufacturer
Model
Software
Model
Weight
268
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
 8-tube, regular and low profle
and Gene expression macro 
patent
6 colored LED shuttle
pending Peltier block
 Filtered photodiodes
Peltier block
vessels
10-50 μL
o
6
/ - Gene expression macro
48-well plate or 12 × 0.2 mL
Filtered photodiodes
48-well LED array
for more accurate 
MiniOpticon TM
quantitation
Up to 2.5°C/s
Peltier block
10-100μL
8-tube
2
/-Gene expression macro for
 more accurate quantitation
96-wellplate or 12 × 0.2 mL
/ (can be changed by
 Filtered photodiodes
I colored LEDs
Chromo 4TM
Up to 3°C/s
Peltier block
10-100 mL
Bio-RAD
Up to 4
8-tube
4
:0
Multiple reference gene
Heating/cooling method
Interchangeable filters
Sample volume range
Emission (detection)
Gradient function
 normalisation
Sample format
Maufacturer
Appearance
channels
Ramp rate
Detector
Targets
Model
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
269
 LED shuttle, 96-well detection
(12 s for 5 color, 3 s fast scan
 Security Edition. Comparison
import fles from all B/R real
photonic shuttel (prewarmed).
normalization. No passive
Patent pending reduced mass
block.Factory calibrated
transfer via e-mail; USB
Drive; Network enabeled
Hard ware and software
time PCR instruments
reference needed
channel)
~20kg
x
array fire illuminate 1 well
at a time (9 s for 2color
 Smallest Real Time PCR
 Instrument World Wide
48-well plate read)
 Opticon monitor 3.1
18 × 32×33 cm
MiniOpticonTM
Photodiodes
6.8kg
illumination of 4 wells at a
Opticon monitor 3.1
Chromo 4TM
Photodiodes
{PTC-200}
Bio-RAD
time
ROX reference dye needed
Dimensions (W × D × H)
Detection Method
 Additional features
 method/accuracy/
Data collection
Heating/cooling
Maufacturer
uniformity
Weight
Software
Model
270
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
3 targets + ROX normalisation
1.1°C/s heating and 1.1°C/s
Peltier block
 96-well plate
cooling
7300
CCD
XX
x
"VeriFlex block" 25"C (5"C
 3targets + ROX passive
+/-1.6"C/s standard and
single exitation LED
2.2°C/s FAST mode
Reference dye
"StepOnePlus"
3 + 1 for ROX
zone-to-zone)
Peltier block
96-well plate
Photodiode
Xx
+/-1.6"Cs standard and 2.2C/s
2 targets + ROX passive
Applied Biosystems
single exitation LED
Reference dye
2 + 1 for ROX
FAST mode
Photodiode
Peltier block 
48-well plate
"StepOne"
xX
Multiple reference gene
Heating/cooling method
Interchangeable filters
Excitation channels
Emission (detection)
Adjustable ramp rate
Gradient function
normalisation
Sample format
Maufacturer
Appearance
Light source
 channels
Ramp rate
Detector
Model
Targets
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
271
 ROX passive reference dye (occupies
ABI's TaqMan w. ROX chemistry
1 channel during run)
34 × 45 × 49 cm
CCD camera
Simultaneous
 25-100 mL
 Peltier block
7300
kg
ABI
96-well sequentiell LED array fire illuminate 1 well at a
LCD touchscreen, USB drive, remote monitoring and
ABI's TaqMan w. ROX chemistry
Peltier block/+/-0,25°C/+/-0,5°℃
 e-mail notification 
"StepOnePlus"
during run)
10-30 mL 
time
kg
ABI
忆
array fire illuminate 1 well
eference dye (occupies 1
Do5'0-/+/.52'0-/+/yp0
48-well sequentiell LED
drive, remote monitoring
ABI's TaqMan w. ROX
LCD touchscreen, USB
and e-mail notification
optional ROX passive
Applied Biosystems
channel during run)
25 × 51 × 43 cm
CCD camera
"StepOne"
10-30 μL
chemistry
at a time
23.6kg
Peltier
ABI
Dimensions (W × D × H)
Open platform chemistry
Sample volume range
ROX reference dye
Additional features
method/accuracy/
Detection method
Heating/cooling
Data collection
Maufacturer
uniformity
pepeeu
Weight
Software
Model
272
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
X(dynamically controlled by the
Stratagene Mx3000P MX3005P
Quartz tungsten-halogen lamp
Up to 4 or5
Peltier block
Stratagene
software)
4 or 5 
4or
"Fast cycling" block upgrade now
available: 96-well format only
3 targets + ROX normalisation
and difficult to replace)
Undetermined
Peltier block
7900HT
CCD
XX
X
4 targets + ROX nommalisation
Applied Biosystems
Undetermined
Peltier block
7500
Lamp
xx
Multiple reference gene
Heating/cooling method
Interchangeable filters 
Adjustable ramp rate
Excitation channels
Gradient function
normalisation
Maufacturer
Appearance
channels
Ramprate
Detector
Model
8 Specifications for PCR Machines
273
Stratagene Mx3000P MX3005P
Photomultiplier tube (PMT)
Scanning (takes up to 18 s)
Optimised for 25 mL
× 46 × 43 cm
normalization
96-well plate
Peltier block
Stratagene
Stratagene
20kg
3
5-50 mL; varies with block format 
ABI's TaqMan w. ROX chemistry
1 channel during run)
96- and 384-well plate
125 × 84 × 64 cm 
CCD camera
Simultaneous
 Peltier block
7900HT
~80kg
ABI
(occupies 1 channel during
ABI's TaqMan w. ROX
Applied Biosystems
× 45 × 49 cm
 96-well plate
CCD camera
Simultaneous
25-100 mL
chemistry
Peltier block
7500
(un
4
ABI
 method/accuracy/uniformity
ROX reference dye needed
(H ×( × M) suoisuw
Open platform chemistry
Detection method
Additional features
Heating/cooling
Sample format
Data collection
Maufacturer
Software
Model
Weight
274
 Specifications for PCR Machines
10°C/s - but variable (depends on 
Variable but not controllable
ambient temperature)
Rotor-Gene 3000
(0.15 s)
Corbett
Up to 4
PMT
6
xx
Fast ramping, but no detailed
LightCycler 480
information
Xenon lamp
Up to 5
CCD
X
Variable but not controllable
and difficult to replace)
LightCycler 2.0
temperature)
C
Roche
PMT
Interchangeable filters
Multiple reference gene
Adjustable ramp rate
Excitation channels
normalisation
Maufacturer
Appearance
Light source
 channels
Ramp rate
Detector
Targets
Model
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
275
36 (0.2 mL thin-walled tubes)
or 72 (0.1 mL strip tubes)
Photomultiplier tube (PMT)
Carousel spins samples past
Air heated/cooled sample
Air heated/cooled sample
Vary with rotor formats
detector (0.15 s)
3× 48 × 31.5 cm
Rotor-Gene 3000
carousel
carousel
Corbett
17kg
Corbett
x
3
20-100 μL (96 well) 5-20
X (tied to LC chemistry)
Peltier block with special
Liquid tech. for cooling
96- and 384-well plate
0×0× OL
LightCycler480
Simultaneous
Roche LC soft
Peltier block
59kg
Air heated/cooled sample
Air heated/cooled sample
(tied to LC chemistry)
32 capillary carousel
× 30 × 40 cm
LightCycler 2.0
detector (5 s)
Roche LC soft
Photohybrid
carousel
10-20 mL
carousel
19.2kg
等
X
ROX reference dye needed
Dimensions (W × D × H)
Heating/cooling method
Heating/cooling method/
Sample volume range
accuracy/uniformity
Additional features
Gradient function
Detection method
Sample format
Maufacturer
Model
Weight
276
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
470 nm blue LED array 96
"CPM" photo-multipliers
Mastercyclerep
optical fibers
PMT
2
470 nm blue LED array 96
Mastercycler ep realplex2
"CPM" photo-multipliers
 optical fibers
Eppendorf
PMT
sda aa  - s/ 1s
 on ambient temperature)
detector (0.15 s)
Rotor-Gene 6000
Corbett
Up to 6
PMT
Multiple reference gene
Interchangeable filters 
Emission (detection)
Excitation channels
 normalisation
Maufacturer
Appearance
Light source
channels
Ramp rate
Detector
Targets
Model
8
 Specifications for PCR Machines
277
Photomultiplier (CPM)
1 well at a time (? s for
 96-well plate read)
Mastercycler ep
Peltier block
25-100 mL
Peltier block
Eppendorf
tube
24 kg
午
well at a time (? s for
Photomultiplier (CPM)
96-well plate read)
× 41 × 39.6 cm
Peltier block
25-100 mL
Peltier block
Eppendorf
Eppendorf
tube
Variable but not controllable
(not possible with carousel)
Photomultiplier tube (PMT)
Air heated/cooled sample
Air heated/cooled sample
100 (0.1 mL carussel)
Vary with rotor formats
detector (0.15 s)
1×8x
Rotor-Gene 6000
carousel
carousel
Corbett
Corbett
2
ROX reference dye needed
Open platform chemistry
Heating/cooling method/
Adjustable ramp rate
Sample volume range
accuracy/uniformity
Additional features
Gradient function 
Detection method
Sample format
Data collection
Maufacturer
Weight
Software
Model
278
8Specifications for PCR Machines
Notice regarding Bio-Rad thermal cyclers and real-time systems: Chapter 8
is intended as a guideline to demonstrate similarities and differences. It is not a
complete or exhaustive guide and the authors do not intend preference.
 Purchase of this instrument conveys a limited non-transferable immunity from
suit for the purchaser's own intermal research and development and for use in applied
fields other than Human In Vitro Diagnostics under one or more of U.S. Patents Nos.
5,656,493, 5,333,675, 5,475,610 (claims 1, 44, 158, 160-163 and 167 only), and
6,703,236 (claims 1-7 only), or corresponding claims in their non-U.S. counterparts,
estoppel under any other patent claim, such as claims to apparatus, reagents, kits, or
methods such as 5' nuclease methods. Further infonmation on purchasing licenses
may be obtained by contacting the Director of Licensing, Applied Biosystems, 850
Lincoln Centre Drive, Foster City, Califormia 94404, USA.
Bio-Rad's real-time thermal cyclers are licensed real-time thermal cyclers under
Applera's United States Patent No. 6,8 14,934 B1 for use in research and for all other
fields except the fields of human diagnostics and veterinary diagnostics.
Glossary of Terms
A
Absolute quantification The absolute quantification assay is used to quantitate
umknown samples by interpolating their quantity from a standard curve
Allelic discrimination assay Assays designed to type for gene variants
AFLPAmplified fragment length polymorphism
Agarose gel electrophoresis  A method for separating nucleic acids (DNA or
RNA) within a gel made of agarose in a suitable buffer under the influence of an
electrical field. Suitable for separation of large fragments of nucleic acid, separation
is based primarily upon the size of the nucleic acid
Allele One of several altermate forms of a gene occupying a given locus on a
chromosome or plasmid
Amino acids  The 20 basic building blocks of proteins, consisting of the basic
formula NH2-CHR-COOH, where "R" is the side chain that defines the amino
acid: Nonpolar side chains (hydrophobic), G Gly Glycine, A Ala Alanine, V Val
Valine, I Ile Isoleucine, L Leu Leucine, F Phe Phenylalanine, P Pro Proline, M
Met Methionine, W Trp Tryptophan, C Cys Cysteine, Noncharged polar side chains
(hydrophilic), S Ser Serine, T Thr Threonine, Y Tyr Tyrosine, N Asn Asparagine, Q
Gln Glutamine, Acidic side chains (very polar, hydrophilic), D Asp Aspartic Acid,
E Glu Glutamic Acid, Basic side chains (very polar, hydrophilic), K Lys Lysine, R
Arg Arginine, H His Histidine
Amino terminus Refers to the NH2 end of a peptide chain (by custom drawn at
the left of a protein sequence)
Amplicon The product' of double-stranded DNA created during PCR
Amplification The production of additional copies of a chromosomal sequence,
found either as intrachromosomal or extrachromosomal DNA. Also refers to the in
vitro process in the polymerase chain reaction
E.A.Pestana et al., Early, Rapid and Sensitive Veterinary Molecular Diagnostics 
279
Real Time PCR Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-90-481-3132-7,
Copyright @ International Atomic Energy Agency 2010
Published by Springer Science+Business Media B.V, Dordrecht 2010. All Rights Reserved.
280
Glossary of Terms
Amplification plot The plot of Fluorescence signal versus cycle numberwhich
correlates with the initial amount of target nucleic acid during the exponential phase
of PCR
that is defined by a pair of PCR primers (these primer pairs are sometimes called
amplimers)
AMV Avian myeloblastosis virus RT
newly synthesized, translocating protein within the lipid bilayer membrane of the
endoplasmic reticulum
via hydrogen bonding
Annealing temperature  The temperature at which a length of single-strand
(heat denatured) DNA or RNA will anneal to a complementary strand. Lower
Antisense strand (or primer) Refers to the RNA or DNA strand of a duplex
molecule that is complementary to that encoding a polypeptide. More specifically,
the DNA strand that serves as template for the synthesis of RNA and which is com.
plementary to it. "Antisense oligonucleotides" hybridize to mRNA, and are used to
prime cDNA synthesis
Avidin A glycoprotein that binds to biotin with very high affinity (Kd = 10-15)
B
Back mutation Reverse the effect of a point or frame-shift mutation that had
altered a gene; thus it restores the wild-type phenotype (see REVERTANT)
Bacteriophage A virus that infects bacteria; often simply called a phage. The
phages that are most often used in molecular biology are the E. coli viruses lambda
MT3andT"7
Base Adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G) and thymine (T) are the molecules
composing DNA. These are bases in DNA that form two pairs of complemen.
tary molecules, hydrogen bonds can link adenine to thymine (A_T) and guanine
to cytosine (G_C). If the sequence of bases matches a complementary sequence in
a second strand of DNA the bonds can hold the two strands together; thus forming
double-stranded
Base pair (bp)  One pair of complementary nucleotides within a duplex strand of
a nucleic acid (BP) and 103 bp = kb) Under Watson-Crick rules, these pairs consist
of one pyrimidine and one purine: i.e., C-G, A-T (DNA) or A-U (RNA). However,
"noncanonical" base pairs (e.g., G-U) are common in RNA secondary structure
Glossary of Terms
281
Baseline The initial cycles of PCR during which there is little change in fuores-
cence signal (usually cycles 3-15)
Blunt end A terminus of a duplex DNA molecule that ends precisely at a base pair
with no overhang (unpaired nucleotide) in either strand. Some but not all restriction
endonucleases leave blunt ends after cleaving DNA. Blunt-ended DNA can be lig-
ated nonspecifically to other blunt-ended DNA molecules (compare with STTCKY
END)
Box Refers to a short nucleic acid consensus sequence or motif that is univer-
sal within kingdoms of organisms. Examples of DNA boxes are the Pribow box
(TATAAT) for RNA polymerase, the Hogness box (TATA) that has a similar function
in eukaryotic organisms, and the homeo box. RNA boxes have also been described.
viral RNAs
BSA Bovine serum albumin
C
CAP A 7-methyl guanosine residue linked 5' to 5' through a triphosphate bridge
to the 5' end of eukaryotic mRNAs; facilitates initiation of translation
Carboxyl terminus  Refers to the COOH end of a peptide chain (by custom drawn
at the right of a protein sequence)
cDNA Complementary DNA. A DNA molecule that was originally copied from
to describe double-stranded DNA that originated from a single-stranded RNA
molecule, even though only one strand of the DNA is truly complementary to the
RNA
cDNA Library A collection of cDNA fragments, each of which has been cloned
into a separate vector molecule
Chaperone proteins  A series of proteins present in the endoplasmic reticulum that
guide the proper folding of secreted proteins through a complex series of binding
and release reactions
of clones can be identified by hybridisation
Clone Describes a large number of cells, viruses, or molecules that are identical
and derived from a single ancestral cell, virus or molecule. The tenm can be used to
refer to the process of isolating single cells or viruses and letting them proliferate
(as in a hybridoma clone, which is a "biological clone"), or the process of isolat.
ing and replicating a piece of DNA by recombinant DNA techniques ("molecular
282
Glossary of Terms
clone"). The use of the word as a verb is acceptable for the former meaning, but not
necessarily the latter meaning
CIS  As used in molecular biology, an interaction between two sites that are located
within the same molecule. However, a cis-acting protein can either be one that acts
only on the molecule of DNA from which it was expressed, or a protein that acts or
itself (e.g., self-proteolysis)
Cistron A nucleic acid segment corresponding to a polypeptide chain, including
the relevant translational start (initiation) and stop (tenmination) codons
Codon A nucleotide triplet (sequence of three nucleotides) that specifies a specific
amino acid, or a translational start or stop
Codon bias The tendency for an organism or virus to use certain codons more
than others to encode a particular amino acid. An important determinant of codon
bias is the guanosine-cytosine (GC) content of the genome. An organism that has a
relatively low G+C content of 30% will be less likely to have a G or C at the third
position of a codon (wobble position) than a A or T to specify an amino acid that
can be represented by more than one codon
Competent
tBacterialcells that are capable of accepting foreign extra
chromosomal DNA. There are a variety of processes by which cells may be made
coimpetent
Ct (thershold cycle) The fractional cycle number at which the fuorescence passes
the fixed threshold. It is inversely correlated to the logarithm of the initial copy
number. The Ct value assigned to a particular well thus refects the point during the
CFT Complement Fixation Test. Serological technique whereby a fixed system
of sheep red blood cells, antibody to sheep red blood cells and complement (from
  si ss ae ss sisoy  s  si (as id a
the addition of antigen/antibody reactions to the titrated complement. Any reaction
uses (fixes) the complement and this is assessed in the pre-titrated system where a
lack of heamolysis indicates extent of test antigen/antibody reaction
Consensus sequence A linear series of nucleotides, commonly with gaps and
some degeneracy that define common features of homologous sequences or recog-
nition sites for proteins that act on or bind to nucleic acids
Conservative substitution  Nucleotide mutation that alters the amino acid
sequence of the protein, but which causes the substitution of one amino acid
with another that has a side chain with similar charge/polarity characteristics (see
AMINO ACID). The size of the side chain may also be an important consideration.
Conservative mutations are generally considered unlikely to profoundly alter the
sdaxa  a aa g daod  n   as
Glossary of Terms
283
Conserved  Similar in structure or function
Contamination Extraneous DNA present in the sample or reaction that will be
amplified and give a false positive result
Contig A series of two or more individual DNA sequence determinations that over-
lap. In a sequencing project the contigs get larger and larger until the gaps between
the contigs fill
Cosmid  A genetically engineered plasmid containing bacteriophage lambda pack-
aging signals and potentially very large pieces of inserted foreign DNA (up to 50 kb)
that can be replicated in bacterial cells. Cosmid cloning allows for isolation of DNA
fragments that are larger than those that can be cloned in conventional plasmids
D
Database search Once an open reading frame or a partial amino acid sequence
has been determined, the investigator compares the sequence with others in the
databases using a computer and a search algorithm. This is usually done in a pro-
tein database such as PIR or Swiss-Prot. Nucleic acid sequences are in GenBank
and EMBL databases. The search algorithms most commonly used are BLAST and
FASTA
DC Direct current
Degeneracy Refers to the fact that multiple different codons in mRNA can specify
the same amino acid in an encoded protein
Delta Rn (ARn) The magnitude of the fuorescence signal generated during the
PCR at each time point
Denaturation  With respect to nucleic acids, refers to the conversion from
double-stranded to the single-stranded state, often achieved by heating or alkaline
conditions. This is also called "melting" DNA. With respect to proteins, refers to the
disruption of tertiary and secondary structure, often achieved by heat, detergents,
chaotropes, and sulfhydryl-reducing agents
Denaturing gel An agarose or acrylamide gel run under conditions that destroy
secondary or tertiary protein or RNA structure. For protein, this usually means the
inclusion of 2-ME (that reduces disulfide bonds between cysteine residues) and
  s  s         
sion of formaldehyde or glyoxal to destroy higher ordered RNA structures. In DNA
sequencing gels, urea is included to denature dsDNA to ssDNA strands. In dena-
turing gels, macromolecules tend to be separated on the basis of size and (to some
extent) charge, while shape and oligomerization of molecules are not important
Contrast with NATIVE GEL
Deoxyribonuclease (DNase) An enzyme that specifically catalyzes the hydrolysis
of DNA
284
Glossary of Terms
Deoxyribonucleotide Nucleotides that are the building blocks of DNA and that
lack the 2' hydroxyl moiety present in the ribonucleotides of RNA
DEPC Diethyl pyrocarbonate
Dideoxyribonucleotide (ddntp) A nucleotide (dATP, dTP, dCTP and dTTP) that
lacks both 3' and 2' hydroxyl groups. Such dideoxynucleotides can be added to a
growing nucleic acid chain, but do not then present a 3' -OH group that can support
(    )     Ha   ' o,
sequencing reactions (see DEOXYRIBO-NUCLEOTIDE)
method of Sanger and colleagues, based on the incorporation of chain terminating
dideox ynucleotides in a growing nucleic acid strand copied by DNA polymerase
Or reverse transcriptase from a DNA or RNA template. Separate reactions include
dideox ynucleotides containing A, C, G, or T bases. The reaction products represent
a collection of new-labelled DNA strands of varying lengths, all terminating with a
dideoxynucleotide at the 3' end (at the site of a complementary base in the template
nucleic acid), and are separated in a polyacrylamide/urea gel to generate a sequence
"ladder". This method is more commonly used than "Maxam-Gilbert" (chemical)
sequencing
same orientation in the same molecule of DNA; they are not necessarily adjacent
DMSO  Di methyl suphoxide
DNA ligase  An enzyme (usually from the T4 bacteriophage) that catalyzes for-
mation of a phosphodiester bond between two adjacent bases from double-stranded
DNA fragments. RNA ligases also exist, but are rarely used in molecular biology
DNA polymersase An enzyme that synthesizes a double stranded DNA molecule
using single strand DNA primer as template
Dot Blot DNA or RNA is simply spotted onto nitrocellulose or nylon membranes,
denatured and hybridized with a probe. Unlike Southem or northerm blots, there is no
separation of the target DNA or RNA by electrophoresis (size), and thus potentially
much less specificity
DOP PCR Degenerate Oligonucleotide Primer-PCR
sion; for example, the coding region is downstream from the initiation codon, toward
the 3' end of an mRNA molecule. Sometimes used to refer to a position within
a protein sequence, in which case downstream is toward the carboxyl end that is
synthesized after the amino end during translation
DsDNA-binding agent A molecule that emits fuorescence when bound to dsDNA
Glossary of Terms
285
Duplex A nucleic acid molecule in which two strands are base paired with each
other
Dynamie range The range of initial template concentrations over which accurate
Ct values are obtained
E
EDTA Ethylinediaminetatraacetic acid
Electroporation A method for introducing foreign nucleic acid into bacterial or
 a s    a    s   as
permeable to the nucleic acid. Also useful for introducing synthetic peptides into
yukaryotic cells
Efficiency of the reaction The efficiency of the reaction can be calculated by
the following equation: E = 10(-1/slope) -1. When the efficiency of the PCR is
90-100%, doubling of the amplicon is expected at each cycle
ELISA Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay. Very widely used group of meth-
Indirect, sandwich and competitive systems. Main serological tool for diagnosis.
Most methods employ microplate methods utilizing antigens or antibodies passively
attached to microplate wells. Separation of sequential reactions is easily made by
washing steps. Multichannel spectrophotometers make reading colour rapid
Elongation or extension Phase of PCR cycle following annealing of primer during
that the Taq polymerase manufactures a strand of DNA. The optimum temperature
depends on the enzyme used but is usually between 68 and 72?C
ELOSA Enzyme linked oligonucleotide sorbent assay
End labeling  The technique of adding a radioactively labeled group to one end (5
or 3' end) of a DNA strand
Endonuclease Cleaves bonds within a nucleic acid chain; they may be specific for
RNA or for single-stranded or double-stranded DNA. A restriction enzyme is a type
of endonuclease
End-point analysis Analysis of the data collected at the end-point phase. Usually
used in allelic discrimination assays (genotyping)
Enhancer A eukaryotic transcriptional control element that is a DNA sequence
that acts at some distance to enhance the activity of a specific promoter sequence.
Unlike promoter sequences, the position and orientation of the enhancer sequence
is generally not important to its activity
          h   o
experimental sample
286
Glossary of Terms
Exogenous control  This is a characterized RNA or DNA spiked into each sample
at a known concentration
Ethidium bromide Intercalates within the structure of nucleic acids in such a
used to visualize RNA or DNA in agarose gels placed on UV light boxes. Proper
precautions are required, because the ethidium bromide is highly mutagenic and
the UV light damaging to the eyes. Ethidium bromide is also included in cesium
chloride gradients during ultracentrifugation, to separate supercoiled circular DNA
from linear and relaxed circular DNA
Evolutionary clock  Defined by the rate at which mutations accumulate within a
given gene
Exon The portion of a gene that is actually translated into protein
Exonuclease An enzyme that hydroylses DNA beginning at one end of a strand,
releasing nucleotides one at a time (thus, there are 3' or 5' exonucleases)
Expression  Usually used to refer to the entire process of producing a protein from
pue uggiou leuone suen-isod uone sun uondosun sapnun gen 'aun e
possibly transport reactions
from inserted foreign DNA under specific controls. Often an inducer is used. The
vector always provides a promoter and often the transcriptional start site, ribosomal
binding sequence, and initiation codon. In some cases the product is a fusion protein
F
FAM 6-carboxy fuorescein. Most commonly used reporter dye at the 5' end of a
TaqMan? probe
Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)  The interaction between the
electronic excited states of two dye molecules. The excitation is transferred from
one (the donor) dye molecule to the other (the acceptor) dye molecule. FRET is
distance-dependent and occurs when the donor and the acceptor dye are in close
proximity
Footprinting A technique for identifying the site on a DNA (or RNA) molecule
that is bound by some protein by virtue of the protection afforded phosphodiester
bonds in this region against attack by nuclease or nucleolytic compounds
Frameshift mutation  A mutation (deletion or insertion, never a simple substitu-
tion) of one or more nucleotides but never a multiple of 3 nucleotides, that shortens
or lengthens a trinucleotide sequence representing a codon; the result is a shift from
one reading frame to another reading frame. The amino acid sequence of the protein
downstream of the mutation is completely altered, and may even be much shorter or
longer due to a change in the location of the first termination (stop) codon
Glossary of Terms
287
Fusion protein A product of recombinant DNA in which the foreign gene product
is juxtaposed ("fused") to either the carboxyl-terminal or amino-terminal portion of
a polypeptide encoded by the vector itself. Use of fusion proteins often facilitates
expression of otherwise lethal products and the purification of recombinant proteins
G
gDNA Genomic DNA. Double helix containing the genetic blueprint of the organ-
ism. DNA sugar phosphate "backbone"' molecules are joined by the pairing of bases,
thymine with adenine and cytosine with guanine. Hydrogen bonds fonm between the
complementary bases holding the two strands together
Gel electrophoresis  Amplicons of differing lengths can be separated by their
migration through an agarose gel whilst subject to an electrical field. The negatively
charged DNA molecules move at a rate that is inversely proportional to their size.
The DNA can be yybridizat by staining with a fuorescent dye and viewing under
UV light. The size of the amplicons is predicted by the positioning of the primers on
Confirmation can be provided by the use of specific probes to check the identity of
the band
Gel shift A method by which the interaction of a nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) with
a protein is detected. The mobility of the nucleic acid is monitored in an agarose gel
in the presence and absence of the protein: if the protein binds to the nucleic acid.
the complex migrates more slowly in the gel (hence "gel shift"). A "supershift'
allows determination of the specific protein, by virtue of a second shift in mobility
Gene Generally speaking, the genomic nucleotide sequence that codes for a par-
ticular polypeptide chain, including relevant transcriptional control sequences and
introns (if a eukaryote). However, the tenm is often loosely used to refer to only the
Gene conversion The alteration of all or part of a gene by a homologous donor
DNA that is itself not altered in the process
Genome The complete set of genetic information defining a particular animal,
plant, organism or virus
Genomie library A DNA library that contains DNA fragments hopefully repre-
senting each region of the genome of an organism, virus, etc, cloned into individual
vector molecules for subsequent selection and amplification. The DNA fragments
are usually very small in size compared with the genome. Such libraries are cDNA
libraries when prepared from RNA viruses
Genotype The genetic constitution of an organism; determined by its nucleic acid
sequence. As applied to viruses, the tenm implies a group of evolutionarily related
viruses possessing a defined degree of nucleotide sequence relatedness
288
Glossary of Terms
GLP Good laboratory practice
Glycoprotein A glycosylated protein
Glyeosylation The covalent addition of sugar yybridiz to N or O atoms present
in the side chains of certain amino acids of certain proteins, generally occurring
within the Golgi apparatus during secretion of a protein. Glycosylation sites are
only partially predictable by current computer searches for relevant motifs in pro-
tein sequence. Glycosylation may have profound but very unpredictable effects on
the folding, stability, and antigenicity of secreted proteins. Glycosylation is a prop-
erty of eukaryotic cells, and differs among different cell types (i.e., it may be very
different in yeast or insect cells used for protein expression, when compared with
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells)
H
HAHaemagglutination
 n d an a e a (xa   
(inverted) complementary sequences within a single strand of RNA or DNA
House keeping genes Genes that are widely expressed in abundance and are usu-
ally used as reference genes for normalization in real-time PCR with the assumption
of "constant expression"
Heteroduplex DNA  Generated by base pairing between complementary sin-
gle strands derived from different parental duplex molecules; heteroduplex DNA
molecules occur during genetic recombination in vivo and during hydridization of
different but related DNA strands in vitro. Since the sequences of the two strands
in a heteroduplex differ, the molecule is not perfectly base-paired; the melting tem-
 perature of a heteroduplex DNA is dependent upon the number of mismatched base
pairs
Homologous recombination The exchange of sequence between two related but
different DNA (or RNA) molecules, with the result that a new "chimeric" molecule
is created. Several mechanisms may result in recombination, but an essential
requirement is the existence of a region of homology in the recombination partners.
In DNA recombination, breakage of single strands of DNA in the two recombination
partners is followed by joining of strands present in opposing molecules, and may
involve specific enzymes. Recombination of RNA molecules may occur by other
mechanisms
Homology Indicates similarity between two different nucleotide or amino acid
sequences, often with potential evolutionary significance. It is probably better to use
more quantitative and descriptive terms such as nucleotide “identity” or, in the case
of proteins, amino acid "identity" or "relate dness" (the latter refers to the presence of
amino acids residues with similar polarity/charge characteristics at the same position
within a protein)
Glossary of Terms
289
Hybridisation The process of base pairing leading to formation of duplex RNA or
DNA or RNA-DNA molecules
Hybridisation probes One of the main fHuorescence-monitoring systems for DNA
Hydrolysis probes Probes that are hydrolyzed by the 5' endonuclease activity of
Taq Polymerase during PCR
Hot start To yybridiz mismatched primers interfering with the PCR the reagents
are heated to above the annealing temperature before all the reaction components
are allowed to mix. This is often achieved by using wax to separate the primers
from the enzyme, the reaction components can mix only when the wax melts thus
avoiding the elongation of non-specifically bound primers. Altematively, enzymes
are now available that will only elongate at elevated temperatures
Hydrophilicity plot A computer plot that examines the relative summed hyropho-
window of about 6 amino acid residues) along the primary sequence of a polypep-
tide chain. Values for the contribution of sidechains of each the 20 common amino
acids to hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity have been developed by Hopp & Woods, and
Kyte & Doolittle, and these plots are often named after these workers. Generally,
hydrophobic regions of proteins are considered likely to be in the interior of the
native protein, while hydrophilic domains are likely to be exposed on the surface
I
run on its own to monitor the presence of inhibitors in the template
Immunoblot See Westerm blot
Inducer A small molecule, such as IPTG, that triggers gene transcription by
binding to a regulator protein, such as LacZ
Inhibition  The exponential nature of PCR means that a small change in the effi-
ciency of each cycle can result in a large difference to the final product. Inhibition
may result from chemical interference in the action of polymerase or other compo-
Altermatively, a large excess of DNA in the sample may prevent efficient amplifica
tion of the target and further dilution of sample is required. Checks for inhibition
can be made by adding a known target to the sample to demonstrate the efficiency
of the amplification
Initiation codon  The codon at which translation of a polypeptide chain is ini
tiated. This is usually the frst AUG triplet in the mRNA molecule from the 5'
end, where the ribosome binds to the cap and begins to scan in a 3' direction.
However, the surrounding sequence context is important and may lead to the first
290
Glossary of Terms
AUG being bypassed by the scanning ribosome in favor of an altemative, down
stream AUG. Also called a "start codon". Occasionally other codons may serve as
initiation codons, e.g. UUG
Insert  Foreign DNA placed within a vector molecule
Insertion sequence  A small bacterial transposon carrying only the genetic func-
tions involved in transposition. There are usually inverted repeats at the ends of the
insertion sequence
 Intron  Intervening sequences in eukaryotic genes that do not encode protein but
which are transcribed into RNA. Removed from pre-mRNA during nuclear splicing
reactions
Inverted repeats  Two copies of the same or related sequence of DNA repeated
in opposite orientation on the same molecule (contrast with DIRECT REPEATS).
Adjacent inverted repeats constitute a palindrome
In situ PCR PCR of DNA within histological specimens
IRE PCR Interspersed repetitive element (IRE)-PCR
ISOA network of nationalstandardsinstitutes from148 countriesworking in
partnership with intermational organizations, govermments, industry, business and
consumer representatives
Isothermal amplification  Amplification step proceeds at one temperature and
does not require thermocycling apparatus
K
Kilobase Unit of 1o00 nucleotide bases, either RNA or DNA
Klenow fragment The large fragment of E. coli DNA polymerase I that lacks
5' -> 3' exonuclease activity. Very useful for sequencing reactions, that proceed in a
5' > 3' fashion (addition of nucleotides to templated free 3'ends of primers)
Knock-out The excision or inactivation of a gene within an intact organism or
even animal (e.g., "knock-out mice"), usually carried out by a method involving
homologous recombination
L
LCR Ligase chain reaction. Amplification of DNA by repeated "cycling"reactions
using ligase enzyme to "ligate" or "join” pairs of primers. Covered by patents owned
by Abbott Laboratories (USA). A range of diagnostic kits is available
Library A set of cloned fragments together representing with some degree of
redundancy the entire genetic complement of an organism (see cDNA LlBRARY)
GENOMIC LIBRARY)
Ligase See DNA ligase
Glossary of Terms
291
Ligation See DNA ligase
Linear view Amplification plot view displayed using exact △Rn values on the
Y-axis. Used for threshold setting
Linkage The tendency of genes to be inherited together as a result of their
relatively close proximity on the same chromosome, or location on the same plasmid
Linker A short oligodeoxyribonucleotide, usually representing a specific restric-
tion endonuclease recognition sequence, that may be ligated onto the tenmini of a
 DNA molecule to facilitate cloning. Following the ligation reaction, the product is
digested with the endonuclease, generating a DNA fragment with the desired sticky
or blunt ends
Lipofectin  A commercially marketed liposome suspension that is mixed with
DNA or RNA to facilitate uptake of the nucleic acid by eukaryotic cells (see
TRANSFECTION)
Long PCR PCR in which the product is several kilobases long. Using cocktails of
enzymes products of up to 40 kb have been accurately manufactured
LSD
M
mRNA Messenger RNA
Melting  The dissociation of a duplex nucleic acid molecule into single strands,
usually by increasing temperature. See DENATURATION
Melting curve analysis When DNA-binding dyes are used, as the fragment is
heated, a sudden decrease in fuorescence is detected when Tm is reached (due to
dissociation of DNA strands and release of the dye). This point is determined from
the inflection point of the melting curve or the melting peak of the derivative plot
MgClz  Magnesium chloride
Mg 2+  Magnesium ion
Missense mutation  A nucleotide mutation that results in a change in the amino
acid sequence of the encoded protein (contrast with SILENT MUTATION)
Minor groove binders (MGBs) These dsDNA-binding agents are attached to the
3' end of TaqMan? probes to increase the Tm value (by stabilization of hybridiza-
tion) and to design shorter probes. Longer probes reduce design Hexibility and are
less sensitive to mismatch discrimination. MGBs also reduce background fuores-
cence and increase dynamic range due to increased efficiency of reporter quenching
(these probes use non-fluorescent quenchers at the 3' end). By allowing the use of
shorter probes with higher Tm values, MGBs enhances mismatch discrimination in
genotyping assays
M-MuLV< Moloney murine leukemia virus RT
292
Glossary of Terms
fanked by two inverted repeats. Reporter and quencher dyes are attached to each
end of the molecule and remain in close contact unless sequence-specific binding
Motif A recurring pattem of short sequence of DNA, RNA, or protein, that usually
serves as a recognition site or active site. The same motif can be found in a variety
of types of organisms mRNA-A cytoplasmic RNA that serves directly as the source
of code for protein synthesis
Multicistronie message  An mRNA transcript with more than one cistron and thus
encoding more than one polypeptide. These generally do not occur in eukaryotic
organisms, due to differences in the mechanism of translation initiation
Multicopy plasmids Present in bacteria at amounts greater than one per chro-
mosome. Vectors for cloning DNA are usually multicopy; there are sometimes
advantages in using a single copy plasmid
endonucleases. This serves as a convenient site into which foreign DNA may be
inserted
Multiplex PCR PCR with two or more independent sets of primers in the same
reaction tube
N
N terminus See AMINO TERMINUS
Native gel An electrophoresis gel run under conditions that do not denature
proteins (i.e., in the absence of SDS, urea, 2-mercaptoethanol, etc.)
Nested PCR (n-PCR) A very sensitive method for yybridization of DNA, that
takes part of the product of a single PCR reaction (after 30-35 cycles), and sub-
jects it to a new round of PCR using a different set of PCR primers which are
nested within the region fanked by the original primer pair (see Polymerase Chain
Reaction)
Nick In duplex DNA, this refers to the absence of a phosphodiester bond between
two adjacent nucleotides on one strand
Nick translation A method for introducing labeled nucleotides into a double.
stranded DNA molecule that involves making small nicks in one strand with Dnase,
and then repairing with DNA polymerase I
Nonconservative Substitution A mutation that results in the substitution of one
amino acid within a polypeptide chain with an amino acid belonging to a different
polarity/chargegroup
Nonsence codon See stop codon
Glossary of Terms
293
Nonsense mutation A change in the sequence of a nucleic acid that causes a
Nontranslated RNA (NTR) The segments located at the 5' and 3' ends of a mRNA
translational control elements
[   e psxa si n a g e g a  s
to normalize the gene expression results for variable template amount or template
quality
Northern blot RNA molecules are separated by electrophoresis (usually in an
agarose gel) on the basis of size, then transferred to a solid-phase support (nitro-
cellulose paper or suitable other membrane) and detected by yybridization with a
labeled probe (see SOUTHERN BLOT, WESTERN BLOT)
No template control (NTC) NTC includes all of the RT-PCR reagents except the
RNA template. No product should be synthesized in the NTC or NAC; if a product
is amplified, this indicates contamination (fuorescent or PCR products) or presence
 s     s  a      
aaxa     a s s
Nucleoside The composite sugar and purine or pyrimidine base that is present in
nucleotides which are the basic building blocks of DNA and RNA. Compare with
NUCLEOTIDE: Nucleoside = Base + Sugar
Nucleotide The composite phosphate, sugar, and purine or pyrimidine base that
     s       a 
nucleotides are adenylic acid, guanylic acid (contain purine bases), and cytidylic
NASBA Nucleic Acid Sequence-Based Amplification. Amplification of RNA
using RNA polymerase. Developed by Cangene Corporation (Canada), also licensed
(       +  = )   
0
OLE
Office Intemational des Epizootie, World Organisation for Animal health.
12, rue de Prony, 75017 Paris, France. Email : oie@o ie.int; Web Site: www.oie.int
Oligodeoxyribonucleotide  A short, single-stranded DNA molecule, generally
15-50 nucleotides in length, that may be used as a primer yybridizationsation probe.
Oligodeox yribonucleotides are synthesized chemically under automated conditions
OligonucleotideSee OLIGODEOXYRIBONUCLEOTIDE
Oncogene One of a number of genes believed to be associated with the malignant
onc) but also present in cells (c-onc)
294
Glossary of Terms
One-tube nested PCR Both reactions in a nested PCR are performed concurrently
in one tube without the need to add further reagents
Open reading frame A region within a reading frame of an mRN" molecule that
potentially encodes a polypeptide; and that does not contain a translational stop
codon (see READING FRAME)
d o s d oss e m  na u as a 
transcription from initiating at the adjacent promoter
Operon A complete unit of bacterial gene expression and regulation, including the
(s)sonpoud auag oe[nga1 Aq
Origin A site within a DNA sequence of a chromosome, plasmid, or non-
integrated virus at which replication of the DNA is initiated
    s  aa  x   s  
nucleotides in one of the two strands (hence eith'r a 3'or 5' overhang). Cleavage
of DNA with many restriction endonucleases leaves such overhangs (see STICKY
END)
P
Package In recombinant DNA procedures, refers to the step of incorporation
of cosmid or other lambda vector DNA with an insert into a phage head for
transduction of DNA into host
Page Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
Palindromic sequence A nucleotide sequence that is the same when read in either
direction, usually consisting of adjacent inverted repeats. Restriction endonuclease
recognition sites are palindromes:
Passive reference dye A fuorescence dye that provides an intermal reference
software, to correct for fuctuations from well to well caused by changes in
concentration or volume
PCR See Polymerase Chain Reaction
PCR-ELIS PCR Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
PfuPlaque forming units
Phenotype  The appe arance of other characteristics of an organism resulting from
the interaction of its genetic constitution with the environment
Phosphatase alkaline An enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of phosphomo
noesters of the 5' nucleotides. Used to dephosphorylate (remove phosphate groups
from) the 5' ends of DNA or RNA molecules, to facili'ate 5' end-labeling with 32P
Glossary of Terms
295
added back by T4 polynucleotide kinase; or to dephosphorylate the 5' ends of DNA
Phosphodiester bond  The covalent bond between the 3' hydroxyl in the sugar
ring of one nucleotide and the 5' phosphate group of the sugar ring of the adjacent
nucleotide residue within a nucleic acid: 5'-Ribose- 3' -O - P(O)2 - O - 5'- Ribose
-3'etc
Phosphorylation The addition of a phosphate monoester to a macromolecule, cat-
alyzed by a specific kinase enzyme. With respect to proteins, certain amino acid
side chains (serine, threonine, tyrosine) are subject to phosphorylation catalyzed by
protein kinases; altering the phosphorylation status of a protein may have dramatic
effects on its biologic properties, and is a common cellular control mechanism. With
respect to DNA, 5’ ends must be phosphorylated for ligation
Plasmid An extrachromosomal, usually circular, double-stranded DNA that is
capable of replication within a cell, and which usually contains and expresses genes
encoding resistance to antibiotics. By strict definition, a plasmid is not essential to
the life of the cell
Point mutation A single nucleotide substitution within a gene; there may be sev-
s n on pan nou op sn nod  as n um sn nod a
FRAMESHIFT MUTATION)
Polyacrylamide gel (PAGE) Used to separate proteins and smaller DNA frag-
ments and oligonucleotides by electrophoresis. When run under conditions that
denature proteins (i.e., in the presence of 2-mercaptoethanol, SDS, and possibly
urea), molecules are separated primarily on the basis of size
Poly-A track A lengthy adenylic acid polymer (RNA) that is covalently linked to
the 3' end of newly synthesized mRNA molecules in the nucleus
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) A DNA amplification reaction involving mul-
tiple (30 or more) cycles of primer annealing. extension, and denaturation, usually
using a heat-stable DNA polymerase such as Taq polymerase. Paired primers are
used, that are complementary to opposing strands of the DNA and which fank
the area to be amplified. Under optimal conditions, single DNA sequence can be
amplified a million-fold. The basic PCR process is covered by patents owned by
Hoffman-La Roche Inc and Hoffman-La Roche Ltd. A range of diagnostic kits is
available
Polymerase  An enzyme that catalyzes the addition of a nucleotide to a nucleic acid
molecule. There is a wide variety of RNA and DNA polymerases that have a wide
range of specific activities and that operate optimally under different conditions.
DNA or RNA; however, DNA polymerases also require a primer to initiate the new
strand, while RNA polymerases start synthesis at a specific promoter sequence
296
Glossary of Terms
Polymorphism Variation within a DNA or RNA sequence
Polynucleotide kinase Enzyme which catalyzes the transfer of the terminal phos-
phate of ATP to 5' hydroxyl termini of polynucleotides, either DNA or RNA.
Usually derived from T4 bacteriophage. pre-mRNA - An RNA molecule that is
transcribed from chromosomal DNA in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, and sub-
sequently processed through splicing reactions to generate the mRNA that directs
protein synthesis in the cytoplasm
Post-translational modification  Modifications made to a polypeptide molecule
after its initial synthesis, this includes proteolytic cleavages, phosphorylation.
glycosylation, carbox ylation, addition of fatty acid moieties, etc
Pre-mRNA An RNA molecule that is transcribed from chromosomal DNA in the
nucleus of eukaryotic cells, and subsequently processed through splicing reactions
Primary structure Refers to the sequence of amino acid residues or nucleotides
within protein or nucleic acid molecules, respectively (also see SECONDARY and
TERTIARY STRUCTURE)
Primer An oligonucleotide that is complementary to a specific region within a
DNA or RNA molecule, and that is used to prime (initiate) synthesis of a new strand
of complementary DNA at that specific site, in a reaction or series of reactions
catalyzed by a DNA polymerase. The newly synthesized DNA strand will contain
the primer at its 5' end. Typically. primers are chemically synthesized oligonu-
cleotides 15-50 nucleotides in length, selected on the basis of a known sequence
(also known as 15-50 mers primers). However, "random primers" (shorter oligonu
cleotides, about 6 nucleotides in length, and comprising all possible sequences)
may be used to prime DNA synthesis from DNA or RNA of unknown sequence.
but probably serves to enhance stability of the RNA. Is frequently used to select
 mRNA for cloning purposes by annealing to a column containing a matrix bound to
poly-uridylic acid
Primer-dimer At room temperature temporary association of primers may take
place allowing the Taq enzyme to polymerise small strands of DNA called primer-
dimers. Can give a false positive result if the detection of amplicons is via labelled
priitiers
Primer extension A reaction in which DNA is reverse transcribed from an RNA
template to which a specific oligonucleotide primer has been annealed. The new
cDNA product is an extension of the primer, that is synthesized at the 3' end of the
primer in a direction extending toward the 5' end of the RNA. This reaction is useful
for exploring the extreme 5' end of RNA molecules
Probe Usually refers to a DNA or RNA molecule that has been labeled with 32P
or with biotin, to facilitate its detection after it has specifically hybridized with a
Glossary of Terms
297
target DNA or RNA sequence. However, the term may also refer to antibody probes
used in westerm blots
 d n   s a sd n s  s
translational modifications of a polypeptide. In the case of RNA, processing may
involve the addition of a 5' cap and 3' poly-A tracks as well as splicing reactions in
the nucleus
Processivity The extent to which an RNA or DNA polymerase adheres to a tem-
plate before dissociating. detenmines the average length (in kilobases) of the newly
synthesized nucleic acid strands. Also applies to the action of exonucleases in
digesting from the ends to the middle of a nucleic acid
Promoter A specific sequence within a double-stranded DNA molecule that is
recognized by an RNA polymerase, that binds to it and uses it to begin transcribing
the DNA template into a new RNA. The location and orientation of the promoter
within a DNA molecule determines the start site of the new RNA. Other proteins
(e.g. transcriptional activators such as sigma factor) are usually required for an RNA
polymerase to recognize a promoter (see TRANSCRIPTION)
Proto-oncogene A cellular oncogene-like sequence that is thought to play a role
in controlling nonmal cellular growth and differentiation
Pseudogene Inactive but stable components of the genome that derived by dupli-
cation and mutation of an ancestral, active gene. Pseudogenes can serve as the donor
sequence in gene conversion events
Pseudorevertant A mutant virus or organism that has recovered a wildtype phe-
notype due to a second-site mutation (potentially located in a different region of the
genome, or involving a different polypeptide) that has eliminated the effect of the
imitial mutation
Pseudoknot A feature of RNA tertiary structure; best visualized as two overlap-
ping stem-loops in that the loop of the first stem-loop participates as half of the stem
in the second stem-loop
Purine bases Adenine (A) or Guanine (G) (see NUCLEOTIDE)
DNA, including complete chromosomes and genomes, by rapidly altemating the
direction of electrophoretic migration in agarose gels
Pyrimidine bases Cytosine (C), Thymine (T) or Uracil (U) (see NUCLEOTIDE)
Q
Q-beta replicase  An isothenmal nucleic acid amplification system that uses the
enzyme Q-beta replicase to replicate an RNA probe. An automated diagnostic
system is being developed by Vysis Inc.(USA)
298
Glossary of Terms
R
R coefficient  Correlation coefficient, which is used to analyze a standard curve
(ten-fold dilutions plotted against C values) obtained by linear regression analysis
It should be ≥ 0.99 for gene quantitation analysis. It takes values between zero and
-1 for negative correlation and between zero and +1 for positive correlations
R² coefficient (coefficient of determination) This coeffcient only takes values
between zero and +l. R? is used to assess the fit of the standard curve to the data
points plotted. The closer the value to 1, the better the fit
RACE Rapid Amplification of Complementary Ends
stranded mRNA. Because codons are nucleotide triplets, each mRNA has 3 reading
frames (each nucleotide can participate in 3 codons, at the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd base
position). Duplex DNA strands have 6 reading frames, 3 in each strand (see OPEN
READING FRAME):AlaSerProLeuVal.1st reading frame,ProAlaProTERTrp 2nd
reading frame: TER = Stop, GlnProProSerGly 3rd reading frame
Real time PCR Real-time PCR (also known as Quantitative PCR, Real-
time Quantitative PCR, or http://www.everythingbio.com/glos/definition.php? ID=
4079RTQ-PCR - but not RT-PCR) is a method of simultaneous DNA quan-
reaction (PCR). After each round of amplification, the DNA is quantified. Real-
time PCR can be combined with reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(http://www.everythingbio.com/glos/definition.php?ID=3471RT-PCR) to quantify
low abundance messenger RNA, enabling a researcher to quantify relative gene
expression at a particular time, or in a particular cell or tissue type. The combined
technique is often called quantitative http://www.everythingbio.com/glos/definition.
php?ID=3471RT-PCR
RT-PCR (Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction) A variation of the
PCR technique in which cDNA is made from RNA via reverse transcription. The
cDNA is then amplified using standard PCR protocols
Recognition sequence A specific palindromic sequence within a double-stranded
DNA molecule that is recognized by a restriction endonuclease, and at which the
restriction endonuclease specifically cleaves the DNA molecule
Recombination-repair A mode of flling a gap in one strand of duplex DNA by
retrieving a homologous single strand from another duplex. Usually the underlying
mechanism behind homologous recombination and gene conversion
erence samples to determine the increase or decrease of gene expression. The out
come is presented as an index, not an absolute amount
Relaxed DNASee SUPERCOIL
Glossary of Terms
299
Replication The copying of a nucleic acid molecule into a new nucleic acid
molecule of similar type (i.e., DNA > DNA, or RNA > RNA)
Reporter dye Fluorescent dye used to monitor the PCR product accumulation
This can be attached to a specific probe or can be a dsDNA-binding agent (see for
example SYBR(?) Green I)
Reporter gene The use of a functional enzyme, such as beta-galactosidase.
luciferase, or chloramphenicol acetyltransderase, downstream of a gene, promoter,
or translational control element of interest, to more easily identify successful
Repression  Inhibition of transcription (or translation) by the binding of a repressor
protein to a specifhic site on DNA (or mRNA
Residue As applied to proteins, what remains of an amino acid after its incorpo-
ration into a peptide chain, with subsequent loss of a water molecule (see PEPTIDE
BOND)
Restriction endonuclease (RE)  A bacterial enzyme that recognizes a spe-
cific palindromic sequence (recognition sequence) within a double-stranded DNA
molecule and then catalyzes the cleavage of both strands at that site. Also called
a restriction enzyme. Restriction endonucleases may generate either blunt or sticky
ends at the site of cleavage
Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)  Variations in the lengths
of fragments of DNA generated by digestion of different DNAs with a specific
restriction endonuclease, refecting genetic variation (polymorphism) in the DNAs
Restriction fragments  DNA fragments generated by digestion of a DNA prepa
ration with one or more restriction endonucleases; usually separated by agarose
gel electrophoresis and visualized by ethidium bromide staining under UV light (or
altematively subjected to Southerm blot analysis)
Restriction map  A linear array of sites on a particular DNA that are cleaved by
various selected restriction endonucleases
Reticulocyte lysate A lysate of rabbit reticulocytes, that has been extensively
digested with micrococcal nuclease to destroy the reticulocyte mRNAs. With the
addition of an exogenous, usually synthetic, mRNA, amino acids and a source of
energy (ATP), the translational machinery of the reticulocyte (ribosomes, eukary-
otic translation factors, etc.) will permit in vitro translation of the added mRNA
with production of a new polypeptide. This is only one of several available in vitro
translation systems
Reverse transcriptase (RT) A DNA polymerase that copies an RNA molecule
into single-stranded cDNA; usually purified from retroviruses
Reverse transcription Copying of an RNA molecule into a DNA molecule
RT-PCR Real time PCR
00E
Glossary of Terms
Ribonuclease (RNASE) An enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of RNA. There
are many different RNases, some of the more important include
RNASE H Degrades the RNA part of RNA:DNA hybrids
isms, part or all of the polypurine sequence AGGAGG located on mRNA just
upstream of an AUG initiation codon; it is complementary to the sequence at the
 3' end of 16S rRNA; and involved in binding of the ribosome to mRNA. The inter
nal ribosomal entry site found in some viruses may be an analogous eukaryotic
genetic element
Ribosome A complex ribonucleoprotein particle (eukaryotic ribosomes contain 4
RNAs and at least 82 proteins) which is the "machine" which translates mRNA intc
protein molecules. In eukaryotic cells, ribosomes are often in close proximity to the
endoplasmic reticulum
Ribozyme A catalytically active RNA. A good example is the hepatitis delta virus
RNA that is capable of self-cleavage and self-ligation in the absence of protein
enzymes
Rn Also known as Normalized reporter signal. The fluorescence emission intensity
of the reporter dye divided by the fuorescence emission intensity of the passive
reference dye
RNA polymerase A polymerase that synthesizes RNA (see POLYMERASE)
RNA splicing A complex and incompletely understood series of reactions occur-
ring in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells in which pre-mRNA transcribed from
chromosomal DNA is processed such that noncoding regions of the pre-mRNA
(introns) are excised, and coding regions (exons) are covalently linked to produce an
mRNA molecule ready for transport to the cytoplasm. Because of splicing, eukary-
otic DNA representing a gene encoding any given protein is usually much larger
than the mRNA from which the protein is actually translated
RNASEsee RIBONUCLEASE
rRNA  Ribosomal RNA (four sizes in humans: 5S, 5.8S, 18S, and 28S); RNA
ROX 6-carboxy-X-rhodamine. Most commonly passive reference dye for normal-
ization of reporter sigmal
RTReverse Transcriptase
RT/PCR reaction A series of reactions that result in RNA being copied into DNA
and then amplified. A single primer is used to make single-stranded cDNA copies
from an RNA template under direction of reverse transcriptase. A second primer
compiementary to this "first strand” cDNA is added to the reaction mix along with
Glossary of Terms
301
is then cycled (denaturation, annealing of primers, extension) to amplify the DNA
by conventional PCR
  d  isas  s    
by a RNase A Cleaves ssRNA 3' of pyrimidines, RNase T1 Cleaves ssRNA at
guanasine nucleotides, RNase V1 Cleaves dsRNA (helical regions)bacteriophage
RNA polymerase such as T7 or SP6) and which terminates at a specific 3' site
because of prior cleavage of the plasmid DNA with a restriction endonuclease.
RNA. Ribonucleic acid. Single strand nucleic acid composed of a phosphate ribose
"backbone" and the nucleotides: adenine, guanine, cytosine and uracil
mRNA Messenger RNA, carries genetic information from DNA to the ribosome
where it is translated into the corresponding protein
S
the upstream primer with a fuorophore at the 5' end, followed by a complementary
 ap raouanb aoanbas aod sgoas a su oste anns door-ns
a PCR primer on the 3' end. Between the primer and its tail (the probe), a blocking
Semi or hemi-nested PCR  If a full nested PCR (using two intermal primers) can-
not be perfonmed, sensitivity and specificity can be improved by using just one
Sl nuclease An enzyme that digests single-stranded DNA or RNA
SDS-page Denaturing protein gel electrophoresis (see POLYACRYLAMIDE GEL
ELECTROPHORESIS)
Selection The use of particular conditions, such as the presence of ampicillin, to
allow survival only of cells with a particular phenotype, such as production of beta-
lactamase
Sequence polymorphism See Polymorphism
Shotgun cloning or sequencing Cloning of an entire genome or large piece of
DNA in the form of randomly generated small fragments. The individual sequences
obtained from the clones will be used to construct contigs
Shuttle vector A small plasmid capable of transfection into both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells
Sigma factor  Certain small ancillary proteins in bacteria that increase the bind-
ing affinity of RNA polymerase to a promoter. Different sigma factors recognize
302
Glossary of Terms
Signal peptidase An enzyme present within the lumen of the endoplasmic
reticulum that proteolytically cleaves a secreted protein at the site of a signal
sequence
peptide chain to be secreted into the endoplasmic reticulum
Silent mutationA nucleotide substitution(never a single deletion or insertion) that
does not alter the amino acid sequence of an encoded protein due to the degeneracy
of the genetic code. Such mutations usually involve the third base (wobble position)
of codons
Site-directed mutagenesis  The introduction of a mutation, usually a point muta-
tion or an insertion, into a particular location in a cloned DNA fragment. This
mutated fragment may be used to "knock out’ a gene in the organism of interest
byhomologousrecombination
Site-specifie recombination  Occurs between two specific but not necessarily
homologous sequences. Usually catalyzed by enzymes not involved in general or
homologous recombination
SOP Standard Operating procedure
Southern blot DNA is separated by electrophoresis (usually in agarose gels), then
transferred to nitrocellulose paper or other suitable solid-phase matrix (e.g, nylon
membrane), and denatured into single strands so that it can be hybridized with a
specific probe. The Southerm blot was developed by E.M. Southem, a molecular
biologist in Edinburgh. Northerm and western blots were given contrasting names
to reflect the different target substances (RNA and proteins, respectively) that are
subjected in these procedures to electrophoresis, blotting and subsequent detection
with specific probes
Southwestern blot  The binding of protein to a nucleic acid on a matrix similar
to what is done for westerm, northerm, and southerm blots. This technique is used to
SP6 RNA polymerase A bacteriophage RNA polymerase that is commonly used
to transcribe plasmid DNA into RNA. The plasmid must contain an SP6 promoter
upstream of the relevant sequence
Splicing see RNA SPLICING
ss Single stranded
ss DNA Single stranded DNA
ss RNA Single stranded RNA
Standard A sample of known concentration used to construct a standard curve
By running standards of varying concentrations, a standard curve is created from
which the quantity of an unknown sample can be calculated
Glossary of Terms
303
Standard curve Plotting of Ct values against log-transformed concentrations of
serial ten-fold dilutions of the target nucleic acid. It is used to find out the dynamic
range of the target (and/or normalizer), to calculate the slope (therefore, efficiency),
r and R? coefficients and also to help with quantitation
Start codon See Initiation codon
Stem-loop A feature of RNA secondary structure, in which two complementary.
as e um anuanbas suuaarui-ous e Aq paeeas are jen sanuanbas paaa
 o  a   do,   ,   mn     
hairpin, but these usually have very small loops and longer stems
Sticky end Terminus of DNA molecule that has either a 3' or 5' overhang, and
which typically results from a cut by a restriction endonuclease. Such termini are
 o  go  a  a , aq  pa ns  s
a "filling in' reaction that adds additional nucleotides complementary to overhang
(see BLUNT END)
SDA Strand Displacement Assay. An isothermal nucleic acid amplifi cation system
where cDNA product is synthesised from an RNA target. Covered by patents owned
by Becton Dickinson (USA)
SYBRR green I Fluorogenic minor groove binding dye that emits no fuo-
stranded DNA. It does not bind to ssDNA but binds to any dsDNA product
T
TaAnmealing temperature
TAE Tris acetic acid EDTA
TAMRA 6-carboxy-terta-methyl-rhodamine. Most commonly used quencher at
the 3'end of a TaqMan? probe
Target The specific piece of DNA or RNA to be amplified by the PCR. The sensi-
 'a asaid ae na a go saidoo andnnn g aua aq uo ess ue go i
repeated sequence or mRNA molecules
TAQ Thermostable DNA polymerase, originally isolated from Thermus aquaticus,
an organism that resides in hot springs
TaqMan assay  5'nuclease fuorogenic assay. For simple and rapid detection of
PCR products. An oligonucleotide probe that is specific for the target to be amplified
is labelled with a fuorescent tag and a quenching molecule. During the extension
step of a PCR the Taq enzyme will disrupt probe bound to the target separating the
fuorescent tag from its quencher molecule thus permitting fuorescence
Taq polymerase  A DNA polymerase that is very stable at high temperatures,
isolated from the thermophilic bacterium Thermus aquaticus. Very useful in PCR
304
Glossary of Terms
reactions which must cycle repetitively through high temperatures during the
denaturation step
TBE Tris boric acid EDTA
Template A nucleic acid strand, upon which a primer has anneated and a nascent
RNA strand is being extended
Termination codon See stop codon
Terminator A sequence downstream from the 3'end of an open reading frame that
serves to halt transcription by the RNA polymerase. In bacteria these are commonly
sequences that are palindromic and thus capable of forming hairpins. Sometimes
termination requires the action of a protein, such as Rho factor in E. coli
Thermal cycler Although PCR may be performed using manual transfer between
a series of water or oil baths, for reproducible results or diagnostic work a reliable
programmable thermal cycling mac hine is essential. There are now many machines
to choose from with a wide range of specifications and costs. A patent on the use of
thermal cycling machines for PCR is held by the Perkin Elmer Corporation (USA).
It should be remembered that heating and cooling parameters vary with the design of
the instrument and a PCR that has been optimised for one machine may not function
as efficiently on a different type of thermal cycler
Three room strategy In order to minimise the risks of contamination 3 worksta-
tions should be used, each in a separate room. A "Clean" room for preparation of
PCR reagents, a "Grey” area for preparation of samples and positive controls and a
"Dirty”’ room for post-amplification work and detection of amplicons
ThresholdUsually1oX the standard deviationof Rnfor the earlyPCR cycles
(baseline). T'he threshold should be set in the region associated with an exponentia]
growth of PCR product (which may be easier is the log-view of the amplifica-
tion plot is used). It is assigned for each run to calculate the Ct value for each
amplification
Tm  The midpoint of the temperature range over which DNA is melted or denatured
by heat; the temperature at that a duplex nucleic acid molecule is 50% melted into
single strands, it is dependent upon the number and proportion of G-C base pairs as
well as the ionic conditions. Often referred to as a measure of the thenmal stability
of a nucleic acid probe:target sequence hybrid. To calculate the approximate Tm for
an oligonucleotide count the numbers of each nucleotide Tm = 2(A+T) + 4 (G + C)
cation system. Amplification of RNA using RNA polymerase. Covered by patents
owned by Gen-Probe Incorporated (USA). A range of diagnostic kits is available
T7 RNA polymerase A bacteriophage RNA polymerase that is commonly used
      e      
Glossary of Terms
305
Trans As used in molecular biology, an interaction that involves two sites that are
located on separate molecules
Iranscript A newly made RNA molecule that has been copied from DNA
Transcription  The copying of a DNA template into a single-stranded RNA
molecule. The processes whereby the transcriptional activity of eukaryotic genes
are regulated are complex, involve a variety of accessory transcriptional factors that
interact with promoters and polymerases, and constitute one of the most important
areas of biological research today
Transcription/translation reaction An in vitro series of reactions, involving the
synthesis (transcription) of an mRNA from a plasmid (usually with T7 or SP6 RNA
polymerase), followed by use of the mRNA to program translation in a cell-free
system such as a rabbit reticulocyte lysate . The polypeptide product of translation in
usually labelled with [35S]-methionine, and examined in an SDS-PAGE gel with or
without prior immunoprecipitation. This series of reactions permits the synthesis of
a polypeptide from DNA in vitro
Transeriptional start site The nucleotide of a gene or cistron at which transcrip-
tion (RNA synthesis) starts; the most common triplet at which transcription begins
in E. coli is CAT. Primer extension identifies the transcriptional start site
Transfection The process of introducing foreign DNA (or RNA) into a host
organism, usually a eukaryotic cell
Transformation Multiple meanings. With respect to cloning of DNA, refers to
the transformation of bacteria (usually to specific antibiotic resistance) due to the
to less-restrained or unrestrained growth
Transgene  A foreign gene that has been introduced into the germ line of an animal
species
Transgenic An animal (usually a mouse) or plant into which a foreign gene has
been introduced in the genm line. An example: transgenic mice expressing the
other pyrimidine, or one purine replaced by the other purine (e.g., A is changed to
G, or C is changed to T) (contrast with TRANSVERSION)
   i       
molecule; carried out by the ribosome in association with a host of translation initi-
level of translation, as well as the level of transcription
Translocation  The process by which a newly synthesized protein is directed
toward a specific cellular compartment (i.e., the nucleus, the endoplasmic reticulum)
306
Glossary of Terms
Transposon A transposable genetic element; certain sequence elements that are
ment for sequence relatedness at the donor and acceptor sites. Many transposons
carry antibiotic resistance determinants and have insertion sequences at both ends,
and thus have two sets of inverted repeats
Transposition  The movement of DNA from one location to another location on
the same molecule, or a different molecule within a cell
Transversion A nucleotide substitution in which a purine replaces a pyrimidine,
or vice versa (e.g., A is changed to T, or T is changed to G) (see TRANSITION)
Triplet A three-nucleotide sequence; a codon
tRNA Small, tightly folded RNA molecules which act to bring specific amino
acids into translationally active ribosomes in a fashion that is dependent upon the
mRNA sequence. One end of the tRNA molecule recognizes the nucleotide triplet
which is the codon of the mRNA, while the other end (when activated) is covalently
linked to the relevant amino acid
U
UNG Uracil N-glycosylase
Untranslated RNA See Nontranslated RNA
Upstream  Identifies sequences located in a direction opposite to that of expres
sion; for example, the bacterial promoter is upstream of the initiation codon. In an
mRNA molecule, upstream means toward the 5' end of the molecule. Occasionally
used to refer to a region of a polypeptide chain that is located toward the amino
tenminus of the molecule
UVUltra violet
Index
3′, 30, 31
B
5,30, 31,218,221,242
Base, 2,6,12, 21,31,34,37,127, 134, 238
Bluetongue, 7,49, 136-139, 140, 208
A
B3 Primer, 43, 116
Aerosol resistant tips, 155, 190, 217
BTV,7,136, 138, 140-143, 208
African horse sickness (AHSV), 7, 49,
132-135
C
African swine fever, 7, 49, 117-120,
CDNA,4,29,31,35,38,67,76,95,117,126,
121, 208
128,176, 208, 248,256,258
African swine fever virus (ASFV), 117-120,
Classical swine fever virus (CSFV), 7, 53,
121,122,123,124,208
56, 64
Allele, 4, 38, 41
Complement Fixation Test (CFT), 265
Allele specific oligonucleotide (ASO)
Contamination,7,29,34,52,55,57,76,78,
sorpion,41
88, 90, 105, 162, 173, 189, 194, 195,
Amplicon, 27,29, 33, 35, 37, 56, 83,84,
202,206, 211,213, 237, 238,239,240,
89-90, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 122, 124, 127,
241-243, 248, 258,259
166,240, 241, 242, 245, 248, 253-254,
Cosmid, 283, 294
255,257-258,259,260
Costs of Disease, 48-49
Amplification, 10, 14, 15-16, 28, 29, 30, 31,
Cycle-sequencing, 3
35, 41, 42, 55-56, 57, 60, 61-63, 64, 67,
Cycling conditions, 14-16, 97, 122
136, 137, 140, 141, 159, 165, 192, 215,
220,222-229,240-241,242,243,248,
D
250,252,257-258,259,260
Denaturation Step, 16
Amplification plot, 76, 80, 81, 92, 227, 228,
DEPC,77, 85,86,103
259-260
Diagnosis, 6, 7, 18, 19,47-69, 73-234
Amplification Refractory Mutation System
DNA Binding Dyes, SYBR? Green I, 33-35
(ARMS)Scorpion, 41
DNA polymerase, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13-14, 17, 20,
Amplified fragment length polymorphism
27,32, 36,42,114,126, 204
(AFLP), 4, 19
DNA polymersase, 284
AMV, 114, 116
DNA sequencing, 4, 19, 20-22, 56
Annealing, 11, 14,15, 30, 35, 37, 38,
DNA template, 4, 10, 12, 14, 16, 20, 21, 29,
39,40, 79,122, 124, 127, 128, 133,
42,208,209, 210,212, 242
135,141, 143, 249, 250, 254, 257,
DOP-PCR, 4
259,260
Duplex, 11, 15, 54, 144-146
Assay failure, 147, 149, 150, 153, 167-168
Avian infuenza (AI), 5, 7, 49, 60, 63, 64,
E
76-81, 83-93, 94-101, 102-108, 144-146,
EDTA, 12,13,152
153, 157, 159, 165, 177, 183187
ELISA, 55, 58, 59, 64, 65, 68,177-182,
Avidin, 19, 64, 204
183-187
307
308
Eongation,11,122,127,128,133,135,137,
K
139, 141, 143, 250, 252
Kary Mullis, 2, 9
Emerging, 5,49, 50, 51, 65-66
Kinetic PCR, 29
Enzyme linked oligonucleotide sorbent assay
Kit, 17, 77, 85, 95, 103, 109, 110, 113, 117,
(ELOSA),285
118, 119, 121,126, 133, 137, 141, 144,
Ethidium bromide,19,29,52,97,231
154, 155, 158, 162, 201, 202, 231
Exponential, 18, 27, 28, 29, 56, 254-255,
259,260
L
Extension Step. 15
Laboratory Diagnostic Technology, 6-7
LAMP, 42-43, 55, 62, 63, 79, 89, 105,
F
113-116, 226, 266, 270, 272, 274
 Fuorescence resonance energy transfer
Length of the primers, 11
(FRET), 31,32,36,3839,117, 118,119,
Ligase, 204
129,230,231,268, 269
Linker, 4
Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), 5, 7, 48-49,
Livak Method, 256-257
60,62,64,75,208,215
 Loop-mediated isothermal amplification assay.
Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV), 59,
61-63
62,193,200-202,203-205,208,215-220,
M
224, 225
Magnesium Chloride, 10, 13, 31, 32, 254
F3 Primer, 42
Magnetic Beads, 64, 163, 194-199
Fred Sanger, 3
Master-mix,16, 31,77, 78, 85-86,87, 88, 95,
FRET-based hydrolysis probes, 36
103, 104, 105,114, 118, 122,126, 133,
 Full-genome sequencing, 67-68
137,141,165, 197, 206, 209-210, 216,
223,237, 238,242,243, 258
G
Maxam and Gilbert, 21
GC-content, 12
Melt-curve analysis, 34
GDNA, 248
Melting Curve dissociation analysis, 35
Gel-based, 51, 52, 54
Metagenomics, 68-69
Gel electrophoresis, 11, 29, 62, 64, 113, 115,
MGB TaqMan Probe,37-38
166,211,253-254,257
MgClz, 10, 13,16, 17,124, 254
GenBank, 56,65,66
General Applications of PCR, 4
M-MuLV, 291
Genome,4,35,52, 53,61,66,67,68,94,125,
Molecular Beacons, 31, 32, 38-39, 40, 52,
121-124, 254
166, 215, 230-231
Molecular diagnostic virology, 59, 66-68, 69
Global Factors, 49
Molecular epidemiology, 3, 47-69
Glycosylation, 288
 Molecular pathotyping, 89-90
Good laboratory practice (GLP), 2, 244
MRNA,29,248,256,257
Multi PCR, 54-55
H
Multiplex PCR, 4, 52, 54, 59
 Harmonization, 51
Hot-start, 118, 257
N
Nested PCR,4, 52, 54
T
New approaches, 66
nhibition, 12, 181, 182
Newcastle disease, 144-146, 147-168
Initial Denaturation Step, 14
Nucleoside, 3,20, 21,204
In situ PCR,290
Nucleotide,2,3,4,12,18,2021,31,35,37,
Interpretation of results, 80-81, 90-93.
41, 56, 57, 61, 63, 65, 94, 98, 250
106-108, 205
RE-PCR, 4
0
ksothermal amplification, 42, 55-56,
Office Intemational des Epizooties (OIE), 50,
61-63, 113
51, 57,58-63, 66, 69,75,92, 94, 107,
230, 244
J
Oligonucleotide, 3,7,29,36,38,41, 52, 60,
Joint FAO/IAEA Division, 1, 57, 59, 230
64, 144, 203, 204, 215
309
Optimization,13,16-17, 31-32,33,34,35,
Real-time PCR, 27-43, 52-53, 54, 59, 61,
36, 63, 243, 261
73234, 247-254, 257-261
Repeats, 12, 42, 232, 233
P
Reverse transcriptase (RT),42, 61-63,76,79,
Padlock probes, 60
113,114, 116,126, 155, 167,172,194,
PCR amplification cycle number, 15
209, 245
FCR amplification problems, 257-258
Rift valley fever (RVF), 7, 48, 50, 109-112
FCR components and assay optimization,
RNA extraction, 52, 86, 87, 90, 95, 105, 113,
31-32
126, 132,136, 140, 144, 156-158,162,
PCR dot-blot assay, 19-20
163, 172, 189, 194, 195, 238-239
PCR and infectious diseases-the veterinary
RNA polymerase, 281, 293, 295, 297, 300,
picture,4-5
301,302,304
PCR kinetics, 28-29
Robots, 52, 55
PCR machines, 53, 55-56, 62, 125, 265-306
RRNA, 300
PCR plateau effect, 17-18
RT-PCR,1,4,35,38,63,77,78,85,95,
Pfaff method, 257
110-112, 132-135, 136-139, 140-143,
Plateau effect, 17-18
145-146, 165, 167, 172, 173, 188, 192,
Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), 22
197,210,215-221,222-229, 258
Polymerase buffer, 14
Porcine viruses, 121-124
S
Portable, 53,56
Safety, 51,55,66,84, 94, 102, 147, 156, 160,
Primer, 10, 11-12, 13,14, 15, 20, 29-31, 32,
163, 169-170, 173, 189, 194, 195,207,
33, 35, 43, 52, 54, 60-61, 152, 153, 154,
208,216, 223, 238, 239, 241
155,248,249-250,252-253, 258
Sanger sequencing, 22
Primer annealing step, 15
Scorpion primers, 40-41, 52
Primer pair, 3, 15,32, 54,60, 97, 113, 250,
Secondary structures, 12, 29, 30-31, 32, 34.
252,253,258
35,43,248,249, 250,253
Primer secondary structures, 30-31
Semi or hemi-nested PCR, 301
Primer sets and probe design, 29-31
Silica particles, 169-171, 175-176
Primer specifications, 11-12
Simultaneous detection, 5455, 59, 60, 63
Probe, 19, 29-31, 36-38,39, 40, 52, 56, 59,
Single-stranded (ss), 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 36, 38,
60-61, 110, 125, 127, 154, 155, 156,
42, 56, 254
167, 258
Solid phase, 60
Probe-based chemistry, 36-38
Southem blot, 293, 299, 302
Probe design, 29-31, 37, 39, 40-41, 56,
Standard curve, 32, 80, 119, 122, 123, 131,
84, 167
233, 254-257, 259, 260, 261
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP), 2, 7,
Q
74-75, 76, 83-93, 102-108, 109-112,
Q-beta replicase, 297
113-116, 117-120, 121-124, 125-128,
Quality control, 5, 57, 58, 147, 148, 149, 158,
129-131, 132-135, 136-139, 140-143,
162, 195-196, 244
144-146, 169-171, 172-176, 177-182,
Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction
183-187, 188-193, 194-199, 200-202,
(QPCR)-,27,28, 29, 31, 32, 33,41,63,
203-205, 220, 222-229, 230-234, 244
224,229, 253
Statistical analysis, 130, 131, 149
Swine vesicular disease (SVD), 7, 49, 60,
R
61-63,113-116, 125-128,208, 215
Radioisotope-PCR based methods, 18-22
SYBR? Green, 113, 137-138, 139, 140-143
Rapid amplification of complementary ends
(RACE),4,35,57,167,188, 207, 216, 222
T
Rapid sequencing, 63, 67
TADs, 48,49, 50,51,52,57,64
Real-time, 27-43, 51, 52-53, 59, 61, 63.
Taq, 2, 7, 13-14, 15, 16, 31, 36, 38, 39, 122,
73-234, 247-254, 257-261
126, 128, 133, 137, 141, 204, 217, 219,
Real-time fuorescense reporters, 32-35
238, 250
310
TaqMan,31,32,36,37-38,40,52,53.
TRIzol, 73,113,126, 132, 136,140,
60-61, 76-82, 83, 110, 132-135, 154, 204,
188-193, 221
215-221, 222, 242, 243, 249-250, 259,271
TRNA, 117
TaqMan assay, 37, 243
Troubleshooting, 168, 192, 213-214, 247-261
TaqMan probe design guidelines, 37
TaqMan probes, 36,37, 259
Target, 2,6, 10, 15, 18, 21, 30, 36, 38, 41, 42,
U
53, 54, 55, 60, 114, 117, 119, 140, 148,
UV, 237,238,240, 242
149,203, 206, 215, 241, 242,244, 245,
256,257,259
A
Threshold selection, 255
Validation, 31, 36, 51, 57, 58, 69, 74, 75,83,
Tracking sheet, 193,216,221,223,225,226
92, 93, 102, 113, 243-244
Transboundary animal diseases (TAD), 48, 49,
Vandesompele method, 257
50, 51, 52, 57, 63, 64, 84
Transcription, 18, 19, 89, 105, 109-111, 112,
114,133, 137, 141, 188, 189,192, 194,
M
210, 256,258
What is the use of PCR, 3-4